Catalog link: https://jainqq.org/explore/090010/1

Page #1:
---------------------------
Ādiyuṛāṇa
Edited and Translated by Dr. Pannālāl Jain, Sāhityācārya
Ācārya Jinsen 

Page #2:
---------------------------
"Adipurana", composed by Acharya Jinsen (9th century), is a highly significant text that illuminates the origins and evolution of Indian culture and history, along with the virtuous narratives of the first Tirthankara, Rishabhdev, and Bharat-Bahubali. It is essential for the study of Jain culture and history. It is not only a Purana text but also a great epic. From the perspective of subject matter, it is considered to be Dharma Shastra, Rajniti Shastra, and Achar Shastra. It has gained international recognition for its exposition of the primordial order of human civilization. The text elaborates on various aspects such as the evolution of human society, its classification into different groups, religious rituals of specific groups, and many more. It has served as a source of inspiration for later poets in Sanskrit and various Indian languages. The complete work ("Adipurana") has been published in two volumes by the Indian Knowledge Centre. The editor of the text is Dr. Pannalal Jain, a distinguished scholar of Jain philosophy, religion, and Sanskrit literature. The text includes the Sanskrit original along with a Hindi translation, a significant introduction, and appendices in the form of glossaries of technical, geographical, and personal terms. This makes it an indispensable text for researchers, especially those studying Puranas and poetic literature from a comparative perspective. From the perspective of subject matter, the third part of the text is "Uttarpurana" (Knowledge Centre Publication) composed by Acharya Gunabhadra, which elaborates on the lives of the remaining 23 Tirthankaras, 11 Chakravartis, 9 Balbhadra, 9 Narayana, 9 Pratinarayana, and various contemporary kings and legendary figures after Rishabhdev. This is a new revised edition of both parts of "Adipurana". 

Page #3:
---------------------------
Acharya Jinsen Krit
Adipurana
[ Pratham Bhag ] 

Page #4:
---------------------------
The five great vows (Mahavratas) are:
1. **Ahimsa** (non-violence)
2. **Satya** (truthfulness)
3. **Asteya** (non-stealing)
4. **Brahmacharya** (continence)
5. **Aparigraha** (non-attachment) 

Page #5:
---------------------------
Murtidevi Jain Granthamala: Sanskrit Granthank- 8
Acharya Jinsen Composed
Adipurana
[ First Part ]
(Hindi Translation and Appendix etc. Included)
Edited- Translated Dr. Pannalal Jain, Sahityacharya
Bharatiya Gyanpith
Tenth Edition: 2004
Price: 300 Rupees 

Page #6:
---------------------------
ISBN 81-263-0853-2 (Set)
81-263-0854-0 (Part-1)
Bharatiya Jnanpith
(Established: Falgun Krishna 9; Veer Ni. San. 2470; Vikram San. 2000; 18 February 1944)
Established by Sahu Shantiprasad Jain in memory of Punyashloka Mata Murtidevi
and
Sponsored by his wife Smt. Rama Jain
Murtidevi Jain Granthamala
This series publishes research-based editions of Jain literature in various subjects like Agamic, philosophical, mythological, literary, historical, etc. available in ancient languages like Prakrit, Sanskrit, Apabhramsha, Hindi, Kannada, Tamil, etc. along with their original and, as far as possible, translations.
Bibliographies of Jain repositories, epigraph collections, studies on art and architecture by eminent scholars and public-welfare Jain literature are also being published in this series.
Chief Editor (First Edition)
Dr. Hiralal Jain and Dr. A. N. Upadhye
Publisher
Bharatiya Jnanpith
18, Institutional Area, Lodi Road, New Delhi- 110 003
Printer: Vikas Computers and Printers, Delhi- 110032
© All rights reserved by Bharatiya Jnanpith 

Page #7:
---------------------------
Moortidevi Jain Granthamala: Sanskrit Series—8
ĀDIPURĀŅA
of
ĀCHĀRYA JINASENA
[ Part - I ]
(With Hindi Translation, Introduction and Appendices)
Edited and Translated by Dr. Pannalal Jain, Sahityacharya
BHARATIYA JNANPITH
Tenth Edition: 2004
Price: Rs. 300 

Page #8:
---------------------------
ISBN 81-263-0853-2 (Set)
81-263-0854 - O (Part-1)
BHARATIYA JNANPITH (Founded on Phalguna Krishna 9; Vira N. Sam. 2470; Vikrama Sam. 2000; 18th Feb. 1944)
MOORTIDEVI JAIN GRANTHAMALA
FOUNDED BY
Sahu Shanti Prasad Jain In memory of his illustrious mother Smt. Moortidevi
and promoted by his benevolent wife
Smt. Rama Jain
In this Granthamala critically edited Jain agamic, philosophical, puranic, literary, historical and other original texts in Prakrit,
Sanskrit, Apabhramsha, Hindi, Kannada, Tamil etc. are being published in the original form with their
translations in modern languages.
Catalogues of Jain bhandaras, inscriptions, studies on art and architecture by
competent scholars and popular Jain literature are also being published.
General Editors (First Edition) Dr. Hiralal Jain and Dr. A. N. Upadhye
Published by
Bharatiya Jnanpith 18, Institutional Area, Lodi Road, New Delhi-110 003
Printed at : Vikas Computer & Printers, Delhi - 110 032
© All Rights Reserved by Bharatiya Jnanpith 

Page #9:
---------------------------
## Editorial
[From the First Edition]

"Ancient stories are called Puranas. When these stories are about great men, or are preached as teachings by great Acharyas, or guide towards great welfare, then they are called Mahapuranas. Other scholars also interpret that the stories that are prevalent due to the influence of ancient poets become Puranas, and due to their own importance, they become Mahapuranas. Therefore, the Maharshis have traditionally considered those stories to be Mahapuranas which are related to great men and preach great progress. This Mahapurana, being composed by Rishis, is called 'Aarsh'. Being described in beautiful language, it is also considered 'Sookt', and due to preaching Dharma, it is also considered 'Dharmashastra'. 'Iti ha aas (aaseet)' meaning 'such a thing happened', being the word of Shruti, it is also appropriate to call it 'Itihaas'. In other words, it is also customary to call it Itiwritt, Aitihya and Amnaya. Therefore, I, with devotion, describe here the Purana which is also called Itihaas, as Gautam Ganadhar had said, following the tradition."

This is the explanation of Purana and Mahapurana given by Jinseanaacharya in the Uththannica (1.2126) of his Mahapurana. From this, the objective and perspective of Jain Puranakars become clear that the heroes of Purana can only be those great men whose characters are famous in the world according to the previous tradition and through whom the progress and upliftment of the world's life is possible. This is the same opinion of Vimalsuri, the author of Paumachariya, when he says, "I tell the story of Rama, who has come down from the Acharya tradition" (1.18). The same thing is said by Ravishena in the Padma Purana, "I describe the story of Rama, which has come down in the line of scholars, because the recitation of such a great man increases knowledge, spreads pure fame and removes sin" (1.2124). And the same thing we find in the Harivansh Purana by Jinsen, "Acharyas, who are knowledgeable about the activities of the country and time, should collect and describe the Purana stories from everywhere, which are inspiring in the means of human effort" (1.170). Such a Purana is the ancient history of this country, because it includes the characters of the great men of the past and the ideals and standards of the world's life. It is futile from the point of view of public welfare and literature to collect scattered stories of those who are not beneficial, who are devoted to sin. Ramayana author Maharshi Valmiki had expressed the desire to know from Narada, "I want to hear the story of someone who is strong in this world, knowledgeable about Dharma, truthful, steadfast in his vows, beneficial to all beings, who conquers anger and is free from envy." And in answer to this curiosity, Narada told him the story of Rama, because he was knowledgeable about Dharma, truthful, benevolent to the people, glorious, knowledgeable, pure-hearted, able to control his senses and possessed qualities like single-mindedness etc. (Ramayana 12-12).

Another thing becomes clear from the Uththannica of Ramayana. It is that until the poet's heart is filled with compassion, kindness and non-violence, he cannot engage in the creation of truly beneficial poetry. Even after hearing the story of Rama from Narada, the stream of poetry could flow from the heart of Valmiki Muni only when he saw a Nishad killing a Kraunch bird and his heart was filled with compassion.

The remembrance of such
Page #10:
---------------------------
##  The Collection of Madipuraṇa

The subject of the twelfth anga, Dṛṣṭivāda, of the Dvādaśāṅga Āgama, which was a collection of Madipuraṇa, was the character of the Tīrthaṅkara and other great men, as well as other narratives. According to the Dhavalāṭīkā of the Ṣaṭkhaṇḍāgama, twelve types of "puraṇa" were described here, including the lineages of Arhants, Cakravartins, Vidyādharas, Vāsudevas, Cāraṇas, Prajñāśramaṇas, Kauravas, Ikṣvākus, Kāśikas, and Vādis, as well as the Harivaṁśa and Nāthavaṁśa. Although this original Anuyogina composition is now unavailable, many sections of this Anuyogina are found in the collection of angas that was compiled under the leadership of Devadhigani during the Vāllhabīvachana in the fifth century. In particular, the last 30 sūtras of the 275 sūtras of the Chaturyāgama Samvāyāṅga introduce the Kulkaras, Tīrthaṅkaras, Cakravartins, and Baladevas, Vāsudevas, and Prativāsudevas, in order, along with their parents, birthplace, place of initiation, etc. Even more detailed lists of these Preṣṭhaśalākāpuruṣas are found in the fourth chapter of the "Tīloyapaṇṇatti" by Yativṛṣhabhāchārya. In addition, 11 Rudras, 1 Nārada, and 24 Kāmadevas are also described here.

Based on the lists found in the above Samvāyāṅga and Tīloyapaṇṇatti, specific narratives would have been passed down through the guru-śiṣya tradition, and later Jain puraṇas were based on them, as the author of the Paumachariyā, Vimalsūri, has clearly stated that "I am telling here in sequence all that was previously written in the Padmachariyā and passed down through the āchārya tradition" (18).

The question arises as to what is the earliest time of the narratives found in the puraṇas? The mention of palyas and oceans, Utsarpiṇī-Avasarpiṇī and Sukhamā-Dukhamā time cycles, and countable and uncountable years in the puraṇas does not reconcile with modern scientific and historical facts. This is not just the case with Jain puraṇas, the same thing is found in the Satyuga-Kaliyuga of the Vedic tradition. However, modern scholars have established a chronology of Indian literature based on language, subject matter, etc., in which the oldest is the Ṛgveda. No literary work from before that has been found. From the perspective of the Jain puraṇas, the sūkta (10.113.6) of the Ṛgveda is very important, in which the Vātarśana munis are praised. It seems that these munis were naked, also wore matted hair, lived with a dirty body from not bathing and with a silent demeanor, and were completely different from the Vedic ṛṣis in these qualities. Keśī was the chief among these munis. In another ṛca (10.110.26), Keśī and Vṛṣabha are used as adjective-noun, leaving no doubt that Keśī Vṛṣabha was the leader of the Vātarśana munis. If there is any doubt about this, it is well
Page #11:
---------------------------
## Editorial
### 3

This corresponds to the other seal, which depicts a meditating seated figure with a three-pronged crown on its head, similar to the Shaiva Trishul and the Jain Triratna, and some animal figures around it. When we look at the nakedness, matted hair, penance on Kailasa, bull symbol, protection of life, etc., of the first Tirthankara Rishabhanatha on the one hand, and the same characteristics of the peacock Mahadeva or Pashupati on the other, it seems that the development of both these deities may have taken place from the symbols of the Indus Valley. This is also confirmed by many verses of the Rigveda. In the Rigvedic verses like 'Tridha baddho vrishabho roraviti Mahadevo martyanavivesha' (415813), 'Arhan idam dayase visvam abhvam na va ojiyo Rudra tvadasti' (2.38.10), etc., the use of Vrishabha and Mahadeva, Arhan and Rudra, and the compassionate nature of the world in addressing the same deity is noteworthy. Thus, as far as history goes back, the sources of both the Shraman and Vedic traditions are visible.

From that ancient time till the Nirvana of the last Tirthankara Mahavira in 527 BC, the descriptions of Tirthankaras, Chakravartis, Baladevas, Narayanas, and Pratinarayanas found in Jain Puranas are also closely related to the Vedic Purana tradition. Apart from Rishabha, the Tirthankaras Nami and Nemi, the Chakravartis Bharat and Sagar, the Baladevas Ram and Baldev, the Narayanas Lakshman and Krishna, and the Pratinarayanas Ravana, Kans, and Jarasandha are worth studying comparatively in both traditions. The similarities in this are indicative of the stream of Indian unity, and the differences, while being indicative of the distinct characteristics of the two sub-streams, make us aware of the richness of Indian culture. Those who, without understanding this essence or deliberately, create a sense of conflict between the two, are truly enemies of the nation.

From this perspective, the presented Mahapurana is a very important work. Although it was created in the 8th-9th century, it contains all the ancient mythological traditions. The mention of King Chetak of Vaishali, King Shrenik of Magadha (Bimbisara), etc., contemporary to the last Tirthankara Mahavira, along with his life story (Paryaya 75), is particularly useful from a historical perspective. The introduction of Chaturbhuj Kalki, who lived a thousand years after Mahavira's Nirvana, has been attempted to be identified with the Hun king Mihirakula by Ka. Ba. Pathak (Bhandarkar Commemorative Essays, Poona, 1917).

Another characteristic of Puranas is that they used to be the knowledge repositories of their time, and they contain a special inclusion of social and religious matters besides history. The presented Mahapurana is also very important from this perspective. Just as the Puranas and Dharmashastras of the Vedic tradition describe the classification of human society into varnas, their distinct special conduct, and the process of upliftment and development of life in the various religious rites from conception to death and in the ashramas like Brahmacharya, etc., the same is found in the presented Mahapurana. Some people believe that this part of the Purana is influenced by the aforementioned tradition. If this is the case, there is nothing surprising, because the Vedic and Shraman traditions have been developing side by side from the historical period, both in terms of area and time, and both traditions have had similar problems of folk life and social order.
Page #12:
---------------------------
Adipurana

That our fundamental religious faith and virtuous character should not be harmed by that conduct. A Jain Acharya has very clearly stated this: "Sarv ev hi naanaam pramaan loukiko vidhih | Yatra samyaktvahani n yatra na vrata dusanam ||" That is, all those practices prevalent in the world are acceptable to Jains as proof, which do not harm their samyaktva, i.e., the belief in the fundamental difference between the inert and the conscious, and do not cause corruption in the vows of non-violence, etc. Those customs which appear to be flawed from a religious point of view should be reformed and made suitable. In this way, the Jain Acharyas have presented a great ideal for the followers of Jainism, that they should never compromise on their fundamental principles, and should not keep themselves aloof from general worldly practices. Live with society, but do not lose your intellectual freedom. Simply, we should examine and understand the points of agreement and disagreement with other traditions on this very criterion. There is one more thing. Considering the nature of the varnas, ashramas and samskaras, it appears that their basic structure is based on individual, familial and social customs and practices. Gradually, religious activities were incorporated into them and an attempt was made to give them stability and sanctity. For example, birth or marriage are universal and timeless in all families, and it is natural to celebrate some social festivals and entertainment on these occasions. Religion has taken these well-established festivals into its fold and given them a special color. This work was done by those who celebrated them according to their own beliefs and made them a part of their religion.

It is an important part of the modern editing system to carefully mark the variations in the text of ancient manuscripts. From this point of view, the present edition of the Mahapuraana is very useful. For this, the learned editor has used 12 manuscripts and taken their variations. Some variations are found to be very valuable. For example, in the fifth parva, after the 41st verse, there are four more verses in the Delhi manuscript, which mention the five skandhas, twelve ayatanas, community, impermanence and liberation, which are in accordance with Buddhist principles. These have been included in the printed and translated edition of Pandit Lalaramji Shastri, leaving out the first half verse. But these verses are not found in the oldest available palm leaf manuscript in Kannada script from the Moodbidri Saraswati Bhandar, nor in any other manuscript. This proves that the said verses were probably written in the margin by some reader or commentator and then entered into the original text.

Finally, we are very grateful to Pandit Pannalalji Sahityacharya for presenting this valuable edition of the Mahapuraana and its Hindi translation. The authorities of the Bharatiya Gyanpith are also commendable for publishing this treasure trove of literature with great enthusiasm, thus benefiting the literary scholars and lovers of self-study.

Vikram Samvat 2007
-Heeralal Jain -A. N. Upadhye (Granthamala Editor)

Page #13:
---------------------------
## Introduction
[From the First Edition]
The objective of the Bharatiya Jnanapith is divided into two parts: 1. Research and publication of lost, unavailable, and unpublished material of knowledge, 2. Creation of original literature for the benefit of the people. To fulfill these objectives, the Jnanapith Murtidevi Granthamala and Jnanapith Lokodaya Granthamala are being published respectively. The Jnanapith Murtidevi Granthamala has been established in memory of Murtidevi, the late mother of Shri Shantiprasadji, the founder of the Jnanapith, and in fulfillment of his last wish. Its Sanskrit, Prakrit, Pali, etc. divisions have published nine books so far. Many books are being edited, and many are in print.

## Special Features of this Edition
Although an edition of the Adipurana has been published earlier with the translation of Pandit Lalaramji Shastri, this edition has several special features, the most prominent being the textual research based on twelve ancient manuscripts. In old texts, many verses are written as annotations, but in some manuscripts, they are included in the original text, leading to many errors in determining the time of the authors, etc. For example:

"Dukham sansarinah skandhah te cha pancha prakirtitaah | Vijnanam vedana sanjna sanskaro rupameva cha ||42|| Panchendriyani shabdadya vishayah pancha manasam | Dharmayatanamethani dvadashayatanani cha || 43 || Samudeti yato loke ragadinaam gano'lilhah | Sa chatmatmiyabhavakhyah samudayasamahitah || 44 || Kshanikaah sarvasanskara iti evam vasana mata | Sanmarga iha vijnheyo nirodho moksha uchyate || 45 ||"

These verses are from the fifth parva. They are found in the Delhi manuscript. In the printed edition, except for the half verse "Dukham sansarinah skandhah te cha pancha prakirtitaah", the remaining three verses are printed at numbers 42 to 45. These verses are not found in all other manuscripts, including those on palm leaves and paper, such as T, B, P, M, S, A, T, etc.

In the introduction to the second part of Nyayakumudachandra (page 38), while comparing Haribhadrasuri and Prabhachandra, I had written: "These four verses are present in the Buddhist philosophy section of the Saddarshanasamuccaya. With the same sequence, these same verses, with slight variations in words, are also present in Jinsen's Adipurana (Parva 5, verses 42-45). From the composition, it is known that these verses must have been composed by some Buddhist Acharya, and they must have reached the Saddarshanasamuccaya and Adipurana from that Buddhist text. Haribhadra and Jinsen are almost contemporaries, so if these verses belong to Haribhadra and have come to the Adipurana, then this should be considered a significant event of non-sectarian sentiment of that time." But this well-edited edition eliminates that basis and clearly proves that these verses must have been written in the margin as annotations by some scribe, and they have been included in the original text over time. From this perspective, it becomes absolutely necessary to compare each text with ancient palm leaf manuscripts. Similarly, the following verses are found written in the D manuscript after verse 186 of Parva 16:

"Saliko malikashchaiva kumbhakaro tilantudah | Napitashcheti panchaami bhavanti sprusyakarakah || Rak
Page #14:
---------------------------
## Adipurana

These verses are clearly taken from another text, perhaps as commentary, as they do not align with Jain tradition. Both verses are included in the printed Mahapurana with Marathi commentary, along with their Marathi translation.

Similarly, it is possible that the previous verse, which mentions the distinction between touchable and untouchable Shudras, was also included in the copies at some point:

"Karavo'pi mata dwadha sprusyaspruśyavikalpataḥ |
Tatraspruśyāḥ prajābāhyāḥ sprusyāḥ syuḥ kārtakādayah ||186||"

Because such ideas have no connection with popular culture.

## Introduction

The learned editor of the text has made sufficient conjectures in the introduction regarding the text and the author, based on the available material. The insights he has presented regarding the caste system and the concept of "Sazzatitva" (being worthy of respect), by illuminating the inner secrets of the text, are entirely original and the natural outcome of his study. By comparing it with Smritis (ancient legal texts) and other works, he has proven that Jain culture does not believe in the caste system based on birth ("janmana"), but rather on qualities and actions ("guna karma"). In this context, he has also discussed Sanskrit and Prakrit languages. These views are also worth knowing:

## Sanskrit-Prakrit

Prakrit language was the spoken language of the people, while Sanskrit language was bound by grammatical rules, refined, cultivated, and the language of a particular class. The teachings of Jain Tirthankaras were delivered in "Ardhamagadhi" language, which was the vernacular of the Magadha region. It contained half the words from the Magadha dialect and half from the dialects of all countries. The Tirthankaras had to convey their religious message to the common people, so they used the vernacular as the medium of their teachings.

When there was a need for a "Prakrit grammar" similar to Sanskrit grammar, it was naturally to be constructed according to the principles and suffixes of Sanskrit grammar. Therefore, Prakrit grammars often mention "Prakritiḥ Sanskritam, tatra bhavam Prakritam," meaning Sanskrit is the root and the word derived from it is Prakrit. The Prakrit word "Ghad" is created from the Sanskrit word "Ghat" according to the rules of Prakrit grammar. This does not mean that Sanskrit came first and then became corrupted. In fact, the vernacular Prakrit-Magadhi has always been the primary language, and it has acquired the form of "Sanskrit" by being regulated according to the rules of Sanskrit grammar, as is evident from the explanations of Ajad and Namisadhu.

Namisadhu, in his commentary on Rudrata's Kavyalankara, has written very clearly and logically that "Prakrit is the natural language system of all beings. It is the root, and the language that arises from it or is the same as it is Prakrit. It does not have the discipline and refinement of grammar, etc. Ardhamagadhi is the language of the ancient scriptures. The Prakrit that existed before is the true Prakrit. Children, women, etc., can easily understand it, and all other languages have originated from it. This is the Prakrit language, like water falling from the clouds, which, though having one form, acquires different forms in different countries and due to different cultures, resulting in Sanskrit and other later distinctions. Therefore, the scholars have described Prakrit first and then Sanskrit, etc. Panini's grammar and other grammars..."

1. "Ardha Bhagavadbhāṣāyā Magadhadeśabhāṣātmakam, aṣaṁ ca sarvadeśabhāṣātmakam" Kriyakalāpaḍh
Page #15:
---------------------------
## Introduction

"When a language is refined, it is called Sanskrit."
Ajad, in his commentary on Sarasvatikanthabharan, has also expressed the same sentiment.
The great Buddhist philosopher Shantarakshita, in his commentary on Vadanaya (p. 103), has provided a logical justification for the meaning-bearing nature of the common language. Acharya Prabhachandra, in his work Nyayakumudachandra, has extensively proven that Prakrit is the natural language of the people. It is through the refinement of this language by grammar that the form of 'Sanskrit' is created. He has refuted the argument of 'Prakriteर्भवं प्राकृतम्' with great force. He writes, "What is that 'Prakriti' from which the language called Prakrit is born? Is it nature, the collection of roots, or Sanskrit words? If it is nature, then Prakrit itself is natural. From the collection of roots, Prakrit words are formed just like Sanskrit words. Calling Sanskrit words as 'Prakriti' is completely inappropriate, because it is refinement, it is a modification. Bringing a particular quality to an existing thing is called refinement, it is a form of modification, therefore calling it 'Prakriti' is inappropriate. Sanskrit is primordial and Prakrit is non-primordial."
Therefore, the notion that 'Prakrit language is derived from Sanskrit' is baseless. The name 'Sanskrit' itself indicates its refinement and posteriority. Prakrit grammar was certainly created after Sanskrit grammar. Because earlier, the Prakrit language did not need the rules of grammar. After the Sanskrit era, the need for its grammar arose. That is why the creators of Prakrit grammar wrote 'Prakritiः संस्कृतम्', because they considered Sanskrit words as 'Prakriti' and then added suffixes to create Prakrit words.

## Origin of Puranas

A collection of some key facts about the lives of Tirthankaras etc. is found in the Stanangasutra, based on which Acharya Hemchandra etc. created works like Trishatimahapuraana etc. In the Digambara tradition, we find an ancient collection of facts about the character of Tirthankaras etc. in the Prakrit language text Tiloyapannatti. In its fourth Mahaadhikari, it mentions from which heaven the Tirthankara came, the name of the city and parents, date of birth, constellation, lineage, interval between Tirthankaras, lifespan, childhood, height of the body, caste, reign, cause of renunciation, symbol, initiation date, constellation, initiation forest, initiation tree, sixth etc. primary penance, initiation family, parana, initiation in childhood or during reign, five vows in donation, time of wandering, date of omniscience, constellation location, time interval of the origin of omniscience, becoming the sky after attaining omniscience, the work of Indra etc. at the time of omniscience, a detailed description of the Samvasarana, how big was the Samvasarana of which Tirthankara, who does not go to the Samvasarana, 

Page #16:
---------------------------
**Marīpurama**

This is a detailed collection of important facts about the 24 Tirthankaras, including:

* Their names,
* Their extraordinary qualities,
* The tree of Kevala Jnana (omniscience),
* The eight miracles,
* The number of Yakshas and Yakshis,
* The duration of their Kevala Kala (state of omniscience),
* The number of Ganadharas (disciples),
* The number of Rishis (saints),
* The number of Purvadharas (predecessors),
* The number of Shikshak (teachers),
* The number of Avadhijnani (clairvoyants),
* The number of Kevalajnani (omniscients),
* The number of Vikriya Riddhi Dharis (those with miraculous powers),
* The number of Vadis (debators),
* The number of Ayikas (female disciples),
* The names of prominent Ayikas,
* The number of Shravakas (male lay followers),
* The number of Shravikas (female lay followers),
* The date of their Nirvana (liberation),
* The Nakshatra (constellation) at the time of their Nirvana,
* The name of the place where they attained Nirvana,
* Whether they attained Nirvana alone or with other monks,
* The number of days before they practiced Yoga Nirodha (cessation of bodily functions),
* The Asana (posture) in which they attained liberation,
* The number of Anubaddha Kevalis (those who attained liberation after the Tirthankara),
* The number of disciples who attained liberation in the Anuttar Vimana (highest heaven),
* The number of Moksha Gami Munis (monks destined for liberation),
* The number of disciples who attained liberation in heaven,
* The difference in time between the Tirthankaras' liberation,
* The details of their Tirthapravartan (establishment of the path).

Similarly, it provides detailed information about the Chakravartis (universal monarchs), including:

* Their parents,
* Their city,
* The color of their body,
* The route, cities, and rivers they encountered during their Digvijaya Yatra (conquest of the world).

It also includes important facts about the lives of Narayana, the six Pratinarayana, Balabhadra, and the eleven Rudras.

Based on this information, various Puranakaras (writers of Puranas) have written numerous Puranas, both large and small.

**Mahapuraana**

This text, the Mahapuraana, is considered the crown jewel of Jain Puranas. It is also known as the "Trishattilakshana Mahapuraanasangraha" (Collection of the Great Puranas with Sixty-Three Characteristics). It contains the lives of the 24 Tirthankaras, 12 Chakravartis, 6 Narayana, 6 Pratinarayana, and Balabhadra, a total of sixty-three Shalaka Purushas (eminent personalities).

Its poetic beauty, the abundance of literary devices, its clarity, power, and sweetness, its wordplay, and its unique style are unparalleled. This work by Swami Jinsen holds a special place among the few great literary gems in the treasury of Indian literature. It is not only unique from a literary perspective but also has significant value in understanding the history of cultural rise and fall, exchange, and interaction.

**Nature of the Text**

It is a historical fact that during the time of Swami Jinsen, there was a fierce conflict between Brahmanism and Jainism in the south. While not forgetting the noble culture of Bhagavan Mahavira, Acharya Jinsen made a timely effort to Jainize the rituals of
Page #17:
---------------------------
## Introduction

There are four types of *datti* (donation), namely *swadhyay* (self-study), *tapas* (austerities) like fasting, and *vratadharana* (observance of vows), which are the main duties of Brahmins.

Bharata Chakravarti considered *tapas* and *shruta* (scripture) as the main sacraments of the Brahmin caste. He further stated that even though a child born to Brahmin parents may be called a Brahmin by name, they cannot be considered a true Brahmin unless they possess *tapas* and *shruta*.

Chakravarti then elaborated on the *garbhanvayakriya* (conception), *dikshanvayakriya* (initiation), and *karttranvayakriya* (action) and explained that these *dwijanma* (twice-born) or Brahmins should perform these *garbhaadhana* (conception) to *nirvana* (liberation) rituals. He then described 48 *dikshanvayakriya* (initiation rituals) from *avatara* (incarnation) to *nirvana* (liberation).

*Vratadharana* (observance of vows) is called *diksha* (initiation), and the rituals performed for this initiation are called *dikshanvayakriya* (initiation rituals). The preparation undertaken by a being for *diksha* (initiation) or *vratadharana* (observance of vows) is called *dikshavatar* (initiation-incarnation).

When a *bhavya* (soul) contaminated by *mithyatva* (false belief) desires to embrace the *sanmarg* (right path), or when an *arjan* (soul) wishes to become a Jain, they approach a *yogindra* (great yogi) or a *grihasthacharya* (householder teacher) and request, "O great sage, please teach me the faultless Dharma. I have considered all other beliefs as worthless. Even the Vedic scriptures do not promote good conduct."

The *grihasthacharya* (householder teacher) then explains the nature of *apta shruta* (authentic scriptures) to the non-Jain *bhavya* (soul) and clarifies that the true Dharma lies in the scriptures, puranas, smritis, charitras, kriyas, mantras, devatas, lingas, and dietary purity, where these are explained from a true and essential perspective. The *dwadashaangshruta* (twelve-part scriptures) is the true Veda, and the scriptures promoting violence through sacrifices cannot be considered Vedas. Similarly, only those puranas and Dharma Shastras that advocate non-violence can be considered authentic, while those promoting killing and violence are the words of deceitful people.

The *shatkarma* (sixfold duties) performed without violence is the *aryavritta* (path of the noble ones), and the *chaturashramdharma* (four-fold order) taught by other religions is the *asanmarg* (wrong path). The rituals from *garbhaadhana* (conception) to *nirvana* (liberation) are the true rituals, while those from *garbha* (conception) to *shmashana* (cremation) are not. The mantras used in the *samyak kriyas* (right actions) from *garbhaadhana* (conception) to *nirvana* (liberation) are the true mantras, while those used for sinful actions like violence are *dumantra* (evil mantras).

The *visheshwar* (universal lord) and other *shanti* (peaceful) deities are the cause of peace, while other cruel deities who consume
Page #18:
---------------------------
## Maripurana

Those who share the same livelihood have always been associated with the Mithyatva (false belief) holders. Now, you will have a relationship with us. By saying this, they make him their equal. This is the **Varnalabha** (gaining of caste) action. - After this, earning a livelihood through the **Aryashatkarma** (six duties of a Jain) is his **Kulcharaya** (family tradition) action. Gradually, he becomes strong through vows, study, etc., and becomes a specialist in **Prayaschitta** (atonement) and other regulations, and attains the position of **Grihasthacharya** (household teacher), this is the **Gaheeshita** (deepening) action. Then there are the actions of **Prashanta** (tranquility), **Grihatyag** (renunciation of household life), **Deeksha** (initiation), and **Jindiksha** (initiation into the order of monks). These are the **Deekshanvaya** (initiation-related) actions.

In these **Deekshanvaya** actions, any **Bhavya** (soul destined for liberation) who is a **Mithyatvi** (false believer) is made a **Dwij-Brahmana** (twice-born Brahmin) through the **Sanskar** (ritual) of **Ahimsa** (non-violence) and other vows, and he is given the **Vidhan** (regulation) from that very body to **Munidisha** (initiation into the order of monks). Nowhere is it written that his birth or body should be of a particular kind? This method of making non-Jains into Jains and making them Brahmins through the **Vrat-Sanskar** (ritual of vows) proves that in the Jain tradition, **Varnalabha-Kriya** (gaining of caste) is according to **Gun** (qualities) and **Karma** (actions), not according to birth. The only condition is that he must be a **Bhavya** and his inclination should be towards accepting the **Sanmarg** (right path). This is enough for Jain initiation. He can become a Jain, not only a Jain but also a Brahmin, by abandoning **Hinsa** (violence), **Pap** (sin), **Veda** (Hindu scriptures) which advocate violence, and the worship of cruel **Mansavrittik** (meat-eating) deities. He can achieve the highest **Munidisha** in the Jain tradition from that very birth. This **Varnalabha Kriya**, which happens according to **Gun** and **Karma**, gives all human beings equal **Dharmaadhikars** (religious rights).

Now, let's look at the **Katranvaya** actions - **Katranvaya** actions are obtained as a result of **Punyakarya** (meritorious deeds) and **Samman Aaradhana** (respectful worship). They are: **Sajjatitva** (being of a good family), **Sadgrihitva** (being a good householder), **Parivajy** (being a householder who has renounced worldly attachments), **Surendrata** (being a king), **Samrajya** (being an emperor), **Paramarhanta** (being a liberated soul), and **Parinirvana** (final liberation). These seven **Paramasthan** (highest states) are attained by the **Asanna Bhavya** (soul who is close to liberation) who follows Jainism.

The **Asanna Bhavya** attains **Sajjatitva** through the benefit of human birth. He is born into a family where the tradition of **Deeksha** (initiation) has been going on. The father and mother's family and
Page #19:
---------------------------
## Introduction

Jain Brahmanas should earn their livelihood through agriculture, trade, writing, and weaponry. (40.167) The essence of the above description is: 1. The Varna system was established by King Rishabhdev during his reign. He established only three Varnas - Kshatriya, Vaishya, and Shudra - based on their livelihood according to their qualities and actions. This was the social or political system of that time, not a religious system. When he attained omniscience and became Lord Adinath, he did not give any teachings regarding this social or political system. 2. Bharat Chakravarti made amendments to this system during his reign. He established the fourth Varna, 'Brahmana', with the intention of honoring the Anu-vrata practitioners. This allows anyone to become a Brahmana through the 'Vrata-Sanskar'. 3. The initiation ceremony in the Diksha-anvaya rituals is for the misguided Bhavyas to embrace the right path. Through this, any non-Jain can be initiated into Jainism. The only condition is that they must be a Bhavyas and willing to embrace the right path. 4. The Varna-labh ceremony in the Diksha-anvaya rituals is for integrating a non-Jain into the Jain community after they become a Jain, placing them in the Varna with similar livelihood. This gives them a new Varna and all the rights associated with it. 5. The teachings of these Garbha-anvaya and other rituals were also given by Bharat Chakravarti during his reign, which was a way to strengthen the social system.

Therefore, even though the Adi Purana is influenced by some Smritis and the Brahmana system, it still contains cultural elements that form the basis of Jain culture. This is the importance of non-violence and other vows, i.e., the importance of good conduct. This is why any individual can be considered high and noble. They write about this theoretical point in very clear words:

"Manushya-jati-reka-eva jati-namo-bayo-dbhava. Vrutti-bheda-hita-bhavat cha-tur-visya-mi-ha-anute." (38.45)

There is only one human race, born from the same origin. Due to the difference in livelihood, it is divided into four categories: Brahmana, etc.

## Adi Purana and Smritis

The Adi Purana grants ten special privileges to Brahmanas:

1. Ati-bal-vidya, 2. Kula-avdhi, 3. Varna-uttam-tva, 4. Patrata, 5. Srishti-adhikrita, 6. Vyavhare-shita, 7. Avadhya-tva, 8. Adandya-tva, 9. Mana-arhata, and 10. Praja-sambandha-antar. (40.175-76)

The Adi Purana explains the invincibility of Brahmanas in this way:

"Brahmano hi guna-utkarsh-an-nanya-to vadha-marhati." (40.194)

"Sarva-praani na hantavyo bahmana-stu visheshatah." (40.195)

Due to their superior qualities, Brahmanas should not be killed. All beings should not be killed, especially Brahmanas.

The reason for their immunity from punishment is given as follows:

"Pariharya yatha deva-guru-dravya-m hi-ta-dhi-bhih. Brahma-sva-m cha tatha-bhutam na danda-hast-ato vi-
Page #20:
---------------------------
## Adipurana

Just as the righteous should not accept *devaguru* wealth, so too should they not accept the wealth of a Brahmin. Therefore, a *dvija* should not be subjected to punishment or fines. These privileges clearly bear the stamp of Brahminical Smritis. The matter of certain rights for certain castes or special privileges for a particular caste is found repeatedly in Manusmriti and other texts. Manusmriti states:

"Never kill a Brahmin, even if he is guilty of all sins. One should banish him from the kingdom, along with his property, unharmed and with his wealth intact." (8.380-81) "There is no sin greater than harming a Brahmin. The king should never confiscate the property of a Brahmin." (189)

In other words, a Brahmin is not to be killed even if he commits all sins. The king should not take his property. While describing the system of marriage, Adipurana states:

"A Shudra should marry a Shudra woman, not another, nor his own sister. A Kshatriya should marry his own, a *dvija* should marry his own, and never another." (16.247)

This means a Shudra should marry only a Shudra woman, not a daughter of a Brahmin or another caste. A Vaishya should marry a Vaishya woman and a Shudra woman. A Kshatriya should marry a Kshatriya, Vaishya, and Shudra woman. A Brahmin should marry a Brahmin woman, and he can also marry a Kshatriya, Vaishya, and Shudra woman. Compare this with the following verse from Manusmriti:

"A Shudra woman is for a Shudra, and his own sister is for him. A Vaishya woman is for a Vaishya, and his own sister is for him. A Kshatriya woman is for a Kshatriya, and his own sister is for him. A Brahmin woman is for a Brahmin, and his own sister is for him." (3.13)

The same order is described in Yajnavalkya Smriti (3.157).

The following verse appears in the Anushasana Parva of the Mahabharata:

"Penance, knowledge, and birth are the causes of Brahminhood. One who possesses these three qualities becomes a *dvija*." (1217)

The latter half of this verse appears in Patanjali's Mahabhashya (2.2.6) with this variant reading:

"One who is deficient in penance and knowledge is a *jatibrahmana*."

This *jatibrahmana* concept based on birth, as found in Adipurana (Parva 38, verse 43), is taken verbatim from these texts:

"Penance, knowledge, and birth are the three causes of Brahminhood. One who is deficient in penance and knowledge is a *jatibrahmana*."

Similarly, many other instances can be cited that clearly demonstrate the influence of Smritis and other texts on Adipurana.

## 2

**Equal Inheritance for Daughters**

Adipurana, while discussing the ritual of leaving home, instructs on the division of wealth:

"One share should be for religious purposes, the second for household expenses, and the third for the division among your siblings. Those who are worthy of respect should be given an equal share." 

Page #21:
---------------------------
13
Preface:  That is, one part of my wealth is for religious work, another part is for household expenses, and the third part is to be distributed among the brothers. The share should be distributed equally among the daughters and sons. This makes it clear that the daughter has the same equal right in the wealth as the sons.
This edition, enriched with original text purification, translation, commentary and study-oriented introduction, is the fruit of the years of hard work of the learned editor.  Panna Lalji is not only an Acharya of literature, but he has also studied Dharma Shastra, Puranas and philosophy well. He has written commentaries on many texts and edited them. He is a scholar, teacher and devout thinker. We congratulate him on this labor-intensive and respected work and hope that he will continue to rescue and edit many more such literary gems.
The founder of the Bharatiya Jnanapith, the benevolent Shanti Prasad Jain, and his calm wife, Smt. Ramaji, are the cultural soul of this institution. They always desire that ancient texts should be liberated and also given a new form, so that the common people can also become familiar with Jain culture. They also want that a study book should be written on each Acharya, which should contain the nectar of their life and their works. The Jnanapith is trying its best for this. The second part of this book will also reach the readers soon. Bharatiya Jnanapith, Kashi.
- Mahendra Kumar Nyayacharya, Vasant Panchami 2...
Editor- Murtidevi Jain Granthamala 

Page #22:
---------------------------
## Introduction

[Editorial Material from the Second Edition]

The editing of the *Adipurana* or *Purvapurana*, the first part of the *Mahapuraana* written by Shri Jinaseenacharya, has been done based on the following 12 manuscripts:

1. **'T' Manuscript:** This manuscript was obtained from the Saraswati Bhavan in Moodbidri through the kind efforts of Pandit K. Bhujabali Shastri 'Vidyaabhusan'. It is written on palm leaves in the Kannada script. The palm leaves are 25 inches long and 2 inches wide. Each leaf has approximately eight lines, with 106 to 112 characters per line. The characters are small and dense. There are also useful notes in the margins and at the bottom. The total number of leaves in the manuscript is 177. The notes are written so closely with the original text that it can be difficult for an ordinary person to read. Numbers have been given to the verses to indicate their order. The author seems to have written the script with great authenticity and diligence. This is why this manuscript is considered more accurate than all other manuscripts. The original text of this work has been taken from this manuscript. The following verses are found at the end of this manuscript, which clearly reveal the author and the time of writing:

"Om Namo Vrishabhanaya, Shri Shri Shri Bharata Vishesha Kevalimyo Namah. Vrishabhasenaadigana Dharamuni Bhyo Namah, Parvataam Jain Shaasanam, Bhannam astu.
Barakarnaateshgaayaam Nivasanyuri Namabhooti Mahapratishtathilakavaan Nemichandrasuryah. Tadairghavamshajaato (ta) Putra Prashasy Devachandrasya. Yannemichandrasuno Varabhaarakhajagotrajaato'ham. Shrimatsuraasuranareeshvarapannagendra maulyachyutagriyuga lo Varadvivyagatra. Raagaadidosharahito Vishutaashtakarma Paayat Sada Budhavaran Varadoloara. Shalyaambe Byomavahivyasanaraashiyate [1730] Vartamaane Dvitiye Paache Phalgusymaase Vidhutishiyutasatkaamyavaarotraraabhe. Purva Punyam Puraanam Purajinacharitam Nemichandran ChaabhoodevabichaarakeetipratipativarashiShyena Chatyaavarena. Dharmasthalapuraadheeshah Kumaaraalyo Naraadhiphah Tasmai Battam Puraanam Bhiguruna Chaarakoti na."

The code name of this book is 'T'.

2. **'B' Manuscript:** This manuscript was also obtained from the Saraswati Bhavan in Moodbidri through the kind efforts of Shri Yuta 50 K. Bhujabali Shastri. This manuscript is also engraved on palm leaves in the Kannada script. The total number of leaves in this manuscript is 237. Each leaf is 25 inches long and 1.5 inches wide. Each leaf has 6 to 7 lines, with 118 to 122 characters per line. There are also notes in the middle of the manuscript. The characters are legible and beautiful. Many parts of the leaves have been destroyed by termite attacks. Nothing is known about the author or the time of writing. The code name of this manuscript is 'B'.

3. **'P' Manuscript:** This manuscript was obtained from the Jain Saraswati Bhavan in Ara through the kind efforts of Pandit Nemichandra Shastri Jyotishacharya. 

Page #23:
---------------------------
## Introduction

This manuscript was obtained from [source not specified]. It is written on paper in Devanagari script using black and red ink. It consists of 305 leaves in total. Each leaf has 13 lines, with 42 to 46 characters per line. The leaves are 14.5 inches long and 6 inches wide. Several portions of the manuscript are missing from the beginning. It appears that the ink used contained a high concentration of "koshis" (a type of gum), which has caused the paper to deteriorate rapidly. The manuscript is legible but contains some errors. There is often no distinction between the letters "sh", "shh", "s", "v", "b", "n", and "nn". Each leaf has necessary annotations at the top, bottom, and sides. Many of these annotations are identical to the annotations in the "T" manuscript. The script dates back to 1735. This is likely the Vikram Samvat era, as it was the most commonly used calendar in North India. The final eulogy of the book reads as follows:

"In the year 1735, on the twelfth day of the dark fortnight of the month of Agrahayan, on a Friday afternoon.

"Sri Harikrishna, the imperishable, the wise, the ruler of the Brahmachakravarti kingdom, the valiant, the destroyer of evil clouds, the fearless, the annihilator of the hordes of barbarians, the mighty, the Brahma, the one who wears the three crowns, the one who sits on the immortal throne, the one who is served by the celestial beings, the one who shines with a thousand rays, the jewel among kings, the one who has the crescent moon on his head, the one who is loved by the supreme Lord Shiva, the one who is adorned with the ornaments of knowledge and meditation, the one who is the king of the gods, the one whose lotus feet are served by the bees, the one whose body is adorned with the words of the brave warriors. This Purana is written for the reading of the auspicious and glorious deeds. Let the world be illuminated by the words of the steadfast disciple, Giridhar Parsuram. May there be auspiciousness, prosperity, and well-being."

At the beginning of the book, on the left side of a blank leaf, it is written:

"This Purana was established in the city of Arna, in the temple of Sri Parsvajin, by the servant of the sages, for the reading of the noble souls. May it be auspicious."

This book is designated as "P".

## "A" Manuscript

This manuscript belongs to the Jain Siddhanta Bhavan in Arna. It contains 258 leaves in total. Each leaf is 12.5 inches long and 6 inches wide. Each leaf has 15 to 18 lines, with 38 to 41 characters per line. The script is legible. It is written in Devanagari script using black and red ink. There are many errors. The numbers of the verses are also often incorrect. There is no distinction between the letters "sh", "shh", "s", "n", "nn", and "b", "v". It is unclear when and by whom this manuscript was written. There are some annotations on specific words in some places. The author of this manuscript is unknown. At the bottom of the last leaf of the book, the following words are written in a thin script:

"This book belongs to Maripuraanaji, given to Bhattarak Rajendra Kitiji, in Lucknow, by the daughter of Thakurdas's wife, Lalitprasad. Date: Magh Badi... year 1905."

## Notes

1. The following six-line verse is present here, which
Page #24:
---------------------------
##  English Translation:

**16**
The manuscript of the Mahavipuraana does not reveal its writing period. Its code name is 'A'.

**5.** 'Prati' - This manuscript was obtained from Pt. Khemchandra Shastri of the Marwari Temple, Shakkar Bazaar, Indore, courtesy of him.  Useful annotations have been provided in the margins throughout. The number of pages is 500, the number of lines per page is 11, and the number of characters per line is 35 to 38. The script is legible, the condition is good, the writing date is not mentioned, and there is no writing at the beginning or end. The first page was damaged, so a second page was written and attached. It is mostly accurate. Due to its origin from Indore, its code name is 'I'.

**6.** 'S' Prati - This manuscript was obtained from the Saraswati Bhavan of the revered Baba Shri 105 Khullak Ganesh Prasadji Varni, by his grace. The handwriting is very ancient, with faded diacritical marks, making it difficult for modern readers to read without practice. It is adorned with illustrations throughout. Illustrations could not be made in the latter part, so blank spaces have been left for them. Many of the illustrations are very beautiful. The number of pages is 364, the condition is good, and there is no writing at the beginning or end. It was learned from the revered Varniji that this manuscript was gifted to him by a gentleman in Banaras. Due to its origin from Sagar, its code name is 'S'.

**7.** 'Prati' - This manuscript was obtained from the grace of Pannalalji Agrawal of Delhi. It contains the original verses along with the Sanskrit commentary by Lalitakiti Bhattarak. The number of pages is 868, the number of lines per page is 12, and the number of characters per line is 50 to 52. The writing period is unknown. At the end, there is a eulogy of the commentator, which reveals the time of the commentary's creation. The eulogy is as follows: "In the year Sagar Nagabhogikamite, in the month of Magha, on the 25th day of the bright fortnight, on the day of the Sun, this commentary was created. In the Kasthasanghvara and Madhuravara Ganas, in the Pushkara Gana, just as Shri Jagadadhikotir was known as a great conqueror of the soul, so his disciple, with a mind trained in the scriptures, known in the world as Bhattarak, with the fame of Shumbha Malita, etc., with devotion, I have carefully examined the great epic spoken by Rajashri Jinasena, so that wise people may read it easily and attain peace." Due to its origin from Delhi, its code name is 'D'.

**8.** 'Prati' - This manuscript was obtained from Moodbidri, courtesy of Shri Pt. Bhujabali Shastri. It contains annotations in Sanskrit on palm leaves, with numbers given to the original verses. The annotations given below the verses in the original text are taken from this manuscript. In this annotation, various meanings of the first verse "Shrime Sakalgyanasamrajyapadamiyuche. Dharmachakrabhate Bhatre Namah Sansarabhimah" have been given, some of which have been mentioned in the Hindi translation. Its script is Kannada. The code name of this manuscript is 'T'. The name of the annotator is unknown.

**9.** 'K' Prati - This manuscript is also a commentary manuscript. It was obtained from the Jain Siddhant Bhavan, Ara. Annotations are given in Kannada script on palm
Page #25:
---------------------------
## Introduction

The lines have 35 to 40 characters per line. The script is legible and mostly accurate. This script seems to be from a Kannada copy. The bottom part of the last letters is worn out. This book seems very ancient. At the end of it is the following inscription:
"Shri Vitragaya Namah. Samvat 1224 Vai 007 Lipiriyam Vishvasena Rishi Na Udaipur Nagare Shrimad Bhagavajinnale. Shubham Bhuyat Shri Shri."
Its code name is 'K'.

11. 'L' copy - This copy is with Hindi translation by Shriman Pandit Lalaramji Shastri. Its publication was done by him. The verse is given above and its translation is given below. In it, the text of many corrupt verses has become corrupted due to tradition. This edition is now unavailable. The code name of this book is 'L'.

12. 'M' copy - This book was published long ago with Marathi translation from Jainendra Press, Kolhapur. Late 50 Kallappa Bharmappa 'Nitave' is its Marathi translator. Before being printed in the book, this translation was probably published in Seth Hirachand Nemichandji's Jain Bodhak. In it, verses are given and their translation in Marathi is given below them. The original text is corrupt in many places. Pandit Lalaramji has mostly taken the text of this book in his translation. This edition is also now unavailable. Its code name is 'M'.

Thus, this book has been edited based on 12 copies. As far as possible, I have kept the text of the 'T' copy in the original. The variations in the text of other copies are given in the notes below according to their code names. In the 'A' and 'P' copies, many texts are very corrupt, which have been omitted as unnecessary. Many corrupt texts of the 'L' and 'M' copies have also been ignored. Where the text of the 'T' copy could not be made sense of, the text of the 'B' copy has been given in the original and the text of the 'T' copy has been mentioned in the notes. But there will be only two or four such places in the entire book. The 'T' copy is very accurate. Pandit Ashadharji, while describing the original qualities in Sagardharmamrut, has quoted the following verse of Jinasenacharya:
"Hinsasatyasteyaadabrahmaparigrahaasch badarabhedat.
Chutanmansadmadvirati garhino'shta santyamii moolagunah." But this verse was not found in the copies available to us. Pandit Kailashchandji and some other scholars also inquired about this verse from me. It is possible that this verse is in some other copy. Shri Pandit Devkumarji Nyayatirith has taken great pains in listening to the Kannada script and converting it into Devanagari script. I have also received great cooperation from Shri Namiraj, Padmaraj and Raghuraj students who were studying at Shri Ganesh Vidyalaya at that time in converting Kannada script into Devanagari script. It took me two summer vacations to take the variations of the entire book and both years the aforementioned gentlemen gave me sufficient cooperation, therefore I am grateful to them for this literary service.

## Sanskrit

The Sanskrit word 'Sam' is formed by adding the suffix 'kt' to the root 'kr' with the prefix 'sam'. The meaning of the root 'kr' with the prefixes 'sam' and 'pari' is when it is an ornament or a group, then that root is Sudagam. Therefore, 

Page #26:
---------------------------
## The Mahavipurana

The Sanskrit language is known for its well-structured and refined nature. Its Sanskrit name, "Anvārtha Saṁjñā," signifies its meaningfulness. This language, without violating the rules laid down by its originators, has been prevalent in the Indian subcontinent for thousands of years. While there have been changes in the language from the Vedic period to the present, these changes are relatively minor. However, observing contemporary texts compels us to acknowledge its evolution over time.

Scholars who understand the essence of language have divided the history of Sanskrit into three periods:

1. **Śruti Kāla:**  Chintamani Vinayak Vaidya identified this period as the first, encompassing the Vedas.
2. **Smṛti Kāla:** This period, the second, extends from the time of Yāska and Pāṇini to the time of the Mahābhāṣyakāra Patañjali.
3. **Bhāpya Kāla:** This period, the third, is characterized by the writing of commentaries on various philosophical texts.

Sir Bhaṇḍārkar, prioritizing the language's structure, identified three periods:

1. **Saṁhitā Kāla:** This period, the first, encompasses the Vedic Saṁhitās.
2. **Madhya Saṁskṛta Kāla:** This period, the second, is characterized by the use of Middle Sanskrit.
3. **Laukika Saṁskṛta Kāla:** This period, the third, is characterized by the use of colloquial Sanskrit. This period is further divided into three stages.

To understand the gradual development of the Sanskrit language, it is essential to examine its various stages:

1. **Saṁhitā Kāla:** This stage includes the Vedic Saṁhitās, which contain numerous hymns. The Sanskrit of this period is significantly different from the Sanskrit of today. The pronunciation of words in this language requires special attention to the tones, such as udātta. The only grammar that can explain the words of this period is the Pāṇini grammar.

2. **Brāhmaṇa Kāla:** This stage, following the Saṁhitā Kāla, encompasses the Brāhmaṇas, Āraṇyakas, and Upanishads. This period is known as the "Brāhmaṇa Kāla." The language of this period is less archaic than the Saṁhitā Kāla, and the rules of Pāṇini grammar are generally applicable. The compositions of this period are simple, concise, and rich in verbs. The Saṁhitā Kāla and Brāhmaṇa Kāla can be considered part of the Śruti Kāla.

3. **Smṛti Kāla:** This stage, following the Śruti Kāla, extends to the time of the Mahābhāṣyakāra Patañjali. This period is considered to have begun with Yāska and Pāṇini. The language of this period is found in numerous sūtra texts, the Rāmāyaṇa, and the Mahābhārata. The compositions of this period are also simple, like those of the Śruti Kāla, and free from long compounds. The Śruti Kāla used many verbs that could not be explained by grammar and were considered acceptable as "Āṛṣa usage." These usages gradually declined during this period.

4. **Bhāṣya Kāla:** This stage saw the writing of commentaries on various philosophical sūtra texts. The commentators seemed to be in a race to expand the simple and concise compositions of the sūtras. Commentaries were written on sūtra texts of various subjects, including logic, grammar, and religion. The language of this period was also simple, free from long compounds, and accessible to the common people.

5. **Purāṇa Kāla:** Although the Purā
Page #27:
---------------------------
## Introduction

The power of imagination developed further, leading to the emergence of literary devices, which gradually increased in number. Initially, there were only four literary devices, but now their number has grown to over a hundred. The language of this period was complex and infused with imagination. During this era, the treasury of Sanskrit language was enriched more than in any other period. Most of the available Jain scriptures in Sanskrit were composed during the commentary period, the Puranic period, and the poetic period.

## Prakrit

It is true that no Jain scriptures written in Sanskrit are available from before the commentary period, but this does not mean that Jains did not have a tradition of writing scriptures before that, or that they did not have their own language. Jain Acharyas have never been obsessed with language. They have always considered language as a means, not an end. This is why they have always taught the truth to the people in their own language. For many centuries before the Common Era, the common language of the people of India was Prakrit. At that time, Jain Acharyas used to teach the truth in Prakrit. Buddhists adopted a branch of Prakrit called Magadhi, which later became known as Pali. The Buddhist Tripitaka scriptures are considered to have been composed before the Common Era. The language of the Jain Anga scriptures is from before the Common Era, even though their current compilation is from a later period.

Some people have held the view that Prakrit originated from Sanskrit, and the first sutra of Prakrit grammar, "Prakritiḥ Sanskritam," supports this view. But the truth is not like that. Prakrit is the ancient common spoken language of India. The inscriptions of the Mauryan emperor Ashoka, who ruled in the 3rd century BCE, are found in many parts of India, and their language is considered to be the Prakrit language of that time. This makes it clear that centuries before the Maha-bhashyakara, the common people spoke different types of Prakrit. Prakrit means natural. The Jain Agamas are written in this Prakrit language.

Since the language of Ashoka's inscriptions is of various types of Prakrit, and the Prakrit languages used in the plays of great poets also show diversity, it can be said that even before the Common Era, different types of Prakrit had emerged due to regional differences. Vararuchi, in his "Prakrit Prakash," has mentioned three types of Prakrit besides the general Prakrit: 1. Shauraseni, 2. Magadhi, and 3. Paisachi. Hemachandra, in his "Hema Vyākaraṇa," has mentioned five types: 1. Shauraseni, 2. Magadhi, 3. Paisachi, 4. Chulika Paisachi, and 5. Apabhramsha. Trivikram, in his "Prakrit Sutra Vritti," and Lakshmidhara, in his "Shadbhasha Chandrika," have also described these types. Markandeya, in his "Prakrit Sarvasva," has considered four types: 1. Bhasha, 2. Vibhasha, 3. Apabhramsha, and 4. Paisachi, and has further classified them into 16 sub-types: 1. Maharashtri, 2. Shauraseni, 3. Prachi, 4. Avanti, 5. Magadhi, 6. Shakari, 7. Chandali, 8. Shabari, 9. Abhirika, 10. Takki, 11. Nagar, 12. Brachad, 13. Upnagar, 14. Kaikaya, 15. Shaurasen, and 16. Panchal. The first five are considered "Bhasha" Prak
Page #28:
---------------------------
## 20
## Adipurana

Jain Acharyas have always given impetus to the progress of Indian literature. Let alone ancient languages, the initial undertaking of the Hindi language was also done by Jain Acharyas. If the Jain community develops intellect and brings its entire literature to light in a modern way with full force, then the whole world will be humbled by their virtues. This is my personal belief.

## Purana

In Indian religious texts, the word Purana is used along with history. Many people have considered history and Purana as the fifth Veda. Chanakya, in his Arthashastra, has counted history in the Atharvaveda and included Itivritta, Purana, Akhyayika, Udaharana, and Dharmashastra in history. This proves that history and Purana are both different, even though Itivritta is mentioned as being similar, both have their own unique characteristics.

The lexicographers have considered the characteristics of Purana as follows:

"Sargashcha pratisargashcha vansho manvantaraani cha.
Vanshanucharitam chaiva puranam panchalakshanam ||"

A Purana is that which describes creation, recreation, lineage, Manvantaras, and lineage traditions. Creation, recreation, etc. are the five characteristics of Purana.

Itivritta only mentions the events that happened, but Purana, while mentioning the events of great men, also describes the fruits and consequences, merit and demerit obtained from them. Along with this, it also displays moral and religious sentiments in between, as opposed to the expectation of character building in an individual. Itivritta only mentions current events, but Purana also mentions the past and future lives of the hero, and that is because ordinary people can understand how a great man can be made. What sacrifices and austerities need to be done to rise from the low to the high. Purana has a very important place in the construction of human life. This is the reason why the faith of ordinary people in it is still intact as before.

The Purana literature of the non-Jain community is very extensive. There are 18 Puranas there, whose names are as follows: 1 Matsya Purana, 2 Markandeya Purana, 3 Bhagavata Purana, 4 Bhavishya Purana, 5 Brahmanda Purana, 6 Brahmavaivarta Purana, 7 Brahma Purana, 8 Vamana Purana, 9 Varaha Purana, 10 Vishnu Purana, 11 Vayu or Shiva Purana, 12 Agni Purana, 13 Narada Purana, 14 Padma Purana, 15 Linga Purana, 16 Garuda Purana, 17 Kurma Purana, and 18 Skanda Purana.

These eighteen are called Mahapuranas. Apart from these, the Garuda Purana also mentions 18 Upapuranas, which are as follows:

1 Sanatkumar, 2 Narasimha, 3 Skanda, 4 Shiv dharma, 5 Ascharya, 6 Naradya, 7 Kapil, 8 Vamana, 9 Ausanas, 10 Brahmanda, 11 Varun, 12 Kalika, 13 Maheswar, 14 Samb, 15 Sour, 16 Parashar, 17 Marich, and 18 Bhargav.

In Devi Bhagavata, the names Shiva, Manav, Paditya, Bhagavata, and Vasishtha are mentioned in place of Skanda, Vamana, Brahmanda, Marich, and Bhargav respectively.

Apart from these Mahapuranas and Upa
Page #29:
---------------------------
## Introduction

It is the opinion of many historians that these modern Puranas were composed between 300 CE and 800 CE.

While a division of Puranas and Upapuranas is found in non-Jain religions, it is not found in the Jain community. However, the Purana literature that exists in Jainism is unique in its own way. While other Purana authors have not been able to preserve the truth of history, Jain Purana authors have preserved the truth of history more accurately. Therefore, today's impartial scholars have clearly concluded that "the help we get from Jain Puranas, their narrative texts, to understand the ancient Indian situation is not available from other Puranas."

Here are the names of some Jain Puranas:

| Purana Name | Author | Composition Year |
|---|---|---|
| 1. Padma Purana (Padmacharit) | Ravishena | 705 CE |
| 2. Maha Purana (Adi Purana) | Jinasena | 7th Century |
| 3. Uttar Purana | Gunabhadra | 10th Century |
| 4. Ajit Purana | Arunamuni | 1716 CE |
| 5. Adi Purana (Kannada) | Kavi Pampa | 641 CE |
| 6. Adi Purana | Bhattaraka Chandrakirti | 17th Century |
| 7. Adi Purana | Sakalakirti | 15th Century |
| 8. Uttar Purana | Sakalakirti | 1688 CE |
| 9. Karnaamrit Purana | Keshavasean | 1555 CE |
| 10. Jayakumar Purana | Brahmaraj | 1560 CE |
| 11. Chandra Prabha Purana | Kavi Agas | Around 1575 CE |
| 12. Chamund Purana (K) | Dev Chamundaray | 17th Century |
| 13. Dharmanath Purana (K) | Kavi Bahubali | Unavailable |
| 14. Neminath Purana | Brahmana Nemidatta | 783 CE |
| 15. Padma Nabha Purana | Bhadrabahu Shubhachandra | 17th Century |
| 16. Paumachariy (Apabhramsha) | Chaturmukha Dev | 999 CE |
| 17.  | Swayambhudev | 15-16th Century |
| 18. Padma Purana | Bhadrabahu Somaseana | 1654 CE |
| 19. Pam Purana | Bhadrabahu Dharmakiriti | 15-16th Century |
| 20.  (Apabhramsha) | Kavi Raidhū | 1657 CE |
| 21.  | Chandrakirti | 1658 CE |
| 22.  | Brahmajinas | 15-16th Century |
| 23. Pandava Purana | Bhadrabahu Shubhachandra | 1608 CE |
| 24.  (Apabhramsha) | Yashaskirti | 1467 CE |
| 25.  | Shribhushan | 17th Century |
| 26.  | Vadi Chandra | 17th Century |
| 27. Parsva Purana (Apabhramsha) | Papprakiti | 15
Page #30:
---------------------------
##  Jain Puranas: A List

**22**
30. Parsva Purana
31. Maha Purana
32. Maha Purana (Adi Purana, Uttar Purana) Apabhramsha
33. Mallinatha Purana (Kannada)
34. Purana Sara
35. Mahavira Purana
36. Mahavira Purana
37. Mallinatha Purana
38. Munisuvrata Purana
36.
37
40. Vagarth Sangrah Purana
"1
11
11
17
11
""
Adi Purana
Vadichandra
Acharya Mallisena
Mahakavi Pushpadanta
(Apabhramsha) ,,) )
"1
Kavi Nagachandra Shrichand
Kavi Asag B. Sakal Kirti
37
41. Shantinatha Purana
42.
43. Shri Purana
44. Harivansha Purana
45. Harivansha Purana (Apabhramsha)
46.
( ()
"1
47.
48.
46.
50.
1671
51.
52.
Composed before 1560
In addition to these, there are numerous character narratives in Sanskrit, Prakrit and Apabhramsha languages, exceeding the number of Puranas. These include significant works like 'Varangacharita', 'Jinadattacharita', 'Jashar Chariu', 'Nayakumar Chariu' and many more.
Brahma Krishnadas
B. Surendrakirti Kavi Paramesthi
Kavi Asag
B. Shribhushan
B. Gunabhadra
Punnat Sanghiya Jinsen
Swayambhudev Chaturmukhadev B. Jindas
B. Yash Kirti
B. Shruta Kirti
1658
1104
10th Century CE
Kavi Raidhū
B. Dharma Kirti Kavi Ramchandra
11th Century CE
11th Century CE -
610
15th Century
"
17th Century CE
18th Century CE
Preceding the Maha Purana of Acharya Jinsen
10th Century
1656
15th-16th Century CE
Shaka Samvat 705
8th Century CE
8th Century CE or earlier
15th-16th Century
1507
1552
15th-16th Century
This list of Purana texts was kindly provided by our fellow scholar, Pandit Paramanandji Shastri, Sarsawa. We are grateful to him for this.
Maha Purana
The Maha Purana has two parts: the first is Adi Purana or Purva Purana and the second is Uttar Purana. The Adi Purana is complete in 47 chapters, of which 42 chapters are complete and 3 verses of the 43rd chapter were composed by Bhagavan Jinsenacharya. The remaining 5 chapters and the Uttar Purana were composed by Shri Gunabhadracharya, the chief disciple of Shri Jinsenacharya.
1. The columns 'Sanskrit', 'Prakrit' and 'Purana' have been aided by Pandit Sitaram Jayaram Joshi MA and Pandit Vishwanath Shastri Bhardwaj MA's 'A Concise History of Sanskrit Literature'. 

Page #31:
---------------------------
## Introduction

The Adipurana is a composition from the transitional period of the Puranic era, therefore it is not only a Puranic text but also a poetic work, not just poetry but an epic poem. All the characteristics of an epic poem are evident in it. In the first chapter, Shri Jinasenacharya, while discussing poetry and epic poetry, expresses the following sentiments:

"Scholars who know the nature of poetry call the feelings or actions of a poet poetry. The poet's poetry is full of universally accepted meaning, free from vulgarity, adorned with figures of speech, and embellished with qualities like grace."

"Some scholars call the beauty of meaning the ornament of speech, and some call the beauty of words the ornament, but our opinion is that the beauty of both meaning and words is the ornament of speech."

"The poetry of noble men, which is full of figures of speech, imbued with sentiments like love, full of beauty, and original, i.e., free from plagiarism, behaves like the mouth of Goddess Saraswati."

"Poetry that lacks the charm of style, the elegance of words, and the flow of sentiment should not be called poetry; it is merely a rustic language that pains the ears."

"Those who compose elaborate works - epic poems - full of word arrangements that convey multiple meanings, adorned with beautiful styles, and illuminated by clear meaning, are called great poets."

"Everyone can compose a few verses on a single topic, but composing a work with a connection between the beginning and the end is a difficult task."

"When the collection of words in this world is infinite, the subject matter to be described is subject to one's own will, the sentiment is clear, and the best meters are readily available, then what is the poverty in composing poetry?"

"The poet who wanders in the vast path of words and is weary of roaming in the dense forests of meaning should take refuge in the shade of the epic poem trees for rest."

"This epic poem tree, whose root is talent, whose branches are elevated qualities like sweetness, vigor, grace, and whose bright leaves are excellent words, bears a garland of flowers of fame."

"Or, this great poet behaves like the ocean, whose shores are intellect, whose waves are qualities like grace, which is full of gems of qualities, adorned with high and beautiful words, and in which the vast flow of the guru-disciple tradition continues."

"O learned men, make full use of the above-mentioned poetic alchemy so that your body of fame may remain stable for eons."

From the above quotations, it becomes clear that the author has more faith in a Purana written in the style of poetry - a religious story - than in just a Puranic composition. It seems that the author does not have faith in poetry alone either; he considers it merely a playful composition. What is the benefit of a composition that does not purify the inner being of a creature? In the preface, he has called the Adipurana a 'religious story' and has stated with great firmness that 'this poetry, which describes the religious story, is considered to be like the principal amount for those who wish to accumulate wealth of fame and trade in the commodity of virtue.'

In reality, the Adipurana is an unparalleled gem of Sanskrit literature. There is no subject that is not discussed in it. It is a Purana, an epic poem, a religious story, a treatise on religion, a treatise on politics, a treatise on ethics, and a great history that tells of the primordial order of the age.

1. Chapter 1, Verses 94-105. 

Page #32:
---------------------------
The Madipuraan Yuga's Adipurusha, Shri Bhagwan Rishabhdev, and his first son, Emperor Bharat Chakravarti, are the main protagonists of the Adipuran. The story also includes many other great personalities who were connected to them. The characterization of each protagonist is so beautiful that it does not cross the boundaries of reality, yet it feels captivating. Lush forests, vines swaying gently in the breeze, gurgling rivers, lakes adorned with blooming lotuses, towering mountain ranges, waterfalls, dark clouds adorned with lightning, chirping birds, the sunrise scattering the red juice of the dawn in the east, and the moonrise that captivates the eyes of the world - the poet has depicted these natural elements with such skill that it evokes immense joy in the heart.

In the third part, the story shows that during the time of the fourteenth Kulkar, Shri Nabhiraj, dark clouds first appeared in the sky. Lightning flashes, there is a low rumble, rainbows of various colors appear in the contact of the golden rays of the sun, sometimes there is moderate and sometimes heavy rain, the earth becomes flooded, peacocks start dancing, the parched chatak birds breathe a sigh of relief, and the strong water currents spread across the earth. The poet has described this natural beauty with such grace and simplicity that it is a subject of study. In the poetry of other poets, you find the same thing enveloped in complex and difficult-to-understand words, and for this reason, the beauty of nature does not bloom in its form, like the beauty of a woman covered in thick clothes. But here, the poet's simple word arrangement has not covered the natural beauty of nature like a garment, but rather, it has blossomed like the radiant glow of a beautiful woman adorned with fine and delicate clothes.

The description of the pleasures of Shrimat and Vajrajanga, the explanation of the grandeur of the land of pleasures, the dignity of the body of Marudevi, the scene of the birth celebration of Shri Bhagwan Rishabhdev, the expanse of water during the coronation, the beauty of the ocean of milk, the childhood games of the Lord, getting married to Yashoda and Sunanda at the behest of his father Nabhiraj, ruling the kingdom, taking initiation with four thousand kings after becoming the cause of the merging of Neelanjina, spending six months in seclusion and then traveling for six months continuously for the sake of the world, being given the food of sugarcane juice by King Somaprbha and Shreyans in Hastinapur, the state of being a tapasvi, the request of the kingdom by Nami-Vinami, the beauty of the Vijayagiri mountain filled with various forms spread throughout the universe, the great war of Bharat and Bahulali, the swayamvara of Sulochana, the amazing war of Jayakumar and Arkakiti, etc. - the poet has done such a wonderful job in describing these topics with a flowing stream of beautiful language that the reader's heart-peacock dances spontaneously. The words "Blessed be the great poet, blessed be!" involuntarily come out of the mouth. The riddle and the beauty of the pictorial imagery that the poet has shown in the form of a question-and-answer between the six maidens and Marudevi during the description of the gestation period is astonishing.

If Acharya Jinsen Swami Bhagwan sits down to praise him, he appears so absorbed that he does not even realize the passage of time, and he sings the glorious praise of the Lord with not one or two, but eighty-four thousand names. His such hymns are known today as Sahasranama Stotra. When he describes the Samavasaran, both the reader and the listener feel as if they are witnessing the Samavasaran in person. The entire universe is filled with the description of the four-fold meditation. Studying it makes one
Page #33:
---------------------------
25

While Lord Vrishabhadeva is teaching his disciples, it seems as if he is a divine incarnation descended from heaven to bring welfare to the distressed human society. He consoles the human society, distressed by the destruction of Kalpavriksha trees, and propagates the system of Shatkarma on the land of India. He divides the country, region, city, self, and master, etc. When he teaches the actions of Garbhanvaya, Dikshanvaya, Karjanvaya, etc., he advocates the practice of Dharma, which is beneficial to the people. He also advises this human being to renounce the attachment and illusion of the world and move towards ultimate liberation. What a glorious thing it is that Emperor Bharat, relying on the power of conquest, teaches politics to the kings! If today's leaders adopt that policy and protect the people, it can undoubtedly be said that peace will prevail everywhere and the dark clouds of unrest will be shattered forever. The description of Shri Pal, etc., given by Gunabhadracharya in the last part, although it has less poetry, the flowing narrative style fills the reader's mind with wonder. In short, the skill shown by Shri Jinasean Swami and his disciple Gunabhadracharya in the creation of this Mahapuraana is the envy of other poets. This Mahapuraana is the crown jewel of all Jain Puraana literature. It contains a detailed description of all the Anuyogas. Later writers have looked upon it with great reverence, which later became known as Aarsha and its verses are quoted with the words "Taduuktam Aarshe" in many places. Looking at the subject matter of this Mahapuraana, it can be firmly said that whatever is expounded in other texts is expounded in this, and whatever is not expounded in this, is not expounded anywhere else.

**Characters of the Story**

The characters of the Mahapuraana are the Trishatishalakapurushas. 24 Tirthankaras, 12 Chakravartis, Balabhadra, 9 Narayana and Pratinarayana - these 64 are called 'Shalakapurushas'. Of these, the Adipurana only describes the first Tirthankara Shri Vrishabhanatha and his son, the first Chakravarti Bharat. The description of other characters is found in the Uttarapurana written by Gunabhadracharya. If Acharya Jinasean Swami had lived and described other characters in the same way he described the first Tirthankara and Bharat Chakravarti, this Mahapuraana would have been greater than all the Puranas and poems of the world. After the demise of Shri Jinaseanacharya, Gunabhadracharya completed the remaining part in a very concise manner, but even in a concise manner, he has mentioned all the essential points. It was a commendable time when the disciples had the power to complete the work started by their Gurudev.

Lord Vrishabhadeva was the first Tirthankara of the twenty-four Tirthankaras of this declining age. At the end of the third age, when the system of Bhogbhumi was destroyed and the creation of Karmabhumi was beginning, he was born in the house of the last human being of Ayodhya, Shri Nabhiraj, from his wife Marudevi, in that transitional period. He was a born genius. After the destruction of the Kalpavriksha trees, people used to live on unplanted rice; but as time passed, when that rice also perished, people became very distressed by hunger and thirst and all of them went to Nabhiraj and cried out "Trahi-Trahi". Nabhiraj took the surrendered people to Lord Vrishabhanatha. The people revealed their tragic story before him. Seeing the distressed state of the people, the
Page #34:
---------------------------
26
Marapurana
He taught the six principles of business (Banikya) and with the help of Indra, he had the country, cities, villages, etc. built. The six principles taught by the Lord enabled people to earn their livelihood. The work-field began. At that time, all the arrangements were made by Lord Rishabhdev with his own intelligence, therefore he was addressed by names like Badipurush, Brahma, Vidhata, etc.
Inspired by Nabhiraj, he married Yashawati and Sunaba, the sisters of the kings of Kachchh and Maha Kachchh. He accepted the burden of the kingdom at the great insistence of Nabhiraj. The people were very satisfied with his rule. In due course, Yashawati gave birth to 100 sons named Bharat Badi and a daughter named Brahmi, while Sunanda gave birth to a son named Bahubali and a daughter named Sundari. Lord Rishabhdev had taught his sons and daughters many welfare-oriented sciences, through which the system of education began in the entire population.
The sudden disappearance of Neelanjina during the dance-time became the reason for the Lord's renunciation. He gave the kingdom to his eldest son Bharat and gave appropriate ownership to his other sons and then took renunciation. A thousand other kings had also renounced with him, but they became corrupt within a few days because they could not bear the obstacles of hunger, thirst, etc. The Lord had taken the first yoga for six months. After six months, he went out for food, but at that time, people did not know how to give food to the monks. Therefore, due to the lack of a method, he had to wander for six months. His journey was from Ayodhya towards the north and he reached Hastinapur while walking. The then king there was Somprabh. His younger brother's name was Shreyans. Shreyans had a previous birth connection with Lord Rishabhdev. In the previous birth, he was his wife named Shrimati. At that time, both of them had given food to a monk. Shreyans remembered his past life and all the incidents were remembered. Therefore, as soon as he saw the Lord, he got up and gave him food of sugarcane juice. That food was given on the third day of the bright fortnight of Vaishakh, since then it is known as 'Akshay Tritiya'. King Somprabh, Shreyans and their queens were greatly honored by the people. After taking food, the Lord went to the forest and practiced self-realization in the clean atmosphere there. After a thousand years of penance, he attained divine knowledge - Kevalgyan. Now he became omniscient, he began to know every object of the world clearly.
His son Bharat became the first emperor. He brought the six-part Bharat region under his control through the Chakra Ratna and expanded politics, teaching the dependent kings the method of governing the kingdom. He established the Brahmin caste. Brahmin, Kshatriya, Vaishya and Shudra, these four castes became prevalent in this Bharat. Among these, Kshatriya, Vaishya and Shudra were determined by the difference in livelihood, and Brahmin was established as a devotee. Everyone earned their livelihood, so no one was unhappy.
Lord Rishabhdev, in his omniscient state, preached the welfare of the lost creatures of the world through divine sound. He had traveled all over the Aryan region. At the end of his life, he reached Mount Kailash and attained Nirvana from there. Bharat Chakravarti, although the ruler of the six-part earth, was not attached to it. This was the reason that when he renounced his household life and took renunciation, he attained Kevalgyan in the very moment. Kevalgyani Bharat also traveled to the
Page #35:
---------------------------
Mention of Lord Rishabhdev and Bharat in Jain and Non-Jain Puranas etc.

Lord Rishabhdev and Emperor Bharat are the main protagonists of the Adipurana. Their brief description related to the present context is as written above. Lord Rishabhdev and Emperor Bharat were such influential virtuous men that they are mentioned not only in Jain scriptures but also in Vedic mantras, non-Jain Puranas, Upanishads etc. The Bhagavata also gives a detailed account of Marudeva, Nabhiraj, Rishabhdev and his son Bharat. It is another matter that it is given in many parts in different ways. This country is also known as Bharat after Bharat Chakravarti.

The following quotes confirm our above statement: "Agniprasoonome stu Rishabho'bhut suto dvijah. Rishabhad Bharat ase virah putra shata barah ||36|| So'bhisichyarishabah puvam mahapravajyamaasthitah. Tapas tepe mahabagah pulahasramsamshayah ||40|| Hima pani barsha bharatay pita dadau. Tasmattu bharatam varsha tasya namna mahatmanah ||41||"
-Markandeya Purana, Chapter 40 "Himahvayam tu yavarsha nabherasi mahaatmanah. Tasyarshabho'bhavatputro malvechya mahaapati ||30|| Pama bharato gane virah putra shatagrajah. So'bhisichyarishabah puvam bharatam prithvipati ||3||"
-Kurma Purana, Chapter 41 "Baramrityubhayam nasti dharmaadhamom yugavikam. Navam madhyam tulya himaveshatu nabhithah ||10||
Phabho maradevya rishabhad bharato'bhavat. Rishabhodattami puve shalyagrame harim gathah ||11|| Bharata bharatam varsha bharatat sumatistva bhut."
-Agni Purana, Chapter 1. Manistvavanavtvam maldevya mahacha tih. Rishabham papivamela sarvakshastrasma purvajam ||50|| Rupama bharato jo virah putra shatabanah. So'bhisichyacha bharatam purva pravajyamaasthitah ||4|| Himahani varsha bharatay nyavedayat. Tasmad bharatam varsha tasya namna vidusha ||42||"
-Vayu Mahapurana Purvardha, Chapter 33
"Nabhistvajanayat purva maradevya mahan tim ||5|| Ava pathirva alan sarvakshastrasya purvajam. Rishabhad bharato jo virah putra shatagrajah ||60|| So'bhisivyarishabah purva mahapravajyamaasthitah. Hima dakshinam va tasya namna bidurvadhah ||6||"
-Brahmanda Purana Purvardha, Anushangapad, Chapter 14 "Mabhirmardevya putramjanayat shabhanamanam tasya bharatah putrastva tavadprajah tasya bharatasya pita rishabah hemakshi mahabaratam nama shashas."
-Varaha Purana, Chapter 74
1. These quotes are taken from Swami Karmamad's book 'Dharma Ka Adi Pravartak'.

Page #36:
---------------------------
## Adipurana
"I will not describe the nature of this land, listen to me. It was not born from the navel of Mahadeva, the great wise one. ||16||  Rishabha, the best of kings, was worshipped by all the Kshatriyas. From Rishabha was born Bharata, the valiant, the eldest of a hundred sons. ||20||  Then Rishabha, the loving father, crowned Bharata. He embraced knowledge and detachment, conquering the serpents of passions. ||21||  He established the Supreme Self, the Lord, in his own self with all his being. He was naked, with matted hair, without food, a thief, and gone into darkness. ||22||  He was without hope, having abandoned all doubts, and attained the supreme state. He gave the land south of the Himalayas to Bharata. ||23||  Therefore, wise men know this land as Bharata, after his name."
_ _- Lingapurana, Chapter 47. "You will not have prosperity in the eight regions of the earth in all ages. The land called Hima, however, is the navel of the great soul. ||27||  His son Rishabha was born to Marudevi, the great wise one. From Rishabha was born Bharata, the eldest of a hundred sons. ||28||"
-Vishnupurana, Second Part, Chapter 1 "Nabhi's son was Rishabha, and from Rishabha was born Bharata. This land is known as Bharata after his name. ||57||"
-Skandhapurana, Maheswarakhanda, Kumarakhanda, Chapter 37

## Bhagavan Vrishabhadeva and Brahma
The deity known as Brahma in the world is none other than Bhagavan Vrishabhadeva, according to the Jain tradition. Among the many other names of Brahma, the following are very famous:
Hiranyagarbha, Prajapati, Lokesh, Nabhij, Chaturanan, Srishta, Swayambhu. ... These names truly correspond to Bhagavan Vrishabhadeva. For example:
Hiranyagarbha - When Bhagavan was in the womb of Mother Marudevi, six months before his birth, there was a rain of gold, silver, and jewels in Ayodhya city. Therefore, your name Hiranyagarbha is meaningful. Prajapati - After the destruction of the Kalpa trees, you protected the people by giving them the six karmas of Asi, Masi, Krishi, etc. Therefore, you were called Prajapati. Lokesh - You were the master of all the worlds, therefore you were called Lokesh. Nabhij - You were born from the fourteenth Manu, named Nabhiraj, therefore you were called Nabhij. Chaturanan - You were seen from all four sides in the Samavasarana, therefore you were called Chaturanan. Srishta - After the destruction of the Bhogbhumi, you were the first to establish the division of the country, cities, etc., the conduct of kings, subjects, teachers, students, etc., the marriage system, etc. Therefore, you were called Srishta. Swayambhu - You developed the qualities of your soul through the feelings of Darshan-Vishuddhi, etc., and became the first Tirthankara yourself. Therefore, you were called Swayambhu. Acharya Jinsen and Gunabhadra
Both these Acharyas belonged to the 'Panchastupa' lineage of the original Sangha, which later became the Senanvaya lineage.
1. This section is taken from Nathuramji Premi's 'Jain Literature and History' and 'Vidvadratnamala'. 

Page #37:
---------------------------
##  Translation:

**22**

This is known as the Sena-Sangha. While the guru of Jinsen Swami, Veeresen, wrote about his lineage as 'Panchastupaanvaya', Gunabhadracharya wrote about the 'Senaanvaya'. Indranandi wrote in his Shrutavatar that the monks who came from Panchastupa-nivas were given the names Sena and Bhadra. Some Acharyas also say that those who came from the caves were called Nandi, those who came from Ashoka Van were called Dev, and those who came from Panchastupa were called Sena. The above mentioned reference in Shrutavatar proves that the group of monks named Senaant and Bhadraant came to be known as Senaanvaya or Sena-Sangha.

**Lineage**

Lineage is of two types - one is worldly lineage and the other is transcendental lineage. Worldly lineage is related to birth, and transcendental lineage is related to knowledge. The worldly lineage of Acharya Jinsen and Gunabhadra is not known. Where did they live? Whose sons were they? What was their caste? This is not mentioned in their own writings or in the writings of their later Acharyas. Monks who have renounced worldly attachments do not consider it appropriate to reveal their worldly lineage, nor does it add any significance to their personality. This is why, except for a few, the worldly lineage of most Acharyas is not preserved.

Research so far has traced their transcendental lineage - their guru lineage - back to Arya Chandrasen. That is, Chandrasen's disciple was Aryanandi, his disciple was Veeresen, Veeresen's disciple was Vinysen, Jinsen's disciple was Gunabhadra, and Gunabhadra's disciple was Lokesen. Although Prabhachandra, the Sanskrit commentator of Atmaanushasan, wrote in the introduction that Gunabhadradev wrote this book with the intention of showing the right path to all beings, for the benefit of Lokesen, who was engrossed in worldly matters, this statement does not seem correct in light of the praise in Uttarapurana. In it, he has described Lokesen as his main disciple. Apart from Jinsen, Veeresen Swami had another disciple named Dasharathguru. Shri Gunabhadra Swami has described himself as a disciple of both these gurus in the praise of Uttarapurana. Apart from these,

1. "Anjanmadissesegavakammaarasabesejass. Sahamatuch panchatyuhalbhaama munina." ||4||
2. "Dhabhala pastapoviptkirana vyambhojani bodhayan. Motisht muninenah panchastupaambayambare." ||5||
3. "Jayadhavla 2. Panchastoopyanivasaadupaagata ye'nmaarinastekhu. Kaaschitatseenaabhilyaana kaaschishvabhaabhidhaana.... karot." ||6||
4. "Anye jagurguhaaya vinirgata mandino mahatmaanaah. Devaarachasoakavanaat paachasstupayattatah senah." ||7||
5. "I. Shrutavatar 4. "Bahasamabhaaturl lokasesnasya vishayalyamugdhabuddhah sambodhamavyaajem sarvasasyopkaarakasannmargmupaadarshayitkaamo ganabhadradevo nirvighnatah shaastrapasamaaptyaadikam phalam abhilashannishtadevatabishevam nabaskurvannah - 'lakshminivasanilayamiti."
6. "Shriveeresenamunipaavpayojabhangah shrimaannabhuud vinayasenamunih
Page #38:
---------------------------
##  The Lineage of Jain Saints

**Aripuarana**

Vinasena Muni was a disciple of Vira Sena. Inspired by him, Jinasena Acharya composed the "Parvabhyudaya" poem.  Devaseanacharya, in his "Darsansar", mentions that Kumarasena, a disciple of Vinasena, established the "Kasthasangh".  The Jayadhwala tika also mentions three scholars, Sri Pal, Padma Sena, and Devasean, who were likely contemporaries or fellow disciples of Jinasena.  Jinasena himself refers to Sri Pal as the guardian of the Jayadhwala tika and praises his qualities in the preface of the Adipurana.

In the preface of the Adipurana, Jinasena Swami praises Vira Sena Swami before praising Vinasena Swami. He requests Vinasena Swami, the embodiment of penance, the repository of scriptures and peace, and the leader of the learned, to protect him. This suggests that Vinasena Swami was a fellow disciple of Vira Sena Swami, and Jinasena remembers him as a guru.  The lineage of Jinasena can be traced through the following chart:

1. "Siri Vira Sena Sissho Jinasena Sayala Satya Vinaani. Siri Pau Manandi Pancha Bau Sangh Samudharan Dhiro ||31|| Tassa Si Sto Gun Gun Maha Vimban Man Paripulo. Paklor Vasa Mandya Maha Tabo Bhava Linga Ya ||32|| Tena Punodhiya Micchuna Mana Muni Vishaya Sena Ssa. Siddha Tam Ghosita Sayam Gayam Sagga Lo Ya Ssa ||33|| Aasi Kumarasena Mandya Vijay Sena Vilpana. Sanna Ma Bhavan Ya Magahiya Puga Vilmo Jago ||3|| To Sana Sampanno Kumarasena Samaba Micchato. Pattocha Samo Vado Kattha Sangh Pamne Vi ||3||" - Darsansar
2. "Sarva Pratipadita Ganam Matsutra Anutika Mi Ma, Pe'mya Syanti Bahu Bhuta: Bhut Guru Sampoojya Pari Prabhum. Te Nitya Ujjvala Pam Sena Parama: Bhideva Sena Achita, Bhasante Ravi Chana Ma Sisa Tapa: Bhi Pal Sat Kirtaya: ||||" - Jayadhwala
3. "Tika Bhi Jayachihnita Oradhwala Sutra Avansangiti Ni Speya Vara Vichana Mujjvala Tapa: Sri Pal Sampalita ||43||" - Jayadhwala
4. "Bhatta Kala Kasri Pal Patra Kesarinam Guna: Viduso Haraya Ruda Harayante Ati Nir Mala:" ||53|| - Adipurana
5. Delo, Adipurana 1 || 55-56. 

Page #39:
---------------------------
## Dasharathguru
Jinsen
Virasen
Preface
Arya Chandrasen
Arya Aryanandi
Vinayasen
Kumarasen (Founder of the Wood Association)
Jayasen
Shripal
Padmasen
Devasen
Gunabhadra
Lokasen

Indranandi has written in his 'Shrutavatar' that after a long time, there was a learned scholar named Elacharya who resided in Chitrakootpur and was well-versed in the secrets of the Siddhanta texts. Shri Virasen Swami studied the entire Siddhanta under him and wrote eight chapters, including Uparitan and Nibandhan. Following his Guru Maharaj's wishes, Virasen Swami left Chitrakoot and came to Matgram. There, he sat in the Jin-Mandir built by Anantendra and, upon obtaining the 'Vyakhyaprajnapti', he summarized the sixth chapter, Satkarma, in the first six chapters of the eighteen chapters of Bandha, etc. He also composed a commentary called 'Dhavla' in a mixture of Sanskrit and Prakrit languages, comprising 72,000 verses. Later, he wrote a commentary called 'Jayadhavla' in 20,000 verses on the four divisions of the first Skandha of the second 'Kashaya Prabhrit'. After that, he passed away due to old age. After him, Shri Jayasen Guru completed the Jayadhavla commentary by adding 40,000 more verses. Thus, the Jayadhavla commentary was completed with 60,000 verses.

The same has been mentioned by Shri Dhar Vibudh in his prose 'Shrutavatar'. Therefore, based on these two 'Shrutavatars', it is proven that Virasenacharya's Guru was Elacharya. However, the identity of this Elacharya is unclear.

1.  Belo Sloka 176-183.
2.  In Sloka 182, "Yatas Tvatah Punastach Shivyo Jayasen Gurunama", Jinsen should be mentioned instead of Jayasen, as the text in Shri Dhar's 'Gadyashrutavatar' mentions Jinsen instead of Jayasen. For example: "... Virasen Muni will go to heaven. His disciple will be Jinsen. He will complete the 'Karma Prabhut' with forty thousand verses. In this way, the Jayadhavla commentary will be completed with sixty thousand verses."

Furthermore, Gunabhadracharya has also referred to Jinsen Swami as the commentator of the Siddhanta Shastra in the praise of the Uttarapurana.

Not only this, Jinsen Swami, in the 'Peethikabandh', has remembered his Guru Virasenacharya and called him the author of the commentaries on the Siddhanta texts, i.e., the 'Siddhantopanibandhanam'. 

Page #40:
---------------------------
## 12
## Mahavipurana

It is not clear. The existence of Elacharya, a contemporary of Vira Sena, is not supported by any other texts. It is possible that the Aryananda Guru, whom Vira Sena himself mentions in the Dhavala through the verses "Ajjajjamandisisseṇa......" etc., is the same as Elacharya. Be that as it may.

## Place-Consideration

Digambara monks are described as having an uncertain abode like birds, meaning that just as birds do not have a fixed place of residence, neither do monks. Except for Pravadya, they are not allowed to stay in a large city for more than 5 days and nights, and in a small village for more than a day and night. Therefore, the mention of the residence of any Digambara monk during his monastic period is rarely found. However, it is essential to consider where they were born and where their household life was spent, in order to gain complete knowledge of any author.

It cannot be definitively said that Jinsen and Gunabhadra were born in a particular city of a particular country and lived mostly in a particular place, because this is not mentioned in any of their inscriptions. However, their own texts and those related to them mention Banka-pur, Vatagram, and Chitra-kut. This suggests that they may have been from the Karnataka province.

Banka-pur was the capital of the Vanavasa country at that time, and is now located in Dharwad Bile in the Karnataka province. It was made the capital by Kera, the father of Lokaditya, a feudatory of the Rashtrakuta Akalavarsha, in his own name. As is evident from the following verses of the Uttarapurana inscription:

"Śrīmati Lokāvitye pradhvasta-praśita-rānusanta-mase ||32|| Banavāsa-deśam akhilaṁ bhujati niṣkaṇṭakaṁ sukhaṁ suciram.
Tapitṛ-nijanāmakṛte tyāte Baṅkāpure pureṣv adhike ||34||" - Uttarapurana inscription

It is also not clear what Vatagram was and where it is now, but it was under the rule of the Gurjara, meaning it was in the kingdom of Amoghavarsha, whose kingdom extended from Malwa in the north to Kanchipuram in the south. Therefore, how can it be determined where it was located in such a vast kingdom? An inscription from the reign of Amoghavarsha, dated Saka Samvat 788, is printed in 'Epigraphia Indica', Volume 6, page 102. It states that Govindaraja, whose successor was Amoghavarsha, conquered Kerala, Malwa, Gurjara, and Chitra-kut, and the kings of all countries were in the service of Amoghavarsha. It is possible that this Chitra-kut is the same Chitra-kut where Elacharya lived, according to the mention in Shrutavatar, and where Vira Sena Swami studied the Siddhanta texts.

There is a city called Chittaldurg to the north of the Mysore state. It was previously the capital of the 'Hoysala' dynasty.

1. "Āgatya Citrakūtāt tataḥ sa bhagavān guror anujñānāt. Vāṭagāme cātrānatenakṛta-jinagṛhe sthitvā || 176||"
- Shrutavatar

"Iti bhī Viraseṇīya ṭokā sūtrāvaśinī. Bāṭagrāmapure śrīmad-gurjarāryanupālite ||6||" - J.D
Page #41:
---------------------------
## Introduction

There are many ancient caves and temples that are five hundred years old. Shwetambar Muni Sheelvijay has mentioned this place as 'Chitragarh'. It is very likely that this Chitrakut was the residence of Elacharya. Sheelvijayji has mentioned Chitragarh, Banausi and Vankaapur together in his pilgrimage. This proves that there will not be much difference between these places. Vankaapur is the place where the worship festival of Uttarapurana was held by Lokasen and Banausi (Vanavasi) is the place where the capital was before Vankaapur. In this way, it is possible that Vatgram will be around Vanavasi and Chittaldurg. Amoghvarsha's capital was Manyakhet, which was the capital of the two countries Karnataka and Maharashtra at that time and is now famous as Malkhed and is 4-5 miles away from a small station called Malkhedgate on the Hyderabad railway line. Amoghvarsha was one of the ardent devotees of Shri Jinasen Swami, so it is possible that he came and went to his capital. But there is no mention of his special residence there.

## Time Consideration

- Jinsen (Second), the author of Harivansh Purana, has mentioned Jinsen's guru Veeresen and Jinsen in his Harivansh Purana in the following words:

"The glory of Veeresen Guru, who has conquered the afterlife and who is the emperor of poets, is shining without blemish. Jinsen Swami has composed an immeasurable praise of the qualities of Shri Parshvanath Bhagwan, that is, the composition of Parshvabhyudaya Kavya, which is well narrating his glory. And the rays of the rising sun in the form of his Vardhaman Purana are shining in the crystal-like earth of the hearts of learned men."3

The mention of these present tense verbs 'Avabhasate', 'Sankirtayati', 'Prasfuranti' proves that Shri Jinsen Swami, the author of Adipurana, was present at the time of the composition of Harivansh Purana and until then he 
1. "Chitragarh Banausi Gam Bankaapur Bitu Shubhdham.
Tirav Manohar Vismayavant....." 2. This was the previous ideology of Premeji, but now he has written his following opinion on this subject on a 
letter to me: "I don't know if Chittaldurg, which I had previously assumed to be Chitrakut, is still there. Chitrafut Manakal will be Chittorgarh of Rajasthan. Harishen believes that Chittorgarh is the Lila of Chitrakut. Apart from this, according to Galtekar's assumption, it will be Vatgram or Batnamabatpad or Baroda. Dhvala is written in the temple of Manatendra here. Baroda is not even east of Chittorgarh. Chitrakut was a center of learning in ancient times. Baroda was under the rule of Amoghvarsha. It was also called Gureswar. There will be some Rashtrakuta king or chieftain, in whose temple they stayed. There have been many Rashtrakuta kings in Inaman." 3. "Jitatmaparalokasya Kavinaam Chakravartinah. Bireseanguroh Kirirkalankavabhasate ||3|| Yamitamyulye Parvajinemaagunastutih. Swaminoh Jinasenasyakiri Sankirtayatyati ||40|| Vaimanapuranochdadityoktinabhastayah. Prasfuranti Girishanaah Sphutasphatikamittishu ||41||"
-Harivansh Purana, Sarg 1
Page #42:
---------------------------
Mavilarav, the author of the Parvajinam Stuti and the Vardhaman Purana, had already established a reputation for himself among scholars due to these works.  His works were so renowned that even the author of the Harivansh Purana, Jinesen, did not attempt to replicate them, including the final part of the Jayadhwala tika and the comprehensive Mahapurana. This suggests that these works were not yet in existence at the time, indicating the early period of Jinesen's literary career.  At this time, he would have been at least 25-30 years old, as such profound scholarship and literary prowess could not be achieved without a significant amount of time and dedication.

The praise given to Jinesen at the end of the Harivansh Purana confirms that it was completed in the year 705 of the Saka era. The Harivansh Purana contains 10-12 thousand verses, and such a vast work would have taken at least 5 years to complete. Subtracting these 5 years from the completion date, we arrive at 700 Saka era as the beginning of the Harivansh Purana's composition.  Jinesen would have been at least 25 years old when he began writing the Harivansh Purana.  Subtracting these 25 years from 700 Saka era, we arrive at approximately 675 Saka era as the year of Jinesen's birth. This is an estimated date, and there may be some variation, but a significant difference is unlikely.

The praise given to the Jayadhwala tika reveals that Jinesen completed the Veeraseeniya tika, begun by his guru, Shri Viraseen Swami, on the 10th day of the bright fortnight of the month of Phalguna in the year 756 of the Saka era, during the morning hours, while the Nastahika Mahotsava puja was being performed. This leaves no doubt that Jinesen Swami was alive until the year 756 of the Saka era.  Now, we must determine how long he continued to illuminate this land of Bharat with his brilliance.

It has already been mentioned that Jinesen Swami gained immense prestige in the scholarly community by writing the Parvaabhyudaya and the Vardhaman Purana in his early life. While the Vardhaman Purana is not available, the Parvaabhyudaya has been published and has reached the eyes of many readers. They have witnessed how its captivating composition draws the reader's heart to it. The Vardhaman Purana would have been similar in its appeal.  Seeing these two poetic works produced by his divine pen, the scholars and saints who were in contact with him must have been inspired to ask him to continue his literary endeavors. 

Page #43:
---------------------------
## Introduction

If the character of the twenty-four Tirthankaras and the Shalakapurushas of their time were to be written, then there would be great benefit to the masses. And if they had decided in their hearts to complete this task, then it would be a great accomplishment. But the work of the commentary on the Siddhanta-granthas, which was started by their Guru, Shri Virsen Swami, remained incomplete after his ascension. A worthy and devoted disciple, who possessed the necessary qualifications, took up the task of completing the work started by his Guru. He completed the work by composing a commentary of 60,000 shlokas, excluding the first part. This task took a lot of your time. After the completion of the commentary on the Siddhanta-granthas, when you got some rest, you took up your long-cherished work and started the composition of that Purana, in which you had promised to depict the characters of sixty-three Shalakapurushas. You had no shortage of words or meanings in your knowledge. Therefore, you were a master in describing any object with great detail. I believe that the readers of the Adipurana will experience this special quality of Shri Jinasen Swami on every step.

## Adipurana

Yes, Adipurana is your previous work. From the beginning to the 42nd Parva, and 3 shlokas of the 43rd Parva were written by your golden pen, when your life ended prematurely and your long-cherished work remained incomplete. There is no way to know when you started and ended the Adipurana, so it cannot be said with certainty that your earthly life ended in a particular Saka Samvat. But let's assume that the composition of the Mahapurana started as soon as the Virseniya commentary was completed. And since Shri Jinasen Swami would have been over 80 years old at that time, the composition would have been done very slowly. It would have taken at least 10 years to compose about 10,000 shlokas. According to this calculation, Jinasen Swami's existence can be accepted till Saka Samvat 770, or if it happened very quickly, then till 765. In this way, it can be assumed that Jinasen Swami benefited the world's distinguished men for 60-65 years.

## Gunabhadracharya

If Gunabhadracharya's age is assumed to be 25 years at the time of Guru Jinasen's death, then it can be assumed that he was born around Saka Samvat 740. But it is difficult to determine when the Uttarapurana was completed and how long Gunabhadracharya lived on earth. Although it is written in the praise of the Uttarapurana that it was completed in Saka Samvat 820. But after a closer study of the praise, it appears that the praise of the Uttarapurana is not uniform, but is divided into two forms. From the first to the twenty-seventh verse, there is one form, and from the twenty-eighth to the forty-second, there is another form. The first form is of Gunabhadra Swami and the second is of his disciple Lokasen. Due to the grace of the scribes, both forms have merged into one. After displaying the glory of the Sangha and the Gurus in the initial 16 shlokas of his praise, Gunabhadra Swami wrote in the twentieth verse that due to the fear of excessive expansion and the request of the extremely short time, I have collected the remaining Mahapurana in brief. After that, in 5-6 shlokas, he described the greatness of the book and said in the final 27th verse that it should be narrated to
Page #44:
---------------------------
## English Translation:

**36**

The *Adipurana* was widely accepted. Verses 29, 30, and 31 praise the Rashtrakuta king Akalavarsha. Subsequently, verses 32, 33, 34, 35, and 36 state that when Akalavarsha's feudatory Lokaditya ruled the entire forest-dwelling country from his capital Vanka-pura, this sacred and all-encompassing, excellent *purana* was worshipped by the *bhavyas* on a certain auspicious occasion in the year 820 of the Saka era. May this meritorious *purana* remain victorious. Following this, in verse 37, Lokasen concludes his statement by saying that this great *purana* will remain forever in the speech and minds of the virtuous. There are two more verses after this, which describe the praise of the *mahapurana*. The second inscription written by Lokasen Muni seems to have been written at the time when the *Uttarapurana* text was ritually worshipped. Thus, the Saka year 820 given in the inscription of the *Uttarapurana* refers to its festival of worship. Gunabhadracharya has not given the Saka year of the completion of the text in the *Uttarapurana*, nor has he given it in his other works, *Atmanushasana* and *Jinadattacharita*. In this situation, it is difficult to determine his exact time. However, it can be said by inference that he would have lived for 50 years after the ascension of Jinasena Acharya to heaven.

**Jinasena Swami and his works**

Jinasena Swami was a disciple of Vira Sena Swami. Gunabhadracharya has rightly written in the inscription of the *Uttarapurana* about him: "Just as the Ganga flows from the Himalayas, the divine sound of the *sarvasastra* from the mouth of *sarvas*, and the radiant sun rises from the shores of the *udayachal*, so too did Jinasena arise from Vira Sena Swami." In the inscription of the *Jayadhavala*, Acharya Jinasena has introduced himself in a very ornate language. See:

"Jinasena, the disciple of Vira Sena Swami, was glorious and possessed a brilliant intellect. Although his ears were unpierced, they were pierced by the pin of knowledge."

"Because of his proximity to the *bhavyas*, the goddess of liberation, Lakshmi, out of eagerness, as if desiring to choose him herself, planned the garland of scriptures for him."

"Although he had observed the unbroken vow of celibacy from childhood, it is surprising that he married Saraswati according to the ritual of *swayamvara*."

"He was neither very handsome nor very clever, yet Saraswati, having taken refuge in him alone, served him."

"Intellect, peace, and humility were his natural qualities. It is these qualities that he used to worship his teachers. So it is right, for who is not worshipped by qualities?"

1. "His disciple was the glorious Jinasena, with a brilliant intellect. Even though his ears were unpierced, they were pierced by the pin of knowledge."
2. "In whom, due to his proximity to the *bhavyas*, the goddess of liberation, Lakshmi, out of eagerness, as if desiring to choose him herself, planned the garland of scriptures for him."
3. "He had observed the unbroken vow of celibacy from childhood, yet it is surprising that he married Saraswati according to the ritual of *swayamvara*."
4. "He was neither very handsome nor very clever, yet Saraswati, having taken refuge in him alone, served him."
Page #45:
---------------------------
## Introduction

"Though he was thin in body, he was not thin in the qualities of tapas. Indeed, thinness of body is not thinness. He who is thin in qualities is truly thin."

"Those who did not take up the skull (kapalika, a vessel used for floating in the Sankhya school of thought) nor did they think excessively, yet they attained the second shore of spiritual knowledge."

"Whose time was spent continuously in the worship of knowledge, and therefore the true seers call them a body of knowledge."

Jinsen was not only a master of the Siddhanta, but also a poet of the highest order. His poetry has strength (oj), sweetness (madhury), clarity (prasad), flow (pravaha), style (shaili), rasa, and alankaras. Wherever there was a need, the poet expressed that emotion in that style. He truly preferred to discuss reality, and it was not his nature to twist the truth to please others. He openly says that the poet should do his duty, whether the other person is satisfied or not. It is not good to worship another, but it is good to give advice on the right path.

So far, the following works have been discovered by him:

**Parvaabhyudaya:** In Sanskrit literature, Kalidasa's Meghaduta is a very famous short poem. Its composition and sentiment are both beautiful. Based on its fourth stanza, many short poems like Hasaduta, Nemiduta, etc. have been written. Jinsen Swami's Parvaabhyudaya Kavya, which is complete in 364 Mandakranta verses, is a solution to Kalidasa's Meghaduta. In it, verses have been composed taking one or two stanzas of Meghaduta, and in this way, the entire Meghaduta has been incorporated into this Parvaabhyudaya Kavya. Parvaabhyudaya is the first independent work written by solving the problem of Meghaduta. Its language and style are very beautiful. After the initiation ceremony of Lord Parshvanath, he is seated in the posture of the image (pratima-yoga). From there, a celestial being named Shambara emerges and, with his knowledge of the mind, considers him his enemy and begins to cause him various troubles. This is the story on which Parvaabhyudaya is based. In it, Shambaradeva is considered a Yaksha, Jyotirbhava is considered Alka, and the Yaksha's curse is considered Shambara's curse. The plot of Meghaduta is different and the plot of Parvaabhyudaya is different, yet to tell different stories with the same words is the great skill of the poet. In solving the problem, the poet has to be very dependent, and due to that dependence, the scattered composition, let alone the reference composition, inevitably becomes dull, but in this Parvaabhyudaya, no dullness has been found anywhere, which is a matter of joy. This poem was composed by Shri Jinsen Swami at the inspiration of his disciple Vinayasen, and it seems to be his first work.

1. "He who was thin in body, but not thin in the qualities of tapas. For thinness is not bodily, but he who is thin in qualities is truly thin."
2. "He who did not take up the skull (kapalika) nor did he think excessively, yet he attained the second shore of spiritual knowledge."
3. "Whose time was spent continuously in the worship of knowledge, and therefore the true seers call them a body of knowledge."
4. "Shri Virasen Muni, the bee of the lotus of the teachings, was great, but Vinayasen Muni was even greater
Page #46:
---------------------------
## Madipuraana

A scholar named Yogirat Panditacharya wrote a Sanskrit commentary on this work, which dates back to after the 15th century Vikram. In his introduction, he wrote that once the poet Kalidasa came to the court of Amoghvarsha in Vankaapur and proudly recited his Meghaduta. In the same court, Jinsen Swami was also present with his fellow monk Vinayasen. Vinayasen urged Jinsen to destroy Kalidasa's pride. Inspired by Vinayasen, Jinsen said that this work was ancient, not an original creation but stolen. Hearing Jinsen's words, Kalidasa was enraged. He said that if the work was ancient, it should be recited. Jinsen Swami could remember any verse he heard once, so he remembered Kalidasa's Meghaduta in the same court. He said that this ancient text was in a distant village and could be brought in eight days. King Amoghvarsha ordered that the text be brought to the court on the eighth day. Jinsen returned to his place and composed Parvaabhyudaya in seven days and presented it to the royal court on the eighth day. Everyone was pleased to hear this beautiful poetic work, and Kalidasa's pride was completely destroyed. Later, Jinsen Swami clarified the whole matter.

However, upon reflection, this story seems completely fabricated. Because there is a huge difference in time between Kalidasa, the author of Meghaduta, and Jinsen Swami. Also, the mention of Vankaapur as the capital of Amoghvarsha is incorrect, as his capital was Manyakhet, and Vankaapur was the capital of Lokaditya, a vassal of Amoghvarsha's successor, Akalavarsha. It is written later that Lokaditya's father, Vankeyaras, named the capital Vankaapur after himself. It is likely that Vankaapur did not exist during Amoghvarsha's time. This story is like the one that scholars in small schools used to tell their students about Amarsingh and Dhananjaya:

"King Bhoja declared in his court that the scholar who presented the best lexicon would receive a great reward. Dhananjaya, the poet, composed the Amarakosha. One day before the presentation, Amarsingh came to Dhananjaya's house. He was his brother-in-law. Dhananjaya read his Amarakosha to him. Amarsingh was so impressed that he had his wife abduct it. When Dhananjaya found out that his lexicon had been stolen, he composed the Mammala in one night and presented it to the court the next day. King Bhoja was very impressed with the composition of Mammala and awarded him the great prize for composing the lexicon."

The scholars who fabricated this story do not consider when Amarsingh, who was one of the nine gems of Vikram, lived, when Dhananjaya lived, and when Bhoja lived. They indulge in false imaginations out of sentimentality. Moreover, the story fabricated by Yogirat Panditacharya about Parvaabhyudaya proves Jinsen's envy and tolerance of adultery, which is a disgrace for a Digambaraacharya.

Regarding the praise of Parvaabhyudaya, Yogirat Panditacharya wrote that no saint is greater than Shri Parshvanath, no villain is greater than Kamath, and no poetry is greater than Parvaabhyudaya. He wrote correctly. Professor K.B. Pathak, in his essay on Kumaril Bhatt and Bhartrhari read at the Royal Asiatic Society, said something very good about Jinsen and his poetry Parvaabhyudaya:

1. "Shripaashravat Saadhutah Saadhu: Kamthat Khalth Khalth: Parvaabhyud
Page #47:
---------------------------
## Introduction

"The works of Jinasena Amogavarsha (First) are mentioned in the Parvabhyudaya, as he himself has stated. Parvabhyudaya is a remarkable and excellent creation in Sanskrit literature. It is an unparalleled poem that reflects and produces the literary taste of that time. Although Kalidasa is generally considered the foremost among Indian poets, Jinasena is considered more worthy than the author of Meghaduta."

Since Parvabhyudaya has already been published, it will be the main focus of this introduction to reveal the greatness of its poetry by quoting its verses. Its composition was during the reign of Amogavarsha, as is known from its final eulogy:

"Thus, this poem, embracing the cloud, is composed, free from defects, surpassing the poetry of Kalidasa.
Amogavarsha, the king, who always removes obstacles, stands like the moon, illuminating the world, which is darkened by other poems."

Your second work, "Varshamanapurana," is mentioned by Jinasena (Second) in his Harivamshapurana. However, its whereabouts are unknown to this day. What can be said about it without seeing it? The name itself makes it clear that it will contain the story of the last Tirthankara, Shri Vardhamana Swami.

## Jayadhavala Commentary

When Shri Guru Virasenacharya ascended to heaven after writing the 20,000-verse commentary called Jayadhavala on the four divisions of the first Skandha of Kashayaprabhuta, his disciple Shri Jinasena Swami completed the remaining part with a 40,000-verse commentary. This commentary is known as Jayadhavala or Vireniya. In this commentary, you have adopted the style of Shri Vira Sena Swami and have analyzed the subject matter in the most subtle way, sometimes using Sanskrit and sometimes Prakrit. The language of these commentaries flows so beautifully that the reader's mind never gets confused. The unique feature of these commentaries is that they present the subject matter in detail by raising numerous alternatives on their own.

## Adipurana

We have already written extensively about the Mahapurana. Adipurana is the first part of it. The latter part is called Uttarapurana. Adipurana has 47 chapters, of which the first 42 and the 3 verses of the 49th chapter were composed by Jinasenacharya, while the remaining 1620 verses of the chapters were composed by his disciple, Bhadant Gunabhadracharya. In the introduction of Adipurana, Jinasenacharya, after praising his guru Jayasena, mentions the Parameshvara Kavi and says about him:

"That Parameshvara Kavi is worthy of being worshipped by poets in the world, who had collected all the Puranas in the form of words and meanings." This Parameshvara Kavi had composed all the Puranas in prose, and Jinasenacharya based his Adipurana on it. Gunabhadracharya, while explaining the importance of Adipurana, said:

1. Neither Gunabhadracharya mentioned this Varshamanapurana in his eulogy, nor did any later Acharya of Jinasena mention it in their works. Therefore, some scholars believe that there is no such Purana called Varshamanapurana written by Jinasena. Jinasena Second mentioned another Varshamanapurana by an unknown poet in his Harivamshapurana. Premeji also expressed a similar sentiment in one of his recent letters.
2. See Adi Pu 1/60. 

Page #48:
---------------------------
## The Bharata Purana

This is the story of Adinath, based on the prose narrative spoken by the divine poet. It contains all the characteristics of meters and figures of speech, it has subtle meaning and profound words, its description is extremely excellent, it reveals the best essence of all scriptures, it rejects other poems, it is worth listening to, it is acceptable to men of developed intellect, it destroys the pride of false poets and it is extremely beautiful. This has been said by Bhagwan Jinsen, who comments on the principle texts and rules over disciples for a long time. Its remaining part has been collected in brief by Gunabhadra Sari, who has a pure intellect, due to fear of excessive expansion and at the request of the inferior times.

The Adi Purana is a treasure trove of proverbs: To clarify this point, two very beautiful verses are found in the Uttar Purana, whose meaning is as follows:

"Just as precious gems are born from the sea, so too are proverbs born from this Purana."

"Those proverbs which are not easily found in other texts, even after a long time, are readily available in this Purana, verse by verse, and can be collected as desired."

See the greatness of the Adi Purana in the words of a poet, how beautiful the description is - "O friend! If you want to become a connoisseur by listening to the sayings of all poets, then bring your ears close to hear the Adi Purana spoken from the lotus mouth of the great poet Jinsenacharya."

A scholar has also said in praise of the entire Mahapurana:

"In this Mahapurana there is religion, there is the path to liberation, there is poetry, and there is the character of the Tirthankaras, or whose mind is not captivated by the words that have come out of the lotus mouth of the poet Jinsenacharya?"

Why is this Purana called Mahapurana? Jinsenacharya himself answers:

"This text has been prevalent since ancient times, therefore it is called Purana, it describes the Mahapuranas or the great men like Tirthankaras have preached it, or by reading it one attains great welfare, therefore it is called Mahapurana."

"It has spread with the support of ancient poets, therefore its antiquity is well known, and its importance is known only from its greatness, therefore it is called Mahapurana."

"This Purana is related to great men and is the heaven of great progress, the cause of liberation etc., therefore the great sages call it Mahapurana." - "This text is considered to be a scripture because it is written by sages, it is strong because it describes the truth, and it is a scripture of religion because it is a model of religion." 

Page #49:
---------------------------
41
"Thus, here, it was like this, because of the depiction of many such stories in it, the sages also consider it history, itihaas, itivrutta, and historical."
In the introduction, Jinsen has said a verse before remembering the previous poets, whose translation is as follows:
_"I bow to those ancient poets in whose lotus mouths Saraswati resides and whose words serve as the starting point for the poetry of other poets."_
This proves that there were other Puranakars before them in whom they had absolute faith. But they were not named, they did not mention them explicitly. Yes, the poet has definitely remembered the God of poets in his immediate past. Seeing the word 'Prathamam' in the seventh verse of the praise of Vikrant Kaurva, many gentlemen have formed the opinion that Adipurana is the first Purana in the Dimbar Jain Purana Granths, which does not seem appropriate. There, 'Prathamam' can also mean best or first. Gunamacharya and his other
Jinsen and Dasharathguru's disciple Gunabhadracharya was also a very great scholar of his time. His father was an excellent knowledge-filled, partisan, ascetic, and emotional Muni Raj. He completed the Adipurana by composing 1620 verses at the end of it and after that, he composed the Uttarapurana, whose size is 8 Itar verses. He was a very devoted disciple. At the beginning of the 433rd chapter of the Badipurana, where he starts his writing, the verses he has written show the good reflection of his devoted heart. He writes that:
"Like 'Inu', the first half of this other is also full of rasa, in the second half, whatever kind of rasa will be produced."
"If my words are sweet, then it should be understood as the greatness of the gurus. It is the nature of trees that their fruits are sweet."
"Words come out of my heart and Gurudev resides in my heart, so he will refine them there, so I will not have to work hard in this task."
"The followers of Lord Jinsen want to cross the ocean of the world by relying on the ancient path, then how difficult is it for me to reach the other side of the Purana-Sagar?" 8
Jinsen
1. See, A.Pu., 101.21-25. 2. A.Pu. 1141. 3. "Yavaadmay Puroraasitpuraanam Prathamam Bhushi. Tadeeyapriya Shishyo'bhoot Gunabhadramunishwarah. 7."
-Vikrant 0 Pro. 4. "Tasyay Sissho Gunavam Gunabhadddo Vivanaanapuripunno. Pakkhobavasamang Mahatako Bhavalingo Va."
Darshansar 5. "Iloribasy Pubar Samevaabhavi Rasaabah. Yatha Tathastu Nishpattiriti Prarabhyate Maya. 14." 6. "Gurunaameva Maahaatmyam Yadapi Swaadumaharah. Tarunaam Hi Swaabhaavo'sau Yatphalam Swaadu Jaayate. 15." 7. "Niryaanti Havayavaacho Hadi Me Garaba: Sthita. Te Tatra Sanskarishyanta Tanna Me'tra Parishrama: 16." 5. "Puraanamaargamasaach Jinseenaanuga Dhra Bam. Bhavaagde: Paaramichchanti Puraanasya Kimuchyate. 16." 

Page #50:
---------------------------
## Adipurana

The following works are available by its author:

**Uttara Purana:** This is the latter part of the Mahapurana. It contains the narratives of 23 Tirthankaras, starting with Ajitanatha, 11 Chakravartis, 6 Narayanas, 6 Balabhadra, 6 Pratinarayana, and some special individuals like Jivandhara Swami. Its composition would have been based on the prose Purana of Kavi Parameshvara. The characters of all Tirthankaras except the eighth, sixteenth, twenty-second, twenty-third, and twenty-fourth are written very briefly. In this part, the abundance of the story has impacted the poet's poetic power. It seems that the poet wants to complete the story part in any way and move forward. But still, there are many such proverbs in between which please the reader. There is a famous legend about the composition of Gunabhadracharya's Uttara Purana:

**42**

When Jinsen Swami became convinced that his life was about to end and he would not be able to complete the Mahapurana, he called his two most worthy disciples. Calling them, he said, "Describe this dry tree standing in front of you in poetic language." Hearing the Guru's words, the first one said, "Shushkam Kastham Tishtatyagre." Then the second disciple said, "Nirastaruriha Vilasati Puratah." The Guru saw rasa in the second disciple's words, so he ordered him to complete the Mahapurana. Accepting the Guru's wish, the second disciple completed the Mahapurana. That second disciple was Gunabhadra.

**Atmanushasan:** This is a beautiful work of 272 verses written in the style of Bharti Hari's Vairagyashataka. Its simple and easy composition has an immediate impact on the heart. Its Sanskrit commentary was done by Prabhachandra. Hindi commentaries have also been done by Shri Sw. Pandit Todarmalji and Pandit Vanshidharji Shastri Solapur. It is also widely circulated in the Jain community. If its verses are memorized, they are very empowering for achieving peace of mind on occasion. At the end, the following verse is found as a praise:

"Jinseenaacharyapaadasmaranaadheenachetasam. Gunabhadra Bhadantanam Kritiraatmanushasanam."

Meaning: This Atmanushasan is the work of Gunabhadra Bhadant, whose mind is under the remembrance of the feet of Shri Jinseenaacharya.

**Jindattcharitra:** This is a small, new-creation poem written in Anushtup verses. Its story is very intriguing. Despite the short word arrangement, the sentiment is very profound in some places. Its Hindi translation has also been done by Shri Lalji Kavya Tirtham.

**Contemporary Kings**

Among the kings who were in contact with Jinsen Swami and Bhadant Gunabhadra, Amoghvarsha (First) is the most prominent. He was the son of Jagattunkadeva (Govinda Third). His household name was Boddanaray. Nripatunga, Sharva, Shanda, Atishayadhaval, Viranarayana, Prithvivallbha, Lakshmivallbha, Maharajadhiraja, Bhatar, Parambhattarak, etc. were his titles. He was also very powerful. He lived a very long life and ruled for about 63 years. Historians have fixed his reign from Saka Samvat 736 to 766. Jinsen Swami's death has been fixed around Saka Samvat 765, so Amoghvarsha was ruling at the time of Jinsen's death
Page #51:
---------------------------
43
He was so famous that he came to be regarded as a kind of title, and three or four kings of the Rathore dynasty, as well as the Parmar king Muñja, adopted it as a mark of their prestige. These last three or four Amogavarshas are known in history as 'First'. They were ardent devotees of Jinasena Swami. As Gunabhadracharya has mentioned in the praise of the Uttarapurana, and its meaning is that Maharaja Amogavarsha considered himself purified by placing his head at the lotus feet of Jinasena Swami and always remembered him.
Introduction
These kings were not only scholars but also patrons of scholars. He wrote the 'Praśnottara Ratnamālikā' when he had wisely removed the burden of the kingdom from his shoulders. Besides the 'Praśnottara Ratnamālikā', he also wrote an alaṅkāra-grantha called 'Kavirājamārga' in the Kannada language, which is well-known among scholars. His capital was Manyakheta, which was as magnificent as Indrapuri. He also made generous donations to Jain temples and Jain settlements. A copper plate inscription of Śaka 782 reveals that he himself donated to Jainacharya Devendra in Manyakheta. This donation inscription is from the 52nd year of his reign. An inscription of Śaka 767 has been found of Krishna (II)'s chief minister Prithviraya, which mentions the donation of some land by him for a Jain temple in Saundatti.
Śākaṭāyana wrote his commentary on the Śabdānuśāsana, Amoṣavṛtti, in the name of this Amogavarsha. The Ghavla and Jayadhavla commentaries were also written in honour of his name, Dhvala or Atiśayadhvala, and Mahāvīrācharya has elaborated on his great glory in his Ganitasārasangraha. This proves that he was a great patron of scholars, especially Jainacharyas.
In the mangalacharana of the 'Praśnottara Ratnamālikā', he has praised Śrī Mahāvīra Swami in the following verse: "Praṇipatyavardhamānaṃ praśnottara ratnamālikāṃ vakṣye | Nāganarāmarabandhyaṃ devam devādhipaṃ vīram ||". And in it he has included many Jain-dharma-approved questions and answers, such as:
"Tvaritaṃ kiṃ kārtavyaṃ viduṣāṃ saṃsārasantati chhedaḥ | Kiṃ mokṣataror bījaṃ samyagjñānaṃ kriyā sahaitam ||4|| Ko narakaḥ paravaśatā ki saukhyaṃ sarvasangaviratir vā | Kiṃ ratnaṃ bhūtahitaṃ preyaḥ prāṇīnāmasavaḥ || 13||" This proves that Amogavarsha was a Jain, and even if he is not considered a Jain throughout his life, it can be said with certainty that he was a Jain at the time of writing the Ratnamālā. This statement is also supported by the verse from the Uththānikā of the Ganitasārasangraha written by Mahāvīrācharya: "Vidhvastaikāntaphakṣasya syādvādanyāyavedinaḥ | Devasya nṛpatuṅgasya vardhatāṃ tasya śāsanaṃ ||".
Akālavarsha - After Amogavarsha, his son Akālavarsha, who is also known in history as 'Krishna II', became the universal emperor. As it is written in the donation inscription of the
Page #52:
---------------------------
## Aripuran

"After Amoghvarsha, Akalavarsha became the sovereign king, whose prowess terrified the sun, making it behave like the moon in the sky."

He was also a great and mighty warrior, like Akalavarsha. In the donation inscription of Krishna Raja III, found near a well in Wardha city, his valor is highly praised. The meaning of the verse found there is:

"Sri Krishna Raja, the son of Amoghvarsha, who had brought under his control the kings of Gurjar, Gauda, Dwarasamudra, Anga, Kalinga, Ganga, Magadha, and other countries."

In the praise of Uttarapurana, Gunabhadracharya has also written a lot in praise of him, saying that his towering elephants drank the water of the Ganges River, which was stained by their own intoxicating juice. This indicates that his kingdom extended to the banks of the Ganges in the north and to Kanyakumari in the south.

He ascended the throne around Shaka Samvat 767 and died around Shaka Samvat 833.

The mention of Lokavitya-Lokaditya is found in the second praise of Uttarapurana by Lokasen Muni, the disciple of Sri Gunabhadra Swami. He states that when Lokaditya, the feudatory of Akalavarsha, ruled the entire Banabas country from his capital Vankaapur, this sacred and supreme Purana was worshipped by the devout in a certain Muhurta of Shaka Samvat 220. This makes it clear that Lokaditya was a feudatory of Akalavarsha or Krishna (III) and the king of Vanavasa. His father's name was Vankeyaras. He was a Chelldhvaj, meaning his flag had the symbol of a kite or a hawk. His capital was Bankaapur. When the Mahapurana was worshipped in Bankaapur in Shaka Samvat 820, he was the reigning king. It is not certain how long he ruled on the throne.

The praise of Uttarapurana, which is extensively used in "Acharya Jinsen and Gunabhadra Prakaran", is found in the last, i.e., the seventeenth chapter of the said text. Acharya Jinsen, the earlier scholar mentioned in Aripuran, has mentioned these scholars who came before him in his Adipurana: 1. Sikhasen, 2. Samantabhadra, 3. Shridatta, 4. Yashobhan, 5. Prabhachandra, 6. Shivakoti, 7. Jatacharya (Sihanandi), 8. Kagabhikshu, 9. Dev (Devanandi), 10. Bhattakalaanka, 11. Shripal, 12. Patrakesari, 13. Vadisinha, 14. Virsen, 15. Jayasen, and 16. Kaviprameswar.

It is necessary to provide some information about these Acharyas here.

Sikhasen - There have been many scholars with this name, but this is the same Siddhasen who is the author of the Prakrit text called "San Di. Prakaran". He was a distinguished scholar of Nyaya Shastra. His time should be the 6th-7th century Vikram.

1. "Tasmaavkalavarsho'bhoot sarvabhaumakshitiśvaraḥ | Yatpratapaparitrasato vyomnI candrayate raviḥ ||" 2. "Tasyotajitgurjaro hatahatalsasobhatashrimado gaudaanaam vinayanatarpanaguruh samunibaahar... : .
Dwaras
Page #53:
---------------------------
## Introduction
45

## Samantabhadra
Samantabhadra was a Kshatriya prince. His birth name was Shantivarma, but he later became known in the world by the melodious name 'Samantabhadra'. It is not known what his guru's name was or what his guru lineage was. He is credited with being the first praiser, along with being a debater, orator, and poet. He was a profound thinker in philosophy and possessed exceptional talent. In an introductory verse, he is described as a Devagya, Vaidya, Mantrik, and Tantrik, as well as an Ashasiddha and Siddhasarvasvat. His lion's roar made all debaters tremble. He traveled to many countries and defeated debaters, showing them the right path. His available works are very important, concise, profound, and evocative of deep meaning. Their names are as follows: 1. Brihatsvayam Bhustotra, 2. Yuktyanusasan, 3. Aptmimamsa, 4. Ratnakaranḍa Shravakachar, and 5. Stutividya. His two works, Jivasiddhi and Tattvanusasan, are unavailable. His time is considered to be the 2nd-3rd century Vikram era.

## Shridatta
Shridatta was a very great debater and philosophical scholar of his time. Acharya Vidyānanda, while mentioning his work 'Jalpnirṇaya', has described him as a conqueror of 63 debaters. This makes it clear that Shridatta was a great ascetic and a scholar who defeated debaters. Devnandi (Pujiyapada), a scholar of the first half of the 6th century Vikram era, has mentioned a Shridatta in the Jainendra grammar in the sutra 'Guṇe Shridattasya Striyaṁ 1.4.34'. It is very likely that the Shridatta mentioned by Acharya Jinsen and Devnandi are the same. It is also possible that they are different. Since the Adipuranakar has described Shridatta as a 'tapas shri diptmurti' and a lion who distinguishes between elephants in the form of debaters, it appears that Shridatta was a philosophical scholar. The six scholars mentioned in Jainendra grammar are mostly philosophical scholars. Among them, only Bhutbali was an expert in the principles of Siddhanta Shastra. It is the practice of the great grammarian Panini to mention the opinions of various Acharyas in grammar. The Indian Acharyas named Shridatta seem to be different from these.

## Yashobhadra
Yashobhadra was a sharp-witted logical scholar. The pride of debaters would be shattered as soon as they reached his assembly. Devnandi has also mentioned Yashobhadra in the Jainendra grammar in the sutra 'Kva' Vrishimrijan Yashobhadra 2.1.66'. We have not seen any mention of his work. If the Yashobhadra mentioned in Jainendra grammar by Devnandi is the same, then he is a scholar who preceded the 6th century.

## Prabhachandra
The Prabhachandra mentioned here is different from the Prabhachandra who authored 'Nyayakumudachandra' and lived much earlier. He was a disciple of Kumarasen. Vira Sen Swami has mentioned Prabhachandra while describing the characteristics of 'naya' in the Jayadhwala commentary. It is likely that he is the same. Jin Sen, the author of the Harivansh Purana, belonging to the Punnat Sangha, has also remembered him. He was a proficient scholar of Nyaya Shastra and his fame, like the rays of the moon, became bright and
Page #54:
---------------------------
## Adipurana

It is possible that Samantabhadra's initiation name was different. It could have been Jinanando or something similar. If this assumption is correct, then Shivakoti could have been Samantabhadra's disciple, and their time could be contemporary with Samantabhadra. In the stories of worship, a verse from Samantabhadra's Brihatsvayambhustotra is also found. Thus, this topic requires special research.

## Jatacharya Singhanandi

This Jatacharya was also known as 'Singhanandi'. He was a very austere ascetic. He died in 'Koppan' in a state of Samadhi. His footprints are also engraved on a hill called 'Pallavaki Gundhu' near Koppan, and below them is an inscription in old Kannada in two lines, which was prepared by a person named 'Chapayya'. His only work, 'Varangacharita', has been edited by Dr. A.N. Upadhye and published by 'Manikchand Granthamala' in Bombay. King Varang lived during the time of the twenty-second Tirthankara, Neminath. Varangacharita is a beautiful poem full of beneficial teachings of Dharma Shastra. Varang has been remembered a lot in Kannada literature. Udyotan Suri, the author of Kuvalayamala, and Ubhayyajinas have remembered him with great respect. Some poets of the Apabhramsha language have also remembered the author of Varangacharita. Upadhyeji has fixed his time in the 7th century AD.

## Kanabhikshu

He is the author of the Kathalankaaratmak Granth. This book is unavailable. Acharya Jinasena, while mentioning his book, wrote that Kanabhikshu, whose voice-like flawless and beautiful jewels followed the Dharma Sutra, adorned the Puranasangh. This mention clearly shows that Kanabhikshu must have written some story-book or Purana. It is unfortunate that that unique book is unavailable. I have not seen any mention of Kanabhikshu's Guruparampara. He is also a scholar from before the 9th century. How much before? This is still uncertain.

## Dev

Dev is the short name of Devanandi. Vadiraj Suri has also mentioned this short name in his Parshvacharita. According to the inscription no. 40 (64) of Shravanabelagola, his names Devanandi, Jinendrabuddhi, and Pujyapada are famous. This Acharya was a very learned scholar of his time. His talent was multifaceted. This is why later writers have remembered him with great respect. From the mention in 'Darshansar' that in 526 VS, Vajranandi, a disciple of Pujyapada, established the Dravida Sangh in Dakshin Mathura or Madurai, you are proven to be a scholar from before 526 VS. Shri Jinasenacharya has remembered him as a grammarian. In fact, you were a unique grammarian. Your 'Jainendra Vyakaran' has been called 'Apastam Ratna' by the name-mala-kar Dhananjay Kavi. So far, the following books of yours have become available:

1. Jainendra Vyakaran - An unparalleled grammar book.
2. Sarvarth Siddhi - A beautiful and easy commentary on Acharya Griha Pichch's Tattvarth Sutra.
3. Samadhi Tantra - An unparalleled book on Samadhi in spiritual language.
4. Ishtopadeś - A heart-stealing chapter of 51 verses full of teachings.
5. Dashabhakti - A holy flow of devotional sentiment in a scholarly language.


Page #55:
---------------------------
## Introduction

Apart from these, there are mentions of some other texts like 'Shabdavatarannyasa' and 'Jainendrannyasa', but they have not been found yet.

Akalanka Bhatta was the son of a king named 'Laghuhamb' and 'Bhatta' was his title. He was a brilliant Acharya of the 8th century Vikram era. Akalankadev was the organizer of Jain logic and an extraordinary scholar of philosophy. Studying his philosophical works reveals his profound scholarship at every step. In them, he has refuted opposing views with irrefutable arguments while establishing his own. The style of the texts is extremely profound, concise, rich in meaning, and aphoristic. This is why later Acharyas like Haribhadra have respectfully mentioned Akalanka's logic. Not only this, scholars like Jinasdasagani Mahत्तर have also been inspired to study his 'Siddhvinischya' text. This clearly shows the importance of Akalankadev. Currently, his following works are available: Laghuyastray, Nyayavinischaya, Siddhvinischya, Ashtshati (Devagam Tika), Pramanasangrah - with Sopanjna Bhashya, Tattvarthrajavartika, Swarupasambodhan, and Akalankastotra.

Akalankadev's time is considered to be the 7th-8th century Vikram era because he had a great debate with Buddhists in Vikram Samvat 700, as is clear from the following verse:

"Vikramarkashagdiyashatasaptpramajushi | Kale'kalankayatinoboudhdharvado mahanabhoot ||"

In the commentary of the Nandisutra, the famous Shwetambar scholar Shri Jinasdasagani Mahत्तर has mentioned the text named 'Siddhvinischya' with great respect, whose time of composition is Shaka Samvat 568, i.e., Vi. Sa. 733, as is evident from his following statement: "Shakarajah panchasavarshashateshvyaatikranteshvashta navatishu nandyanayanachanih samaapta." Muni Jinavijayaji has correctly stated this time of the commentary based on many palm leaf manuscripts. Therefore, Akalankadev's time is definitely the 7th century Vikram era.

Shripal - He was a disciple of Virsvami and a contemporary scholar or Dharma Guru brother of Jinsen. Jinsenacharya has mentioned that Jayadhwala was edited by him. This makes him seem like a very great scholar. Although there is not much information about him due to lack of material, he is definitely a scholar of the 8th century Vikram era.

Patrakesari - He was born in a Brahmin family. He was a very intelligent and learned scholar. Hearing Acharya Samantabhadra's Devagamstotra, he developed faith in Jainism. Patrakesari was an expert in logic and the author of the logical text 'Trilakshanak Darshan'. Although this text is currently unavailable, the commentator of Tattvasangrah, Buddhist Acharya Kamalshil, has mentioned this text of Patrakesari. Many of its verses are found in 'Tattvasangrahapunjika'. The subject of this text is to refute the three-fold characteristic of the Buddhist argument in detail. His other work is 'Jinendragunastuti', which is famous as 'Patrakesari Stotra'. This stotra is also full of philosophical discussions. In it, through praise, he has introduced the true nature of things through his logical and research-based arguments. The total number of verses in the stotra is 50. In it, the extraordinary
Page #56:
---------------------------
## Adipurana

**Vadirbhasah** - This was a high-ranking poet and a lion for those who were elephants in the form of debate. His roar silenced the debaters. Vadirbhasah Muni was a disciple of Pushpasen. Three of his works are available today, two of which are prose and poetry, and the other is a beautiful treatise on the Nyaya of 'Syadvad Siddhi'. Sadly, it is only available in an incomplete form. If these two scholars are the same person due to the similarity in names, then their time period could be the 8th century Vikram era.

**Virensen** - He was the Acharya of the Mula Sangha Panch-stupa Anvaya, which became famous in the world as the Sen Sangha. He was a disciple of Chandrasen, a student of Aryananda, and the Guru of Jinasenacharya. Virensenacharya studied the Shatkhandagama and the principles like Kashayaprabhrut, etc., near Elacharya in Chitrakoot. He passed away after writing the 'Dhavla Tika' on Shatkhandagama, which is 72,000 verses long, and the 'Jayadhavla Tika' on Kashayaprabhrut, which is 20,000 verses long. The remaining 40,000 verses of the Jayadhavla Tika were completed by his disciple, Jinasenacharya. Apart from these, Acharya Virensen also wrote a commentary on the 'Siddh Bhupaddhati' which is mentioned by Gunabhadracharya. This commentary is unavailable. The time period of Virensenacharya is the first half of the 9th century Vikram era.

**Jayasen** - He was a great ascetic, a peaceful soul, a scholar, and a leader among the learned. Punnat Sanghi Jinasen, the author of the Harivansh Purana, mentions Jayasen, the Guru of Amitasen, who lived for a hundred years. He describes him as a great teacher, victorious over the senses, a holder of the Agama in the form of Karma-prakriti, a renowned grammarian, influential, and a master of the entire ocean of knowledge. This makes him appear to be a great yogi, ascetic, and influential theoretical Acharya. It is not surprising if he was also the author of some Karma-granth, as he was a holder of the Agama in the form of Karma-prakriti. However, we have not seen any authentic mention of any book written by him. It seems that both these Jinasens are the same person. The Guru Parampara given by the author of the Harivansh Purana clearly shows that if we assume 25-25 years for Amitasen, who lived for a hundred years, and his disciple Kirtisen, which is very less, and subtract it from the time of the composition of the Harivansh Purana (Shak Samvat 705, Vikram Samvat 840), then the time period of Jayasen could be around Shak Samvat 655, Vikram Samvat 760. This means that Jayasen was a scholar-Acharya of the 8th century Vikram era.

**Kaviprameswar** - Acharya Jinasen, revered by poets and known as Kaviprameswar, is described as the author of the Purana named 'Vagarth Sangrah' by the poets. Acharya Gunabhadra describes his Purana as a prose narrative, containing all meters and figures of speech, subtle meaning, and deep word composition, as is clear from his following verse:

"Kaviprameswar Nigavita Gadyakathamatrakam (Matrikam) Purocharitam
Page #57:
---------------------------
## Introduction

N. Upadhye has speculated that this Purana is a prose-poetry Champu text. This speculation seems largely accurate, and only then does the epithet 'Sakalchandolankritilkshyam' given by Gunabhadra seem to be true. The great poet Adipaamp, Abhinavpaamp, Nayasen, Aggaladeva, Kamalabhava, and many other poets have remembered him with respect, which makes him seem like a great scholar of his time. His time is not yet certain, but he is definitely a predecessor of Jinesen.

## Introduction of some countries mentioned in the Adipurana's description of the division of the country:

**Sukosal:** Madhya Pradesh is called Sukosal. Its other name is Mahakosal.

**Avanti:** The region surrounding Ujjain was called Avanti. The city of Avanti (Ujjain) was its capital.

**Pundr:** The northern part of present-day Bengal was called Pundr. Its other name was Gauda.

**Kuru:** This is a plain of many kos on the left side of the Saraswati river. It is also called Kurujangal. Hastinapur was its capital.

**Kashi:** The province around Banaras was included in this country. The capital of this country was Varanasi (Banaras).

**Kaling:** The northern part of Madras province and the southern part of Utkal (Odisha) were previously known as Kaling. Its capital was Kaling Nagar (Rajamahendri). It has a mountain called Mahendramali.

**Ang:** The eastern part of Magadh was called Ang. Its main city was Champa, which is near Bhagalpur.

**Bang:** The old name of Bengal is Bang. It is east of Suhma. Its ancient capital was Karnswarna (Vanasona). Currently, Kalighatpuri (Kolkata) is the capital.

**Suj:** This is the country where the Kapisha (Kosia) river flows. Tamralipti (Tamluk) is its capital.

**Kashmir:** This province is on the northern border of India. It is still called Kashmir. Its capital is Srinagar.

**Anart:** In ancient times, Gurjar (Gujarat) was divided into three parts: 1. Anart, 2. Surastra (Kathiawar), and 3. Lat. Anart is the northern part of Gurjar. Dwaravati (Dwarka) is its main city.

**Vats:** The plain north of Prayag was called Varsa. Its capital was Kaushambi (Kosam).

**Panchanad:** Its old name is Panchanad and its modern name is Punjab. It has five rivers, including Vitasta, hence its name Panchanad. There were many provinces in the middle of its five rivers, including Kulat, Madr, Aratt, Yaudheya, etc. Lavpur (Lahore), Kushpur (Kushawar), Takshashila (Taxila), and Mul-Sthan (Multan) are some of its present-day main cities.

1. This section uses information from "A Brief History of Sanskrit Literature" by Pt. Sitaram Jayaram Joshi MA and Pt. Vishwanath Shastri Bhardwaj MA. 

Page #58:
---------------------------
## Kadipurana

**Malava:** This is the name of Malwa. Earlier, Avanti was known by another name and was included in this, but now it is included in Malava. Ujjain, Dashpur (Mandsaur), Dharanagari (Dhar), Indrapur (Indore) etc. are its famous cities.

**Panchal:** This is east of Kurukshetra. It was divided into two parts: Dakshin Panchal and Uttar Panchal. Its extent was up to the Charmanvati river. Kanyakubj (Kannauj) is in this. Ahichchhatra was the capital of Uttar Panchal and Kampilya was the capital of Dakshin Panchal.

**Dasharna:** This region is the eastern part of Malwa. The Vetravati (Betasha) river flows in this region. In some places, the Dasharna (Dhasan) river also flows and finally merges into the Vetravati. Vidisha (Bhilsa) was its capital.

**Kachchh:** The region on the western coast was called Kachchh. It is still known as Kachchh Kathiawar.

**Magadh:** The southern part of the Ganga in the Bihar province was called Magadh. Its capital was Pataliputra (Patna). Gaya and Uruvilva (Buddhagaya) were in this province.

**Vidarbha:** Its modern name is Berar. Its ancient capital was Vidarbhapur (Bidar) or Kundinpur.

**Maharashtra:** The vast plain from the Krishna river to the Narmada was called Maharashtra.

**Saurashtra:** The western region of Malava was called Saurashtra or Surashtr. Nowadays, it is called Saurashtra (Kathiawar). The Raivatak (Girnar) region is in this. The part of Saurashtra where Dwarka is located was called Banart.

**Konkan:** This region on the western coast extends from Suryapatan (Surat) to Ratnagiri. Mahamba Pur (Mumbai) and Kalyan are in this Konkan region.

**Vanavasa:** A part of the Karnataka province was called Vanavasa. Now it is called Banausi. During the time of Gunabhadracharya, its capital was Banka Pur, which is in the Dharwad district.

**Andhra:** This was between the Godavari and Krishna rivers. Its capital was Andhranagar (Bengali). Most of it is included in the Bhagyapur (Hyderabad) state. It is also called Ling (Telang) country.

**Karnat:** This was the southern or western part of Andhradesh. Vanavasa and Mahisha or Mahi Pur (Mysore) are included in this. Its capitals were Mahishapur and Srirangapatna.

**Kosala:** This was divided into two parts: Uttar Kosala and Dakshin Kosala. Ayodhya, Sharavati (Shravasti), Lakshmanpuri (Lucknow) etc. are its famous cities. The Gomati, Tamasa and Sarayu rivers flow here. The nearby region of Kushavati was called Dakshin Kosala. And the region near Ayodhya, Lucknow etc. was called Uttar Kosala.

**Chola:** The southeastern part of Karnataka, i.e. Madras city, some of the regions north of it and a large part of the Mysore state were previously known as Chola.

**Kerala:** The land south of Krishna and Tungabhadra, which is now included in Kerala, was known as Pandya Kerala and Satiputra. 

Page #59:
---------------------------
## Introduction

**Shurasen:** The region near Mathura was called Shurasen. Gokul, Vrindavan and Agravan (Agra) are in this region.

**Videh:** The region near Dwaravang (Darbhanga) was called Videh. Mithila or Janakpuri is in this region.

**Sindhu:** This region is still known as Sindh, and Karachi is its capital.

**Gandhar (Kandahar):** Its modern name is Afghanistan. It is west of the Sindhu River and Kashmir. Its ancient capitals were Purushpur (Peshawar) and Pushkaravart (Hastinagar).

**Yavan:** This is the old name for Greece.

**Chedi:** The region near the modern city of Chanderi in Malwa was called Chedi. It is now in the Gwalior state.

**Pallava:** The region near Kanchi in the south was called Pallava. The historically famous Pallava kings ruled here.

**Kamboja:** Its modern name is Balochistan.

**Aratta:** Aratta was the name of a region in Punjab.

**Turushka:** Its modern name is Turkistan.

**Shaka (Shakasthan):** Its modern name is Bactria.

**Sauvira:** A part of Sindh was called Sauvira.

**Kekaya:** The region between the Vitasta (Jhelum) and Chandrabhaga (Chenab) rivers in Punjab was previously known as Kekaya. Girivraja, which is now called Jalalpur, was its capital.

## Commentary and Annotations on the Adipurana

The Adipurana is the best among the first Anuyoag texts of the Jain Agam. It is as deep as the ocean. Therefore, it is natural that commentaries and annotations were written on it by later Jain Acharyas. While editing, I received 3 copies of the commentary and 1 copy of the Sanskrit annotation of the Adipurana. The copies named 'T', 'K' and 'Kh' introduced in the editing material are the commentary copies, and the copy with the code name 'D' is the Sanskrit annotation copy. The script of the 'T' and 'K' copies is Kannada. The 'T' copy has an elaborate commentary on the first verse, "Shrime Sakalashanasamrajyapadamiyushe, Dharmachakrabhute Bhatra Namah Sansarbhimuse." This commentary gives many meanings of the verse. The 'K' copy does not have the same extensive commentary on the first verse as the 'T' copy. The 'Kh' copy is written in Nagari script. The date given at the end of this copy, Samvat 1224, 0 Ku 7, makes it seem very old. Except for the detailed explanation of the Mangal Shlok, the rest of the commentary is mostly similar to the commentary in the 'T' copy. The commentary given in this edition of the Adipurana is taken from the 'T' copy for the first verse and from the 'K' copy for the rest. The commentaries in the 'K' and 'Kh' copies are older than the commentary in the 'T' copy. In the commentary on the first verse (page 5), the verse from Acharya Ashadharji's Pratistasaroddhar text is quoted, "Panchamuktyai Swayam Ye, Acharanavarantah Paramaranamacharayante Mumukhoon, Lokapraganyasharannyan Ganadharavrishabhan Ityashaadharainirupanat." This proves that the commentary was written after Acharya Ashadharji. The names of the commentators are not mentioned anywhere in the beginning or end of these three copies, so I am unable to say who wrote these commentaries and
Page #60:
---------------------------
## Adipurana

The book "Jinaratnakosa" edited by Prof. Velhankar from the Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute, Pune, which was published in English, mentions four commentaries on the Adipurana. (1) The commentary by Lalitakirti, which is introduced as "The" manuscript under the heading "Commentary Material". More will be written about this later. (2) The second commentary is by Prabhachandra. (3) The third is by Hmachari and (4) the fourth is by Harishena. In addition to these, there is also mention of a Mangala commentary.

Where these commentaries are located and which of them are the "T", "K" and "Kh" manuscripts cannot be stated clearly until all the aforementioned manuscripts are examined. I urge the heads of ancient script repositories to send information about these manuscripts.

Apart from these independent commentaries, there are also commentaries written alongside other original manuscripts, which I have mentioned in the introduction of the "P", "A" and "I" manuscripts. These commentaries have similarities in some places and differences in others.

The manuscript of the Sanskrit commentary named "D" definitely has a self-praise by the commentator at the end, which reveals that its author is Shri Lalitakirti Bhattarak. A brief introduction to him is as follows:

"Bhattarak Lalitakirti was a scholar of the Kasthasangh, Mathuragachchha and Pushkargana, and a disciple of Bhattarak Jagatkoti. He wrote commentaries on the Adipurana and Uttarapurana - the entire Mahapurana. The first commentary is on 42 chapters of the Mahapurana, which he completed on Sunday, the first day of the bright fortnight of Margashirsha, Samvat 1874. The second commentary is on the 43rd chapter, which he completed in 1886. Apart from this, he completed the commentary on the Uttarapurana in Samvat 1888."

The ancient Hindi commentary on the Adipurana is by Pt. Daulatramji, which has been printed. This commentary is written with verse numbers. It does not give the original verses but only their numbers. Late Pt. Kallalappa Bharmappa 'Nitave' also wrote a Marathi commentary on it, which was published by Jainendra Press, Kolhapur. It printed the Sanskrit verses and their Marathi translation below them. Apart from these, a Hindi commentary was written by Shri Pt. Lalaramji Shastri, which was printed with the collective original verses above and the Hindi translation below, verse by verse. This edition, being complete with the original text, was more popular among the people. It is now difficult to obtain.

## Adipurana and Varna Vyavastha (Caste System) and Varnotpatti (Origin of Castes)

Jainism believes that the universe, in its form, has existed since time immemorial and will continue to exist for an infinite time. It has specific characteristics, many of which are natural and many are also due to human effort. Jain scriptures mention that in the Bharat and Airavat regions, time has been changing in the form of Avasarpini. Each of these has six divisions, namely Sushma, etc. This is the Avasarpini time. When its first part was passing here, there was a system of excellent enjoyment. When the second time came, there was a system of moderate enjoyment. When the third time came, there was a system of inferior enjoyment. When eight parts of the Paly of the third time were left, then fourteen Manus - Kulkaras were born in succession. They taught the people many things at that time with their unique scholarship. The fourteenth Kulkar was Nabhiraj. By his time, the Kalpavriksha had been
Page #61:
---------------------------
## Introduction

People used to live off of spontaneously generated grains without having to sow them. It was in this time that Lord Rishabhdev, the first Tirthankara, was born. During his time, the spontaneously generated grains disappeared. People became hungry and started wandering around in search of food. Some people went to Nabhiraj to tell him about their plight. They took all the people to Lord Rishabhdev. Remembering the system of Videhakshetra, Lord Rishabhdev explained the same system to the people there. He explained to them, "Look, until now this was a Bhogbhumi (land of enjoyment), where you received the means of enjoyment from Kalpvriksha (wish-fulfilling trees). But now, Karmabhumi (land of action) is beginning. This is the age of action. No living being can survive without performing actions. Asi (weapons), Masi (ink), Krishi (agriculture), Vidya (knowledge), Vanijya (commerce), and Shilp (crafts) are the six actions. By performing these actions, you can sustain yourselves. Until now, all kinds of grains and cereals were spontaneously generated, but from now on, they will not be generated without sowing. You will have to produce grains through agriculture. Milk from cows, buffaloes, and other animals will be beneficial for your sustenance. Until now, everyone's life was individual, but now, social life is essential. Only through social organization can you survive happily and peacefully in Karmabhumi. Those of you who are strong should take up arms and protect the weak. Some people should collect useful goods and provide them to people at the right time, i.e., engage in trade. Some people should earn their livelihood through writing and knowledge. Some people should create tools like plows, carts, etc., that fulfill people's needs. And some people should earn their livelihood through entertaining arts like dance and music.

The people liked the six actions explained by the Lord. They started earning their livelihood according to them. During the time of Bhogbhumi, people were all of similar abilities, so no one needed the help of anyone else. But now, people with different abilities started appearing. Some were weak, some were strong, some were hardworking, some were lazy, some were intelligent, and some were less intelligent. The need to protect the weak from the arrogant strong arose. The need to deliver goods produced through crafts to people was felt. The need for mutual cooperation for agriculture, crafts, and other activities became apparent. Then, Lord Rishabhdev, who was the real Brahma, took up arms in his arms and taught the people that it is the duty of strong men to protect weak humans from attackers. Many people accepted this task. Lord Rishabhdev named these people Kshatriyas. He taught people to walk on their thighs, explaining that the creation needs people who can transport finished goods from one place to another for convenience. Many people agreed to do this work. The Lord named these people Vaishyas. After that, he explained that this is the age of action and action cannot happen without cooperation. Therefore, there is a need for people who cooperate with each other. Many people adopted this service attitude. The Adi Brahma named them Shudras. In this way, at the beginning of the creation in the form of Karmabhumi, the Adi Brahma established the Kshatriya, Vaishya, and Shudra varnas.

Later, the thought came to Bharat Chakravarti's mind, "I have collected a lot of resources through my conquests. Other people also collect wealth as much as they can according to their abilities. Where should it be donated? Who should be made its recipient?" Along with this, he also felt the need for people who, if they were intellectuals, would continuously provide intellectual material to the other three varnas. With this thought, he
Page #62:
---------------------------
## Masi-dhaan

They asked the reason for not coming, and they all replied that their clothes would harm the green grass creatures, so they did not come. Maharaj Bharat, acknowledging their compassion, invited them inside through another suitable path, praised and honored them, gave them the designation of Brahmanas, and assigned them the duties of study, teaching, yajna, and yajana. This incident is described by Jinaseanacharya in his Adipurana, Parva 16, verses 243-246.

## Janmana Karmaa Na Va

There are two schools of thought currently circulating regarding whether the caste system is based on birth or deeds. Some believe that the caste system is based on birth, meaning that whoever is born into a particular caste, regardless of their favorable or unfavorable actions, will remain in that caste in that life. Their caste will only change after death. Others believe that the caste system is based on qualities and deeds. The four castes were established to organize the six karmas, so one's caste will be determined by their favorable and unfavorable actions.

Historically, when considering these two schools of thought, the caste system based on deeds appears to be more ancient. Because wherever the caste system is discussed in the Brahmanas and the Mahabharata, it is considered to be based on deeds rather than birth. For example, consider these excerpts:

In the Mahabharata, Bharadvaja asks Bhrigu Maharshi: "If the four castes are differentiated by color, namely, white (sattva guna), red (rajo guna), yellow (rajas-tamovyamishra), and black (tamo guna), then why is caste intermixing seen in all groups? Desire, anger, fear, greed, sorrow, worry, hunger, and fatigue are present in all of us. Why then is there a caste difference? Our bodies all excrete sweat, urine, feces, phlegm, and blood. How then is there a caste difference? There are countless species of mobile and immobile creatures. How can the caste of these diverse colored species be determined?"

In response, Bhrigu Maharshi says: "In reality, there is no distinction between the groups. Brahma initially created this world as only the Brahmana caste. However, due to their individual actions, they acquired different caste distinctions. Those who are fond of sensual pleasures, sharp in nature, angry, courageous, abandon their own dharma (sattva guna-dominant dharma), and are red-bodied (rajo guna-dominant) became Kshatriyas. Those who earn their livelihood through cattle and other means, are yellow-bodied (rajas-tamovyamishra guna-dominant), engage in agriculture, and do not follow their own dharma became Vaishyas. Apart from these, those who are fond of violence, deceit, greedy, earn their livelihood by doing all kinds of work, are black-bodied (tamo guna-dominant), and are devoid of cleanliness and purity became Shudras. Thus, due to these actions, they became distinct and acquired different caste distinctions. Dharma and yajna rituals are not prohibited for any of them."

1. Bharadvaja said, "If the caste is differentiated by color, then caste intermixing is seen in all groups. Desire, anger, fear, greed, sorrow, worry, hunger, and fatigue are present in all of us. Why then is there a caste difference? Our bodies all excrete sweat, urine, feces, phlegm, and blood. How then is there a caste difference? There are countless species of mobile and immobile creatures. How can the caste of these diverse colored species be determined?" 

Page #63:
---------------------------
55
See another example from the Mahabharata:
Bharadwaja asks Bhrigu Maharshi, "O best of speakers, O Brahman Rishi, tell me, what is the reason for a man being a Brahman, Kshatriya, Vaishya, and Shudra?"
In reply, Bhrigu Maharshi says:
"One who is cultured by the rites like Jatakarma, is pure, is accomplished in the study of the Vedas, is engaged in the six duties like worship, is established in the conduct of purity, eats the remnants of sacrifices, is dear to the teachers, constantly observes vows, and is devoted to truth, is called a Brahman. Truth, charity, non-violence, non-cruelty, shame, compassion, and austerity are seen in him, he is a Brahman. One who serves the Kshatriya duty, is associated with the study of the Vedas, and has a liking for giving charity, is called a Kshatriya. One whose work is trade and animal husbandry, who loves agriculture, is pure, and is accomplished in the study of the Vedas, is called a Vaishya. One who has a liking for all kinds of food, who does everyone's work, is impure, is devoid of the study of the Vedas, and is devoid of good conduct, is considered a Shudra. In the Sanskrit commentary of these verses, it is clearly stated that Dharma is the cause of Varna division in the three Varnas, not caste."
Similarly, see a chapter from the Agni Purana, in which it is clearly written:
"O King, the cause of Dwijatva is not caste, nor lineage, nor self-study, nor knowledge of scriptures, but only virtuous conduct. What will a wicked man without virtuous conduct do? What will insects do in fragrant flowers?
→Yuruvach "There is no difference in the classes, all this world is Brahman. It was created by Brahman in the beginning, and it has attained its Varna due to its actions. ||10|| Those who are fond of sensual pleasures, are strong, are angry, are fond of bravery, are attached to their abandoned duties, are red-bodied, they have attained Kshatriyahood. ||11|| Those who are engaged in the business of cows, are fond of wealth, are yellow, are engaged in agriculture, do not follow their duties, they have attained Vaishyahood. ||12|| Those who are fond of violence, are greedy, are engaged in all kinds of work, are black, are devoid of purity, they have attained Shudrahood. ||13|| Thus, the Dwijas have gone to different Varnas due to their actions. Dharma, the performance of sacrifices, is not forbidden to them. ||14||"
-Mahabharata, Shanti Parva, Adhyaya 188
1. "Bharadwaja said, 'O best of Dwijas, tell me, by what does one become a Brahman, or a Kshatriya, or a Vaishya, or a Shudra?' ||1|| Bhrigu said, 'One who is cultured by the rites like Jatakarma, is pure, is accomplished in the study of the Vedas, is engaged in the six duties like worship, ||2|| is established in the conduct of purity, eats the remnants of sacrifices, is dear to the teachers, constantly observes vows, and is devoted to truth, is called a Brahman. ||3|| Truth, charity, non-violence, non-cruelty, shame, compassion, and austerity are seen in him, he is a Brahman. ||4|| One who serves the Kshatriya duty, is associated with the study of the Vedas, and has a liking for giving charity, is called a Kshatriya. ||5|| One whose work is trade and
Page #64:
---------------------------
"Are the Adipuranas not born? King, only one thing is not acceptable from this that he reads, therefore he is a Dvija, his character should be investigated. Do not the Rakshasas read? What is the use of a wicked man reading like an actor? He who follows the action, he has read and he has heard. Just as water kept in a skull and milk kept in a dog's bladder becomes contaminated, so too the Shruta of a man without character becomes contaminated due to the fault of the place. A wicked man, even if he is a knower of the four Vedas, if he is wicked, he is more lowly than a Shudra. Therefore, O King, know character as the mark of a Brahmin."
The old Gautamīya Dharmaśāstra also mentions:
"O King! Caste is not worshipped, virtues are the doers of good, even a Chandala who is situated in character and good conduct is called a Brahmin by the gods."
The Shukranītisāra also mentions:
"One should not look only at caste and not only at lineage. Actions, character and compassion, generosity, etc. are the virtues that are worshipped, not caste and lineage. Superiority cannot be attained by caste and lineage alone."
Who can be a Brahmin? While resolving this, the sage Vaishampayana says to Yudhishthira in the Mahabharata:
"Truthfulness, purity, compassion, control of the senses, compassion for all beings, and austerity, these are the five types of purity. We call him a Brahmin who is endowed with these five characteristics of purity. O Yudhishthira, the rest of the Dvijas are Shudras. A man does not become a Brahmin by lineage or by caste, but by actions. O Yudhishthira, even a Chandala who is steadfast in character is a Brahmin. Earlier, this whole world was of one caste, but due to the special nature of actions and deeds, it became four-caste. A virtuous, virtuous Shudra can also become a Brahmin, and a Brahmin can also become lower than the pure. One who has crossed the terrible ocean of five senses - that is, who has brought the five senses under control, even if he is a Shudra, one should give him unlimited charity. O King,
1. "Neither caste nor lineage, O King, nor study, nor scripture. The reason for being a Dvija is character alone. What will lineage do for a wicked man without character? Do not worms arise in fragrant flowers? Reading is not to be accepted in isolation, O King. Investigate character, for what is not read by the Rakshasas? What is the use of a wicked man reading like an actor? He who follows the action, he has read and he has heard. Just as water kept in a skull and milk kept in a dog's bladder becomes contaminated, so too the Shruta of a man without character becomes contaminated due to the fault of the place. Even if he is a knower of the four Vedas, a wicked man is considered lower than a Shudra. Therefore, O King, know character as the mark of a Brahmin."
- Vahnipurana 2. "Caste is not worshipped, O King, virtues are the doers of good. Even a Chandala who is situated in character and good conduct is called a Brahmin by the gods."
- Old Gautamīya Dharmaśāstra 3. "I do not look at caste or lineage alone. Actions, character and virtues are worshipped, not caste and lineage. Superiority cannot be attained by caste and lineage alone."
- Shukranītisāra, Chapter 3

Page #65:
---------------------------
57
Caste is not considered. Qualities are the ones that do good, therefore a man born of a Shudra is also a Brahmin if he is virtuous."
There is another verse in Shukra Neeti with this meaning:
"A man cannot be a Brahmin, Kshatriya, Vaishya, Shudra or Mlechchha by birth. But these distinctions are made by qualities and actions."
The Bhagavad Gita also mentions the same: "I have created the four varnas according to the division of qualities and actions."3
Thus, we see that in the Vedic culture, where the varna system was given great importance, the varna system was adopted based on qualities and actions until the Vedic, Brahman and Mahabharata eras. But as soon as the Smriti era came and due to the influence of time, people's spiritual qualities declined, good conduct and good morals declined, and the tendency of ego and other vices increased, the veil fell on the varna system based on qualities and actions. Now the basis of the varna system became caste, not qualities and actions. Now the slogan was raised that "He is the god of gods from birth." There has also been a period of synthesis of this quality-actionism and casteism, in which birth or caste also entered along with qualities and actions. As it has been said:
"A man who is endowed with caste, family, conduct, self-study and scripture is called a Dvija."5 "Knowledge, birth and action are the three things that make one a Brahmin."6 "Brahminhood is achieved by birth, physical distinction, knowledge, conduct, scripture and righteous dharma."
1. "Truth, purity of body, purity of speech, purity of mind, control of the senses, compassion for all beings, and purity of austerity are the five qualities. He who is endowed with these five qualities is a Dvija. I consider him to be a Brahmin, the rest are Shudras, Yudhishthira. A man does not become a Brahmin by birth or by actions, but by his conduct. Even a Chandala who is virtuous is a Brahmin, Yudhishthira. This whole world was once one caste, Yudhishthira. The four varnas were established by the difference in actions. Even a Shudra who is virtuous and qualified is a Brahmin. Even a Brahmin who is devoid of actions is inferior to a Shudra. If even a Shudra has crossed the terrible ocean of the five senses, then he should be given immeasurable charity, Yudhishthira. Qualities are not born of caste, O King, they are the ones who do good. Therefore, even a man born of a Shudra is a Brahmin if he is virtuous."
-Mahabharata 2. "A man is not a Brahmin, Kshatriya, Vaishya or Shudra by birth. Nor is he a Mlechchha. He is distinguished by his qualities and actions."
-Shukra Neeti 3. "I have created the four varnas according to the division of qualities and actions." -Bhagavad Gita 4.13. "The Brahmins, Kshatriyas, Vaishyas and Shudras, O Arjuna, are distinguished by their actions, which are born of their nature and qualities." -Bhagavad Gita 18.41. 4. "A Brahmin is the god of gods by birth." -Manu 11.384. 5. "Brahminhood is achieved by birth, family, conduct, self-study, scripture and righteous dharma."
-Agni Purana 6. "Knowledge, birth and action are the three things that make one a Brahmin." Smriti verse in Pingala Sutra Vyakhya. 7. "Brahminhood is achieved by birth, physical distinction,
Page #66:
---------------------------
## The Adi Purana
"Austerity, learning, and lineage are the three causes of Brahmanhood."1

However, gradually, qualities and actions faded away, leaving only lineage, or caste, as the cause of the Varna system. Today, a Brahmin may eat meat and fish, drink alcohol, gamble, engage in prostitution, and commit many other vices, yet he remains a Brahmin. He feels pride in having others of lower castes touch his feet. A Kshatriya may commit theft, robbery, murder, and other heinous crimes, yet if anyone dares to speak against him, he will frown. The same is true for a Vaishya. Today, a Shudra, no matter how virtuous he may be, is always considered an object of disgust. People fear his touch and flee from his shadow. Today, the Varna system, based solely on caste, has filled the hearts of humans with hatred, envy, and ego. In the name of religion, ego, envy, and hatred are fostered.

## Jainism and the Varna System

According to Jain principles, there is an eternal realm of karma, the Videha Kshetra, where the Kshatriya, Vaishya, and Shudra varnas exist. These three varnas are also necessary for livelihood. Jainism does not consider the Brahmin varna as a means of livelihood. In the Videha Kshetra, there is no Brahmin varna. In the Bharat Kshetra, it was established by Bharat Chakravarti, but examining the entire episode reveals that Bharat Maharaj called the virtuous beings Brahmins. He bestowed the name Brahmin on the compassionate humans invited to his palace and gave them specific instructions on vows and rituals. He gave them the sacred thread as a symbol of their vows. In essence, while Buddhism completely rejects the Varna system, Jainism does not. However, it is certain that Jainism does not accept the Varna system based solely on caste, as propagated during the Smriti period.

The mention in the Adi Purana is only for the purpose of organizing livelihood. Jinaseanacharya clearly states in it:

"Humanity is one, born from the karma of caste. It is divided into four types due to differences in livelihood. Brahmins are recognized by their vows and rituals, Kshatriyas by their wielding of weapons, Vaishyas by their righteous earning of wealth, and Shudras by their service to others." - Adi Purana, Parva 38

In other words, the karma of caste, or the five-sense caste, is a sub-division of the human caste, which arises from the karma of human birth. It is only due to differences in livelihood that it becomes four types. Brahmins are recognized by their vows and rituals, Kshatriyas by their wielding of weapons, Vaishyas by their righteous earning of wealth, and Shudras by their service to others.

This same verse was modified and explained by Gunabhadracharya, the direct disciple of Jinaseanacharya, in the Uttar Purana:

"Humanity is one, born from the karma of caste. It is divided into four types due to differences in livelihood. There is no caste-based difference among humans, like cows and horses. It is perceived differently due to the perception of form."

1. "Austerity, learning, and lineage are the three causes of Brahmanhood." - Adi Purana 

Page #67:
---------------------------
## Introduction

The meaning of the first verse has already been written. The meaning of the second verse is that the kind of caste-based distinction found in cows, horses, etc., is not found in humans, because their form is the same.

These verses from the Adipurana are quoted in the Sandhisamhita, Dharmasangraha-Shravakachar, etc., sometimes verbatim and sometimes with some changes.

Apart from these, see also the opinion of Amitagatyacharya, which he expressed in his Dharmapariksha:

"Those beings who are devoid of truth, purity, austerity, character, meditation, and self-control, do not attain Dharma merely by being born into a high caste."

"The distinction of Brahmanas, etc., among castes is only a matter of conduct. In reality, there is no fixed caste of Brahmanas, etc."

"Self-control, rules, character, austerity, charity, restraint, and compassion are present in whom, that is the highest caste."

"Even those born in low castes have gone to heaven if they are virtuous, and even noble men who have destroyed character and self-control have gone to hell."

"Since caste is formed by virtues and destroyed by the destruction of virtues, therefore, the wise should respect virtues alone."

See this verse from the Darshanpahuḍ of Shri Kundakunda Swami, in which he writes:

"Neither the body is worshipped, nor the family, nor the man endowed with caste. No one devoid of virtues is worthy of worship, whether he be a Shraman or a Shravak."

Why did Lord Rishabhadeva not establish the Brahmin Varna?

A natural question arises: Lord Rishabhadeva established the Kshatriya, etc., classes, but why did he not establish the Brahmin Varna? The answer seems to be that the Bhogbhumij humans are naturally good and peaceful. The nature of the Brahmin Varna was already present in the humans of that time. Therefore, they did not feel the need to establish a class of humans with that nature. However, some people started to cause trouble, etc., to those good-natured humans, so the Kshatriya Varna was established. Without earning, no one can survive, so the Vaishyas were established, and for the cooperation of all, the Shudras were organized.

1. "Dharma is not obtained by mere caste by those who have bodies. It is obtained by truth, purity, austerity, character, meditation, and study. The distinction of castes is only a matter of conduct. There is no fixed caste of Brahmanas, etc., in reality. Self-control, rules, character, austerity, charity, restraint, and compassion are present in whom, that is the highest caste of the virtuous. The virtuous have gone to heaven even though they were born in low castes. The noble have gone to hell, having destroyed character and self-control. Virtue makes caste, and the destruction of virtue destroys caste. Therefore, the wise should respect virtues alone."
-Dharmapariksha, Chapter 17

Page #68:
---------------------------
## Aachipuran

The mention in non-Jain texts like the Mahabharata, that Brahma first established the Brahmin caste, seems to have the same meaning. Originally, humans were of Brahmin nature, but due to the development of vices over time, divisions like Kshatriya etc. arose. In other descending and ascending eras, humans do not neglect their nature, hence the establishment of the Brahmin caste does not occur in those times. The same reason applies to the absence of the Brahmin caste in the Videha region. This is the Hundavaspini era, which has come after the passage of numerous ascending and descending eras. It particularly produces humans who are increasingly depraved by nature. Time passed, and Bharat Chakravarti emerged. He took charge of the kingdom, and depravity among the people continued to increase. In the time of the Manus, there were only three streams of political punishment: 'Ha', 'Ma', and 'Dhik'. If someone committed a crime, the ruler would say 'Ha', meaning 'I am sorry'. This alone was enough to make the offender conscious. Time passed, people became somewhat depraved, and 'Ma' was added after 'Ha', meaning 'I am sorry, don't do this again'. This was the punishment decided. Then time passed, people became even more depraved, and 'Ha', 'Ma', 'Dhik' - meaning 'I am sorry, don't do this again, and if you don't listen, you are cursed' - these three punishments became prevalent. 'Dhik' was like the death penalty of that time. How virtuous were the people then, and how are they today? Comparing the past and present, the difference seems like the distance between the earth and the sky.

## Caste and Varna

We have already discussed Varna sufficiently. Here, it is necessary to discuss caste as well. The five divisions of caste mentioned in Jain Agamas, namely Ekendriya, Dwiendriya, etc., are general. Apart from them, there are countless sub-divisions within each caste. Considering it unnecessary to describe all of them here, we will only discuss human castes.

Human castes are divided into the following categories:

1. **Vrittirūpa Jāti:** This caste is related to one's profession or occupation, such as carpenter, blacksmith, goldsmith, potter, oilman, etc.
2. **Vansh-Gotra Ādirūpa Jāti:** This caste is based on lineage from a specific influential male, such as Garg, Shrotriya, Rathore, Chauhan, Khandelwal, Agrawal, Raghuvansh, Suryavansh, etc.
3. **Rāshṭrīyarūpa Jāti:** This caste is based on nationality, such as Indian, European, American, Chanderia, Narsimhpur, Devgarh, etc.
4. **Sāmpradāyik Jāti:** This caste is based on one's religion or sect, such as Jain, Buddhist, Sikh, Hindu, Muslim, etc.

The castes mentioned in Jain texts and the Yajurveda and Taittiriya Brahmanas all fall under these categories. The emergence of these diverse castes is undoubtedly due to their respective causes, but today...

1. "**Asṛjad Brahmananēva Pūrva Brahma Prajāpatīn. Ātmatējo'bhinivṛttān Bhāskarāgnisamaprāmān.**  **Tatah Satyam Cha Dharma Cha Tapo Brahma Va Shāśvatam. Āchāram Chaiva Shaucham Swaya Vivaṣē Prabhuḥ.**" - Mahabharata, Chapter 158
2. "**Prajāpatiryajñamasṛjata, Yajña Sṛṣṭamanu Brahmakshatra Asṛjyēt
Page #69:
---------------------------
## Introduction

In the present age, the social system that aims to achieve human goals (purushartha) does not utilize all these concepts, nor can it. If there is a direct connection with the social system that aims to achieve human goals, it is only with the caste in the form of profession (vrutti-rupa jati). An individual accepts the caste in the form of profession according to their nature. This nature may be similar to that of the father and son, or it may be dissimilar. The father may have a sattvic nature, but his son may be a holder of a rajasic nature. The father may be a Brahmin, but his son may not like the traditional study and teaching and may prefer to become a soldier. The father may be a Vaishya, but his son may prefer the profession of study and teaching. The father may be a Kshatriya, but his son may work for someone else. Humans are of different natures, and according to those different natures, the accepted professions are of various kinds. The common classification of all these is the four varnas (chaturvarna). It is not necessary to explain that each varna is a general collection of many castes and sub-castes. Varna is a general collection, and jati is its specific collection. Changes in the specific can happen quickly, but changes in the general take some time. The maternal lineage is called jati. This is not the intention here to define jati.

## Varna and Kula

Based on a prominent male in the family, the practice of kula or lineage begins. For example, based on Raghu, the Raghu dynasty, based on Yadu, the Yadu dynasty, based on Arka-kirti, the Arka-Surya dynasty, based on Kuru, the Kuru dynasty, based on Hari, the Hari dynasty, etc., have come into practice. If, in the same lineage, another influential person emerges, their lineage begins, and the old lineage ends. From one lineage, many sub-lineages are born. This practice of lineage occurs in every varna, not just in the Kshatriya varna. It is another matter that the stories of only those lineages are found in the Puranas and other narrative texts. But it should also be kept in mind that the Puranas and other texts only narrate the stories of specific individuals, not everyone. This is the mention of the lineage of sex (youn-vansh). Apart from this, there is also mention of the lineage of knowledge (vidya-vansh), which is based on the Guru-Shishya tradition. This also has many variations. Thus, varna and lineage are general and specific forms. The worldly gotra is a variation of lineage or kula.

## Varna and Gotra

In Jainism, a karma called gotra is considered, from the rise of which a being is born into a high or low lineage. From the rise of a high gotra, one is born into a high lineage, and from the rise of a low gotra, one is born into a low lineage. The gods always have the rise of a high gotra, and the hell-dwellers and animals always have the rise of a low gotra. Among humans, the humans of the enjoyment realm (bhog-bhoomi) always have the rise of a high gotra, but the humans of the karma realm (karma-bhoomi) have the rise of both gotras, some have a high gotra, and some have a low gotra. Self-praise, slander of the existing qualities of others, and egoistic attitude bind a low gotra, and the opposite of this leads to the binding of a high gotra. The definition of gotra is written in the Gommatasara Karmakanda as follows:

"Santanakamenagav jeevaayara jast godan
Page #70:
---------------------------
##  62
## Adipurana

There is a lineage of both Tiryanchas and Devas, however, the lineage of all these does not continue. If the meaning of offspring is not taken as lineage but as tradition or Amnaya, and if it is understood that the conduct, i.e., the tendency of the living being obtained from tradition or Amnaya, is called Gotra, then the above definition of Gotrakarma can be comprehensive, because the tradition of ancient Devas and Narakas for Devas and Narakas is proven.

Gotra exists everywhere, but the practice of Varna is only in the Karmabhoomi. Therefore, it does not seem appropriate to believe that both are always connected. When a person becomes a Nirgrantha Sadhu, the practice of Varna ceases even in the Karmabhoomi, but the origin of Gotra remains. Many people readily call Brahmanas, Kshatriyas, and Vaishyas as high Gotras and Shudras as low Gotras. But in this age, when there is a mixture of professions in all classes, is any scholar ready to say with certainty that such and such class is such and such Varna? In some places, Brahmanas have been eating meat and fish for fifty generations, not one or two. They should be considered high Gotras because they were born in the Brahman Kula, and the carpenter, blacksmith, goldsmith, barber, etc. castes of Bundelkhand, who have not consumed meat and liquor for fifty generations, should be called low Gotras because they were born in the Shudra Varna. This does not seem to be understandable. Those who have the practice of Kara-Dhara are Shudras, low, and those who do not have this practice are Trivarna Dwijas, high. This also does not hold true today because, if not openly, then secretly, this practice of Kara-Dhara has been going on in the Trivargas, Dwijas, for thousands of years.

## Varna System: Anadi or Sadi?

The Varna system is Anadi in relation to the Videha Kshetra, but Sadi in relation to the Bharat Kshetra. When the Bhogbhoomi was created here, there was no Varna system. Everyone was of similar age and intellectual capacity. The Jain-other Karma Purana also clearly mentions that there was no Varna division in the Krita Yuga. There was no practice of high and low among the people there, everyone was equal, everyone had the same age, happiness, contentment, etc. were equal in all, all the people lived happily, were full of enjoyment. Thereafter, gradually, attachment and greed began to appear in the people, good conduct began to be destroyed, and some became strong and some became weak, due to which the rules were destroyed. Then, to protect them, Lord Aj, i.e., Brahma, arranged for the Kshatriyas for the benefit of the Brahmanas, established the Varna Ashrama system, and initiated the practice of Yajna, which was free from animal sacrifice. He did all this work at the beginning of the Treta Yuga.

Jain Dharma also believes that until the end of the first, second, and somewhat less the third Kal, people were of similar intellect, strength, etc., so there was no need for the Varna Ashrama system at that time. But from the latter part of the third Kal, there was inequality among people, so Lord Adi Brahma Rishabhdev established the system of Kshatriya, etc. classes.

1. "Kritam tvamithuno-tpattir-vruttih saakshatalolupa. Prajastuptaah sada sarvaa sarvanandaasch bhoginaah. Adhamotama-tvaam naastyaasaam nivises
Page #71:
---------------------------
## Introduction

Many scholars in the Bharat Kshetra, without considering the clear system of Sadi-Anadi, try to prove the caste system as Anadi. They argue that during the Bhoga Bhoomi period, the four varnas - Brahmin, Kshatriya, Vaishya, and Shudra - were suppressed within the hearts of people. However, this argument is not acceptable. When only the higher gotras rise during the Bhoga Bhoomi period, how is the emergence of a lower gotra, which includes the Shudra varna, scripturally justified? Moreover, the creation of the Brahmin varna is mentioned only in this Hundavarshipini period. Before that, there was no Brahmin varna here, not even in the Videha Kshetra. Then, how did its latent existence come into the bodies of Bhoga Bhoomi humans?

## Varna and Untouchability

In ancient Vedic literature, where the four varnas are discussed, there is no mention of Antyajans, meaning untouchable Shudras. This indicates that there was no distinction between the touchable and untouchable in ancient India. Their mention is found in Smritis and Puranas. Therefore, it can be said that this distinction arose during the Smriti period and received nourishment during the Purana period. Shudras are of two types: Grahyaanna and Agrahyaanna, or Spashya and Aspashya. These distinctions are first seen in Manusmriti. This division must have taken place in society at that time.

In Adipurana (16.186), Jinsen Swami also wrote that Shudras are of two types: Spashya and Aspashya. Karu, Rajak, etc., are Spashya, and Chandala, etc., are Aspashya Shudras. According to the mention in Adipurana, if we connect this to the life of Bhagwan Rishabhdev, it should be mentioned in some form in ancient Indian literature. However, there is no discussion of these distinctions anywhere. Also, Bhagwan Rishabhdev never said to anyone, "You are a Kshatriya, you are a Vaishya, you are Spashya, and you are Aspashya Shudra. Until now, you could see us, come before us, but from today, being untouchable, you cannot do anything." He would never have dared to say this. There are thousands of times more professions-based castes today than there were during Bhagwan Rishabhdev's time. People, influenced by their own abilities and circumstances, start doing various livelihoods, and over time, a community of those doing that work is formed, which comes to be known as a caste. Many such castes have already been formed, and more will continue to form in the future. Due to lack of ability and resources, many humans have accepted lower work. What does a creature forced by circumstances not do? Gradually, humans, inflated by their abilities and resources, began to consider them inferior. A feeling of hatred arose in their hearts, and they were divided into Aspashya and Spashya. Those with whom humans had more self-interest or contact remained Spashya, and those with whom humans had less self-interest or contact became Aspashya.

Jain Dharma's soul does not accept this caste-based humiliation of humans. Jain scriptures clearly state that Samyagdarshan can be attained in all four gatis. As a result, even those who are called Aspashya today are also entitled to Samyagdarshan. If their untouchability does not go away even after attaining Samyagdarshan, which pacifies the infinite world, then it should be considered a wonder.

## Translation and Acknowledgement

Our dear friend, Mulchand Kisan Das Ji Kapadia Surat, has repeatedly encouraged us, saying that Adipur
Page #72:
---------------------------
## Baripuraan

I had already written a concise story of the Adipuran and Uttarapurana under the name "Chaubisi Puran" and it was also published by the Jinavani-Pracharak office, Calcutta, so I was not interested in doing a concise translation. As a result, I replied that I did not want to do a concise translation. However, if you want a translation following the original text, giving the number of the shloka, I can do it.

Kapadia ji did not understand the overall size of the text, so he gave me the final letter to start the translation without having a firm idea of publishing it. It was the summer vacation time, so I started translating. When the translation work was completed in three summer vacations - six months - I informed him and asked when he wanted to send it to the press. The size of the Adipuran is twelve thousand Anushtup shlokas, so both the original and the Hindi translation of so many shlokas became very large, so Kapadia ji started to back away from its publication. The time of inflation and the difficulty in obtaining paper as per requirement due to control were the main reasons for Kapadia ji's backing away.

At the same time, the annual convention of the Madhya Pradesh Hindi Sahitya Sammelan was going to be held in Sagar, and the responsibility of arranging the 'Darshan Parishad' was on me. I was thinking of inviting Jain scholars to give lectures on Jain philosophy when at the same time, people decided to call a meeting of the newly inaugurated 'Jain Education Board'. There are many learned members on the board's committee. I invited the members with love, including Pandit Vanshidharji Indore, Pandit Rajkumarji Mathura, Pandit Mahendrakumarji Banaras, and many other scholars came. Both the Sahitya Sammelan and the Jain Education Board's work were completed happily. Just a few months before that, the Bharatiya Gyanpeeth was established in Banaras. Pandit Mahendrakumarji is the editor and regulator of the Murti Devi Jain Granthamala, so I discussed with Pandit Mahendrakumarji about publishing the Adipuran from the Gyanpeeth in Sagar, and he happily agreed to publish it from the Gyanpeeth. He also provided the facility to collect palm leaf and other handwritten copies and take readings from them. Not only that, he also made arrangements for reading the palm leaf Kannada script in the Nagari script and converting it into the Nagari script. Once, to take readings, I stayed in Banaras for about 25 days during the summer vacation, then you provided facilities on behalf of the Gyanpeeth. I could not reach Banaras the next year, so you sent Pandit Devkumarji Nyayatirith from Banaras to Sagar, from whom we received full cooperation in listening to the readings of the Kannada script. Pandit Gulabchandra 'Dandi' Vyakaranacharya, MA, provided sufficient assistance in taking readings from Banaras. In this way, after 5-6 years of hard work, the present form of the Adipuran has been completed. I received help from the Sanskrit commentary by Lalitakiti and the Hindi commentaries by Pandit Daulatramji and Pandit Lalaramji. Therefore, I am grateful to all these great people. I have mentioned the names of the great people whose help I received in writing the preface in the respective sections, but I consider it my duty to express their grace here again. I am very grateful to the venerable old scholar Shri Nathuramji Premi, who, even in his ill health, gave me valuable suggestions after seeing my entire preface. The historical material that has been compiled in it regarding Jinsen and Gunabhadra is the result of his grace. I cannot remain silent without thanking my classmate friend Pandit Par
Page #73:
---------------------------
## Introduction

I am deeply grateful to the esteemed individuals whose generosity made it possible for this great work to reach the public. Due to my distance, I was unable to personally review the proofs.  Pandit Mahadevji Chaturvedi, the grammarian, has reviewed the entire manuscript. In my opinion, he has fulfilled his responsibility completely.  There may be some errors, but I hope that readers will be able to correct them by comparing the original text and the translation during their study.

It is a matter of joy that the second edition of the Mahapurana is being released. The Mahapurana, in its first edition, was adorned with the Sanskrit original, Hindi translation, a significant introduction, and appendices, and was first published. In this second edition, some additional improvements, revisions, and changes have been made. The errors that remained in the original and translation of the first edition have been corrected in this edition.  After the publication of the first edition, there were some favorable and unfavorable discussions on the chapter titled "Adipurana and Varna-Vyavastha" in the introduction. Keeping these discussions in mind, necessary changes have been made in that chapter as well.

Some additional material has also been added to this edition. After the introduction, the verses of the Adipurana have been given. And at the end of the book, a new appendix has been added under the name "Shabdanukramanika". This includes lists of geographical, technical, and personal names that appear in the Adipurana. The great utility of such appendices is not hidden from scholars.

This edition, presented in its entirety, has been attempted to be made useful for all, including lovers of self-study, devout people, and research students and scholars.

Our friend Shri Ratnalalji Kataria Kekdi is a studious scholar. It is his nature to study things in detail. I am grateful to him for drawing our attention to the shortcomings in the previous part when he wrote a letter.

Finally, I conclude this introduction with this humble request that the Mahapurana is as deep as the ocean. It is natural for errors to remain in its translation, revision, and editing. Therefore, learned people will forgive me, knowing that I am of little knowledge.

"Mahatyasmin Purananthou Shakharaattarangake | Skhalitam Yatpramadannme Tadadhah Kshantumarhath ||"

-Pannalal Jain
Varnibhawan, Sagar 

Page #74:
---------------------------
##  Collection of Aphorisms

The **Mahapuraana** is a treasure trove of aphorisms, as evident from the following verses:

> Just as precious gems are born from the **Makara** (a mythical sea creature), so too are aphoristic gems born from this **Puraana**. (2.116)

This section presents some aphoristic gems for the use of scholars. The language is very simple, hence a separate Hindi translation is not provided.

> One should not follow the path explored by the easterners. (1.31)
> A good person is worthy of praise. (1.37)
> Those who have the essence of Dharma in their words are the true poets and wise men in the world. (1.62)
> Poetry that is based on Dharma is fruitful. Even if used well, other poetry is only for the wicked. (1.63)
> A great poet is never afraid of criticism from others. Just as the sun does not fear the darkness of owls, so too does a great poet not fear criticism. (1.17)
> A poet should not be swayed by the praise of others, but should focus on his own purpose. It is better to guide others on the right path than to seek their approval. (1.76)
> The efforts of good people are for their own benefit, not for the approval of the world. (1.144)
> Who can be content in the presence of a great treasure? (1.160)
> What is the use of light when darkness has been dispelled? (1.163)
> Who can stumble on a path illuminated by a great lamp? (1.164)
> Dharma is the root of all wealth, happiness, and prosperity. (2.33)
> Dharma is a wish-fulfilling cow, Dharma is a great jewel, Dharma is a wish-fulfilling tree, Dharma is an inexhaustible treasure. (2.34)
> Who, with a wise mind, would ignore the words of a friend? (2.161)
> The lineage of delusion is difficult to overcome. (4.25)
> Competition flourishes among the noble due to the similarity of their actions. (4.135)
> Wealth acquired through Dharma leads to the rise of desire and happiness. This tradition of acquiring wealth through Dharma brings joy to people. (5.15) 

Page #75:
---------------------------
##  Collection of Aphorisms

* Without seed, there is no sprout; without rain, there is no water; without an umbrella, there is no shade; without Dharma, there is no prosperity. (5.18)
* Dharma originates from compassion, compassion is the kindness towards all beings. To protect compassion, the faults of the Ganadharas are declared. (5.21)
* Who is not subject to the fear of birth, death, old age and fear? (6.10)
* What will devotion achieve with pure conduct? (6.110)
* What is not attainable by merit? (6.195)
* Devotion is the cause of liberation. (7.276)
* Happiness is the consequence of suffering, wealth is always with the wealthy. (8.77)
* Associations end in separation, and prosperity ends in misfortune. (8.77)
* Good company purifies one's own faults, increases joy, and refines the mind. (9.160)
* Good company keeps evil far away and nourishes one's virtues. (9.161)
* Those who are seeking liberation are indifferent to their own suffering but are pained by the suffering of others. (6.164)
* Just as a metal, when mixed with a substance, becomes gold, so too, a soul, when associated with the qualities of a Guru, attains purity. (6.174)
* Without a boat, one cannot cross the ocean. Without the teachings of a Guru, one cannot cross the ocean of existence. (17)
* One finds joy in two relationships: with relatives and with Gurus. Relatives bring joy in this life, while Gurus bring joy in this life and the next. (6.177)
* Is merit difficult to attain? (187)
* Without Dharma, where is heaven? Without heaven, where is happiness? Therefore, for those seeking happiness, the Dharma tree is the best. (18)
* Happiness comes from Dharma, and suffering comes from Adharma. Knowing this, the wise person strives for Dharma to overcome misfortune. (10.14)
* Dharma is compassion, truth, peace, purity, non-attachment, knowledge, and detachment. Adharma is the opposite of these. (10.15)
* Attachment to worldly pleasures brings temporary happiness to the foolish. It burns like a fire, causing intense suffering. (10.16) 

Page #76:
---------------------------
##  68
## Adipurana

Dharma protects from suffering, Dharma brings peace. Dharma gives liberation and happiness, born from the destruction of karma. ||10.107||

From Dharma comes kingship, rulership, and elephant-hood. From Dharma comes the state of a Tirthankara and the ultimate liberation. ||10.108||

Dharma is a friend, a companion, and a teacher for the embodied. Therefore, place your mind in Dharma, the giver of liberation and happiness. ||10.109||

One attains a low state through unrighteousness, and a high state through righteousness. Therefore, desiring a high position, one should become devoted to Dharma. ||10.116||

The minds of the self-realized are usually inclined towards their own liberation. ||10.124||

The wise usually seek liberation. ||11.5||

By this, the existence of the cycle of birth and death is destroyed. ||11.71||

The pulsation of all beings is for their own benefit. ||11.71||

Those who have attained the state of being free from duality, find peace here. How then can those who are attached to duality, with minds afflicted by duality, find peace? ||11.164||

Enjoyment of women is not happiness, it is merely a delusion arising from the gratification of the senses. It is like fever, arising from the attachment to thirst. ||11.165||

Service to pleasing objects is not for satisfaction, but for the sake of thirst. How can one who is burnt by the fire of thirst be happy? ||11.167||

That which does not lead to the destruction of disease is not medicine. That which does not lead to destruction is not water. ||11.168||

The wise desire only mental peace. How then can those who are blind to the truth, with minds always restless, find peace? ||11.172||

Happiness derived from the enjoyment of objects is dependent on others and is temporary. It is full of suffering, impermanent, and a cause of bondage. ||11.173||

Objects are like poison, which are attractive to those who are addicted to them. The happiness arising from them is like the scratching of an itch. ||11.174||

Just as the mention of sandalwood oil in a burnt forest brings some comfort, so too is the happiness arising from objects. ||11.175||

Those who indulge in objects, especially women, are full of fear. They breathe heavily, their bodies are sweaty, and if they are happy, then who is unhappy? ||11.184||

The ignorant consider effort as happiness. Deluded by the desire for objects, they are like dogs gnawing on bones. ||11.185|| 

Page #77:
---------------------------
##  A Collection of Aphorisms

**Just as a person who drinks salty water becomes even more thirsty, so too does one who indulges in worldly pleasures experience greater suffering.** (111166)

**Women are the enjoyment of the strong.** (13.56)

**Those who desire victory are resourceful.** (15.57)

**A learned man in the world is respected as a wise person. A woman with knowledge holds the highest position in the female world.** (16.6)

**Knowledge brings fame to men, knowledge is considered to be the source of prosperity. Knowledge, when properly cultivated, becomes a deity that fulfills desires.** (16.66)

**Knowledge is a wish-fulfilling cow, knowledge is a wish-fulfilling gem for people. Knowledge gives birth to the fruits of the three goals of life and a lineage of wealth.** (16.10)

**Knowledge is a relative, a friend, knowledge is a benefactor. Knowledge is a companion, wealth, knowledge is the fulfiller of all desires.** (16.101)

**There is no happiness without virtue, just as there are no sprouts without seeds. Virtue is the root of giving, non-violence, restraint, truthfulness, sorrow, renunciation, tolerance, and good deeds.** (16.271)

**Give gifts to the wise, offer worship to the holy ones. Observe good conduct, fast on holy days. Do not be negligent, O wise ones, if you desire happiness.** (16.27)

**The beauty of the evening glow, the splendor of the rising sun, the brilliance of youth, all fade away like the leaves of a tree.** (17.14)

**Youth is like the flower of a forest vine, which soon withers. Enjoyments are like a poisonous vine, which brings ruin to life.** (17.15)

**Life melts away like water in a water clock. This body is extremely foul-smelling and repulsive.** (17.16)

**In this world, which is devoid of essence, even a little happiness is difficult to obtain. A foolish person desires happiness in this world, which is full of suffering.** (17.17)

**One who is detached from worldly pleasures, even in his own body, is free from attachment. He considers a kingdom with all its possessions as insignificant as grass.** (17.151)

**Austerity is the supreme power.** (18.4)

**The difference between the old and the young is made by age. Wisdom does not increase with age, nor does intelligence decline with youth.** (18.11) 

Page #78:
---------------------------
The intellect of the old, due to the effect of age, is generally dull. But the intellect of those who have attained self-realization increases with age. ||18||11||

New age is neither a defect nor a virtue, it is just a change. Like a new fire, even though it burns, it is not as strong as an old fire. ||18||120||

One who speaks without being asked is considered very arrogant. ||18||121||

The tongue of a wise person, even in dreams, does not speak eight kinds of harmful words, does not engage in harmful actions, and does not speak harshly to others. ||18||123||

Just as a mixture of milk and other things is spoiled by adding sour substances, so too, even if given to an undeserving person, it becomes their own and is destroyed. ||20||143||

Just as a metal vehicle cannot carry another vehicle, so too, a person burdened with karma and vices cannot liberate another. ||20||14||

A foolish person, under the control of his own desires, considers things to be desirable or undesirable. From these desires and aversions, he binds himself with a bondage that is difficult to break. ||21||24||

That happiness which arises from association with others is not true happiness. True happiness is eternal, imperishable, and arises from the Self. ||21||20||

True knowledge, conduct, and the fruits of conduct are all based on truth. Knowledge, obtained through seeing, hearing, and association with the wise, is the cause of liberation. ||24||121||

Conduct that is devoid of knowledge and true vision is useless. It is like a blind man wandering aimlessly, leading to a fall. ||24||122|| 

Page #79:
---------------------------
## Table of Contents

**Subject** | **Page** | **Subject**
------- | -------- | --------
First Chapter | 1-7 | Praise of Gautama Ganadhar by the Sadhus, Mangalacharan
| 33-38 | Description of Riddhis and Request for Dharma Upadesh, Pledge
| 7-6 | Demonstration of the Author's Brevity
| 38-42 | Gautama Ganadhar's Eagerness for the Purana Story
| 6.13 | Description of the Outcome of the Purana
| | | Remembrance of Past Poets
| | | Gradual Description of the Inferiority of the Purana and the Anga-Purvas
| | | Poets and Poetry
| 13-14 | Description of the Nature of the Poets of the Mahapurana, their Uniqueness,
| | | Demonstration of the Virtuous and the Wicked, Final Mangal
| 15-16 | Poet, Maha-Poet, Kavya, Maha-Kavya
| 16-18 | The Mahapurana is a Dharma Katha
| 45 | Pledge to Explain the Preface of the Mahapurana
| 18-16 | Description of Time and Wealth
| 45-46 | Characteristics of the Storyteller
| 16-21 | Characteristics of the Listener, Utsapini-Avasarpini, their Differences and Qualities,
| | | Six-Six Differences, Superior, Medium, Inferior, Fruits of Listening to the Bhogasatkaha
| 21 | Description of the Earth
| 46-50 | Relationship of the Kathavatar
| 21-24 | In the Third Kalpa, when the Eighth Part of the Paly Remained on Mount Kailash,
| | | Bharat Expresses his Curiosity to Lord Rishabhdev
| 50-51 | Appearance of the Sun and Moon in the Sky
| 25 | Solution of Bharat's Questions by Lord Adinath, Promise
| 51-60 | Origin of the Adi-Kulkaras and Description of their Work and Lifespan
| 26-28 | Appearance of the Adi-Ghanaghata in the Sky during the Time of the Last Kulkar, Nabhiraj,
| | | Rainfall from it, Flow of Rivers and Springs
| 60.61 | Historicity, Antiquity of the Adipurana, Purana Dominance and Final Mangal
| 26 | After the Destruction of the Kalpavriksha, Various Grains Spontaneously Appear,
| | | Absence of Kalpavriksha, People's Distress Without Livelihood
| 62-63 | King Shrenik's Praise of Gautama Ganadhar, Request to Tell the Dharma Katha
| 31 | Request for a Means of Livelihood
| 31-33 | Praise of the Magadheshwar by Other Sadhus
| | | Nabhiraj Kulkar's Answer, Grains Produced Without Sowing,
| | | Fruits of Trees, etc.
| 25-26 | ...

**Second Chapter** | **Mangal and Pledge**
| 31 | 
| | 
| | 
| | 
| | 
| | 
| | 
| | 
| | 
| | 
| | 
| | 
| | 
| | 
| | 
| | 
| | 
| | 
| | 
| | 
| | 
| | 
| | 
| | 
|
Page #80:
---------------------------
##  Chapter 72

**Subject:**  Instruction on how to satiate hunger with sugarcane juice, etc., description of the emergence of the karma-bhoomi, making earthen pots and achieving success through them, etc.

**Description of the characteristics of the Kulkaras, and the mention that Bhagwan Rishabhdev and Bharat Chakravarti are also called Kulkaras.**

## Chapter 63-64

**Description of the penal system prevalent during the time of the Kulkaras.**

**Description of the numbers of the Purvaanga, Purva, etc., that appear in the description of the age of the Kulkaras.**

**List of the Kulkaras.**

**Compilation of the works of the Kulkaras.**

**Conclusion.**

## Maadipurana

**Page**

**Fourth Chapter**

**Promise to narrate the Vrishabhcharit, the fruit of studying the aforementioned three chapters, the eight topics to be described in the Puranas, and their nature.**

## Chapter 64

**Description of Atibal Vidyadhar.**

## Chapter 65-66

**Description of Atibal's beautiful consort, Manohara. The birth of their son, Mahabal.**

## Chapter 66

**Description of the eight topics to be described, starting with Lokakhyan, which refutes the creation of the world by God and establishes the eternal, uncreated nature of the world. Description of the three divisions of the world and their shapes. Description of the Madhyalok and Jambudvipa.**

## Chapter 66-67

**Description of the Gandhila country within the Videhakshetra.**

## Chapter 67

**Description of the Vijayardha mountain in the Gandhila country.**

## Chapter 65

**Description of the city of Alka in the northern range of the Vijayardha mountain.**

## Chapter 68-72

**Description of Atibal's renunciation and initiation.**

## Chapter 72-73

**Description of Mahabal's coronation, etc.**

## Chapter 73

**Description of Mahabal's four ministers: Mahaमति, संभिन्नमति, शतमति, and स्वयं बुद्ध.**

## Chapter 80-82

**Description of the king's enjoyment of pleasures after entrusting the burden of the kingdom to his ministers.**

## Chapter 82-83

**Description of the fruit of Dharma by the minister, स्वयं बुद्ध, at the birth anniversary of Mahabal Vidyadhar.**

## Chapter 83

**Description of the second minister, Mahaमति, explaining the philosophy of Chaitanya.**

## Chapter 83-84

**Description of the third minister, संभिन्नमति, establishing the philosophy of Vigyan.**

## Chapter 84-86

**Description of the fourth minister, शतमति, supporting the philosophy of Nairatmya.**

## Chapter 86-90

**Refutation of the aforementioned three false philosophies by the minister, स्वयं बुद्ध, using logical arguments and establishing the belief in the existence of God in the assembly.**

## Chapter 95-101

**Four stories told by the minister, स्वयं बुद्ध, to explain the fruits of the Raudra, Arta, Dharma, and Shukla meditations, respectively, and to prove the independent, eternal existence of the Jiva dravya. The story of King Arvind.**

## Chapter 101-104

**The story of Dand Vidyadhar.**

## Chapter 104-105

**The story of Shatabal.**

## Chapter 105-106
Page #81:
---------------------------
## Poison-Drinking Jewels

**Subject** | **Page** | **Subject**
------- | -------- | --------
Adityagati Muniराज knew through Avadhiज्ञान that the Dev was remembering and grieving. The Pandita said that your 'Swami is glorious, and appointed the Dhaay to care for him. He will be the first Tirthankara of the Bharat-Kshetra in the next tenth Bhava. | 127-128 |  
The description of the appearance of the Chakra-ratna and the previous birth of Mahabal, the king Vajradant. | 111-112 |
The news of the father attaining Kevalज्ञान, the results of the two dreams seen by Mahabal. The first was the announcement of the Kevalya Mahotsav by the Muniराज to the minister, and the birth of Avadhiज्ञान. | 111-112 |
The worship of the Chakra-ratna, the Digvijaya, the quick announcement of the results of the dreams to Mahabal, and the statement that your lifespan is only one month remaining. | 128-126 |
The news of Lalitang Dev, the knowledge of the decline of Mahabal's lifespan, the knowledge of the nearness of the previous birth by Shrimati, the performance of the Ashtahnik festival for eight days, and the search for Lalitang with the help of the Chitrapat. | 112-113 |
The journey towards the Maha-Puta Jinalaya after giving the kingdom to the son, the description of the beauty of the Jinalaya on the Siddhakut. | 129-134 |
The performance of Sallekhana for twenty-two days. | 113-116 |
The Pandita Dhaay, sitting in the temple, spreading the Chitrapat, becoming the Aishana heaven due to the effect of Sallekhana, becoming a Mahardhik Dev named Lalitang. | 113-116 |
The description of the Chakravarti's Digvijaya, his return, his wealth, etc. | 116-116 |
The entry into the city with great celebration. | 136-138 |
The sixth and seventh Parva. | 
With six months of life remaining, Lalitang Dev returned from Digvijaya, the grief of King Vadant, and the explanation by Achyut. | 136-147 |
Shrimati, the daughter, said that Lalitang is my nephew, and he will meet you on the third day, below the Chaitya Vaks, and perform the Panch Namaskar Mantra. | 136-147 |
The completion of the lifespan in heaven by chanting the mantra. | 120-122 |
The description of Lalitang's descent in the form of Vanajangha, in the Jambudvipa-Purva Videhakshetra, Pushkalavati Desh, by the Pandita Dhaay. | 122-124 |
The description of the Chitrapat, the city of Utpalkhet, King Vajraबाहु, the birth of Lalitangdev as Vanajangha, Queen Vasundhara, the description of the Chitrapat, and the name of the son. | 122-124 |
The offering of the Chitrapat related to his previous birth to Lalitangdev's beloved Vallabha, Swayamprabha. | 147-154 |
The Jambudvipa Videhakshetra, the sister-in
Page #82:
---------------------------
## Chapter 74: Maadi Purana

**Page | Topic**

156-162 | The wedding ceremony of Shrimathi and Vajranjangh.
162-166 | The welcome of the bride by twenty-five thousand crowned kings, including Mativar, Anand, Dhanamitra, and Akampan.
167-169 | The sermon delivered by Damdhar Muniraj, while Shardool, Nakul, Vanar, and Suka, four beings, listened with equanimity.
170 | King Vajranjangh's inquiry about the four beings.
170-171 | Vajranjangh's return to his city with splendor and enjoyment of royal pleasures.
171-172 | Damdhar Muniraj's explanation of their past lives, stating that Mativar and the other four will be reborn with Vajranjangh, and all of them, along with five hundred kings and Shrimathi, will attain liberation in the eighth existence.
172-174 | Vajranjangh's coronation as a Tirthankara in the eighth existence, Shrimathi becoming the Danatirtha, and Vajradant becoming the Chakravarti.
174-176 | Vajranjangh's renunciation of the world upon seeing Damdhar Muniraj, and his decision to take initiation with five hundred kings and Shrimathi.
177-181 | The description of Vajranjangh and Shrimathi's enjoyment of the six seasons in their city, Pundarikini.
181-182 | The arrival of Damdhar and Sagarasen, two Charan-Riddhi-bearing Munirajs, during their stay in Pundarikini.
182-183 | Vajranjangh and Shrimathi's offering of food and gifts to the Munirajs, and the manifestation of five miracles by the Devas.
183-185 | The description of their past lives.
185-187 | The joy of everyone upon hearing their past lives, and Vajranjangh's renunciation of the world upon seeing Damdhar Muniraj.
187-188 | Vajranjangh's return to his city with splendor.
160-161 | The description of Vajranjangh and Shrimathi's enjoyment of the six seasons in their city, Pundarikini.
161-192 | The accidental death of Vajranjangh and Shrimathi due to the negligence of the gatekeeper, Kanchuki.

Page #83:
---------------------------
## Translation:

**fararasurfer**
**Subject**
The effect of the virtuous donation resulted in both of them becoming Aryas in Uttar Kuru, located in the Videha region of Jambudvipa. In this same episode, a detailed description of the characteristics of the Bhogbhumi by the ten types of Kalpavriksha.
**Page**
162-167
Shardul, Nakul, Vanar, and Suka also originated from the approval of the virtuous donation, and after attaining the Diksha, they were born in the Adhograiveyak as Mativar, etc.
**167**
**17-18**
Vajragh and Shrimati remembered their past lives after seeing the celestial chariot of Suryaprabhadev. At that time, two Charanridvidhari Munis arrived from the sky and asked them about their identity. The Muni said, "When you were Mahabal, I was your minister named Swayambuddha. After your renunciation, I took Diksha and was born in the Saudharma heaven. From there, I was born as the son of King Priyaseen, named Preetikar, in the city of Pundarikin, in the Pushkalavati country of the eastern Videha region of Jambudvipa. This Preetideva is my younger brother. We both took Diksha from Swayamprabha Jinendra and performed severe penance. As a result, we attained Avadhigyan and Charan Riddhi. Knowing that you were born here through Avadhigyan, I have come to help you attain Samyaktva. The time is favorable for you, so both of you should embrace Samyaktva." Saying this, he explained the characteristics and effects of Samyaktva. Both of them embraced Samyaktva after the Muni's teachings. And the beings like Shardul, Nakul, etc., also adorned their souls with Samyaktva. After giving the teachings, the pair of Munis departed through the sky. 166 - 203 The said Arya and Arya were very happy with the great favor of Preetikar Muni and continued to contemplate his virtues. At the end of their lifespan, Vajrajangha became a deva named Shridhar in the celestial chariot of Shri Prabha in the Aishan heaven. Shrimati and other companions also became various devas in the same heaven.
**75**
**Page**
203-207
Upon hearing the news of Shatamati's suffering from the mouth of the Kevali, Shridhar became very sad and went to hell. He preached Dharma to the being of Shatamati and was satisfied. Due to Shridhar's good advice, the being of Shatamati embraced Samyaktva. As a result, a son named Jayasen was born to the beautiful queen of King Mahidhar in the city of Mangalavati in the Pushkalavati country. He was about to get married when Shridhardeva arrived and reminded him of the suffering of hell, causing him to become a disciple again and become the Indra of Brahma heaven.
**Dasham Parva**
One day, Shridhardeva knew through Avadhigyan that his Guru Preetikar had attained Kevalgyan and was residing on the mountain named Shri Prabha. Upon knowing this, he took the materials for worship and went to worship his Gurudev. Upon reaching there, he worshipped him and after the worship, he asked, "When I was Mahabal and you were the minister Swayambuddha, there were three other ministers named Shatamati, Mahaमति, and Sambhinnhabhati. What happened to them?" In response to Shridhardeva's question, Kevali
Page #84:
---------------------------
## Chapter 76
## Adi Purana
## Subject
## Page Subject
## Page

Shridhardev, having chosen from heaven, went to Jambudvipa-East, the Videha-Mahavatskavati country, the city of Susima, after being enlightened by the Laukantic Devas.

On pages 230-231, the beautiful Nandana, queen of King Sudrishti, gave birth to a son named Suvidhi from the womb of the Chakra Ratna. The description of Vajranabhi's reign, the birth of the Chakra Ratna, and the description of Suvidhi's body from head to toe are on pages 218-220. Vajranabhi, the Chakravarti, had a son named Grihapati, who, at his father's request, took over the kingdom.

On pages 231-232, Vajranabhi married his daughter Manorama to Abhayghosh Chakravarti's son, Vajradant. Vajranabhi entrusted the kingdom to Vajrangh and, along with his sons, brothers, and the soul who was his wife, took initiation with Dhandev.

On pages 220-221, Vajranabhi, along with his companions, contemplated the sixteen causes of emotions and, through the influence of the Tirthankara's nature, bound himself. He then went to Vimala Vah Muni and, through the influence of his feet, received many Siddhis.

Vajranabhi, along with his companions, took initiation, but Suvidhi, the king's son, could not renounce his home due to his affection for his family. He therefore took the vow of a householder. The description of the renunciation and the memory of renunciation are on pages 232-237.

Suvidhi, the king's son, followed the vows of a Shravak throughout his life and, at the end of his life, took the Sarvarthasiddhi initiation. Through the influence of Samadhi, he was born in the sixteenth Vimana in heaven.

On pages 221-222, the description of the Sarvarthasiddhi Vimana and Ahmendra, who was born in it. At the end of his life, Keshav, through the influence of his austerities, was born in the same Achyut heaven as Pratindra.

On pages 237-241, the description of the birth of Vajranabhi, the special qualities of Ahmendra, and the fact that the souls of Shardul and others were born as Devas in the same heaven, according to their merits.

On pages 246-248, the description of the Achyutendra's glory and the Devis.

## Eleventh Parva Mangal
## 227

The aforementioned Ahmendra became Lord Adinath. The soul of Vajrangh was Achyutendra, who, having chosen from heaven, went to Jambudvipa-East, the Videha region, the Pushkalavati country, the Bharat region of Jambudvipa, in the southern direction.

The last Kulkar was Nabhiraj. His wife was Maruki, a very beautiful woman. They had a son named Vajrasen, who was born in the city of Pundarika.

On pages 246-255, the description of Vajrasen's body from head to toe. His companions were also born there.

The soul of Keshav was born in the same city as Kubera Dutt and Anantmati, a Vaishya couple. Indra, who came from heaven, first created the city of Dhandevpuri. The description of
Page #85:
---------------------------
## Subject Index
**77**
**263**

**Subject Page | Subject**
257-256 | The mythical description of the fourteen-day rain of jewels.
256-262 | Sixteen dreams seen by the queen in the night after the consecration.
304-305 | The queen, after applying fragrant substances to the body of the Jain child, adorned him with clothes and ornaments and reached the assembly hall in the morning.
305-306 | The detailed praise of the Jain child by Indra.
262-263 | After the praise, Indra asked the queen about the meaning of the sixteen dreams she had seen in the night.
306-311 | The description of the decoration of Ayodhya city.
311-316 | Indra danced in the city and explained the meaning of each dream. The Jain child was named 'Vrishabha'. Indra appointed the goddesses Shri, Hri, etc. to serve the mother.
264-276 | The description of the Jain child's childhood. The description of their service, as well as riddles, the explanation of their inner and outer qualities, and the beautiful and elegant description of the words like Chyutak, Vindhyachyutak, etc.
316-324 | The description of the mother's service to the Jain child.
276-282 | The description of the mother's pregnancy.
**15th Chapter**
**13th Chapter**
283 | When the Jain child reached puberty, his body became beautiful and radiant. He had one hundred and eight marks and nine hundred and nine features.
325-329 | The celebration of the Jain child's birth by Indra. The description of the four-faced gods going to Ayodhya city and praising the Jain child.
286-291 | The description of the Panduk Shila in the north-east direction.
326-334 | The description of the Jain child's marriage. The father's desire for the Jain child's marriage. The Jain child was seated on the Panduk Shila facing east. The consent of the father and Indra. The arrangement of the ocean of milk by the gods. The marriage of Vrishabhadeva with Yashawati and Sunanda, the sisters of Mahakaachch. The description of the Jain child and Sunanda.
291-303 | The description of the consecration of the Jain child by Indra. The description of the water stream, the earth, Mount Sumeru, the moon, the sun, the swan-filled lake, the playful waves, the rain of flowers, etc.
262.303 | The queen saw the ocean of prisoners. 

Page #86:
---------------------------
## 78
## Adipurana
## Subject
## Subject Page
## Page by

The auspicious praise and awakening songs, similar to those of the Videha regions, were heard by the six karmas.  Upon hearing them, her sleep was broken. She thought of going to the Lord in the morning, after being free from the duties of the time, such as the arrangement of the varna-ashrama and the village, city, etc. Indra reached the Lord and began to ask about the fruits of her dreams, saying that she had built the Jinamandir according to His command. The Lord, with His knowledge of the future, considered and replied, and then gave her a boon in all four directions, saying that she would have a Chakravarti son.  Hearing the creation of many small and large countries, she was very happy. At that time, 
## 357-360
the tiger-like being who was the Indra of Sarvarthasiddhi, fell from there and entered the womb of Yashasvati.  The description of her pregnancy
## 360-362
After dividing the cities, they established six professions useful for livelihood: asi, masi, krushi, etc.  After nine months, Yashasvati gave birth to a son. He was born embracing the earth with his arms.  This was on the day of Ashadh Krishna Pratipad. Therefore, the Nitignanis declared that he would be a Chakravarti.
## 334-337
The arrangement of the Kshatriya, Vaishya, and Shudra varnas was done by them. The Lord had arranged all this.  From that day, the Krit Yuga began.
## 337-336
With the consent of Nabhiraj, the Devas crowned the child Bharat, who gradually reached the age of youth.  The description of the coronation of the Lord, the placing of the crown on the head of Rishabhdev
## 336-345
## 362-367
After obtaining the kingdom, the Lord made such rules for the sixteen festivals, so that no other varna could do the livelihood of another varna.  He defined the work of each varna, regulated their marriage system, and established a system of punishment.  He called the four fortunate Kshatriyas, Hari, Akampan, Kashyap, and Soma Prabha, and honored them.  He made them Mahamandaleshwars.
## 346-350
The Lord Rishabhdev had made many kinds of ornaments for all of them.  The description of the various types of garlands in those ornaments
## 350-352
## 367-372
The Lord Rishabhdev had ninety-nine sons and a daughter named Brahmi from his wife Yashasvati, including Vrishabhasen.  He had another queen named Sunanda, from whom he had a son named Bahubali and a daughter named Sundari.  Bahubali was the god of love.  The description of his body
## 346-350
While ruling in this way, twenty lakh years of the Lord's reign passed.  The Lord taught Brahmi and Sundari the art of writing and the art of writing, and taught his sons various subjects.  Gradually, the Lord became detached and began to contemplate the nature of the world.  Twenty lakh years of the Lord's great time passed.
## 352-357
## 373-376
The arrival of the Lokantik Devas, the coronation of Bharat, and the giving of wealth to his
Page #87:
---------------------------
## The Story of the Great Initiation

**The Subject**

**Page | Subject**

**367-403** The initiation ceremony of the Lord. The Lord, created by the gods, was initiated along with four thousand kings who rode on palanquins. The kings, unable to bear the pangs of hunger and thirst, abandoned their palanquins and embarked on a journey of penance. They were corrupted by the Vidyaadharas and adopted various disguises to protect themselves. The grieving Yashawati and Sunandadevi, along with the ministers, followed the Lord, their eyes filled with tears. The Lord's grandson, Marichi, who had become an ascetic, established the Kapil tradition.

**403-410** The grief of the women of the inner palace. Some approached the Lord to request something, while others were stopped by the guards. Only Yashawati and Sunandadevi, along with some of the key women, were allowed to proceed.

**411-418** The detailed description of the Vijayardha mountain in the poet's eloquent language.

**387-388** The Lord, the Jagadguru, took the two princes to the Vijayardha mountain to witness the initiation ceremony of the 19th festival.

**416-421** The Lord introduced the princes to the mountain's unique features. He explained the significance of renouncing possessions and facing the east. He also described the names and extent of the Siddha cities.

**421-427** The princes, after bowing to the Lord, plucked the hair from their heads and threw it away.

**427-441** The description of the mountain's natural beauty in various meters. On the ninth day of the dark fortnight of Chaitra, the Lord accepted initiation in the evening. Indra placed the Lord's sacred hair in a jeweled casket and deposited it in the ocean of milk.

**388-362** The Lord, along with four thousand other kings, was initiated. However, they did not understand the secrets of initiation and remained mere holders of the Dravyalinga.

**392-3** Indra praised the Lord.

**442-444** All the Vidyaadharas bowed to the kings. The kings returned to Ayodhya at sunset after a year of interruption.

**The 18th Festival**

In Hastinapur, Shreyans Maharaj, after remembering his past life, received the knowledge of the initiation ceremony. He attained the knowledge of Manahparyaya as soon as he received the food offering. He consumed sugarcane juice and performed the five-fold worship of the gods. 

Page #88:
---------------------------
## 80
## Nāpinurāga
## Subject Page | Subject Page

This section describes the qualities of the donor, the recipient, and the events of the Prayoviśa Parva. It details how King Somaprbha honored Śreyāṁs and others with unprecedented respect, adorned with three belts on his back (445-456). 

## Description of the Gandhakuṭī
(540-542) This section describes the Lord's ascetic practices, including the description of the throne in the middle of the Gandhakuṭī (542). It also describes the five great vows, their feelings, 28 fundamental qualities, and 12 austerities. The Lord Ādinātha was seated on the throne with a gap of four fingers. Indra and others were worshipping him on the day of Phālguna Kṛṣṇa Ekādaśī, and the description of the origin of Ākāśa Jñāna (456-453).

## Description of the Ekaviṁśa Parva
(543-544) This section describes the Aśoka tree according to Śreṇika's question, as explained by Gautama Svāmī (544). It also describes meditation in detail (474-477).

## Description of the Kṣatra-tray
(544-545) This section describes the four types of Chamara Prātihārya: Ārta, Raudra, Dharmya, and Śukla (545-547). It also describes the four types of Ārta-dhyāna.

## Description of the Devadundubhi
(547-548) This section describes the Devadundubhi, including its internal parts (477-478).

## Description of the Bhāmaṇḍala
(548) This section describes Raudra-dhyāna (478.476).

## Description of the Divyadvani
(548-546) This section describes Dharmya-dhyāna, its suitable place, the seat, internal parts, and detailed discussion (462-467). It also describes the Śukla-dhyāna in detail, its types, and the entry into the Samavasaraṇa. It describes the Śāla and Gopura, etc. (550-552).

## Description of Yoga
This section describes the nature of Pratyāhāra, etc., the suitable seeds, and their fruits (498-500). It also describes the eternal nature of the soul in Ādyajineṇdra (553.555).

## Description of the Dvāviṁśa Parva
This section describes Indra's worship of Ādyajineṇdra with eight substances (555-556). It also describes the destruction of the four types of Ghāti (555-556).

## Description of the Lord's Kevala Jñāna
This section describes the Lord's Kevala Jñāna (506-507). It also describes Indra's praise of the Lord Jineṇdra (556-572).

## Description of Indra's Arrival
This section describes Indra's arrival with many gods to celebrate the Jñāna-Kalyāṇaka (507).

## Description of the Ādyamangala Devas
This section describes the family of the Ādyamangala Devas (507-506).

## Description of the Lord's Kevalyoṭpatti and Chakra-rat
Page #89:
---------------------------
## Table of Contents
**Page** | **Topic**
------- | --------
577-581 | Expression of desire to know the nature of the path, its fruits, etc.
581-560 | After Bharat's question, the divine sound of Lord Adinath. He elaborated on the principles of Jiva, Jivadi, and the six substances.
560-561 | Bharat Chakravarti was very happy after hearing the divine sound from the mouth of Shri Jinendra. He attained right faith and purity of vows. Other noble beings also attained purity as per their capacity.
561-563 | The younger brother of Bharat, the king of Purimatal, became the chief Ganadhara named Vrishabhasena. King Shreyans, Soma Prabha, etc. also became Ganadharas after taking initiation. Brahmi and Sundari also attained the position of Ganini after taking initiation. Except for Marichi, almost all the corrupt monks performed penance in the presence of the Lord and became monks again. King Bharat returned to his capital with great pomp and glory after worshipping the Lord.
564-603 | After Bharat left and the divine sound ceased, there was complete silence. Then, the first Jinendra, adorned with eight miracles, thirty-four extraordinary qualities, and infinite fourfold virtues, began to praise the Lord. This includes the description of birth, omniscience, and divine extraordinary qualities. After the general praise, the introduction of the thousand-name hymn through the preface.
603-630 | Thousand-name hymn.
630-636 | After the hymn, Indra requested the Lord to go on a pilgrimage. Subsequently, the Lord went on a pilgrimage. Description of the pilgrimage. 

Page #90:
---------------------------
The five great vows (Mahavratas) are:
1. **Ahimsa** (non-violence)
2. **Satya** (truthfulness)
3. **Asteya** (non-stealing)
4. **Brahmacharya** (continence)
5. **Aparigraha** (non-attachment) 

Page #91:
---------------------------
## The Adi Purana Composed by Shri Jinaseanacharya
**First Chapter**

Salutations to the glorious one, who has attained the kingdom of all knowledge, who is the upholder of the Dharmachakra, the lord of the three worlds, and the destroyer of the fear of the world, which is in the form of five transformations.

**Special Note:** All the adjectives in this verse are themselves the subject, not the object. This proves that the one in whom these adjectives are found is the one worthy of worship. These adjectives are found in the Arhant Devas, therefore, they are being saluted here. Alternatively, the word "Shrime" is the subject. One of the thousand and eight names of Shri Rishabhdeva is also "Shrime," as will be mentioned later in this text: "Shriman Swayambhuvrishhabha" etc. Therefore, the hero of this story, Shri Bhagwan Rishabhdeva, is being saluted here.

The commentator has explained this verse in various ways:

1. Salutations to the glorious one who is the first Tirthankara. Om Namo Vakragrivacharyaya Shri Kundakunda Swamine. 
2. This is the beginning of the great story of the three and sixty-six lakh Purusha Charitra, which is composed by the great poet Shri Jinasean Muni Indra, who is adorned with the crown of the great king Amoghvarsha Maharaj, and whose feet are adorned with the moon-like nails of the great king Amoghvarsha Maharaj. This is the first part of the great Purana, which is the first part of the great Purana, which is the first part of the great Purana, which is the first part of the great Purana, which is the first part of the great Purana, which is the first part of the great Purana, which is the first part of the great Purana, which is the first part of the great Purana, which is the first part of the great Purana, which is the first part of the great Purana, which is the first part of the great Purana, which is the first part of the great Purana, which is the first part of the great Purana, which is the first part of the great Purana, which is the first part of the great Purana, which is the first part of the great Purana, which is the first part of the great Purana, which is the first part of the great Purana, which is the first part of the great Purana, which is the first part of the great Purana, which is the first part of the great Purana, which is the first part of the great Purana, which is the first part of the great Purana, which is the first part of the great Purana, which is the first part of the great Purana, which is the first part of the great Purana, which is the first part of the great Purana, which is the first part of the great Purana, which is the first part of the great Purana, which is the first part of the great Purana, which is the first part of the great Purana, which is the first part of the great Purana, which is the first part of the great Purana, which is the first part of the great Purana, which is the first part of the great Purana, which is the first part of the great Purana, which is the first part of the great Purana, which is the first part of the great Purana, which is the first part of the great Purana, which is the first part of the great Purana, which is the first part of the great Purana, which is the first part of the great Purana, which is the first part of the great Purana, which is the first part
Page #92:
---------------------------
## Adipurana

This text explains the salutations offered to Arhant, Siddha, Acharya, Upadhyaya, Sadhu, Bharat Chakravarti, Bahubali, Vrishabhasena Ganadhara, and Parsvanatha Tirthankara. Therefore, according to their meaning, some special explanations are given here. The explanation of Lord Vrishabhadeva's side has been done above. In the case of Arhant Parameshthi, the word 'Shrime' means Arhant Parameshthi because he is endowed with both inner and outer Lakshmi. In the case of Siddha Parameshthi, the word 'Sakalgyanasamrajyapadamiyuse' means Siddha Parameshthi; because he has attained the position of the kingdom of all knowers - the dwellers of the highest world. In the case of Acharya Parameshthi, the word 'Dharmachakrabhrute' means Acharya; because 

The meaning of the sentence is incomplete without the mention of the object of the action. In the absence of the direct mention of the doer, the object of the action is implied by the words 'Aham' (I) and 'Kian' (doing). This implies that the object of the action is the one who is the refuge of the three worlds, the holder of all scriptures, the holder of ten previous scriptures, the holder of eleven angas, the one who is Indra, the one who is the refuge of the refuge, and so on. The absence of the direct mention of the action implies that all the future lions should offer salutations to them, which is the ultimate auspiciousness, so that they may attain the desired Siddhi. This highlights the Acharya's dedication to the welfare of others.

Let us assume that there is a purpose for the direct mention of the doer and the action. What is the action? Is it 'doing' because it is transitive? No, because the word 'Namah' (salutation) is used. The word 'Namah' is a word of worship, which signifies bowing down with folded hands. This is explained by the Nyasa-kara. Since the word 'Namah' is a word of worship, it is clear that it is an action. Here, the divine salutation 'Namah' also includes the mental salutation, which is the contemplation of the inner self. This is because the sun, who is full of boundless devotion, is present in both.

Let us assume that the word 'Namah' is a word of worship. To whom should we offer worship? When there is a desire to know the object of worship, the word 'Shrime' is used to specify it. Shri Lakshmi resides in virtuous men. She is of two types, outer and inner. Outer Lakshmi is the beautiful surroundings, while inner Lakshmi is the knowledge of the self. The word 'Shri' encompasses both because it is easier to understand in terms of caste. Although there are many types of Lakshmi, such as the Lakshmi of prosperity, the Lakshmi of the king of kings, the Lakshmi of the half-circle, the Lakshmi of the half-wheel, the Lakshmi of the holder of the wheel, the Lakshmi of the holder of the club, the Lakshmi of the Tirthankara, and the Lakshmi of good deeds, based on the relationship with the directions, the word 'Shri' here refers to both the outer and inner Lakshmi, which are the most important. The word 'Shriman' (possessing Shri) is used for the Lakshmi described above, because the word 'mati' (possessing) is used for the meaning of 'ati' (excessive). Since it is impossible for Lakshmi to be excessive, it is necessary to understand that the word 'mati' is used not only for the outer Lakshmi, but also for the inner Lakshmi, which is always connected with the outer Lakshmi. This is
Page #93:
---------------------------
First Chapter

They hold the wheel, or group, of the ten virtues, beginning with forgiveness. In the context of the Upadhyaya, the term 'Bhartre' is interpreted as Upadhyaya, because he nourishes all beings with the nectar of right knowledge, removing them from the darkness of ignorance. In the context of the Sadhu, the term 'Sansarabhimuse' is interpreted as Sadhu, because he destroys the fear related to the world with his lion-like conduct.

In this verse, the words 'Srimate' etc. are used as nouns, hence the singular suffix is applied. Therefore, this verse also applies to all the Tirthankaras, past, present, and future. In the context of Bharat Chakravarti, the explanation is as follows: He who is the lord of Lakshmi, who is in the form of nine treasures and fourteen jewels, who has attained the position of kingship, which is the protection of all knowing beings (Sakalaasch ye Gnasch Sakaljnaah, Sakaljnanaam Asan Jeevanam Yasminstat Tathabhootam Yatsamrajyapadam Tad Iyuushe), who holds the Chakra Ratna as a result of the fruits of his Dharma in his previous birth.

“Siddho Lokottaraabhikyam Kevalaakhyamakevalam. Anupamamanantaam Taamanubobhooyate Shriyam ||”  This is said by the wise, as it is stated in the scriptures.

Thus, there is no loss of promise, as the liberated soul is authorized here. This is stated in the Dharmachakra. The second sun, the Dharmachakra-bearer, bears the Dharmachakra weapon, which is blazing with the brilliance of the reflection of the sun. This is evident from the teachings like "Sphuradarasasrasuruchira" etc., and from the statement "Dharmachakraayudho Devaah". This is for him. The Dharmachakra weapon is only for the liberated soul, as this is the accepted meaning of the subject matter. By this, the inseparable things like the presence of the liberated soul are also indicated. Or, this duality is a possible qualifier, as it describes the one who is the beloved of both Lakshmi and Saraswati. This is according to the principle "Sambhavavyabhicaraabhyaam Syaadvisheshanam Arthavat".

Furthermore, the attainment of the position of kingship of all knowledge is for the bearing of which weapon? Here, it is Dharma. Dharma is character, as Kundakunda Swami has explained "Charitam Khalu Dhammo". Here, due to the strength of the context, it is the character that is described, which is like a wheel, a wheel that is invincible, which is the cause of attaining the position of kingship of all, by conquering the enemies of harmful actions. He always bears it, hence he is the Dharmachakra-bearer. By this, the relationship between the character and the attainment of the position of kingship of all knowledge by conquering the enemies of harmful actions is established, and his extraordinary grace is also indicated.

It is argued that he should also be extraordinarily gracious to others. Because, if his worship is weak, then it is said - Bhartre. He nourishes the entire world, he is of such character, he is the Bhartre, the lord of the entire world, he is engaged in nourishing, by this, his boundless grace is stated. How can we be certain that he is extraordinarily gracious to others? To this, it is replied "Sansareti". Here, as in the saying "Guravo Rajamaasha Na Bhakshanoyah", the answer is given with a qualifier that is related to the fear of the world, etc., of worldly beings. Because, the fear of his own world and the fear
Page #94:
---------------------------
**The Adipurana**

Salutations to Chakravarti Bharat, the Tattva-liberated, who holds the wheel (of Dharma) obtained by his virtuous deeds, who protects the six-fold Bharat-kshetra and has destroyed the fear of the beings of the world, or who has no fear in roaming all over the six-fold Bharat-kshetra (meaning, he has no fear in roaming all over the world), or who destroys the fear of all by means of the appropriate wheel (meaning, the wheel-jewel with its essence and its parts), to such Chakravarti Bharat, the Tattva-liberated, salutations.

The following is an explanation in favor of Bahubali: He, who defeated Chakravarti Bharat in the three-fold battle and was endowed with extraordinary valor, who, by Dharma or for Dharma, worshipped the wheel-jewel, or who, having been taught the three-fold rise of Kaivalya, etc., considered Dharma to be the greatest and, having performed the worship of Kaivalya, worshipped the wheel-jewel, as it is said, "He worshipped the wheel-jewel after accumulating Dharma."  Bharat is called Chakravarti because he nourishes, worships, and holds the wheel of Dharma. He, with the wealth of Dharma, such as right faith, etc., with the wealth of objects, such as the nine treasures, etc., with the wealth of desires fulfilled, such as the beautiful Mahadevi, etc., with the knowledge and the path of knowledge, such as the "Shromana," etc., taught by Brahma, with the attainment of the position of emperor, and with the attainment of the position of the emperor of all knowledge, became the lord of the six-fold Bharat-kshetra. He, as the lord, moves people here and there, and he destroys the obstacles of the world, such as thieves, robbers, and sorcerers, etc., with his own power, and thus he becomes the refuge of the people who are afraid of the world.  Therefore, he is the refuge of the people who are afraid of the world.  Thus, he is the refuge of the people who are afraid of the world.  Thus, he is the refuge of the people who are afraid of the world.  Thus, he is the refuge of the people who are afraid of the world.  Thus, he is the refuge of the people who are afraid of the world.  Thus, he is the refuge of the people who are afraid of the world.  Thus, he is the refuge of the people who are afraid of the world.  Thus, he is the refuge of the people who are afraid of the world.  Thus, he is the refuge of the people who are afraid of the world.  Thus, he is the refuge of the people who are afraid of the world.  Thus, he is the refuge of the people who are afraid of the world.  Thus, he is the refuge of the people who are afraid of the world.  Thus, he is the refuge of the people who are afraid of the world.  Thus, he is the refuge of the people who are afraid of the world.  Thus, he is the refuge of the people who are afraid of the world.  Thus, he is the refuge of the people who are afraid of the world.  Thus, he is the refuge of the people who are afraid of the world.  Thus, he is the refuge of the people who are afraid of the world.  Thus, he is the refuge of the people who are afraid of the world.  Thus, he is the refuge of the people who are afraid of the world.  Thus, he is the refuge of the people who are afraid of the world.  Thus, he is the refuge of the people who are afraid of the world.  Thus, he
Page #95:
---------------------------
## First Chapter

Bharata, the one who holds (the Dharma), has attained the position of the kingdom of pure knowledge, through praise and other things. After a year of rigorous austerities, only after being praised by Bharata, did Bahubali Swami attain pure knowledge, having become free from all impurities and having attained white meditation. Salutations to Sri Bahubali Swami, who is both the Lord of desires and the King, or who is the Lord of Lakshmi and who destroys the bondage of karma and removes the fear of the world.

In this section, the meaning of the verse should be interpreted as follows: Salutations to the glorious one, the holder of the Dharma wheel, the one who has attained the position of the kingdom of all knowledge, the one who removes the fear of the world, the one who is the Lord.

The explanation in the section of Vrishabhasena Ganadhara is as follows: The word "Srimate" is not in the fourth case ending, but in the seventh case ending (Shriya - Svadvalakshmya upalakshitam matam Jinashasanam tasmin). Therefore, the one who has attained the kingdom of knowledge, which is the knowledge of knowing all things indirectly, in the subject of the Jina-shastra, which is marked by Svadva-lakshmi, the one who holds the Dharma-chakra, that is, the group of Dharmas, the one who knows the infinite nature of things, the one who is the head of the Muni-sangha.

Pushnatiti evamshila bharta tasmai bhartre namah upadhyaya parameshthine namah 'namo uvajhayanamiti' yavat. "Jo rayanatayajutto niccam dhammovadesane nirado. So utrazhao appa jadivarous ho namo tassa" iti agamat. Saddhyanan nileenah san darshanajnan samagrabhavamokhasya sadhakatamam vishuddhacharitram nityam sadhayan yatiindro bhavasamsarabhiyam mushnatiti samsarabhimut tasmai samsarabhimuse namah sadhu parameshthine namah 'namo loe savvasahunamiti' yavat. "Dansananan samaggam maggam mokkhass jo hu charitam. Sahaydi suddha nicvam sahu sa muni namo tassa ||" iti pravachanat. Atra - itarapadavac chaturthi vibhaktyantatven padatvam hitva sakalajnanasamrajyapadamiti vyasavachanam tu matamahaatishayajnapanartham pratijnaavachanamaacharyasyet iti brumah. Tathahi sakalatattvavyaavasthajivaatusyaadvaadaamoghalanchhanalanchhitatven sarvabadhavidhurasadhana sadhitatven sarvodayavattven cha shrimadarhanmantam tirtha shrimatam "sarvodayam tirthamidam - tavede" iti yuktyanusasanat. Tasmin shrimate eva sakalajnanasamrajyapadam shrimattvanyathanupapatteriti. Tadiyuse iti sambandhah. Atra purane na kevalamadititharkarah bharatadharma chakrabhrichchhala kapurushasch pratipadyata iti prakasitah. Aradanayanrupatiprabhriti dharmicoottanso jano'piiti pratipadyartha prakashayati shrimat iti. Shrimat iparyayosyasteeti shrimatah "abhraadibhyah" ityadvithaanat danashreyonrupatirithyartha tasy shrimaticharattvat tasmin sati sakalajnanasamrajyapad
Page #96:
---------------------------
**Salutation to the Adipurana, which illuminates the world like the sun, and is adorned with the radiance of the Jinas.**

**Victory to the Jain religion, whose glory is invincible, which destroys the rule of false beliefs, which is illuminated by the light of the principles of conduct, and which is the sole cause of liberation.**

**Victory to the weapon of the Jains, the three jewels, which easily conquered the army of the enemies of virtue.**

**Salutation to the great man, the foremost among men, who, considering his kingdom as insignificant as a blade of grass, renounced his earthly possessions and embraced the life of a monk.**

**Salutation to the great man, who, inspired by devotion to the Lord, led thousands of kings from the Ikshvaku and Bhoj dynasties to renounce the world.**

**Salutation to the great man, whose virtuous conduct was beyond the capacity of kings like Kachchha and Maha Kachchha, who, unable to follow his example, adopted the practice of wearing leaves and bark and eating wild roots and fruits.**

**Salutation to the great man, who, renouncing food and water, endured all hardships like the earth, and practiced austerities for a long time, the main cause of the destruction of karma.**

**Salutation to Vrishabhasena, the head of the Ganadharas, who, through his teachings, destroys the fear of the world.**

**Salutation to the Lord Parshvanatha, the Tirthankara who holds the Dharmachakra, the wheel of righteousness, close to him, as the earth holds the mountains.**

**Salutation to Jayakumar, Narayana, Balabhadra, and other heroes of the Jain scriptures.**

**The purpose of this work, as revealed by the first letters of each verse, is "Shree Sadhana," which means to attain the wealth of liberation.**

**Salutation to the sun-like Jinas, who illuminate the world shrouded in the darkness of ignorance, and whose radiance, spreading everywhere, makes them resplendent.**

**Victory to the Jain religion, whose glory is invincible, which destroys the rule of false beliefs, which is illuminated by the light of the principles of conduct, and which is the sole cause of liberation.**

**Victory to the weapon of the Jains, the three jewels, which easily conquered the army of the enemies of virtue.**

**Salutation to the great man, the foremost among men, who, considering his kingdom as insignificant as a blade of grass, renounced his earthly possessions and embraced the life of a monk.**

**Salutation to the great man, who, inspired by devotion to the Lord, led thousands of kings from the Ikshvaku and Bhoj dynasties to renounce the world.**

**Salutation to the great man, whose virtuous conduct was beyond the capacity of kings like Kachchha and Maha Kachchha, who, unable to follow his example, adopted the practice of wearing leaves and bark and eating wild roots and fruits.**

**Salutation to the great man, who, renouncing food and water, endured all hardships like the earth, and practiced austerities for a long time, the main cause of the destruction of karma.**

Page #97:
---------------------------
His matted hair, shining like flames of fire ignited by the fire of meditation, adorned his head. He, who moved about at will, for the sake of revealing the limits of conduct, was seen by gods and demons as if Mount Meru itself were moving.  The gods, pleased with the gift given to him, showered him with a rain of five jewels, as he strived for the highest good.  From the defeat of his enemies, the karma-destroying forces, his supreme light, known as Kevala, arose, illuminating all worlds.  He, who established the true Dharma, the destroyer of karmic enemies, was like the sun illuminating the lotuses that are the faces of the holy beings in the lake of virtue.  Hearing of the greatness of his lineage, Bharata's son, adorned with a beautiful garment of bark, danced in delight.  I bow down to that first god, the son of Nabhi, the bull-bannered, the mighty Vrishabha, and I praise him again and again.  I worship the Jinas, the lords of the Dharma-kingdom, from Ajita to Mahavira, the supreme lords.  I praise the Ganadharas, who stand in the position of the heir apparent to the kingdom of all knowledge, and who have attained the necklace of perfect knowledge.  O noble beings, worship the tree of the Shruta-skandha, which is without beginning or end, lofty, bestowing many fruits, and with a vast and dense shade.  Thus, having made auspicious preparations with hymns of praise to the divine teacher, I will collect the Purana, which is based on the thirty-six persons (twenty-four Tirthankaras, twelve Chakravartis, nine Narayanas, nine Pratinarayanas, and nine Balabhadra).  I will also speak of the Purana of the Tirthankaras, Chakravartis, Balabhadra, Narayanas, and their enemies, the Pratinarayanas.  This text is very ancient and is called Purana because it is based on great beings, because it was taught by great beings, and because it teaches the greatest good. 

Page #98:
---------------------------
## Adipurana: A Translation with Jain Terms Preserved

**Verse 22:**  The Adipurana is considered ancient due to its reliance on earlier poets and its significance is established by its own greatness, as stated by others.

**Verse 23:**  This Purana is related to great personalities and is a guide to great liberation (moksha), hence it is considered a Mahapurana by the great sages.

**Verse 24:**  This text is considered *Aarsha* (authored by a sage), *Sukta* (containing truthful teachings), and *Dharmashastra* (a treatise on Dharma) because it is a guide to Dharma.

**Verse 25:**  The sages consider this text as *Itihasa* (history), *Itivritta* (narrative), and *Aitihya* (legend) because it narrates stories of "iti, iha, aasit" (thus, here, it was).

**Verse 26:**  I will narrate this Mahapurana, called *Itihasa*, as spoken by Ganadhardeva, driven solely by devotion, despite my limited knowledge.

**Verse 27:**  Just as a calf desires to carry a heavy load meant for oxen, I, with my limited knowledge, desire to narrate this Mahapurana spoken by Ganadhardeva.

**Verse 28:**  How can a small creature like me, with limited knowledge, attempt to swim across the vast ocean of this profound Purana? I am sure to be ridiculed.

**Verse 29:**  Even though I am a small creature, I will try my best to narrate this Purana, just as a calf with a docked tail still tries to lift its tail.

**Verse 30:**  Even though this Purana was spoken by Ganadhardeva, I will try my best to narrate it. Just as a deer follows the path taken by lions, I will follow the path laid out by the ancient poets.

**Verse 31:**  My path lies within the narrative, made smooth by the ancient poets. Who would not follow the path cleared by the ancient poets?

**Note:** The translation preserves the Jain terms like *Aarsha*, *Sukta*, *Dharmashastra*, *Itihasa*, *Itivritta*, *Aitihya*, *Ganadhardeva*, and *Mahapurana*. 

Page #99:
---------------------------
## First Chapter

**32.** In the forest, where the trees have been thinned by the trampling of great elephants, the young wild elephants roam freely.

**33.** In the ocean, where the great fish have cleared the way with their wide mouths, the young fish also swim about at will.

**34.** In the battlefield, where the great warriors have stopped the enemy with their weapons, even the cowardly men jump about, thinking themselves warriors.

**35.** Therefore, considering the ancient poets as my support, I am eager to cross this ocean of Puranas.

**36.** In this vast ocean of Puranas, filled with hundreds of waves like branches, if I happen to slip due to carelessness or ignorance, wise men should forgive me.

**37.**  Gentle people should discard the faults arising from the poet's carelessness and accept only the virtues from this nectar of stories, for the virtuous accept only virtues.

**38.** In this ocean of stories, filled with precious jewels of good sayings, one should strive to collect the essence, ignoring the crocodiles.

**39.**  We are poets, just like the ancient poets like Siddhasena, but there is as much difference in meaning as there is between a ruby and glass.

**40.** I respect those poets whose words are like mirrors reflecting all the scriptures. What use do I have for other poets who falsely claim to be poets?

**45.** I bow to the creators of the Puranas, in whose mouths Saraswati resides, and whose words serve as the starting point for the poetry of other poets. 

Page #100:
---------------------------
## Adipurana

**Verse 42:**  The lion-like leader of the herd of elephants, the Pravadi, is Siddhasena the poet, whose saffron (hair) is the Nayagadi principles, and whose sharp claws are the alternatives like existence and non-existence.

**Verse 43:**  Salutations to the great poet Samantabhadra, who is like Brahma among poets, whose words, like the thunderbolt, shatter the mountains of falsehood.

**Verse 44:**  The fame of Samantabhadra adorns the heads of poets, composers, debaters, and eloquent speakers, like a crown jewel.

**Verse 45:**  Salutations to Shri Datta, whose body is radiant with the glow of penance, who is like a lion in breaking the elephants of the Pravadi.

**Verse 46:**  May Yashobhadra protect us, whose name alone dispels the pride of the learned in gatherings of the wise.

**Verse 47:**  I praise Prabhachandra the poet, whose fame is as white as the moon's rays, who, by composing Chandrodudaya, has forever delighted the world.

**Verse 48:**  Whose fame, born from the creation of Chandrodudaya, is not praised by anyone? It has become the crown of the virtuous, lasting until the end of time.

**Verse 49:**  May Shiva koti, the sage, protect us, whose words, the fourfold worship, have brought peace to the world, and who shows the path to liberation.

**Verse 50:**  May Jatasimhanandi, the teacher, protect us, whose locks, like strong verses, shine in the contemplation of poetry, as if they were explaining the meaning to us.

**Verse 51:**  May Kanabhikshu, the victorious, protect us, whose pure words, strung together like threads of Dharma, have attained the beauty of narrative art. 

Page #101:
---------------------------
**First Chapter**

Who can describe those Devācārya-Devanandī who were like Tīrthankaras among poets, or who composed some treatise to guide poets, and whose word-like Tīrtha destroys the verbal faults of the learned? [52] The extremely pure qualities of Bhatṭākalaka, Śrīpāla, and Pātrakesarī, etc., adorn the hearts of the learned like a string of jewels. [53] That Vādisimha, who was the ultimate limit of poetry, the highest position of eloquence, and the end of interpretation, is not worshipped by whom? [54] May that very famous Vīrasena Bhaṭṭāraka purify us, whose soul is itself pure, who is the best among poets, who is a great knower of worldly affairs and the nature of poetry, and whose speech makes even the speech of the celestial preceptor, Bṛhaspati, seem limited and small. [55-56] May the soft lotus feet of our Guru Śrīvīrasena Bhaṭṭāraka, the creator of many treatises on the Dhvala and other principles, always reside in our mind-like lake. [57] I repeatedly bow down to the Dhvalaṭīkā, the speech of Śrīvīrasena Guru, which is like the moon, pure and makes the whole world pure, and to his fame. [58] May that Jayasena Guru protect us, who was the father of Tapollakshmi, a treasure house of scriptures and peace, and the leader of the group of learned men. He was worshipped by poets in the world as the Lord of poets, who collected the entire Purāṇa in the form of a collection of words and meanings. [59-60]

Besides these poets mentioned above, there are many other poets. Who can even mention their names, let alone praise them? That is, no one. For the sake of obtaining auspiciousness, I pay my respects to all those world-renowned poets. [61] In the world, those men are poets and those are clever, whose speech attains the quality of being a part of the Dharmakatha. [1-2]

**Notes:**

1. The expression "Tīrthankara of poets" itself is sufficient description. The meaning is that there is nothing else to be described about those Devās in excess. That Tīrthankaratva itself is sufficient. The other half of the verse says something else. [1]
2. Water. [2]
3. The form of speech. [3]
4. Vādivṛnda - S, D. [4]
5. Best. [5]
6. Vāgmina - S, D. [6]
7. Avāmitā - exaggerated. [7]
8. Of interpretations. [8]
9. Tāṁ namāmy - D. [9]
10. Word. [10]
11. Sangrahamakarot. [11]
12. To mention even by name. [12]
13. Capable. [13] 

Page #102:
---------------------------
The poetry that is connected to Dharma is considered praiseworthy. Even if other poetry is well-crafted, it only serves to increase the flow of sin.  

Some people create beautiful poetry that pleases the ears, but because it is not connected to Dharma, it cannot satisfy the righteous. 

There are some who strive to create poetry, but they are like mute people who want to speak, only achieving laughter. 

Some, claiming to be poets, take a few lines from other poets and present them as their own, like merchants who take a few pieces of cloth and alter them to sell as their own. 

Some are unable to enjoy the beauty of poetry and seek the help of others, like those who are unable to enjoy the pleasures of love and seek the help of aphrodisiacs. 

Some take the words and meanings of other poets and present them as their own, like merchants who take goods made by others and sell them as their own. 

Some create poetry that is beautiful in its words but lacks meaning. This poetry is like a necklace made of pearls, beautiful but lacking in substance. 

Some, even when they have found beautiful meaning, are unable to express it in a way that pleases the righteous, like a miser who has gained wealth but cannot use it to benefit others. 

Some begin to create poetry according to their own desires, but they lack the strength to complete it, like those who are burdened by taxes. 

Page #103:
---------------------------


Page #104:
---------------------------
## First Chapter

Considering virtuous men as the support in the creation of the work of poets, I am eager to cross the ocean of poetry filled with waves of ornamentation, qualities, and styles. ||13||

Those who know poetry say that the feeling or the action of the poet is poetry. That poetry should be filled with universally accepted meaning, free from vulgarity, adorned with ornamentation, and embellished with qualities like clarity. ||14||

Some say that the beauty of meaning is the ornamentation of speech, while others say that the beauty of words is the ornamentation. But our opinion is that the beauty of both meaning and words is the ornamentation of speech. ||15||

Poetry created by virtuous men, adorned with ornamentation, filled with emotions like love, beauty, and so on, and free from plagiarism, is as radiant as the mouth of Saraswati. ||16||

That which lacks the charm of style, the beauty of words, and the flow of emotions, should not be called poetry. It is merely a vulgar language that hurts the ears. ||17||

Those who create compositions with well-connected words, adorned with pleasing styles, and clear meaning, are considered great poets. ||28||

A great epic is considered to be that which is related to ancient history, depicts the characters of Tirthankaras, Chakravartis, and other great men, and shows the fruits of Dharma, Artha, and Kama. ||19||

Every poet can compose a few verses on a scattered topic, but it is difficult to create a composition by connecting the beginning and the end. ||100||

When the collection of words is infinite in this world, the subject to be described is under one's control, the emotions are clear, and the best meters are readily available, then what is the poverty in poetry? ||101||

One should not disrespect the wicked, nor should one disrespect the virtuous. ||91-92|| 

Page #105:
---------------------------
-
First, considering the noble men as the support in the creation of the work of poets, I am eager to cross the ocean of poetry, full of waves. ||13||
Poets' emotions or actions are called poetry by the connoisseurs. That poetry should be full of meaning, free from vulgarity, adorned with figures of speech, and embellished with qualities like clarity. ||9||
Some say the beauty of meaning is the ornament of speech, while others say the beauty of words. Some say the purity of speech is the ornament, but our opinion is that both the beauty of meaning and words are the ornaments of speech. ||15||
Poetry adorned with figures of speech, born from the abundance of rasa, free from plagiarism, and created by noble men, shines like the mouth of Saraswati. ||96||
Poetry that lacks the charm of style, the grace of words, and the flow of rasa, should not be called poetry. It is merely a harsh language for the ears. ||97||
Those who create compositions with well-connected words, with pleasing styles, and clear meaning, are considered great poets. ||9||
A great epic is desired to be related to great Puranas, to be the subject of great heroes, and to show the fruits of the three goals of life. ||19||
Every poet can create a few verses on a scattered topic, but it is difficult to create a composition with a connection between the beginning and the end. ||10||
When the collection of words is infinite in this world, the subject to be described is under one's control, the rasas are clear, and the best meters are easily available, then what is the poverty in poetry? ||10||
One should not disrespect the noble, nor should one disrespect the wicked. ||91-92||

Page #106:
---------------------------
**Adipurana**

102. While traversing the vast expanse of the path of words, a poet, weary from wandering through dense forests of meaning, should seek refuge in the shade of great poets. 

103. The great poet, whose roots are in wisdom, whose branches are adorned with qualities like sweetness, vigor, and clarity, and whose leaves are radiant with beautiful words, bears a garland of flowers of fame.

104. Or, the great poet, whose shores are wisdom, whose waves are qualities like clarity, who is filled with gems of virtue, who is adorned with lofty and beautiful words, and whose vast flow is the lineage of teacher and student, acts like the ocean.

105. O wise men! Make full use of the poetic alchemy described above, so that your body of fame may endure for eons. Just as consuming alchemy strengthens the body, so too, understanding the nature of poetry, great poets, etc., makes the fame of a poet enduring.

106. For those who desire to accumulate wealth of fame and trade in the currency of virtue, this poetry, which describes the Dharmakatha, is considered capital (wealth).

107. I begin this story, which is connected to the Dharma Shastra, which was initiated by many virtuous men, and which describes the lives of great men like Rishabhanatha.

108. This Dharmakatha, like a Kalpalata (wish-fulfilling vine), is spread out with many branches (stories and sub-stories), providing shade (protection from the sun), and bearing fruit (wisdom).

109. This Dharmakatha is beautiful, serene, deep, pure, and cool, like a wish-fulfilling vine, and it dispels the suffering of the world, like a great ocean. 

Page #107:
---------------------------
First, the first chapter, the origin of the Guru stream, is free from suffering. It is made by the virtuous deeds of the virtuous, like a cloud that has rained. ||110|| It is the mother of mental clarity, a collection of auspicious things. It is the reflection of the three worlds, laughing with the beauty of a mirror. ||111|| Like a great branch of the Kalpa tree, which is very high and gives desired fruits, it is taken from the Shruta Skandha. ||112|| Like the waves of a vast ocean, it is full of great sounds and vast meanings, the first Anuyoga, which is deep. ||113|| It is the one that accepts all the principles, rejects false beliefs, is the mother of the enthusiasm of the virtuous, and increases the taste of renunciation. ||114|| This wonderful, divine, great story of the ultimate truth, is connected with many stories, composed by the virtuous ancient sages. ||115|| It is auspicious, brings fame and welfare, and gives the fruits of enjoyment and liberation. I will speak of it, following the previous teachers. Listen carefully, O virtuous men. ||116|| Wise men should definitely describe the characteristics of the story, the speaker, and the listeners before the beginning of the story. ||117|| The telling of Dharma, Artha, and Kama, which are useful for the purpose of liberation, is called a story. Among them, wise men consider the story of Saraka to be the best. ||118|| 

Page #108:
---------------------------
The Adipurana states: "A story that depicts the fruits of Dharma, including wealth and desires, is considered a story. Otherwise, it is merely a Vikatha, a cause of the flow of negative karma." (19) "The Dharma that leads to liberation and the highest good is true Dharma. The story that is connected to this Dharma is called Sadharmakatha." (120) "The seven adornments of Sadharmakatha, as described by the Ganadharas and other deities, are: Dravya, Kshetra, Tirtha, Kala, Bhava, Mahaphala, and Prakrti. A story adorned with these seven elements becomes as captivating as a skilled actor." (121) "Dravya refers to the six substances: Jiva, Pudgala, Dharma, Adharma, Akasha, and Kala. Kshetra refers to the three realms: Urddhva, Madhya, and Patala. Tirtha refers to the life story of the Jina. Kala refers to the three types of time: past, present, and future. Bhava refers to the two states: Kshayopaśama and Kshayika. Mahaphala refers to the attainment of true knowledge. Prakrti refers to the subject matter of the story." (122-124) "Thus, a story that contains these seven elements is considered a Satkatha. In this text, we will elaborate on these elements as the occasion arises." (125) "The speaker of this story should be a wise person, virtuous, with a steady mind, able to control his senses, with excellent senses, a beautiful body, clear and pleasing speech, a mind cleansed by the ocean of Jina teachings, a speech free from all defects, dignified, able to captivate audiences, eloquent, profound, insightful, whose interpretations are appreciated by the wise, and able to answer questions." (126-128) "A wise person calls a story that explains the essence of Dharma a Satkatha." (118) "The fruits of Dharma include liberation and the highest good, and wealth and desires are also important aspects of this. Therefore, to illustrate the fruits of Dharma, it is necessary to describe wealth and desires in a story. If this story of wealth and desires is devoid of Dharma, it is merely a Vikatha, a cause of the flow of negative karma." (119) "The Dharma that leads to liberation and the highest good is true Dharma. The story that is connected to this Dharma is called Sadharmakatha." (120) 

Page #109:
---------------------------
First, the speaker should be compassionate, wise, and skilled in understanding others' opinions. He should be well-versed in all knowledge and be a courageous and valiant person. Only such a person should narrate a story. (129) He should be skilled in various anecdotes, proficient in multiple languages, and knowledgeable in various scriptures and arts. Such a person is considered a leading storyteller. (130) The speaker should not snap his fingers, raise his eyebrows, criticize anyone, laugh, speak loudly, or speak softly while narrating. (131) If he needs to speak loudly in the middle of the assembly, he should do so without arrogance, speaking truthfully and in a way that does not offend anyone. (132) He should always speak words that are beneficial, limited, filled with religious teachings, and bring fame. Even when the opportunity arises, he should not speak words that are against Dharma or spread infamy. (133) After carefully considering the merits and demerits of the story, the speaker who begins to narrate the story is considered praiseworthy and the best among speakers. (134) A wise speaker should narrate an "Aakshepini" story to establish his own opinion, a "Vikshepini" story to refute false opinions, a "Samvedini" story to describe the blessings and prosperity resulting from good deeds, and a "Nirvedini" story to generate detachment. (135-136) Thus, considering the four types of stories - Aakshepini, Vikshepini, Samvedini, and Nirvedini - which are integral parts of Dharmakatha, the speaker should narrate them according to the listener's capacity. (137) Now, the Acharya describes the characteristics of the listeners. 

Page #110:
---------------------------
## Adipurana: On the Types of Listeners

**Chapter 39:**

The fourteen types of listeners are: earth, sieve, goat, cat, parrot, heron, stone, snake, cow, swan, buffalo, broken pot, leech, and worm.

**Chapter 14:**

The listeners are classified as excellent, mediocre, and inferior.

**Chapter 14:**

Those resembling the cow and swan are considered excellent, those resembling the earth and parrot are considered mediocre, and all others are considered inferior.

**Chapter 142:**

The listeners who are like eyes, mirrors, scales, and touchstones, are considered the examiners of good and bad speech.

**Chapter 138:**

The above mentioned examples are used to illustrate the types of listeners.

**Explanation:**

(1) **Earth:** Just as earth remains soft when in contact with water but later becomes hard, similarly, listeners who are receptive during the discourse but become hard-hearted later are like earth.

(2) **Sieve:** Just as a sieve lets the essential flour fall through and retains the chaff, similarly, listeners who discard the essential teachings and retain only the superficial ones are like a sieve.

(3) **Goat:** Those who are extremely lustful and whose minds become filled with lustful thoughts during the discourse are like a goat.

(4) **Cat:** Just as a cat, despite receiving many teachings, does not abandon its violent nature and attacks the bird when it comes close, similarly, listeners who, despite being taught, do not abandon their cruelty and resort to it when the opportunity arises are like a cat.

(5) **Parrot:** Just as a parrot is ignorant and learns only by imitating others, similarly, listeners who are devoid of knowledge and learn only by listening to others are like a parrot.

(6) **Heron:** Those who appear virtuous on the outside but are extremely wicked inside are like a heron.

(7) **Stone:** Those who are always hard-hearted and whose hearts do not allow the water of Jain teachings to enter are like a stone.

(8) **Snake:** Just as milk given to a snake turns into poison, similarly, even the best teachings have a negative effect on those who are like a snake.

(9) **Cow:** Just as a cow gives milk after eating grass, similarly, those who benefit greatly from even a little teaching are like a cow.

(10) **Swan:** Those who only accept the essential teachings are like a swan.

(11) **Buffalo:** Just as a buffalo drinks little water but makes the entire water muddy, similarly, listeners who accept little teaching but create disturbance in the entire assembly with their bad conduct are like a buffalo.

(12) **Broken Pot:** Those whose hearts do not retain any teachings are like a broken pot.

(13) **Leech:** Those who do not accept any teachings but disturb the entire assembly are like a leech.

(14) **Worm:** Those who only accept the negative aspects and discard the positive ones are like a worm.

**Chapter 139-140:**

These fourteen types of listeners are further divided into three categories: excellent, mediocre, and inferior. There are other types of listeners as well, but what is the benefit of counting them all?

**Chapter 141:**

Among these listeners, those who are like the cow and swan are considered excellent, those who are like the earth and parrot are considered mediocre, and all others are considered inferior. 

Page #111:
---------------------------
First, the listener should not desire any worldly fruit from hearing the story. Similarly, the speaker should not desire respect, wealth, medicine, or shelter from the listeners. ||143|| The speaker should only preach the righteous path with the expectation of heaven, liberation, and other blessings, and the listener should listen with the same expectation. For the actions of the righteous are only for the attainment of true welfare, not for worldly affairs. ||144|| The listener who is endowed with qualities like devotion, etc., is considered praiseworthy. Similarly, the speaker who is adorned with qualities like affection, etc., is considered praiseworthy. ||145|| Devotion, listening, understanding, retention, remembrance, inference, rejection, and decision-making are the eight qualities of the listener. ||146|| The listener accumulates merit by listening to good stories, which leads to the attainment of heaven and other blessings, and ultimately to liberation. ||147|| Thus, I have described the beginning of the story to you according to the scriptures. Now I will tell you about the origin of this story, so listen. ||148|| It is heard that in the past, at the end of the third kalpa, the son of Nabhiraj, Lord Rishabhadeva, while wandering, came to reside on Mount Kailasa, the crown of the earth, by his own will. ||149|| The gods worshipped Lord Rishabhadeva, who was seated on Kailasa, with devotion, and praised him with their hands clasped in reverence. ||150|| The gods, pleased with the presence of the Lord, the teacher of the three worlds, built a Samavasarana there. The Lord, having attained liberation, started the Samavasarana. ||151|| 

Page #112:
---------------------------
22
In that assembly of gods, the Lord was present, His presence wondrous and extraordinary. Filled with devotion, Bharata bowed down to Him with joy. ||152|| With appropriate words, Bharata, the king, praised the Lord, who is worshipped by both humans and gods, with many hymns filled with meaning. He sat down in his designated place, bowing with humility. ||153|| Having drunk the nectar of Dharma from the Lord, the assembly, filled with gods and demigods, was satisfied, like a lotus satisfied by the rays of the sun. ||154|| Then, standing in the middle of the assembly, Bharata, with folded hands, like a personification of humility, spoke these words. ||155|| From the lotus-like mouth of Bharata, adorned with the saffron-colored rays of his teeth, emerged a sweet voice, as if Saraswati herself, radiant and beautiful, had emerged from his mouth. ||156|| O Lord, this assembly, filled with gods and demigods, is becoming radiant like a lotus, awakened by your presence, as their faces, like lotuses, are blooming. ||157|| O Lord, your divine words seem like nectar, poured upon this world, which was lost in the darkness of ignorance, for its rebirth. ||158|| O Lord, if the rays of your words, which destroy the darkness of ignorance, did not appear, then surely this entire world would remain lost in the dense darkness of ignorance. ||159|| O Lord, I am fulfilled simply by seeing you. Indeed, who is not fulfilled by the presence of a great treasure? ||160|| Having heard your words, I am even more fulfilled. When people are fulfilled simply by seeing nectar, what about the one who tastes it? Surely, he will be even more fulfilled. ||161|| O Lord, it is said that rain in the forest is desirable for everyone. Today, I have seen the rain of Dharma-water poured by you, and it has become clear to me. ||162|| 

Page #113:
---------------------------
23
First, what is the essence that you have left out while teaching? Does the sun, which destroys darkness, leave anything out while illuminating?  ||163||
When the truth is shown by you, the minds of the righteous never get confused. Does a person with eyes ever stumble on the great path shown by the great ones? ||164||
O Lord, I am seeing the reflection of all the objects of the world in the expanse of your words, which are like a mirror of auspiciousness for the three worlds. ||165||
Even so, there is a desire in my heart to ask something. The reason for that desire is the thirst for drinking the nectar of your words continuously. ||166||
O God, people might say, "Who is this one who is asking you directly, bypassing the Ganadharas?" But I don't understand this. It is your extraordinary devotion that is inspiring me to ask you. ||167||
O Lord, the desire to know the special nature of the object, the feeling of greater benefit, the abundance of faith, or the desire to do something, is making me talkative in front of you. ||168||
O Lord, I want to hear the merit of the Tirthankaras and other great people, in which all the Dharma taught by the omniscient ones is collected. O God, be pleased with me, be merciful and tell me: How many omniscient Tirthankaras will there be like you? How many Chakravartis will there be like me? How many Narayanas, how many Balabhadra, and how many their enemies, the Pratinarayanas? What was their past character like? What will it be like in the present and the future? O best of speakers, I want to hear all this from you. ||169-170||
O Jinendra, who benefits everyone, also tell me: What will be the names of all of them? In which gotras will they be born? Who will be their siblings? What will be their characteristics? What kind of forms will they have? What will be their ornaments? 

Page #114:
---------------------------
24
Adipurana
1
What is the measure of their lifespan? What is their height? What is the difference between them? I am curious to know this, O World-born, about the universe. || 173 ||
In which yuga are there how many yuga-ansha? What is the difference between one yuga and another? How many times does the cycle of yugas occur? || 174 ||
In which part of the yuga are the Manus born? What do they know? What is the interval between one Manu and another? O God, I am curious to know all this, so tell me the nature of all these principles in a truthful manner. || 175 ||
Besides this, I also want to know from your auspicious mouth the nature of the world, the descent of time, the birth, destruction, and existence of lineages, and the origin of the varnas. || 176 ||
O Jinaraka-sun, quickly destroy this darkness of my doubt, which has grown excessively due to the false knowledge born from the vasanas of the beginningless time, with the rays of your words. || 177 ||
Having asked this question, King Bharata, the son of Shatamata, became silent and sat down in his proper seat, eager to hear the story. || 178 ||
The entire assembly rejoiced at this question of the king, which was asked at the right time, full of luminous meanings, connected with the previous and subsequent parts, and free from arrogance. || 179 ||
At that moment, the gods, their faces illuminated by the question of the story, looked at King Bharata as if they were showering flowers on him. || 180 ||
"O Bharateshwar, you are blessed, today you have become worthy of our worship." Thus Indra praised him, for who does not praise with humility? That is, everyone does. || 181 ||
Although the omniscient Lord Rishabhanatha knew King Bharata's intention without even asking a question, he waited for the question to be completed at the request of the listeners. || 182 ||
1. Varsha means height, the measure of the body. 2. Hit for the world-born. 3. Yuga-anta means the end of the yuga, like Sushma, etc. 4. Avadhi means the interval. 5. Katina means the completion of how many. 6. Jananti means they know. 7. Tat tvam means the division of the word. 8. Vanshotpatti layasthiti means the birth, destruction, and existence of lineages. 9. Bodhumichchhami means I want to know. 10. Shata means hundred, Shatamata means the mother of a hundred, Shatamatura means the son of Shatamata. "Sankhyasambhradanmastujur". 11. Tushnim sthita means silent. 12. Upvishta means seated. 13. Idha means prosperous. 14. Vishmi means the king of the masses. 15. Prati means to look at, to see. 16. Pujya means worthy of worship. 17. Vina means without. 18. Pratipatra means the request of the listeners. 

Page #115:
---------------------------
The first chapter, thus declared by the Lord, the first Tirthankara, Aditi, expounded the meaning of the Purana with profound words.  ||18||  From the lotus-like mouth of the self-created one, Saraswati, arose, a wonder, with a tongue that did not move, and teeth that were not visible. ||18||  The truth is, this is the womb of her birth, her very mouth.  There, she obtained the pure one, and brought him to the assembly. ||185||  Without any desire, her divine voice spread.  The deeds of the great are wondrous, as they strive to liberate the world. ||186||  Even though the delight is one, it becomes manifold, reaching different beings, like water that becomes diverse in taste, depending on the vessel it is in. ||187||  The Lord, having achieved his own purpose, still worked for the benefit of others through his teachings.  Indeed, the deeds of the great are naturally for the benefit of others. ||188||  The speech born from his own mouth, a divine sound, filled that great assembly.  It soothed them like a stream of nectar, a stream that removes suffering. ||189||  Whatever the Lord Aditi had touched, he expounded it all in order, without effort, to Bharata. ||190||  The Lord, the teacher of the world, expounded the very profound Purana, which is related to the time of the ascending cycle, and the beings who are its support. ||191||  Then, taking the time of the descending cycle as his support, he presented the story, and set forth the introduction to the Purana, before the main narrative. ||192||  "The story that the Lord of Words, the Ganadhara, Vrishabhasena, spoke in the ancient times, that is what I will now explain." ||193|| 

Page #116:
---------------------------
The Adipurana, then, was composed by Swayambhuvi, the divine voice, for the benefit of the world. The Ganadharas, led by the first Tirthankara, compiled this Purana, which is a continuation of the previous Puranas.  ||19||  The remaining Tirthankaras, the Ganadharas, and the great sages also illuminated this Purana. ||195||  Then, at the end of the fourth Yuga, the Lord Vira, the son of Siddhartha, adorned the Vipulachala mountain in Rajagriha, his gaze encompassing all beings. ||196||  Approaching him, the king of Rajagriha, the virtuous Srennika, respectfully inquired about the meaning of the Purana. ||197||  Understanding the king's desire for grace, the Lord Vira, through the Ganadhara Gautama, narrated the entire Purana. ||198||  Gautama, remembering and contemplating it for a long time, later conveyed it to Sudharma, who in turn passed it on to Jambuswami. ||199||  From that time until now, this Purana has been passed down through an unbroken lineage of Gurus. I, too, will illuminate this Purana to the best of my ability. ||200||  This statement confirms that the original author of this Purana is the last Tirthankara, Lord Mahavira, and the immediate successor is the Ganadhara Gautama. ||201||  Inspired by the question of King Srennika, I am composing this Purana, reflecting on the answer given by Gautama. ||202||  This section, called "Promukha Nama," indicates the connection of the story and is useful for establishing its authenticity. Therefore, I have included it here. ||203||  This Purana, spoken by the sages, is undoubtedly authentic. Therefore, those seeking liberation should have faith in it, study it, and meditate on it. ||204||  This Purana is conducive to accumulating merit, is pure, is a supreme auspiciousness, increases lifespan, is excellent, and enhances fame. ||205||  Finally, the history of the past was studied by the Ganadhara Vrishabhasena in its true meaning. ||193||  After that, the chief Ganadhara, Vrishabhasena, holding the divine voice in his heart, composed it in the form of a Purana for the benefit of the world. ||194||  This same Purana was illuminated by Ajitanatha and the remaining Tirthankaras, the Ganadharas, and the great sages. ||195|| 

Page #117:
---------------------------
## First Chapter

**27** May this (text) bring peace, contentment, and nourishment to those who inquire. May it bring health to those who read, and the destruction of karma to those who listen. ||206|| From this, bad dreams are destroyed, and good dreams are obtained. From this, desired results are achieved, and those who contemplate will see auspicious and inauspicious omens. ||207||

**Hariṇī Chanda:** "The path that the great sage Vṛṣabha followed, I too wish to follow now. What else in the world could be more humorous than to follow in his footsteps? Or perhaps this is not surprising, for just as large birds like Garuda fly in the sky, so too do small birds." ||208||

**Mālinī Chanda:** "Just as the great sage Vṛṣabha illuminated this path, so too do I illuminate it according to my ability. Just as the sky is illuminated by the rays of the sun, so too is it illuminated by the stars. What in the world does not illuminate the sky?" ||209||

This (text) grants peace and heaven. ||205|| Those who worship this Purāṇa attain peace, their obstacles are destroyed, those who inquire about it attain contentment and nourishment, those who read it attain health and many benefits, and those who listen have their karma destroyed. ||206|| By studying this Purāṇa, bad dreams are destroyed, and good dreams are obtained. From this, desired results are achieved, and those who contemplate will see auspicious and inauspicious omens. ||207|| In the past, the great sages like Vṛṣabha followed a certain path. I too wish to follow that path now, meaning I wish to expound the same Purāṇa that they did. This will only bring me laughter, what else could it bring? Or perhaps this is not surprising, for just as large birds like Garuda fly in the sky, so too do small birds. ||208|| Just as the great sages like Vṛṣabha illuminated this Purāṇa, so too do I illuminate it according to my ability. For just as the sky is illuminated by the rays of the sun, so too is it illuminated by the stars. What in the world does not illuminate the sky? ||209||

I will definitely speak this Purāṇa, but I cannot expound it as clearly as the great sages like Vṛṣabha did. Just as the stars illuminate the sky...

1. *Susvapnasphīti* - P., *Susvapnasya aptireva* - L., M., 80, A.
2. *Sphāti* - increase.
3. *Vṛṣabha* - the main one.
4. *Patavyatilankhitam* - M., D., L. 

Page #118:
---------------------------
## Adipurana
**Verse 21:**
This glorious Purana, adorned with beautiful verses, dispels the darkness of false beliefs with its radiant words, illuminating the path of righteousness and purity. It shines brightly, like the sun, with its wealth of words and meaning, and brings forth the knowledge of the Jinas. May this auspicious Purana forever triumph in the world!

**Chapter 1:**
Thus ends the first chapter of the Trishattilakshana Mahapurana, composed by the venerable Acharya Jinaseena, titled "Kathamukhavarnana".

**Notes:**
1.  "Kritva" - meaning "having done"
2.  "Sataam Vrittam Yasmin Tat" - meaning "that in which the deeds of the righteous are described"
3.  "Bhragnha Bhanu" - meaning "the sun that shines brightly" 

Page #119:
---------------------------
## Second Chapter

Saluting the Self-Existent Lord, the Supreme Lord of the Gods, the Lord Tama, we begin the detailed introduction of this Purana. ||1||

Now, the wise Shrenik, whose mind is focused on the knowledge of Dharma, asked the Lord of the Ganadharas, Gautam Swami. ||2||

O Lord, I have heard this entire Purana from the mouth of the Self-Existent Lord, in its essence. Now, by your grace, I wish to hear it from the scriptures. ||3||

O Lord, you are our uncaused friend, you love us without any reason, and you are the uncaused physician for those who are tormented by the suffering of birth and death. ||4||

O Lord, the rays of your nails, falling on our heads, are like the pure water of the celestial Ganga, as if they are performing an endless abhisheka (consecration) upon us. ||5||

O Lord, the radiance of your body, obtained through intense penance, is all-pervading and shines even at an untimely hour, like the dense, brilliant light of the morning sun. ||6||

O Lord, just as the sun quickly awakens and opens the lotuses that were closed in the night, you have awakened and roused this entire world, which was asleep in the slumber of ignorance. ||7||

O Lord, the darkness of ignorance in the heart, which the moon cannot touch with its rays, and which the sun cannot touch with its rays, is effortlessly destroyed by you with the rays of your words. ||8||

O Lord, your seven great wisdoms, which are constantly increasing, are like the seven flames of fire, ignited by the burning of the fuel of karma. ||9|| 

Page #120:
---------------------------
30
This Adipurana, a sacred place of pilgrimage, is pure by your grace. It is like a protective forest, free from troubles, filled with the wealth of penance. ||10||
Here, these wild animals are well-nourished, fed with sweet grass shoots. They never know the pain inflicted by wicked animals. ||11||
From the water of the kamandalu, scattered by the running of feet, these deer fawns are purified and grow, as if they are drinking nectar. ||12||
Here, these she-elephants are feeding their cubs with milk, and these elephant calves are freely touching the breasts of the lioness, drinking milk. ||13||
Oh, what a wonder! Even these deer, who cannot speak, are taking shelter in the shade of the Lord's feet, like the sages. ||14||
These trees of the forest, whose bark has never been peeled, and which are adorned with flowers and fruits, seem like the trees of a garden of Dharma. ||15||
These beautiful forest vines, blooming and surrounded by bees, do not know the hardship of taxes, like the subjects of a righteous king. ||16||
This beautiful forest of penance, situated around the vast mountain, delights my mind, like a compassionate one. ||17||
These Digambara ascetics, who are burning with intense penance, are worshipping the path of liberation only by the grace of your feet. ||18||
Oh Lord, your greatness is clearly evident. You are skilled in benefiting the world, therefore you are considered the leader of the community of the worthy. ||19||
Oh great yogi, there is nothing in the world that is beyond your knowledge. Your divine rays of knowledge are spreading throughout the three worlds. ||20||

Page #121:
---------------------------
## Second Chapter

31. Listen, with your mind fixed, for there is something else I wish to declare. "So that your mind may be firm in granting me your favor." 21. "In the past, due to ignorance, I committed great sins. For the sake of pacifying those sins, I am performing this penance." 22. "O Lord, I, the ignorant one, have accumulated immense sins in the past through violence, falsehood, theft, sexual misconduct, and various types of initiation and attachments." 23. "And what's more, I, the misguided one, took great pleasure in killing the Muni-Rajas, due to which I have been bound by the karma of hell, a hellish life-span that cannot be escaped." 24. "Therefore, O Lord, be pleased to tell me the story of that sacred Purana from its beginning, for listening to that auspicious Purana will surely eradicate my sins." 25. Thus, the King of Magadha, offering worship and praise with flowers that shone like the brilliance of his teeth, spoke these words with humility and fell silent. 26. Then, the Muni-Janas, adorned with the splendor of intense penance, praised the righteous King of Magadha, pleased by his question. 27. "O King of Magadha, you are blessed! You are the best among those who ask questions, and therefore, you are even more blessed! Today, by asking questions about the great Purana, you have filled our hearts with great joy." 28. "O Shrenika, we wished to ask about the Purana that contains the supreme essence, and you have asked about it. See, what a wonderful connection we have found!" 29. "The desire to know is called a question. In your question, you have desired to know the nature of Dharma. So, O Shrenika, by desiring to know the nature of Dharma, you have desired to know the entire universe, that is, by desiring to know the nature of Dharma, you have expressed your desire to know the nature of the entire universe." 30. "O Shrenika, see, this Dharma is a tree. The meaning 
1. From declaration, from fixing. 2. Your. 3. Other wealth, forest, and delight. 4. Given, not taken, A, S, D, 50. 5. Inaction, T. 6. Having spoken. 7. Having asked, desired. 8. Supreme letters, A, S, 50, L, D. 6. Conversation that does not deviate from the intended meaning. 1. Desire to know. 11. Knowing, declaration. Knowing, A, S, D. 12. Desiring, D, S, 10, 50, M, L. 13. All, D, P. 14. Dharma story, M, 50. 

Page #122:
---------------------------
## Chapter 32

32. **O Ayushman, be certain that Dharma is the source of Artha, Kama, and Svarga.** Indeed, Dharma is the origin of Artha and Kama. 

33. **He who desires Dharma desires all desirable things.** A man who desires Dharma is wealthy and happy, for Dharma is the root of all wealth, prosperity, and happiness.

34. **Dharma is the Kamadhenu cow that grants all desires, Dharma is the great Chintamani gem, Dharma is the eternal Kalpavriksha tree, and Dharma is the indestructible treasure.**

35. **O Shrenik, see the greatness of Dharma!** He who abides in Dharma, with pure intentions, is protected from many calamities. Even the Devas cannot attack him, they stay far away.

36. **O wise one, even through contemplation, kingship, worldly fame, self-realization, and divine knowledge, the immeasurable greatness of Dharma is known.**  The contemplation of the infinite powers of substances, royal honor, worldly fame, self-realization, and the powers of Avadhi and Manahparyaya, all these are attained through Dharma. Therefore, by observing all these things, one should know the extraordinary greatness of Dharma.

37. **This Dharma protects the being from the suffering of hell, Nigoda, etc., and leads it to the abode of liberation, filled with eternal happiness.** Therefore, it is called Dharma.

38. **What is the meaning of the Puranas is Dharma.** The sages consider the Puranas to be of five types: Kshetra, Kala, Tirtha, Satpurusha, and their actions.

39. **The creation of the three worlds, the upper, middle, and lower, is called Kshetra.** The expanse of the three times, past, present, and future, is called Kala. The means of attaining liberation, namely Samyagdarshan, Samyagjnana, and Samyakcharitra, are called Tirtha. Those who practice this Tirtha are called Satpurusha, and their righteous conduct, which destroys sins, is called their actions or deeds.

40. **O Shrenik, you have included the entire meaning of the Puranas in your question.**

**O Shrenik, your question, though simple, is profound and filled with all truths, and is a battleground for Kshetra and Kshetrajna (the knower of the field, the soul).** 

Page #123:
---------------------------
This is the second chapter. At the beginning of the Yuga, Bharat Chakravarti asked this question to Bhagwan Adinath. Then, Chakravarti Sagar asked the same question to Bhagwan Ajitnath. Today, you have also asked this question to the very intelligent Gautam Ganadhar. Thus, you have adorned the true tradition of the speaker and the listener, which has been going on for a long time.

O Shrenik, you are the questioner, Bhagwan Mahavir Swami is the answerer, and we all are listening with you. O King, such material has never been found before and will never be found again. Therefore, let these Gautam Swamis, who possess complete Shruta-knowledge, begin to tell this auspicious story, and we all listen with you.

Thus, all those Rishijan Maharaj Shrenik, encouraged in Dharma, with a focused mind, began to read the following hymn of Ganadhar Swami in a loud voice.

O Swami, even though the great Munis, who are the holders of direct knowledge, could not know your greatness through their knowledge, yet we are eager to praise you through direct hymns, so this is a matter of wonder.

O Rishi, you are the one who has crossed the ocean of fourteen Mahavidyas (fourteen Purvas). Therefore, we, motivated only by devotion, want to praise you.

O Bhagwan, you are the one who leads the Bhavyas to the attainment of the place of liberation. Your bright fame, like the moon, is shining like a fluttering flag.

O Dev, your fame, which has made the surrounding ocean its garden, is now attacking the top of the Sanad tree, wanting to climb it.

O Nath, even the great Munis believe that you are the Mahayogin among Yogis, famous, the holder of countless virtues, and the head of the Sangha - Ganadhar.

1. Questioner. 2. Rishis. 3. Four Vedas, Shiksha Kalpa, Vyakaran, Chhandovi Chitti, Jyotish, Nirukta, Itihas, Purana, Mimamsa, Nyaya Shastra, etc. are the fourteen Mahavidya sthans or fourteen Purvas or fourteen Mahavidya sthans. 4. Not mentioned. 5. Of the Sangha. 6. The mine of liberation. 7. Alavall: Aavapa. 

Page #124:
---------------------------
## English Translation:

34
The Adi Purana states, "Gautama is said to be the one who possesses the excellent speech, and that excellent speech can only be the divine sound of the omniscient Tirthankara. You know it or study it, therefore you are considered Gautama. This name is meaningful for you." (Excellent cow, Gautama, he studies that speech, Gautama, 'tad adhite veda va' - this is the suffix 'ana'.) ||52||

Or, understand it this way: Lord Vardhaman Swami, the 16th Tirthankara, descended from the highest heaven, therefore he is called Gautama. You read and know the divine sound spoken by this Gautama, i.e., Vardhaman Swami, therefore people call you Gautama. (Gautama came from there, Gautama, 'tat agata' - this is the suffix 'ana', spoken by Gautama, therefore Gautama, he studies Gautama's speech, therefore Gautama.) ||53||

You have attained the glory in the form of worship by Indra, therefore you are called Indra-bhuthi. You have also attained the ornament of the neck in the form of right knowledge, therefore you are like the son of the omniscient Lord Vardhaman Swami. ||54||

O Dev, you have known the entire world through your four pure knowledges, and you have attained the peak of wisdom, therefore wise people call you Buddha. ||55||

O Dev, it is very difficult to attain the excellent light of omniscience, which is beyond the darkness of ignorance, without seeing it. You are the unique lamp of light, because you are the light of that light. ||56||

O Swami, your omniscience, in the form of a lamp, which is taken by the Shruta Devata in the form of a woman, is illuminating the house of the world and is shining brightly. ||57||

The group of your divine words destroys the darkness of falsehood in people, and illuminates the right path like a group of rays of the sun. ||58||

O Dev, your wisdom is the highest in the world, it is proficient in all knowledge, and it is capable of being a ship in the ocean of the twelve angas - i.e., it serves the purpose of a ship. ||59||

O Dev, you have brought down the Shruta-knowledge, in the form of the Ganga river, from the very high Vardhaman Swami, in the form of the Himalayas. This river is itself pure and washes away all the dirt of sins. ||60||

O Dev, there is only one omniscience in the Kevali Bhagwan, and you have two types of knowledge, in the form of direct and indirect, therefore you are Shruta-Kevali.

1. Speech. 'Cow, man, bull, heaven, fragment, Hima, sun, woman, cow, earth, direction, eye, speech, arrow, water, in three.' This is the world. 2. - Madhoste M, L. 3. Tirthankara. 4. Jina A, S, D, 10. 5. Beyond darkness. 6. Omniscience. It is difficult to attain, this is the connection. 7. Knows S. 8. Related to women. 9. Spread M, L. 

Page #125:
---------------------------
Second chapter, we are eager to enter the supreme abode, the abode of liberation. We seek the cause of opening its door by worshipping you, the seed. ||3|| You know all the knowledge spoken by the omniscient Brahma, therefore you are called Brahma's son, O Muni. The knowers of Brahma say that the attainment of the supreme Brahma is dependent on you. ||63|| O Muni, the Digambara monks, desiring to attain liberation, bow their heads to you and worship the means of liberation - right faith, right knowledge, and right conduct. ||64|| O Mahayogin, salutations to you, O Mahaprajna, salutations to you. Salutations to you, O Mahatman, salutations to you, O Maharddhaya. ||65|| Salutations to you, O Avadhijush, salutations to you, O Deshavadhish. Salutations to you, O Paramavadhi, salutations to you, O Sarvavadhish. ||66|| Salutations to you, O Kosthabuddhi, salutations to you, O Bojabuddhi. Salutations to you, O Padanusari, salutations to you, O Sambhinna Shrota. ||67|| 

Page #126:
---------------------------
36
Adipurana
Salutations to you, the one with the straight path, salutations to you, the one with the vast mind. Salutations to the one who is a Pratyekabuddha, salutations to the one who is a Swayambuddha. || 68 || Salutations to you, the one who has attained worship due to the ten perfections. Salutations to you, the one who is the guide of all the previous knowledge. || 69 || Salutations to you, the one who performs severe austerities like Pakshopavasa, Masopavasa, etc. Salutations to you, the one who is a great ascetic, the one who is a fierce celibate, the one who is full of fierce energy. || 70 || Salutations to you, the one who has attained the eight Siddhis of Vikriya, namely: Anima, Mahima, Garima, Laghima, Prapti, Prakamya, Ishitva, and Vashitva. Salutations to you, the one who is adorned with the Siddhis of Amarsha, Kshvela, Vagviprut, Jalla, and Sarvoṣadhi. || 71 || Salutations to you, the one who possesses the Amritasravinī, Madhusravinī, Kshirasravinī, and Ghritasravinī, etc. Salutations to you, the one who is strong in mind, speech, and body. || 72 ||
"
Ho || 67 || You are both a Rujumati and a Vipulamati, therefore, salutations to you. You are a Pratyekabuddha, therefore, salutations to you. You are a Swayambuddha, therefore, salutations to you. || 68 || O Lord, you have attained worship in the world due to the completion of the ten perfections, therefore, salutations to you. Moreover, you are the guide of all the previous knowledge, therefore, salutations to you. || 69 || O Lord, you perform severe austerities like Pakshopavasa, Masopavasa, etc. You perform severe austerities for a long time by applying yoga like Atapa, etc. You are full of many virtues, you follow the path of unbroken celibacy, and you are very radiant, therefore, salutations to you. || 70 || O God, you have attained the eight Siddhis of Vikriya, namely: Anima, Mahima, Garima, Laghima, Prapti, Prakamya, Ishitva, and Vashitva. (1) You can make your body as subtle as an atom. (2) You can make your body as large as Mount Meru. (3) You can make your body very heavy. (4) You can make your body light. (5) You can touch the peak of Mount Meru while sitting on the ground, or you can make the seats of the gods tremble. (6) You can go anywhere in the three islands, or you can walk on water as if it were land, and on land as if it were water. (7) You can attain the power of a Chakravarti. (8) You can subdue even your enemies. Therefore, salutations to you. Moreover, O God, you are adorned with the Siddhis of Amarsha, Kshvela, Vagviprut, Jalla, and Sarvoṣadhi. (1) The air of your vomit can destroy all diseases. (2) The air that flows by touching the phlegm that comes out of your mouth can cure all diseases. (3) The air that comes out of your mouth can destroy all diseases. (4) The air that flows by touching your excrement can cure all diseases. (
Page #127:
---------------------------
## English Translation:

**37**

**73.**  O Lord, you are the embodiment of all the *charanas* (powers of movement): *jalacharana*, *janghacharana*, *phalacharana*, *shrenicharana*, *tantucharana*, *pushpacharana*, and *ambaracharana*. This means: (1) You can walk on water as easily as on land, and no aquatic creatures are harmed by your presence. (2) You can traverse the sky without taking a step. (3) You can walk on fruits without causing them to fall from the tree. (4) You can travel in a straight line through the sky, even over mountains. (5) You can walk on threads of yarn or spiderwebs without breaking them. (6) You can walk on flowers without crushing them or harming the creatures that live there. (7) And you can move freely through the sky. Therefore, we offer you our salutations. O Master, you are the holder of inexhaustible wealth. Even if you eat in a small dining hall, the food will never run out, even if you feed the entire Chakravarti's army. And even if you give a sermon in a small space, it will be spacious enough for all humans and gods. Therefore, we offer you our salutations.

**74.** O Lord, you are the ultimate benefactor in this world, the supreme guru. Those who serve you attain the wealth of knowledge.

**75.** O Lord, you have described all the scriptures of this world. Therefore, great yogis offer you their salutations.

**76.** O Lord, we believe that liberation is attained through you. We take refuge in the shade of your feet, and we worship you with faith.

**77.** O Lord, even though speaking your praise may harm our *vaggupta* (control over speech), remembering you may harm our *manogupta* (control over mind), and bowing to you may harm our *kayagupta* (control over body), we do not care. We will always praise you, remember you, and bow to you.

**78.** O Lord, we have praised you as described above. As a result, we request you to tell us the story of the sixty-three *shalaka purushas* (liberated souls). This is our prayer.

**79.** O Lord, we hope to receive the appropriate Dharma from listening to the Puranas, and we look forward to the Puranas in the form of poetry.

**Note:** The terms *charana*, *jalacharana*, *janghacharana*, *phalacharana*, *shrenicharana*, *tantucharana*, *pushpacharana*, *ambaracharana*, *vaggupta*, *manogupta*, *kayagupta*, *shalaka purushas* are all Jain terms. 

Page #128:
---------------------------
The merit we have earned by worshipping your feet, O Lord, may we attain that great wealth of yours. ||40||  O Lord, may our prayer be successful by your grace.  Please grace us today along with the king-sage Shrenik and all the listeners. ||8||  Thus, when the sages chanted the hymns in a loud voice, a great and auspicious commotion arose in the assembly of sages. ||42||  Thus, when the great sages praised the Lord of the assembly, he was pleased.  For, yogis are indeed subdued by devotion. ||83||  Having praised the Lord of the assembly with great peace and solemnity, Gautama focused his mind on his grace. ||44||  Then, when the commotion arising from the praise had subsided, and the assembly of virtuous men, with folded hands, were attentively listening, the Lord Gautama, addressing the listeners, spoke in a voice that was both solemn, pleasing, and full of profound meaning.  At that time, the radiant rays emanating from his teeth seemed to manifest the goddess Saraswati, who is completely free from all defects related to speech.  At that time, the Lord of the assembly appeared as if he were showing the assembly of sages, who desired to acquire the precious jewels of good sayings, a collection of those jewels, purchased with the price of devotion.  At that time, he was scattering the flowers of the rays of his teeth throughout the assembly, as if he were preparing the stage for the entry of Saraswati.  As if to distribute the joy of the mind, the Lord Gautama, with his pure and joyful gaze, which extended everywhere, seemed to be cleansing the entire assembly.  Although he was seated on the seat obtained by the power of his austerities, he appeared as if he were seated above all the worlds, by virtue of his great glory.  At that time, he did not want to cause too much trouble to Saraswati, nor did he want to make his senses too active. 

Page #129:
---------------------------
The second chapter, as if not wanting to trouble Saraswati, was not excessive.  He intensified the pulsation of his organs, his beauty of face remaining unchanged. ||11||  Nor did he, while toiling, slip, nor did he, while toiling, slip, nor did he, while toiling, slip, nor did he, while toiling, slip, nor did he, while toiling, slip, nor did he, while toiling, slip, nor did he, while toiling, slip, nor did he, while toiling, slip, nor did he, while toiling, slip, nor did he, while toiling, slip, nor did he, while toiling, slip, nor did he, while toiling, slip, nor did he, while toiling, slip, nor did he, while toiling, slip, nor did he, while toiling, slip, nor did he, while toiling, slip, nor did he, while toiling, slip, nor did he, while toiling, slip, nor did he, while toiling, slip, nor did he, while toiling, slip, nor did he, while toiling, slip, nor did he, while toiling, slip, nor did he, while toiling, slip, nor did he, while toiling, slip, nor did he, while toiling, slip, nor did he, while toiling, slip, nor did he, while toiling, slip, nor did he, while toiling, slip, nor did he, while toiling, slip, nor did he, while toiling, slip, nor did he, while toiling, slip, nor did he, while toiling, slip, nor did he, while toiling, slip, nor did he, while toiling, slip, nor did he, while toiling, slip, nor did he, while toiling, slip, nor did he, while toiling, slip, nor did he, while toiling, slip, nor did he, while toiling, slip, nor did he, while toiling, slip, nor did he, while toiling, slip, nor did he, while toiling, slip, nor did he, while toiling, slip, nor did he, while toiling, slip, nor did he, while toiling, slip, nor did he, while toiling, slip, nor did he, while toiling, slip, nor did he, while toiling, slip, nor did he, while toiling, slip, nor did he, while toiling, slip, nor did he, while toiling, slip, nor did he, while toiling, slip, nor did he, while toiling, slip, nor did he, while toiling, slip, nor did he, while toiling, slip, nor did he, while toiling, slip, nor did he, while toiling, slip, nor did he, while toiling, slip, nor did he, while toiling, slip, nor did he, while toiling, slip, nor did he, while toiling, slip, nor did he, while toiling, slip, nor did he, while toiling, slip, nor did he, while toiling, slip, nor did he, while toiling, slip, nor did he, while toiling, slip, nor did he, while toiling, slip, nor did he, while toiling, slip, nor did he, while toiling, slip, nor did he, while toiling, slip, nor did he, while toiling, slip, nor did he, while toiling, slip, nor did he, while toiling, slip, nor did he, while toiling, slip, nor did he, while toiling, slip, nor did he, while toiling, slip, nor
Page #130:
---------------------------
This Purana begins with an explanation of its structure, which is essential for understanding its content. This structure is called "Upkrama" and has another name, "Upodhata." 

There are five aspects to this Upkrama: 

1. Anupurvi
2. Nama
3. Pramana
4. Abhidheya
5. Arthaadhikāra

If we consider the four Mahaadhikāras in their natural order, then the first Anuyoga is the first Anuyoga. However, if we consider them in reverse order, then the same first Anuyoga becomes the last Anuyoga. Depending on the order of counting, it can be considered the second, third, or any other number.

The name of the text is considered the "Nama Upkrama." This first Anuyoga is the first of the four Anuyogas in the Shruta Skandha, making its name "Prathama Anuyoga" meaningful.

To address the concerns of listeners who might be intimidated by the vastness of this text, I will now explain its "Pramana" (extent). This Pramana will be explained in terms of both the number of words and the meaning.

While this text is immeasurable in terms of its meaning, it is measurable in terms of its words. How can a part of it be immeasurable when the whole text is measurable?

According to the count of 32-letter Anushtup shlokas, this text contains two lakh crore, fifty-five thousand crore, four hundred forty-two crore, and thirty-one lakh seven thousand five hundred (2554423107500) shlokas.

Having established the extent of the text, we will now describe the number of words in it. The number of words in this text is considered to be five thousand, and there are sixteen hundred thirty-four crore eighty-three lakh seven thousand eight hundred eighty-eight (16348307888) letters in a single "Madhyama Pada." This Madhyama Pada is used to describe the number of texts in the eleven Angas and fourteen Purvas. 

Page #131:
---------------------------
## Second Chapter

**41. The standard mentioned above is of the nature of *dravya-śruta*, not *bhāva-śruta*. It is *śruta-jñāna* in relation to *bhāva*, which is true, free from contradiction, and enunciated by the *kevali*.** ||114||

**The entire *dvādaśāṅga* is the subject matter of this *purāṇa*, for there is no object or word outside it.** ||115||

**Just as the origin of precious gems is from the ocean, so is the origin of gems of good sayings from this *purāṇa*.** ||116||

**This *purāṇa* will describe the wealth of the *tīrthankaras*, *cakravartīs*, *indra*, *bala-bhadras*, and *nārāyaṇas*, as well as the prosperity of the *munis* along with their causes.** ||117||

**Similarly, the worldly being, the liberated being, bondage, liberation, the causes of both, the six *dravya*, and the nine *padārtha* are all the essence of this text, i.e., all of this will be described in it.** ||118||

**This *purāṇa* will describe the creation of the three worlds, the collection of the three times, the origin and destruction of the universe.** ||119||

**The path, which is *samyak-darśana*, *samyak-jñāna*, and *samyak-cāritra*, its fruit, which is liberation, and the *puruṣārtha* of *dharma*, *artha*, and *kāma*, all of which are extensive, are the subject matter of this text, i.e., they will be stated in it.** ||120||

**What is the point of saying more? Whatever is the creation of unhindered *dharma*, all of that is the subject matter of this text.** ||121||

**What is difficult to find elsewhere, even after a long time, is easily available in this *purāṇa* at every step.** ||122||

**Whatever is established as good in this text is good elsewhere, and whatever is established as bad in this text is bad everywhere. Meaning: This text is like a touchstone for testing the goodness and badness of things.** ||123||

**Thus, this great *purāṇa* is going to expound very weighty subjects. Now, the number of its *artha-adhikāras* is being stated.** ||124||

**This text will describe sixty-three great persons, therefore, the sages have stated sixty-three *adhikāras* in it, according to that number.** ||125||

**This *purāṇa-skandha* has sixty-three *adhikāras*.**

**1. *Śruta-jñāna* (name). 2. *Abhidheya*. 3. *Artha*. 4. -*mihocyate* (D, 50, S, M, L). 5. *Ratnatraya-ātmaka*. 6. *Abādhita*. 7. *Vicāra-kṣama*. 8. -*ttā-adhigamo* (A, D). 

Page #132:
---------------------------
The *Adipurana* is a collection of the *Tirthankara Puranas*, and some say that it also includes the *Chakravarti Puranas*, making a total of twenty-four *Puranas*. 

The first *Purana* is of Rishabhanatha, the second of Ajitanatha, the third of Sambhavanatha, the fourth of Abhinandanatha, the fifth of Sumatinatha, the sixth of Padmini, the seventh of Suparshvanatha, the eighth of Chandra Prabha, the ninth of Pushpadanta, the tenth of Shitalanatha, the eleventh of Shreyansanatha, the twelfth of Vasupujya, the thirteenth of Vimalanatha, the fourteenth of Anantanatha, the fifteenth of Dharmanatha, the sixteenth of Shantinatha, the seventeenth of Kunthunatha, the eighteenth of Aranatha, the nineteenth of Mallinatha, the twentieth of Munisuvrata, the twenty-first of Naminatha, the twenty-second of Neminatha, the twenty-third of Parsvanatha, and the twenty-fourth of Sanmati-Mahavira Swami.

This collection of twenty-four *Puranas* of the twenty-four *Tirthankaras* is called the *Mahapuraṇa*.

The *Mahapuraṇa* that I have described will be very short in the last part of this *Avasarpini* era.

Because of the faults of the fifth *Kala* called *Dushsama*, the intellect of humans will decrease, and as the intellect decreases, the size of the *Purana* will also decrease.

This should be understood clearly: After us, the *Shruta Kevali* Sudharma Acharya, who is like us, will fully reveal this *Mahapuraṇa*.

From him, Shri Jambuswami will hear this entire *Purana*, and he, being the last *Kevali*, will fully reveal it in this world.

At this time, I, Sudharma Acharya, and Jambuswami, all three of us are *Shruta Kevali*, possessing complete *Shruta* knowledge. We three will attain *Kevalgyan* and become liberated in due course.

The time of our liberation, we three *Kevalis*, will be sixty-two years after the liberation of Bhagavan Vardhamana Swami. 

Page #133:
---------------------------
The second chapter, then, in order, will be Vishnu, Nandimitra, Aparajita, Govardhana, and Bhadrabahu, wise Acharyas. These Acharyas will be proficient in the fourteen Mahavidya-sthana and will illuminate the Purana completely for a hundred autumns. 

Then, in order, will be Visakha, Prosthila, Kshatriya, Jaya, Nagasena, Siddhartha, Prati-sena, Vijaya, Buddhiman, Ganadva, and Dharma-sena. These eleven Acharyas will be the holders of the eleven Angas and the ten Purvarupa. Their time will be 183 years. Until then, this Purana will be fully illuminated.

After them, in order, will be Nakshatra, Jayapala, Pandu, Dhruvasena, and Kansa-acharya. These five great ascetics will be the holders of the eleven Angas. Their time is considered to be 220 years. At that time, this Purana will be illuminated in three-fourths of its form. Then, due to the lack of worthy recipients, this Purana, spoken by the Lord, will surely diminish.

After them, will be Subhadra, Yasho-bhadra, Bhadra-bahu, and Loha-acharya. These four Acharyas will be the holders of great fame and will be proficient in the first Anga (Achara-anga), like the ocean. Their time will be eighteen years. At that time, only one-fourth of this Purana will remain in circulation.

After that, that is, 683 years after the liberation of Vardhamana Swami, this Purana will gradually diminish. At that time, the intellect of people will also diminish, so only rare Acharyas will be able to hold it in a reduced form.

Thus, this Purana will be illuminated by the lineage of Gurus, who are endowed with knowledge and wisdom, in whatever measure and whenever it is illuminated. To remember this, great, wise, and revered poets like Jinasena will be born.

This Purana is the first one, spoken by Swayambhuva. They say that other Puranas are merely verbal embellishments. 

Page #134:
---------------------------
## Chapter 44:

**The Adi Purana**

Even the mere mention of the names of the Tirthankaras purifies the soul. What then to speak of the nectar of their stories, heard again and again? (155)

Therefore, this great Purana, filled with the jewels of merit, should be immersed in by the devout, again and again. (156)

Now, this Purana will be described in order. The learned know the summary of this Purana as follows: (157)

The establishment, the origin of the Kulakaras, the lineage, the kingdom, the Arhathood, the Nirvana, and the end of the Yuga, these are the main topics of the Purana of Lord Rishabhadeva. (158)

Other topics in other Puranas will be mentioned as the occasion arises. (159)

This is the introduction to the story, as desired. Now, I will speak of the Kalavtaras and the state of the Kulakaras. (160)

**Malini Chhandas**

The assembly of munis, filled with devotion, humbly requested the wise Gautama to narrate the Purana. The king of Magadha, Narma, was attentive, and the wise, having heard the words, understood the meaning. (161)

**Sardula Vikridita**

This Purana, which is pure and meritorious, was spoken by the Lord Rishabhadeva, the Jina, in the Kalpa, to the Chakravarti Bharat. (162)

This holy water of the Purana, which is the greatest pilgrimage, will wash away all your sins, which are like mud, and give you supreme purity. (162)

Thus ends the second chapter of the Trishattilakshana Mahapurana, composed by the Acharya Bhagavan Jinaseana, known as "Kathamukhavarnana". (2)

**Notes:**

1. श्रद्धानयुक्तः - Devout
2. पुण्यसंरत्न - Jewels of merit
3. कारिकां - Summary
4. उत्पत्तिः - Origin
5. विच्छिदा - End
6. एषोऽस्याः - This is the
7. स्थिति - State
8. अमा सह - With the king
9. अवज्ञां कुर्यात् - Would disrespect
10. तथाहि - Indeed
11. परम्परागतम् - Received through tradition 

Page #135:
---------------------------
## Third Chapter

Saluting the ancient sage, Vrishabhanatha, the invincible, the Jina, I will explain the introduction of this great Purana.

1. Time is considered to be without beginning and end, its characteristic being change. It is the measure of the universe, being as subtle as the smallest atom.

2. Though countless, it is capable of bringing about the transformation of an infinite number of substances, thus becoming infinite itself.

3. Just as the nail fixed beneath the potter's wheel is the cause of its rotation, so too is time the cause of the transformation of substances.

4. Even though substances change on their own, time is the facilitator of their transformation. Each substance undergoes its own transformation according to its inherent qualities, and there is no merging of one into another.

5. Some people believe that time does not exist in the five basic substances (jiva, pudgala, dharma, adharma, and akasha) because it is not found in them. However, this is incorrect because time is found in the six substances, and its existence is also supported by logic.

6. The existence of time is evident in the world through the use of terms like "hour," "minute," etc. These are merely transformations, and every transformation must have a basis. Without a basis, there can be no transformation. Therefore, the basis of the time we experience in our daily lives is time itself. 

Page #136:
---------------------------
.46
Adipurana
"Time is considered to be a primary substance in practical usage. Just as a lion is not considered a lion without the primary lion, similarly, time cannot be considered time without the primary time, such as a clock or a bell. However, it is definitely present, so the existence of time as a substance must be accepted. 5-7"
Although it lacks multiple regions, it is not considered an astikaya. However, it has many qualities like heavy, light, etc., and many synonyms in the form of their modifications. Because it is a substance, every substance has a group of qualities and synonyms. The relationship of substance with qualities and synonyms is not the same as with multiple regions. Therefore, even in the absence of multiple regions, time can be considered a substance, and in this way, the existence of a separate substance called time is proven. 8"
It is proven that time is not an astikaya by calling jiva, pudgala, dharma, adharma, and akasha as astikayas. Because the meaning of an adjective can only be proven in the presence of its opposite. Just as calling the conscious soul jiva in the six substances proves the other five substances, pudgala, etc., to be non-jiva, similarly, calling jiva, etc., astikaya proves time to be anastikaya. 9"
Besides this primary time, there is the practical time, such as a clock or a bell. It is important to remember that practical time is not completely independent of primary time. It is born from it and is its synonym. It is small, it is big, etc., these things are clearly known from practical time. This is what the omniscient God has described. 10"
This practical time is activated by the definite time substance, which is the characteristic of existence, and it exists in the form of past, future, and present, and is capable of running the affairs of the world, or is imagined. 11"
This practical time is of many types, such as time, avali, ucchvasa, nadi, etc. Wise people know that this practical time is revealed by the rotation of the sun and other celestial bodies. 12"
If the time of the existence of bhava, ayu, kaya, and body, etc., is added, it becomes infinite time, and its transformation also happens in infinite ways. 13"
1. By nature. 2. Heavy, light qualities. 3. Jiva astikaya. 4. Dependence. 5. By primary time. 6. Imagined. 7. You, body, existence, etc. 8. Conceptual. 9. Infinite. 10. Armor, measure. "Armor, body measure" - Amarakosha. 

Page #137:
---------------------------
## The Third Chapter

The duration of a *kotikovy* (a unit of time) is ten *sagar* (oceans). The duration of the remaining *kotikovy* is also the same. Thus, a *kalpa* (eon) is considered to be twenty *kotikovy*. (15)

O King, each of these *utsarpini* (ascending) and *avsarpi* (descending) periods has six divisions. Listen to their names in order. (16)

The six divisions of the *avsarpi* period are: 
1. *Susamasushama*
2. *Sushama*
3. *Sushamadushma*
4. *Dushmasushama*
5. *Dushma*
6. *Atiduhsma* or *Dushmadushma*

These are the divisions of the *avsarpi* period that should be known. The *utsarpini* period also has six divisions, which are the opposite of these, such as:
1. *Dushmadushma*
2. *Dushma*
3. *Dushmasushama*
4. *Sushamadushma*
5. *Sushama*
6. *Susamasushama* (17-18)

The division of *sama* (time) is called *sama*. The prefixes *su* and *dur* denote good and bad respectively. By combining *su* and *dur* separately with *sama* and applying the grammatical rule of changing *s* to *sh*, we get the words *sushama* and *dushma*, which mean good time and bad time respectively. Thus, all six divisions of the *utsarpini* and *avsarpi* periods have meaningful names. (19)

Similarly, the *utsarpini* and *avsarpi* periods, along with their sub-divisions, also have meaningful names. Because the period in which there is an increase in *sthiti* (state) etc. is called *utsarpini*, and the period in which there is a decrease is called *avsarpi*. (20)

These two periods, called *utsarpini* and *avsarpi*, revolve along with their six divisions, like the *krishnapaksha* (dark fortnight) and *shuklapaksha* (bright fortnight) of the lunar month, due to the rotation of the *kalachakra* (time cycle). Just as the *shuklapaksha* follows the *krishnapaksha* and the *krishnapaksha* follows the *shuklapaksha*, similarly, the *utsarpini* follows the *avsarpi* and the *avsarpi* follows the *utsarpini*. (21)

Previously, in this *bharatkshetra* (land of Bharat), the first division of the *avsarpi* period, called *susamasushama*, was passing. The duration of that period was four *kotikovy* *sagar*. At that time, the arrangement was as follows: (22-23)

The state in the northern regions of *devakuru* and *uttarakuru* is the same as the state in this *bharatkshetra* at the beginning of a *yuga* (epoch). (24) 

Page #138:
---------------------------
48
In the Adipurana, it is stated that in the beginning of the time cycle (Avasarpini), the lifespan of humans was equivalent to three *palyas* (a unit of time). Their height was six thousand *dhanus* (a unit of length). ||25|| The people of that time had bone structures as strong as diamonds, they were gentle and beautiful in form. Their bodies shone like polished gold. ||26|| They always adorned themselves with crowns, earrings, necklaces, waistbands, bracelets, armlets, and the sacred thread (Brahmasutra). ||27|| These people, blessed with unparalleled beauty and other riches due to their accumulated merit, enjoyed themselves with their wives for a long time, like the gods in heaven. ||28|| They were all great beings, possessing immense fortitude, broad chests, and great strength. They were all highly respected, possessing great brilliance and noble qualities. ||29|| They felt the urge to eat every three days and consumed divine food, *kuvali* fruits, obtained from the wish-fulfilling trees. ||30|| They were free from exertion, disease, bodily waste, distress, and sweat. They lived a long life, free from any troubles. ||31|| The women of that time also had the same lifespan and height. They were as radiant as the wish-fulfilling vines growing on the wish-fulfilling trees, and they were devoted to their husbands. ||32|| The women were devoted to their husbands, and the husbands were devoted to their wives. They enjoyed all the pleasures of life together, without any conflict, for their entire lives. ||33|| Their beauty was natural, their speech was naturally sweet, and their actions were naturally graceful, like those of the celestial beings. ||34|| All their material comforts, such as delicious food, beautiful homes, musical instruments, garlands, ornaments, and clothes, were obtained from the wish-fulfilling trees. ||35|| 

Page #139:
---------------------------
## The Third Chapter

The leaves of the Kalpa trees, which are always shining, are moved by a gentle, fragrant breeze.  [36]  These Kalpa trees, nourished by the strength of the land, born from the experience of time, are capable of fulfilling the desires of the beings there. [37]  Because they grant the desires of the virtuous, these Kalpa trees are called Kalpa trees by the wise. [38]  There are ten types of Kalpa trees: Madyaanga, Turyanga, Vibhushananga, Sraganga (Malyanga), Jyotiranga, Dipaanga, Grihaanga, Bhojananga, Patraanga, and Banaanga. They perform their functions according to their names, so they are only mentioned by name; there is no need for further elaboration. [39-40]  Thus, the people there enjoy the fruits of their past good deeds for a long time, and at the end of their lives, they dissolve like the clouds of autumn. [41]  At the end of their lives, they experience a yawn or a sneeze, and then, leaving their bodies, they ascend to heaven. [42]  Because they are naturally gentle and virtuous, these blessed beings go to heaven; there is no other destination for them. [43]  This is a description of the first period of the Avasarpini called Sushama-Sushama. The rest of the rules should be understood as being similar to those of Uttarakuru. [44]  Then, as time progresses, the first period ends, and the strength of the Kalpa trees, the lifespan of the beings, their height, and other things begin to decline. Then, the second period called Sushama begins. Its measure is three Koti-Kodi oceans. [45-46]  During that time, in this Bharatavarsha, the state of medium enjoyment prevails, with the Kalpa trees spreading great prosperity. [47]  At that time, the people here were radiant like the gods, their lifespan was two Palyas. 

Page #140:
---------------------------
50
They, whose bodies shone with a brilliance that rivaled the radiance of the moon, consumed food equivalent to a *bārbha* (a type of fruit) in two days, a measure equal to an *akṣamātra* (a unit of measurement). ||19|| The remaining rules were as perfect as those of *Hari-kṣetra* (a mythical land of perfect virtue). Then, in due course, as the second *kalpa* (eon) came to an end, ||50|| the strength of the trees and other things gradually declined, and the boundaries of the *jighanya-bhoga-bhūmi* (a land of inferior pleasures) became apparent. ||51|| At that time, the third *kalpa* named *suṣamā-duṣṣamā* (a period of prosperity and adversity) began, like a righteous king, without transgressing its boundaries. ||52|| Its extent was like two *koṭi* (a unit of measurement) of oceans. In that *kalpa*, the lifespan of humans in this *Bharata-varṣa* (India) was equal to one *palyā* (a unit of time). Their bodies were one *krośa* (a unit of distance) tall, they were dark like *priyaṅgu* (a type of fruit), and they ate food equivalent to an *āmala* (a type of fruit) every other day. ||53-54|| As the third *kalpa* passed, when only one-eighth of a *palyā* remained, the strength of the *kalpa-vṛkṣa* (mythical trees of abundance) declined, and the *jyoti-raṅga* (a type of tree) became dim. ||55-56|| Then, on the full moon day of the month of *Āṣāḍha* (July-August), in the evening, the bright moon rose in the east and the setting sun appeared in the west. ||57|| At that time, the sun and moon shone brightly, as if they were two golden ships in the ocean of the sky, or two *tilaka* (marks) made of vermilion near the temple of the elephant of the sky, or two beautiful balls of lac placed in the hands of the woman representing the full moon, or two golden pots placed at the grand entrance of the house of the world, for the entry of the new king, the *kalpa* named *duṣṣamā-suṣamā*, or like foam in the form of stars. 

Page #141:
---------------------------
The third chapter is like two beautiful golden water-play houses in the middle of the ocean of the sky, filled with crocodiles in the form of hours. Or, because of their virtuous circularity (always virtuous) and their singularity (without possessions), they are imitating the group of the virtuous. Or, because of their coolness (taking a small tax) and their intensity (taking a large tax), they are imitating the just and unjust kings respectively. 

The first family head, known as "Promise," was present there. He was the most radiant and shone like the eyes of the people, meaning he showed the people the path of benefit. 

The Jinadeva has said that his lifespan was one-tenth of a "paly" and his height was one thousand eight hundred "dhanus." 

His head was adorned with a shining crown, his ears were adorned with golden earrings, and he himself was as tall as Mount Meru, so the necklace of jewels on his chest seemed like a waterfall. His elevated and excellent body was extremely radiant with the brilliance of various ornaments. He had even scorned the sun with his increasing brilliance. He was very tall, so he seemed like a measuring rod erected to measure the height of the house of the world. Besides this, he possessed the knowledge of the past lives gained from the practice of past lives, so he was considered the most intelligent among all. 

He repeatedly washed the directions with the water of the rays of his shining teeth. When he spoke words that satisfied the people, it seemed as if he was revealing the nectar. 

Seeing the sun and the moon, which had never been seen before, the terrified beings of the earth were made fearless by him, saying, "This is their form." 

He said, "O virtuous men, these that you see are the planets called the sun and the moon. They are the holders of great brilliance and always roam in the sky. Until now, their light was hidden by the light of the Kalpa trees of the Jyotiranga race, so they were not visible. But now, because of the fault of time, 

Page #142:
---------------------------
52
Adipurana
Thus, upon hearing those words, they were greatly reassured. [‘I am present in this field and beyond, and I will guide future generations.’] || 72 || The wise Yaksha, Pratiśruti, responded with these words. Pleased with his words, they praised him by that name. || 73 || Oh, wise and great one, long-lived one, be pleased with us. You have provided us with a vessel for our journey, a way to cross this ocean of suffering. || 74 || Thus, praising him and honoring him again and again, those Aryas, having received his instructions, went to their respective homes with their wives. || 75 || In time, Pratiśruti ascended to heaven, and as time passed, countless millions of years of the Manvantara (the period between the birth of one Kalpa and the next) elapsed. || 76 || Then, a second Kalpa named Sammati, with a mind full of wisdom, was born. His garments were resplendent, and he was very tall, appearing like a Kalpa tree as he walked. || 77 || His hair was beautiful, he wore a crown on his head, earrings in his ears, and his chest was adorned with a garland. All this made him very radiant. || 78 || His lifespan was immeasurable, lasting for a number of years equal to the product of twenty-eight and fifty-five zeros. His height was considered to be one thousand three hundred Dhanus. || 79 || During his time, the brilliance of the Jyotiranga trees had greatly diminished, and their light was fading, like a lamp about to go out. || 80 || One day, at the beginning of the night, when there was a little darkness, the stars filled the sky, the celestial courtyard, and shone brightly. || 81 || At that time, seeing the stars suddenly, the Bhogbhumi humans were confused and distressed. Fear shook them, as if they were about to be killed by a yogi. || 82 || 

Page #143:
---------------------------
The Third Chapter - 

The wise one, the embodiment of right understanding, addressed the Aryas, saying, "Fear not, this is no calamity. Do not be swayed by fear."  

These are stars, this is the constellation of stars, these are the planets, the sun, the moon, and others, that shine eternally, and this is the sky filled with stars. 

This celestial sphere, this cosmic wheel, eternally resides in the path of the sky. It was previously hidden by the light of the Jyotiranga trees, but now their light has diminished, making it visible. 

From this day forward, the cycle of day and night will continue, with the rising and setting of the sun, moon, and stars. 

The wise one, the best among the learned, explained the causes of eclipses, planetary movements, the change of seasons, and the transition of days, revealing the seeds of the science of astrology. 

Hearing his words, the Aryas were immediately relieved of their fear. Indeed, he was a supreme light, a benefactor of the people, a true embodiment of right understanding. 

"May this right understanding be our master, the giver of right understanding," they said, praising and honoring him, and then they returned to their respective places. 

After an immeasurable number of koti years, the third Manu, Kshemankara, appeared in this Bharat Kshetra. 

His arms were as long as a yuga, his body tall, his chest broad, his radiance bright, and his head adorned with a crown. He was more magnificent than Mount Meru. 

The lifespan of this mighty Manu was immeasurable, and his height was eight hundred dhanus. 

In the past, animals like lions and tigers were benevolent and nurtured by the people. But in his time, they became corrupted, their mouths gaping, and their roars terrifying. 

Seeing this corruption and hearing their terrifying roars, the people were frightened and... 

Page #144:
---------------------------
The Adi Purana states: "These gentle deer, formerly, were very fond of sweet grasses and herbs. They were nourished by the juices of medicinal plants and the sweet waters of lakes. They were accustomed to being held in our laps and fed by our hands. We had great faith in them, and they lived with us without causing any trouble. But now, without any reason, they attack us with their horns, they want to tear us apart with their teeth and claws, and they appear very frightening. O great one, tell us what remedy we can use to protect ourselves. You are the protector of the world, and you always think about the welfare of all beings."

Hearing these words, Manu, filled with compassion, said, "What you say is true. These animals were indeed peaceful in the past, but now they have become terrifying. Therefore, you should avoid them. They have been corrupted by the influence of time, and you should not trust them anymore. If you ignore them, they will surely cause you harm."

Hearing these words, the people abandoned the company of the horned and toothed wicked animals, and they only lived with the harmless cows, buffaloes, and other animals.

As time passed, Manu's lifespan came to an end. After countless millions of years, another Manu, named Kshemandhara, appeared. He was the fourth Manu, a great being with a tall body, who controlled his vices and was a leader among the virtuous. His lifespan was measured in tutikas, and his height was seven hundred and seventy-five dhanus. During his time, when lions, tigers, and other wicked animals became extremely powerful and angry, he advised people to protect themselves using wooden clubs and other means. Because he taught people how to protect themselves from wicked creatures, he was known as Kshemandhara, the protector of the people. 

Page #145:
---------------------------
The third Manu, born from the merit of the people, was named **Sīmankara**. His body was adorned with beautiful clothes and garlands, and he enjoyed all the pleasures of heaven, just like Indra. Wise teachers say his lifespan was as long as a lotus flower, and his height was 750 bows. 

When the **Kalpa** trees became scarce and bore little fruit, disputes arose among the people. **Sīmankara** Manu, with his wisdom, established boundaries for the **Kalpa** trees, ensuring that each group of people had access to a specific tree. This arrangement earned him the name **Sīmankara**, which means "one who sets boundaries."

After an immeasurable number of years, the sixth Manu, **Sīmandhara**, was born. He was known for his pure mind and had a lifespan as long as a lotus flower. His face and eyes shone like a lotus, and his height was 725 bows. During his reign, the **Kalpa** trees became even more scarce, and the people fought fiercely, even pulling each other's hair. To restore peace, **Sīmandhara** Manu marked the boundaries of the **Kalpa** trees with other trees and shrubs.

Then, after countless years, the seventh Manu, **Vimala-vahana**, appeared. His body was embraced by the goddess of fortune, and his lifespan was as long as a lotus flower. 

Page #146:
---------------------------
12
Adipurana 'The order of riding on elephants, etc., was taught by them. 'With the use of a sword, goad, rope, and a whip. ' ||19|| Again, an immeasurable number of kotis of years passed. Then the eighth Manu, named Chakshusman, was born. ||120|| His lifespan was the measure of a Padmaanga, and he was six hundred and seventy-five Dhanus tall. ||121|| In his time, the Aryas, for the first time, saw the face of their child. This was a great cause for joy. ||122|| Then, immediately, the Aryas were filled with fear. Chakshusman, with his teachings, calmed their fear. ||123|| Because in his time, the parents could see their children for a moment, he was called Chakshusman. ||124|| Again, an immeasurable number of kotis of years passed, and the ninth Manu, named Yashasvan, was born. ||125|| His lifespan was the measure of a Kumudaanga, and he was six hundred and fifty Dhanus tall. ||126|| In his time, the people, after seeing the face of their children, would give them blessings and then depart to the other world. ||127|| Because of his teachings, the people gave blessings to their children. The people with good children were happy, and they praised him. Therefore, he was called Yashasvan. ||128|| After an immeasurable number of years, the tenth Manu, named Abhichandra, was born. ||129||
His lifespan was the measure of a Kumudaanga, and he was six hundred and twenty-five Dhanus tall. ||130|| 

Page #147:
---------------------------
## Third Chapter

The one who was like a Kalpavriksha, bearing fruits of great merit, and shining with a great light, adorned his body with various kinds of ornaments like flower buds. He was like a Kalpavriksha, bearing fruits of great merit, and shining with a great light, adorned his body with various kinds of ornaments like flower buds.  ||131||

Seeing their children, the people were filled with joy and played with them, showing them the moon at night. ||132||

At that time, the people, following the teachings of the previous Manu, stood before the moon and played with their children. Thus, he was known as Abhichandra. ||133||

After a long time, the eleventh Manu, Chandrabha, was born. His face was like the moon, and he was a knower of the movements of time. His lifespan was a Nayuta years. He was radiant with many auspicious signs. His body was six hundred Dhanus high, and he shone like the rising sun. ||134-135||

He was born with all the arts and knowledge, and was beloved by the people. His gentle smile brought joy to all. He was like the moon, shining with sixteen Kalas, and was popular among the people. ||136||

During his time, the people were very happy, and they lived with their children for some time. Then, they attained the other world with ease. He brought joy to all beings, like the moon, and thus he was known as Chandrabha. ||137-138||

After that, the twelfth Kulkar, Marudeva, was born. He was handsome and brought joy to the eyes of the people. His body was five hundred and seventy-five Dhanus high, and his lifespan was a Nayuta years. He shone like the sun, or perhaps he was a unique sun himself, because even though he was as bright as the sun, people could look at him without discomfort. Unlike the sun, which blinds people with its brilliance, he never set, and he was never defeated. ||139-140|| 

Page #148:
---------------------------
The Adipurana states that he was radiant, blissful, and free from attachments. Though he resided on earth, he illuminated the sky like the sun, and was extraordinary in his appearance.  During his time, people lived long lives with their families, finding joy in seeing his face and touching his body. They were dependent on him for their sustenance, and thus called him Marudeva. He taught people how to navigate water obstacles by using boats and how to climb mountains by building stairs. During his reign, many small mountains, seas, and rivers emerged, and unstable clouds, like fickle kings, rained intermittently.

As the time for the creation of the karma-bhoomi approached, the thirteenth Manu, the powerful Prasenajit, was born. His lifespan was the length of a kalpa, and his height was five hundred and fifty dhanus. He was like a third eye for his people, guiding them and free from the darkness of ignorance. He was radiant like the rising sun, attracting the Padma-Lakshmi with his hands, just as the sun brings joy to the lotus flowers.

During his time, children were born with a thin membrane of flesh covering their bodies. He taught his people how to remove this membrane, which is called the "jarayu-patala" or "prasena."  Because he taught people how to overcome this membrane, he is known as Prasenajit. 

Page #149:
---------------------------
The third chapter is about Prasa-Prasooti, the one who prevents the birth of a Jiva. He is called Prasenajit because he taught the ways to destroy or conquer Prasa.  

After him came Naabhiraaj, a wise and noble soul. He carried the burden of the world order, just like the great leaders of the past. His lifespan was one crore purvas and his height was five hundred and twenty-five Dhanush. His head was adorned with a crown, and his ears were decorated with earrings. He was as radiant as Mount Meru, with the sun and moon shining on its peak. His face, filled with pride, scorned the full moon with its beauty. His gentle smile revealed teeth that shone like saffron. Just as the Himalayas hold the banks of the Ganga, Naabhiraaj held his chest adorned with jewels and a necklace of gems. His arms, with their beautiful fingers and palms, were raised like the hood of a snake. His shoulders, adorned with armlets, resembled two horses carrying treasures with serpents. His waist was strong and stable, with a beautiful navel, and his bones were like a forest. He seemed like the middle world, holding the upper and lower parts, a vast expanse. He wore a belt around his waist, which made him look like the ocean, holding a jewel-studded island. His thighs, strong and round like a forest, were like pillars supporting the entire universe. 

Page #150:
---------------------------
The Adipurana states that the two strong pillars within the house had a chest-like stone structure, making them extremely heavy. Brahma, knowing this, had made their shanks (thighs) and uras (the part above the knees) very strong to support this weight. The feet they stood on were adorned with auspicious signs like the moon, sun, river, ocean, fish, and tortoise, making it seem as if the entire universe, both animate and inanimate, had taken refuge under them. This body, formed by natural sweetness and beauty, was so magnificent that I believe even Indra, the king of the gods, would find it difficult to obtain such a form. 

When the child was born, a cord was visible in his navel, and Nabhiraj ordered it to be cut. This is why he was named "Nabhi." 

During the same time, dense, dark clouds with a hint of white appeared in the sky. These clouds were accompanied by rainbows. 

Due to the influence of time, the subtle particles of matter had gained the ability to form clouds. Thus, these clouds, composed of fine particles, spread out, filling the entire sky without any gaps. 

These clouds were filled with lightning, thundered loudly, and rained heavily. They resembled elephants adorned with golden garlands, intoxicated, and roaring. 

The echoes from the mountain walls, struck by the thunderous roar of the clouds, seemed like the mountains themselves were expressing their anger through these echoes. 

The cool wind, carrying the raindrops showered by the clouds, blew, spreading its wings like a peacock. 

Seeing the arrival of the clouds in the sky, the happy Chatak birds sang sweetly, and the group of peacocks spontaneously began to dance. 

The clouds, pouring down in torrents, seemed to be made of metals, as they showered the earth with their rain. 

Page #151:
---------------------------
The Third Canto

The great rains poured down, the rivers overflowing, their waters red with the color of ochre, like the flow of blood from mountains struck by lightning. (1.2) The clouds thundered, releasing thick torrents of water, as if weeping in sorrow for the destruction of the Kalpa trees. (1.3) The wind struck the clouds, producing a deep sound like the beat of a drum struck by a careless hand. (1.7) Lightning flashed in the sky, a dancer in a celestial stage, changing its form every moment. (1.75) The thirsty Chataka birds, like children clinging to their mothers' breasts, drank greedily from the rain-laden clouds, never satisfied. (1.76) The clouds, like foolish men, were captivated by the lightning, their heavy bodies filled with water, eager to bring forth the harvest. (1.77) Though lacking in wisdom, the clouds, due to the ever-changing nature of the pudgala particles, quickly released their rain, transforming into various forms. (1.78) The raindrops, like pearls, fell from the clouds, cooling the earth scorched by the sun's rays. (1.79) Then, the rain, soaked in moisture, brought forth the coolness that had been hidden within the earth. (1.10) 

Page #152:
---------------------------
The material consisting of the elements of the earth, sky, air, and the cold atoms, and the heat of the sun, came into existence, and from this, many sprouts were born in the fields. These sprouts were close together, and they grew slowly and steadily from the sprout stage to the fruiting stage. In the same way, many other types of grains were born everywhere without being sown. All these grains ripened in due time and became fit to bear fruit due to the good deeds of the people in the past or the influence of that time. 

Just as a son succeeds his father after his death, so these grains took the place of the Kalpa trees. There was neither excessive rain nor drought at that time, but moderate rainfall, so all the grains bore fruit without any hindrance. 

Saathi, rice, Kalma, Brihi, barley, wheat, Kangni, Sama, Kodo, Nivaar (Tinni), Batane, sesame, flax, lentil, mustard, coriander, cumin, mung, urad, arhar, Ronsa, Moth, chickpea, Kulthi, and Tevra, along with many other types of grains, as well as Kusumbha (from which Kusumanee-red color is made) and cotton, were born for the livelihood of the people. 

Even though these grains were available for enjoyment and consumption, the people, not knowing how to use them, were repeatedly caught in delusion - they were repeatedly misled by seeing them. 

At the time of this change of era, the Kalpa trees had completely perished, so the people became very distressed, being without any support. At that time, due to the emergence of the concept of food, they were afflicted by three types of hunger. 

Page #153:
---------------------------


Page #154:
---------------------------
The Adipurana states that these are naturally sweet and long, like sugarcane stalks. They should be crushed with teeth or machines and their juice should be drunk. ||20|| The compassionate King Nabhiraj made various vessels, including plates, from clay at the elephant's temple and gave them to the Aryan men. He also taught them how to make them. ||20|| Thus, the people were pleased by the advice given by King Nabhiraj. They honored him greatly and followed the way of life he had taught them, which was suitable for that time. ||205|| King Nabhiraj, who was the benefactor of the people, was the only one who existed at that time when the system of enjoyment on earth was destroyed. Therefore, he attained the state of the Kalpataru, meaning he was like the Kalpataru in benefiting the people. ||206|| The fourteen Manus, starting from the first one and ending with Nabhiraj, who have been described above, were all great men of noble lineage in their previous births in the Videha region. ||207|| In that birth, they had already bound the lifespan of the enjoyment realm by performing meritorious deeds like giving gifts and observing vows as per their capacity. After attaining Samyagdarshan, they lived near the Jina and obtained the knowledge of the scriptures. As a result, they were born in this Bharat Kshetra after their death at the end of their lifespan. ||208-209|| Some of these fourteen were Kulkaras who remembered their lineage, and some were possessors of the eye of knowledge (Avadhijnana). Therefore, they considered and taught the people the duties mentioned above. ||210|| These Manus and Aryan men, knowing the means of livelihood for the people, were called Kulkaras because they taught them to live like a family. They established many lineages and were therefore called Kuladhara. They were also called Yugadhipurusha because they were born at the beginning of the Yuga. ||211-212|| Lord Rishabhadeva was both a Tirthankara and a Kulkara. Similarly, King Bharat was a Chakravarti and a Kuladhara. ||213|| 

Page #155:
---------------------------
## The Third Chapter

85

There, the five Kulkaras of the first group had established the punishment of "Ha" for those who had committed offenses. This punishment meant, "Alas, you have committed such an offense." The next five Kulkaras had established the punishment of "Ha" and "Ma," meaning, "Alas, you have committed such an offense, do not do it again." The remaining Kulkaras had established the punishment of "Ha," "Ma," and "Dhik," meaning, "Alas, do not do it again, and you are despicable for committing the offense even after being stopped."

Bharata Chakravarti, during his reign, had established the practice of inflicting physical punishments like death, imprisonment, etc., on those who committed grave offenses.

The lifespan of these humans has been mentioned above using the numbers "Ama," etc. Therefore, to determine their lifespan, we will now describe their definitions.

One Purvang is equal to eighty-four lakh years. The square of eighty-four lakh, i.e., the product of multiplying it by itself, is called Purva (8400000 x 8400000 = 70560000000000). Multiplying this number by one crore gives us one Purva Koti. Multiplying Purva by eighty-four gives us Parvang, and multiplying Parvang by Purvang, i.e., eighty-four lakh, gives us Parva.

This method of multiplication should be applied sequentially to the subsequent numbers like Nayutang, Nayut, etc., without any confusion.

The names of these different numbers, in order, are mentioned below, as they are established in the eternal Jain scriptures.

These are: Purvang, Purva, Parvang, Parva, Nayutang, Nayut, Kumudang, Kumud, Padmang, Pan, Nalilang, Nalin, Kamalang, Kamal, Tutya, Tutik, Atatan, etc. 

Page #156:
---------------------------
## English Translation:

66
The first is called Nalina, the second Kamala, another is known as Kamala, then Tuvyanga, Tuṭika, another is Aṭaṭanga, and then Aṭaṭ. ||224||
Bhama, Ama, and then Ama, and then Para. Hahak, Hahak, and then Huhu, thus they are known. ||225||
Lataja, Latadha, Mahātpurva, and then Tavaya. Then Shiraḥprakampita, and then Hastaprahelita. ||226||
Achalātmaka, thus is the nature of the time-cycle. It is countable, beyond count, they say, is time beyond that. ||227||
As much as possible, in these, the lifespan of the Manus should be understood. This knowledge of numbers, the wise, the learned, the Paurashika, should know. ||228||
The first is Pratiśruti, the second is Sanmati, the third is Kṣemaṁkara, the fourth is Kṣemaṁdhara. ||229||
The fifth is Sīmaṁkara, the sixth is Sīmaṁdhara, the seventh is Vimala Vāhana, the eighth is Cakṣuṣmān. ||230||
The ninth is Yaśasvān, the tenth is Abhicandra, the eleventh is Candrābha, the twelfth is Marudeva. ||231||
The thirteenth is Prasenajit, the fourteenth is Nābhīrāja, beyond him is Vṛṣabha, the Tirthachakrabhṛtau Manu, and then Bharata. ||232||
The sub-caste Pratiśruti, heard the fear of the people from the sight of the sun and moon. He, the wise, dispelled the fear of the people from the sight of the star-filled sky. ||233||
Kṣemaṁkara, the noble Kṣemaṁdhara, brought welfare to the people. Sīmaṁkara, the noble Sīmaṁdhara, set the boundaries for the Aryas and the trees. ||234||
The sub-caste Vāhopadeśa, the Vimala Vāhana, the son of Anāloka, by tradition. The Manu called Cakṣuṣmān, was not a fool, he was a giver of glory, he was loved by all. ||235||

Aṭaṭ, Amaṁga, Amama, Hahak, Hahak, Huṅga, Hūhū, Latāṅga, Latā, Mahālatāṅga, Mahālatā, Shiraḥprakampita, Hastaprahelita, and Acala, all these are names of the said numbers, which are synonyms for time-substance. All these are countable, they are different types of countable, beyond that is uncountable, beyond count. ||222-227||
The lifespan of the Manus, the lineage holders, mentioned above, should be understood in these categories as much as possible. The wise man who knows this knowledge of numbers, is the learned, the knower of the Puranas. ||228||
The lineage holders mentioned above, in order, are: first Pratiśruti, second Sanmati, third Kṣemaṁkara, fourth Kṣemaṁdhara, fifth Sīmaṁkara, sixth Sīmaṁdhara, seventh Vimala Vāhana, eighth Cakṣuṣmān, ninth Yaśasvān, tenth Abhicandra, eleventh Candrābha, twelfth Marudeva, thirteenth Prasenajit, and fourteenth
Page #157:
---------------------------
The third chapter of the Trishatika Lakshana Mahapurana, titled "Pithikavarnana", describes the lineage of the Tirthankaras. 

The text states that the first Tirthankara, Rishabhadeva, taught the importance of being the first to perform a pilgrimage, and established the tradition of looking at the face of one's child.  Amichandra taught the importance of children playing with the moon, and that parents should live with their children for a short time.  Marudeva taught that parents should live with their children for a long time.  Prasenajit taught the importance of removing the umbilical cord, and Nabhiraj taught the importance of comforting the people.  Nabhiraj also gave birth to Rishabhadeva.

The text then describes how the sage Gautama, the head of the Jain community, described the lineage of the Tirthankaras with great respect.  This caused great joy for the entire assembly of monks, including King Shrenik.

The text then describes how the great Jain teacher, Jinaseanacharya, explained the six different types of time and the actions of the Tirthankaras.  He then prepared to tell the story of the first Tirthankara, Adinath, and addressed King Shrenik, saying, "O Shrenik, listen."

This concludes the third chapter of the Trishatika Lakshana Mahapurana, titled "Pithikavarnana". 

Page #158:
---------------------------
## Fourth Chapter

The wise person who studies the three sacred texts mentioned above, understands the meaning of the entire Purana and rejoices in this world and the next. ||1||

Having thus established the preface of this great Purana, I will now narrate the life story of Lord Rishabhadeva. ||2||

In Puranas, one must necessarily describe eight aspects: Lok (world), Desh (country), Pur (city), Rajya (kingdom), Tirth (pilgrimage site), Dan (charity), Tap (austerity), Gati (path), and Phal (fruit). ||3||

Describing the name of the world, its origin, the length, breadth, etc. of each direction and its intervals, and elaborating on many other aspects, is called Lokakhyan. ||4||

Describing in detail a part of the world, including countries, mountains, islands, and oceans, is called Deshakhyan by knowledgeable and righteous individuals. ||5||

Describing the capital city in regions like Bharatavarsha, etc., is called Purakhyan, or the description of the city, according to the opinion of scholars who know the Puranas. ||6||

Describing that this part of the country belongs to such and such a king, or that this city belongs to such and such a king, is called Rajakhyan in Jain scriptures. ||7||

A Tirth is considered to be a means of crossing the boundless ocean of Samsara. The narration of the life story of the Jina, which is the Tirth, is called Tirthakhyan. ||8||

The narration of the type of austerity and charity that leads to unparalleled fruits for beings is called Tapodanakatha. ||9||

There are four types of Gatis, based on the different types of hell, etc. The narration of these is called Gatyakhyan. ||10||

Describing the fruits of karma, both good and bad, that beings receive, up to the attainment of liberation, is called Phalakhyan. ||11||

Here, I will briefly describe the eight aspects mentioned above, as appropriate. The remaining aspects will be described as the opportunity arises. ||12|| 

Page #159:
---------------------------
The fourth chapter is called "Loka" because it describes the world where all living beings and their attributes are observed. This is the definition of "Loka" given by the wise. [13] The world is also called "Kshetra" because it is the place where all living beings and their attributes reside. This is a meaningful name given by the learned. [14] The world is not created by anyone, it is eternal, self-existent, and located in the middle of infinite space. [15] Some foolish people believe that there is a creator of this world. To refute their belief, the theory of creation is examined here. [16] If we assume that there is a creator of this world, then we must ask where he existed before creating the world? Where did he sit and create the world? If we say that he is without a base and eternal, then how did he create this world and where did he place it? [17] Furthermore, if we assume that the creator is one and without a body, then he cannot be the creator of the world. How can one creator create a world with so many different forms? How can a formless creator create a world with forms? It is clear that forms can only be created by beings with forms, like a potter creates a pot. [18] Another point is that the world cannot be created without any cause or material. How can the creator create the world without any cause or material? If we say that he first creates the cause and material and then the world, then this is also not correct because it leads to an infinite regress. To create the cause and material, we need another cause and material, and so on. This process will never end. [19] 

Page #160:
---------------------------
70
This applies to the world as well, if you say that the cause-material is self-existent by nature, it is not created by God, then it should be believed that the world is also self-existent, it is not created by anyone. In addition, it is also worth considering who created that God? If he was created by someone, then the infinite regress fallacy arises as mentioned above, and if he is self-existent, he was not created by anyone, then this world can also be self-existent, it can be created on its own. ||20|| If you say that God is independent and capable of creating the universe, therefore he creates the world by mere desire without any material, then this is just your desire. What wise man will believe this illogical statement? ||21|| It is also worth considering that if God is fulfilled, all his work is complete, he has no work left to do, then how can he have the desire to create the universe? Because a fulfilled person does not have any desire. If you say that he is unfulfilled, then he cannot be capable of creating the world. Just as an unfulfilled potter cannot create the world. ||22||
One thing is that the God you believe in is formless, inactive, pervasive and without any change, so such a God can never create the world because it has been written above that a formless God cannot create material things. To perform any action, some kind of action in the form of movement of hands, feet, etc. is necessary, but you have considered God to be inactive, therefore he cannot create the world. If you consider him active, then it is impossible because action can only be done by someone who has some area left from his base, but your God is all-pervasive, how can he perform action? Besides this, God cannot have the desire to create the universe because you have considered God to be unchanging. It is impossible for someone whose soul does not have any changes like attachment, aversion, etc. to have a desire. ||23|| When God is fulfilled and does not desire anything in Dharma, Artha, Kama, Moksha, then what will he gain by creating the universe? This should also be considered, because creating the universe only by nature without any purpose makes his creation meaningless. If you say that this is his play, he creates the world just for play, then it has to be said with sorrow that your God is very deluded, very ignorant, who does meaningless work like children. ||24-25||
1. World like God. 2. Desire to create. 

Page #161:
---------------------------
71
If you say that God creates the bodies and other things of living beings according to their karma, that is, He creates bodies and other things according to the karma they perform, then this is also not right, because by believing this, your God does not remain God. The reason for this is that by expecting karma, He becomes dependent like a weaver, and by becoming dependent, He cannot remain God, because just as a weaver is dependent on thread and other tools, and by being dependent, he is not called God, in the same way, your God is also dependent on karma, and by being dependent, He cannot be called God. God is always independent and self-sufficient. ||26||
If you say that the actions of happiness, sorrow, etc. of living beings happen automatically according to their karma, and God is considered to be the cause of them, then this is also not right, because when the actions of happiness, sorrow, etc. are automatically fulfilled according to karma, then it is unfortunate that you are unnecessarily supporting God. ||27||
Perhaps it will be said that God is very loving and merciful, therefore He creates the universe to benefit living beings, then He should have made this entire universe full of happiness and free from troubles. Why does He make the majority of the universe unhappy even though He is merciful? ||28||
One thing is this, that before the creation, was there a world or not? If there was, then why did He waste effort in creating something that was already self-existent? And if there was not, then what will He create from it? Because one cannot create something that is completely non-existent, like the sky lotus. ||29||
If the creator God is liberated, free from the stain of karma, then He cannot create the world because He is indifferent, free from attachment and aversion. And if He is a worldly being, stained with karma, then He will not be called God like us, then how will He create the world? In this way, this theory of creation does not prove true in any way. ||30||
Just consider this, that He creates the world, therefore all the living beings in the world become like His children, then the same God also destroys everyone, therefore He incurs a great sin of destroying His own children. Perhaps you will say that He destroys only the wicked beings, then it would be better if He did not create the wicked beings in the first place. ||31||
If you say that the bodies and other things of living beings are created due to some intelligent cause, 
1. नत्वेव-अ०, ल०। 2. कार्ये निष्पन्ने सति प्राप्तः। 3. अनुगृहीतुमिच्छया। 4. व्यर्थत्वम् । 5. विद्यमानस्य। 6. सृष्टिः । 7.-री सोऽप्यनीश्वरः अ०,५०, म०, द०, स०,ल.। 8. येन केन प्रकारेण नास्तीत्यर्थः । 9. उद्भवितुम् । 1.. सन्निवेशः रचना । 

Page #162:
---------------------------
## Adipurana

This argument is not sufficient to prove the existence of God. The creation of a special design can also happen in other ways. ||33||

This world, with its bodies, senses, pleasure, pain, and other diverse elements, is created by the Karma-maker, who is associated with the conscious soul. ||34||

Therefore, we declare that the diversity in the limbs and appendages of worldly beings is born from the skill of the Karma-maker, called "Creation." ||35||

This diversity of Karma makes the world multi-faceted. It proves that the souls of worldly beings are the creators of this world, with Karma as their helper. In other words, these worldly beings create the world, including their bodies, driven by the rise of their Karma. ||36||

"Vidhi," "Srasta," "Vidhata," "Daiva," "Purakrut Karma," and "Ishvara" are all synonyms for the Karma-maker. There is no other creator of the world besides him. ||37||

While those who believe in God accept that space, time, etc., are created without God, how can they say that all things in the world are created by God? This contradiction in their statement necessitates that the wise should rebuke those who, driven by their false beliefs, arrogantly promote their flawed views. ||38||

Therefore, one should believe that this world, like time and matter, is uncreated, without beginning or end, and eternally shines as the foundation of the soul and non-soul elements. ||39||

It cannot be created or destroyed, and it always exists in its natural state. It is comprised of three realms: the lower realm, the middle realm, and the upper realm. ||40||

Just as a "Vetrasana" (a type of seat), a "Jhallari" (a type of musical instrument), and a "Mridanga" (a type of drum) have their own shapes, so too do the lower, middle, and upper realms. The lower realm is like a "Vetrasana," the middle realm is like a "Jhallari," and the upper realm is like a "Mridanga." ||41|| 

Page #163:
---------------------------
## Chapter Four:

**42.** Wise men say that the structure of the universe is like a man standing with his hands on his hips, his waist narrow, his body wide, and his head narrow.

**43.** The universe is situated in the middle of the infinite and boundless space, surrounded by three types of winds: *ghano-dadhi*, *ghana-vat*, and *tanu-vat*. It appears as if it were woven from countless threads.

**44.** The universe is enveloped by these three winds from bottom to top, and it appears as if it were covered by three layers of cloth, resembling a *su-pratistha* (a solid foundation).

**45.** Wise men say that the expanse of the *tiryag-lok* (horizontal universe) is one *rajju* (thread), and the height of the entire universe is fourteen times that, or fourteen *rajjus*.

**46.** The universe is seven *rajjus* wide at the bottom, one *rajju* wide in the middle, five *rajjus* wide in the middle of the *urdhva-lok* (vertical universe), and one *rajju* wide at the very top.

**47.** In the very center of this universe is the *madhyam-lok* (middle universe), adorned with countless islands and oceans. These islands and oceans are twice as wide as each other, and they are arranged in a circular pattern. This means that Jambudvipa is like a plate, and the other islands and oceans are like rings around it.

**48.** In the middle of this *madhyam-lok* is Jambudvipa. Jambudvipa is round and surrounded by the salt ocean. In its center is Mount Meru, like a navel.

**49.** Jambudvipa is one hundred thousand *yojanas* wide and is divided into seven regions (Bharat, etc.), six mountain ranges (Himalaya, etc.), and fourteen rivers (Ganga, Sindhu, etc.). It is a very beautiful place.

**50.** Jambudvipa is adorned with Mount Meru as its crown and the salt ocean as its belt. It is like the king of all the islands and oceans.

**51.** In Jambudvipa, to the west of Mount Meru, in the Videha region, there is a country called Gandhila. It is as beautiful as a piece of heaven.

**52.** To the east of this country is Mount Meru, to the west is the *vibhanga* river called Urmimalini, to the south is the river Sitoda, and to the north is the Neel mountain. 

Page #164:
---------------------------
74
The Adipurana states that in this land, where the sages, free from the defilement of karma, are always liberated, the name Videha is both meaningful and established. (53) The people here are always joyful, celebrating constantly. They are always surrounded by pleasures, so they do not even consider heaven. (54) The women are naturally beautiful, the men naturally clever, and the children naturally speak sweetly, each in their own homes. (55) The cleverness of the people is evident in their clever attire, their wealth is known by their ornaments, and their youth is indicated by their enjoyment and luxury. (56) The people here delight in giving to worthy recipients and in worshipping the Arhant Bhagwan, the supreme among gods. They exert their utmost strength in protecting their virtue and find pleasure in observing fasts. (57) In this land, where the sun of the Jina shines, there is never any rise of false beliefs, just as fireflies do not appear in the daytime when the sun is shining. (58) The gardens here are always adorned with fruit-bearing trees, and the melodious calls of the cuckoos in them seem to invite travelers with their sweet sounds. (59) The border regions of this land are always adorned with fields of rice and other crops, bearing fruit, as if they were the virtuous actions themselves, adorned with the fruits of heaven. (60) In this land, when a flock of parrots descends from the sky near the rice fields, the women who tend the rice fields allow them to adorn the entrance to their homes. (61)

Page #165:
---------------------------
**Verse 64:** In this land, the fields of paddy are bent low with the weight of flowers, swaying gently in the soft breeze. They seem to be urging the birds to take flight, with the sound of the wind rustling through them.

**Verse 65:** Travelers freely drink the sweet juice of sugarcane in this land, where the fields of sugarcane and millet are adorned with the sounds of machinery.

**Verse 66:** The villages in this land are so close together that a rooster can easily fly from one to another. Their boundaries are intertwined, and the borders are adorned with fields of paddy that yield fruit with minimal effort.

**Verse 67:** In this land, people begin learning new skills only after they have mastered one. They strive for complete knowledge in every subject. Despite the absence of the quality of arrogance in claiming to be virtuous, there is no arrogance in this land.

**Verse 68:** In this land, if there is any weakness in the ascetics, it is only in their bodies, due to their constant fasting and other practices. Their meditation and concentration remain strong. Similarly, if there is any restraint, it is only in the control of the senses, not in the harming of living beings.

**Verse 69:** In this land, the sound of birds chirping is only heard in their nests. There is no sound of departure from the land, and there is no mixing of colors except in paintings. The people of this land do not engage in inter-caste marriages.

**Verse 70:** In this land, if there is any sound of breaking, it is only in the waves. There is no destruction among the people. The flow of liquid from the temples of intoxicated elephants is a characteristic of elephants. 

Page #166:
---------------------------
The Adi Purana

"The cities of that land are like heaven, the villages are like Kuru-Uttara-Kuru, the houses are like celestial chariots, and the people are like gods." || 69 || "The elephants of that land are like Airavata and other celestial elephants, the women are like celestial princesses, and the kings who conquer the world are like the guardians of the directions." || 70 || "In that land, there are many beautiful wells filled with pure water, which cool the people. The shade of the trees on the banks prevents the heat from entering the wells, and they look like drinking fountains." || 71 || "The wells, ponds, and other water bodies in that land may be like water (in the sense of being inert), but they still cool the people with their sweet water." || 72 || "The rivers of that land are like beautiful courtesans. Just as courtesans are characterized by vipanka (special sin), so too are the rivers free from mud. Just as courtesans are grahavati (wealth-accumulating), so too are the rivers grahavati (filled with crocodiles). Just as courtesans are pure on the surface, so too are the rivers clean and clear. Just as courtesans are kutilavritti (deceitful), so too are the rivers kutilavritti (winding). Just as courtesans are alangya (not to be crossed), so too are the rivers alangya (deep and not to be crossed by swimming). Just as courtesans are sarvabhogya (enjoyed by all), so too are the rivers sarvabhogya (enjoyed by all creatures). Just as courtesans are vicitra (of many colors), so too are the rivers vicitra (of many colors or full of wonders). And just as courtesans go to the lower classes, so too do the rivers go to the lower ground." || 73 || "In that land, there are lotus flowers on the banks of the ponds, which are like..." 

Page #167:
---------------------------
77. In that land, where swans make melodious sounds on the banks of the Saraswati River, where lotus petals cling to their throats, where wild elephants roam with eyes heavy with intoxication, seemingly challenging the celestial elephants, where bulls with mud clinging to their horns, fiercely dig up the earth, where peacocks dance in the Jain temples, intoxicated by the sound of musical instruments, even out of season, where herds of cows, pregnant in due season, nourish the people with their milk, shining like clouds, where clouds rain, resembling intoxicated elephants, with banners of lightning and thunderous roars, where the people are never touched by the burden of taxes, always blessed with prosperity, and free from injustice, in the heart of this Gandhila land, there stands a majestic mountain called Vijaya, shining with silver, as if mocking the Kulacala mountains with its radiant beams. 81. This Vijaya mountain rises twenty-five yojanas above the earth, its lofty peaks seemingly reaching out to touch the heavens. 82. From its base, it extends fifty yojanas for the first ten yojanas of its height, then thirty yojanas in the middle, and ten yojanas at the top. 83. It is deeply rooted in the earth, extending a quarter of its height, like a measuring rod for the circumference of the Gandhila land. 

Page #168:
---------------------------
The Adipurana describes a mountain that spans ten yojanas in width, with two ranges, the northern and southern, that are each ten yojanas wide. These ranges are the abode of the Kechari, who are so beautiful that they mock the vimanas of the gods. 

The mountain is adorned with the footprints of the Kechari women, who constantly move about, making it appear as if it is always being showered with red lotuses. 

The mountain is impenetrable and indestructible, worshipped by many Siddhas. It is pure and radiant, like the soul of a Siddha, which is also impenetrable, indestructible, worshipped by the right-knowing beings, and eternally pure, free from the stains of karma. 

The mountain is like a Bhavyajiva, for just as a Bhavyajiva possesses the power of purity, attained through right faith, right knowledge, and right conduct, the mountain also possesses the power of purity. The only difference is that the mountain cannot receive initiation, while the Bhavyajiva can receive initiation and practice austerities. 

The mountain is eternally worshipped by the Vidyadharas, is pure, eternal, and has definite measurements. It thus embodies the essence of the Jain Agamas, which are also worshipped by the Vidyadharas, who are wise men possessing right knowledge, are pure, eternal, and have definite proofs. 

On the mountain, the Charanas, who are wealthy monks, roam freely like lions. Just as lions are solitary, so too are these monks. Just as lions are fearless, so too are these monks, free from the fear of the cycle of birth and death. Just as lions have large claws, so too do these monks have great wisdom. 

Page #169:
---------------------------
79
This fourth mountain, with its two broad ranges, like two wings, appears as if it wants to fly up, not out of desire for Lakshmi. ||11||
On its pleasant peaks, Kinnaras and celestial serpents, playing for a long time, forget their own homes. ||12||
Its silver-like walls, on which the autumn clouds rest, are revealed by the falling, roaring, and moving drops. ||13||
With its lofty peaks, it holds the abodes of the gods, sparkling with jewels, like the crest jewels, preceded by Siddha temples. ||14||
It bears its high peaks, like crowns, on the earth-bearer, adorned with precious stones, worthy of praise by gods and demons. ||15||
It holds two caves, with a resounding vajra-like gate, like a long, fortified fortress, for the protection of its essence. ||16||
From its side, the Ganga and Sindhu, great rivers, have come from the blue mountain, and taken refuge at the foot of this pure and unblemished mountain. ||17||
It is adorned with many forests standing near its banks, and thus bears the splendor of the one who wears blue clothes, the great Balabhadra. ||18||
It bears a high forest-altar, surrounding the forest, like a beautiful boundary or limit of beauty, created by someone. ||19||
The fragrant wind blows gently through the Kalpa trees on this mountain, carrying the sweet sound of the anklets of the Vidyadharis who roam about. ||20||
This mountain, with its eastern and western extremities, breaks the boundaries of the directions, and speaks of its own greatness, the protector of the world. ||21||
The long practice of austerity is the reason why the nails of those munis are large, and just as a lion is courageous, so too are those munis extremely courageous and valiant. ||22|| 

Page #170:
---------------------------
The Adipurana states:

101. It seems as if the mountain, capable of bearing the weight of the entire universe, is revealing its own greatness by crushing it.

102. If this mountain were to grow in the sky, not horizontally, but only for play, where would it fit in the hut-like universe?

103. That mountain is so high and pure that it is ready to compete with the Kulachala mountains with its towering peaks.

104. In the northern range of that victorious mountain, there is a superior city called Alaka, which mocks the moon along with the faces of the Keshava Vidyaadharis.

105. That city, having attained great prosperity, shines in that northern range, just as the Abhishek Kriya of the Jinadeva shines on the Panduka rock.

106. That Alaka city is extremely vast, like a process built on a great grammar, and just as there is a great deal of multilingualism in the divine sound of Bhagavan Jinadeva, meaning that there is a great deal of transformation in the form of different languages, so too is there multilingualism in that city, meaning that different languages are spoken in that city.

107. That city bears a very high rampart (kot) with tall gopura-doorways, making it seem like the land of Jambudvipa, bearing the ring of the Vedika.

108. In the moat of that city, there are many lotuses in bloom, and bees are flying around them, making it seem as if that moat is adorned with beautiful, collyrium-like eyes, in the form of lotuses, looking at the Vidyaadharas there, who are wandering around.

109. The fort that surrounds that city on all sides is only for its beauty, because the Vidyaadhara king who protects that city protects his subjects with his own arms.

110. The flags flying on the peaks of the large, fortified houses of that city scorn the swan garland that descends on the peak of Kailasa.

111. In every house of that city, there are many pools adorned with blooming lotuses. In them, the Kalahansa (duck) birds make melodious sounds, making them seem as if they are laughing at the Manasarovar. 

Page #171:
---------------------------
The fourth chapter describes a city where:

* **Clean water is the garment, blue lotuses are earrings, lotuses are faces, and shining kuvalaya are eyes.** (112)
* **There are no ignorant people, no women without virtue, no homes without gardens, and no gardens without fruit.** (113)
* **There are no festivals without proper worship, and no deaths without the rites of renunciation.** (114)
* **Fields of rice constantly shine, ripening on their own, giving great rewards like merit to the people.** (115)
* **In the gardens, there are many small trees (plants) that have not yet reached full stability. Others carefully protect them and feed them milk like children.** (116)
* **The city's markets are like a great ocean, with the same sound, the same shining jewels, and people moving around like aquatic creatures.** (117)
* **Only lotuses lack petals when they bloom, not the people of this city. Fear is only in women, not in the men. Lowliness is only in lips, not in the people. Sharpness is only in swords, not in the people. Begging and taking hands (a special ritual during marriage) are only in marriage, not in the people.** (118-119)
* **The city's gardens are like a bride and groom, beloved by all, because they are:**
    * **Adorned with earrings.** (112)
    * **Constantly shining.** (115)
    * **Giving great rewards.** (115)
    * **Fed milk.** (116)
    * **Like a great ocean.** (117)
    * **Full of flowers.** (120)
    * **Marked with arrows.** (120) 

Page #172:
---------------------------
The city of Alaka, whose greatness is renowned and which is filled with people of good character from all the four varnas (Brahmana, Kshatriya, Vaishya, Shudra), adorned the head of King Vijaya like a beautiful and round tilak.  

The king of Alaka was a Vidyadhara named Atibala, who destroyed the strength of his enemies and whose command was worn like a crown by all the Vidyadhara kings. 

Atibala was a valiant warrior who achieved victory through Dharma (righteousness) and conquered his enemies. He defeated his powerful adversaries using the six qualities of diplomacy, war, strategy, position, refuge, and duality. 

The king always associated with the elderly and had conquered his senses. Therefore, he easily uprooted and destroyed his enemies with his army. 

Like an elephant, he was endowed with great prosperity, belonged to a noble lineage, and had long, radiant arms. Just as an elephant nourishes its dependents like bees with its abundant water from its trunk, the king sustained those who sought his refuge with his great generosity. 

The rays of his shining teeth emanated from his mouth, and his eyebrows were slightly raised, making it seem as if he had conquered the moon adorned with moonlight. 

Page #173:
---------------------------
## Fourth Chapter

His head, adorned with flowers, was like the peak of Trikuta mountain, always new, with a cascade of chamaras flowing from its sides.  His broad chest, adorned with garlands, was like the playground of Lakshmi, a sea of virtues. His hands were like elephant trunks, his thighs like the quiver of Kamadeva, his hips like rubies, and his feet like lotus blossoms.  It is futile to describe each of his limbs, for he surpasses all beautiful things in the world.

His beautiful wife, Manohara, was like the victorious arrow of Manobhava, her beauty captivating all. She was like a vine adorned with flowers of laughter, dear to her husband, a follower of Jainism, and a bringer of fame.

Their son, Mahabala, was born under a fortunate star.  His birth brought joy to all his brothers, like a lump of sugar to a group of friends.  He possessed natural qualities: skill in the arts, bravery, generosity, intelligence, forgiveness, compassion, patience, truthfulness, and purity.  His body and virtues grew in mutual rivalry, each striving to surpass the other.  This rivalry is common among those who live together, for similarity in action breeds competition. 

Page #174:
---------------------------
The Adipurana
'The king studied all four royal sciences in the presence of his guru. He shone with those sciences like the rising sun with its rays. ||16|| He studied all the sciences with the blessings of his guru. He shone even brighter, like fire with the wind. ||30|| Seeing his son's humility and other qualities, which were conducive to his fitness, the king accepted him as the heir apparent. ||13|| The fortune of the kingdom, divided between father and son, shone even brighter. It stretched from the Himalayas to the ocean, like the Milky Way in the sky. ||13|| The king had many sons, but he considered this son, Mahabala, as his only son, just as the sky is illuminated by the sun, not by other planets. ||14|| Then, one day, King Atibala became detached from worldly pleasures. He renounced desires and became ready to take initiation. ||14|| He thought, "This kingdom is like a poisonous flower, extremely harmful and life-taking. It is like a venomous snake, extremely frightening. It is like a deceitful woman, destructive. It is like a garland that has been worn, and is now discarded. Therefore, it is completely worthless and should be abandoned. It is not fit for the enjoyment of noble men." ||142-143|| The wise King Atibala thought further, "I will uproot this vine of the world with the axe of great meditation and forbearance." ||144|| The root of this vine of the world is falsehood, its flowers are birth and death, and its fruits are various vices, such as...

Page #175:
---------------------------
Fourth Chapter
7.
Youth is fleeting, pleasures enjoyed do not bring satisfaction. On the contrary, they only increase the fire of craving. This body is extremely impure, a place of disgust and perishable. It will be crushed to dust by the thunderbolt of death, either today or tomorrow. This body, like a bamboo, is full of knots of attachments and bears the fruit of sorrow. It will soon be consumed by the fire of time, making a crackling sound. Relatives are like bonds, wealth is a source of sorrow, and worldly objects are like poisonous food, contaminated with poison. Therefore, renounce the enjoyment of kingdom, for Lakshmi is extremely fickle, wealth is like waves in the ocean, constantly changing, and everything is impermanent. 

Having thus decided, the wise king Atibala, before his coronation, entrusted his entire kingdom to his son, Mahabala. Then, like an elephant freed from its bonds, he left his home and, accompanied by many celestial beings, went to the forest to take initiation. 

His austerity was like a powerful army of conquerors, well-protected by secrecy, just as an army is well-protected by weapons of secrecy, such as camouflage, and by groups of soldiers. Or, his austerity was like the jewels adorning the hood of a great serpent, unattainable by ordinary men. His austerity was free from faults and, like the Kalpavriksha, which appears during the time of the navel-king, was devoid of clothes and ornaments. 

85
The fruit of this is the attainment of sorrow. For the sake of drinking the intoxicating liquor of worldly objects, these beings, like filled vessels, constantly serve this craving. This youth is fleeting, and these pleasures of the five senses, though enjoyed many times, do not bring satisfaction. Far from bringing satisfaction, they only increase the fire of craving. This body is extremely impure, a place of disgust and perishable. It will be crushed to dust by the thunderbolt of death, either today or tomorrow. Or, this body, like a bamboo, full of knots of attachments and bearing the fruit of sorrow, will soon be consumed by the fire of time, making a crackling sound. Relatives are like bonds, wealth is a source of sorrow, and worldly objects are like poisonous food, contaminated with poison. Lakshmi is extremely fickle, wealth is like waves in the ocean, constantly changing, and everything is impermanent. Therefore, renounce the enjoyment of kingdom, for it is better to give it up in every way. 

Having thus decided, the wise king Atibala, before his coronation, entrusted his entire kingdom to his son, Mahabala. Then, like an elephant freed from its bonds, he left his home and, accompanied by many celestial beings, went to the forest to take initiation. 

After that, King Atibala, wearing the sacred Jina-linga, began to perform severe austerities for a long time. His austerity was like an army of conquerors, well-protected by secrecy, just as an army is well-protected by weapons of secrecy, such as camouflage, and by groups of soldiers. Or, his austerity was like the jewels adorning the hood of a great serpent, unattainable by ordinary men. His austerity was free from faults and, like the Kalpavriksha, which appears during the time of the navel-king, was devoid of clothes and ornaments. 

Page #176:
---------------------------
The Adipurana is like the abode of the Siddhas, free from sorrow, misery, and despair. It is like the wind-circle, based on forgiveness. It is like the detached atoms, due to its non-attachment. It is like the three pure jewels, because it is the means of liberation. It is endowed with great virtues, radiant with immense brilliance, and strong with inner strength. It is the sacred Jain scripture, the form of the Lord, and it has been performing penance for a long time.

Then, after being initiated with great strength, his powerful son, Mahabala, took up the burden of the kingdom. At that time, many Vidyadharas would worship his lotus feet with humility.

Mahabala was endowed with both divine and human strength, his actions were like those of a valiant man, and he destroyed the strength of his enemies, making his own strength famous.

Just as serpents become powerless and devoid of venom under the influence of mantras, so too, his enemies became powerless and devoid of venom (subdued) under the influence of his mantras (power of discernment).

Just as people are drawn to a mango tree adorned with sweet and ripe fruits, so too, the people were drawn to King Mahabala, adorned with sweetness and other virtues.

He was neither too harsh nor too soft, but by adopting a middle path, he subdued the entire world.

Just as clouds calm the dust raised by the summer wind, so too, this king, who desired prosperity, calmed both internal (lust, anger, pride, envy, greed, and delusion) and external enemies who had become arrogant and proud due to the passage of time.

His dharma, artha, and kama did not hinder each other, they were all in harmony. His skill in using them brought his enemies together as if they were his own relatives. 

Page #177:
---------------------------
The fourth chapter is often characterized by kings being arrogant and harsh. However, this king, Mahabala, was not like that. He was known for his clear and calm mind.  

While other kings become arrogant due to their youth, beauty, wealth, lineage, and caste, Mahabala's qualities only brought him peace. 

Many princes become extremely proud because of their royal fortune, but Mahabala remained calm, like a sage seeking liberation who remains unmoved by worldly desires. 

Under Mahabala's rule, injustice was eradicated, and fear and anxiety were unknown, even in dreams. 

His spies and his own intellect served as his eyes in governing. His actual eyes were only for beauty and seeing objects. 

When he reached his youth, Mahabala's beauty became as popular as the moon, which possesses all sixteen arts. 

Mahabala and Kamadeva, the god of love, were both known for their handsome bodies. Previously, Mahabala was compared to Kamadeva, but now that Kamadeva was invisible and Mahabala was visible, it seemed as if Kamadeva had abandoned the comparison. 

Mahabala had dark, soft, curly hair on his head, like a swarm of bees. His crown made his head look like the peak of Mount Meru, covered in dark clouds. 

His forehead was wide and high, making it seem like a golden platform built for Lakshmi to rest upon. 

His eyebrows were long and curved, resembling two bows kept in Kamadeva's arsenal. 

His eyes, situated near the eyebrow-shaped arch, shone brightly, like the instruments of a warrior who desires to conquer the entire world. 

Page #178:
---------------------------


Page #179:
---------------------------
The fourth chapter, "The Form of Mahabala," depicts the splendor of his youthful exuberance, as if all beauty were concentrated in him. (18) He conquered the world not only by his handsome appearance but also by the power of mantras acquired through the company of elders. (189) He had four wise ministers, Mahaमति, सम्भिन्नमति, शतमति, and स्वयंबुद्ध, who were like his vital breaths, loyal, and farsighted. (190) They were the stable pillars of his kingdom. (191) Among them, स्वयंबुद्ध was a pure सम्यग्दृष्टि, while the other three were मिथ्यादृष्टि. Despite this difference in views, they were all dedicated to the welfare of their king. (192) With these four ministers, like well-coordinated limbs, Mahabala's kingdom expanded like a समवृत्त. (193) He sometimes consulted all four ministers, sometimes three, sometimes two, and sometimes only the realistic स्वयंबुद्ध. (194) He decided matters himself, and his ministers merely praised his decisions, like the celestial beings who praised the Jina's renunciation. (195) 

Page #180:
---------------------------
## The Adipurana
**Malini Chhandas**

With gentle, fragrant breezes, dense Mandara trees,
and the cool comfort of companionship,
all his anxieties of love were dispelled.
He often roamed through the gardens,
conquering the abode of Kamadeva,
and emulating the beauty of Nandana,
accompanied by his wives. ||197||

Thus, with the rise of merit,
the Vidhyadharas,
with their shining crowns adorned with Makaras,
touched his lotus feet again and again.
He, destined for the great glory of a Tirthankara,
played on Mount Meru, like Indra,
and on Mount Vijaya, for a long time. ||198||

Thus, in the **Trishattilakshana Sri Mahapurana Sangraha**,
composed by the **Bhagawan Jinaseena Acharya**,
known as **Bhashya**,
the fourth chapter, **Sri Mahabala Abhyudaya Varnana**,
is complete. ||4||

1. Similar.
2. From the rise of merit.
3. -Makarikaama Spashta. 

Page #181:
---------------------------
## The Fifth Chapter

Once upon a time, the King Mahabala was celebrating his birthday. The occasion was filled with auspicious songs, music, and dances. [1]

The King Mahabala, the lord of the Vidhyadharas, was seated on his throne. Many beautiful women were waving white chamaras, like the color of the ocean of milk, over him. [2]

The young women standing near him seemed like buds of the tree of Kamadeva, or waves of the ocean of beauty, or blossoms of beauty itself. [3]

The King Mahabala was surrounded by many Vidhyadharas, their chests broad and covering the nearby area, adorned with shining crowns.  He sat amongst them, shining like Mount Meru surrounded by many mountains. [4]

On his chest, a white garland, shining like the rays of the moon, was draped. It looked like a waterfall cascading down the peak of Mount Himavat. [5]

On his chest, a string of pearls, adorned with Indranila gems, shone brightly. It looked like a flock of swans flying across the vast sky. [6]

At that time, the ministers, the commanders, the priests, the merchants, and other officials were gathered around the King Mahabala. [7]

He pleased all the attendees by smiling at some, conversing with others, offering seats to some, giving gifts to some, honoring some, and looking at others with respect. [8]

He enjoyed the company of learned men, experts in music and other arts, and watched them compete with each other in front of the audience. [9]

He received the ambassadors sent by his vassals, brought by the gatekeepers, and honored them repeatedly with due respect. [10] 

Page #182:
---------------------------
92
Adipurana
They were receiving greetings and observing the gifts brought by the distinguished men of other countries, and they were also honoring them accordingly. Thus, spreading supreme joy, with wondrous splendor, they were seated in the assembly hall, as they pleased, along with the council of ministers. ||9-12||
At that time, seeing the king extremely pleased, the self-enlightened minister, the holder of sharp intellect and speaker of auspicious and pleasing words, spoke the following words for the benefit of his master. ||13||
O lord of the Vidyadharas, listen here, I will speak some words for your welfare. O lord, consider this wealth of the Vidyadharas that you have obtained as the fruit of your merit alone. ||14||
O king, wealth is obtained according to one's dharma, from that comes the attainment of desired happiness, and from that men remain happy. Therefore, this tradition is obtained only through dharma. ||15||
Kingdom, wealth, enjoyments, birth in a worthy family, beauty, scholarship, long life, and health, consider all this as the fruit of merit. ||16||
O lord, just as there is never the creation of an effect without a cause, just as no one has ever seen light without a lamp, just as there is no sprout without a seed, no rain without clouds, and no shade without an umbrella, in the same way, there is no attainment of wealth without dharma. ||17-18||
Just as there is no life from eating poison, no grain is produced from barren land, and no delight is produced from fire, in the same way, there is no attainment of happiness from adharma. ||19||
That which leads to the definite attainment of heaven and other higher goals, as well as the goal of liberation, is called dharma. O king, I am now describing that dharma in detail, listen. ||20||
Dharma is that which has compassion as its root, and compassion is to have mercy on all beings. For the protection of this compassion, the other virtues like forgiveness, etc., have been described. ||21||
The signs of that dharma are self-control, forbearance, non-violence, austerity, charity, good conduct, meditation, and detachment. ||22||
Non-violence, truthfulness, non-stealing, celibacy, and renunciation of possessions, this is the eternal dharma. ||23||
1. Mahattamaiḥ b., a., s., 60, 50, l., 80. 2. Shuddhavaak. 3. Poorvasmin drishta. 4. Artha: prayojanam. 5. Prananu -a., b., s., p., 60, l. 6. -rahinsta a., p., s., d. 7. Dhyanam. 

Page #183:
---------------------------
The fifth chapter, therefore, describes the fruits of Dharma and the characteristics of all kingdoms.  O great soul, those who desire these things should keep their minds firmly fixed on Dharma. ||24|| O wise one, if you wish to make this fickle Lakshmi permanent, you should accept this Dharma of non-violence, etc., and practice it according to your ability. ||25|| Having said this, the self-enlightened minister, who was concerned with the welfare of his master, remained silent after speaking words that were full of Dharma, wealth, and fame. ||26-27|| Then, the second minister, a misguided Mahamathi, unable to understand his words, spoke as follows. ||27||  Embracing the theory of the four elements, he began to criticize the living being, nurturing the Charvaka doctrine. ||28|| He said, "It is appropriate to consider the Dharma of a righteous person while he is alive, but the existence of the soul, the righteous person, is not proven, so how can there be any fruit of Dharma?" ||29|| Just as intoxicating power arises from the combination of Mahua, jaggery, water, etc., so too does consciousness arise from the combination of earth, water, air, and fire. ||30|| Therefore, in this world, there is no such thing as consciousness separate from our body, which is made up of earth, etc., because it is not seen separate from the body. In the world, the existence of things that are not directly proven to be separate is not accepted, like the flower of the sky. ||31|| Since the living being, which is the power of consciousness, is not proven to be a separate entity, how can anyone's virtue, vice, or afterlife be proven? When the body is destroyed, these living beings are dissolved in an instant, like bubbles of water. ||32|| Therefore, those who abandon the pleasures of the present life and desire the pleasures of the afterlife, are deprived of the pleasures of both worlds and suffer in vain. ||33|| Thus, the desire for the afterlife of those who abandon the pleasures of the present life is like a jackal, who, out of delusion, abandons the meat in its mouth and falls into the water to catch fish. ||34|| 

Page #184:
---------------------------
The Adipurana states that those who abandon their present happiness in pursuit of happiness after death, are like those who lick their hands after discarding food offered to them. They are deluded, their vision obscured, and they are foolish.  

The wise, however, understand the truth and say, "The one who has renounced the theory of the soul, and who relies solely on knowledge, presents the existence of life." 

The third minister, Sambhinnamati, who was eager to engage in debate, smiled and said, "You who believe in the soul, there is no such thing as a separate entity called the soul, because it cannot be perceived separately. This entire world is merely knowledge, because it is momentary. All that is momentary is a modification of knowledge. If they were not modifications of knowledge, but independent entities, they would be eternal. But there is no eternal entity in the world, therefore they are all merely modifications of knowledge."

He further explained, "This knowledge is without parts, without any constituent elements, and it perishes without leaving any trace. It shines forth in the form of the knower, the known, and the knowledge itself. It is not known by any other knowledge, nor does it know anything else. It exists for a moment and then perishes completely."

"Before it perishes, it leaves behind its own offspring, which is the cause of the remembrance of objects. This offspring is not different from the knowledge from which it originates."

One might ask, "If we accept that knowledge has offspring, then the remembrance of objects is established, but not the recognition of objects. Because for the recognition of objects, the object must be:

1. In a different time period.
2. In a state of rest.
3. In a state of being present.

Sambhinnamati explains, "The recognition of objects is a delusion, because objects are momentary. Just as a nail or hair that has been cut and grown back is not the same, so too are objects momentary. They are not perceived, they are devoid of the parts of the knower and the known, they are not derived from any other source, they are without any connection, and they perish without leaving any trace. They are parts of knowledge, and they are different from the knower and the known. They are the parts of knowledge, and they are different from the knower and the known. They are the parts of knowledge, and they are different from the knower and the known. They are the parts of knowledge, and they are different from the knower and the known. They are the parts of knowledge, and they are different from the knower and the known. They are the parts of knowledge, and they are different from the knower and the known. They are the parts of knowledge, and they are different from the knower and the known. They are the parts of knowledge, and they are different from the knower and the known. They are the parts of knowledge, and they are different from the knower and the known. They are the parts of knowledge, and they are different from the knower and the known. They are the parts of knowledge, and they are different from the knower and the known. They are the parts of knowledge, and they are different from the knower and the known. They are the parts of knowledge, and they are different from the knower and the known. They are the parts of knowledge, and they are different from the knower and the known. They are the parts of knowledge, and they are different from the knower and the known. They are the parts of knowledge, and they are different from the knower and the known. They are the parts of knowledge, and they are different from the knower and the known. They are the parts of knowledge, and they are different from the knower and the known.
Page #185:
---------------------------
## Chapter 5, Part 3

**Verse 44:**
Then, the proponent of the theory of consciousness, having expressed his opinion, fell silent.  At that time, the fourth minister, Shatamati, praising himself, embraced the doctrine of non-self (niraatmavada) and spoke as follows:

**Verse 45:**
This entire world is void. The appearance of human beings, animals, birds, pots, and other objects in it is all illusory. It is a false perception, just like the appearance of elephants, etc., in a dream or magic show.

**Verse 46:**
Therefore, since the whole world is illusory, how can your supposed "jiva" (soul) be proven? And in the absence of a jiva, how can a "paraloka" (afterlife) be proven? Because all this is unreal, like the city of Gandharvas.

**Verse 47:**
Therefore, those who engage in austerities and various rituals for the sake of the afterlife are merely experiencing unnecessary suffering. Such beings are devoid of true knowledge.

**Verse 48:**
Just as a deer, seeing the shimmering rays of the sun in the desert during the summer, mistakenly believes it to be water and runs in vain, similarly, these desire-driven humans, mistaking the pleasures of the afterlife for true happiness, run in vain.

**Note:** The bracketed section in the original text is based on the "B and K" versions only. 

**Explanation of Jain terms:**

* **Jiva:** The soul, the living being.
* **Paraloka:** The afterlife, the realm beyond this life.
* **Niraatmavada:** The doctrine of non-self, the belief that there is no permanent, unchanging self.
* **Shatamati:** A name, meaning "one with a hundred minds."
* **Gandharvas:** Mythical beings in Hindu mythology, often associated with music and celestial realms. 

Page #186:
---------------------------
## Chapter 12

**49.** When Shatamati was silenced by the use of faulty examples and invalid arguments, which were meant to prove the non-existence of the soul, the wise Svayambuddha stepped forward to speak.

**50.** O proponent of the materialist view, you are wrong in saying that there is no soul. For, besides the four elements (earth, water, fire, and air), there is also the perception of consciousness, which is the nature of knowledge and perception.

**51.** Consciousness is not the body, and the body is not consciousness. This is because their natures are mutually contradictory. Consciousness is the essence of the soul, which is knowledge and perception, while the body is non-soul, which is inert.

**52.** The body and consciousness cannot be one because they possess mutually contradictory qualities. The manifestation of consciousness is like the blade of a sword, which is internal, while the manifestation of the body is like the scabbard, which is external. Just as the scabbard does not become one with the sword, so also the body does not become one with the soul. The difference in their manifestations proves that they are distinct entities.

**53.** Consciousness is neither a product nor a quality of the four elements. This is because their natures are different. One is consciousness, and the other is inert. The relationship of cause and effect, and the relationship of quality and qualified, exist only between entities of the same nature, not between entities of different natures. Furthermore, the body, which is made up of the four elements, is perceived by the senses, which are its parts. But consciousness, which is the nature of knowledge, is beyond the senses and is known only through knowledge itself. If consciousness were a product or a quality of the four elements, then it would be perceived by the senses along with the body made up of the four elements. But this does not happen. This clearly proves that the body and consciousness are distinct entities.

**54.** Consciousness cannot be a modification of the body because it is different from the modifications of the body, such as ashes. If consciousness were a modification of the body, then it would have to be in the form of ashes and other modifications. But this is not the case. This proves that consciousness is not a modification of the body. Furthermore, the modifications of the body are material, but consciousness is immaterial, devoid of form, taste, smell, and touch, and cannot be perceived by the senses.

**55.** The relationship between the body and the soul is like the relationship between a house and a lamp. 

Page #187:
---------------------------
The fifth point is that the consciousness which pervades the whole body is not affected by the different elements that make up the body. This is because the consciousness is different from the elements. [56] How can consciousness, which is non-material, arise from a material body? Because there is no cause-and-effect relationship between material and non-material things. [57] You might say that non-material things can arise from material things, just as we see non-material knowledge arising from the material senses. But this is not correct, because the knowledge that arises from the senses is also considered to be material. [58] This is because the soul is bound by material karma and has become one with it. Therefore, it is considered to be material. Since the soul is considered to be material, it is also appropriate to consider the knowledge that arises from the senses to be material. This proves that non-material things cannot arise from material things. [59] Another point to consider is that the transformation of the four elements into the form of the body is due to some other cause. If we consider that cause, what other cause could there be besides the soul bound by karma? There is none. In other words, the soul bound by karma is the cause of the transformation of the four elements into the form of the body. This proves that the body and the soul are distinct entities. [60] If you say that the soul does not exist before the body, but arises with the body and is destroyed with the body, then it is like a bubble of water, which arises from water and is destroyed in water. In the same way, the soul arises with the body and is destroyed with the body. This is not correct, because the body and the soul are two distinct and different things. A different thing cannot arise from a different thing. [61] 

Page #188:
---------------------------
The Adipurana states that the body is not the cause of consciousness, neither as a material cause nor as a contributing cause. The body cannot be the material cause of consciousness because it is a different kind of substance. If it is a contributing cause, then we would accept that, but we must still search for the material cause. If you say that the subtle elements are the material cause, that is incorrect because consciousness is distinct from the body, which is formed by the combination of the subtle elements. Therefore, it is correct to consider the Jiva-dravya as the material cause of consciousness, because it is of the same kind and has the same characteristics.

The example of intoxication, given by the materialists, is refuted by the above argument. The substances that cause intoxication, such as flowers, jaggery, and water, are inert and material, and the intoxicating power that arises from them is also inert and material. The example of intoxication is inappropriate because you are trying to prove the origin of a different kind of substance from a different kind of substance, while giving an example of the origin of a similar kind of substance from a similar kind of substance.

The materialists, the Charvakas, seem to be obsessed with the material elements. If they were not, how could they say that the world is only made up of earth, water, fire, and air, without any living beings?

Perhaps the materialists will say that the four elements contain consciousness in an unmanifest form. But that is also incorrect because it is well known that inert substances do not possess consciousness.

The above argument proves that the Jiva is a distinct substance and consciousness is its characteristic. Just as the Jiva exists in this present body, it also existed in previous bodies and will exist in future bodies. This is because the present body of a Jiva cannot exist without a previous body. The reason for this is that the actions of the Jiva in this present body, such as drinking milk, are the result of past karma. If the Jiva had not had a body before this one, and had just come into existence, it would not have been able to drink milk immediately. Similarly, after this present body, the Jiva will take on another body, because the soul, with its sensory knowledge, cannot exist without a body. 

Page #189:
---------------------------
The fifth chapter states, "Where the soul is associated with its previous and future bodies, that is called the afterlife, and the soul residing in those bodies is called the afterlife soul. This afterlife soul experiences the fruits of its karmic actions in the afterlife." (19)

Furthermore, the soul's distinct existence is established through the remembrance of past lives, the cycle of birth and death, and the teachings of the enlightened ones. (7)

Just as the movement of a machine is caused by an external force, so too is the movement of this body caused by an external force, which is the soul. Additionally, the actions of the body are performed with consideration for what is beneficial and harmful, further indicating the existence of the soul. (71)

If, as you claim, the soul is born from the combination of the four elements (earth, water, fire, and air), then a soul should also be born in a pot placed on fire for cooking, as it too involves the combination of all four elements. (72)

Thus, it is evident that the theory of materialism is riddled with flaws. Therefore, it should be understood that the theory of materialism is nothing but the ramblings of fools, devoid of any substance. (73)

"You claim that the world is merely consciousness, and there is no reality beyond it. But how can consciousness be established through consciousness itself? According to your view, both the object and the means of knowing become one - consciousness itself. In such a scenario, how can the truth be ascertained?" (74)

Another point to consider is that the existence of external objects is established through the use of language. Without language, no object can be established, and the world's functioning would cease. If language is distinct from consciousness, then the non-duality of consciousness cannot be established while language is in use. If you claim that language is also consciousness, then, oh fool, tell me, by what means have you established the non-duality of consciousness, which states that the world is merely consciousness? Furthermore, how can the distinction between the perceiver and the perceived be established when you believe in a single, indivisible consciousness? (75-76) 

Page #190:
---------------------------
## Adipurana

**77.**  A perception does not appear without an object. How can it be established without a cause, and what is the cause?

**78.**  In your view, does one perception grasp another perception, or not? If it does, then your perception is not independent, as it has grasped another perception. This establishes the duality of perceiver and perceived, which contradicts the non-dual nature of perception.

**79.**  If you say that one perception does not grasp another, then what is the basis for establishing the second perception, which is like a descendant? Perhaps you will establish it through inference. But then the existence of external objects like pots and cloths will also be established, because when you accept the inference with its subject and object, where is the non-dual nature of perception? Without it, you must accept the existence of external objects that are the subject of inference.

**80.**  If the world is only perception, then all speech and knowledge would be false. Because if there are no external objects like pots and cloths, how can there be a distinction between truth and falsehood, such as "these words and knowledge are true, and these are false"?

**81.**  When you use means like instruments, you must also accept the object that is different from the means. That object is the external object like pots and cloths. In this way, the existence of external objects besides perception is established. Therefore, your non-dualistic theory of perception is like the talk of children, pleasing only to the ears.

**82.**  Thus, having refuted the theory of perception, he was ready to refute the theory of pure nothingness. He said, "In your theory of nothingness, are there words that establish nothingness, and is there knowledge arising from them, or not?" This creates two alternatives.

**83.**  If you answer these alternatives by saying, "Yes, there are words that establish nothingness, and there is knowledge," then, unfortunately, you have been defeated. Because if there are words and knowledge, then how can there be nothingness? 

Page #191:
---------------------------
101
The fifth chapter, which is devoid of meaning, is like a madman's roar. Then there is the soul, and Dharma, characterized by compassion and restraint. ||44|| "This truth is known only to the omniscient, this is the opinion of the knowers of truth. The opinions of those who consider themselves omniscient are to be rejected by the wise." ||85|| From these words, the entire assembly became free from doubt regarding the existence of the soul, and the king, the ruler of the assembly, was overjoyed. ||86|| Those who argued against the existence of the soul, like trees, were quickly withered by the harsh blow of the vajra, the words of the self-enlightened minister. ||87|| Then, when the entire assembly was silent and peaceful, the self-enlightened minister spoke a story related to what he had seen, heard, and experienced. ||88|| Listen, O great king, to this ancient story. There was a vidyadhara named Arvind, a jewel in your lineage. ||89|| He ruled this excellent city of Alaka, using his virtuous deeds to dispel the pride of his arrogant enemies. ||90|| That king experienced many excellent and supreme enjoyments, befitting the vidyadharas. He had two sons, one named Harichandra and the other named Kuruvind. ||91|| That king Arvind, with his fierce meditation, which intensified his beginnings, bound himself to a life of hell, which brought intense suffering. ||92|| When his death was near, 
1. Because of that. 2. Those who believe in emptiness. 3. Words. 4. First taught by the omniscient. 5. They consider themselves omniscient, so their opinions are those of the omniscient. 6. Without doubt. 7. In the existence of the soul. 8. Story. 9. Driving away. 10. Effort, exertion, is said to be the intensification of effort in carelessness, in giving up one's life for others, etc. 

Page #192:
---------------------------
102
The king, afflicted by a burning fever, could not find relief, neither from the cool, fragrant water of lotuses, nor from the cool breeze of fans, nor from garlands of jewels, nor from the application of sandalwood. ||14||  His knowledge, having abandoned him due to the depletion of his merit, left him as powerless as an elephant whose pride has been completely extinguished. ||15||  His body, tormented by the burning fever, was unable to bear the heat. He called his son, Harichandra, and said, ||16||  "Son, the fever in my body is increasing. Look, the garlands of red lotuses, placed on my body to alleviate the heat, have withered." ||97||  "Therefore, son, quickly send me to the Uttarakuru region by your knowledge. And in Uttarakuru, send me to those forests that are situated on the banks of the Satoda river and are extremely cool." ||98||  "The cool breeze there, which shakes the Kalpa trees and rises from the waves of the Satoda river, will surely pacify this fever of mine." ||99||  Hearing his father's words, the prince Harichandra sent his celestial knowledge, but the king, Arvind, had depleted his merit, so that knowledge could not benefit him, that is, it could not send him to the Uttarakuru region. ||100||  When even the celestial knowledge turned away from its task, the son understood that his father's illness was incurable.  He became very sad and perplexed. ||101||  Then, one day, two lizards were fighting with each other. In the fight, the tail of one lizard broke, and some drops of blood from the tail fell on the body of King Arvind. ||102||  Those drops of blood cooled his body, and the pain of the burning fever subsided. He was very pleased with the emergence of this good fortune and thought, "By divine grace, I have obtained a great remedy today." ||103||  He called his other son, Kuruvind, and said, "Son, there is a pond filled with my blood. Let it be done." ||104|| 

Page #193:
---------------------------
## Fifth Chapter

103. Again, the king, devoid of understanding, said in that forest, "There are many kinds of deer here. You should carry out your task with them." 

105. Hearing those words, Kuruvind, fearing sin, pondered and remained silent for a moment, unable to carry out that wicked deed. 

106. Realizing the truth, that his father was bound for hell, the wise man, with divine knowledge, became hesitant. 

107. Believing that he could not disobey his father's words, he nevertheless had a well built, filled with artificial blood made from lac. 

108. Hearing this, the wicked king, Kuruvind, was overjoyed, as if a poor man would be overjoyed to find a treasure he had never possessed before. 

109. Just as a wicked being considers the river Vaitarani to be very good, so too did the wicked king Kuruvind, deceived by the red color of the lac, consider that well to be very good, thinking it was real blood. 

110. When he was brought to the well, he immediately lay down in the middle of it and began to play as he wished. But when he rinsed his mouth, he realized that it was artificial blood. 

111. Knowing this, the foolish king Kuruvind, like the moon that increases the ocean of sin, became enraged, as if he wished to fulfill his full lifespan in hell, and ran to kill his son. 

112-113. But in the middle of his run, he fell in such a way that his heart was pierced by his own sword, and he died. 

114. Having obtained that evil fate, he went to hell, due to his wicked deeds. O King! This story is still remembered by the people of this city of Alka. 

115. Just as an elephant lowers its head when its tusks are broken, or as a serpent loses its brilliance when its gem is removed, so too... 

Page #194:
---------------------------
104
Kuruvinda, like a lotus, drooped his head in sorrow at the demise of his father. His body became weak and he fell into a state of grief. ||116||
Similarly, in your lineage, O King, there was a Vidyaadhara named Danda, vast like the ocean. He was a powerful ruler who punished all his enemies. ||117||
Just as a gem is born from the ocean, so too was Manimali born to Danda. When he grew up, Danda appointed him as the Yuvaraja, and he enjoyed all the pleasures he desired. ||118||
Even after enjoying these pleasures for a long time, he was never satisfied. He became increasingly attached to women, clothes, and ornaments. ||119||
Driven by his intense attachment to worldly pleasures and his cunning schemes, this ignorant king, due to his intense suffering, was bound to the cycle of transmigration. ||120||
At the end of his life, his ignorance was fully manifested, and he died a miserable death, becoming a huge serpent in his own treasury. ||121||
He retained his memory of his past life and, like a treasurer, allowed only his son to enter the treasury, excluding everyone else. ||122||
One day, the wise King Manimali, having learned from some knowledgeable monks about his father's transformation into a serpent, decided to free his father from his delusion out of filial piety. He went to the treasury and stood quietly before the serpent, speaking words of love. ||123-124||
"Father, you were consumed by your attachment to wealth, prosperity, and worldly pleasures. It is because of this fault that you have fallen into this wretched state, into the form of a serpent." ||125||
"This worldly bait is extremely bitter, difficult to overcome, and like the fruit of a poisonous tree. It is worthy of condemnation. Father, please abandon this worldly bait." ||126||
1. State. 2. Again, why? 3. Cunning, deceit. 4. Ignorance. 5. Of the serpent. 6. Attachment. 7. Delusion. 8. Enjoyment. "Aamisha palale lobe sambhoga utkocaya orapi" - as it is said. 9. Exhale. 

Page #195:
---------------------------
Chapter
13

"Just as the wheel of a chariot continuously binds the world, so too do these objects continuously bind the world. Even though they are difficult to abandon, they must be abandoned, just as life itself is difficult to abandon." ||127||

"These objects, like the song of a hunter, first inspire trust in humans, like deer, and then become terrifying, taking away their lives." ||128||

"Just as betel nut, lime, and catechu, when combined, increase the redness of the mouth, so too do these objects, when combined with women, children, etc., increase attachment and, like increasing darkness, obstruct the right path." ||129||

"Just as Jainism refutes other doctrines, so too do these objects refute the doctrines of fathers, teachers, etc., in the form of their good advice. They are as fickle as lightning and as varied as a rainbow." ||130||

"What is the point of saying more? See, this worldly pleasure, born of objects, leads this being astray in the forest of the world." ||131||

"Salutations to the group of ascetics who are steadfast in their souls, free from attachment to these objects." Thus, King Manimali condemned the objects. ||132||

"Then, his son, adorned with the rays of the Dharma-mantras, was born, his entire darkness of ignorance melted away." ||133||

"Having received the medicine of Dharma, he became filled with remorse and said, "I have abandoned the desire for objects, which is like a great poison." ||134||

"He abandoned food and body out of fear of the world and, at the end of his life, having abandoned his body, he became a god with great wealth." ||135||

"Knowing his past life, he came and worshipped Manimali, giving him a garland of shining jewels." ||136||

"That garland, shining with the rays of jewels and as pure as the laughter of Lakshmi, is still seen on your neck today." ||137||

"O King, I will tell you another story just as it happened. There are still some old celestial beings who saw this." ||138||

"Your great-grandfather, named Shatabala, ruled over his people, attracting them with his own virtues." ||139|| 

Page #196:
---------------------------
106
Having enjoyed the kingdom for a long time, he, being free from the desire for worldly pleasures, entrusted the kingdom to his son, the great Mahendra, and became a Shravaka. ||14|| Having purified his soul by Samyag Darshan, he took the vows of a Shravaka and, due to his pure karmas, bound himself to the life of a Deva. ||14|| He practiced fasting, Avamodarya, and other virtuous practices, and at the end of his life, he shed his body through Samadhi-maran, as per the proper procedure. ||12|| He became a great Deva in the Mahendra Kalpa, possessing many Siddhis, including Anima, Mahima, etc., and his abode was as vast as seven oceans. ||13|| Once, you, O Kumar, went to the Nandana Vana on Mount Meru to play, and this Deva also came there. Seeing you, he, with great affection, gave you this advice: "O Kumar, Jain Dharma is the supreme Dharma, the means to attain heaven and other auspicious things. Never forget it." ||14-15|| Having said this, the Self-Enlightened One continued, "O King, your father's grandfather was named Sahasrabal. Many Vidhyadhara Kings used to bow to him and wear his orders on their heads. ||146|| He also entrusted the kingdom to his son, King Shatabal, and took the great Jain Diksha, which leads to liberation. ||147|| He illuminated the entire earth with the rays of his tapasya, dispelling the darkness of falsehood like the sun. ||148|| Gradually, he attained Kevala Jnana and was worshipped by humans, Devas, and Dharmendras. He then attained the eternal, infinite, and everlasting state of liberation. ||149|| O Ayushman, in the same way, your father, who controlled his senses, entrusted the kingdom to you and, with a feeling of detachment, took the great Jain Diksha. He, along with his sons, grandsons, and many Vidhyadhara Kings, is practicing tapasya and desires to attain the Lakshmi of liberation. ||150-151|| O King, I have presented these examples to show you the fruits of Dharma and Adharma. These kings of your lineage, who are well-known for their stories, are like the beating of a drum, which is a clear and well-understood message. ||152|| 

Page #197:
---------------------------
## Fifth Chapter

Know that the fruit of the four dhyanas is shown here. The first two dhyanas, *ārt* and *raudr*, are *pāpa* (unwholesome) and *śukodaka* (unwholesome), respectively. Therefore, for those who are devoted to dharma, enjoyment and liberation are not difficult to obtain. You can be certain of this through direct evidence and the teachings of the omniscient, the liberated one. This dharma, as taught by the Jinas, is known for its greatness. You too should practice it with all your might if you desire great fruit.

Hearing these generous and profound words of the *svayambuddha* minister, the entire assembly was overjoyed and attained the state of *paramāstikyam* (supreme faith). From the words of the *svayambuddha*, the entire assembly was convinced that this dharma, as ordained by the Jinas, is the true reality, and there is no other path.

Then, the entire assembly began to praise him, saying that the *svayambuddha* has *samyagdṛṣṭi* (right vision), is a *vrati* (practitioner of vows), is adorned with good qualities and character, is straightforward in thought, word, and deed, is devoted to his guru, is a scholar of the scriptures, is extremely intelligent, is worthy of being a great *śrāvaka* (disciple) due to his excellent qualities, and is a *mahātma* (great soul).

The king of the *vidyadharas*, Mahābala, also praised the highly intelligent *svayambuddha*, accepted his words, and happily honored him greatly.

Then, one day, the *svayambuddha* minister went to Mount Meru, desiring to pay homage to the Jina images enshrined in the *acaittyaveśma* (temple).

This mountain is adorned like the *samavasarana* (assembly hall) of the Jina, because it is surrounded by four forests, like the *śubhodaya* (auspicious rise) of the Jina, and is like a mountain of scriptures, complete with evidence. 

Page #198:
---------------------------
## 108
## Adipurana

**163.** It is called a great king because it is the lord of the earth, because it is virtuous, because it is always present, and because it has a high peak.

**164.** It is like the first man because it is superior to all worlds, because it is the eldest of all earth-bearers, because it is great, and because it is golden in color.

**165.** It is like the king of the gods because it is adorned with diamonds, because it is the support of apsaras, and because its form is surrounded by light.

**166.** It is like a single pillar raised up, supporting the heavens, because the palace of Indra, the abode of the gods, is situated near its peak.

**167.** It is adorned with rows of forests, which are always bright with flowers, and which seem to compete with the Kalpa trees in bearing fruits and flowers of all seasons.

**168.** It is made of gold, it is very high, and it is adorned with the brilliance of many jewels, so it seems like a golden throne, high and adorned with jewels, made by the gods for the coronation of the Jina.

**169.** It has attained heaven effortlessly because of its connection with the coronation of the Jina, because it supports the Jina's temple, and because it has accepted the merit of this.

The mountain is adorned with four forests (Ashoka, Saptachhada, Amra, and Champaka), just as the world is adorned with four forests. It is also adorned with four forests (Bhadrashala, Nandana, Saumanasa, and Panduka). It is without beginning or end, and it is one lakh yojanas in extent, so it is like the Shruta Skandha, because the Shruta Skandha is also without beginning or end, and it is supported by direct and indirect evidence.

Or, the mountain is like a great king, because just as a king is the lord of many kings, so the mountain is the lord of many mountains. Just as a king is virtuous and always present in his court, so the mountain is virtuous (round) and always present. Just as a king is the leader of a large army, so the mountain has a high peak.

Or, the mountain seems like the first man, Shri Vrishabhadeva, because just as Vrishabhadeva is superior to all worlds, so the mountain is superior to all countries, being situated in the north. Just as Vrishabhadeva was the eldest of all earth-bearers (kings), so the mountain is the eldest (most excellent) of all earth-bearers (mountains). Just as Vrishabhadeva was great, so the mountain is great, and just as Vrishabhadeva was golden in color, so the mountain is golden in color.

Or, Mount Meru is adorned like Indra, because just as Indra is adorned with forests (forests of trees), so the mountain is adorned with forests (of diamonds). Just as Indra is the support of apsaras, so the mountain is the support of ponds filled with water. And just as Indra's body is adorned with light that spreads in all directions, so the mountain's body is adorned with astrologers who spread in all directions. The palace of Indra in the Saudharma heaven is very close to the peak of this mountain (it is only a hair's breadth away). Therefore, it seems as if a high pillar has been erected to support the heavens.

The mountain supports rows of forests with its slopes, which are always bright with flowers, and which seem to compete with the Kalpa trees in bearing fruits and flowers of all seasons. The mountain is made of gold, it is high,
Page #199:
---------------------------
The fifth mountain, adorned with the blue waters of the salt ocean as a smooth garment, stands like a well-placed crown on the king of Jambudvipa. [17] It is majestic with the vast, towering waves of the Kulacala mountain, and resounds with the music of birds, the sounds of which are like the notes of instruments. [171] It is adorned with the lotus flowers that bloom in the waters of the great rivers, and is covered with the leaves of the Nandana and other great forests. [102] It is adorned with the lotus flowers that shine like the assembly halls of the gods and demons, and is inhabited by swarms of bees attracted to the sweet nectar of happiness. [173] In the middle of this world, which is like a lotus pond, stands the golden Mount Meru, which appears as if it were a heap of saffron, blown together by the wind of the apocalypse. [174] Indeed, this mountain is the king of mountains, for just as a king is adorned with a necklace of jewels, so too is this mountain adorned with peaks of jewels, and just as a king is adorned with a crown, so too is this mountain adorned with a crown of shining peaks. [175] Thus, the self-illuminated minister saw this Mount Meru, which is described as above and adorned with Jain temples. [162-175] Seeing this Mount Meru, which is adorned with wondrous beauty, the minister was filled with great joy and, out of wonder, began to describe the surrounding regions as follows. [176] This king of mountains has enveloped the entire sky with its peaks, so that it appears as if it is measuring the length of the veins of the world. [177] On the peaks of this mountain, which are adorned with beautiful and dense trees, the gods dwell eternally with their consorts. [178] The very feet of this mountain are beyond the reach of the blue sky, and who among the great ones could attain such a height? [179] 

Page #200:
---------------------------
110
The Gaja-danta mountain, which extends from the Nishadha and Nila mountains, is like a devotee who has stretched out his hands in devotion to the feet of the great ones. For who, serving the feet of the great, does not attain greatness? ||179||

These Gaja-danta mountains, which are situated at the feet of the great mountains, seem as if the Nishadha and Nila mountains have stretched out their hands in devotion to serve them. ||180||

These great rivers, Sita and Sitoda, seem to be afraid to approach the mountain and are flowing towards the ocean from a distance of two kosas. ||181||

This Bhadrashala forest, which surrounds the mountain, surpasses the beauty of Devakuru and Uttarakuru with its splendor and adorns the surrounding land with its trees. ||182||

Here is the Nandana forest, here is the Saumanasa forest, and here is the Panduka forest, all three of which are adorned with ever-blooming trees and are extremely beautiful. ||183||

Here are the crescent-shaped Devakuru and Uttarakuru, here is the glorious Jambu tree, and here is the Salmali tree. ||184||

In these four forests, the Chaitya-alaya of the Jina-eshvara are shining brightly, illuminating the sky-like courtyard with their peaks, which are radiant with the brilliance of the forests. ||185||

This mountain is always filled with virtuous beings (Yakshas), is adorned with many gardens and Jina-alaya, and has many rivers and Videha fields nearby, so it seems like a city. For a city is also always filled with virtuous beings (righteous people), is adorned with gardens and Jina-mandilas, and has many rivers and fields nearby. ||186||

Or, this mountain, adorned with worldly beings like bees and leaves like the Bharata and other fields, appears like the lotus-petal of the Jambu-dvipa. ||187||

Thus, this Sumeru mountain, endowed with such excellent glory, seems to be exceeding the length of the three worlds today. ||188||

Describing it from afar, the self-enlightened minister reached the Meru mountain as if the Jina-mandilas had called him with their flag-like hands. ||189||

Seeing the timeless, ever-shining, and divine Chaitya-alaya, which were not made by human hands, the self-enlightened minister attained supreme joy. ||190||

He first circumambulated, then bowed down repeatedly in devotion, and then offered worship. Thus, he worshipped the Bhadrashala and other forests in order. ||191||

Page #201:
---------------------------
## The Fifth Chapter

111. Having performed the rituals of worship and prostrated himself, the minister sat for a while in the Jain temple located in the eastern direction of the city of Saumanas. ||192||

193. At that moment, two monks, Aditya-Gati and Ari-jaya, who were from the city of Arisht in the Maha-Kachchha region of the former Videha, appeared in the sky. They were the chief swans of the lake, which was the Samavasarana of Yugandhara Swami. ||193-194||

195. The minister, who was wise and self-enlightened, went to them, worshipped them, and prostrated himself repeatedly. When they were seated comfortably, he asked them what was on his mind. ||195||

196. "O Bhagavans, you possess the knowledge of the future, which is the light that illuminates the world. Therefore, I ask you something that is on my mind. Please tell me." ||196||

197. "O Swami, our master, Mahabala, is the most famous king of the Vidhyadharas in this world. Is he destined for liberation or not? I have doubts about this." ||197||

198. "He accepts our scriptures as proof, which reveal the true path taught by the Jinas. Will he also have faith in them, or not? I wish to know this from your grace." ||198||

199. Having asked this question, the minister fell silent. Then, Aditya-Gati, the monk who possessed the knowledge of the future, spoke. ||199||

200. "O Bhavy, your master is destined for liberation. He will believe your words and attain the position of a Tirthankara in his tenth birth." ||200||

201. "He will be the first Tirthankara of the coming age, born in the Bharat region of this Jambudvipa, and will be full of wealth." ||201||

202. "Now, I will briefly describe his past life, where he sowed the seed of Dharma with a desire for worldly pleasures. O King, listen." ||202||

203. "In this Jambudvipa, in the Videha region, west of Mount Meru, there is a country called Gandhila. In it, there is a city called Singhapura, which is as beautiful as the city of Indra. In that city, there was a king named Srishena. He was beloved by all, like the moon. He had a very beautiful wife named Sundari." ||203-204||

205. "They had a son named Jayavarman. His younger brother was named Srivarman, who was beloved by the people." ||205|| 

Page #202:
---------------------------
## Chapter 112:

112
Adipurana 'Even though he was younger than his father, he was still beloved. Often, even when children are equal, there is a preference for one. ||206|| Seeing the love and enthusiasm of the people for his younger son, the father crowned Srivarma, ignoring his elder son, Jayavarman. ||207|| Feeling deeply hurt by his father's neglect, Jayavarman renounced the world and took up asceticism. He condemned his own sins and sought refuge in the presence of his own Guru, the Self-Illuminated One. ||208|| He was newly initiated, having not long received his vows, when he saw a celestial being named Maheendhar, ascending to the heavens with his retinue. Jayavarman, with his keen insight, understood that in his next birth, he would enjoy the pleasures of a great celestial being. ||209|| While he was contemplating this, a terrible dream emerged from a termite mound and stung him. He had died desiring pleasures, and therefore, he had become a powerful celestial being, enjoying the pleasures appropriate for such beings, which never satisfy. ||210|| Due to the karmic residue of his past life, he remained attached to these pleasures for a long time. However, upon hearing your words, he will soon become detached from them. ||211-212|| Last night, he saw in a dream that three wicked ministers, besides yourself, had forcibly thrown him into a deep mire. ||213|| Then, you, having rebuked those wicked ministers, rescued him from the mire, seated him on the throne, and crowned him. ||214|| In another dream, he saw a blazing flame, flickering like lightning, diminishing with each passing moment. He saw both these dreams at the end of last night. ||215|| Having seen these dreams so clearly, he is waiting for you. Therefore, go quickly and enlighten him. ||216|| Upon hearing about these two dreams from you, he will be greatly astonished, even before you ask him. He will be pleased and will undoubtedly accept all your words. ||217|| 
1. Of the father and the son. 
2. Even though they are equal in sonship. 
3. Occupation. 'Utsaho vyavasaayah syaat savoryamatishaktimaak' - Amarakosha. 
4. Showing disregard. 
5. A relative. 
6. Condemning. 
7. Going. 
8. Named Maheendhar. 
9. The pleasures he would enjoy. 
10. 60, Lo, 
11. He desired pleasures, therefore, he desired pleasures. Bhoga-kaam-a, sa, 
12. Unsatisfying. 
13. Due to the cause. 
14. He will become detached. 
15. Saints. 
16. Himself. 
17. Immediately after. 
18. Lightning. 
19. At the end of the night. 
20. Waiting. 
21. -ka sukshma sa, a, 60, sa. 

Page #203:
---------------------------
..The Fifth Chapter
113. Just as a thirsty chatak bird is extremely fond of water falling from the clouds, and a blind man is extremely fond of the best medicine that removes the darkness of blindness, in the same way, Mahabala, who is driven by the time-bound opportunity like a messenger for a woman seeking liberation, will be extremely fond of the right Dharma after being enlightened by you. 218-219. The first dream that King Mahabala saw, consider it as an indication of the abundance he will attain in his future births, and the second dream, consider it as an indication of the extreme decline of his lifespan. 220. It is certain that only one month of his life remains, therefore, O noble one, for his welfare, act quickly, do not be negligent. 221. Saying this, and giving blessings to the minister Swayambuddha, the sky-walking Muni named Aditya-Gati disappeared along with his companion Arinjaya. 222. Swayambuddha, who was somewhat disturbed after hearing the Muni's words, also returned quickly to explain to Mahabala. 223. And immediately, going to Mahabala, he saw him sitting in anticipation and began to narrate all the words of the Rishi-raja, from the beginning to the end of the dream's results. 224. After that, he also gave this advice: "O wise one, this Dharma spoken by the Jina-endras is the destroyer of the lineage of all sorrows, therefore, fix your mind on it, follow it." 225. The wise Mahabala, knowing the fear of his lifespan from Swayambuddha, fixed his mind on abandoning the body - adopting Samadhi-death, in accordance with the Dharma. 226. The extremely prosperous king, performing the Ashtahika Maha-yajna with devotion in the Jina-mandir in the garden of his house, began to spend his days there. 227. He entrusted his prosperous kingdom to his son named Atibala, and after consulting with the ministers and all the people, he attained supreme independence. 228. After that, he quickly reached the supremely revered Siddha-kutta Chaityalaya. There, he worshipped the Siddha images and fearlessly took Sannyasa. 229. The wise Mahabala, in the presence of his Guru, renounced food, water, and the body for the rest of his life. 230. 
1. Janmanandha. 2. Andhamanandha karanamanandhakarana tasmin. 3. Karana paramaaushadham a. 4. Swalpattvam. 5. Nishchitamba, sa. 6. Cheshtam kuru. 7. Amanda. 8. Uktva. 9. Tiroshanam. 10. Aashirvada datva. - Rasha sya ba. 11. Tanmatam ma, 50, ta. Tavabhishttam. Dharmavruddhimiti yavat. 12. Nijapuram pratyagatah. 13. Hanta sambodhane, he mahabala. 14. Pataka. 15. Shikshamakarot. 16. Anayat. - Mahapayan ba, sa. 17. Santosham nitva. 18. Sannyasanam akarot. 19. Pratijna. 
15 

Page #204:
---------------------------
##  Translation:

114
The Adi Purana, a vast ocean of time, was crossed by Paruhmara, the great one. He honored the self-enlightened minister, the guide, as the one who would help him cross. ||23||
He cultivated equality, friendship, and non-attachment everywhere. He became a monk, free from external and internal attachments. ||232||
With a resolute mind, he embraced the vow of renunciation of body and food, and he devoted himself to the ultimate purity of worship with a calm and collected mind. ||233||
Having taken the vow of Prayopagama, he renounced all attachment to the body, desiring neither self-created nor other-created benefits. ||234||
His body became emaciated due to his intense austerities, but his mind remained focused on the five Supreme Beings, leading to the purification of his karma. ||235||
His body became weak due to prolonged fasting, but his vow remained firm. This is the vow of great souls, to never waver in their commitments. ||236||
His body, depleted of blood, flesh, and other bodily fluids, became as weak as the clouds of autumn. Or, you could say, he was like a god, free from flesh and blood. ||237||
Seeing him embrace the vow of the beginning of death, his eyes, as if filled with sorrow, retreated from their usual playful expressions. ||238||
Although his cheeks were dry, devoid of blood, flesh, and skin, he still retained the beauty of his past, like a golden statue, free from sin. ||239|| 

Page #205:
---------------------------
## The Fifth Chapter

115. His shoulders, once very thick and rough from the friction of the armlet, became extremely soft at that time. ||24|| 'His belly was slightly sunken in, and the three folds had disappeared, so it seemed like a dry, still pond without waves.' ||24|| 'He shone even more brightly, like a gold stone heated in fire, having attained supreme purity through the fire of penance.' ||24||  He bore the unbearable bodily pain with ease, and never succumbed to any adversity. Therefore, the Pariṣahas were defeated in battle against him, they could not deviate him from his path of duty. ||24||  Although only skin and bones remained in his body, he conquered many Pariṣahas by the power of his samadhi. Therefore, he was truly a 'Mahābala' (mighty) lion at that time. ||24||  He established the supreme Lord in his head, and the Arhant Lord in his heart. He wore the helmet, armor, and weapon of the Ācārya, Upādhyāya, and Sādhu, as a symbol of their meditation. ||24||  Through yoga, his eyes saw only the Supreme Soul, his ears heard only the supreme mantra (the Ṇamokāra mantra), and his tongue recited it. ||24||  He placed the Arhant Lord, free from impurities, in the chamber of his mind, like a lamp dispelling darkness with the light of meditation. ||24||  For twenty-two days, he continued the practice of Sallekhana. When the time of his death arrived, he focused his mind on the five supreme beings. He joined his hands and placed them on his forehead, silently chanting the mantra of salutation, and contemplating the separation of the soul from the body, like a sword from its sheath. ||24|| 

Page #206:
---------------------------
## The Adipurana, Chapter 1

**251.** Just as the Self-Enlightened Minister previously instilled strength (power or army) in the Great Strong One through the power of mantras, so too did he instill strength (power or self-strength) in him through the power of mantras at that time, the Great Strong One.

**252.** Thus, the Self-Enlightened Minister, acting without any expectation of reward, fulfilled his duty as the Great Strong One's Dharma-helper.

**253.** Then, shedding the burden of his body, he became light as a feather in an instant and attained the proximity of the great pleasure of the Aishana heaven.

**254.** There, on the Uppaada bed in the beautiful Vimāna called Shri-Prabha, he was born as the excellent Deva, Lalitaanga, the possessor of great wealth.

**255.** Just as lightning shines in a cloudless sky, so too did his divine Vaikriya body shine brightly on the Uppaada bed.

**256.** Filled with the fullness of youthful vigor and adorned with all auspicious marks, he arose from sleep, as if a young man had awakened, within a moment.

**257.** Adorned with blazing earrings, armlets, crowns, and anklets, wearing a garland and fine garments, the extremely radiant Deva Lalitaanga appeared.

**258.** His form shone at that time, like the water of a lotus pond, with eyes that did not blink, and a body as steady as two fish.

**259.** His arms were like bright branches, his palms like soft leaves, and his eyes like bees. His body possessed the splendor of a Kalpa tree.

**260.** What is the point of describing the divine form of Lalitaanga, born without a womb, so beautiful?

**261.** At that time, Kalpa trees themselves showered down a rain of flowers, and the deep sound of the Dundubhi drum filled the directions.

**262.** A gentle breeze, carrying the fragrance of Mandara flowers and pollen from the Nandan forest, blew softly, scattering droplets of water.

**263.** Then, he turned his gaze slightly, encompassing all directions with the radiance of his body, which was like a mountain of light. 

Page #207:
---------------------------
"Fifth festival, oh, what supreme majesty is this? Who am I? Who are these? They are bowing to me from afar. I am astonished for a moment.  Where have I come from? From where does my mind rejoice today? Whose is this bed? What is this beautiful, great ashram?  While thinking this, he suddenly gained knowledge. By that knowledge, he knew all the news of the self-enlightened minister, etc.  Oh, this is the beautiful fruit of my austerities, this is the heaven of great splendor. These are the gods, bowing, their bodies radiating light. This is the shining chariot, surrounded by Kalpa trees. These are the beautiful goddesses, adorned with jeweled anklets. This is the group of Apsaras, dancing with gentle smiles.  Here, beautiful and solemn songs are being sung, and there, the Mridanga is being played.  Thus, with the knowledge of the cycle of existence, he understood all of the above.  Lalitanga Deva, sitting comfortably on the bed, adorned with the rays of many jewels, was being approached by many gods, bowing.  They were saying in a loud voice, "Victory to you, O Lord! You are victorious, you are prosperous. You are the joy of the eyes, the one of great splendor, may you always grow, may your strength, knowledge, and wealth always increase."  Then, inspired by their own duties, many gods came to him with humility, bowing their heads and saying, "O Lord, the bathing materials are ready, so first, take a blessed bath, then perform the worship of the Jina, which increases merit.  Then, look at the army of gods, who have come from all directions, with their own groups, obtained by your good fortune.  Come here, to the theater, and see the beautiful divine dancers, dancing with grace and moving their eyebrows.  O God, honor the goddesses, adorned with beautiful clothes, because..." 

Page #208:
---------------------------


Page #209:
---------------------------
## The Fifth Chapter

119. He, the divine being, resided in bliss, sometimes on Mount Meru adorned with beautiful moonstone slabs and filled with the sounds of bees and cuckoos, sometimes on the peaks of great mountains like Nila, Nishadha, and others, sometimes on the summits of Vijayardha, sometimes on Mount Kundala, sometimes on Mount Ruchak, sometimes on the Manushottara mountain, sometimes in the Nandishvara Mahadeep, sometimes in other islands and seas, and sometimes in the regions like Bhogbhumi. ||290-292||

This great being, Lalitanga, possessing immense wealth and adorned with extraordinary splendor, enjoyed, according to his desires, a vast and magnificent divine pleasure, accompanied by many celestial nymphs, whose graceful movements were evident in their gentle smiles, laughter, and playful gestures, all arising from the fruition of his virtuous deeds. ||293||

This wise Lalitanga, in his previous birth, had purified his body through intense and painful austerities, and therefore, in this life, he enjoyed pleasures with beautiful and radiant celestial nymphs. Thus, happiness is born from Dharma, which arises from practices like austerities. Therefore, those who desire happiness should always strive to acquire Dharma. ||294||

O noble ones, if you desire immense wealth, then cultivate a thirst for austerities, abandoning the thirst for worldly pleasures. Worship the pure and glorious Jina, the Lord, and follow his teachings. Do not study the false doctrines of the wicked and misguided. ||295||

Thus, this Jain Dharma, which is worthy of praise and capable of bestowing the highest human values, is like a sharp axe that destroys the forest of evil deeds. Therefore, O wise ones, who desire happiness, strive diligently to serve this Dharma and have faith in the Jain teachings, which dispel ignorance. ||296||

Thus ends the Fifth Chapter, titled "Lalitanga's Heavenly Enjoyments," in the Trishattilakshana Mahapurana, a collection of scriptures composed by the venerable Jinaseena Acharya, known as the "Aarsha." ||5|| 

Page #210:
---------------------------
## Sixth Chapter

Once, the pure gems adorning Lalitangadeva, like lamps in the night, lost their brilliance.  ||1||

The garland, born with him, that adorned his broad chest, became dull, as if Lakshmi herself had lost her luster due to his separation. ||2||

The Kalpa tree, associated with his celestial abode, trembled, as if shaken by the great wind of his separation, and embraced fear. ||3||

His body's radiance dimmed quickly, for where could his shadow remain without the umbrella of his merit? ||4||

Seeing him thus, devoid of radiance and lost in gloom, the celestial beings born in the Aishana heaven were unable to bear the sight. ||5||

His servants, witnessing his sorrow, were also filled with grief.  For when a tree moves, do not its branches and twigs also move? ||6||

It seemed as if all the divine pleasures he had enjoyed since birth had turned into sorrow. ||7||

The news of the fading of his neck garland spread throughout the heavens, like a swift atom reaching the end of the universe. ||8||

Then, the divine beings of the Samajika caste approached him, offering words of comfort and solace. ||9||

"O valiant one, remember your fortitude and abandon sorrow.  For who is free from birth, death, old age, disease, and fear?" ||10||

"This fall from heaven is common to all.  When life's strength wanes, even heaven cannot be sustained for a moment." ||11|| 

Page #211:
---------------------------
## The Sixty Chapters

**121.** Even the eternal, luminous heaven, the Dyuloka, appears dark. It is enveloped in darkness from all sides due to the extinction of the lamp of merit.

**12.** Just as there was constant joy in heaven due to the flourishing of merit, so too, there arises constant sorrow when merit diminishes.

**13.** Not only does the garland, born with the being, fade, but even the body of beings becomes weary due to the scorching heat of sin.

**14.** The heart trembles first, then the Kalpa tree trembles at the end.  Sri (prosperity) fades first, then the body's radiance fades along with it.

**15.** First, there is a lack of affection among people, then the tongue grows large, and finally, even the clothes become distasteful.

**16.** First, pride is broken, then the desire for objects is lost. The darkness of ignorance first obstructs the mind, then the eyes.

**17.** How much more can be said? The intense sorrow that the gods experience when they are about to fall from heaven is not even experienced by those in hell. You are experiencing that great sorrow now.

**18.** Just as the rising sun is destined to set, so too, the beings who have attained heaven are destined to fall.

**19.** Therefore, O Arya, do not grieve, for grief leads to the cycle of rebirth.  Fix your mind on Dharma, for Dharma is the supreme refuge.

**20.** O Arya, no action ever occurs without a cause. Wise people say that merit is the cause of heaven and liberation.

**21.** Therefore, fix your mind on the Jain Dharma, which is the means to achieve merit. Abandon sorrow, for by doing so, you will surely become free from sin.

**22.** Thus, encouraged by the words of the Samanika Devas, Lalitangadeva took refuge in courage, fixed his mind on Dharma, and worshipped the Jina shrines throughout the world for fifteen days.

**23.** After that, worshipping the Jina images in the Achyuta heaven, he attained Samadhi at the end of his life. 

Page #212:
---------------------------
The Adipurana, bowing down to its words, I study without fear. Having calmed my fear, I fold my hands and disappear. ||25|| In Jambudvipa, in the great Meru, in the east, lies the land of Videha, beautiful and delightful, known as Pushkalavati. ||26|| This city, like a heavenly abode, is adorned with lotus ponds, paddy fields, forts, and moats. ||27|| Its king was Vajraबाहु, obedient like Indra. His queen, Vasundhara, was like another earth, full of virtues. ||28|| Their son, Kalitanga, fell from heaven and was known as Vajraja, a name that fit him well. ||29|| He, Vajraja, grew up, increasing his skills every day, crushing his enemies like lotuses, and growing like the moon in its second phase. ||30|| When he reached his youth, his beauty became unparalleled, like the full moon's radiance. ||31|| His head was adorned with black, curly, long hair, like the young ones of a black serpent, Kamakrishna. ||32|| His lotus-like face, with eyes like bees and a smile like saffron, held a sweet voice, like the nectar of honey. ||33|| His eyes, like flames, shone near his ears, as if they were studying subtle knowledge from the ears, which had heard many scriptures. ||34|| He wore a necklace around his neck, as white as frost, like a cluster of stars come to serve the moon, his face. ||35|| His broad chest was smeared with sandalwood, making it look like Mount Meru, adorned with the moonlight of autumn on its shores. ||36|| 

Page #213:
---------------------------


Page #214:
---------------------------
124
The wise one's time passed in great bliss, as it is said in the Adipurana. Now, it is said where the self-luminous celestial being was born after her fall from heaven. ||49|| 
Then, the self-luminous celestial being, upon falling from heaven, became very distressed due to the separation from her beloved. ||50||
Like the earth, devoid of radiance, bearing the heat in the summer, she too became devoid of radiance, bearing the pain of separation. And like the cuckoo, who stops its melodious call in the rainy season, she too stopped her melodious call. ||51||
Just as many difficult diseases torment a person in the absence of divine medicines, so too, many mental afflictions tormented the virtuous self-luminous celestial being in the absence of Lalitangadeva. ||52||
Then, a god named Dridhadharma, a member of the inner council, dispelled her sorrow and directed her mind towards the right path. ||53||
At that time, she was like a painted image, or like a valiant man, free from the fear of death, indifferent to worldly pleasures. ||54||
She, who was destined to become Srimatī, was devoted to the worship of the Jinas for six months, like a member of the lineage of the blessed ones. ||55||
Then, in the eastern direction, in the Jina temple of the forest of Saumanasa, remembering the five supreme beings, she attained samadhi and gave up her life at the foot of the Chaitya tree. As soon as she fell from heaven, she disappeared instantly like a star at the end of the night. ||56-57||
In the Videha region, as mentioned before, there is a city called Pundarikinī. Its ruler was a king named Vadanta. His queen, Lakshmi-mati, was truly beautiful, like Lakshmi herself. The king, adorned by her, was like a Kalpa tree adorned by a Kalpa vine. ||58-59||
Their daughter, known as Bhimatī, was famous. She was like the banner of Manoj, with her beauty and grace. ||60||
As the moon's phases bring joy to people in the month of Chaitra, so too, this young girl, like a moonbeam, brought joy to the world... 

Page #215:
---------------------------


Page #216:
---------------------------
126
The necklace, white and pure like frost, rested on the edge of her breasts, adorned with the beauty of the lotus bud, touching the foam. ||73|| Her neck, marked with many lines, bore the beauty of a conch shell, and she herself held beautiful shoulders, as if she were a swan with pure wings. ||74|| Her face, pleasing to the eyes, bore the beauty of both the moon and the lotus, for it seemed like the moon with its laughter-like moonlight, and like the lotus with the saffron-like rays of her teeth. ||75|| The moon, having performed the Chandrayana penance for a long time, due to the increase and decrease of its phases, had attained the likeness of her face. ||76|| Her eyes were so large that they overshadowed the ears adorned with lotuses. Who can bear the one who expands beyond his limits, even if he is close by? ||77|| Lotus-like ear ornaments were seen near her eyes, as if they wanted to see the beauty of the eyes that laughed at their own beauty. ||78|| The lady wore black tresses on her forehead, above her lotus-like face. Who does not bear the impure, harmless things that come to their shelter? That is, everyone does. ||79|| She wore soft, twisted locks of hair hanging down, as if she were a sandalwood tree with a long, black serpent-like body. ||80|| Thus, she, adorned with such beauty that even Cupid was driven mad, seemed to be made of the essence of the forms of the celestial nymphs. ||81|| It seemed that Brahma, having created Lakshmi, who was fickle, had washed away the sin he had earned by creating her, by creating this lady. ||82|| Seeing this lady, who was like the moon's phase, bringing joy to the people, her parents were filled with great joy. ||83||
1. Moon. 2. -Kudmal -A, S, D, M, L. 3. With lines. 4. Kambukandharavibhramam P, D, M, T. The beauty of the neck of the corpse. 5. Slightly raised. Shastavanso D, S, L. 6. Free from the defects mentioned in the Samudrika Lakshana, in the case of a woman, she is pure. 7. Simultaneously. 8. Adorned with ear ornaments. 9. 'Smridrish' is the rule of the Taddhita, so it is Anash. 10. Laughing. 11. -Ktamalakali A, 50, S, D. 12. Waistband. 13. Inclined. 14. Body. 15. Mother. 16. By the creation of the beautiful. 

Page #217:
---------------------------
## Sixth Chapter

127. And then, she was sleeping in a palace, pure like the feathers of a swan, adorned with precious jewels, and putting even celestial chariots to shame. ||44|| On that day, a strange event occurred, connected to her. In that city, where the possibility of liberation existed, the great teacher Yashodhar was seated in the middle of the garden called Manohar. ||85-86|| On that day, he attained liberation, and so the gods, riding in their chariots, arrived with their wealth to worship him. ||86|| A shower of flowers, accompanied by bees, filled the directions, as if it were a procession of eyes sent by the goddess of heaven to see Yashodhar. ||87|| At that time, the gentle breeze, carrying the fragrance of the dense, saffron-colored flowers of the Mandara trees, and the buzzing of the gathered bees, made a beautiful sound. ||88|| And the sound of the drums, filling the ten directions, along with the great clamor arising from the joy of the gods, was resounding. ||89|| Hearing that sound, she woke up suddenly in the morning, and, hearing the roar of the clouds, she became frightened, like a swan that is afraid. ||90|| Seeing the arrival of the gods, she immediately remembered her past life, and remembering Lalitang, she became anxious and repeatedly sighed. ||91|| Then, her friends, using various cooling treatments and the air from fans, comforted her, but she still did not raise her head. ||92|| At that time, the body of Lalitang, beautiful, shining with radiance, handsome, and adorned with many excellent qualities, was shining in her heart, as if it were written there. ||93|| With many anxieties, her friends asked her the reason, but she remained silent. Thinking, "It is best for me to remain silent until I obtain Lalitang," she remained silent. ||94|| Then, the frightened friends, along with the guards, went and told her parents everything. 

Page #218:
---------------------------
128
Hearing the news, her parents rushed to her side, overcome with grief at her state. ||96||
"Daughter, come into our embrace, come into our arms," they pleaded. But even when urged, she remained silent and unconscious. ||97||
Seeing this, the wise and discerning King Vanadanta, addressed Queen Lakshmi-mati, "My dear, your daughter has reached the fullness of her youth. ||98||
Look at her beauty, her radiant form, so rare even among the celestial nymphs. ||99||
Don't worry, my dear, this state of hers is not harmful. It is not a disease, so don't be afraid. ||100||
Surely, some memory of a past life has awakened in her heart. For often, beings are overcome by the recollection of past karmas. ||101||
Saying this, King Vanadanta rose, accompanied by Queen Lakshmi-mati, and appointed the learned nurse, Pandita, to comfort the girl. ||102||
At that moment, two important tasks arose before him simultaneously. One was to perform the puja for his Guru, Yashodhar Maharaj, who had attained Kevalgyan (omniscience), and the other was to embark on a Digvijay (conquest) campaign, as the Chakra-ratna (divine weapon) had been born in the armory. ||103||
Faced with these two pressing matters, King Vanadanta was momentarily perplexed, unsure which to prioritize. ||104||
Then, pondering the situation, the wise Vanadanta decided to first perform the puja for his Guru, Yashodhar Maharaj's Kevalgyan. ||105||
For, wise men always prioritize immediate tasks over distant ones, and then attend to the more important, distant tasks. ||106||
Therefore, the most important task, like the puja of an Arhant, which brings great merit, immense prosperity, and is a righteous duty, should be undertaken first. ||107||
1. Quickly. 2. Nearby. 3. Seeing her. 4. Embrace. 5. Lap. 6. Ours. 7. Even when urged. 8. Becomes unconscious. 9. Mental disturbance. 10. Arrived. 11. Pondering. 12. Arrived from afar. 13. Duty. 14. Perishable. 

Page #219:
---------------------------
The Clear Festival

Thinking thus in his mind, King Vajradanta rose to perform an excellent worship of Yashodhara Maharaja, which would increase his merit. || 108 || Then, along with his army, he approached the World Teacher and worshipped him, his lotus-like face beaming with joy. || 109 || As the radiant-minded Vajradanta prostrated at the feet of Yashodhara, he attained knowledge of the past, present, and future. It is right, for what will not be the fruit of devotion with pure results? Or what fruits will it not bear? || 110 || By that knowledge of the past, present, and future, the king realized that in a previous life he was Indra of the Acyuta heaven, and this was his daughter, Srimat Lalitangadevi, known as Svayamprabha. || 111 || Having performed prostrations and other rites, the wise Vajradanta returned from there and entrusted his daughter Srimat to the Pandita nurse, and then quickly set out to conquer the directions. || 112 || The Chakravarti, radiant like Indra, worshipped the Chakra-ratna and then, with his six-fold army of elephants, horses, chariots, infantry, gods, and Vidyadharas, set out to conquer the directions. || 113 || 

Then, one day, the extremely clever Pandita nurse, in private, began to speak to Srimat with words full of cunning, in order to make her understand. || 114 || At that time, she was sitting on a moonstone slab in the middle of the Asoka grove, and with her soft hand, she was lovingly touching the limbs of Srimat, who was sitting in front of her. As she spoke, the flow of water-like rays from her lotus-like mouth, which came from her teeth, seemed as if she were extinguishing the burning of Srimat's heart. || 115-116 || She said, "Daughter, I am Pandita, the planner of all actions, extremely clever. Therefore, my name Pandita is true, meaningful. Besides, I am like your mother and a dear friend who will always be with you like your life." || 117 || "Therefore, O blessed daughter, tell me the reason for your silence here. For it is well known that illness is not hidden from one's mother." || 118 || "I have carefully considered this behavior of yours in my mind, but I have not understood anything. Therefore, O daughter, tell me clearly." || 119 || "O friend, is this the madness of love, or the pain of some planet? For often, at the beginning of youth, the planet of love stirs." || 120 || 

Page #220:
---------------------------
130
When asked about the Adipurana, her lotus-like face drooped, like a wilted lotus at sunset.  She said, "It is true, I cannot speak such words in front of anyone, my heart is overwhelmed with shame."  "But today, I am not ashamed to speak before you, for I am deeply distressed, and you are like a mother to me, and we are long acquainted."  "So, listen, O beautiful one, I will tell you a great story.  Seeing the arrival of the gods has brought back memories of my past life."  "What was that past life like? What was that story? I will tell you everything in detail.  It all seems so vivid in my memory, like a dream."  "In a previous birth, I was called Dhataki-khanda, in a great island, lotus-eyed, surpassing even the heavens."  "There, in the Videha region, west of Mount Meru, lies the country of Gandhila, which could conquer even the Devakuru and Uttarakuru with its beauty."  "In that country, in the village of Patali, lived a merchant named Nagadatta.  His wife was called Sumati, and they had five sons: Nanda, Nandimitra, Nandishena, Varensena, and Jayasena, in that order.  They also had two daughters: Madanashri and Shrikant."  "In that past life, I was their youngest daughter, called Nirnama."  "Once, in the beautiful forest of Charanacharita, on the Ambertilaka mountain, I saw the Muni, Pihithamarava, adorned with many powers and possessing perfect knowledge.  I bowed and asked him, 'O Lord, by what karma was I born into this poor family?  Please, O Master, tell me the reason, and be merciful to this wretched and deeply troubled woman.'"  "The Muni, hearing this, spoke in sweet words, 'Daughter, in your past life, you were born in this very country, in the village of Devilagrama, on the Palala mountain.'" 

Page #221:
---------------------------
The Sixth Chapter
131
In the village of Palala Parvata, from the Devigramakoota, there was a daughter named Dhanshri, well-known in the womb of Sumati. ||135||
One day, out of ignorance, she placed the putrid body of a dog near the Muni's Samadhi, and was happy about her act. ||136||
Seeing this, the Muni said to her, "You have done a very wrong act, O girl. This will bear a bitter fruit for you in the future, because disrespect to the venerable ones brings great suffering in other births." ||137-138||
Approaching him, she begged for forgiveness, saying, "O Bhagavan, I did this out of ignorance, please forgive me." ||139||
Due to that appeasement, you received a little merit, and because of that, you have been born in this extremely poor family in this human birth. ||140||
Therefore, O Kalyani, accept the *Jinengra Guna Sampatti* and *Shruta Gyan* vows, one after the other. ||141||
O Arya, this *Anashan* (fasting) penance, performed according to the rules, is considered to quickly destroy the karmas. ||142||
The sixteen *Karana Bhavanas* (causes of meditation), five *Kalyanaks* (auspicious events), eight *Pratiharayas* (miracles), and thirty-four *Atishyas* (superhuman powers) are the sixty-three qualities that are the cause of the *Tirthankara* (liberated soul) merit. The *Jinengra Guna Sampatti* vow is performed with these sixty-three qualities as the goal. ||143-144||
The Muni's like Ganadhara have said that one should perform sixty-three fasts in the *Jinengra Guna Sampatti* vow. Now, the nature of the *Shruta Gyan* vow is being explained. ||145||
Twenty-eight, eleven,
... 1. *Nydhan Mudha* 2. *Nikrishtam* 3. *Poojyavagna* 4. *Grahayat Tada* 5. *Kshibram* 6. *Utkrisht Daridre* 7. *Tadanantara* 8. *He Punyavati* 9. *Shubham* 10. *Vratam* 11. *Etad Dwaya Namakam* 12. *Kramanatikram* 13. *Paripachana* 14. *Kathitam* 15. *Uposhitavrate* 16. *Atishya* 17. *Jinaguna Sampatto* 18. *Mati Gyanam* 19. *Panchakam* 

Page #222:
---------------------------
132
Adipurana
Know the number one hundred and fifty-eight from the categories of Mati, Jnana, etc. The order of their names is remembered as follows: || 147 ||
Mati, Jnana, Ayas, eleven Angas, two Parikarmas, eighty-four Sutras, one Anuyoga, fourteen Purvas, five Chulika, two Avadhi, two Manas-paryaya, and one Kevala. Thus, the one hundred and fifty-eight days of fasting for the realization of these one hundred and fifty-eight types of knowledge is called the Shruta Jnana Upavasa Vrata. || 148-149 ||
O son, you too should perform the two aforementioned Anashana Vratas according to the rules. || 150 ||
O son, the main fruit of these two Vratas is the attainment of Kevala Jnana, and the secondary fruit is the attainment of heaven, etc. || 151 ||
O Kalyani, see, the Munis are capable of both cursing and blessing, therefore, insulting them is harmful to both worlds. || 152 ||
Those who transgress the Munis by speech become mute in the next birth. Those who disrespect them with their minds lose their memory, which is connected to the mind. And those who disrespect them with their bodies, what kind of suffering do they not receive? Therefore, wise men should never disrespect the Tapasvi Munis. || 153 ||
O Mugdha, those who ignite the fire of anger in the Munis, who possess the wealth of forgiveness, with the embers of harsh words, born from the wood of delusion, driven by the wind of opposition, and covered with the ashes of forgiveness, what good of theirs in both worlds is not destroyed? || 154-156 ||
Thus, accepting the beneficial words of the Muni, and performing the Upavasa of both Jinenra Guna Sampatti and Shruta Jnana Vratas according to the rules, I went to heaven at the end of my life. || 157 ||
There, there was a beautiful Mahadevi named Swayamprabha, the beloved of Lalitanga Deva. From there, along with Lalitanga Deva, I came to the Madhyaloka and worshipped the Pihithastrava Guru who gave me the Vrata. || 158 ||
Possessing great Siddhis, I enjoyed the pleasures in that Aishana heaven, along with the lord of the Sri Prabha Vimana, Lalitanga.
Six,
1. Sankhya cha A, P, S, D, L.
2. Paryayan A, P, S, D, L.
3. Vidhi B, A, D, M, P, L, 80.
4. Vidhi.
5. - Yoranushangajam A, P, 60, M, L, 80.
6. Anushangikam.
7. Samarthaha.
8. Atikramanam.
9. Kayena atikrame tesham karthi sa ya na dhokte. A, P, S, D. Kayena atikramaste sham kayatim sadhaye tatram. M.
10. Pratip - A, S, D.
11. Pratikulyameva vayu.
12. Bhuktva tu. 

Page #223:
---------------------------
The Sixth Chapter

133. After being expelled from the heaven of Lalita, I worshipped the Jina for six months. Then I was born here. 

160. O slender-waisted one, I am now remembering that event and striving to find him. That is why I have taken a vow of silence.

161. O friend, look, Lalitaanga still resides in my heart. It is as if someone has engraved him there forever. Even though his divine body is not here, he is present in my heart with his divine power, in the form of ananga (absence of body and the nature of Kamadeva).

162. O beautiful-faced one, I see his body, which is so gentle and beautiful, adorned with clothes and garlands that were born with him, and shining with brilliant ornaments. I see the touch of his hand, which is so soft and delightful. But without him, my body is not losing its thinness.

163-164. These tears are constantly flowing from my eyes, as if they are unable to bear my sorrow and are eager to find Lalitaanga.

165. Saying this, she again addressed her friend Pandita, "O dear friend, you are the only one who can find my husband. No one else can do this task."

166. O lotus-eyed one, how can I be unhappy while you are here? Does the lotus suffer when the sun shines brightly? Of course not.

167. O friend, you are very skilled in doing all tasks. Therefore, you are truly a Pandita - your name Pandita is meaningful. So, the success of this task depends on you.

168. O friend, protect my life by finding my husband Lalitaanga. Women are the only support for women in times of distress.

169. "I will tell you the way to achieve this goal today. I have written down the details of our past life connection." 

Page #224:
---------------------------
134
Adipurana
Some of the contents of this painting are a bit mysterious and pleasing to the mind. It is a source of delusion for the wicked. ||171|| "Those who falsely claim to be husbands, with their arrogant minds, should be covered with the garment of humor, like the rays of the moon, in the midst of the difficulties of the mysterious subjects." ||172|| Having said this, the wise woman, with a smile like the rays of the moon, spoke words of comfort to her friend, like a cuckoo singing on a mango tree. ||173|| "My dear, while I am here, your heart will not be troubled, just as a cuckoo does not suffer while the mango tree is in bloom." ||174|| "My dear, just as a poet's mind seeks out the best meaning, and Lakshmi seeks out a hardworking man, so too will I find your husband." ||175|| "My dear, I am a clever and determined woman, and I will surely accomplish this task for you. You can be sure that there is nothing difficult for me in these three worlds." ||176|| "Therefore, my dear, just as the Madhavi vine adorns itself with clusters of coral and buds, so too should you adorn yourself with various ornaments." ||177|| "You should have no doubt about the success of this task, for the desires of a fortunate woman are always fulfilled." ||178|| Having said this, the wise woman comforted her friend and, taking the painting she had given her, quickly went to the Mahapuja, or the very holy Jain temple. ||179|| The Jain temple, with its lofty towers shining with the rays of jewels, seemed as if the serpent king, with his hood raised, had emerged from the underworld, pleased. ||180|| The walls of the temple were like courtesans, for just as courtesans are born of mixed blood (adultery with Brahmins and other castes) and are full of wondrous deeds, 
1. Those who call themselves husbands are called patibruvas. 2. Boldness. 3. Flower garland. 4. Kiranti a, s, d, l. 5. Flower. 6. Excellent. 7. Know. 8. Vasantatilakevodyat l. Madhavi vine. 9. New leaves. 10. Duty. 11. Sri means wealth, so Srimat means a wealthy woman, and the desired objects of such a woman. 12. By any means. 13. [Painting work] In the case of various kinds of sinful deeds. 

Page #225:
---------------------------
135
52
The sixth chapter: 'It seemed as if the sky was opening up, as if the heavens were being unveiled, with its towering peaks adorned with a multitude of gems, shining brightly.' (182) 'The constant chanting of the virtuous assembly, the sound of their hymns, seemed like a conversation with the fortunate ones who had arrived.' (183) 'The banners, attached to the peaks, swayed in the wind, adorned with auspicious symbols, as if calling upon the gods.' (184) 'The smoke and incense emanating from the windows seemed to be forming new clouds, as if to offer a gift to heaven.' (185) 'The stars, with their shimmering rays, clinging to the edges of the peaks, created an illusion of a floral offering, as if the gods in the sky were being presented with flowers.' (186)
The temple, adorned with beautiful paintings, was a place of virtuous conduct, filled with the sound of hymns, and thus resembled a great epic poem. (187) With its banners fluttering, bells ringing, and the deep sound of hymns, it stood firm on its strong pillars, like a mighty elephant. (188) The temple, with its sound of chanting and the cries of praise, even in the absence of rain, would excite the peacocks, mistaking the sound for thunder. (189)
The peak, constantly praised by the charanas, seemed to be a mountain of knowledge, like Mount Meru, surrounded by the celestial beings. (190) Just as the beautiful women of the world captivate the hearts of men, so too did the temple, adorned with its colorful paintings, captivate the hearts of all beings. (181) 

Page #226:
---------------------------
## Chapter 136

The learned woman, having paid homage to the Jina, spread out her scroll in the hall of the scroll and sat down, eager to test those who had come. Some, with great intelligence, looked at the scroll with care. Others, seeing it, exclaimed loudly, "What is this?" 

The learned woman answered them with appropriate words, her face adorned with a gentle smile, as she addressed the learned ones. 

Then the victorious wheel-turning king, having conquered all directions, returned, having vanquished all the enemies of knowledge, the demons. He then received the anointment of kingship from thirty-two thousand lords of the earth. What is not attainable through merit? 

He and they, though equal in form, with hands, feet, and faces, were yet unequal in merit, due to the power of his merit. His body was peerless, his face as gentle as the moon, his eyes like lotuses. By virtue of his merit, he surpassed all men and gods. 

On his feet shone the marks of the conch, discus, and goad, as if Lakshmi herself had inscribed these auspicious signs on the wheel-turning king. 

While this king, with his righteous rule, governed the earth, no one, even among those who had committed offenses, was punished. He carried Lakshmi on his chest and Saraswati on his lips, but he had no space to carry his own beloved fame, so he sent it alone to the end of the world. 

Page #227:
---------------------------
**Chapter**
137

Like a shining sun, like a brilliant gem, he, the king, was radiant with splendor and brilliance. His glorious rise was truly wondrous.  || 201 ||

Like the fruits of a virtuous Kalpa tree, his fourteen great treasures appeared, signifying the abundance of his virtue. || 202 ||

He possessed nine inexhaustible treasuries, like heaps of merit, ensuring the prosperity of his kingdom. || 203 ||

He, the virtuous king, protected the earth adorned with six continents, enjoying the fruits of his tenfold path of righteousness for a long time. || 204 ||

**Harini Chhandas**

Thus, having conquered the world with his valor, the king, accompanied by his victorious army, returned to his capital. He shone like Indra, adorned with a radiant crown and sparkling earrings, entering Amravati with his celestial army. || 205 ||

**Malini**

Even after completing all his duties, the king, with a slight concern for his daughter's marriage, entered his city, adorned with magnificent splendor, his banners fluttering gently in the breeze. || 206 ||

**Sardula Vikridita**

The soldiers of his army, who had crushed sandalwood trees in the forests on the shores of the ocean, where fragrant clove vines grew, were seen by the celestial nymphs, who gazed at them with languid, beautiful eyes. These nymphs, who had taken shelter in the caves of the victorious mountain, were the companions of the victorious king, who enjoyed the fruits of his merit for a long time. || 207 || 

Page #228:
---------------------------
The Adipurana, having invaded the forest-altar, crossed the shores of Vijayad, the turbulent Ganga and the Sindhu, and having disregarded the heights of the Himalayas, obtained the glory of the wheel-bearing, the knower of the Jina-doctrine, Sri Vadantha. ||20|| Thus ends the sixth chapter of the Trishattilakshana Mahapurana, composed by the venerable Jinasena Acharya, entitled "The Description of Lalitanga's Descent from Heaven." ||6|| 

Page #229:
---------------------------
Seventh Chapter

Calling his daughter, the Cakri said to her, "My dear, do not grieve, be silent. I know all about your husband's situation through my Avadhi knowledge." [1]

"My dear daughter, bathe happily, adorn yourself, and look at your face in the mirror, which is like the moon." [3]

"Eat and delight your friends with sweet words. Your beloved husband will surely come, either today or tomorrow." [4]

"I attained Avadhi knowledge at the time of the great yogi Yashodhar's Kevala Jnana festival. From that time, I have known about some births." [5]

"Listen, daughter, I will tell you separately about the past births of you, me, and your husband." [6]

"In the fifth birth before this, I was born in this very city of  Pundarika, which is as radiant as a heavenly city, and was known as Chandrakirti, the son of an Ardha Cakravartin." [7]

"At that time, I had a friend named Jayakirti, who grew up with me." [8]

"We enjoyed ourselves together in this city, having inherited the prosperity of our father's lineage." [9]

"At that time, I was a householder who observed the Anuvrata vows. Then, at the end of my life, I went to a guru named Chandrasena to attain Samadhi." [10]

"In the garden called Pritivardhana, I renounced food and body and was born in the fourth Mahendra heaven through the power of Sannyasa." [11]

"There, I became a Samanika deva, with a lifespan of seven oceans. My friend Jayakirti was also born there, possessing the same powers as me." [12]

"At the end of our lifespan, we were both born in the Pushkara island, which is located in the eastern Mandara mountain range, in the Videha region." [13] 

Page #230:
---------------------------
The Adipurana
In the city of Ratnasanchay in the Mangalavati country, in the Purva-Videha region, related to the Eastern Meru, in the Pushkara island, we were born as the sons of King Shridhara. I was Balabhadra and Jayakirtika was Narayana. I was born to Queen Manohara, the wife of King Shridhara, and my name was Shrivarma. Jayakirtika was born to the same king's other queen, Manorama, and his name was Vibhishana. We both, being brothers, enjoyed the kingdom for a long time. || 13-15 || Our father, King Shridhara, entrusted me with the burden of the kingdom and took initiation from Sudharma Acharya. He attained the Siddha state by observing many types of fasts. || 16 || My mother, Manohara, had great affection for me, so she remained at home for a long time, observing pure vows and performing the austerities prescribed by Sudharma Acharya. || 17 || She observed the *Karmakshapana* fast according to the rules and at the end of her life, she left her body in a state of Samadhi, which led her to become Lalitanga Deva in heaven. || 18 || After some time, my brother Vibhishana passed away and I was deeply grieved by his loss. At that time, Lalitanga Deva came and explained to me in many ways. || 19 || "O son, do not grieve like an ignorant man. Understand this for sure, in this world, there are always fears of birth, death, etc." || 20 || Thus, being explained by Lalitanga Deva, who was my mother in the past, I gave up my grief and became happy, focusing my mind on Dharma. || 21 || After that, I took Jain initiation from Shri Yugandhara Muni along with five thousand kings. || 22 || I performed the extremely difficult but fruitful *Singhanishkidita* and *Sarvatobhadra* austerities according to the rules and attained the pure light of knowledge, which is the form of Mati, Shruta, and Avadhi Jnana. Then, at the end of my life, I died and attained the Indra position in the sixteenth heaven called Achyuta, which is endowed with many powers. My lifespan there was twenty-two Sagaras. || 23-24 || In that very radiant Achyuta heaven, I enjoyed divine pleasures. One day, out of love for my mother, I went to worship Lalitanga Deva. || 25 || 

Page #231:
---------------------------
The Seventh Chapter
1
I placed him in the very bright chariot called Pritivardhana and brought him to my own heaven (the sixteenth heaven) and honored him greatly. ||26||  He, my mother's being, enjoyed divine pleasures in that heaven of great happiness and I honored him many times while he was there. ||27||  Then, Lalitanga, leaving that place, went to the eastern Videha region of Jambudvipa, to the northern range of the Vijayardha mountain in the Mangalavati country, and was born as the son of the queen Prabhavati, wife of Vasava, the king of Gandharvapura, the lord of the celestial beings. ||28-29||  King Vasava, entrusting his entire kingdom to his son Mahadhara, performed the Muktavali tapasya near the sage Arinjaya and attained Nirvana. Queen Prabhavati, initiated by the Aryika Padmavati, performed the excellent Ratnavali tapasya and became the Pratindra in the Achyuta heaven. Meanwhile, Mahadhara also became proficient in many sciences and attained extraordinary wealth. ||30-32||  One day, I went to the western part of the Pushkarardha island, to the Videha region of Vatsakavati. There, in the city of Prabhakari, I performed the Nirvana-kalyana puja of the venerable Vinayandhara Muni and, after completing the puja, went to Mount Meru. There, I saw Mahadhara (Lalitanga's being) engaged in the worship of knowledge in the Chaityalaya located in the eastern part of Nandana forest. I addressed him in a loud voice, "Oh, blessed one, know that I am the Indra of the Achyuta heaven and you are Lalitanga. You are my mother's being, and I have an extraordinary love for you. Oh, blessed one, now be free from the attachment to these worldly pleasures that cause suffering." ||33-37||  As soon as I said this, he became detached from worldly pleasures and, entrusting his kingdom to his eldest son, Mahikampa, became a disciple of the Muni Jagannandana along with many celestial beings. He performed the Kanakavali tapasya and, by its power, became the Indra of the Pranat heaven, the holder of the position for twenty oceans. There, he enjoyed many pleasures and then went to the Gandhila country, located in the western Videha region, in the eastern part of the Dhatakikhanda island. 

Page #232:
---------------------------
142
In the city of Ayodhya, in the land of Gandhara, Jayavarman had a son named Ajitanjaya, born to his wife Suprabha. ||4|| After entrusting his kingdom to Ajitanjaya, Jayavarman went to the great sage Abhinandan and took initiation, performing the Achaamlavardhana tapa. ||42|| Freed from the bonds of karma, he attained the supreme state, where there is infinite, imperishable, and uninterrupted bliss. ||43|| Suprabha, after reaching the Ganini Sudarshana, performed the Ratnavala vow and became a deity in the Achyuta heaven. ||44|| Ajitanjaya, becoming a Chakravarti, went to pay homage to Abhinandan. While doing so, the doors of his papaasrava were closed, hence he was named Pihitavrava. ||45|| With this meaningful name, he enjoyed the pleasures of his kingdom for a long time. ||46|| One day, I spoke to him with affection, saying, "O noble one, do not be attached to these perishable objects. See, wise people call that state of contentment which is not born of objects and is free from any end, as true happiness. That contentment cannot be attained even by enjoying the best of objects, both human and divine. These objects have been enjoyed repeatedly, and their taste does not change. If the taste is the same as before, what is the benefit of chewing what has already been chewed? One who is not satisfied with the pleasures of Indra, how can he be satisfied with the pleasures of mortals? Therefore, give up these perishable pleasures that do not bring true contentment." ||47-50|| Thus, inspired by my words, Pihitavrava, along with twenty thousand great kings, took initiation from the great sage Mandarastavira and attained the knowledge of Avadhi and the Charana power. ||51|| It was Pihitavrava, on the mountain Ambaratilaka, who in a previous life, gave you the vows of Jinaguna and Shrutajnana, which lead to the supreme happiness of heaven. Thus, O daughter, Pihitavrava, who was my teacher in a previous life, was your mother's soul. ||52-53|| 

Page #233:
---------------------------
Seventh Chapter
143. Then my Guru, who was also your desired Guru, worshipped twenty-two Lalitanga Devas with love for the Guru. ||54|| Among them, your husband was a Mahabala in the previous birth. He attained the glory of being a Deva by the teachings of the Self-Enlightened. ||55|| The twenty-second Lalitanga, having fallen from heaven, is now in the mortal realm. He is our closest relative. He will be your husband. ||56|| Listen, O Kamalane, I will tell you another story that will make you aware. When I was Indra of Achyuta heaven, Brahma Indra and Lantava Indra, with devotion, asked me, "We have attained Samyagdarshan in the Tirtha of Yugandhar Jinendra, so now we want to know his complete biography." ||57-58|| Then I told them, and also to you two couples (Lalitanga and Swayamprabha) who had come along with them by chance, the biography of Yugandhar Swami. ||59||
In the eastern Videha region of Jambudvipa, there is a country called Vatsakavati, which is like a land of enjoyment. In this country, to the south of the Sota river, there is a city called Susima. In that city, there lived two scholars named Prahasita and Vikasita, who were very intelligent and possessed knowledge as their wealth. ||60-61|| The king of that city was Sriman Ajitangaya. His minister was named Mitamati, and his beloved daughter was named Satyabhama. Prahasita was the intelligent son of these two, and Vikasita was his friend. These two always stayed together. ||62-63|| These two scholars were experts in all subjects like Heta, Hetvabhasa, Chal, Jati, etc., and were dedicated to mastering grammar, the ocean of knowledge. ||64|| 

Page #234:
---------------------------
144
The learned scholar, a master of debate, was a true connoisseur of knowledge, a sharp blade in the assemblies of learned discourse.  He was a true connoisseur of knowledge, a sharp blade in the assemblies of learned discourse.  He was a true connoisseur of knowledge, a sharp blade in the assemblies of learned discourse.  He was a true connoisseur of knowledge, a sharp blade in the assemblies of learned discourse.  He was a true connoisseur of knowledge, a sharp blade in the assemblies of learned discourse.  He was a true connoisseur of knowledge, a sharp blade in the assemblies of learned discourse.  He was a true connoisseur of knowledge, a sharp blade in the assemblies of learned discourse.  He was a true connoisseur of knowledge, a sharp blade in the assemblies of learned discourse.  He was a true connoisseur of knowledge, a sharp blade in the assemblies of learned discourse.  He was a true connoisseur of knowledge, a sharp blade in the assemblies of learned discourse.  He was a true connoisseur of knowledge, a sharp blade in the assemblies of learned discourse.  He was a true connoisseur of knowledge, a sharp blade in the assemblies of learned discourse.  He was a true connoisseur of knowledge, a sharp blade in the assemblies of learned discourse.  He was a true connoisseur of knowledge, a sharp blade in the assemblies of learned discourse.  He was a true connoisseur of knowledge, a sharp blade in the assemblies of learned discourse.  He was a true connoisseur of knowledge, a sharp blade in the assemblies of learned discourse.  He was a true connoisseur of knowledge, a sharp blade in the assemblies of learned discourse.  He was a true connoisseur of knowledge, a sharp blade in the assemblies of learned discourse.  He was a true connoisseur of knowledge, a sharp blade in the assemblies of learned discourse.  He was a true connoisseur of knowledge, a sharp blade in the assemblies of learned discourse.  He was a true connoisseur of knowledge, a sharp blade in the assemblies of learned discourse.  He was a true connoisseur of knowledge, a sharp blade in the assemblies of learned discourse.  He was a true connoisseur of knowledge, a sharp blade in the assemblies of learned discourse.  He was a true connoisseur of knowledge, a sharp blade in the assemblies of learned discourse.  He was a true connoisseur of knowledge, a sharp blade in the assemblies of learned discourse.  He was a true connoisseur of knowledge, a sharp blade in the assemblies of learned discourse.  He was a true connoisseur of knowledge, a sharp blade in the assemblies of learned discourse.  He was a true connoisseur of knowledge, a sharp blade in the assemblies of learned discourse.  He was a true connoisseur of knowledge, a sharp blade in the assemblies of learned discourse.  He was a true connoisseur of knowledge, a sharp blade in the assemblies of learned discourse.  He was a true connoisseur of knowledge, a sharp blade in the assemblies of learned discourse.  He was a true connoisseur of knowledge, a sharp blade in the assemblies of learned discourse.  He was a true connoisseur of knowledge, a sharp blade in the assemblies of learned discourse.  He was a true connoisseur of knowledge, a sharp blade in the assemblies of learned discourse.  He was a true connoisseur of knowledge, a sharp blade in the assemblies of learned discourse.  He was a true connoisseur of knowledge, a sharp blade in the assemblies of learned discourse.  He was a true connoisseur of knowledge, a sharp blade in the assemblies of learned discourse.  He was a true connoisseur of knowledge, a sharp blade in the assemblies of learned discourse.  He was a true connoisseur of knowledge, a sharp blade in the assemblies of learned discourse.  He was a true connoisseur of knowledge
Page #235:
---------------------------
The word "Jiva" refers to an external object, as it is a noun. Just like the words "worldly pot", "delusion", "opinion", and "reason", all nouns are related to a specific object.  

The Muni explained the nature of the Jiva using these arguments. Hearing this, both scholars abandoned their pride and bowed to the Muni. 

Both scholars, in the presence of the same Muni, performed intense austerities and observed the Sudarshan and Achamlavardhan vows. They also received the boon of attaining the Narayana state. At the end of their lifespan, both left their bodies and became the best of gods, Indra and Pratindra, in the Maha Shukra heaven, residing in a space equivalent to sixteen oceans. They were immersed in happiness and experienced the bliss of heavenly fortune. 

At the end of their lifespan, both departed from there and were born as sons of King Dharmajay and Queen Yashovati in the city of Pundarikin in the Pushkalavati country, in the eastern part of the Videha region, which is part of the western region of the Dhataki Khand island. They were born as Balabhadra and Narayana, who were destined to attain those states. Now, the order of their birth was reversed. Balabhadra was destined to ascend, and Narayana was destined to descend. The elder son was named Mahabal, and the younger was named Atibal. 

At the end of his reign, when Narayana (Atibal) reached the end of his lifespan, Mahabal performed intense austerities after taking initiation from the Muni Samadhi Gupta. At the end of his lifespan, he left his body and became Indra in the fourteenth heaven called Pranat. 

There, he enjoyed the fortune of the gods for twenty oceans. At the end of his lifespan, he departed from there and was born as the son of Queen Vasundhara, the wife of King Maha Sen, the ruler of the city of Prabhakari in the Vatsakavati country, in the eastern part of the Videha region, which is part of the western region of the Dhataki Khand island. He was born as Jayasen, who brought joy to all the people like the moon. 

He became a Chakravarti, and... 

Page #236:
---------------------------
146
He meditated on the sixteen causes at the root of the lotus feet of Simandhar Swami for a long time and performed flawless austerities. ||4|| At the end of his lifespan, he attained the position of Ahmindra in the middle of the eighth Praveyak. He experienced divine pleasures for thirty oceans and then descended from there. He was born as a son named Yugandhar, famous in the Ratnasamchay city of Mangalavati country in the Videha region in the east of Pushkaradweep, to King Ajit-anjay and Queen Vasumati. That son was worshipped by humans and gods. ||89-91|| That same son, who received worship from Indra and other gods in the three auspicious events of conception, birth, and austerities, is now, in sequence, a Kevalgyani and worshipped by all. ||92|| Thus, in the life of that blessed being, he enjoyed the pleasures of heaven for sixty-six oceans (16+20+30=66) through virtuous deeds and attained the Arhant position. ||13|| This Yugandhar Swami is the most excellent man of this age, a Tirthankara, the driver of the chariot of Dharma, and like the sun, he causes the lotus forest of the Bhavyas to bloom. May such Tirthankara Devas protect us, remove the sorrows of the world, and grant us the position of liberation. ||94|| At that time, many beings attained Samyagdarshan upon hearing my words, and you two (Lalitang and Swayamprabha) also attained supreme love for Dharma. ||95|| Daughter, you will remember that when Pihitastrav Bhattarak attained Kevalgyan, we all went together to worship him. ||96|| Daughter, you also know that we used to go to the Swayambhurman ocean and Anjanagiri mountain for recreation. ||97|| Thus, after the father finished speaking, Shrimati said, "Father, by your grace, I know all this." The worship of Gurudev Pihitastrav Muni's Kevalgyan on the Ambaratilak mountain, which was done by...

Page #237:
---------------------------
Seventh Chapter

Everything seems to be flashing before my eyes. But my mind is wavering as to where my husband Lalitanga was born. ||100||

Hearing this, the king replied, "My dear daughter, I was expelled from the Achyuta heaven before you two were expelled from the heaven. ||101|| I was born in this city as the son of King Yashodhara and Queen Vasundhara, named Vajradanta. ||102|| When there were fifty thousand years remaining in your lifespan, I was expelled from heaven. ||103|| After you both enjoyed your remaining lifespan, you were expelled from heaven and were born as a prince and princess in this very land. ||104|| Your Lalitanga will be united with the prince on the third day from today. Your friend, the Pandita, will bring you all the news clearly today. ||105|| My dear daughter, Lalitanga is the son of your aunt and he will be your husband. This union is like finding a vine that you were searching for, right at your feet. ||106|| My dear daughter, your maternal aunt is coming today, so we will go to meet her." Saying this, King Vajradanta got up and went out. ||107||

At that very moment, the Pandita friend arrived. Her face was radiant and the joy on her face indicated the success of the task. She came and said to the lady, ||108|| "My dear daughter, you are blessed. Your wish has been fulfilled today. I will tell you all the news in detail, listen carefully. ||109|| When I went from here with the picture at your command, I stayed in the Mahaputa Jinalaya, which is full of wonders. ||110|| There, I spread your beautiful picture. Many fools who considered themselves wise did not understand its meaning. ||111|| 

Page #238:
---------------------------
The Adipurana
The two, Vasava and Durdanta, who were very clever in lying, were delighted to see our painting and said, based on their own assumptions, "We know the clear meaning of this painting. A princess has remembered her past life, so she has written about all her actions in her previous birth." 

They said this with great cunning and then said that they were the husband of this princess in her previous birth. I laughed for a long time and said, "Perhaps that could be true."

Then, when I asked them about the deeper meaning of the painting and forced them to answer, they became silent and left in shame.

After that, your father-in-law's young son, Vajrajangha, came there. He was unparalleled in the whole world because of his divine body, radiance, and brilliance.

He first circumambulated the Jin temple. Then he praised the Jina, bowed to him, worshipped him, and entered the painting gallery.

He looked at the painting and said, "It seems as if the story written in this painting is known to me from before."

The beauty of the painting depicted on this painting is beyond words. This painting is perfectly proportioned in length, width, and height, and it shows all the different regions, high and low, in a precise way.

Oh, this painting is filled with great skill, its brilliance is very beautiful, it is full of rasa and emotion, it is charming, and it is consistent with the sweetness of the lines.

The connection of my previous birth is written in detail in this painting. It seems as if I am seeing the ownership of the Sri Prabha Vimana, the lord of Lalitanga, in my previous birth.

Oh, the form of this woman is very beautiful here. It is adorned with various ornaments, 

Page #239:
---------------------------


Page #240:
---------------------------
150
Adipuranam, on her cheek, like the fruit of the Priyangu, I had written many letters. But that subject is not shown in this picture. ||13|| Surely, this skill of the hand belongs only to the being of Swayamprabha, for such skill in the art of painting cannot be found in any other woman. ||135|| Thus reasoning, he, the prince, was troubled, like one in distress, with a heart devoid of peace and eyes closed, for a moment. ||136|| Tears were flowing from his eyes, he was about to reach the state of death, when, by divine grace, his friend, like a fainting woman, came and held him, that is, he fainted. ||137|| Seeing his state, not only I was filled with sorrow, but the hearts of the figures in the painting also became moist. ||138|| Then, the attendants, with many remedies, brought him back to consciousness, but his mind was fixed on you. All directions seemed to him to be filled with you. ||139|| After a short while, when he regained consciousness, he asked me, "O noble one, who has written these deeds of my past life in this picture?" ||140|| I replied, "Your maternal aunt has a daughter named Shrimati, she is the one and only heroine of the creation of women, she is the most beautiful among women and is fit for marriage, she is unmarried." ||141|| O prince, consider her as the banner of Kamadeva, adorned with bright clothes, or as the final line of creation, adorned with the sweetness of the creation of women, that is, there can be no creation of women more beautiful than her. ||142|| Her long glances are like the threads that indicate the beginning of full youth. It is by such glances that Kamadeva praises the skill of his arrows, that is, by looking at her long glances, it is known that her body has reached the beginning of full youth, and Kamadeva, who praises the skill of his arrows, does so on the strength of her glances. ||143|| The moon in the form of her face always shines with the bright rays of the teeth, like the lotus that desires to be united with the water of the ocean. ||144|| 

Page #241:
---------------------------
## Seventh Chapter

151.  As he walked, bees swarmed around his feet, mistaking them for red lotuses, dyed crimson with lac. 
145.  The buzzing bees, like whispers of Kama Vidya, seemed to be giving him amorous advice, yet they did not leave even when he tried to shoo them away, clinging to the lotus buds of his ears. 
146.  This is the artistic skill of the beloved daughter of the king Vajradanta, displayed in this painting. 
147.  Like Lakshmi, desired by many, she is a maiden with firm breasts, sought after by many, just as you are blessed. 
148.  She calls you Lalitanga, your heavenly name, but it is a lie, for even in this human form, you are graceful and beautiful. 
149.  Thus, I spoke, and the prince, a wise man, said, "Well spoken, Pandit, well said. The workings of fate are indeed strange in the attainment of desired objects." 
150.  See, fate brings together beings from past lives, quickly uniting them in this present life, if they are destined to be together. 
151.  Fate, in its pursuit of the desired object, brings it from another island, from the ends of the earth, from a distant island, or even from the ocean. 
152.  Speaking thus, the prince, his hands sweating, took our painting in his hand, filled with curiosity. 
153.  He then gave us his own painting, in which all the details matching our painting are clearly visible. 
154.  The order of the threads is clear here, the order of the colors is also clear.  This order, like the Pratyahara, is a reminder of the past. 
155.  The meaning is clear. 

Page #242:
---------------------------
152
This Adipurana is offered by me, my heart filled with love. This is a pledge of truth, offered to fulfill your desires. ||15|| Then, extending his hand, the prince said, "May I see you again, my lady. Farewell." And with these words, he left the Jain temple. ||157|| Taking this news, I have come here. Saying this, the Pandita spread the painting given by the prince before the lady. ||158|| She looked at the painting for a long time, and her faith in the fulfillment of her desires was confirmed. She breathed a sigh of relief. Just as a thirsty chatak bird rejoices at the sight of a cloud, just as a swan rejoices at the sight of the land emerging from the riverbank in the autumn, just as a group of noble beings rejoices at the sight of spiritual scriptures, just as a cuckoo rejoices at the sight of a forest full of blooming flowers, and just as the army of gods rejoices at the sight of the Nandishwar island, in the same way, the lady was overjoyed at the sight of the painting. All her anxieties were gone. Indeed, the fulfillment of one's desires removes the anxiety of everyone. ||159-162|| Then, to confirm that the lady would be fulfilled by obtaining her desired groom, the Pandita spoke words befitting the occasion. ||163|| "O auspicious one, by the grace of fate, you will soon receive many blessings. Have faith, for your union with your beloved will soon happen." ||164|| Don't be doubtful because he left silently, for his mind was fixed on you even then. I have ascertained this well. ||165|| He lingered at the door for a long time, looking at me again and again. 
1. Verification. 2. He was spreading. 3. Advanced. 4. Excitement and mental agitation. 5. It was said. 6. Blessings. 7. Have faith. 8. Union. 9. Doubt. 10. Farewell. 11. Silently. 12. It is easy to go in this, so it is easy in this. 

Page #243:
---------------------------
The Seventh Chapter
153. He smiles, yawns, remembers something, looks far away, breathes heavily and long. This fever of love is evident in him. ||16||
He is the son of the king of the forest, the nephew of Vadantaka, and the son of the brother of Lakshmi Devi. Therefore, your parents also consider him a worthy husband. ||168||
Besides, he is wealthy, born in a noble family, intelligent, handsome, and respected by the virtuous. Thus, he possesses many qualities that make him a suitable husband. ||169||
O Kalyani, you, being the co-wife of Lakshmi and Saraswati, should reside in his heart-like home for a long time, experiencing hundreds of joys. ||170||
If we consider the comparison in general (equality of qualities), then neither Lakshmi nor Saraswati can be compared to you, because you are a unique Lakshmi and a unique Saraswati. ||171||
The Lakshmi born in a lotus-like hut, whose leaves are torn, which is always contracted (narrow), and which is filled with pollen-like dust, cannot be called Lakshmi; she is actually Alakshmi - poor. How can you be compared to her? Similarly, the Saraswati born on the tip of a tongue that is unclean and fickle, cannot be compared to you because of her low birth. Your lineage is extremely pure - you were born in a noble family. ||171-173||
O Latangi (one who has slender limbs like a creeper), just as the royal swan plays in the sacred Manasarovar, so too should you play in the pure and secluded mind of Lalitanga (the king of the forest) for many years. ||174||
May the Creator fulfill your destiny by bringing about a suitable union between you two; for if he does not, that is, if he does not bring about your union, how can he escape the censure of the world? ||175||
Therefore, O Bhadra, be patient, your husband will soon arrive. See, how the entire city is filled with excitement for your husband's arrival.
1. Slightly insane. 2. Mother and father. 3. One who has a wheel. 4. Because of being the son of the brother. 5. Lakshmi Devi. 6. With similar qualities. The word division is "Samaanyena". 7. With different lids and different prices. 8. Alakshmi, poor. 9. In a straw bowl. 10. Fickle tongue tip - A, 80, M, L. 11. Birth in the mouth of them D. 12. Where did you come from? 13. Lineage. 14. In the pure. "Viviktau Patavijanaau" is the name. 15. Specific number. Latangamiv M, L. 16. "Kanikaaramathavaa Janitaantmalaanagandhagunitoo Janitaant. Sajjanehi Vidhirapratimohstasya Yuktighatanam Pratimoh." Because of the criticism of the noble. 17. Enthusiasm.
20

Page #244:
---------------------------
154
The Pandita, by speaking about the forest, etc., made the lady happy. But she was not yet free from anxiety about obtaining it. ||17||
Meanwhile, the Cakrin, showing great affection for his brother, had gone halfway and brought the king Vajrabahu. ||178||
The king, seeing his brother-in-law, sister, and nephew, attained supreme joy, for the sight of loved ones is indeed for joy. ||179||
Then, after some time spent in pleasant conversation, the Cakrin gave proper hospitality to all the guests. ||180||
Receiving this hospitality from the Cakrin himself, king Vajrabahu was very pleased. Indeed, hospitality given by the master is for the joy of the servants. ||181||
Thus, when all the relatives were sitting happily and contentedly, the Cakrin spoke these words to his brother-in-law, king Vajrabahu. ||182||
"If you have extraordinary affection for me, take whatever you like from my house." ||183||
"Today you have come to my house with your son and wife, so my mind is reaching the ultimate limit of joy." ||184||
"You are my beloved relative, and today you have come to my house with your son, so what better opportunity could I have to give you something?" ||185||
"Therefore, on this occasion, there is nothing that I cannot give you. O beloved, do not break this love of mine, which is like a supplicant." ||186||
Hearing these words of the Cakrin, who was overwhelmed with love, king Vajrabahu replied, "O Cakrin, by your grace, I have everything, what should I ask for today?" ||187||
"Today you have honored me with your own company, by giving me gifts, etc., and showing me affection, as if you have given me..." 

Page #245:
---------------------------
155
O Dev, how much is this wealth that is about to be lost? Your vision, which is capable of making one prosperous, has been bestowed upon me. This is enough for me. ||189|| O Dev, today you have looked at me with eyes filled with affection. Therefore, I am fulfilled, blessed, and my life is successful today. ||190|| O Dev, just as words like "jiva," "ajiva," etc., created by scholars and made of famous metals, hold meaning for the sake of benefiting others, similarly, noble men like you also hold wealth (wealth, grain, etc.) for the sake of benefiting others. ||191||
O Dev, you are satisfied with the thing that is useful to the supplicants, and even more so with the thing that is useful to the relatives who are devoid of wealth, etc. (who live together). ||192|| Therefore, let the wealth that I can enjoy at my will remain with you as a legacy. I do not need it at this time. O Dev, I have no pride in not asking for wealth from you, nor do I have any disrespect for you. ||193|| O Dev, although I do not need anything, I pray to you, considering your command to be sacred, that you give your daughter, Shrimati Vajrajkaya, to my son Vanajangha. ||194|| This Vanajangha is first your nephew, and secondly, his high lineage is famous because he is your nephew. Thirdly, the respect you have shown him today is strengthening his worthiness. ||195|| Or, all this talk is useless. Vanajangha is worthy of receiving a daughter from you in every way. Because there is a famous saying in the world that a guest is entitled to a daughter, whether she is laughing or crying. ||196|| Therefore, O Dev, please be pleased to give your daughter to your nephew. Let my prayer be fruitful, let this young man be her husband. ||197||

Page #246:
---------------------------


Page #247:
---------------------------
Seventh Chapter
157. The wedding pavilion was constructed by the order of the Chakravarti, by the jewel-like human-gem Vishwakarma, with the use of precious gems and gold. ||210|| The pillars were made of gold, and the base was adorned with precious gems. The pillars were adorned with the gems, like a king adorned with his throne. ||211|| The walls were made of crystal, reflecting the images of people, making them appear as if they were painted, and thus delighting the viewers. ||212|| The floor of the pavilion was made of blue gems, and flowers were scattered all over it. The flowers made it look like the blue sky filled with stars. ||213|| The pearl garlands hanging inside the pavilion looked like strands of foam-covered reeds, hung there out of curiosity. ||214|| In the middle of the pavilion, there was a large platform made of ruby gems, which looked like the love of humans transformed into the shape of a platform. ||215|| The white peaks of the pavilion, plastered with lime, were shining brightly, as if they were laughing at the chariots of the gods with their brilliance. ||216|| There was a small platform all around the pavilion, which looked like its waist-band. The pavilion, surrounded by this platform-like waist-band, looked like it was surrounded by the boundary of beauty, stopping the directions from all sides. ||217|| The pavilion's gate, made of various gems and very high, looked like a rainbow made of the spreading brilliance of gems. ||218|| The inner door of the pavilion was made of all kinds of gems, and there were nets of jewels on both sides, making it look like it was made for the entry of Lakshmi. ||219|| At that time, the Chakravarti, the lord of the forest, performed the great worship called Kalpavriksha in the Mahapuja Chaitya for eight days. ||220|| After that, on a good day, in a good time, as determined by the astrologers, with the moon and stars in a favorable position,
... 1. From the order. 2. Vishwakarma. 3. Stone used as a seat. 4. For those who see. 5. Inside that pavilion. 6. By the name of the platform, with three golden threads. 7. Astrologer. 

Page #248:
---------------------------
## The Adipurana

In the city, adorned with beautiful decorations and arches on all sides, it shone like the heavens, possessing great wealth.  || 222 ||

The courtyard of the royal palace was sprinkled with fragrant sandalwood and adorned with flowers, buzzing with bees. || 223 ||

The bride and groom were seated in the courtyard, and learned priests performed the abhisheka (ceremony of anointing) with golden, jeweled pots filled with sacred water. || 224 ||

At that time, a great sound arose in the royal palace, a cacophony of conch shells and drums, echoing through the sky. || 225 ||

At that auspicious wedding ceremony, there was no one in the inner palace who did not dance with joy and satisfaction. || 226 ||

The dancing girls, the wives of the nobles, and all the citizens of the city showered the bride and groom with blessings, offering sacred flowers and akshata (unbroken rice). || 227 ||

After the abhisheka, the bride and groom donned new, fine silk garments, as radiant as the waves of the ocean of milk. || 228 ||

Then, they went to a beautiful dressing room, facing east, and adorned themselves with the finest ornaments befitting a wedding celebration. || 229 ||

They anointed their entire bodies with sandalwood paste, and then applied a sandalwood tilak (mark) on their foreheads, befitting the occasion. || 230 ||

Next, they adorned their chests with necklaces of large pearls, shining with the brilliance of saffron or sandalwood, resembling a circle of stars. || 231 ||

On their heads, adorned with coiled hair, they wore garlands of flowers, as beautiful as the Sita river flowing near the peak of the Nilgiri mountains. || 232 ||

They wore earrings in their ears, and the radiance of the jewels on their faces brought them great fortune. || 233 || 

Page #249:
---------------------------
Seventh Chapter

They were adorned with garlands that hung down to their knees, their faces radiant with the brilliance of the gems they wore. Their beauty was like the moonlight of autumn or the delicate strands of a lotus. Their arms, adorned with bracelets, armlets, keyuras, and rings, resembled the branches of a wish-fulfilling tree. Their hips were encircled with sashes, and the tinkling of the small bells attached to them echoed like the triumphant sounds of an elephant's victory drums. Their feet, adorned with anklets, resonated with the sweet sounds of bees buzzing around lotus flowers. They were adorned with all the ornaments befitting a wedding, their beauty itself being their greatest adornment. Lakshmi, the goddess of wealth, adorned her daughter, Srimatī, just as the earth, Vasundhara, adorned her son, Jangh. After being adorned, they were seated on a jeweled platform, where auspicious rituals had already been performed. The platform, illuminated by gem-studded lamps and adorned with auspicious objects, shone like the peak of Mount Meru, adorned with gods and goddesses. The deep, resonant sounds of drums, struck with sticks, echoed like the roar of the ocean. The women sang auspicious songs, while the bards and the singers chanted auspicious verses, their voices filled with enthusiasm. The dancers, with their arched eyebrows, performed a graceful dance, their anklets jingling rhythmically. 

Page #250:
---------------------------
## Chapter 160

The bride and groom, their foreheads purified by the water of the Siddha image, were seated on a magnificent golden platform.  The Chakravarti, with his long arms, held a bejeweled golden bangle, adorned with large gems and sparkling pearls.  The bangle, adorned with Ashok leaves, seemed to imitate the beauty of the couple's hands.  Then, as if to signify their long life, a stream of water was poured from a high vessel, falling upon the groom's hand.

The mighty Vanajangha, with great joy, took the hand of the bride.  Her soft touch filled him with such bliss that his eyes closed.  The touch of his hand caused the bride to sweat, like the dew that forms on a Chandrakanta gem exposed to the moon's rays.  Just as the rain relieves the earth's heat, so too did the touch of Vanajangha's hand dispel the bride's long-standing anxieties.  United with Vanajangha, the bride shone like a creeper clinging to a great Kalpa tree.  She was the most excellent of women, and her presence made Vanajangha as radiant as Kamadeva adorned by Rati.

Thus, with the blessings of the gurus, the wedding, a source of great joy for all, concluded.  The people showered the bride with respect, proclaiming her to be a true Srimat, a goddess of fortune.  The couple, with their perfect forms, resembled divine beings, filling the hearts of the onlookers with joy and peace. 

Page #251:
---------------------------
The seventh festival, a sight so auspicious, rare even in the celestial realms, filled the onlookers with supreme joy. They praised the event, saying, "The Chakravarti is most fortunate, blessed with such a noble son-in-law. He has placed him in a position worthy of universal acclaim."  The mother, a paragon of virtue, is the best among mothers, for she has given birth to a daughter as radiant as Lakshmi herself. What austerities did this prince perform in past lives to merit such a jewel of a wife, the very essence of the world, radiating unparalleled beauty? This maiden, blessed with the Chakravarti as her husband, is worthy of all praise, a beacon of virtue, unmatched in her auspiciousness. What fasts did they observe, what arduous austerities did they perform, what gifts did they bestow, what worship did they offer, what vows did they uphold in their past lives?  Oh, the greatness of Dharma!  Austerities yield the finest materials, generosity brings forth abundant fruits, and the vine of compassion bears the sweetest of fruits.  Surely, they must have performed the highest form of worship to the great Arhats in their past lives, for the worship of the worthy always leads to a lineage of prosperity.  Therefore, those who desire abundant blessings, wealth, and boundless happiness should fix their minds on the path taught by the Arhats, the path that leads to heaven and other great rewards.  Thus, amidst the praises of the onlookers, the couple, surrounded by their beloved kin, sat comfortably in the assembly hall.  In this grand festival, the poor shed their poverty, the miserly cast aside their stinginess, and the orphaned found solace in their newfound kinship.  The Chakravarti, through his generosity, respect, and kind words, honored all his relatives.  His servants were also delighted in this grand celebration. 

Page #252:
---------------------------
162
There was great joy in every house, flags were hoisted in every house, there was talk about the groom in every house, and the bride was praised in every house. ||269|| There was great joy every day, devotion to religion every day, and the bride and groom were honored with great splendor every day. ||270||
On the second day, the groom, eager to express his religious zeal, went to the great pure temple with many lamps lit in the evening. ||271|| The groom, who was extremely radiant, was going ahead, and the bride was following behind him. Just as the radiant light follows the sun, which destroys darkness. ||272|| The groom reached the Jain temple, carrying with him the great materials for worship. The temple was as high as Mount Meru, because its peaks were also very high. ||273|| The groom, circumambulating the temple with the bride, was shining like the sun, adorned with great radiance, circumambulating Mount Meru. ||274|| After circumambulation, he performed *Eiryapatha-shuddhi*, i.e., he removed the bodily impurities that occur while walking, and he performed atonement to remove the unintentional killing of living beings. Then, entering the Jain temple, adorned with many auspicious signs, he saw the great ascetic monks there and paid his respects to them. Then, in the middle of the fragrant chamber, he worshipped the golden image of the Jina with sandalwood and other fragrant substances. ||275-276|| After worshipping, the great-minded groom began to praise the Jina, who is worthy of praise, by seeing him directly (considering the image as the Jina himself), with hymns filled with excellent meanings. ||277|| O Lord! You are the best among those who conquer the enemies of karma, and you are free from mental anguish, therefore I bow to you. O Lord, today I worship you with the desire to destroy the enemies of karma. ||278|| O Lord, your infinite qualities cannot be praised even by the gods. But with devotion, I offer this hymn, my mind being attached to the highest good. ||279||
All the relatives were honored, and the maidservants, servants, and other attendants were also satisfied. ||268|| 

Page #253:
---------------------------
## Seventh Chapter

163

**280.**  "Happiness comes from you, Lakshmi herself seeks you. Devotion to you grants worldly pleasures to people and liberation, which is the greatest."

**281.**  "The worthy ones, with pure mind, speech, and body, praise you. You are clearly like a wish-fulfilling tree for those who seek your grace."

**282.**  "You shower the world with the rain of Dharma, quenching the thirst of the beings parched by the heat of evil deeds, like a fresh cloud."

**283.**  "Those who seek their own good follow the path shown by you, just as people follow the path illuminated by the sun."

**284.**  "You have shown the seed for the destruction of the cycle of birth and death, from which the success of all beings in this world and the next is achieved."

**285.**  "You have abandoned Lakshmi, the wealth of all wealth, and the kingdom with its royal splendor, and embraced liberation, a wonder indeed!"

**286.**  "You are adorned with the vine of compassion, a great ocean of generosity, a wish-fulfilling tree, granting the desires of those who seek you."

**287.**  "You hold the wheel of Dharma, adorned with the fire of austerity, in your hand, without fear, desiring to destroy the great enemies of karma."

**288.**  "You have not furrowed your brow, nor bitten your lips, nor marred the beauty of your face, nor abandoned your place, while conquering the enemies of karma."

**289.**  "Even with compassion, you have wielded the axe of austerity, desiring to conquer the enemy of delusion."

**290.**  "The vine of worldly existence, nurtured by the waters of ignorance, bearing the fruits of various sorrows, does not grow even when nurtured by you."

**279.**  "I cannot praise you myself, O Ganadhara Deva, yet I begin your praise out of devotion, for devotion alone brings good." 

Page #254:
---------------------------
## Chapter 164 of the Adi Purana:

164
Adi Purana
When your lotus feet are pleased, Lakshmi is pleased. When they are turned away, Lakshmi also turns away. Your mediating nature is truly unique. ||29||
O Jinendra, you possess the incomparable glory of being free from attachment, yet you are found nowhere else. This is truly amazing. ||292||
This towering Ashoka tree, with its cool shade, dispels the sorrow of the worthy beings who seek refuge in it. It is truly magnificent. ||293||
O Jinendra, just as the blooming Kalpa trees shower flowers all around Mount Meru, so too do the gods shower flowers from the sky all around you. ||294||
O God, your divine voice, which is the culmination of all languages, dispels the darkness of ignorance from the minds of even those beings who cannot speak clearly like humans. ||295||
O Jin, the two chamaras, which are held on either side of you, are as bright as the rays of the moon and are as beautiful as waterfalls cascading from above. ||296||
O Jinraj, your throne, made of gold, rivals the peak of Mount Meru and is truly magnificent. ||297||
O God, your halo, which spreads out in all directions, rivals the sun and dispels the darkness of the world. It adorns your body. ||298||
O God, the deep sound of the celestial drums in the sky seems to be proclaiming loudly that you are the sole master of the universe. ||299||
O God, your three umbrellas, which rival the moon in brilliance and are extremely tall, reveal your supreme influence. ||300||
O Jin, the eight glories mentioned above are so magnificent that they seem to be the essence of all the best things in the three worlds gathered together in one place. ||301||
This is truly a matter of great wonder (that the vine of the world does not grow when you cut it). In Sanskrit, the verb "vṛdhu" has two meanings: to cut and to grow. When the word "vardhita" in the verse is used in the sense of "grow," it creates a contradiction. But when it is used in the sense of "cut," the contradiction is resolved. ||290||

Page #255:
---------------------------
Seventh Chapter

O Lord, this collection of miracles cannot obstruct your wealth of detachment, for it was created by the gods out of devotion. ||302||

O Jinendra, by merely remembering your feet, elephants, lions, fire, snakes, Bhils, turbulent oceans, diseases, and bonds, etc., all cease to be troublesome. ||303||

The elephant, whose intoxicated water from his temples brings about evil days, and who is ready to strike, is conquered by men merely by remembering you. ||304||

Even a lion, whose claws are extremely hard from piercing the temples of large elephants, cannot kill a creature that has fallen at his feet, if he remembers your feet. ||305||

O Lord, fire, whose flames are very bright and which is rising due to those increasing flames, cannot cause trouble if it is calmed by the water of remembering your lotus feet. ||306||

A snake, whose hood is raised in anger and who is spitting out terrible poison, becomes free of poison immediately by remembering your feet as medicine. ||307||

O Lord, wealthy merchants, following your feet, travel fearlessly through the terrible forest, even with the sound of the bows of fierce robbers. ||308||

Those who are crossing the great ocean, full of large waves, agitated by the untimely and sudden increase of strong wind, cross it playfully, being devoted to your feet. ||309||

Even people who are suffering from large wounds caused by boils, etc., arising from unclean places, become free of disease immediately by remembering your feet as medicine. ||310||

O Lord, you are free from the bonds of karma. Therefore, even a man bound by strong bonds becomes free from bonds immediately by remembering you. ||311||

O Jinendra, you have humbled and destroyed the group of obstacles. Therefore, with a heart full of devotion, I worship you to destroy my group of obstacles. ||312||

O Lord, you alone are the light of the three worlds, you alone are the master of the three worlds, you alone are the relative of the three worlds, you alone are the teacher of the three worlds. ||313||

Ho ||301|| 

Page #256:
---------------------------
166
He is the origin of all knowledge, the first among all yogis, the first to establish the pilgrimage of Dharma, and the first guru of all beings. ||314|| He is the benefactor of all, the master of all knowledge, and the witness of all realms. O Lord, how can I describe your praise in detail? The praise I have offered so far is enough for someone like me, who is of limited knowledge. ||315|| O Lord, I bow to you in this way, and I do not seek any other limited fruit as a result. But O Jin, grant me that my devotion to you remains steadfast, for that devotion alone produces the supreme fruits of heaven and liberation. ||316|| Thus, the noble King Vajrajangha bowed to the Jina, praised him, and worshipped him. Then, he worshipped the group of monks, free from attachment and aversion, in order. Afterwards, remembering the qualities of the Jina again and again, he entered the city of Pundarika, adorned with many riches, with his queen, for the sake of prosperity. ||317|| There, thirty-two thousand crowned kings of Bharatavarsha honored the prosperous Vajrajangha with a grand coronation. Thus, experiencing the auspicious tradition received repeatedly from thousands of kings, enjoying the best of pleasures with his queen, Vajrajangha resided in that city of Pundarika for a long time, worshipping the Jina. ||318|| Thus ends the seventh chapter of the Trishatilakṣaṇamahāpurāṇa, composed by the venerable Jinaseṇācārya, known as Ārṣa, which describes the union of Śrīmatī and Vajrajangha. ||7||
1. Benefactor of all. 2. Seek. 3. In order. 4. Great, patient, etc. 5. Experiencing. 

Page #257:
---------------------------


Page #258:
---------------------------


Page #259:
---------------------------
169
~
The eighth chapter: He sometimes enjoyed strolling in the regions of the riverbanks, adorned with blooming creepers and flowers. ||21|| Sometimes he engaged in water sports in the pond waters, adorned with clusters of pollen dust. ||22|| With golden water-pistols, he sprinkled the face of his beloved, who had a captivating glance. ||23|| When she tried to sprinkle water on his face, her breast-cloth slipped, and she turned away in shame. ||24|| During the water-play, the fine water-soaked cloth clung to her breast, appearing like a shadow of water, diminishing the beauty of her breasts. ||25|| Her breasts were like lotus buds, her delicate arms like lotus stalks, and her face like a lotus blossom, so she appeared like a lotus in the water. ||26|| The water, as if unable to bear the beauty of her face, seemed to have drawn back to her ear-lotus. ||27|| In the water-house, where the water falls from above, he played with his beloved, like lightning, enjoying himself. ||28|| Sometimes, he enjoyed the moonlight at night, sitting on the jeweled terraces of the palace, adorned with the reflections of stars. ||29|| Thus, they, the bride and groom, enjoyed themselves for a long time in that city of lotus, with pleasures surpassing even those of heaven. ||30|| With such pleasures, festivals of worship of the Jina, and auspicious occasions like giving gifts and food, much time passed for them. ||31|| Many people came there, offering the best of things to the couple, and there were festivals of worship, and celebrations of births, so their time passed effortlessly. ||32||
1. Kūṇitam means contracted. Koṇitekṣaṇam is a synonym for captivating glance. ||2. Lajjā means shame. ||3. Jalacchāyā means shadow of water. ||4. Ślakṣṇā means fine. ||5. Kṛśamakurvat means diminished. ||6. Kudamala means lotus bud. ||7. Subatṛptaḥ means enjoying himself. ||8. Pratibimba means reflection. ||9. Anubhavan means enjoying. ||10. Pūjotsava means festival of worship. ||11. Tasyaprasāda means his grace. ||12. Prasannatā means happiness.
22 

Page #260:
---------------------------
170
Adipuranam
Vajrajakānujāṁ kanyāmanurūpām anundharīm | Vajrabāhurvibhūtyāsāv aditāmitatejase ||33|| Cakrisūnuṁ tamāsātha sutaraṁ piprye satī | Anundharī navoḍhāsau vasantamiva kokilā ||34|| Atha cakradharaḥ pūjāsatkārairamipūjitam | Svapurṁ prati yānāya vyasṛjat tadvadhūvaram ||35|| Hastyaśvarathapādāt ratnaṁ deśaṁ sakosaakam | Tadānvayinikam putryai dadau cakradharo mahat ||36|| Atha prayāṇasaṁkṣomād dampatyostapurṁ tadā | Paramākulataṁ bheje sadguṇairunmanāyitam ||37|| Tataḥ prasthānagam bhīrabherīdhvānāiḥ śubhe dine | Prayāṇamakarocchīmān vajrajāḥ sahajanaḥ ||38|| Vajrabāhumaharājō devī cāsya vasundharā | Vanajara sapnīkaṁ brajantama nujagmatuh ||39|| Pauravargā tatha mantri senāpati purohitān | So'rnuvajitu māyātanā tirād byasarjayat ||40|| Hastyaśvarathabhūyiṣṭhaṁ sādhanam sahappattikam | Samvāhayan saṁ prāpat purmutpalakheṭakam ||41|| Parāddhartharacanopetṁ sottsavaṁ praviśan puram | Purandara ivāmāsīd vajrajahō'mitacutiḥ ||42|| Paurāṅganā mahāvīthīviśantaṁ taṁ priyānvitaṁ | Sumanō'ñjalimiḥ prōtyā cakaruḥ saudhasamśritāḥ ||43|| Puṣpākṣatayutāṁ puṇyāṁ śeṣāṁ puṇyāśiṣā samam | Prajāḥ samantatō'bhyetya dampatī tāvalammayan ||44||
Vajrajanghi had a younger sister named Anundhari, who was as beautiful as she was. King Vajrabahu had given her to Amitateja, the eldest son of the Chakravarti, with great pomp and ceremony. ||33|| Just as the cuckoo rejoices at the arrival of spring, so too did the newlywed Anundhari, a virtuous woman, rejoice at the sight of the Chakravarti's son. ||34|| When all the ceremonies were completed, the Chakravarti, King Vadan, honored everyone with worship and respect, and then sent the bride and groom on their way back to their city. ||35|| At that time, the Chakravarti gave his daughter a great dowry, including elephants, horses, chariots, foot soldiers, jewels, land, and treasure, all of which had been passed down through their lineage. ||36|| The news of the couple's departure filled the city with sorrow, for they had captivated the hearts of all the citizens with their virtues. ||37|| On a propitious day, Vajrajanghi set out with his wife, accompanied by the deep sound of drums announcing their departure. ||38|| Vajrajanghi and his wife walked ahead, while King Vajrabahu and his wife Vasundhara followed behind. ||39|| Vajrajanghi bid farewell to the citizens, ministers, generals, and priests who had come to see them off,
Page #261:
---------------------------
## Chapter Eight

171. Seeing the city adorned with many triumphal arches and filled with the deep sound of drums, he entered the royal palace. ||15||

There, in the beautiful palace, a source of happiness in all seasons, he lived happily with his beloved, Srimatī, with great joy. ||46||

Showing her the beautiful royal palace with love, he comforted her, who was saddened by the separation from her guru. ||47||

The wise Pandita, the leader of her companions, came with her. She kept her happy with various forms of entertainment, like dancing. ||48||

Thus, time passed by, filled with continuous enjoyment. Srimatī gave birth to ninety-five pairs of sons. ||49||

Then, one day, the great king Vajrabāhu, standing on the roof of his palace, was observing the rising clouds of the autumn season. ||50||

Seeing the cloud he had observed rising, vanish instantly, he was filled with detachment. His mind became averse to all worldly pleasures, and he began to think deeply. ||51||

"Look, this autumn cloud, right before our eyes, took the form of a palace and vanished in an instant. ||52||

Just like this, our wealth will also vanish in an instant, like a cloud. Indeed, this Lakshmi is as fickle as lightning, and the beauty of youth is also fleeting. ||53||

These pleasures are beautiful only at the beginning, but they bring great sorrow at the end. This life, like the water of a broken pot, is constantly being lost, moment by moment. ||54||

Beauty, health, wealth, the company of loved ones, and the love of a beloved wife – all these are impermanent, fleeting. ||55||

Thinking thus, the wise king Vajrabāhu, desiring to renounce fickle Lakshmi, crowned his son Vanajangha and entrusted him with the kingdom. ||56||

And he himself... 

Page #262:
---------------------------
The Adipurana
And the eighty-nine sons of Srimatitayana, led by Virabahu, became ascetics along with this king-sage. ||58||  This one, dwelling with purity, attained the supreme abode of liberation, produced in due course. ||59||  Vajrajangha then, having obtained his paternal kingdom, enjoyed pleasures for a long time, pleasing the elements. ||60||  Then, on another occasion, the great king Vajradanta, possessed of great wealth, was seated on his throne, surrounded by kings. ||61||  While he was seated, the forest warden brought a newly blossomed, fragrant lotus and presented it to him with joy. ||62||  He smelled it in his hand, beautiful with the fragrance of his own face.  He was pleased with the lotus in his hand and played with it, not playing with it. ||63||  A bee, greedy for that fragrance, was trapped there, having taken refuge in another world.  The wise king, seeing it, was freed from attachment to worldly pleasures. ||64||  Alas, this intoxicated bee, attracted by the fragrance, came here and drank the nectar, and being trapped in it at sunset, died.  May such desires for worldly pleasures be cursed! ||65||  These worldly pleasures are like bitter fruits.  They seem good at the beginning, that is, when they are enjoyed, but they bear bad fruit when they are borne, so may they be cursed! ||66||  Alas, this body of living beings, which is the means of worldly pleasures, is like a cloud in the autumn season, which disappears in a moment, so may such a body be cursed! ||67||  This Lakshmi is as fickle as the flash of lightning, this sensual pleasure is also unstable, and wealth, grain, etc., are like wealth obtained in a dream. 

Page #263:
---------------------------
The Eighth Chapter
173
Why do these wise men strive for these fleeting pleasures, which come and go like the wind? 69
Health, wealth, youth, and happiness are all as fleeting as a rainbow. 70
Just as a drop of water on a blade of grass is destined to fall, so too is the life of living beings destined to end. 71
The Yama Raja, ever ready for battle, leads his army of old age, followed by the strong soldiers of various diseases, and the Kshaya, like wild beasts, are always by his side. 72
These desires, with their fiery flames of thirst, burn the senses, and the pain arising from them destroys life. 73
In this world, happiness is fleeting, while sorrow is abundant. What is there to be content with? How can one be content? 74
The desire for worldly pleasures brings suffering first, then dissatisfaction during enjoyment, and finally regret after separation. 75
The family that is prosperous today may be poor tomorrow, and the one that is suffering today may be prosperous tomorrow. 76
This worldly happiness is a source of sorrow, wealth is accompanied by destruction, union is followed by separation, and prosperity is followed by misfortune. 77
Thus, seeing the impermanence of the world, the Chakravarti considered these fleeting pleasures as poison. 78
Having renounced these pleasures, the Chakravarti, with his boundless energy, wished to give his kingdom to his son. 79

Page #264:
---------------------------
174
The king, Vandan, repeatedly urged his son, Amittej, to take the kingdom. Though instructed, Amittej did not desire the royal fortune.  He said, "If you, the divine one, wish to relinquish this kingdom, then I do not desire it either.  May I not be guilty of disobeying your command.  I will go to the forest with you.  Whatever path you take, I will follow."  Knowing his son's firm resolve, Vandan gave the kingdom to his grandson,  Pundarika, a young boy who was the protector of the lineage.  The king, Vandan, along with his son, Amittej, his wives, and many kings, went to the sage Gunadhar, the disciple of the Tirthankara Yashodhar, and took initiation.  Sixty thousand queens, twenty thousand kings, and a thousand sons took initiation with King Vandan.  At that time, Pandita, the friend of the queen, also took initiation according to her own capacity.  True knowledge is that which liberates one from the cycle of birth and death.  

Just as the lotus wilts in the absence of the sun, so too, Lakshmimati and Anundhari were filled with sorrow at the departure of Vandan and Amittej.  Those who had not taken initiation, but had gone to witness the ceremony, entered the city with the young Pundarika, led by the ministers.  They were all pale with grief.  Lakshmimati was deeply troubled, thinking, "A young, unknown boy has been placed on the throne of this vast kingdom.  He is my grandson.  How can I protect him without any support?  I will send this news to the wise Vajangha today.  With his guidance, this kingdom will be secure.  Otherwise, it will be overrun by enemies." 

Page #265:
---------------------------
The Eighth Chapter

175. Having decided thus, the king of Gandharvapura, Mandaramali, summoned his two sons, Chintagati and Manogati, and his daughter-in-law, Sundarya.  ||12||

176. "They are both dear to Chakravarti, pure, skilled, of noble lineage, devoted to each other, well-versed in all the scriptures, and experts in their work." ||13||

177. Then, placing a letter in a casket, along with gifts, they sent them to the forest with the message: ||14||

178. "Chakravarti has gone to the forest with his son and family, and has become a recluse.  His son,  Pundarika, has been placed on the throne.  But where is Chakravarti's kingdom, and where is this weak child?  Truly, a small calf has been entrusted with the burden of a great bull.  This Pundarika is a child, and we, his mother and mother-in-law, are women.  Therefore, this kingdom without a master is almost ruined.  Its protection now rests on your shoulders.  Therefore, come without delay.  You are both wise, and with your presence, this kingdom will be free from trouble." ||15-18||

179. Taking this message, they immediately set off through the sky.  As they went, they pulled the nearby clouds far away with their speed. ||19||

180. They tore through the high clouds that obstructed their path, and the water droplets falling from them seemed like tears.  They saw rivers, which, due to their distance, appeared thin and pale, as if they had become emaciated and pale from the absence of the rain-bearing clouds.  They also saw mountains, which, due to their distance, appeared round, like the earth, and as if they were submerged in the heat of the sun. ||20-22|| 

Page #266:
---------------------------
176
The water of the wells appeared round like a single circle, as if the earth, fearing the sun's heat, had hidden itself. They saw the water of the wells, which appeared very round due to the distance, as if the earth, a woman, had applied a white sandalwood tilak. Thus, seeing the beauty of the path every moment, they both reached the city of Utpalakhetak in sequence. That city was deafening the directions with the deep sounds of music. ||100-104|| When the two brothers reached near the royal palace, the gatekeepers took them inside. They entered the royal palace and saw Vanjangha sitting in the royal court. ||105|| The two Vidyadharas bowed to him and then placed before him a jeweled casket containing the letter and the gifts they had brought. ||106|| Maharaj Vanjangha opened the casket and took out the necessary letter inside. Seeing it, he decided to take the initiation of the Chakravarti and was very surprised by this. ||107|| He thought, "Oh, the Chakravarti is very virtuous, who has given up the glory of such a vast empire and taken initiation like a pure-bodied woman." ||108|| "Oh! The sons of the Chakravarti are also very virtuous and possessors of unimaginable courage, who have rejected such a vast kingdom and taken initiation along with their father." ||109|| "The boy, the bearer of the radiance of the face like a blooming lotus, has been appointed to bear the great burdens of the kingdom, and Mami Lakshmi is in a hurry to see me, that is, she is calling me, because she understands that it is difficult to manage the affairs." ||110-111|| Thus, being clever and wise, Vanjangha decided the meaning of the letter and informed Srimathi of his decision. ||112|| Besides the letter, the Vidyadharas also conveyed Lakshmi's oral message, which helped Vanjangha understand the meaning of the letter correctly. After that, the wise Vanjangha decided to go to the city of Pundarikin. ||113|| Srimathi was very sad to hear the news of her father and brother taking initiation, but Vanjangha comforted her and discussed the pros and cons with her. ||114||
1. Tadu-nmudvitam antastham p. | Tadu-nmudray l. | 2. Pravajy-p, 20, 60, s, m. | 3. Upayachchate sm. | Swikaroti sm. | 'Yamo vivahe' upayame-stako bhavati vivahe iti tad. | 4. Pavitranom. | 5. Avagna krutva. | Avmanyashi-p. | 6. Dharandharah. | 7. Matulani. | 8. Samipyam. | 9. Pratikshate. | 

Page #267:
---------------------------
The Eighth Chapter

177. Having sent the two chief messengers ahead, the king himself prepared to depart in their wake. 15. Then, the wise Mativar, Anand, Dhanamitra, and Akampan, the four great ministers, the priest, the royal treasurer, and the generals, 16. along with other prominent men eager to depart, surrounded the king like the gods surrounding Indra. 17. On that day, the efficient Vanajangha set out on his journey. 18. There was a great commotion among the officials at the time of departure. 19. They said to their servants, "Bring quickly those female elephants adorned with golden necklaces and golden anklets, who are free from rut and thus virtuous like noble women, for the queens to ride. 20. You, quickly saddle the swift messengers and make them ready. 21. You, bring palanquins for the queens to ride, and you, find strong bearers for the palanquins. 22. You, water and saddle the swift young horses quickly. 23. You, quickly summon those maids who are skilled in all tasks, especially in cooking, grinding grain, and cleaning." 24. You, go ahead of the army and prepare the encampment, and also make high stacks of grass and fodder. 25. You, are in charge of all the king's wealth, so you are appointed to the royal kitchen. 26. You, gather all the necessary supplies for the kitchen without any hindrance. 27. You, take along beautiful cows with calves, who give plenty of milk, and keep them safe in places with water and shade along the way. 28. You, protect the royal domain first, like the guardians of the ocean, with shining swords in your hands. 

Page #268:
---------------------------
178
Adipurana
You, the elderly Kankuchi people, should stay among the women of the inner palace and protect them with great respect. You should remain here and perform the tasks that need to be done afterwards with great care. You should all go together and oversee your respective duties. You should go and urge the officials of the country to come and receive the king with appropriate offerings. On the way, you should protect the elephants and horses, you should care for the camels, and you should protect the cows with their calves, which give a lot of milk. You should worship the image of Jineshwar with the three jewels and perform the Shantikarman for the king. You should first perform the abhisheka of Jineshwar and then, while chanting Shantikarman, sprinkle the remaining akshata of the Siddhas mixed with fragrant water on the king's head, giving him blessings. You, the astrologers, should accurately determine the auspicious rising of the planets, etc., and tell the best time for the king's departure for the success of his journey. Thus, at that time, there was a great commotion of the officials who were gathering the materials for the departure of the king Vajrajandha. 119-135. After that, the square in front of the royal palace was filled with elephants, horses, chariots, and foot soldiers carrying weapons. 136. At that time, the sky was filled with white umbrellas raised high and blue umbrellas made of peacock feathers, so it seemed as if it were filled with white and black clouds. 137. At that time, the sun's rays were also blocked by the group of stretched umbrellas, so it is right. Even the brilliance of the brilliant men cannot stand near the virtuous - the righteous. The umbrellas were also round (in favor of) the virtuous - the righteous, so the sun's rays could not stand near them. 138. At that time, the flags on the chariots and elephants were swaying in the wind and meeting each other, so it seemed as if they were meeting each other after a long time, satisfied with seeing each other.
1. With respect. 2. Tasks that are suitable to be done afterwards. 3. To come face to face. 4. Nourish. 5. Herd of cows. 6. - Purussara A, S. 7. Having made a resolution. 8. Sprinkle D. 9. At the time of departure A, S. 10. For success. 11. Tantra section. 12. Tantra-niyuktanam P. 13. It rose. 14. - Picchchchhatra A, P, 60, S, M. 15. Aura brilliance. 16 – Nyonyamashlishan 50 A, S, 50, M, L. 17. Embracing. 18. Praise. 

Page #269:
---------------------------
179
The dust raised by the hooves of the horses was moving forward, as if to guide the forest-march, violating the region of the sky. ||140|| The earth's dust was calmed by the flow of the elephants' mad, by the water-sprays from their sand, and by the saliva and foam of the horses. ||141|| Then, emerging from the city, that army was very beautiful, like a great river with white foam, and waves of horses. ||142|| Or, with large elephants as large aquatic animals, horses as waves, and fluttering swords as fish, that army-like river was very beautiful. ||143|| Then, that army, having equalized all the high and low ground, was not contained by the very large road, and was spreading out as it wished. ||144|| Leaving the elephant-temples of the forest, the mad-intoxicated bees were merging into the elephant-temples of the king's forest-march, which were pouring out mad. ||145|| Leaving the beautiful trees of the forest, the bees, who are fond of fragrance, were mostly taking refuge in the elephants of the king's forest-march, which were constantly delighting the world. ||146|| The beautiful forests were welcoming the king on the path, with their fruit and flowers, their dense shade, and their large trees. ||147|| Then, the women were taking many flowers and leaves from the forest vines, with their hand-leaves, to make ear-ornaments and other ornaments. ||148|| It seems that those forest trees had definitely obtained the boon of inexhaustible flowers, because even after the soldiers had taken many flowers, they did not abandon the beauty of the flowers. ||149|| Then, that army, resounding with the neighing of horses and the deep roar of elephants, reached the lake called Shashpa. ||150|| ... That lake was holding cool water, which was yellow like melted gold, because its waves were made yellow by the clusters of lotus pollen. ||151||
1. They were spreading. 2. Serpent dust, A, M, S. 3. To guide. 4. Aquatic animal. 5. Mad-intoxicated. -intoxicated A, 50, D. 6. They had merged. 7. Elephant-temple. 8. They were coming. 

Page #270:
---------------------------
180
Adipurana
"The sun's rays cannot reach the heart of this forest, which is surrounded by dense woods. Who can heat up the one whose inner being is filled with water?" (152)
The lake, with its waves and the sweet sounds of swans and other birds, seemed to be inviting the forest army with its wave-like hands and melodious calls. (153)
The forest army then settled on the shores of the lake, which was surrounded by trees and creepers and where a gentle breeze blew. (154)
Just as in grammar, when the suffixes 'vadh' and 'ghaslu' are applied, the original words like 'han' lose their place, similarly, the weak creatures were driven away by the strong ones from the shores of the lake. (155)
The birds abandoned their nests, the deer were terrified, and the lions slowly opened their eyes due to the commotion of the army. (156)
The men and women of the army, who had settled under the forest trees, hung their ornaments and clothes on the branches, making the trees look like Kalpavriksha. (157)
When the trees were plucked of their flowers, they bent their branches, as if they were showing their approval of the flower-pluckers, considering it a form of hospitality. (158)
The women of the army were bathing in the lake, their bodies submerged up to their breasts. They looked so beautiful that it seemed as if the lake was swallowing them up, considering it a gain of unprecedented beauty. (159)
Seeing the laborers, whose strong shoulders were burdened with heavy loads, entering the lake, it trembled in fear, thinking, "Our water will be wasted by their bathing." (160)
The tents pitched on the shores of the lake looked like the abode of the forest goddess, who was destined to become a Tirthankara in the future. (161) 

Page #271:
---------------------------
- The Eighth Chapter
181. The horses, having fallen to the ground and then risen again, were full of strength and seemed like proud wrestlers anointed with oil. 162. The elephants, with their excellent spines, were also bound by their mahouts, as if they were enraged by drinking honey, just as the noble and respected men of the world are bound by their drinking of alcohol. 163.
When all the armies had settled in their respective places, the king, riding on a swift horse, skilled in traversing the path of Vajrajangha, quickly reached his camp. 164. The horsemen, whose bodies were roughened by the dust raised by the hooves of the horses, arrived at their camps, sweating and bathed in the heat of the sun, which was scorching their foreheads. 165. The king, residing in a large and magnificent tent, found comfort in the gentle breeze that carried the coolness of the lotus-filled lake. 166. Then, the glorious Damodhara, a monk who traversed the sky, arrived at the camp of Vajrajangha, accompanied by the monk Sagaraseena. 167. Both these monks had vowed to take their meals in the forest, and so, wandering at will, they approached the camp of Vajrajangha. 168. The king Vajrajangha saw these two monks from afar, who were radiant with brilliance and free from sin, like the very paths to heaven and liberation. 169. The king Vajrajangha, seeing these two monks, whose radiance dispelled the darkness of the forest, rose up in excitement and greeted them. 170. The virtuous Vajrajangha, with his queen Srimatī, offered them a respectful welcome, joining his hands in reverence, and then, after bowing, led them into the dining hall. 171. There, Vajrajangha seated them on a high platform, washed their feet, offered them worship, and bowed to them, purifying his mind, body, and speech. 172.
They had built the best houses for them. 161. After rolling on the ground, the horses, having grown large, were fierce, as if they were proud wrestlers anointed with oil. 162. The elephants, with their excellent spines, were also bound by their mahouts, as if they were enraged by drinking honey, just as the noble and respected men of the world are bound by their drinking of alcohol. 163.
Then, when all the armies had settled in their respective places, the king, riding on a swift horse, skilled in traversing the path of Vajrajangha, quickly reached his camp. 164. The horsemen, whose bodies were roughened by the dust raised by the hooves of the horses, arrived at their camps, sweating and bathed in the heat of the sun, which was scorching their foreheads. 165. The king, residing in a large and magnificent tent, found comfort in the gentle breeze that carried the coolness of the lotus-filled lake. 166. Then, the glorious Damodhara, a monk who traversed the sky, arrived at the camp of Vajrajangha, accompanied by the monk Sagaraseena. 167. Both these monks had vowed to take their meals in the forest, and so, wandering at will, they approached the camp of Vajrajangha. 168. The king Vajrajangha saw these two monks from afar, who were radiant with brilliance and free from sin, like the very paths to heaven and liberation. 169. The king Vajrajangha, seeing these two monks, whose radiance dispelled the darkness of the forest, rose up in excitement and greeted them. 17
Page #272:
---------------------------
182
The virtuous one, endowed with the qualities of faith, etc., gave food to the two pure and virtuous monks in accordance with the rules. As a result, he obtained the five wonders. The gods showered jewels and flowers from the sky, a gentle breeze carrying drops of water from the Milky Way was blowing, the sound of drums was resounding, and the words "Oh, what a gift! Oh, what a gift!" were being uttered, filling all directions. ||172-175||

After that, Vajrajanga, having paid homage and worship to the two monks, sent them back. Then, he learned from his attendant that the two monks were his own last sons. ||176||

King Vajrajanga, with great love, went near Srimatī and, with a desire to gain merit, began to listen to the Dharma of the righteous householders. ||177||

Having heard the detailed description of the Dharma, including giving, worship, good conduct, and offerings, Vajrajanga asked about his and Srimatī's past lives. ||178||

The monk named Damavara, illuminating the directions with the rays of his teeth, began to describe their past lives. ||179||

O King, in your fourth birth, you were the eldest son of King Srīṣeṇa and the extremely beautiful Queen Sundarī, in the city of Simhapura, in the Gandhila country, located in the Videha region of Jambudvīpa. There, you renounced the world and took Jain initiation. However, you could not practice restraint and became attached to the pleasures of the Vidyadhara kings, and thus met your death. Before that, you were a powerful king in the city of Alaka, located on the northern slope of the Vijayadha mountain in the aforementioned Gandhila country. There, you enjoyed all the pleasures you desired. Then, guided by the advice of the self-enlightened minister, you attained self-knowledge, worshipped the Jinas, and left your body through Samadhi, becoming Lalitanga Deva. From there, you have fallen down and become King Vajrajanga now. ||180-184||

Srimatī, in a previous birth, was the daughter of a householder in the village called Palalaparvata, in the Gandhila country, located west of the Eastern Meru, in the Dhātakīkhaṇḍa dvīpa. There, due to some merit, you were born in the same country, in the city of Pāṭalī...

Page #273:
---------------------------
The Eighth Chapter

183. In the Gandhila country, a woman named Nirnamika, the daughter of a merchant, was born in the village of Palaka Parvata. Due to her past karma, she was born with little merit. ||186||

184. In the same country, in the village of Patala, there was a woman named Nirnamika, the daughter of a merchant. She took refuge with the Muni Pihithastrava. ||187||

185. Following the rules, she observed the fasts of Jineendra Guna Sampatti and Shrutagyan. As a result, she became the self-illuminated Devi, Shri Prabha, in the Shri Prabha Vimana. ||188||

186. Hearing this, you, the King, along with your beloved Shrimati, asked about the past lives of your beloved ones, out of curiosity. ||189||

187. "O Lord, these Mativara, Anand, Dhanamitra, and Akampan are very dear to me, like my own brothers. Please be pleased and tell me about their past lives." ||190||

188. Hearing the King's question, the Muni replied, "O King, in the past, in the eastern part of Jambudvipa, there was a country called Vatsakavati, which was as beautiful as heaven. In that country, there was a city called Prabhakari. This Mativara was the King of that city in his past life. His name was Ati Grighna. He was very attached to his kingdom and his possessions. Due to his excessive attachment, he was bound to the hellish life and was born in the fourth hell, Pankaprabha. He suffered the torments of hell for ten Sagaras. ||191-193||

189. In his past life, he had buried a lot of his wealth on a mountain near the city of Prabhakari. After being released from hell, he was born as a tiger on that same mountain. ||194||

190. One day, the King of Prabhakari, Pritivardhan, returned to the city after conquering his rebellious younger brother. He stayed on that same mountain. ||195||

191. While he was sitting there with his younger brother, the Purohit came and told him that he would receive great benefits that day due to the influence of Muni Dan. ||196||

192. "O King, how can we obtain those Muni Rajas? I will tell you the way, as I know it through my divine knowledge. Listen." ||197||

193. We should announce in the city that today is a day of great joy for the King. Therefore, all the citizens should hoist flags on their houses, decorate their doorways, and... 

Page #274:
---------------------------
## The Adipurana

The king, Preetvardhan, ordered his citizens to decorate their homes and streets with flowers, ensuring no gaps remained. This was done to attract the sage, Pihithastrav, who had been avoiding the city due to its distractions.  

The sage, pleased by the king's efforts, returned to the city. After completing a month-long fast, he entered the king's palace, following the prescribed order of his wanderings. The king offered him food, which pleased the gods, who showered the earth with jewels, creating a beautiful sound. 

Witnessing this, a lion, overcome with greed, remembered his past life. He became calm, his delusion vanished, and he renounced all attachment to his body and food. He sat on a rock, abandoning all possessions and attachments. The sage, Pihithastrav, with his divine knowledge, saw the lion's transformation. 

He told the king, "A devotee is practicing austerities on this mountain. You should serve him." The king, filled with wonder, went with the sage and saw the lion, who had performed a great act of courage. 

The king then helped the lion in his meditation, recognizing his potential for divinity. The sage, Pihithastrav, chanted the five-fold mantra into the lion's ear, ensuring his future as a god. The lion, after abstaining from food for eighteen days, left his body and became a god named Divakar Prabhu, residing in his celestial abode. 

Page #275:
---------------------------
## The Eighth Chapter

Seeing this great wonder, the king's commander, minister, and priest were filled with immense peace.  [211]  They had received the king's blessings for their charitable deeds, and thus they became Aryas in the land of Uttarakuru after their lifespan ended. [212]  At the end of their lifespan, they became glorious gods in the Aishana heaven.  Among them, the minister became the god Kankaab in the Kanchan Vimana, the priest became the god Prabhanjan in the Ruchi Vimana, and the commander became the god Prabhakar in the Prabha Vimana.  These were all your family gods in the realm of Lalitaanga Devi. [213-214]

The lion's soul, having fallen from there, became your minister, Mativar, the son of Matisagar and Shrimati. [215]  Prabhakar's soul, having fallen from heaven, became your commander, Akampan, the son of Aparajit and Arjava. [216]  Kanakaprabha's soul, having become the son of Shrutakeerti and Anantamati, became your beloved priest, Anand. [217]  Prabhanjan, having fallen from there, became your wealthy merchant, Dhanamitra, the son of Dhanadatta and Dhanadatta. [218]

Hearing these words of the Muni, both the king Vajrangh and Shrimati were filled with immense joy in Dharma. [219]

The king Vajrangh, still filled with wonder, asked the Muni, "Why are these four beings, the jackal, the lion, the monkey, and the boar, sitting fearlessly in this land filled with humans, their eyes fixed on your lotus-like face?" [220-221]

The sage, the holder of the Charan Riddhi, replied to the king, "Oh King, this lion was once in this very land, in the famous city of Hastinapur, the son of the wealthy Vaishya, Sagaradatta, and his wife Dhanavati.  His name was Ugrasen. [222-223]  He was extremely angry by nature, and this ignorant being, like a splitting of the earth, was bound by the karma of a lower life form due to his unyielding anger." [224] 

Page #276:
---------------------------


Page #277:
---------------------------
The Eighth Chapter

187. The foolish man, having given some *puas* to the laborers, secretly had them bring some bricks to his house. When he broke some of the bricks, he saw gold in them. 

237.  His greed increased, and he began to have the laborers bring many bricks to his house, giving them *puas* and other food.

238. One day he had to go to his daughter's village. As he was leaving, he said to his son, "Son, you also give some food to the laborers and have them bring bricks to our house."

239. Having said this, he left, but his son did not have the bricks brought to the house as he had instructed. When the wicked man returned home and learned what had happened, he became very angry with his son.

240. In his foolishness, he smashed his son's head with a club and stones, and in his grief, he cut off his own feet.

241. In the end, he was killed by the king and, upon death, attained the state of a *nakul*. This confectioner reached this state due to the arising of the *apratyakhyanavaran* greed.

242. O King, seeing your donation, these four have attained supreme joy, and all four have regained their *jati-smaran*, which has made them very detached from the world.

243. By approving your donation, all of them have bound themselves to the lifespan of the highest *bhogabhumi*. Therefore, they have abandoned fear and are sitting here with a desire to hear the Dharma.

244. O King, in the eighth future birth from this one, you will become the *Vrishabhanatha* Tirthankara and attain liberation, and in that same birth, all of these will also become Siddhas. There is no doubt about this.

245. Until then, these virtuous beings will enjoy the best of happiness and blessings of the gods and humans along with you.

246. This *Shrimati* being will also be King *Shreyans* in your *tirtha*, who will establish the practice of *danatirtha*, and from that birth, he will attain the highest good, liberation. There is no doubt about this.

247. Hearing these words of the *charan* *yogindra* muni, the king's body stood covered in goosebumps, as if sprouting with love. 

Page #278:
---------------------------
188
The king, accompanied by his beloved, returned to his abode along with the wise men, who were pleased. ||24|| The two yogis, adorned with the wind, followed the wind, proclaiming the freedom from attachment of the monks, and flew through the sky. ||249|| The king, his mind filled with the contemplation of their virtues, spent the rest of the day on the banks of the lake, along with his army. ||250|| After that, he traveled many stages and reached the city of Puṇḍarīkī. There he saw the grieving queen Lakṣmīmatī, and his sister Anundharī, who was also filled with anxiety. He comforted them both slowly and made the kingdom of Puṇḍarīka free from troubles. ||251-252|| He won over the people with the means of conciliation, gifts, punishment, and division, and honored the chieftains and vassal kings, appointing them to their respective duties as before. ||253|| Then, he placed the young Puṇḍarīka, who shone like the morning sun, on the throne, entrusted the administration of the kingdom to capable ministers, and returned to his city of Utpalakheṭaka. ||254|| The king, adorned with great splendor, entered his beautiful city of Utpalakheṭaka, which resembled a heavenly city, accompanied by his beloved Śrīmatī. As he entered, the beautiful women of the city drank in his beauty with their eyes. The king, as he entered the city, shone like Indra entering heaven. ||255||
1. Protyam samam-A. 2. Vātavasanī D, L. Vāntavasanau P. Vāntarasanaau A. 3. Kathayantī. 4. Divasavaseṣam. 5. Atītya. 6. Nirupadravam. 7. Prajāḥ. 8. Sāmabhedadāṇḍaḥ. 9. Satkṛtya. 10. Sadṛśam. 11. Ātmiyam. 12. Viśatka-A, 50, S, M. 13. Samyagdṛtaśroḥ. 

Page #279:
---------------------------
The Eighth Chapter
189
Is he Indra? Or Kubera? Or Dharnendra? Or Kamadeva with a physical form? Thus, praised by the talk of the men and women of the city, the one with great splendor and excellent virtues, Vanajangha, entered his magnificent abode. ||256||
In that beautiful palace, which brings joy in all six seasons, Vanajangha, beautiful like Kamadeva, resided happily, enjoying the desired pleasures obtained by his merit. Just as Indra pleases Indrani with appropriate means of enjoyment, so too, Vanajangha pleased Shrimati with means of enjoyment. He always remembered Jain Dharma and spread his fame in all directions. ||257||
Thus ends the eighth chapter of the Trishattilakshana Mahapurana Sangraha, composed by Bhagavajinaseenacharya, known as Arsha, which describes the donation of the vessel of Shrimati Bhor Vajraja. ||8||
- 1. Shlaadhyaamanah. 2. Sau Puramaav-a. 3. Aatmaabhoshtan. 4. Priyatammam. 5. Dishah Da, Sa. 

Page #280:
---------------------------


Page #281:
---------------------------
The ninth chapter, adorned with the flowers of the **Shariṣa** tree, like a beautiful woman, he was very pleased.  ||12||  He was always with his beloved, and he was always happy. ||13||  The earth was covered with **Indragop** (a type of insect), the clouds thundered, and the rainbow appeared.  The hearts of the travelers were filled with anxiety. ||14||  We were stopped by the **Suragop** (a type of deity) who guarded the earth.  The thunderous clouds said, "Where will you go? We have surrounded the sky, and the earth is filled with **Indragop** insects.  Where will you go?" ||15||  The valleys of the mountains were covered with blooming **Kutaja** trees, and the sound of the peacocks filled the air.  The king's mind was filled with anxiety. ||16||  The mountains, with their fragrant peaks, were filled with the scent of **Kadamba** flowers, and the king's mind was filled with joy. ||17||  The sky was lit up by lightning, and the king was sleeping in his beautiful palace with his beloved.  He was very happy. ||18||  The rivers were overflowing with water, and the king was very happy. ||19||  The king enjoyed the pleasures of the six seasons with his beloved, and he showed the fruits of his past **tapas** (austerities) to the foolish people. ||20||  One day, the king was lying on a soft, beautiful bed, adorned with silk, like the sandy shore of the Ganges River.  The room was filled with the scent of **Krishna Aguru** incense. ||23|| 

Page #282:
---------------------------
192
The palace was adorned with beautiful paintings, its darkness dispelled by the light of gem-studded lamps. It was resplendent with numerous platforms, each inlaid with jewels, and adorned with garlands of pearls, making it seem as if it were laughing. The air was heavy with the fragrance of jasmine, blue lotus, and mandara flowers, attracting swarms of bees. The walls were decorated with intricate paintings, adding to its splendor. ||21-24||

The forest-dwelling hero, his eyes closed in pleasure from the touch of his beloved's breasts, was radiant like lightning, embracing the cave of Mount Meru. ||25||

That day, by chance, the servants forgot to open the windows and doors of the palace, trapping the fragrant smoke from the incense used for hair rituals. The smoke, rising from the incense, caused the couple to faint momentarily. ||26||

The smoke choked their breath, causing them some internal distress. Finally, in the middle of the night, the couple, husband and wife, fell into a deep sleep – a sleep from which they would never awaken. ||27||

Just as a house becomes defiled by the darkness that lingers after the lamp is extinguished, so too did their bodies become defiled in an instant, their souls departing. ||28||

Like a uprooted Kalpa tree, even with its vines still attached, that no longer shines, the lifeless forest-dwelling hero, even with his beloved by his side, lost his radiance. ||29||

Though the incense was meant for their enjoyment, it led to their death. Therefore, these pleasures, like the fangs of a serpent, are destroyers of life, and deserve to be condemned. ||30||

The forest-dwelling hero and his beloved, who had always been happy, experiencing the finest pleasures, were now both in a state worthy of pity. Therefore, this state of the world deserves to be condemned. ||31||

O noble ones, when even the means of enjoyment can lead to such a state for living beings, what is the purpose of these pleasures that ultimately bring sorrow? Abandon them and find joy in the path of the Jinas, free from attachment. ||32||

Page #283:
---------------------------
193
Bound by the merit of giving alms, they attained the blissful abode of Uttarakuru, and in a moment they were born there among the Kurus. ||33||
The Uttarakurus, who reside in the northern direction of Jambudvipa, the great Mount Meru, are known for their heavenly splendor. ||34||
They have ten types of Kalpa trees, named after their characteristics: Madyaanga, Vaaditraanga, Bhushaanaanga, Maalaanga, Deepaanga, Jyotiraanga, Grihaanga, Bhojanaanga, Bhajanaanga, and Vastraanga. These Kalpa trees are made of various gems and illuminate the ten directions with their vast radiance. ||35-36||
Among these, the Madyaanga trees spread out, fragrant and sweet like nectar, offering various types of juices like Madhu, Maireya, Sidhu, Arisht, and Asava. ||37||
Due to their similarity to aphrodisiacs, these Madhu, etc., are called Madya (intoxicating drinks) by convention. In reality, these are a type of juice from the trees, consumed by the Aryas born in the blissful abode. ||38||
The Madya consumed by those who drink it is intoxicating and deludes the mind, therefore it is completely to be avoided by the Aryas. ||39||
The Vaaditraanga trees bear various types of musical instruments like Dundubhi, Mrudanga, Mallari, Shankha, Bheri, and Chang. ||40||
The Bhushaanaanga trees produce various types of ornaments like Nupura, Bajuband, Ruchika, Angada (Ananta), Karadhani, Haara, and Mukuta. ||41||
The Maalaanga trees are adorned with various types of garlands and ear ornaments, made from flowers of all seasons. ||42||
The Deepaanga Kalpa trees are adorned with gem-studded lamps, and the Jyotiraanga trees, bearers of radiant light, constantly spread illumination. ||43||
The Grihaanga Kalpa trees are capable of creating various types of buildings like tall palaces, mandapas, assembly halls, art galleries, and dance halls. 
. 1. Accepted. 2. Uttarakuru. 3. Vessel. 4. Abundant. 5. Related to. 6. By those who drink intoxicants. 7. -Deluding the mind. 8. -Tal, Jhallari. 9. -Patha, Mardala, Tala, Mallari. 10. Nupura. 11. Ruchika, Kundala, Greevaabharana (neck ornament). 12. -Mukuta. 13. Various. 14. Always spread light. 15. To make.
25 

Page #284:
---------------------------
## Adipurana 3

**45.** The Kalpavriksha, a type of tree, produces food that tastes like nectar, nourishes the body, and bears fruits with all six tastes, including food, drink, edibles, and delicacies.

**46.** There are four types of food: food (bread, lentils, rice, etc.), drink (milk, water, etc.), edibles (laddoos, etc.), and delicacies (betel nut, nutmeg, etc.). There are six types of tastes: bitter, sour, pungent, sweet, astringent, and salty.

**47.** The Kalpavriksha also produces vessels like plates, bowls, conch-shaped vessels, and various other types of vessels. These vessels hang from the branches of these trees.

**48.** The Kalpavriksha also produces clothes like silk garments, shawls, and dhotis. These clothes are soft, smooth, and very valuable.

**49.** These Kalpavriksha are not plants, nor are they controlled by gods. They are simply the essence of the earth, transformed into the shape of trees.

**50.** These trees are eternal and naturally bear fruit. It is not logical to question how they produce clothes and vessels, as it is their nature to do so. The nature of things is diverse, and there is no need to reason about it. As the saying goes, "Nature is beyond reason."

**51.** Just as other trees bear fruit in their season and benefit living beings, these Kalpavriksha also bear fruit due to the merit of human donations, benefiting the beings in that realm.

**52.** The earth in that realm is made of all kinds of jewels, and is adorned with beautiful flowers, so it never loses its beauty.

**53.** The ground in that realm is always covered with four-finger-high, beautiful grass, making it look like the earth is covered with a green cloth.

**54.** The animals in that realm graze on the soft, delicious, and nourishing grass, which is full of medicinal properties. 

Page #285:
---------------------------
## Ninth Chapter

Where there are many ponds filled with lotuses, with golden lotuses blooming, and made beautiful by the sweet and deep sounds of the swans. ||55|| Where there are ponds adorned with blooming lotuses, forests filled with mad kokilas, and beautiful playgrounds everywhere. ||56|| Where the gentle wind blows softly, shaking the trees, and spreading the pollen of lotuses everywhere, as if scattering fragrant powder. ||57|| Where the earth is covered with pollen carried by the wind, and shines as if covered with a yellow silken cloth. ||58|| Where the pollen carried by the wind from all directions gathers in the sky, creating the beauty of a vast canopy. ||59|| Where there is no heat, no rain, no frost, no excessive rain, no snakes, scorpions, bedbugs, or other harmful creatures that frighten beings. ||60|| Where there is no moonlight, no division of night and day, no change of seasons, and all things that bring happiness remain eternally the same. ||61|| Where the forests are always filled with flowers, the lotus ponds always have lotuses, and the lands covered with the dust of jewels are always happy. ||62|| Where the newly born Aryas remain lying on their beds for the first seven days. During this time, the Acharyas have declared that sucking the sweet thumb is their divine food. ||63|| After that, the wise say that both the couples, in the second week, crawl on the earth, like a stage, from one place to another. ||64|| Then, in the third week, they stand up, speak indistinctly but sweetly, and start walking on the ground, playing and falling. ||65|| Then, in the fourth week, they start walking with their feet firmly planted, and in the fifth week, they become endowed with many arts and virtues. ||66|| In the sixth week, they become fully grown, and in the seventh week, they are born as Mogamagins, wearing beautiful clothes and ornaments, and enjoying pleasures. ||67|| 

They roam with great joy, considering the sweet, soft, and beautiful grass-like wealth as a kind of elixir. ||54|| 

Page #286:
---------------------------
## Adipurana

**Verse 68:**  In the abode of gems, where the couple are born, they are born as givers of charity. They remain in the womb for nine months, like a dwelling in a palace of gems. There is no suffering for them in the womb. And the man and woman are born together. They both remain as husband and wife.

**Verse 69:** When the couple is born, their parents die at the same time. Therefore, the beings there do not have the desire for sons or daughters.

**Verse 70:**  Where a mere sneeze or yawn is enough to cause death for the beings, meaning that at the end of their life, the mother sneezes and the man yawns. Those born there, due to their gentle nature, go to heaven.

**Verse 71:**  The scriptures of the enlightened ones clearly describe that the bodies of those born there are adorned with many auspicious marks and are six thousand bows tall.

**Verse 72:**  The lifespan of the beings there is three *palyas* (a unit of time). They eat after three days, and their food is the size of a *kuvali* fruit (a small berry).

**Verse 73-74:**  The beings born there do not experience old age, disease, separation, sorrow, contact with the unpleasant, worry, or poverty. They do not sleep, feel lazy, or blink their eyes. They do not have bodily impurities, saliva, or sweat.

**Verse 75:**  There is no madness of separation, no fever of lust, no interruption of pleasures, but only continuous happiness.

**Verse 76:**  There is no sadness, fear, exhaustion, lack of appetite, or anger. There is no miserliness, no misconduct, no strong, and no weak.

**Verse 77:**  The people there are radiant like the morning sun, sweatless, and wear clean clothes. They always play happily due to the constant rise of their merit.

**Verse 78:**  The happiness experienced there, born from the enjoyment of pleasures arising from the ten types of Kalpa trees, surpasses even the pleasures of a Chakravarti. In other words, the beings there are happier than a Chakravarti.

**Verse 79:**  The people there have long lifespans, and they do not die prematurely. They live their full lifespan of three *palyas* without any obstacles. 

Page #287:
---------------------------
The Ninth Chapter,
197. All beings experience equal pleasures, all experience equal happiness, all are free from disease and enjoy the pleasures of all six seasons. ||10|| All beings are beautiful in form, all are strong like the diamond, all have long lives and are radiant like the gods. ||8|| Where couples, entering the shade of the Kalpa tree, laugh playfully, and enjoy themselves with music and festivities. ||42|| Where skill in the arts, a heavenly body, a sweet voice, and the absence of envy and other vices are natural. ||83|| Where beings are naturally beautiful in form, naturally graceful in their movements, and naturally sweet in their speech. Thus, they are always happy. ||44|| Where beings born in a land of good fortune, due to giving to worthy recipients or approving of such giving, enjoy life free from disease and grow in happiness. ||85|| Those who are of wrong belief, who have abandoned their vows, and who are only interested in pleasures, give to unworthy recipients and are reborn as animals. ||86|| Those who are deceitful, of bad character, poorly dressed, poorly nourished, and who practice magic, are reborn as deer and other animals in a land where vows are broken. ||87|| "Even among these animals, there are couples who enjoy themselves. There is no conflict, no hatred, and no dullness in their lives." ||48|| Thus, in that land of great happiness, known as Uttarakuru, due to the influence of giving to worthy recipients, the couple, Srimatī and Vajrajangha, were reborn as a woman and a man. ||49|| The animals, Nakula, Simha, Vanara, and Suka, who were mentioned earlier, also received a divine human body in that same land, due to the influence of approving of giving to worthy recipients, and became virtuous Aryans. ||20|| On the other hand, the four beings, Mativara, Anand, Dhanamitra, and Akampan, were filled with great sorrow due to the separation from Srimatī and Vajrajangha. In the end, all four of them received the excellent Jain initiation from the Acharya named Sridridhadharma. ||91|| And all four of them attained perfect knowledge, 
1. They obtain. 'Vidung Labhe'. 2. Where they are distressed. 3. They enjoy. A, 50, D, S, M. 4. Free from disease. Kalpadehatva A, 10, D, S. 5. Pleasant voice. 6. Movements. 7. Couple. Mi-S, D, L. 8. The nature of killing, etc. 9. Mental hatred. 10. Loss of taste. 

Page #288:
---------------------------
198
The Adipurana states that those who practice right faith and right conduct, according to their lifespan, attain the heavenly realms. 
They attained the position of Ahamindra in the lowest plane of the Adhoveyaka (the first Preveyaka) through the power of their austerities. This is fitting, for austerities bear fruit according to one's desires. 
Then, one day, Vajrajangha Arya, along with his wife, was gazing at the beauty of the Kalpa tree, lost in contemplation. 
At that moment, he saw the celestial chariot of Surya Prabha Deva, soaring through the sky.  Seeing it, he and his wife were instantly reminded of their past lives, and in that instant, they both attained true knowledge of the nature of the world. 
At that very moment, two Charana Munis, coming from afar, saw Vajrajangha.  They descended from the sky, showering him with their blessings. 
Seeing them approaching, Vajrajangha quickly stood up.  Indeed, the karmas of past lives continue to guide beings towards their welfare. 
Standing before the two Munis, Vajrajangha, along with his wife, shone brightly, like the day adorned with the lotus, shining before the rising sun and the counter-sun. 
Vajrajangha offered obeisance to the feet of the two Munis, his eyes overflowing with tears of joy, washing their feet with his tears. 
The two Munis, with their wives, blessed Vajrajangha, assuring him, and then sat down in their appropriate places. 
Then, seated comfortably, Vajrajangha asked the two Charana Munis the following questions. As he spoke, a stream of light emanated from his teeth, as if he were scattering a shower of flowers. 
He said, "O Bhagavans, where do you reside? From where have you come, and what is the reason for your arrival? Please tell me all this today." 
"O Prabhus, the sight of you has filled my heart with a sense of friendship, my mind is filled with joy, and it seems as if you are my relatives." 

Page #289:
---------------------------
199
Nav Parva
11

Thus, after the questions of Vajrasangha were finished, the elder Muni, washing his body with the streams of water from the rays of his teeth, spoke as follows:

104
"O Arya, know me as the self-enlightened minister-soul, from whom you, in the Mahabala bhava, obtained the knowledge of the Jain Dharma, which destroys karma and leads to perfect knowledge."

105
"In that bhava, I, filled with sorrow at your separation, took refuge in enlightenment. After receiving initiation, I left my body at the end of my life and became a deva named Manichula in the self-luminous celestial chariot of the Saudharma heaven. There, my lifespan was slightly longer than an ocean. After that, I fell from there and was born in the world."

106-107
"In the eastern Videha region of Jambudvipa, in the city of Pundarika, I was born as the elder son of King Priyasena and his queen Sundari, named Pritikara. This great ascetic, Pritideva, is my younger brother."

108-109
"We both, after receiving initiation near the self-luminous Jina, obtained, through the power of our austerities, the knowledge of the avadhi and the power of aerial locomotion."

110
"O Arya, we both, with our eyes of avadhi knowledge, have known that you have been born here. Since you were our dearest friend, we have come here to explain to you."

111
"O Arya, know for certain that you have been born here only by the special merit of giving gifts, without pure and perfect knowledge."

112
"In the Mahabala bhava, you, having obtained knowledge from us, left your body, but at that time, due to your desire for enjoyment, you did not attain the purity of perfect knowledge."

113
"Therefore, we both, desiring to give you perfect knowledge, the supreme and the chief cause of happiness in heaven and liberation, have come here."

114
"Therefore, O Arya, accept perfect knowledge today. This is the time for its attainment, because without the attainment of the right time, the birth of perfect knowledge does not occur in this world for any living being."

115
"When there is the attainment of the right time, the right place, and other external causes, and when there is the attainment of the right karmic conditions, the internal cause, then the pure self, the true self, is born."

116
"You are our friend."

1. Streams.
2. Buddha.
3. Destroyer.
4. Pushkalavati.
5. Undestructible union.
6. United.
7. Our own.
8. Know.
9. Realms of enjoyment.
10. Not obtained.
11. Bhavas.
12. Inner karmic conditions.
13. Pure.
Page #290:
---------------------------
## Translation:

**200**

**Adipurana**

"From the pacification of the delusion of perception, the taste of right faith is acquired."  The soul of a being, which is stained with the blemish of false belief, is eternal. ||17||

Just as the knowledge of the true nature of milk, etc., arises from the cessation of the disturbed mental states caused by the rise of bile, so too, the knowledge of the true nature of the soul, etc., arises from the pacification of the internal cause, delusion. ||11||

Just as the sun does not rise without dispelling the darkness of night, so too, right faith does not arise without dispelling the darkness of false belief. ||119||

This auspicious being, by means of the three karmas of Adhakarana, Apurvakarana, and Anivrittikarana, reduces the state of karma by dividing the nature of false belief into three parts: false belief, right-false belief, and right belief, and thus becomes a right-sighted one. ||120||

The Vitaraga Sarvajña Deva has declared that having faith with great devotion in the scriptures, the omniscient, the knowable, and the soul, etc., is considered right faith. This right faith is the root cause of right knowledge and right conduct. Without it, both of these are impossible. ||21||

Having true faith in the seven principles, from the soul to liberation, free from the three types of delusion and with eight limbs, is right faith. ||22||

Pacification, emotion, faith, and compassion are the four qualities of right faith, and faith, interest, touch, and perception are its synonyms. ||123||

Doubtless, free from doubt, free from uncertainty, free from delusion, respectful, affectionate, stable, and influential, these are the eight limbs of right faith. With these eight limbs as rays, the jewel of right faith shines brightly. ||124||

O Arya, abandon doubt in this excellent Jain path, do not entertain any kind of suspicion, give up the desire for worldly pleasures, abandon delusion, and attain a clear vision. Increase the appropriate Dharma by concealing the places of faults, stabilize the righteous soul who deviates from the path, spread love in the assembly of Arya men who hold the three jewels, and exert influence according to the power of the Jain scriptures. ||125-127||

Abandon the delusion of gods, the delusion of the world, and...

1. The attainment of the first pacification right faith.
2. Contaminated.
3. This is the night.
4. By the difference in the nature of false belief, right-false belief, and right belief.
5. That perception is the root cause of both.
6. Knowledge and conduct.
7. Faith in the seven principles from the soul to liberation.
8. Two types, based on self and other. 

Page #291:
---------------------------
## Chapter 201

**129.**  O noble one, consider right faith (Samyak Darshan) as the essence of all Dharma.  Upon attaining it, there is no happiness in this world that is not attainable by beings.

**130.**  The one who has attained it has been born well, he is fulfilled, he is wise.  His right faith shines brightly and without hypocrisy in his heart.

**131.**  Right faith is the first step towards the ladder of liberation.  It is the strong door that blocks the entrance to the paths of misery.

**132.**  It is the firm root of the tree of Dharma, the door to the abode of heaven and liberation.  It is the best jewel, shining brightly, placed in the middle of the garland of good conduct.

**133.**  O noble one, adorn your heart with this right faith, which is the most excellent jewel, shining brightly, and the garland of liberation.

**134.**  The one who has attained this very rare right faith will soon attain the supreme happiness of liberation.

**135.**  A being who has attained right faith, even for a moment, cuts short the vine of this world, meaning he will not remain in this world for a long time due to the reduction of karmic matter.

**136.**  The one who has right faith in his heart is born only in the realm of the best gods and the best humans.  He is never born in the miserable realms of hell or animals.

**137.**  What is the benefit of talking more about this right faith?  Its praise is sufficient in that even the infinite world becomes finite (limited) upon attaining it.

**138.**  O noble one, accept right faith, taking the words of the Arhat as your authority, and do not seek refuge in other gods who are attached to passions and hatred.

**139.**  Just as the head is the most important among the limbs of the body, and the eyes are the most important in the face, so too, right faith is considered the most important among all the limbs of liberation.

**128.**  Abandon heresy, foolishness, and these three types of ignorance, because a being blinded by ignorance does not see even when he sees the truth. 

Page #292:
---------------------------
202
Discarding the ignorance of the world, heresy, and the gods, illuminate the vision that is not tainted by false views. ||140||
Cut the length of the cycle of existence with the sword of right vision. You are surely a near-future being and a future Tirthankara. ||141||
O Arya, following the teachings of the Arhant, I have given this instruction on right vision. You should definitely accept it for the sake of your own liberation. ||142||
Thus, the Muni explained to Arya Vajjangha and said to Arya Shrimati, "Mother, you too should quickly accept this right vision, which is like a boat, to cross the ocean of existence. Why are you grieving in vain in the female womb?" ||143||
Mother, in all the realms, except for the Ratna Prabha, right vision beings are not born in the six lower realms, the Bhavanavasi, Vyantara, and Jyotishi Devas, and other lower realms. ||144||
Shame on this female womb, which is an obstacle to the observance of the Digambara Muni Dharma, and in which the wise have described the suffering of desire as being like the fire of burning dung. ||145||
Mother, now abandon this womb and, by the power of your own mind, attain the seven supreme states by worshipping the pure right vision. ||146||
You people, by holding some virtuous births, will burn all your karmas with the fire of meditation and attain the supreme state. ||147||
Thus, accepting the words of the Pritikara Acharya as authoritative, Arya Vajjangha, with his wife, happily embraced right vision. ||148||
He, with his beloved, was very pleased to have attained right vision. It is right, for the gain of an extraordinary thing nourishes the great joy of beings. ||149||
Having attained the right vision necklace, which is in accordance with the Sutras, he became established in the position of a prince, possessing the wealth of liberation and kingship. ||150||
The earth and the gods consider right vision to be the main limb. ||139||
O Arya, you should discard the ignorance of the world, heresy, and the gods, and illuminate the vision that is not tainted by false views. ||140||
You should cut the length of the cycle of existence with the sword of right vision. You are surely a near-future being and a future Tirthankara. ||141||
O Arya, following the teachings of the Arhant, I have given this instruction on right vision. You should definitely accept it for the sake of your own liberation. ||142||
Thus, the Muni explained to Arya Vajjangha and said to Arya Shrimati, "Mother, you too should quickly accept this right vision, which is like a boat, to cross the ocean of existence. Why are you grieving in vain in the female womb?" ||143||
Mother, in all the realms, except for the Ratna Prabha, right vision beings are not born in the six lower realms, the Bhavanavasi, Vyantara, and Jyotishi Devas, and other lower realms. ||144||
Shame on this female womb, which is an obstacle to the observance of the Digambara Muni Dharma, and in which the wise have described the suffering of desire as being like the fire of burning dung. ||145||
Mother, now abandon this womb and, by the power of your own mind, attain the seven supreme states by worshipping the pure right vision. ||146||
You people, by holding some virtuous births, will burn all your karmas with the fire of meditation
Page #293:
---------------------------
## Ninth Chapter

**150.** Just as a prince, having obtained a beautiful garland strung with pearls, becomes established in the position of heir to his kingdom, so too, that forest-dwelling being, having obtained a beautiful garland of right faith strung with the thread of Jain principles, became established in the position of heir to the kingdom of liberation.

**151.** That virtuous lady, desiring to attain liberation through union with the pure essence of the male principle, was extremely pleased with the attainment of right faith.

**152.** Having tasted the nectar of right faith, which had never been tasted before, both of them, husband and wife, attained great strength in the destruction of karma and in Jain Dharma.

**153.** The lion, monkey, mongoose, and boar, mentioned earlier, also, having taken refuge at the feet of the Guru, the Muni, attained the nectar of right faith along with the forest-dwelling being and the virtuous lady.

**154.** The two Muni-kings, filled with love for Dharma, repeatedly touched the two couples, who had manifested their desires through signs of joy.

**155.** The forest-dwelling being, with eyes wide open from love born of past lives, was overjoyed at the touch of the Muni's lotus feet.

**156.** Having bowed down, he followed them, hoping to receive their blessings. Then, ready to go to their respective destinations, the two Muni-kings said, "May we see you again, O Arya! Do not forget this right faith." Having said this, the two Muni-kings, who were like celestial beings, disappeared.

**157.** After the two Muni-kings had departed, the forest-dwelling being was filled with anxiety for a moment. Separation from loved ones is indeed a cause of mental distress.

**158.** He repeatedly contemplated the qualities of the Muni-kings, soothing his mind, and for a long time, he pondered the following thoughts, which were conducive to Dharma.

**159.** Oh, what a wonder! The association of virtuous people removes distress from the heart, increases supreme joy, and satisfies the mind's desires.

**160.** The association of virtuous people, even from afar, destroys evil, nourishes excellent qualities, and brings about great good. 

Page #294:
---------------------------
204
The virtuous, endowed with austerity, are always devoted to the path of liberation. They have no desire to please the worldly people. ||12||
These sages, out of compassion, only guide others to the path of liberation. This is the nature of the great souls. ||13||
These virtuous, desiring liberation, are always compassionate towards others' suffering, though they are indifferent to their own. They are like deer, bound by their own desires, yet always ready to help others. ||16||
Where are we, and where are these selfless sages? Where is this place of enjoyment, this abode of the liberated? It is not easy for these selfless sages to go to the abode of enjoyment and preach to the people there. Yet, these ascetics are so careful in their service to us. ||15||
May all beings be happy, this is their only desire. They are called 'Yatis' (ascetics) because they strive for this. ||16||
Just as these four-footed sages came from afar to help us, so do the great souls always delight in helping others. ||16||
I still see those four-footed sages, whose bodies were burnt by the fire of austerity, as if they were standing before me. ||168||
I bow down to their lotus feet, and they, with gentle hands, touch my head, making me their own. ||169||
They have given me the nectar of right vision, quenching my thirst for Dharma. My mind, free from worldly sorrows, is filled with joy. ||170||
The sage named Pritikara is truly a giver of joy, for his joy is all-pervading. He has shown us great love by guiding us to the right path. ||17||
The meaning is that when a person, capable of going anywhere, goes to a particular place and gives advice to a particular person, it shows his great love for that person. Here too, the sages had the ability to go anywhere because of their four-footed power, but they did not go anywhere else at that time, but went to the forest-dwelling creature. This shows their great love for him.
1. Jananuvartanam. 2. Shreshtha. 3. Darshanam A, S. -Deshanam M, L. 4. Punarutpath. 5. Vanchha. 6. Charanarṣabho A, S. 7. Tapo'gni. 8. Panamkarayatam. 9. Bhogasantarṣam P, A, 60, S, M. 10. Sarvatragah Protah M, L. 

Page #295:
---------------------------
## Ninth Chapter

205.  Mahabala, in this existence too, the Self-Enlightened One, the Guru, is ours. He has bestowed upon us the right vision, and now, especially, he has done so. ||12||

373. If there were no association with Gurus in the world, there would be no attainment of virtues. Without the attainment of virtues, where would the birth of any being be fruitful? ||373||

17. Just as a metal, when infused with the right essence, attains the state of gold, so too, the soul, when infused with the virtues of the Guru, attains purity. ||17||

105. Just as one cannot cross the ocean without a boat, so too, one cannot cross this ocean of existence without the guidance of the Guru. ||105||

17. Just as a blind person cannot see objects without a lamp, so too, this being cannot know the soul, non-soul, and other things without the guidance of a teacher. ||17||

17. In this world, both brothers and Gurus are for the happiness of humans. But brothers bring happiness only in this world, while Gurus bring happiness in both this world and the next, in a special way. ||17||

18. Since we have attained this purity through the instructions of the Guru, we wish that our devotion to the Guru's lotus feet may remain even in future births. ||18||

19. Thinking in this way, the right faith of Bajjangh became very firm. This faith will be like a wish-fulfilling tree for him, bearing all desired fruits. ||19||

18. Shrimati also had the same thoughts as Bajjangh, so her right faith also became firm. Both of them had the same nature, so there was an unbroken love between them. ||18||

18. Thus, enjoying their lives with love, three Palyas of time passed for them. ||18||

182. At the end of their lives, they happily gave up their bodies and, with the remaining merit, reached the Aishana heaven, just as one moves from one house to another. ||182||

183. Just as clouds appear on their own during the rainy season and disappear on their own in due time, so too, the bodies of beings in the realm of enjoyment appear on their own and disappear on their own at the end of life. ||183||

184. Just as there is no possibility of impurities in the Vaikriya body, so too, there is no possibility of impurities in the bodies of those who have attained the right vision. ||184||

171.  ... चलता है ॥१७१।। 

Page #296:
---------------------------
##  English Translation:

206. 
In the Aishana Kalpa, in the Sri Prabha Vimana, the radiant Sri Dhar, adorned with the brilliance of eternal light, was a celestial being.  ||185|| 
Due to the power of right faith, the Arya Srimati, freed from the female form, became the celestial being,  Sriyamprabha, in the self-illuminating Vimana. ||186||
In this Kalpa, the Lion, the Mongoose, the Monkey, and the Boar, all became celestial beings with great wealth and happiness. What is unattainable through merit? ||187||
Without Dharma, where is heaven? Without heaven, where is happiness? Therefore, those seeking happiness should serve the Dharma Kalpavriksha for a long time. ||188||
The one who was previously a Lion, became the celestial being, Chitrangada, in the beautiful Chitrangada Vimana, adorned with a radiant crown. ||189||
The Boar, in the Nanda Vimana, became the celestial being, Manikundali, adorned with a radiant crown, armlets, and jeweled earrings. ||190||
The Monkey, in the Nandyaavarta Vimana, became the celestial being, Manohar, beautiful in form and captivating to the celestial women. ||191||
The Mongoose, in the Prabhakar Vimana, became the celestial being, Manorath, who enjoyed divine pleasures, consuming nectar obtained from hundreds of desires. ||192||
Thus, the description of the form, beauty, and pleasures of these six beings, who enjoy the happiness of the celestial realm due to their merit, should be understood as similar to Lalitanga Deva. ||193||
Thus, the radiant Sri Dhar, who brought joy to the eyes of the celestial Lakshmi, adorned with a very pure and bright body, enjoyed delightful pleasures with celestial women who spoke sweet words, and played in his own Vimana with many festivals. ||194||
     -
1. In the Aishana Kalpa. 2. The one whose name is the same as this Vimana, meaning Sriyamprabha. 3. -crown-etc., 50, D. 4. Named Manohar. 5. -enjoying nectar of pleasures. 6. Celestial being. 7. -those who share happiness, etc., 50, S, D, M. 8. -radiant, etc., S. 

Page #297:
---------------------------
## Ninth Chapter
207
The sequence of the celestial nymphs pressing their soft, tender hands against his feet, showering him repeatedly with the cool, gentle rays of their moon-like faces, and constantly aiming at him with the arrows of their captivating glances, adorned with the playfulness of their eyebrows. Thus, the joyful Shridhar, destined to become a Tirthankara in the future, was never satiated with the pleasures of enjoyment, moment by moment. ||195||

Thus ends the ninth chapter of the *Trishattilakshana Shreemahapurana*, composed by the venerable Jinaseenaacharya, known as Parsvanatha, which narrates the origin of the right faith of Shrimati and Vajrajvaarya. ||6||

-
1. Sadbhu-p0. Subhru b0, s0. 

Page #298:
---------------------------
The tenth chapter:

1. The sage, free from passions, used the term "Athaneyechurakhudasau" to refer to his guru, who had attained liberation and resided on Mount Prabha.
2. This guru, who brought joy to the world, was the one who was to be worshipped.
3. Sri Dhardeva, desiring to know the fate of his three ministers, went to Mount Prabha and asked the omniscient guru about them.
4. "Where are my three ministers, who were of great strength, born now? What path have they taken?"
5. The omniscient guru, with his words like rays of light, dispelled the darkness of ignorance in Sri Dhardeva's heart and said:
6. "Alas, when you left your mortal body and went to heaven, and I attained the three jewels and took initiation, those three stubborn ministers, due to their bad karma, died and went to hell."
7. "Two of them, Mahaमति and Sammिन्नमति, went to the Nigoda region, where there is only dense darkness and where they experience birth and death repeatedly, like the turmoil of boiling water."
8. "The minister Shatamati, due to his false beliefs, went to hell. Hell is the main destination for those who bear the fruits of their wrong actions."
9. "Those who are intoxicated by the poison of false beliefs and oppose the true Jain path wander for a long time in this world, which is full of whirlpools of bad karma."
10. "Those who oppose right knowledge are plunged into the darkness of hell. Therefore, a wise person should diligently practice true knowledge, which is free from misleading interpretations."

11. Later, one day, Sri Dhardeva, using his knowledge of the future, realized that his guru, Sri Prabha, was residing on Mount Prabha and had attained liberation.
12. The sage, who brought joy to all beings in the world, was his guru. Sri Dhardeva went to him with the best offerings to worship him.
13. He worshipped the omniscient, joy-bringing Maharaj, who resided on Mount Prabha, offered him salutations, explained the nature of Dharma, and then asked his question as follows:
14. "O Lord, where are my three ministers, who were of great strength and held false beliefs, born now? What path have they taken?"
15. The omniscient guru, with his words like rays of light, dispelled the darkness of ignorance in Sri Dhardeva's heart and said: 

Page #299:
---------------------------
## The Land of Merit

**209.** The soul ascends through Dharma (righteousness) and falls through Adharma (unrighteousness). It attains the human realm through a mixture of both. This is the conclusion reached by the wise. ||11||

**12.** Your minister, Shatabuddhi, is suffering in the second hell due to the firmness of his false knowledge, experiencing excruciating pain. ||12||

**13.** This is the consequence of the self-inflicted harm of a soul that has not conquered its own mind, for it harbors hatred for Dharma and delights in Adharma. ||13||

**14.** It is well-known that Dharma brings happiness and Adharma brings suffering. Therefore, wise individuals, desiring to escape suffering, strive for Dharma. ||14||

**15.** Dharma is compassion for all beings, truthfulness, patience, freedom from greed, absence of desire, and the attainment of knowledge and detachment. Adharma is the opposite of these. ||15||

**16.** Attachment to worldly pleasures intensifies the thirst for sensual delights. This thirst, like a blazing fire, generates intense suffering. ||16||

**17.** Tormented by this suffering, the soul seeks relief and becomes attached to sin. One who is attached to sin hates Dharma and, due to Adharma, falls into lower realms. ||17||

**18.** Just as the poison of a mad dog takes effect in due time (usually during the rainy season), so too do the evil deeds committed in time bring great suffering in hell. ||18||

**19.** Just as improper food consumption intensifies fever in foolish people, so too does the practice of sin greatly increases the suffering of those with false beliefs. ||19||

**20.** The ripening of karma is relentless and yields bitter fruit. Due to this, the soul falls into hell and does not find relief from suffering even for a moment. ||20||

**21.** If you wish to know about the suffering in hell and the origin of beings there, listen attentively with a steady mind. ||21||

**22.** Those who are engaged in violence, those who are devoted to falsehood, those who are thieves, those who are attached to other people's wives, and those who are addicted to alcohol... ||22|| 

Page #300:
---------------------------
##  Chapter 210: The Adi Purana

Those who are of false belief, cruel, and devoted to fierce meditation, who are always hateful and merciless, and who are attached to many beginnings and possessions (23). Those who always oppose Dharma and nourish Adharma, who are defamers of the virtuous, and who are afflicted by envy (24). Those who are excessively cruel to those who are without possessions, who are violent towards the Muni's who are virtuous and devoted to Dharma, and who are fond of honey and meat (25). Those who nourish the killers of other beings, who are extremely cruel, who eat honey and meat, and who approve of those who do so (26). Those men enter the Rasatal (hell) with the weight of their sins. Know this to be the field of retribution for evil deeds (27). Cruel aquatic and terrestrial creatures, snakes, reptiles, women of evil character, and birds all go down (28). The senseless beings go to the first earth called "Dharma," reptiles to the second, birds to the third, snakes to the fourth, lions to the fifth, women to the sixth, and sinful men and fish to the seventh (29-30). The seven earths are Ratna-Prabha, Sharkara-Prabha, Baluka-Prabha, Panka-Prabha, Dhuma-Prabha, Tama-Prabha, and Maha-Tama-Prabha, which are progressively lower (31). Their synonyms are Dharma, Vansha, Shila, (Megha), Anjana, Aristha, Maghavi, and Madhavi, in order (32). In those earths, those beings are born with their faces downwards, hanging like honeybees in a honeycomb, in a repulsive place. How can there be progress for sinful beings? (33). Due to their evil deeds, they immediately acquire a body that is foul-smelling, repulsive, unsightly, and deformed (34). Just as leaves fall down when the branches are broken, so too, those beings of hell, upon acquiring a complete body, fall from their place of birth onto the earth of hell, which is burning with unbearable fire (35). 

Page #301:
---------------------------


Page #302:
---------------------------


Page #303:
---------------------------
The Tenth Chapter

213. "They are made to dry like flesh, hung on iron rods, and roasted in fire. Others are thrown head-down from the top of mountains. 5. Some are pierced with sharp hooks in their vital parts and joints, and their nails are pierced with red-hot needles, causing excruciating pain. 59. Others are impaled on sharp spikes, their intestines hanging out, their bodies red with blood. 60. Those whose bodies are mangled with wounds are sprinkled with saline water. This revives them from their swoon. 61. Some are thrown down from high mountains, and then mercilessly beaten with hundreds of vajra fists. 62. Others are struck with maces by cruel tormentors, their eyeballs falling out. 63. Asuras make others fight each other, using them as battering rams, their heads bursting with a loud sound, and their brains and flesh oozing out. 64. Those who were once arrogant are made to sit on red-hot iron seats and are laid down on beds of sharp thorns. 65. Thus, experiencing unbearable and terrible torment in hell, the terrified hell-beings are filled with anxiety. 66. Alas! This earth, heated by flames, is difficult to endure. The wind blows, carrying sparks, and its touch is unbearable. 67. These burning directions create the fear of fire in all directions. Rain falls from the sky, composed of burning embers. 68."

How many hell-beings are there? Some are hung on iron rods like flesh, and roasted in fire until they become dry like valloora (dry flesh). 
And how many are thrown head-down from the top of mountains? Some are pierced with sharp hooks in their vital parts and joints, and their nails are pierced with red-hot needles, causing excruciating pain. 59. How many are impaled on sharp spikes, their intestines hanging out, their bodies red with blood? 60. Those whose bodies are mangled with wounds are sprinkled with saline water. This revives them from their swoon. 61. How many are thrown down from high mountains, and then mercilessly beaten with hundreds of vajra fists? 62. How many are struck with maces by cruel tormentors, their eyeballs falling out? 63. Asuras make others fight each other, using them as battering rams, their heads bursting with a loud sound, and their brains and flesh oozing out. 64. Those who were once arrogant are made to sit on red-hot iron seats and are laid down on beds of sharp thorns. 65. Thus, experiencing unbearable and terrible torment in hell, the terrified hell-beings are filled with anxiety. 66. Alas! This earth, heated by flames, is difficult to endure. The wind blows, carrying sparks, and its touch is unbearable. 67. These burning directions create the fear of fire in all directions. Rain falls from the sky, composed of burning embers. 68."

Page #304:
---------------------------
## Adipurana 214

This is the poison forest, filled with poisonous creepers, and this is the Asipatra forest, terrifying with its sharp-edged leaves. ||19||

These are the deceitful, hot-tempered women, daughters of Yama, who, like burning iron, embrace us forcefully, causing great suffering (arousing lust). ||7||

These powerful men are forcing us to fight, as if they were sent by Yama to bear witness to our past karmic deeds. ||71||

This group of camels and donkeys, with their terrifying roars, nostrils flared, burning with flames, and spewing fire from their mouths, are rushing towards us to devour us. ||72||

These men, with their terrifying forms, swords in hand, are threatening us, taunting us, and showing us their anger without reason. ||73||

These vultures, falling from the sky with terrifying speed, are swooping down on us, and these barking dogs are frightening us greatly. ||74||

Surely, these wicked beings are causing us suffering through the deceit of our past lives. It is amazing how we are surrounded by suffering from all sides. ||75||

Here, the sound of the feet of the running Narakas is causing suffering, and here, the sound of someone crying, filled with sorrowful lamentation, is coming. ||76||

Here, the harsh sound of the crows, cawing loudly, and the ominous sound of the jackals, echoing through the sky and earth, is spreading. ||77||

Here, the sound of the wind blowing strongly through the Asipatra forest, and the harsh sound of the leaves falling from the trees due to the force of the wind, is happening. ||78||

This is the same artificial Simul tree, with thorns on its trunk, where even the thought of it makes our bodies immediately prickle with thorns. ||79||

And these clouds are raining down hot dust. ||68|| 

Page #305:
---------------------------
The Tenth Chapter
215
This is the river named Vaitarani, which is full of scorching heat. Even remembering it is terrifying, let alone crossing it. || 8 || These are the abodes of the hellish beings, burning with intense heat within. Like blind mice, the hellish beings are turned around and around. || 8 || The unbearable pains, the severe blows, these are difficult to bear. The lives are cut short, and the hellish beings cannot be stopped. || 82 || Where shall we go? Where shall we stand? Where shall we sit? Where shall we sleep? Wherever we go, there is more and more suffering. || 83 || This endless suffering, when will we cross it? Even the oceans are not a comparison to the length of our lives. || 84 || Let them contemplate this, the constant mental torment that they endure. It is this alone that is capable of causing doubt in their lives, that is, it makes them doubt whether they will die. || 85 || What is the point of saying more? Whatever terrible suffering there is in the world, all of it has been gathered together in the hells by the difficult-to-remove karmas. || 86 || Even the blink of an eye is not a moment of happiness for them. They experience only suffering, day and night. || 87 || Immersed in the ocean of hell, filled with hundreds of different kinds of suffering, they are far from attaining happiness, even remembering it is a distant thought. || 88 || The suffering that they experience in the cold and hot hells is completely unbearable and inconceivable. There is nothing in the world that can be compared to it. || 89 || In the first four earths, there is hot pain. In the fifth earth, there is both hot and cold pain, that is, in the upper two hundred thousand hells, there is hot pain, and in the lower one hundred thousand hells, there is cold pain. In the sixth and seventh earths, there is cold pain. This hot and cold pain increases gradually in the lower hells. || 90 || In those seven earths, there are thirty lakh, twenty-five lakh, fifteen lakh, ten lakh, three lakh, 
1. Filled with the oil of the Bhallataka tree. 2. These are the A, 10, 60, S. 3. 'Aas upaveshane'. 4. 'Shing swapne'. 5. Detailed. 6. Doubt. 7. Very far. 8. Equal to L. 

Page #306:
---------------------------
The Adipurana

There are many blazing pits in hell, which are very large. The wicked beings of hell are roasted in them like the contents of a pot. || 92 ||

There are one, three, seven, ten, seventeen, twenty-two, and thirty-three oceans of lifespan in those hells. || 93 ||

The height of the bodies of the hell beings in the first earth is seven bows, three hands, and six fingers. And in the second and subsequent earths, it should be understood as doubled. That is, in the second earth, it is fifteen bows, two hands, twelve fingers, in the third earth, it is thirty-one bows, one hand, in the fourth earth, it is sixty-two bows, two hands, in the fifth earth, it is one hundred and twenty-five bows, in the sixth earth, it is two hundred and fifty hands, and in the seventh earth, it is five hundred bows. || 94 ||

Those hell beings are deformed, with a hunched posture, impotent, foul-smelling, dark-skinned, rough to the touch, harsh-voiced, and ugly. || 95 ||

Their bodies are made of dark and rough atoms, like darkness. Their dravya-leshya is extremely black. || 96 ||

But there is a difference in their bhava-leshya, which is as follows: In the first earth, there is the lowest kapoti bhava-leshya, in the second earth, there is the middle kapoti leshya, in the third earth, there is the highest kapoti leshya and the lowest nila leshya, in the fourth earth, there is the middle nila leshya, in the fifth earth, there is the highest nila and the lowest krishna leshya, in the sixth earth, there is the middle krishna leshya, and in the seventh earth, there is the highest krishna leshya. Thus, the bhava-leshya is described in the seven earths, starting with Dharma. || 97-98 ||

Just as a bitter taste and eight tastes are produced from the combination of bitter gourd, brinjal, and tamarind, so too is the same taste produced in the bodies of the hell beings. || 99 ||

The stench that arises from collecting the dead bodies of dogs, cats, donkeys, camels, and other animals cannot compare to the stench of the bodies of these hell beings. || 100 ||

Just as there is a rough touch in thorns and gokhuru, so too is there a rough touch in their bodies. || 101 ||

Page #307:
---------------------------
## The Tenth Chapter

217

Due to the arising of their evil karma, they experience **apṛthagvikriyā** (separate actions), which are extremely distorted, repulsive, and deformed.  ||32||

Upon reaching the **paryāpta** (completion) stage, they attain the knowledge of **vibhanga** (separation), which makes them remember their past enemies and they begin to express their animosity. ||10||

Those who were wise in committing sins in their previous birth, who were skilled in uttering harsh words, and who were wicked, are now experiencing the fruits of their evil deeds. ||104||

O God, that minister, **Śatabuddhi**, has attained great suffering related to the second hell due to the arising of his evil karma, as described above. ||105||

Therefore, those wise men who do not desire the intense suffering of the hells mentioned above, should worship this **Jina**-proclaimed Dharma. ||106||

This Jain Dharma protects from suffering, this Dharma expands happiness, and this Dharma grants the liberation-happiness arising from the destruction of karma. ||107||

Through this Jain Dharma, one attains the position of Indra, Chakravarti, and Ganadhara. The position of **Tīrthankara** is also attained through this Dharma, and the supreme **siddh** position is also obtained through it. ||108||

This Jain Dharma is the relative of beings, this is the friend, and this is the teacher. Therefore, O God, fix your mind on this Jain Dharma, which grants happiness in heaven and liberation. ||109||

Hearing these words of **Preetikara** Jina, **Śrīdhara**, the pure-minded, attained great devotion to Dharma. ||110||

Following the instructions of his teacher, he went to the second hell and began to explain to **Śatabuddhi**: "O simple-minded **Śatabuddhi**, do you know me, the mighty one?" ||111||

In that existence, your **mithyātva** (false belief) was very strong due to your reliance on many false beliefs. See, the fruit of that **mithyātva**, which brings suffering, is before you. ||112||

Thus, **Śatabuddhi**, having been explained by him, embraced pure **samyagdarshana** (right faith) and attained supreme purity by abandoning the defilement of **mithyātva**. ||113||

At the end of his life, this **Śatabuddhi** being, having emerged from those hells, went to the eastern part of **Puṣkaradvīpa**, the land of **Prāgvideha**. ||114||

**Note:** The terms in bold are Jain terms. 

Page #308:
---------------------------
## Chapter 218

In the city of Ratnasamchaya, in the Mangalavasyā region of the Pūrvavideha territory on the Pūṣkara island, a son named Jayasen was born to the king Mahidhara and his queen Sundaryā.  [115]  When Jayasen was about to be married, Śrīdharadeva appeared and enlightened him.  Becoming detached, Jayasen took initiation from the sage Yamadhara.  [116]  Śrīdharadeva reminded him of the terrible torments of hell, causing him to renounce worldly attachments and engage in arduous austerities.  [117]  At the end of his life, Jayasen attained the state of Brahma-indra, absorbed in meditation.  Behold, how he went from being a hell-bound being to attaining the position of Indra!  Indeed, the course of karma is truly extraordinary.  [118]  Through actions like violence and other forms of misconduct, a being is born in lower realms like hell, while through actions like non-violence and other virtues, a being attains higher realms like heaven.  Therefore, those who desire a higher state should always be devoted to dharma.  [119]  Having attained the state of Brahma-indra, endowed with the knowledge of the future, Jayasen came down from the Brahma-loka and worshipped Śrīdharadeva, recognizing his role as a benevolent friend.  [120]

After that, Śrīdharadeva, having descended from heaven, resided in the Mahāvatsa territory, a region as beautiful as heaven, in the Pūrvavideha territory of Jambudvipa.  [11]  In the city of Susimā, a son named Suvidhi, a virtuous and wise soul, was born to king Sudṛṣṭi and his queen Sundaranandā.  [121-122]  From childhood, Suvidhi was a repository of all arts, like the moon, and he brought joy to the eyes of the people every day.  [123]  Even as a child, Suvidhi understood the nature of true dharma.  Indeed, the minds of self-realized individuals are always focused on their own welfare.  [124]  Even in his childhood, Suvidhi possessed a beautiful form that brought joy to people, and when he reached full youth, his beauty became even more captivating.  [125]  His head, adorned with a crown, always stood tall, making him appear elevated among other kings, just as Mount Meru stands tall among the mountains.  [126] 

Page #309:
---------------------------
## The Tenth Canto

**219**

His face, adorned with earrings, shone like the sun and moon. It was like the sky, adorned with stars and a rainbow. **(27)** His face, with its sweet breath, was like a blooming lotus, fragrant and beautiful. **(128)** His nose, as if meant to smell the fragrance of the face-lotus, was long and graceful. The two nostrils, facing downwards, seemed to drink the nectar of the face. **(129)** His neck, adorned with a garland of pearls, was like a beautiful creeper, holding the face-lotus. **(130)** His broad chest, adorned with precious jewels, shone like the dwelling of Lakshmi, the goddess of wealth, illuminated by lamps. **(131)** His shoulders, raised high, were like the tusks of an elephant, signifying his noble character. He was of a noble lineage, like an elephant with a strong backbone, and his stature was majestic, like an elephant. **(132)** His arms, strong and righteous, were like two pillars, protecting the world from harm. **(133)** His beautiful palms, adorned with nails like stars, were marked with the signs of the sun and moon, making them shine like the sky. **(134)** His middle part, holding the beauty of the middle of the world, was vast and magnificent. **(135)** In the middle, there was Mount Meru, adorned with a crown. **(126)** 

Page #310:
---------------------------


Page #311:
---------------------------
## The Tenth Chapter

221.  The powerful wife of the king, named Srimatī, was born as his son, Keshava.  What can be said?  Such is the state of the world. ||146||

The king had great love for his son.  It is natural to love one's son, but what can be said when the beloved of a previous life is born as one's son?  He is loved even more. ||147||

The beings of the lion, monkey, and boar lineages, who had become gods in the second heaven after enjoying the earth, were born as princes in this same Vatsakavati country, with the same merit and the same power as the king. ||148||

The lion being, Citrāṅgada, was born as the son of Vibhīṣaṇa, the king, from his wife, Priyadattā, named Baradatta. ||149||

The boar being, named Maṇikuṇḍala, was born as the son of king Nandiṣeṇa and queen Anantamatī, named Vareseṇa. ||150||

The monkey being, named Manohara, was born as the son of king Ratiṣeṇa and queen Candramati, named Citrāṅgada. ||151||

The jackal being, named Manoraṭha, was born as the son of king Prabhañjana and queen Citramālini, named Praśāntamadana. ||152||

All these princes, with their similar forms, appearances, beauty, and wealth, enjoyed their respective kingdoms for a long time. ||153||

Then, one day, all four kings, along with the Chakravartī Abhayaghoṣa, went to pay homage to the pure and radiant Jina, Vimala Vāha.  There, they all paid homage with devotion and then, renouncing the world, took initiation. ||154||

This Chakravartī had been initiated along with eighteen thousand kings and five thousand sons. ||155||

All these Munīśvaras, attaining the highest state of *samvega* and *niveda*, engaged in the arduous practice of austerities, the path to heaven and liberation. ||156||

*Samvega* is intense delight in Dharma and its fruits, and *niveda* is detachment from the body, pleasures, and the world. 

Page #312:
---------------------------
##  King Suvidhi, overwhelmed by love for his son, did not renounce his householder life. He practiced intense austerities, remaining in the exalted position of a Shravaka. [15]

He attained the eleventh position of the householder, the Uddishta-tyaga-pratima, among the eleven positions described by the Jina for householders: (1) Darshan-pratima, (2) Vrata-pratima, (3) Samayika-pratima, (4) Proshdha-pratima, (5) Sachitta-tyaga-pratima, (6) Divaa-maithuna-tyaga-pratima, (7) Brahmacharya-pratima, (8) Aarambha-tyaga-pratima, (9) Parigraha-tyaga-pratima, (10) Anumati-tyaga-pratima, and (11) Uddishta-tyaga-pratima. [159-161]

The Jina has described twelve vows for the householder: five Anuvratas, three Gunavratas, and four Shikshavrata. [162]

The five Anuvratas are: Ahimsa-anuvrata (non-violence), Satya-anuvrata (truthfulness), Achaurya-anuvrata (non-stealing), Brahmacharya-anuvrata (celibacy), and Parigraha-parimana-anuvrata (limited possessions). [163]

If these five Anuvratas are practiced with fivefold contemplation and purified by right faith, they lead to great rewards for householders. [164]

The three Gunavratas are: Dig-virati (non-attachment to direction), Desh-virati (non-attachment to place), and Anarth-danda-virati (non-attachment to harmful objects). Some Acharyas also consider Bhogopabhoga-parimana-vrata (limited enjoyment of possessions) as a Gunavrata. [165]

The four Shikshavrata are: Samayika (meditation), Proshdha-upavasa (fasting), Atithi-sanvibhaga (sharing with guests), and Sannyasa at the time of death. [166]

These twelve vows for householders are like steps leading to the palace of heaven and a shield against the miseries of hell. [167]

Thus, King Suvidhi, purified by right faith and the purity of his vows, practiced the path of liberation for a long time. [168]

At the end of his life, he received the Digambar initiation, free from possessions, and, through proper practice, attained the supreme path of liberation. He died in Samadhi, becoming Indra in the Achyuta heaven. [169]

His lifespan there was twenty Sagaras. [170] 

Page #313:
---------------------------
## The Tenth Chapter

**223**

Keshava, having renounced all external and internal attachments, embraced the path of non-attachment, attained the supreme position of Indra in the Achyuta heaven after attaining the ultimate liberation. ||17||

The aforementioned princes, like Varadatta, were born in the Achyuta heaven as gods of the Samanika caste, due to their own accumulated merits. ||172||

Residing in the Achyuta heaven, the Indra of that realm, possessing the eight divine powers, enjoyed divine pleasures for a long time. ||173||

His body, imbued with divine radiance, was naturally beautiful, untouched by the afflictions of poison, weapons, etc., and extremely pure. ||174||

He adorned his head with a garland of Kalpavriksha flowers, as if displaying the vast fruits of his past austerities. ||175||

His beautiful body was adorned with naturally occurring ornaments, as if each limb was adorned with the praiseworthy fruits of the vine of compassion. ||176||

With his perfectly proportioned limbs, he shone with numerous divine attributes, resembling a Kalpavriksha adorned with flowers of various hues. ||177||

His head, adorned with dark hair and a white turban, resembled the peak of Mount Kailasa, adorned with Taapichcha flowers and the Milky Way. ||178||

His face, resembling a blooming lotus, was adorned with radiant eyes, like bees attracted to the lotus, and his smile, like the white rays of the moon, illuminated his face. ||179||

He wore a pure garland on his beautiful and broad chest, resembling a cluster of autumn clouds resting on the slopes of Mount Meru. ||180||

His hips, covered with a shining garment, shone like a sandy mound on the seashore, covered with waves. ||181||

His two beautiful thighs, captivating the hearts of celestial nymphs, resembled golden banana trees, radiating brilliance. ||182|| 

Page #314:
---------------------------
## Translation:

**224**
**Adipurana**
**5**

His two feet were like a lake, adorned with the rays of his nails like pure water, adorned with lotus marks like lotuses, and filled with fish lines like fish. Thus, his feet possessed an unparalleled beauty. ||183||

Adorned with this most excellent and beautiful, divine, and transformative body, the Achyuta Indra enjoyed the pleasures born in his own heaven. ||184||

This Achyuta heaven is above the six Rajus of the Madhyaloka. Yet, due to the rise of his punya, he became the recipient of the pleasures of a virtuous king. What is not attainable through the rise of punya? ||185||

The number of vimanas that come to this Indra's enjoyment is stated by the Jinas in the supreme Agama as one hundred sixty-nine. ||186||

Among these one hundred sixty-nine vimanas, one hundred twenty-three are scattered, one is the Indra's vimana, and the remaining thirty-five are large, ranked vimanas. ||187||

There were thirty-three Trayashi-jati, excellent Devas for this Indra. He considered them as his sons with his affectionate mind. ||188||

He had ten thousand Samanika Devas. All these Devas were equal to the Indra in terms of enjoyment, but their commands did not hold the same weight as the Indra's. ||189||

He had forty thousand Atmarakshaka Devas, equal to his bodyguards. Although there is no fear of any kind in heaven, they exist to showcase the Indra's magnificence. ||190||

There were three assemblies of this Indra, distinguished as Antahparishad, Madhyamparishad, and Bahya parishad. The first assembly had one hundred twenty-five Devas, the second had two hundred fifty Devas, and the third had five hundred Devas. ||191||

There were four Lokapalas guarding the four directions of this Achyuta heaven, and each Lokapala had thirty-two Devis. ||192||

This Achyuta Indra had eight Mahadevis, who, with their beauty and splendor, were like dolls made to attract the iron of his mind. ||193||

Besides these eight Mahadevis, he had sixty-three Vallabhika Devis. 
1. Abjam Lakshnaroopakamalam. 2. Matsyayukte. Matsyaadi Shubhalakshanayukte cha. 3. Bhukti: Bhuktiksetram. 4. - Mathaikona - A, P, 50, S, M, L. 5. Trayovimsatyuttarashatam. 6. Dasasahasra. 7. Chatvarinshatsahasrani. 8. - Syanya A, P, S, D. 9. Panchavimsatyuttarashatam. 10. Panchashadhadhikdvishateh. 

Page #315:
---------------------------


Page #316:
---------------------------
## 226
**Adipurana**

With graceful movements, charming expressions, captivating glances, playful gestures, and delightful smiles, the celestial nymphs, adorned with delicate emotions, captivated the mind of Achyutendra. || 206 ||

**Shārdūlavikrīḍita**

Gazing at his own reflection in the moon-like faces of the celestial nymphs, Achyutendra, the radiant one, found himself transformed into a bee hovering over a lotus.  His heart, pierced by the arrows of their captivating eyes, was soothed by the touch of their gentle hands. || 207 ||

**Sragdhara**

Achyutendra, resplendent with the brilliance of the moon, reveled in the celestial palace, surrounded by his celestial consorts.  He, the embodiment of wealth, the invincible lord, adorned with divine splendor, enjoyed the company of his beloveds, ever radiant and unmatched in his glory. || 208 ||

**Thus ends the tenth chapter of the Trishattilakshana Mahapurana, a collection of scriptures composed by the venerable Jinaseanacharya, known as the "Srimad Achyutendraisvaryavarnanam," which describes the magnificence of Achyutendra. || 10 ||**

**Notes:**

* **Achyutendra:** A Jain deity, often depicted as a king or emperor.
* **Trishattilakshana Mahapurana:** A Jain scripture that describes the characteristics of the universe and its inhabitants.
* **Jinaseanacharya:** A Jain sage and author.
* **Shārdūlavikrīḍita and Sragdhara:**  Two poetic meters used in Sanskrit literature. 

Page #317:
---------------------------
## Eleventh Chapter

The one whose words are filled with the radiance of the four infinite qualities, the destroyer of karmas, and the attainment of liberation, may that Jina, the sun of knowledge, purify your lotus-like minds. ||1||

Then, when that Acyutendra was about to leave heaven and come to earth, the garland of Mandara flowers on his body suddenly withered. This garland had never withered before. ||2||

The signs of falling from heaven are clearly visible in other ordinary gods, but not so in the Indras, only a few are visible. ||3||

Although the Indra knew from the withering of the garland that he was about to fall from heaven, he did not grieve at all. This is the nature of the great souls. ||4||

When only six months of his life remained, that Acyutendra, the holder of pure intellect, began to worship the Arhantdeva. This is right, for wise people are always desirous of their own welfare. ||5||

At the end of his life, he fixed his mind on the feet of the five supreme beings and, sustained by the remaining good karma, he completed his life there. ||6||

Although the gods of heaven are always subject to pleasure, possess great fortitude, and are the holders of great powers, they still fall from heaven. Therefore, this state of existence is to be condemned. ||7||

Then, after falling from heaven, that Acyutendra, the radiant one, came to the Jambudvipa, in the eastern Videha region, in the land of Pushkala, where he was desired. ||8|| 

Page #318:
---------------------------
228
In the city of Puṇḍarīkī, the king of the earth, Vajrasena, and his queen, Śrīkāntā, had a son named Vajranāmi. ||9|| They had daughters named Varadattā, etc., in order. They also had sons named Vijaya, Vaijayanta, Jayanta, and Aparājita. ||10|| They also had sons who were dear to them, great and noble. They were the same as the Indra of the past, who were also fallen from the Abode of the Blessed. ||11|| The one who was formerly the wise minister, Mativāra, became their son, Subāhu, after falling from the Abode of the Blessed. The one who was formerly the priest, Ānanda, became their son, Mahābāhu. The one who was formerly the general, Akampana, became their son, Pīṭha. The one who was formerly the merchant, Dhanamitra, became their son, Mahāpīṭha. It is right that beings gather together in the same place due to the karmas of their previous lives. ||12-13|| The one who was formerly the king of the Acyuta heaven, Keśava, also fell from there and became the son of the merchant, Kuberadatta, and his wife, Anantamati, in this city, named Dhandeva. ||14||
When Vajranāmi reached the full bloom of youth, his body shone brightly like polished gold, and he was as beautiful as the morning sun. ||15|| His head was adorned with dark, curly hair, like the peak of a mountain covered with rain clouds. ||16|| His cheeks were adorned with the touch of the sun-like earrings, and his face, like a blooming lotus, shone like a lake filled with blooming lotuses. ||17|| On the banks of his forehead, like a mountain, two vines, like eyebrows, were adorned with flowers, like rays of light, and bees, like stars. ||18|| His breath was fragrant, his smile was like saffron, and he attracted the bees, like the eyes of women, so he was like a lotus. ||19|| On his ever-blooming face, like a lotus, a line of bees, like the eyes of the people, rushed to drink the nectar of his beauty and were fully satisfied. ||20|| His nose, situated between his eyes, added to his beauty. The boundaries of his features were well-defined, and they did not cross each other. ||21||

Page #319:
---------------------------


Page #320:
---------------------------
## English Translation:

230
In this Adipurana, Lakshmi and Saraswati were extremely fond of him. His pure fame, like the moon, spread to the ends of the ten directions, as if out of envy for them. ||3|| 
It seems that Brahma, desiring to count his virtues, drew many lines in the sky, using the deception of the cluster of stars. ||35|| 
His charming form, his knowledge, and his youth, all captivated people. Indeed, who is not captivated by virtues? ||36|| 
From the description of his virtues, one can understand the virtues of the other princes as well. Just as the stars possess some of the qualities of the moon, so too, the other princes possessed some of the qualities of Vajnabhi. ||37|| 
Then, recognizing his worth, King Vanasen, the great leader, entrusted his entire kingdom to him. ||38|| 
The king, in his own presence, performed his coronation with great pomp and ceremony, and had his investiture performed by ministers and crowned kings. ||39|| 
At the time of the investiture, he was seated on the royal throne, and many beautiful women were waving chamaras, as pure as the waves of the Ganga. ||40|| 
Seeing those women waving chamaras, my mind imagines that they were trying to remove the dust of slander, which had settled on Vajnabhi due to his association with the kingdom's wealth. ||41|| 
At that time, Lakshmi also had a deep affection for him, and it seemed as if she was bound to him by the trickery of the investiture. ||42|| 
King Vanasen, the best among kings, placed his crown on Vajnabhi's head in the presence of many kings. At that time, it seemed as if he was surrendering his burden to him, as if in the presence of witnesses. ||43|| 
At that time, his chest was adorned with a garland, his arms were adorned with armlets and other ornaments, and his waist was adorned with a belt, a sash, and a garment. ||44|| 
He had mastered all the royal sciences, including mantras, which were capable of fulfilling the three purusharthas (Dharma, Artha, Kama), which yielded great fruits, and which were capable of attracting Lakshmi. ||33|| 

Page #321:
---------------------------
Eleventh Chapter
231. Having performed the coronation ceremony, he [Vajranabha] gave the kingdom to him [Vajrasena] saying, "You are the great emperor." He [Vajranabha] ruled along with the kings. ||45||
After that, being advised by the Lokantika Devas, King Vajrasena decided to take the vows of renunciation. ||46||
Having performed the appropriate rituals, he [Vajrasena] took the vows of renunciation, and he [Vajrasena] attained the auspiciousness of liberation. ||47||
Along with the Bhagavan [Vajrasena], a thousand kings took the vows of renunciation in the great Amravan forest. ||48||
Having made the kingdom free from thorns, Vajranabha ruled it. The Bhagavan [Vajrasena], the king of yogis, performed his austerities without any blemishes. ||49||
Vajranabha was very pleased with the association of the kingdom's prosperity, and his father, the Bhagavan [Vajrasena], was very pleased with the association of the prosperity of austerities. ||50||
Vajranabha had great patience due to his brothers, and the yogi [Vajrasena] had great patience due to his virtues. ||51||
Vajranabha, with the help of his ministers, made the kings favorable to him. The Muni Indra [Vajrasena] nurtured the group of virtues through his austerities and yoga. ||52||
"The son [Vajranabha] is in his own kingdom, and the father [Vajrasena] is in the hermitage of the Muni. Both of them are dedicated to the welfare of others, and both of them protect the people." ||53||
In the treasury of Vajranabha, the wheel-jewel shone brightly, and in the mind-treasury of the yogi [Vajrasena], the meditation-wheel shone brightly. ||54||
Then the king [Vajranabha] conquered the entire earth with that wheel-jewel, and the Muni [Vajrasena] conquered the three worlds with the glory attained through his karma-yoga. ||55||

Page #322:
---------------------------
## Translation:

232
The Adipurana states that both of them, Vajanabhi and Vanasen, were engaged in a competition, but one's victory was limited to six continents, while the other's victory transcended the entire universe. 

Vajanabhi's victory was limited to six continents, while Vanasen's victory transcended the entire universe. 

Dhandev, a radiant gem, was also a part of the treasury and kingdom of that Chakravarti. 

After enjoying the earth for a long time, the wise and great Vajanabhi, the Chakravarti, learned the nature of the three jewels from his father, Vanasen Tirthankara. 

A wise person who practices Right Faith, Right Knowledge, and Right Conduct, like a Rasayana, attains the immortal state of liberation. 

Thinking thus in his heart, the Chakravarti considered his entire kingdom as mere withered grass and devoted his mind to austerity. 

He surrendered his kingdom to his son, Vajradanta, and along with sixteen thousand crowned kings, a thousand sons, eight brothers, and Dhandev, he took the Jain initiation, worthy of being honored by the people, in the presence of his father, Vanasen Tirthankara, for the purpose of liberation. 

Many other kings, distressed by the suffering of birth and death, went to the forest with him to practice austerity. It is right, for who, afflicted by cold, would not seek the warmth of the sun?

After taking initiation, King Vajanabhi, with his mind, speech, and body, renounced violence, falsehood, stealing, sexual indulgence, and attachment for the rest of his life. That is, he observed the five great vows of non-violence, truthfulness, non-stealing, celibacy, and non-attachment. 

Being steadfast in his vows, he also observed the twenty-five contemplations of the five great vows, the five Samitis, and the three Guftis. The five Samitis are: Iriya (walking), Bhasha (speech), Eshana (looking), Adan (receiving), Nikshepan (depositing), and Pratistapana (establishing). The three Guftis are: Kayagupti (guarding the body), Vachanagupti (guarding speech), and Manogupti (guarding the mind). These eight together are called the eight Pravachanamatrikas. Every monk must observe them. This is what the Ganadharas, who protect the Indra Sabha (Samavasarana), say. 

Page #323:
---------------------------
The Eleventh Chapter

233. He, the one who contemplates the excellent, austere, patient, heroic, and sinless monks, and is endowed with right faith, attained the one-course vow, i.e., he began to live alone. ||66||

Having attained the one-course vow, he, like an elephant, roamed the earth for a long time, slowly (with measured steps), observing the beauty of lakes and forests. ||67||

Then, the wise and heroic Vajranabha Muni, contemplating the nature of the soul, reflected upon the sixteen qualities that lead to the attainment of the Tirthankarahood, near his father, Vajrasena Tirthankara. ||68||

He possessed pure right faith free from doubts and other defects, he practiced humility, he avoided transgressions in conduct and vows, he constantly engaged in the application of knowledge, and he experienced fear of the world. ||69||

He practiced austerities according to his capacity, without hiding his strength, and he focused his mind on renunciation, which is the means of attaining knowledge and self-control. ||70||

He was always vigilant in removing obstacles from the vows, conduct, etc., of the virtuous, for the entire effort of benevolent beings is directed towards samadhi, i.e., removing obstacles for others. ||71||

When a vow-bound person suffered from illness or other afflictions, he served him, considering him as inseparable from himself, for service is the heart, the essence of austerity. ||72||

He expanded his unwavering devotion to the venerable Arhant Bhagavan, he served the Acharyas with humility, and he also served the highly knowledgeable monks. ||73||

He also increased his devotion to the scriptures spoken by the true Dev, for one who lacks devotion to the scriptures cannot conquer the enemies of attachment, aversion, etc., which have grown strong. ||74||

Even when he was guilty (avasya), he was still under control (vashi), and he fully observed the six essentials: samata (equality), vandana (salutation), stuti (praise), pratikramna (confession), svadhyaya (self-study), and kayotsarga (relaxation), which are dependent on substance, space, time, and the state of being. ||75||

He, the Muni, like the sun, illuminating the path of Jainism, possessed the rays of austerity, knowledge, etc., and he blossomed the lotuses of the worthy beings. ||76||

The Dev has said: ||64-65||

1. Apapan. 2-3. Ekavihari-tvam. 4. Parvata-jatah. 5. Shanai-h. 6. Sajala-maranyam. 7. Satatyat. 'Abhikshanam sasvadanarate' ityabhidhanan. 8. Agopayan. 9. Samadhau. 10. Chesta. 11. Anatma-banchakah. Anatmantarakah-Da,La. 12. Indraadi-krita-pujayogyeshu. 13. Nirmalam Pa,Da. 14. Aptena prathama-upkrame. 15. Samartho na bhavathi. 16. Vistritan. 17. Anapta-h. Sa na bhavathi-tyasa-h. Pravachana-bhakti-rahit ity-artha-h. 18. Anichchuh. 19. Munindra-surya-h. 
30 

Page #324:
---------------------------
234
The sage, full of love for dharma, performed the great vow of love, establishing those who were devoted to the teachings of the Jinas in dharma. ||7||
"Thus, the great-souled sage contemplated these sixteen causes of attaining the state of a Tirthankara for a long time." ||7||
Then, contemplating these virtues perfectly, the supreme sage bound the great merit, the cause of shaking the three worlds. ||79||
He attained the pure Koṣṭha-buddhi, Bīja-buddhi, Padānusārī-buddhi, and Sammiśrotra-buddhi. ||80||
Just as a king-sage knows the comings and goings of his enemies through royal knowledge, so too, the radiant sage, the holder of the radiant virtues, knew his past lives through the four types of knowledge called Buddhi. ||81||
He attained great radiance through the power of the Dīpta-virtue, practiced great austerities through the power of the Tapta-virtue, practiced the Ugra-tapas through the power of the Ugra-virtue, and practiced the Ghora-tapas through the power of the Ghora-virtue, piercing the heart of the terrible enemy, karma. ||82||
Just as, in his previous state as a king, he, the knower of mantras, used to contemplate the duality (of the self and karma) with his ministers, desiring to conquer the other world (the group of enemies), so too, now in his state as a sage, he, the knower of mantras like the five prostrations, contemplated the duality (of the self and karma, or attachment and aversion, etc.) with the ministers of tapas (yogis who know the science of mantras), desiring to conquer the other world (the hells and other states of existence). ||83||
The sage, with a noble intention, desired only the glorious state of a Siddha. He did not desire any virtues at all, yet he attained the Vikriya-virtue with many qualities like Aṇimā, Mahimā, etc. ||84||
He also attained the virtues of Jalla, etc., which are beneficial to the world. It is only right, for the fruits of the Kalpa-tree benefit everyone. ||85||
Although the sage had vowed to renounce ghee, milk, etc., he manifested many virtues of ghee, milk, etc., which flowed forth. It is only right, for...
1. इहामूनि ल०। 2. सत्तमः श्रेष्ठः । 3. परलोकगमनागमनम् । 4. दीप्ति । 5. चोराधारा-१०। घोरापोराति-ल०। 6. परिग्रहम् । इष्टानिष्टादिकं च । पक्षे कलह च। 7.-जगतीहिता म०, ल.। 8. अमृतादिरससिद्धिः। 

Page #325:
---------------------------
The five great vows (Mahavratas) are:
1. Ahimsa (non-violence)
2. Satya (truthfulness)
3. Asteya (non-stealing)
4. Brahmacharya (continence)
5. Aparigraha (non-attachment) 

Page #326:
---------------------------
## 236

The Muni, having left the abode of humans, went to the forest. This is called *Prayopagama*, which means to go to the forest, leaving behind the places where humans usually live. This is a type of renunciation, considered to be the best by the great Shramanas.

He did not desire any treatment for his body, neither for himself nor from others. He abandoned his attachment to the body, becoming free from worry, just like someone who abandons the dead body of an enemy.

Although his body was reduced to skin and bones, and his belly was extremely thin, the Muni, relying on his natural patience, remained seated for many days with a steady mind.

Desiring to not deviate from the path of the Muni and to achieve the vast *nirjara* of karmas, the Muni endured twenty-two hardships: hunger, thirst, cold, heat, bites of insects, nakedness, lack of desire, women, walking, sleeping, sitting, anger, killing, begging, lack of gain, not seeing, disease, touching grass, wisdom, ignorance, excrement, and respect and reward.

The wise, fearless, and best among the speakers, the Muni, embraced ten virtues: forgiveness, gentleness, straightforwardness, purity, truth, self-control, austerity, renunciation, non-attachment, and celibacy. These ten virtues are indeed very dear to the Ganadharas.

Besides these, he constantly contemplated twelve *anupreksha* (reflections):

* All worldly pleasures, lifespan, strength, and wealth are impermanent.
* When faced with death, old age, and birth, humans have no refuge.
* This world is full of suffering due to the various changes in substance, space, time, existence, and perception.
* The soul, which attains knowledge and vision, is always alone.
* The soul is always separate from the body, wealth, relatives, and spouse.
* This body is impure because excrement constantly flows out of its nine openings.
* This being has a continuous inflow of karmas in the form of merit and demerit.
* Due to factors like *gupti* (concealment) and *samiti* (assembly), these karmas are accumulated.
* *Nirjara* (destruction of karmas) is achieved through austerity.
* This world is fourteen *rajupramāṇa* (units of measurement) high.
* In the ocean of existence, the three jewels are difficult to obtain.

**Notes:**

* *Prayopagama* is a Jain term for a type of renunciation where one leaves behind the world and goes to the forest.
* *Nirjara* is a Jain term for the destruction of karmas.
* *Anupreksha* are reflections or contemplations that help a Jain to detach from worldly attachments.
* *Gupti* and *samiti* are Jain terms related to the accumulation of karmas.
* *Rajupramāṇa* is a unit of measurement used in Jain cosmology. 

Page #327:
---------------------------
## Eleventh Chapter

**237**  The contemplation of the principles, the attainment of the state of purity, and the contemplation of the state of purity, these are the contemplations. The Muni, who is endowed with the highest purity of the subtle bodies, contemplates these. ||109||

Having ascended the ladder of the stages of tranquility for the second time, he completed the contemplation of separateness and attained the highest state of samadhi. ||110||

Having relinquished his life in the eleventh stage of tranquility, he attained the state of all-fulfillment and became the Indra of that state. ||111||

This celestial abode of all-fulfillment is situated twelve yojanas below the edge of the world of the two-faced. It is the most excellent and is situated in the foremost part. ||112||

Its length, breadth, and circumference are equal to that of Jambudvipa. It is situated at the end of the sixty-three celestial realms, like the jewel of the crown. ||113||

Since all the desires of the beings born in that celestial abode are fulfilled effortlessly, it is called the abode of all-fulfillment. ||114||

It is very high and adorned with fluttering flags, so it appears as if it is calling the Munis with the desire to give them happiness. ||115||

Seeing the sapphire-made land there, adorned with flowers, the gods remember the sky filled with stars. ||116||

The walls there, reflecting the images of the gods, appear as if they want to create a new heaven. ||117||

The rays of the gems there have dispelled the darkness. It is true, indeed, that pure substances do not associate with impure ones. ||118||

The rainbow formed by the rays of the gems around that celestial abode appears as if a shining coat has been made all around. ||119||

The hanging garlands of fragrant and delicate flowers there appear as if they are indicating the happiness of the Indras there. ||120||

The garlands of pearls continuously strung in that celestial abode appear as if they are the bright smiles of the teeth. ||121||

**Pa**
**r**
**-**
**ra...............randu.  -...     **
**-**

It is extremely difficult to attain and only through the religion of compassion can the welfare of beings be achieved. Thus, contemplating the principles, he contemplated the twelve contemplations. At that time, the Muni, who was endowed with auspicious thoughts, was holding the extreme purity of the subtle bodies. ||105-109||

Having ascended the ladder of the stages of tranquility for the second time, he completed the contemplation of separateness and attained the highest state of samadhi. ||110||

Finally, in the eleventh stage of tranquility, called the stage of pacified delusion, he relinquished his life and attained all-fulfillment, where he attained the position of the Indra. ||111||

This celestial abode called all-fulfillment is twelve yojanas below the edge of the world of the two-faced. It is the most excellent and is situated in the foremost part. ||112||

Its length, breadth, and circumference are equal to that of Jambudvipa. It is situated at the end of the sixty-three celestial realms, like the jewel of the crown. ||113||

Since all the desires of the beings born in that celestial abode are fulfilled effortlessly, it is called the abode of all-fulfillment. ||114||

That celestial abode is very high and adorned with fluttering flags, so it appears as if it is calling the Munis with the desire to give them happiness. ||115||
Page #328:
---------------------------
238
In the *Madipuranam*, a creation that is unparalleled in its authenticity and completeness, it is described:

"He, the Dev, attained a complete body in an instant on the *Uppapad* bed. ||22|| His body, free from the touch of impurities, elements, and waste, was adorned with beautiful features and possessed the fullness of youth. ||12|| His body, never fading in its brilliance, naturally beautiful and a delight to the eyes, was as if crafted from nectar. ||124|| The atoms of this world, which are auspicious, fragrant, and smooth, were the building blocks of his body, due to his virtuous deeds. ||25|| After attaining perfection, he, the *Ahamindra*, was adorned with the radiance of his own body, like the full moon in the sky, surrounded by moonlight. ||126|| Seated on the *Uppapad* bed, that divine swan (*Ahamindra*) shone for a moment, like a young swan perched alone on a sandbank of the Ganges. ||127|| After his birth, *Ahamindra* ascended the nearby throne. At that time, he shone like the sun, resting on the peak of the magnificent *Nishadha* mountain. ||128|| *Ahamindra* was not only anointed with the water of his own virtue but also adorned with many ornaments, like the qualities of his body. ||129|| He wore not only a garland of flowers on his chest but also the eternal, inherent celestial wealth that was born with him. ||130|| His body, always radiant without bathing or anointing, adorned with naturally born garments and ornaments, *Ahamindra* shone on the heads of the Devas, like a jewel of the celestial realm, or like the sun itself. For, like a jewel or the sun, he is radiant without bathing or anointing, and naturally adorns the sky with his brilliance. ||131||

His body, pure and excellent, shone like pure crystal, and his head was adorned with a radiant crown. *Ahamindra*, whose crest...

1. He attained perfection, क्ष-ब०, द०, स०, म०. 2. Without impurities, *Anupaadhimanjulam*. 3. Smooth, *Chikkanaah*. 4. The best of Devas, *Devasreshtha*. 5. Nearby, *Sameepastham*. 6. *Parardhanishadho*, अ०, ५०, ८०, स०, ल०. 7. With beauty and other qualities, *Saukumaryaadibibhih*. 8. Without obstruction, *Abadhaam*. 9. On the heads of the Devas, *Devaanamaane*. 10. Pure, *Shuddhah*. 

Page #329:
---------------------------
The eleventh chapter, adorned with a crown, earrings, bracelets, and other ornaments. He, the glorious one, adorned with garlands and fine clothes, possessed the wealth of a Kalpa tree. [133] He, the praiseworthy one, with the qualities of Anima, etc., possessed a body made of Kriya. He wandered in his own realm, worshipping the images of the Jinas. [134] He performed the worship of the Jinas, with divine scents, Akshata, etc., obtained by mere thought, in accordance with the Jain tradition, which binds merit. [135] He, the virtuous one, being situated in the same place, worshipped the images of the Jinas, who are present in the entire universe. [136] He, the virtuous one, engaged his speech in praising the Jinas, his mind in remembering their qualities, and his body in bowing to them. [137] He had great respect for the conversation with other Ahamindras, who were invited to the Dharma assemblies, who were endowed with similar powers, and who were well-intentioned. [138] He, the glorious Ahamindra, sometimes cleansed the walls of the directions with the waves of his smiling, radiant water, and engaged in Dharma discussions with the other Ahamindras. Sometimes, he wandered at his leisure in the gardens, lakes, and banks of his residence, like a swan in the sky. [139-140] The Ahamindras do not wander in other realms, because they are satisfied with their own enjoyments, due to the influence of the white karma. They do not have the desire to wander in other realms, because they experience the supreme joy in their own peaceful and blissful abode. [141-142] "I am the Indra, there is no other Indra than me." They constantly praise themselves in this way, and therefore they are known as the supreme gods, the Ahamindras. [143] There is no envy, no slander, no self-praise, no jealousy among the Ahamindras. They are only given joy, which is born of happiness. [144] 

Page #330:
---------------------------
## Translation:

240
This Ahamindra, carrying the supreme bliss, was born with an age of thirty-three oceans and was extremely radiant. ||145|| He was extremely beautiful with a square-shaped body, one hand tall, and a swan-like white body. ||146|| He was adorned with naturally-born divine clothes, garlands, and ornaments, and his beautiful body seemed like a collection of beauty. ||147|| His attire and playful actions were extremely peaceful, graceful, sublime, and dignified. Moreover, he was always immersed in the ocean of his own body's radiating light. ||148|| He illuminated all directions with the brilliance of his shining ornaments, and this Ahamindra seemed like a single, extremely radiant mass of light. ||149|| He was the holder of pure Leshya and his body's pure and radiant rays illuminated all directions. Therefore, this Ahamindra, who always remained happy, seemed as if he was created from the nectar of bliss. ||150|| Thus, this Ahamindra attained that supreme position which is beyond the reach of even Indra and other gods, which bestows supreme bliss, and which is the best. ||151|| After thirty-three thousand years had passed, this Ahamindra, while consuming divine mental food, remained steadfast. ||152|| After sixteen months and fifteen days had passed, he began to breathe. Thus, this Ahamindra resided happily in Sarvarthasiddhi. ||153|| Illuminating the worthy, tangible substances residing in the Lokanadi, along with their synonyms, with the light of his own knowledge of perception, this Ahamindra was extremely radiant. ||154|| This Ahamindra had the ability to constantly cause changes in his field of perception, but because he was free from attachment, he never acted without purpose. ||155|| His face was like a lotus, his eyes were like blue lotuses, his cheeks were like the moon, and his lips were like the red fruit of the Bimbi plant. ||156|| 

Page #331:
---------------------------


Page #332:
---------------------------


Page #333:
---------------------------


Page #334:
---------------------------
244
The natural joy that arises from the destruction or pacification of karma is true happiness. This happiness cannot be attained through any other means. ||18||

You might say that the inhabitants of heaven experience happiness from their families, wealth, and other possessions, but the Ahamindras do not have these things. How can they be happy without them? To answer this question, we ask two questions: Do those who have families and possessions experience happiness simply from their existence, or from enjoying them? ||187-188||

If you believe that happiness comes simply from the existence of these things, then a king who is sick and surrounded by his wives, wealth, prosperity, and a powerful family should also be happy. ||189||

You might say that happiness comes from enjoying these things. But we have already answered that a man who enjoys his family and possessions, who serves them, experiences great toil and fatigue. How can such a man be happy? ||190||

Look, these objects of enjoyment are like dreams, fleeting and deceptive. How can a man who is constantly in a state of anxiety find happiness in them?  The meaning is that first, these objects of enjoyment are not easily obtained by everyone, so one must constantly worry about getting them. Second, once obtained, they quickly disappear like dreams, leaving one constantly in a state of anxiety over their loss.  Therefore, it is clear that these objects of enjoyment are not the cause of happiness. ||191||

First, a being experiences great suffering in acquiring these objects of enjoyment. Then, once acquired, he experiences great suffering in worrying about protecting them. ||192||

Then, when these objects are lost, he experiences immeasurable suffering, because he constantly remembers the enjoyment he had from them and becomes very distressed. ||193||

These objects of enjoyment, which are insatiable, perishable, and cannot alleviate the suffering of beings, are to be condemned. ||194||

Just as fire is not quenched by fuel, and the ocean is not filled by rivers, so too, the thirst of beings is never quenched by the enjoyment of objects. ||195||

Just as a man who drinks salty water becomes even more thirsty, so too, a being who engages in the enjoyment of objects experiences even greater suffering. ||196||

The reason is that the soul becomes deluded by the objects of enjoyment. ||185|| 

Page #335:
---------------------------
## Eleventh Chapter

245. Alas, how great is the sorrow of those beings who are subject to the senses, who are addicted to the pleasures of the senses, and who are consumed by an insatiable desire for them! They are destined to experience immeasurable suffering.

198. In the forest, the mighty wild elephants, leaders of their herds, intoxicated with passion, fall into pits, lured by the touch of the she-elephants, and suffer greatly.

199. In a lake adorned with blooming lotuses, the fish, swimming freely, are lured by the bait of flesh attached to a hook, and perish, losing their lives.

200. The bee, attracted by the intoxicating scent of the elephant's musk, buzzes around, and is struck by the elephant's ears, meeting its death.

201. The moth, drawn to the flickering flame, repeatedly falls into the fire, its body blackened like ink, and despite its unwillingness, it meets its demise.

202. The deer, roaming freely in the forest, nourished by tender and delicious grass shoots, are captivated by the hunter's songs and meet their end.

203. If even a single object of sense, when enjoyed, brings about so much suffering, what then can be said of the enjoyment of all five senses?

204. Just as an object carried away by the current of a river falls into a deep pit and is whirled around in its eddies, so too, this being, carried away by the objects of sense, falls into the deep pit of human existence and is whirled around in the eddies of suffering.

205. This foolish being, deluded by the objects of sense, first desires wealth, and in his pursuit of it, he experiences many hardships and suffers greatly.

206. Even when he is afflicted with suffering, he is still not satisfied, and he continues to chase after more, always experiencing sorrow.

196. Just as a person who drinks salty water becomes even thirstier, so too, this being, through the enjoyment of the objects of sense, becomes even more attached to them. 

Page #336:
---------------------------
246
Thus, the deluded soul, contaminated by the poison of attachment and aversion, binds karma that is very difficult to shed, and due to which it suffers in the next life. ||20|| Due to this karma, it falls into the hells and other miserable states, and experiences great and highly reprehensible suffering. ||20|| Even while suffering, it desires objects and is greedy for their attainment, and thus, through excessive misconduct, it binds karma that brings suffering. ||209|| Thus, revolving on this wheel of karma, it falls into the vast ocean of samsara, which is extremely difficult to cross. ||210|| Therefore, recognizing that this entire chain of misery is caused by objects, one should abandon attachment to objects, which bring intense suffering. ||211|| The three Vedas, namely, the Veda of women, the Veda of men, and the Veda of eunuchs, are considered like the fire of dry twigs, the fire of bricks, and the fire of grass, respectively. How can one who holds these Vedas be happy? ||212|| ... Therefore, O Srenika, know for certain that the divine bliss of the Ahamindra gods, which is free from deliberation, is far superior to the happiness derived from objects. ||213|| From this, it can be understood that the bliss of the Siddhas is devoid of objects, immeasurable, infinite, and arises solely from the Self. ||214|| The happiness of the heavens and the human realm, which is experienced in all three periods of time, is not even equal to a single moment of bliss experienced by the Siddha Supreme. ||215|| The bliss of the Siddhas arises solely from the Self, is free from obstacles, is born from the destruction of karma, is of the form of supreme delight, is unparalleled, and is the best. ||216|| When the Siddha Supreme, who are free from all dualities, are peaceful, and free from desire, are considered to be happy, then the happiness of the Ahamindra state is self-evident. The meaning is that when the Siddha Lord, who is devoid of even a single particle of attachment, 
1. Therefore, due to this. 2. Attachment and aversion, which are the objects of desire. 3. Karma, by that karma. 4. Miserable state, being in a state of suffering. 5. Attainment of objects. 6. Greedy. 7. Therefore, due to greed. 8. Thus, they are considered. 9. Therefore, due to this. 10. In the manner of explaining the happiness of the Ahamindra. 11. It is said excessively. 12. Value. 13. Duality, attachment. 

Page #337:
---------------------------
## Chapter Eleven

**Verse 217**

Why shouldn't those Ahamindras, who have a body or other minimal possessions, be called happy?

**Verse 218**

The happiness experienced by those Ahamindras, who have attained the fruits of their good deeds and reside beyond the celestial realms (in Sarvarthasiddhi), seemed as if they had attained the bliss of liberation itself. Just as the bliss of liberation is free from excess, generous, free from deviation, divine (supreme), and naturally pleasing, so too was the happiness of those Ahamindras, free from excess, generous, free from deviation, divine (celestial), and naturally pleasing.

**Meaning:** There is a vast difference between the bliss of liberation and the happiness of the Ahamindra state. However, to highlight the superiority of the latter, the happiness of the Ahamindras is compared to the bliss of liberation.

**Verse 219**

The Arhant Devas have said that in this world, beings experience happiness and sorrow, both of which occur according to their respective karmic bonds. This karma is said to be of two types, based on the distinction between merit and demerit. Just as a single fruit, when eaten, can have two different effects, sweet and bitter, similarly, these karmas, in the form of merit and demerit, also have their respective sweet (pleasant) and bitter (unpleasant) results.

**Verse 220**

One should know that the excellent fruit of meritorious karma is attained in Sarvarthasiddhi, while the excellent fruit of demeritorious karma is experienced by the inhabitants of the seventh earth (Narakas). The excellent fruit of merit is attained by those who are virtuous, due to their calming of the passions, control of the senses, and adherence to a blameless conduct. The excellent fruit of demerit is attained by those who are wicked, due to their failure to calm the passions, control the senses, and adhere to a blameless conduct. 

Page #338:
---------------------------
## 248
A wise person, with a pure mind, should contemplate the commands of the Jinas, which are full of _shama_, _dama_, and _yama_ (purity of conduct), without any laziness. Just as Vajranabha, who desired to attain the Tirthankara position very quickly, contemplated the commands of the Jinas for the purification of _shama_, _dama_, and _yama_, so too should wise and learned men, who desire the incomparable happiness and wish to abandon the burden of suffering, contemplate the commands of the Jinas for the purification of _shama_, _dama_, and _yama_ without any laziness (negligence). They should contemplate the sixteen _bhavanas_ (contemplations), starting with _darshan-vishuddhi_ (purity of perception). || 221 ||

-
Thus ends the eleventh chapter of the _Trishattilakshana Mahapurana Sangraha_, composed by the revered Bhagavan Jinaseanacharya, which describes the attainment of all-round success by Bhagavan Vajranabha. || 11 ||
3. _Shrijinaagnaam_ M., L.
4. - _Sidhy_ A., S.
1. _Sampurnabuddhi_. 2. _Vidwaan_. 5. _Haatumichchu_. 

Page #339:
---------------------------
## The Twelfth Chapter

Now, when that great soul, the Vajranabhi, was about to descend from the celestial realm to earth, the events that unfolded in this world, I shall now narrate. Listen attentively. ||1||

In the meantime, the humble sages, experts in the meaning of the Puranas, questioned the venerable Gautama, the leader of the assembly. ||2||

"O Lord, when the state of the Bhoga-bhoomi (land of enjoyment) was destroyed in Bharatavarsha, and the Karma-bhoomi (land of action) gradually spread, you have already described the origin of the Kulakaras (lineage holders). Among them, the last Kulakara was Nabhiraj, the leader of all the Kshatriyas. Where did this Nabhiraj give birth to the great-minded, the architect of the Dharma-sarga (creation of Dharma), the supreme among the Ikshvaku lineage, the Lord Rishabhadeva? What was the glory of his celestial descent and other auspicious qualities? We wish to know all this through your grace." ||3-6||

Thus, when the questions of the sages were finished, the leader of the assembly, Gautama, replied, purifying the sages with the radiant beams of his teeth, free from any blemish. ||7||

"In the Jambudvipa, in the Bharat Kshetra, south of the Vijayardha mountain, in the Madhyama-Arya Khanda, at the time of the Kalasandhi (the end of the Bhoga-bhoomi and the beginning of the Karma-bhoomi), Nabhiraj was born. Though he was the last of the fourteen Kulakaras, he was also the foremost (the best among them). His lifespan, height, form, beauty, and luxury have already been described." ||8-9||

Adorned with a radiant crown and a magnificent diadem, Nabhiraj was the ancestor of the future kings, and he shone in the world like the sun, with his rays of virtue. ||10||

He was the foundation of arts (various sciences) like the moon, radiant like the sun, powerful like Indra, and a wish-fulfilling tree like the Kalpavriksha. ||11|| 

Page #340:
---------------------------
## English Translation:

250
The Adipurana states that there was a queen named Marudevi, who was like the goddess Indraani in her beauty, grace, radiance, brilliance, intelligence, splendor, and other qualities. ||12|| Her beauty was like the phases of the moon, bringing joy to all, and she seemed to be created by gathering the essence of the forms of heavenly women. ||13|| Her body was slender, her lips like ripe bimba fruit, her eyebrows beautiful, and her breasts captivating. She appeared as if Kamadeva had shown his banner to conquer the world. ||14|| It seems that some wise and skilled person, contemplating her beauty, her gestures, her emotions, and her charm, composed the Natya Shastra. ||15|| It is clear that the composer of the music treatise, inspired by Marudevi's sweet voice, considered all the notes like Nishad, Rishabh, Gandhar, etc., in her speech. That is why he became famous in the world. ||16|| Marudevi had robbed other women of their beauty, making them poor. It is clear that she followed the ways of a wicked king, for a wicked king also robs his subjects of their wealth and makes them poor. ||17|| This clever Marudevi possessed many auspicious signs in her feet. It seems that poets used these signs as examples to describe the signs of other women. ||18|| Her feet were adorned with soft, lotus-like toes and shone with the rays of her nails, resembling lotuses. They were the embodiment of Lakshmi (wealth and prosperity). ||19|| It seems that Marudevi's feet had conquered the red lotuses, for they were smiling slightly, as if in jest, with the clusters of rays from her nails. ||20||

1. Vibhuti: Animadi. 2. Indoriyam. 3. "Havo mukha vikara syad bhavo syayittasambhava: | Vilaso netrajo jneyo vibhramo bhrayugantayo: ||" 4. Sanskaram kurvan. 5. Pranita: prokta:. 6. Virupattvam viruddham cha. 7. Kinapanaan. 8. -Mandhiyat 10, M., L. ' In the book, after seventeen verses, this verse is quoted: "Bhrngarasha [sa] navajikuñjararathashrivrkshayupeshv cha [dhi] malakundala. Chamarakushayava [chamarashava:] shailadhvaja toranah. Matsyasvastikavedika vyajanika shanga cha patraambujam padau panitale'thava yuvata yo gachchanti rajna: [rashi] padam ||" 9. Uchu:. 10. Padaabje A., 50, S., M., D., L. 11. Bibhratu:. 12. Samprapta sukho. 

Page #341:
---------------------------


Page #342:
---------------------------


Page #343:
---------------------------


Page #344:
---------------------------
254
Adipuranam 'Though her ears were adorned with earrings, they were further embellished with ear ornaments like the flowers offered to Saraswati Devi. ||49|| Her forehead was as beautiful as the moon on the eighth day, and it seemed like the mirror of the charming Lakshmi, the consort of Kamadeva. ||50|| Her dark hair, gathered on her lotus-like face, resembled bees, and her eyebrows had conquered the bow-like creeper of Kamadeva. ||51|| Her very dark, crooked, and long hair was so radiant that it seemed as if it had come to the moon to steal its beauty. ||52|| As she walked, her loose braid, with its cluster of flowers, seemed to offer a gift to the earth. ||53|| Her strong body, with its beautiful limbs, seemed like a beautiful image created by the Creator for the creation of women. ||54|| All the women in the world who were very famous, long-lived, had excellent children, were auspicious, and had excellent husbands were inferior to Marudevi, meaning Marudevi was the chief among them. ||55|| She was a mine of virtues, a land of pious wealth, a pure Saraswati Devi, and a scholar without learning. ||56|| She was the ultimate limit of good fortune, the excellent nourishment of beauty, the ultimate delight of friendship, and the excellent path (shelter) of virtue. ||57|| She was the conqueror of the art of love, the flow of the river of the art of knowledge, the origin of fame, and the ultimate limit of the virtue of chastity. ||58|| At the time of Marudevi's marriage, Indra,
1. By listening to the scriptures. 2. By the eyebrows, Vin-50, M, L. 3. With virtues. 4. Rahu. 5. Loose, slack. 6. In going back and forth. 7. As it is the same, so it is well divided. 8. Representative. 9. Having good sons. 10. Having a husband. 11. Saraswati Devi, M, L. 12. Patience, holding. Patience, L. 13. Of friendliness. 14. Obstacle. 15. 'T, B' This reading is according to the book. In place of Kusruti, 'Prasooti: Prasooti:' or this reading. It is also written in the 'T, B' books. 'Prasooti: Kamatattvasya Kalagamasarichchati: Prasootiryashasaam saa aasiit Satiitvasya paraa Dhriti: ||' S, A. 'Prasooti: Kamatattvasya Kalagamasaritsrutih: Prasootiryashasaam saa aasiit Satiitvasya paraa Dhriti: ||' D. 'Prasooti: Kamatattvasya Kalagamasaritsrutih: Prasootiryashasaa saa aasiit Satiitvasya paraa Dhriti: ||' L. 'Kusuti: Kamatattvasya Kalagamasaritsati: ||' T. Kusruti: Deception. 16. Of the art of love. 17. The flow of the river of the art of knowledge. 18. Expansion. 19. Of chastity. 20. At marriage. 21. Marriage enthusiasm. 

Page #345:
---------------------------


Page #346:
---------------------------
Adipurana
The gods, desiring to create a reflection of heaven on earth, built this city, which was exceptionally beautiful. ||71||  "Our heaven is too small, as it is only fit for thirty gods," they thought, and thus they created this city, fit for hundreds of thousands of humans. ||72||  The gods brought together humans scattered far and wide and settled them in the city, creating various facilities for their comfort. ||73||  In the heart of the city, they built a royal palace, rivaling Indra's city in splendor and adorned with countless precious treasures. ||74||  With the gods as the artisans, Indra as the architect, and the entire earth as their material, how could this city not be praiseworthy? ||75||  The gods adorned the city with ramparts, walls, and moats. The city was called Ayodhya, not just in name but also in its qualities. No enemy could conquer it, making its name truly meaningful. ||76||  The city was also called Saketa, as it was renowned for its beautiful houses. The flags flying atop these houses seemed to beckon the houses of heaven with their waving arms. ||77||  The city was located in the Kosala region, hence it was also known as "Sukosala." It was filled with virtuous, educated, and well-mannered people, hence it was also called "Vineeta." ||78|| 

Page #347:
---------------------------
The city of Sakoshala was very famous and it adorned the navel (center) of the future vast country. It was adorned with a royal palace, a moat, a fort and a ditch. It seemed as if it was a blueprint for the cities that would be built in the future. On a pious day, at an auspicious time, in a favorable constellation and at a favorable time, the gods celebrated the auspicious occasion with joy.  King Nabhiraj and Marudevi, who had inherited a lineage of many fortunes, began to reside in the extremely prosperous city of Ayodhya with great joy at the time of the auspicious occasion. Knowing that these two would give birth to the omniscient Rishabhdev, Indra worshipped them greatly with an abhisheka (ceremony).  Knowing that Lord Rishabhdev would descend from heaven in six months, the gods showered precious stones from the sky out of respect. The rain of precious stones, which was arranged by Kubera, who was appointed by Indra, was so beautiful as if the wealth of Rishabhdev had arrived before his arrival due to eagerness. That rain of precious stones was shining with a group of rays of Hari-mani, Indra-neel mani and Padmarag etc. gems, as if it was acquiring simplicity (becoming straight in a line) and the beauty of the rainbow was coming.  That stream of precious stones, which was as thick as the trunk of the elephant Airavata, round and long, was shining as if it was the lineage of the large shoots of the pious tree. Or, that stream of precious stones, which was extremely dense and stopped the sky and the earth, was shining as if it was the lineage of the shoots released by the Kalpa trees. Or, that golden rain falling from the courtyard of the sky was shining as if it was coming from heaven. 

Page #348:
---------------------------
258
The rain of gems, fallen from the sky, was witnessed by the people for a moment. They wondered if the earth was shaking and the treasures were being expelled from their depths. ||10||
The gems scattered in the sky were like the fruits of the Kalpavriksha, plucked and scattered by the divine elephants. ||11||
The stream of countless gems in the sky shone like a constellation of stars, sparkling and moving with the passage of time. ||12||
The gods, seeing the rain of gems, wondered if it was a combination of lightning and rainbows falling from heaven, a display of Indra's weapon. ||13||
The celestial beings, seeing the radiant light, wondered if it was the brilliance of lightning or the glow of the gods, fearing the destruction of the world. ||14||
This rain of gold, showered by the lord of rain, seemed to be a message to the world, reminding it of the 'Hiranyagarbha' state of the Lord. ||15||
For six months before the descent of Lord Vrishabhadeva, there was a rain of gems and gold over the house of the extremely pious Nabhiraja. ||16||
And for nine months after the conception, there was a rain of gems and gold. This is fitting, for the impact of the future Tirthankara is extraordinary and vast. ||17||
At the time of the Lord's conception, the entire earth was filled with gems, the gods were overjoyed, and the entire world was filled with joy. ||18||
At the time of the Lord's conception, the earth was sprinkled with the drops of the Ganges and adorned with various gems, making it heavy like a pregnant woman. ||19||
At that time, the earth, adorned with gems and flowers, and sprinkled with fragrant water, was like a woman who had bathed and applied sandalwood paste and ornaments. ||20||
Or, perhaps, the brilliant light of the divine beings in their celestial vehicles was shining. ||21||
Or, perhaps, people were wondering if the earth was shaking and the treasures were being expelled from their depths, as they saw the rain of gems falling from the sky. ||22||
Or, perhaps, the gems scattered in the sky were like the fruits of the Kalpavriksha, plucked and scattered by the divine elephants. ||23||
Or, perhaps, the stream of countless gems in the sky shone like a constellation of stars, sparkling and moving with the passage of time. ||24||
Or, perhaps, the gods, seeing the rain of gems, wondered if it was a combination of lightning and rainbows falling from heaven, a display of Indra's weapon. ||25||
Or, perhaps, the celestial beings, seeing the radiant light, wondered if it was the brilliance of lightning or the glow of the gods, fearing the destruction of the world. ||26||
Or, perhaps, this rain of gold, showered by the lord of rain, seemed to be a message to the world, reminding it of the 'Hiranyagarbha' state of the Lord. ||27||

Page #349:
---------------------------


Page #350:
---------------------------
Karmakshata.  Suvarnadavasanpadayantaivaarmanah.  Kshubhyantamadhi
260
Adipuranam sasho sarasi sampulkumudorapalpankaje.  Praapashyanayanayaam darshayantaivaatmanah.  ||112|| Taratsarojakialkapieroadakamaikshata.  Suvarnadravasanpoornamiva digyam saroveram.  ||113|| Kshubhyantamabhdhimudvelam chalakallolakahallam.  Saadarshchhikarairmuktumasamaivoodyatam.  ||114|| Sainhmaasanamuttungam sphuranmanihiranmayam.  Saapashyanmerujasya baidagdhi dadhadurjitam.  ||115|| Naakalayam vyalo Kishta paraayamaanimaasuram.  Swasuno: prasabagaaramiv devarupaahritam.  ||116|| Phaniindrabhavanam bhumimuniyodgatam aikshata.  Praagasvvimaanen spha kartumivodhatam.  ||117|| Ravanaam rashimutsarpadamsupallavitambaram.  Sa nidamyoparaddegyani dhaamamiva darshitam.  ||118|| Jvalanaasuranidhumavapursha vishamaapim.  Pratapamiva putrasya murtirupan nyachaavat.  ||119|| Nyashaamaya tujha pujavam rukmasachchhavi.  Pravishanta vavaktranam swapnante pinakandharam.  ||120|| Tatah "praabodhistupaiyanashih pratyabuddha sa.  Bandina mangalodgito: shrinvatiti sumangalaah.  ||121||
Sukhapraabodhamaadhatumetaasyaah punyapathakaah.  Tada prapeturisyumigalaanyaskhalanirah.  ||122|| 
Hue apne dono stanakalashe hi hon.  ||113|| Nauven swapnmen phoolay hue kumud aur kamalonse shobhaayaman talaab men koda karti hui do machhliyan dekhi.  Ve machhliyan aisi maaloom hoti thi manon apne (marudevike) netronki lambai hi dikhala rahi hon.  ||112|| Dasven swapnmen usne ek sundar talaab dekha.  Us talaabka pani tairate hue kamalonko kesharse peela-peela ho raha tha jisse aisa maaloom hota tha manon pighile hue suvarnase hi bhara ho.  ||113|| Gyarahven swapnmen usne jhabhit ho bela (tat) ko ullghan karta hua samudra dekha.  Us samay us samudrmen uthti hui laharonse kuchh-kuchh gambhir shabd ho raha tha aur jalke chhote-chhote kan udkar uske charon or pad rahe the jisse aisa maaloom hota tha manon vah attahaas hi kar raha ho.  ||114|| Barahven swapnmen usne ek uncha simhaasan dekha.  Vah simhaasan suvarnaka bana hua tha aur usmen anek prakarke chamkilay mani lage hue the jisse aisa maaloom hota tha manon vah meru parvatke shikhar ki utkrishta shobha hi dharan kar raha ho.  ||115||
Page #351:
---------------------------
## The Twelfth Chapter

**261** This is the time of your awakening, O Goddess, which seems as if it were being offered to you by blooming lotuses. **123** This night, adorned with the moon whose entire radiance has been vanquished by the brilliance of your face, is shining in such a strange way. **124** O Goddess, now that the moon has lost its luster, the world's respect for it has diminished. Therefore, your blooming lotus-like face alone brings joy to the entire world. **125** This moon, with its hidden rays (like hands in its sides), is touching the faces of its directional wives. It seems as if it wants to seek permission from its beloved wives to go abroad. **126** The cluster of stars is now visible only sparsely in the sky. It seems as if the beauty of the night's garland has been scattered due to the haste of its departure. **127** O Goddess, here, on the ponds, these saras birds are making melodious and deep sounds. It seems as if they want to praise you along with us, while performing auspicious rituals. **128** Here, in the well of the house, the lotus-like faces of the lotuses have bloomed, and the bees are buzzing on them. It seems as if the lotuses are singing your praises in a loud voice. **129** Here, this pair of chakwas and chakvis, deeply distressed by their separation from each other during the night, are now finding some solace in the touch of the waves of the pond. **130** The chakwas and chakvis, deeply pained in their hearts by the intensely scorching rays of the moon, are now praying for the company of their friend (the sun). The meaning is: just as when someone is harassed by someone else, they desire the company of their friend, similarly, the chakwas and chakvis, being harassed by the moon, desire the company of their friend, the sun. **131** Here, the loud voice of the roosters, announcing the sorrow of the imminent separation from their wives, is causing pain to the hearts of the lustful men. **132** The gentle rays of the moon, which is of a peaceful nature, have not destroyed the darkness of the night, which is now facing the rising sun. **133**  I was reading the text. **122** 

**Notes:**

* **Jain terms:** The translation preserves the Jain terms like "chakwachakvi" (a pair of migratory birds symbolizing love and devotion), "saras" (a type of crane), and "lotus" (a symbol of purity and enlightenment).
* **Context:** The text is likely a devotional hymn or a description of a scene from a Jain text. 
* **Literary style:** The translation attempts to capture the poetic and descriptive style of the original text. 

Page #352:
---------------------------
262
The darkness, born of the night, is dispelled by the rising sun. The twilight, filled with love for the sun, shines like an army advancing before its commander. ||134|| This rising sun, the orb of light, does two things at once: it expands the bloom of the lotuses and it causes the moonflowers to fade. ||135|| Or, seeing the lotus bloom, the moonflower fades with envy. ||136|| The sun, with its rays outstretched, rises like a radiant child born from the womb of the east. ||137|| The sun, with its red disc near the Niṣadha mountain, appears like all the evening hues gathered together by Indra. ||138|| With the rising sun, all darkness is dispelled, the distress of the chakwas is gone, the lotuses bloom, and the world is filled with light. ||139|| Now, the cool breeze, carrying the fragrance of the blooming lotuses, blows from all sides. ||140|| Therefore, O Goddess, this is clearly the time for you to wake up. Just as the swan leaves its nest of sand, so too should you leave your pure bed. ||141|| May your mornings always be auspicious, may you attain hundreds of blessings, and just as the east gives birth to the sun, may you give birth to a son who will illuminate the three worlds. ||142|| Although the Goddess of the Wind had already awakened, much earlier than the auspicious songs of the prisoners, they woke her again. Thus, awakened, she saw the whole world filled with joy. ||143|| The Goddess of the Wind, filled with joy from seeing a good dream, was like a blooming lotus, her body tingling with excitement. ||144||

Page #353:
---------------------------
## The Twelfth Chapter

**263**  Then, unable to contain the joy of seeing him, she adorned herself as if for her own husband and went to her lord. **145**  Seeing the king, she bowed to him with due respect and, seated comfortably, spoke to him. **146**  "O Lord, last night, while sleeping peacefully, I saw sixteen auspicious dreams in the latter part of the night." **147**  "I saw a white, pure-bodied Airavata elephant, a bull roaring like a Dundubhi drum, a lion conquering the mountain peak, Lakshmi bathed by divine elephants, two garlands hanging in the sky, the moon illuminating the sky, the rising sun, a beautiful pair of fish, two kalasas filled with nectar, a clear lake with lotuses, a turbulent sea with whirlpools, a radiant throne, a celestial chariot descending from heaven, a serpent king's abode emerging from the earth, a heap of shining gems, and a blazing fire." **148**  "After seeing these sixteen dreams, O King, I saw a golden bull entering my mouth. O Lord, please tell me the meaning of these dreams. My desire to hear their meaning is constantly growing. Indeed, whose mind does not become curious after seeing something extraordinary?" **149-153**  Then, the king, Nabhiraj, who knew the meaning of dreams and whose teeth shone brightly, told the queen the meaning of her dreams. **154**  "Hear, O Queen, you will have a great son from seeing the elephant. He will be the greatest in all the worlds from seeing the bull." **155**  "He will be endowed with infinite strength from seeing the lion, a righteous and virtuous guide from seeing the garlands, and he will be crowned by the gods on the peak of Mount Meru from seeing Lakshmi." **156**  "He will bring joy to all people from seeing the full moon, he will be the bearer of radiant light from seeing the sun, he will obtain many treasures from seeing the two kalasas, and he will be happy from seeing the pair of fish." **157**  "He will be adorned with many auspicious signs from seeing the lake, he will become a Kevali from seeing the sea, and he will become the ruler of the world, the teacher of the world, from seeing the throne." 

**1. वृष दुन्दुभिनिःस्वनम्**  (Vṛṣa Dundubhinisvanam) - A bull roaring like a Dundubhi drum.
**2. भूभेः सकाशात्** (Bhūbheḥ Sakāśāt) - From the earth.
**3. नागालयम्** (Nāgālayam) - A serpent king's abode.
**4. प्राप्स्यति** (Prāpsyati) - He will obtain.
**-माप्तोऽसौ** (Māpto'sau) - He will obtain. 

Page #354:
---------------------------
264
He will descend from heaven after seeing the celestial chariots. He will be endowed with the eyes of knowledge after seeing the abode of the serpent king. ||159|| He will be the mine of virtues after seeing the heap of shining jewels, and he will be the burner of the fuel of karma after seeing the smokeless fire. ||160|| The fruit of the bull that has entered your mouth is that Lord Vrishabhadeva will take his form in your pure womb. ||161|| Hearing these words of Nabhiraja, her whole body trembled with joy, as if it were filled with the sprouts of joy, being overwhelmed with supreme bliss. ||162|| From that time onwards, by the command of Indra, the Dikkumari goddesses served Marudevi like maidservants, performing the duties appropriate to that time. ||163|| 

Page #355:
---------------------------


Page #356:
---------------------------


Page #357:
---------------------------
## The Twelve Festivals
**267**
**51**

Some, with eyes that never blinked, kept constant vigil, wielding weapons, serving the Goddess. || 186 ||

Some, at times, delighted in water sports, or frolicked in the forest, or engaged in storytelling, bringing joy to her. || 187 ||

Some, at times, served her with musical gatherings, or with instrumental music, or with dance performances. || 188 ||

Some, with graceful movements and arched eyebrows, danced in groups, their bodies swaying in rhythm, like celestial nymphs. || 189 ||

Some, with joyous abandon, danced in the sky, their limbs swaying, their radiance like lightning. || 190 ||

Some, with outstretched arms, practiced archery, as if learning from Kamadeva himself, to conquer the world. || 191 ||

One, scattering flowers around a colorful square, seemed to be appointing Kamadeva as the ruler of the art gallery. || 192 ||

The buds of the lotus, their breasts, trembled with the dance, as if mimicking the movements of the celestial nymphs out of curiosity. || 193 ||

In that dance group, the eyebrows, like bows, were constantly drawn, and the glances, like arrows, were aimed, as if practicing the art of archery for Kamadeva. || 194 ||

They smiled, revealing rows of pearly teeth, sang clearly and sweetly, gazed with amorous glances, and spun in rhythm. Their dance, their gestures, their every movement, were like the arrows of Kamadeva, captivating the hearts of all. And their bodies, adorned with the grace of their movements, were beyond description. || 195 ||

Thus, these celestial nymphs, with their captivating beauty, their graceful movements, and their enchanting charm, were the embodiment of Kamadeva's power. || 196 || 

Page #358:
---------------------------


Page #359:
---------------------------
The twelfth festival, the mridangas, not we, truly see you, made of gold. Thus, the thieves were caught on Sunday. ||20|| The Muravas, the Kuravas, these are not to be spoken of, having done their work. Thus, the Panavadyas, the Sura-nakas, sounded their instruments with a deep sound. ||207|| In the morning, some blew large conch shells. As if unable to bear the pressure of their own hands, they were full of essence. ||208|| Some, with the high-pitched sounds of the trumpets, sang praises, both sweet and deep, to the auspicious ones. ||209|| Thus, adorned by the service done by them, the goddess shone, as if she had attained oneness, the Lakshmi of the three worlds. ||210|| Served with great excitement by the Dikkumari goddesses, that Marudevi took on a very excellent beauty, and she seemed as if she had taken on such excellent beauty from the influence of the goddesses who had entered her body. ||211||
Then, as the ninth month approached, those goddesses, with great respect, began to please the pregnant Marudevi with various poetic gatherings. ||212|| With verses whose meaning is hidden, whose action is hidden, whose fourth part (the pada) is hidden, or in which a dot is missing, a measure is missing, or a letter is missing, and with many other types of verses, those goddesses pleased the Marudevi. ||213|| Those goddesses said, "O Mother, have you seen only one moon in this world, who is taking away all his wealth of art by force?" The meaning of this verse is a vyajastuti alankara, that is, the goddess is praised by means of a subtle criticism. The goddesses mean to say that as your radiance increases, the moon's radiance decreases, that is, in front of your radiant face, the moon seems to be without radiance. This shows that you have taken away all the wealth of art from the moon, considering him to be weak. 
1. Mrinmayavayavah. 2. Dvanitam. 3. Murajah. Suravah A, 50, S, D, L. 4. Kutsitaravah. 5. Purhayanti sm. 6. Tatkarotpidanam M, L. 7. Aravena sahitan. 8. Ekatvam. 9. Pravishtah. 10. Gabhini. 11. Arthashcha kriyashcha padashcha arthakriyapadah nigudha arthakriyapadah yeshu taih. 12. Binduchyutakamaatrachyutakaksharachyutakah. 13. Yat karanat. 

Page #360:
---------------------------
270
The moon-like face has surely conquered the lotus, for it is always shrinking. The moon itself cannot bear the defeat of the lotus, and it too shrinks, being like the lotus. 21
The lotus, adorned with pollen, is conquered by your face, which is like a sal tree. It shrinks again and again. 21
The bee, mistaking your face for a lotus, keeps coming back to it, and, fearing the death that awaits it from the shrinking lotus, never goes near it again. 20
The bee, having found satisfaction in smelling your face, which is like a lotus, never goes near another lotus that grows on earth. 218
This one is not lustful, nor does he desire anything else. He is always devoted to you. Who is he? 219
[Riddle] - What is it that is red, dear to King Nabhiraj, not lustful, not low, and always radiant? 20
[Answer] - Your lower lip. 214
[Explanation] - Your lower lip is red, dear to King Nabhiraj, not lustful, not low because it is on the upper part of the body, and always radiant. 219
[Another Riddle] - What is the fine line on your body, and what is another name for the elephant? 20
[Answer] - The fine line is your eyebrow, and another name for the elephant is "Hasti". 214

Page #361:
---------------------------
## Chapter Twelve

**271** What is the name of a place filled with straight, tall, and shady trees? What is the most beautiful part of your body? Answer both questions with the same word. 
[**One-Answer Dialogue**]  "Mother, tell me, what is the name of a place filled with straight, tall, and shady trees? And what is the most beautiful part of your body?" The mother replied, "Kanan."  That is, a place filled with straight, tall, and shady trees is called "Samanan" (a forest of teak trees), and the most beautiful part of our body is "Salakanan" (Sa + Alak + Anan), which means my face with fragrant, powdered hair, fit for singing. 

**222**  "Mother, O Sati, do not let your beautiful form become dull, and give up your love for food and eat many kinds of ambrosia." [This verse is **Kriyagupt** because the actions "Nay" and "Ashan" are hidden.]

**223**  "Mother, this lion is about to leave the cave of the mountain and climb to its peak, and therefore he is shaking his terrifying mane." [This verse is **Kriyagupt** because the action "Adhunat" is hidden.]

**224**  "O Devi, you have destroyed the suffering of the world through your son born from your womb, therefore you are the only one who purifies the world, and you are the mother of the world." [This verse is **Kriyagupt** because the action "Adhuna" is hidden.]

**225**  "O Devi, the festival of the gods is increasing at this time, therefore I will completely stop the creation of the group of arrows, called "Aravarg", in the circle of the demons." [The wooden sticks that are fixed in the middle of the circle are called "Ar". This verse is **Kriyagupt** because the action "Adhunam" is hidden.]

**Notes:**

* **One-Answer Dialogue:** This is a type of dialogue where two or more questions are answered with a single answer.
* **Kriyagupt:** This is a type of verse where the action is hidden. 

Page #362:
---------------------------
272
Adipurana 'A large, wealthy, shady banyan tree stands before you. Even though it was said, no one went near it, what a wonder!' ||226||
[Spashtaandhakam] 'Your breast is like a pearl necklace, warm, rubbed with sandalwood, and somewhat white, like a forlorn man.' ||227||
[Samanopamam] 'The one who brings joy to the world, who burns the fuel of evil, who is like the color of molten gold, will be born as your son.' ||228||
- [Guda Chaturthakam] 'The conqueror of the world, the conqueror of desire, the refuge of the virtuous, the omniscient, the Tirthankara, the one who has fulfilled his purpose, may your son be victorious.' ||229||
- - - [Niraushtyem] 'May your son, O auspicious one, O faithful wife, show you hundreds of auspicious things and attain a place (moksha) from which there is no return. Therefore, be content.' ||230||
. [Niroshtayameva]

Page #363:
---------------------------
## Chapter Twelve
**273**

The gods, along with their beautiful wives, are going to Nandishwar island and Mandarag mountain, eager to play.  [This verse is *bindumaan*, meaning that the text has a dot placed on the letter 'd' in 'Sudantiindra', changing it to 'Sudantiindrai', similarly, a dot is placed on 'n' in 'Nadeeshwaram', changing it to 'Nandishwaram', and a dot is placed on 'm' in 'Madaragam', changing it to 'Mandaragam'.  Therefore, when the dot is removed, the verse has a different meaning:  "Oh beautiful-toothed goddess, see, these gods, riding on the Indra of elephants (large elephants), are going to the island and the sea, eager to play with their wives."]

**[Bindumaan]**

The faces of the divine elephants are shining with many dots.  They are moving about in the sky, like clouds, with three streams of *mad* flowing from them.  [This verse is *binduchyutak*, meaning that by removing the dot from the word 'bindu' and placing it on the word 'ghata', the verse takes on a different meaning.  In *chitralaankara*, there is no difference between 'sh' and 's', so in the second meaning, 'tridha sruta' should be understood as 'tridha shruta'.  The second meaning is:  "Oh goddess, these great gods, who possess three types of knowledge - two, many, and twelve - and who move about in the sky, making a sound like bells, are shining with their beautiful faces."]

**[Binduchyutak]**

The moat of the city of the gods holds water that is red in some places from the pollen of red lotuses, in some places it is filled with lotuses, in some places it is adorned with small drops of water, and in some places it is terrifying due to the crocodiles and other aquatic creatures that live in it.  [In this verse, there are two words for water: 'toyam' and 'jal'.  One of these is definitely redundant, so by removing the dot from the word 'jal', we get the word 'jalmakaradarunam', which means 'terrifying due to the crocodiles in the water'.  Therefore, this is also a *binduchyutak* verse.  However, in *Alaankarachintaamani*, this verse is read as:  'Makarandaruṇam toyaṁ dhatte tatpurukhātika | sāmbujam kachiduddu bindu chalannmakaradāruṇam |' and it is given as an example of a *bindumaan binduchyutak*.  This happens as follows:  In the beginning of the verse, the text was 'makaradāruṇam', and a dot was added to make it 'makarandāruṇam'.  At the end, the text was 'chalannmakarandāruṇam', and the dot was removed to make it 'chalannmakaradāruṇam' (moving crocodiles).] 

Page #364:
---------------------------
##  Translation:

**274**

**Adipurana**  "Hari does not neglect even for a moment a child who is a threat. What does a woman desire in the cold season?"  The mother replied, "A woman with equal thighs desires a son in the cold season." [This verse is called *Matrachyutaka* because in the first line, the vowel *a* in the word *balam* should be removed and read as *balam* to get the meaning "army," and in the last line, the vowel *a* in the word *balam* should be added and read as *balam* to get the meaning "son." Similarly, in the first line, the vowel *a* in the word *samaj* should be added and read as *samaj* to get the meaning "of elephants." ]  **234**

[**Matrachyutaka Question and Answer**]  "A woman, filled with longing, is overwhelmed with grief and faints. She is disheartened by the absence of her beloved." [This verse is called *Vyanjanachyutaka* because the meaning of the verse is not coherent as long as the word *jagale* is read with the meaning "to be disheartened."  A woman would not have a choked voice or be disheartened by the absence of her beloved.  Therefore, the consonant *l* in the word *jagale* should be removed and read as *jage*.  Then the meaning of the verse would be: "A woman, filled with longing, is overwhelmed with grief and faints. She is singing something with a choked voice, her voice wavering, due to the absence of her beloved." ] **235**

[**Aksharachyutaka**]  ... "Who dwells in the cage?" "Who has a harsh voice?" "What is the foundation of living beings?" "What is readable even after the letters are dropped?"  The mother answered each question by adding a letter before the interrogative *k* and thus fulfilled the missing letter in each line of the verse.  For example, the woman asked, "Ka: panjara madhyaste?" (Who dwells in the cage?)  The mother replied, "Shuka: panjara madhyaste" (The parrot dwells in the cage).  "Ka: parushanisvanah?" (Who has a harsh voice?)  The mother replied, "Kaka: parushanisvanah" (The crow has a harsh voice).  "Ka: pratiṣṭhā jīvānam?" (What is the foundation of living beings?)  The mother replied, "Loka: pratiṣṭhā jīvānam" (The world is the foundation of living beings).  And "Ka: pāṭhyo'kṣara cyutaḥ?" (What is readable even after the letters are dropped?)  The mother replied, "Shloka: pāṭhyo'kṣara cyutaḥ" (The verse is readable even after the letters are dropped).  **23**

[**Aksharachyutaka Question and Answer**]  "A fish is afraid of..." [This is the reading that has been given.] **233** 

Page #365:
---------------------------
**Verse 237**

What makes a sweet sound? What has flower branches? What has a fragrant smell? What is omniscient?

**Verse 238**

Who has a sweet voice? What is an old tree? What king should be abandoned? What is the opinion of the wise?

**Verse 239**

What is the best sound among all sounds? What disease destroys beauty and mental interest? Who can please her husband? What makes a loud and deep sound?

**Verse 240**

What is the best sound among all sounds? What disease destroys beauty and mental interest? What woman can please her husband? What makes a loud and deep sound? 

Page #366:
---------------------------
## Adipuranam

**Verse 241:**  A crow constantly enjoys the company of a lustful female crow.  Fill in the missing four letters in this verse.

**Verse 242:**  Mother, who resides within your womb?  What is absent in your wealth?  What kills a glutton?  Answer these questions with words that have the same final consonant but different initial consonants.

**Verse 243:**  Mother, what enhances the taste of fine food?  What is a deep reservoir?  Who is your husband?  Answer these questions with words that have different initial consonants.

**Verse 244:**  Mother, what is discarded from grain?  Who makes a pot?  Who is the sinner that eats mice?  Answer these questions with words that have different first two consonants.

**Verse 245:**  Mother, what is your address?  What is the verb that signifies existence?  How does the sky shine?  Answer these questions. 

Page #367:
---------------------------
**Verse 246**

What is the name of the Jina, whose feet even Indra, the king of the gods, worships with utmost humility? And how should one know a good elephant? 

**Answer:** The Jina is called **Suravarada**, the giver of boons to the gods. An elephant with good teeth and a good voice is considered to have good qualities.

**Verse 247**

A goddess said, "Mother, you should consider your son as a lion, based on the color of the Ketki flower, the color of the evening, and the color of the middle of his body."

**Answer:** The first letter of Ketki is 'K', the first letter of Sandhya is 'S', and the middle letter of the body is 'R'. Combining these three letters, we get 'Kesari', which means lion. So, your statement is true. 

Page #368:
---------------------------
278
Adipuranam, what is deep in your body, O Kamb? How long are the arms of King Dorlamb? What should you enter, and how are you praiseworthy, O Sati? ||249||
[Naabhirajaanugaadhik, an example of Bahiralapik Anta Visham Prashnottar]  O Devi, to entertain you, these celestial women have come from the celestial realm. They are dancing in the sky, using various karanas (dance forms). ||250||
O Mother, look at the delicious dance in that play, and look at the group of apsaras brought by the gods and gathered in the sky. [This is a Gomutrika-bound verse.] ||251||
O Tanvi! Your courtyard is shining with the rain of jewels. It seems to be holding a great treasure. ||252||
...[Gomutrika] 

Page #369:
---------------------------
## The Twelfth Chapter

The earth is shining as if it is holding a great treasure. || 252 || 

O Devi! Look at this stream of jewels, adorned with the rays of various gems. It seems to me that this stream of jewels, by its deception, is the Lakshmi of heaven, coming to worship you. || 253 ||

O Mother! This shower of jewels, blessed by the gods, filling the sky, extremely beautiful, destroying the poverty of beings, and falling from the sky with humility, is for your joy. [This is an Ardhabhram sloka - the third and fourth lines of this sloka have come in the first and second lines.] || 254 ||

Knowing these difficult questions asked by the goddesses, especially, the pregnant Marudevi resided happily for a long time. || 255 ||

By nature, she was content, and when she realized that she was carrying a Tirthankara son, a form of knowledge and supreme light, in her womb, she was even more pleased. || 256 ||

She was holding the extremely radiant light within her womb, and therefore, she had attained the extreme beauty of the east, which holds the rays of the sun. || 257 ||

The Marudevi, with lotus-like eyes, who has been fully affected by the vast lamp in the form of a stream of jewels, which has rejected all other lights, shone like a treasure-filled land. || 258 || 

Page #370:
---------------------------


Page #371:
---------------------------
## Chapter Twelve

**Change**

She, the embodiment of auspiciousness, the one worshipped by the goddesses of prosperity, the one who possesses all beauty and wealth, resides in the most beautiful palace in the three worlds, adorned with all splendor. The king, the embodiment of prosperity, serves her with utmost devotion. || 269 ||

**Malini**

She, with her most beautiful limbs, was like a wish-fulfilling tree, showing forth the blossoms of her gentle smile, as if promising soon to bear fruit. The king, seated beside her, shone like a tall, auspicious tree, adorned with the splendor of prosperity. || 270 ||

Her lotus-like face, fragrant and beautiful, was adorned with the radiance of her teeth, like saffron. The king, like a swan, was deeply enamored by the nectar of her words. Her face, like a full moon, radiated joy, and her words, like the nectar of immortality, filled the hearts of all. The king, thirsty for her words, drank deeply of this nectar, sharing it with his family, like a cluster of lotuses. || 271 ||

**Explanation**

The mother of all beings, she is the one who nourishes all. || 268 ||

She, who is naturally adorned with beautiful limbs, is worshipped by the goddesses of prosperity, and even the king, who possesses all beauty and wealth, serves her. She resides in the most beautiful palace in the three worlds, adorned with all splendor. || 269 ||

She, with her most beautiful limbs, was like a wish-fulfilling tree, showing forth the blossoms of her gentle smile, as if promising soon to bear fruit. The king, seated beside her, shone like a tall, auspicious tree, adorned with the splendor of prosperity. || 270 ||

Her lotus-like face, fragrant and beautiful, was adorned with the radiance of her teeth, like saffron. The king, like a swan, was deeply enamored by the nectar of her words. Her face, like a full moon, radiated joy, and her words, like the nectar of immortality, filled the hearts of all. The king, thirsty for her words, drank deeply of this nectar, sharing it with his family, like a cluster of lotuses. || 271 ||

**Meaning**

The story of the Marudevi and her nurturing nature.

**Notes**

1.  **Samibhaba:**  A Jain term referring to the auspiciousness of the Marudevi.
2.  **Satibhaba:**  Another Jain term referring to the auspiciousness of the Marudevi.
3.  **Shrohodhritya:**  A Jain term referring to the goddesses of prosperity.
4.  **Mangal:**  A Jain term referring to auspiciousness.
5.  **Makarandarasavachcha:**  A Jain term referring to the nectar of the Marudevi's words.
6.  **Tadvachanamritam:**  A Jain term referring to the nectar of the Marudevi's words.
7.  **Patumichchan:**  A Jain term referring to the king's desire to drink the nectar of the Marudevi's words.
8.  **Khandao:**  A Jain term referring to the king's family.
9.  **Sanvibhaktan:**  A Jain term referring to the king sharing the nectar of the Marudevi's words with his family. 

Page #372:
---------------------------
## Chapter 282

**The Adi Purana**

**Sardulavikridita**

This auspicious chapter, dedicated to the glorious Bhagavati Devi, is filled with wonder. The king, destined to become a Jina, eagerly awaits the arrival of the sun, the radiant Lord Rishabhadeva, who brings supreme joy to the three worlds. The king, adorned with the brilliance of the Jina, stands as a beacon of hope, his heart filled with anticipation.

**The Descent of the Lord**

The twelfth chapter of the Trishattilakshana Mahapurana, composed by the venerable Bhagavatzinaseenacharya, known as Sri Bhashya, concludes with the description of the Lord's descent from heaven.

**Notes:**

1. Bhagavati: The auspicious one.
2. Ascharya: Wonder, amazement.
3. Tejas: Radiance, brilliance.
4. Jinabhavi: One destined to become a Jina.
5. Padmakara: Lotus-like, referring to the king's heart filled with anticipation.
6. Pratikshamanah: Awaiting, expecting.
7. Prasoadavam: Bringing supreme joy. 

Page #373:
---------------------------
## The Thirteenth Chapter

Then, after nine months, the divine mother, Marudevi, who was always surrounded by the divine ladies like Sri, D, etc., who were eager to serve her, gave birth to the Lord Vrishabhadeva. ||1||

Just as the east receives the radiant sun, which blooms the lotuses in the morning, so too, Maya Devi, on the ninth day of the dark fortnight of Chaitra, at sunrise, in the Uttaraashada Nakshatra and the Brahma Maha Yoga, received a son who was adorned with the three knowledges of Mati, Shruta, and Avadhi, who was old in virtues even as a child, and who was the sole lord of the three worlds, a radiant son. ||2-3||

That child-like sun, adorned with the rays of the three knowledges, possessing immense brilliance, and rising from the navel-lotus, was very radiant. ||4||

At that time, all directions became pure, and the sky became clear. It seemed as if the directions and the sky had become pure to imitate the purity of the Lord's virtues. ||5||

At that time, the joy of the people increased, the gods were filled with wonder, and the Kalpavriksha trees showered down blooming flowers from above. ||6||

The drums of the gods were sounding without being struck, and a gentle, cool, and fragrant breeze was blowing softly. At that time, the earth, as if dancing in joy, was shaking, moving the mountains, and the ocean was surging, as if experiencing supreme bliss. ||7||

Then, the king of the gods, Indra, realizing the birth of the Jina, the conqueror of all sins, who would cause the blooming of the lotus-like future beings, by the shaking of his throne and the combination of Avadhi and Jhana, decided to perform his birth ceremony. ||9-10||

At that time, the seats of all the gods suddenly began to shake, as if they were being thrown down by the fear of the gods' worship. ||11|| 

Page #374:
---------------------------
The Adipurana, with their heads bowed in reverence, their crowns swaying, seemed to be contemplating the birth of the Lord, the teacher of gods and demons, with wonder.  ||12||  The sounds of bells, lions, drums, and conch shells echoed throughout the abodes of the Kalpavasis, Jyotishis, Vyantaras, and Bhavanavasis. ||13||  Hearing the deep sound of these instruments, like the waves of a vast ocean, the gods understood that the birth of the Tirthankara, the master of the three worlds, had taken place. ||14||  Then, at the command of Indra, the armies of the gods, like waves of the ocean, emerged from heaven in succession. ||15||  Elephants, horses, chariots, Gandharvas, dancers, foot soldiers, and bulls - these were the seven great armies of Indra. ||16||  Then, the Indra of the Saudharma heaven, accompanied by Indrani, mounted the mighty Airavata elephant, which was a hundred thousand yojanas wide, and set out, surrounded by many gods. ||17||  After him, the gods of the Samanika, Bayastrincha, Parishada, Amiraksha, and Lokapala classes surrounded him, moving in his wake. ||18||  At that time, the deep sound of the Dundubhi drums and the shouts of victory of the gods created a great commotion in the divine army. ||19||  Some of the gods in that army were laughing, some were dancing, some were leaping, some were making loud noises, some were running ahead, and some were singing. ||20||  All the gods, led by Indra, filled the entire sky, their chariots and various vehicles. ||21||  The sky, filled with the vehicles of the arriving gods, seemed to be creating another heaven, different from the heaven of sixty-four layers. ||22||  At that time, the radiance of Indra's body, like a celestial lake filled with pure water, reflected the beauty of the Apsaras, whose faces were blooming with smiles. ||23|| 

Page #375:
---------------------------
The thirteenth chapter, obeisance to the ocean, the wave of the battle of the king of the gods. Like makara, the elephants of the gods, with their trunks raised, were adorned. ||24||  From the sky, the armies of the gods descended in order, quickly reaching the city of Ayodhya, adorned with the best of qualities. ||25|| The armies of the gods surrounded the city of Ayodhya and stood there. The courtyard of King Nabhiraj was filled with the kings who had come, with great festivities. ||26|| Then, with great celebration, Indrani entered the delivery room. There, along with the prince, she saw the Jina mother, Marudevi. ||27|| Just as the evening, with its redness, looks upon the eastern direction with great joy, so too, with love, Indrani looked upon the Jina mother, with the Jina child. ||28|| Going there, Indrani first circumambulated many times, then bowed to the Jina, the teacher of the world, and then, standing before the Jina mother, praised her, saying: ||29|| "O mother, you are the well-wisher of the three worlds, you are the bringer of auspiciousness, you are the great goddess, you are virtuous, and you are glorious." ||30|| Indrani, who had hidden her body, praised the Jina mother in this way and then, putting her into a magical sleep, placed another magical child in front of her. Then, taking the Jina child, the teacher of the world, in her arms, she experienced supreme joy, as if she had obtained the jewel of the crown, which spreads its brilliance throughout the world. ||31-32|| At that time, touching the body of the Lord, which was very rare, Indrani felt as if she had brought all the wealth of the three worlds under her control. ||33|| She looked at his face again and again, touched his body again and again, and smelled his body again and again, so that her eyes were filled with joy and she experienced great delight. ||34|| Then, taking the Jina child, Indrani went away, adorned in such a way that it seemed as if the sun, with its radiant rays, was covering the sky. ||35|| 

Page #376:
---------------------------
##  Chapter 286

**286**

Then, the Dik Kumaris, bearing auspicious objects, went ahead of the Lord, who was the auspiciousness of the three worlds, as if they were the accumulated wealth of the Lord. ||36||

A parasol, a flag, a pot, a whisk, a seat, a fan, a mirror, and a palm leaf fan - these eight are called auspicious objects. ||37||

At that time, the Lord, who was the embodiment of auspiciousness, was obscuring the light of the lamps with the light of his own body, like the young sun. ||38||

Then, just as the rising sun is placed on the peak of the eastern mountain, adorned with shining jewels, Indra's wife placed the Jina child in Indra's palm. ||39||

Indra, with reverence, took the Lord from Indra's hand and, with joyful eyes, gazed upon his beautiful form. ||40||

He then praised him, saying: "O Lord, you are the light of the three worlds; O Lord, you are the teacher of the three worlds; O Lord, you are the creator of the three worlds; O Lord, you are the master of the three worlds." ||41||

O Lord, wise people consider you to be the great mountain of the rising sun, worthy of being worshipped by great sages, for the sake of the rising of the sun of perfect knowledge. ||42||

O Lord, you are like the sun, who causes the lotus flowers of the noble beings to bloom. This world, enveloped in the darkness of false knowledge, will be enlightened by you. ||43||

O Lord, you are the teacher of even the teachers, so I bow to you; you are the great intellect, so I bow to you; you are like the sun, who causes the lotus flowers of the noble beings to bloom, and you are the ocean of virtues, so I bow to you. ||44||

O Lord, you have known the three worlds, so desiring to gain knowledge from you, we place your lotus feet on our heads with great reverence. ||45||

O Lord, the goddess of liberation, eager for liberation, is devoted to you. All virtues reside in you, just as jewels reside in the ocean. ||46|| 

Page #377:
---------------------------
The Thirteenth Chapter

287.  Thus praising, the king of the gods, Indra, took him in his lap and raised his hand, indicating his departure to Mount Meru. ||4||

48.  The gods, with loud voices, exclaimed, "Victory to you, O Lord! May you prosper and grow!" At that time, such a great clamor arose that all directions were deafened. ||48||

49.  Then, chanting victory cries, they rose up into the sky, which was like a courtyard.  They stretched out their celestial bows, their rays of light spreading like ornaments. ||49||

50.  The Gandharvas began to play music, and the Apsaras danced in front.  They raised their eyebrows, which were like flags, and danced in the sky, which was like a stage. ||50||

51.  The sky, filled with celestial chariots, shone brightly, like the sun opening its eyes to behold the Lord. ||51||

52.  White clouds, with white banners, mingled with black elephants, shining like black clouds with herons. ||52||

53.  The great celestial chariots, in their rush, shattered some of the clouds.  It is right that those who are dull (like water and fools), and who oppose their superiors, should be destroyed. ||53||

54.  Attracted by the fragrance of the intoxicating nectar that flowed from the temples of the celestial elephants, the bees abandoned the forests.  It is true that people are fond of novelty; they like new things. ||54||

55.  The radiance of the Indra's body eclipsed the sun's brilliance, making it seem as if the sun had gone into hiding, ashamed. ||55||

56.  The celestial beings, with their radiant bodies, dispelled the sun's embrace of the directions, for women are the rightful possession of strong men. ||56||

46.  Just as jewels continue to grow, so too do your many virtues continue to grow. ||46||

**Meaning:** The radiance of Indra's body surpassed the sun's.

1.  Journey.  "Prasthanam gamanam gamah" - Amarakosha.
2.  Like one with open eyes.
3.  Crushed.
4.  Destroyed.
5.  Dull-minded.
6.  Forest delights.  "Abhoga: paripurnaata" - Amarakosha.
7.  By devotees.
8.  Overpowered.
9.  Became submerged.
10.  Embrace.
11.  Releasing.
12.  Radiance. 

Page #378:
---------------------------
The Adipurana

The dance of the Apsaras, performed on lotus petals in the lakes formed by the tusks of Airavata, was extremely captivating to the gods. ||57|| Hearing the sweet songs of the Kinnaras, created by the qualities of the Jina, the gods were receiving the fruit of their ears. ||58|| Seeing the divine form of the Bhagavan with unwavering eyes, the gods received the fruit of their unwavering eyes. ||59|| The Indras, performing the acts of carrying the Jina child in their arms, holding a white umbrella over him, and waving a chamara, were proclaiming his magnificence. ||60|| The lord of the Saudharma heaven, seated in the lap of the lord, was being served by the lord of the Aishana heaven with a white umbrella. ||61|| Sanatkumar and the lord of the Mahendra heaven were waving chamaras over him, like waves of the ocean of milk. ||62|| Seeing this glory, many other gods with false vision, believing in Indra, were becoming devoted to the right path. ||63|| The stairs made of blue gems, reaching up to Mount Meru, were shining brightly, as if the sky itself had become a stairway through devotion. ||64|| Gradually, the Indras crossed the veil of light and went upwards. At that time, they considered the sky with its stars to be like a lake with lotuses. ||65|| Then, the lords of the gods reached that lofty Mount Meru, which is ninety thousand yojanas high. ||66|| The tuft of hair on his head shines like a crown, and the jewel on his crown holds the glory of the seasons. ||67|| 

Page #379:
---------------------------
The Thirteenth Chapter

67. On whose summit the celestial chariot of the Saudharma heaven, adorned with the brilliance of a jewel, rests.

68. Who bears on his hips the great forest of Bhadrashala, filled with dense shade, as if wearing a green dhoti.

69. Who further on, on his first girdle, bears the Nandana forest, adorned with trees of many jewels, as if it were his waist-band.

70. Who bears the green, flower-and-leaf-adorned, auspicious forest of Saumanasa, as if it were his shawl.

71. Whose peak is always adorned with the Panduka forest, which, with its fragrant flowers, attracts swarms of bees, and thus adorns his crown.

72. Whose four forests, in every direction, are illuminated by Jain temples, shining with the brilliance of jewels, as if they were laughing celestial chariots.

73. Who, being a golden mountain, very high, bears the golden crown of the king of Jambudvipa, who wears the garment of the salt-sea.

74. Who is always pure, being the receptacle of the sacred ablutions of the Tirthankaras, and is very high and prosperous, so that the group of celestial beings always circumambulates him.

75. Who, being like the Jina, is very high (excellent and tall), so that many Charana Munis, desiring to gain merit, always serve him.

76. Who, with his surrounding mountains, always protects the Devakuru and Uttarakuru regions, without hindrance, for this is the greatness of his majesty.

77. In whose caves, abandoning heaven, the gods and the Asuras, along with their wives, reside, mocking the beauty of the celestial world.

78. Who, in the Panduka forest, bears stones made of crystal, pure and fit for the ablutions of the Tirthankaras.

Page #380:
---------------------------
290
The Adipurana, which is the abode of the gods, is constantly worshipped by them. It shines like the Sudharma Indra, surrounded by groups of Apsaras. ||79|| Having attained it, the gods attained joy, which is full of exaltation. The beautiful creation of heaven, the supreme deity. ||40|| Then, with great love, the king of the gods, along with the other gods, circumambulated the mountain king, the sun of the Jinas, and placed the Jina on its head with joy. ||1|| In the eastern and northern directions of that Meru mountain, there is a large Panduka stone, which is the abode of the Tirthankara's birth abhisheka. ||2|| That stone is extremely pure, beautiful, charming, pleasing, round, and shines like the Ashtami Prithvi Siddhishila. ||3|| That stone is one hundred yojanas long, fifty yojanas wide, eight yojanas high, and shaped like a half-moon, as the Jina Deva has said. ||84|| That Panduka stone always remains pure. Indra has washed it many times with the water of the Kshiroda ocean, therefore it is the epitome of purity. ||45|| Due to its purity, greatness, and sanctity, that Panduka stone shines like the mother of the Jinas. ||86|| On that stone, the offering of flowers is never impure. It is the manifestation of the fruit of liberation, like the liberated ones. ||7||
The Panduka stone, which is pure and fit for the kriya, is being held. ||78|| And that Meru mountain shines like the Sudharma Indra, because just as the Sudharma Indra is high, that is, excellent or generous, so is the Meru mountain also high. Just as the Sudharma Indra is served by many Vibudhas (gods), so is the Meru mountain also served by many gods or scholars. Just as the Sudharma Indra is the abode of the six seasons, and just as the Sudharma Indra is served by groups of Apsaras, so is the Meru mountain also adorned by Apsaras or lakes filled with water. ||7|| Thus, that Meru mountain, which shines with its height, is a mine of beauty, and is like the presiding deity of heaven, the gods were very happy to obtain it. ||80||
Thereafter, Indra, with great love, along with the gods, circumambulated that mountain king, Meru, and with joy placed the sun of the Jinas, the Sri Jina, on its head. ||1|| In the Panduka forest of that Meru mountain, in the eastern and northern directions, that is, in the Aishanya direction, there is a large heavy stone called Panduka, which holds the abhisheka of the Tirthankara, that is, on which the Tirthankaras are anointed. ||2|| That stone is extremely pure, beautiful, charming, pleasing, round, and shines like the Ashtami Prithvi Siddhishila. ||3|| That stone is one hundred yojanas long, fifty yojanas wide, eight yojanas high, and shaped like a half-moon, as the Jina Deva has said. ||84|| That Panduka stone always remains pure. Indra has washed it many times with the water of the Kshiroda ocean, therefore it is the epitome of purity. ||45|| Due to its purity, greatness, and sanctity, that Panduka stone shines like the mother of the Jinas. ||86|| That stone is as bright as the pearls that are dropped from above by the gods, and the flowers that the gods offer on it are hidden in it due to their similarity. ||7||
1. Satatam pad
Page #381:
---------------------------
The thirteenth festival, which holds the lion throne for the consecration of the Jinas, is like another Mount Meru placed atop Mount Meru.  [48]  It also holds two beautiful divine thrones, perfectly placed, for the consecration of the Jinas, one for the king of the gods of the Saudharma heaven and the other for the king of the gods of the Aishana heaven. [89]  The gods constantly offer beautiful gifts and perform rituals, making it eternally beautiful with auspicious music, dance, and instruments. [90]  It holds eight auspicious objects: an umbrella, a whisk, a fly whisk, a fan, a mirror, a water pot, a flag, and a palm leaf fan. [91]  This pure Panduka stone is very dear to the monks, like the tradition of good conduct, and is extremely radiant, pleasing, fragrant, and pure, like the body of the Jina. [92]  Although it is already white and pure, the king of the gods has washed it hundreds of times with the pure water of the ocean of milk.  It is like a mine of merit, generating merit. [93]  The surrounding areas are illuminated by the light of jewels, creating a rainbow of splendor. [94]  The gods, desiring to see the auspiciousness of the Jina's birth, surround the Panduka stone, sitting in their respective places in all directions. [95]  The guardians of the directions, along with their respective groups, sit in their designated places, eager to witness the festival of the Jina. [96]  The army of gods, having occupied the sky-like courtyard, spread out over the top of Mount Meru, settling in the Panduka forest. [97]  The Panduka forest, surrounded by gods and kings, seems to be laughing at heaven, adorned with clusters of flowers. [98] 

Page #382:
---------------------------
292
. Adipuranam
.
It seemed as if heaven had indeed vacated its place and Mount Meru had attained the status of heaven, bearing all the splendor of Indra. || 99 ||
Thereafter, the Indra of Saudharma heaven, facing east, was seated on a throne made of Panduka stone and was eager to perform his abhisheka. || 100 ||
At that time, the divine drums were resounding, filling the entire sky, and the apsaras had begun to perform exquisite dances on all sides. || 101 ||
At the same time, the smoke of the excellent incense called Kalaaguru was rising in great quantities, and it seemed as if the stain that had been removed from the hearts of the virtuous by the merit generated from the celebration of the Lord's birth was being carried away. || 102 ||
At that time, the gods, desiring peace, prosperity, and radiance of the body, were offering sacred arghya from all sides, with akshata, water, and flowers, which seemed like particles of merit. || 103 ||
At that time, Indra created a large, heavy mandap there, in which all the beings of the three worlds could sit without obstructing each other. || 104 ||
In that mandap, many garlands made of the flowers of the Kalpavriksha were hanging, and the bumblebees were sitting on them and singing. The music of those bumblebees made those garlands seem as if they were singing the praises of the Lord. || 105 ||
Thereafter, the Indra of the first heaven, having performed all the rituals of the occasion, lifted the first kalasha to perform the Lord's first abhisheka. || 106 ||
And the second, Aishaneendra, who was extremely beautiful and knew the mantra for lifting the kalasha, also lifted a second kalasha, which was adorned with dense sandalwood and filled. || 107 ||
The remaining Indras, with joyful shouts of "Victory, Victory," received the role of attendants, serving according to the instructions of those two Indras. || 108 ||
Indrani and other chief goddesses, along with their respective apsaras and families, also became attendants, adorned with auspicious substances. || 109 ||
After that, many gods, in rows, with great joy, went to bring the pure water of the Kshirasagara in golden kalashas.
1. Shunyikritah. 2. -Garudhdhama M, L. 3. Varcha teja ity artha. 4. Uddharanam kritavan. Prodasthat M, L. 5. Paricharakatha P, A, L. 

Page #383:
---------------------------
## The Thirteenth Festival

**293.** The body of the Self-Existent One is pure, clear as milk and blood. There is no other water fit to touch His body than the water of the Ocean of Milk. **111.**  Considering this, the gods, with great joy, decided to bathe the Lord with the water of the fifth Ocean of Milk. **112.** The festival of the Lord's birth and anointment began with golden pitchers, eight yojanas deep, one yojana wide at the mouth. **113.**  These great pitchers, raised by the hands of the gods, were adorned, removing all impurities and obstacles. **114.**  Golden pitchers, adorned with pearls, smeared with sandalwood paste, and filled with water, appeared in the sky. **115.**  The sky was filled with these golden pitchers, passed from hand to hand by the gods, as if it were filled with reddish evening clouds. **116.**  Indra, desiring to hold all the pitchers, created many arms. He was adorned with these arms, bearing ornaments, like a Kalpavriksha adorned with jewels. **117.**  Or, Indra, with a thousand arms, was adorned with these golden pitchers, filled with pearls, like a Kalpavriksha adorned with vessels. **118.**  Soudharma Indra, chanting "Victory, Victory," poured the first stream of water on the Lord's head. At the same time, millions of other gods, shouting "Victory, Victory, Victory," created a great uproar. **119.**  The stream of water falling on the head of the Jina shone like the Milky Way, falling from the peak of Mount Himavan. **120.**  Then, all the other Indras of the heavens, together, poured streams of water on the Lord's head from golden pitchers, shining like evening clouds, filled with water.  Although the stream of water was falling on the Lord's head, it was like the Ganges and the Indus... 

Page #384:
---------------------------
The Adipurana
Even though great rivers were falling together, the Jina, who is as stable as Mount Meru, was bearing them with his greatness as a mere play. || 121-122 || At that time, many water drops were bouncing far and wide in the sky-like courtyard after touching the body of the Lord, and it seemed as if they were becoming free from sin and going upwards after touching his body. || 123 || Many water drops were bouncing in the sky, shining brightly, as if they wanted to sprinkle the abodes of the gods. || 124 || Many drops of the Lord's abhisheka water were spreading sideways in all directions, and they seemed as if they were enhancing the beauty of the ear-ornaments on the faces of the directional goddesses. || 125 || The water streams, reflected in the pure body of the Lord after falling on it, were shining brightly, as if they were considering themselves very fortunate to be united with his body. || 126 || The streams of the water of the ocean of milk, poured by the Indras on the head of the Lord, were shining brightly, as if white waterfalls were falling on the peak of a mountain by the clouds. || 127 || The water of the Lord's abhisheka, being satisfied, first jumped up into the sky and then fell down. At that time, the fine drops of water that remained in it seemed as if it were laughing at its own foolishness. || 128 || The water of the ocean of milk, as if wanting to compete with the drops of water of the Milky Way, was quickly purifying the celestial chariots with its drops, while going upwards along with the rays of the sun. || 129 || The Lord himself was pure, he purified that water with his pure limbs, and that water, spreading in all directions, purified this whole world. || 130 || The army of gods, immersed in that abhisheka water, appeared for a moment as if they were distressed after being submerged in the ocean of milk. || 131 || That water was falling on the head of Mount Meru along with the lotuses placed on the mouths of the kalasas, therefore it was attaining such beauty as if it were falling along with the swans. || 132 || That pure water, filled with the red leaves of the ashoka tree that had fallen from the mouths of the kalasas, was shining brightly, as if it were filled with the sprouts of the vidruma. || 133 || 
294
"
1. प्रत्यग्रहीत् । 2. च्छलन्त्यो स० द०, प०, अ० । 3. विस्तारं कर्तुमिच्छत्रः । 4 - तिपवित्रिताः म० । 5. दिष्ट्या वृद्धघा भाग्यातिशयेन इत्यर्थः । दिष्टिबुद्धयैव प० द० । 6. हसन्ति स्म । 7. इव । 8. जलतां जडत्वं च । 9. झटिति । 10. स्वर्गगृहाणि [ स्वर्गविधिपर्यन्तमित्यर्थः ] । 11. क्षीरप्रवाहः । 12. पवित्रमकरोत् । 13. पुनाति स्म । 14. अवगाहीकृताः । 15. विस्तृतम् । 

Page #385:
---------------------------
## Chapter Thirteen

**295** - The pure water falling on the crystal throne seemed to become even purer by the grace of the Lord's feet. **134** -  The water, adorned with the rays of various jewels, shone brightly, as if the rainbow itself had melted into water. **135** -  In some places, the water, tinged with the spreading brilliance of Padmaraga gems, appeared like the glow of the setting sun. **136** -  In some places, the water, suffused with the radiance of Indranila gems, seemed like a dense darkness hidden in one place. **137** -  In some places, the water for the abhisheka, adorned with the clusters of emerald rays, resembled a green garment. **138** -  The sky, adorned with the flying droplets of the abhisheka water, seemed to be laughing, as if it were pleased by the touch of the Lord's body. **139** -  Some of the droplets of the Lord's abhisheka water, exceeding the limits of the sky, shone brightly, as if they wanted to play with the Lakshmi of heaven. **140** -  Many droplets of water, leaping in all directions, blocking all paths, seemed to be laughing with the direction-like women, as if in joy. **141** -  The flow of the abhisheka water, pushing aside the seated celestial couples at will, quickly reached near Mount Meru. **142** -  And falling from Mount Meru to the earth, the flow of the ocean of milk shone brightly, as if it were measuring Mount Meru with its standing height. **143** -  The flow of that water was increasing on Mount Meru, as if it were being accepted by the peaks and being consumed by the mouths of the caves. **144** 

Page #386:
---------------------------
296
The Adipurana, what is its glory? Freed from the shackles of the world, it is now united with heaven. Indeed, the Meru mountain, with its waterfalls, seems to be scorning heaven, saying, "What is heaven now? Even the gods have abandoned it. Now all the gods have come to us, so we are worthy of being considered heaven itself." ||145|| The flow of that water had covered the entire sky, enveloped the celestial sphere, covered Mount Meru, and blocked the space between the earth and the sky. ||146|| The flow of that water rested for a moment in the beautiful forests of Mount Meru, and then, as if satisfied, it spread to another place in the next moment. ||147|| The great flow of water was slowed down by the group of trees inside the forest, but as soon as it crossed the path of the forest, it spread quickly far and wide. ||148|| Spreading over Mount Meru and covering the sky, the flow of that water was so beautiful, as if it were covering Mount Meru with white garments. ||149|| Flowing all around and covering Mount Meru, the flow of the water of the Milky Ocean was taking on the beauty of the flow of the Milky Way. ||150|| Making a sound in the caves of Mount Meru, the flow of that water seemed to be expanding the concept of "Shabdadvaita" or proving that the entire creation is made of water. ||151|| Mount Meru, from top to bottom, was drenched in the flow of water, so even the gods who had direct knowledge seemed to be unaware of the past, that is, it seemed as if 
1. Heaven. 2. He was laughing. -Mityakashin-50, D. -Mityakashan- A, S. 3. Heaven. 4. 'Hage in covering'. 5. 'Urgunj in covering'. 6. Sky and earth. 7. In the non-violent. Meaning, in the indestructible. 8. Pra like satisfaction. 9. Vyanshe. 10. Anutkat. 11. 'Arad from far and near'. 12. On Meru. 13. Covering. 14. Sky covered. 15. Covering. 16. Going in the form of a flow. 17. He was making a sound. 18. From the flowing of the sky. A, 10, D, S, M, L. 19. Of the flow of the Ganges water. 20. The theory of sound. 21. -Mivaapmayim M, L. Watery. 22. He was shining. 23. -Nannadrikukhisu D, M, L. In the bright caves. 24. By the flow of water. 25. Of those who have direct knowledge. 

Page #387:
---------------------------
The thirteenth parva

The mountain was not Meru, but a silver mountain, adorned with blooming Nameru trees. ||153|| Was it a heap of nectar, or a mountain of crystal, or a palace of white lime, the wealth of the three worlds? ||154|| The flow of water, spreading to the ends of the directions, as if bathing the direction-women, made the mountain Meru a subject of debate. ||155|| Some of the drops, pure as the moon, rose up and spread in all directions, as if enhancing the splendor of the white umbrella on Meru. ||156|| The streams of water, white like garlands, frost, white lotuses and kumuda flowers, flowed in all directions, as if they were the streams of the glory of the Jina. ||157|| The drops of water, pure as garlands, seemed like offerings of flowers in the courtyard of the sky, or like earrings in the ears of the direction-women. ||158|| The flow of water, reaching the end of the world, spread upwards to the heavens, reaching the sphere of light, and grew in all directions. ||159|| The stars, scattered in the sky, were immersed in the water of the abhisheka, and became radiant, like scattered pearls. ||160|| The stars, staying in the flow of the abhisheka water for a moment, emerged from it, but some water still dripped from them, making them shine like rows of hailstones. ||161|| The sun, staying in the water of the abhisheka for a moment, emerged from it, and became cool, as if a hot iron ball had been taken out of water. ||162|| The moon, in the flowing water, seemed like an old goose, frozen with cold, swimming slowly. ||163|| 

Page #388:
---------------------------
298
The Adipurana, attracted by the celestial sphere, has taken a reverse course, as if embracing a crooked path. ||164|| The Bhagana, with its enhanced rays, submerged in water, served Pushana out of delusion, fearing the torrential rays. ||165|| The celestial wheel, a perishable light, revolving around the milky ocean, never stops for even a moment, fearing the transgression of time. ||166|| The luminous sheet, thus agitated by the bath water, for a moment, revolved obliquely, like a potter's wheel. ||167|| From the summit of the mountain, the sustainer of the world, the bath water, scattered sparsely, purified the human world. ||168|| The entire earth was irrigated, the Kula mountains purified, the lands made free from calamities, and all beings were united in welfare. ||169|| By this purification of the world's artery, what welfare remained for the beings that was not bestowed by the bath water? ||170|| Then, in that great flood, with its mind filled with meditation, and its face turned towards the directions, calm and having extinguished the heat of all the worlds, the remaining water... ||171|| ...in the caves of the great Meru, where the water had receded, Meru, with its water and forest, took some rest. ||172|| When fragrant incense was being burned in the fires of fragrant fuel, and jewel-like lamps were lit for the purpose of devotion alone... ||173|| ...when the gods were reciting auspicious hymns in loud voices, and the Kinnari goddesses, with their sweet voices, were singing melodious songs... ||174|| ...when the sounds of auspicious songs related to the welfare of the Jina were filling the ears of all the gods, making a festival for their hearing... ||175|| 

Page #389:
---------------------------
The thirteenth chapter of the text describes the abhisheka (consecration) of the Jina (Tirthankara) at his birth. It is a detailed account of the celestial celebration, with many examples of the use of the Natya Veda (the science of drama and dance).

The celestial dancers, using the Natya Veda, performed a dance in honor of the Jina's birth. The music of the Gandharvas (celestial musicians) and the sound of the mridanga (drum) filled the air, along with the deep resonance of the dundubhi (a large drum). The celestial women, adorned with saffron and garlands, danced on the Meru (Mount Meru, the mythical center of the universe), which served as a stage for the Apsaras (celestial nymphs). They danced with grace, using various hand gestures, body movements, and rhythmic steps.

The gods listened attentively to the auspicious chants and engaged in conversations praising the Jina's greatness. The sounds of the Nandi (a musical instrument), trumpets, and other instruments filled the space between the sky and the earth. The echoes of victory cries reverberated, as if the Meru itself was praising the Jina.

The wind, carrying the scent of the celestial beings, gently blew through the nearby forests. The celestial guards, wielding colorful staffs, pushed back the crowds, creating a space for the ceremony. Many people, fearing the guards, stood still like paintings.

After the abhisheka with pure water was completed, Indra (the king of the gods) began the abhisheka with fragrant water. Indra, knowing the proper rituals, performed the abhisheka using fragrant water that attracted bees. The pure stream of fragrant water fell upon the Jina's body, as if ashamed of its own fragrance compared to the Jina's. 

Page #390:
---------------------------
300
The fragrant water stream, flowing from the spout of the golden pitcher, adorned with the Kanaka-Kanaka-Bhringar, seemed to be eager to pay homage to the Jina, as if burdened by devotion. ||18||
The stream, filled with the radiance of the Lord of Liberation, was as bright as lightning. It was as if a ghee offering was being poured into a blazing fire. ||189||
The stream, falling upon the naturally fragrant and extremely pure body of the Lord, became fulfilled and absorbed both of His qualities - the fragrance and the softness. ||190||
Although the stream was perfumed with fragrant flowers and fragrant substances, it could not hold its own against the fragrance of the Lord's body. The fragrance of the water seemed insignificant in comparison. ||191||
May this stream of white water, like milk, bring joy to us all. It is like a stream of jewels, fulfilling all desires and bringing happiness to the entire world. ||192||
May this fragrant stream, like a stream of holy water, bestow upon us an abundance of wealth, the three jewels of liberation. ||193||
May this stream of pure fragrant water, like a sharp sword, destroy all obstacles and always lead us to liberation. ||194||
May this fragrant stream, revered by great sages, the sole purifier of the world, shining like the Milky Way, protect us all. ||195||
May this fragrant stream, having attained the body of the Lord and become supremely pure, purify our minds. ||196||
Thus, Indra, having performed the ablution with fragrant water, chanted the peace mantra in a loud voice for the peace of the world. ||197||
Then, the gods applied the fragrant water to their own foreheads, then to their entire bodies, and finally kept the remaining water to take to heaven. ||198||
At the end of the fragrant water ablution, the gods, with a chorus of victory cries, sprinkled themselves with fragrant water mixed with powder. ||199||

Page #391:
---------------------------
## The Thirteenth Festival

The abhisheka (consecration) was completed, and the gods bathed. They circumambulated the supreme light, the unfathomable, the all-pervading.  They worshipped him with fragrant scents, incense, lamps, flowers, water, mantras, and all kinds of fruits. 

The Indras, having performed their desired actions, having removed their undesired actions, and having performed nourishing actions, declared loudly, "This is the birth abhisheka!" and were satisfied. 

The Indras and Indranis, along with all the gods, circumambulated the giver of supreme bliss, the one who shone like a jewel on Mount Meru for a moment, and bowed to him. 

At that time, a shower of flowers fell from heaven, along with drops of water, like a string of pearls, the tears of joy of the celestial beings. 

The wind, carrying the pollen of the Kalpavriksha trees, blew gently, showering the immortal nectar of the abhisheka bath. 

The radiant Lord, like Mount Meru, was surrounded by the gods, who were like the Kulachala mountains. The kalashas (vessels) shone like clouds of milk, and the goddesses were like lakes filled with water. 

Indra himself was the one who bathed him. Mount Meru was the bathing platform. The goddesses danced, the gods were the attendants, and the ocean of milk was the bathing vessel. 

Thus, the abhisheka festival was completed on the most praiseworthy Mount Meru. May the Lord, whose soul is pure, purify the entire world. 

Then, the Pavana Kumaras, with their deep devotion, spread out in all directions, moving slowly. The Megha Kumaras, with their bodies filled with nectar, released continuous streams of water, showering the land of Mount Meru with a gentle rain. 

Page #392:
---------------------------
302
The wind, which was shaking the Kalpavriksha trees with great speed, which was capable of carrying the extremely cold waves of the Milky Way, and which was stealing flowers from the forests on the banks, was circling around Mount Meru. It seemed as if it was performing a circumambulation. ||210|| The deep sound of the Dundubhi drums, beaten by the hands of the gods, was heard, as if proclaiming the auspiciousness of the occasion, saying that it is inappropriate for inauspiciousness to exist in the three worlds when the birth festival of the Lord of the three worlds, Vrishabhadeva, is generating countless auspiciousness. ||211|| At that time, a shower of flowers from the Kalpavriksha trees, scattered by the hands of the gods, was falling from a great height. The fragrance of the flowers was attracting swarms of bees from all sides. It seemed as if the goddess of fortune of heaven had manifested her rows of eyes all around to witness the auspiciousness of the birth of the Jina. ||212|| Thus, when the celestial nymphs were dancing with various types of dance forms, accompanied by musical instruments, Indra and the other gods, along with the lord of the earth, celebrated the birth abhisheka of the supremely pure and the guru of the three worlds, Sri Vrishabhanatha Jinendra, on Mount Meru with the water of the Milky Ocean, with great joy. May he always be victorious! ||213|| Immediately after his birth, a multitude of gods and asuras, having blocked the sky with various types of vehicles, airplanes, and foot soldiers, performed the abhisheka of the Jina with the pure water of the Milky Ocean, brought to the top of Mount Meru. 

Page #393:
---------------------------
The thirteenth chapter, entitled "Description of the Birth Abhisheka of the Bhagavan," from the Trishatilak Mahapurana, composed by the venerable Jinaseanacharya, is as follows:

**Chapter 13**

The thirteenth chapter, entitled "Description of the Birth Abhisheka of the Bhagavan," from the Trishatilak Mahapurana, composed by the venerable Jinaseanacharya, is as follows:

**Verse 215**

The sun quickly shed its heat, water droplets danced, the moon donned coolness, stars played like small, bound boats, and the group of moving, fickle stars shone like a mass of foam. May the Jina, the purifier of the world, always be victorious!

**Verse 216**

The stream of water from the Bhagavan's birth abhisheka, shining on the peak of Mount Meru, protects us all. It was seen with great joy by Indra, with wonder by the goddesses, with fear by the elephants of the gods, with reverence by the Charanas, and with doubt by the Vidyadharas, who wondered, "What is this?"

Thus ends the thirteenth chapter of the Trishatilak Mahapurana, composed by the venerable Jinaseanacharya, which describes the birth abhisheka of the Bhagavan.

**Notes:**

1. "Dvistiriruktan" - This refers to the two-fold and three-fold nature of the abhisheka.
2. "Ghritam" - This refers to the ghee used in the abhisheka.
3. "Baddakalah sadbhih kriditam" - This refers to the stars playing like small, bound boats.
4. "Avadhanaparais" - This refers to the Charanas, who were focused and attentive. 

Page #394:
---------------------------
## The Fourteenth Chapter: The Coronation Ceremony

After the coronation ceremony was complete, Sachi Devi, the Queen of the Gods, with great joy, adorned the World Teacher, Vrishabhadeva, with ornaments. [1]

She wiped away the water droplets clinging to the body of the Lord, who had just been consecrated, with clean and pure garments. [2]

She saw the white shadow of her own gaze falling on the Lord's face and mistook it for water droplets, so she wiped his face again and again. [3]

She anointed the Lord's body with fragrant, thick, and highly perfumed unguents, which could intoxicate the entire universe with their fragrance. [4]

Although these fragrant substances were endowed with excellent fragrance, they were overshadowed by the natural, pervasive fragrance of the Lord's body. [5]

Sachi Devi adorned the Lord's forehead with a tilak, but what could adorn the Lord, who himself is the tilak of the universe? [6]

She placed a garland of Mandara flowers on the Lord's head. Adorned with these garlands, the Lord appeared as if he were adorned with fame itself. [7]

Although the Lord was himself the jewel of the universe and the foremost among the virtuous, Pauloma, filled with devotion, placed a jewel on his head. [8]

Although the Lord's eyes, with their thick eyelashes, were naturally dark, Sachi Devi, out of duty, applied collyrium to them. [9]

The Lord's ears were naturally pierced, and Sachi Devi adorned them with jeweled earrings, which made it seem as if the sun and moon had come to witness the radiance and brilliance of the Lord's face. [10]

The Lord Vrishabhadeva, the master of the three worlds, was adorned with a beautiful necklace of pearls, resembling the necklace of Moksha-Lakshmi. [11] 

Page #395:
---------------------------
## Chapter Fourteen

The radiance of the neck ornament was very intense. ||11|| His two arms, adorned with armlets, bangles, and armlets, appeared like two branches of the Kalpa tree. ||12|| The jeweled belt, adorned with small bells, shone brightly on his waist, like the shoots of the Kalpa tree. ||13|| His feet, adorned with brilliant gems shaped like cow's mouths, shone brightly, as if Saraswati herself was serving him with reverence. ||14|| Adorned with many ornaments, the Lord appeared like a heap of Lakshmi, a mountain of jewels, or a collection of desirable objects. ||15|| Or, adorned with ornaments, the Lord shone like a collection of beauty, a treasure of good fortune, or a dwelling place of virtues. ||16|| The naturally beautiful and well-proportioned body of the Lord, adorned with ornaments, shone brightly, like the poetry of a poet, adorned with similes, metaphors, and other literary devices. ||17|| Adorned with jeweled ornaments placed on every part of his body, the Lord shone like the Kalpa tree, whose every branch is adorned with ornaments. ||18|| Thus, having adorned the Lord, who was seated in Indra's lap, with many garments and ornaments, Indrani herself was filled with wonder at the sight of his beauty. ||19|| Indra also desired to see the Lord's beauty at that time, but he was not satisfied with seeing it with two eyes. Therefore, it seems that he became a Sahasraksha (one with a thousand eyes) - he created a thousand eyes with his power of action and saw the Lord's form. ||20|| At that time, the gods and demons, with their unblinking eyes, saw the Lord, adorned like the jewel on the peak of Mount Meru, for a moment. ||21|| Then, Indra and the other great gods were eager to praise him. It is indeed true that the influence of a Tirthankara is immense. ||22|| 

Page #396:
---------------------------
306
O Dev, you have arisen to give us supreme bliss. Do lotuses ever bloom without the sun rising? ||23|| O Dev, you are going to give the support of the hand of Dharma to these worldly beings who have fallen into the well of false knowledge. ||24|| O Dev, just as darkness is destroyed by the rays of the sun before it rises, so too has the darkness of our hearts been destroyed by your words, which are like rays. ||25|| O Dev, you are the original Dev of Devs, the original Guru of the three worlds, the original creator of the worlds, and the original leader of Dharma. ||26|| O Dev, you are the master of the worlds, you are the father of the worlds, you are the protector of the worlds, and you are the leader of the worlds. ||27|| O Dev, just as the moon, which is itself white, makes the whole world white with its moonlight, so too do you, who are yourself pure, purify the whole world with your excellent qualities. ||28|| O Lord, these beings who are afflicted by the disease of the world will be cured by your words, which are like medicine, and will attain supreme bliss from you. ||29|| O Bhagavan, you have attained this Tirthankara, the supreme state, by destroying all afflictions, therefore you are pure. You are the one who purifies others, and you are the imperishable, excellent light. ||30|| O Lord, although you are Kutastha - eternal - you do not appear to us to be Kutastha, because all the qualities that arise from meditation are constantly increasing in you. Meaning - That which is Kutastha (eternal) does not undergo any change, that is, neither do its qualities decrease nor increase, but we see that many qualities arising from meditation and other yogic practices continue to increase in you every moment, so you do not appear to us to be Kutastha. ||31|| O Dev, although you are pure without bathing, the abhisheka that was performed on you on Mount Meru was done only to purify this world, which is polluted by sins. ||32|| O Dev, by your birth abhisheka, not only we have been purified, but also this Mount Meru, the ocean of milk, and the forests of both (the gardens and the forests). ||33|| 

Page #397:
---------------------------
**Verse 34:** Fourteen festival days, like the rays of the sun, illuminate the directions, bringing joy to the world, like dense masses of glory.

**Verse 35:** You are fragrant even without being anointed, beautiful even without adornment. Yet, we, filled with devotion, have adorned you with fragrant unguents and ornaments.

**Verse 36:** You, the embodiment of the self, have manifested, radiating brilliance, surpassing all worlds. You are like the sun, the jewel of the universe, born from the heart of Mount Meru.

**Verse 37:** At the time of your descent to heaven, you bore the name "Sadyōjāta" (newly born). You are "Acyuta" (imperishable), and today, adorned with beauty, you bear the name "Vāmadeva" (the left-handed god), signifying that you are Brahma, Vishnu, and Maheshvara.

**Verse 38:** Just as a gem, born from a pure mine, shines brightly through the process of refinement, so too, you, through the ritual of birth, shine with extraordinary brilliance.

**Verse 39:** Those who claim that everyone can only see the body and other aspects of the Supreme Brahman, but cannot see the Supreme Brahman itself, are mistaken. For you, the Supreme Light, are manifest before our very eyes.

**Verse 40:** The great yogis, reciting your praises in detail, call you the ancient man, Puru, the poet, and the Purana.

**Verse 41:** Salutations to you, whose soul is pure. Salutations to you, whose virtues are renowned. Salutations to you, who dispel fear, and who are the sole source of all virtues.

**Verse 42:** Salutations to you, who embody the earth, and whose primary virtue is forgiveness. Salutations to you, who, like water, bring joy to the world, and who embody the essence of water. 

Page #398:
---------------------------
308
Salutations to you, the one who is free from attachments, pure, and who possesses the form of the wind, who destroys the great tree of delusion. ||43|| Salutations to you, the one who burns the fuel of karma, who has a reddish-yellow body, and whose brilliance of meditation is always ablaze. ||44|| Salutations to you, the one who is free from the dust of sin, who is all-pervading, infinite, unchanging, and the protector of all, who possesses the form of the sky. ||45|| Salutations to you, the one who performs the offering of the totality of karma in the fire of meditation, who possesses the form of the priest. Salutations to you, the one who bestows liberation (moksha or bliss), who possesses the form of the moon. ||46|| Salutations to you, the one who is completely inseparable from the sun, the form of pure knowledge, who illuminates infinite things. O Lord, you possess the forms of the earth, water, wind, fire, sky, priest, moon, and sun, and you are a Tirthankara. Therefore, salutations to you. ||47|| O Lord, you are the possessor of great strength (mahabala), or you were the Mahabala Vidyadhara in the tenth previous birth. Therefore, salutations to you. You are Lalitanga, the one who possesses a beautiful body, or you were the Lalitanga Deva of the Aishana heaven in the ninth previous birth. Therefore, salutations to you. You are the one who establishes the path of Dharma, who is wealthy, and who has strong thighs like a forest (vanajangha), or you were the king named Vanajangha in the eighth previous birth. Therefore, salutations to you. 

Page #399:
---------------------------
**Verse 49:**
Salutations to you, the venerable one, the divine Sri Dhar, salutations to you. Salutations to you, the auspicious one, salutations to you, the imperishable lord, Achyutendra.

**Verse 50:**
Salutations to you, whose body is as steady as the pillar of a forest, and whose navel is as strong as a thunderbolt, Vajranabhi. Salutations to you, the lord of all accomplishments, the one who has attained all accomplishments.

**Verse 51:**
Salutations to you, the supreme lord, the son of Nabhiraj, the one who has attained the ultimate, the most magnificent body among the ten incarnations.

**Verse 52:**
By praising you in this way, we hope for this fruit, that our devotion may remain in you. We have no use for other limited fruits.

**Verse 53:**
Having praised him thus, the Indras, filled with supreme joy, again made plans to go to Ayodhya.

**Verse 54:**
Just as there was a celebration on the way from Ayodhya to Mount Meru, so it began again. Just as the drums were sounded, just as the shouts of victory were uttered, and just as Indra had placed the Jina on the shoulders of the elephant Airavata.

**Verse 55:**
Those gods, with great noise, songs, dances, and proclamations of victory, crossed the sky-like courtyard and quickly reached the city of Ayodhya. 

Page #400:
---------------------------
Ayodhya, with its towering gates that seemed to pierce the sky and its banners fluttering in the wind, resembled a celestial city. Its gem-studded ground, reflecting the stars at night, was like a lotus-filled lake. The banners, swaying in the breeze, seemed to beckon the gods from heaven out of curiosity. The city's gem-encrusted palaces, adorned with beautiful men and women, eclipsed the splendor of Indra's chariots. The white marble of the palaces, adorned with moonstone, shimmered with the touch of moonlight, resembling clouds. The city's grand towers, adorned with gems, radiated a rainbow of colors, as if the city itself was wearing a celestial bow. The sky above Ayodhya, at times, appeared tinged with the red glow of ruby gems, resembling the clouds of twilight. The city's palaces, adorned with Indra-nila gems, were so bright that the celestial constellations were obscured. The city's towers, like mountain peaks, were the abode of autumn clouds, for what is truly great needs no support. The city's golden ramparts, adorned with gems, seemed to mock the splendor of Mount Meru. The city's moat, teeming with aquatic creatures, was constantly agitated by waves and currents, resembling a vast ocean. Ayodhya, the birthplace of Lord Rishabhadeva, was as pure as the sun, giving birth to countless great souls. 

Page #401:
---------------------------
311
Fourteenth Chapter
The city whose outer gardens, filled with countless stories, were adorned with fruit-bearing trees and whose shade resembled that of Kalpa trees. ||68|| The city whose surrounding area was encompassed by the river Sarayu, whose beautiful banks were adorned with sleeping cranes and singing swans. ||69|| The city that was difficult to conquer by enemies and was filled with warriors, hence called Ayodhya (unconquerable in battle). It was also known as Vinita and was situated in the middle of the Aryakhanda, hence it shone like its navel. ||70|| The city was surrounded by the armies of the gods, making it seem as if all three realms had come to witness its glory. ||71|| Then, accompanied by some gods, Indra, the king of gods, entered the palace of King Nabhiraj, adorned with supreme prosperity. ||72|| There, in the courtyard of the palace, where the gods had created many beautiful designs, Indra placed the child-form of the Lord on a throne. ||73|| King Nabhiraj, his body trembling with excitement, his eyes filled with joy and wide open, saw the Lord, who was a delight to behold. ||74|| Having overcome the illusion of sleep, Queen Marudevi, awakened by Indraani, looked at the Lord of the three worlds with joy, along with the other goddesses. ||75|| The virtuous Marudevi saw her son as a radiant mass of energy, illuminating the eastern direction like the rising sun. ||76|| The parents of the Lord of the world, their desires fulfilled, were overjoyed to see Indra and Indraani. ||77|| Then, Indra worshipped the revered parents of the world with various ornaments, garlands, and precious garments. ||78|| Then, Indra of the Sudharma heaven, filled with joy, praised them, saying, "You are blessed and virtuous, for you have given birth to the Lord of the world." ||79||
43
That city was pure and had a soil like that of the Khaṇika, and it had produced countless men, who were like priceless jewels. ||67|| The outer gardens of that city, filled with various kinds of fruit-bearing trees and providing shade, surpassed the beauty of Kalpa trees. ||68|| The river Sarayu flowed around the city, its beautiful banks adorned with sleeping cranes and singing swans. ||69|| That city was difficult to conquer by enemies and was filled with warriors, hence called Ayodhya (unconquerable in battle). It was also known as Vinita and was situated in the middle of the Aryakhanda, hence it shone like its navel. ||70|| The armies of the gods surrounded the city of Ayodhya, making it seem as if all three realms had come to witness its glory. ||71|| Then, accompanied by some gods, Indra, the king of gods, entered the palace of King Nabhiraj, adorned with supreme prosperity. ||72|| There, in the courtyard of the palace, where the gods had created many beautiful designs, Indra placed the child-form of the Lord on a throne. ||73|| King Nabhiraj, his body trembling with excitement, his eyes filled with joy and wide open, saw the Lord, who was a delight to behold. ||74|| Having overcome the illusion of sleep, Queen Marudevi, awakened by Indraani, looked at the Lord of the three worlds with joy, along with the other goddesses. ||75|| The virtuous Marudevi saw her son as a radiant mass of energy, illuminating the eastern direction like the rising sun. ||76|| The parents of the Lord of the world, their desires fulfilled, were overjoyed to see Indra and Indraani. ||77|| Then, Indra worshipped the revered parents of
Page #402:
---------------------------
The Adipurana

You two are blessed with virtue and are very fortunate, for the best son in the world is yours. ||79|| In this world, you two are very fortunate, you two are destined to receive many blessings, and there is no one in the world who can equal you, because you are the parents of the Guru of the world. ||80|| O Nabhiraj, it is true that you are the glorious Udayachal and Queen Marudevi is the east, because this son, the supreme light, was born from you. ||81|| Today, your home is as sacred as a Jain temple for us, and you are the parents of the father of the world, therefore, we will always respect you. ||82|| Thus, Indra praised the parents and entrusted the Lord to their hands, and then, while narrating the excellent story of their birth ceremony, he stood there for a moment. ||83|| Having learned the whole story of the birth ceremony from Indra, both parents were overwhelmed with joy and wonder. ||84|| Having received permission from Indra, the parents, along with the people of the city who were eager to celebrate, performed the Lord's birth ceremony with great splendor. ||85|| At that time, Ayodhya, filled with rows of flags, seemed as if it were beckoning the heavens with its curiosity. ||86|| At that time, Ayodhya seemed like a heavenly city, the city dwellers seemed like gods, and the women of the city, adorned with many ornaments, seemed like apsaras. ||87|| The fragrance of incense filled all directions, the sky was filled with fragrant powder, and the sound of music and drums made all directions deaf. ||88|| At that time, all the streets of the city were adorned with powdered gems, and the sun's rays were blocked by the fluttering flags. ||89|| At that time, flags were fluttering in all parts of the city, making it seem as if the city itself was dancing. Its gateways were adorned with garlands, making it seem as if it were showing off its beauty. The city was decorated everywhere. 

Page #403:
---------------------------
## The Festival of the Four Quarters

The city shone with beauty, as if dancing, and resounded with joy, as if engaged in conversation.  The entire populace was engrossed in songs, dances, musical instruments, and other auspicious activities, their hearts overflowing with joy.  There was no one who was poor, no one who was destitute, no one whose desires were unfulfilled, and no one who was devoid of joy.  The entire world was filled with merriment, as if the festival itself was Mount Meru, encompassing the entire city, including its inner quarters.  Witnessing the joy of the people, Indra, filled with the desire to express his own joy, decided to perform a play called "Ananda" (Joy).

As Indra began to dance, the Gandharvas, masters of music, prepared their instruments and began to play with great skill.  The dance, an imitation of a previous performance, was performed according to the rules of the Natya Shastra, a knowledge of which was possessed by Indra and the other gods.  The grace of the dance, performed by Indra himself, is beyond description.  Even when the dance is performed by other actors, it still delights the hearts of the virtuous.

This dance, performed by Indra, was a spectacle for the great souls to behold, filled with various verses, colorful costumes, and intricate gestures.  The earth, adorned with mountains, became the stage, while Indra himself was the lead dancer.  The great men like Nabhiraj were the audience, and the Lord Vrishabhadeva, the supreme teacher, was the object of their devotion.  The three goals of life - Dharma (righteousness), Artha (wealth), and Kama (desire) - were all fulfilled in this dance. 

Page #404:
---------------------------
314
The world-teacher, worthy of worship by the likes of Nabhiraj, is the Adipurana. The fruit of it is the fulfillment of the three goals of life and supreme bliss. ||10|| Even a single item of this collection is pleasing to the virtuous, what to say of the entire collection of virtues gathered together in one place? ||102|| Having enacted the play of the conception, which is the means to achieve the fruit of the three goals of life, Hari then instructed him to enact the play of birth and coronation. ||103|| Then, taking up the story of the ten avatars of the Lord, Indra began to enact many other plays with many forms. ||104|| In the process of enacting these plays, Indra first performed the auspicious act of removing obstacles, and then, with full attention, began the pre-play. ||105|| Beginning the pre-play, Indra first performed the Tandava dance, offering a shower of flowers. ||106|| At the beginning of the Tandava dance, he performed the Nandi Mangala, and after completing the Nandi Mangala, he entered the stage. At that time, Indra, the knower of the science of drama and adorned with auspicious garments and ornaments, was shining brightly. ||107|| When he descended onto the stage, he stood with his legs spread out and his hands on his hips, surrounded by the Maruts, the gods. It seemed as if the earth, surrounded by the winds, was standing there. ||108|| In the middle of the stage, Indra, scattering flowers, seemed to be distributing the remaining essence of the play for the benefit of others. ||109|| Adorned with beautiful garments and ornaments, and with a group of beautiful eyes, he shone like a Kalpa tree, full of flowers. ||110|| The falling shower of flowers, followed by many intoxicated bees, shone like a sky adorned with various paintings. ||111|| 

Page #405:
---------------------------
## The Fourteenth Festival

**Verse 112:** The rows of Indra's eyes, like stars, spread their brilliance all around, illuminating the stage with their radiant glow.

**Verse 113:** With rhythmic steps, he circled the stage, adorned with vibrant colors, shining like a celestial being, as if measuring the earth.

**Verse 114:** As Indra began his Tandava dance, offering floral tributes, the gods, delighted by his devotion, showered the heavens with a rain of flowers.

**Verse 115:** At that moment, countless instruments, like Pushkaras, resounded with deep tones, their echoes reverberating across the horizons.

**Verse 116:** The melodious Vina, the sweet flute, and the rhythmic beats of the drums all blended harmoniously, creating a symphony of sound.

**Verse 117:** The musicians, playing their instruments in unison, created a harmonious melody, for unity is inherent in things of the same nature.

**Verse 118:** The Kinnari dancers, accompanying the Vina, sang with delicate, charming, slightly deep, high, and subtle notes.

**Verse 119:** Just as a virtuous disciple, receiving the teachings of his guru, speaks with sweet words and engages in practices without any dispute, remaining true to his lineage, so too did the bamboo instruments, like the flute, produce melodious sounds, fulfilling their purpose without any conflict, true to their nature.

**Verse 120:** Indra, first performing the pure, unadulterated Purvaranga, then skillfully incorporated various movements of the hands and body, creating a spectacle of beauty.

**Verse 121:** With graceful movements of his feet, waist, neck, and hands, Indra danced the Tandava, showcasing the essence of rasa, his eyes, a spectacle in themselves. 

Page #406:
---------------------------
316
In the Adipurana, it is said that Indra, with a thousand arms, danced, causing the earth to tremble as if it were splitting, and the mountains to sway like heaps of grass. The vast ocean, as if in joy, surged and roared. 

His arms, shining with magnificence, were like the branches of a Kalpavriksha, adorned with flowing garments and ornaments. The sky, enveloped by the rays of the jewels in his moving crown, seemed to be filled with thousands of lightning bolts. 

The stars, scattered by the movements of his arms, revolved around him, like pearls from a broken necklace. The clouds, struck by the joy of his dance, released showers of water, like tears of sorrow. 

As he spun, the rows of jewels on his crown, driven by the force of his movement, revolved like a wheel of fire. The earth, shaken by his dance, trembled, and the oceans, stirred by the earth's tremors, washed the walls of the directions with their surging waves. 

In a moment, he was one, in a moment, he was many, in a moment, he was everywhere, in a moment, he was small, in a moment, he was near, in a moment, he was far, in a moment, he was in the sky, and in a moment, he was on the earth. Thus, displaying his power born of his actions, Indra danced, as if performing a magical illusion. 

The Apsaras, laughing softly, swayed on the branches of Indra's arms, their bodies moving gracefully, and their garlands of flowers swaying with them. 

Page #407:
---------------------------
317
The fourteenth festival, the Vairmanalaya, was adorned with some who danced with the Tandava style, some with the graceful movements of celestial dancers, and some with beautiful acting. ||13|| Some were like lightning, some like Indra's body, and they danced with controlled entrances and exits, following the rules of drama. ||134|| They shone like the creepers of the Kalpa tree, growing on the branches of Indra's arms. ||135|| He, the glorious Indra, danced with them, spinning like a whirling wheel, his crown swaying. ||136|| With thousands of eyes, he was like a blooming lotus pond, and they, with their smiling lotus faces, were like the lotuses themselves. ||137|| Their faces, adorned with gentle smiles, shone like blooming lotuses bathed in the nectar of the divine. ||138|| Some danced on Indra's arms, which were like the Kula mountains, and they shone like embodied Lakshmi. ||139|| Others, like another Lakshmi, danced on Indra's arms, which were like the pillars that bind the Airavata elephant. ||140|| Some danced with many forms, their reflections falling on the pearls of their necklaces, like Indra's multifaceted Vidya. ||141|| Some danced gracefully, placing their feet on Indra's fingertips, like a needle dance. ||142|| Others, with their navels resting on the tips of Indra's fingers, spun like bamboo poles placed on a wooden platform. ||143|| The celestial dancers, on Indra's...
1. Tandava dance. 2. Body. 'Sanghatagrasoh pindir dvayo: punsi kalevare.' This is the definition. 3. Exits. 4. Rotation. 5. Combined. 6. Blooming. 7. Washed. 8. Flows. 9. Dancing. 10. Binding pillar. 11. Reflections. 12. Rested. 13. Well-tied. 

Page #408:
---------------------------
## Adipurana

The celestial nymphs, adorned with ornaments, were moving around the sleeping Indra, their eyes filled with desire.  They were captivating with their glances, their cheeks glowing, their feet spreading, their hands adorned, their faces smiling, their eyes blooming, their bodies radiating with color, and their navels submerged.  Their waistbands were moving, and their sashes were slipping, as if they were dancing.  The dramatic essence of the play was increasing, and it was as if it was manifesting in the bodies of the celestial beings.  

The best movements of Indra's body while dancing were being replicated by all the other characters, as if Indra had distributed his movements among them.  The rasa, bhavas, anubhavas, and gestures of Indra's dance were also present in all the other characters, as if Indra had infused his soul into them.  

Indra was dancing with the celestial nymphs on his arms, making them dance, as if he were a puppeteer, making wooden puppets dance on the strings of a machine.  He was lifting the celestial nymphs into the sky, making them dance in front of him, and then making them disappear in an instant.  He was like a magician, performing tricks.  

Indra was moving the celestial nymphs around on his arms, as if he were a juggler, showing off his dexterity.  He was dancing on his arms, which were like branches, while making the young gods and goddesses dance on his other arms.  He was displaying his amazing power.  

The gods and goddesses were dancing in circles on the stage, which was Indra's arms.  Indra was like a sutradhar, a master of the art of drama, who knew the Vedas.  

The dance was a combination of two styles: one was fierce and powerful, like the Tandava dance, and the other was graceful and delicate, like the Lasya dance. 

Page #409:
---------------------------
## The Fourteenth Festival

**Verse 156:**  Displaying wondrous dances of diverse flavors, Indra aroused great joy among the assembly.

**Verse 157:**  Indra concluded the joyous dance called "Ananda," with a symphony of various instruments played by the chief Gandharvas.

**Verse 158:**  The dance, filled with the sound of cymbals and drums, resembled a garden. Just as a garden is adorned with trees like Kantha and Tal, the dance was adorned with cymbals. Just as a garden is filled with the sound of tall bamboo swaying in the wind, the dance was filled with the sound of flutes. Just as a garden is adorned with Apsaras (celestial nymphs) and water bodies, the dance was adorned with Apsaras. Just as a garden is filled with the essence of water, the dance was filled with the essence of emotions like love.

**Verse 159:**  Seeing the wondrous dance, King Nabhiraj, along with his queen, was amazed and received great praise from the best of the gods.

**Verse 160:**  "This Vrishabha is the greatest in the world, and he will shower the world with the nectar of Dharma. That is why Indra named him Vrishabhadeva."

**Verse 161:**  "Or, Vrishabha means the supreme Dharma, and the Tirthankara is adorned with that supreme Dharma. That is why Indra called him 'Vrishabhaswami'."

**Verse 162:**  "Or, during his mother Marudevi's pregnancy, she saw a Vrishabha in her dream. That is why the gods called him 'Vrishabha'."

**Verse 163:**  "Indra first called Lord Vrishabhanatha 'Purudeva'. That is why Indra's name 'Puruhut' (one who calls upon Lord Vrishabhadeva) is truly meaningful."

**Verse 164:**  "Then, Indra, along with the other gods, went to their respective heavens, having appointed divine princes of equal age, form, and attire to serve Lord Vrishabha."

**Verse 165:**  "Indra, with great respect, appointed many goddesses as wet nurses to bathe, dress, feed milk, perform rituals (applying oil, kajal, etc.), and play with Lord Vrishabha." 

Page #410:
---------------------------
## Adipurana

Then, he, smiling gently, walked on the jewel-studded earth, filling his parents with joy, his playful antics wondrous. || 166 ||

His childhood was like the moon's, a festival for the eyes of the world, a source of joy, radiant with art. || 167 ||

A gentle smile, like moonlight, graced his moon-like face, making his parents' ocean of joy swell. || 168 ||

His face, adorned with a charming smile, was like the first note of Saraswati's music, or Lakshmi's radiant laughter, or the blossoming of the vine of fame. || 169 ||

His beautiful lotus-like mouth gradually uttered indistinct words, as if Saraswati herself had come to imitate his childhood. || 170 ||

His feet, stumbling gently on the sapphire earth, shone like a gift of lotuses, illuminating the earth. || 171 ||

He played with the divine children in the dust of jewels, filling his parents' hearts with joy, his form a delight to behold. || 172 ||

He, like the moon, shone with the radiance of fame, bringing joy to the people with his delightful qualities. || 173 ||

His childhood passed, and then his youthful form, worshipped by the gods, became even more beautiful, a testament to his great strength. || 174 ||

Page #411:
---------------------------
....... The Fourteenth Festival
174. Just as the moon's brilliance, radiance, and other qualities increase with its growth, so too did the many qualities of the Lord increase with the growth of his body. 
175. At that time, his beautiful body, sweet speech, charming gaze, and smiling conversation were all spreading joy throughout the world.
176. Just as the moon's growth brings about the growth of all its arts, so too did the growth of the Lord's body, the delight of the world, bring about the growth of all his arts.
177.  The three knowledges of mati, shruta, and avadhi were born with the Lord, and therefore he knew all the sciences and the state of the world perfectly.
178. He was the Lord of all knowledge, and therefore all knowledge came to him naturally. This is right, because the practice of past lives nourishes memory greatly.
179. Without any education, he possessed praiseworthy skill in all arts, praiseworthy cleverness in all sciences, and praiseworthy diligence (ability to work) in all actions.
180. He was the sole master of Saraswati, and therefore all scriptures (shastra) were revealed to him, and therefore he became the teacher of all the worlds.
181. He was a purana, that is, a knower of ancient history, a poet, an excellent speaker, a gamaka (one who clarifies the meaning of things through commentary, etc.), and beloved by all, because he was born with many qualities like intelligence, etc.
182. His क्षायिक samyag darshan removed all the impurities from his mind, and Saraswati, who had naturally spread her influence, removed all the defects in his speech.
183. He had scriptural knowledge by nature, and his actions were very peaceful because of that scriptural knowledge. Because his actions were peaceful, his efforts were for the benefit of the world, and through those world-benefiting efforts, he protected the people.
184. As his qualities increased along with his body,
1. With growth. 'Anu' is used in the sense of 'saha' (along with).
2. Such as radiance and brilliance.
3. Looking.
4. The world, etc.
5. Birth.
6. Of the one who brings delight.
7. From the three knowledges.
8. Practice is the impression.
9. Cleverness.
10. Diligence in work.
11. Network of words.
12. By scriptures.
13. Because of being the master of speech.
14. It is said.
15. Rightness.
16. Born.
17. From peace. 

Page #412:
---------------------------
322
Adipurana, he, increasing the supreme joy of his parents and the fulfillment of kinship, and increasing the joy of the world, grew up. ||186|| His supreme lifespan was eighty-four lakhs of years, having a final body. ||187|| He was long-sighted, long-lived, long-armed, long-eyed, and long-winded, and he became the thread-holder of the worlds. ||188|| Sometimes he would study the arts of writing, arithmetic, and Gandharva, which he had previously studied, and sometimes he would teach others. ||189|| Sometimes he would contemplate the arts of prosody, rhetoric, and the exposition of the principles of the universe, and sometimes he would contemplate the arts of painting and other arts. ||190|| Sometimes he would discuss grammar with grammarians, sometimes he would discuss poetry with poets, and sometimes he would debate with eloquent speakers. ||191|| Sometimes he would spend time with song-gatherings, sometimes with dance-gatherings, sometimes with instrumental music gatherings, and sometimes with gatherings of veena players. ||192|| Sometimes he would dance in the form of a peacock, teaching the celestial dancers to dance according to the rhythm, beating time with his hands. ||193|| Sometimes he would take the form of a parrot, with the power of transformation, and teach the celestial princes to recite verses with clear and sweet letters. ||194|| Sometimes he would make sounds in a low, rumbling voice, in the form of a swan, and honor the swan-like celestial beings by giving them pieces of clay with his own hand. ||195|| Sometimes he would take the form of an elephant calf, with the power of transformation, and comfort the celestial beings, or playfully strike them with his trunk. ||196||
1. Joy. 2. The speaker who speaks after careful consideration. 3. Wide-eyed. 4. Meaning: firmly established and acting. 5. Arithmetic. -Numbering 10, 80, M, L. -Numbering A, S, . 6. Arts. 7. Well-studied in the past. 
8. The science that expounds prosody. Prosody, rhetoric - 10, L. 9. Description. 10. With gatherings of grammarians. 11. With eloquent speakers. 12. -Dance-A. 13. Clear. Well-joined - P. -Not joined - A, L. 14. Making sound. 15. Slow - A, S, D, L. 16. Broken. 17. Relating to the elephant. 18. Persuading. 19. -Raanaayya A, 50, S. Raanaadhya 60. -Raanaadya M, L. 20. Requesting. 21. Dancing with the trunk as a stick. 

Page #413:
---------------------------
Sometimes, assuming the form of a peacock, He would watch the Devas who desired to fight, touching them with His own reflections, or He would touch them. ||197|| Sometimes, assuming the form of a wrestler, He would encourage the Devas who desired to fight, without any malice, just for the sake of play, with a deep roar and dancing around. ||198|| Sometimes, assuming the form of a crane and a saras bird, He would listen to the continuous, pleasing sounds of the Devas, who were making a loud, resonant sound. ||199|| Sometimes, He would make the Devas, who were adorned with garlands, smeared with sandalwood, and gathered together, dance by engaging them in the game of "Danda Krida" (a game played with sticks). ||200|| Sometimes, He would listen to His own glory, which was being sung continuously by the Devas, who were reciting hymns, and which was as pure as the fragrance of jasmine, the moon, and the water of the Ganges. ||201|| Sometimes, He would watch with joy the beautiful pictures made of powdered gems, which were being made by the tireless Devas in the courtyard of the house. ||202|| Sometimes, He would honor the subjects who came to see Him, with sweet and affectionate glances, a gentle smile, and respectful conversation. ||203|| Sometimes, He would play with the Devas in the water of the wells, enjoying the pleasure of water sports. ||204|| Sometimes, He would play in the water of the Sarayu River, which was filled with the sounds of swans, and with wooden instruments that made sounds when they were struck against the water. ||205|| During the water sports, the Devas of the Megha Kumar caste would serve the Lord by assuming the form of fountains and releasing streams of water from all sides, with devotion. ||206|| Sometimes, He would play in the forest of Nandana, which was adorned with the beauty of trees that competed with Nandana, along with His friends, the Devas. ||207|| During the pleasure of the forest sports, the Devas of the Pavana Kumar caste would make the earth dust-free and gently shake the trees of the garden. ||208|| Thus, the Lord would enjoy the pleasures of various games and pastimes, which were appropriate for the time, along with the Devas. ||209|| 

Page #414:
---------------------------
## The Birth Festival of the Lord

**The Adipurana**

**Malini**

The Lord, worthy of worship by the lords of the worlds, approachable, a mine of all virtues, a form of purity, remained in the sacred home of the noble king Nabhiraj, enjoying divine pleasures with the celestial princes, for a long time. ||21||

**Sardulavikridita**

The glorious Lord, whose feet are worshipped by gods and demons, was growing up like a young moon, gradually increasing in brilliance, with his pure form, adorned with the playfulness of a child, yet with the wisdom of an elder, engaging in games, food, entertainment, and elegant attire, delighting the minds of all beings with his words like rays of light. ||212||

He wore a heavy garland, broad and fitting, resting on his chest, like a creeper of swaying lotuses, and adorned himself with a garment of moonlight, shining with a brilliance like the moon, playing with the celestial princes, like stars, in great splendor. ||213||

Thus ends the fourteenth chapter, named **The Birth Festival of the Lord**, in the **Trishattilakshana Sri Mahapurana Sangraha**, composed by the venerable Jinaseanacharya. ||14||

**Notes:**

1. Worthy of worship by the lords of the worlds.
2. Approachable.
3. In a sacred home.
4. Brought.
5. Attained pleasure.
6. From the fruits of good deeds.
7. Acting like an elder.
8. Garland of lotuses.
9. The moon's rays.
10. Shining like the moon.
11. Like a row of stars.
12. Like a creeper of swaying lotuses.
13. Considering himself as moonlight.
14. Wearing.
15. Adorned with a garland.
16. Like the stars.

**Additional Information:**

The text describes the childhood of Lord Rishabhadeva, the first Tirthankara of Jainism. It highlights his divine nature, his playful yet wise demeanor, and his enjoyment of celestial pleasures. The text also emphasizes the importance of good deeds and their fruits. 

Page #415:
---------------------------
## The Fifteenth Chapter

His body was beautiful in the fullness of youth. The moon is naturally radiant, but what to say when autumn arrives?  ||1||

His form was most beautiful and extraordinary. He was radiant like polished gold, free from sweat, dust, and dirt. His complexion was white like milk, his body well-proportioned, and his limbs strong like those of a bull. He possessed the ultimate beauty and fragrance, adorned with eighteen thousand auspicious marks. He was immeasurable, supremely powerful, and spoke words that were both dear and beneficial. ||2-4||

His head, adorned with a crown, was like the peak of Mount Meru, adorned with the finest jewels. ||5||

The garland of celestial flowers on his head was like the Milky Way, encircling the peaks of the Himalayas. ||6||

The broad forehead band on his forehead was like the beautiful garden or playground of the goddess Saraswati. ||7||

The two eyebrows, like vines, rested on the banks of the mountain-like forehead, as if they were two ropes meant to restrain the deer-like Cupid. ||8||

The radiance of his eyes, like lotus petals, was like the brilliance of two black stars, with bees hovering around them. ||9||

His ears, adorned with jeweled earrings, shone like the two edges of the sky, adorned with the moon and the sun. ||10||

The radiance of his face, like the moon, was not found anywhere else in the three worlds. Just as the nectar of immortality is not found anywhere else. ||11||

His face, with its gentle smile, was like a blooming lotus, with its white petals. ||12|| 

Page #416:
---------------------------
## The Adi Purana

**Verse 13:** His long and high nose was shining like a channel, as if it was created for the descent of Saraswati.

**Verse 14:** His neck was adorned with beautiful lines. It seemed as if the Creator had carved a golden pillar for the house of his face.

**Verse 15:** He was wearing a necklace with a great gem in the middle on his chest. It was shining like a well-organized army of virtuous Kshatriyas, led by a great commander.

**Verse 16:** Just as Mount Meru holds waterfalls on its peak, Lord Vrishabhadeva was wearing a highly radiant necklace called Indra Chhand on his chest.

**Verse 17:** His chest was adorned with that beautiful necklace, resembling the bank of the Himalayas with the flow of the Ganges River.

**Verse 18:** His chest was as beautiful as a lake, filled with the rays of the necklace like water. Divine Lakshmi, in the form of a swan, played there for a long time.

**Verse 19:** His chest was the home of Lakshmi, and his two shoulders, rising high on either side, were shining like two tall towers where she resided.

**Verse 20:** He was wearing arms adorned with bracelets, which were smooth and adorned with vines of beauty. These arms were as beautiful as wish-fulfilling Kalpa trees.

**Verse 21:** I believe that the nails on his hands, which were adorned with the light of happiness and supported by straight fingers, were like mirrors reflecting the playful beauty of Lakshmi, enjoyed in his ten great incarnations.

**Verse 22:** The navel of Lord Vrishabhadeva, the son of King Nabhiraj, was adorned in the middle of his body. It was shining like a lotus pond, served by Lakshmi in the form of swans and surrounded by whirlpools.

**Verse 23:** His hips, adorned with a loincloth and a belt, were shining like a mountain, with clouds of lightning and rain. 

Page #417:
---------------------------
## The Fifteenth Chapter

327. The hero, the lord, possessed two thighs that shone like gold, resembling the two lofty pillars of Lakshmi's swing. ||24||

His two shanks, resplendent like the bars that even the elephant of Kamadeva could not cross, seemed to have been polished by Lakshmi herself, attaining supreme brilliance. ||25||

The radiance of his lotus feet, born of the embrace of the Lakshmi of the three worlds, was unmatched in the universe. ||26||

From the tips of his nails to the ends of his hair, his body radiated such brilliance that it seemed to have found no other place to settle, choosing to manifest itself in his form. ||27||

His body, naturally beautiful, was bound by vajra-like bones, impenetrable to poison weapons, and thus possessed the radiance of Mount Meru. ||28||

His body was a fortress of vajra-like bones, bound by vajra-like tendons and pierced by vajra-like nails, the very same fortress of the vajra-bull, Vrishabhadeva. ||29||

The great diseases born of the three humors (vata, pitta, and kapha) could not find a place in his body. Just as the wind that shakes trees cannot affect Mount Meru, so too did these diseases not affect him. ||30||

He never experienced old age, sorrow, or untimely death. He was always immersed in happiness, resting on the bed of the earth, worshipped by all. ||31||

His body, the very source of the supreme liberation, the ultimate goal, was resplendent with unparalleled magnificence. ||32||

His body, with its proportions, length, breadth, and height, was free from any deficiency or excess. It was perfectly square. ||33|| 

Page #418:
---------------------------
228
As the Adipurana describes, just as his form was endowed with beauty, so too were his possessions. For a Kalpavriksha does not arise without being adorned with ornaments. ||34|| Just as the celestial bodies shine brightly when they are adorned with the jewel-studded shores of Mount Meru, so too did the auspicious marks shine brightly when they adorned the pure body of the Lord. ||35|| The Lord, resplendent with ornaments, shone like the Kalpavriksha. Auspicious marks, like beautiful flowers, adorned him. ||36|| These marks were: the Srivriksha, the Shaka, the lotus, the Swastika, the Ankusha, the Torana, the Chamara, the white umbrella, the throne, the flag, two fish, two pitchers, the tortoise, the wheel, the ocean, the lake, the chariot, the palace, the elephant, the man, the woman, the lion, the arrow, the bow, Mount Meru, Indra, the celestial Ganga, the city, the gateway, the moon, the sun, the excellent horse, the Talavrinta-feather, the flute, the Veena, the Mridanga, garlands, silken garments, shops, earrings, and other dazzling and diverse ornaments; a garden full of fruit, a field adorned with ripe trees, a jewel-island, a forest, the earth, Lakshmi, Saraswati, the Kamadhenu, the bull, the jewel-crown, great treasures, the Kalpalata, gold, Jambudvipa, Garuda, stars, constellations, a royal palace, the sun and other planets, the Siddhartha tree, eight miracles, and eight auspicious substances. These, and other marks, numbered one hundred and eight, and there were nine hundred other delicacies like Masurika. ||37-44|| The Lord's body, filled with these beautiful and auspicious marks, shone like the sky, the courtyard of the celestial beings, filled with celestial bodies. ||45|| Since the Lord's pure body was graced by these marks, it seems that there must have been some auspicious inner marks within them. ||46|| Just as Lakshmi, with great difficulty, found a place in the mind, the home of the Lord, the world-teacher, who was free from attachment and aversion. ||47|| 

Page #419:
---------------------------
## The Padarsha Parva 329

Saraswati was dear to him, and fame, which is like a constant flame. He had little love for Lakshmi, who is as fickle as lightning. ||48|| Attracted by his beauty, youth, and other qualities, people, like bees, found no other joy. ||49|| Seeing the beginning of the Lord's youth, King Nabhiraj thought to himself, "Should I arrange his marriage?" ||50|| "This God is so beautiful, who could be a worthy wife for him? Even if a beautiful woman could be found, his desire for worldly pleasures is very weak, so it would be difficult to begin his marriage." ||51|| "Furthermore, he is deeply devoted to his dharma, and will, like a wild elephant, enter the forest, renouncing all possessions, to take initiation." ||52|| "However, until the time is right for him to practice austerities, it is appropriate to consider a suitable wife, following the customs of the world." ||53|| "Therefore, just as laughter dwells in a pure mind, free from impurities, so too should a worthy and noble woman reside in his pure mind." ||54|| Having decided this, King Nabhiraj, full of joy and respect, approached the Lord, the best of speakers, and said peacefully, ||55|| "O God, I wish to speak to you, so please listen carefully. You are the Lord of the world, and it is your duty to benefit the world." ||56|| "O God, you are Brahma, the creator of the world, and you are self-born. We consider you our father, as we are but a small part of your creation." ||57|| 

Page #420:
---------------------------
The Adipurana states that just as the rising of the sun is caused by the rising mountain, but the sun itself rises, so too, your birth was caused by us, but you were born on your own. [54] You were born in your mother's pure womb, on a divine lotus seat, having established your supreme power, therefore you are truly without a body. [59] O Lord, although I am not truly your father, but only a cause, I still request you to turn your mind to the creation of the world at this time. [60] You are the first being, therefore seeing you, others will also follow the same path, because those who have good offspring follow the path of great men. [61] Therefore, O best of the wise, you should desire to marry a suitable woman in this world, because by doing so, the lineage of the people will not be cut off. [62] If the lineage of the people is not cut off, the lineage of dharma will flourish, therefore, O Lord, accept this imperishable dharma of marriage for humans. [63] O Lord, consider this marriage as a dharma for householders, because householders must strive to protect their offspring. [64] If you consider me your guru in any way, you should not violate my words for any reason, because it is not desirable to violate the words of gurus. [65] Saying this, the wise and valiant king Nabhiraj remained silent, and the Lord, smiling, accepted his words by saying "Om," meaning he agreed to the marriage. [66] What was the reason for the Lord's acceptance of the marriage? Was it his fatherly affection, or his desire to benefit the people, or was it some kind of obligation? [67] Knowing the Lord's consent, Nabhiraj, without any doubt, celebrated a grand wedding with great joy. [68] King Nabhiraj, with the permission of Indra, married two virtuous and beautiful women, who were truthful and had a charming appearance. [69] People are just illusions. [57] 

Page #421:
---------------------------


Page #422:
---------------------------


Page #423:
---------------------------
333
4
The two goddesses adorned themselves with blue lotus-like earrings, as if they wanted to measure the excessive length of their eye-shaped lotuses against each other. ||8|| They were adorned with strands of hair that hung down from their foreheads, resembling sapphires set on the edge of a golden band. ||89|| People compared their loose garlands, hanging down, to a black snake swallowing a white snake and then spitting it out again. ||10|| Thus, with their naturally sweet and beautiful forms, adorned with ornaments, they shone like radiant Kalpa creepers. ||11|| Seeing their beautiful form, people thought that they had truly conquered the celestial nymphs who considered themselves women. ||12|| The best of husbands, Vrishabhadeva, was adorned by them, as if by fame and fortune, and they met him like great rivers meeting the ocean. ||13|| They were beautiful, radiant, and lovely, like the banner of Kamadeva, who desired to conquer the entire world, and thus they stole the heart of Vrishabhadeva. ||14|| Just as a radiant ruby set in the middle makes the middle part of the garland red, so too did Vrishabhadeva, with his excellent radiance and desire, delight the minds of those goddesses. ||15|| Although Kamadeva had been humiliated many times in front of Vrishabhadeva, he continued to move secretly. Scholars should consider the reason for this. ||16|| It seems that Kamadeva was unable to openly obstruct the Lord, so he took on a formless state. This is appropriate, because those who desire victory are full of many strategies. ||17||

Page #424:
---------------------------
334
The Adipurana states that Kamadeva, being bodiless, entered the bodies of these goddesses and, stationed there like a fort, wounded the Lord with his arrows. ||9|| Thus, while enjoying pleasures with these goddesses, the time of the Jagadguru, Lord Rishabhadeva, passed like a single moment in a great city, filled with continuous festivals. ||99||
 
Then, one day, Yashaviti Mahadevi was sleeping in the palace. In her dream, she saw the earth, Mount Meru, the sun with the moon, a lake with swans, and the ocean with its surging waves. After waking up from the dream, she heard the words of the prisoners chanting auspicious hymns. ||100-101||
 
At that time, the prisoners were chanting auspicious hymns, saying, "O goddess, who brings welfare to others and who has attained hundreds of blessings, now you wake up; for you are like a lotus, adorned with beauty. This is the time for you to awaken." Meaning: Just as this is the time for the lotus to awaken and bloom, so too is it the time for you to awaken. ||102||
 
"O mother, the auspicious dreams you have seen, of the earth, Meru, the ocean, the sun, the moon, and the lake, are for your happiness." ||103||
 
"O goddess, this swan, like the moon, has been searching for the darkness, like algae, in the sky, like a lake, for a long time. Now, it is as if, out of sorrow, it is taking refuge in the tree, like the setting sun, that is, it is setting." ||104||
 
"These swans, like stars, have been swimming in the sky, like a lake, for a long time. Now, it is as if they are taking refuge in the peaks of the setting sun, to dwell there, that is, they are setting." ||105||
 
"O goddess, this moon has become devoid of radiance. It seems as if, during the night, the chakavis, with their eyes red due to sleep, have looked at it with envy. Therefore, it is as if, due to the fault of their sight, it has become devoid of radiance." ||106||
 
"O goddess, now this night is also fleeing, wrapping its stars, like wealth, in the garment of moonlight. It seems as if it wants to follow the hours that have passed." ||107||
 
"On this side, the moon is setting, and on this side, the sun is rising. It seems as if...

Page #425:
---------------------------
## The Fifteenth Chapter

**335**

The stars, like pearls scattered in the ocean of the sky, are being extinguished by the sun, the great fire, losing their brilliance. (109)

The Cakravaka, tormented by the separation of the night, cries and cries, searching for his beloved Cakavi on the sandbanks of the river. (110)

Oh Sati, this young swan, with a blade of grass in his beak, is scratching his body and wants to sleep with his beloved. (111)

Here, the lotus-faced one is adorned with blooming lotuses, and there, the Kumudini, with her drooping face, is bowing down, as if to the wilted Kumuda. (112)

On the banks of the lake, these Kurer birds are making a sound like your anklets, high and sweet. (113)

These birds, making a clamor, are flying out of their nests, as if reciting the morning auspicious prayers. (114)

These lamps, deprived of the ritualistic purification of the morning, are becoming dim, like the Kanchuki, who are also losing their vigor with time. (115)

Oh Devi, your family, including the hunchback and the dwarf, are waiting for you at your home, eager to celebrate your auspicious arrival. (116)

Therefore, just as the beloved Cakavi of the royal swan, who resides in the Manasarovar, leaves the riverbank, so too, you, the beloved of Lord Vrishabhadeva, should leave your bed. (117)

As the group of prisoners chanted the auspicious prayers loudly, Yashawati Mahadevi, awakened by the sound of the drums, gradually overcame her sleep. (118)

Leaving her bed, she performed the auspicious morning bath, her body filled with joy, and, eager to know the true meaning of her dreams, she turned to the beings of the world, who are enveloped in the darkness of ignorance. (119)

**Notes:**

1. Surya Sarathi: The charioteer of the sun.
2. Kujann Kujan: Crying and crying.
3. Vihvala: Distressed.
4. Shayitumiichchhati: Wants to sleep.
5. Bho Pativrata: Oh, virtuous wife.
6. Utkosha: Anklets.
7. Ruti: Sound.
8. Sadashama: High.
9. Stree Sambandhi: Related to women.
10. Parikshina Vatka: Depleted, aged.
11. Vidhatumiichchhaya: With the desire to celebrate.
12. Pashyati: Sees, or arrives, or stays.
13. Rajashreshtha: The king, the royal swan. 

Page #426:
---------------------------
336
The Adipurana, filled with joy, sent a message to the queen, like a seal on a letter.  She went to the Lord of Life, the one who dispels the darkness of the world, the great one. ||120|| Reaching him, she sat comfortably on her appropriate, auspicious throne.  Like Lakshmi, she shone with the radiance of her husband. ||121|| She told her husband about the dream she had seen, just as it had appeared.  The god, with his divine vision, spoke of its meaning. ||122|| "You, O Devi, will have a son, a king of the mountains, a chakravarti.  The sun will be eclipsed by his power, and the moon will be overshadowed by his brilliance." ||123|| "O lotus-eyed one, the lake you saw signifies that your son will be adorned with auspicious marks, with a broad chest, and will hold Lakshmi, the dweller in the lotus, upon it." ||124|| "O Devi, the earth-eating you saw signifies that your son, a chakravarti, will protect the entire earth, which wears the ocean as its garment." ||125|| "And the ocean signifies that he will be a charma-shariri, one who crosses the ocean of birth.  Moreover, this son, the joy of the Ikshvaku dynasty, will be the eldest among your hundred sons." ||126|| Hearing her husband's words, the queen, filled with joy, grew like the tide of the ocean at the rising of the moon. ||127||
Then, the being of Ati-Grdhaka, who was once a tiger, then a god, then Subahu, and then Ahminndra in Sarvartha-siddhi, fell from there and came to reside in the womb of the glorious queen. ||128|| The Devi was carrying the child born of the divine influence of Lord Rishabhadeva.  This was the reason why she could not bear the sun moving in the sky above her. ||129|| The Devi, who would give birth to a valiant son, saw the radiance of her face in the mirror of a sword.  Being extremely proud, she could not bear her own unfavorable shadow falling on the sword. ||130|| Just as peacocks, when the time of rain arrives, look with great eagerness at the clouds filled with water, so also the Lord...
1. Purushaaya. 2. Avadhi-jnana-drishti. 3. 'Luti'. Labdha bhavishyasi. 4. Vishala. 5. Sagaravasanam. 6. Pratikoolam. 7. Mayura. 

Page #427:
---------------------------


Page #428:
---------------------------
338
The earth embraced the Adipurana, and he was born with both his arms outstretched.  Therefore, the earth dwellers proclaimed him as the universal sovereign.  ||142||
His mother, Yashovati, was as radiant as the moon, and his father, Vrishabhadeva, was as bright as the sun.  ||143||
His grandparents, Marudevi and Nabhiraj, were overjoyed at his birth, just as the ocean rejoices at the rise of the moon.  ||144||
The virtuous women, filled with joy, showered Yashovati with blessings, saying, "May you give birth to hundreds of sons."  ||145||
The sound of joy resonated throughout the palace, with countless drums booming like thunder, their deep tones echoing like the clouds.  ||146||
Trumpets, kettledrums, cymbals, flutes, sitars, conch shells, bells, and cymbals all played in unison, as if celebrating the joyous occasion.  ||147||
Fragrant, blooming flowers, adorned with buzzing bees, fell from the sky, as if showered by the gods.  ||148||
A gentle breeze, laden with the pollen of the Kalpavriksha, carried away the dust and brought a refreshing coolness.  ||149||
The voices of the gods echoed through the heavens, proclaiming "Victory!" while the goddesses, in their melodious voices, spread the news of his birth, wishing him "Long life!"  ||150||
The dancers, who had captivated the Apsaras with their beauty and surpassed the celestial dancers in their skill, began to perform, their movements synchronized with the rhythm of the music.  ||151||
The streets of the city, adorned with sandalwood water, seemed to be laughing at the beauty of heaven, as if they were competing with it.  ||152||
The city was adorned with arches made of jewels, and the sky was decorated with the beauty of rainbows and lightning vines.  ||153||
1. 'Yavo + Avava' is the split.  Rajasamapaneta.  2. Devanam.  3. Kriyaviseshanam.  4. Yabhih Nartakihibhih.  5. Shobham. 

Page #429:
---------------------------
## The Fifteenth Chapter

339. On the ground adorned with garlands of creepers and strewn with powdered sandalwood, there stood majestic golden pots with mouths covered in golden lotuses, radiating brilliance. ||154||

The entire city was filled with festivities, just as a river flowing towards the sea gains prosperity with the sea's rise. ||155||

No one was poor at that time, for the king, like the ocean, showered his subjects with abundant wealth, like the ocean's waves. ||156||

Thus, filling the city and the palace with joy, the moon-like child, Vrishabhadeva, rose from the mountain of his birth. ||157||

Filled with joy and love, the family, with great delight, called the son of the king of the entire Bharata land, "Bharata." ||158||

It is said by historians that the land from the Himalayas to the ocean, the realm of the Chakravartis, became known as Bharatavarsha, after this son, Bharata. ||159||

The child-moon, growing amidst the lotus-like family, increased joy and destroyed the darkness of the enemy's clan. ||160||

While drinking the milk of his mother, Yashovati, Bharata would often spit out the curds, shining brightly as if distributing his glory in all directions. ||161||

With his gentle smile, charming laughter, graceful movements on the jeweled ground, and unspoken sweet words, he filled his parents with immense joy. ||162||

As the child grew, his innate qualities also grew, as if captivated by his beauty. ||163||

The wise Vrishabhadeva, knowing the rituals, personally performed the ceremonies of the child's first feeding, tonsure, and sacred thread ceremony. ||164||

After that, Bharata passed through the stages of childhood and youth, eventually reaching the joyful age of adolescence. ||165|| 

Page #430:
---------------------------
340
Adipurana
His journey was like that of his father, Vrishabhadeva, conquering the three worlds. His radiant body was like his father's, and his gentle smile was like his father's. || 166 || His speech, art, knowledge, brilliance, character, and wisdom were all like those of his father, Vrishabhadeva. || 167 || Seeing their son, who had attained such unity with his father, the people said, "The soul of the father is called the son." This was indeed true. || 168 || Praised by his father for his qualities, he was like Kamadeva himself. With his charming qualities, he was highly respected by the virtuous. || 169 || He captivated the mind of Manu, the fifteenth Manu, Vrishabhanatha, and so people said that he was the sixteenth Manu. He was as beautiful as Kamadeva, and he resided in the hearts of all beings. || 170 || His body, adorned with the never-fading victory-goddess, shone brightly, as if the brilliance of all the Kshatriyas were gathered in one place. || 171 || His powerful body, radiating divine and human qualities, shone brightly, as if it were made of luminous atoms. || 172 || His magnificent head, adorned with jewels and the rays of the sun, shone brightly, like the peak of Mount Meru with its tuft of hair. || 173 || His head, rising gradually in height, was perfectly round and shone brightly, as if it were a divine umbrella created by the Creator for the goddess of fortune. || 174 || His head, adorned with slightly curly, smooth, black hair, which had grown all at once, looked as if it were covered with a cap made of lapis lazuli. || 175 || His mind, speech, and body were all pure and upright, and his black hair, like the curls of a bee, was slightly curly at the ends. || 176 || His blooming lotus-like face, adorned with the rays of his teeth, was very beautiful, and the fragrance of his breath attracted bees. || 177 ||
1. Pitarupa. 2. Gamanam. 3. Pitarasvarupataam. 4. Pitra saha. 5. Raabhiramakai: A, P, V, 60. 6. Puroh. 7. Ipadvakrah. 8. Yugapjatam. Hrasvonnatarahiita ity arthah. 9. Rachitam. 

Page #431:
---------------------------
## Fifteen Chapters
**341** His face was like a full moon, a perfect circle. It was as beautiful as the moon, with a radiance that outshone the stars. **17** His ears were adorned with radiant jewels, like lightning flashes. His face, like the moon, was surrounded by a halo of white teeth, like the moon's rays. **179** The sun has brilliance, the moon has radiance, and the lotus has growth. These qualities, though separate, were all present in Bharata's face, in perfect harmony. **18** The moon wanes, and the lotus closes at night, but his face was always full and blooming, never diminishing. How can it be compared to anything else? His face was truly unique. **181** It seems that his face, like a blooming lotus, was defeated by the ever-blooming Lakshmi, and so he was leaving to dwell in the forest or the water. **182** The sun's rays must have been involved in the creation of his forehead, which was adorned with a beautiful band and was radiant. **183** Seeing the brilliance of his cheeks, the moon must have been defeated and thus became blemished. **184** His two eyebrows, like beautiful vines, were adorned with such beauty, as if they were two flags raised by Kamadeva when he conquered the world. **185** The blooming of his eyes, like blue lotuses, was as beautiful as the offering of flowers in the courtyard of his face, illuminating all directions. Thus, he was spreading joy and becoming famous. **186** The radiance of his playful glances surpassed even his ears, which were filled with the knowledge of the best scriptures. It is only natural that his playful glances would surpass even his ears, which were filled with the knowledge of the best scriptures. **187**

Or, his face possessed the beauty of a full moon, for just as the sight of a full moon brings joy, so too did the sight of his face bring joy to all. Just as the full moon is a perfect circle, so too was his face a perfect circle. And just as the full moon is filled with an unbroken radiance, so too was his face filled with an unbroken radiance. **178** His face, like the moon, was surrounded by a halo of white teeth, like the moon's rays, and was made even more beautiful by the radiant jewels adorning his ears. **179** The sun has brilliance, the moon has radiance, and the lotus has growth. These qualities, though separate, were all present in Bharata's face, in perfect harmony. **18** The moon wanes, and the lotus closes at night, but his face was always full and blooming, never diminishing. How can it be compared to anything else? His face was truly unique. **181** It seems that his face, like a blooming lotus, was defeated by the ever-blooming Lakshmi, and so he was leaving to dwell in the forest or the water. **182** His forehead, adorned with a beautiful band and radiant, must have been created with the help of the sun's rays. **183** Seeing the brilliance of his cheeks, the moon must have been defeated and thus became blemished. **184** His two eyebrows, like beautiful vines, were adorned with such beauty, as if they were two flags raised by Kamadeva when he conquered the world. **185** The blooming of his eyes, like blue lotuses, was as beautiful as the offering of flowers in the courtyard of his face, illuminating all directions. Thus, he was spreading joy and becoming famous. **186** The radiance of his playful glances surpassed even his ears, which were filled with the knowledge of
Page #432:
---------------------------


Page #433:
---------------------------
## The Fifteenth Chapter

**343**  His upper body, adorned with his own ornaments like a tight-fitting garment, a bracelet, an armlet, and a necklace, was shining brightly, as if laughing at his lower body. ||199||

**200**  Just as the upper body of this one has been described, so too should his lower body be understood. For just as the beauty of the Kalpa tree is above, so too is it below. ||200||

**201**  Although the description of his lower body has been given above, it is being described again for the sake of the purpose. For it is a great fault to leave out any part of a group while describing it. ||201||

**202**  His navel, a well that held the flow of the essence of beauty, was so beautiful that it seemed to be the path of the intoxicated elephant, the embodiment of Kamadeva, who was about to arrive. ||202||

**203**  He wore a white dhoti, adorned with a belt, on his hips, which made him look like Mount Meru, bearing the weight of the autumn clouds, adorned with rainbows, and the buttocks (middle part). ||203||

**204**  His two thighs were very thick and strong, their length was appropriate, and their color was yellow like gold. Therefore, they seemed as if Kamadeva had placed two pillars in his temple. ||204||

**205**  The two shanks of that Bharat were also extremely beautiful in shape and possessed a beautiful luster. They seemed as if Kamadeva had peeled them with a weapon and made them round. ||205||

**206**  His two feet, appearing like lotus flowers with petals in the form of fingers, were adorned with Lakshmi, who never left them, like a bee in a lotus flower. ||206||

**207**  His two feet were shining brightly, as if they were laughing at the lotus flower, having conquered its beauty with their own radiance, which spread out from the light of their nails. ||207||

**208**  The marks of fourteen jewels, such as a wheel, an umbrella, a sword, and a staff, were engraved on his lotus feet. They seemed as if these fourteen jewels were serving the future Chakravarti, through the deception of signs, from before. ||208||

**209**  The power of his feet alone was capable of conquering the entire earth. What then was the power of the entire body of this proud Bharat? ||209|| 

Page #434:
---------------------------
344
The description of Balamanik's physical strength is given in the Adipurana as follows: "His strength was sattvic, as indicated by his conquests and other external signs." (210) The strength of the kings who ruled the Chakravarti Kshetra was far less than the strength of his arms. (211) His physical beauty was matched by his virtuous qualities. Such a beautiful body can never be abandoned by virtue. (212) "Where there is beauty, there virtue resides." There is no doubt about this proverb, because virtue itself had embraced Bharat's incomparable beauty. (213) Truth, purity, forgiveness, renunciation, wisdom, enthusiasm, compassion, self-control, tranquility, and humility - these virtues always accompanied his soul. (214) The radiance, brilliance, charm, pleasant speech, and artistic skills of his body were his physical qualities. (215) Just as a naturally beautiful gem becomes even more beautiful through polishing, so too Bharat, naturally beautiful, was further adorned by the virtues mentioned above. (216) He was a divine human being, his form was extraordinary, he was a treasure of brilliance, and all his actions were wondrous. Therefore, he shone like a very high peak of Lakshmi. (217) Seeing his extraordinary beauty, which was not found anywhere else, people praised his past virtuous deeds. (218) A beautiful body, health, wealth, prosperity, beauty, strength, longevity, fame, intelligence, pleasant speech, and cleverness - all these things in this world that are the cause of happiness are called "abhyudaya" (progress), and they are all obtained by living beings through the ripening of their virtuous deeds. (219-220) Without virtue, there is no great progress. Therefore, a wise person who desires progress should accumulate virtue. (221)
Who could bear it? (209)

Page #435:
---------------------------
## The Fifteenth Chapter

**345**  **Shārdūlavikrīḍita**  

Every day, enhancing the lineage of bliss with his own virtues, calming the sorrow of the world with his qualities, like the rising sun from the eastern mountain, he shone, illuminating the earth.  

**223**  

The glorious one, adorned with golden mountains, strong in nature, a master, capable of bearing the weight of the earth, his feet touching the ground.  He wore a garland, the beautiful radiance of waterfalls, on his chest, a mountain of a wheel, his head adorned with a crown, a mountain of brilliance.  

**224**  

Seeing the beautiful spectacle before his eyes, hearing the sweet and humble words, embracing the glorious one, bowing down, lifting him up, the great Lord Jinashrī, the victorious one, was filled with supreme joy.  

Thus, in the **Triṣaṣṭilakṣaṇamahāpurāṇa** compiled by the venerable Jinaseṇācārya, known as **Ārya**, ends the fifteenth chapter, which narrates the childhood of the Lord, the marriage of Yashasvatī and Sunandā, and the birth of Bharata.  

**15**  

**22**  Those who wish to attain the wealth of the Arhant state must first accumulate **puṇya**. 

**222**  Thus, he, Bharata, shone like the moon, for just as the moon enhances the lineage of bliss with its coolness, beauty, and other qualities, so too did Bharata enhance the lineage of bliss of his parents and siblings with his compassion, generosity, humility, and other virtues.  Just as the moon calms the sorrowful situations of people, so too did Bharata calm the sorrowful situations of people.  Just as the moon rises from the eastern mountain, which humbles all other mountains, so too did Bharata rise from the eastern mountain, the Lord Ṛṣabhadev, who humbles all kings.  And just as the moon illuminates the entire earth, so too did Bharata illuminate the entire earth.  

**223**  Or, he, Bharata, was as beautiful as the mountain of the rising sun, which brings forth the sun, the wheel.  For just as the mountain of the rising sun is adorned with golden rocks, so too was Bharata adorned with a body as beautiful and strong as gold.  Just as the mountain of the rising sun is high, so too was Bharata high (noble).  Just as the mountain of the rising sun is naturally heavy, so too was Bharata naturally a master (superior).  Just as the mountain of the rising sun has conquered the surrounding smaller mountains, so too did Bharata conquer the entire earth with his feet, during his conquest.  Just as the mountain of the rising sun is capable of bearing the immense weight of the earth, so too was Bharata capable of bearing the immense weight of the earth (governing it).  Just as the mountain of the rising sun wears the beautiful radiance of waterfalls on its banks, so too did Bharata wear the beautiful radiance of garlands on his chest, which rivaled the banks.  And just as the mountain of the rising sun is adorned with shining peaks, so too was Bharata adorned with his shining crown.  

**224**  The Lord Vṛṣabhadev, who was destined to attain the wealth of the Arhant state, saw the beautiful and extraordinary face of Bharata, which brought joy to the eyes, heard his sweet words, spoken with humility, which brought joy to the ears, and after bowing down, he repeatedly embraced Bharata, who had risen, and placed him on his lap, attaining supreme joy.  

Page #436:
---------------------------
## The Sixteenth Chapter

Now, in due course, the glorious sons of the Creator, who were formerly the Indra of the heavens, were born to Yashaviti.  

1.  Pitha, who was formerly Vrishamasena, became the younger brother of Bharata.  His younger brother, who was formerly Maha-Pitha, became Ananta-Vijay.
2.  Vijay, who was formerly Ananta-Virya, became the younger brother of Ananta-Vijay.  Vajayanta, who was formerly Achyuta, became the younger brother of Ananta-Virya.  Vir, who was formerly Jayanta, became the younger brother of Achyuta.  And Aparajita, who was formerly a mongoose, became the younger brother of Vir.
3.  Thus, there were ninety-nine sons born to Vrishabha-deva from Yashaviti, after Bharata.  All these sons were of the highest order of beings and possessed great strength.
4.  Then, just as the bright crescent moon appears in the western sky, Brahma, the first Tirthankara, was born to Yashaviti as her daughter, Brahmi.
5.  The being who was formerly Maha-bahu and then became the Indra of Sarvartha-siddhi, was born as the son of Vrishabha-deva and his second wife, Sunanda, and was named Bahubali, like the gods.
6.  Anundari, who was formerly the sister of Vrishabha-deva in the Vanajangha realm, was born as the daughter of Vrishabha-deva and Sunanda, and was named Sundari, who was extremely beautiful.
7.  Sunanda, the queen, was adorned with her daughter, Sundari, and her son, Bahubali, just as the eastern sky is adorned with the sun and its rays.
8.  At that time, the powerful young Bahubali, who possessed the most excellent beauty, became the first of the twenty-four Kamadevas.
9.  Such beauty as Bahubali's was not seen anywhere else.  Just as ornaments are not seen anywhere else but on a Kalpa-druma, so too, such beauty was not seen anywhere else. 

Page #437:
---------------------------
His hair, like the wings of a bee, curled at the ends, adorning his head like a helmet, with tiny, round, iron stars.  ||11|| His forehead, broad and beautiful like the eighth moon, shone with such radiance as if Brahma had made it wide for the placement of the royal crown. ||12|| His face, adorned with two earrings, glowed like a lotus with a pair of swans nearby. ||13|| His face, a lotus pond, was adorned with two lotus-like eyes, filled with the water of a gentle smile, and purified by the dwelling of Lakshmi. ||14|| He wore the garland of victory, called Vijaya Chanda, hanging from his chest, and adorned himself with the splendor of a mountain of emeralds, shining like waterfalls. ||15|| His shoulders, at the edge of his chest, radiated such beauty as if they were two small mountains at the edge of an island. ||16|| His arms, belonging to the great-armed one, were filled with strength and energy, for he was the repository of great strength, and thus his name, Bahubali, was fitting. ||17|| Just as the Kulachal mountain holds a large, beautiful lake in its center, fit for the dwelling of Lakshmi, so too did Bahubali hold a deep navel in the center of his body. ||18|| His waist, encircled by a belt, shone like the vast shore of Mount Meru, surrounded by a great serpent. ||19|| His thighs, shining like the trunk of a banana tree, were radiant as if constantly touched by the palms of Lakshmi. ||20|| The legs of this valiant Bahubali were auspicious, filled with good omens, and seemed to be the cause of the future image-meditation practice he would undertake. ||21|| His feet, soft like the petals of a lotus, were red with the color of the red earth, and shone with beauty. ||22|| 

Page #438:
---------------------------
348
This extremely generous and great-bodied one, how did he enter the small hut-like heart of the Manini women? ||23|| Even in their dreams, those women whose minds were solely focused on him, saw his captivating form as if it were engraved in their hearts. ||24|| At that time, the women called him Manobhava, Manoj, Manobhu, Manmaya, Angaja, Madana, and Ananyaja. ||25|| Who would believe the illogical statement that the god of love, whose bow is made of sugarcane, destroys the entire world with arrows made of flower clusters? ||26|| All those princes were like King Bharata in terms of knowledge, art, brilliance, beauty, and playful charm. ||27|| Just as elephants gradually reach a state of intoxication, so too did those one hundred and one sons of Lord Rishabhadeva, starting with Bharata, gradually reach their youth. ||28|| Just as the spread of spring season on the groves of trees in a garden appears extremely beautiful, so too did that youth appear extremely beautiful in those princes at that time. ||29|| Having attained youth, all those princes, like trees born from the earth, were adorned with white flower clusters representing gentle smiles, red-colored hands representing leaves, and tall branches representing arms that bore fruit. ||30|| The hair on their heads was perfumed with incense, whose fragrance spread everywhere, making them appear as if they were adorned with ornaments. ||31|| 

Page #439:
---------------------------


Page #440:
---------------------------


Page #441:
---------------------------
## Chapter Sixteen
### 351
I
A **yashti** with a large bead in the middle is called a **shirshak** (head). A **yashti** with three progressively larger beads in the middle is called an **upshirshak** (sub-head).  || 52 || A **yashti** with five progressively larger beads in the middle is called a **prakanḍak** (main stem). A **yashti** with a large bead in the middle and smaller beads decreasing in size on either side is called an **avghātak** (reducer). || 53 || A **yashti** with uniform beads throughout is called a **taralpratibandh** (fluid restraint). Similarly, the three types of bead-adorned **yashtis** - **ekavali**, **ratnavāli**, and **apvartikā** - should also be understood to have five variations each, as described above, for **shirshak**, **upshirshak**, etc. || 54 || A group of **yashtis** is called a **hār** (necklace). It is of eleven types, based on the number of **yashtis** and their variations, such as **Indrachchand** etc. || 55 || A **hār** with 1008 **yashtis** is called an **Indrachchand hār**. It is the most excellent **hār** and is fit for wearing by Indra, the Chakravarti, and the Jina. || 56 || A **hār** with half the number of **yashtis** as an **Indrachchand hār**, i.e., 504, is called a **Vijayachchand hār**. This **hār** is said to be fit for wearing by the Ardhachakravarti, Balabhadra, and other men. || 57 || A **hār** with 108 **yashtis** is called a **hār**, and one with 81 **yashtis** is called a **Devachchand**. || 58 || A **hār** with 64 **yashtis** is called an **ardhahār**, one with 54 **yashtis** is called a **rashmikalāp**, and one with 32 **yashtis** is called a **gucchh**. || 59 || A **hār** with 27 **yashtis** is called a **nakshatramālā** (star garland). This **hār**, with its beads, seems to be laughing, mimicking the beauty of a garland of stars like Ashvini, Bharani, etc. || 60 || A **hār** with 24 **yashtis** is called an **ardhagucchh**, one with 20 **yashtis** is called a **māṇav**, and one with 10 **yashtis** is called an **ardhamāṇav**. || 61 || When a bead is placed in the middle of the **hār** mentioned above, such as **Indrachchand** etc., the word **māṇav** is added to their names, making them sound even more beautiful, i.e., **Indrachchandmāṇav**, **Vijayachchandmāṇav**, etc. || 62 || A **shirshak hār** is:
1. **Samamauktik** (with uniform beads) - 5 variations.
2. Variations according to the five types mentioned above.
3. The five variations of **shirshak** etc. should also be applied to the bead-adorned **ekav
Page #442:
---------------------------
352
A *shuddha-haar* is one that has only a *shirshka* (head). If an *upapada* like *Indra-chanda* is added after the *shirshka*, then it becomes eleven-fold. ||63|| Similarly, there are eleven varieties of *shuddha-haar* for each *upa-shirshka* etc. Thus, there are fifty-five varieties of *haar* in total. ||64|| If a gem is placed in the middle of an *ardha-maanava-haar*, it is called a *phalaka-haar*. If three or five gold plates are attached to the same *phalaka-haar*, then it becomes two-fold due to the difference between *sopana* and *mani-sopana*. That is, the one with three gold plates is called *sopana*, and the one with five gold plates is called *mani-sopana*. The difference between these two *haar* is that the *sopana* *haar* has only gold plates, while the *mani-sopana* *haar* has gold plates studded with gems. (Round gold beads are called *phalaka*.) ||65-66|| Thus, at the beginning of the *karma-yuga*, Lord Vrishabhadeva created many ornaments for the neck and chest of his sons, and those sons wore those ornaments as appropriate. ||67|| In this way, adorned with ornaments for the neck and other parts of the body, those princes were as beautiful as a group of celestial beings. ||68|| Among all those princes, Bharat, the most radiant, was as beautiful as the sun, and the extremely handsome young Bahubali was as radiant as the moon. ||69|| The remaining princes were as beautiful as the planets, stars, and constellations. Among them, Grami was as radiant as a firefly, and Sundari was as beautiful as moonlight. ||70|| Surrounded by all those sons and daughters, the fortunate Lord Vrishabhadeva was as beautiful as the high Mount Meru surrounded by a group of celestial beings. ||71||
Once, Lord Vrishabhadeva was sitting comfortably on his throne, when he turned his mind to teaching art and knowledge. ||72|| At that time, his daughters, Brahmi and Sundari, approached him, adorned with auspicious attire. ||73||

1. *Ekaḥ shirshko yasmin saḥ shuddha-haar*. 2. *Indra-chandaadyupapadaḥ shirshkaat paraḥ sa haar indra-chanda-shorpaka-haar iti yaavat. Evam shuddhaatmanam upa-shirshkaadinaameva indra-chanda-upa-shirshka-haar iti kramaat. Shirshkaadiṣh panchasu indra-chandaadikam pratyekam. Ekadashadha taadhite sati pancha-panchaashat*. 3. *Vedebhyah*. 4. *Kevala mani" madhyashcheti*. 5. *Anyah mani-sopanaḥ saratnaḥ rokm-phalakaḥ syaditi*. 6. *Kanthaḥ urascha*. 7. *Abhi stve. Abhisye ity-arthaḥ*. 8. *Mangala-alankarae. -nepathy-e a. 50, d. 0, s. 0, m*. 

Page #443:
---------------------------


Page #444:
---------------------------
354
Their throats were beautiful, their voices sweet and melodious like the cuckoo's song. Their lips were copper-colored, their faces adorned with a faint smile. 85. Their teeth were beautiful, their glances captivating, their eyelashes thick, and their eyes like lotus flowers, the victorious arrows of Madana. 86. Their cheeks were adorned with the reflection of their hair, which seemed to shame the moon, whose luster was marred by blemishes. 87. They wore garlands of flowers, their hair tied in a knot, which seemed like the flowing current of the Yamuna, where the Ganges had merged. 88. Their forms were radiant with beauty, each limb glowing with a brilliance that seemed to have been created by gathering all the beauty in the world. 89. Are these divine maidens? Or daughters of the Nagas? Or daughters of the directions? Or goddesses of good fortune? Or Lakshmi and Saraswati? Or their presiding deities? Or their avatars? Or are they Lakshmi, born from the great ocean, the form of Jagannatha (Vrishabhadeva)? For their form is auspicious, bringing about many blessings. 90-93. The people, filled with wonder, praised them, and they, with humility, approached Jagannatha and bowed to him. 93. He lifted them up, their heads bowed in reverence, and seated them on his lap with love. He touched their heads and smelled their hair, and smiling, said, "Come, you must think that we will go to the immortal forest with the gods today, but that is not possible, for the gods have already gone." 94-95. Thus, Vrishabhadeva, the lord, played with them for a moment, and then said, "You are like old women in your youth, because of your virtue and humility." 96. 
1. Copper-colored. 2. Slightly. 3. Beautiful-toothed. 4. Your. 5. The presiding deities of Lakshmi and Saraswati. 6. The avatars of the presiding deities. 7. Coming. 2nd person singular, imperative mood. 8. You will go. 2nd person plural, future tense. 9. You. 

Page #445:
---------------------------
. Sixteen Chapters
355.
If this body, this state and this unparalleled character of yours are adorned with knowledge, then this birth of yours will be successful. || 97 || In this world, a learned man is respected even by the learned, and a learned woman also attains the highest position. || 98 || Knowledge is the glory of men, knowledge is the welfare of men, knowledge well worshipped is the deity that fulfills all desires. || 99 || Knowledge is the cow that fulfills all desires, knowledge is the wish-fulfilling gem of men, knowledge gives rise to a lineage of wealth, bearing fruit in the form of dharma, artha and kama. || 100 || Knowledge is the relative of men, knowledge is the friend, knowledge is the benefactor, knowledge is the wealth that goes along with you, and knowledge is the fulfiller of all purposes. || 101 || Therefore, O daughters, you both strive to acquire knowledge, for this is the time for you both to acquire knowledge. || 102 || Saying this, and blessing them again and again, the Lord Vrishabhadeva placed the Shruta Devi, who resided in his mind, on a wide golden plate with reverence, then with both hands he wrote the alphabet starting with 'a' and taught them the script (writing), and in sequence, he also taught them the knowledge of numbers through units, tens, etc. It is said that the Lord wrote the alphabet with his right hand and the numbers with his left hand. || 103-104 || After that, the Lord uttered the alphabet, which had the auspicious invocation "Siddham Namah" clearly stated, which is called Siddhamatrika, which has two divisions due to the difference between vowels and consonants, which is found in all knowledge, which has the origin of many combined letters, which is filled with many seed letters, and which is like a string of pure pearls, the entire pure alphabet, starting with 'a' and ending with 'ha', and including the visarga, anusvara, jihvamuliya and upadhmaniya, the entire pure alphabet, starting with 'a' and ending with 'ha', and including the visarga, anusvara, jihvamuliya and upadhmaniya, the entire pure alphabet, starting with 'a' and ending with 'ha', and including the visarga, anusvara, jihvamuliya and upadhmaniya, the entire pure alphabet, starting with 'a' and ending with 'ha', and including the visarga, anusvara, jihvamuliya and upadhmaniya, the entire pure alphabet, starting with 'a' and ending with 'ha', and including the visarga, anusvara, jihvamuliya and upadhmaniya, the entire pure alphabet, starting with 'a' and ending with 'ha', and including the visarga, anusvara, jihvamuliya and upadhmaniya, the entire pure alphabet, starting with 'a' and ending with 'ha', and including the visarga, anusvara, jihvamuliya and upadhmaniya, the entire pure alphabet, starting with 'a' and ending with 'ha', and including the visarga, anusvara, jihvamuliya and upadhmaniya, the entire pure alphabet, starting with 'a' and ending with 'ha', and including the visarga, anusvara, jihvamuliya and upadhmaniya, the entire pure alphabet, starting with 'a' and ending with 'ha', and including the visarga, anusvara, jihvamuliya and upadhmaniya, the entire pure alphabet, starting with 'a' and ending with 'ha', and including the visarga, anusvara, jihvamuliya and upadhmaniya, the entire pure alphabet, starting with '
Page #446:
---------------------------
356
Brahmi and Sundari, the beautiful daughters of Samvadi, learned mathematics well, understanding the place values of units, tens, etc. [10] There is no glory or art without language. Therefore, Vrishabhadeva, the teacher of the Jain scriptures, first taught them language. [10] These highly intelligent daughters, like Saraswati, learned all of language, both words and meaning, from their father's mouth, free from any doubts or errors. [11] Those who know language, like the Gandharvas, call the combination of grammar, prosody, and rhetoric as language. [11] At that time, a great grammar text, called Swayambhu, created by Vrishabhadeva, became famous. It had more than a hundred chapters and was as deep as the ocean. [112] Similarly, he taught prosody in many chapters and showed its twenty-six divisions, like Ukta, Atyukta, etc. [113] The Lord, the master of many sciences, also explained the six suffixes of prosody: Prastar, Nasht, Uddishta, Ekdvitrilghu Kriya, Sankhya, and Adhvayoga. [114] While compiling the collection of figures of speech, or in the text of the collection of figures of speech, the Lord described figures of speech like Upma, Rupak, Yamak, etc. He explained in detail the two paths of figures of speech, namely, verbal figures of speech and figurative figures of speech, and also described the ten vital principles, namely, Madhurya, Oja, etc. [115] Then, the knowledge of grammar, like a lamp, illuminated both Brahmi and Sundari, and all their knowledge and arts matured on their own. [116] Thus, these two daughters, who had learned all the sciences from their teacher or father, became eligible to become incarnations of Saraswati. Meaning: They became so knowledgeable that Saraswati herself would incarnate in them.
1. Samyagvadharayati sma. 2. Shabdatah. 3. Vyakaranashastram. 4. Shabdalankaram. 5. Swayambhuvam naama Vyakaranashastram. 6. Shatat pare parashshatah [Shatat parani adhikany parashshatani, parashabdene samaanarthah. 'Parashabdah asantah ityake. Rajadantaaditvat purvanipatah' ityamoghāvṛttāvuktam. Varchaaskaadishu namaskaraaday ititra. Iti tippanapustake 'parashshatah' iti shabdoupari tippani]. 7. Meruprastaram. 8. Gaudavidarbhamargadwayam. 9. "Sleshah prasadah samata madhuryam sukumarta. Arthavyakti rudaratvam ojah kantisamadhayah|| iti vaidarbhamargasya pranah dashagunaah smatah. Tesham viparyayah prayo lakshyate gaudavamani ||" 10. Brahmi Mundaryoh. 11. Vyakaranashastraparijnanapradipika. 12. Iti hyadhitap, a, d, l. 

Page #447:
---------------------------
## Chapter Sixteen

**3**

**118**  The World Teacher, the Lord Vrishabhadeva, taught his sons, Bharat and others, various scriptures, including the Amnaya, in a systematic manner, with due respect and humility.

**119**  The Lord taught Bharat the science of economics and the art of dance, with detailed explanations and comprehensive chapters.

**120**  The Lord Vrishabhadeva taught his son Vrishabhasena the Gandharva Shastra, which included music, dance, and other arts, and comprised over a hundred chapters.

**121**  He taught his son Anantavijaya the art of painting, which included numerous chapters and encompassed all forms of art.

**122**  He taught his son Anantavijaya the science of architecture and the art of building, which included many chapters and various aspects.

**123-124**  He taught his son Bahubali the science of love, the characteristics of men and women, Ayurveda, Dhanurveda, the science of horses and elephants, and the art of gem testing, all through detailed and extensive chapters.

**125**  What is the need to elaborate further? In short, the Lord Adinath taught all the scriptures that benefited the world to his sons.

**126**  Just as the brilliance of the sun, naturally radiant, intensifies during autumn, so too did the brilliance of Lord Vrishabhadeva, who had illuminated all knowledge, become even more extraordinary.

**127**  Surrounded by his sons, who had mastered all knowledge, Lord Vrishabhadeva shone like the sun in autumn, adorned with its rays.

**128**  The Lord Vrishabhadeva, surrounded by his beloved sons and wives, spent a long time enjoying divine pleasures.

**129**  Thus, the Lord's Kumarakala, a period of twenty lakh years, came to an end, as narrated by the great sages. 

Page #448:
---------------------------
358
In the meantime, the Mahaaushadhi, the Diptaaushadhi, and the Kalpavriksha trees, along with all other herbs, had become powerless due to the influence of time. ||130|| The grains that used to grow without being sown, which were meant for the sustenance of humans, had also become scarce on earth due to the influence of time. ||131|| When the Kalpavriksha trees became devoid of their rasa, virya, and vipaka, the people there started to suffer from various ailments and other troubles. ||132|| Due to the loss of rasa, virya, etc., of the Kalpavriksha trees, the people, with troubled minds, went to Maharaj Nabhiraj, seeking to stay alive. ||133|| Following the order of Nabhiraj, the people went to Bhagwan Vapabhnath, seeking a way to stay alive, and bowed their heads in reverence. ||134|| Then, the people, who were experiencing various fears due to the loss of food, etc., and who had taken refuge in Bhagwan, the savior of all, went to the eternal Bhagwan and pleaded as follows: ||135|| "O Dev, we have come to your refuge seeking sustenance. O Lord of the three worlds, please protect us by showing us the way." ||136|| "O Vibho, the Kalpavriksha trees, who were like our fathers, who protected us like fathers, have all perished, root and branch, and the grains that used to grow without being sown, no longer bear fruit." ||137|| "O Dev, the increasing troubles of hunger, thirst, etc., are making us miserable. Deprived of food and water, we are no longer able to stay alive even for a moment." ||138|| "O Dev, the cold, heat, strong winds, and rains, etc., are troubling us, who are without shelter. Therefore, please tell us the way to overcome all these troubles." ||139|| "O Vibho, you are the creator of this age, and you are as high as the Kalpavriksha trees. How can we, who have taken refuge in you, be in a place of fear?" ||140|| "Therefore, O Dev, please show us the way so that our livelihood becomes free from troubles. Please be merciful to us." ||141|| 

Page #449:
---------------------------
359
Hearing the sixteen chapters, the compassionate Lord, moved by pity, thought to himself: "Thus the Supreme Being, the first Purusha, has bestowed upon them." ||142|| The state of existence that prevailed in the eastern and western Videha regions should be established here as well. Only then will these people survive. ||143|| Just as there were six karmas like Asi and Mashee, just as there were different classes like Kshatriya, and just as there were different arrangements for villages, houses, etc., so should it be here as well. Only through these means can the livelihood of the beings be sustained. There is no other way for their livelihood. ||144-145|| Now that the Kalpa trees have perished, this Karmabhoomi has appeared. Therefore, it is appropriate for the people to earn their livelihood here through the six karmas like Asi, Mashee, etc. ||146|| Thus, Lord Rishabhadeva, having thought for a moment about the means of livelihood for the welfare of the people, repeatedly reassured them, saying, "Do not be afraid." ||147|| Then, merely by remembering the Lord, Indra, along with the other gods, arrived and, following the instructions below, made arrangements for the livelihood of the people. ||148|| On an auspicious day, under an auspicious constellation, at an auspicious time and auspicious moment, when the Sun and other planets were in their respective exalted positions, and with the blessings of the Jagadguru, Indra first performed auspicious rites and then established a Jina temple in the middle of Ayodhya city. After that, he established Jina temples in all four directions, east, south, west, and north, in a systematic manner. ||149-150|| After that, he created the great countries like Kosala, etc., the cities like Ayodhya, etc., the forests, the villages with their boundaries, and the fields, etc. ||151|| Sukosala, Avanti, Pund, Undu, Ashmak, Ramyak, Kuru, Kashi, Kalinga, Anga, Vanga, Suha, Samudrak, Kashmir, Ushinar, Anart, Vatsa, Panchal, Malava, Dasharna, Kachchha, Magadha, Vidarbha, Kurujangala, Karahat, Maharashtra, Surastra, Abhira, Konkan, Vanavasa, Andhra, Karnata, Kosala, Chola, Kerala,
1. They made it one-pointed. 2. They were assembled. The meaning is special creation. 3. Various. 4. Lord. 5. Remembrance. 6. Divisionally. A, 50, 60, S. T. 1 From division. 7. Pundoda-. 8. -Vart- A, 10, 60. 9. Kurujangala. S. 

Page #450:
---------------------------
360
Adipurana
The countries of Karhat, Maharashtra, Saurashtra, Abhiras, Kona, Vanavasa, Andhra, Karnataka, Kosala, Nol, and Kara were established. [154]
The countries of Dabhisara, Sauvira, Shurasen, Aparantaka, Videha, Sindhu, Gandhara, Yavana, Chedi, Pallava, Kamboja, Rat, Vahika, Turushka, Shaka, and Kekaya were also established. [155]
Besides these, many other countries were divided at that time. [156]
Some of these countries were Adeva-matrika, some were Deva-matrika, and some were ordinary. [157]
The earth was adorned with these newly emerged countries, as if pieces of heaven had come down out of curiosity. [158]
From the vicinity of the Vijayardha mountain to the sea, there were many ordinary countries, many with abundant water, and many with scarcity of water. The earth, covered by these countries, was very beautiful. [159]
Just as there are places of the Lokapala gods on the boundaries of the heavenly abodes, so too, on the boundaries of these countries, there were forts of the Antapalas, the guardians of the boundaries, on all sides. [160]
In between these countries, there were many other countries protected by the Lubdha, Aranya, Charat, Pulinda, and Shabara, etc., Mlechchha tribes. [161]
In the middle of these countries, there were beautiful capitals adorned with forts, ramparts, moats, gateways, and balconies, etc. [162]
These capitals, also known as "sthaniya," were surrounded on all sides by villages, etc., established according to the prescribed characteristics. [163]
Villages are those which have houses surrounded by fences, where most of the people are Shudras and farmers, and which have gardens and ponds. [164]
A village with one hundred houses is called "nikrishta" (inferior), and a village with five hundred houses and 

Page #451:
---------------------------
## Pod Parva

**Verse 166:** Villages with a circumference of 361 krośas are considered the best. They have fertile fields, abundant crops, and plenty of water.

**Verse 167:** Rivers, mountains, caves, cremation grounds, bhir trees (thower), thorny trees like babul, forests, and bridges are the markers of their boundaries.

**Verse 168:** Establishing rules for the inhabitants of the village, ensuring the creation of new things and the protection of old ones, levying taxes, punishing criminals, and collecting revenue from the people are all under the authority of the king.

**Verse 169-170:** A city fortified with a moat, towers, terraces, walls, and ramparts, adorned with numerous buildings, gardens, and ponds, situated in a suitable location, with water flowing towards the northeast direction, and fit for the residence of prominent individuals is considered praiseworthy.

**Verse 171:** Wise men call a city surrounded by a river and a mountain a "khet," and one surrounded only by a mountain a "kharvat."

**Verse 172:** Learned people consider a city surrounded by five hundred villages a "maḍamba," and a city situated on the coast where people disembark from boats is called a "pattana."

**Verse 173:** A city situated on the bank of a river is called a "droṇamukha," and a place where there are tall stacks of grain reaching up to the head is called a "sanvāha."

**Verse 174:** Thus, these villages, cities, etc., are situated on the earth according to their respective suitability.

**Verse 175:** A capital city has eight hundred villages, a droṇamukha has four hundred villages, and a kharvat has two hundred villages. A large village situated in the middle of ten villages is called a "sangraha" (where all kinds of things are stored). Similarly, one should imagine the characteristics of "ghosa" and "ākara" etc. 

Page #452:
---------------------------
## The Adi Purana, Chapter 4

**Verse 176:** The great village among the ten villages is called Sangraha. Similarly, the place where the Ghosha (Ahir) reside is called Ghosha, and the place where gold, silver, and other mines are found is called Akar.

**Verse 177:** Thus, Indra, the king of gods, divided the cities, villages, and other places in a very good way. Therefore, he received the meaningful name Purandara (the city-destroyer) from that time onwards.

**Verse 178:** After that, Indra, following the orders of Lord Mahavira, settled the people in these cities, villages, and other places. Having completed his task, he went to heaven, following the orders of the Lord.

**Verse 179:** Asi, Mashi, Krishi, Vidya, Vanijya, and Shilpa - these six occupations are the means of livelihood for the people. Lord Rishabhadeva, with his skillful intellect, taught the people to earn their livelihood through these six occupations. It is appropriate because at that time, the Lord, the teacher of the world, was still Sragi (attached to worldly things) and not Vitrag (detached from worldly things).

**Verse 180:** The meaning is that the teaching of worldly activities can be given in the Sragi state.

**Verse 181:** Among those six occupations, serving with weapons like swords is called Asi Karma. Earning a living by writing is called Mashi Karma. Cultivating the land and sowing seeds is called Krishi Karma. Earning a living by studying scriptures or through dance, music, etc. is called Vidya Karma. Trading is called Vanijya Karma. And earning a living through skillful use of hands is called Shilpa Karma. This Shilpa Karma is considered to be of many types, such as painting, cutting flowers and leaves, etc.

**Verse 182:** At that time, Lord Rishabhadeva, the first Tirthankara, established three varnas (castes) - Kshatriya, Vaishya, and Shudra, based on their qualities like Kshattraan (protection from danger), etc.

**Verse 183:** At that time, those who earned their living by wielding weapons were called Kshatriyas. Those who earned their living through agriculture, trade, and animal husbandry were called Vaishyas.

**Verse 184:** And those who served them were called Shudras. These Shudras were of two types - Karu and Akaru. Those Shudras like washermen, etc. were called Karu, and those different from them were called Akaru.

**Verse 185:** Karu Shudras were also considered to be of two types - Spruhya (touchable) and Aspruhya (untouchable). Among them, those who lived outside the community were called Aspruhya, meaning they were not fit to be touched. And the barbers, etc. were called Spruhya. 

Page #453:
---------------------------
## The Sixteenth Chapter

The people performed their respective duties as befitting their nature, without any mixture. Their marriages, caste relations, and conduct were all in accordance with the teachings of Lord Ādināth.  || 187 ||

All the righteous means of livelihood in the world, free from sin, were practiced with the consent of Lord Vṛṣabhadev. Indeed, the eternal Brahma is Lord Vṛṣabhadev. || 188 ||

Since the primordial Brahma, Lord Vṛṣabhadev, initiated this karma-yuga, the knowers of the Purāṇas call it the Kṛta-yuga. || 189 ||

On the first day of the dark fortnight of the month of Āṣāḍha, the accomplished Lord Vṛṣabhadev initiated the Kṛta-yuga and attained the position of Prajāpati (Lord of beings). || 190 ||

When a considerable amount of time had passed, and the people, through the practice of the six karmas, had attained a state of well-being and were worthy of being liberated, the gods, with great speed, came to perform the coronation of their king. || 191-192 ||

The gods, filled with reverence, performed the coronation with divine water. What more need be said? || 193 ||

However, some further description is given, even though it is well-known, because ordinary people often do not know even the most obvious things. || 194 ||

At that time, the entire world was filled with joy. The gods of heaven, with Indra at their head, descended from heaven and came to Ayodhyāpuri. || 195 ||

Ayodhyāpuri was beautifully decorated. The entire sky was filled with flags hoisted on the front of the houses. || 196 ||

At that time, great drums of joy were being played in the royal palace, the women were singing auspicious songs, and the celestial nymphs were dancing. || 197 ||

The celestial attendants, along with the auspicious signs, were proclaiming the valor of the Lord, and the gods, filled with joy, were shouting "Victory! Long live!" || 198 || 

Page #454:
---------------------------
364
Adipuranam
A platform made of earth was constructed in the middle of the earth. On this platform, the divine artisans built a magnificent Ananda Mandap, adorned with a multitude of precious gems, painted with vibrant hues, and embellished with clusters of freshly bloomed flowers. The reflection of the pearls hanging from the ceiling was cast upon the ground inlaid with jewels. The silken garments of the celestial beings were adorned with two shades of color, creating a vibrant spectacle. The path of the celestial maidens, carrying auspicious offerings, was blocked.  Near them, an abundance of auspicious materials was kept. The celestial nymphs, with their hands, waved the fluttering chamaras. They exchanged the bathing materials with each other. The celestial maidens, gracefully moving with their feet, filled the ten directions with the sound of their anklets. The courtyard of the palace, adorned with an array of auspicious materials, was transformed into a stage.  Lord Vrishabhadeva was seated on a suitable throne, facing the east. As the Gandharvas began to play music, the deep sound of the mridanga resonated throughout the three worlds. The celestial maidens, dancing to the rhythm of the music, sang the praises of the Lord, their voices blending with the melody. The Kinnaris, with their melodious voices, filled the ears with the glory of the Lord.  Then, the gods began to perform the abhisheka of Lord Vrishabhadeva with golden pots filled with holy water.  The water from the great rivers Ganga and Sindhu, which had not yet touched the earth, was brought from the peaks of the Himalayas, where it flowed down in streams.  The water that had been collected in vessels before it fell to the earth was also brought.  The pure water of the Ganga was brought from the Ganga Kund, and the clear water of the Sindhu was brought from the Sindhu Kund.  Similarly, the pure water of other rivers, falling from above, was collected from their respective sources.  
"Victory to the Jiva," they proclaimed.  198.  
At the very beginning of the coronation, in the middle of the earth, where an earthen platform was built, and on that platform, where the divine artisans had built a magnificent Ananda Mandap, adorned with a multitude of precious gems, painted with vibrant hues, and embellished with clusters of freshly bloomed flowers, where the reflection of the pearls hanging from the ceiling was cast upon the ground inlaid with jewels, where the silken garments of the celestial beings were adorned with two shades of color, creating a vibrant spectacle, where the path of the celestial maidens, carrying auspicious offerings, was blocked, where an abundance of auspicious materials was kept, where the celestial nymphs, with their hands, waved the fluttering chamaras, where they exchanged the bathing materials with each other, where the celestial maidens, gracefully moving with their feet, filled the ten directions with the sound of their anklets, and where an array of auspicious materials was collected, in the courtyard of the palace, transformed into a stage, Lord Vrishabhadeva was seated on a suitable throne, facing the east.  As the Gandharvas began to play music, the deep sound of the mridanga resonated throughout the three worlds. The celestial maidens, dancing to the rhythm of the music, sang the praises of the Lord, their voices blending with the melody. The Kinnaris, with their melodious voices, filled the ears with the glory of the Lord.  Then, the gods began to perform the abhisheka of Lord Vrishabhadeva with golden pots filled with holy water.  199-208.  
For the coronation of the Lord, the water from the two great rivers, Ganga and Sindhu, was brought. This water flowed down from the peaks of the Himalayas in streams, and had not yet touched the earth.  The water that
Page #455:
---------------------------
_365
Sixteen festivals, Sri Devi, the goddesses, brought water from ponds like Padma, etc., which was yellow due to the saffron of golden lotuses. ||212|| Water from ponds with fragrant lotuses that bloomed in the evening, sweet and beautiful, with blue lotuses, was brought. Also, the water of the salt ocean, which was superior, with a cluster of pearls that had emerged. ||213|| Water from the ponds like Nandottra, etc., in the Nandishvara island, which were very pure, was brought. ||214|| Besides, water from the Bhira ocean, Nandishvara ocean, and Swayambhuraman ocean was brought in divine pots made of gold. ||215|| Thus, the Lord Jagadguru, Vrishabhadeva, was consecrated with the above-mentioned famous water. Since the Lord's body was already pure, how could he be purified by consecration? Only the Lord purified that water with his own pure body. ||216|| At that time, the stream of water released by the gods on the Lord's head was so radiant, as if it had been released, considering that head as the abode of the goddess of fortune. ||217|| The radiance of the water falling on the head of Lord Vrishabhadeva, the guru of the movable and immovable, was so radiant, as if it were the wealth of pure qualities that destroyed the suffering of the world. ||218|| Although the Lord's body was naturally pure, he was consecrated with the water of the Ganges river in Indraloka, so his purity increased even more. ||219|| At that time, Indra did not only wash the Lord's body, but also the minds, eyes, and bodies of the spectators. Meaning: The minds, eyes, and entire bodies of the humans who were watching the Lord's coronation became pure. ||220|| At that time, the arrows in the form of glances of the dancing celestial nymphs were reflected in the flow of that water, so it seemed as if they were placed on sharp water, and therefore they were piercing the minds of humans. Meaning: The glances of the celestial nymphs pierced the minds of the humans who were watching. ||221|| 

Page #456:
---------------------------
366
The Adipurana states that the earth was purified by the water of the horses' hooves, and thus, by destiny, the king's wealth was secured.  The Lord was anointed by the celestial beings with golden pitchers, just as Mount Mandara is adorned by the evening clouds.  The kings, led by Nabhiraj, all anointed him together, saying, "This Vrishabhadeva is truly worthy of being king."  The citizens also anointed his feet with water from the Sarayu River, some using lotus leaf cups, others earthen pots.  The Indra of the Vyantara gods, led by Magadha, also anointed him with joy, saying, "He is the lord of our land."  The Lord Vrishabhadeva was first bathed in holy water, then in kasaya water, and finally in fragrant water.  He then entered a golden bath-pond filled with warm water and enjoyed a pleasant bath.  The earth, adorned with the garlands, clothes, and ornaments that he discarded after his bath, seemed to have received the gifts of her lord's touch.  (This is a metaphor for the love between a man and a woman, where they wear each other's clothes and ornaments.)  As the celestial singers chanted auspicious hymns, the Lord Vrishabhadeva received a bath fit for a king, one that would bring him the goddess of fortune.  After his bath and the offering of incense, the Lord was adorned with garlands, ornaments, and clothes brought from heaven by the gods. 

Page #457:
---------------------------
## Chapter Sixteen

**12**

**367** The king Nabhiraj, with his own hand, placed the crown upon the head of the Lord. The Lord, adorned with the great crown, is the sovereign of kings. ||22|| The band, the bond of the world, was placed upon the forehead of the Lord. This band is the means of securing the stability of the fickle queen of fortune. ||23|| The Lord, adorned with a new garment, with earrings shining in both ears, wearing a crown on his head, like the plaything of Lakshmi, was resplendent. ||234|| Wearing a garland of flowers around his neck, a girdle around his waist, and the sacred thread of Brahma on his shoulder, he was like a mountain king, bearing the Ganges on his back. ||235|| His long arms were adorned with bracelets, armlets, and other ornaments. He was like a moving Kalpa tree, with its branches spreading out in all directions. ||236|| His feet were adorned with anklets made of blue gems, and they were like two red lotuses, with bees hovering over them. ||237|| Thus, adorned with the wealth of ornaments on every part of his body, the Lord, the first Brahma, shone like a Kalpa tree, the embodiment of ornaments. ||238|| Then, the king of the gods, Indra, knowing the art of drama, performed a play called "Ananda" in that assembly, and went to heaven with joy. ||239|| The gods and demons, having finished their work, and with their minds fixed on the service of the Lord's feet, followed Indra to their respective abodes. ||240|| Then, having attained sovereignty, the Lord, the creator of the world, made efforts to protect the people in the presence of King Nabhiraj. ||241|| First, he created the people (divided them into different classes, etc.), then he established rules for their livelihood, and then he made rules to prevent them from transgressing their own dharma. ||242||

**Footnotes:**

1. Crown - A, 50, S, M, L.
2. Like.
3. Of the one who is moving about.
4. The cause of stability.
5. Crown - A, 10, S, M, L.
6. Body covered.
7. Like a king, P.
8. In the assembly.
9. Heaven.
10. Thousand-eyed.
11. Creation.
12. Livelihood.
13. Regulating. 

Page #458:
---------------------------
## DNAWARA
368

The Lord, holding weapons in both his arms, created the Kshatriyas, instructing them in the art of warfare. This is fitting, for those who protect the weak from the attacks of strong enemies, wielding weapons in their hands, are called Kshatriyas.

Then, the Lord, showing the way of travel with his thighs, created the Vaishyas, instructing them in the art of travel. This is fitting, for traveling to different lands, by water or land, and engaging in trade is their primary livelihood.

The wise Lord, using his feet, created the Shudras, who are always engaged in lowly activities. Serving the Brahmanas, Kshatriyas, and Vaishyas is their diverse livelihood.

Thus, the Lord, Rishabhadeva, created the three classes. After him, his eldest son, Maharaja Bharata, created the Brahmanas by teaching them the scriptures through his mouth. Studying, teaching, receiving gifts, and performing rituals and sacrifices are their duties.

[Note: Those who believe that the Brahmanas were born from Brahma's mouth, the Kshatriyas from his arms, the Vaishyas from his thighs, and the Shudras from his feet, are mistaken. This is a false belief.]

The system of classes cannot be maintained without a system of marriage. Therefore, Lord Rishabhadeva established the following marriage system: A Shudra can only marry a Shudra woman, not a Brahmana, Kshatriya, or Vaishya woman. A Vaishya can marry a Vaishya woman or a Shudra woman. A Kshatriya can marry a Kshatriya woman, a Vaishya woman, or a Shudra woman. A Brahmana can only marry a Brahmana woman. However, in some countries, a Kshatriya can also marry a Vaishya or Shudra woman.

At that time, the Lord also established the rule that anyone who abandons their own class's livelihood and takes up the livelihood of another class will be punished by the king. This is because such an act would lead to a mixing of classes, making it impossible to distinguish between them.

Before establishing the system of marriage, Lord Adinath established the six activities: agriculture, trade, service, crafts, and warfare. Therefore, these six activities are the basis of life. 

Page #459:
---------------------------
## Sixteen Chapters

Having created the beings, the Creator, for their well-being and prosperity, established the three-fold system of Ha, Ma, and Dhikkaar (punishment) based on reason.  ||25||

The suppression of the wicked and the protection of the righteous is the purpose of this system. This was not the case in the Bhoga-bhoomi (realm of enjoyment) because all beings were innocent and free from any wrongdoing. ||251||

In the absence of a king who administers punishment, the people will resort to Matsya-nyaya (law of the fish), where the strong devour the weak. The wicked, hidden within, will swallow the powerless. ||252||

Fear of punishment keeps people from straying from the righteous path. Therefore, a king who administers just punishment is essential and only such a king can conquer the earth. ||253||

Just as milk is drawn from a cow without causing her any pain, and this benefits both the cow and the milkman, so too should the king collect wealth from his subjects. This wealth should be collected through taxes that do not cause undue hardship. This way, the people will not suffer, and the kingdom will have the necessary resources. ||254||

Therefore, the Lord Vrishabhadeva appointed the following individuals as kings, who would administer punishment, as the well-being and prosperity of the people are entrusted to them. ||255||

The Lord summoned the four great and fortunate Kshatriyas, Hari, Akampan, Kashyap, and Soma Prabha, and honored them with due respect and reverence. He then crowned them as Mahamandalik (great rulers) and made them the overlords of four thousand other smaller kings. ||256-257||

Soma Prabha, by the grace of the Lord, became the king of Kuru and was known as the jewel of the Kuru dynasty. ||258||

Hari, by the Lord's command, adopted the name Harikanta and adorned the Hari dynasty. He was known as Hariparakrama, meaning one who is as powerful as Indra or a lion. ||259||

Akampan, also by the grace of the Lord, was given the name Shridhara and became the leader of the Natha dynasty. ||260|| 

Page #460:
---------------------------
The Adipurana
Kashyapa, the lord of the people, also received the name Madhava from the Guru. He was a descendant of the Ugra lineage and became a king, for what is not attainable by the grace of the Lord? ||261|| Then, the Lord Adi Nath honored the kings of Kutch, Maha Kutch, and other prominent regions, establishing them in the position of overlords. ||262|| Similarly, the Lord distributed palaces, vehicles, and other forms of wealth to his sons as per their merit. This is the fruit of attaining the kingdom. ||263|| At that time, the Lord instructed humans on the extraction of juice from sugarcane. Therefore, people of the world began to call him Ikshvaku. ||264|| The word "Go" means heaven, and the best heaven is called "Gautama" by virtuous people. The Lord Vrishabhadeva came from the best heaven, attaining all-round perfection. Therefore, he also received the name "Gautama." ||265|| "Kashya" refers to brilliance. The Lord Vrishabhadeva was the protector of that brilliance, hence he was called "Kashyapa." He also contemplated the means of livelihood for his subjects, therefore he was also called Manu and Kuladhara. ||266|| Apart from these, the people of the world called the Lord, the master of the three worlds, and the imperishable one, by many names like "Vidhata," "Vishwakarma," and "Srashta." ||267|| The Lord's reign was fixed at sixty-three lakhs of years. That vast period passed unnoticed due to his being surrounded by his sons, grandsons, and others. In other words, he was so engrossed in the happiness of his sons, grandsons, etc., that he did not even realize how much time had passed during his reign. ||268|| The Lord Vrishabhadeva, radiating great brilliance, sat on the throne of the kingdom of Ayodhya and enjoyed the happiness of the imperial fortune obtained through virtuous deeds. ||269|| Thus, the Guru of the gods and demons, through his virtuous deeds, 

Page #461:
---------------------------
The wise, who possess unfathomable fortitude, are called heroes.  They attain happiness through **puṇya** (merit), for there is no happiness without **puṇya**. **Puṇya** is acquired through **dāna** (charity), **samyama** (self-control), **satya** (truthfulness), and **śauca** (purity). Therefore, O wise ones, strive to accumulate **puṇya**.

Just as a sprout cannot grow without a seed, so too, happiness cannot be attained without **puṇya**.  **Puṇya** is the root of all auspicious actions, such as **dāna**, **samyama**, **satya**, and **śauca**.

Through **puṇya**, gods, demons, humans, and serpents attain all the pleasures of existence, including wealth, long life, unparalleled beauty, prosperity, excellent speech, universal dominion, the position of Indra, and the **arhat** state, which frees one from rebirth.  **Puṇya** also leads to the ultimate happiness of **nirvāṇa**, which is free from all suffering.

Therefore, O wise ones, if you desire to attain the incomparable bliss of heaven and liberation, then practice **dharma** (righteousness).  For **dharma** alone leads to the enjoyment of worldly pleasures and the eternal happiness of **nirvāṇa**.  Indeed, happiness is the fruit of **dharma**.

O wise ones, do not forget to:

1.  **Dāna** (charity) - Give generously to **muni** (ascetics) with joy.
2.  **Pūjā** (worship) - Offer homage to **tīrtha** (pilgrimage) makers.
3.  **Śolāna** (fasting) - Observe fasts on **parva** (festival) days. 

Page #462:
---------------------------
372
Adipurana
Sardulavikridita, He, the glorious one, was always engaged in enjoying, with his sons and grandsons, who were full of affection. He, the embodiment of compassion, was seated on the throne. Indra, Sun, and Moon, along with other excellent gods, were under his rule, and he was not subject to anyone's command. Such was the Lord Vrishabhadeva, who ruled this earth, bounded by the ocean. ||275||
Thus ends the sixteenth chapter, named "Description of the Kingdom of the Lord," in the Trishatilak Shree Adipurana Sangraha, composed by the venerable Jinaseanacharya. ||16||
If you wish to attain happiness, then joyfully give donations to the great sages, bow down to the Tirthankaras and worship them, nurture the virtuous, and do not forget to fast on the auspicious days. ||274||
Thus, he who was the master of abundant wealth, experienced constant enjoyment, was filled with affection for his sons and grandsons, and was content. Indra, Sun, and Moon, along with other excellent gods, were under his rule, and he was not subject to anyone's command. Such was the Lord Vrishabhadeva, who ruled this earth, bounded by the ocean. ||27||
Thus ends the sixteenth chapter, named "Description of the Kingdom of the Lord," in the Trishatilak Shree Adipurana Sangraha, composed by the venerable Jinaseanacharya, known as "Aarsh." ||16||
1. Dhritasnehaiḥ. 2. Praptasantoṣaḥ. 3. Vyūḍha dhṛta. 4. -Māsiṃdhusīmāṃ p0, d0, s0. 

Page #463:
---------------------------
The Seventeenth Chapter

Then, in the midst of the great assembly hall, surrounded by hundreds of kings, Lord Vrishabhadeva was seated on his throne, just as the sun is seated on the shore of the mountain Naishadha. ||1|| Thus seated on the throne, Indra, along with the apsaras and the gandharvas, came there with offerings to worship the Lord. ||2|| And, conquering the sun, which is situated on the peak of the mountain of the rising sun, with his own brilliance, he sat on his worthy throne. ||3|| Filled with devotion, Indra, desiring to worship the Lord, then began to have the apsaras and the gandharvas dance. ||4|| That dance also captivated the mind of Lord Vrishabhadeva. Just as a very pure crystal also acquires color, i.e., redness, from contact with other substances. ||5|| Thinking, "How can the Lord be detached from the enjoyment of the kingdom and pleasures?" Indra then appointed a dancer whose lifespan was very short. ||6|| Then, that very beautiful celestial dancer named Neelanjana, was dancing with rasa, bhava, and laya, when, due to the depletion of the lamp of life, she became invisible in an instant. Just as a creeper of lightning disappears in an instant, so too, that goddess, who had a form that was as fickle and bright as lightning, disappeared in an instant. As soon as she disappeared, Indra, fearing a break in the rasa, immediately placed another goddess with the same body in that place, so that the dance continued as before. 

Page #464:
---------------------------
374
The Adipurana, the beautiful creeper of the Souldamini, was seen to be destroyed in an instant. The Indra of the Rasa-Maga, the Lord, assumed another form here. ||9|| That same place was delightful, that same earth was delightful, and that same dance was delightful. Even so, the Lord Vrishabhadeva knew the change in her form at that time. ||10|| Then, in his mind, there arose a thought, born of detachment from enjoyments, and he attained supreme emotion and renunciation. ||11|| Oh, how wonderful it is that this world is perishable, that Lakshmi is as fickle as a lightning-like creeper, that youth, body, health, and wealth are all fleeting. ||12|| The ignorant man, intoxicated by the pride of beauty, youth, and good fortune, binds himself to a permanent mind, but what is not perishable here? That is, all things are perishable. ||13|| The beauty of this form is like the redness of the evening sky, which is destroyed in an instant, and the bright youthful state is like the brilliance of a leaf, which quickly fades. ||14|| Like the flowers of creepers born in the forest, this youth is soon to be destroyed, enjoyments are like poison vines, and life is perishable. ||15|| This state of life is like the stream of water in a water clock, which quickly melts away, and this body is extremely foul-smelling and repulsive. ||16|| It is certain that in this impermanent world, even a shred of happiness is rare, and sorrow is great, yet it is surprising that foolish men desire happiness in it. ||17|| If one remembers even the great suffering that has been experienced in the hells in this life, then who would desire those enjoyments? ||18|| All the enjoyments that the beings who are constantly tormented experience are born to them in the hells, filled with the rising of the asata, in the form of suffering. ||19|| Even in a dream, happiness is not attained in the hells, which are full of suffering, because there is nothing but suffering day and night, and such suffering that binds the asata karma, which is the cause of suffering. ||20|| Having somehow escaped from those hells, this foolish being wanders through various births, 
1. He binds himself. 2. He takes many forms. 3. He walks on foot. 4. He is detached. 5. He is perishable. 6. -Lightning creeper - A., 50, 80, I., M., S. 7. Ignorant. 8. Here D., P. There L. 9. Perishable D., P. 10. Like a water clock, which is held with a stream of water for the purpose of smelling good. 11. He desires happiness for himself. He desires happiness B. 12. This means that he has escaped from the hells, without the rise of good karma. 13. This means long, abundant. 14. He makes it his own. 

Page #465:
---------------------------
## The Seventeenth Chapter

**375** The ignorant being wanders through the realms of earth, water, fire, air, and plants, experiencing great suffering. ||22||

It suffers greatly in these realms due to being dug up, heated in flames, quenched, struck by heavy objects, and cut. ||23||

The being wanders repeatedly through the subtle, coarse, sufficient, and insufficient states, holding the position of a clockwork mechanism. ||24||

Even in the animal realm, the being experiences suffering throughout its life due to being killed, bound, and obstructed. ||25||

First, it suffers the pain of birth, then the pain of old age, and even greater, the pain of death. Thus, it is submerged in the ocean of existence filled with hundreds of whirlpools of suffering. ||26||

It perishes in an instant, ages in an instant, and takes birth in an instant. Thus, it is constantly trapped in the mud of birth, death, old age, and disease, like a cow. ||27||

The Jinas believe that the animal realm is the greatest abode of suffering, as the ignorant being experiences endless suffering there, unaware of the passage of time. ||28||

Then, with some weakening of its evil karma, it emerges from the animal realm with great difficulty and, driven by the chariot of karma, attains the human realm. ||29||

Even there, it experiences various physical and mental sufferings, being restrained by the enemies of karma, though it does not desire them. ||30||

Serving others, poverty, worry, and sorrow cause great suffering to humans, which seems like a direct hell. ||31||

The human body is like a cart filled with the burden of suffering. It is certain that this cart will overturn and be destroyed within three or four days. ||32||

Although beings in the heavenly realm experience some happiness, 

Page #466:
---------------------------
376
Even in that heaven, there is separation from the beloved, and there are many gods who are of lesser fortune, who are pained by seeing those who are more fortunate than them. Therefore, their mental suffering is also experienced with great sorrow. ||3|| In this cycle of samsara, with its various transformations, the wretched being experiences sorrow due to the ripening of his evil karma. ||35|| See, this extremely beautiful, female-shaped instrument (the body of the dancing Neelajana) has been destroyed before our very eyes. ||36|| Considering the female form, which appears radiant from the outside, to be very beautiful, lustful people fall upon it and, upon falling, are destroyed like moths - they become bound by evil karma and are forever sorrowful. ||37|| This deceitful play, which Indra has enacted, that is, the dance of Neelajana, has surely been done by that wise one, after careful thought, only to awaken us. ||38|| Just as this body of Neelajana was perishable, destined for destruction, so too are the other objects of enjoyment of living beings perishable, destined to be destroyed, and only deceitful. ||39|| Therefore, what is the use of ornaments that are like burdens, what is the benefit of fragrant sandalwood paste that is like dirt, this dance is also useless, like the actions of a madman, and these songs are also purposeless, like sorrow. ||40|| If there is inherent beauty in the body, then what is the need for adornments? And if there is no inherent beauty in the body, then what can be achieved by these burdensome adornments? ||41|| Therefore, this form is to be condemned, this worthless samsara is to be condemned, this enjoyment of kingdom is to be condemned, and this fickle Lakshmi, like lightning, is to be condemned. ||42|| Thus, the eternal Lord Vrishabhadeva, whose soul was detached, became detached from enjoyments and, having obtained the time-bound liberation, quickly began to strive for liberation. ||43|| At that time, the purities took their place in the heart of the Lord, and they appeared as if they were his companions, sent by the Lakshmi of liberation, who had come before him. ||44|| At that time, all of this appeared to him as void, as he attained the highest state of contemplation, being united with the liberated women. ||45|| 

Page #467:
---------------------------
The Seventeenth Chapter

377. Then, Sudharmendra, the lord of the senses, knew the inner intention of the Guru. At that moment, he realized that the Lord had been using his knowledge of the future. ||46||

To awaken the Lord, the Laukantika Devas descended from the Brahma-loka, eager to cross over. ||47||

They were the Sarvasvata, Aditya, Agni, Aruna, Gardatoya, Tusita, Avyabadha, and Aristha, eight in number. They were the best among the Devas, having mastered all the scriptures in their previous births, with pure intentions. ||48-49||

They were the inhabitants of the Brahma-loka, peaceful, with auspicious Leshyas, possessing great powers. They were called Laukantika because they resided at the end of that world. ||50||

They shone like divine swans, eager to reach the banks of the river of liberation. They announced the arrival of the autumn season, symbolizing the auspiciousness of the Lord's initiation. ||51||

The Laukantika Devas offered flower garlands, as if they were offering parts of their own minds to worship the Lord's feet. ||52||

They first worshipped the Lord's feet with flowers from the Kalpavriksha, and then began to praise him with hymns filled with meaning. ||53||

O Lord, your desire to conquer the enemy of delusion clearly shows that you have decided to act as a brother to the Bhavyas, to help them like a brother. ||54||

O Deva, you are the ultimate light, the cause of all things. You are the one who will liberate the world from the fall of ignorance. ||55||

O Deva, by showing us the path of Dharma, you have made it possible for the Bhavyas to cross the insurmountable and terrifying ocean of Samsara with ease. ||56||

Your words, like rays of the sun, illuminate the entire world. They will awaken the lotus of knowledge in the Bhavyas. ||57||

The Lord was deeply concerned about the union of the liberated soul with the Angana, the embodiment of liberation. Therefore, the entire world seemed empty to him. ||45||

The Lord, Vripbhadeva, attained enlightenment, meaning he became detached from the world. The lord of the senses, Indra, knew all the intentions of the Guru through his knowledge of the future. ||46||

At that time, the Laukantika Devas descended from the Brahma-loka to awaken the Lord and worship his auspiciousness. ||47||

These Laukantika Devas were of eight types: Sarvasvata, Aditya, Agni, Aruna, Gardatoya, Tusita, Avyabadha, and Aristha. They were the best among the Devas, having mastered all the scriptures in their previous births, with pure intentions. ||48-49||

They resided in the Brahma-loka, the fifth heaven, always peaceful, with auspicious Leshyas, possessing great powers. They were called Laukantika because they resided at the end of that world. ||50||

They resembled swans of the Laukantika heaven, eager to reach the banks of the river of liberation. They announced the arrival of the autumn season, symbolizing the auspiciousness of the Lord's initiation. ||51||

The flower garlands offered by the Laukantika Devas seemed as if they were offering parts of their own minds to worship the Lord's feet. ||52||

They first worshipped the Lord's feet with flowers from the Kalpavriksha, and then began to praise him with hymns filled with meaning. ||53||

O Lord, your desire to conquer
Page #468:
---------------------------
## Translation:

378
They call you the Creator, the conqueror of the enemies of karma, the leader of the pilgrimage of Dharma, and the protector, the world teacher. ||54||
This entire world is submerged in the great mire of delusion. You will quickly rescue it by holding onto the hand of Dharma. ||59||
You are self-existent, self-enlightened, and the path of liberation. The fact that you will enlighten us proves that your heart is filled with compassion. ||60||
You are the Buddha, the self-enlightened one, with three pure eyes of knowledge, perception, and clairvoyance. You have attained the path of liberation by your own efforts, therefore you are the Buddha. ||61||
You have attained the path of liberation by your own efforts, therefore you are not to be enlightened by us. However, this duty of ours is making us eloquent today. ||62||
You do not need any other motivation to enlighten the world, just as the sun does not need any other motivation to illuminate the world. ||63||
Or, even though you are enlightened by us, you will enlighten us in the same way that a lit lamp benefits the world by illuminating it. ||64||
You are called the "Sadyajat" (born immediately) in the first auspicious birth, the "Vamatam" (beautiful) in the second auspicious birth, and now you are attaining the "Aghoratam" (gentle) in the third auspicious birth. ||65||
O Lord, you should work for the benefit of the world. These noble birds, the "Bhavya Chaataka," will be pleased to worship you as if they are seeing you for the first time. ||66||
Just as the rays of the sun illuminate the entire world and cause the lotuses to bloom, so too will your words, like radiant rays, illuminate the entire world and cause the lotuses of noble beings to bloom. ||57||
O God, people consider you the creator of the world, the conqueror of the enemies of karma, the leader of the pilgrimage of Dharma, and the protector, the world teacher. ||58||
O God, this entire world is submerged in the great mire of delusion. You will quickly rescue it by holding onto the hand of Dharma. ||59|| 

Page #469:
---------------------------
379
Saptadarsha Parva
This eternal time is fit to pour out your Dharma-amrita, O Dev, you are worthy to be the creator of Dharma. ||67|| "Victory to you, O Ish, conquer the Karma-warriors, conquer the Maha-Asura of delusion, conquer the haughty warriors of the Pariṣaha, conquer by the power of your tapas. ||68|| Arise, O Dev, for liberation, leave behind these enjoyed pleasures, for there is no difference in the taste of these pleasures, even after repeated experience by the beings. ||69|| Thus praised by the Laukantika Devas, who had requested him to perform tapas, the Dhaata, Vrishabhadeva, fixed his firm mind on performing tapas, on taking initiation. ||70|| With this very purpose, they, having achieved their goal, went to heaven, like swans illuminating the sky with the radiance of their bodies. ||71|| At the same time, the Nākinīs, with their many transformations, their seats trembling, appeared before the Purandara, the leader of the Devas, to witness the auspicious event. ||72|| Then, filling the sky-court, they surrounded Ayodhya city, and stood there, according to their respective groups, with their respective vehicles. ||73|| Then, for the auspicious occasion of his departure, the Devas, led by Indra, performed a grand abhisheka with the waters of the Kshira-sagara. ||74|| After the abhisheka, the Devas, with great respect, adorned him with divine ornaments, garments, garlands, and sandalwood from the Malaya mountains. ||75|| Then, after the abhisheka, Vrishabhadeva made his eldest son, Bharata, the king of this Bharatavarsha. ||76|| And he established Bahubali as the Yuvaraja. Thus, at that time, this earth was ruled by those two brothers, and was therefore called Rajanvati, meaning "possessed of a worthy king." ||77|| At the time of the celebration of the departure of Vrishabhadeva and the coronation of Bharata, both the heavenly and earthly realms were filled with joy. ||78||

May the Chataka, like a bird symbolizing the soul, be satisfied by serving you, like a Chataka is satisfied by the fresh rain clouds. ||66|| 

Page #470:
---------------------------
380
Aapuranama
On one hand, the celebration of the auspicious departure of the Lord was in full swing, while on the other, the ceremony of the bestowal of the earthly kingdom upon the two princes, Bharata and Bahubali, was being held. || 79 || - On one hand, the Rajarshi, the Lord Vrishabhadeva, was ready for his tapas-ruled kingdom, while on the other, the two young princes were striving to marry the goddess of fortune. || 80 || On one hand, the divine architects were constructing a palanquin to carry the Lord into the forest, while on the other, the Vastuvedis, the architects who knew the art of building palaces, mandapas, etc., were constructing a magnificent pavilion for the coronation of the princes. || 81 || On one hand, Sachi Devi had created a rangoli, with colorful squares all around, while on the other, Yashovati and Sunanda Devi had created a rangoli with great joy, with beautiful squares of various kinds all around. || 82 || On one hand, the Dikkumari Devis were adorned with auspicious substances, while on the other, the beautiful Varanganas, adorned with clothes and ornaments, were standing with auspicious substances in their hands. || 83 || On one hand, the Lord Vrishabhadeva was surrounded by the best of the gods, who were extremely pleased, while on the other, the two princes were surrounded by thousands of Kshatriya kings. || 84 || On one hand, the celestial beings were offering flower garlands to Lord Vrishabhadeva, praising him, while on the other, the citizens were throwing auspicious rice grains, with blessings, at the two princes. || 85 || On one hand, the Apsaras were dancing in the air, without touching the earth, while on the other, the Varanganas were dancing gracefully, with their feet moving in a playful manner. || 86 || On one hand, the sound of the great drums of the gods was filling all directions, while on the other, the loud sound of the auspicious drums like Nandipatha was spreading everywhere. || 87 || On one hand, the beautiful auspicious songs of the Kinnara race were being sung, while on the other, the sweet sound of the auspicious songs of the women of the inner palace was being heard. || 88 || On one hand, the roar of the victory cries of millions of gods was echoing, while on the other, the sound of millions of people reciting scriptures was resounding. || 89 ||
The celestial and earthly realms were both filled with joy during these celebrations. || 78 || 

Page #471:
---------------------------
## The Seventeenth Festival

The people, both human and divine, were filled with excitement for the two great festivals. The royal palace, filled with supreme bliss, was a spectacle of joy.  

The king, relieved of the burden of his kingdom, was free from worry and ready to take his vows.  He had divided his vast empire among his sons, leaving no room for doubt or anxiety.  

The king, free from worldly attachments, sought the guidance of his family, including the great king Nabhiraj, before boarding the divine palanquin, the Sudarshana, crafted by Indra.  

With great respect, Indra, who had supported the king with his own hand, helped him ascend the palanquin, as if he were taking a vow to embrace the path of liberation.  

The king, eager to embrace the path of liberation, seemed to be ascending the palanquin as if he were entering the embrace of the divine consort of liberation.  

Adorned with garlands, his body shining with sandalwood paste and draped in fine garments, the king, riding the palanquin, resembled a divine bridegroom, the perfect match for the goddess of fortune.  

The king, having attained the purity of the soul, first ascended the path of liberation, and then the palanquin.  He seemed to be practicing the ascent of the stages of spiritual progress.  

The kings carried the palanquin for seven steps, then the celestial beings carried it for seven steps in the sky.  The celestial beings, filled with joy, then lifted the palanquin onto their shoulders and carried it swiftly through the heavens.  

This is enough to praise the greatness of the king.  Even Indra, the king of the gods, became a mere carrier of the palanquin.  

The people were reciting scriptures.  

This is how both the great festivals were celebrated, with the divine and human beings filled with excitement.  The royal palace, filled with supreme bliss, was a spectacle of joy.  

Page #472:
---------------------------
382
Then the auspicious ones, the flower-rainers, rejoiced. The cool wind, bearing the fragrance of the Mandakini, blew. ||10||
The celestial attendants chanted auspicious hymns in high voices. The celestial beings sounded the departure-announcing drums. ||102||
"This is the time for the Lord of the Universe to engage in the endeavor of conquering the demon Mohara!" Thus, the celestials proclaimed, by order of Indra. ||103||
Filled with joy, the gods and demons raised a triumphant clamor, filling the entire sky with their salutations to the Lord. ||104||
The sky was filled with the sounds of auspicious music, repeated victory cries, and the booming of great drums. ||105||
The radiance of the Indras illuminated the entire sky, and the resounding sound of the drums reverberated throughout the universe. ||106||
The celestial fans, waved by the hands of the Indras, fluttered in the sky, resembling a flock of swans. ||107||
The sound of millions of celestial drums, struck by the hands of millions of celestial attendants, filled the sky. ||108||
Celestial women danced gracefully in the sky, their movements adorned with umbrellas, canopies, and other intricate dance forms. ||109||
The celestial singers, with their melodious voices, sang sweet and harmonious songs of auspiciousness and celebration. ||110||
The celestial attendants chanted auspicious hymns in high voices, along with other appropriate and pleasing verses. ||111||
Those who were filled with joy, bearing colorful banners, ran about in a joyous and festive manner. ||112||
Their palanquin was carried by Indra himself. ||100||
At that time, the celestial beings of the Yaksha clan were showering fragrant flowers, and a cool breeze, carrying the scent of the Ganges, was blowing. ||101|| 

Page #473:
---------------------------
The seventeenth chapter, in which the blowing of conch shells and the beating of drums are described, and the gods are described as having their limbs contracted like a ball. The gods, filled with devotion, were blowing conch shells and beating drums, their limbs contracted like a ball. [13]

The goddesses Lakshmi and others, holding lotuses in their hands, were proceeding ahead, and the Dikkumari goddesses, holding auspicious substances and offerings, were following them with great respect. [11]

When all these special features were manifesting in their proper order, the glorious Lord Vrishabhadeva, adorned with magnificent splendor, filled the entire world with joy, and mounted on a divine palanquin made of precious jewels, set out from Ayodhya. At that time, he was eclipsing the splendor of Mount Meru, which stood on the jeweled earth. [115]

The radiance of the ornaments adorning his neck, spreading like a red halo around his face, made his face appear like the sun. With the brilliance of that sun-like face, he eclipsed the light of the moon, the king of the celestial luminaries. [116]

With a tall crown adorned with gems, he eclipsed the brilliance of the crowns of the Agni Kumaras, the kings of the fire gods, whose crowns were ablaze with flames. [117]

The garland of flowers adorning his crown, like a crown of flowers, seemed to display the joy of his mind, as if he were wearing his own mental happiness on his head. [119]

The pure radiance of his eyes, spreading in all directions, seemed to be offering the graceful movements of the eyes that are made during the renunciation of Indra, as if he were teaching Indra how the eyes behave during renunciation. [120]

The red glow of his lips, slightly revealed by a smile, seemed to wash away all remaining traces of passion with his purity. [121]

The beautiful garland adorning his chest, like a waterfall cascading down a mountain, seemed to mock Mount Sumeru, which has a waterfall cascading down its side. [122]

The splendor of his arms, adorned with bracelets and other ornaments, seemed to rebuke the radiance of the gems adorning the hood of the serpent king. [123]

The splendor of his loins, encircled by a girdle, seemed to accept only the splendor of Jambudvipa, which is surrounded by a platform. [124] 

Page #474:
---------------------------
The Adipurana, adorned with the shining ornaments of his arms, was a sight to behold. The brilliance of the jewels on the hoods of the serpent kings was eclipsed by his radiance. (123) With his hips adorned with the Kanchi garland, he accepted the homage of the Jambudvipa, the land of the righteous. (124) His nails, shining with the brilliance of the sun, bestowed blessings upon all who bowed before him, even unto the end of the universe. (125) His body, radiating with the light of the sun, eclipsed the brilliance of all the gods, even the great Indra. (126) With the beauty of his every limb, he seemed to cast away the attachments of the world, which had been nurtured for so long. (127) He was adorned with a white umbrella, its brilliance like that of the moon, which seemed to serve him, dispelling his weariness. (128) He was fanned by the celestial beings, their chauris like a cloud of white, as if the ocean of milk itself were serving him, in celebration of his birth. (129) Thus, the great Vrishabhadeva, surrounded by the gods, emerged from Ayodhya. The people of the city hailed him with joy. (130) Go forth, O Jagannatha, to achieve your goal. May your path be auspicious. O God, may you complete your task and return to us soon. (131) O Lord, there is no one like you who can protect the helpless. Therefore, please turn your mind to our protection. (132) O Lord, all your actions are for the benefit of mankind. Who else will you bless, if you abandon us without reason? (133) Thus, the people of the city, with hearts filled with joy and devotion, bowed their heads in reverence, praising the Lord with words of admiration and heartfelt prayer. (134) At that time, some of the people of the city were saying to each other, "The gods are taking the Lord away. We do not know the reason. Is it for play, or for some other purpose?" (135) 

Page #475:
---------------------------
## The Safdarsha Festival

Even though the Meru mountain was destroyed long ago, it was brought back by Indra, who desired to celebrate a birth festival.  [136]  This same story is happening again today, due to our good fortune.  Therefore, no one should be distressed, others said to each other.  [137]

What is this glorious sun that is seated in this palanquin?  It shines brightly in the sky, blinding our eyes with its radiance.  [138]  Like the king of mountains, the Meru, adorned with a golden peak, shines brightly among the Kulachala mountains, so too does the Lord, adorned with a crown and radiating the brilliance of heated gold, shine brightly among the Indras.  [139]

Who is this, with eyes fixed on the Lord's face, performing wondrous acts?  Ah, it is Indra, the Lord's obedient servant.  [140]  Look here, the radiance of the bodies of these mighty gods who carry the palanquin spreads in all directions, like a group of lightning bolts.  [141]

Oh, the Lord's merit is so great, it cannot be described by words or conceived by mind.  Look, these gods, bowing down with the weight of devotion, are offering their salutations.  [142]

Here, the divine drums are sounding with sweet and deep tones, and here, the sound of the mridangas is loud and deep.  [143]  Here, there is dancing, here, songs are being sung, here, there is auspicious music, here, there are waving chamaras, and here, there is an immense gathering of gods.  [144]

Is this a moving heaven, filled with apsaras and vimanas?  Or has someone painted this extraordinary picture in the sky?  [145]

Is this magic, a magician's trick, or is it a delusion of our minds?  This wonder is completely unprecedented, we have never seen such a wonder before.  [146]

Thus, many people, filled with wonder at the sight, spoke freely, with their own opinions and interpretations.  [147] 

Page #476:
---------------------------
## English Translation:

386
Adipurana
||157
When this Dev (Vrishabhadeva) descended to earth, since then there has been no interruption in the coming and going of the Devas. ||148|| Seeing the dance of the celestial damsel named Neelanjana, the Dev (Vrishabhadeva) experienced detachment from worldly pleasures without any specific reason. ||149|| At that time, the venerable Laukantika Devas, who had arrived, addressed him, which further strengthened his mind in detachment. ||150|| Detached from desires and worldly pleasures, he even became indifferent to his own body. He now considers palaces, chariots, and kingdoms as mere grass. ||151|| Just as a rutting elephant enters the forest seeking pleasure in roaming freely, similarly, Dev Vrishabhadeva desires to enter the forest for the sake of freedom and happiness, and the Devas are encouraging him to go. ||152|| Even if the Dev resides in the forest, happiness will still be under his control. For the well-being of his subjects, he has placed his sons on the throne. ||153|| Therefore, this journey that the Dev has begun will bring him happiness, and may these people also prosper by their good fortune. Let no one be disheartened. ||154|| May the Dev Vrishabhadeva, whose soul is indestructible, live long, achieve victory, be prosperous, and return to protect us. ||155|| Today, the great soul, Bharat, is giving a great gift, fulfilling the hopes of the world, by the command of the Tribhuki. ||156|| Be content with the golden gift that Bharat has given. Here, horses are being given along with their palanquins, and here, elephants are being distributed. ||157|| Thus, with various words of praise from both the ignorant and the wise, Dev Vrishabhadeva slowly moved towards the outskirts of the city. ||158|| 

Page #477:
---------------------------
307
The Seventeenth Chapter

When the Lord was about to depart, the queens, led by Yaswati, along with the ministers, followed Him. Their eyes were filled with tears of sorrow. ||159|| Their bodies, like creepers, were withered, and they had removed their ornaments. Some were stumbling, their feet unsteady, as they followed the Lord. ||160|| Some were consumed by the fire of grief, their limbs trembling, their eyes closed in a faint. They fell to the ground. ||161|| "Where are you going, O Lord? Where will you wait for us? How far do you have to go?" Some asked repeatedly. ||162|| Others felt a tremor in their hearts, a throbbing in their breasts, a weariness in their bodies, a stammer in their speech, and tears in their eyes. ||163|| "Don't bring bad luck by crying, child," they were told. One woman stopped crying, but her tears remained trapped in her eyes, making her seem as if she were bursting with grief. ||164|| Unable to bear the auspiciousness of the departure, another woman held back her tears, but her eyes were filled with them, making her seem as if she had been swallowed by grief. ||165|| The speed of their movement caused the necklaces of some to break, scattering their pearls. These scattered pearls made them seem as if they were shedding large tears. ||166|| The hair of some women had come loose, their garlands of flowers had fallen, their garments were loose, and their eyes were filled with tears. They were in a state of great sorrow. ||167|| Some women were so overwhelmed with grief that they were carried in palanquins and comforted and consoled in various ways. They were barely able to keep from fainting. ||168|| Some women, though valiant and courageous, had tearful eyes. They followed their Lord, their hearts filled with devotion, like pure-hearted queens. ||169|| 

Page #478:
---------------------------
288
The Adipurana states that the departure procession was marked by sorrow, not joy. The queen, with a heavy heart, followed slowly behind her husband.  "Hurry, hurry, Devi, suppress your grief. The Lord is being escorted by the gods. He is now within our sight, within our reach."  Thus, the elder women of the inner palace consoled Yaswati and Sunanda, who then set out on foot.  What more need be said?  Having heard the news of the Lord's departure, the ladies of the court, leaving behind their umbrellas, fans, and other paraphernalia, followed in his footsteps.  "Let there be no anxiety," said the elders, accompanying the queen.  "This is the Lord's command."  And so, they blocked the path of the women of the inner palace, just as the mighty ocean restrains the flow of rivers.  With a long, hot sigh, the queen, filled with despair, lamented her good fortune and turned back.  However, Yaswati and Sunanda, driven by their devotion to the Lord, accompanied by the chief women of the inner palace, followed behind, carrying the offerings for worship.  At the same time, King Nabhiraj, surrounded by Queen Marudevi and a hundred kings, set out to witness the Lord's auspicious departure.  Emperor Bharat, along with the citizens, ministers, and nobles of his lineage, and his younger brothers, followed behind, carrying great wealth.  The Lord ascended into the sky, not too far, so that the people could see him clearly, and began his journey with the auspicious rites mentioned earlier.  Thus, the Lord Vrishabhadeva, the World Teacher, reached the vast forest of Siddhathaka. 

Page #479:
---------------------------
The Seventeenth Chapter

382. Then, spreading over the sky and earth, the army of the Indra reached the Siddharthaka forest, where the birds were singing, as if calling the army. ||182||

383. There, on a stone slab, previously established by the gods, a magnificent, pure, and elevated stone, like the culmination of the Lord, was present. ||183||

384. Made of moonstone, it shone with the beauty of the moon, and was like the pure glory of the Lord, gathered in one place. ||184||

385. Radiant by nature, beautiful, and perfectly round, it seemed like a Siddha-kshetra, descended to earth to witness the glory of the Lord. ||185||

386. The cool shade of the trees blocked the heat of the sun, and the flowers from the branches of the trees were falling on it in abundance. ||186||

387. The stone was adorned with auspicious sandalwood marks, and on it, Indrani had drawn designs with her hand, using powdered jewels as offerings. ||187||

388. A magnificent canopy was created with large cloths, and the sky was filled with multi-colored flags, fluttering in the gentle breeze. ||188||

389. The directions were filled with the fragrance of incense, and near the stone, there was an abundance of auspicious treasures. ||189||

390. Thus, on this stone, adorned with many virtues and auspicious signs, Lord Rishabhadeva descended from the palanquin carried by the gods from the earth. ||190||

391. Seeing the stone, the Lord remembered the Panduka-sila, which had borne the glory of his birth and anointment. ||191||

392. Then, for a moment, the Lord sat on the stone and honored the assembly, filled with humans, gods, and the earth-king, with appropriate teachings. ||192|| 

Page #480:
---------------------------
The Adipurana
Again, the Lord, with a gentle and deep voice, asked his relatives, bound by love, for permission to take initiation. ||193||
When the commotion of the people had subsided, and they had all gone back, and the auspicious beginning of the morning had arrived, and Indra was himself serving the Lord, then the Lord Vrishabhadeva, standing within the curtain, renounced all internal and external possessions, having vowed to be without possessions, and considering all things in the world with equanimity, and filled with good intentions, renounced clothes, ornaments, and garlands, etc., to destroy delusion. ||194-196||
The ornaments that were previously shining brightly on the Lord's body, became devoid of luster at that time, due to being separated from the Lord's body. So it is, because what luster can remain when there is a change of location? That is, none. ||197||
Having taken the vow of non-possession as the main thing, the Lord Vrishabhadeva renounced, with the witness of the gods and the Siddhas, all that was sentient, such as maidservants, servants, cows, bulls, etc., and all that was non-sentient, such as gems, pearls, corals, etc., without any expectation. ||198-199||
Then, the Lord, facing east, sat in the lotus posture, and bowing to the Siddha Supreme, he plucked his hair in five handfuls. ||200||
The brave and wise Lord Vrishabhadeva, plucking many hair-like vines, resembling the main vines of the deluding karma, took the Jain initiation, becoming a Digambara. ||201||
The Lord, renouncing all sinful beginnings, took the Samayika vow, and also took the divisions of the vow, such as vow-secrecy, committee, etc. ||202||
On the ninth day of the bright fortnight of the month of Chaitra, at an auspicious time and a good sunrise, the Lord renounced the world in the afternoon. ||203||

Page #481:
---------------------------
The seventeenth chapter: The hair, purified by long dwelling on the head of the Lord, was taken by Indra, his mind filled with joy, and placed in a casket of jewels. ||204||

The hair, black as the dark spots on the moon, stood erect, adorned with a white cloth and surrounded by a heap of jewels, like the rays of the moon. ||205||

These hairs, having touched the head of the Lord, have attained the highest state. Therefore, they should be placed in a suitable place, free from disturbance. The fifth ocean of milk is naturally pure. Therefore, they should be offered to it and placed in its pure water. ||206-207||

These hairs are blessed, having dwelt on the head of the Lord, the master of the universe. And that ocean of milk is blessed, which will receive these hairs as an offering. ||208||

Thinking thus, Indra, with great reverence, took the hairs and, with great devotion, carried them to the ocean of milk and cast them in. ||209||

It is true that even a low person becomes worthy of respect by associating with great people, for even the black hairs, by associating with the Lord, became worthy of worship. ||210||

The gods also worshipped with extraordinary reverence all the clothes, ornaments, and garlands that the Lord had discarded. ||211||

At that time, four thousand other kings also took initiation. These kings did not know the Lord's opinion, but were only motivated by devotion to their master. ||212||

"Whatever is pleasing to our master is also especially pleasing to us." Thinking only this, they became initiated and became Dravyalingi ascetics. ||213||

"To follow the Lord's wishes is the duty of servants." Thinking this, they foolishly embraced the state of Nirgrantha, nakedness, out of a desire for material gain, not out of devotion. ||214||

These kings, born into great lineages, desired to manifest their supreme devotion to the Lord. ||215|| 

Page #482:
---------------------------
392
The Adi Purana is the authority for us regarding the matters of this world and the next.  Considering this, the best of kings, the Kachchas, took initiation. ||216||
Some kings took initiation out of affection, some out of delusion, and some out of fear. ||217||
Surrounded by those who were not yet fully restrained, the Lord Vrishabhadeva shone like a great Kalpa tree surrounded by small Kalpa trees. ||218||
The Lord, whose brilliance was inherent, shone even more brightly due to the radiance of his tapasya. He shone like the sun whose inherent brilliance is intensified by the autumn season. ||219||
Just as gold heated by fire shines brightly, so too did the Lord's naked form, adorned with excellent radiance, shine brightly. ||220||
Then, the Lord Adinath, worshipped by the gods, shone like a Kalpa tree, embraced by the vine of initiation. ||221||
At that time, the Lord's incomparable form shone brightly. Even Indra, with his thousand eyes, could not be satisfied by seeing it. ||222||
Then, the Indra of heaven, greatly pleased, praised the Lord Vrishabhadeva, the master of the three worlds, the supreme light, and the lord of speech, in a loud voice. ||223||
O Lord, you are the creator of the world (the one who arranges the world in the form of karma-bhami), the master, and the giver of desired results. Therefore, we praise you to destroy our undesired things. ||224||
O Lord, how can we, who are mere beings, praise your countless qualities? However, we, being under the influence of devotion, are merely expanding our own souls by the pretense of praise. ||225||
O Lord, just as the rays of the sun shine forth when the cloud cover is removed, so too do your qualities shine forth when the impurities of the body, speech, and mind are removed. ||226||
They had adopted the fragrance-free conduct of the Lord because they desired it. ||215|| 

Page #483:
---------------------------
## Saptadarsha Parva

**Verse 226:**
Your virtues are shining brightly, as the external and internal impurities, in the form of dravya karma and bhava karma, have been eradicated.

**Verse 227:**
O Bhagavan, you are adopting the pure Jain Diksha, which is like the Jain scriptures, purifying the human world. You are the well-wisher of all and bringer of happiness, therefore, salutations to you.

**Verse 228:**
O Bhagavan, your Parameshwari Diksha is like the Ganga River, removing the suffering of the three worlds and purifying them. This Diksha of yours will always purify us.

**Verse 229:**
O Bhagavan, this Diksha is like a stream of wealth, satisfying us. Just as a stream of wealth is Suvarna (golden), this Diksha is also Suvarna (possessing excellent fame). Just as a stream of wealth is Ruchira (radiant and beautiful), this Diksha is also Ruchira (giving the feeling of right conduct). Just as a stream of wealth is Hridya (pleasing to the heart), this Diksha is also Hridya (pleasing to the hearts of the righteous). Just as a stream of wealth is adorned with radiant jewels, this Diksha is also adorned with the radiant jewels of right faith, right knowledge, and right conduct.

**Verse 230:**
O Bhagavan, you, who are striving for liberation, were already enlightened by your pure consequences. The celestial beings, due to their nature, were enlightened later.

**Verse 231:**
O Muninath, the intention of taking Diksha, which you, the creator of the world, have, has been attained by you. Therefore, you are self-enlightened.

**Verse 232:**
O Nath, you have accepted the Diksha of Nirvana, considering this worldly wealth as unworthy and fickle, to destroy your afflictions.

**Verse 233:**
O Bhagavan, no one can stop you today as you enter the forest, having uprooted the stake of attachment like a drunken elephant.

**Verse 234:**
O Dev, these enjoyments are like those enjoyed in dreams, this wealth is perishable, and this life is fickle. 

Page #484:
---------------------------
394
Discarding the *Adipurana*, you have cast away fickle Lakshmi, broken the bonds of affection, and scattered wealth like dust. You are united with liberation. ||235||
You are indifferent to worldly Lakshmi, but you are deeply attached to the Lakshmi of liberation, and you find supreme joy in it. It is amazing that you are drawn to the Lakshmi of austerity even without being attached to sensual pleasures. ||236||
You are detached from worldly prosperity, but you are attached to the prosperity of austerity, and you are eager for the prosperity of liberation. This shows that your detachment has been lost. (This is an example of *vyajostuti*, where praise is disguised as criticism.) ||237||
Knowing what is to be discarded and what is to be accepted, you have discarded everything that is to be discarded. How can you be impartial when you want to accept what is to be accepted? (This is also an example of *vyajostuti*.) ||238||
You want to give up worldly happiness and attain happiness that is independent. You want to give up small things and attain great things. Where is your renunciation in this? (This is also an example of *vyajostuti*.) ||239||
"The heart of yogis knows only self-knowledge." But you see others as yourself. What kind of self-knowledge do you have? ||240||
All the gods and demons are serving you as they did before. Even Lakshmi is secretly serving you. Where did your austerity come from? How can you be called an ascetic? ||241||
You have adopted a life of renunciation and have given up the desire for worldly pleasures. Yet, good people still call you happy. ||242||
You possess the three powers of *mati-jnana*, *shruta-jnana*, and *avadhi-jnana*. You want to destroy the army of your enemies, which is karma. Even in this kingdom of austerity, you still have the desire to conquer your enemies. ||243||
You have dispelled the darkness of ignorance with the lamp of knowledge. You are not troubled by the fall of your enemies. You are walking on the path of liberation. ||244||

Page #485:
---------------------------
The Seventeenth Chapter, the Great Rain of Karma-Destroying Merit:

This is the blazing flame of the fire of age, towards that which is the rain of merit, the eightfold destruction of karma. ||245||

The rain of merit, the destruction of the eightfold karma, is the true essence. There, the axe of knowledge, the three jewels, is its own. ||246||

The wealth of knowledge and detachment, which is not found elsewhere, is the means of liberation, and the destroyer of the world for the devotees. ||247||

Thus, even though you possess the wealth of knowledge, which benefits both yourself and others, you are the greatest of the detached, so I bow to you. ||248||

Thus praising, the Indra-like beings, having taken the pure remembrance of your qualities into their hearts, went to their respective places. ||249||

Then, King Bharata, with great devotion to his Guru, worshipped him with various garlands of words, being full of Lakshmi. ||250||

Then, King Bharata, with great devotion to Rudra, worshipped the Muni-Indra, who had attained Samadhi, who was always mindful of his own work, with fragrant water, fragrance, flowers, Akshata, lamps, and incense. ||251||

And, the king, whose Lakshmi was very vast, worshipped the feet of the Lord with ripe, beautiful mangoes, jamuns, kathas, jackfruits, vadahals, bananas, pomegranates, bijouras, betel nuts, and beautiful bunches of coconuts. ||252||

Thus, King Bharata, who had worshipped the feet of the Lord, whose knees were on the earth, and whose eyes were filled with tears of joy, washed his hands with the pure water of the rays of the jewels in his excellent crown. ||253|| 

Page #486:
---------------------------
396
The king Bharat, who was adorned with many praises that revealed his devotion to the Guru and destroyed all his sins, and who was accompanied by many princes and his younger brothers, set out for Ayodhya. ||25|| Then, as the sun's rays gently touched the face of the west, like a woman, and the wind gently moved the fluttering flags, the king Bharat, who was incapable of disobeying his Guru's command, entered Ayodhya. ||25||
The king Bharat, who was destined to be a Chakravarti, resided in Ayodhya, serving the great Lord Vrishabhadeva with reverence from afar, and engaged in activities that benefited all beings. He always kept his brothers happy and honored his Gurus with respect. Thus, he ruled the earth, marked by a single umbrella, for a long time. ||256||
Thus, the king of kings, Bharat, having performed the proper service to the Guru during the Tapas-Kalyanak, returned to his city of Ayodhya, accompanied by his younger brothers. Every morning, he would rise with the group of kings, remembering his Guru with devotion, and protect all directions, destroying the enemies, just as the Jina, Vrishabhanatha, had done before. ||257||
Thus ends the seventeenth chapter, named "Bhagavan's Tapas-Kalyanak," in the Trishattilakshana Mahapurana Sangraha, composed by the venerable Jinasena Acharya. ||17||

Page #487:
---------------------------
## Chapter Eighteen
5
11
Then, abandoning all actions, he became absorbed in the practice of austerities. He remained silent, relying on his own self, for the liberation of the world. ||3|| The great sage, the master of austerities, having vowed to observe a fast for six months, remained steadfast. ||2|| He stood in a straight, even, and spacious place, maintaining the posture of Kayotsarga. At that time, the distance between the tips of his feet was one Vitasti (twelve angulas), and the distance between his ankles was four angulas. ||3|| He stood with his lotus feet placed on a hard stone slab, as if he were standing on a secret Padmasana brought by Lakshmi herself. ||4|| The eternal one, the imperishable, was reciting some text silently within himself, with indistinct syllables. It seemed as if a mountain whose caves echoed with the sound of hidden waterfalls. ||5|| He was adorned with a very serene and radiant form, with both arms hanging down. He appeared as if he were embodying the supreme form of tranquility for the attainment of meditation. ||6|| He wore a head adorned with a very distinct circular halo, with a radiant Ushnisha (the knot on the crown of the head) that rivaled the sun's disc. ||7|| He had a beautiful face, free from any frown or sidelong glances, with steady eyes and lips that were closed and free from any distress. ||8|| The groups of illusions that were flying around his face, attracted by the fragrance of his sweet-smelling breath, seemed like particles of impurity (black, blue, etc.) being expelled. ||9|| 
93
Then, the Lord Vrishabhadeva, the sovereign of all beings, abandoned all attachment to his body and, becoming absorbed in the practice of austerities, remained silent, for the attainment of liberation. ||1|| The great sages, the masters of austerities, who have restrained all the modifications of the mind and the external senses, remained steadfast, having vowed to observe a fast for six months. ||2|| They stood in a straight, even, and spacious place, maintaining the posture of Kayotsarga. At that time, the distance between the tips of their feet was one Vitasti (twelve angulas), and the distance between their ankles was four angulas. ||3|| They stood with their lotus feet placed on a hard stone slab, as if they were standing on a secret Padmasana brought by Lakshmi herself. ||4|| They, the eternal ones, the imperishable, were reciting some text silently within themselves, with indistinct syllables. It seemed as if a mountain whose caves echoed with the sound of hidden waterfalls. ||5|| They were adorned with a very serene and radiant form, with both arms hanging down. They appeared as if they were embodying the supreme form of tranquility for the attainment of meditation. ||6|| They wore a head adorned with a very distinct circular halo, with a radiant Ushnisha (the knot on the crown of the head) that rivaled the sun's disc. ||7|| They had a beautiful face, free from any frown or sidelong glances, with steady eyes and lips that were closed and free from any distress. ||8|| The groups of illusions that were flying around their faces, attracted by the fragrance of their sweet-smelling breath, seemed like particles of impurity (black, blue, etc.) being expelled. ||9|| 

Page #488:
---------------------------
398
The Adipurana, with his long, outstretched arms, shining and tall, was like a Kalpa tree adorned with two branches at the top. ||10|| Though his body was shaded by an invisible umbrella, born of the greatness of his austerities, he was indifferent to it, being free from desire. ||11|| The tips of the branches of the nearby trees, swayed by the gentle breeze, seemed to be waving away his fatigue, like fans. ||12|| After his initiation, he attained the knowledge of Manahparyaya, and thus, the glorious Lord, possessing the four knowledges of Mati, Shruta, Avadhi, and Manahparyaya, was like a palace with a lamp burning within. ||13|| Just as a king, through his ministers, observes the comings and goings of his enemies, the other world, so too, the Lord Vrishabhadeva, through his four strong knowledges, was observing the comings and goings of all beings in the other world, their past lives. ||14|| When the Lord Vrishabhadeva was thus seated, in complete detachment, the kings of Kacha, Maha-Kacha, and others, lost their patience. ||15|| Those kings, who considered themselves to be munis, having taken initiation only two or three months ago, lost their patience, overwhelmed by the wind of Paripahar. ||16|| Unable to follow the extremely difficult path of their Guru, the Lord Vrishabhadeva, these self-proclaimed munis, abandoning their pride, began to speak to each other loudly. ||17|| "Oh, what patience, what steadfastness, what strength in his thighs! Who else, except him, could dare to do such a thing?" ||18|| How long will this Lord remain standing, without any laziness, enduring the obstacles arising from faith, etc., like an immovable mountain? ||19||
1. Dipt-M, L. 2. Kalpandhip iva-. 3. Ibochchagra-A, M, L. Avenantashakhadyayalam. Krit. 4. Vanchharahitatvat. 5. Dakshatechchah M, L. 6. Vidyutaih M, L. 7. Vinashitasramah. 8. Nirupitam. 9. Uttaragatigamanagamanam, pale shatrujangamanagamanam. 10. Kachaadinaam. 11. Dhairysya. 12. Dvau va trayau va dvitrah. 13. Na bhavanti. 14. Dhairya. 15. Manobal. 

Page #489:
---------------------------
Chapter Eighteen
399. He may stand for one day, two days, or even three or four days. But he is tormenting us by standing for months. ||20||
It would have been better if he had eaten and drunk himself and satisfied us with food and drink, and then stood. There would have been no harm in that. But he is completely fasting, without any compensation for hunger and thirst, and is thus standing and destroying us. ||21||
Or, for what purpose is he standing like this? There is no such quality as standing like this in the six qualities of kings, such as alliance, war, etc. ||22||
In this forest full of many troubles, he is standing without protecting himself. This makes it seem that he is not a knower of dharma, because one should protect oneself with effort. ||23||
He is often disgusted with life and wants to leave his body. But we are disgusted with this life-taking penance. ||24||
Therefore, until the time of his yoga is over, that is, until his meditation is complete, we will sustain our lives by eating the roots, fruits, etc., that grow in the forest. ||25||
Thus, some men, indifferent to penance, spoke in a very humble way, ready to adopt a humble way of life. ||26||
Others, ignorant of what should be done, stood around him, knowing the past and future, their minds sometimes steady and sometimes unsteady. ||27||
They were saying to each other, "When he was in the kingdom, that is, when he was ruling, we slept when he slept, ate when he ate, stood when he stood, and walked when he walked. And now that he is in penance, that is, when he is 
1. Bahumasam (?)
2. Santarpya
3. Anashanavan
4. -Ni:pratikara: A, P
5. Nasham
6. Urdhvajanu: -Durvgyam Yosita A
7. Sandhivigrahayanaasanadvaidhasrayalaksane
8. Kshatriyanam
9. Virakta:
10. Tyaktum
11. Viraktah
12. Vanabhavai:
13. Asanashadana: 'Kashipurbhojanavadi'
14. Pranapravrittim
15. Purvaapara Vidam
16. Antarange Panchalah
17. Asritam 

Page #490:
---------------------------
400
This act of service has been performed by us before. But the time for our pride in our lineage has passed, and now we are in danger of losing our lives. ||29|| We have been living in the forest, without food or drink, ever since the Lord entered it. We have stood firm for as long as we could, but now we are weak. What should we do? ||30|| The Lord is merciless, making us perform this useless penance. Should we, who are weak, compete with him and die? ||31|| This Lord will not return home. Who is capable of following his path? He is a free-willed being, and his actions should not be imitated by anyone. ||32|| Is my mother alive? Is my father alive? Does my wife remember me? Are my people well? ||33|| Unable to stay there, many people expressed their inner thoughts and, desiring to go home, repeatedly went before the Lord and bowed down at his feet. ||34|| Some said, "Ah, this Lord is a great hero! He has conquered his own self and has renounced the wealth of his kingdom for some reason. He will surely be reunited with it again." ||35|| The best of speakers, the Lord Vrishabhadeva, who is steadfast in his resolve, will surely end his penance today or tomorrow and be reunited with his kingdom. Then, he will surely expel us, who have lost our enthusiasm or have been deceitful in this matter, and make us destitute. ||36-37|| Or, if we leave the Lord, King Bharata will torment us. Therefore, we will endure until the Lord's penance is complete. ||38||

Page #491:
---------------------------
## The Aparadah Parva

The Lord Yamala will surely become a Siddhayanga, meaning his yoga will be perfected. He will surely accept us, those who have endured many hardships.  

We will not suffer from the Lord or his son Bharat. They will be pleased and satisfy us with offerings, respect, and wealth.

Many munis, though troubled within, remained steadfast. Others, though trying to be courageous, were unable to maintain their composure.

Some, driven by pride, remained steadfast. Others, falling to the ground, remembered the Lord's feet.

The king, through various conversations and thoughts, became detached from the hardships of penance and focused on livelihood.

Some, unable to bear the sight, looked at the Lord's face. Others, ashamed, turned their faces away. Thus, they gradually began to fall from their path.

Some sought guidance from the Lord Vripbhadev, while others, without asking, circumambulated him and bowed, seeking ways to sustain themselves.

"Oh Lord, you are our only refuge, we have no other path," they cried, fleeing and seeking ways to protect their lives.

Many, trembling with fear, turned away from the Lord and abandoned their vows.

Some fell at the Lord's feet, pleading, "Oh Lord, protect us! Our bodies are emaciated from hunger, please forgive us."  They then disappeared.

**Notes:**

* **Siddhayanga:** A perfected yogi.
* **Aparadah Parva:** A section of the Jain scriptures that describes the events surrounding the Lord Yamala's attainment of Siddhayanga.
* **Munis:** Jain ascetics.
* **Bharat:** The son of Lord Yamala.
* **Vripbhadev:** A Jain deity.
* **Sankalpa-Vikalpa:** Thoughts and doubts.
* **Penance:**  Austerities practiced by Jain ascetics.
* **Livelihood:**  The means of sustenance.
* **Vows:**  The principles of Jainism that are followed by ascetics. 

Page #492:
---------------------------


Page #493:
---------------------------
The eighteenth chapter. Marichi, the grandson of the Guru, was a wandering ascetic. He propagated false doctrines, increasing the prevalence of falsehood. [6] The Yoga Shastra and the Sankhya Shastra were first taught by him, which mislead the world and turn it away from right knowledge. [62] Thus, the great Muni, Lord Vrishabhadeva, endowed with the power of intellect, remained steadfast in his practice, having attained all these various activities. [63] He was like Mount Meru, unshakable, like the ocean, unperturbed, like the wind, free from attachment, and like the sky, pure. [64] His body became intensely radiant due to the intense heat of his austerities. Just as the gold that has been refined by fire acquires a brilliance, so too did his body. [65] The three secrets of the mind, speech, and body were like fortresses protecting him, and restraint was his armor. His virtues were his soldiers, who fought against the enemies of karma. [66] The six external austerities of the great, valiant Lord Vrishabhadeva were: first, fasting, second, avoiding excessive enjoyment, third, counting breaths, fourth, renouncing taste, fifth, bodily hardship, and sixth, sleeping and sitting in solitude. [67-68] The six internal austerities are: atonement, humility, self-control, study of scriptures, renunciation, and meditation. Of these, Lord Vrishabhadeva was most devoted to meditation, meaning he spent most of his time in meditation. [69] The twenty-eight fundamental virtues of Lord Vrishabhadeva were: five great vows, five efforts called samitis, five restraints of the senses, six essentials, shaving the head, sleeping on the ground, not brushing teeth, remaining naked, not bathing, standing while eating, and eating only once a day. These were like his foot soldiers, his infantry. Due to the purity of his meditation, these virtues were purified in him. [70-72] 

Page #494:
---------------------------
## Chapter 404 of the Adi Purana

**Verse 73:** The great sage [Vrishabhadeva] performed a six-month penance. Though his body was emaciated, his fortitude remained unwavering.

**Verse 74:** Despite abstaining from food, he experienced no fatigue. This was a divine manifestation of his extraordinary creation karma.

**Verse 75:** Due to the absence of any rituals, his hair grew into matted locks. These seemed to have hardened to endure the pain of his austerities.

**Verse 76:** The matted locks, blown by the wind, spread far and wide over the head of the great sage. They resembled the dark hue of molten gold, heated by the fire of meditation.

**Verse 77:** The intensity of his penance filled the forest with a radiant glow, day and night, like the brilliance of the morning sun.

**Verse 78:** The branches of the trees, laden with flowers and fruits, bowed down in reverence, as if paying homage to the sage's feet.

**Verse 79:** The bees hummed a sweet melody on the vines, making them seem like musical instruments, playing a devotional song in praise of the world teacher, Vrishabhadeva.

**Verse 80:** The trees surrounding the sage shed their flowers, offering them as a tribute to his feet, like a devotional offering.

**Verse 81:** The young deer, resting at ease near the sage's feet, reflected the tranquility of his hermitage.

**Verse 82:** Lions, abandoning their animosity towards deer and other animals, lived harmoniously with herds of elephants. This was a manifestation of the sage's meditative power.

**Verse 83:**  Oh, what a wonder! Tigers, with compassion, used their claws to untangle the matted hair of cows whose hair was caught in thorns.

**Verse 84:** The young deer, mistaking the tigresses for their mothers, freely suckled their milk and found contentment. 

Page #495:
---------------------------
The Eighteenth Chapter

405. The elephants of the forest, filled with devotion, offered blooming lotuses at the feet of the Lord.  ||45||

86. The red lotuses, held in the trunks of the elephants, seemed to double the beauty of the pushkaras (trunks). ||86||

8. The rays of peace emanating from the Lord's body subdued even the untamed lions and other animals. ||8||

10. Though the Lord, the King of the Universe, was fasting, he did not experience hunger.  This is because the feeling of contentment, arising from the highest state of devotion, conquers all desires. ||10||

89. The thrones of the Indras trembled due to the power of the Lord's meditation.  Indeed, the fortitude of great souls can shake the world. ||89||

10. Thus, the Lord attained the state of Pratimā Yoga, which is completed in six months.  For him, that long period passed like a fleeting moment, as he was filled with unwavering fortitude. ||10||

91. Meanwhile, the princes, Nami and Vinami, sons of the King of Mahākaccha, arrived at the Lord's presence.  They were both young and delicate, filled with devotion, and eager to serve the Lord's feet. ||91-92||

93. They were both consumed by worldly desires.  Therefore, they bowed to the Lord, saying, "May you be pleased," and clung to his feet, interrupting his meditation. ||93||

94. "O Lord, you have divided your kingdom among your sons and grandsons.  You forgot us while doing so, therefore, please grant us some worldly possessions." ||94||

95. Thus, they repeatedly pleaded with the Lord, oblivious to the difference between right and wrong.  At that time, they were engaged in the worship of the Lord with water, flowers, and incense. ||95||

96. The Naga king, known as Dharanendra, who resided in the palace, became aware of this entire incident through his divine knowledge, as he felt his throne tremble. ||96|| 

Page #496:
---------------------------
## Adipurana

Knowing all this, Dharanendra, with great agitation, arose and quickly approached the Lord. || 97 || At that moment, he arrived before the Lord, having pierced the earth, carrying the materials for worship. From afar, he saw Muni Raja Vrishabhadeva, as tall as Mount Meru. || 98 || At that time, the Lord was absorbed in meditation, and his radiant body was shining with the brilliance of intense tapasya. Therefore, he appeared like a lamp placed in a windless region. || 99 || Or, the Lord was shining like a great performer of yajna, for just as a performer of yajna is eager to offer oblations into the fire, so too was the Lord eager to offer karma-oblations into the fire of great meditation. And just as a performer of yajna is accompanied by his wife, so too was the Lord accompanied by his inseparable wife, compassion. || 100 || Or, Muni Raja appeared like an elephant, for just as an elephant is fortunate, so too was the Lord fortunate, possessing great wealth. Just as an elephant has a tall body, so too did the Lord have a tall body. Just as an elephant has a strong spine, so too did the Lord belong to a noble lineage. And just as an elephant is tied to a post with ropes, so too was the Lord bound to the great post of tapasya with the ropes of great vows. || 105 || The Lord possessed a body like Mount Sumeru, for just as Mount Sumeru stands firm and unshakable, so too was his body unshakable. Just as Mount Sumeru is tall, so too was his body tall. Just as ferocious creatures like lions and tigers dwell in Mount Sumeru, so too did ferocious creatures remain peaceful and worship the Lord's body, dwelling near him. Or, just as Mount Sumeru is worshipped by great beings like Indra, so too was the Lord's body worshipped by great beings like Indra. Or, just as Mount Sumeru is worshipped with great strength and firmness, so too was the Lord's body worshipped with great strength and firmness. And just as Mount Sumeru is capable of bearing the weight of the earth, so too was the Lord's body capable of bearing the weight of peace. || 102 || At that time, the Lord had made his mind still within meditation, and his actions were extremely profound. Therefore, he appeared like the profound stillness of the ocean, when the wind does not blow. || 103 ||

1. Agni
2. Atyajyadayaastri-svīkāram
3. Antarlon
4. Nirvāt - P. 

Page #497:
---------------------------
The Eighteenth Chapter

The ocean of the great wind of the Pariṣaha, which is not disturbed by the great wind, is like a lake of water. It is not touched by the faults, like a pristine ocean. ||1.4n.||

Seeing the body of the Lord, adorned with the auspiciousness of penance, he was astonished. ||105||

Having circumambulated, prostrated, and praised the World Teacher, the one with a concealed form spoke to the two Kumaras with a stratagem. ||106||

"You young men, you appear to me with weapons, with distorted forms. And I see this peaceful, excellent forest of penance. ||107||

"Where is this peaceful forest of penance, and where are you two with your terrible forms? Is this union of light and darkness not inappropriate? ||108||

"Alas, these enjoyments are most reprehensible, for they cause people to beg even in inappropriate places. For what is the consideration of what is proper and improper for those who beg? ||109||

"You two desire enjoyments, but this Lord is devoid of desire for enjoyments. So your desire for a lotus from a stone is astonishing to us today. ||110||

"He who is himself full of desire for enjoyments considers others to be the same. Who, indeed, would desire these enjoyments, which bring suffering in the end? ||111||

"A man who is under the sway of enjoyments, which are beautiful only at the beginning, becomes as small as a blade of grass, even if he is great, due to the fault of begging. ||112||

"If you two desire enjoyments, go to Bharata, for he is the one who bears the burden of the kingdom. ||113|| 

Page #498:
---------------------------
408
The Bhagavan has renounced attachment, aversion, and other internal possessions, and is even detached from his own body. How then can he give you both, who are desirous of enjoyment? ||114|| Therefore, it is useless to approach the Lord, who is striving only for liberation. You both are desirous of enjoyment, so go to Bharata and worship him. ||115|| When the Dharanendra had finished speaking, the two Kumars, bowing low, replied to him: "What is your interest in the affairs of others? You are wise, so go away silently from here. ||116|| For we know what is right and what is wrong in this matter, but you are ignorant, so go where you please. ||117|| "These are old and these are young," this distinction is made only by age. There is no increase of knowledge in old age, nor is there any decrease of intelligence in youth. On the contrary, it is seen that with the ripening of age, there is often a dullness of intelligence in old age, and in the first stage, the intelligence of virtuous men usually increases. ||118-119|| Neither youth nor old age is a cause of fault or virtue, for the moon, even when new, delights men, and fire, even when old (on the verge of being extinguished), burns. ||120|| He who speaks without being asked is considered very presumptuous. We do not wish to ask you for such a task, so why do you speak in between? ||121|| You, who are of a despicable character, deceive people by giving instructions without being asked, and by speaking very false and harmful flattery. ||122|| The tongue of the wise never speaks impurely, even in dreams, their actions never harm others, and their memory is never harsh to destroy others. ||123||

Page #499:
---------------------------
## Chapter Eighteen

**124.**  For those who know all the Vedas, there is no need for instruction from us, who are like children.  For those who are righteous, their livelihood is righteous, meaning they live by righteous conduct.

**125.**  Your attire, worn in accordance with your age, is peaceful.  Your appearance is gentle, and your words are pleasant and radiant, clearly revealing your wisdom.

**126.**  The brilliance that shines within you, unseen by ordinary people, and that radiates outward, along with your extraordinary body, speaks of your greatness.  (Meaning: Your radiant, transcendent brilliance and extraordinary, luminous body reveal that you are a great soul.)

**127.**  Why are you so attached to our work, you who possess so many unique qualities and are blessed with good fortune?  We do not understand.

**128.**  To please the Guru, Lord Vrishabhadeva, is praiseworthy everywhere, and this is the desired fruit for both of us.  (Meaning: We both desire to please the Lord.)  But you are hindering it, creating obstacles.  It seems you are indifferent to the work of others, unwilling to help them.

**129.**  Only wicked people envy the growth of others.  For noble and great souls like you, the growth of others should bring joy.

**130.**  Does the Lord's greatness diminish because he resides in the forest?  Look, the entire universe, both animate and inanimate, still exists at the root of his lotus feet.

**131.**  Who, desiring many fruits, would abandon the Kalpavriksha (wish-fulfilling tree) and serve another ordinary tree?  Similarly, why do you advise us to go to Bharata?

**132.**  Or, would someone seeking gems abandon the great ocean and seek them in a small pond where even the seaweed has dried up?  Or would someone seeking rice rely on a stalk of straw?

**133.**  Is there not a great difference between Bharata and Lord Vrishabhadeva?  Is it possible to equate the cow's foot with the ocean? 

Page #500:
---------------------------
410
Adipuranam
Is there no other water reservoir in the world, that the Chatak bird always begs for water from the clouds? Is this not some inexplicable obstinacy of his? ||133||
Therefore, consider this as the conduct of those who aspire for great fruits, who seek refuge in a very generous place. ||135||
Hearing these humble words, the Indra of the Nagas was very pleased in his heart, for the patience of the proud is praiseworthy. ||136||
Oh, how great is the magnanimity of these young men! Oh, how profound is their seriousness! Oh, how great is their supreme devotion to the Lord! Oh, how praiseworthy is their desire! ||137||
Thus pleased, he revealed his divine form and spoke these words like flowers of the vine of joy: ||138||
You two are young, yet you are like elders. I am very pleased with your courageous deeds. My name is Dharan, and I am the chief Indra of the Naga race. ||139||
Consider me as the servant of the Lord, who resides in the netherworld and heaven, and I have come here to provide you both with the means of enjoyment. ||140||
The Lord has commanded me to provide these two devotees with their desired enjoyments. Therefore, I have come here quickly. ||141||
Therefore, rise up and ask the creator of the world. I will give you the enjoyments that the Lord has instructed me to give you. ||142||
Hearing these words of Dharanendra, the two Kumaras were very pleased and said to him: "Indeed, our Guru is pleased with us and wants to give us our desired enjoyments. ||143||
O Dharanendra, tell us the true opinion of the Lord in this matter, for we do not accept any enjoyments without the consent of the Guru. ||144||

Page #501:
---------------------------
The Eighteenth Chapter

411. Saying this, the Lord of the Earth, having convinced the Kumaras with logic, bowed to the Bhagavan and quickly took them along. ||145||

He, the Lord of the Nagas, shone like the rising sun with the two Kumaras, as if with heat and light. ||146||

Or, like a king of yogis, adorned with humility and calmness, he was adorned with the two Kumaras, like the sons of the Nagas. ||147||

He, having taken the two princes in his chariot, flew through the sky and quickly reached the Vijayardha mountain, which resembled the laughter of the Earth-goddess. ||148||

The Vijayardha mountain, with its eastern and western sides, plunged into the salt ocean and stood in the middle of the Bharatavarsha, like a measuring rod. ||149||

It was adorned with many peaks, shining with various jewels, and surrounded by the sky-gardens, as if adorned with crowns. ||150||

The mouths of its caves were filled with the sound of falling waterfalls, as if inviting the gods and goddesses to rest. ||151||

Its girdle, the edge of the mountain, was covered on all sides by huge clouds, moving here and there, with a deep roar, like mountains. ||152||

With its edges made of shining gold and adorned with the rays of the sun, this mountain seemed to threaten the gods and the Vidyadharas with a burning fire. ||153||

From the vicinity of the peaks of this mountain, large waterfalls with long streams fell, shaking the clouds and creating many waterfalls near the mountain. ||154||

On this mountain, many creepers bloomed in the forests, and bumblebees sat on them, making the mountain seem as if it were attracting the creepers with its fragrance. ||155|| 

Page #502:
---------------------------
412
The mountain, adorned with its girdle, was always beautiful, with the sweet sounds of the Kinnara gods resting in the vine-covered mansions. ||156||
On that mountain, in the forest lanes, within the vine-covered houses, the Vidyadharis, swinging on swings, seemed like the forest deities. ||157||
On that mountain, the reflections of the lotus-like faces of the Vidyadharis, roaming here and there, made it seem as if it were adorned with the beauty of lotuses rooted in the sapphire earth. ||158||
That mountain was adorned with crystal-like lands, which, due to the red color of the great vermilion applied to the beautiful feet of the roaming Vidyadharis, seemed as if they had been worshipped with red lotuses. ||159||
That mountain, in its caves, held lions like waterfalls, for those lions, like waterfalls, were far-reaching, possessed of deep sounds, and had pure radiance. ||160||
That mountain, on its nearby land, always held such divine couples who were filled with love for each other and, after enjoying each other, used to entertain themselves by playing the veena and other musical instruments. ||161||
That mountain had two ranges, north and south, which were very long, like two wings, and in those ranges were many excellent cities fit for the habitation of the Vidyadharas. ||162||
On the peaks of that mountain, where many waterfalls were flowing, those peaks seemed as if flags were fluttering on their upper parts, and with such high peaks, that mountain seemed as if it were crossing the front part of the sky. ||163||
With waterfalls whose unbroken streams flowed from the peak to the ground, that mountain seemed as if it had taken on a long rod to measure the world's pulse. ||164||
With moonstone gems, from which the stream of water flowed every night due to the touch of the moon's rays, that mountain seemed as if it were watering the trees on its banks out of fear of the fire. ||165||

Page #503:
---------------------------
The Eighteenth Chapter

413. The mountain stood high, as if it had humbled the moon with its Chandrakanta gems, the stars with its clusters of Kumuda flowers, and the constellations with the spray of its waterfalls. 16. In the autumn, when white clouds, driven by the wind, took shelter on the white banks of the forests, the mountain seemed to have grown larger because of those clouds. 16. The sound of the waterfalls on the mountain made it seem as if Mount Meru was only high, not as long as ours. It was as if the mountain was laughing loudly with joy. 16. "I am very pure and made of silver from the base to the peak. Other mountains are not as pure as me," it seemed to have declared its height. 169. The mountain always had contact with the celestial beings and the rivers Ganga and Sindhu flowed below it. For these reasons, it had conquered other mountains and was therefore called Vijaya. Meaning: Other mountains do not have celestial beings living on them, nor do the Ganga and Sindhu flow below them. Instead, they flow above the Himalayas. It was because of these special qualities that the mountain seemed to have conquered other mountains, and because of this victory, it was given the meaningful name Vijaya (Victory + A + Rddha). 170. The celestial beings constantly worshipped the mountain as they would a Jina, because just as the Jina is immovable, meaning he upholds the unshakeable principles, so too was the mountain immovable, meaning it always remained unshakeable. Just as the Jina is lofty, meaning he is the best, so too was the mountain lofty, meaning it was high. Just as the Jina is pure, meaning he is free from the karmic defilements of attachment, aversion, etc., and is therefore pure, so too was the mountain pure, meaning it was free from dust, thorns, etc., and was therefore clean. Just as the Jina is the teacher of the world, so too was the mountain the best in the world, or its glory. 171. Or perhaps the mountain was imitating the creator of the world, the Jina, because just as the Jina is imperishable, meaning he is free from destruction, so too was the mountain imperishable, meaning it was not subject to destruction by a deluge, etc. Just as the Jina is impenetrable, so too was the mountain impenetrable, meaning it was not penetrable by forests, etc. 172. The world, being sick, was paying homage to the teacher, because of his imperishability, impenetrability, his greatness, and his sweetness. 

Page #504:
---------------------------
## Adipurana 50

**173.** That cave, holding the Digvijaya-prasavagaram, was double. It was well-covered, well-guarded, and had a hidden entrance.

**174.** It was adorned with nine towering peaks, resembling the crown of the Earth Goddess, and surrounded by rows of verdant forests, like blue garments.

**175.** At its base, it was fifty yojanas wide, twenty-five yojanas high, and a quarter of that, one hundred and twenty-five yojanas, was buried beneath the earth.

**176.** Ten yojanas above the earth, it was thirty yojanas wide, and ten yojanas further up, it narrowed to only ten yojanas in the front.

**177.** Its edges were sometimes high, sometimes low, sometimes level, and sometimes uneven with rocks.

**178.** From the region where the sun-baked, gem-studded rocks were, groups of monkeys were retreating, making the mountain resound with their clamor.

**179.** In some places, herds of elephants were terrified by the roars of lions, while in others, the forest was filled with the sweet sounds of cuckoos.

**180.** In some places, snakes were fleeing into their burrows, terrified by the cries of peacocks, and the entire wilderness was filled with fear. 

Page #505:
---------------------------
The Eighteenth Chapter

415. The deer, resting in the shade of the mountain's golden slopes, seemed to be made of gold themselves, bathed in the radiance of the sun. 

182. In some places, the mountain was adorned with a vine of Indra's bow, crafted from the brilliance of various gems, resembling a celestial vine, blown by the wind.

183. In other places, celestial nymphs roamed, their anklets jingling in harmony with the calls of swans, making the shores of the lakes even more enchanting.

184. In some spots, elephants, skilled in their playful antics, uprooted trees with their tusks, causing the forest to sway and dance.

185. On the banks, the calls of sleeping cranes mingled with the sweet sounds of ducks, making the water of the lake resonate with their melodies.

186. In some places, the mountain seemed to breathe, as if in play, with the hissing of angry serpents, while in others, it appeared to laugh, with the fluttering of pure white peacocks.

187. The mountain, with its breath carried by the wind from the caves, seemed to exhale a long, deep breath, while in other places, it appeared to sway, as if dancing, with the trees swaying in the breeze.

188. In secluded spots, celestial women, lost in contemplation, pondered the union with their beloveds, making the mountain seem silent and still.

189. In some places, the mountain seemed to have begun a celestial symphony, with the buzzing of playful bees, their sweet sounds echoing far and wide.

190. On the mountain, young celestial nymphs, adorned with the fragrance of Kadamba blossoms, strolled with their beloveds, their breath as sweet as the scent of the flowers, their faces radiant like lotuses touched by the midday sun. 

Page #506:
---------------------------


Page #507:
---------------------------


Page #508:
---------------------------
## Chapter 18: The Journey to Mount Vijaya

**Verse 20:** The wind, carrying the fragrance of flowers, blew from the forests of the mountain, making it seem as if the forests themselves were approaching Dharanendra. The forests were filled with the sounds of intoxicated cuckoos, like musical instruments, and the sweet humming of bees, like auspicious chants.

**Verse 209:** Seeing Mount Vijaya, which was very high and the source of all knowledge, and whose fame spread throughout the world, Dharanendra was filled with joy, like a devotee seeing a Jina. He approached the mountain with the two princes.

**End of Chapter 18:** Thus ends the eighteenth chapter of the *Trishatilakṣaṇamahāpurāṇa*, composed by the venerable Jinaseṇācārya, which describes the journey of Dharanendra to Mount Vijaya. 

Page #509:
---------------------------
## The Twenty-First Chapter

The serpent king, having descended to the first belt of Mount Vijaya, showed the realm of the Vidyadharas to the two princes, saying:

1. "It seems as if this mountain, being very heavy, was unable to ascend further, and therefore spread itself out on both sides, merging with the ocean."

2. "This mountain, like a king, is adorned, and its two never-ending ranges, like great goddesses, are resplendent. Just as great goddesses are adorned with abundant pleasures, so too are these ranges adorned with vast expanse. And just as great goddesses possess a beautiful future, so too do these ranges possess length."

3. "Ascending ten yojanas from the earth, this first belt of the mountain is the abode of the Vidyadharas, which shines like a part of heaven."

4. "The Vidyadharas dwelling in these two ranges seem as if they are gods who have come down from heaven to reside here."

5. "This abode of the Vidyadharas casts doubt on our own realm, for just as our realm (of the Dharanendras) is served by the Nagendras, who possess great hoods, so too is this abode of the Vidyadharas served by the Vidyadharas, who possess great pleasures."

6. "Seeing these beautiful Vidyadhara maidens, like Naga maidens, I truly remember the heavenly realm of Patala, the abode of the dwellers in mansions."

7. "Here there is no fear arising from one's own king, nor the three fears arising from enemy kings. There are no calamities like excessive rain or drought, nor any hindrance arising from disease." 

Page #510:
---------------------------
420 -
Adipurana. The state of the fourth kalpa at the beginning is the same as the state of humans in this Maha Bharatavarsha. In this Maha Bharatavarsha, the state of humans at the beginning of the fourth kalpa is the same as the state of humans at the end of the fourth kalpa. Similarly, the height of the body at the beginning of the fourth kalpa is the same as the height of the body at the end of the fourth kalpa. In the same way, the best lifespan here is one crore years ago and the worst is one hundred years, and the best height of the body is five hundred dhanus and the worst is seven hands. Meaning - Here, there is no change of six kalpas like in Aryaskandha, but there is a change similar to the beginning and end of the fourth kalpa. ||2-10|| In the karmabhoomi, there are changes in seasons like rain, winter, summer, etc., and there are six karma forms like asi, mapi, etc., which are all complete here, but the special thing here is that the Mahavidyas give the people here the fruits according to their wishes. ||11|| The Mahaprajnapti etc. vidyas that are attained by the vidyadharas here give them fruits as desired, like a kamadhenu. ||12|| Those vidyas are of two types - one is those that are dependent on the kula (patrilineal) or jati (matrilineal), and the other is those that are attained through tapasya. Of these, the first type of vidyas are obtained from the kula-parampara, and the second type of vidyas are obtained by diligently worshipping them. ||13|| The way to worship those vidyas that are obtained through worship is to worship them in a pure dress, following the brahmacharya vrata, near the Siddhayatana, or in any other holy place like an island, mountain, or riverbank. ||14|| ..... - By worshipping with a pure dress, following the vidyadeva vrata, and performing great fasts, and worshipping them daily, ||15|| the Mahavidyas are attained by the vidyadharas through this method, and by performing tapascharya, daily worship, japa, and homa, etc., in sequence. ||14-16|| After that, those vidyadharas who have attained the vidyas, first worship the image of the Siddha Bhagavan, and 
1. At the end. 2. Of the fourth kalpa. 3. From the best to the worst. 4. The best lifespan at the end. 5. The difference of one crore years in sequence. 6. Up to the seven aralis. 7. Complete. 8. Of the vidyadharas. 9. Lineage, etc. 10. Kshatriya, etc. 11. Near the Siddhakutanityaalaya. 12. Brahmacharya vrata. 13. Previous service. 14. Considered. 

Page #511:
---------------------------
The Twenty-First Chapter

421. Just as the celestial beings enjoy the fruits of knowledge, so too do they enjoy the fruits of grains and other things at will. ||18||

Here, grains grow without being sown, the wells are full of blooming lotuses, the boundaries of the villages are connected, they have gardens, and all the trees are laden with fruit. ||19||

The rivers here are filled with jeweled sand, swans always sit on the banks of the ponds and pools, and the reservoirs are full of clear water. ||20||

The forest areas here are beautiful with the sweet calls of cuckoos, and the blooming vines are accompanied by the music of buzzing bees. ||21||

There are many artificial mountains here, adorned with steps made of moonstone, filled with vine-covered houses, suitable for the enjoyment of the celestial beings, and fit for everyone to enjoy. ||22||

The cities, towns, and villages here are very beautiful, they are very large, and they are adorned with rivers, lakes, gardens, rice fields, and sugarcane forests. ||23||

The creation of men and women here imitates Rati and Kamadeva, and because they are full of all kinds of enjoyment and possessions, they are not even interested in the pleasures of heaven. ||24||

Thus, all the special things that are the cause of happiness for humans, even though they are rare in heaven, are present here everywhere. ||25||

Thus, this mountain, as if out of curiosity, holds all these special things, which are extremely beautiful and suitable for the celestial beings, in its lap. ||26||

In these two श्रेणियाँ, which are full of beauty and wealth as described above, this beautiful arrangement of cities is seen. ||27||

These two श्रेणियाँ are ten yojanas wide each, and they extend as far as the ocean, like the length of the mountain. ||28||

There is no difference in the width, etc., of these two श्रेणियाँ, but the northern श्रेणी has a greater length. ||29|| 

Page #512:
---------------------------
## Adipurana

The Puranas, which reside in heaven, shine brightly here. There are fifty in the southern row and sixty in the northern row. ||30||  Vidyadharas reside in these great cities, enjoying the pleasures earned by their own merit, just like the celestial beings. ||31||  What is the name of this city that shines in the east? It is adorned with towering palaces that seem to touch the heavens. ||32||  Then, the city of Kinnaragita, possessing great splendor, is seen. Its gardens are always worthy of being enjoyed by the songs of Kinnara women. ||33||  The city of Naragita, possessing great splendor, shines brightly. There, men and women are always joyful and full of laughter. ||34||  This is the city of Bahuketa, adorned with many flags, which seems to be calling us with its flag-like arms. ||35||  This is the city of  Pundarika, where swans sing softly with their melodious voices in the forests of white lotuses, captivating the ears. ||36||  This is the city of Singhadhvaja, with lion-emblazoned flags adorning the palaces, blocking the path of the gods who fear lions. ||37||  The city of Shvetaketa shines brightly with white flags, towering over the palaces, seemingly calling upon Kamadeva from afar. ||38||  The city of Garudhadhvaja, adorned with palaces made of Garuda gems, spreads across the sky-like courtyard. ||39||  The two excellent cities, Shriprama and Shridhara, adorned with the splendor of Lakshmi, shine brightly, as if they have adorned themselves with such splendor in competition with each other. ||40||  This is the city of Lohargala, which is extremely difficult to access due to its iron bars. And this is the city of Arinjaya, which seems to laugh with its towers, having conquered its enemies. ||41|| 

Page #513:
---------------------------
## The Twenty-First Chapter

**23** The two cities, Vajrargala and Vajravyam, are shining brightly. The Vajrakar (diamond mine) nearby seems to be expanding daily. **42** This city is called Vimocha, and this one is called Puranjay. These two cities are so beautiful that the world of the Nagas (serpents) seems to have been defeated and descended below. **43** This is the city of Shakatamukhi, and this is the city of Chaturmukhi. The Chaturmukhi city, with its four tall Gopuras (gates), seems to be conquering the sky. **44** This is the city of Bahumukhi, this is the city of Arajaska, and this is the city of Virajaska. These three cities seem to have gathered the wealth of all three worlds. **45** This is the city of Rathanupura Chakravala, which is like a tilak (mark) among the cities mentioned and to be mentioned. **46** This city is the capital of this region, where the Chakravarti (emperor) of the Vidyadharas resides, enjoying the supreme wealth obtained through his good deeds. **47** This is the beautiful city of Mekhalagra, this is the city of Kshemapuri, this is the city of Aparajit, and this is the city of Kamapushpa. **48** This is the city of Gaganachari, this is the city of Vinayachari, and this is the city of Chakrapur. This is the city of Sanjayanti, which completes the number thirty, this is the city of Jayanti, this is the city of Vijaya, and this is the city of Vaijayantipuri. This is the city of Kshemakar, this is the city of Chandraabha, and this is the city of Suryabha, which is extremely radiant. **49-50** This is the city of Ratikut, this is the city of Chitrakut, this is the city of Mahakut, this is the city of Hemakut, this is the city of Meghakut, this is the city of Vichitrakut, and this is the city of Vaishravanakut. **51** These are the cities of Suryapur, Chandrapur, and Nityodyotini, in that order. This is the city of Vimukhi, this is the city of Nityavahi, this is the city of Sumukhi, and this is the city of Paschima. **52** Thus, there are fifty cities in the southern row. The forts and Gopuras (main gates) of these cities are very tall, and each city is surrounded by three...

**41** The enemy is defeated and is laughing. 

Page #514:
---------------------------
The Adipurana

The three ditches are surrounded by ramparts. ||53|| The distance between these three ditches is one danda (bow's length) each, and the first ditch is fourteen dandas wide, the second twelve, and the third ten. ||54|| These ditches are progressively one-fourth, one-half, and one-third as deep as their width, meaning the first ditch is ten and a half dandas deep, the second six dandas, and the third three and a quarter dandas deep. All these ditches are of uniform width from bottom to top. ||55||

They are made of golden bricks, inlaid with precious stones, and filled with water that is very clear. These ditches are also equipped with channels for the flow of water. ||56|| The red and blue lotuses in these ditches look like ear ornaments, and they are capable of withstanding the impact of aquatic creatures' arms. Their high waves seem to be competing with the great oceans. ||57||

At a distance of four dandas from these ditches, there is a rampart, which is covered with stones that are coated with gold dust. It is six dandas high and twelve dandas wide. ||58|| The upper part of this rampart is adorned with numerous turrets. These turrets are round like a cow's hoof and bulge outwards like the belly of a pot. ||59||

Beyond this rampart of dust, there is another rampart, which is twice as high as it is wide. Its height from the base to the top is twenty-four dandas, meaning it is twelve dandas wide and twenty-four dandas high. ||60|| The front part of this rampart is made of turrets shaped like mridangas and monkey heads. This rampart is decorated with various kinds of golden bricks all around. ||61||

Page #515:
---------------------------
425
The twenty-ninth chapter, the width of the city, the four-sided dance, the tabahalaka-patis, thirty, and the number of dandas, the Rudras, twice the number of vines. ||62|| Thirty dandas between them, these are adorned with jewels and gold, with steps for climbing, like the summit of a mountain, touching the sky. ||63|| Between the two ahalakas, there is a gopura, adorned with jewels. It is fifty dhanus high and twenty-five dhanus wide. ||64|| Between the gopura and the ahalakas, there are three dhanus wide indrakosas, meaning burjas. The burjas are equipped with windows and balconies. ||65|| Between those burjas, there are very clean devapathas, which are three hastas wide and twelve hastas long. ||66|| Thus, surrounded by the moat, the kot, and the parikota, these cities are adorned, as if they were beautiful women wearing clothes. ||67|| In each of these cities, there are one thousand squares, twelve thousand streets, and one thousand gates, both small and large. ||68|| Half of these, that is, five hundred gates, are equipped with doors, and they are adorned like the eyes of the city. Of these five hundred gates, two hundred are the most excellent. ||69|| These cities are nine yojanas wide from east to west, and twelve yojanas long from south to north. All these cities face east. ||70|| Who can describe the extent of the royal palaces and other things in these cities? For even I, the king of the nagas, am overwhelmed by the thought of it. ||71|| For each of these cities, there is one crore of villages, and there are also various other settlements, such as kheta, mandaba, etc. ||72||

Page #516:
---------------------------
426
The villages are always flourishing with unploughed rice, other grains, and are surrounded by forests of *puṇḍa* and sugarcane. ||73|| The distance between these cities on Mount Vijaya is 195 *yojanas*, as measured by the omniscient gods. ||74|| Just as the arrangement of these cities has been described in the southern row, so too are there many prosperous cities in the northern row. ||75|| However, the distance between the cities in the northern row is 178 *yojanas*. ||76|| Starting from the west, the names of these cities in order are: ||77|| 1. Arjunī, 2. Cāruṇī, 3. Kailāsavāruṇī, 4. Vivam, 5. Kilikil, 6. Cūḍāmaṇi, 7. Śaśimabhe, 8. Vaṁśāla, 9. Puṣpacūla, 10. Haṁsagarbha, 11. Balāhaka, 12. Śivaṁkara, 13. Śrīhamy, 14. Camara, 15. Śivamandira, 16. Vasumatka, 17. Vasumatī, 18. Siddārthaka, 19. Śatrujaya, 20. Ketumālā, 21. Surendrakānta, 22. Gaganānandan, 23. Aśokā, 24. Viśokā, 25. Vītaśokā, 26. Alakā, 27. Tilakā, 28. Tilakānta, 29. Ambara, 30. Mandira, 31. Kumuda, 32. Kunda, 33. Gaganavallabha, 34. Dyutilaka, 35. Bhūmitilaka, 36. Gandharvapura, 37. Muktāhāra, 38. Nimisa, 39. Agnijvāla, 40. Mahājvāla, 41. Śrīniketa, 42. Jayāmaya, 43. Śrīvāsa, 44. Maṇivālya, 45. Madrāśva, 46. Sadhananjay, 47. Gokṣīra, 48. Phena, 49. Akṣobhya, 50. Giriśikharā, 51. Dharaṇī, 52. Dhāraṇī, 53. Durga, 54. Durdharā, 55. Sudarśana, 56. Mahendrāyapura, 57. Vijayasahaya, 58. Sugandhinī, 59. Vajrārdhatara, 60. Ratnākara. Thus, these sixty great cities adorn the northern row, their splendor rivaling that of the cities of heaven. ||78-87|| 

Page #517:
---------------------------


Page #518:
---------------------------


Page #519:
---------------------------
## The Twenty-First Chapter

**429** The banks are drenched with the water of the celestial river, the peaks are kissed by the clouds, and the mountain, adorned with jeweled peaks, conquers even Mount Meru, the abode of the gods.  

**12** The banks are adorned with trees nourished by the celestial river, their branches laden with flowers. The great mountain, echoing with the hum of bees, seems to be laughing at the beauty of the celestial gardens.

**10** Here, the celestial river Ganga, showering its spray, shines in the eastern direction. And there, the mighty river Sindhu, echoing with the sweet sounds of swans, flows towards the west.

**10** Though both Ganga and Sindhu originate from the lake Padma, situated on the head of Mount Himavat, they serve the foot of this Vijayardha, for purity surpasses even height.  

**1.5** Here, the virtuous, the skilled, and the righteous Vidyadharas, like dutiful sons, always receive desired fruits from this mountain, due to their merit and effort.

**10** This land produces grain without being sown, yields precious gems without any effort, and its towering trees always bear flowers and fruits out of season.

**107** The lakes are filled with the sounds of cranes and swans, the blooming creepers hum with bees, and the groves resound with the songs of cuckoos. It seems as if Kamadeva himself, the god of love, is eternally awake here.

**101** What can be said of the Vidyadharas when even the human mind is captivated?

**102** This Vijay mountain, whose trees are watered by the Ganga and whose peaks are kissed by the clouds, conquers even Mount Meru with its jeweled peaks, and is served by the Vidyadharas.

**103** This mountain, whose trees are watered by the Ganga, whose branches are adorned with flowers, and whose air is filled with the hum of bees, seems to be laughing at the beauty of the celestial gardens.

**104** Here, the celestial river Ganga, showering its spray, shines in the eastern direction. And there, the mighty river Sindhu, echoing with the sweet sounds of swans, flows towards the west.

**105** Though both Ganga and Sindhu originate from the lake Padma, situated on the head of Mount Himavat, they serve the foot of this Vijayardha, for purity surpasses even height.  

**106** Just as virtuous sons receive desired fruits from their noble fathers, so too, the virtuous, skilled, and righteous Vidyadharas always receive desired fruits from this mountain, due to their merit and effort.

**107** This land produces grain without being sown, yields precious gems without any effort, and its towering trees always bear flowers and fruits out of season.

**10** The lakes are filled with the sounds of cranes and swans, the blooming creepers hum with bees, and the groves resound with the songs of cuckoos. It seems as if Kamadeva himself, the god of love, is eternally awake here. 

Page #520:
---------------------------
430
Adipuranam... By the winds that draw the pollen of the lotus grove, that shake the blooming trees of the gardens, and that remove the fatigue of sexual pleasure, the Vidyaadharis here are always filled with joy. ||109|| Here in this forest, the lion roars, and from fear of him, the herd of elephants leaves the forest, and the herd of deer, whose mouths are dripping with saliva, flee from the mountain caves. ||110|| Here on the bank of the lake, the anxious female swan, whose feathers have turned yellow from the pollen of the lotus, does not approach her beloved swan, mistaking him for a Cakravaka, and she cries, shedding tears. ||111|| Here, this Cakavini, not seeing her beloved Cakravaka, hidden by the new leaves of the lotus, wanders around the lake, uttering mournful cries. ||112|| Here on the jeweled bank of this mountain, a small autumn cloud has arrived. Because it is light, everyone can easily take it, and so the daughters of the gods and Vidyaadharas move it here and there, pulling it towards themselves. ||113|| This great mountain bears on its lower peaks the Ganga, which is very dear to all beings, which is very large, whose waves seem to hold the autumn clouds, and whose water has spread to the ends of the forests. ||114|| And this mountain also bears the Sindhu river, which is very wide, which is difficult to cross, which has flowed continuously to the sea, which has made the forest of creepers wet with its water, and which is like its own bank. ||115||

Page #521:
---------------------------
## The Twenty-First Chapter

Whatever is described here about this mountain king, with its many special qualities, is indeed delightful, captivating the heart and enchanting the eyes. || 116 ||

**Indravajra**

This mountain wears the beauty of a green forest as its lower garment, adorned with flowers, and a row of white clouds, like a garland, adorns its peak. || 117 ||

**Upeandravajra**

In this mountain's grove, adorned with a row of white clouds at its end, like a curtain, Vidyaadharis play with Vidyaadharas, their darkness dispelled by the brilliance of gems. || 118 ||

**Vansh-Sthava Vrittam**

In the autumn, the Vidyaadharis spread their wings, creating a canopy over the forest, making their home there. They revel in the dense shade, unmindful of the heat of the day. || 119 ||

Seeing the autumn forests, bathed in the brilliance of shining Indraneel gems, and resembling dark clouds, the peacocks, filled with joy, dance with their vibrant plumage, their cries echoing in the air. || 120 ||

**Ruchira Vrittam**

The Vidyaadharis, mistaking the white clouds, clinging to the mountain's edge, for land, have come near and are making their beds upon them, as if on a vast expanse of silk. || 121 || 

Page #522:
---------------------------
432.
Here, on the banks of lakes teeming with flocks of saras birds, wild elephants are entering, causing rows of swans to fly up into the sky in fear of the Shravana month, appearing like strands of a garland adorning the sky, the form of Lakshmi. ||122|| Here, the orb of the sun is enveloped by clusters of the brilliance of green gems, so the Vidyadharas, mistaking it for a green leaf of the lotus, repeatedly gaze towards this bank of the mountain. ||123|| Somewhere, on the banks of the lake, the trees of the forest, whose bark has been stripped off by the rubbing of the cheeks of wild elephants, seem to be weeping, shedding tears in the form of flowers, and their sorrowful sound is carried by the buzzing of the bees within them. ||124|| Here, in the lotus groves, the kalhansas and saras birds, whose voices are heightened by intoxication, are making sweet sounds, and here, the melodious sound of the cuckoos, amplified by the beautiful sound of the mynas, is spreading far and wide. ||125|| Here, in this forest, the white clouds of autumn and the black clouds of the rainy season are meeting willingly, and it seems as if two white and black elephants are engaged in battle, facing each other and wielding their trunks. ||126|| Here, the ground of the forest, which is swaying in the wind and completely covered in pollen, is not visible, but this group of bees, eager for fragrance and coming from all directions, is revealing it. ||127|| Here, the forest, which is served by many herds of wild elephants, whose trees are watered by the intoxicating water of those elephants, and whose trees and creepers are interspersed with groups of intoxicated bees, making a beautiful sound, is being perceived. 

 
 
1. Row of swans. 2. Emerald gem. 'Garutmatam marakatam asmagarbha harinmani' is the name. 3. Enveloped. Embodied. 4. Leaf. 'Patram palasha chhadanam dalam parna chhadaha pumān' is the name. 5. As if. 6. Karunasvaranvitaha, karunasvananvitaha is the reading. 7. Mixed. 8. Pratanyate Lo.Ma. 9. Makhabhimukhasthapitavadaha. 10. Covered. 11. -api gama-da. 12. Shapayati. 13. Anumiyate. 14. Damakala. Mantarantare 80,10. Malatamantarantare Ma, Lo. 15. Madhye madhye. 

Page #523:
---------------------------


Page #524:
---------------------------
##  Chapter 434: Adipurana

**Pushpitaagraavrittam**

**135.**  In this forest, where the gentle breeze blows, fragrant Malati flowers bloom, their edges adorned with beautiful, golden bees. The wind, laden with the scent of honey, stirs the rows of trees, their leaves dusted with pollen.

**136.**  The wind, having stirred the rows of Kalpa trees, fills the air with the sweet fragrance of Mandara pollen. It carries the sounds of intoxicated bees and cuckoos, gently parting the new, tender leaves.

**137.**  The wind, carrying the scent of nectar, creates waves in the lotus ponds, its cool breath touching the tops of the blooming trees.

**138.**  The wind, having brushed against the soft, new leaves of the vines, carries the pollen of flowers, creating a canopy of fragrance.

**139.**  The Kinnaras, with their jingling anklets and bracelets, easily recognize the passionate play of the Vidyadharis in this forest.

**Champakamalaavrittam**

**140.**  In the heart of this forest, a group of birds sings a melody that delights our ears. The peacock, adorned with its feathers, dances with a vibrant display. 

Page #525:
---------------------------
435
The nineteenth chapter of this great mountain, adorned with a row of various trees, is shining. "Look, it seems as if the trees are dancing, being blown by the wind." ||11||
"The row of trees, with the buzzing of bees, seems to be singing the glory of this mountain. It seems as if it is offering a garland of flowers to the mountain, with its garlands of flowers spreading all over." ||142||
The trees of the forest, with their essence of fruit being stolen by a group of bees, seem to be shouting, as if the group of thieves, in the form of bees, has stolen all the essence of the flowers, and they are making a noise with the sound of the cuckoos, as if they are shouting." ||143||
The ground of this great mountain, where the snakes are moving, is covered with the white dust of time, and the peacocks are dancing beautifully. The reflection of the peacocks is spreading the beauty of the group of blue lotuses blooming on this mountain. Meaning - The reflection of the peacocks on the white ground of silver seems as if a group of blue lotuses is blooming in the water." ||144||
This mountain, with its unparalleled glory, its brilliance like snow, its virtuous form that cannot be transgressed, and its silver peak that has reached the sea and rejected it, is shining on the earth like the flow of the Ganges river. ||145||
Seeing the green row of trees on every high bank of this great mountain, these peacocks are suspecting the clouds, and they are rejoicing
1. Look. 2. Sounding loudly. 3. Silver. "Kaladhautam rupyahemnoh" - from this name. 4. By reflection. 5. In the book "T", there is no fourth foot. 6. Seeing. 

Page #526:
---------------------------
436
Adipurana
Vasantatilaka
These groves, adorned with the play of the gods, serpent-kings, and earth-kings, are resplendent with various arbors, ponds, and sandhills. The trees are perpetually radiant with delicate leaves and flowers. ||147||
Here, the sun, moving along, has reached the edge of this great mountain, and there, adorned with the rays of various jewels, it assumes the appearance of a bird with many colored wings in the sky. ||148||
This mountain, whose interior is filled with the brilliance of jewels, where serpent-princes and Vyantara gods play joyfully, has stopped the sun's disc, covered all directions, and is resplendent with dense peaks that obstruct the wind, captivate the minds of celestial maidens, and transcend the sky. ||149||
Behold, just as a great fish emerges slowly from the ocean, so too, this terrible serpent emerges slowly from the caves of this mountain. It has crushed the nearby creepers, small plants, and trees with its body, and with the heat of its angry breath, it is burning the nearby forest. ||150||
Here, on the edge of this mountain, the deep red of the evening, mixed with the light of various jewels, is spreading, and this mountain, though beautiful in form, is assuming the appearance of the golden Mount Meru, which is contrary to its nature.
1. These are the places where they play together. 2. Sandhills. 3. Moving. 4. Being filled. 5. In the sky. 6. Sun, bird. 7. Sun, colorful bird (meaning Makara). 8. With wide spaces. 9. Covered. 10. Cloud. 11. Terrible. 12. Emerging. 13. Long fish. 14. Crushed. 15. With the heat of anger. 16. Dawn. 17. With beauty. 18. Bright. 19. Form. 20. Beautiful. 

Page #527:
---------------------------
437
Nineteenth Chapter
The Maharshiņi Uddhata, with the wind blowing high, is adorned with the pollen of the Asana trees, which is scattered like golden umbrellas. (152)
These are the marks of the elephants, whose temples are rubbed against the rocks, and whose mad water flows down, leaving behind broken trees and rocks. (153)
Here, in the forest, the deer sniff the grass, their nostrils flared, seeking the best grass to eat. (154)
The deer, attracted by the different types of jewels found on the different shores of this mountain, take on the appearance of those jewels. (155)
This group of deer, mistaking the green rays of the emerald jewels for grass, eat them, but their desire is not fulfilled. (156) 

Page #528:
---------------------------
18
438
Adipuranam
A herd of deer, hearing the beautiful music of the Kinnari women singing in the forest, stood still, with half-chewed grass in their mouths and their eyes half-closed. ||15||
"Has the sun set, hidden behind the peak of this mountain?" The cuckoo, filled with anxiety, asks her mate, fearing the worst, even before dusk. ||15||
Upeendravaja. The lotuses are always in full bloom, the bees always buzz, the elephants always exude their musk, and the trees of the forest are always beautiful and fruitful. ||15||
Vasantatilakam - - This mountain, with its blue peaks, is adorned with the beauty of the autumn clouds. The green forest on its summit looks like a blue garment draped over the white thighs of Balabhadra. ||160||
Chanda (?) This beautiful mountain, adorned with forests, shines like the moon, with its two ranges divided by a valley. Its form, bright with the radiance of the clouds, is like a dark elephant, with its tusks reaching out to the horizon. ||161||
Malini The fragrant pollen of flowers fills the air, and the buzzing of bees, gathered by the fragrance, is pleasing to the ear. The wind, blowing gently through every forest of this mountain, dispels the sorrow of the celestial nymphs. ||162||
Muchaki is not eating. ||156||
Here, in the middle of the forest, a herd of deer stands still, listening to the beautiful music of the Kinnari women singing. They have half-chewed grass in their mouths and their eyes are half-closed. ||157||
Here, the sun has set behind the peak of this mountain. The cuckoo, filled with anxiety, asks her mate, fearing the worst, even before dusk. ||158||
On this mountain, the lotuses are always in full bloom, the bees always buzz, the elephants always exude their musk, and the trees of the forest are always beautiful and fruitful. ||159||
This mountain, with its blue peaks, is adorned with the beauty of the autumn clouds. The green forest on its summit looks like a blue garment draped over the white thighs of Balabhadra. ||160||
This beautiful mountain, adorned with forests, shines like the moon, with its two ranges divided by a valley. Its form, bright with the radiance of the clouds, is like a dark elephant, with its tusks reaching out to the horizon. ||161||
The fragrant pollen of flowers fills the air, and the buzzing of bees, gathered by the fragrance, is pleasing to the ear. The wind, blowing gently through every forest of this mountain, dispels the sorrow of the celestial nymphs. ||162||
1. Deer. 2. Beautiful. 3. First mouthful. 4. Goes when. 5. Covering. 6. Sun. 7. Luminary. 8. Before evening. 9. Near beloved. 10. Deer. 11. Forest trees. 12. Small. 13. Cloud-colored. 14. Garment. 15. Beautiful - A. 16. Not as white as the sun. 17. Balabhadra's. 18. White like the moon. 'Voodhu tu vimalaarthaakam' - meaning. 19. Connected by speed. 20. Treated or rejected. 21. Group of women. 

Page #529:
---------------------------


Page #530:
---------------------------
440
The joy that the gods experience on the silver peaks of this mountain, while they are roaming with their consorts, is not found in heaven, nor on Mount Himavan, nor on any shore of Mount Sumeru. ||169||
Look here, this lion, mistaking the round rock on this mountain for an elephant, is repeatedly striking it and digging the nearby ground with its claws, because it sees the rock covered with the mad-water that flows from the temples of wild elephants. ||170||
Here, in this forest, this lion, with the radiance of a full moon in autumn, is adorning the mouth of the cave-like opening of this mountain with the beauty of its laughter. It is slowly waking up, yawning, and desiring to leap onto the peak of the mountain. ||171||
Here, this serpent is lying in the bower of creepers. It is protruding half of its body from the burrow of this mountain, and it appears as if a large, heavy mass of the intestines of a mountain, gathered in one place. It has held its breath, opened its mouth-like burrow, and desires to satisfy its hunger by falling into it, mistaking it for a burrow, with the wild creatures. ||172||
It is fitting that this mountain, with its long, extended peaks, touches the water of the ocean, and that this ocean, agitated by the wind, constantly cools the shores of this mountain king with the many small drops of its rising waves. For those whose hearts are cool, that is, peaceful, cool, that is, pacify, the men who come near them. ||173||

Page #531:
---------------------------
441
Nineteenth Chapter
(Verse meter?) The Ganges and the Indus rivers, being full of rasa (juice) and beauty, are like the heart of this mountain, and they have torn apart its banks. They are constantly touching the banks with their waves, which are like their hands, and are moved by the wind. This is appropriate, because even the hearts of the greatest men can be pierced by the sharp points of arrows. ||174||
The clouds, which are like pearls or stars, and whose roar is excellent, are coming quickly and repeatedly near the peaks of this mountain, which is very strong and whose parts are all equal. They are revealed by their roar, even though they are coming quickly and repeatedly. Meaning: The white clouds that are hovering near the white peaks of this mountain are not visible until they roar. ||175||
Here, in the middle of the lake, there is a flock of sarasa birds, which are beautiful and move gracefully, and they are making a loud noise. And here, in the sky, there is a garland of clouds, which is raining heavily and making a loud noise, and it is roaring with a high and deep voice. ||176||
A woman, who is beautiful, pure, and has a beautiful body, is sitting on the bank of this mountain, which is adorned with excellent jewels, and she is singing a song that is very beautiful, high-pitched, and full of rasa. She is singing this song to please her husband, who is beautiful, pure, and has a beautiful body. ||177||
Here, in the middle of this mountain, there are vidyadharis, who are beautiful, have husbands, are under the control of love, and have a radiant glow. They are sitting in beautiful gardens, and they are looking at the siddhas. 
1. Coming. -Going P. -Going M, L. 2. By the form of water and by beauty. 3. By great force. 4. Rains with excellent speed. 5. Having equal stable parts. 6. Star or long star. Pure star. In the case of star, very pure, excellent by the word swarasara. 7. Going and coming. 8. Beautiful to the immortals. 9. Very excellent, raining with speed or. 10. As high as it is. 11. Deep. 12. Excellent in roar. 13. Excellent in growth of rasa. 14. Stable. 15. Deep, bright or. 16. Tree of great beauty. 17. Beloved. 18. Able to enjoy. 19. Hidden rasa, expressed rasa. 20. Woman. 21. With their beloveds. 22. Women of the gods. 

Page #532:
---------------------------
452
Adipurana
Vasantatilaka

This glorious mountain, like the Vrishabha Jinendra, is adorned with both inner and outer Lakshmi. Just as the Vrishabha Jinendra is served by humans, gods, vidyadharas, and charanas, so too is this mountain served by them. The Vrishabha Jinendra is the guru of the three worlds, and so too is this mountain. The Vrishabha Jinendra is known for his brilliant radiance, like the moon, and so too is this mountain. The Vrishabha Jinendra is lofty and pure, and so too is this mountain. The Vrishabha Jinendra's feet are worshipped by Bharat Chakravarti, and so too are the base of this mountain. May this mountain, like the Vrishabha Jinendra, protect you both. ||179||

Hearing these words of the mountain king, the two princes praised him. Then, accompanied by the mountain king, they descended and entered the city of Rathanu Purchakraval, adorned with magnificent and tall flags. ||180||

There, the mountain king seated them on thrones and said to all the vidyadharas, "These are your masters." Then, the valiant mountain king, using large golden pots carried by vidyadharis, performed their coronation. ||181||

After the coronation, the mountain king said to the vidyadharas, "Just as Indra is the lord of heaven, so too is Nami now the lord of the southern region." And so, Nami, who was constantly worshipped by many vigilant vidyadharas, became the lord of the southern region. ||182||

The women of the Jatikas are ashamed. ||178|| 

Page #533:
---------------------------
The twenty-first parva, the Devendra, the Jagadguru, the great Vrishabha, having given his consent, sent these two here, the creator of the world. Therefore, the king of the Khacharas, out of love for them, said to the serpent king, "Let us carry out their orders with our heads." ||183|| Due to their merit, the description of the separation from the guru, and the proper instruction from the Nagendra, those Khacharas accepted all that. It is right, for whatever is undertaken by a great person is quickly accomplished. ||184|| Having given the two of them the knowledge of Gandharapada and Pannagapada, the serpent king, the wise one, having completed his task, left the two princes, bowing in humility, and went to his own abode. ||185|| 

Then, when the serpent king had gone, those two young men were greatly honored by the king of the Agara, who showered them with various enjoyments and pleasures, bowing their heads with folded hands. ||186|| They lived happily on the peak of Vijayadha, which is like an unbreakable chain of birds, a dwelling place for virtuous people, an imitation of heaven, and like the assembly of the Jinas, worthy of worship by all the worlds. ||187|| 

Honoring the knowledge that they had acquired according to the rules, and having achieved their desired goal with the help of learned men, those two princes enjoyed the pleasures that were subject to knowledge and that brought happiness in all six seasons. They attained the position allotted to them by the Khacharas on that mountain. ||187|| 

**Meaning:** Although they were not Khacharas by birth, they went there and acquired many kinds of knowledge.

1. Having given permission.
2. Sent.
3. Therefore.
4. Due to your merit, due to the good deeds of your sons.
5. Accepted.
6. Undertaken.
7. The two kinds of knowledge, Gandharavidya and Pannagavidya.
8. The serpent king.
9. Satisfaction.
10. -Madhattampo, A, D, L, M.
11. Making contact. 'Yu' in the mixture.
12. Attained.
13. Kunmalit, a crown made of hands, as it were.
14. The rule.
15. Virtuous people, in the case of the gods.
16. Like.
17. Lived there.
18. The rule.
19. The purpose.
20. The limit. 

Page #534:
---------------------------
The Adipurana states that the Khachchranarapas, the sons of Khachchhara, served the two supreme beings, Namin and Vinami, with humility and devotion. They were always eager to fulfill their commands. Where were these two born, and how did they attain the position of Indra of the Khachchharas, a position that eliminates all enemies? Indeed, it is the merit of humans that brings them happiness and prosperity. (189)

Nami, the son of Khachchhara, subdued all the kings of the Khachchhara cities in the southern region, having acquired vast wealth and possessions. Vinami, on the other hand, humbled all the kings of the Khachchhara cities in the northern region. (190)

Thus, the two princes, having divided the wealth of the Khachchharas, resided on the banks of Mount Vijaya, free from all worries. O noble beings, observe how these two princes, by taking refuge in the feet of Lord Vrishabhadeva, attained such great glory through their merit. Therefore, those who desire to attain happiness and prosperity, including heaven, should accumulate merit. (191)

Having bowed down to Lord Vrishabhadeva, the teacher of both the movable and immovable worlds, and the one worshipped by the lords of the three realms, the two devoted Khachchharas, the rulers of the Khachchharas, attained appropriate happiness. Therefore, those noble beings who desire to attain the imperishable happiness of liberation and the qualities of the Jina, should bow down to the Adi Guru, Lord Vrishabhadeva, and worship him with devotion. (192)

Thus ends the nineteenth chapter of the Trishattilakshana Mahapurana, composed by the venerable Jinaseanacharya, which narrates the story of Namin and Vinami's attainment of kingship. (193) 

Page #535:
---------------------------
## The Vishan Parva

Six months were completed for the Lord, the holder of Yoga, whose greatness is inconceivable and whose position is unshakeable, like Mount Meru. ||1||

Then, with the intention of enlightening the Yatis regarding their conduct, especially their food intake, a thought arose in their minds: "Let us search for a food that is free from defects and conducive to the stability of the body." ||2||

Alas! Those newly initiated ascetics, born into great lineages, have become corrupted by hunger and other afflictions due to their lack of knowledge of the right path. ||3||

Therefore, to guide them towards the path of liberation and to attain liberation with ease, I shall now reveal the method of food intake that is conducive to the stability of the body. ||4||

The seeker of liberation should not merely make their body thin, nor should they nourish it with juicy and sweet, palatable foods. ||5||

Just as the senses should be under control and not wander off the path, so too should one strive to follow the middle path in their food intake. ||6||

Fasting and other practices are recommended to eliminate the doshas (vata, pitta, and kapha). The scriptures have outlined the intake of food for the sustenance of the life force. ||7||

One should engage in bodily austerities only to the extent that they do not lead to mental distress. For, if mental distress arises, the mind becomes fickle and one deviates from the path. ||8||

Therefore, those who desire the stability of their body, seeking the attainment of the journey of self-control, should consume food that is free from defects, without being attached to its taste. ||9||

Thus, having made this decision, the Lord, the holder of Yoga, the valiant and wise, began to move, as if shaking the entire earth with his steps. ||10|| 

Page #536:
---------------------------
446
When the great Lord Vrishabhadeva, as high as Mount Meru, was going on a pilgrimage, the earth, trembling, accepted the imprint of his feet. ||11|| If at that time, Lord Vrishabhadeva had not made an effort to practice austerities with a walking staff, then truly, this earth would have sunk into the netherworld, overwhelmed by the weight of his feet. Meaning: Because Lord Vrishabhadeva walked with a walking staff, he placed his feet lightly, so the earth did not bear a heavy burden. ||12|| After that, while walking, the glorious Lord Vrishabhadeva, as high as a mountain, visited many cities, villages, settlements, forts, and camps. ||13|| Wherever the Lord, who embodied the conduct of the monks, placed his foot, wherever he went, the people there, filled with joy and great excitement, came and bowed to him. ||14|| Some of them said, "O Lord, be pleased and tell us what you need," while others, silently, followed him as he went. ||15|| Others brought precious jewels and placed them before him, saying, "O Lord, be pleased and accept our worship." ||16|| ... Some brought millions of goods and millions of types of vehicles to the Lord, but the Lord had no need for any of them, so he continued his journey silently. ||17|| Some brought garlands, clothes, perfumes, and ornaments with great respect, saying, "O Lord, please wear these." ||18|| Some brought beautiful young women, hoping to marry them to the Lord, but such foolishness is to be condemned. ||19|| Some surrounded the Lord with bathing materials, while others offered food, saying, "O Lord, I offer you this." ||20|| 

Page #537:
---------------------------
They brought food with all the necessary ingredients, saying, "Please be pleased, sit on this seat and bathe and eat." (20-21)

Many foolish people, not knowing the rules of the Charya, prayed to the Lord, saying, "O Lord, we join our hands, be pleased and grace us." (22)

Many people, having obtained the Lord's lotus feet and purified by the touch of His dust, bowed their heads and repeatedly prayed to Him for food. (23)

And they said, "O Lord, this is food, this is delicious food, this is separate food, and this is a very pleasing, satisfying drink for the body." Thus, many ignorant people, confused, repeatedly prayed to the Lord, but knowing that it was not proper, He remained silent and moved on. (24-25)

Many people, unable to understand the meaning of the Lord's hidden conduct, were confused about what to do and what not to do, standing still like painted figures. (26)

Others, with their wives and children, fell at the Lord's feet, tears streaming from their eyes, momentarily interrupting His Charya, but as soon as the interruption was over, He continued His journey. (27)

Thus, six more months passed for the Lord, who was practicing the highest Charya with His hidden Charya, a wonder to the world. (28)

Then, after a year was complete, Lord Rishabhadeva reached the beautiful city of Hastinapur, the ornament of the Kuru-Jangala country. (29)

At that time, the king, Soma Prabha, was the protector of that city. King Soma Prabha was like the crest jewel of the Kuru dynasty, his mind was very happy, and his face was as gentle as the moon. (30)

He had a younger brother named Shreyans Kumar. Shreyans Kumar was superior in the growth of his qualities, he was like Kamadeva in beauty, like the moon in radiance, and he was a noble man. (31) 

Page #538:
---------------------------
448
The one who was formerly Dhandev and then became Ahmindra, descended from heaven, he became the treasure of welfare for the people, the embodiment of welfare, the श्रेयान्सकुमार. ||32||
When the Bhagavan was about to arrive near this Hastinapur city, श्रेयान्सकुमार saw the following dreams in the last watch of the night. ||33||
First, he saw the Sumeru mountain, which was made of gold, had a great body, and was extremely tall. Second, he saw the Kalpa tree, which was adorned with ornaments hanging from the tips of its branches. Third, he saw a lion with yellow mane, whose mane was rising high, like the clouds of the evening during the time of destruction. Fourth, he saw a bull, whose horns were covered with mud, and who was digging up the ground. Fifth, he saw the sun and the moon, whose radiance was extremely bright, and who were like the eyes of the world. Sixth, he saw the ocean, whose water was adorned with waves rising very high and with jewels. Seventh, he saw the forms of the Vyantara Devas, who were holding the eight auspicious things and were standing in front of him. Thus, श्रेयान्सकुमार saw these seven dreams, whose main fruit is the vision of the lotus feet of the Bhagavan. ||34-37||
Then, श्रेयान्सकुमार, whose mind was filled with joy, went to King Soma Prabha in the morning and respectfully told him about all the dreams he had seen in the night. ||38||
Then, the Purohit, whose rays of knowledge were spreading and purifying all directions, spoke about the auspicious fruit of those dreams. ||39||
He said, "O Prince, seeing the Sumeru mountain in your dream indicates that a Dev who is as high as the Sumeru mountain (or as generous as the Sumeru mountain) and who has been crowned on the Sumeru mountain will surely come to his home today. ||40||
And these other dreams also indicate the increase of his qualities. Today, due to the respect shown to that Bhagavan, we will experience a great rise in our punya. ||41||
Today, we will attain great praise, fame, and wealth in the world - there is no doubt about it. And the Kumar, who knows the true nature of things, 

Page #539:
---------------------------
The two brothers, pleased by the words of the Purohit, were engaged in conversation about the dream or the story of the Lord. Just then, the Yogiraj, Lord Vrishabhadeva, entered Hastinapur. [43]

At that time, a great commotion arose from the mouths of the citizens who had gathered from all sides, eager to see the Lord. [44]

"The Adikarta, Lord Vrishabhadeva, has come to protect us. Let us go quickly and see him, and worship him with devotion." [45]

Some said, "The eternal Lord has returned from the forest region only to grace us." [46]

Some, eager to see the Lord who knows both this world and the next, abandoned all their work and ran hither and thither. [47]

"He whose body is as tall as Mount Sumeru and whose radiance is like that of refined gold, can be seen from afar." [48]

"The one who is the father of the world, whom we have only heard about, is now, by fortune, present before us. We are seeing him with our own eyes." [49]

"Our eyes are blessed by seeing him, our ears by hearing him, and even an ignorant being attains purity of heart by remembering him." [50]

"He who has renounced all attachments, whose body is radiant, and who is free from the bonds of wealth, shines like the sun freed from the clouds." [51]

"It is a great wonder that the Lord of the three worlds, having renounced all possessions, wanders alone in this way." [52]

"Or perhaps what we heard before is true, that the Lord, desiring independent happiness, has gone to the forest like an elephant protecting its herd." [53] 

Page #540:
---------------------------
450
He is wandering alone, free from all attachments, without any effort, according to his own will. 53-54 || This Lord, wandering through many countries according to his own will, has come here by our good fortune, so we should worship him, offer him puja, and go before him. Thus, many people were speaking praiseworthy words. 55 || At that time, a woman was saying to her maid, "Oh maid, you take the child and feed him milk, I am going to see the Lord's feet." 56 || Another woman was saying, "Let this bathing material and this adornment material stay away, I will bathe in the holy water of the Lord's vision." 57 || May our mind-lotus blossom for a long time by seeing the Lord's face, the sun of the world. Let's go, today we will see the world-teacher, Lord Rishabhadeva. 58 || Another woman was saying, "Oh friend, stop eating, get up quickly, and take this offering in your hand, let's go and worship the world-worthy Lord." 59 || At that time, the city dwellers, ignoring the bathing and eating materials kept in front, were going to see the Lord who was going ahead. 60 || Some people, seeing others going, followed them, eager to see the Lord. Some were devoted, and some were eager to see the Jinadeva out of curiosity. 61 || Thus, the city dwellers, with various conversations and many resolutions and alternatives, were bowing to the Lord, the protector of the world, from afar, and seeing him. 62 || "I will reach first, I will reach first," thinking this way, the city dwellers, coming from all sides, filled the city up to the royal palace at that time. 63 || All this was happening in the city at that time, but the Lord, with his mind fixed on the nature of the world and the body, for the sake of achieving detachment and equanimity, was thinking about all beings, the virtuous, the suffering, and the unrighteous beings, in order to 
1. Forest. It is heard that he departed. 2. Unhindered. 3. Alone. 4. Worthy to go in front. 5. A certain woman spoke. 6. Enough of eating. 7. Quickly. 8. Puja material. 9. Ignoring. 10. The meaning is that he was situated in front. 11. Those who are under the influence of wonder. 12. Separated. 13. They saw. 14. Those who have come into being. 15. Up to the royal palace. 16. Remembrance. 17. Practicing. 

Page #541:
---------------------------
Chapter Twenty

Contemplating the virtues of friendship, joy, compassion, and equanimity, [the Tirthankara] walked a path of four hands' length, not too slow, not too fast, with a gait like that of a maddened elephant.  [He] considered the city filled with people as a desolate forest, and, free from anxiety, [He] wandered, relying on the Chandri-caryā.  Just as the moon shines its light on the homes of both the rich and the poor, so too did the Lord, free from attachment and aversion, go to the homes of both the poor and the rich to receive food.  Thus, entering each home as appropriate, [He] went to the royal palace to enter.  The Acharya says that to be free from attachment and aversion and to hold the attitude of equality is the eternal, supreme, ancient Dharma. ||64-68||

Then, Siddhartha, the gatekeeper, quickly went to King Soma-Prabha and informed him of the Lord's arrival, [who was] with his younger brother, Shreyans-Kumar. ||69|| Hearing this, King Soma-Prabha and the young prince Shreyans, both, along with the inner palace, the army commander, and the ministers, quickly arose. ||70|| Rising, the two brothers went outside to the courtyard of the palace, and both, from afar, bowed down with humility and devotion, paying homage to the Lord's feet. ||71|| They offered water for the Lord's feet, along with a portion of food, circumambulated the world-teacher, Lord Rishabhadeva, and, having done all this, both were so pleased as if a treasure had come to their home. ||72|| Just as trees acquire buds from the touch of the Malaya wind, so too, these two brothers, filled with joy at the sight of the Lord, were experiencing goosebumps on their bodies. ||73|| Seeing the Lord's face, their lotus-like faces blossomed, and they appeared like two ponds filled with lotuses in the morning. ||74|| Filled with joy, their heads bowed down under the weight of devotion, and they shone like two beautiful statues. ||75|| 

Page #542:
---------------------------
452
The two were adorned near the feet of the Tirthankara, as if they were the kings of the Saudharma and Aishana heavens, come to see the Lord. ||76||
The Lord Vrishabhadeva stood between Soma Prabha and Shreyans Kumar, who were standing on either side, as if Mount Sumeru stood between the Nishadha and Neel mountains. ||77||
Seeing the form of the Lord, Shreyans Kumar remembered his past lives, and with the influence of his past karma, he decided to offer food to the Lord. ||78||
He remembered the entire story of Shrimati and Vanjangha, and also remembered that in that very life, he had offered food to two charan rishis who had the power of walking on water. ||79||
Shreyans Kumar, with his pure mind, decided that this was the best time to offer food to the monks, and he offered food to the Lord. ||80||
Shreyans Kumar, the first to establish the tradition of offering food to the Tirthankaras, offered food to the Lord with the seven qualities of faith, power, devotion, knowledge, equanimity, forgiveness, and renunciation, and with the ninefold devotion that increases merit. ||81||
Faith, power, devotion, knowledge, equanimity, forgiveness, and renunciation are the seven qualities of a giver. ||82||
Faith is the belief in the teachings of the Tirthankaras. Without faith, there may be disrespect in giving. The absence of laziness in giving is the quality of power. Respect for the qualities of the recipient is the quality of devotion. ||83||
Knowledge of the proper way to give is the quality of knowledge. The ability to give without attachment is the quality of equanimity. Forgiveness is the quality of patience. Giving the best of what one has is the quality of renunciation. ||84||
A giver who possesses these seven qualities, who is free from the two defects of attachment and aversion, and who gives to a worthy recipient, is eager to attain liberation. ||85||
The following are the three ways to receive a Tirthankara: to offer him a seat, to wash his feet, and to worship him. ||86||
The Tirthankara is the embodiment of humility and peace. ||87|| 

Page #543:
---------------------------
## The Chapter of Purity

**453** The one who gives such donations, obtains nine types of merit or nine types of devotion. The wise and virtuous Shreyans Kumar, motivated by the karmas of his past lives, performed all these devotions. ||86-87||

**18** Considering the Lord to be highly desirable and a special recipient, Shreyans Kumar, attaining supreme satisfaction, offered the Lord a donation of food prepared for the occasion. ||88||

**89** Considering the Lord's qualities like contentment, absence of begging, renunciation of possessions, and self-reliance, the Lord would accept food only with his own hands. ||89||

**10** Thinking, "If I get a good seat, I will be content, but if I don't, I will feel aversion, and in that state, I will be unrestrained," the Lord would eat standing up. ||10||

**9** The Lord endured bodily pain to overcome attachment to pleasure, and to promote Dharma. ||9||

**12** The Lord embraced the state of nakedness, which is characterized by complete renunciation, the direct cause of liberation, and is untouched by the vices of violence, protection, and begging. It is extremely powerful, impossible for ordinary beings to attain, and not desired by anyone. It is like a newborn child, free from change and disturbance. ||12||

**13** The Lord practiced the vow of non-bathing, considering the vices of begging for oil, etc., the attachment to gain and loss, and the violence towards tiny creatures like lice in the hair. ||14||

**15** Despite not eating for a year, the Lord maintained strength and radiance in his body. ||15||

**96** The Lord would shave his own hair, considering the need to acquire and protect the tools like a razor, and the worry of losing them. ||96||

**97** The Lord, who was pacified by the five senses, protected by the three secrets, and free from desire, was a great soul, a great being, and a great liberator. ||97||

**Notes:**

1.  *Eshanasudhī* means purity of desire.
2.  *Pūrvabhavasaṃskārapraēritaḥ* means motivated by the karmas of past lives.
3.  *Devaḥ* means the Lord.
4.  *Shreyāṇ* means virtuous.
5.  *Ātmaēva pradhānatvam* means self-reliance.
6.  *Saṃtoṣaḥ* means contentment.
7.  *Dvēṣaḥ* means aversion.
8.  *Sharīrasukhasahanaartham* means to endure bodily pain.
9.  *Gatāya* means to overcome.
10. *Naasti kiṃcana yasyaasāvakiṃcanaḥ tasya māyā tat praṣānam yasya tat* means "He who has nothing is truly a renunciant, his illusion is his renunciation."
11. *Yācyā* means begging.
12. *Anyaranuṣṭhātumashkyaṃ* means impossible for others to practice.
13. *Prāptavate* means attained.
14. *Saṃyogaḥ* means attachment.
15. *Saṃvatsaropavāse'pi* means even after a year of fasting.
16. *Tejaḥ* means radiance.
17. *Muṇḍana* means shaving.
18. *Shastraādi* means tools like a razor.
19. *Shamītā* means
Page #544:
---------------------------
454
The Adipurana, through the practice of restraint, is a source of fearlessness for all beings. It is a guide for the welfare of all beings, a giver of universal knowledge, and a supreme being. ||18||
The act of giving food is a great means of liberation. It is a guide to the path of welfare for all beings in the three worlds. ||19||
Shreyans, along with King Soma Prabha and Queen Lakshmi Mati, respectfully offered a drink made from sugarcane to the great Lord Vrishabhadeva, whose hands were raised in offering. ||100||
Shreyans, with his hands raised in offering, was adorned with a stream of sugarcane juice, as bright as a stream of merit, flowing into the Lord's hands. ||101||
Then, from the sky, a rain of jewels fell, like a tradition of the fruits of great giving by the gods. ||102||
At that time, a rain of flowers, filled with swarms of bees, fell from the sky, released by the hands of the gods. This rain of flowers was as beautiful as a garland of the eyes of the gods. ||103||
At that time, the drums of the gods, which deafened all beings, sounded with a deep resonance. A gentle, cool, and fragrant breeze began to blow. ||104||
At that time, the gods, filled with joy, proclaimed in the vast expanse of the sky, "Blessed is this gift, blessed is this recipient, and blessed is this giver." ||105||
At that time, the two brothers considered themselves to have achieved their purpose, for the great Lord Vrishabhadeva, having achieved his purpose, had purified their home. ||106||
By approving of that gift, many others also attained supreme merit. Just as a crystal gains brilliance from another precious gem, so too does one gain merit from approving of a good deed. ||107||
If anyone doubts how one can attain merit by approving of a good deed, the answer is that the cause of bondage to merit and demerit is only the result of the soul's actions. External causes are only the cause of the cause, as the Jina has said. 
1. For the sake of teaching the welfare of all beings. 2. The giving of food and drink. 3. For the sake of the capable. 4. The liberator from the ocean of existence. 5. With the wife of Soma Prabha. 6. Made from sugarcane. 7. Of flowers. 8. They sounded. 9. A great sound, giving, and receiving. 10. By those who had attained. 11. The Tirthankara. 12. From the cause. 13. Our own. 14. Another. 15. The cause of the cause. The cause of the result is the object. 

Page #545:
---------------------------
The cause of auspicious and inauspicious results is explained. While auspicious results are considered the main cause in the practice of virtue, those who approve of auspicious actions also inevitably receive those auspicious fruits. ||108-109||

Thus, the wise yogi-king, Bhagavan Vrishabhadeva, having taken food for the sake of maintaining his body, and having experienced a kind of wonder, and being extremely humble, departed towards the forest, delighting those two brothers. ||11||

The lion-like valiant king Somaprabha, the best of the Kuru dynasty, and Shreyans, followed Bhagavan for some distance into the forest, and then returned again and again. ||111||

Those two brothers, turning their faces away, looked at Bhagavan again and again as he went into the forest without any attachment. ||112||

As long as they could see Bhagavan, they were unable to turn back their gaze or their mental focus, which was fixed on him. ||113||

They repeatedly spoke of the stories of Bhagavan, repeatedly praised his virtues, and considered themselves fulfilled. They looked upon the ground, which was purified by the touch of Bhagavan's feet, adorned with many auspicious signs, and marked by his footprints, with great love. ||114-115||

"This Kuru king Somaprabha is a good brother, fulfilled, virtuous, and skilled. He has such a great brother." ||116||

"This Shreyans is very auspicious, with great wisdom. His virtues are praised by the citizens." ||117||

They collected the jewels, which were like serpents, scattered throughout the great city, and delighted the common people as they wished. ||118||

"The middle part of the city, with its high and low areas, was filled with jewels scattered by the gods. The kings' palaces were repeatedly desired by the poor." ||119|| 

Page #546:
---------------------------
456
Adipurana
1
The two Kuru princes, who had been praised by many and were being watched by the citizens with great joy, entered the city, which was adorned with beautiful decorations, as if it had taken on a new form. ||114-120||
Then, having completed his fast, the Lord Vrishabhadeva went to the forest. ||121||
"Oh, what a great blessing! Such a blessing! And that kind of blessing!" The whole world was filled with the fame of Prince Shreyans, and rightly so, because the best kind of charity is that which brings fame. ||122||
The practice of giving charity began at that time, and Prince Shreyans was the first to understand the method of giving charity. The kings like Bharat were amazed by this method of giving charity. ||123||
King Bharat was wondering how this silent Lord had understood the intention of the Lord. ||124||
The gods were also amazed by him. They had great faith in Shreyans, and they all came together and worshipped him with great respect. ||125||
Then, King Bharat asked Prince Shreyans respectfully, "Oh, great giver of charity, tell me how you understood the Lord's intention." ||126||
"Who can understand this kind of charity, which has never been seen before in this world? Oh, Kuru king, today you have become as worthy of worship as the Lord himself." ||127||
"Oh, Prince Shreyans, you are a practitioner of the path of charity, and you are a great benefactor. Therefore, I am asking you this, tell me the truth." ||128||
Thus, asked by King Bharat, Prince Shreyans replied, as if spreading moonlight from the group of his teeth in the middle, ||129||
"Just as a sick person is happy to find a good medicine to cure his illness, or a thirsty person is happy to find a pond full of clean water and lotuses, ||130||
13
19

Page #547:
---------------------------
## Vansa Parva, Chapter 7

Seeing the glorious form of the Bhagavan, I was filled with joy. This joy brought back my jati-smaran, and I understood the Bhagavan's intention. 

In a previous birth, when the Bhagavan was in the Vajrajangha form, I was his beloved Srimati in the city of Pundarikini in the Videha region. 

At that time, while the Bhagavan was in the Vajrajangha form, I gave donations to two Charana Munis. 

Giving such a great donation, which is completely pure, free from defects, and a cause for fame, and composing poetry, are both obtained through great punya. 

O King Bharat, hear a little about the purity of dana. Giving one's wealth with purity of mind, speech, and body, for the benefit of oneself and others, is called dana. 

The purity of the giver, the object given, and the recipient, all purify each other. The purity of the object given purifies the giver and the recipient. Similarly, the purity of the recipient purifies the giver and the object given. Therefore, dana given with nine types of purity yields abundant results. 

**Meaning:** For dana to be effective, the giver, the object given, and the recipient must be pure. 

A person who is endowed with qualities like shraddha, etc., is called a giver. The four types of objects given are food, medicine, knowledge, and protection. 

A person who is free from attachment, etc., and is endowed with many virtues, is called a recipient. There are three types of recipients: inferior, mediocre, and superior. 

O King, I have known all this from the memory of my previous birth. 

A person who is a mithyadristi but follows vows and good conduct due to fear of punishment is called an inferior recipient. A person who is a samyagdristi but lacks the feeling of vows and good conduct is called a mediocre recipient. 

A person who is a samyagdristi and follows vows and good conduct is called a superior recipient. A person who is a mithyadristi and lacks good conduct is not considered a recipient. 

Page #548:
---------------------------
## English Translation:

**458**

A being who gives to the unworthy attains the womb of a wicked being (ku-bhoga-bhumi). Just as a vessel that is not purified contaminates the milk and other things kept in it, so too does the unworthy contaminate the gift given to him. ||142||

Just as honey, milk, etc., kept in an unbaked vessel perish and also destroy the vessel, so too does a gift given to the unworthy perish itself and also destroys the recipient. ||143||

That which is worthy of being a vessel is known by its possession of pure qualities, just as a vessel is known by its ability to carry. ||144||

Just as a vessel made of iron cannot carry anyone across the ocean (nor can it cross itself), so too a person burdened with the weight of karma and full of faults cannot liberate anyone from the ocean of samsara (nor can he liberate himself). ||145||

Therefore, those who wear the Digambara garb, which is the means of attaining liberation, who desire food for the sake of maintaining their body and attaining knowledge and other virtues, who do not desire strength, longevity, taste, or nourishment for the body, who are content with just enough food to sustain their life, and who are capable of liberating themselves and others, are the only ones who are worthy of receiving gifts. The food given to them is the cause of liberation, i.e., it leads to the cessation of rebirth. ||146-148||

This is the most powerful and convincing example to illustrate the greatness of the virtue of giving. It is indeed a wonder that I have attained the five wonders through the greatness of giving. ||149||

Therefore, O King Bharata, we should all give the best gifts. Now, at the time of the Tirtha of Lord Vrishabhadeva, the worthy will spread everywhere. Meaning: Due to the Lord's good advice, many people will adopt the Muni vows. We should give them food and other gifts. ||150||

Prince Shreyans, with the details of his own past lives, spoke to all those members, which aroused their interest in giving the best gifts. ||151||

**Notes:**

* **Ku-bhoga-bhumi:** The womb of a wicked being, a state of existence characterized by suffering and negativity.
* **Digambara:** A Jain ascetic who wears no clothes.
* **Tirtha:** A sacred place or pilgrimage site.
* **Muni vows:** The five vows of Jainism: non-violence, truthfulness, non-stealing, celibacy, and non-attachment.
* **Shreyans:** A Jain Tirthankara, a spiritual teacher who attained liberation.
* **Vrishabhadeva:** The first Jain Tirthankara. 

Page #549:
---------------------------
## Chapter Twenty
**459**

Thus, the king of the Bharatas, having heard these words of Shreyans, which were both delightful and conducive to merit, attained great joy.  || 152 ||

Filled with joy, he honored him greatly, displaying great affection.  Reflecting on the qualities of his Guru, he returned to his palace. || 153 ||

Then, the Lord, born with great strength and fortitude, engaged in the supreme practice of austerity, as prescribed by the Jain scriptures. || 154 ||

In the chamber of his mind, the lamp of knowledge, burning brightly, dispelled the darkness of delusion, serving as a guide to the right path. || 155 ||

He who sees qualities with the eye of wisdom and faults with the eye of fault-finding, he alone is the knower of what is to be rejected and what is to be accepted.  Where is the path of ignorance for such a one? || 156 ||

From that knowledge of the self, he became a knower of the division of qualities and faults.  He was attached to qualities, completely abandoning all faults. || 157 ||

With a mind awakened, he embraced complete renunciation of all vices and diligently followed their divisions, as specified by the vows. || 158 ||

Embracing compassion, being constantly devoted to truth, being dedicated to non-stealing, and being single-minded in celibacy, || 159 ||

He cultivated non-attachment to possessions, avoidance of untimely meals, and the practice of vows.  He contemplated these vows and their perfection. || 160 ||

Mind control, speech control, control of movement, body control, and the control of food and drink, these are the five primary vows of non-violence. || 161 || 

Page #550:
---------------------------
460
The five **bhavanas** (mental attitudes) of the second **satya-vrata** (truthful vow) are: abandoning anger, greed, fear, and laughter, and speaking according to the scriptures. ||162||
The five **bhavanas** of the third **achaurya-vrata** (non-stealing vow) are: taking limited food, taking food suitable for austerity, taking food when requested by a devotee, not taking food contrary to the proper method, and being content with the food and drink received. ||163||
The five **bhavanas** of the fourth **brahmacharaya-vrata** (celibacy vow) are: abandoning the stories of women, abandoning the sight of their beautiful limbs, abandoning association with them, abandoning the remembrance of past pleasures, and abandoning strong flavors. ||164||
The five **bhavanas** of the fifth **aparigraha-vrata** (non-attachment vow) are: abandoning attachment to the five senses, which are the objects of the five senses, both with and without consciousness, both internal and external. ||165||
The four **uttar bhavanas** (higher mental attitudes) of the above vows are: maintaining patience, being forgiving, constantly striving to focus on meditation, and not deviating from the path when faced with temptations. ||166||
Lord Rishabhadeva, the protector of all beings, observed these vows, purified by these **bhavanas**, to destroy his sins. ||167||
Similarly, other wise people should also abandon laziness and observe the five great vows, including non-violence, with the five **samitis** (principles of conduct) and three **guptis** (secrets), along with eighty-four lakh **uttar gunas** (higher qualities). ||168||
Similarly, the **munis** (ascetics) should abandon all three **shalyas** (obstacles) mentioned in Jain scriptures, namely **maya** (illusion), **mithyatva** (falsehood), and **nidana** (cause), and live a life free from obstacles. ||169||
This is the **sthavira kalpa** (conduct of an elder), which should also be applied in the **jina kalpa** (conduct of a Jina). According to the scriptures, one should observe the **sthavira kalpa** and then the **jina kalpa**.
Meaning: Observing the above vows, staying with the **munis**, giving teachings, initiating new disciples, etc., is called **sthavira kalpa**, and observing the vows while living alone, constantly engaged in self-reflection, is called **jina kalpa**.

Page #551:
---------------------------
## Chapter 20, Verse 4

461
**Chapter Twenty**
**4**

The Jinas, who are free from transgressions, abide in the Samayika vow. They are the possessors of the four knowledges, the eyes of the world. || 171 ||

The Jinas have shown the various forms of the Chhedopasthapana vow, according to the strength, lifespan, and knowledge of the yogis. || 172 ||

The Jinas have declared that the five types of conduct are distinguished by knowledge, vision, conduct, austerity, and strength. Conduct is restraint, protection, and the vow, as declared by the Jina Lords. || 173 ||

Therefore, for the sake of attaining the perfection of restraint, the Supreme Man, endowed with knowledge, patience, and strength, performed twelve types of austerities. || 174 ||

The Muni, the Lord Vrishabhadeva, who practiced extremely rigorous austerities, performed the Anashana austerity, which is very difficult. He also practiced the Avamoudarya austerity, following the rules of one mouthful (Sith) and so on. || 175 ||

Sometimes, he performed the Vrittiparisankhyana austerity, which is very difficult, and has many forms, such as Bithi, Charya, and so on. || 176 ||

Furthermore, the First Man, free from laziness, performed the Rasa-parityaaga austerity, which is very severe, by constantly abandoning milk, ghee, jaggery, and other flavors. || 177 ||

The Yogi, in the three seasons of rainy, winter, and summer, tormented his body, which is called the Kaya-klesha austerity. The Ganadharas have declared that the restraint of the body, that is, Kaya-klesha, is the most excellent and difficult austerity. || 178 ||

When the body is restrained, all the senses, such as the eyes, are also restrained. When the senses are restrained, the mind becomes restrained. || 179 ||

The restraint of the mind is the highest meditation, which is the means of destroying karma. From this, one attains infinite happiness, and then one should strive to excel in one's actions. || 180 ||

- The Tirthankara Bhagavan is a Jina-kalpi, and this is truly worthy of emulation. Although ordinary Munis have to be Sthavira-kalpi in the beginning, they should also strive to become Jina-kalpi in the end. || 170 || 

Page #552:
---------------------------
The Adipurana states that the Lord possessed the three knowledges (mati, shruta, and manahparyaya) from birth. He attained the knowledge of manahparyaya after initiation.  Even though he was destined to attain Siddhatva, the Lord, with his eyes of right knowledge, performed intense and severe austerities for a thousand years. This shows that the austerities called Kayaklesha are highly desired by the great sages and they perform them diligently. Just as the head is the most important part of the body, Kayaklesha is the most important among all external austerities. 

Therefore, the Lord, the king of yogis, who endured all hardships, performed the Kayaklesha, the most difficult and the best means to attain liberation.  He was ready to burn the fuel of karma with the fire of austerity. The Lord, with his unwavering determination, was shining brightly like a blazing fire. He was destroying the dense darkness of karma with the countless streams of virtues. His body was shining brightly with the radiance of austerity, making him look like the sun. 

The Lord, who was always awake, had his bed in a secluded place. When he sat down, it was always in a pure and lifeless place. He was always awake and had conquered his senses. He never slept or sat in one place for long. He renounced the enjoyment of worldly pleasures and diligently followed the rules of conduct, wandering all over the earth. 

**Meaning:** The Lord was always awake, so he didn't need a bed regularly. But when he did rest, he would lay down in a pure and secluded place. Similarly, when he was not wandering, he would sit in a secluded and pure place for meditation. This means that the Lord practiced the austerity of having a secluded bed and seat. 

Page #553:
---------------------------
The Yogi King, observing the six types of external austerities, which are extremely difficult to perform, also observed the six types of internal austerities, which are mentioned later. (189) The austerity of atonement, in the case of the Muni who does not transgress, has become fulfilled, for what darkness can ever be in the sun? (190) In the same way, his austerity of humility had become internalized, for he, the supreme being, was the one who humbled everyone else. So, who would he be humble towards? (191) Or, he had become humble with the desire to become a Siddha, and worshipped the Siddha Bhagavans, for he had taken initiation by saying, "Salutations to the Siddhas." (192) Or, he had the appropriate humility in his knowledge, vision, conduct, austerity, and strength, for he was truly striving. (193) His austerity of engagement was limited to the three jewels, for the Supreme Lord, where else would he be engaged? (194) The meaning here is that in these three austerities of atonement, humility, and engagement, the Lord Vrishabhadeva was only the controller, not the controlled. He taught these to others, but he himself was not controlled by anyone else, meaning he did not follow these austerities by taking instructions from others. (195) 

Page #554:
---------------------------
## Translation:

**464**

The **Bhadra Purana** states that the entire **Dharmamaya** creation is eternal. At the beginning of the Yuga, the **Snatana** (Eternal) Lord **Vrishabhadeva** demonstrated this by practicing it himself.  ||19||

Even though he was already well-versed in all the scriptures (**Dwadashanga**), he continued to study (**Swadhyaya**) for the purification of his intellect.  Because of his example, even today, the **Samyata** (controlled) ones practice **Swadhyaya**.  There is no other **Tapa** (austerity) equal to **Swadhyaya**, neither in the external nor internal realms, nor in the twelve forms of **Tapa**. ||19||

A **Muni** (sage) who is devoted to **Swadhyaya**, with controlled senses, becomes one-pointed in his mind, humble, and focused. ||199||

In secluded forests, mountains, groves, and cremation grounds, the Lord practiced the fifth **Tapa** called **Vyutsarga**, renouncing his body. ||20||

He saw the soul as distinct from the body and practiced the three **Guptis** (secrecies): **Manogupti** (mental secrecy), **Vachanagupti** (verbal secrecy), and **Kayagupti** (physical secrecy).  He practiced this **Tapa** with detachment even towards his own body. ||20||

After **Vyutsarga**, the Lord practiced the **Tapa** of **Dhyana** (meditation).  It is fitting that a **Muni** who has renounced his body becomes the master of the supreme wealth of **Dhyana**. ||202||

The **Yogi** (meditator) **Vrishabhadeva** attained perfection by practicing **Dhyana**.  **Dhyana** is the supreme **Tapa**, while all other forms of **Tapa** are merely its means.  ||20||

The **Samyata** (controlled) ones followed his example. ||195||

In this world, whatever **Dharma-Srishti** (creation of Dharma) existed, the **Snatana** Lord **Vrishabhadeva** practiced it himself as an example and made it known at the beginning of this **Yuga**.  ||196||

Even though the Lord was knowledgeable in all the scriptures (**Dwadashanga**), he continued to study (**Swadhyaya**) for the purification of his intellect.  Because of his example, even today, the **Muni**s practice **Swadhyaya**.  ||197||

Even though it was not necessary for him to practice **Swadhyaya** because he was already knowledgeable in the **Dwadashanga** without it, he wanted to establish the practice of **Swadhyaya** for the benefit of other ordinary **Muni**s.  Therefore, he practiced **Swadhyaya** himself.  Seeing him practice **Swadhyaya**, other **Muni**s adopted this practice, which continues even today. ||198||

There is no other **Tapa** equal to **Swadhyaya**, neither in the external nor internal realms, nor in the twelve forms of **Tapa**. ||199||

Because a wise **Muni** who is devoted to **Swadhyaya**, with humility, becomes free from the mental fluctuations of **Sankalpa** (resolution) and **Vikalpa** (doubt), his senses become controlled, and his mind becomes fixed on the contemplation of a single object.  ||199||

The practice of **Swadhyaya** naturally leads a
Page #555:
---------------------------
## Twenty Chapters
**465**

The practice of austerities involves the burning and restraint of the mind, senses, and body. This austerity, as described by the Jinas, is of twelve types. ||204||

The wise, desiring great liberation and the best kind of liberation, were always engaged in these twelve types of austerities. ||205||

They conquered the enemies (of the soul) and practiced for a long time the virtues of secrecy, community, non-attachment, forgiveness, and right conduct. ||206||

Then, desiring to meditate, they resided in places suitable for meditation, which were secluded, beautiful, and free from the causes of attachment and aversion. ||207||

These places included caves, riverbanks, mountain peaks, dilapidated gardens, and forests. They were not excessively hot or cold, and were accessible to all. ||208||

The time was not excessively hot or cold, and was conducive to the happiness of beings. The mental state was characterized by knowledge, detachment, patience, and other virtues. ||209||

"The substances that are conducive to the destruction of afflictions are the best. The Lord (of the soul) should engage in meditation for their attainment." ||210||

Sometimes, the knower of the true nature of the soul would meditate in the leafy retreats on mountaintops, sometimes in mountain caves, and sometimes on mountain peaks. ||211||

Sometimes, for the purification of the soul, they would meditate on the stone slabs on the peaks of beautiful mountains, where the sounds of peacocks were very pleasing. ||212||

Sometimes, for the sake of meditation, they would stay in inaccessible forests, where there were no traces of cattle, in secluded, uninhabited places. ||213|| 

Page #556:
---------------------------
466
The Adipurana states that sometimes, in the cold upper regions of mountains, where the water from nearby waterfalls was spraying, he attained a state of deep meditation. ||214|| Sometimes, at night, in cremation grounds where many demons danced according to their desires, he remained in meditation, contemplating the Lord. ||215|| Sometimes, on the banks of rivers with beautiful, pure sand, sometimes on the banks of lakes, sometimes in the beautiful forests, and sometimes in other peaceful lands, free from mental agitation, the merciful Lord wandered throughout this earth, practicing meditation. ||216-217|| The silent, meditative, and selfless Lord, with his extraordinary intelligence, wandered through many lands and one day reached the vicinity of the city of Purimatala. ||218|| Not far from that city, there was a garden called Sakata, which was neither too close nor too far from the city. In that pure, tranquil, beautiful, secluded, and deserted forest, the Lord stayed. ||219|| With a pure mind, the Lord sat on a clean, large stone beneath a banyan tree, to attain the perfection of meditation. ||220|| Sitting facing east in the Padmasana posture, and with his mind focused on the highest purity of the Leshyas, the Lord concentrated his mind on meditation. ||221|| With his extremely pure mind, the Lord Vrishabhadeva first focused his mind on the supreme state of liberation, the "Anuttara Pada," and contemplated the eight qualities of the Siddha Parameshthis. ||222|| The eight qualities of the Siddha Parameshthis are: infinite Samyaktvam, infinite Darshan, infinite Jnana, infinite and miraculous Virya, Sukshmatva, Avgahanatva, Anyabadhatva, and Agurulaghutva. Those who desire to attain Siddhi must contemplate these qualities. Similarly, the Dravya, Kshetra, Kala, 
1. Vyaapta. 2. Dhyanaikapatantatam. 3. Ratri. 4. Rakshasa. 5. Vyakula. 6. Asmat Purat. 7. 'Pumanchanyato'bhyaniti sutrena pumbadbhava. 8. Vijane. 'Viviktau patavijanoi'tyabhidhanat. 9. Vata. 10. Adhat iti pathe akaroth. Adhaditi pathe dharati sma. 11. Silapatte. 12. -paryanka-lo, mo, do, so, ao. 13. Abhiprayagatam kritva. 14. Akshayasthanam. 15. Sukshmatva. 96. Avgahanitva. 

Page #557:
---------------------------
## English Translation:

467
Eight qualities of the Siddhas are to be contemplated by one who desires liberation. These qualities are based on substance, space, time, and state. ||224||
The liberated one is united with the qualities, subtle, free from impurities, manifest to the yogi, eternal, pure, and desirous of liberation. ||225||
Then, the contemplation of the twelve Anuprekshaas is the highest dharma for the one who desires liberation. ||226||
Their names and forms have been described before. After that, the one who possesses the utmost purity of intellect attained Dharma-Dhyana. ||227||
There are four types of Dharma-Dhyana: Aagna-Vichaya, Apaaya-Vichaya, Vipaaka-Vichaya, and Sansthaana-Vichaya. ||228||
The four Dharma-Dhyanas, whose nature is revealed by their names, were contemplated by Jineendradeva, because they lead to the attainment of great merit, which is the cause of the supreme happiness of the heavenly realms. ||229||
The dust of sin has been washed away, and the passions of attachment and aversion have been destroyed. In the mind of the yogi, Vrishabhadeva, there was no negligence at that time, due to the power of knowledge, perception, etc. ||230||
Having attained supreme purity in the results of knowledge, etc., there were no impurities, even in the slightest degree, that could cause affliction for Jineendradeva. ||231||
At that time, the power of contemplation, shining brightly, appeared like a huge meteor, indicating the destruction of the enemy, delusion. ||232||
... 1. Substance, such as luminosity and consciousness. 2. Space, such as being spread over countless regions. 3. Time, such as pervading the three periods of time. 4. State, such as being a result. 5. Ordinary qualities. 6. Eight qualities like Right Faith, and four qualities based on substance, making a total of twelve qualities. 7. One who desires to contemplate. 8. The highest dharma, free from attachment. 9. Being a part of the whole. 10. Pure, sometimes. 11. One whose intellect is developed and pure. 12. Aagna is the scripture, and Vichaya is the contemplation of the things mentioned in it. Here, it is the contemplation of the scriptures. Apaaya-Vichaya is the contemplation of karma. 13. Contemplation of the difference and non-difference of happiness and sorrow, which are born from the arising of auspicious and inauspicious karma. 14. One's own body. 15. Contemplated. 16. Attained from this. 17. Right Faith, Right Knowledge, and Right Conduct. 18. No downfall. 

Page #558:
---------------------------
The Adipurana
Then, having purified his inner nature, the Lord, like a king, divided his army of purity into three categories: inferior, middle, and superior. He then led them forth, fearless of death, with all his resources, to conquer the enemy army. ||233||

The Lord, having overcome the fear of death, stood up with all his resources to conquer the army of delusion, which is the enemy of all beings. ||234||

He had two types of restraints, like a helmet to protect the head and armor to protect the body, to conquer the enemy of delusion. These were restraint of the senses and restraint of the soul. He also had the weapon of supreme meditation, which is capable of conquering the enemy of delusion. ||235||

He appointed ministers of knowledge to protect the army of purity from harm and appointed the pure result as the commander of the army. ||236||

He made the virtues, which are invincible and constantly engaged in battle, into soldiers and placed the enemies of passion, etc., on the side of those who are to be slain. ||237||

Thus, having arranged his entire army, the Lord, the teacher of the world, began the conquest. As the Lord's chain of virtues flowed, the army of karma was destroyed piece by piece. ||238||

As the Lord's purity increased, the army of karma was destroyed and its power to bear fruit was diminished. ||239||

Page #559:
---------------------------
On the auspicious day of the Vishva Parva, there was a transition in the nature of karma, the enemies of the Jivas. Their nature was changing, their potency was diminishing, and their qualities were fading. ||240|| Just as a victorious king stirs up the inner nature of his enemies, their ministers and advisors, and then uproots them, so too did the Yogiraj, Lord Vrishabhadeva, through his yogic power, stir up the higher natures of karma and then uprooted them, or caused a transformation in their root natures. ||241|| After that, cultivating the feeling of supreme purity, the Lord, free from negligence, ascended the Bhapka श्रेणी, which is like a ladder to the palace of liberation. ||242|| First, he cultivated the feeling of Adhaḥkaraṇa in the seventh stage of the गुणस्थान, called Apramattasanyata, and then, becoming the eighth stage, called Apūrvakaraṇa, he attained the ninth stage, called Anivṛttikaraṇa. ||243|| There, he held the first white meditation, called Prthaktva Vitaraka, and through its flow, he attained purity, becoming fearless and defeating the entire army of the king of delusion. ||244|| First, he pulverized the eight passions, which are like the bodyguards of the king of delusion, namely, Apraatyakhyanavaraṇa and Pratyakhyanavaraṇa. Then, he destroyed the three types of Vedas, namely, Napumsakaved, Strived, and Purushaved, and the nine Kapāyas, the six warriors like laughter, etc. ||245|| After that, he destroyed the most important and foremost of all, Sanjvalana Krodha (burning anger), and then Mana (pride), Maya (illusion), and Bādaraloba (greedy desire). ||246|| Thus, destroying these enemies of karma, the great warrior, the Lord, with the flag of character waving in the arena of great meditation, armed with the sharp weapon of knowledge, and wearing the armor of compassion, attained the ninth stage of the गुणस्थान, called Anivṛtti, from which there is no turning back. 

Page #560:
---------------------------
The Adipurana has conquered the battlefield of Jayabhummi, the land of non-retreat, for the great warriors who do not retreat, the enemy forces cannot stand before them. ||348|| To reveal the true nature of the three karmas, Adhahkaran, Apurvakaran, and Anivrittikaran, the Ganadharas and other devatas who know the true meaning of the Agamas have spoken these words with their meanings, which are worthy of being known, i.e., their knowledge should be acquired. ||249|| In the first moment of Adhapravrittikaran, the karmas that occur are the same karmas that occur in the second moment, and in this same second moment, there are also other karmas that are different from the previous karmas. Similarly, the group of karmas related to the second moment occurs in the third moment, and there are also other karmas of a different kind from those. This sequence continues until the fourth and subsequent moments, up to the final moment. Therefore, this karma is aptly named Adhapravrittikaran. However, this is not the case with Apurvakaran, because there, each karma is a new karma, and therefore, this karma is also aptly named Apurvakaran. In Anivrittikaran, there is no retreat or difference in the jivas, because in each moment, all the jivas that reside there are equal to each other in terms of the karmas they have. Therefore, this karma is also aptly named Anivrittikaran. ||250-253|| Of these three karmas, the first karma, Adhahkaran, does not involve the beginning of the destruction of sthiti, etc., but the jiva residing in it, while becoming pure, only reduces sthiti-bandha and anubhaga-bandha. ||254|| The same arrangement exists in the second karma, Apurvakaran, but the difference is that the jiva residing in this karma, through the guna-shreni, destroys the front part of both sthiti-bandha and anubhaga-bandha, while causing their transition and destruction. ||255|| Similarly, in the third karma, Anivrittikaran, the karma-rupa, extremely intelligent jiva, who is engaged in pravritti, also destroys the sixteen and eight enemies without making any difference in the purity of the karmas. ||256||

Page #561:
---------------------------
The Yogi King, having destroyed the thirteen (1. Naraka-gati, 2. Naraka-gati Prayogyanupurvi, 3. Tiryanch-gati, 4. Tiryanch-gati Prayogyanupurvi, 5. Ekeindriya jati, 6. Dwiindriya jati, 7. Triindriya jati, 8. Charindriya jati, 9. Atap, 10. Udyot, 11. Sthavar, 12. Sukshma, and 13. Sadharan)  types of Karma that cause birth in Naraka and Tiryanch-gati, and the three (1. Styanagridhi, 2. Nidranidra, and 3. Prachalaprachala) types of Karma called Styanagridhi etc., thus destroying sixteen types of Karma in one blow,  became free from them. ||257||

Then, the knower of the Self, the Lord, destroyed the eight Kashayas (Apratyaakhyana Avarana and Pratyaakhyana Avarana related Krodha, Mana, Maya, Lobha). After some time, he destroyed the remaining (Napumsaka Veda, Stri Veda, Purusha Veda, Hasya, Rati, Arati, Shoka, Bhaya, Jugupsa, Sanjwalana Krodha, Mana, and Maya) types of Karma. ||258||

The Lord performed all the rituals like Ashvakarna Kriya, Krishtkaran etc. in this stage of Anivrittikaran Gunasthan and then reached the tenth Gunasthan called Sukshma Samparaya. ||259||

There, he conquered the extremely subtle Lobha and thus achieved victory over all the Mohaniya Karma. This is just like a powerful enemy being easily defeated by a victorious man when he becomes weak. ||260||

At that time, the Muni Raja Vrishabhadeva was shining brightly in the arena of Kshapanikani, having destroyed the enemy called Moha, just like a victorious wrestler shines brightly after the opponent wrestler leaves the wrestling arena. ||261||

Then, the Lord, who is the repository of eternal qualities, attained the twelfth Gunasthan called Kshina Kashaya. There, he completely destroyed the dust of all Mohaniya Karma and became a graduate. ||262||

Then, he destroyed all the arrogant types of Karma like Jnana Avarana, Darshan Avarana, and Antaraya Karma with the second Shukla Dhyana called Ekatva Vitarka. Thus, the Muni Raja, by burning the four types of Ghatiya Karma with the fire of Dhyana, became a Kevalgyani and a Vishvadrik (one who sees all the worlds). ||263-264||

In this way, illuminating the entire world, and relying on the infinite nature of Dana, Lama, Bhoga, and Upbhoga, the Lord, who is the source of infinite knowledge, infinite power, infinite renunciation, and pure vision, became the source of liberation for all the Bhavyas. ||265|| 

Page #562:
---------------------------
## The Adipurana

**Chapter 472**

The Jina, radiant with the nine infinite perfections, is like the scriptures. He, the embodiment of compassion, illuminates the world like the lotus. ||266||

Thus, the Jina, whose karmic fuel is burnt by the fire of meditation, has attained the state of liberation, the embodiment of pure knowledge. ||267||

On the eleventh day of the dark fortnight of the month of Phalguna, under the constellation Uttaraashada, the Lord attained liberation. ||268||

**Malini Chanda**

When the Lord, victorious over delusion, shone with the brilliance of perfect knowledge, the Indra of the heavens bowed down, overwhelmed by devotion. ||269||

The sound of victory echoed throughout the universe, and the sky was filled with the showers of celestial flowers. The sound of celestial drums reverberated throughout the heavens. ||269||

The sky buzzed with the sound of bees, and the directions were contracted by the falling flowers of the Kalpavriksha. The celestial chariots descended sparsely, making the sky like an ocean filled with boats. ||270||

The wind, fragrant with the scent of flowers, carrying the pollen of lotuses, and accompanied by intoxicated bees, gently touched the cool waves of the Ganga. It spread throughout the directions, soft and boundless. ||271||

1. The attainment of perfect knowledge.
2. The emergence of the nine infinite perfections.
3. The flowers of the Kalpavriksha, which produce various colors.
4. The sky is filled with celestial chariots, just as it is filled with boats.
5. The Indra of the heavens bowed down.
6. The wind. 

Page #563:
---------------------------
## The Twentieth Chapter

**Verse 272:** At that very moment, a gentle rain, devoid of clouds, was falling from the sky, cleansing the courtyard of the Lokanāḍī. The drops of this rain were spreading everywhere, as if the Lord of the Universe, Vṛṣabha-Jineśvara, was purifying the ground of his Samvasaraṇa.

**Verse 273:** Thus, at that time, the sun of Kevala-jñāna, born from the rising mountain of Vṛṣabhadeva, was shining for the benefit of all beings. This sun of Kevala-jñāna was spreading joy throughout the three worlds, proclaiming the sovereignty of the Jineśvara and revealing the impact of his Tīrthankarahood.

**End of the Twentieth Chapter:** Thus ends the twentieth chapter of the Triṣaṣṭilakṣaṇa Mahāpurāṇa, composed by Bhagavata Jinaseṇācārya, which describes the attainment of Kevala-jñāna by the Lord. 

Page #564:
---------------------------
The Twenty-First Chapter
6
The humble King Shrenik asked the Muni Gautam, "O Bhagavan, I wish to know the extent of dhyana (meditation)." ||1|| "O Yogi-raj, what is the characteristic of this dhyana? What are its divisions? What is its etymology? Who is its master? What is its duration? What is its cause? And what is its fruit?" ||2|| "O Swami, what is its essence? What is its base? What are the names of its divisions? And what is the meaning of each of them?" ||3|| "What is its object of meditation? And what is its obstacle? O best of speakers, I wish to know all this." ||4|| "Dhyana is considered the best means for liberation. Therefore, O Bhagavan, tell me its true nature, which is kept secret even from great Munis." ||5|| Thus asked, Bhagavan Gautam, with his teeth shining like rays of water, sprinkled the King's body with water and said, ||6|| "O King, I will teach you about this excellent tapas called dhyana, which is the main means for destroying karma, according to the scriptures." ||7|| "Dhyana is the restraint of the mind on a single object with undivided attention. This dhyana lasts for a maximum of an antarmukhurta for those who are strong like Vajra-Vrishabha-Naracha-Samhanana." ||8|| "Dhyana is that which has a stable outcome, and that which is fickle is called Anupreksha, Chinta, Bhavana, or Chitta." ||9|| "This dhyana is present in those who are in the 12th Gunasthan, and it is also present in the omniscient God who is in the 13th Gunasthan, due to the power of his yoga." ||10||
22
Then, King Shrenik, humbly asked the great Muni Gautam, "O Bhagavan, I wish to know the extent of dhyana (meditation)." ||1|| "O Yogi-raj, what is the characteristic of this dhyana? What are its divisions? What is its etymology? Who is its master? What is its duration? What is its cause? And what is its fruit?" ||2|| "O Swami, what is its essence? What is its base? What are the names of its divisions? And what is the meaning of each of them?" ||3|| "What is its object of meditation? And what is its obstacle? O best of speakers, I wish to know all this." ||4|| "Dhyana is considered the best means for liberation. Therefore, O Bhagavan, tell me its true nature, which is kept secret even from great Munis." ||5|| Thus asked, Bhagavan Gautam, with his teeth shining like rays of water, sprinkled the King's body with water and said, ||6|| "O King, I will teach you about this excellent tapas called dhyana, which is the main means for destroying karma, according to the scriptures." ||7|| "Dhyana is the restraint of the mind on a single object with undivided attention. This dhyana lasts for a maximum of an antarmukhurta for those who are strong like Vajra-Vrishabha-Naracha-Samhanana." ||8|| "Dhyana is that which has a stable outcome, and that which is fickle is called Anupreksha, Chinta, Bhavana, or Chitta." ||9|| "This dhyana is present in those who are in the 12th Gunasthan, and it is also present in the omniscient God who is in the 13th Gunasthan, due to the power of his yoga
Page #565:
---------------------------
## Chapter Twenty-One

**Dhyana** (meditation) is said to be **taniruujyate** (subdued) by the **dhib layattavritti** (mind controlled by wisdom). True **dhyana** is that which is **samdhana** (connected) to the **yathartha** (reality), otherwise it is **apadhyana** (not meditation). ||11||

**Yoga**, **dhyana**, **samadhi**, **dhirodha** (control of the mind), **svantigraha** (self-control), and **antasamlinata** (absorption in the self) are all considered synonyms of **dhyana** by the wise. ||12||

**Dhyana** is the process by which the self contemplates objects. This is the **karanasadhana** (instrumental) definition of **dhyana**. The self's contemplation of objects is also the **kartrivacya** (agent-oriented) definition of **dhyana**, because the self, which was previously a **karan** (instrument) due to its dependence on the **atma** (soul), now becomes a **karta** (agent) due to its independence. And from the **bhavacya** (action-oriented) perspective, the act of contemplation itself is the definition of **dhyana**. Thus, due to the different **shakti** (powers), the three definitions of **dhyana** are appropriate for the same subject, the **atma**. ||13-14||

Although **dhyana** is a synonym of **jnana** (knowledge) and is concerned with **dheyagocara** (objects of meditation), it also encompasses **bodha** (understanding), **darshan** (vision), **sukha** (bliss), and **virya** (energy) when considered collectively. ||15|| 

Page #566:
---------------------------
The Adipurana states that just as happiness, anger, and other emotions are considered to be transformations of consciousness, but manifest as distinct entities, similarly, the inward contraction known as meditation, although described as a result of consciousness (knowledge), manifests as a distinct entity. This statement emphasizes the subtle difference between the essence and its manifestation. ||16||

All the elements of the universe, in their true form, without the thought "these are mine, and I am their master," are the objects of meditation. In other words, all things can be contemplated in a detached manner during meditation. ||17||

Alternatively, one should contemplate the essence of the self, which exists in two forms: the worldly and the liberated. This contemplation of the self is for the purification of the meditator's actions. ||18||

With the purification of actions, the individual eliminates the causes of bondage. The elimination of the causes of bondage leads to restraint and non-attachment, and these, in turn, lead to liberation without doubt. ||19||

For the seeker of liberation, the entire universe is the object of meditation. Every object, in its true form, becomes a part of the meditator's practice. ||20||

What is the point of elaborating further? In essence, all things in this universe, with their respective attributes, are included in the category of objects of meditation, according to the scriptures. In other words, all of them can be meditated upon. ||21||

The description of objects of meditation mentioned above should be understood as the contemplation of auspicious things. If one contemplates desirable and undesirable things, it is called false meditation, and there is no concept of the object in it. In other words, there is no object in false meditation. One should never engage in false meditation. ||22||

A person who does not understand the true nature of things, due to their contrary nature, starts contemplating even undesirable things as desirable. By thinking about things in terms of desirability and undesirability, they only achieve meditation filled with complexities. ||23||

Page #567:
---------------------------
A foolish being, under the sway of resolve, considers objects as desirable and undesirable. From this arises attachment and aversion, and from these two, he attains the bondage of karma, which is difficult to break. ||24||

Resolve is a mental activity that desires objects. This same resolve is called wrong intention, and from wrong intention arises inattention. ||25||

Therefore, for the purification of the mind, one should contemplate the true nature of things. For by contemplating the true nature of things, knowledge is purified, and by the purification of knowledge, meditation is purified. ||26||

Meditation is remembered as being of two kinds: praiseworthy and unpraiseworthy. Each of these is further divided into two, according to the nature of the thoughts. ||27||

The wise have described meditation as being of four kinds: Ārta, Raudra, Dharmya, and Śukla. ||28||

Know the first two, Ārta and Raudra, as unworthy of practice, for they are false meditations and increase worldly existence. The latter two, Dharmya and Śukla, are worthy of practice even by the ascetics. ||29||

Now, I will explain the internal divisions of these meditations, their characteristics, their etymology, their causes, their bases, their time, their nature, and their fruits. ||30||

The first, Ārta meditation, is that which arises from suffering. It is of four kinds: the first arises from the non-attainment of a desired object; the second arises from the attainment of an undesired object; the third arises from a cause; and the fourth arises from illness, etc. ||33||

To repeatedly think about the union of a desired object when it is separated from you, is the first Ārta meditation. Similarly, to constantly think about the separation of an undesired object when it is united with you, is the second Ārta meditation. ||32||

The meditation that arises from the desire for enjoyment is the third Ārta meditation, called Nidāna. This meditation arises in a being whose mind is disturbed by seeing the enjoyment of others. And the repeated thinking of a person suffering from pain, to destroy that pain, is the fourth Ārta meditation. ||33|| 

Page #568:
---------------------------
478
1.  The first type of Ārta-Dhyāna is called Iṣṭa-Viyoga-ja, which arises from the sorrow caused by the absence of desired objects. 
2.  The second type is called Nidāna-Pratyay, which arises from the contemplation of the cause of the desired object not being obtained. 
3.  The third type is called Aniṣṭa-Samyoga-ja, which arises from the association with an undesirable object. 
4.  The fourth type is called Vedana-Upagamo-dbhava, which arises from the experience of pain. 
5.  The contemplation of the cause and the removal of pain is the subject matter of these four types of Ārta-Dhyāna. 
6.  This Ārta-Dhyāna is characterized by the contemplation of the cause and the removal of pain. 
7.  This Ārta-Dhyāna is characterized by the contemplation of the cause and the removal of pain. 
8.  This Ārta-Dhyāna is characterized by the contemplation of the cause and the removal of pain. 
9.  This Ārta-Dhyāna is characterized by the contemplation of the cause and the removal of pain. 
10.  This Ārta-Dhyāna is characterized by the contemplation of the cause and the removal of pain. 
11.  This Ārta-Dhyāna is characterized by the contemplation of the cause and the removal of pain. 
12.  This Ārta-Dhyāna is characterized by the contemplation of the cause and the removal of pain. 
13.  This Ārta-Dhyāna is characterized by the contemplation of the cause and the removal of pain. 
14.  This Ārta-Dhyāna is characterized by the contemplation of the cause and the removal of pain. 
15.  This Ārta-Dhyāna is characterized by the contemplation of the cause and the removal of pain. 
16.  This Ārta-Dhyāna is characterized by the contemplation of the cause and the removal of pain. 
17.  This Ārta-Dhyāna is characterized by the contemplation of the cause and the removal of pain. 
18.  This Ārta-Dhyāna is characterized by the contemplation of the cause and the removal of pain. 
19.  This Ārta-Dhyāna is characterized by the contemplation of the cause and the removal of pain. 
20.  This Ārta-Dhyāna is characterized by the contemplation of the cause and the removal of pain. 

Page #569:
---------------------------


Page #570:
---------------------------
## Adipurana

**Steyananda** is the third Raudra Dhyana, which is the contemplation of stealing another's possessions. **Samrakshanananda** is the fourth Raudra Dhyana, which is the contemplation of earning wealth and other things. (Samrakshanananda is also known as **Parigrahananda**). || 51 ||

**Steyananda** and **Samrakshanananda**, these two Raudra Dhyanas are known in the world. Ganadhardeva has said that the result of this Raudra Dhyana is the attainment of extreme suffering in hell. || 52 ||

The external signs of this Dhyana are: furrowed eyebrows, distorted face, sweating, trembling of the body, and extreme redness of the eyes. || 53 ||

These two Dhyanas (Arta and Raudra) arise from the desires of the beginningless time, and they happen without effort. Therefore, the monks should abandon both of them. || 54 ||

After abandoning these two false Dhyanas, which are the cause of the worldly cycle, the monks practice the two final Dhyanas. These Dhyanas are superior, they depend on the country and the state, they are subject to external materials, and their results are also of two types: secondary and primary. || 55-56 ||

The monk who knows the nature of the spiritual self, sits in a deserted house, a cremation ground, an old forest, on the bank of a river, on the peak of a mountain, in a cave, in the hollow of a tree, or in any other such holy and beautiful place, where there is no scorching sun, no extreme heat or cold, no strong wind, no rain, no disturbance from microscopic creatures, no waterfall, and a gentle breeze is blowing. He sits on a bed or a seat, keeping his body straight and still, with his left hand placed on his bed in such a way that his palm is facing upwards. He places his right hand on his left hand in the same way. He keeps his eyes neither too open nor too closed. He breathes slowly... 

Page #571:
---------------------------
1. **Niruddha Dhi:** With a steady mind, he breathes slowly, barely opening his eyes, keeping his teeth gently touching. 
2. The Muni, with a mind trained by practice, should focus his mind on the heart, forehead, navel, or any other place, knowing the true nature of the self.
3. He should contemplate the true nature of substances and the self, following the teachings of the scriptures, enduring any obstacles that arise with a calm mind.
4. If the breath control is too intense, the mind becomes agitated. Agitation leads to a loss of concentration and disrupts meditation.
5. Even for someone who has renounced attachment to the body, there is no prohibition against slow breathing, blinking, or other natural bodily functions during meditation.
6. A body in a balanced posture will have a stable mind. An unbalanced body will lead to agitation and a disturbed mind.
7. Therefore, the Muni should sit in the Paryanka posture, as described, and practice meditation, abandoning distractions.
8. The Kayotsarga posture is also considered acceptable for those who wish to meditate. In this posture, all parts of the body should be kept balanced and free from the 32 faults mentioned in the scriptures.
9. If someone sits in an uneven posture during meditation, their body will inevitably experience discomfort. This discomfort will lead to mental distress and agitation.
10. With agitation, it becomes impossible to meditate. Therefore, it is best to sit in a comfortable posture during meditation. Kayotsarga and Paryanka are two comfortable postures. All other postures are uneven and cause discomfort.
11. These two postures are considered the most important for the Muni who meditates. Even among these two, Paryanka is often recommended as the most comfortable. 

Page #572:
---------------------------
482
The *Adipurana* states that the great beings with vajra bodies, who are established in all postures, are heard to have attained the imperishable state through the power of meditation. ||73|| Therefore, due to the abundance of weak beings, the two postures of *Kayotsarga* and *Paryanka* are described. For those who are strong enough to endure hardships, there is no fault in practicing various postures. ||74|| The posture of the body should not be an obstacle to meditation. The monks should meditate while sitting, standing, or lying down, as they are able. ||75|| Similarly, the rules regarding place and time are primarily for those with limited strength. For those with full strength, all places and all times are means for meditation. ||76|| A place free from contact with women, animals, and eunuchs, or a secluded place, is always suitable for monks. Such a place is especially suitable during meditation. ||77|| Monks who live in cities or other places full of people and constantly see objects of sense may have their minds disturbed by the abundance of sense objects. 

Page #573:
---------------------------
## Ekavimsham Parva 483

**79.** Therefore, the monks should sleep in secluded places and reside in the forest. This is the common path for both Jinakalpī and Sthavirakalpī monks.

**80.** Although this common arrangement has been stated for the residence of monks, there are many wise and valiant monk-kings who are equanimous and wander in places filled with people, such as cities, and in empty (uninhabited) places, such as forests.

**81.** Similarly, for those wise and valiant monk-kings who desire to meditate, there is no fixed time, such as day, night, or twilight. That is, there is no rule for them regarding time, because meditation, which is like wealth, can be utilized at all times. In other words, meditation can be practiced at any time according to one's desire.

**82.** Because many monk-kings have attained Siddhi in the past, are attaining it now, and will continue to attain it in the future, all in all countries, at all times, and in all postures, there is no specific rule for meditation regarding country, time, or posture.

**83.** Thus, the state of the meditator has been described. Now, the characteristics of the meditator, the object of meditation (i.e., the thing to be meditated upon), meditation itself, and the fruit of meditation – these four things are to be described.

**84.** He who possesses a body as strong as a vajra, a bull, or a thunderbolt, who is extremely valiant in the practice of austerities, who has thoroughly studied many scriptures, who has eliminated the false meditations called Ārta and Raudra, who avoids inauspicious Leshyās, who contemplates the purity of Leshyās without distraction, who has attained enlightenment (i.e., who is extremely wise), who is a yogi, who is endowed with mental strength, who relies on the meaning of the scriptures, who is wise and valiant, and who has overcome all obstacles – 

**(Three distinguishing features)**

**1.** Due to the cause. **2.** Secluded place. **3.** Place filled with people. **4.** Desire to meditate. **5.** That wealth. **6.** Because of that cause. **7.** Those who are endowed with understanding. **8.** The meaning is that they have become Siddha Parameṣṭhins. **9.** They will become Siddhas. **10.** There is no rule regarding that country, time, etc. **11.** Difference in posture. **12.** It is to be stated. **13.** Valiant in the group. Valiant in the group of monks. The meaning is that he is rich in knowledge. **14.** Reliance on the meaning of the scriptures. 

Page #574:
---------------------------
## The Adi Purana

**And also, one who has experienced the feeling of remorse, who has attained the feeling of detachment, who, due to the excellence of the feeling of detachment, sees the objects of enjoyment as unsatisfactory, who has destroyed the dense darkness of false knowledge through the feeling of right knowledge, who has removed the deep-rooted thorn of false belief through pure right vision, who has attained the excellent actions that yield the fruit of liberation and has abandoned all evil actions, who is always eager to perform the right actions, who has abandoned the actions that are not to be performed, who has eradicated all the faults that are opposed to the vows, such as violence, falsehood, etc., and has attained the ultimate purity of the vows, who, through his excellent qualities of forgiveness, gentleness, straightforwardness, and lightness, avoids the enemies of the passions, such as anger, pride, deceit, and greed, who sees the body, lifespan, strength, health, and youth, etc., as impermanent, impure, painful, and completely different from the true self, who, abandoning the feelings of attachment, aversion, etc., which have been cultivated for a long time, contemplates the feelings of knowledge and detachment that have never been contemplated before, and who, through the contemplation of the feelings mentioned later, never becomes deluded, such a monk can become steady in meditation. Those feelings through which the monk does not become deluded are called the feelings of knowledge, vision, conduct, and detachment.**

**The five feelings of knowledge are to be known as: reading the Jain scriptures, asking questions, contemplating the nature of things, memorizing verses, and giving appropriate religious instruction.**

**The seven feelings of right vision are to be known as: fear of the world, calmness, steadiness, freedom from delusion, absence of pride, faith, and compassion.** 

Page #575:
---------------------------
**Verse 98:**  
The efforts to restrain the objects of envy, speech, desire, acceptance, deposition, and establishment, which are the five restraints, are the practices of the four virtues: guarding the mind, guarding speech, guarding the body, and tolerating insults.

**Verse 99:**  
Non-attachment to objects, repeated contemplation of the nature of the body, and contemplation of the nature of the world are the practices that stabilize detachment.

**Verse 100:**  
Thus, the mind of a Muni who contemplates these practices, knows the principles, and is free from attachment and aversion, becomes established in knowledge, conduct, and other virtues.

**Verse 101:**  
A Muni who meditates, whether he knows fourteen past lives, ten past lives, or nine past lives, is considered to possess all the qualities.

**Verse 102:**  
Even a Muni with limited knowledge, but with a highly developed intellect and who is the first in his category to practice righteous meditation, is considered a great meditator.

**Verse 103:**  
A Muni with these qualities, having obtained abundant resources, attains excellent meditation in the category of pacification or agitation. (Note: Excellent meditation is called "Shukla Dhyana" and it occurs only in the categories of pacification or agitation.)

**Verse 104:**  
A Muni who knows the principles, having first been associated with the Vajravrishabhanaracha concentration, can only ascend to the category of agitation. And a Muni who has the other three concentrations (Vajravrishabhanaracha, Vajranaracha, and Naracha) can also attain the category of pacification.

**Verse 105:**  
A Muni who knows the inner self should meditate by slightly diverting his vision from the external group of objects and focusing his memory on himself.

**Verse 106:**  
First, he should withdraw the senses from their objects of touch, etc., and then, withdrawing the mind from its object, he should hold the steady intellect on the object of meditation.

**Verse 107:**  
The inner self, which is beneficial for human purposes, is the object of meditation. Liberation is the human purpose, and right faith, right knowledge, and right conduct are its means. 

Page #576:
---------------------------


Page #577:
---------------------------
## The Twenty-First Chapter

**487**  Even though they are embodied, they are formless; even though they are formless, they are embodied. They have mastered all objects of knowledge, but only those with the eyes of knowledge can know them. **117** Their form is as clear as a reflection in a mirror. Even though they are formless, they are the embodiment of pure consciousness and are eternally stable. **118** Even though they are free from attachment, they are the object of meditation for the worthy souls, who are destined to break free from the cycle of birth and death. This is their inherent quality, as they have shattered the bonds of karma. **119** Alternatively, those who have attained the state of liberation by the destruction of the karmic obstacles, the Kevalis, the Jinas, who are adorned with a luminous body, are worthy of meditation. **120** Those who are called Jinas, having conquered passions and ignorance, those who are called Arhants, having destroyed the karmic obstacles, those who are called Siddhas, having attained the pure self-realization, and those who are called Buddhas, having attained knowledge of all things in the three worlds, are the ones who perceive all things in the three times, who are endowed with infinite permutations, who are the embodiment of all things, who are the knowers of the universe, who are the seers of the universe, and who are the embodiment of the universal consciousness. **121** The Kevalis, whose eyes are vast and pure, whose infinite fourfold qualities have manifested due to the destruction of the karmic obstacles, who reside in the assembly ground (Samavasarana) filled with the multitude of twelve types of beings, whose dominion over the three worlds is manifested through the eight auspicious signs, are indeed omniscient. **122** 

**Meaning:** **116** They are omniscient. **117**  These Bhagavans are embodied yet formless, and formless yet embodied. Although they have mastered all objects of the world, meaning they know all objects of the world, only those who possess the eyes of knowledge can know them. **Meaning:** These Siddha Bhagavans have a subtle form, hence they are called embodied, but their form is beyond the reach of the senses, hence they are also called formless. Because they are without a body, they are not visible to the gross vision of humans, hence they are formless. However, those who have direct knowledge, the liberated souls, clearly perceive their countless living beings, hence they are also called embodied. Although they know all things in the world, not everyone in the world can know them. They can only be known through the eyes of knowledge. **118** Their form is as clear as a reflection in a mirror. Even though they are formless, they are the embodiment of pure consciousness and are eternally stable. **119** Even though they are free from attachment, they are the object of meditation for the worthy souls, who are destined to break free from the cycle of birth and death. This is their inherent quality, as they have shattered the bonds of karma. **120** Alternatively, those who have attained the state of liberation by the destruction of the karmic obstacles, the Kevalis, the Jinas, who are adorned with a luminous body, are worthy of meditation. **121** Those who are called Jinas, having conquered passions and ignorance, those who are called Arhants, having destroyed the karmic obstacles, those who are called Siddhas, having attained the pure self-realization, and those who are called Buddhas, having attained knowledge of all things in the three worlds, are the ones who perceive all things in the three times, who are endowed with infinite permutations, who are the
Page #578:
---------------------------
488
The Adipurana, though of definite form, is the universal form due to its own inherent qualities. It is the reflection of all objects, known and unknown, and is therefore considered to be the universal form.  It is all-pervasive due to its knowledge-yoga, and is known as the all-pervading one. It is the object of faith for all, the all-seeing one, and the jewel of all worlds. It has crossed the ocean of samsara, is blissful, free from all afflictions, and has severed the bonds of samsara. It is fearless, desireless, free from obstacles, free from anxiety, free from expectations, free from disease, eternal, and free from the stain of karma. Its body is extremely strong due to the nine Kevala-labdhi and other qualities. It is impenetrable, firm like a mountain carved from stone. 

Such is the object of meditation, the Supreme Soul, the Supreme Person, the Supreme Lord, the Supreme Reality, the Supreme Light (Kevala-jnana), and the imperishable one.  

The object of meditation described above is common to both Dharma-dhyana and Shukla-dhyana.  The difference between the two lies in the purity and the master.  

The object of meditation in Shukla-dhyana is more pure than that of Dharma-dhyana. Dharma-dhyana is practiced from the fourth guna-sthana onwards, while Shukla-dhyana is practiced only in the higher stages.  

Meditation is the steady and praiseworthy concentration on a single object. It is of two types: Dharma-dhyana and Shukla-dhyana.  Dharma-dhyana is the means to liberation. 

1. Attached. 2. All objects of knowledge. 3. All-seeing. 4. Blissful. 5. Free from desires for wealth, etc. 6. Free from any expectations, and brings happiness to devotees. 7. Free from the stain of karma. 8. Extremely strong body. 9. Impenetrable body. 10. Purity is of two types: with and without kshaya. Or, the result, the master, the doer, and the purity are the master. 11. A specific type of meditation. 12. The result. 

Page #579:
---------------------------
## The Twenty-First Chapter

"That which is not separate from Dharma, that is Dharma-dhyana. Dharma is the essence of the object, encompassing its origin, decay, and permanence. (133) It is characterized by the understanding of the Aagna, Apaaya, Sansthana, and Vipaaka. The wise, following the Aagna, have declared this Dharma-dhyana. (134)

The Aagna is a subtle subject, described in the Aagama. In the realm of the visible and the inferable, the Aagama is the sole guide for faith. (135) The Aagama is synonymous with Shruti, Suunruta, Aagna, Aapta-vacana, Vedaanga, and Aamnaaya. The wise understand it. (136)

It is eternal, subtle, illuminating the true nature of things, beneficial to all beings, a guide to the ultimate goal, invincible, limitless, untouched by the ignorant, powerful, encompassing all objects, profound in its teachings, and the ultimate discourse. (137-138)

The Muni, believing in the truth of this discourse, which is subtle, revealed by the Aapta, and without any other interpretation, should contemplate the subtle objects described in the Aagama. (139)

The Yogi, the best among the knowers of Yoga, accepting the Aagna as the proof, should contemplate the subtle objects like Dharmaastikaaya, etc., as described in the Aagama. (140)

This contemplation is called Aagna-vichya. Now, the Dharma-dhyana called Apaaya-vichya will be described. Contemplation of the Apaaya, the suffering, of beings born in the ocean of existence, filled with the three types of Taapa, is called Apaaya-vichya. (141)

There are two types of Dhyana. (132) The one that is accompanied by Dharma is called Dharma-dhyana. Dharma is the true nature of the object, encompassing its origin, decay, and permanence. (133) The wise, following the Aagna, have declared this Dharma-dhyana. (134)

The Aagna is a subtle subject, described in the Aagama. In the realm of the visible and the inferable, the Aagama is the sole guide for faith. (135) The Aagama is synonymous with Shruti, Suunruta, Aagna, Aapta-vacana, Vedaanga, and Aamnaaya. The wise understand it. (136)

It is eternal, subtle, illuminating the true nature of things, beneficial to all beings, a guide to the ultimate goal, invincible, limitless, untouched by the ignorant, powerful, encompassing all objects, profound in its teachings, and the ultimate discourse. (137-138)

The Muni, believing in the truth of this discourse, which is subtle, revealed by the Aapta, and without any other interpretation, should contemplate the subtle objects described in the Aagama. (139)

The Yogi, the best among the knowers of Yoga, accepting the Aagna as the proof, should contemplate the subtle objects like Dharmaastikaaya, etc., as described in the Aagama. (140)

This contemplation is called Aagna-vichya. Now, the Dharma-dhyana called Apaaya-vichya will be described. Contemplation of the Apaaya, the suffering, of beings born in the ocean of existence, filled with the three types of Taapa, is called Apaaya-vichya. (141)
"
Page #580:
---------------------------
## Adipurana: Contemplation on the Remedies for the Threefold Afflictions

This chapter discusses the contemplation on the remedies for the threefold afflictions (tapatraya), which is an integral part of the Jain path. 

**Verse 142:** This contemplation involves understanding the characteristics of the twelve Anupreksha (self-reflection) and the ten Dharmas (virtues).

**Verse 143-145:** The contemplation on the ripening of karma, known as Vipaka-vichaya, is a crucial aspect of Jain meditation. It involves understanding the diverse nature of the cycle of birth and death (bhavacakra) caused by the ripening of karma. Karma ripens in two ways: naturally, like fruits ripening on a tree, and through efforts like austerities, which accelerate the ripening process.

**Verse 146:** The ripening of karma is influenced by various factors, including the nature of the karmic bond, the substance, space, time, and the cause of the karma.

**Verse 147:**  Since a Muni (ascetic) who understands the ripening of karma strives to eliminate it, this contemplation on Vipaka-vichaya is essential for those seeking liberation (moksha).

**Verse 148:** The contemplation on the structure of the universe, known as Sansthana-vichaya, involves visualizing the different realms of existence and the beings inhabiting them.

**Verse 149-150:** This contemplation includes visualizing the three worlds (trijagat), the islands, oceans, mountains, rivers, lakes, celestial beings, those dwelling in mansions, the infernal regions, and the various beings inhabiting these realms.

**Verse 151:**  It also involves understanding the different types of beings, both worldly and liberated, and their qualities, including their actions, speech, and knowledge. 

Page #581:
---------------------------
## The Twenty-First Chapter

**491** The ocean of existence, born from the potency of their own actions, is extremely difficult to cross. It is filled with whirlpools of afflictions and teeming with creatures of vices. 

**152-153** The wise monk should contemplate this ocean of existence, which is traversable only by the boat of right knowledge. This ocean is vast, deep, and impossible to cross for those who are attached to possessions. 

**154** What is the point of saying more? The entire expanse of the Agamas, filled with hundreds of divisions of the principles, is worthy of contemplation for the purification of the soul.

**155** This contemplation of Dharma, supported by the state of non-distraction, remains stable for a moment within, and attains supreme excellence only in those who are free from distraction (those who have attained the seventh stage of spiritual development).

**156** This contemplation of Dharma, which is nourished by the three auspicious hues of yellow, red, and white, and which holds supreme purity, is found in the fourth stage of spiritual development, accompanied by right faith, as per the scriptures. It is also found in the fifth and sixth stages, but in a lesser degree. This means that the contemplation of Dharma is present in these stages, but with varying intensity. It is essential to have right faith to contemplate Dharma, as without it, one cannot have faith and understanding of the true nature of things. The contemplation of those who are deluded and have weak passions is called a good feeling.

**157** This contemplation of Dharma, empowered by the suppression of passions, grows and bears excellent fruit. It is embraced by the most intelligent and wise sages.

**158** This contemplation of Dharma, which has earned its name due to its adherence to the principles of things and whose objects of contemplation have been described in detail, should be contemplated repeatedly.

**159** The external signs of this contemplation of Dharma are: a cheerful mind, enthusiasm for Dharma, good conduct, study of excellent scriptures, a stable mind, and a special interest (love or faith) arising from the teachings (scriptural pronouncements) and one's own knowledge.

**160** These are the signs of Dharma that are internal, and the good feelings and various auspicious emotions mentioned earlier are external.

**151** Also, contemplate the qualities of the living beings, such as the Prana, Bhoktarpana, and Darshan. 

**Notes:**

1. जलजन्तुसमूहः - Group of aquatic creatures
2. परिग्रहवद्भिः - By those who are attached to possessions
3. नयभेद- - Divisions of principles
4. धर्म्यध्यानम् - Contemplation of Dharma
5. परमप्रकर्षम् - Supreme excellence
6. असंयतदेशसंयतप्रमत्तेषु - In those who are restrained in some areas but unrestrained and distracted in others
7. सहायविजृम्भितम् - Empowered by the suppression of passions
8. महाप्राज- - Great sages
9. वस्तुयथास्वरूप - The true nature of things
10. शुभपरिणाम - Auspicious results
11. आज्ञा नान्यथावादिनो जिना इति श्रद्धानम् - Faith in the Jinas, who are the non-deceitful teachers
12. अधिगमः प्रवचनपरिज्ञानम् ताभ्यां जाता रुचिः - Interest arising from understanding the teachings and one's own knowledge 

Page #582:
---------------------------
## Translation:

**492**

The assembly of the limbs, as described earlier, should be considered as the external signs of Dharmic meditation.  A pleasant face, gentle gaze, etc., should be observed.  [16]

The fruit of this excellent Dharmic meditation is the complete destruction of inauspicious karma and the attainment of happiness arising from the rise of auspicious karma, such as the happiness of Indra and others. [162]

Or, it is said that the fruit of this Dharmic meditation is the attainment of heaven and liberation.  Heaven is attained directly through this Dharmic meditation, but the supreme state, liberation, is attained through tradition. [163]

Even when the meditation is complete, the wise Muni should contemplate the absence of the world with the help of Anupreksha (reflection) and auspicious, fruitful, and excellent thoughts. [164]

O King Shrenik, the ruler of Magadha, be certain of this Dharmic meditation whose characteristics have been described.  Now I will describe the Shukhladhyan (White Meditation), which is the direct cause of liberation for beings. [165]

This Shukhladhyan, which has been named Shukhladhyan due to the destruction of the impurities of Kshaya (passions), is described with its sub-categories.  Understand it well from me. [166]

This Shukhladhyan is described in the scriptures as two types: Shukhladhyan and Param Shukhladhyan.  The first, Shukhladhyan, is for the Chham-sth Muni (those who have conquered their passions), and the second, Param Shukhladhyan, is for the Kevali Bhagwan (the Arhant). [167]

The first Shukhladhyan has two sub-categories: Prithaktva-Vitarka-Vichar and Ekatva-Vitarka-Vichar. [168]

These two sub-categories of the first Shukhladhyan are meaningful names.  To understand their meaning, one should understand the etymology (origin and meaning) of both names. [169]

The Shukhladhyan, where the Vichar (transition) of the words of the scriptures occurs separately, is called Prithaktva-Vitarka-Vichar.  Meaning:  Where the transition of the meaning, the expression, and the yogas occurs separately, i.e., where the mind contemplates the expression (word) leaving the meaning, or the meaning leaving the expression, or where the mind contemplates the change in the three yogas (mind, speech, and body) separately, is called Prithaktva-Vitarka-Vichar. 

Page #583:
---------------------------
**One-Twentieth Chapter**

The contemplation where there is oneness of deliberation, where there is no deliberation, is called *ekatva-vitarka-vichara*, the white contemplation. (17)

Consider separateness as diversity, deliberation is called *shruta*, the scripture. The transition of meaning, implication and yoga is considered *vichara*. (172)

The sage, controlling the senses, goes from one meaning to another, from one implication to another, from one yoga to another, contemplating this first white contemplation, *prthaktva-vitarka-vichara*. (173)

Because the sage, who holds the three yogas of mind, speech and body, and knows the fourteen *purvas*, contemplates this first white contemplation, therefore this first white contemplation is called *savitarka* and *savichara*. (174)

The extent of the words and meanings of the *shruta-skandha*, the ocean of scriptures, is the object of contemplation, the subject to be contemplated, of this first white contemplation. The result is the destruction or pacification of the *mohaniya* karma. (175)

The meaning here is that the sage, contemplating, takes one object from the great ocean of the *shruta-skandha* and, contemplating it, attains another object, that is, leaving the previously grasped object, he begins to contemplate another object. He goes from one word to another, and similarly, from one yoga to another. Therefore, this contemplation is called *savichara* and *savitarka*. (176-177)

Which is filled with jewels of words and meanings, which has many waves of *naya-bhangas*, which is deep with extensive contemplation, which is accompanied by the deep water of words and sentences, which is agitated by the three of production, destruction and *dhrauvya*, which has the great sound of the seven *bhangas* of *syat*, *asti*, *syat-na*, etc., which is a group of water creatures like *bauda*, etc., due to the influence of the previous side. (178-179) 

Page #584:
---------------------------
494
Adipurana 'The one who has attained the state of liberation, who is free from the defilements of the world, who is a great merchant, who is adorned with the banner of conduct, who has attained the state of liberation, who is free from the defilements of the world, who is a great merchant, who is adorned with the banner of conduct, who has attained the state of liberation, who is free from the defilements of the world, who is a great merchant, who is adorned with the banner of conduct, who has attained the state of liberation, who is free from the defilements of the world, who is a great merchant, who is adorned with the banner of conduct, who has attained the state of liberation, who is free from the defilements of the world, who is a great merchant, who is adorned with the banner of conduct, who has attained the state of liberation, who is free from the defilements of the world, who is a great merchant, who is adorned with the banner of conduct, who has attained the state of liberation, who is free from the defilements of the world, who is a great merchant, who is adorned with the banner of conduct, who has attained the state of liberation, who is free from the defilements of the world, who is a great merchant, who is adorned with the banner of conduct, who has attained the state of liberation, who is free from the defilements of the world, who is a great merchant, who is adorned with the banner of conduct, who has attained the state of liberation, who is free from the defilements of the world, who is a great merchant, who is adorned with the banner of conduct, who has attained the state of liberation, who is free from the defilements of the world, who is a great merchant, who is adorned with the banner of conduct, who has attained the state of liberation, who is free from the defilements of the world, who is a great merchant, who is adorned with the banner of conduct, who has attained the state of liberation, who is free from the defilements of the world, who is a great merchant, who is adorned with the banner of conduct, who has attained the state of liberation, who is free from the defilements of the world, who is a great merchant, who is adorned with the banner of conduct, who has attained the state of liberation, who is free from the defilements of the world, who is a great merchant, who is adorned with the banner of conduct, who has attained the state of liberation, who is free from the defilements of the world, who is a great merchant, who is adorned with the banner of conduct, who has attained the state of liberation, who is free from the defilements of the world, who is a great merchant, who is adorned with the banner of conduct, who has attained the state of liberation, who is free from the defilements of the world, who is a great merchant, who is adorned with the banner of conduct, who has attained the state of liberation, who is free from the defilements of the world, who is a great merchant, who is adorned with the banner of conduct, who has attained the state of liberation, who is free from the defilements of the world, who is a great merchant, who is adorned with the banner of conduct, who has attained the state of liberation, who is free from the defilements of the world, who is a great merchant, who is adorned with the banner of conduct, who has attained the state of liberation, who is free from the defilements of the world, who is a great merchant, who is adorned with the banner of conduct, who has attained the state of liberation, who is free from the defilements of the world, who is a great merchant, who is adorned with the banner of conduct, who has attained the state of liberation,
Page #585:
---------------------------
The graduate, free from karmic defilement, attains the state of liberation. He is the master of both types of supreme white meditations, the master of the supreme white meditation.  ||18||

For the purpose of restraining the yogas, the omniscient Jina, naturally, manifests the process of expansion. ||149||

At first, his soul's regions are the size of a staff, fourteen rajjus high. In the second time, they are the size of a door. In the third time, they are in the form of pratar, and in the fourth time, they fill the entire universe. Thus, he resides in the entire space of the universe, filling it in four times. ||190||

At that time, pervading the entire universe, the benefactor of all, the knower of all, he is called the Purvak. Then, he attains the state of contraction, i.e., the contraction of the soul's regions, and while doing all this, he is considered highly venerable. ||191||

The omniscient Lord, filling the entire universe, attains the state of pratar after each time, and then, gradually, after each time, he contracts, attaining the state of door and staff, and enters his own body. ||192||

At that time, the omniscient Lord destroys countless parts of the aghātiya karmas, and in the same way, he destroys countless parts of the anubhaga, i.e., the power to bear fruit, of the inauspicious karmas. ||193||

Then, in the antarmūhūrta, he restrains the yoga-like asrava, and, relying on the kaya-yoga, he makes the vāc-yoga and mano-yoga subtle. Then, he also makes the kaya-yoga subtle, and, relying on it, he contemplates the third white meditation called sūksma-kriyāpāti. ||194-195||

Then, the yogiraj, whose all yogas have been completely restrained, free from all asravas, attains the fourth white meditation called samuccchinna-kriyā-nivṛtti. ||196||

The Jina Lord maintains that extremely pure fourth white meditation until the antarmūhūrta, and then, destroying all the parts of the karmas, he attains the state of liberation. ||197||

This yoga can be any one of the three yogas. ||187||

The graduate muni, who has attained the supreme omniscience by the destruction of the ghātiya karmas, is the master of both types of supreme white meditations. Meaning: The supreme white meditation is only for the omniscient Lord. ||188||

The omniscient Jina, when he is eager to restrain the yogas, naturally manifests the process of expansion before that. ||189|| 

Page #586:
---------------------------
496
In the fourteenth **guna-sthāna** (stage of spiritual development), the **ayogi-parameshthi** (liberated soul) loses thirteen **karma-aṅśa** (karmic particles) in the penultimate moment and seventy-two in the final moment. ||19||
After the fourteenth **guna-sthāna**, the **Jina** (liberated soul) becomes **ni-lepa** (free from defilement), **niṣ-kala** (without parts), **śuddha** (pure), **ni-ā-bādha** (without obstacles), **ni-rā-maya** (free from disease), **sūkṣma** (subtle), **a-vyakta** (unmanifest), **vyakta** (manifest), and **mukta** (liberated), residing in the **loka-anta** (end of the universe). ||199||
Due to their inherent nature of **ūrdhva-vrajya** (ascending), they reach the **loka-anta** in a single moment, their **ātma** (soul) becoming **śuddha** (pure) and shining like a **cūḍā-maṇi** (crown jewel). ||200||
There, due to the complete destruction of **karma-mala** (karmic impurities), they attain **śuddhi** (purity).  Their **śarīra** (body) is destroyed, and they experience infinite **sukha** (bliss) with **ati-indriya** (super-sensory) senses. ||201||
They are **niṣ-karma** (free from karma), having destroyed all **saṁsārika-sukha-ā-sukha** (worldly pleasures and pains). Their **ātma-pradeśa** (soul-region) is the size of their final **śarīra** (body), but slightly smaller in **parimāṇa** (quantity). ||202||
Although **a-mūrta** (formless), they resemble their final **śarīra** (body) in **ā-kāra** (form) and **upalakṣaṇa** (characteristics). They are like **mūṣā-garma-niruddha** (space confined by the heat of a mouse), resembling the **ākāśa** (space) within a **pasamṛśan** (vessel). ||203||
They are free from all **duḥ-śva-bandhana** (bonds of suffering) related to the **śarīra** (body) and **manas** (mind). They are **nir-dvanda** (free from duality), **ni-kriya** (inactive), **śuddha** (pure), and possess the eight **guṇa** (qualities) of **samyak-tva** (right faith) etc. ||204||
Their **ātma-pradeśa** (soul-region) is an **a-bhedya-saṁhati** (indivisible unity), shining like the **śikhā-maṇi** (crest jewel) on the peak of the **loka** (universe). They are **jyoti-maya** (radiant), having attained their **svātma** (true self), and are **siddhā** (liberated), eternally **sukhā-yate** (enjoying bliss). ||205||
**Kṛta-ārtha** (having fulfilled their purpose), **niṣṭhita** (established), **siddhā** (liberated), **kṛta-kṛtya** (having done their duty), **ni-
Page #587:
---------------------------
**Chapter Twenty-One**

**On the Absence of Hunger and Other Pains**

208.  Those who are free from hunger and other pains have no desire for worldly objects.  For who, being healthy, would seek out medicines?

209.  The happiness that arises from association with external objects is not true happiness.  True happiness is eternal, imperishable, and arises from the Self.

210.  If health is considered happiness, then that happiness is inherent in the liberated soul.  There is no other happiness in the world.

211.  The liberated soul is free from all afflictions, free from delusion, and free from disturbance.  Being subtle, who can bind them?  Their happiness is infinite.

212.  The great sages declare that this infinite happiness is the fruit of meditation.  It is for this happiness that the monks, clad in the sky, practice austerities.

213.  Just as clouds, struck by the wind, quickly dissolve, so too, karmic clouds, struck by the wind of meditation, quickly dissolve.

214.  Just as poison, pervading the entire body, is drawn out by the power of a mantra, so too, karmic poison is removed by the power of meditation.

215.  The other eleven austerities are considered to be aids to meditation.  Therefore, those who desire liberation should constantly practice meditation.

216.  Hearing this description of the practice of meditation, the king of Magadha, Shrenik, was greatly pleased.  At that time, his mind, like a lotus, blossomed, as the darkness of ignorance was dispelled.

**Notes:**

1.  **Viṣayaṣitā:**  Desire for worldly objects.
2.  **Sukham:**  Happiness.
3.  **Svasvarūpāvasthāyitvam:**  Being established in one's true nature.
4.  **Munvataḥ:**  Of the monks.
5.  **Digambarāḥ:**  Sky-clad, naked monks.
6.  **Nirasyate:**  Is destroyed.
7.  **Vikasitam:**  Blossomed.
8.  **Ajñāna:**  Ignorance. 

Page #588:
---------------------------
498
Then the sages, having paid their respects to Gautama with devotion, asked the yogi-king some questions about yoga. ||217||
O Bhagavan, we have heard the essence of the science of yoga from you many times. Now we wish to know the purification of the other directions. ||218||
O Deva, just as the sun destroys the darkness, so also you destroy all the contradictions in this science of meditation. ||219||
O Lord, you are called a sage because you have attained many riches, you are a muni who knows many things directly, you are called an anagara because you are free from possessions, and you are called a yati because you are in front of both categories. ||220||
Therefore, to overcome the yogas mentioned in the Bhagavata and others, please explain to us the seeds of yoga, as you have heard it, according to reason and scripture. ||221||
Hearing these words, Bhagavan Gautama said, "I will tell you clearly the essence of yoga that you have asked about." ||222||
One should ask a yogi who explains yoga in six ways, "What is yoga? What is samadhi? What is pranayama? What is dharana? What is dhyana? What is dhyeya? What is smriti? What is the fruit of meditation? What are the seeds of meditation? And what is its pratyahara?" ||223-224||
Those who know yoga consider the actions of the body, speech, and mind to be yoga. That yoga attains two forms, due to the difference between good and bad. ||225||
The firm establishment of the mind in the highest results is truly called samadhi or samadhana, or the remembrance of the five supreme beings is also called samadhi. ||226||
The control of the mind, speech, and body, and the maintenance of good intentions, is called pranayama, and the retention of the seed letters mentioned in the scriptures is called dharana. 

Page #589:
---------------------------
**One-Twentieth Chapter**

Meditation is the repeated contemplation of impermanence and other such thoughts. The object of meditation is the supreme Self, which is beyond the reach of mind and speech. (228)

The remembrance of the true nature of the soul and other principles is called *smriti*. Or, the remembrance of the qualities of the Siddhas and Arhats is also called *smriti*. (229)

The fruit of meditation has been stated above. The seed-syllables will be mentioned in due course. The withdrawal of the mind from its outward tendencies and the resulting mental satisfaction is called *pratyahara*. (230)

He who meditates on this supreme seed-syllable, which begins with the letter 'a' and ends with the letter 'ha', with 'reph' in the middle and a dot at the end, will never be afflicted. (231)

Or, the seed-syllable consisting of six letters, 'namo arhat', meaning 'salutation to the Arhats', by meditating on this, the seeker of liberation attains the state of the Arhat, who is endowed with infinite qualities. (232)

Or, the five-lettered syllable, 'namah siddhebyah', meaning 'salutation to the Siddhas', by chanting this, the devotee attains his desired objects, i.e., all his desires are fulfilled. (233)

Or, the eight-lettered supreme seed-syllable, 'namo arhat parameshthinah', meaning 'salutation to the supreme Arhat', by remembering this, the soul will never again see sorrow, i.e., he will be liberated. (234)

And, the sixteen-lettered seed-syllable, which includes all the seed-syllables, 'ahant siddha acharyo upadhyaya sarvasadhubhyo namah', meaning 'salutation to the Arhats, Siddhas, Acharyas, Upadhyayas, and all the virtuous', by meditating on this, the seeker of liberation will surely attain liberation. (235)

By unifying the five Brahma-like mantras, the Yogi, meditating on the supreme Self, becomes the knower of the Brahma-principle. (236)

The supreme bliss of the Yogi, which arises from the withdrawal of the mind, is the greatest of all powers. What to speak of other powers arising from Yoga? (237) 

Page #590:
---------------------------
500
The Muni, who knows Yoga, is endowed with the qualities of Anima, etc., and is adorned with the supreme bliss of the Indras, etc. He enjoys this world and then, freed from the bonds of karma, attains Nirvana. ||23|| He who does not know these seeds, but calls himself a Mantra-vit (knower of mantras) merely by name, and is consumed by false pride, is always bound by the bonds of karma. ||239|| Now, refuting the Yoga accepted by other sects, we ask: Is the Jiva (soul) eternal or non-eternal according to those who are proud of Yoga, i.e., those who consider false Yoga to be true Yoga? If it is eternal, then it will be unchanging, i.e., devoid of change (transformation), and in such a state, it will not be able to transform into the object of meditation. Moreover, it is impossible for an eternal Jiva to experience happiness and sorrow, to remember, and to have desires, etc., because if the Jiva does not even have the desire to meditate in the first place, then thinking about the principles is far away. And without thinking about the principles, how can there be meditation? Without meditation, how can there be attainment of fruit? And without that, all the actions that are the cause of bondage and liberation become fruitless. ||240-242|| If the Jiva is considered non-eternal, then there will be no possibility of meditation in the continuous succession of thoughts that are newly born every moment, because it is impossible to remember the objects experienced by oneself in this momentary state of mind. Meaning: If the Jiva is considered completely non-eternal, then there will be no possibility of meditation, because the Jiva who meditates is destroyed every moment. If you say that the Jiva is non-eternal, but it leaves behind its offspring when it is destroyed, then there is no obstacle, but this is also not correct, because when the Jiva is completely destroyed, then it cannot be said that this is its offspring. And even if it is accepted that it is its offspring in some way, then the statement "everything is momentary" 

Page #591:
---------------------------
501.
Even in the 'Tattva-pudgala-vada' (theory of the soul being a subtle form of matter), where the body and the soul are considered to be either different or non-different or indescribable, the attainment of meditation is not possible.  Therefore, the desire for meditation and the practice of meditation cannot arise. Just as one cannot imagine the fragrance of a non-existent flower in the sky, similarly, in this case, the desire for meditation cannot arise.  ||24||

In the 'Vijnapti-matra-vada' (theory of consciousness alone), where the object of consciousness is considered to be consciousness itself, how can consciousness exist without an object?  ||24||

In the theory of the soul being a collection of the four elements, the soul is considered to be the totality of the four elements and not anything else.  Therefore, in this case also, meditation cannot be attained.  ||243-244||

The soul is considered to be impermanent, therefore, meditation cannot be attained.  ||245||

Just as a man cannot remember the experiences of another man because they are completely different, similarly, when the soul, which experiences, is destroyed, its descendants cannot remember the experiences of the original soul.  Because the original soul is considered to be completely destroyed, there is no connection between it and its descendants.  Without the memory of the experienced object, the desire for meditation is impossible.  Without the desire for meditation, meditation cannot be attained.  And without meditation, the attainment of liberation is also impossible.  Similarly, the eight limbs of right faith, right intention, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right concentration cannot be attained.  Therefore, even by considering the soul to be impermanent, meditation (yoga) cannot be attained.  ||246||

In the 'Pudgala-vada' (theory of the soul being a form of matter), where the soul is considered to be a form of matter, the attainment of meditation is not possible in the case of the body and the soul being different, non-different, or indescribable.  Therefore, the desire for meditation and the practice of meditation cannot arise.  Just as one cannot imagine the fragrance of a non-existent flower in the sky, similarly, in this case, the desire for meditation cannot arise.  ||247||

In the 'Vijnapti-matra-vada' (theory of consciousness alone), where the object of consciousness is considered to be consciousness itself, how can consciousness exist without an object?  ||248||

Page #592:
---------------------------
502
Adipurana 'Without it, there is no meditation, no object of meditation, nor liberation. Just as a lamp, sun, and fire illuminate, and a pot, cloth, etc., are illuminated, so too, objects can be illuminated only in this way. ||24||
In the view of the Nairatmya school, however, what is measured by what? It would be like binding a garland of sky flowers with the hair of a tortoise. ||249|| Even if there is an object of meditation, there is no duality of acceptance and rejection. There is nothing in the absence of acceptance and rejection. ||250|| Even the liberated soul, due to the absence of consciousness, is not an object of meditation for the Kapilas, just as the sky lotus is not real due to the absence of qualities. ||25||
One cannot gain knowledge without an object. That is, knowledge is absent. ||245-247|| And without knowledge, there is no meditation, no object of meditation, and no liberation. Just as a lamp, sun, fire, etc., illuminate, and a pot, cloth, etc., are illuminated, so too, objects can be illuminated only in this way. Meaning: Just as the illumination of reality depends on the presence of both illuminating and illuminated objects, so too, the existence of meditation, the object of meditation, and liberation depends on the presence of both knowledge and the object of knowledge. However, the proponents of the non-dual nature of knowledge only accept the illuminating, i.e., knowledge, and not the illuminated, i.e., the object of knowledge. And upon logical consideration, their knowledge is not even established. In such a situation, meditation is not even a possibility. ||248||
Similarly, in the view of the Buddhists who do not accept the self, meditation cannot be established. Because when everything is empty, who knows what? Who meditates on what? To imagine meditation in their view is like binding a garland of sky flowers with the hair of a tortoise. Meaning: The proponents of emptiness do not accept the self that meditates, nor do they accept the object of meditation. In such a situation, the idea of meditation is impossible for them, just as it is impossible to bind a garland of sky flowers with the hair of a tortoise. ||249||
Furthermore, the object of meditation cannot be established in the view of the proponents of emptiness. Because there are two options for the object of meditation: one that can be accepted and one that can be rejected. When the proponents of emptiness do not accept any fundamental object, how can there be a choice between what is to be accepted and what is to be rejected? That is, it cannot be done. ||250||
The Sankhyas believe that the liberated soul is devoid of consciousness. However, due to the absence of the characteristic of consciousness in their belief, the object of the self is not established. Just as the sky lotus is not real due to the absence of qualities like form and fragrance, so too, the liberated soul is not real due to the absence of the specific quality of consciousness. 
1. Absence of knowledge. 2. Also, the reading is 'no meditation'. Absence of meditation is when there is no meditation. 3. Fire. The word 'etc.' includes jewels, etc. The meaning is that there is no meditation in the view of emptiness. 4. Emptiness. 5. With the hair of a tortoise's body. 6. Non-self. 7. Garland. The meaning is that those who say everything is empty do not have any basis for meditation. 8. The plan is to accept and reject. The meaning is that it is necessary to ask. 9. The proponents of emptiness say that there is no acceptance and rejection.
Page #593:
---------------------------
## Chapter Twenty-One

2.
3.
"The liberated soul is like one in deep sleep," so say the Vaanikas. It seems they want to remain ignorant while contemplating the nature of the object of meditation. ||252||

Among the remaining doctrines, there is no determination of the object of meditation. All of them are tainted by inherent flaws, like the dualists and non-dualists. ||253||

Meditation is possible only for those who accept the soul as both eternal and non-eternal. It is not possible for those who hold other views. ||254||

One might argue that a single object cannot be the basis of two opposing principles. This is not true because there is no contradiction when the meaning is different. If both opposing principles were asserted with the same meaning, then there would be a contradiction. But here, many principles are asserted with many meanings, so there is no contradiction. The soul is eternal in terms of its substance, not in terms of its modes. In the same way, the soul is non-eternal in terms of the arising and ceasing of its modes, not in terms of its substance. ||255-256||

Just as Devadatta is both father and son depending on the context, so too is a single object both eternal and non-eternal depending on the context. Devadatta is a father in relation to his son and a son in relation to his father. Similarly, every object in the world is eternal in terms of its substance and non-eternal in terms of its modes. This proves that both opposing principles are found in an object, but their inclusion depends on the context and the lack of context. ||257-258||

Therefore, meditation is possible only for those who are Syadvadins, whose knowledge, gained through the study of the Jaina scriptures, has spread everywhere. It is not possible for those who hold other false views. ||259||

The Jina, having conquered the enemy of delusion, is called a Vitaraga, because his intellect is free from all impurities. He is called a Vacaspati, because he teaches the path to liberation through his words. ||260|| 

Page #594:
---------------------------
## Adipurana

They are called Arhat or Arihant because of their qualities like killing the enemies of karma, like attachment and aversion, which are not found in others. They are called Buddha because they know all the objects of the three worlds, and they are called Vibhu because they protect all beings. ||260||

Similarly, they are called Vishnu because they are present in the whole universe, Vijishnu because they conquer the enemies of karma, Shankar because they bring peace, Abhayankar because they give fearlessness to all beings, Shiva because they are of the nature of bliss, Sanatan because they are without beginning and end, Siddha because they have achieved their goal, Jyoti because they are of the nature of pure knowledge, Param because they are endowed with infinite fourfold Lakshmi, and Akshar because they are imperishable. ||261||

Thus, the Lord, the master of the three worlds, has many meaningful names. The same Arhantdeva is capable of making the wise understand, that is, wise people can consider him to be the only one worthy of being known. ||262||

Whose form is extremely radiant even without clothes and ornaments, and whose gaze without looking, indicates the absence of the fever of desire. ||263||

Being without weapons, they are free from fear and anger, and because of the absence of anger, their eyes are not red. They are always gentle and have a faint smile. They are superior to all other men because they have conquered all the vices like attachment, etc. Their lotus-like face itself teaches the best governance to the wise, that is, wise people consider them to be the best rulers just by looking at their lotus-like face. ||264-265||

Besides this, the Arhantdevas are the only ones whose knowledge and detachment are spread throughout the world. This nature of meditation has been spoken by them, therefore it is auspicious for those who seek auspiciousness. ||266||

Thus, when Gautama Ganadhar, who possesses great powers, described the essence of meditation in the assembly of the monks, those monks, who were filled with devotion, were very... 

Page #595:
---------------------------
## Chapter Twenty-One: The Essence of Meditation

**505**

The disciples were overjoyed. Their bodies trembled with delight, and just as the lotus blossoms open when touched by the sun's rays, so too did their faces bloom with joy. (267)

Then, with their mouths filled with praise, these yogis, the foremost among yogis, turned their attention to the Lord of the Jina army, the Jina himself, the master of the fourfold army, or to the Acharya Jinasena, the disciple of Gautama Ganadhara. They offered their salutations and focused their minds to hear the Arhat Lakshmi, the embodiment of all knowledge, who is established in his own true nature. (268)

Thus ends the twenty-first chapter of the *Trishatilakṣaṇamahāpurāṇa*, composed by the venerable Jinasena Acharya, which describes the essence of meditation. (21)

**Notes:**

1. *Kiranasaṁyogāt*: due to the contact of the rays.
2. *Vā iva*: as if.
3. *Kṣaṇaparyantamityarthaḥ*: meaning for a moment.
4. *Jinaseṇācāryasvāminam, athavā jinasya senā jinaseṇā samavasaraṇasthabhavyasantatīstasyā adhīśvarastam*: the Acharya Jinasena, or the Jina army, the lineage of the worthy ones who reside in the assembly of the Jinas, and their lord.
5. *Avadhānayuktamakarṣaḥ*: they made their minds attentive.
6. *Jñānatejasaḥ*: the brilliance of knowledge.
7. *Svātma eva dhāma syānāṁ yasya tasya svāsvarūpādavasthitasyetiyarthaḥ*: meaning, he whose abode is his own self, he who is established in his own true nature. 

Page #596:
---------------------------
## The Havinsham Parva

**1.** When the Lord Jinendra conquered the Ghatiya karma, the entire world was filled with joy and peace. The three realms were shaken by the wind of liberation, which arose from the birth of Kevala Jnana.

**2.** At that time, the bell of the Kalpavasis, echoing the sound of the waves of the ocean, filled the entire world with its resonance.

**3.** In the realm of the Jyotishis, a great roar like that of a lion resounded, causing the elephants of the gods to lose their intoxication.

**4.** In the homes of the Vyantara gods, the sound of drums reverberated, surpassing even the roar of thunderclouds.

**5.** The conch shell, proclaiming loudly, "O dwellers of the heavens, come together with the Kalpavasis to receive the joy and peace born from the Lord's vision," echoed through the abodes of the gods.

**6.** The thrones of all the Indras trembled, unable to bear the pride that arose from the Lord's victory over the Ghatiya karma.

**7.** The divine elephants, holding lotus-shaped offerings in their trunks, danced like towering mountains adorned with snow.

**8.** The Kalpa trees, with their long branches like arms, showered flowers all around, as if offering a floral tribute to the Lord.

**9.** All directions were filled with joy, the sky shone clear of clouds, and the earth was free of dust, as a cool breeze blew. 

Page #597:
---------------------------
507
The twenty-second parva, spreading joy in the universe, as the full moon of Kevala Jnana illuminates the ocean of the world. ||10||  The Indra, knowing the time, was awakened by these signs, and quickly recognized the glory of the Kevala Jnana of the Lord Vrishabhadeva, which pervades the world and destroys it. ||11||  Then, carrying supreme joy, Indra quickly rose from his seat, and bowed his head as if burdened by that joy, in reverence to the Lord. ||12||  "What is this?" asked Indrani, filled with wonder. Indra explained to her the news of the Lord's Kevala Jnana. ||13||  Then, as the drums of departure sounded loudly, Indra, surrounded by many gods, set out to worship the Lord's Kevala Jnana. ||14||  At that time, the god Balahak created a celestial vehicle called Kamagahvaya, whose form was like a cloud (Balahak) and whose size was equal to Jambudvipa. ||15||  That vehicle was made of jewels and adorned with hanging garlands of pearls, and the sound of its bells made it seem as if it were laughing with joy. ||16||  The god Nagadatta, who was the chief among the gods of the Abhiyogya jati, created an Airavata elephant with his Vikriya power. That elephant was white like the clouds of autumn, very large, and its whiteness illuminated all directions. ||17||  Then, Saudharma Indra, along with his Indrani and Aishana Indra, mounted that celestial vehicle, created by the Vikriya power, and set out. ||18||  In front of them, the gods of the Kilvishik jati played beautiful drums loudly, and behind them were Indra, Samajik, Trayastrimsha, Parishad, Atmaraksha, Lokapala, Anik, and 
1.  He was increasing. 2.  Immediately. 3.  Gone is the wealth, gone is the glory, gone is the being, gone is the glory.  It means that the being has fallen from the world. 4.  Clearly. 5.  The glory of the Supreme Lord. 6.  Indrani. 7.  He was going out. 8.  Cloud-shaped. 9.  Kamagahvaya. 10.  Named Balahak. 11.  Equal in size. 12.  Due to its absence. 13.  Small bells. 14.  Large. 15.  Chief of the vehicle gods. 16.  Elephant. 17.  Indra. 18.  Along with Indrani. 

Page #598:
---------------------------
The Adipurana states that the celestial beings, known as the **Prakiर्णक** (scattered), were riding their respective vehicles, following behind the glorious **Soudharmendra** (Indra), the king of the gods, as he moved freely. (19-20)

At that time, the **Apsaras** (celestial nymphs) were dancing, the **Gandharvas** (celestial musicians) were playing their instruments, and the **Kinnaris** (half-human, half-bird celestial beings) were singing. Thus, the army of the gods was moving with great splendor. (21)

Now, some of the characteristics of Indra and other gods are described here. Those who possess supreme sovereignty, characterized by **Aṇimā** (the power to become small), **Mahimā** (the power to become large), and other qualities not found in other gods, are called **Indra**. (22)

Those who are equal to Indra in all qualities except for command and sovereignty, and whom Indra himself considers great, are called **Sāmanika** (equal) gods. (23)

The **Sāmanika** gods are considered equal to the parents and teachers of Indra, and they receive the same respect as Indra, according to their own beliefs. (24)

The gods who are like the priests, ministers, and advisors (those who always remain with Indra) of Indra are called **Trayastriṁśa** (thirty-three). These gods are counted as thirty-three each for every Indra in the assemblies. (25)

Those who are present in Indra's assembly are called **Pāriṣad** (attendants). These **Pāriṣad** gods are like Indra's friends, and Indra has great affection for them. (26)

Those gods who, like bodyguards, stand with their swords drawn, circling around Indra, are called **Ātmarakṣa** (self-protectors). Although Indra has no fear, these gods constantly circle around him to display his grandeur. (27)

Those who protect the celestial realm like the guardians of a fort are called **Lokapāla** (guardians of the world), and the seven types of gods who are like an army, including infantry, etc., are called **Anīka** (army). (28)

The gods who reside in cities and countries, like ordinary people, are known as **Prakiर्णक**, and those who are like servants are called **Ābhiyogyā** (worthy of service). (29)

Those who have **Kilbiṣa** (sinful deeds) are called **Kilbiṣika** (sinful) gods. These gods live outside the other gods, like outcasts. Whatever little merit they acquire... (30)

Page #599:
---------------------------


Page #600:
---------------------------
510
Adipurana
He was a knower of the meaning of words, auspicious himself, his nature was auspicious, he was auspicious, born without a womb, his birth was excellent, he was endowed with seven types of strength: power, brilliance, force, courage, strength, consolidation, and speed. He was adorned with rows of bees that were drenched in the streams of intoxication flowing from his temples, and they seemed like another stream of intoxication. Thus, adorned with many mouths, the elephant king appeared as if all the elephants of the world, having come with devotion, were serving him. [32-41] The elephant's palate was extremely red, like the leaves of the Asoka tree. Therefore, he seemed as if he were constantly spitting out the leaves he had eaten, because they did not taste good under the pretext of the shade of his red palate. [42] The sound of the elephant's ear-shaped drums was as deep as that of a mridanga, and the bees that were sitting there were making a sound like a vina. With both of these, the elephant seemed as if he had just begun to play music. [43] The elephant, with his long trunk and the stream of intoxicating water, seemed to be adorned with the beauty of a mountain with a waterfall and a serpent. [44] With the lotus flowers stuck in his teeth, he looked beautiful, as if he were adorned with the sprouts of his bright teeth, like pieces of the moon. [45] The beautiful elephant seemed like a lake, because just as a lake is adorned with the beauty of lotuses, so too was he adorned with the beauty of his trunk, or the elephant seemed like a tall Kalpa tree, because just as a Kalpa tree is worshipped by men who desire gifts, so too was he worshipped by men who desired the gift of intoxicating water.
1. Anugatasaksharavedi. 2. Mangalamurti. 3. Svabhava. 4. Shreyowan. 5. Shobhanajati 'Jatastu kulaje budhe.' 6. Saptavidhamadavishta. 7. -rivaruchyan D, M. -rivaruchyam L, M. 8. Alivinaravasahita. 9. Madadhara. 10. Ajagarasahitasya. 11. Shifabhih. 12. Unnata. 13. Pakshe bhramarai. 

Page #601:
---------------------------
## Chapter Twenty-Two

He shone like a mountain covered in golden vines, adorned with a garland of stars, eclipsing the splendor of the autumn sky. (47)

[With Six Families]

He carried a garland of pearls around his neck, making his voice resonate. He was adorned with the beauty of a mountain's flank, surrounded by a flock of birds. (48)

He resounded with two golden bells, announcing the worship of the Jinas, as if to awaken the gods. (49)

His body was as vast and thick as Jambudvipa, with long, lake-adorned tusks like the Kula mountains, making him resemble Jambudvipa itself. (50)

He shone with the whiteness of Shvetadvipa, his body resembling a moving Mount Kailasa, with cascading streams of fragrant nectar. (51)

Thus, the leader of the elephant army, the great Airavata, was described, with his vastness and other qualities. (52)

Indra, mounted on Airavata, shone like a lotus blooming on a mountain peak, with thousands upon thousands of eyes. (53)

Airavata had thirty-two mouths, each with eight teeth, each tooth with a lake, each lake with a lotus, each lotus with thirty-two petals, each petal with thirty-two divisions. (54)

On each of these long divisions, thirty-two Apsaras danced, their faces adorned with a gentle smile, their eyebrows exquisitely beautiful, causing shoots of joy to sprout in the minds of the spectators. (55)

They danced in rhythm, their faces like blooming lotuses, their movements graceful. (56) 

Page #602:
---------------------------


Page #603:
---------------------------


Page #604:
---------------------------
514
The place of the Lord, the Adipurana, was spread over nine yojanas. It was adorned with a floor made of Hari-nila (blue sapphire) gems. ||7||
The Indra-nila (blue sapphire) gem-made Samavasarana was built then. It was like a mirror reflecting the beauty of the three worlds. ||4||
Who can describe the arrangement of this Samavasarana Mandala? Indra himself was the architect, skilled in his work. ||79||
Still, I will try to describe a little of its beauty, for listening to it brings joy to the minds of the noble souls. ||80||
On the outer edge of the Samavasarana, there was a Dhulisala (dust-wall) made of gem dust, its brilliance illuminating the surrounding land. ||41||
It looked like a rainbow, shining brightly, with a circular shape, serving the Samavasarana land as a protective wall. ||82||
This Dhulisala, with its circular shape, adorned with a belt-like design, surrounded the Samavasarana of the Jina. ||43||
Made of gem dust, the Dhulisala was sometimes black like a group of collyrium, sometimes yellow like gold, and sometimes red like coral. ||84||
In some places, it was covered with green gem dust, like the feathers of a parrot, and it looked like it was covered with the tender leaves of a lotus. ||85||
In some places, it was made of powdered Chandrakanta (moonstone) and shone like moonlight, yet it captivated the minds of people. ||86||
The Lord Vrishabhadeva saw this Samavasarana from afar. ||76||
It was spread over twelve yojanas, with a floor made of Indra-nila gems, shining brightly. ||77||
Made of Indra-nila gems, the Samavasarana was circular, like a mirror reflecting the beauty of the three worlds. ||78||
Who can describe the real construction of this Samavasarana, where Indra himself was the architect, skilled in all his work? No one can, but I will try to describe a little of its beauty, for listening to it brings joy to the minds of the noble souls. ||79-80||
On the outer edge of the Samavasarana, there was a Dhulisala (dust-wall) made of gem dust, its brilliance illuminating the surrounding land. ||81||
It looked like a rainbow, shining brightly, with a circular shape, serving the Samavasarana land as a protective wall. ||82||
This Dhulisala, with its circular shape, adorned with a belt-like design, surrounded the Samavasarana of the Jina. ||83||
Made of gem dust, the Dhulisala was sometimes black like a group of collyrium, sometimes yellow like gold, and sometimes red like coral. ||84||
In some places, it was covered with green gem dust, like the feathers of a parrot, and it looked like it was covered with the tender leaves of a lotus. ||85||
In some places, it was made of powdered Chandrakanta (moonstone) and shone like moonlight, yet it captivated the minds of people. ||86||

Page #605:
---------------------------
Thirty-two Parsva
515  Sparkling with the radiance of emerald and ruby, it seemed as if it were enhancing the beauty of the sky-like courtyard with the rainbow.  In some places, it was adorned with the light of ruby and indigo, refined like the dust particles of love and anger pulverized by the Lord.  In some places, it was resplendent with the clusters of golden dust, appearing like a towering mass of fire, as if someone were thinking, "Where is that deceitful Cupid hiding? Let him be seen, he deserves to be burned by us."  Besides this, it was filling the sky with a network of rays of small and large gems.  || 89-90 ||
Outside this dust-hall, in all four directions, four toranas were adorned, supported on golden pillars, with fish-shaped ornaments and garlands of gems hanging from them.  || 91 ||
Going a little further inside this dust-hall, in the middle of the streets, golden, extremely tall manastambhas were shining.  || 12 ||
The jagati on which the manastambhas stood was surrounded by three forts with four-four gopura-gates.  In the middle of it was a platform.  That platform was sanctified by the water of the abhisheka of the Lord Jinendra, the master of the three worlds.  There were sixteen golden steps to climb up to it.  All beings, humans, gods, and demons, worshipped it, and offerings of flowers were always kept on it.  Those manastambhas, touching the sky, were adorning that platform, which, when seen from a distance, quickly destroyed the pride of those with false vision.  || 93-95 ||
Those manastambhas were touching the sky, were holders of great knowledge, were surrounded by bells, and were adorned with chamaras and flags, therefore they were like great elephants.  || 16 ||
(In the Parihara Paksha, he was filled with love)  || 86 ||
In some places, the emerald and ruby gems were intermingled, and it seemed as if it were enhancing the beauty of the sky-like courtyard with the rainbow.  || 87 ||
In some places, it was filled with the light of ruby and indigo, refined like the dust particles of love and anger pulverized by the Lord.  || 88 ||

Page #606:
---------------------------
516
The four pillars of the universe were adorned with the four pillars of the universe. The four infinite Jinas were born from the four pillars of the universe. ||17|| The golden Jina images were established at the base of these pillars. The Indra gods worshipped them with abhisheka of milk and water. ||18|| These pillars were always adorned with great music, auspicious songs, and continuous dancing. ||19|| In the middle of the Jagati, there was a platform with three cuts. On the front of this platform, the pillars were established. Their base was very beautiful, they were made of gold, very high, and their heads were adorned with three umbrellas. Because they were made by Indra, they were also known as Indra flags. Their bodies destroyed the false beliefs of the deluded beings. Their size was very high, and the beings of the three worlds respected them. Therefore, the wise people called them Manastambhas. ||100-102|| The wells, which were adorned with various kinds of lotuses, filled with pure water, and resembled the purity of the noble beings, were adorning the land near the pillars. ||103|| The wells, which were adorned with the wealth of blooming white and blue lotuses, were adorned in such a way that it seemed as if the earth had opened its eyes to see the wealth of the Jina. ||104|| The wells, which were covered with blooming blue and white lotuses, on which swarms of bees were sitting, were adorned in such a way that it seemed as if they were covered with black and white eyes with kajal. ||105|| The wells were four in each direction, and on their banks sat rows of birds making sounds, which made them seem as if they were making sounds.
1. Manastambhachatushtayam. 2. Matastambhavyaajat. 3. Mula. Budhnam pratisthitaha lo, mo. 4. Tadayaman. 5. Sanmulaha. 6. Indradhvajasamshaya praptaprasiddhayaha. 7. Mahapramanayogat. 8. Pujat. 9. Vishuddhiparinamaha. 10. Unmilitaha. 11. Vapyah. 12. Vikasanasilaha. 13. Sitambhojah. 14. Sakajjalaiha. 15. Shlathaha. 

Page #607:
---------------------------
The twenty-second pavilion was adorned with jeweled steps, its elevated banks were made of crystal, and the earth's beauty flowed forth like streams, making these renowned pavilions resemble artificial rivers.  They resounded with the hum of bees, as if singing the praises of the Arhant, and their surging waves seemed to dance in joy at the victory of the Jina.  The sound of the cakravaka birds echoed like hymns to the Jina, and the clear water they held seemed to express contentment.  The pavilions, named Nandottara and others, were further embellished by bathing pools on their banks, as if they were accompanied by their children.  A little further on, beyond each street, lay a moat filled with water and lotus flowers, encircling the ground of the Samavasarana.  This moat, filled with pure water and purifying for humans, shone brightly, as if the Milky Way had taken the form of a moat to serve the Lord.  It was filled with clear water like crystal, reflecting the images of all the stars and constellations, making it resemble the splendor of the sky.  This moat was adorned with jeweled banks and a garland of sweetly singing birds, as if it were wearing a beautiful, radiant necklace held by hands made of waves.  The waves, stirred by the clash of aquatic creatures and whipped by the wind, danced in delight, as if celebrating the victory of the Jina. 

Page #608:
---------------------------
The moat, filled with a multitude of fish, appeared to be practicing the graceful glances of celestial nymphs, as the fish, swirling and turning within the waves, seemed to be hiding in shame, defeated by the allure of those celestial eyes.  

The inner region of the moat was encircled by a grove of creepers, adorned with blossoms of all seasons, born from vines, shrubs, and trees.  

Within this grove, numerous flower-like creepers, radiant with the laughter of blossoms, shone brightly, mimicking the gentle laughter of celestial nymphs.  

The creepers of this grove, their ends covered with buzzing bumblebees, were adorned as if they had draped themselves in blue garments.  

The Ashoka creepers of this grove, bearing new, crimson leaves, seemed to be vying with the crimson hands of the celestial nymphs.  

The sky above, filled with saffron dust carried by a gentle breeze, was adorned with the brilliance of fragrant powder, turning all directions a pale yellow.  

Within this grove, bumblebees, humming sweetly, perched on every flower, mocking the playful glances of Indra, who bears a thousand eyes.  

A gentle breeze, carrying the dense pollen from clusters of flower buds, blew softly through the grove, swaying the creepers.  

Within this grove, there were delightful play-mountains, creeper-houses adorned with beds, and cool breezes, all suitable for the celestial nymphs. 

Page #609:
---------------------------
## The Twenty-Second Chapter

**516**  Where the blossoming creepers were touched by the honey-bees, even the menstruating women were considered pure, where are the purity of the honey-drinkers? (126)

**517**  In the midst of that forest, there were moonstone slabs, cool to the touch of snow, for the rest of the Indra. (127)

**518**  Then, within that forest, there was a golden fort, the first of its kind, that encircled the entire Samavasarana land. (128)

**519**  That fort, situated around the Samavasarana land, was adorned as if the Manushottara mountain, situated around the human world, was there. (129)

**520**  It seemed as if hundreds of rainbows, wanting to adorn the celestial courtyard, had come in the guise of a fort and adorned the Samavasarana land. (130)

**521**  On the upper part of that fort, there were clusters of pearls, embedded, which made people wonder if they were a cluster of stars. (131)

**522**  In that fort, there were clusters of mungas, which were made even more red by the rays of the Panaragamanis, and were capable of revealing the beauty of the evening clouds. (132)

**523**  That fort was sometimes black like a new ram, sometimes green like grass, sometimes like the Indragopa, sometimes yellow like lightning, and sometimes it produced the beauty of a rainbow with the rays of various jewels. Thus, it was mocking the beauty of the rainy season. (133-134) 

Page #610:
---------------------------
The city was filled with the forms of elephants, horses, and tigers, some adorned with parrots, swans, and peacocks. In some places, it was embellished with human couples made of various jewels, while in others, it was decorated with creepers painted inside and out. In some places, it seemed to laugh with the rays of shining jewels, and in others, it roared like a lion with its echoing sound.  

The city, with its brilliant form, was adorned with the radiance of jewels, encompassing the sky-like courtyard and rivaling the Mount Nishadha.  

The city had four large silver gates in each direction, which were as magnificent as the peaks of Mount Vijaya, touching the sky. 

These gates, pure like clusters of moonlight, were tall and three-storied, as if they had conquered the beauty of the three worlds and were laughing. 

The gates were adorned with peaks made of ruby jewels, reaching the sky, and their spreading red rays seemed to clothe the directions with new, tender leaves. 

On these gates, many divine singers were singing the virtues of the Jina, Lord Rishabhadeva. Some were listening, and some were dancing with a gentle smile. 

Each of these gates was adorned with one hundred and eight auspicious objects, such as musical instruments and mirrors. 

Each gate was also adorned with one hundred toranas, which were made of jewels and whose brilliance filled the sky with various colors. 

The ornaments on each of these toranas seemed to be naturally beautiful, as if they were on the body of the Lord himself. 

Page #611:
---------------------------
501
The nine treasures, starting with conch, were placed near the gates, signifying the vast influence of the Jina, who transcends the three worlds. ||146|| These treasures, situated outside the gates, seemed to be ignored, as if the Lord Jina, the master of the three worlds, had rejected them, and they were serving him from afar. ||147|| Within the great thoroughfare of the gate, there were two theaters on each side, making a total of four theaters, one for each direction. ||148|| These two theaters were each divided into three sections, symbolizing the three paths to liberation: right faith, right knowledge, and right conduct. ||149|| The theaters were adorned with golden pillars, walls made of sparkling crystal, and roofs adorned with jewels, illuminating the sky. ||150|| In the theaters, celestial nymphs danced, their bodies radiant like pools of light, resembling lightning in their brilliance. ||151|| These celestial nymphs, gathered in the theaters, sang songs of the Jina's victory and performed acts of devotion, offering floral tributes. ||152|| The sound of the veena and the mridanga resonated in the theaters, causing the peacocks to suspect the arrival of the rainy season. ||153|| The two theaters, white like autumn clouds, were adorned with celestial nymphs dancing, their movements resembling flashes of lightning. ||154|| In the theaters, Kinnaras, celestial beings, played melodious veenas, accompanied by beautiful music, captivating the minds of the spectators. ||155|| Beyond the theaters, two incense burners were placed on each side of the streets, their smoke filling the sky like a courtyard. ||156|| 

Page #612:
---------------------------
The Adipurana

Seeing the sky filled with the smoke of the incense, the celestial beings or Vidyadharas who traverse the sky, even though it was not the rainy season, began to fear the clouds of the rainy season. || 157 || The incense, carried by a gentle breeze, spread its fragrance in all directions. It shone so beautifully that it seemed like the fragrance of the mouth of the Earth Goddess, revealed by her breath. || 158 || Attracted by the fragrance of the incense, swarms of bees spread out in all directions, enhancing the beauty of the hair of the women who were the directions. || 159 || On one side, the fragrance of the incense pots was spreading, and on the other side, the fragrant breath of the celestial women was coming out, so the bees, overwhelmed by the fragrance, were buzzing. || 160 || There was always the sound of the rainy season, with the thunderous sound of the drums that overpowered the thunder, and the falling rain of flowers. || 161 || A little further ahead, on the sides of the main streets, there were four lanes of forest, which seemed as if the rows of forests like Nandana had come to see the Lord. || 162 || Those four forests were of Ashoka, Saptaparna, Champa, and Mango trees, all of which were in full bloom, making them look as if they were laughing with joy. || 163 || With their many kinds of trees adorned with fruits and flowers, those forests seemed as if they were standing with offerings for the Jina, the Lord of the world. || 164 || In those forests, the trees were swaying in the wind, their branches waving like hands, as if they were dancing in joy. || 165 || Or, those trees were full of good shade, full of fruits, tall, the cause of happiness for humans, comfortable and cool, so they seemed like good kings, because good kings are also full of good shade, that is, shelter, full of fruits, tall, that is, generous, the cause of happiness for humans, comfortable and peaceful. || 166 || Called by the fragrance of the flowers, and therefore gathered together, the swarms of bees, with their sweet buzzing, made the forest trees seem as if they were singing the praises of the Jina. || 167 || 

Page #613:
---------------------------


Page #614:
---------------------------
The four forests were worthy of being served like excellent women, for they were beautiful like excellent women, *medur* (extremely smooth), *unnidra kusuma* (with blooming flowers, in the context, with the season of menstruation), *sashri* (with splendor), and *kamad* (giving desired things, in the context, giving love). || 178 || 

Or, those forests were adorned like the *uttariya* (scarf) of women, for just as the *uttariya* of women removes the obstacle of the sun, so too did those forests remove the obstacle of the sun, just as the *uttariya* of women is adorned with excellent *pallava* (fringe), so too were those forests adorned with *pallava* (new tender leaves), and just as the *uttariya* of women touches the *payodhara* (breasts), so too were those forests touching the *payodhara* (clouds) due to their height. || 179 ||

Of those four forests, the first was the *ashoka* forest, which destroyed the sorrow of beings, and was adorned with red flowers and new leaves, as if it were vomiting its own love (affection). || 180 ||

The second forest, of *saptachchada* trees, which bore seven leaves on each knot, was also adorned, and it seemed as if it were showing the seven supreme places of the Lord, such as *sajatitva*, *sadgrihasthattva*, *paritrajya*, etc., on each knot of the trees. || 181 ||

The third forest of *champaka* trees, adorned with the weight of flowers, was also adorned, and it seemed as if the forest of *dipaanga* class of *kalpavriksha* trees had come to serve the Lord. || 182 ||

And the fourth forest of mango trees, beautiful with the sweet sounds of cuckoos, was also adorned, as if it were praising the Lord who gives pure teachings. || 183 ||

In the middle of the *ashoka* forest, there was a large *ashoka* tree, which was situated on a high platform made of gold with three cuts. || 184 ||

That tree was surrounded by three *kotas* (forts) in which there were four gates, and near it were placed auspicious things like *chhatra* (umbrella), *chamara* (fly whisk), *bhriṅgāra* (perfume), and *kalasha* (pot). || 185 ||

Just as the *jambu* tree is adorned in the middle of the *jambu* island, so too was that *ashoka* tree, called *chaitavriksha*, adorned in the middle of that *ashoka* forest. || 186 ||

Page #615:
---------------------------
## The Twenty-Second Chapter

The **Ashoka** tree, with its branches spreading in all directions, stood majestic, as if determined to make the entire world free from sorrow.  || 187 ||

The **Chaitya** tree, adorned with fragrant flowers, filled the sky, as if blocking the path of the **Siddhas** and **Vidhyadharas**. || 188 ||

Its leaves were made of **lapis lazuli**, adorned with intricate paintings, and surrounded by clusters of **ruby** flowers. || 189 ||

Its golden branches, reaching high, were supported by a **vajra** base, and the buzzing of bees created a symphony, as if challenging **Kamadeva** (the god of love). || 190 ||

This **Chaitya** tree served as a pillar to bind the elephants of **Suras**, **Asuras**, and **Narendras** (gods, demons, and kings), and its radiance illuminated all directions. || 191 ||

The bells hanging from its branches, resonating with their sound, deafened the entire world, as if proclaiming the victory of the Lord in the **Bhuloka**, **Nagaloka**, and **Svargaloka** (earth, serpent realm, and heaven). || 192 ||

The tree, with its flags and banners, wiped away the clouds from the sky, as if cleansing the sins clinging to the bodies of beings. || 193 ||

It wore three umbrellas adorned with pearl garlands on its head, as if showcasing the glory of the Lord in the three worlds without words. || 194 ||

At the base of this **Chaitya** tree, in each direction, stood four images of **Jina** (the victorious ones), with **Indra** himself performing their abhisheka (consecration). || 195 ||

The gods offered **incense**, **lamps**, **fruits**, and **Akshata** (unbroken rice) to these **Jina** images, performing their worship. || 196 ||

Page #616:
---------------------------
526
Humans, gods, and demons, bowing down to the golden, supremely pure Tirthankara images, whose bodies have been washed with the water of the Milky Ocean, worship them. ||19|| Some praise them with meaningful hymns, some bow down, and some, remembering and contemplating their virtues, sing their praises. ||19|| Just as there is an Ashoka tree in the Ashoka forest, so too are there other trees of their own kind in the other three forests, and the roots of all of them are adorned with the images of the Jinas. ||195|| Thus, in the four forests, there were four very tall trees named Ashoka, Saptaparna, Champaka, and Amra. ||20|| These trees, which are called "Chaitya trees" because they have the images of the Jinas at their roots, and which Indra used to worship, were very beautiful. ||201|| These trees, which are born from the earth, are truly like the kings of the earth, for just as kings are adorned with many fruits, so too are these trees adorned with many fruits; just as kings are radiant, so too are these trees radiant; just as kings conquer the whole earth with their feet, so too do these trees conquer the whole earth with their roots; and just as kings are full of chariots, so too are these trees full of leaves. ||202|| These trees, with their red new shoots, seemed to be expressing their inner love, and with their clusters of flowers, they seemed to be showing their joy. Thus, these trees were serving the Lord. ||203|| If the greatness of these trees was so great, then what can be said about the power of the knowledge of the Lord Rishabhadeva, who is beyond comparison? ||204||
They used to worship continuously with incense, lamps, fruits, and rice grains. ||196|| 

Page #617:
---------------------------
The Twenty-Second Chapter

527. Then there was a Vana-Vedika (forest-altar) extending to the limits of the forests, with four lofty Gopura-doors (tower-gates) reaching up to the sky-like courtyard. ||20||

206. That Vana-Vedika was made of gold, studded with jewels all around, as if it were the jewel-case of the forest. ||206||

207. Or, that Vana-Vedika was adorned like the intellect of the noble beings, for just as the intellect of the noble beings is Udgra (excellent), so also was that Vana-Vedika Udgra (very high); just as the intellect of the noble beings is Sacarya (possessing excellent character), so also was that Vana-Vedika Sacarya (protected); and just as the intellect of the noble beings is Samayavan (relying on the protection of the Agamas), so also was that Vana-Vedika Samayavan (relying on the protection of the forest). ||207||

208. Or, that Vana-Vedika was Sugupta-angi (well-protected), Sati (appropriate), Ruchira (radiant), Sutrapa (protecting the thread) - made according to the measure of the thread - not high or low anywhere, and surrounding the forest on all sides, so it seemed like the intellect of a virtuous man, for the intellect of a virtuous man is also Sugupta-angi (well-protected) - it protects its body from evil deeds, Sati (free from doubts and other defects), Ruchira (bestowing the virtue of faith), Sutrapa (protecting the Agamas), and Satrapavan (purified by the Satras) - it follows their teachings. ||208||

209. In each Gopura-door of that Vedika, there were hanging groups of bells, garlands of pearls, and wreaths of flowers, all beautifully adorned. ||209||

210. The four Gopura-doors of that Vedika, made of silver, were adorned with the eight auspicious substances, music, the sound of drums, dancing, and garlands of jewels. ||210||

211. Beyond those Vedikas, rows of various flags were attached to the front of golden pillars, adorning the ground in the middle of the Maha-Vithi (great street). ||211||

212. Those flag-poles were fixed on pedestals of jewels, radiant with brilliance, worthy of the world, and very high, so they were adorned like some excellent kings, for excellent kings also sit on jeweled seats. ||212||

Page #618:
---------------------------
528
The width of those pillars is said to be eighty-eight angulas, and their distance is known to be twenty-five kodandas. ||213||
The Siddhartha trees, Chaitya trees, ramparts, forest-vedikas, stupas, toranas with manastambhas, and pillar-ketus are all twelve times the height of the Tirthankaras' bodies. Wise men say that their width, etc., is in proportion to their length. ||214-215||
Similarly, wise men who know the Agamas have said that the height of forests, houses in forests, and mountains is the same, i.e., they are all twelve times the height of the Tirthankara's body. ||216||
Mountains are eight times wider than their height, and wise men have said that the diameter of stupas is slightly more than their height. ||217||
The Ganadharas, who are the crossers of the ocean of perfect knowledge, have said that the width of the forest-vedikas is one-fourth the height of the forest. ||218||
There were garlands, clothes, peacocks, lotuses, swans, Garuda, lions, bulls, elephants, and wheels on the flags, so there were ten types of them. ||219||
There were one hundred and eight flags of each type in each direction, and they were very high, resembling the waves of the ocean. ||220||
The assembly of clothes on those flags, moved by the wind, was so beautiful as if it wanted to call humans and gods to worship the Jina. ||221||
On the flags with garlands, there were divine garlands made of flowers hanging, and they seemed as if Indra had made them to show the simple result of the noble beings. ||222||
The flags with clothes were made of fine and white clothes, and they were flying in the wind, making them look like the big, high waves rising from the ocean of the sky. ||223||
The peacocks on the flags with peacocks were spreading their tails playfully, and they were swallowing the clothes with the wisdom of a snake, making them look like...

Page #619:
---------------------------
## Twenty-Second Chapter

The banners with lotus emblems were adorned with lotuses, each with a thousand petals, blooming like lotuses in a celestial lake. (225) Their reflections on the earth, made of precious gems, were mistaken for real lotuses by the bees, who were thus deceived. (226) Seeing the unparalleled beauty of these lotuses, Lakshmi abandoned all other lotuses and made her abode among them. (227) On the banners with swan emblems, swans with beautiful garments were seen, using their beaks to preen their feathers, as if spreading their own essence. (228) On the banners with Garuda emblems, Garudas were perched on the tips of the staffs, their wings spread wide, as if they were about to conquer the sky. (229) The reflections of these Garudas on the earth, made of blue sapphires, appeared as if they were entering the netherworld to capture the Nagas. (230) On the banners with lion emblems, lions were depicted, ready to leap, as if they were about to conquer the gods' elephants. (231) Large pearls hung from the mouths of these lions, as if they were the trophies of victory, collected from the shattered heads of elephants. (232) On the banners with bull emblems, bulls were depicted, their horns adorned with the banners' cloth, as if they had won victory and were holding the victory flag. (233) On the banners with elephant emblems, elephants were depicted, their trunks raised high, holding the banners, as if they were mighty mountains with waterfalls cascading from their peaks. (234) 

Page #620:
---------------------------
## Adipurana

**Chapter 235:**
Thousands of flags with thousands of wheels, their rays rising upwards, shone brightly, as if ready to compete with the sun.

**Chapter 236:**
These great flags, as if sweeping the sky, embracing the directions as women, or shaking the earth, were resplendent.

**Chapter 237:**
These flags, obtained by conquering the delusion, shone brightly, proclaiming the unparalleled lordship of the Lord of the three worlds.

**Chapter 238:**
In each direction, there were a thousand and eighty flags, and in all four directions, there were four thousand three hundred and twenty.

**Chapter 239:**
After them, in the inner part, there was a great silver fort, very beautiful, unique and yet a second one, meaning another fort.

**Chapter 240:**
Like the previous fort, this one also had four silver gates, shining brightly, as if they were the embodiment of the laughter of the earth goddess, who had gathered there.

**Chapter 241:**
In those gates, adorned with many ornaments, the treasures kept there were radiating a brilliance that could even make Kubera's wealth laugh.

**Chapter 242:**
The rest of the details of this fort have been described along with the previous one. Due to repetition, its detailed description is not being given here again.

**Chapter 243:**
Like before, there were two playhouses on either side of each great street, and two incense burners were placed there.

**Chapter 244:**
The special feature of this enclosure is that after the incense burners, in the space between the streets, there was a forest of Kalpa trees, shining brightly with the radiance of various jewels.

**Chapter 245:**
Those Kalpa trees in the forest were very tall, providing excellent shade, adorned with fruits, and adorned with various garlands, clothes, and ornaments, making them appear like kings. 

Page #621:
---------------------------
## The Twenty-Second Chapter

531. The Devakurus and Uttarakurus have surely come to serve the Jina, adorned with ten types of Kalpataru trees in rows. ||26||

24. Their fruits are like ornaments, their leaves like forests, and their branches adorned with long garlands like great matted hair. ||24||

24. The gods and Nagas, seated in the shade beneath them, left their own abodes and sported there for a long time. ||24||

249. The Jyotishka gods resided in the Jyotiranga Kalpatarus, the Kalpavasis in the Dipanga Kalpatarus, and the Bhavanavasis in the Malanga Kalpatarus, each according to their preference. ||249||

250. That forest of Kalpatarus was adorned like a bride and groom, for just as a bride and groom are adorned with garlands, so was that forest, just as they are adorned with ornaments, so was that forest, just as they wear beautiful clothes, so were there beautiful clothes in that forest, just as the lips of a bride and groom are red like new leaves, so were the new leaves of that forest red, just as lamps are lit around a bride and groom, so were lamps lit in that forest, and just as a bride and groom are extremely beautiful, so was that forest extremely beautiful. ||250||

251. In the midst of those Kalpatarus were the Siddhartha trees, whose roots were very radiant because they were presided over by the images of the Siddhas, and they were all shining like the sun. ||251||

252. The descriptions given earlier for the Chaitya trees should also be applied to these Siddhartha trees, but the special features are:

1. Arranged in rows.
2. Leaves spread out on all sides, like the lips of one who has leaves.
3. With radiant limbs.
4. Bride and groom, bride and groom.
5. In the middle of the forest.
6. Very radiant.
7. Like the sun.

...

Because kings are also very high, that is, extremely excellent or generous, they are endowed with excellent shade, that is, radiance, they are adorned with fruits in the form of the attainment of various kinds of things, and they are adorned with various kinds of garlands, clothes, and ornaments. ||245||

Seeing those Kalpatarus, it seemed as if the Devakurus and Uttarakurus, adorned with rows of their ten types of Kalpatarus, had come to serve the Lord. ||246||

The fruits of those Kalpatarus seemed like ornaments, the new tender leaves seemed like forests, and the garlands hanging from the tips of the branches were adorned like great matted hair. ||247||

The gods and Dharanendras, seated in the shade beneath those trees, left their own abodes and sported there for a long time. ||248||

The Jyotishka gods resided in the Jyotiranga Kalpatarus, the Kalpavasis in the Dipanga Kalpatarus, and the Bhavanavasis in the Malanga Kalpatarus, each according to their preference. The meaning is that each god sported beneath the tree that he liked best. ||249||

That forest of Kalpatarus was adorned like a bride and groom, for just as a bride and groom are adorned with garlands, so was that forest, just as they are adorned with ornaments, so was that forest, just as they wear beautiful clothes, so were there beautiful clothes in that forest, just as the lips of a bride and groom are red like new leaves, so were the new leaves of that forest red
Page #622:
---------------------------
532
In the Adipurana, there were some poets who had created a beautiful world. In this world, there were forests, and within these forests, there were beautiful pavilions. These pavilions were made of gold and had four gateways. 25

The gateways were adorned with toranas and other auspicious objects, as described earlier. The height and width of these gateways were similar to those described before. 255

Beyond the gateways, there was a wide and long path, and on both sides of this path, there were rows of houses built by divine artisans. 256

These houses had large pillars made of gold, their foundations were made of wood, their walls were made of Chandrakant gems, and they were decorated with various jewels. Some of these houses had two floors, some had three, and some had four. Some had Chandrasalas (upper floors) and some were adorned with attics. 257, 258

These houses were bathed in their own light, and their peaks touched the sky, appearing as if they were made of moonlight. 259

There were also storehouses, assembly halls, and viewing galleries. These storehouses had beds, seats, and stairs, and their brilliance made the sky white. 260

In these houses, there were gods, Gandharvas, Siddhas (a type of god), Vidyadharas, Nagas, and Kinnaras, all playing and enjoying themselves. 261

Some of these gods were engaged in singing, while others were playing musical instruments. They were all engaged in music and dance, worshipping the Supreme Being. 262

Were there Kalpavriksha trees that granted wishes? 252

In the forests of these Kalpavriksha trees, there were wells, rivers, sand dunes, and assembly halls, all beautifully decorated. 253

The forest path was surrounded by a pavilion made of gold, with four gateways. 254

The gateways were adorned with toranas and auspicious objects, as described earlier. The height and width of these gateways were similar to those described before. 255

Beyond the gateways, there was a wide and long path, and on both sides of this path, there were rows of houses built by divine artisans. 256

These houses had large pillars made of gold, their foundations were made of wood, their walls were made of Chandrakant gems, and they were decorated with various jewels. Some of these houses had two floors, some had three, and some had four. Some had Chandrasalas (upper floors) and some were adorned with attics. 257, 258

These houses were bathed in their own light, and their peaks touched the sky, appearing as if they were made of moonlight. 259

There were also storehouses, assembly halls, and viewing galleries. These storehouses had beds, seats, and stairs, and their brilliance made the sky white. 260

In these houses, there were gods, Gandharvas, Siddhas (a type of god), Vidyadharas, Nagas, and Kinnaras, all playing and enjoying themselves. 261

Some of these gods were engaged in singing, while others were playing musical instruments. They were all engaged in music and dance, worshipping the Supreme Being. 262

1. Gold
2. Auspicious
3. Gateway
4. Divine artisans
5. Understand from the context
6. Two-storied
7. Upper floor
8. House with many peaks
9. Theatre
10. Seats
11. White sky
12. Types of gods
13. Playing musical instruments 

Page #623:
---------------------------
533
In the midst of the twenty-two volumes of the scriptures, nine stupas stood tall, made of padmaraga gems, reaching high, surpassing the sky. ||23|| They were adorned with images of Siddhas and Arhants, reflecting their glory, as if the love of the people had taken the form of the stupas. ||26|| They were as magnificent as Mount Meru, adorned with celestial beings, just as Mount Meru is worshipped by the Vidyadharas. ||15|| These stupas, towering and worshipped by Siddhas and Charanas, were like the nine Kevala Jnanas, embodying the essence of the teachings. ||26|| Between the stupas, garlands of precious gems adorned the sky-like courtyard, resembling the rainbow in their beauty. ||267|| They were adorned with umbrellas, flags, and auspicious offerings, making them as joyous as kings, who are also adorned with umbrellas, flags, and auspicious offerings, bringing joy to their people. ||268|| There, the Jainas worshipped the images of the Jinas, offering them abhisheka, praise, and worship, and circumambulating them with great joy. ||269|| The earth, surrounded by rows of stupas and houses, was surpassed by a crystal-like enclosure, as if the sky itself had become the enclosure. ||270|| Or, due to the purity of its essence (parinama) and its service to the Jinas, the enclosure was as beautiful as a Bhanajiva, for a Bhanajiva also possesses pure essence (bhavas) and serves the Jinas. Moreover, this enclosure was as tall (superior in quality) and well-rounded (perfect) as a Bhanajiva. ||271||
The people were worshipping the Lord through dance and other activities. ||262||

Page #624:
---------------------------
534
The Adipurana, being served by celestial beings, was as high as the Vindhya mountain and as firm as it. It seemed as if the Vindhya mountain itself had taken the form of a fort and was circumambulating the Lord. ||272|| In all directions of this excellent fort, there were four tall gateways, made of padmaraga gems, which seemed to have been created by the love of the glorious beings. ||273|| Just as there were treasures of auspicious substances on the gateways of the previous forts, so too, one should know that there were treasures of auspicious substances on these gateways. And just as before, there were also luminous and deep-seated treasures near these gateways. ||274|| On each gateway, there were eight auspicious substances: a fan, an umbrella, a whisk, a flag, a mirror, a su-prati-shthaka (a pedestal), a bhringar (a kind of perfume), and a kalasha (a pot). ||275|| On the gateways of the three forts, there were, in order, the Vyantara, Bhavana, and Kalpa gods, who were the gatekeepers, holding clubs and other weapons in their hands. Meaning: The Vyantara gods guarded the gate of the first fort, the Bhavana gods guarded the gate of the second fort, and the Kalpa gods guarded the gate of the third fort. All these gods were holding clubs and other weapons in their hands. ||276|| Then, from that fort, which was as clear as the sky and made of crystal, to the back, there were sixteen walls, which were situated in the intervals of the great streets. Meaning: There were eight walls on either side of the four great streets in all four directions, and eight walls in the four intermediate directions, two by two, making a total of sixteen walls. These walls were long, extending from the crystal fort to the back, and they divided the twelve assemblies. ||277|| Those walls, which were made of sky-crystal, whose pure radiance spread everywhere, and which were attached to the edge of the first platform, were shining like moonlight. ||278|| Those walls were extremely pure, showing the reflections of all objects, and were endowed with great wealth, so they were adorned as if they were the supreme knowledge of the Lord Vrishabhadeva, the sustainer of the world. ||279|| Above those walls, there was a very large and beautiful Srimandapa, built with gem-studded pillars and made of sky-crystal. ||280|| That Srimandapa was truly a Srimandapa, because there, the Lord Vrishabhadeva, in the presence of humans, gods, and Asuras, circumambulated the three worlds. ||281|| (Always virtuous) ||271|| 

Page #625:
---------------------------
The **Srimandapa**, adorned with a brilliance like a second sky, was resplendent, reflecting the brilliance of the sky. It was a place that could accommodate all beings of the three worlds, thus possessing immense wealth. ||282|| On its upper surface, clusters of flowers, released by the Yaksha deities, created a doubt in the hearts of humans below, resembling stars. ||283|| In that Srimandapa, garlands of flowers, indicated by the buzzing of intoxicated bees, never seemed to wilt, as if they were sheltered by the coolness of the shade of the Jina's feet. ||284|| In that Srimandapa, a line of bees, nestled among offerings of blue lotuses, was indistinguishable due to the similarity in color, but their buzzing revealed their presence. ||285|| In that Srimandapa, which spanned a yojana in length and breadth, all humans, gods, and demons resided comfortably, without hindering each other, a testament to the greatness of the Lord. ||286|| In that Srimandapa, a group of swans, approaching the edge of pure gems, though hidden by the brilliance of the gems, revealed themselves through their sweet sounds. ||287|| The walls of the Srimandapa, whose splendor was like the mirror of Lakshmi, reflected the images of all beings from the three worlds, making them appear as if adorned with various paintings. ||288|| The gods and demons, bathed in the ocean of radiance emanating from the Srimandapa, seemed to be taking a bath in a holy place. ||289||

Page #626:
---------------------------
536
The first platform, adorned with vaidurya gems, stood in the center of the field, resembling the peak of Kulachal.  ||290|| Sixteen steps, with sixteen intervals, extended in the four cardinal directions, leading to the assembly halls and entrances. ||291||  Eight auspicious substances and dharma chakras, adorned with the lofty heads of yakshas, graced this platform. ||292||  These chakras, with their thousands of spokes, shone with the radiance of emerging gems, resembling the rising sun from the mountain of the platform. ||293||  Above this first platform, a second, made of gold, rivaled the sun's rays and illuminated the sky. ||294||  On its surface, eight great banners, resembling the eight Lokapalas, stood tall, approved by the king of the gods. ||295||  These banners, adorned with the symbols of the wheel, elephant, bull, lotus, cloth, lion, Garuda, and garland, were pure like the eight qualities of the Siddhas. ||296||  These banners, with their shimmering garments fluttering in the wind, seemed to be sweeping away the dust of sin. ||297||  Above this second platform, a third, made of all gems, stood vast and radiant, dispelling the darkness with its brilliance. ||298||  This platform, with its three belts, was crafted from the finest gems, resembling Mount Meru, come to worship. ||299||  This platform, like a chakra-bearing king, with its banners, resembled Airavata, the elephant, and with its golden form, shone like the great Mount Meru. ||300||  Six-legged bees, drawn to the clusters of flowers, were bathed in the golden glow. ||301|| 

Page #627:
---------------------------
The twenty-second chapter describes the magnificent structure of the assembly hall, which was adorned with countless jewels. It was as resplendent as the body of the Jina, which was worshipped by both gods and demons.  

The assembly hall was surrounded by a radiant halo, like the Jyotigans (celestial beings) surrounding Mount Meru. It was the most excellent of all structures, just as Mount Meru is situated in the northernmost direction. It held the Jina, the world teacher, just as Mount Meru held him during his birth. 

The assembly hall had three tiers, each adorned with intricate carvings. The Jina sat atop this magnificent structure, radiating the same brilliance as the Siddhas (liberated souls) who reside at the peak of the three realms. 

The inner space of the assembly hall, enclosed by a crystal dome, was one yojana (approximately 8 miles) in diameter. The three forests (the forest of creepers, the forest of Ashoka trees, and the forest of Kalpa trees) and the flag-bearing grounds were also each one yojana in extent. The moat surrounding the assembly hall was one yojana wide, as measured from the dust-filled area. All these measurements were given by the Jina himself. 

The forest of Kalpa trees was half a yojana away from the crystal dome, and the first platform was one yojana away from the dome. The top of the first platform was half a kos (approximately 4 miles) in diameter. The second and third platforms had a circumference of 750 dhanus (approximately 1.5 miles) each. 

The grand avenues leading to the gateways were one kos wide, and the sixteen walls were one-eighth of their height in width. 

Page #628:
---------------------------
538
The first platform, known as Jagati, is eight dhanus high. The second platform is half the height of the first, meaning four dhanus high, as learned scholars know. ||30|| The third platform is also four dhanus high, while the throne and the Dharmachakra are each one dhanus high. ||31|| Thus, the Samavasarana assembly of the Jina was established as described. Now, listen from my mouth about the place where the Jina was seated, the Gandhakuți, in the middle of it. ||312||

The Ganadhar Gautama Swami, the leader of the Ganadharas, described the Samavasarana assembly of the Jina in clear, sweet, appropriate, and enlightening words about the true meaning. Just as a group of lotuses blooms in the morning, holding blooming lotuses, so too did the king Srenika, whose mind was enlightened, hold his blooming face. In other words, the lotus-like face of King Srenika bloomed with joy upon hearing the words of Gautama Swami. ||313||

Upon hearing the words of Ganadhar Gautama Swami, which were worthy of the assembly, most excellent, and free from the darkness of false views and the faults of speech, all those present in the assembly, along with the Jina, attained supreme joy. At that time, the eyes of all those in the assembly were blooming with joy, making them appear like a group of lotuses blooming with the rays of the sun, the source of Lakshmi. ||314||

Those who desire to worship the supreme knowledge of Kevala Jnana and the extraordinary glory...
1. The first platform, Jagati.
2. With fourteen dhanus.
3. The place where the Jina is seated.
4. From here onwards.
5. Enlightened.
6. Worthy of the assembly.
7. Most excellent.
8. The false views of the false ones.
9. Free from the faults of speech.
10. They received from all sides.
11. Desiring to spread. 

Page #629:
---------------------------
539
The Indra, holding the four Nikayas of gods, bowed from afar and was extremely pleased seeing the Samavasarana ground.  May the glorious Jinadeva always be victorious!  ||315||  Is this a new creation of the celestial realm? Or is this the influence of the Jina, or is it a natural order, or is this the influence of Indra?  Thus, with many arguments and counter-arguments, the group of gods, who were watching with great curiosity, may that Samavasarana ground of the Lord always be victorious!  ||316||
Thus ends the twenty-second chapter, named "Description of the Samavasarana", in the collection of the Trishattilakshana Mahapurana, composed by the venerable Jinaseanacharya, known by the name of Arsha.  ||22||
1. Creation. 2. Jainonubhava: 50, A, 20, I.  Anubhava: Power. 3.  Ut. 

Page #630:
---------------------------
## Chapter Twenty-Three

On the vast expanse of the Trimekhala Muni Peetha, adorned with a multitude of shining, multi-colored, celestial flowers, 
[1] 
shining like the moon, showered with flowers flung by Indra, 
[2] 
it seemed to laugh, like the sky after the clouds have vanished, revealing the twinkling stars. 
[3] 
Reflected in the multitude of waving chowries, it seemed as if swans were serving the vast expanse of a lake. 
[4] 
Competing in brilliance with the sun, adorned with great riches, it was studded with crystal gems, resembling the foam of the Milky Way. 
[5] 
In some places, it was filled with the spreading rays of rubies, appearing as if it were devoted to the red glow of the feet of the Jina. 
[6] 
Pure, smooth, soft to the touch, sanctified by the touch of the Jina, and adorned with countless auspicious treasures, 
[7] 
there, Kubera built the Gandhakuti on the earth, adorned with lofty trees, surpassing even the celestial chariots in its splendor. 
[8] 
On the Trimekhala-marked Peetha, this Gandhakuti shone, like the peak of Mount Meru, adorned above the three forests of Nandana, Saumanasa, and Panduka. 
[9] 
Just as the Sarvarthasiddhi shines above the heavens, so too, this radiant Gandhakuti shines above the Peetha. 
[10] 
The sky, filled with the peaks of the Gandhakuti, radiating the brilliance of countless gems, seemed to be adorned with countless paintings, or perhaps with rainbows. 
[11] 

Page #631:
---------------------------
541
The Gandhakuti, adorned with countless victory flags atop its towering peaks, seemed to be inviting gods and vidyadharas with its outstretched arms.  [11]  With its three platforms, it resembled a reflection of the three worlds' wealth in the celestial lake of the sky. [12]  Surrounded by hanging, large pearl-like ornaments, the Gandhakuti was adorned as if the vast oceans had offered it hundreds of pearl gifts. [13]  In some places, the Gandhakuti was adorned with thick, long, golden nets, as if it were adorned with luminous shoots hanging from Kalpa trees. [14]  The Gandhakuti was resplendent with garlands of jeweled ornaments hanging all around, resembling gifts sent by the goddess of heaven. [15]  The Gandhakuti was filled with the buzzing of millions of intoxicated bees, attracted by the fragrance of flower garlands, as if it were eager to praise the Jina. [16]  The Gandhakuti, resonating with the sounds of hymns composed by Indra, seemed like Saraswati, eager to praise the Lord. [17]  The Gandhakuti, its entire body covered with the light of surrounding forests, was adorned as if it were made of Lakshmi, the goddess of wealth, for the Jina. [18]  The Gandhakuti, drenched in the fragrance of intoxicated bees attracted by its scent, and with its smoke spreading in all directions, seemed to be measuring the length of the directions with its fragrant incense. [19]  The Gandhakuti, with its fragrance spreading in all directions, seemed to be made of fragrance itself, with flowers spreading in all directions, it seemed to be made of flowers, and with incense spreading in all directions, it seemed to be made of incense. [20]  Or, the Gandhakuti was adorned like a woman, for just as a woman's breath is fragrant, so too was the fragrant air flowing through the Gandhakuti from the incense, like her fragrant breath.  [21] 

Page #632:
---------------------------
542
The Gandhakuti, filled with the fragrance of incense and the divine aroma of the Jina's body, perfumed the entire world.  ||22||
Just as the fragrance is the essence of flowers, so too is this Gandhakuti the essence of beauty, the abode of Lakshmi. ||23||
This Gandhakuti was six hundred dhanus wide, six hundred dhanus long, and slightly higher in height, adorned with the measure of pride and humility. ||24||
In the center of the Gandhakuti, the Lord of Wealth had constructed a throne, adorned with a multitude of precious gems, surpassing even the peak of Mount Meru. ||25||
This throne, made of gold, was tall, exceedingly beautiful, and its radiance put the sun to shame. It seemed as if Mount Meru, in its radiant peak, had come to serve the Jina, taking the form of a throne. ||26||
The throne, radiating light in all directions, was resplendent with great wealth, adorned with exquisite gems, and captivating the eyes. ||27||
Its vast and radiant form, emanating a multitude of rays, illuminated by the finest gems, and surpassing even Mount Meru in its splendor, made the throne truly magnificent. ||28||

Page #633:
---------------------------
-
The Twenty-Third Chapter

The Lord, the first Tirthankara, adorned the lion throne. He was elevated four finger-breadths above the throne by his own magnificence, without touching the base. ||29||

Indra and other gods, with great reverence, showered flowers from the sky like clouds, upon the Lord seated on the throne. ||30||

The rain of flowers, buzzing with intoxicated bees, filled the sky like a garland of bees, or a garland of flowers worn by men. ||31||

The rain of flowers, released by the divine clouds, covered the earth for twelve yojanas with pollen, a wondrous sight. ||32||

The rain of flowers, pleasing to the eyes, fell near the Lord, like the eyes of women. ||33||

The rain of flowers, scattered by the divine beings, was adorned with pollen from the swarm of bees, and was very beautiful. ||34||

The rain of flowers, soaked with the cool waters of the Ganges, was filled with bees and its fragrance spread everywhere. ||35||

Near the Lord stood an Ashoka tree, adorned with emerald green leaves and jeweled flowers, its branches swaying gently in the breeze. ||36||

The Ashoka tree, filled with intoxicated bees and cuckoos, filled all directions with its sweet sounds, as if praising the Lord. ||37||

1. Pari-charya-chakra-ire, seva-chakra-ur-ity-artha.
2. Aach-chadayanto.
3. Dva-dasha-yojana-pramit-bhu-bhag-am vya-pya.
4. Ma samanta-an mukta.
5. Vistritam.
6. Stri-na-am.
7. Su-manas-a-am kusuma-na-am sambandhini. 

Page #634:
---------------------------
544
Adipurana
Rukmavati Vrittam
With its swaying branches, it seemed as if the Ashoka tree was dancing before the Lord. And with its clusters of flowers, it seemed as if it was offering a radiant floral tribute to the Lord. ||38||
Panava Vrittam
The Ashoka tree, adorned with vibrant hues, blocked the path of the celestial beings and the lords of the Vidyaadharas. Its branches, stretching for a yojana, dispelled the darkness of sorrow. ||39||
Upasthita Vrittam
With its verdant foliage and blooming flowers, the tree seemed to be ready to cleanse all directions. It was offering a floral tribute to the Lord with its blossoming flowers. ||40||
Mayura Sarini Vrittam
The Indra, the king of the gods, declared this tree as the chief among all trees. Its roots were embedded in the earth, its base adorned with jewels, and its flowers were like the radiant gems of the Japa Mala. It was frequented by intoxicated cuckoos and bees. ||41||
The radiant white umbrella above the Lord had conquered the Lakshmi of the moon. It was so beautiful that it seemed as if the moon itself had taken three forms to serve the Lord, the master of the three worlds, Vrishabhadeva. ||42||
The three white umbrellas were so beautiful that they seemed like the discs of the moon, which had taken the form of umbrellas. The clusters of pearls on them seemed like rays of light. This trio of umbrellas was created by Kubera, following the command of Indra. ||43||
This is a praise of the Lord. ||37||
1. Gaganachara Maha Prabhu
2. Disha
3. Vyaapnoti Sma
4. Upahaar
5. Adhri
6. Maloparibhaag
7. Prashasta Japa Kusuma Samaan Ratnamayavichitra Prasunam
8. Chandra Sambandhini
9. Bhrisham Virajamanam
10. Kubera 

Page #635:
---------------------------
## Chapter Twenty-Three

**Indravajra Vritta**
- The three umbrellas, adorned with countless strings of precious gems, shone with the brilliance of the rising sun. They were so pure and radiant that they seemed to have been created from the union of the moon and the sun. (44)
- Adorned with the finest pearls, shimmering like the ocean's waves, resplendent, stealing the radiance of the moon, and adorned with sparkling Indranila gems, the three umbrellas, upon reaching the Lord, radiated an unparalleled brilliance. (45)

**Vamsastha Vritta**
- Is this the laughter of the goddess of fortune, the embodiment of the world? Or is it the radiant glory of the Lord's virtues? Or is it the gentle smile of the king of Dharma? Or is it the spotless moon, bringing joy to the three worlds? (46)
- Thus, spreading joy among the people, the three umbrellas shone brightly, like a radiant image of the Lord's glory, earned by conquering the enemy of delusion. (47)

**Upendravajra Vritta**
- Like waves in the ocean of milk, the groups of yakshas, serving the Jina, waved their chamaras (fly whisks) all around, creating a dazzling spectacle. (48)

**Upajati Vritta**
- Composed of the finest pearls, radiating a pure brilliance like the moon, the group of chamaras, upon reaching the Jina, shone like waterfalls cascading from a mountain. (49)

**Notes:**
1. Extremely white.
2. This is explained by the presence of excellent pearls.
3. The one who has sparkling Indranila, ruby, and diamond gems.
4. Laughter.
5. Radiant.
6. Of the chamaras.
7. Piece.
8. Related to the moon.
9. Reached the Lord.
10. Waterfall-like. 

Page #636:
---------------------------
546
The row of pure white chamaras, sprinkled with water, was shining brightly, as if the Milky Way had come to serve the Lord. ||50||
The white chamaras, falling down like a cluster of moonbeams, were creating an illusion, as if the radiance of the Lord's body was ascending or the moonbeams were descending. ||51||
The row of chamaras, adorned with the nectar-like body and shining brightly, was swaying like the waves of the ocean, agitated by the wind. ||52||
The row of excellent chamaras, falling down like the moon and nectar, was radiating a magnificent glow, as if the ocean of milk was coming to serve the Jina. ||53||
The white chamaras, being waved around by the gods, were falling down, as if the swans were descending from the sky or the Lord's glory was ascending. ||54||
The clever Yakshas, with their long lotus-like eyes, were playfully waving the white chamaras, like the waves of the wind-blown ocean. ||55||
The row of high chamaras was shining brightly, as if the Milky Way was descending from the sky to serve the Jina, or the moonlight was descending to bloom the Kumudini flowers. ||56||
1. Ascending. 2. Of moonbeams. 3. Falling down from all sides. 4. Abundant. 5. Desiring to serve. 6. Coming. 7. Of the Lord. 8. Upon the Lord. 9. White. 'Valaksha dhavla arjuna' - meaning white. 10. Under the guise of chamaras. 

Page #637:
---------------------------
547
The yakshas, whose senses were filled with joy and whose eyes were radiant, were waving their chamaras, which were as bright as the moon, as if they were competing with the qualities of the Lord. ||57||
Those chamaras, shining like pure nectar, were immeasurable in their brilliance and radiance. They proclaimed the unparalleled sovereignty of the Lord over the world. ||58||
The wise ones declare that there are sixty-four chamaras, each holding the infinite brilliance of the Lord Jinendra, whose chest is embraced by Lakshmi and who bears the mark of the Srivṛksha. ||59||
Thus, these sixty-four chamaras are said to be the eternal chamaras of the Lord Jinendra. They are halved in number from the Chakravartin down to the king, meaning there are thirty-two for the Chakravartin, sixteen for the Ardhachakra, eight for the Mandalesvara, four for the Ardhamandalesvara, two for the Maharaja, and one for the king. ||60||
Similarly, the divine drums, whose sound was sweet and resonant, were resounding in the sky, as if they were announcing the arrival of the rainy season, while the peacocks, intoxicated with love, were watching them with great affection. ||61||
The panava, tuna, kahl, shankha, and nagada, whose sound was extremely sweet and deep, were filling the entire space with their sound, covering the sky with their resonance. ||62||
Those divine nagadas, struck by the strong sticks of the divine artisans, seemed to be angry and were uttering clear words, as if they were saying, "Why are you tormenting us?" ||63||

Page #638:
---------------------------
548
What is this sound that is resounding like the roar of the ocean, and the smoke that is rising up? The sound of the victorious drums of the Jinas, spreading far and wide, is filled with the essence of the Jinas. ||6||
The entire world, surrounded by the radiance of the Jinas, is filled with the light of the Samavasarana. What wonder is there in the brilliance of the Lord, which is filled with the Devas, Asuras, and humans? ||15||
The radiance of the Jinas' bodies, surpassing the brilliance of the midday sun, eclipses the radiance of millions of Devas, and spreads throughout the world, revealing the great glory of the Lord. ||66||
The Devas, Asuras, and humans, filled with joy, see their own seven births in the pure and radiant aura of the Jinas' bodies, which is like a mirror reflecting all the auspiciousness of the world. ||67||
Seeing that the moon has quickly attained the state of the three umbrellas of the Lord, the radiant sun, as if deceived by the brilliance of the Lord's body, began to serve the ancient poet, Lord Rishabhadeva. ||18||
Meaning: The three umbrellas of the Lord are:
1. The Samavasarana, which is born from the body of the Jinas.
2. The Samavasarana, which is the ground of the Samavasarana. The extent of the eleven Samavasarana grounds, in order, is as follows: "Each of the twenty-four parts, two of the four, half of the two that are struck twice, the eighth part of the three, the three, the two, the eight parts, the five, and the rest." The Samavasarana grounds of the Tirthankaras, starting with Rishabhadeva, are mentioned here. The twenty-four parts are the extent of the Samavasarana ground. The extent of the Bhavanabhumis is twice the extent of the Vallivanas, etc., which are four parts of the twenty-four parts. The extent of the Ganabhumis is half the extent of the Bhavanabhumis. The extent of the Ganabhumis is one-eighth of the two, and the extent of each of the two Pithas is one-eighth of the Ganabhumis. The extent of the Ganabhumis is one-eighth of the two, and the extent of the last Pitha is half the extent of the Ganabhumis. The extents of the eleven grounds, in relation to the first Tirthankara, are written in order. 3 Yojanas, 3 Kha, 1 Shiva, 1 Up, 1 Dhwaja, 1 Kalpa, 3 Bhava, 3 Abhu, 4 Gun, 4 Pitha Dandas.
3. "Ruruche" is a variant reading in the "P" manuscript.
4. The Devas, Asuras, and humans are together.
5. "Nu" is in the sense of "in the argument."
6. "Tejamshi" means "radiances."
7. "Mahomay" means "unparalleled radiance."
8. "Maladarpana sadase" means "like a mirror reflecting all the auspiciousness."
9. "Deepa-" means "radiant."
10. "Deha prabha byajat" means "born from the radiance of the body." 

Page #639:
---------------------------
## Chapter Twenty-Three

**Doddhakavrittam**

The supremely divine sound, emanating from the lotus-like mouth of the Lord, resembled the roar of clouds. It illuminated the minds of the blessed beings, dispelling the darkness of delusion like the sun. (69)

Though the divine sound was of one kind, it encompassed all human languages and many dialects, due to the greatness of the Jina. It dispelled ignorance and imparted knowledge of the truth. (70)

Just as a single stream of water acquires different tastes due to the variety of trees it flows through, so too did the divine sound of the omniscient Lord manifest in diverse ways, depending on the recipient. (71)

Like a crystal stone, which takes on the color of whatever is placed near it, due to its own purity, so too did the divine sound of the omniscient Lord, though of one kind, assume various forms depending on the listener. (72)

Some say that the divine sound was created by the gods. This is false, for it would diminish the Lord's qualities.  Furthermore, the divine sound is composed of letters, and without letters, there can be no understanding of meaning in the world. (73)

**Shalini Vrittam**

Thus, the Lord Vrishabhadeva, the master of the three worlds, had this glory performed by Indra, with the devotion of the gods. The Lord of the universe, the omniscient, the master of the four infinite treasures, was served by Indra, the king of the gods. (74) 

Page #640:
---------------------------
550
Padipuranam
The Lord, who is like the wind, is truly wise and is worshipped by all the learned. He ascended the golden throne, adorned with lions, to teach the world. ||75||
Seeing the beautiful assembly, the gods were filled with joy and performed three circumambulations with devotion. Then, with happy hearts, they entered the assembly to see the Lord. ||76||
The assembly, adorned with banners that seemed to sweep the sky, was surrounded by a dust-cloud, making it appear as if it were constantly enveloped in a rainbow. ||77||
The assembly was supported by four pillars that reached the sky, and the pure banners on them seemed to call the heavens to serve the Lord. ||78||
The assembly was adorned with many ponds filled with clear, cool water and blooming lotuses, making it appear as if it were a row of eyes, eager to see the Lord, the destroyer of the demons of birth, old age, and death. ||79||
The assembly was surrounded by a moat filled with pure water, echoing with the sounds of water birds and large waves, making it appear as if the waves were raising their hands to welcome the water birds. ||80||
The assembly was situated on that land. ||74||
The Lord, who knows all things and is worshipped by many learned people, ascended the golden throne adorned with lions to teach the beings of the world. ||75||
Seeing the beautiful assembly, the gods were filled with joy and performed three circumambulations with devotion. Then, with happy hearts, they entered the assembly to see the Lord. ||76||
The assembly, adorned with banners that seemed to sweep the sky, was surrounded by a dust-cloud, making it appear as if it were constantly enveloped in a rainbow. ||77||
The assembly was supported by four pillars that reached the sky, and the pure banners on them seemed to call the heavens to serve the Lord. ||78||
The assembly was adorned with many ponds filled with clear, cool water and blooming lotuses, making it appear as if it were a row of eyes, eager to see the Lord, the destroyer of the demons of birth, old age, and death. ||79||
The assembly was surrounded by a moat filled with pure water, echoing with the sounds of water birds and large waves, making it appear as if the waves were raising their hands to welcome the water birds. ||80||
The assembly was situated on that land. ||74||
1. Extensive. 2. Service. 3. They performed three circumambulations. 4. To worship. 5. Extensive. 6. Meaning: pillars. 7. To invite. 8. They did. 9. The demon Yama, who takes away the life of beings, is the destroyer of demons. 

Page #641:
---------------------------
551
Chapter Twenty-Third
'The land was adorned with many kinds of creepers, buzzing with the sweet sound of intoxicated bees, and bearing forests of flowering vines, as if it were smiling.' ||1||
The Army's Description
'The land was adorned with high, golden gates, and it seemed to be displaying the gentle radiance and elevation of the sun of the winter season, as if it were the very embodiment of the Lord.' ||82||
Meter (1) 'The land was adorned with two beautiful dance halls on either side of each great street, like clear autumn clouds, with lightning-like dancers in their dances, and it seemed to be holding them for the worship of the Jina, as if it were filled with devotion.' ||8||
The Lineage's Description *'The land was adorned with two incense-filled pots, as if it were the breasts of the two-breasted Lakshmi, the goddess of fortune, who was herself present, along with Saraswati, the goddess of learning, to serve the Jina, as if she were the very embodiment of the three worlds.' ||4||
The Indra Lineage's Description 'The land was adorned with four beautiful forests, frequented by swarms of bees, and it seemed to be wearing a blue garment, as if it were standing to worship the Lord.' ||45||
'You wish to call upon the Indras themselves to serve the Lord under the guise of words.' ||40||
'The land was adorned with many kinds of new creepers, buzzing with the sweet sound of intoxicated bees, and bearing forests of flowering vines, as if it were smiling.' ||81||
'The land was adorned with high, golden gates, and it seemed to be displaying the gentle radiance and elevation of the sun of the winter season, as if it were the very embodiment of the Lord.' ||2||
'The land was adorned with two beautiful dance halls on either side of each great street, like clear autumn clouds, with lightning-like dancers in their dances, and it seemed to be holding them for the worship of the Jina, as if it were filled with devotion.' ||8||
'The land was adorned with two incense-filled pots in front of the playhouses, as if it were the breasts of the two-breasted Lakshmi, the goddess of fortune, who was herself present, along with Saraswati, the goddess of learning, to serve the Jina, as if she were the very embodiment of the three worlds.' ||4||
'The land was adorned with four beautiful forests, frequented by swarms of bees, and it seemed to be wearing a blue garment, as if it were standing to worship the Lord.' ||45||
1. New creeper. 2. Made of gold. 3. Like the sun of the winter season. 4. Dance. 5. Place of assembly. 6. Filled with devotion. 7. Pair of incense pots. Fourth. 8. Incense, this is also a reading. 9. Like a pair of breasts. 10. As if she were standing in the form of the place of assembly. 11. Like the ashoka tree with seven layers of leaves. 12. Garment. 13. Wearing. 14. Under the guise of the forest. 15. Omniscient. 

Page #642:
---------------------------
552.
.
Adipuranam
Putavrittam
The Samavasarana ground, adorned with groves and lakes, was laughing with the beauty of the faces of young women and children. And the forest-altar, like a young woman, was wearing a girdle of jewels. ||86||
The ground, raised by water, was adorned with banners and flags, and was filled with ten kinds of flag-poles. It seemed as if it were sweeping the sky-court to make it worthy of the glory of the Jina. ||87||
The forest, with its beautiful trees, was like a sky full of stars, adorned with flowers. The Samavasarana ground, with its forest-altar and the Kalpavriksha trees, was like a garden of merit. ||88||
Beyond the forest, the ground was adorned with magnificent palaces, adorned with large, shining jewels, and nine stupas made of jewels. It seemed as if it had desired to conquer the world. ||89||
Beyond that, the ground was adorned with a beautiful, crystal-like palace, with walls made of sky-crystal, and a magnificent pavilion above them, which could hold all three worlds. The Indra of the Saudharma heaven entered this Samavasarana assembly. ||90||
Seeing this Samavasarana ground, adorned with such extraordinary beauty, the Indra of the Saudharma heaven, whose eyes were filled with wonder, was freed from his deluding karma, and desired to see the Jina. ||91||
1. Eshadvakachakamalapadma:
2. Parivrita
3. Ya
4. Rachanabhih
5. Dasa-prakaraih
6. Sammarjanam kurvati
7. Bhavanabhumivistarah
8. Bhuvanavijayaya
9. Akashasphatik
10. Sphatikamityuparimabhage lakshmia: sadanam lakshmimandapamityartha:
11. Ishanadi-indra:
Mahardikadeva: cha
* All these verses are connected to the previous 76th verse. 

Page #643:
---------------------------
553
The twenty-fifth chapter

He entered, with great magnificence, along with the best of the gods, desiring to see the Jina, the destroyer. ||12||

He who was seated on a high and brilliant pedestal, the god of gods, with four faces, the glory of the four directions, worshipped by the kings of the gods, the kings of men, and the kings of the ascetics, the cause of the creation and destruction of the world. ||12||

Whose face rivaled the disc of the autumn moon, shining with the brilliance of the autumn moon, whose eyes were adorned like newly blossomed blue lotuses, and whose body, like a white and blue lotus-filled lake, seemed to laugh. ||13||

Whose body was radiant and brilliant, rivaling the blazing sun, immersed in the fire of his own brilliance, whose body was very tall, worthy of worship by the gods, and whose body, like Mount Meru, was adorned with a golden brilliance. ||14||

Who, with his vast chest, revealed the sovereignty of the three worlds without words, through the infinite fourfold virtues, who was without food, who had cast off all ornaments, who was devoid of sensory knowledge, who had destroyed the veils of knowledge. ||15||

Who was seated in the midst of the brilliance of a thousand suns, worshipped by the gods with a multitude of fly whisks, whose sound, like the roar of a drum, was very pleasing, and whose body, like the waves of the ocean, was constantly moving. ||16||

Whose surroundings were filled with flowers showered by the gods, whose tall body was sheltered by a great Ashoka tree, and whose surroundings were filled with flowers shed by the Kalpa trees, thus shaming Mount Meru with his brilliance. ||17||

* The creator of the world in the form of the path to liberation, and the destroyer of the world in the form of sin. 

Page #644:
---------------------------
554
Adipurana
With his three vast and white umbrellas, shining with jewels, standing in the sky, it seemed as if the first Tirthankara, Lord Rishabhadeva, was revealing his own greatness, his magnificence, and his ever-expanding, excellent fame. || 92-98 ||
Seeing him, the Indras, with their heads bowed, prostrated themselves, their knees touching the ground. As they prostrated, it seemed as if they were worshipping the feet of the Jina with the garlands of jewels adorning their crowns. || 99 ||
Their eyes filled with joy, their faces radiant with a gentle smile, the Indras prostrated before the Arhant. It seemed as if the Kulachal mountain, Sumeru mountain, along with their lakes, adorned with white and blue lotuses, were serving the Arhant. || 100 ||
At that time, Indraani, accompanied by the Apsaras and all the goddesses, also prostrated before the Jina. As she prostrated, it seemed as if she was worshipping him with her lotus-like face, her lotus-like eyes, and her pure, abundant, devotional flowers. || 101 ||
The Jina's lotus-like feet, with their rays of nails, touched the heads of the gods. It seemed as if he was bestowing grace upon them, as if he were offering them the sacred Sheshashtak, in the form of a never-fading garland. || 102 ||
The Indras, who were purified by the radiance of the Jina's feet, and who had been bathed in the water of the rays of his nails, considered their elevated and most excellent heads to be truly elevated and most excellent. They felt that the radiance of the Jina's feet that fell upon their heads during their prostration made them extremely pure, and that the radiance of his nails was like a bath of water. Thus, they considered their heads, which were truly elevated, to be the most excellent of all their limbs. || 103 ||
1. Supported by others, always standing in the sky. 2. As if. 3. Peaceful nature - A. 4. With the flowers of results. 5. On the head. 6. His own Siddha Shesh. 7. Sheshashtak - I. Sheshashtak - L, 60. 8. Offered. 9. Own. 

Page #645:
---------------------------
The twenty-third chapter: The rays of the nails of the Lord, shining with the brilliance of the sacrifice, were falling upon the breasts of the Apsaras, who were bowing down with devotion, along with the celestial nymphs. The group of rays, emanating from the beautiful, liberated Lakshmi, was like a beautiful garment adorning her. ||104||

At the time of prostration, the Indras, adorned with brilliant ornaments, along with their consorts, were shining like great Kalpa trees, along with the Kalpa creepers, serving the Jina with devotion. ||105||

Then, the Indras, pleased with the offering, performed the worship of the Jina with their own hands, with fragrant substances, garlands, incense, lamps, beautiful Akshata, and offerings of nectar and sweetmeats. ||106||

The offering, brought by the Indras, was spread out on the ground in front of the Lord, adorned with colors, and it seemed as if all the wealth of the world, in the form of material possessions, was present there, desiring to worship the feet of the Lord. ||107||

Indrani had created a circle of fine, smooth, and subtle powders of various jewels in front of the Lord. The circle was adorned with sprouts of rays rising from it, and it seemed as if it were made of the soft powder of the rainbow. ||108||

Then, Indrani, with devotion, poured a pure stream of water from a vessel of brilliant jewels near the feet of the Lord. This stream of water was as pure as Indrani herself, and it was as joyful and clear as her own mind. ||109||

At that time, Indrani, remembering the feet of the Jina, with devotion, filled all directions with fragrance, and the sound of the buzzing of bees, moving in rows, was very pleasing to the ears. In the celestial realm, 
1. It flowed. 2. With a group of Kalpa creepers. 3. The fragrance was beautiful. 4. Abundant. 5. Spread out. 6. Worship. 7. Of the feet. 8. By the offering made by Indra. 9. The color. 10. It had spread out. 11. With sprouts of rays. 12. Subtle, powder, beautiful, light, and soft. 13. Near the feet. 14. Born in heaven. 15. She worshipped. 

Page #646:
---------------------------
556
The Adipurana, with its offerings of pearls, rice, and pure fragrance, was like a manifestation of the Lord's own joy. With garlands of never-fading Mandara flowers, the Lord's feet were worshipped with great delight. ||11|| Then, with jeweled lamps, the radiance of the Jina was dimmed, as if the sun were veiled by the moon. The Queen of the Gods, overcome by devotion, worshipped the Jina, for the truly devoted do not distinguish between the worthy and the unworthy. ||112|| She offered fragrant incense and a nectar-filled vessel, placed on a grand pedestal, adorned with burning lamps. It seemed as if the moon, surrounded by stars and embraced by Rahu, had come near the Jina's feet. ||113|| With countless fruits, fragrant and beautiful, and buzzing with swarms of bees, as if singing the Jina's praises, the Queen worshipped with great joy. ||114|| Thus, the gods, with devotion, worshipped the Jina. But what was there for the fulfilled Lord to gain? Though devoid of attachment, he neither desired nor disliked anything, yet he bound his devotees with the fruits of their desires. This was truly wondrous. ||115|| 

Then, the great Indra, filled with joy, desiring to praise the Jina, the master of all knowledge, offered a garland of words, adorned with various colors, with their hands of devotion. ||116|| 

Page #647:
---------------------------
557
Chapter Twenty-Three
Promitaakshara Vritta
O, treasure of virtues, we are indeed fortunate to be able to praise you, the Jina. Even though we are dull-witted and slow-spoken, our devotion to you bears fruit. ||17||
We are indeed fortunate to be able to praise you with words born from the essence of our intellect. Just as a man who is unable to drink the entire ocean of nectar would still drink as much as he can, so too do we offer our devotion to you. ||11||
Where are we, mere mortals, and where are you, the ocean of virtues, the supreme, the sinless? Even though we know this, our devotion to you compels us to speak. ||19||
Even the Ganadharas, with their vast intellect, are unable to fully comprehend your virtues. What wonder then, that we, who are your devotees, are able to praise you? ||10||
Drutvilambita Vritta
This unwavering devotion to you, the Jina, has awakened in us an unyielding desire to praise you. This devotion, born from your infinite virtues, compels us to sing your praises. ||12||
You are the knower of all, the creator of the world, the ocean of virtues, the indestructible. You are the savior of all beings, the one who guides the world. O Jina, please accept our praise. ||22||
They began to praise. ||116||
O Jina, it is certain that devotion to you bears fruit. Therefore, we, though dull-witted and slow-spoken, are eager to praise you, the treasure of virtues. ||117||
O Lord, we, who have been blessed with the power of intellect, are only able to offer you our devotion. Just as a man who is unable to drink the entire ocean of nectar would still drink as much as he can, so too do we offer our devotion to you. ||118||
O Lord, where are we, with our dull intellect, and where are you, the ocean of virtues, the supreme, the sinless? Even though we know this, our devotion to you compels us to speak. ||119||
O Lord, it is a wonder that we are able to praise your virtues, which even the Ganadharas are unable to fully comprehend. Or perhaps it is not a wonder, for those who have attained your grace are capable of anything. ||120||
Therefore, O Jina, the unwavering devotion to you, born from your infinite virtues, compels us to praise you. And so, we are eager to sing your praises today. ||121||
O Lord, you are the knower of all, the creator of the world, the ocean of virtues, the indestructible. You are the savior of all beings, the one who guides the world. O Jina, please accept our praise. ||122||
1. Past thoughts.
2. According to the power of intellect.
3. Without any fault.
4. Knowing them, knowing them.
5. Us.
6. They were very capable.
7. Desiring to praise. 

Page #648:
---------------------------
558
Adipurana
There, the rays of the Jinaraka, free from all karmic stains, shine brightly, like the rays of the sun, pure and radiant after the clouds have cleared. || 123 ||
O Jinendra, just as the ocean holds within its deep waters, jewels that are pure, vast, and radiant, so too do you hold within you, jewels of infinite, pure, and boundless qualities. || 124 ||
O Lord, you have uprooted this vine of samsara, which is vast, bears the fruits of great suffering, and is adorned with the flowers of birth, death, and old age, with your hands of peaceful consequence. || 125 ||
Tamrasa Vritta
O Jinavara, you have conquered the mighty army of delusion, and the four kashayas, who are the most valiant warriors, with the sharp, powerful blows of your intense tapas. || 126 ||
O Lord, your group of sharp weapons of conduct have slain the enemy of the mind, Kamadeva, who is unconquerable and invisible. Therefore, you are the greatest teacher in all three worlds. || 127 ||
O Lord, this beautiful body of yours, which is never affected by any defilement, never casts a glance upon anyone, is free from all defilements, and shines without adornment, reveals the greatness of your conquest over Kamadeva. || 128 ||
O Jinendra, free from the world, Kamadeva enters the heart of one who is filled with the pollen of attachment, causing him to engage in various kinds of defiled actions. But you, who have conquered Kamadeva, are free from any defilement. Therefore, you are the chief teacher of all three worlds. || 129 ||
1. Rays. 2. With hands of pacification. In the case of the sun, with rays of the sun. 3. You uprooted. Meaning, you destroyed. 4. The four. 5. From the beginning, etc. With black, blue, etc. 6. Sharp-edged. 7. Greatly superior. 8. Not a doer of defilement. 9. Excellent. 10. He does defilement. 11. Dust of attachment. 12. Because of. 

Page #649:
---------------------------
## Chapter Twenty-Three

He who is under the sway of Kamadeva, the fool, dances, sings, wanders, speaks untruthfully, and laughs loudly. But you, O conqueror of Kamadeva, are free from all these vices, and your body reflects your peaceful bliss. || 130 ||

O Lord, free from pride and envy, your body, devoid of the dust of karma, the mud of delusion, and the stain of attachment, clearly reveals your sovereignty over the three worlds. || 131 ||

O Lord, your body, adorned with all the splendors of the universe, is beautiful even without clothes. Just as it is not pleasing to cover a heap of brilliant, radiant gems with cloth, so too, it is not pleasing to cover your body with clothes. || 132 ||

O Lord, your body is free from sweat, free from the impurities of waste, fragrant, endowed with excellent qualities, free from blood, a destroyer of the darkness of ignorance, free from impurities, with strong, vajra-like joints, symmetrical, possessing infinite strength, adorned with auspicious and beneficial words, free from blinking, and radiant like pure, divine gems. Therefore, you have attained the position of the Lord of Lords. || 133-134 ||

O Lord, your body, which transcends the human, is free from all vices, delusion, and pride, and shines like gold. It reveals the splendor of your unparalleled sovereignty, which surpasses the world. || 135 ||

O Lord, free from darkness, the group of sins never even touches you. For how can darkness ever approach the sun, which is the great lamp that illuminates the world, dispelling all darkness? || 136 || 

Page #650:
---------------------------
560
Adipuranam
Jaladharamalavrittam

A stream of jewels, blocking the sky, fell from heaven, quickly entering this world-house, as if making the entire creation golden. ||13||

Like the long path of an Airavata elephant, that stream of jewels shone, as if your Lakshmi, embodied, was quickly spreading the message, "O people, serve these Jinas, the conquerors of karma-enemies." ||38||

At your birth, fragrant, intoxicating flowers, released by the gods from the sky, spread their sweet scent in all directions, as if the rows of eyes of celestial nymphs were coming. ||13||

Indra, on the peak of Mount Meru, performed your great and holy abhisheka with golden, deep pitchers filled with the pure water of the ocean of milk, spreading your greatness throughout the world. ||14||

It is not surprising that we were ready to carry you, mounted on a jeweled palanquin, at the time of your tapas-kalyanak. For, in all your kalyanaks, until nirvana, these people remain present like servants. ||141||

With the rise of this radiant sun of pure knowledge, it has become clear that you are the creator of the path to liberation, the master of the three worlds. Moreover, you are the one who ends the disease of birth and death, you are the treasure of virtues, and you are the best in the world. Therefore, O God, we bow to you again and again. 

1. At the descent from heaven. 2. It fell. 3. The house. 4. Oh. 5. Victorious. 6. From the sky. 7. O Master. 8. From the heavenly world. 9. Armed. 10. Servants. 11. Now. 12. Radiant. 13. Beyond birth and death. 14. We bow again and again. 

Page #651:
---------------------------
## Chapter Twenty-Three

**561. Praharṣiṇī Vṛtta**

You are the friend, you are the Guru, you are the Lord, you are the Creator, you are the father of the universe. The being who meditates on you attains the bliss of immortality. O Lord, today, save these three worlds from destruction. Show them the path that will liberate them from the suffering of birth and death and lead them to the infinite bliss of liberation. ||143||

**Rucira Vṛtta**

The best yogis, desiring to know the supreme, imperishable, blissful abode, contemplate the words of your supreme teachings. ||144||

**Svayoḍita Vṛtta**

Those who follow the path revealed by you, O Jinendra, and are filled with supreme joy and a lineage of bliss, burn the vine of samsara with the flames of your teachings. ||145||

**Mattamayūra Vṛtta**

Your white chamaras, like waves of the ocean of milk stirred by the wind, or like a cluster of moonbeams, are beautiful to behold. Seeing them, beings are freed from the bondage of samsara. ||146||

**Saiṃha Pīṭha Vṛtta**

Your throne, shining with its own brilliance, surpassing even the sun, is vast and high. Adorned with jewels, it is worshipped by the gods and, with its glory, humbles all the worlds. It shines like the peak of Mount Meru. ||147||

**Majubhāṣiṇī Vṛtta**

This magnificent, divine form of yours, created by divine artisans, is a shelter from the scorching sun, like the cool moon in autumn. ||148||

**Loka**

People bow down again and again. ||142|| 

Page #652:
---------------------------
## Adipurana

**Verse 1 (Chandah)**

The Ashoka tree, its trunk resplendent with emerald gems, stands tall and majestic, its branches adorned with beautiful blossoms. It seems to dance gracefully, swaying in the gentle breeze, its sweet fragrance carried by the wind.  

**Verse 2 (Chandah)**

The tree is adorned with flowers, beloved by humans, gods, and great sages. It sways gently in the soft breeze, its shade a welcome respite. It dispels sorrow, just as you, O Lord, bring joy to all beings.

**Verse 3 (Asambadhavritta)**

The gods, their voices echoing like the thunder of rain clouds, shower the world with flowers, filling the sky with their fragrance. They release the sweet sounds of their divine drums, their music resonating through the heavens.

**Verse 4 (Aparajitavritta)**

The peacocks, their feathers spread wide, dance in the courtyard, their vibrant colors a feast for the eyes. They sing their melodious songs, their voices echoing the sweet nectar of the divine.

**Verse 5 (Gaya)**

The three umbrellas of Gaya, shining with their brilliance, resemble the moon in the autumn sky.

**Commentary**

This passage describes the beauty of an Ashoka tree, comparing it to the divine qualities of the Lord. The tree is a symbol of joy, peace, and prosperity, reflecting the blessings of the divine. The verses also depict the celebration of the gods, their music and dance filling the world with joy. 

Page #653:
---------------------------
## Triyonisha Parva

**Verse 153:** This row of your **chamaras**, adorned with shining jeweled crowns, carried by the gods, with their beautiful form, enhances the beauty of the lake of your radiant body, like white birds (swans).

**Verse 154:** Your divine sound, filled with all the essence of the world, demonstrating all languages, transforming into all languages due to its extraordinary nature, and destroying the darkness of otherness with the policy of **Syadvada**, quickly grants knowledge of the truth to the wise.

**Verse 155:** This holy water of your speech washes away all the impurities of our minds. Indeed, this is the **tirtha**, and this **dharma**-tirtha, spoken by you, is the path for others to cross the ocean of existence.

**Verse 156:** Your knowledge reaches all things in the world, you know all things, therefore you are **Sarvag**, all-pervasive. You have known the totality of all things in the world, therefore you are **Sarvajña**, all-knowing. You have conquered the enemies of desire and delusion, therefore you are **Sarvjit**, conqueror of all. You see all things in the world in a special way, therefore you are **Sarvadrik**, all-seeing.

**Verse 157:** You are always eager to purify beings with the appropriate **dharma**-tirtha, which destroys all impurities, therefore you are **Tirthankara**. You are skilled in creating the pure scripture, the supreme mantra, which removes all poisons of sin, therefore you are **Mantrakrit**.

**Verse 158:** The sages consider you the **Purana Purusha**, the supreme being (Brahma). They call you the **Rishi Ishvara**, the lord of the sages, and **Achyuta**, the imperishable (Vishnu), who possesses inexhaustible wealth. Therefore, we worship you, the **Jina**, the **Yogishvara**, the one who possesses inconceivable yoga, the protector of the world. 

Page #654:
---------------------------
564
Salutations to you, the primordial Purana, the one whose pure eyes of Kevala Jnana arose from the destruction of all karmic impurities. Salutations to you, the one who breaks the chains of bondage, the one who shatters the shackles of existence, the one who is the greatest among the Jinas, like a mighty elephant. ||15||
Salutations to you, the one who is the father of all three worlds. Salutations to you, the cause of ultimate liberation. Salutations to you, the one who is the Guru of even the Gurus, the one who is the ocean of virtues. Salutations to you, the one who knows all three worlds. ||16||
Thus, we have composed this beautiful hymn in your praise, filled with many colors, out of our love for your noble qualities. O Lord, O Supreme Lord, be pleased with us and accept this offering, pure with devotion, like a beautiful garland offered at your feet. ||16||
We, the ones with folded hands, remember you, the Lord Jina, and offer our salutations. O Lord, may the merit accumulated by us today through praising you, lead to pure and joyful devotion towards you. ||16||
Thus, the thirty-two chief Indras, whose knowledge is supremely radiant (the Bhavanavasi 10, the Dhyantar 8, the Jyotish 2, and the Kalpavas 12), along with the groups of gods, demons, humans, Nagas, Yakshas, Siddhas, Gandharvas, and Charanas, bowed their heads in reverence to Lord Rishabhadeva with hundreds of hymns. ||163||
Thus, the Indras, filled with love for Dharma, with their great crowns touching the sky, along with the gods who will never be born again, praised the Jina, the one who is the sole friend of the world, and then, facing the Jina, they took their respective places around him in the Samavasarana. ||16||
1. Chhedakaya. 2. Bhedakaya. 3. Adhigurve. 4. '-miḍya hai' iti 'l' pustakagato pāṭho'śuraḥ. 5. Stutipaṭhaka. 6. Indrasreshṭhāḥ. 7. Jinapateḥ samantāt. 

Page #655:
---------------------------
At that time, the victorious Jina, whose body shone like gold, was radiating such brilliance that the reflections in the eyes of the gods were like swarms of intoxicated bees on the branches of a Kalpa tree, eager to drink the nectar of the flowers. ||16||

With arms like the trunks of elephants, a face like the moon, a crown of hair that was unmoving and unchanging, and a chest like the slopes of Mount Meru, the Lord of the gods, the Jina, was beheld by the gods, who were filled with joy. ||16||

Their eyes, like blooming lotus petals, were fixed on the Jina, whose body was adorned with the radiance of the moon and the brilliance of gems. The gods, their eyes wide with wonder, were overwhelmed by the beauty of the Jina. ||17||

Surrounded by white chowries, the Jina, victorious over the arrows of Cupid, was a source of pure nectar for the gods, who, like bees, drank in his beauty, their bodies cleansed of all impurities. ||158||

With eyes like blooming lotuses, a face that seemed to smile, and a body that radiated an extraordinary fragrance, the Jina, surrounded by gods and men, was a source of joy for all who beheld him. His body, resplendent with beauty, was a sight to behold. ||169||

The Jina's face, like a lotus with a hundred petals, was adorned with bees that rested on his unblinking eyes. His fragrance was intoxicating, and he was free from the chill of Cupid's arrows. The goddesses, their eyes filled with longing, gazed upon the Jina's face, like a lotus, drinking in its beauty. ||17||

**Meaning:**

1. Victorious.
2. As on the body of a Kalpa tree.
3. Filled with joy.
4. They drank, they were satisfied.
5. Unblinking.
6. Like a smile.
7. Extraordinary radiance.
8. The implication is that they were eager to drink in the sight of the Jina's face even before they had seen it, just as one is eager to drink something without knowing how satisfying it will be. 

Page #656:
---------------------------
The Adipurana, which conquers the darkness of ignorance, is like a swarm of bees attracted to the eyes of the gods, with a body like honey.  It is a tribute to Vrishabha, the ageless, birthless, and immortal, who is worshipped by the gods, whose teachings are the most excellent, whose radiance is boundless, and who is the master of the sages.  O noble beings, bow down to him!  (17)

I praise the body of Sri Jinendra, whose face is like a lotus, whose color is like the saffron of a lotus, whose eyes are large and long like lotus petals, whose fragrance is like that of a lotus, whose shadow does not fall, and whose radiance is like that of a pure crystal. (172)

I bow down again and again to the Jinendra, whose eyes, free from redness, reveal his lack of anger, whose face, free from furrowed brows, reveals his peace, and whose body, free from the gaze of lust, reveals his victory over Kamadeva. (173)

O wise men, bow down to Vrishabha Jinendra, whose body is fragrant and beautiful, destroying Kamadeva, whose eyes are free from redness and filled with a group of extremely pure rays, and whose face, not biting the lips, is adorned with a smile. (174)

His face is gentle, his eyes are pure like lotus petals, his body is like the son of gold, he is the master of the sages, his pure and soft feet are adorned with the radiance of a red lotus, he is the supreme being, and his speech is very gentle. (105)

The lotus of the face of Bhagavan was so beautiful that the celestial nymphs could not be satisfied by looking at it. (170) 

Page #657:
---------------------------
## Chapter Twenty-One

**567**

**Vāṇīnī Vṛtta**
Victory to the one whose pair of feet, adorned with auspicious marks, shines like a lotus, and is situated in the middle of the lotus, and is marked with excellent characteristics. Victory to the one who destroys the passion of the mind, who delights the world, and whose feet are dusted with the pollen of the garland of the king of the gods. ||17||

**Hariṇī Vṛtta**
Victory to the one whose excellent great throne, adorned with the hair of the gods, shines, and whose garment is adorned with shining threads. Victory to the one whose face, which is the cause of the world's liberation, mocks the pride of the gods, and whose face, like the tip of a thunderbolt, threatens the gods. ||17||

**Śikhariṇī Vṛtta**
Victory to the one whose white umbrella, adorned with all the splendor of the entire moon, shines, and who is the teacher of the three worlds. Victory to this glorious one, the lord of the bulls, the conqueror of enemies, the one who is worshipped by the Indras, whose crown is adorned with shining jewels, and who is free from blemishes. ||178||

**Pṛthvī Vṛtta**
Victory to the one whose pair of feet have been worshipped by the great kings of the gods, and whose feet have been dusted with the dust of the chamaras of the gods. Victory to the one who is like a mountain peak, who is worshipped by the gods, and whose feet are bathed in the pure water of the ocean, which competes with the rays of the moon. ||179||

**Vaṁśapatrapati Vṛtta**
Victory to the one whose brilliant qualities, like a radiant stream of rays, are a treasure trove of qualities, and whose beautiful conduct benefits all beings. May this one, who is like the sun in the middle of the lotus, who is the lord of the universe, protect us. ||18||

**I bow down to the Jina.** ||17||

May the Lord Vṛṣabha deva, whose pair of feet are like lotuses, are adorned with auspicious marks, are capable of destroying the passion of the mind, delight the world, and are dusted with the pollen of the garland of the king of the gods, always be victorious. ||176||

May the Lord Vṛṣabha deva, whose great throne, which is very high, is adorned with lions, is studded with jewels, is surrounded by shining rays, humiliates the world, mocks the splendor of Mount Meru, and whose face, like the tip of a thunderbolt, threatens the gods, always be victorious. ||177||

May the Lord Ṛṣabha Jina, who is the teacher of the three worlds, whose white umbrella, adorned with all the splendor of the entire moon, shines, who has conquered enemies, whose lotus feet are dusted with the jewels of the shining crowns of the Indras, and who is adorned with inner and outer wealth, always be victorious. ||178||

May the Lord Ṛṣabha Jina, whose pair of feet have been worshipped by the great kings of the gods, whose feet have been dusted with the dust of the chamaras of the gods, who is like a mountain peak, who is worshipped by the gods, and whose feet are bathed in the pure water of the ocean, which competes with the rays of the moon, always be victorious. ||179||

May the Lord, whose brilliant qualities, like a radiant stream of rays, are a treasure trove of qualities, whose beautiful conduct benefits all beings, and who is like the sun in the middle of the lotus, who is the lord of the universe
Page #658:
---------------------------
## Adipuranam, Mandakranta Vritta

**Verse 181:**

May the glorious Vrishabha Jinendra, adorned with emerald-like shoulders, whose leaves, flowers, and banners shine with the brilliance of jewels, whose dense shade dispels the sorrows of all beings, and who is like the sun illuminating the lotus-like assembly of the liberated souls, forever be victorious!

**Verse 182:**

May the beautiful Ashoka tree of the Jainendra, whose body is adorned with exquisite beauty, who constantly showers flowers with his swaying branches, who has enveloped all directions, whose heart is filled with the sweet music of cuckoos, and who, with his dancing branches, serves the Jinendra with devotion, like a devotee, forever be victorious!

**Verse 183:**

May the Samvasarana, where the gods, delighted, shower down rows of flowers, like rows of eyes, from the sky, where the wind, with its fluttering banners, sweeps the sky clean, and which is the abode of supreme good, forever bestow its blessings upon us!

**Verse 184:**

May the glorious dust-sal, where the sun shines brightly, adorned with the brilliance of jewels, where the pillars are like Kalpa trees, adorned with high banners, and where the life-giving rays of the Jinendra, surpassing the sky, shine brightly, forever be victorious! 

Page #659:
---------------------------
Chapter Twenty-Three

The wells, adorned with blooming blue lotuses, their waters clear and serene, resound with the hum of bees, their fragrance intoxicating. Let us praise these wells.

569
We also praise the beautiful grove, adorned with blooming flowers, its branches adorned with coral-like buds, and the first enclosure of the Lord.

185
The trees, with their leaves like glowing rubies, illuminate all directions, their branches swaying in the wind, as if ready to dance. We bow to these forests, adorned with Ashoka trees, and the four enclosures of the Lord, the Jain tradition.

186
We bow to the forest of Ashoka trees, the radiant forest of Saptparna trees, the forest of mango trees, and the most excellent forest of Champaka trees, all adorned with Chaitya trees, where the image of the Lord resides, and where Indra, with humility, bows his head in reverence.

187
Beyond the enclosure, shines the beautiful grove, adorned with the symbols of the lion, bull, Garuda, garlands, elephants, armor, peacocks, and swans, its glory manifest. We praise this grove, adorned with banners, shining brightly, and worshipped by the gods, and swaying in the wind.

188
May these pillars of faith always remain victorious.

184
I praise those wells, adorned with jewels, filled with clear water, adorned with blue lotuses, and resonating with the hum of bees, their fragrance intoxicating. I also praise the grove, beautiful with blooming flowers, its branches adorned with coral-like buds, and the first enclosure of the Lord.

185
I bow to these forests, adorned with Ashoka trees, and the four enclosures of the Lord, the Jain tradition, where the trees, with their leaves like glowing rubies, illuminate all directions, their branches swaying in the wind, as if ready to dance.

186
We bow to the forest of Ashoka trees, the radiant forest of Saptparna trees, the forest of mango trees, and the most excellent forest of Champaka trees, all adorned with Chaitya trees, where the image of the Lord resides, and where Indra, with humility, bows his head in reverence.

187
The grove, beyond the enclosure, shines beautifully, adorned with the symbols of the lion, bull, Garuda, garlands, elephants, armor, peacocks, and swans, its glory manifest. We praise this grove, adorned with banners, shining brightly, and worshipped by the gods, and swaying in the wind.

188
May these pillars of faith always remain victorious.

184
1. Blooming.
2. Development.
3. The four forests of Ashoka, Saptparna, Mango, and Champaka.
4. The place of assembly.
5. The four enclosures.
6. Most excellent.
72

Page #660:
---------------------------
570
Adipurana
Suvadanavrittam

May those two great and excellent incense-burners, which, spreading their smoke, pollute the sky-path, cover the outskirts of the directions, and quickly perfume the whole world, produce joy in our minds. In the same way, may those two beautiful and splendid playhouses, belonging to the three kotis, also produce joy in our minds. ||189||

In the forests of the most beautiful Kalpa trees, adorned with flowers and leaves, and worshipped by the Goddess of Fortune, Indra, are the Siddha trees, which have the images of the Siddhas shining in their roots. I praise, bow down to, and remember all of them with a happy mind. I also praise, bow down to, and remember with a happy mind the rows of stupas, whose entire body is made of jewels, and which are adorned with the images of the Jinas. ||190||

The white row of houses, which is in front of the rows of forests of Kalpa trees, which are surrounded by the vedi of the forest, is followed by the third excellent koti, which is made of crystal gems. In front of it is the Srimandapa of the Lord, which has the power to shelter all the beings of the three worlds. And in front of it is the high three-tiered platform, which is supported by the Gandhakuti, and which increases our wealth. ||191||

In short, the construction of the Samavasarana is as follows: First (after the Dhulisala), there are four Manastambhas in the four directions. Around the Manastambhas are the lakes. Then there is the moat filled with pure water. Then there is the Pushpavatika (garden of creepers). In front of it is the first koti. In front of it are two playhouses on either side. In front of them is the 
1. Vibhumikam. This means Trimekhalam. 
2. Karotu. 

Page #661:
---------------------------
## The Twenty-Third Chapter

The Arhat Dev is facing east or north,
In the middle of the Samvasaran, the auspicious land,
He is surrounded by twelve assemblies, in order:
1. The Buddhic Gods, Ganadharas, and other Munis,
2. The Kalpavasini Devis,
3. The Aryikas, human women,
4. The Bhavanavasini Devis,
5. The Vyantaranis,
6. The Jyotishkinis,
7. The Bhavanavasi Devas,
8. The Vyantar Devas,
9. The Jyotishk Devas,
10. The Kalpavasis,
11. Humans,
12. Animals.

##

In the first enclosure, the Ganadharas and other Munis, holders of immense knowledge,
In the second, the Kalpavasini Devis,
In the third, the Aryikas, the wives of kings, and ordinary human women,
In the fourth, the Jyotish Devis,
In the fifth, the Vyantar Devis,
In the sixth, the Bhavanavasi Devis,
In the seventh, the Bhavanavasi Devas,
In the eighth, the Vyantar Devas,
In the ninth, the Jyotish Devas,
In the tenth, the Kalpavasis,
In the eleventh, the Chakravartis and other noble humans,
In the twelfth, the animals.

All of them, filled with devotion and humility, sit around the Jina.

##

The one who has dispelled darkness with the rays of his words,
Who has removed the night of Samsara,
And who has also removed the twelfth Gunasthana, the state of dwindling delusion,
Like the twilight of that night,
He is seated on the chariot of Syadvada,
Driven by the excellent charioteer of Samyagjnana,
With seven swift horses of Nayas,
Bound by the reins of Pratiniyama. 

Page #662:
---------------------------
The **Bhadra Purana** thus describes the **Samvasarana** where the **Dharmachakra** is established. 
The **Bhagyasmas** should remember this **Samvasarana** with devotion, their mouths filled with praise. 
The **Jain** who contemplates the **Lakshmi** of the **Mahatma**, who is full of all virtues, will attain the **Arhat** state. 
He will be adorned with **Mani Mukuta** (jewel crowns) and worshipped by the **Devas** with garlands. ||19||
Thus ends the twenty-third **Parva** of the **Trishattilakshana Mahapurana** composed by the **Bhagavajinaseena Acharya**, which describes the **Samvasarana Vibhuti**. ||23||
-
1. **Maladharini** (those who wear garlands). 

Page #663:
---------------------------
## The Twenty-Fourth Chapter

The Lord Vrishabha, who eradicated poison-like delusion from the world, like the knowledge of the Patavidya, may He always be victorious! ||1||

The great king-sage Bharat, learned of three events simultaneously: the attainment of Kevala Jnana by his revered father, the birth of a son in the inner palace, and the manifestation of the Chakra-ratna in the armory. ||2||

The king inquired about the attainment of Kevala Jnana from the Dharma-adhikari, the news of the Chakra-ratna from the guardian of the armory, and the birth of his son from the Kanchuki. ||3||

The king was momentarily perplexed, wondering which of these events should be celebrated first, as they all occurred at the same time. ||4||

The manifestation of the Punyateertha (Kevala Jnana), the birth of a son, and the Chakra-ratna are the fruits of Dharma, Artha, and Kama, respectively, which I have received simultaneously. ||5||

The attainment of Kevala Jnana is the fruit of Dharma, the birth of a son is the fruit of Kama, and the manifestation of the radiant Chakra is the fruit of Artha, which leads to wealth. ||6||

Or, perhaps, all these are the complete fruits of Dharma, for Artha is the fruit of the Dharma-tree, and Kama is its essence. ||7||

Among all actions, Dharma should be performed first, as it leads to welfare and bears great fruits. Therefore, the worship of the Jina should be performed first. ||8||

Thus, the king of kings, Bharat, decided to perform the worship of the Lord first. Indeed, the actions of the righteous are always conducive to merit. ||9||

Then, the king Bharat, along with his younger brother, the women of the inner palace, and the citizens, prepared for the journey to the place of worship. ||10|| 

Page #664:
---------------------------
574
The great king, filled with devotion to his Guru, and engaged in the propagation of Dharma, rose to perform the worship of the Lord. ||11|| Then, the sound of the drums, like the roar of the ocean, filled the army-like ocean with excitement, and the sound reverberated in all directions. ||12|| Then, the great king, the lord of the Bharata land, who was surrounded by an immeasurable army of elephants, horses, foot soldiers, and chariots, set out to worship the Jina. ||13|| The moving army shone like the ocean during the full moon, for the sound of the drums was like the roar of the ocean, and the countless flags fluttering in the wind were like the waves. ||14|| Surrounded by his army, the king reached the Jina's assembly hall, which spread its brilliance in all directions, conquering the sun. ||15|| He circumambulated the assembly hall, worshipping the Manastambhas, and then passed through the moat, the forest of creepers, the fort, the four forests, and the second fort. He was amazed to see the flags, the rows of Kalpa trees, the stupas, and the assembly of buildings. ||16-17|| Then, guided by the doorkeepers, the king entered the assembly hall and saw the splendor of the Srimandapa, which had conquered heaven. ||18|| Then, the king, filled with joy, circumambulated the four Dharmachakras and worshipped them, reaching the first platform. ||19|| Then, he worshipped the eight great banners, which were situated on the second platform, with offerings of pure incense, flowers, and other things. ||20|| Then, in the middle of the Gandhakuți, he saw the Jina, who was seated on a magnificent throne, like the sun on the peak of Mount Udayagiri. ||21||
And they prepared to go with the chief people of the city, taking with them a large quantity of materials for worship. ||10|| The great king, filled with devotion to his Guru, the Lord Rishabhadeva, and engaged in the propagation of Dharma, rose to perform the worship of the Lord Bharata. ||11||
Then, the sound of the drums, like the roar of the ocean, filled the army-like ocean with excitement, and the sound reverberated in all directions. ||12|| Then, the great king, the lord of the Bharata land, who was surrounded by an immeasurable army of elephants, horses, foot soldiers, and chariots, set out to worship the Jina. ||13|| The moving army shone like the ocean during the full moon, for the sound of the drums was like the roar of the ocean, and the countless flags fluttering in the wind were like the waves. ||14|| Surrounded by his army, the king reached the Jina's assembly hall, which spread its brilliance in all directions, conquering the sun. ||15|| He circumambulated the assembly hall, worshipping the Manastambhas, and then passed through the moat, the forest of creepers, the fort, the four forests, and the second fort. He was amazed to see the flags, the rows of Kalpa trees, the stupas, and the assembly of buildings. ||16-17|| Then, guided by the doorkeepers, the king entered the assembly hall and saw the splendor of the Srimandapa, which had conquered heaven. ||18|| Then, the king, filled with joy, circumambulated the four Dharmachakras and worshipped them, reaching the first platform. ||19|| Then, he worshipped the eight great banners, which were situated on the second platform, with offerings of pure incense, flowers, and other things. ||
Page #665:
---------------------------
## Twenty-fourth Chapter

The great body of the Lord, being fanned by the group of white chamaras, shone like gold, resembling Mount Meru with waterfalls cascading down its sides. ||22||

The Lord, seated beneath the shade of three umbrellas at the foot of a great Ashoka tree, resembled Mount Meru, adorned with three moons. ||23||

Surrounded by showers of flowers, the Lord shone brightly, resembling Mount Mandara, adorned with the blossoms of Kalpa trees. ||24||

The sound of celestial drums reverberated near the Lord, creating a great roar, resembling the ocean, stirred by the wind, with waves reaching the shore. ||25||

The Lord, showering the world with the nectar of Dharma, a sound deep and profound, bringing joy to all beings, resembled a thunderous cloud, pouring down rain. ||26||

The Lord, whose radiance had cleansed all other lights, resembled a golden mountain, rising from the ocean of milk. ||27||

Bharata, the greatest among the worshippers, circumambulated the Lord, the teacher of the world, and offered him the finest of offerings. ||28||

At the end of the puja, Bharata, with his knees touching the ground, bowed to the Lord, the master of all languages, and offered him a garland of words, praising him as follows: ||29||

You are Brahma, the supreme light, the powerful, the unborn, the sinless, the first Tirthankara, the Lord of the gods, the great Maheshwara. ||30||

You are the creator, the sustainer, the ruler, the universal being, the all-pervading, the one with a thousand faces. ||31|| 

Page #666:
---------------------------
576
The Adi Purana, the all-pervading, the lord of the world, the universal, the all-pervading light, the origin of the universe, the non-originated. ||32||
The Lord Hiranyagarbha, the Vrishabha, the one with the Vrishabha flag, the Paramaeshthi, the supreme reality, the Paramatma, the self-existent. ||33||
You are the master, the supreme light, the lord, the non-originated, the ageless, the beginningless, the endless, the unchangeable. ||34||
You are the Akshara, the imperishable, the Akshaya, the indestructible, the Anaksha, the one without senses, the Anakshara, the one beyond words, the Vishnu, the all-pervading, the Jishnu, the conqueror of karma, the Vijishnu, the one with the most excellent nature, the Swayambhu, the self-existent, the Swayamprabha, the self-illuminated. ||35||
You are the Shambhu, the Shambhava, the Shamyu, the happy one, the Shamvada, the one who teaches happiness or peace, the Shankar, the one who brings peace, the Hara, the enemy of the Asura in the form of delusion, the enemy of the darkness of ignorance, and the best sun for the auspicious beings. ||36||
You are the Purana, the first, the Adi Kavi, the poet, the Yogi, the best among the knowers of Yoga, the one who gives refuge to all, the best, the foremost, the pure, and the leader of the virtuous. ||37||
You are the Yoga, the one who is meditation, the one with Yoga, the one with the self-pulsation, the Siddha, the accomplished one, the Buddha, the one with the perfect knowledge, the one without worldly festivities, the subtle, the one beyond the reach of false knowledge, the Niranjana, the one without the stain of karma, the one born on the lotus stalk in the womb, hence the Brahma, and the best among the Jina. ||38||
You are the knower of the twelve-part Vedas, the creator of the twelve-part Vedas, the knower of the Agamas, the best among the speakers, the master of words, the creator, the sustainer, the lord, the most excellent, the purifier, the Adi Purusha, the lord of the world, the one who shines in the world, and the all-seeing. ||31||
You are present in the entire universe, the lord of the world, the one who sees all things, the protector of all, the Vibhu, the one who holds the self-illumination that spreads everywhere, the origin of all, the one who gives rise to all knowledge and other qualities, and the one who is self-originated, without rebirth. ||32||
You are the Hiranyagarbha, the Brahma, the Lord, the Vrishabha, the one with the Vrishabha symbol, the Paramaeshthi, the supreme reality, the Paramatma, and the Atmabhu, the self-existent. ||33||
You are the master, the supreme light, the lord, the Ayonija, the one born without an origin, the ageless, the beginningless, the endless, and the Achyuta, the unchangeable. ||34||
You are the Akshara, the imperishable, the Akshaya, the indestructible, the Anaksha, the one without senses, the Anakshara, the one beyond words, the Vishnu, the all-pervading, the Jishnu, the
Page #667:
---------------------------
You are the twenty-fourth Tirthankara, the conqueror of desires, the Arhat, the worthy of worship, the destroyer of enemies, the one without obstacles, the flag of Dharma, the lord of Dharma, and the destroyer of karmic enemies. ||40|| You are like the sun to the lotus-like souls, you are the fire, the sacrificial altar, the part of the sacrifice, the best sacrifice, the one who performs the sacrifice, and the offering for the sacrifice. ||41|| You are the one who performs the sacrifice, the ghee, the object of worship, the one with infinite merit, the mine of virtues, the one without enemies, the one without boundaries, and the one who is the middle even though you are without a middle. ||42|| You are the best, the supreme, the eldest, the greatest teacher, the most stable, the most subtle, the greatest, the most gross, and the abode of greatness. ||43|| You are great, you walk the earth with the virtue of forgiveness, you are worthy of worship, you are capable, you are stable in nature, you are imperishable, you are victorious, you are immovable, you are eternal, you are auspicious, you are peaceful, and you are the end of the world. ||44|| O God, you are the object of meditation for those who know the Self, and you are the Lord of the Brahmavada, the pure synonym of the Self. Thus, we praise you with many names. ||45|| O Lord, thus, remembering your one hundred and eight names with my heart, I praise you, the master of eight miracles and the abode of praises. ||46|| O Lord, this tall Ashoka tree, whose branches are moving very fast, protects those who take shelter in its shade, just as it protects those who take shelter in its teachings. ||47|| 

Page #668:
---------------------------
578
These groups of your chamaras, carried aloft by Yakshas, appear as if they are driving away the sins of men, like flies, without any deceit. ||48|| O Lord, the showers of flower-offerings from heaven that are falling around you, appear like drops of tears of joy shed by the satisfied celestial Lakshmi. ||49|| O Jina, your three umbrellas, adorned with strings of pearls and extremely high, appear like the playground of Lakshmi. ||50|| O Bhagavan, your throne, borne by lions, is so adorned as if you are the bearer of the burden of the entire world - the lord of the three worlds, and therefore the lions have made an effort to bear your burden, but due to its weight, they have had to bend slightly to carry it. ||51|| O Bhagavan, the radiance of your body pervades this entire assembly, and it appears as if it is bestowing upon all beings an ablution of holy water from all sides. ||52|| O Lord, the spread of your divine words (the expanse of the divine sound) purifies the minds of the beings of the world, destroying the darkness of ignorance, and therefore you are like the sun spreading rays of knowledge. ||53|| O Bhagavan, these eight miraculous powers of yours, so pure and incapable of being stolen by anyone, are shining brightly, like the pure banks of a river, fit for the play of Lakshmi, the goddess of wealth. ||54|| O Lord, you are pervading the entire universe in terms of knowledge, or all the objects of the universe are reflected in your soul, therefore salutations to you. You are the creator of the world, therefore salutations to you. You are self-existent, due to the nine attainments that manifest from the bondage of karma, therefore salutations to you. ||55|| O Lord, your nine Kshayika purities are: Kshayika-jnana (perfect knowledge), Kshayika-darshan (perfect vision), Kshayika-samyak-tva (perfect conduct), Kshayika-charitra (perfect character), and Kshayika-dana (perfect giving), laabha (gain), bhoga (enjoyment), upbhoga (consumption), and veerya (strength). 

Page #669:
---------------------------
## The Chapter of the Four Powers

**57.**  Your unobstructed knowledge knows the entire universe at once, because the three obstacles - the need for sense organs, the need for a process, and the need for a sequence - are all caused by the karma of knowledge-obscuring. But your karma of knowledge-obscuring is completely destroyed, so you know the entire universe at once without any obstruction.

**58.**  O Lord, it is a great wonder that you have known this diverse universe all at once. Or perhaps, it is considered praiseworthy to have attained liberation through the grace of great men.

**59.**  O Lord, even though all your sense organs are present, your knowledge is still beyond the senses. This is because even yogis cannot comprehend your powers.

**60.**  O Lord, just as your knowledge is imperishable, so is your vision. And both of these together make your use extraordinary.  **Meaning:** For other beings in the world, the use of vision comes first, and then the use of knowledge. But for you, both uses happen simultaneously.

**61.**  O God, your quality of knowledge pervades all things in the universe. You are a wonder, and yogis call you omniscient and all-seeing.

**62.**  O Lord, you know all things in the universe, yet you experience no fatigue or sorrow. This is the manifestation of your infinite power and greatness.

**63.**  O Lord, the detachment that has manifested in you, due to the destruction of passions like attachment, is the destruction of all suffering and the manifestation of happiness arising only from the soul.  **Meaning:** If detachment is considered happiness, then happiness exists only in you. If detachment is not considered happiness, and attachment is considered happiness, then there is no suffering in the three worlds.  **Meaning:**  Detachment means the absence of agitation. There is no absence of agitation in attachment to objects and passions, so there is no real happiness in them. 

Page #670:
---------------------------
## Adipurana

**65.** Just as water becomes pure when the impurities are removed, so too your right faith becomes pure when the impurities of false beliefs are removed.

**66.**  O Lord, although you possess other gains like charity and profit, they are not relevant to you. For a person who has achieved their purpose, external material connections are meaningless.

**67.**  O Lord, your countless virtues are praised in countless ways. But I, with my limited intellect, am unable to even slightly praise them.

**68.**  O God, let this be a mere name-only praise of your virtues. We, who have taken refuge in your name, are purified by it.

**69.**  O Lord, you are called Hiranyagarbha because at the time of your birth, there was a wondrous rain of gold, a golden shower.

**70.**  You are called Vrishabha because at your birth, the gods showered you with jewels. You are also called Rishabha because you received Mount Meru for your coronation.

**71.**  O God, you are the embodiment of knowledge, encompassing all that is knowable. Therefore, great sages call you Sarvagata, all-pervading.

**72.**  O Lord, your names like "Swayi" and others are meaningful and relevant to you. Therefore, you are called Jagajyestha (the greatest in the world), Parameshti (the supreme), and Sanatana (eternal).

**73.**  O Imperishable, I am unable to hold onto this intellect of mine, which is inspired by devotion to you. Therefore, I have been compelled to praise you. Even though I am not worthy, I am praising you solely out of devotion. 

Page #671:
---------------------------
O Lord, we who desire liberation by following the path shown by you, and who worship you as our God, may you be pleased with us and bestow your grace. ||74|| O Lord, we praise you, who possess such extraordinary glory. We desire only intense devotion to you, and nothing else. ||75|| Thus, after praising you, King Bharata, who was being watched by the assembly of gods with wonder in their eyes, entered the grand pavilion and sat in his rightful assembly. ||76|| Then, desiring to receive enlightenment from the Lord, that assembly, like a lake of virtues, became silent, with hands folded like a lotus bud. When everyone sat silently, with hands folded, desiring to know the nature of the principles, King Bharata, desiring to know the nature of the principles, bowed his head in humility and respectfully made this request to Lord Rishabhadeva. ||77-78|| O Lord, what is the extent of the principles? What is the path? And what is its fruit? O best of those who know the principles, I wish to hear all this from you. ||79|| When Bharata's question was finished, the first Tirthankara, Lord Rishabhadeva, explained the extent of the principles in detail, with a very profound voice. ||80|| There was no change in the lotus-like face of the Lord while speaking. Just as there is no change in a mirror when it reflects objects, so too there was no change in the Lord's face. ||81|| At that time, neither the palate, lips, nor any other part of the Lord's mouth moved, nor did the radiance of his face change. And the letters that were coming out of his mouth did not even touch the senses - they were coming out without any effort, without striking the senses. ||82|| That divine sound, in which all the letters were clear, came out of the Lord's mouth like the echo coming from the front of a mountain cave. ||83|| 

Page #672:
---------------------------
582
Sarasvati was speaking without any desire to speak. This is appropriate because the powers of great men, born of yoga, are inconceivable. No one can contemplate their dominion. ||8||
O Ayushman, listen to the essence of the truth, which will be explained in order. Listen to the Jivas, Pudgalas, Dharmas, Adharmas, Akasha, and Kala, along with their distinctions and synonyms. ||45||
The true nature of Jivas and other substances is called Tattva. This Tattva is the limb, i.e., the cause of right knowledge, and it is also the limb of liberation for Jivas. ||86||
That Tattva is of one kind in general, and of two kinds due to the distinction of Jiva and Ajivas. It is also said to be of three kinds due to the distinction of liberated Jivas, non-liberated Jivas, and Ajivas. ||87||
Non-liberated Jivas are considered to be of two kinds: Bhavyas and Abhavyas. Therefore, liberated Jivas, Bhavyas, Abhavyas, and Ajivas are considered to be four kinds of Tattva. ||88||
Or, there are two kinds of Jivas: liberated and non-liberated. Similarly, there are two kinds of Ajivas: Murtik and Amurtik. Combining both, four kinds of Tattva are also established. ||89||
That Tattva is also remembered to be of five kinds due to the distinction of five Astikayas. These five Astikayas are: Jiva Astikaya, Pudgala Astikaya, Akasha Astikaya, Dharma Astikaya, and Adharma Astikaya, along with their synonyms. ||90||
When Kala is added to these five Astikayas, there are six kinds of Tattva. Thus, for those who desire to know in detail, the Tattva can have infinite distinctions. ||91||
Jiva is characterized by consciousness. It is eternal and imperishable. It is the knower, the seer, the doer, and the enjoyer. It is equal to the size of the body. ||92||
It is endowed with many qualities. Its nature is to ascend after the complete destruction of karma. It is capable of transformation and dissolution, like a lamp. ||93|| 

Page #673:
---------------------------
## Translation:

**583**

The 24th chapter describes the means of investigation, movement, etc. The soul is to be investigated with the fourteen Gunasthanas, beginning with Sat. ||9||

Movement, sense organs, body, yoga, Veda, passions, knowledge, restraint, vision, Leshya, Bhavyatva, Samyaktva, Samshithva, and Aharaka are the fourteen means of investigation. ||15||

The means of investigation are to be investigated with the help of Sat, Sankhya, etc. The soul is to be investigated with these means, especially with yoga. ||96||

The soul is to be investigated by the wise with the eight Anuyogas: Sat, Sankhya, Kshetra, Sparsha, Kala, Bhava, Antara, and Alp-Bahutva. ||9||

These are the means of investigating the soul. The wise should also investigate the soul with the help of Pramana, Nay, and Nikshepa. ||18||

The five states of the soul are: Aupashmika, Kshayika, Kshayopa-samika, Audayika, and Parinamika. The soul is to be recognized by these qualities. The soul has two uses: knowledge and vision. ||19-20||

Knowledge is of eight types and vision is of four types. Knowledge is that which is concrete, i.e., it knows objects with modifications. Vision is that which is abstract, i.e., it knows objects without modifications. ||101||

The perception of the difference of objects is called Aakara, and the perception of the general form is called Anaakara. Knowledge perceives objects with difference, therefore it is called Saakara-Savikalpaka. Vision perceives objects without difference, therefore it is called Anaakara-Nirvikalpaka. ||102||

Just like the light of a lamp, the soul contracts and expands. The soul becomes as small or as large as the body it receives due to the rise of Bhavartha-Namakarma. ||13||

The soul is to be investigated with the help of the fourteen means of investigation, the fourteen Gunasthanas, and the eight Anuyogas. The nature of the soul is understood through these means. ||14||

The Bhavyas, who have the eye of the Siddhanta Shakha, should investigate the soul with the eight Anuyogas: Sat, Sankhya, Kshetra, Sparsha, Kala, Bhava, Antara, and Alp-Bahutva. ||17||

These are the means of investigating the soul. The wise should also investigate the soul with the help of Pramana, Nay, and Nikshepa. ||18||

The five states of the soul are: Aupashmika, Kshayika, Kshayopa-samika, Audayika, and Parinamika. The soul is to be recognized by these qualities. The soul has two uses: knowledge and vision. ||19-20||

Knowledge is of eight types and vision is of four types. Knowledge is that which is concrete, i.e., it knows objects with modifications. Vision is that which is abstract, i.e., it knows objects without modifications. ||101||

The perception of the difference of objects is called Aakara, and the perception of the general form is called Anaakara. Knowledge perceives objects with difference, therefore it is called Saakara-Savikalpaka. Vision perceives objects without difference, therefore it is called Anaakara-Nirvikalpaka. ||102||

1. Vicaropayaha
2. Tattvavicharavishaye
3. Vicharyah

Page #674:
---------------------------
## The Adi Purana: Translation of Verses 103-110

**103.**  Jiva, Praani, Jantu, Kshetrajna, Purusha, Pumaan, Atma, Antaratma, Gna, and Gnaani are all synonyms for the Jiva.

**104.**  Since this Jiva is alive in the present, was alive in the past, and will continue to live in countless births in the future, it is called Jiva. The Siddha Bhagwan was also alive in his previous births, therefore he is also called Jiva.

**105.**  The five senses, three powers, lifespan, and breath - these ten Pranas are present in this Jiva, therefore it is called Praani. It takes birth repeatedly in countless births, therefore it is called Jantu. Its nature is called Kshetra, and it knows this, therefore it is also called Kshetrajna.

**106.**  Purusha is defined as one who dwells in good and pleasurable experiences. He purifies his Atma, therefore he is also called Pumaan.

**107.**  This Jiva continuously moves through various states like Naraka and Narka, therefore it is called Atma. It is also called Antaratma because it is within the eight Karmas like Gnanavarana.

**108.**  This Jiva is endowed with the quality of Gnan, therefore it is called Gna. For the same reason, it is also called Gnaani. Thus, this Jiva can be known through the above-mentioned synonyms and other similar words.

**109.**  This Jiva is eternal, but its states like Naraka and Narka are different. Just as clay is eternal, but its creation and destruction occur in relation to its states, similarly, this Jiva is eternal, but its creation and destruction occur in relation to its states. The meaning is that in relation to the general nature of Dravyatva, the Jiva Dravya is eternal, and in relation to its states, it is impermanent. Considering both aspects together, this Jiva is in the form of creation, destruction, and permanence.

**110.**  Those who do not know the nature of the Atma, as described above, are misguided. They hold different opinions and argue with each other. 

Page #675:
---------------------------
## Chapter Twenty-Four

585

Some say there is no self, others say it exists but is impermanent. Some say it is not the doer, others say it is not the enjoyer. This is a state of confusion. 112

Some say there is a self but no liberation for it. Others say liberation exists but there is no way to attain it. 113

Therefore, O Ayushman Bharata, abandon these erroneous views and follow the right path. Determine the nature of the soul as described in the scriptures. 114

The soul has two states: Samsara and Moksha. Samsara is the cycle of birth and death, revolving through the four realms of hell, animal, human, and god. 115

Moksha is the complete annihilation of karma, it is the state of infinite bliss. It is attained through the means of Right Faith, Right Knowledge, and Right Conduct. 116

Right Faith is the unwavering belief in the true Gods, true scriptures, and the right principles, with great joy. It is the first step towards liberation. 117

Right Knowledge is the illumination of the true nature of the soul, the non-soul, and other entities. It arises after the destruction of the darkness of ignorance. 118

Right Conduct is the state of equanimity towards pleasant and unpleasant things. It is the characteristic of a true sage, free from desires, seeking liberation, devoid of clothes, and completely non-violent. 119

These three - Right Faith, Right Knowledge, and Right Conduct - are the means to liberation. Even a slight deficiency in any one of them will render them ineffective. 120

Right Faith is the foundation for Right Knowledge and Right Conduct, which bear fruit. Right Knowledge is the cause of liberation when accompanied by Right Faith and Right Conduct. 121

Right Conduct without Right Faith and Right Knowledge is useless. It is like a blind man running, leading to his downfall. 122 

Page #676:
---------------------------
## Adipurana, Chapter I

**123.**  From the analysis of the three (darshan, jnana, charitra) into one or two, there arise six wrong views of the path (marg-durnaya) for the ignorant. These are refuted here. 

**124.**  There is nothing more or less than what has been said about the nature of the Aapta, Agama, and Padartha. This is because the purity of right faith (samyak-darshan) arises from the firmness of faith in these three.

**125.**  One who is endowed with infinite knowledge (ananta-jnana) and other qualities, free from the stain of karmic impurities (kalanka), pure in intention, accomplished, and benevolent is called an Aapta. Others are merely Aapta-abhas (appearances of Aapta).

**126.**  What is spoken by the Aapta, describes all the aims of human life (purushartha), and is profound in its principles and proofs (naya and pramana) is called Agama.  Anything else is merely Agama-abhas (appearance of Agama).

**127.**  There are two divisions of Padartha, based on the distinction between Jiva and Ajiva.  Jiva is that which has the characteristics of consciousness (chetana) as described above, and is subject to the three transformations of birth (utpatti), existence (sthiti), and death (pralaya).

**128.**  There are three types of Jiva: Bhavya, Abhavya, and Mukta.  Bhavya is one who is destined to attain liberation (siddhi) in the future.  The Bhavya Jiva is like gold mixed with stone (suvarna-pashana), meaning that just as gold mixed with stone can become pure gold with the right treatment, so too can the Bhavya Jiva become pure Siddha with the right conditions.

**129.**  Abhavya is the opposite of Bhavya, meaning one who will never attain liberation.  The Abhavya Jiva is like a blind stone (andha-pashana), meaning that just as a blind stone can never become gold, so too can the Abhavya Jiva never become a Siddha.  The Abhavya Jiva never has the means to attain liberation.

**130.**  Mukta is one who is free from karmic bondage (karma-bandhana) and resides in the peak of the three worlds (triloka-shikhara).  He is called Siddha, free from all impurities (niranjana), and has attained infinite bliss (ananta-sukha). 

Page #677:
---------------------------
## Chapter 24: The Essence of Living and Non-Living

**507**

The essence of the living being has been briefly explained in this 24th chapter. Now, O bearer of wisdom, understand the essence of the non-living as well. ||5||

The essence of the non-living is described in five categories: Dharma, Adharma, Akasha, Kala, and Pudgala. ||12||

Dharma is the cause that assists the movement of the living being and Pudgala, while Adharma is the cause that assists their stillness. ||13||

These two, Dharma and Adharma, are the causes of movement and stillness, but they themselves are not the movers. They assist the movement and stillness of the living being and Pudgala. ||134||

Just as a fish cannot move without water, but water does not move the fish, similarly, the living being and Pudgala cannot move without Dharma, but Dharma does not move them. However, just as water supports the fish while it moves, Dharma supports the living being and Pudgala while they move. ||135||

Just as the shade of a tree provides shelter to a man who desires it, but does not move him, and yet is the cause of his stillness, similarly, Adharma, being indifferent, provides stillness to the living being and Pudgala, but does not move them. ||136-137||

Akasha is the space that provides a place for the living being and other entities to exist. It is intangible, formless, pervades everywhere, and is inactive. ||138||

Kala is characterized by its movement. It is the support of both itself and other entities, like the living being. It is the cause of the transformation of all entities according to their own qualities and forms. ||139||

Just as the stone beneath the potter's wheel is the cause of its rotation, similarly, Kala is the cause of the transformation of all entities, as wise people have explained. ||140||

**Meaning:**

1. The cause of movement.
2. The cause of stillness.
3. Of the living being and Pudgala.
4. The cause of Adharma.
5. Dharma is the support.
6. That which supports itself and other entities.
7. That which causes transformation. 

Page #678:
---------------------------
##  588

The Adi Purana states that the main purpose of the discussion on time is to determine the nature of time.  "Just as the Vahika is understood through the main substance, so is the secondary substance understood through the main substance." (141)  The true nature of time is known through its minute particles, which are countless and distinct like a heap of jewels. (142)  Time is called "A-Kay" because it is not made up of parts, unlike the other five substances which are "Astika-Kay" because they are made up of parts. (143)  The four substances, Dharma, Adharma, Akash, and Kal, are formless, while the Pudgal substance is formed.  Now listen to the explanation of its different forms. (144)

(The time is of two types: one is Vyavahar Kal (practical time) and the other is Nishchay Kal (absolute time).  The clock, hour, etc. are called Vyavahar Kal, and the countless Kal-Anu (time particles) that are present in every part of the Lokakash (universe) and are distinct from each other like a heap of jewels, are called Nishchay Kal.)  The Vyavahar Kal determines the Nishchay Kal, because the secondary substances like Vahika are understood through the main substance.  (The meaning is that Vahika is the name of a country, but it is also used to refer to the people of that country.  Here, the main meaning of the word Vahika is the specific country, and the secondary meaning is the people who live there and are devoid of good conduct.  If there were no main substance called Vahika to indicate the specific country, then the word Vahika would not be used for the people living there.  Similarly, if there were no main substance of time, then there would be no Vyavahar Kal.  We understand the Vyavahar Kal by knowing the day, night, month, etc. through the sunrise and sunset, but we find it difficult to understand the abstract Nishchay Kal.  Therefore, the Acharyas have instructed us to understand the Nishchay Kal through the Vyavahar Kal, because the meaning of the synonym is understood through the synonym.) (141)  The Nishchay Kal is known through its countless particles that are present in every part of the Lokakash (universe) and are distinct from each other like a heap of jewels. (142)  Because the parts of time are not connected, it is called "A-Kay" (without parts).  The other five substances are called "Astika-Kay" (with parts) because their parts are connected. (The meaning is that something with many parts is called "Astika-Kay".  The substances of Jiva, Pudgal, Dharma, Adharma, and Akash are called "Astika-Kay" because they have many parts, and the substance of time is called "A-Kay" because it has only one part.) (143)  The four substances, Dharma, Adharma, Akash, and Kal, are formless, while the Pudgal substance is formed.  Now listen to the explanation of its different forms. (The meaning is that the Jiva substance is also formless, but it is not being discussed here because the discussion is about the non-Jiva substances.  Anything that can be clearly perceived by any of the five senses is called formed.  Except for Pudgal, no other substance can be clearly perceived by the senses.) 

Page #679:
---------------------------
## Chapter Twenty-Four

**589.**  The **pudgalas** are considered to be those that possess color, smell, taste, and touch. They are called **anvartanam** due to their nature of **purana** (filling) and **galana** (dissolving). ||145||

**590.**  There are two types of **pudgala** arrangements based on the difference between **skandha** and **anu**. The collection of **snigdha** (smooth) and **ruksha** (rough) **anus** is called **skandha**. ||146||

**591.**  Its extent ranges from **dwayanu** (two **anus**) to **maha-skandha** (infinite **anus**). Its variations include **chhaya** (shadow), **atapat** (sunlight), **tamo** (darkness), **jyotisna** (moonlight), **megha** (cloud), etc. ||147||

**592.**  **Bhanavas** are the **karma-lingas** (karmic indicators), they are **dvi-sparsha** (two touches), **parimandala** (round). They are **ekavarna** (one color), **rasa** (taste), **nitya** (eternal), and **anitya** (non-eternal) in terms of **paryaya** (transformation). ||148||

**593.**  There are six types of **pudgalas**: **sukshma-sukshma** (very subtle), **sukshma** (subtle), **sukshma-sthula** (subtle-gross), **sthula-sukshma** (gross-subtle), **sthula** (gross), and **sthula-sthula** (very gross). ||149||

**594.**  **Sukshma-sukshma** is a single **anu** that is **arashya** (invisible) and **asprasya** (intangible). **Sukshmas** are the **skandhas** of **karma** because they are a collection of infinite **pradeshas** (regions). ||150||

**595.**  **Shabda** (sound), **sparsha** (touch), **rasa** (taste), and **gandha** (smell) are **sukshma-sthula** because they are not perceived by the eye but are perceived by their respective senses (ear, skin, tongue, nose). ||151||

**596.**  **Chhaya** (shadow), **jyotisna** (moonlight), and **atapat** (sunlight) are **sthula-sukshma** because they are visible to the eye but their form cannot be collected, making them **vighatarhit** (non-destructive) and therefore subtle. ||152||

**597.**  **Drava-dravya** (liquid substances) like water are examples of **sthula-bheda** (gross difference). **Sthula-sthula** is **prithvi** (earth) and other **skandhas** that cannot be reunited after being separated. ||153||

Therefore, **pudgala-dravya** is **murtika** (concrete) and the rest of the **dravya** is **amurti** (abstract). ||144||

**Explanation:**

* **Pudgala** is a fundamental substance in Jainism, considered the building block of the physical universe.
* **Anvartanam** refers to the constant cycle of creation and destruction of **pudgalas**.
* **Skandha** is a collection of
Page #680:
---------------------------
This is the essence of the Badipurana, free from any distortion. Whoever has faith in it, that noble soul attains the Supreme Brahman. ||154|| Having explained the essence of the teachings in their entirety, the supreme among the wise, [Vrishabhadeva], then explained some of the seeds of the teachings again for emphasis. ||155|| He explained the soul, the purpose of life, the path, the fruits of the path, bondage, liberation, the bound being, and the liberated being. ||156|| He also explained the structure of the three worlds, the layers of hell, the islands, oceans, mountains, and the Kulachala. ||157|| The glorious Vrishabhadeva, the holder of the four infinite forms of Lakshmi, also explained the heaven with its sixty-two layers, the lifespan of the gods, their enjoyments, the state of liberation, and the Lokanadhi. ||158|| The world teacher, Vrishabhadeva, also explained the Puranas of the Tirthankaras, the Chakravartis, and the Ardha Chakravartis, the Kalyanakas of the Tirthankaras, and the sixteen causes of their auspiciousness. ||159|| The Lord explained where a particular being is born after death, from where a particular being can be born, the birth and death of beings, the objects of enjoyment, the powers of the monks, and the actions that humans should and should not perform. ||160|| The all-knowing and benevolent Vrishabhadeva explained to Bharat the nature of all substances, past, present, and future. ||161|| Hearing the essence of the teachings from the world teacher, the supreme being, Vrishabhadeva, King Bharat, filled with devotion, attained supreme bliss. ||162|| Then, holding onto that supreme bliss, Bharat, free from attachment to the body, attained the purity of right faith and the supreme purity of the Anuvratas from Vrishabhadeva. ||163|| Just as a cluster of blooming lotuses shines brightly in the autumn season, so too, King Bharat, enlightened by Vrishabhadeva, attained the knowledge of the truth and the supreme purity of mind. 

Page #681:
---------------------------
The Twenty-Fourth Chapter

591. He obtained the Guru, worthy of worship, who was the leader of Right Faith, pure like a necklace of liberation, adorned with vows and virtues. ||165||

The king Bharat, illuminated by the grace of the Guru, shone like a gem emerging from a great mine. ||166||

That assembly of Munis, along with the Devas, Asuras, and humans, drank the nectar of pure Dharma and attained supreme bliss. ||167||

Hearing the divine sound like the roar of clouds, the Bhavyas, like the Chataka birds, were filled with supreme joy. ||168||

Hearing the divine sound, like the roar of clouds, the divine beings, perched on the branches of the Ashoka tree, uttered sounds of joy. ||169||

Having obtained the Lord, who protects all and shines like fire, the Bhavyas, like gems, attained supreme purity, radiating divine brilliance. ||170||

At that time, the lord of the city of Purimasatha, Bharat's younger brother, virtuous, wise, valiant, pure, steadfast, the best among the proud, glorious, the master of wisdom, and self-controlled, whose name was Vrishabhasena, also received initiation from the Lord and became the first Ganadhara. ||171-172||

He, adorned with seven Riddhis, surrounded by the radiance of tapas, illuminated like the autumn sun, dispelling the darkness of ignorance. ||173||

At that time, the glorious and the best of the Kuru dynasty, King Soma Prabha, Shreyans, and other kings also received initiation and became the Lord's Ganadharas. ||174||

Bharat's younger sister, Brahmi, also received initiation by the grace of the Guru and attained the position of Ganini (Mistress) among the Aryas. She was worshipped by all the Devas. ||175||

At that time, she 
1. Prabhasu Kantisha Aram Atyartham. 
2. Parimatari Sho-ta. 
3. Kuruvansha Shreshtha. 
4. Aryikaanam. 

Page #682:
---------------------------
592
The king's daughter, adorned like a swan with a sweet voice, shone brightly, lying on a bed of soft grass, having taken the vows of renunciation. ||16|| Sundari, the other daughter of Vrishabhadeva, also became renounced and took the vows after Brahmi. Many others, frightened by the world, also took the vows from the Guru at that time. ||17|| Shrutakeerti, a man of great wisdom and fame, took the vows of a Shravaka and became the best among those who observed the vows of the country. ||178|| Similarly, Priyavrata, a woman of great courage and pure heart, took the vows of a Shravaka and became the best among women of pure character. ||179|| At the moment of the Lord's attainment of Kevalgyan, many other great kings also became monks, having taken the vows and attained great powers. ||180|| Anantvirya, the brother of Bharata, also received the vows from the Lord after attaining Sambodhi. He was worshipped by the gods and became the foremost among those who attained liberation in this Avasarpini. ||181|| All the tapasvis who had become corrupt, except Marichi, attained Sambodhi from the Lord, understood the true nature of the principles, and again took the vows and began to practice tapasya. ||182|| Then, Maharaja Bharata, the holder of pure intellect, who was eager to worship the Chakra Ratna, worshipped the Jagadguru and went towards his city. ||183|| The young, intelligent Bahubali and other younger brothers of Bharata followed the Jagadguru, returning with joy. ||184|| At that time, Maharaja Bharata appeared like the sun, for just as the divine influence of the sun spreads, so too did the divine and extraordinary influence of Bharata spread. Just as the sun takes on a reddish hue at sunrise, 
1. Renounced. 2. A certain Shravaka named Shrutakeerti. 3. Of the country. 4. Of pure form. 5. A certain woman named Priyavrata. 6. Foremost among those who wished to attain liberation. Meaning, he was liberated by Adinatha. 7. He who has raga (passion) at his rise, in other words, he who has raga at his own rise. 8. Accepted. 9. At the end of the day. 10. Attack. 

Page #683:
---------------------------
596
- Twenty-fourth Parva
The King, filled with joy, entered his capital city, Ayodhya, which was adorned with flags and resembled a Jina-vani in its splendor. Just as Jina-vani is filled with the expanse of all things, so too was Ayodhya filled with the expanse of various objects. Just as Jina-vani is radiant with the spread of letters, so too was Ayodhya radiant with the spread of Kshatriya and other varnas. Just as Jina-vani is pure and free from impurities, so too was Ayodhya pure and free from dirt and other impurities. Just as Jina-vani is superior due to the presence of the group of Naya, so too was Ayodhya superior due to the presence of the group of Naya. Just as Jina-vani bestows abundant joy, so too did Ayodhya bestow abundant joy upon all. Just as Jina-vani is trustworthy and encompasses all things, so too was Ayodhya trustworthy and encompassed all things. Just as Jina-vani is known by the Munis who possess all twelve angas, so too was Ayodhya known by all beings. 
-
-
  
1. The totality of all things that are considered to be within oneself, or the totality of the nature of all things that are considered to be within oneself. 2. The vast group of Kshatriyas and others, or the vast letters. 3. Nourishing, or pure. The root of the word is "poshaka" which means nourishing and "shuddha" which means pure. 4. The one who is a guru due to the connection with the jewel of the cycle of Naya, or the one who is a guru due to the connection with the group of Naya. 5. The one who brings abundant satisfaction to the people. Both are similar. 6. The one who is all-encompassing, or the one who is surrounded by Gopuras. 7. The one who is known by all beings, or the one who is known by those who possess the seven angas. 8. The one who is Indian. 9. The one who is one's own. 
75 

Page #684:
---------------------------
## Twenty-Fifth Chapter

The great King Bharata, having been instructed in the divine language, has departed. The sound of the universe has ceased, like the wind that has calmed down, or the ocean that has become still. The universe, like a forest of living beings, has been watered by the rain of Dharma. The Tirthankara, like a cloud that has finished raining, is silent. He is like the Kalpavriksha, ever ready to bestow desired fruits. The beings of the three worlds find rest at his feet. He has destroyed the darkness of ignorance, like the sun. He is adorned with the radiant rays of the nine Kevala-gnanas. He is like a great mine, filled with the jewels of virtues. He is the Lord of the universe, the one who is beyond thought, and possesses infinite glory. He is surrounded by the four types of Shramanas, like Mount Meru surrounded by the four forests of Bhadrashala, etc. He is endowed with eight Praatihaaryas, has attained the five Kalyanakas, and his glory is enhanced by thirty-four Atishyas. He is the Lord of the three worlds.

Seeing the Lord Vrishabhadeva, the Indra of the Saudharma heaven, with his thousand eyes wide open and his mind filled with joy, began to praise him with a steady mind.

"O Lord, though I am devoid of great intellect, I praise you, the supreme light, the mine of virtues, solely inspired by my devotion."

"O Jinendra, I am certain that those who praise you with devotion attain the highest fruits. It is with this conviction that I praise you."

"Praise is the description of pure virtues. The one who praises is a Bhavy, a being destined for liberation. You, whose all endeavors are fulfilled, are worthy of praise. The fruit of praise is liberation and happiness." 

Page #685:
---------------------------
## The Twenty-Fifth Chapter

595.  "O Vibho, O Sanatan, thus being certain, may you purify me, the one who desires to praise you and seeks your fruit, with your auspicious gaze." (12)

"O Bhagavan, devotion inspired by your qualities delights me. Therefore, though detached from the world, I am engaged in this path of praise, my mind stirred." (13)

"O Vibho, even a little devotion to you, like the service of the Kalpavriksha, bears great wealth-like fruits for beings." (14)

"O Bhagavan, your body, devoid of adornments, clearly proclaims your victory over your enemies, like lust and hatred, for adornments are the manifestations of the vices of the passionate." (15)

"O Prabho, your body, which adorns the universe, is extremely beautiful even without adornments. For, an ornament that is self-luminous does not need another ornament." (16)

"O Bhagavan, though your head is not adorned with beautiful hair, nor with a crown, nor with the weight of a diadem, it is still extremely beautiful." (17)

"O Nath, your face is not adorned with furrowed brows, nor have you bitten your lips, nor have you engaged your hand in weapons. Yet, you have destroyed the enemy of harmful deeds." (18)

"O Dev, you did not even turn your large eyes, like the petals of a blue lotus, in the conquest of the enemy of delusion. This shows that your power of dominion is truly wondrous." (19)

"O Jinendra, your two eyes, devoid of sidelong glances, and filled with gentle vision, clearly tell us that you have conquered the enemy of Kamadeva." (20)

"O Nath, your eyes, which touch our heads and purify the entire world, are like a stream of peace, pure and radiant." (21) 

Page #686:
---------------------------
596
Your arrival in this world, O Lord, is adorned with the splendor of a blooming lotus. Your radiance, like a ray of light, pervades the entire universe. ||32|| Your face, neither adorned with laughter nor with a roar, nor with compressed lips, reveals your state of detachment to the wise. ||23|| The brilliance emanating from your mouth, O Lord, shines like Saraswati, purifying and dispelling darkness, having conquered the brilliance of the morning sun. ||24|| The eyes of the gods, fixed on your lotus-like face, resemble a swarm of bees attracted by the fragrance of a flower. ||25|| Drinking the nectar of your words, emanating from your lotus-like face, these glorious beings, like bees, attain bliss. ||26|| Though you face one direction, O Lord, you appear to face all directions. This is indeed the wondrous power of your virtue of penance. ||27|| Your words, like rays of light, spread in all directions, dispelling the darkness even from the hearts of the lower beings, O Sun-like Jina. ||28|| Having drunk your nectar-like words, we have truly become immortal today. This nectar, which cures all diseases, is most dear to us, O Lord. ||29|| Your lotus-like face, O Jina, from which flows the nectar of your words, shines like a treasure of Dharma, delighting the souls. ||30|| Your words, like rays of light emanating from the moon-like disc of your face, dispel darkness and fill the assembly with joy. ||31|| It is indeed a wonder, O Lord, that from you arise various languages, or perhaps it is the greatness of your being a Tirthankara. ||32||

Page #687:
---------------------------
## The Twenty-Fifth Chapter

**33.**  Your body, free from sweat and excrement, fragrant, adorned with auspicious marks, square-shaped, without red blood, and stable like a forest, is exceedingly beautiful.

**34.**  O Lord, your beauty that delights the eyes, your fortune that pleases the mind, and your sweet speech that brings joy to the world, are your extraordinary qualities, not found in any other being in the world.

**35.**  O Lord, though your power is immeasurable, it is contained within your finite, small body. This is fitting, for even the image of an elephant can be contained in a small mirror.

**36.**  O Lord, wherever you reside, within a radius of a hundred yojanas, food, drink, and everything else become readily available due to your greatness.

**37.**  O Lord, this earth is unable to bear the weight of all the gods and demons, therefore your chariot, the form of your presence, never touches the earth and always remains in the sky.

**38.**  O Lord, like a life-giving medicine, your appropriate teachings of Dharma make even fierce creatures like lions and tigers refrain from harming other beings.

**39.**  O Lord, since your deluding karma has been destroyed, you have attained infinite happiness, therefore you do not eat. This is fitting, for only those who are afflicted by hunger eat.

**40.**  O Jina, those fools who, due to the arising of their non-cognizable karma, plan for you to eat, saying that you eat because of the arising of your non-cognizable karma, should seek out old ghee to cure their disease of ignorance. Just as applying old ghee cures a cold, so too, they should seek the affection of an old, experienced person to cure their ignorance.

**41.**  O Lord, just as poison, whose strength has been destroyed by a mantra, cannot do anything, so too, poison, whose strength has been destroyed by the destruction of harmful actions, cannot do anything. 

Page #688:
---------------------------
598
The poison of the Asatavedaniya cannot do anything to you. ||41||
O Lord, the absence of the cooperative causes of the Ghatiyakarma, the poison of the Asatavedaniya is powerless against you, because the fruit arises only when all the ingredients are gathered. ||42||
O Lord, you are the protector of the world, and by your mere play, you have washed away the stain of sin, therefore neither the Itis nor the Upsargas can exert their power over you. Meaning: You are free from Itis, Bhiti, and Upsargas. ||43||
O Lord, although your pure eye of knowledge, the Kevalgyan, is infinite-faced, meaning it knows the infinite knowables, yet because your four Ghatiyakarmas are destroyed, it is fitting that you have these four faces. ||44||
O Lord, you are the master of all knowledge, a Yogi, four-faced, imperishable, and your self-existent light of Kevalgyan is spreading everywhere, therefore you are very beautiful. ||45||
O Lord, your body, which is full of light and divine, is characterized by the absence of shadow and the non-blinking of the eyes, meaning your body does not cast a shadow, and your eyes do not blink. ||46||
O Lord, although you are wearing three umbrellas, you appear shadowless, because the actions of great men are wondrous, or your power is such. ||47||
O Lord, the Devas have stopped the movement of their eyes just to see your lotus-like face, whose eyes do not blink. Meaning: The Devas do not blink their eyes, so it seems as if they have stopped blinking their eyelids just to see your beautiful face. ||48||
O Lord, the finite state of your nails and hair reveals the absence of rasa, etc., in your pure crystal-like body. Meaning: Your nails and hair remain as they are, they do not grow, this shows that your body is devoid of rasa, blood, etc. ||49||
Thus, these generous qualities of yours, which are not found elsewhere, have not found a home elsewhere, and have come to you themselves. ||50||

Page #689:
---------------------------
## The Twenty-Fifth Chapter

599

**51.**  These qualities of beauty, radiance, and brilliance, which are desirable even to Indra, are considered insignificant by you, O wondrous one!

**52.**  It is fitting that those who are free from the bonds of all other qualities and who are devoted to you alone, should become like you, for it is the duty of disciples to follow the will of their master.

**53.**  This magnificent Ashoka tree of yours seems to be dancing with joy, as if it were being stirred by a gentle breeze, with its branches like a multitude of hands.

**54.**  The groups of fly whisks, held by the gods in playful fashion, are waving around you as if they were competing with the waves of the ocean of milk.

**55.**  Your three umbrellas, shining with pearls and as pure as the moon, appear to have sprouted in the sky, like shoots from the earth.

**56.**  Your lofty throne, borne by lions, is adorned with the rays of jewels, as if your touch had awakened joy in them.

**57.**  The millions of divine drums of the gods are sounding sweet melodies, as if they were proclaiming your victory throughout the heavens and the earth.

**58.**  The millions and a half of divine drums, including the Dundubhi, are sounding, as if they were eager to imitate your profound and divine sound.

**59.**  The rain of flowers that the gods are showering from the sky, seems to have been sent by the satisfied Goddess of Fortune, through the agency of the Kalpa trees.

**60.**  The halo of your body, spreading out in all directions, creates a perpetual dawn for the people who are gathered here, making this place a source of joy for them. 

Page #690:
---------------------------
600
The reddish rays of your nails, like sprouts emerging from the Kalpa tree of your feet, spread in all directions. ||61|| These rays, like particles of your grace, touch our heads, emanating from the cool, moon-like nails of your feet, bringing joy to all beings. ||62|| The divine Lakshmi, in the form of a beautiful swan, dives into the lake of your feet, which is shaded by the lotus of your feet, adorned with the brilliance of your nails. ||63|| The radiance that your two lotus feet possess seems like the red stain of blood, left behind when you destroyed the enemy of delusion. ||64|| The reflections of the faces of the celestial beings in the lake of your nail-radiance, enhance the beauty of the lotuses. ||65||  Salutations to you, the Self-born, who have manifested yourself in your own Self, and whose greatness is beyond comprehension. ||66|| Salutations to you, the Lord of the three worlds, the husband of Lakshmi, the best among the learned, and the best among the speakers. ||67|| Wise people consider you the destroyer of the enemy of karma, and your lotus feet are worshipped by the celestial beings with garlands of their radiant crowns. ||68|| You, the Infinite Conqueror, have cut down the mighty tree of the heavy karma of destruction with your axe of meditation, and have conquered the lineage of the infinite world. ||69|| You, the Conqueror of Death, have overcome the king of death, who is filled with pride due to his conquest of the three worlds, and is extremely difficult to conquer. ||70|| You are the liberator of all beings from the bondage of the world, the friend of the worthy souls, and the destroyer of birth, death, and old age. 

Page #691:
---------------------------
## Twenty-Fifth Chapter

601. You are called **TrikalavishayaasheShatattvaBhedat** because you are born in three ways due to knowing all the substances of the three times. You are called **Kevalaakhya** because you possess the **Kevalgyan** eye. You are called **Dadhachakshuvijetro** because you are the conqueror of the eye of the ignorant. You are called **Swameeshita** because you are the master of yourself. ||72||

You are called **Swamandhakant** because you destroyed the demon of ignorance. You are called **Ardhanareeshwar** because half of the eight enemies of karma are not your enemies. ||73||

You are called **Shiv** because you reside in the **Shivpad** (liberation). You are called **Har** because you destroy the enemies of sin. You are called **Shankar** because you bring peace to the world. You are called **Shambhav** because you are born from happiness. ||74||

You are called **Vrushabh** because you are the best in the world. You are called **Purush** because you have many excellent qualities. You are called **Nabhey** because you are born from the **Nabhiraja**. You are called **IkshvakuKulnand** because you are born in the **Ikshvaku** lineage. ||75||

You are called **Swamek** because you are the best among all men. You are called **Purushskandh** because you are the support of all men. You are called **Swam** because you are the eyes of the world. You are called **LokasyaLochan** because you are the eyes of the world. You are called **Trija** because you know the three paths of liberation: **Samyagdarshan**, **Samyaggyan**, and **Samyakcharitra**. You are called **Trigyan** because you possess knowledge of the past, present, and future. ||76||

You are called **Chatursharan** because you are the embodiment of the four refuges: **Arhant**, **Siddh**, **Sadhu**, and **Kevali**. You are called **Mangalyamurti** because you are the embodiment of auspiciousness. You are called **ChaturasraDhi** because you know everything around you. You are called **PanchBrahmaMay** because you are the embodiment of the five supreme beings. You are called **Pavan** because you are pure. Please purify me, O God. ||77||

You are called **Sadyajatma** because you were born quickly at the time of your descent from heaven. You are called **Vamadev** because you were very beautiful at the time of your birth. Greetings to you. ||78||

You are called **Sanishkrantavaghooray** because you have attained supreme peace. You are called **ParamPrasham** because you have attained supreme peace. You are called **Kevalgyanasamsiddhav** because you have attained **Kevalgyan**. You are called **Vishana** because you are the Lord. Greetings to you. ||79||

1. You are called **Ardhanareeshwar** because half of the eight enemies of karma, such as **gyanavaran** and **karma**, are not your enemies.
2. You are called **Shiv** because you reside in the **Shivpad**.
3. You are called **Shankar** because you bring happiness.
4. You are called **Shambhav** because you are born from happiness.
5. You are called **Vrushabh** because you are the best in the world.
6. You are
Page #692:
---------------------------
Adipuranam
"To the one who is liberated by being the first Purusha, my salutations to you who will be in the state of the Tatpurusha. ||80|| To you who are the one with infinite vision, capable of destroying the knowledge-obscuring karma, my salutations. And to you who are the one who sees the entire universe, capable of destroying the perception-obscuring karma, my salutations. ||81|| Salutations to you, O Lord, who destroy the perception-obscuring karma and possess the pure, unblemished, right perception. Salutations to you who destroy the conduct-obscuring karma, are free from attachment, and possess immense power. ||82|| Salutations to you who possess infinite strength. Salutations to you who are the embodiment of infinite bliss. Salutations to you who are the infinite light and see both the worlds and the non-worlds. ||83|| Salutations to you who possess infinite giving. Salutations to you who possess infinite gain. Salutations to you who possess infinite enjoyment. Salutations to you who possess infinite consumption. ||84|| Salutations to you, O Lord, who are the supreme meditator. Salutations to you who are free from the cycle of births and deaths. Salutations to you who are the most pure. Salutations to you who are the supreme sage. ||85|| Salutations to you who possess the supreme knowledge, the Kevala Jnana. Salutations to you who destroy all other doctrines. Salutations to you who are the embodiment of the supreme truth. Salutations to you who are the supreme soul. ||86|| Salutations to you who possess the supreme form. Salutations to you who are the supreme radiance. Salutations to you who are the supreme path. Salutations to you who are the supreme lord. ||87|| Salutations to you who serve the supreme abode of liberation, the supreme light. Salutations to you who have attained the supreme state, the supreme soul. ||88|| Salutations to you who are free from the stain of karma. Salutations to you whose karmic bondage is destroyed. Salutations to you whose delusion-karma is destroyed. Salutations to you who are free from all faults. ||89||" 

Page #693:
---------------------------
## Twenty-Fifth Chapter

603. Salutations to you, the Sugata, who is destined for a glorious path. Salutations to you, the one who is free from the senses and possesses transcendental knowledge and bliss. ||10||

Salutations to you, the Akaya, who is free from the bondage of the body. Salutations to you, the A-yoga, the supreme among the yogis. ||11||

Salutations to you, the A-veda, the one who is free from the Vedas. Salutations to you, the A-kṣaya, the one who is free from the kṣayas. Salutations to you, the supreme yogendra, whose feet are worshipped by all. ||12||

Salutations to you, the Parama-vijñāna, the one who possesses supreme knowledge. Salutations to you, the Parama-samyama, the one who possesses supreme restraint. Salutations to you, the Parama-haradṛṣṭa, the one who has seen the ultimate truth through supreme vision, and the protector of all. ||13||

Salutations to you, the Aleśyā, the one who is free from the leśyās, but who touches the essence of the pure and white leśyā. Salutations to you, the one who has transcended the intermediate state and is the liberator. ||14||

Salutations to you, the one who is free from both the saṁjñī and asaṁjñī states, and who possesses a pure soul. Salutations to you, the Vīta-saṁjñā, the one who is free from the four saṁjñās, and who possesses the kṣayika-samyagdṛṣṭi. ||15||

Salutations to you, the Anāhāra, the one who is free from food, yet always satisfied. Salutations to you, the Parama-mājūṣa, the one who possesses supreme brilliance. Salutations to you, the one who has transcended all karmic impurities and has reached the shore of the ocean of existence. ||16||

Salutations to you, the Ajara, the one who is free from old age. Salutations to you, the one who is free from birth. Salutations to you, the Amṛtyu, the one who is free from death. Salutations to you, the Acala, the one who is unshakeable and eternal. ||17||

Let the praise of your qualities cease, for your qualities are infinite and impossible to enumerate. I wish to worship you simply by remembering your name. ||18||

Your eight thousand and eight characteristics are well-known and you are the master of all words. I praise you with eight thousand and eight names for the fulfillment of my desires. ||19||

Your infinite fourfold inner wealth and eight extraordinary qualities are:

1. The protector.
2. The one who is free from the five leśyās except the white leśyā.
3. The one who is free from the saṁjñī and asaṁjñī states.
4. The one who has attained the saṁjñā in a special way.
5. The one who is destined for a glorious path.
6. The one who is eternal.
7. The one whom we wish to worship.
8. Eight thousand and eight.
9. With eight thousand and eight.
10. We praise.

And all your passions and other karmic impurities have been destroyed, therefore salutations to you. ||8||

You are destined for the supreme path of liberation, therefore you are the Sugata, therefore salutations to you. You are free from the senses and possess transcendental knowledge
Page #694:
---------------------------
604
The Adi Purana states: He is called Sriman 1 because he is accompanied by Lakshmi. He is called Swayambhu 2 because he is self-born, having attained enlightenment without the help of any guru. He is called Vrishabha 3 because he is adorned with Dharma, the bull. He is called Sambhava 4 because he has attained infinite happiness himself and has given happiness to many other beings in the world. He is called Shambhu 5 because he is the giver of supreme bliss. He is called Atmabhū 6 because he has attained this exalted state by himself, or because only a yogi can realize him in his own soul. He is called Swayamprabha 7 because he is self-illuminated. He is called Prabhu 8 because he is powerful or the master of all. He is called Bhoktā 9 because he experiences infinite, self-arising happiness. He is called Vishvabhū 10 because he is present everywhere, not just in knowledge, but also in manifestation through meditation and other practices. He is called Apunarbhava 11 because he will not take birth again in the world. 100. He is called Vishvātmā 12 because all the objects of the world are reflected in his soul. He is called Vishvalokesh 13 because he is the master of all the worlds. He is called Vishvatchakshu 14 because his eyes of knowledge and vision are unobstructed everywhere in the world. He is called Akshara 15 because he is imperishable. He is called Vishvavid 16 because he knows all things. He is called Vishvavidyesha 17 because he is the master of all knowledge. He is called Vishvayoni 18 because he is the cause of the origin of all things, i.e., the teacher. He is called Anashvara 19 because his form is never destroyed. 101. He is called Vishvadrishva 20 because he sees all things. He is called Vibhu 21 because he is present everywhere, not just in knowledge, but also because he is capable of liberating all beings from the world, or because he is endowed with supreme excellence. He is called Dhātā 22 because he liberates worldly beings and places them in the state of liberation, or because he nourishes all beings, or because he creates the path to liberation. He is called Vishvesha 23 because he is the lord of the entire universe. He is called Vishvalochana 24 because he sees all things, or because he is like the eyes of all beings, giving them the right path and advice. He is called Vishvavyaapi 25 because his knowledge is present everywhere, because he knows all the objects of the world. He is called Vidhi 26 because he establishes the appropriate path to liberation. He is called Vedha 27 because he creates the world in the form of Dharma. He is called Shashvata 28 because he is eternally present. He is called Vishvatomukha 29 because his face is seen in all directions in the Samavasarana assemblies, or because he is like water, removing the dirt of sin. 
1. He is called Swayamatmana Bhavatīti. 2. He is called Vrisheṇa Dharmeṇa Bhavatīti. 3. He is called Sha Sukhe Bhavatīti. 4. He is called Swayamprakasha. 5. He is called Karana. 

Page #695:
---------------------------
##  605

**The Twenty-Fifth Chapter**

**Vishvakarma, the Supreme Being of the Universe, the Lord of the Jinas.**

He is the Lord of all the worlds, the Lord of the light of the universe. ||103||

The Jina, the Victorious, the immeasurable soul, the Lord of the universe, the Lord of the world. He is the Infinite Victor, the Incomprehensible Soul, the friend of the liberated souls, the unbound. ||104||

He is the first being of the age, Brahma, the five-fold Brahma, Shiva. He is the Supreme, the most Supreme, the subtle, the Supreme Lord, the eternal. ||105||

He is self-luminous, unborn, without a womb, without origin. He is the conqueror of delusion, the victorious, the righteous, the wheel-turner of Dharma, the banner of compassion. ||106||

Those who are doers, pure, and free from craving are called **Vishvato-mukha** (all-faced). ||102||

You established the field of karma and taught all actions and deeds, including the sword and the measuring rod, for the livelihood of people. Therefore, you are called **Vishvakarma** (the creator of the universe). You are the most senior, the best in the world, therefore you are called **Jagaj-jyestha** (the most senior of the world). You are full of infinite qualities, or the form of all things is reflected in your knowledge, therefore you are called **Vishvamurti** (the form of the universe). You conquer the enemies in the form of karma, and you are the Lord of the right-seeing beings, therefore you are called **Jineshwara** (the Lord of the Jinas). You have a general view of all the things in the world, therefore you are called **Vishvadrik** (the seer of the universe). You are the Lord of all beings, therefore you are called **Vishvabhut-esha** (the Lord of all beings). Your light of pure knowledge pervades the entire universe, therefore you are called **Vishvajyoti** (the light of the universe). You are the Lord of all, but you have no Lord, therefore you are called **Anishwara** (without a Lord). ||103||

You have conquered the enemies in the form of bad karma, therefore you are called **Jina** (the conqueror). Conquering the enemies in the form of karma is your nature, therefore you are called **Jishnu** (the victorious). No one has known your soul, your infinite qualities, therefore you are called **Ameyatma** (the immeasurable soul). You are the Lord of the earth, therefore you are called **Vishwarish** (the Lord of the universe). You are the Lord of the three worlds, therefore you are called **Jagatpati** (the Lord of the world). You have conquered the infinite world, or the false view, therefore you are called **Anant-jit** (the infinite conqueror). Your soul cannot be contemplated even by the mind, therefore you are called **Achintyatma** (the incomprehensible soul). You are the well-wisher of the liberated souls, therefore you are called **Bhavya-bandhu** (the friend of the liberated souls). You are free from the bondage of karma, therefore you are called **Abandhan** (the unbound). ||104||

You were born at the beginning of this age, the field of karma, therefore you are called **Yugadhipurusha** (the first being of the age). The qualities of pure knowledge, etc., are increasing in you, therefore you are called **Brahma** (the creator). You
Page #696:
---------------------------
The Adipurana, the peaceful, the infinite, the one worshipped by yogis and the lord of yogis. The knower of Brahman, the knower of the essence of Brahman, the knower of the Brahmanic knowledge, the lord of the ascetics. ||10|| Pure, enlightened, with an enlightened soul, the one who has attained enlightenment, the one who established the right path. The perfected one, the knower of the perfected principles, the one who is worthy of being worshipped, the one who has achieved perfection, the benefactor of the world. ||10|| Tolerant, unshakeable, infinite, the powerful, the one who has emerged from existence. The powerful, the ageless, the invincible, the radiant, the lord of wisdom, the unchangeable. ||109||

They are not born in the 84 lakh species, hence they are called Ayo nij 60. They are the conquerors of the enemy in the form of delusion, hence they are called Moharivijayi 61. They always exist in the most excellent form, hence they are called Jeta 62. You have set in motion the wheel of Dharma, hence you are called Dharmachakra 63. Compassion is your flag, hence you are called Dayadhwaj 64. ||106||

All your enemies in the form of karma have been pacified, hence you are called Prashantar 65. No one has been able to find the end of your soul, hence you are called Anantatma 66. You are endowed with yoga, i.e., Kevalgyan, etc., or you are engaged in meditation, or you are adorned with the means of liberation, such as Samyagdarshan, etc., hence you are called Yogi 67. The yogis, i.e., the monks, worship you, hence you are called Yogishwararchit 68. You know Brahman, i.e., the pure self, hence you are called Brahmavitt 69. You know the secret of Brahman, i.e., the essence of the self, hence you are called Brahmatattvagya 70. You know all the principles, i.e., the knowledge of the self in the form of Kevalgyan, spoken by Brahma, hence you are called Brahmadyavit 71. You are the lord of the disciplined monks who strive to attain liberation, hence you are called Yateeshwar 72. ||107||

You are pure 73 because you are free from the stains of karma, such as attachment, aversion, etc. You are called Buddha 74 because you are endowed with the knowledge of Kevalgyan, which knows all the objects of the world. Your soul is always illuminated by pure knowledge, hence you are called Prabuddhatma 75. All your purposes have been fulfilled, hence you are called Siddharth 76. Your rule is established, i.e., famous, hence you are called Siddhasasan 77. You have attained your infinite qualities, or you are about to attain the state of liberation very soon, hence you are called Siddha 78. You know the twelve-limbed principles, hence you are called Siddhantvid 79. Everyone meditates on you, hence you are called Dhyeya 80. All your achievable tasks have been accomplished, hence you are called Siddhasadhya 81. You are the benefactor of all the beings in the world, hence you are called Jagaddhit 82. ||108||

You are tolerant 83, i.e., you are a treasure trove of the quality of forgiveness. You are never deviated from the qualities of knowledge, etc., hence you
Page #697:
---------------------------
## The Twenty-Fifth Chapter

**Vibhavasu, Khambhushnu, Swayambhrushnu, Puratan, Paramatma, Paranjyoti, Trijagat Parameshwar.** ||110||

Thus ends the Srimad Adishatam.

**Divyabhashapathi, Divya, Putavak, Puta Shasan, Putaatma, Paranjyoti, Dharmaadhyaksha, Dameshwar.** ||111||

**Shripathi, Mangavan, Ahan, Raja, Viraja, Shuchi, Tirthakrit, Kevali, Ishana, Pujarah, Snataka, Amal.** ||112||

**Anantdeepti, Gyaanatma, Swayambuddha, Prajapati, Mukta, Shakto, Nirabadho, Nishkalo, Bhuvaneshwar.** ||113||

**You are called Avyaya** ||109|| **because your expenditure, meaning your destruction, never happens.**

**You are called Vibhavasu** ||94|| **because you are like fire to burn the fuel of karma, or like the sun to destroy the darkness of delusion.**

**You are called Asambhushnu** ||95|| **because you will not be reborn in the world again.**

**You are called Swayambhushnu** ||96|| **because you have attained this state by yourself.**

**You are called Puratan** ||97|| **because you are ancient, meaning you are eternally existent according to the Dravyarthic Nay.**

**You are called Paramatma** ||98|| **because your soul is supremely excellent.**

**You are called Paranjyoti** ||99|| **because you are the embodiment of the supreme light.**

**You are called Trijagat Parameshwar** ||100|| **because you are the Lord of the three worlds.**

**You are called Divyabhashapathi** ||101|| **because you are the master of the divine sound.**

**You are called Divya** ||102|| **because you are extremely beautiful.**

**You are called Putavak** ||103|| **because your words are extremely pure.**

**You are called Puta Shasan** ||104|| **because your rule is pure.**

**You are called Putaatma** ||105|| **because your soul is pure.**

**You are called Paranjyoti** ||106|| **because you are the embodiment of the supreme light.**

**You are called Dharmaadhyaksha** ||107|| **because you are the head of Dharma.**

**You are called Dameshwar** ||108|| **because you are the best among those who have conquered their senses.**

**You are called Shripathi** ||109|| **because you are the lord of the Lakshmi of liberation.**

**You are called Bhagavan** ||110|| **because you possess the eight great qualities of supreme wealth.**

**You are called Arhan** ||111|| **because you are worthy of being worshipped by all.**

**You are called Araja** ||112|| **because you are free from the dust of karma.**

**You are called Viraja** ||113|| **because you remove the karma of the worthy beings, or because you are free from the karma of knowledge-obscuration and perception-obscuration.**

**You are called Shuchi** ||114|| **because you are extremely pure.**

**You are called Tirthakrit** ||115|| **because you are the creator of the Dharma-Tirtha.**

**You are called
Page #698:
---------------------------
## Adipurana 3

**114**
Nir-anjana, Jagat-jyoti, Nirukta-ukti, Anamaya, Achal-sthiti, Akshobhya, Kutastha, Sthanu, Akshaya.

**115**
Pranita, Praneta, Nyaya-shastra-krit, Shasta, Dharma-pati, Dharmya, Dharma-atma, Dharma-tirtha-krit.

**116**
Vrishadhwaja, Vrishadhish, Vrishaketu, Vrishayudha, Vrisha, Vrishapati, Bharta, Vrishabhanka, Vrishodbhava.

**117**
Hirany-nabhuta-atma, Bhuta-bhrut, Bhuta-bhavana, Prabhava, Vibhava, Masvan, Bhava, Bhava, Bhavantaka.

**113**
They are called **Nirabadha** because they are free from obstacles, **Nishkala** because they are free from body and Maya, and **Bhuvaneshwar** because they are the Lord of the three worlds.

**114**
They are called **Nir-anjana** because they are free from the stain of karma, **Jagat-jyoti** because they illuminate the world, **Nirukta-ukti** because their words are meaningful and free from contradictions, **Anamaya** because they are free from disease, **Achal-sthiti** because their state is unmoving, **Akshobhya** because they are never disturbed, **Kutastha** because they are eternal, **Sthanu** because they are free from movement, and **Akshaya** because they are imperishable.

**115**
They are called **Pranita** because they are the best in the three worlds, **Gramani** because they lead the group of worthy beings to liberation, **Neta** because they lead all beings to the path of welfare, **Praneta** because they are the creators of the twelve-limbed scripture, **Nyaya-shastra-krit** because they teach the science of justice, **Shasta** because they teach welfare, **Dharma-pati** because they are the masters of the highest virtues like forgiveness, **Dharmya** because they are full of virtue, **Dharma-atma** because their soul is virtuous, and **Dharma-tirtha-krit** because they are the creators of the virtuous pilgrimage.

**116**
They are called **Vrishadhwaja** because their flag has the symbol of a bull, or because Dharma itself is their flag, or because they are marked with the symbol of a bull, **Vrishadhish** because they are the master of Dharma, **Vrishaketu** because they are the flag of Dharma, **Vrishayudha** because they have taken up the weapon of Dharma to destroy the enemies of karma, **Vrisha** because they are Dharma itself, **Vrishapati** because they are the master of Dharma, **Bharta** because they nourish all beings, **Vrishabhanka** because they are marked with the symbol of a bull, and **Vrishodbhava** because they were born as a Tirthankara by practicing the highest Dharma.

**117**
They are called **Hirany-nabhuta-atma** because they have a beautiful navel, **Bhuta-atma** because their soul is truth, **Bhuta-bhrut** because they protect all beings, **Bhuta-bhavana** because their thoughts are very noble, **Prabhava** because
Page #699:
---------------------------
## Twenty-Fifth Chapter

Hiranyagarbha, Shrigarbha, Prabhutavibhavo'bhavah.  
Swayamprabhu Prabhutaatma Bhutanatho Jagatpatih. || 118 || 
Sarvaadih Sarvatrik Sarvah Sarvajnah Sarvadarshanah. 
Sarvaatma Sarvalokeshah Sarvavit Sarvalokajit. || 119 || 
Sugatih Sushrutaha Sushrutsuvaak Surir Bahushrutaha. 
Vishrutaha Vishvatah Paado Vishvashirshah Shuchishravaah. || 120 ||

**609**

Birth is praiseworthy, therefore you are called Prabhava 162.  
Being devoid of the world, you are called Vibhava 163. 
Due to being effulgent, you are called Bhasvan 164. 
You are constantly born in the form of production, expenditure, and destruction, therefore you are called Bhava 165. 
You are absorbed in your own consciousness, therefore you are called Bhava 166. 
You are the end of worldly wandering, therefore you are called Bhavantak 167. || 117 ||

When you were in the womb, the earth became golden, and the gods rained gold from the sky, therefore you are called Hiranyagarbha 168. 
Infinite fourfold Lakshmi shines in your inner being, therefore you are called Shrigarbha 169. 
Your wealth is immense, therefore you are called Prabhutavibhavo 170. 
You are called Abhava 171 because you are birthless. 
You are called Swayamprabhu 172 because you are self-sufficient. 
Your soul is omnipresent, beyond the need for knowledge, therefore you are called Prabhutaatma 173. 
You are the lord of all beings, therefore you are called Bhutanatha 174. 
You are the lord of the three worlds, therefore you are called Jagatpati 175. || 118 ||

You are the most important, therefore you are called Sarvaadi 176. 
You see all things, therefore you are called Sarvadrik 177. 
You benefit all, therefore you are called Sarvah 178. 
You know all things, therefore you are called Sarvajnah 179. 
Your vision, i.e., Samyaktva or Kevaladarshan, has attained its full state, therefore you are called Sarvadarshan 180. 
You wish well for all, you consider all equal to yourself, or all the objects of the world are reflected in your soul, therefore you are called Sarvaatma 181. 
You are the lord of all people, therefore you are called Sarvalokeshah 182. 
You know all things, therefore you are called Sarvavit 183. 
You have conquered all the worlds, you are the greatest, therefore you are called Sarvalokajit 184. || 119 ||

Your liberation-like movement is extremely beautiful, or your knowledge is very excellent, therefore you are called Sugatih 185. 
You are extremely famous, or you are the holder of excellent scriptures, therefore you are called Sushruta 186. 
You hear the prayers of all beings, therefore you are called Sushrut 187. 
Your words are very excellent, therefore you are called Suvaak 188
Page #700:
---------------------------
## English Translation:

**610**

*Adipurana* 'He is called *Sahanshirsh* (195) because of his infinite bliss, *Kshetrajna* (196) because of his knowledge of the soul (Kshetra), *Sahasraksh* (197) because he knows infinite things, *Sahasrapat* (198) because he possesses infinite power, *Bhootbhavyabhavabharta* (199) because he is the lord of the past, present, and future, and *Vishvavidyameshwara* (200) because he is the supreme lord of all knowledge.' ||12||

*Thus ends the Divyaadi Shatam*

*You are called *Sthavisht* (201) because you are extremely vast in comparison to appropriate qualities, *Sthavir* (202) because you are old due to qualities like knowledge, *Jyesht* (203) because you are extremely prominent in all three worlds, *Prasht* (204) because you are the leader of all, *Presht* (205) because you are extremely dear to all, *Varishtdhi* (206) because your intellect is extremely superior, *Shesht* (207) because you are extremely stable, *Garisht* (208) because you are extremely heavy, *Banhisht* (209) because you possess many forms in comparison to qualities, *Shresht* (210) because you are extremely prominent, *Anisht* (211) because you are extremely subtle, and *Garishtgi* (212) because your speech is filled with extreme glory.' ||122||

*You are called *Vishvamut* (213) because you destroy the cycle of four births, *Vishvasrit* (214) because you manage the entire universe, *Vishvet* (215) because you are the lord of all worlds, *Vishvamuk* (216) because you protect the entire universe, *Vishvanayak* (217) because you are the master of all worlds, *Vishvasi* (218) because you are present in the entire universe, *Vishvarupatma* (219) because your form is *Kevalgyan* (perfect knowledge) or because your soul is multi-faceted, *Vishvjit* (220) because you conquer all, and *Vijitantak* (221) because you conquer death.' ||123||

*You are called *Vibhav* (222) because your worldly wanderings have ceased, *Vibhay* (223) because your fear has vanished, *Vir* (224) because you are infinitely powerful, *Vishuk* (225) because you are free from sorrow, *Vijar* (226) because you are free from old age, *Jaran* (227) because you are the oldest among all beings in the world, *Viraag* (228) because you are free from attachment, *Virat* (229) because you are free from all desires, *Asang* (230) because you are free from all attachments, *Vivikt* (231) because you are detached, *Vitamatsar* (232) because you are free from envy, *Vitarag* (233) because you are free from attachment, *Vitar* (234) because you are free from fear, *V
Page #701:
---------------------------
## Twenty-fifth Chapter

They are called **Vineyajanatabandhu** (233) because they are well-wishers of their disciples, **Vilinaasheshakamasha** (234) because all their karmas are destroyed, **Viyoga** (235) because they are free from the fluctuations of the self caused by mind, speech, and body, **Yogavid** (236) because they know the nature of yoga (meditation), **Vidwan** (237) because they know all things, **Vidhata** (238) because they are the creators of the universe in the form of dharma, **Suvidhi** (239) because their actions are excellent, and **Sudhi** (240) because their intellect is excellent. || 125 ||

They are called **Kshantibhaak** (241) because they possess great forbearance, **Prithvimurti** (242) because they are as tolerant as the earth, **Shanthibhaak** (243) because they are devotees of peace, **Salilatmak** (244) because they generate coolness like water, **Vayumurti** (245) because they are free from contact with external objects like air, **Asangatma** (246) because they are free from attachments, **Bahnimurti** (247) because they burn the fuel of karma like fire, and **Adharmadhak** (248) because they burn unrighteousness. || 126 ||

They are **Suyajwa** (249) because they perform the homa (fire sacrifice) of karmic material well, **Yajmanatma** (250) because they worship their own nature, **Sutwa** (251) because they are anointed in the ocean of self-bliss, **Sutramapujita** (252) because they are worshipped by Indra, **Ritvik** (253) because they are called the teacher in performing the knowledge-sacrifice, **Yajnapati** (254) because they are the chief authority of the sacrifice, **Yajya** (255) because they are worthy of worship, **Yajyang** (256) because they are parts of the sacrifice, **Amrita** (257) because they destroy the thirst for worldly objects, and **Havi** (258) because they have offered their own impure karmic results in the knowledge-sacrifice. || 127 ||

They are **Vyommurti** (259) because they are as pure as the sky, or they are pervading the world and the non-world in relation to pure knowledge, **Amurtatma** (260) because they are free from form, taste, smell, and touch, **Nirlep** (261) because they are free from the stain of karma, **Nirmal** (262) because they are free from impurities, **Achal** (263) because they always exist in one form, **Sommurti** (264) because they are peaceful, beautiful, or radiant like the moon, **Susomyatma** (265) because their soul is extremely gentle, **SuryaMurti** (266) because they are as radiant as the sun, and **Mahaprabha** (267) because they possess immense brilliance. || 128 ||

1. **Kshamabhaak** is therefore due to this reason. Similarly, it should be applied to the rest.
2. **Shobhanhota** means beautiful.
3.
Page #702:
---------------------------
612
He is known as Maadipuranam, Mantravint, Mantrakrit, Mantri, Mantramurti, Anantga,  Svatantra, Tantrakrit, Svantah, Kritaantah, Kritaantakrit. ||129|| He is Kriti, Krtaarth, Satkrit, Kritakrit, Kritakratu, Niryah, Mrityunjaya, Amrityu, Amritaatma, Amritodbhava. ||130|| He is Brahmnishtha, Parabrahma, Brahmaatma, Brahmasambhava, Mahabrahmaapati, Brahmaet, Mahabrahmapedeswar. ||131|| He is Suprasanna, Prasannaatma, Gyanadharmadam Prabhu, Prashamaatma, Prashaantama, Puraanapurushottama. ||132||
Thus ends the Shatakam of Stavistha.
He is called Maha Prabhu 267. ||12|| He is called Mantravint 268 because he knows the Mantras. He is called Mantrakrit 269 because he performs many Mantras. He is called Mantri 270 because he is endowed with Mantras. He is called Mantramurti 271 because he is in the form of Mantra. He is called Anantga 272 because he knows infinite things. He is called Svatantra 273 because he is free from the bondage of karma. He is called Tantrakrit 274 because he performs the scriptures. He is called Svantah 275 because your inner self is excellent. He is called Kritaantah 276 because you have ended the Yama Raja, the death. He is called Kritaantakrit 277 because you are the creator of the Agam. ||129|| He is called Kriti 278 because you are very skilled or virtuous. He is called Krtaarth 279 because you have achieved all the goals of the soul. He is called Satkrit 280 because he is worthy of being honored by all the beings of the world. He is called Kritakrit 281 because he has done all the work. He is called Kritakratu 282 because he has performed the Yajna in the form of glory or penance. He is called Nitya 283 because he is always present. He is called Mrityunjaya 284 because he has conquered death. He is called Amrityu 285 because he is free from death. He is called Amritaatma 286 because your soul is like nectar, always peaceful. He is called Amritodbhava 287 because your birth is going to be excellent in nectar, i.e., liberation. ||130|| He is called Brahmnishtha 288 because he always remains absorbed in the pure self-form. He is called Parabrahma 289 because he is the supreme Brahma form. He is called Brahmaatma 290 because Brahma, i.e., knowledge or celibacy, is your nature. He is called Brahmasambhava 291 because you have attained the pure self-form yourself and you make it happen for others. He is called Mahabrahmaapati 292 because he is the lord of even the Mahabrahma like Ganadhar. He is called Brahmaet 293 because you are the master of only knowledge. He is called Mahabrahmapedeswar 294 because he is the God of the Arhanta and Siddhatva state, i.e., Mahabrahma Pad. ||131|| He
Page #703:
---------------------------
The twenty-fifth chapter:

The great Ashoka flag, Ashoka, who is the creator, the one seated on a lotus seat. He is the lord of lotuses, born of a lotus, the one with a lotus navel, the unsurpassed. He is the one born of a lotus, the one born of the world, the one worthy of praise, the lord of praise. He is the one worthy of praise, the lord of the senses, the one who has conquered the conquerable, the one who has done his duty. He is the lord of the ganas, the best of the ganas, the one worthy of being counted, the virtuous, the leader of the ganas. He is the ocean of virtues, the knower of virtues, the leader of virtues. He is the one who respects virtues, the one who destroys virtues, the one without virtues, the one with virtuous speech, the one who is worthy of refuge, the one with virtuous speech, the one who is worthy of praise, the one who is the leader of virtues.

It is said: The great Ashoka tree is your symbol, therefore you are called the great Ashoka flag. You are free from sorrow, therefore you are called Ashoka. You give happiness to all, therefore you are called 'Ka'. You create the path to heaven and liberation, therefore you are called the creator. You are seated on a lotus seat, therefore you are called the one seated on a lotus seat. You are the lord of Lakshmi, therefore you are called the lord of lotuses. When you walk, the gods create lotuses beneath your feet, therefore you are called the one born of a lotus. Your navel is like a lotus, therefore people call you the one with a lotus navel. And there is no one greater than you, therefore you are called the unsurpassed.

O Lord, your body was born in the lotus-shaped womb of your mother, therefore you are called the one born of a lotus. You are the cause of the creation of the world, which is in the form of dharma, therefore you are called the one born of the world. The worthy beings desire to attain you through penance and other practices, therefore you are called the one who is to be attained. You are worthy of being praised by Indra and other gods, therefore you are called the one worthy of praise. You are the lord of praise, therefore you are called the lord of praise. You are worthy of being praised, therefore you are called the one worthy of praise. You are the lord of the senses, therefore you are called the lord of the senses. You have conquered all your enemies, such as attachment, therefore you are called the one who has conquered the conquerable. You have done all your duties, therefore you are called the one who has done his duty.

You are the lord of the twelve ganas, therefore you are called the lord of the ganas. You are the best of all the ganas, therefore you are called the best of the ganas. You are the one worthy of being counted in all the three worlds, therefore you are called the one worthy of being counted. You are pure, therefore you are called the virtuous. You lead all the beings in the ganas to the path of liberation, therefore you are called the leader of the ganas. You are the mine of virtues, therefore you are called the ocean of virtues. You are the collection of virtues, therefore you are called the ocean of virtues. You know the virtues, therefore you are called the knower of virtues. You are the lord of virtues, therefore you are called the leader of virtues.

You respect virtues, therefore you are called the one who respects virtues. You destroy the virtues of sattva, rajas, tamas, or lust, anger, etc., therefore you are called the one who destroys virtues. You are free from the virtues of sattva, rajas, tamas, or
Page #704:
---------------------------
## Ādipurāṇam

**137.**  Agṇyaḥ puṇyadhīrguṇyaḥ puṇyakṛt puṇyaśāsanaḥ | Dharmarāmo guṇaprāmaḥ puṇyāpuṇyanirodhakaḥ || 137 ||

**138.** Pāpāpetaḥ vipāpātmā vipāpmā vītakalmaṣaḥ | Nirdvandvo' nirmadaḥ śānto nirmoho nirupadravaḥ || 138 ||

**139.** Nirnimeṣo nirāhāraḥ niṣkriyo nirupaplavaḥ | Niṣkalanko nirastena nirdhūtāṅgaḥ nirāsravaḥ || 139 ||

**140.** Viśālo vipulajyotiḥstulo'cintayvaibhavaḥ | Susamvṛtaḥ suguptātmā subhṛt sunayatatvavīt || 140 ||

**614.**  They are called **Śaraṇya** (333) because they are worthy of refuge, **Pūtavāk** (334) because their words are pure, **Pūta** (335) because they are themselves pure, **Vareṇya** (336) because they are excellent, and **Puṇyanāyaka** (337) because they are the lord of merit. || 136 ||

You are **Agṇya** (338) because you are immeasurable, **Puṇyadhī** (339) because you possess pure intellect, **Guṇya** (340) because you are endowed with virtues, **Puṇyakṛt** (341) because you perform meritorious deeds, and **Puṇyaśāsana** (342) because your rule is virtuous. You are **Dharmarāma** (343) because you are like a garden of Dharma, **Guṇagrāma** (344) because you possess a multitude of virtues, and **Puṇyāpuṇyanirodhaka** (345) because you have stopped both merit and demerit by being absorbed in pure use. || 137 ||

You are **Pāpāpeta** (346) because you are free from sins like violence, **Vipāpātmā** (347) because your soul is free from all sins, **Vipāpmā** (348) because you have destroyed sinful actions, and **Vītakalmaṣa** (349) because all your blemishes like attachment, aversion, etc., in the form of karmic impurities, have been destroyed. You are **Nirdvandva** (350) because you are free from attachment, **Nirmada** (351) because you are free from ego, **Nirmoha** (352) because your delusion has been eradicated, and **Niruapadrava** (353) because you are free from troubles and afflictions. || 138 ||

You are **Nirnimeṣa** (354) because your eyelids do not blink, **Nirāhāra** (355) because you do not eat, **Niṣkriya** (356) because you are free from worldly actions, **Nirupaplava** (358) because you are free from obstacles, **Niṣkalanka** (359) because you are free from blemishes, **Nirastena** (360) because you have removed all sins, **Nirdhūtāṅ
Page #705:
---------------------------
## Translation:

**615**

**Chapter 25**

The Muni, who possesses one knowledge, is called Ekavidya (370). The Muni, who possesses many great knowledges, is called Mahavidya (371). The Muni, who is a direct knower, is called Muni (373). The Muni, who is the master of all, is called Parivruddha (374). The Muni, who protects the beings of the world, is called Pati (375). The Muni, who is the master of intellect, is called Dheesh (376). The Muni, who is the treasure of knowledge, is called VidyNidhi (377). The Muni, who knows all things directly, is called Sakshi (378). The Muni, who reveals the path to liberation, is called Vineta (379). The Muni, who destroys Yama (death), is called Vihataantaka (380).

The Muni, who protects all beings from hell and other lower realms, is called Pita (381). The Muni, who is the teacher of all, is called Pitamaha (382). The Muni, who nourishes all, is called Pata (383). The Muni, who is extremely pure, is called Pavitra (384). The Muni, who purifies all, is called Pavana (385). The Muni, who is the goal of all aspiring souls, is called Gati (386). The Muni, who protects all beings, is called Trata (387). The Muni, who is the best physician to destroy the disease of birth, old age, and death, is called Bhishagvara (388). The Muni, who is the best, is called Vaya (389). The Muni, who grants desired objects, is called Varada (390). The Muni, whose knowledge and other virtues are supreme, is called Parama (391). The Muni, who purifies the soul and the Supreme Being, is called Puman (392).

The Muni, who describes the twelve Angas, is called Kavi (393). The Muni, who is eternal, is called Puranapurusha (394). The Muni, who is very old in terms of knowledge and other virtues, is called Varshiyan (395). The Muni, who is the best, is called Rishabha (396). The Muni, who is the first among the Tirthankaras, is called Puru (397). The Muni, who is the cause of stability and respect, is called Pratistaprasava (398). The Muni, who is the cause of all good deeds, is called Hetu (399). The Muni, who is the only teacher of the world, is called Bhuvanekapitamaha (400).

The Muni, who is marked by the Srivruksha symbol, is called Srivrukshalakshana (401). The Muni, who is subtle, is called Shlakshna (402). The Muni, who possesses all the characteristics, is called Lakshanya (403). The Muni, who has many auspicious signs on his body, is called Shubhalakshana (404). The Muni, who observes all things, or who does not see through the eye organ, is called Nireeksha (405). The Muni, whose eyes are as beautiful as the lotus flower, is called...

1. Pratyakshagyani (Direct knower)
2. Palaka (Nourisher)
3. Kavyakarta (Poet)
4. Vrudda (Old
Page #706:
---------------------------
616
The Adi Purana states that Siddha is:

* **Siddhi-da:** Giver of Siddhi (perfection)
* **Siddha-sankalpa:** One whose every resolve is fulfilled
* **Siddha-atma:** One whose soul has attained the state of Siddhi
* **Siddha-sadhana:** One who has attained the means of liberation (Samyak Darshan, Samyak Jnana, and Samyak Charitra)
* **Buddha-bodhya:** One who has known all that is knowable
* **Maha-bodhi:** One whose greatness is highly praiseworthy, possessing the three jewels (Ratnatraya)
* **Vardhaman:** One whose qualities continue to grow
* **Mahardhika:** One who possesses great powers

**146**
Siddha is also:

* **Vedanga:** The limb (cause) of the Vedas (Anuyoga)
* **Vedavit:** Knower of the Vedas
* **Vedya:** Knowable by the Rishis
* **Jatarupa:** One who is in the form of Digambar (sky-clad)
* **Vidavar:** The best among knowers
* **Vedavedha:** Knowable by the Agamas or Kevala Jnana
* **Swasamvedya:** Knowable through experience
* **Viveda:** One who is free from the three types of Vedas
* **Vadatavar:** The best among speakers

**147**
Siddha is further described as:

* **Anadinidhana:** One without beginning or end
* **Vyakta:** One who is completely clear through knowledge
* **Vyaktavaak:** One whose words are extremely clear
* **Vyaktasasana:** One whose rule is completely clear or manifest
* **Yugadhikrit:** The creator of the Yuga (era)
* **Yugadhara:** The sustainer of the Yuga
* **Yugad:** The beginning of the Yuga
* **Jagadad:** The origin of the world

**148**
Siddha is also:

* **Ateeindra:** One who has surpassed the Indras (kings of the gods) through his power
* **Ateeindriya:** One who is beyond the senses
* **Dheendra:** The master of intellect
* **Mahendra:** One who experiences supreme power
* **Ateeindriyarthadrik:** One who sees subtle, distant, and hidden objects
* **Anindriya:** One who is free from senses
* **Ahamindraya:** One who is worshipped by the Indras
* **Mahendramhita:** One who is worshipped by the great Indras

**Notes:**

1. **Bodhya:** Knowable, one who is worthy of being known
2. **Vardhaman:** One who is prosperous, rich, and has great wealth
3. **Vedajnapak:** One who reveals the Vedas
4. **Agamenya:** Knowable through the Agamas
5. **Ateeindra:** One who surpasses the Indras in power
6. **Ateeindriya:** One who transcends the senses
7. **Poojadhip:** One who is the master of worship
Page #707:
---------------------------
## Chapter Twenty-Five

**617**  **Udbhava**, **Karana**, **Karta**, **Paraga**, **Bhavataraka**, **Agaya**, **Gahana**, **Guhya**, **Paraya**, **Paramesvara** ||19|| • **Anantaridhi**, **Ameyaridhi**, **Achintyadhi**, **Samgradi**, **Pragaya**, **Pragrahara**, **Abhyagra**, **Pratyagra**, **Apya**, **Agrimo**, **Agraja** ||15||
**Mahatapa**, **Mahateaja**, **Mahouda**, **Mahoudaya**, **Mahayasha**, **Mahapatama**, **Mahasarava**, **Mahashati**, **Mahadyarya**, **Mahavirya**, **Mahasanma**, **Mahabala**, **Mahashanima**, **Mahjyotmi**, **Mahabuti**, **Mahayuti** ||152||

They are called and are themselves the greatest, therefore they are called **Mahaan** ||158|| You are elevated above the entire world, or your birth is the most excellent in the world, therefore you are called **Udbhava** ||443||, because you are the cause of liberation, you are called **Karana** ||444||, because you perform pure actions, you are called **Karta** ||445||, because you have attained the other shore of the ocean of the world, you are considered **Paraga** ||446||, because you are the one who saves the worthy beings from the ocean of the world, you are called **Bhavataraka** ||447||, because you are not attainable by anyone, that is, no one can understand your qualities, therefore you are called **Agadha** ||448||, because your nature is extremely profound or difficult, you are called **Gahana** ||449||, because you are in the form of a secret, you are **Guhya** ||450||, because you are the most excellent, you are **Paraya** ||451||, and because you are the most powerful, you are considered **Paramesvara** ||452||. ||149||

Your riches are infinite, immeasurable and inconceivable, therefore you are called **Anantaridhi** ||453||, **Ameyaridhi** ||454|| and **Achintyadhi** ||455||, your intellect has attained the complete state, therefore you are **Samgradi** ||456||, because you are the main one in everything, you are **Pragaya** ||457||, your remembrance is done first in every auspicious act, therefore you are **Pragrahara** ||458||, because you are in front of attaining the front part of the world, you are **Abhyagra** ||459||, because you are unique and new from all people, you are called **Pratyagra** ||460||, because you are the master of all, you are called **Apya** ||461||, because you are the forerunner of all, you are called **Agrimo** ||462||, and because you are the eldest, you are called **Agraja** ||463||. ||150||

You have performed great and difficult penance, therefore you are called **Mahatapa** ||464||, your great and heavy brilliance is spreading everywhere, therefore you are **Mahateaja** ||465||, the result of your penance is great and heavy, therefore you are called **Mahouda** ||466||, your wealth is great and heavy, therefore you are considered **Mah
Page #708:
---------------------------
## Translation:

**618**

**153.**  He is called **Mahamaati** (Great Intellect) because he is extremely intelligent, **Mahaneeti** (Great Justice) because he is extremely just, **Mahakshanati** (Great Patience) because he is extremely patient, **Mahadaaya** (Great Compassion) because he is extremely compassionate, **Mahapraajna** (Great Wise) because he is extremely wise, **Mahaabhaaga** (Great Fortunate) because he is extremely fortunate, **Mahanaanada** (Great Joyful) because he is extremely joyful, and **Mahaakavi** (Great Poet) because he is the best poet.

**154.** He is called **Mahamaaha** (Great Great) because he is extremely radiant, **Mahakeerti** (Great Fame) because he is the holder of great fame, **Mahakaanati** (Great Radiance) because he is endowed with extraordinary radiance, **Mahaavapu** (Great Body) because he has a magnificent body, **Mahaadaana** (Great Giver) because he is very generous, **Mahajnaana** (Great Knowledge) because he is omniscient, **Mahayoga** (Great Yogi) because he is a great meditator, and **Mahaaguna** (Great Virtues) because he is the holder of great virtues.

**155.** He is called **Mahamahapati** (Great Lord of Festivals) because he is the lord of many great festivals, **Praaptamahakalyaanapachak** (Obtainer of Five Great Auspiciousness) because he has obtained the five great auspiciousness (womb, birth, etc.), **Mahapraabhu** (Great Lord) because he is the greatest lord, **Mahapraatihaaryaadheesha** (Lord of Eight Great Miracles) because he is the lord of the eight great miracles (Ashoka tree, etc.), and **Maheshvara** (Great Lord of Gods) because he is the lord of all gods.

**156.** He is called **Mahamauni** (Great Sage) because he is the best among all sages, **Mahamauni** (Great Silent) because he is devoid of unnecessary speech, **Mahaadhyaana** (Great Meditator) because he practices the meditation of white light, **Mahadama** (Great Self-Controlled) because he is extremely self-controlled, **Mahakshama** (Great Forgiving) because he is extremely forgiving, **Maashaila** (Great Virtuous) because he is endowed with great virtues, **Mahayajna** (Great Performer of Sacrifice) because he performs the sacrifice of karma in the fire of penance, and **Mahamaakha** (Great Worthy of Worship) because he is extremely worthy of worship.

**157.** He is called **Mahavrataapati** (Lord of Five Great Vows) because he is the lord of the five great vows, **Mayah** (Great Worthy of Worship) because he is worthy of worship by the world, **Mahakaanatidhara** (Holder of Great Radiance) because he is the holder of great radiance, **Adhipa** (Lord) because he is the lord of all, **Mahamaitrimaaya** (Great Compassionate) because he has compassion for all beings, **Ameya** (Unmeasurable) because he is the holder of immeasurable virtues, **Mahopaaya** (Great Means) because he is endowed with the best means of liberation, and **Mahomaya** (Great Light) because he is the embodiment of light.

**158.** He is called **Mahaakaarunika** (Great Compassionate) because he is extremely compassionate, **Mantaa** (Great Knower) because he knows
Page #709:
---------------------------
## Chapter Twenty-Five

**616**

* **Maha-dhvara-dhara** (525) - Holder of the great sacrificial fire, due to being the holder of the vast sacrificial fire.
* **Dhuryo** (526) - Steadfast, due to bearing the burden of the entire realm of action.
* **Mahoudaryo** (527) - Extremely generous, due to being extremely generous.
* **Maheshta-vak** (528) - Possessor of the best words, due to being endowed with the best words.
* **Mahatma** (529) - Great soul, due to being the holder of a great soul.
* **Mahasan-dhama** (530) - Abode of all brilliance, due to being the abode of all brilliance.
* **Maharshi** (531) - Great sage, due to being the chief among sages.
* **Mahito-daya** (532) - Possessor of a noble birth, due to being the possessor of a noble birth.

**617**

* **Maha-klesha-ankusha** (533) - Great bridle of afflictions, due to being like a bridle for destroying great afflictions.
* **Shuro** (534) - Hero, due to being a valiant hero in conquering enemies of karma.
* **Maha-bhuta-pati** (535) - Lord of the great elements, due to being the lord of great beings like the Ganadharas.
* **Guru** (536) - Teacher, due to being the best in all three realms.
* **Maha-parakrama** (537) - Possessor of great power, due to being the possessor of great power.
* **Ananta** (538) - Infinite, due to being infinite.
* **Maha-krodha-ripu** (539) - Great enemy of anger, due to being the great enemy of anger.
* **Vashi** (540) - Subduer, due to subduing all the senses.

**618**

* **Maha-bhava-abdhi-santari** (541) - Savior from the ocean of existence, due to leading across the ocean of existence.
* **Maha-moha-adri-sudana** (542) - Destroyer of the mountain of delusion, due to destroying the mountain of delusion.
* **Maha-guna-akara** (543) - Mine of great virtues, due to being the mine of great virtues like right faith.
* **Kshata** (544) - Patient, due to conquering passions like anger.
* **Maha-yogi-ishvara** (545) - Lord of great yogis, due to being the lord of great yogis and ascetics.
* **Shami** (546) - Peaceful, due to being extremely peaceful.

**619**

* **Maha-dhyana-pati** (547) - Lord of great meditation, due to being the lord of great meditation like white meditation.
* **Dhyata-maha-dharma** (548) - Contemplator of great dharma, due to contemplating great dharma like non-violence.
* **Maha-vrata** (549) - Possessor of great vows, due to possessing great vows.
* **Maha-karma-ariha** (550) - Destroyer of great karmic enemies, due to destroying great karmic enemies.
* **Atma-jna**
Page #710:
---------------------------
##  Chapter 620

**165.**  The Supreme Being is called **Adipurana** (the first Purana), **Pradhana** (the chief), **Marma** (the essence), **Prakriti** (nature), **Param** (the supreme), **Paramodaya** (the supreme awakening), **Prakshinabandh** (the one who has shed the bonds of karma), **Kamar** (the enemy of desire), **Kshemakrit** (the benefactor), and **Kshemasasan** (the ruler of welfare).

**166.**  The Supreme Being is called **Pranava** (the syllable Om), **Pranat** (the one who is worshipped), **Pran** (life), **Pranada** (the giver of life), **Pranateshwar** (the lord of the liberated souls), **Praman** (the proof), **Pranidhi** (the one who possesses infinite knowledge), **Daksh** (the competent), **Dakshin** (the righteous), **Adhwaryu** (the performer of the yajna), and **Adhvar** (the guide).

**167.**  The Supreme Being is called **Anand** (bliss), **Nandan** (the giver of bliss), **Nand** (the prosperous), **Vanya** (the one who is worthy of worship), **Anindh** (the one who is free from blame), **Abhinandan** (the one who is praised), **Kamaha** (the destroyer of desire), **Kamada** (the giver of desires), **Kamy** (the desirable), **Kamadhenu** (the wish-fulfilling cow), and **Ariinjaya** (the conqueror of enemies).

**168.**  The Supreme Being is called **Asanskruta-susanskara** (the one who possesses the highest virtues without being influenced by others), **Prakrit** (the natural), **Vaikritantkrit** (the one who destroys the impurities), **Antkrit** (the one who ends the cycle of birth and death), **Kantgu** (the one who possesses beautiful radiance, speech, and senses), **Kant** (the beautiful), **Chintamani** (the wish-fulfilling gem), and **Abhishtda** (the giver of desired heaven and liberation).

**169.**  The Supreme Being is called **Ajit** (the unconquerable), **Jitkamari** (the conqueror of desire), **Amit** (the limitless), **Amitshasan** (the giver of unparalleled dharma), **Jitkrodh** (the conqueror of anger), **Jitamit** (the conqueror of enemies), **Jitklesh** (the conqueror of afflictions), and **Jitantak** (the conqueror of death).

**164.**  The Supreme Being is called **Jnan Sarvag** (the one who is omnipresent through knowledge).

**165.**  The Supreme Being is called **Pradhana** (the chief) because of the concentration of the soul, **Atma** (the soul) because of being the essence of knowledge, **Prakriti** (nature) because of the excellent deeds, **Param** (the supreme) because of being the holder of the highest wealth, **Paramodaya** (the supreme awakening) because of the highest awakening, **Prakshinabandh** (the one who has shed the bonds of karma) because of the shedding of the bonds of karma, **Kamar** (the enemy of desire) because of being the enemy of desire, **Kshemakrit** (the benefactor) because of being the benefactor, and **Kshemasasan** (the ruler of welfare) because of giving auspicious teachings.

**
Page #711:
---------------------------
## English Translation:

621
The twenty-fifth chapter: The Jina is called **Jineendra** (617) because he conquers the enemies in the form of karmas, **Paramānanda** (618) because he is the holder of supreme bliss, **Munīndra** (619) because he is the lord of the monks, **Dundubhisvana** (620) because he has a deep voice like the sound of a drum, **Mahendravanhya** (621) because he is worshipped by the great Indras, **Yogīndra** (622) because he is the lord of the yogis, **Yatīndra** (623) because he is the master of the ascetics, and **Nābinandan** (624) because he is the son of Nābhi Mahārāja. ||17||

He is also called **Nābheya** (625) because he is a descendant of Nābhi Mahārāja, **Nābhija** (626) because he is born from Nābhi Mahārāja, **Ajāta** (627) because he is birthless in terms of the Dravyārthika Naya, **Suvrata** (628) because he is the holder of the highest vows, **Manu** (629) because he reveals the entire system of the karma-bhūmi or because he is in the form of contemplation and knowledge, **Uttama** (630) because he is the best, **Abhedya** (631) because he cannot be penetrated by anyone, **Anatya** (632) because he is imperishable, **Anāśvān** (633) because he is engaged in austerities, **Adhika** (634) because he is the best or because he has attained true happiness, **Adhiguru** (635) because he is the supreme teacher, and **Sudhī** (636) because he is the holder of excellent words. ||17||

He is also called **Sumedhā** (637) because he has excellent intellect, **Vikramī** (638) because he is powerful, **Svāmī** (639) because he is the lord of all, **Durādharṣī** (640) because he cannot be insulted, harmed, or prevented by anyone, **Nirutsuka** (641) because he is free from worldly desires, **Viśiṣṭa** (642) because he is special, **Śiṣṭabhuka** (643) because he nourishes the noble ones, **Śiṣṭa** (644) because he is virtuous, **Pratyaya** (645) because he is in the form of faith or knowledge, **Kāmanī** (646) because he is charming, and **Anagha** (647) because he is sinless. ||172||

He is also called **Kṣemī** (648) because he is full of welfare, **Kṣemaṁkara** (649) because he brings welfare to the worthy beings, **Akṣaya** (650) because he is imperishable, **Kṣema Dharma Pati** (651) because he is the lord of the welfare-bringing dharma, **Kṣamī** (652) because he is full of forgiveness, **Agray** (653) because he is not understood by those with little knowledge, **Jñāna Nig
Page #712:
---------------------------
## English Translation:

**622**
**Adipurana**
One who is true in self, true in knowledge, true in speech, true in teaching, true in blessings, true in promise, true in form, and constantly devoted to truth is called **Satyatma** (667), **Satyavijnana** (668), **Satyavak** (669), **Satyashasan** (670), **Satyashi** (671), **Satyasandhan** (672), **Saty** (673), and **Satyaparayan** (674) respectively. ||175||

One who is extremely stable is called **Sthayan** (675), one who is extremely large is called **Sthaviyan** (676), one who is close to devotees is called **Nedian** (677), one who is far from sins is called **Daviyan** (678), one who can be seen from afar is called **Durdarshan** (679), one who is smaller than an atom is called **Anoh Aniyan** (680), one who is not like an atom is called **Anan** (681), and one who is the greatest among the gurus is called **Gariyasamady Guru** (682). ||176||

One who is always in the form of yoga is called **Sadayog** (683), one who always enjoys bliss is called **Sadabhog** (684), one who is always content is called **Sadatrupt** (685), one who is always in the form of auspiciousness is called **Sadashiv** (686), one who is always in the form of knowledge is called **Sadagati** (687), one who is always in the form of friendship is called **Sadasaukhya** (688), one who is always endowed with the knowledge of Kevala Jnana is called **Sadavidya** (689), and one who is always in the form of rising is called **Sadoday** (690). ||177||

One who has a beautiful voice is called **Sughoh** (691), one who has a beautiful face is called **Sumukh** (692), one who is peaceful in form is called **Saumya** (693), one who is beneficial to all beings is called **Sukhad** (694), one who benefits all is called **Suhit** (695), one who has a noble heart is called **Suhrit** (696), one who is protected or hidden from false views is called **Sugupt** (697), one who holds secrets is called **Guptibhrut** (698), one who protects all is called **Gopta** (699), one who witnesses all three worlds is called **Lokadhyaksh** (700), and one who is the master of self-control, which is the victory over the senses, is called **Dameshwar** (701). ||178||

Thus ends the **Asanskruta Shatak**.

One who is the guru of the Indras is called **Brihabrihaspati** (702), one who possesses eloquent speech is called **Vagmi** (703), one who is the master of words is called **Vachaspati** (704), one who possesses a noble intellect is called **Udardhi** (705), one who is endowed with the power of contemplation is called **Manishi** (70
Page #713:
---------------------------
## The Twenty-Fifth Chapter

623. **Jnana-garbha** (one whose womb is filled with knowledge), **daya-garbha** (one whose womb is filled with compassion), **ratna-garbha** (one whose womb is filled with jewels), **Prabhasvara** (radiant), **Padma-garbha** (one whose womb is like a lotus), **Jagad-garbha** (one whose womb is the universe), **Hema-garbha** (one whose womb is filled with gold), **Sudarsana** (beautiful to behold). ||18||

**Lakshmi-van** (possessing Lakshmi), **Tridasha-adhyaksha** (the lord of the thirty-three gods), **Drdhiyaan** (firm), **Ishita** (the lord), **Manohara** (charming), **Manojna-anga** (one with beautiful limbs), **Dhira** (courageous), **Gambhira-shasana** (one with a profound rule). ||182||

**Dharma-yupa** (the pillar of Dharma), **Daya-yaga** (one who performs the sacrifice of compassion), **Dharma-nemi** (the wheel of Dharma), **Muni-ishvara** (the lord of the sages), **Dharma-chakra-ayudha** (one who wields the weapon of Dharma), **Deva** (divine), **Karma-ha** (destroyer of karma), **Dharma-ghoshana** (proclaimer of Dharma). ||183||

**Amogha-vak** (one whose words never fail), **Amogha-ajna** (one whose commands are never fruitless), **Nirmala** (pure), **Amogha-shasana** (one whose rule is always successful), **Surupa** (beautiful), **Subhaga** (prosperous), **Tyagi** (renouncer), **Samaya-jna** (knower of the principles), **Samahita** (composed). ||184||

**Susthita** (well-established), **Swasthya-bhaak** (possessing health), **Swastha** (healthy), **Nirajaska** (free from the dust of karma), **Niruddhava** (free from worldly attachments), **A-lepa** (unstained), **Nishkalanka-atma** (one with a spotless soul), **Vitaraga** (free from attachment), **Gataspriha** (free from desire). ||185||

**Vashyendriya** (one who has conquered the senses), **Vimukta-atma** (one whose soul is liberated), **Nish-sapatna** (one without enemies), **Jita-indriya** (one who has conquered the senses), **Prasanta** (peaceful), **Ananta-dhaam-arshi** (the sage of the infinite abode), **Mangala** (auspicious), **Mala-han-agha** (one who destroys sin). ||186||

Those who are **A-prata-atma** (without a separate self) due to being united with their true nature, **Kritagjna** (grateful) due to knowing all actions, and **Kritalakshana** (one who has described the characteristics of all things) due to explaining the nature of all things, are called so. ||180||

Those who have knowledge within them are called **Jnana-garbha** (one whose womb is filled with knowledge), those who have a compassionate heart are called **Daya-garbha** (one whose womb is filled with compassion), those who are endowed with the three jewels or who had a
Page #714:
---------------------------
## English Translation:

**624**
The Adi Purana is unparalleled, a sight beyond the reach of the gods. Immortal, embodied, one, yet many, a seer of the essence of all. ||187||

He is known through spiritual knowledge, the soul to be known, revered by yogis, the master of yoga. He is omnipresent, eternally existing, a seer of the essence of all three times. ||188||

He is the bringer of happiness, the revealer of happiness, subdued, a subduer, devoted to peace. He is the lord, supreme bliss, the knower of the supreme self, the ultimate. ||189||

He is the beloved of the three worlds, worthy of worship, the bringer of auspiciousness to the three worlds. He is the one whose feet are worshipped by the lords of the three worlds, the jewel on the crown of the three worlds. ||190||

Thus ends the Brihad Adi Shatam.

Therefore, he is called **Vimuktatma** 762, as he has no enemy or rival, he is called **Nissapatna** 763. By conquering the senses, he is called **Jiteindriya** 764. Due to his extreme peace, he is called **Prasanta** 765. As he is the holder of infinite brilliance, he is called **Ananta Dhamarsi** 766. Because he is the embodiment of auspiciousness, he is called **Mangala** 767. As he destroys impurities, he is called **Malha** 768.

He is free from vices and sorrows, therefore he is called **Anagha** 769. There is no one like him, therefore he is called **Anihak** 770. He is worthy of being an example for all, therefore he is called **Upmabhut** 771. As he is the destiny of all beings, he is called **Disti** 772 and **Daiv** 773. He cannot be known through the senses, and after attaining omniscience, he does not walk on the earth, but travels in the sky, therefore he is called **Agocara** 774. He is formless, devoid of form, taste, smell, and touch, therefore he is called **Amurt** 775. He has a body, therefore he is called **Murtiman** 776. He is unique, therefore he is called **Ek** 777. He possesses many qualities, therefore he is called **Naik** 778. He does not see or dwell on anything other than the soul, therefore he is called **Nanakatatvadruk** 779. ||187||

He is known through spiritual scriptures, therefore he is called **Adhyatmagamya** 780. He is not known by beings with false vision, therefore he is called **Agamyatma** 781. He is a knower of yoga, therefore he is called **Yogavid** 782. He is worshipped by yogis, therefore he is called **Yogivandit** 783. He is present everywhere, except for omniscience, therefore he is called **Sarvatraga** 784. He eternally exists, therefore he is called **Sadabhavi** 785. He sees all things related to the three times, therefore he is called **Trikalavishayardhadruk** 786. ||188||

He brings happiness to all, therefore he is called **Shankara** 787. He reveals happiness, therefore he is
Page #715:
---------------------------
The Twenty-Fifth Chapter

The Trikala-darshi, the Lokesh, the Lokadhata, the Dridhavrata, the Sarvalok-anigah, the Pujya, the Sarvalok-aik-sarathi. || 193 || The Purana, the Purusha, the Purva, the Kritapurvang-vistarah, the Adideva, the Puranadya, the Purudeva, the Adhidevata. || 192 || The Yugamukhya, the Yugjyeshti, the Yugadisthitideshak, the Kalyanavarna, the Kalyana, the Kalyah, the Kalyanalakshana. || 193 || The Kalyana, the Kalyanama, the Vikalmasha, the Vikalankah, the Kalatita, the Kalilagna, the Kaladharah. || 194 || The Devadeva, the Jagannatha, the Jagadbandhu, the Jagadvibhu, the Jagadvitai-shi, the Lokajna, the Sarvago, the Jagadugragah. || 195 ||

The Guru, the Gadatma, the Griha, the Gocharah. The Matrijata, the Prakashatma, the Jwalajjwalanasaprabhah. || 596 ||

They are called Trikala-darshi because they see all things, Lokesh because they are the lords of the worlds, Lokadhata because they are the protectors of all beings, Dridhavrata because they are steadfast in their vows, Sarvalok-anigah because they are superior to all beings, Pujya because they are worthy of worship, and Sarvalok-aik-sarathi because they are able to lead all beings to their desired destination. || 191 ||

They are called Purana because they are the most ancient, Purusha because they have attained the highest qualities of the soul, Purva because they are the first, Kritapurvang-vistarah because they have expanded their limbs and the east, Adideva because they are the chief among all gods, Puranadya because they are the first in the Puranas, Purudeva because they are the great or first Tirthankara, and Adhidevata because they are the god of gods. || 192 ||

They are called Yugamukhya because they are the chief of this Avasarpini Yuga, Yugjyeshti because they are the greatest in this Yuga, Yugadisthitideshak because they are the preachers of the appropriate rules at the beginning of the Yuga, which is the field of karma, Kalyanavarna because they have the radiance of gold, Kalyana because they are of the nature of Kalyana, Kalyah because they are ready or eager to attain liberation, and Kalyanalakshana because they are endowed with auspicious characteristics. || 193 ||

They are called Kalyanaprakriti because their nature is of Kalyana, Diprakalyanatma because their soul is pure like shining gold, Vikalmasha because they are free from the stain of karma, Vikalankah because they are free from blemishes, Kalatita because they are without a body, Kalilagna because they do not commit sins, and Kaladharah because they possess many arts. || 194 ||

They are called Devadeva because they are the god of gods, Jagannatha because they are the lord of the universe, Jagadbandhu because they are the brother of the universe, Jagadvibhu because they are the lord of the universe, Jagadvitai-shi because they desire the welfare of the universe, Lokajna because they know the world, Sarvago because
Page #716:
---------------------------
## Translation:

**626**

**197.**  Aditya-varna 845,  Bharma-abha 846,  Suprabha 847,  Kanaka-prabha 848,  Suvarna-varna 849,  Rukma-abha 850,  and Surya-koti-sama-prabha 851 are called so because they are radiant like the sun, have the brilliance of gold, possess excellent radiance, have the glow of gold, are golden in color, have the radiance of gold, and possess the radiance of millions of suns respectively.

**198.**  Tapaniya-nibha 852,  Tunga 853,  Bala-arka-abha 854,  Anala-prabha 855,  Sandhya-ghra-babhru-hama-abha 856,  Hema-abha 857,  and Tapta-chami-kara-prabha 858 are called so because they are radiant like gold, have a tall body, possess the radiance of the morning sun, have the brilliance of fire, are beautiful like the evening clouds, have the radiance of gold, and possess the radiance of heated gold respectively.

**199.**  Nishtapta-kanaka-chhaya 859,  Kanaka-anjana-sannibha 860,  Hiranya-varna 861,  Svarna-abha 862,  Shatakumbha-nibha-prabha 863,  Ghumna-abha 864,  Jata-rupa-abha 865,  Tapta-jambu-nada-yuti 866,  Sudhauta-kala-dhauta-shri 867,  and Hataka-dyuti 868 are called so because they have the radiance of highly heated gold, are brilliant like shining gold, have the color of gold, have the radiance of gold, have the radiance of a golden pot, have the radiance of a cloud, have the radiance of a flame, have the radiance of heated sapphire, have a pure and bright radiance, and are radiant respectively.

**200.**  Pradipta 869 is called so because it is radiant.

**201.**  Shishta-ishta 870,  Pushti-da 871,  Pushta 872,  Spashta 873,  Spashta-akshara 874,  Kshama 875,  Shatru-ghna 876,  Aprati-gha 877,  Amogha 878,  Prashasta 879,  Sasita 880,  and Svabhu 881 are called so because they are loved by the noble, they give nourishment, they are strong, they are clearly visible, they have clear words, they are capable, they destroy enemies, they are free from enemies, they are successful, they are excellent teachers, they are protectors, and they are self-born respectively.

**202.**  Shanta-nishtha 882,  Muni-jyeshta 883,  Shiva-tati 884,  Shiva-prada 885,  Shanta-da 886,  Shanta-krit 887,  Shanta 888,  Kanti-man 889,
Page #717:
---------------------------
## English Translation:

627
**Twenty-fifth Chapter**

**Dhikasā** (one who wears garments of the directions) **Vātarashana** (one who wears the wind as his garment) **Nirgranthēsha** (master of the Nirgrantha monks) **Niranbara** (one who is without clothes) **Nishkinchana** (one who is without possessions) **Nirāshansa** (one who is without desires) **Jñānachashu** (one who has the eye of knowledge) **Amomuha** (one who is free from delusion) ||20||

**Tejorāshi** (one who is a mass of brilliance) **Anantauja** (one who has infinite power) **Jñānābdhi** (one who is an ocean of knowledge) **Shīlasāgara** (one who is an ocean of conduct) **Tejomaya** (one who is made of brilliance) **Amitajyoti** (one who has infinite light) **Jyotirmoorti** (one who is a form of light) **Tamopāha** (one who destroys the darkness of ignorance) ||205||

**Jagachchūḍāmani** (the jewel of the universe) **Dīpta** (one who is radiant) **Shanvān** (one who is peaceful) **Vighnavināyaka** (one who destroys obstacles) **Kalighna** (one who destroys evil) **Karmashatrudhna** (one who destroys the enemies of karma) **Lokālokaprakāshaka** (one who illuminates the worlds and the beyond) ||206||

**Anidrālu** (one who is without sleep) **Atandrālu** (one who is without laziness) **Jāgarūka** (one who is always awake) **Pramāmaya** (one who is full of knowledge) **Lakshmipati** (the lord of Lakshmi) **Jagajyoti** (the light of the universe) **DharmaRāja** (the king of Dharma) **Prajāhita** (one who is benevolent to the people) ||207||

**Mumukṣu** (one who desires liberation) **Bandhamokṣajña** (one who knows the nature of bondage and liberation) **Jitākṣa** (one who has conquered the senses) **Jitamanmatha** (one who has conquered desire) **Prashāntarasashalūsha** (one who is like a dancer, displaying the peaceful essence of rasa) **Bhavyapetakanāyaka** (the leader of the assembly of the liberated) ||208||

**Mūlakartā** (the originator of Dharma) **Akhilajyotī** (one who illuminates all things) **Malagna** (one who destroys the impurities of karma) **Mūlakāraṇa** (the primary cause of liberation) **Āpta** (one who speaks the truth) **Vāgīshvara** (the lord of words) **Shreyān** (one who is auspicious) **Shrāyasokti** (one who speaks auspicious words) **Niruṭkavāk** (one who speaks meaningful words) ||20||

Those who are very vast are called **Prathīyān** (898), those who are famous are called **Prathita** (899), and those who are great in terms of knowledge and other qualities are called **Pṛthu** (900) ||20||

**Digvāsā** (901) is called so because they wear garments of the directions, **Vātarash
Page #718:
---------------------------
## Translation:

**Verse 21**

The speaker, the Lord of words (Vachasameesha), the conqueror of Kamadeva (Marajit), the knower of all things in the world (Vishvabhavavit), the one with a beautiful body (Sutanu), the one freed from the body (Tanunirmukt), the one who moves well in the sky (Sugata), the one who destroys wrong beliefs (Hatadurnay).

**Verse 21**

The Lord of Lakshmi (Shrosh), the one whose feet are served by Lakshmi (Shreshritapadabja), the fearless one (Veetbhi), the one who removes fear from others (Abhayankar), the one who has destroyed all faults (Utsannadosha), the one who is free from obstacles (Nirvighna), the one who is steady (Nischala), the one who is loved by the people (Lokavatsala).

**Verse 21**

The one who is superior to all beings (Lokottara), the Lord of the three worlds (Lokapati), the eye of all beings (Lokachakshu), the one with infinite wisdom (Aparadhi), the one with steady wisdom (Dheeradhee), the one who knows the right path (Buddhasanmarg), the one who is pure (Shuddha), the one who speaks truth and pure words (Satyasoonritavak).

**Verse 21**

The one who has attained the highest wisdom (Prajnaparamit), the one who is very wise (Prajna), the one who has controlled the senses (Yatiniamayitendriya), the one who is worthy of respect (Bhadant), the one who does good to all beings (Bhadrakrit), the one who is auspicious (Bhadra), the one who is like a wish-fulfilling tree (Kalpvriksha), the one who grants wishes (Varaprad).

**Verse 21**

The one who has uprooted the enemies of karma (Samunmoolitkarmaari), the one who is like fire to burn the fuel of karma (Karmakashtashushukhani), the one who is skilled in action (Karmany), the one who is strong (Karmaṭha), the one who is excellent (Pranshu), the one who is wise in knowing what is to be abandoned and what is to be accepted (Heyadeyavichakshana).

**Verse 21**

The one with infinite power (Anantashakti), the one who cannot be destroyed (Accheya), the one who destroys birth, old age, and death (Tripurari), the one who sees the three times (Trilochan), the one with three eyes (Trinetra), the one who is the embodiment of the three worlds (Tryambaka), the one who is the witness (Vyaks), the one who has the eye of pure knowledge (Kevalgyanavikashana).

**Notes:**

* The numbers in parentheses after the terms are the page numbers from the original text.
* The translation attempts to preserve the Jain terms as much as possible.
* The verses are numbered according to the original text. 

Page #719:
---------------------------
-rrrrrrrrrrrrrowroomrana
The twenty-fifth chapter, Samantabhadra is the Shantaridharmacharaya, the treasure of compassion, the subtle seer, the conqueror of desire, the compassionate, the preacher of Dharma. ||216|| Shubhamyu, the one who is born of happiness, the treasure of merit, the one who is free from disease, the protector of Dharma, the protector of the world, the leader of the Dharma empire. ||217||
Thus, the wise one who knows the Agamas, has collected these one hundred and eight names of yours, O Lord of the Dharma. The one who meditates on these names, his memory becomes very pure. ||218||
O Lord, although you are within the reach of these words, you are considered to be beyond the reach of words. Even so, the one who praises you, undoubtedly attains his desired fruit. ||219||
Therefore, O Bhagavan, you are the friend of this world, you are the physician of the world, you are the nourisher of the world, and you are the benefactor of the world. ||220||
O Lord, you are the light of the world. You are two-fold in your use, being both knowledge and vision. You are three-fold in your nature, being the path of liberation through right faith, right knowledge, and right conduct. You are four-fold in your nature, being born of yourself. ||221||
You are five-fold in your nature, being the five supreme beings, or the leader of the five auspicious ones. You are six-fold in your nature, being the knower of the six substances: jiva, pudgala, dharma, adharma, akasha, and kala. You are seven-fold in your nature, being the embodiment of the seven nayas, including naigama. You are eight-fold in your nature, being the embodiment of the eight transcendental qualities, including samyaktva. You are nine-fold in your nature, being endowed with the nine kevala-labdhis. You are ten-fold in your nature, being determined by the ten avatars, including mahabala. Therefore, O Lord, protect me from the sorrows of the world. ||222-223||
1. Samantat mangala. 2. Shubham yunakti. 3. Sukhadhina. 4. Punyarashiniramaya. 5. Pavitrajnani. 6. Jnana-darshanoupayoga. 7. Ratnatrayaswarupa. 8. Panchparameshthiswarupa. 9. Shaddravyaswarupajna. 10. Samyaktva-ashta-guna-murti. Or Prithivya-ashta-guna-murti. 11. Mahabala-adi-purujina-paryanta-dasha-avatar. 12. Rachita. 13. Aradhayam. 

Page #720:
---------------------------
630
The one who remembers this hymn of the Adi Purana becomes pure. The one who recites this auspicious text becomes blessed. ||22|| Therefore, a virtuous man, desiring merit, or desiring the supreme glory of Indra, should always recite this hymn. ||226|| Thus, Indra, praising the Lord Vrishabhadeva, the Guru of the movable and immovable worlds, then made this request for a pilgrimage. ||227|| O Lord, the crops of the worthy beings are drying up due to the lack of rain of sin. O Lord, shower them with the nectar of Dharma and be their refuge. ||228|| O Lord of the assembly of worthy beings, adorned with the banner of compassion, this Dharmachakra is ready to accomplish your victory. ||229|| O Lord, after destroying the army of delusion that obstructs the path to liberation, now is the time for you to preach the right path. ||230|| Thus, the words of Indra, as if repeated, appeared before Lord Vrishabhadeva, who had realized all the truths and was eager to go on a pilgrimage. Meaning: At that time, Lord Vrishabhadeva was eager to go on a pilgrimage himself, so Indra's request seemed futile. ||231|| Then, the one who stirs up the three worlds, the Tirthankara, whose chariot is the virtuous nature, the Sun-like Jina, stood ready to grace the worthy beings. ||232|| Adorned with the umbrella of the three worlds, like steps to ascend the palace of liberation, with the white chowries waving like the foam of the ocean of milk, his body resonating with a sweet, deep, steady, and divine sound, shining with a halo that rivals millions of suns, with the deep sound of the drums beaten by the gods resounding near him, the Lord, whose lotus feet are worshipped by the showers of flowers released by the assembly of gods, the Lord who sits on a throne as high as the peak of Mount Meru, with the Ashoka tree, with its shade and fruits, 
1. Opportunity. 2. Meaning: lack of rain. Amarakosha: "Vrstivrsat tadvighatave grahavagrahi samau". 3. "As bhuvi" bhava. 4. Udonovahi iti tang, udyukto'bhoot. 5. Utkat. 6. Suratadiyaman. 

Page #721:
---------------------------
## The Twenty-Fifth Chapter

**631** The Meru-peak, towering high, with a lion's expanse, is the leader. The Ashoka tree, with its shade and fruits, has manifested its activity. **236** The earth's circumference is surrounded by a dust-wall, and the false-views, with their pride and doubts, are suppressed by the pillars of faith. **237** The assembly ground, adorned with an unprecedented splendor, is made beautiful by the clear water of the moat, surrounded by groves of creepers. **238** The great majesty is revealed by the three walls, adorned with the lofty towers, and the creations of the enemies. **239** The assembly ground is filled with the shade of the Ashoka and other trees, and the whole world is summoned by the waving of garlands, clothes, and flags. **240** The gods, who have rested in the shade of the Kalpa-tree forest, always worship him. The Kinnaras, situated on the earth, surrounded by palaces, sing his praises. **241** The splendor of the Stupas, which are radiant and possess great glory, is manifested. The festival of the people is enhanced by the two theaters, which are full of wealth. **242** He is the lord of the great fragrant chamber, which fills the ten directions with the fragrance of incense. He is worthy of the great worship offered by the Indras. **243** He is the beloved of the three worlds, the glorious, the first Purusha, the Bhagavan. He, the lord of the Dharma-chakra, has undertaken the endeavor of victory. **244** Then, when the time for the Bhagavan's activity arrived, millions of gods, with their crowns shaking, began to move about. **245** At that time, the jewels, shaken from the crowns of the frightened Indras, seemed to be performing the Arati of the world. **246** The gods, shouting "Victory!" filled the sky-like courtyard, and, illuminating the faces of the directions with their brilliance, they set out. **247** The leaders of the gods, along with the four Nikayas, were agitated by the great wind of the Jina's activity, and they seemed like four great oceans. **248** Thus, accompanied by the gods and Asuras, the Bhagavan, like the sun, set out on his journey, his actions being free from desire. **249**

**Notes:**

1. Creeper grove.
2. Tree-creeper.
3. Clouds created by the Indras and others.
4. Covering.
5. Great wind. 

Page #722:
---------------------------
11
632
. The Adipurana, composed in the Ardhamagadhi language, is a treasure trove of knowledge. It is a wonder of virtues, bringing together the three worlds in friendship.  ||250|| It is a tree that blossoms with fruits and sprouts in the presence of the Lord. It has transformed the earth into a circle of ideals. ||251|| A fragrant, cool, and gentle breeze follows the Lord. The Lord's magnificence brings joy to all beings. ||252|| The Marukumaras, the wind gods, make the land beautiful for a yojana around the Lord's resting place. ||253|| The Meghakumaras, the rain gods, shower fragrant water on the land, making it dust-free and suitable for the Lord's walk. ||254|| The Lord's lotus feet, soft and comforting, rest on lotus flowers. The earth, abundant with rice, barley, and other crops, announces the Lord's arrival. ||255|| The sky, competing with the autumnal lake, announces the Lord's proximity. The purity of the space between the directions reveals the Lord's arrival. ||256|| The Lord's words, like the calls of the gods to each other, fill the directions. A thousand radiant Dharmachakras roll before the Lord. ||257|| The sky is filled with banners of eight auspicious substances, fluttering in front of the Lord. Devas and Asuras follow the Lord, who is adorned with beautiful garments. ||258|| At that time, a sweet and deep sound of drums, like the roar of the ocean, filled the sky. ||259|| The devas showered flowers, filling the sky, like a courtyard, and bringing joy to the beautiful beings, like bees. ||260|| Millions of flags, their clothes fluttering in the wind, waved all around, as if calling out to the beautiful beings, "Come here, come here!"
1. All beings have evolved. 2. Evolved. 3. Gently, gently. 4. Due to a different reason. 5. Vayukumaras, honored. 6. Meghakumaras. 7. Autumnal lake. 8. The proximity is exemplified. 9. Immortal. 10. Directions. 11. Eight auspicious substances. 12. Followed, adorned. 13. Desiring to walk. 14. Happy mind. 15. Flag. 16. Come, come. 

Page #723:
---------------------------
## Translation:

**633**

**260.** The sound of the drums, echoing throughout all directions during the Lord's procession, seemed to be challenging the enemies of karma, as if threatening them.

**261.** Celestial nymphs, their banners fluttering, danced in the sky, their radiant bodies illuminating the directions.

**262.** The gods chanted hymns with great enthusiasm, the Kinnaras sang sweetly, and the Gandharvas played their veenas, accompanied by the Vidyadharas.

**263.** The lords of the gods, their crowns ablaze, seemed to be ready to illuminate the entire world with their radiance, as they followed the Lord's path.

**264.** The directions, cleansed of dust, seemed to be filled with joy, and the sky, devoid of clouds, shone with extraordinary purity.

**265.** The earth, adorned with ripe crops of rice and other grains, seemed to be trembling with joy, as if benefiting from the Lord's presence.

**266.** Fragrant winds, touched by the celestial waters of the Milky Way, and carrying the pollen of lotuses, blew gently, as if draped in fragrant garments.

**267.** The earth, smooth and level like a mirror, shone brightly. The gods showered it with fragrant water, making it dust-free and radiant, like a chaste woman, free from impurities and bathed.

**268.** Trees, displaying an unusual blossoming, seemed to be embraced by all seasons at once, as if in fear.

**269.** Due to the Lord's greatness, there was abundance for four hundred leagues around, prosperity, health, and the earth was free from the violence of living beings.

**270.** All beings, suddenly experiencing a wave of joy, embraced friendship, as if they had found kinship.

**271.** The flowers, showering pollen and nectar, with newly blossomed stamens, and petals adorned with various jewels, were a sight to behold. 

Page #724:
---------------------------
634
In the region of the place of prostration at the feet of the Lord, in the Adipurana, there was a beautiful golden lotus, soft to the touch and with great splendor. ||27|| Seven lotuses bloomed in front and behind it, filled with the rich fragrance of saffron. ||27|| Similarly, other lotuses bloomed in that vicinity, appearing like the mansions of Lakshmi in the courtyard of the sky. ||27|| The gods, by the command of Indra, created a row of these golden lotuses, adorned with rows of bees. ||27|| The row of lotuses, facing the lotus feet of the Jina, shone brightly, as if they wanted to absorb the radiance of those lotus feet due to their excess. ||27|| It shone as the footstool of the Jina, a row of lotus flowers in the lake of the sky, consisting of fifteen squares, i.e., 225 lotuses. ||27|| At that time, the sky, filled with golden lotuses, shone brightly on all sides, like a lake full of blooming lotuses during the Jina's conquest. ||279|| The Lord of the universe, filled with joy, wandered over the entire earth, delighting everyone with his nectar-like words. ||280|| The Jina, the sun of the world, destroyed the darkness of falsehood with his rays of words and illuminated the entire world. ||281|| Wherever the Lord, who walked on golden lotuses, wandered, the devotees there received supreme satisfaction from the showers of the nectar of Dharma. ||282|| When the Jina, like a cloud, showered the nectar of Dharma, the entire world, filled with contentment, was immersed in the flow of happiness. ||283|| The devotees, like thirsty chatakas, eagerly drank the water of Dharma, flowing from the Jina, the ocean of Dharma, and were filled with contentment. ||284|| 
1. Loss of dwelling. 2. They created. 3. Row. 4. Facing the lotus feet of the Jina. 5. To absorb. 6. The radiance of the lotus feet. 7. In which. 8. In that. 9. Like a cloud. 10. Was immersed. 11. Filled with happiness. 12. Drinking and drinking. 13. They attained contentment. 

Page #725:
---------------------------
## The Twenty-Fifth Chapter

**Vasantatilaka Vritta**

Thus, desiring to liberate the world of mobile and immobile beings, the Jina, whose nature is unblemished, who is immersed in the ocean of Samsara, and who is accompanied by gods and demons, wandered the earth, his lotus feet adorned with golden lotuses. ||285||

**Mahada Vritta**

The forest of the world, consumed by the fierce fire of the rapid flow of time, was quenched by the showers of the nectar of Dharma, and the Jina, whose divine sounds resounded, shone like a cloud laden with rain. ||286||

**Sardula Vikridita Vritta**

The resolute Jina, eager to teach the right path, wandered through the lands of Kashi, Avanti, Kuru, Kosala, Sujha, Pundra, Chedi, Anga, Vanga, Magadha, Andhra, Kalinga, Madra, Panchala, Malava, Dasharna, and Vidarbha. ||287||

**Vasantatilaka Vritta**

Thus, the Jina, whose character is serene, having wandered through many lands and enlightened countless beings, reached the lofty Kailasa, the abode of his own glory, like the moon, illuminating the three worlds. ||288||

**Sardula Vikridita Vritta**

There, in the assembly hall, built by the gods, beautiful, adorned with all the descriptions mentioned earlier, and enhancing the splendor of heaven, the Jina, adorned with twelve virtues, sat surrounded by the eight auspicious signs, receiving the respectful salutations of the assembled beings. ||289|| 

Page #726:
---------------------------
636
Adipurana
After the destruction of the lords of the directions,
We praise the glorious Jina, who is the embodiment of the four infinite qualities, the lotus of the mind, the ocean of compassion, the lord of the three worlds, whose majestic form humbles even the greatest of beings, who has attained inconceivable external glory, and who is free from all sins. ||29||
Thus ends the twenty-fifth chapter of the Trishatika-Lakshana Mahapurana, composed by the venerable Jinasena Acharya, which describes the glorious wanderings of the Lord. ||25||
1. The Lord. 2. The Sun. 

Page #727:
---------------------------
Acharya Jinsenakrit
Adipurana
[- First Part 1
Word List 

Page #728:
---------------------------
## Glossary of Terms

**Being**
* **Bhanivrittikaran:** The ninth Gunasthan (stage of spiritual progress).
* **Abhavy:** A being who has not attained liberation.
* **Ajiva:** Two types: 1. Murtik (material) 2. Amurtik (non-material)
* **Samasamayavarti Jivas:** Contemporary beings.
* **Pariṇām:**  Results, consequences.
* **Samaan:** Similar.
* **Visham:** Dissimilar.
* **Abhinn:** Undifferentiated.
* **Dashapurvin:** Ten previous births.
* **Utpada Purva:**  Previous to birth.
* **Ajiva:** Five types: 1. Pudgal (matter) 2. Dharma (principle of motion) 3. Adharma (principle of rest) 4. Akash (space) 5. Kaal (time)
* **Bhanik:** A type of deva (god).
* **Pratrang:** All types of vessels.
* **Anukampan:** A type of Samyag Darshan (right faith).
* **Aṭṭaṭ:** A number.
* **Amam:** A number.
* **Anu:** The smallest particle of Pudgal.
* **Amrit Shravin:** A Muni (sage) who possesses the power to shower nectar.
* **Riddhi:**  Spiritual powers.
* **Anumanan Syag:** Renunciation of permission.
* **Aambar Charan:** A name for the tenth pratima (image).
* **Anu Vrat:**  Minor vows: 1. Ahimsa (non-violence) 2. Asaty (non-lying) 3. Chaury (non-stealing) 4. Vyapar Vishayak (non-trading) 5. Pari Grah (non-attachment).
* **Bhai:** Arhant Jinendra (liberated soul), a country.
* **Patiya Karma:**  Karmas (actions) that are destroyed.
* **Bhataparishadsya:**  Inner circle.
* **Bale:**  Jinendra (liberated soul), a title.
* **Bhatidushma:** The sixth stage of the Avspini (descending cycle).
* **Bhapurakaran:** The eighth Gunasthan (stage of spiritual progress).
* **Bhakok:** The infinite space beyond the Lok (universe).
* **Bhasha Karan:** The seventh Gunasthan (stage of spiritual progress).
* **Avadhi:**  Knowledge of the past, present, and future.
* **Avadhi Gyan Avaran:**  The veil of knowledge that obscures Avadhi.
* **Avasarpini:**  A period of decline in the world.
* **Adharma:**  A type of Kshaya (passion) that hinders progress.
* **Apratyaakhyan:**  Renunciation of the world.
* **Desha Samyam:**  Control over the senses.
* **Koda Kodi Sagar:**  The ocean of countless worlds.
* **Sushama:**  A period of prosperity.

**Note:** This is a partial glossary of terms. There are many other Jain terms that are not included here. 

Page #729:
---------------------------
## Glossary of Terms

**Six Kalas:** Sushama, etc.
**3114 Bhashtaguna:** Anima, Mahima, Garima, Laghima, Prapti, Prakamya, Ishitva, and Vashitva are the eight qualities.
**10.173 Ashtapratihariya:** Eight miracles manifested by the Tirthankaras in Samavasarana: 1. Ashoka Tree, 2. Throne, 3. Triple Umbrella, 4. Bhamandala, 5. Divine Sound, 6. Flower Rain, 7. Sixty-four Chamaras, 8. Sound of Dundubhi drums.
**-257 Ashtaanga:** Eight limbs of Samyakdarshan: 1. Nishankit, 2. Nikaankshit, 3. Nivichikitsit, 4. Bamudha Drishti, 5. Upagoohan Bhashva Upahan, 6. Sthiti Karan, 7. Vatsalya, 8. Prabhavana.
**9.122 Astikaya:** Five types of multi-entry substances: 1. Jiva, 2. Pudgala, 3. Dharma, 4. Adharma, 5. Aakash.
**Praat:** A type of dhyana. Its four types are: 1. Ishta, 2. Viyogaj, 3. Anishta Samyogaj, 4. Vednajanaya, and 5. Nidana.
**16.176 Aakar:** Different types of objects.
**21.31.41 Aastikya:** A part of Samyakdarshan. It involves accepting the existence of: 1. Guna, 2. Atma, 3. Parlok, 4. Aakash.
**24.102 Avgahan:** The place where Jivas and other substances enter.
**9.123 Aakshepini:** A story that presents one's own opinion.
**11135 Indra:** The king of the Devas.
**2.117 Aagam:** The true scripture, the voice of the Vitaraga Sarvagya Deva.
**9.121 Indrak:** A series of Vimanas.
**101187 Achaamlavardhan:** A type of tapasya.
**777 Atmaraksha:** The protector of Indra.
**101190 Utkrishtopasak Sthan:** The eleventh Samaan Deva.
**10.158 Bhashashukladhyana:** A type of dhyana involving the contemplation of separateness.
**20244 Bhanupurvi:** The order of a topic to be described. Its three types are: 1. Purvanupurvi, 2. Antanupurvi, 3. Yatra Tatranupurvi.
**2.104 Dushama:** The opposite of "Prama."
**2.104 Maavi:** A type of knowledge.
**9.121 Maas:** The Vitaraga, Sarvagya Deva.
**22.29 Upkram:** The name of a scripture. Its five types are: 1. Anupurvi, 2. Naam, 3. Pramaan, 4. Abhidheya, 5. Maryadhikhar.
**2071 Bhaamarsh:** A type of Riddhi.
**2.1.3 Bhaaramparichyuiti:** The eighth pratima, which involves abandoning the beginning.
**5.254
Page #730:
---------------------------
## Translation:

**640**
Results of the souls dwelling in the 8th to 11th Gunasthanas, which subdue karma.
**11689**  Upshant Kashayata - Eleventh Gunasthana
**11190**
Kharvat - A village surrounded only by mountains.
**163171** Khet - A village surrounded by a river and mountains.
**16.171**
Rijumati - Rijumati Man: Paryaya
The holder of this Riddhi, the holder of the Riddhi called knowledge, knows the objects in the form of the mind of others, which are thought of by the simple mind, speech and body.
**2068**
Kankaavali - The name of a Vrat.
**739** Kamal - A measure of number.
**3.109** Karan - The state of mind that leads to the attainment of Samyagdarshan. It has three divisions: 1. Adhokaran 2. Apurva Karan 3. Banivrittikaran
**9.120** Karananuyog - A division of Shastras.
It describes the three Lokas.
**2.99** Kalp - Utsarpini and Avasarpini
Together they make up one Kalp of twenty Koda Koti Sagars. It is time.
**3.15** Kalpapadap - Kalpvriksha, from which one gets desired objects.
**3138** Kamadev - The holder of the Kamadev पद.
Adipuranam (There are 24 Kamadevs in total).
**169** Kayagupti - Kay = To control the body.
**277** Kayabalin - The holder of the Kayabal Riddhi.
**2072** Kal - A substance with the characteristics of time.
**24.139-142** Philvishik - A division of Devas.
**22.30** Kumud - A measure of number.
**3.126** Kumudang - A measure of number.
**33130** Kanvali - The complete knowledge that is revealed by the destruction of the Jnanavarana Karma. Those who have attained it are also called Arhant Sarvagya or Jinendra.
**2061** Keshav - Narayan, there are nine of them.
**2.117** Kaivalya - Kevalgyan, the knowledge that knows all the objects of the world at once.
**5.149** Kotabuddhi - Kosthabuddhi Riddhi's holder.
**2067** Kshirnaavin - Kshirsraavini Riddhi's holder.
**2072** Kshetra - Lok
**4.14** Shwel - A Riddhi.
**2071**
Ghandhar - A special Muni who resides in the Samavasaran of Tirthankaras. They are the holders of four types of knowledge.
**2.51** Gun Vrat - Those who benefit from Anuvrats. There are three: Digvat, Deshavrat and Anarth Dandavrat. Some Acharyas include Bhogopa... Bhogo Pariman in Gunavat and Deshavrat in Shikshaprat.
**101162** 14 Gunasthanas - The states of the soul arising from the cause of Moha and Yoga are called Gunasthanas. There are 14: 1. Mithyadristi 2. Sasadan 3. Mishr 4. A
Page #731:
---------------------------
## Glossary of Terms:

**Shudra Shor Kisan** -  Shudra, a social class in ancient India, who are farmers.
**Darshanaachar** -  Conduct related to the philosophical principles of Jainism.
**Charitraachar** -  Conduct related to the ethical principles of Jainism.
**Vihar Karna** -  To wander, to travel.
**Bagicha** -  Garden.
**Tap Aachar** -  Conduct related to austerities and self-discipline.
**Veeryaavar** -  Conduct related to courage and strength.
**Talaab** -  Pond.

**Five types of Aachar (conduct) are also called Jinagunardi-Ek Nay:**

**Charitra** -  Character, conduct.
**Five types of Charitra:**

1. **Samayik** -  A short period of meditation and self-reflection.
2. **Chhedopastha** -  A vow to abstain from certain actions.
3. **Parihar Vishuddhi** -  Purification of conduct.
4. **Shloka** -  A verse, a hymn.
5. **Sukshma Samparaya** -  Subtle attachment.

**Four Karmas (actions) that lead to bondage:**

1. **Jnanavarana** -  Obscuration of knowledge.
2. **Darshanaavarana** -  Obscuration of perception.
3. **Moh** -  Attachment.
4. **Antaraya** -  Obstacles.

**Charitra Bhavana** -  The feeling of character, the desire to be virtuous.

**Five types of Jeev (living beings):**

1. **Aupshamik** -  Those who are on the path of liberation.
2. **Kshayik** -  Those who are on the path of destruction.
3. **Kshayopapshamik** -  Those who are on the path of both liberation and destruction.
4. **Audayik** -  Those who are on the path of progress.
5. **Parivideh** -  Those who are on the path of liberation from the cycle of birth and death.

**Six types of Antaratma (inner self):**

1. **Jeev** -  Living being.
2. **Praani** -  Creature.
3. **Jantu** -  Animal.
4. **Kshetrajna** -  Knower of the field of action.
5. **Purush** -  Man.
6. **Puman** -  Human being.

**Twelve types of Chakravarti (universal monarch):**

1. **Chakra Ratnaka Swami** -  Master of the wheel of fortune.
2. **Rajadhiraj** -  King of kings.
3. **Bharat** -  A legendary king.
4. **Airavat** -  A legendary king.
5. **Six types of Bahmatap (external austerities):**

    1. **Anashan** -  Fasting.
    2. **Avamoudarya** -  Simplicity.
    3. **Vritti Pari** -  Abstinence from certain activities.
    4. **Ras Parityag** -  Renunciation of taste.
    5. **Vivikt Shayyasan** -  Sleeping on a hard bed.
    6. **Kay Klesh** -  Physical suffering.

**Six types of Antaranay (internal obstacles):**

1. **Prayashchitta** -  Penance.
2. **Vinay** -  Humility.
3. **Baigyaav
Page #732:
---------------------------
## Translation:

642.
Adipurana
Chapter 20
2.119
...
Three types of Tattva - 1. Mukta Jiva (liberated soul) Lokamoodhata (worldly ignorance)
Tyaga (renunciation) 2. Lobhatyaga (renunciation of greed) 3. Bhaya... 2. Sansari Jiva (worldly soul) 3. Ajeeva (non-living)
9.122
Tyaga 4. Hasya Tyaga (renunciation of laughter) and 24/87 'Privarga - Dharma, Artha, Kama
5. Motranugami - Shastrake Tvasvartha - Jiva, Pudgal, Dharma,
11.33
According to the words, speaking is Adharma (unrighteousness), Akash (space) and Kal (time)
Five Satya Vrat (true vows) are the essence of Trishatipurusha - 24 Tirthankara 12. - These are the six Tattvartha. These
201162 Chakravarti 9 Narayan 9 are called the six Dravya
Pratinarayan 9 Balabhadra
- Imaleshya - Body's form and color. 24.85 Trishatipurusha 63 Shalaaka. .....
It has six types - 1. Krishna Tannucharan - Charan Ridhika is one
2. Neel 3. Kapoot 4. Pot are called Purusha types
5. Padma 6. Shukla 2073
10.96 Traikaly - Bhoot (past), Bhavishyat (future), Vartaman (present) Tirthakrit - Dharma's propagator Tirthankara
Imyanuyog - Shastra's (scripture's) type,
Kal (time) are, Bharat and Airavat Kshetra (regions)
In which the Dravya's (substance's) form is described, their number is 24-24
2.107
Dand - Four hands make one Dand, Mukh - which is situated on the bank of a river 2.117
Such a village
16.173 Nutichabd - Number's one proof
19.54 3.104 Darshan - Padartha (objects of perception) are Anakar (formless) - Nirvi
Dhanush - Four hands make one Dhanush, Tuang - a person who gives to archers, one Kalp is known
Kalpvriksha
24||1.1
10194 3239
Darshanmoh - Mohaniyakarma (delusive karma) is one Dharma - which helps Jiva and Pudgal in the movement of Samyagdarshan Guna (right faith) 1. Mitaahar Grahan (moderate food intake) 2. Uchi - destroys
24|133 Taahar Grahan (food intake) 3. Abhyanugnat
9.117
Dharmachakra - Tirthankara's Kevalgyan (omniscience) Grahan (acceptance) 4. Vidhike Virudh Darshanopyogke 4 types
After it is manifested, food intake is not done 1. Chakshudarshan (eye perception) 2. Achakshudarshan (non-eye perception) Devopneet Upakaran (divine instrument) 5. Prapt Aahar Pan (intake of received food) 3. Avadhidarshan (clairvoyance) 4. Kevaldarshan (omniscience
Page #733:
---------------------------
## Glossary of Terms

**643**

* **Pāha:** A reader of the jīvas.
* **Paramāvadhi-avadhijñāna:** A type of knowledge that knows the ultimate truth.
* **Naya:** A perspective or viewpoint.
* **Niryapaka:** A destroyer.
* **Sallekhanā:** A type of fast unto death.
* **Samādhi:** A state of deep meditation.
* **Nityatva-anityatva:** The nature of being eternal or impermanent.
* **Parameṣṭha:** The supreme being.
* **Arahanta:** A liberated soul.
* **Siddhā:** A liberated soul.
* **Pācārya:** A teacher.
* **Upādhyāya:** A teacher.
* **Sādhu:** A monk.
* **Dravyārthika:** Relating to substance.
* **Paryāyārthika:** Relating to modification.
* **Niveda:** A statement.
* **Saṁsāra:** The cycle of birth and death.
* **Śarīra:** The body.
* **Bhoga:** Enjoyment.
* **Vairāgya:** Detachment.
* **Paryāpta:** One whose body is complete.
* **Nivedinī:** A story that increases detachment.
* **Paryāpti:** The state of being complete.
* **Paryāpti-bheda:** The different types of completeness.
* **Paryāpti-bheda:** The different types of completeness.
* **Paryāpti-bheda:** The different types of completeness.
* **Paryāpti-bheda:** The different types of completeness.
* **Paryāpti-bheda:** The different types of completeness.
* **Paryāpti-bheda:** The different types of completeness.
* **Paryāpti-bheda:** The different types of completeness.
* **Paryāpti-bheda:** The different types of completeness.
* **Paryāpti-bheda:** The different types of completeness.
* **Paryāpti-bheda:** The different types of completeness.
* **Paryāpti-bheda:** The different types of completeness.
* **Paryāpti-bheda:** The different types of completeness.
* **Paryāpti-bheda:** The different types of completeness.
* **Paryāpti-bheda:** The different types of completeness.
* **Paryāpti-bheda:** The different types of completeness.
* **Paryāpti-bheda:** The different types of completeness.
* **Paryāpti-bheda:** The different types of completeness.
* **Paryāpti-bheda:** The different types of completeness.
* **Paryāpti-bheda:** The different types of completeness.
* **Paryāpti-bheda:** The different types of completeness.
* **Paryāpti-bheda:** The different types of completeness.
* **Paryāpti-bheda:** The different types of completeness.
* **Paryāpti-bheda:** The different types of completeness.
* **Paryāpti-bheda:** The different types of completeness.
* **Paryāpti-bheda:** The different types of completeness.
* **Paryāpti-bheda:** The different types of completeness.
* **Paryāpti-bheda:** The different types of completeness.
* **Paryāpti-bheda:** The different types of completeness.
* **Paryāpti-bheda:** The different
Page #734:
---------------------------
## Translation:

**644**
**Adipurana**

One lakh years is a purvang and eighty-four lakh purvangs make one purva. One crore such purvas…

**3.153**  Purvaranga-nataka’s initial form
**2188**  Prithaktva - numbers above three and below nine
**5.286**  Prithaktva-bhyan (Prithaktva-vitarka) - the first stage of Shukla-dhyana
**111110**  Prakirnak - scattered flying vehicles
**10.187**  Pratyay - another name for Samyag-darshan
**9.123**  Each Buddha - the cause of vairagya
See the muni who has embraced vairagya himself
**2068**  First Vrat Maavna - 1 Manogupti
2 Vachan-gupti 3 Kay-gupti 4 Irya Samiti and 5 Eshana Samiti - these are the five feelings of Ahimsa-vat
**20.161**  Pratyamanuyog - a division of scriptures
In which the stories of Satpurushas are written
**2.98**  Praman - the knowledge that encompasses all the dharmas of an object
(Nityatva-anityatva etc.)
**2.101**  Prasham - a quality of Samyag-darshan,
Kashaya’s countless lokas, the place where the mind becomes weak in the Praman sthana.
**Bhavya** - a being who is naturally capable of attaining Siddhi-mukti
**9.123**
**24.128**  Prayenapagam (Prayopagam) - Bhavana-bhavana-vaasi deva sannyasa
**13.13** **11.96**
Bhavaleshhya - the tendency of Prayopagaman-sannyasa-smaran due to the rise of Kashaya, a division of Anuranjit yogas, in which one does not serve the body themselves nor does one get others to serve the area of enjoyment-pleasure
**10197**
**10.185** **5.234**
Bhojananga - all kinds of food
Prayo-paveshan - sannyasa-sallekhana
A Kalpa-vriksha that gives all kinds of food…
**11.94-95**
**3.39**  Proshadhavat - Proshadhopavas named
Madamb - a city surrounded by five hundred villages. In this, one has to fast on the eighth and fourteenth
**16.172**
Madhyanga - a Kalpa-vriksha, from which many
kinds of juices are obtained
**10.159**
**3.39**  Phalcharan - a division of Charan Riddhi. The holder of this Riddhi
walks on the fruits of the trees without breaking them
**-2272**
Manogupti - controlling the mind
**2177** **2073**
Manobalin - the holder of Manobal Riddhi
**2072**  Bal - Balabhadra, brother of Narayan,
Matrika-pad - 1 Irya 2 Bhasha - there are nine of these
3 Eshana 4 Aadan Nikshep
and 5 Prati-sthapan - these are the five Samitis of Beej-buddhi -
Page #735:
---------------------------
## Glossary of Terms

**645**
* **Maatraatak** - Quantity, Language, Desire.
* **Aadaan Nikshepana aur Prati. Sthaapana** - These five committees and **Manogupti**, **Vachanagupti** and **Kayagupti** these three secrets.
**1065 14 Maargnaae** - 1. Motion 2. Indri 3. Karma 4. Yoga 5. Veda ... 6. Kashaya 7. Gyaan 8. Samyam 9. Darshan 10. Leshya 11. Bhavyaatva 12. Samyaktva 13. Sanjnitva and 14. Aahaarak
**24.94-96 Muktaavali** - A name of a penance.
**7.30 Moksha** - The soul's complete liberation from karma.
**2.118**
* **14 Rajuu** - High and **343**. **Vimang** - False perception knowledge, **Rajuu** - Fruitful sky.
* **5.105** - This is called the Lok.
**Vibhushanang** - One who gives ornaments.
**1112**
* **Kalpvruksh Lokpal** - A type of Dev, these are like the city's protectors.
* **3.39** - Dev Kotwal.
**Vairagyasthairyabhavana** - Non-attachment, contemplation of the nature of the body, contemplation of the nature of the world, and contemplation of the nature of the world. These are the feelings of steadfastness in detachment.
**10.192**
* **Vachobalinn** - Strength of words.
**2072**
* **21499 Van (Chaturvidh)** - 1. Bhadrashalavan 2. Nandanavan 3. Saumanasavan 4. Pandukakn
**Vratonki . Uttar Bhavana 1** - The feeling of the vow.
**Dhutimmatta** - To possess patience.
**25.6**
* **Kshamavatta** - To possess forgiveness.
* **Dhyanakatanata** - To be absorbed in meditation.
* **Vanya** - Dev of the wilderness, these are Kinnar, Kimpurush, Mahorag, Gandharva, Pari, Yaksha, Rakshas, Bhoot and Pishach. These are the eight types.
**201166**
* **13.13 Vaggupti** - To control speech.
**Vratodyot** - Second vow image.
**2.77**
* **5 Anuvrat** - 3 **Gunvaagvigrut** - A type of Ridi.
**2171**
* **Vikrishtpram** - A village with a hundred houses. Its boundary is one Kos.
**10.159**
* **Rajju** - An innumerable number of Yojanas is one Rajju.
**10.185**
* **Rakhatray** - Samyagdarshan, Samyaggyaan, Samyakcharitra.
* **14 Rakhavali** - A penance.
**7.44**
* **Ruchi** - Synonym for Samyagdarshan.
**9.123**
* **Roudradhyaan** - A type of meditation. It has four types - 1. Hinsa
Page #736:
---------------------------
## 646
Adipurana
Nivati
Payantar.
Shukladhyan-Dhyanaka ek bhed Satsankhyadhanuyog-1 Sat 2. Samyaggyan-Jivadi padarthonko
Iske char bhed hain 1 Prithaktva Sankhya 3 Kshetra 4 Sparshan 5 Yatharthata ko Prakashit Vitarkavichar 2 Ekatva Kal 6 Antar 7 Bhav
Karnevala Gyan Vitark 3 Sukshmakriyaprati- aur 8 Alp Bahutva
24.118 Pati aur 4 Vyupratkriya
24.97
Samyagdarshan-Sachche Dev-Shastra. Sadarshan-Darshan Pratima Shravak ki Guru ka Shraddhan athava 211166.200 | Pehli Pratima jismein aath. Jivadi sat tattvonka Shraddha-Samyagdarshan ka Paryayantar mul gunon ke sath Samyagdarshan. Shraddhan naam dharan karna padta hai
9.121,-122 9.123
10.159
Sapissravin-Ghatssravinon Riddhisraman Sangha ke char bhed-1 Rishi
Saptaang-Kathamukh ke nimanlikhit ke dharak 2 Muni 3 Yati 4 Anagar sat ang hain-1 Dravya 2
2072 25.6
Kshetra 3 Tirth 4 Kal 5. Sarvatobhadra-Ek Pratka naam Shrutakevali-Purn Shrutaggyan ke dharak Bhav 6 Mahaphal aur
7.23 Prakrit
Sarvavadhi - Avadhiggyan ka ek 2061
1.122 Shrutaggyan-Ek vrat ka naam, iski Saptambudhi-Sat Sagar
2066 Vidhi 6the parv ke 146 se - 151 shlok tak hai
5.143
Soushadhi-Ek Riddhi 6.141 Samata-Samayik namak tisri
2071 Shrutaggyanvidhi-Ek Tap
Pratima, ismein din mein 3 baar Sallekhana-Samadhimran 753 kam se kam do-do ghadi
5.248 Shrenicharan-Charan Riddhi ka ek. Paryant Samayik karna
Sammanik-Devon ka ek bhed jo
Sammanik-Deva bhed padta hai
ki Indra ke mata-pita 2073
adik ke tulya hota hai
10.159 Shreniva-Shrenon ke anusar base
Samahit-Samadhimran se yukt. hue viman
Sid-Ast karma se rahit Trilok
Purush. 101187
ke agrah bhaag par niwas. 10.118
karnevale jeev Padavya-Jeev, Pudgal, Dharm, Samyakcharitra-Mokshaabhilashi evam
24.130 Adharm, Akash aur Kal
Sansar se nishprih Muni ki | Sidd ke path gun-1 Samyaktva ye chhe dravya hain
Madhyasth Vritti ko Samyak- 2 Darshan 3 Shan 4 Veerya 2118 Charitra kahte hain.
5 Sokshamya 
Page #737:
---------------------------
## Glossary of Terms

**647**

* **Sushama-Sushama:** The first period of the Abaspini.
* **Sookshma-Kamanaskandha:** The subtle-desire skandha.
* **Sookshma-Anu Skandha:** The subtle-atom skandha.
* **Vyanuk:** A subtle-atom skandha, in relation to its divisions.
* **Sookshma-Rag-Dasha Gunasthan:** The subtle-passion-ten gunasthan.
* **Sookshma-Sookshma:** A subtle-atom skandha, in relation to its divisions.
* **Sookshma-Sthula:** That which is not visible to the eyes, but can be perceived by other senses, such as sound, touch, taste, and smell.
* **Sankalp:** The mental activity that increases desire for objects. It is also called Duspraṇidhāna.
* **Sangrah:** A large village situated between ten villages.
* **Samishrot:** A holder of the Samhinnashrot Riddhi.
* **Samvah:** A place where the head reaches a high point, and where heaps of grain are piled up when they meet. It is also a place where oil and water mix, such as a village.
* **Samveg:** A quality of Samyagdarshan.
* **Sthula-Sthula:** That which can be separated and rejoined, such as a stone.
* **Sthula-Sookshma:** That which is visible to the eyes, but cannot be grasped, such as moonlight, sunlight, etc.
* **Sanvedini:** A story that describes the fruits of Dharma.
* **Sansari Jiva:** A worldly being. There are two types: 1. Bhavya, 2. Abhavya.
* **Sparsha:** A synonym for Samyagdarshan.
* **Sihanishkridit:** A type of Pratyaka.
* **Swayambuddha:** A muni who becomes detached without external causes.
* **Skandha:** The eleven skandhas, from Nushanukshe to Lokarupa, are called the Prachal Skandha.
* **Svodistaparivartan:** The name for the eleventh Pratyma, which is the abandonment of the desired.
* **Sthavir Kalpa:** The practice of observing the Muni Vrat, while simultaneously engaging in Vihar.
* **Naga:** All types of garlands.
* **Kalpavruksha:** A wish-fulfilling tree.
* **Sthula:** That which can be separated, such as a stone.

**24.150**

* **Vyanuk:** A subtle-atom skandha, in relation to its divisions.

**24.151**

* **Sookshma-Sthula:** That which is not visible to the eyes, but can be perceived by other senses, such as sound, touch, taste, and smell.

**24.152**

* **Sthula-Sthula:** That which can be separated and rejoined, such as a stone.

**24.153**

* **Samveg:** A quality of Samyagdarshan.

**9.123**

* **Sanvedini:** A story that describes the fruits of Dharma.

**11.136**

* **Sthula-Sookshma:** That which is visible to the eyes, but cannot be grasped, such as moonlight, sunlight, etc.

**24.147**

* **Skandha:** The eleven skandhas, from Nushanukshe to Lokarupa, are called
Page #738:
---------------------------
## Geographical Glossary

This list provides a brief introduction to the geographical terms mentioned in the Adi Purana. A detailed study of these terms from the perspective of modern geography is required.

| **Term** | **Description** | **Reference** |
|---|---|---|
| Ayodhya | A city located east of the Ghatak Khand. | 16.154 |
| Andhra | A country in the south. | 16.154 |
| Akshomya | A part of the Uttara श्रेणी (Uttara श्रेणी). | 16.154 |
| Gandhil | A city in the Gandhil country. | 16.155 |
| Abhisar | A country. | 19385 |
| Agnijwala | A part of the Uttara श्रेणी (Uttara श्रेणी). | 16.154 |
| Ayodhya | A famous city in Uttar Pradesh. | 1983 |
| Amir | A country and a city. | 1076 |
| Paratt | A country. | 16.156 |
| Aj | A region near Bhagalpur. | 1978 |
| Arjun | A city in the Uttara श्रेणी (Uttara श्रेणी). | 16.152 |
| Umra (Undra) | A country. | 16.152 |
| Achyut | The sixteenth heaven. | 10.24 |
| Bharjaska | A city in the Dakshina श्रेणी (Dakshina श्रेणी). | 16.152 |
| Uttar Kuru | A region in the Videh Kshetra. | 19.45 |
| Anjanasel | A part of the Nandishwar island. | 7.99 |
| Anjanagiri | A mountain. | 3.24 |
| Arinjaya | A city in the Dakshina श्रेणी (Dakshina श्रेणी). | 1941 |
| Anjana | A part of the Bouthi Prithvi. | 10.32 |
| Arishtapur | A city in the eastern Videh. | 6.27 |
| Adhogredeyak | The nine Aveyak Vimanas above the sixteenth heaven. | 5.193 |
| Udak Kuru | A part of the Uttar Kuru region, located north of the Meru mountain. | 9.93 |
| Arishta | The fifth Prithvi. | 10132 |
| Alka | A city located above the Vijaya mountain in the Anudish Vimanas of the Achyut Kalpa. | 5.98 |
| Ushinar | A country. | 16.153 |
| Aparajit | A city in the Uttara श्रेणी (Uttara श्रेणी). | 744 |
| Bhavanti | A country located near Ujjain. | 1948 |
| Bhamravati | Indra's city. | 16.152 |
| Ashmak | A country. | 6.205 |
| Ritu | The first patal of the Sauvarma heaven. | 13.67 |
| Ambaratilak | A mountain in the Videh. | 752 |
| Ambaratilak | A city in the Uttara श्रेणी (Uttara श्रेणी). | 1981 |
| Anart | A country.
Page #739:
---------------------------
## Geographical Glossary

**Regions**

* **Kumuda:** A city in the Uttara श्रेणी (Uttara श्रेणी is a Jain term for a celestial realm).
* **Gaganandan:** A city in the Uttara श्रेणी.
* **Kachchha:** A country.
* **Kuru:** A country, located near Merath.
* **Karnata:** A country in the south.
* **Kurujaangala:** A region located near Hastinapur.
* **Karahaat:** A country.
* **Kaling:** Modern name Odisha.
* **Kekaya:** A country.
* **Kaambhoj:** A region located near Kabul.
* **Kerala:** A country in South India.
* **Kaashi:** A country, located near Varanasi.
* **Kokana:** A country, located near Poona.
* **Kaashmeer:** A country.
* **Kosala:** A region located near Ayodhya.
* **Dharma:** The first hell, also known as Ratnaprabha.

**Cities**

* **Nagar 16.153 19482 1981:** A city.
* **Kankaadri-Sumeru Parvat:** A mountain.
* **Gaganavashlam:** A city in the Uttara श्रेणी.
* **Gajadanta-Meru Parvat:** A mountain, located at the corner of four mountains called Gajadanta.
* **Gandharvapura:** A city in the Uttara श्रेणी.
* **Kaanchan:** A city in the Aishanaswarga (Aishanaswarga is a Jain term for a celestial realm).
* **Ketumala:** A city in the Uttara श्रेणी.
* **Gandhila:** A part of Videha.
* **Garudhadhwaja:** A city in the Dakshina श्रेणी (Dakshina श्रेणी is a Jain term for a celestial realm).
* **Girishikhar:** A city in the Uttara श्रेणी.
* **Goksheer:** A city in the Uttara श्रेणी.
* **Kinnarageet:** A city in the Dakshina श्रेणी.
* **Kilimkil:** A city in the Uttara श्रेणी.
* **Kshemapuri:** A city in the Dakshina श्रेणी.
* **Kshemakar:** A city in the Dakshina श्रेणी.
* **Chaturmukee:** A city in the Dakshina श्रेणी.
* **Chandrapura:** A city in the Dakshina श्रेणी.
* **Kunda:** A city in the Uttara श्रेणी.
* **Gaganchari:** A city in the Dakshina श्रेणी.
* **Chandraam:** A city in the Dakshina श्रेणी.

**Mountains**

* **Kachchha:** A country.
* **Kachchha:** A country.
* **Kachchha:** A country.
* **Kachchha:** A country.
* **Kachchha:** A country.
* **Kachchha:** A country.
* **Kachchha:** A country.
* **Kachchha:** A country.
* **Kachchha:** A country.
* **Kachchha:** A country.
* **Kachchha:** A country.
* **Kachchha:** A country.
* **Kachchha:** A country.
* **Kachchha:** A country.
* **Kachchha:** A country.
* **Kachchha:** A country.

Page #740:
---------------------------
650
Adipuranam
. City
Chamar-Vi. U. Shre. One city.
Bharani-Vi. U. Shre. One 1979
Tamahprama-Sixth Earth (Sixth city Charuni-Vi. U. Shre. One hell)
1985 City
10॥31
Dhataki Khand-This name 1978
TamasTamahprama-Seventh Earth Second Island Its extent Chitrakut-Vi. D. Shre. One
1031
4 lakh yojanas are... -...city
Tilka-Vi. U. Shre. One 6.126 city
Dhanyapur-One city 1951 19582
8.230 Chitrangad-Aishana heaven's aircraft Turushk-One country-Turk
Dhumprama-Fifth Earth 9.189
1031 Chudamani-Vi. U. The. One Trikuta-Vi. D. Shre. One city. Dhyanchatushk-Atadhyan, Raudra.
19.51
Dhyan, Dharmyadhyan, Shukla1978
Dhyan
The Chedi-One country. Chandrika Pavam.
5.153 Dasharna-Modern Vidishaka Verti Pradesh
Pavavarti Pradesh 166155
16.153:
Nand-Aishana heaven's aircraft Chol-South India's one country Dar-One country
9.190 16154
163154
Nandan-Meru mountain's one forest Durg-Vi. U. Shre. One city
5.144 Jaganadi-Lokanadi 14 Raju
1985
Nandeswar-Eighth island where Praman Lok is located in the middle. 'Durdhar-Vi. U. Shre. One city. 52 Jinalaya is one Raju Chaudi one Raju
1985
5.292 Yoto and 14 high Nadi. Devakuru-Videh area's under Nando Uttara-Samavasaran's one It is also called Sanadi ' One province in which Uttama- Vapika's name 2050
Bhogabhumiki creation is. Nando Uttara, Nanda, Nandavati, 3124
Nandghosha these four Vapikas Jambu Dham-Videh area's one famous tree due to which Devadvi- Sumeru mountain
Purvamana Stambh's east direction this island's name Jambu Dwip
Directions are. 4.52
Dyutilka-Vi. U. The. One Vijaya, Vaijayanti, Jayanti fell
And Aparajita these four cities 5.184 Jambu Dwip-First island
19683
Vapikas South Man
Stambh's east direction 4.51
Dhutilka-Ambartilka mountain. Jay-Vi. U. The. One city
7.99
Shoka, Supratibuddha, Kumuda 1984
And Pundarika these four Jayanti-Vi. D. Shre. One Dhananjay-Vi. U. Shre. One Vapikas West Manastambh
City
1950
19.64
Hridayananda, Mahananda,
City

Page #741:
---------------------------
##  English Translation:

**Suprabuddha and Prabhankari are the four Vāpikās in the east, south, west, and north directions of the Manastambha in the north direction.**
22.110

**Nandyaavarta - A Vimāna of the Aishāna heaven**
9.191

**Nargit - A Nagar of the Vidisha-Dvipa-Shreshtha**
19.34

**Nityavaahini - A Nagar of the Vidisha-Dvipa-Theertha**
19.52

**Nishyoodyotini - A Nagar of the Vidisha-Dvipa-Theertha**
19.52

**Nimisha - A Nagar of the Vidisha-Uttara-Shreshtha**
19.83

**Nishedha - A Kulachala where the sunrise and sunset occur**
12.138

**Neela - A Kulachala**
5.109

**P**

**Pankaprabha - The fourth Prithvi**
10.131

**Panchamarnava - Ksheerasagara**
13.112

**Pachala - A Desh**
16.153

**Pallava - A Desh in the south**
16.155

**Palala - A Gram of the Gandhila Desh in the Videha Kshetra of the Ghataki Khanda of the Palala Parvata**
6.135

**Prabha - A Vimāna of the second heaven**
8.214

**Geographical Glossary**

**Prabhakar - A Vimāna of the Aishāna heaven**
9.192

**Prabhakarapuri - A Nagari of the Videha in the Pushkaravar Dvipa**
7.34

**Pataliagram - A Nagar of the Gandhila Desh in the Videha Kshetra of the Ghataki Khanda**
6.127

**Panduka - A Van of the Meru**
5.183

**Patatri - Pratyanta Parvata**
5.179

**Pragvideha - Purva Videha**
5.193

**Pranata - The fourteenth heaven**
7.39

**Pritivardhana - A Vimāna**
7.26

**Pundra - The northern part of modern Bengal, also known as God Desh**
16.152

**Pundarika - A Nagar of the Vidisha-Dvipa**
19.36

**Purunjaya - A Nagar of the Vidisha-Dvipa**
19.43

**Purimatala - A Nagar**
24.171

**Pushkalavati - A Desh of the Videha**
6.26

**Pushpachula - A Nagari of the Vidisha-Uttara-Shreshtha**
19.79

**Purvamandara - Purva Meru**
7.13

**F**

**Phen - A Nagar of the Vidisha-Uttara-Shreshtha**
19.85

**B**

**Bang - Bengal**
16.152

**Balahaka - A Nagari of the Vidisha-Uttara-Shreshtha**
19.79

**Bahuketuka - A Nagar of the Vidisha-Dvipa-Shreshtha**
19.35

**Bahumukhi - A Nagar of the Vidisha-Dvipa
Page #742:
---------------------------
## 652.
**Adipurana**
- **Nagar**
A city of the **Vimala-Uttara-Shreni**.
1982 **Mahakachchha-Purva** a country of **Videha**
5.193 **Mahakoota-Vimala-Dakshina-Shreni** a city of the
19.51 **Mahajvala-Vimala-Uttara-Shreni** a city of the
1984 **Mahapoota-Jinalaya** - a temple name
6.179 **Maharashtra** - a country
164154 **Mahendra-Pur** - a city of the **Vimala-Uttara-Shreni**
**Nagar**
19886. **Madhavi** - the seventh earth
1032 **Manushottara-Parvata** - a mountain shaped like a crown, located in the middle of the **Pushkaravar-Dwipa**
5.291 **Malava** - a country
163153 **Maheindra** - the fourth heaven
7.11 **Muktahar** - a city of the **Vimala-Uttara-Shreni**
19483 **Mekhalamanagar** - a city of the **Vimala-Dakshina-Shreni**
19.48 **Meghkoota** - a city of the **Vimala-Dakshina-Shreni** 19.51
**Ratikoota** - a city of the **Vimala-Dakshina-Shreni**. **Vajrargal** - a city of the **Vimala-Dakshina-Shreni**
1951 **Ratnapur** - a city of the **Vimala-Uttara-Shreni** 19.42 **Nagar**
**Vass** - a country 1987
16.153 **Ratnaprama** - the first earth (the first part of **Vassakavati** - the **Pushkara** hell)
**Videha** - a country east of **Bhagast** 10131
. -7133 **Ranasanchay** - a forest in the east of the **Pushkar-Dwipa** **Vanavasa** - a city in the south of **Bharat** related to **Videha**
16.154 10.115
**Vasumati** - a city of the **Vimala-Uttara-Shreni** **Rakhasanchay** - a city in the **Mangalavati** country of the **Videha** region
1980 7.14
**Vasumatka** - a city of the **Vimala-Uttara-Shreni** **Ratnakar** - a city of the **Vimala-Uttara-Shreni**
1980 1986
**Valukaprama** - the third earth **Rathnupurachakraval** - a city of the **Vimala-Dakshina-Shreni**
10.31
**Vahik** - a country 19.46
16.156 **Ramya** - a country
**Vichitrakoota** - a **koota** of the **Vimala-Dakshina-Shreni** 163152
**Rushit** - a **Vimana** of the second heaven 1951 8.213
**Vijay
Page #743:
---------------------------
## Geographical Glossary

**Cities**

* **Nagara** - City
* **Nagari** - City
* **Videha-Jambudeep** - A region in Videha-Jambudeep
* **Vansha-Dusra Naraka-Sharkaraprabha** - A second hell, Sharkaraprabha
* **Shriniket** - A city in the Uttar-Shreshtha region, 4153
* **Vidhyutpram** - A city in the Uttar-Shreshtha region, 10.29
* **Vanshal** - A city in the Uttar-Shreshtha region, 1984
* **Shrinagara** - A city in the Aishana heaven, 19.78, 1979
* **Vimana Vineeta** - The name of Ayodhya
* **Shrinagara** - A mountain, 12178
* **Shaka** - A country, 11194
* **Vineyachari** - A city in the Dakshina-Shreshtha region, 16.156
* **Shrinagara** - A mountain, a city
* **Shakatmukhi** - A city in the Dakshina-Shreshtha region, 19.49
* **Shrinagara** - A city in the Dakshina-Shreshtha region, 19.44
* **Vipuladri** - The first city of Rajagho
* **Shatrujaya** - A city in the Uttar-Shreshtha region, 19.40
* **Shrinagara** - A city in the Uttar-Shreshtha region, 1980
* **Shrivala** - A city in the Uttar-Shreshtha region, 1980
* **Vimana** - The abode of the Devas
* **Sharkaraprama** - The second earth, 10208
* **Vimukhi** - A city in the Dakshina-Shreshtha region, 19.84
* **Shashriprabha** - A city in the Uttar-Shreshtha region, 10131
* **Shrinagara** - A city in the Uttar-Shreshtha region, 1952
* **Shrinagara** - A city, 1978, 1979
* **Vimocha** - A city in the Dakshina-Shreshtha region, 1978, 1979
* **Shalmali** - A famous tree in the Videha region, 5.184
* **Shwetaketa** - A city in the Dakshina-Shreshtha region, 19.43
* **Shila** - The third earth, its city
* **Mesha** - Another name for Shila, 19.45
* **Sajjayanti** - A city in the Dakshina-Shreshtha region, 10.32
* **Vishonka** - A city in the Uttar-Shreshtha region, 1950
* **Shivakar** - A city in the Uttar-Shreshtha region, 1981
* **Samudraka** - A country, 16.152
* **Vitashoka** - A city in the Uttar-Shreshtha region, 1981
* **Shivamandhir** - A city in the Uttar-Shreshtha region, 1979
* **Sarvarthasidhi** - The
Page #744:
---------------------------
## Adipurana - Places and Locations

**Forest:**

* **Siddhārthaka Van:** A forest near Ayodhya, located in the Sauvīra country. It is where Lord Ādinātha attained liberation (diksha) in 19585.
* **Su-darshan:** A forest near Ayodhya, located in the Sauvīra country.
* **Somanas-Meru:** A forest in the Somanas-Meru mountain.

**Cities:**

* **Ayodhya:** A city in the Sauvīra country.
* **Su-prasthita:** A city in the Sauvīra country.
* **Siddhāyatana:** A city in the Vijaya mountain.
* **Su-mukhi:** A city in the Su-mukhi mountain.
* **Su-ra-di-Su-meru:** A city in the Su-meru mountain.
* **Su-ra-shṭra:** A city in the Girinār mountain of the Saurashtra country.
* **Su-re-ndra-kānta:** A city in the Su-re-ndra-kānta mountain.
* **Su-sīma-nagar:** A city in the Jambudvīpa, located in the eastern Videha country.
* **Singh-pur:** A city in the Jambudvīpa, located in the western Videha country.
* **Su-ko-sal:** A city in the Su-ko-sal country. Modern name: Madhya Pradesh.
* **Su-r-yāma:** A city in the Su-r-yāma mountain.
* **Su-g-andh-inī:** A city in the Su-g-andh-inī mountain.
* **Su-rya-pur:** A city in the Su-rya-pur mountain.
* **Hās-ti-nā-khya-pur:** A city in the Hās-ti-nā-khya-pur mountain. Modern name: Hastinapur.
* **Hema-kūṭa:** A city in the Hema-kūṭa mountain.

**Mountains:**

* **Sva-pāda-giri:** A mountain where Lord Ādinātha attained liberation (diksha).
* **Gaja-danta:** A mountain.
* **Vijaya:** A mountain.
* **Su-mukhi:** A mountain.
* **Su-meru:** A mountain.
* **Girinār:** A mountain in the Saurashtra country.
* **Su-re-ndra-kānta:** A mountain.
* **Hema-kūṭa:** A mountain.

**Other:**

* **Sva-yam-prama-sau-dharma:** A city in the Sva-yam-prama-sau-dharma heaven.
* **Sva-yam-pra-bha:** A city in the Sva-yam-pra-bha heaven.
* **Sva-yam-bhū-ramaṇa:** The last island.
* **Sva-yam-bhū-ramaṇa-udadhi:** The last ocean.
* **Si-ndhu:** A country.
* **Harivarsha:** The southern region of the Jambudvīpa.
* **Si-to-da:** A region in the Videha country.
* **Su-jha:** A country.
* **Ma-hā-nadi:** A river.
* **Si-ddha-kūṭa:** A place related to the Su-ra-di-Su-meru mountain.
* **Si-ddh
Page #745:
---------------------------
## English Translation:

**655**
**List of Proper Nouns**

**2**  Agrani - One of the 1008 names of Bhagavan
Ajah,  "Not born" - One of the 1008 names of Bhagavan 25.115
24/30 8.116
Agrim - One of the 1008 names of Bhagavan 25.150
Aj - One of the 1008 names of Bhagavan 25.106
Leader of the Makan-Nath dynasty, King of Varanasi, established by Bhagavan Adinath 24.37
Adhy - One of the 1008 names of Bhagavan 24.37
Ajanman - One of the 1008 names of Bhagavan 25.106
Agrya - One of the 1008 names of Bhagavan 25.150
Ajar - One of the 108 names of Bhagavan 16.260
One name, "He who does not have old age" 25.144
Akshayya - One of the 1008 names of Bhagavan 24.34
Ajar - One of the 1008 names of Bhagavan 25.109
Avalsthiti - One of the 1008 names of Bhagavan 25.114
Akshayya - One of the 108 names of Bhagavan 24.35
One name, "He who cannot be destroyed" 24.35
Achal - One of the 1008 names of Bhagavan 25.128
Ajarya - One of the 1008 names of Bhagavan 25.109
Akshamhya - One of the 1008 names of Bhagavan 25.173
Bhachinsya - One of the 1008 names of Bhagavan 25.164
Bhajat - One of the 1008 names of Bhagavan 25.171
Akshar - One of the 108 names of Bhagavan 24.35
One name, "He who does not decay" 24.35
Achintryardi - One of the 1008 names of Bhagavan 25.114
Bhajit - Second Tirthankara 1.16
Akshar - One of the 108 names of Bhagavan 24.35
One name, "He who is eternal" 24.35
Ajit - Second Tirthankara 2.142
Bhachinsyavaimava - One of the 1008 names of Bhagavan 25.101
Ajit - One of the 1008 names of Bhagavan 25.140
Prakshobhya - One of the 1008 names of Bhagavan 25.169
Bhajitjaya - Jayavarma Bora
Son of Suprabha 7.41
Achintyatman - One of the 1008 names of Bhagavan 25.104
Bhajitkshaya - A Chakravarti of Videha 7.45
Akhiljyotis - One of the 1008 names of Bhagavan 25.215
Bhacchedya - One of the 1008 names of Bhag
Page #746:
---------------------------
##  Adipurana, Chapter 656

**656**

**Adipurana**

**Bhanoraniyas -** One name among the 1008 names of Bhagavan, 25.176.

**Bhadideva -** One name among the 1008 names of Bhagavan, 25.192.

**Atandralu -** One name among the 1008 names of Bhagavan, 25.207.

**Adhip -** One name among the 1008 names of Bhagavan, 25.157.

**Atigridhra -** King of Prabhakari Puri, 192.

**Adhip -** One name among the 1008 names of Bhagavan, 25.189.

**Atibala -** King of Alka Nagari, a Vidyadhara, 4122.

**Adhisthan -** One name among the 1008 names of Bhagavan, 25.203.

**Atibala -** Son of Mahabala, 5.228.

**Adhyatmagamy -** One name among the 1008 names of Bhagavan, 25.188.

**Atibala -** King of Pushkalavati, in the Videha region, in the Dhaatki Khand, 24141.

**Adhvar -** One name among the 1008 names of Bhagavan, 25.166.

**Adhvar -** One name among the 1008 names of Bhagavan, 25.166.

**Dhananjaya** and **Yashasvati** (Queen), son and wife of **Narayanapada**. 781.

**Adhvaryu -** One name among the 1008 names of Bhagavan, 25.166.

**Bhatindra -** One name among the 1008 names of Bhagavan, 25.148.

**Anaksha -** One name among the 108 names of Bhagavan, not existing, 
*Indriyani yasya so'naksha*, 24.35.

**Atiriya -** One name among the 1008 names of Bhagavan, 25.148.

**Atiriyartarak -** One name among the 1008 names of Bhagavan, 25.148.

*Kshayikgyanayuktwena kshayo*, 
*Pashmikgyanajanitbhaavendriya*, 
*Rihitwat naamah sarth*, 
*Kattwam*, 24.35.

**Bhanabhar -** One name among the 108 names of Bhagavan, not existing, 
*Ksharo nasho yasmat so'nakshara*, 24.35.

**Bhatus -** One name among the 1008 names of Bhagavan, 25.1240.

**Adharmabhak (Adharmadaha) -** One name among the 1008 names of Bhagavan, 25.126.

**Anagha -** One name among the 1008 names of Bhagavan, 25.172.

**Adharmari -** One name among the 108 names of Bhagavan, 24.3
Page #747:
---------------------------
## English Translation:

**Anadi** - One of the 108 names of the Bhagwan, meaning "without beginning".  The term "Anadi" refers to the absence of a beginning in relation to the substance and its modes. (24.34)

**Anadinidhan** - One of the 1008 names of the Bhagwan. (25.114)

**Anamय** - One of the 1008 names of the Bhagwan. (25.217)

**Anaśvān** - One of the 1008 names of the Bhagwan. (25.171)

**Aniśvara** - One of the 108 names of the Bhagwan, meaning "without a lord".  It refers to one who has no inclination to go to any particular place. (24.44)

**Anidrālu** - One of the 1008 names of the Bhagwan. (25.207)

**Anindya** - One of the 1008 names of the Bhagwan. (25.167)

**Anindriya** - One of the 1008 names of the Bhagwan. (25.148)

**Anīś** - One of the 1008 names of the Bhagwan. (25.187)

**Anīśvara** - One of the 1008 names of the Bhagwan. (25.103)

**Anuttara** - One of the 108 names of the Bhagwan. (24.43)

**Anuttara** - One of the 1008 names of the Bhagwan. (25.133)

**Anundharī** - Sister of the Tirthankara, Trājñaj. (8.33)

**Antakṛt** - One of the 1008 names of the Bhagwan. (25.168)

**Aparājita** - A Muni, one of the fourteen previous Knowers. (2.141)

**Aparājita** - Son of Vajrasena and Śrīkāntakā (Nakulaka Jīva). (11.10)

**Aparājita Senānī** - Father of Akampana Senāpati. (8.216)

**Apāra** - One of the 108 names of the Bhagwan. (24.42)

**Apāradhī** - One of the 1008 names of the Bhagwan. (25.212)

**Apārī** - One of the 108 names of the Bhagwan, meaning "without a limit".  It refers to one who has no limitations in their knowledge. (24.42)

**Punarbhava** - One of the 1008 names of the Bhagwan. (25.100)

**Aprataryātmān** - One of the 1008 names of the Bhagwan. (25.180)

**Apratigh** - One of the 1008 names of the Bhagwan. (25.201)

**Apratiṣṭha** - One of the 1008 names of the Bhagwan. (25.203)

**Aprāmeyātmān** - One of the 1008 names of the Bhagwan. (25.163)

**Aband
Page #748:
---------------------------
658
Adipurana
Amovach - One of the 1008 names of Bhagwan 25.184 Bhamoughshasan - One of the 1008 names of Bhagwan 25.184 Bhamodhaajna - One of the 1008 names of Bhagwan 25.184 Amomuh - One of the 108 names of Bhagwan 25.204 Ayoonij - One of the 108 names of Bhagwan, Yono na jayate iti Ayoonijah 24||34 Ayoonij - One of the 1008 names of Bhagwan 25.106 Bhar - The 18th Tirthankar 21132 Arajas - One of the 1008 names of Bhagwan, Karmarajo rahitatvat Arajah 24.30 Bharjas - One of the 1008 names of Bhagwan 25.112 Bharvind - A Vidyadhar Raja Mahabal, descendant of the previous lineage, mentioned in the discourse of Swayambuddha 5489 Mahat - One of the 108 names of Bhagwan 24040 Bhait - One of the 1008 names of Bhagwan 25.112 Bharhas - One of the 1008 names of Bhagwan, Na vidyate raho antarayakarma yasya sohah 24|40 Bharikṣaya - A Muni Raja 5.194 Bharikṣaya - A Muni 7.30 Bharikṣaya - One of the 1008 names of Bhagwan 25.167 Bharihan - One of the 108 names of Bhagwan 24.40 Mahan - Surya's charioteer, Prat: - |
Time of sunrise, the redness spreading in the east
15.109 Bharun - A type of Laukantik Dev 17148 Alap - One of the 1008 names of Bhagwan 25.185 Bhavishesh - One of the 1008 names of Bhagwan 25.180. Avyak - One of the 1008 names of Bhagwan 25.147 Amyay - One of the 1008 names of Bhagwan 25.109 . Anyabadh - A type of Laukantik Dev 17148 Ashoka - One of the 1008 names of Bhagwan 25.133 Asang - One of the 1008 names of Bhagwan 25.124 Asangasman - One of the 1008 names of Bhagwan 25.126 Asankhyey - One of the 1008 names of Bhagwan 25.163 Bhasambhooshnu - One of the 1008 names of Bhagwan 25.110 Bhasanskrut (alternative) - One of the 1008 names of Bhagwan
25.169 Prasanskrut Susanskar - One of the 1008 names of Bhagwan
25.168 Bhamintrar - One of the 1000 names of Bhagwan 25.140 Bharih - A type of Laukantik Dev 1748
A . Bhajy - One of the 108 names of Bhagwan
I am one name 24
Page #749:
---------------------------
E.
Ikshvaku Bhagavan - One of the 108 names of Bhagavan Adinath 16.264
Izya - One of the 108 names of Bhagavan 24.42
Izya - One of the 1008 names of Bhagavan 250174
Ity - One of the 1008 names of Bhagavan 25.134
In - One of the 108 names of Bhagavan 24/34
Indrabhuti - The chief Ganadhar of Bhagavan Mahavira, his other name is Gautam 2054
E
Ish - One of the 108 names of Bhagavan, endowed with wealth 24.34
Ishan - One of the 108 names of Bhagavan 24.30
Ishan - One of the 1008 names of Bhagavan 25.112
Ishit - One of the 1008 names of Bhagavan 25.182
U
Ugrasen (Shardul's Jiva) - Son of Sagardatt and Dhanvati of Hastinapur 8223
Uttam - One of the 108 names of Bhagavan 24.43
Uttam - One of the 1008 names of Bhagavan 25.171
Utsavdosh - One of the 1008 names of Bhagavan 25.211
Udardhi - One of the 1008 names of Bhagavan 25.179
Udhav - One of the 1008 names of Bhagavan 25149
1
List of Personal Nouns
Upmabhut - One of the 1008 names of Bhagavan 251187
Ritvij - One of the 1008 names of Bhagavan 25.127
A
Ek - One of the 1008 names of Bhagavan 25.187
Ekavidya - One of the 1008 names of Bhagavan 25.141
K
K - One of the 1008 names of Bhagavan 25.133
Kachch - Bhagavan Adinath's Sala 15.70
Kanjasanjat - One of the 108 names of Bhagavan, the meaning of the name is due to being born on a lotus in the womb of the mother 24.28
Kanakprabh - One of the 1008 names of Bhagavan 25.197
Kanakprama - Lalitangdevki's chief Devi 5.283
Kanakalata - Lalitangdevki's chief Devi 5.283
Kanakam - Ekdev (Jiva of the Mahamantr of Vajrajamp) 8213
Kanaskanchanasnim - One of the 1008 names of Bhagavan 25.199
Kartri - One of the 1008 names of Bhagavan 25.149
Karmakashtashushukhani - One of the 1008 names of Bhagavan 25.214
Karmath - One of the 1008 names of Bhagavan 25.214
656
Karmany - One of the 1008 names of Bhagavan 25.214
Karmas
Page #750:
---------------------------
##  Adipurana 660

**Kamaga** - One name among the 1008 names of the Lord (22.15). **Kritakritya** - One name among the 1008 names of the Lord (25.130). **Ksham** - One name among the 1008 names of the Lord (25.201). **Kamajit** - One name among the 1008 names of the Lord (14.40). **Kritakratu** - One name among the 1008 names of the Lord. **Kshamin** - One name among the 1008 names of the Lord (25.130). **Kamada** - One name among the 1008 names of the Lord (25.173). **Kritakriya** - One name among the 1008 names of the Lord (25.167). **Kshata** - One name among the 1008 names of the Lord (25.134). **Kamadhenu** - One name among the 1008 names of the Lord (25.161). **Kritagnya** - One name among the 1008 names of the Lord (25.167). **Kshatiprayana** - One name among the 1008 names of the Lord (25.189). **Kaman** - One name among the 1008 names of the Lord (25.171). **Kritpurvajavistar** - One name among the 1008 names of the Lord (25.192). **Kshatimaj** - One name among the 1008 names of the Lord (25.126). **Kamahan** - One name among the 1008 names of the Lord (25.167). **Kshetrajna** - One name among the 1008 names of the Lord (25.121). **Kamari** - One name among the 1008 names of the Lord (25.165). **Kritlakshana** - One name among the 1008 names of the Lord (25.180). **Kshemakrit** - One name among the 1008 names of the Lord (25.165). **Kamitprada** - One name among the 1008 names of the Lord (25.202). **Kritantakrut** - One name among the 1008 names of the Lord. **Kshemkar** - One name among the 1008 names of the Lord. **Kritantam** - One name among the 1008 names of the Lord (25.173). **Kamy** - One name among the 1008 names of the Lord (25.167). **Agamamkarotitikritanta** - One name among the 1008 names of the Lord (25.129). **Kshemkar** - Third Kulkar (3.90). **Krit** - One name among the 1008 names of the Lord (25.1149). **Karana** - One name among the 1008 names of the Lord. **Kshemadharmapati** - One name among the 1008 names of the Lord (25.173). **Kritanta
Page #751:
---------------------------
## Translation:

**Gati** - One of the 1008 names of the Lord 25.182
**Gambhirasasan** - One of the 1008 names of the Lord 25.182
**Gamyatman** - One of the 1008 names of the Lord 25.188
**Gardatoy** - A type of Laukantic Dev 17148
**Grimaspad** - One of the 108 names of the Lord 2443
**Garisht** - One of the 1008 names of the Lord, Atishayena Guru 25.122
**Garisht** - One of the 108 names of the Lord 24.43
**Garishtgi** (Garishtgir) - One of the 1008 names of the Lord 25.122
**Gariyasamady** - One of the 1008 names of the Lord 25.176
**Gahan** - One of the 1008 names of the Lord 25.149
**Girampati** - One of the 1008 names of the Lord 25.179
**Gun** - One of the 1008 names of the Lord 25.136
**Gunagram** - One of the 1008 names of the Lord 25.137
**Gunajn** - One of the 1008 names of the Lord 25.135
**Gundhar** - A Muni, disciple of Yashodhar Yogindra 884
**Gunnayak** - One of the 1008 names of the Lord 25.135
**Gunakar** - One of the 1008 names of the Lord 24.42
**Gunakar** - One of the 1008 names of the Lord 25.135
**Gunadarinn** - One of the 1008 names of the Lord 25.136
**Gunambhodi** - One of the 1008 names of the Lord 25.135
**Gunocchedin** - One of the 1008 names of the Lord 25.136
**Gunya** - One of the 1008 names of the Lord 25.137
**Guptibhrud** - One of the 1008 names of the Lord 25.178
**Guru** - One of the 1008 names of the Lord 25.160
**Guru** - One of the 1008 names of the Lord 25.176
**Guhya** - One of the 1008 names of the Lord 25.149
**Gudhagocar** - One of the 1008 names of the Lord 25.196
**Gudhatman** - One of the 1008 names of the Lord 25.196
**Goptri** - One of the 1008 names of the Lord 25.178
**Gopy** - One of the 1008 names of the Lord 25.196
**Govardhan** - A Muni, knower of fourteen previous births 21141
**Gautam** -
Page #752:
---------------------------
##  English Translation:

**662.**

**J**

* **Jagatchudamani** - One of the 1008 names of the Bhagavan, 25.206
* **Jagajjyestha** - One of the 1008 names of the Bhagavan, 25.103
* **Jagajjyotish** - One of the 1008 names of the Bhagavan, 25.114
* **Jagajjyotis** - One of the 1008 names of the Bhagavan, 25.207
* **Jagatpati** - One of the 1008 names of the Bhagavan, 25.118
* **Jagatpati** - One of the 1008 names of the Bhagavan, 25.104
* **Jagatpal** - One of the 1008 names of the Bhagavan, 25.217
* **Jagadgarbha** - One of the 1008 names of the Bhagavan, 25.181
* **Jagabandhu** - One of the 1008 names of the Bhagavan, 25.195
* **Jagadbhartri** - One of the 1008 names of the Bhagavan, 2432 (because he guides to the path of righteousness and protects the world, he is called Jagadbhartri)
* **Jagadadīj** - One of the 1008 names of the Bhagavan, 25.147
* **Jagaddhit** - One of the 1008 names of the Bhagavan, 25.108
* **Jagadvitaishi** - One of the 1008 names of the Bhagavan, 25.195
* **Jagadvibhu** - One of the 1008 names of the Bhagavan, 25.195
* **Jagadyoni** - One of the 1008 names of the Bhagavan, 25.134
* **Jagannandan** - A Muni Raja, 7.39
* **Jagannath** - One of the 1008 names of the Bhagavan, 25.195
* **Jatacharya** - The author of Varangacharita, Jasinghanand Acharya, 1150
* **Adipuranam**
* **Jastra** - The Kevali who came after Sudharma Swami, 2.138
* **Jambu** - The Kevali Jambu Swami, 1.199
* **Jay** - A Muni who knew the eleven Angas and the ten Purvas, 2.143
* **Jayakirti** - The friend of Chandrakirti, 78
* **Jayant** - The son of Vajrasena and Shrikanta (a monkey), 11.17
* **Jayapal** - A Muni who knew the eleven Angas, 2.146
* **Jayavarma** - The eldest son of King Shripena and Queen Sundari of Singhapura, 5.205
* **Jayavarma** - The king of Ayodhya in Gandhiladesh, 7.41
* **Jayasen** - The son of King Mahidhar and Queen Sundari of Ratnasamchay Nagar, a Shatdhi Mantra जीव who was born after being released from hell, 10.1
Page #753:
---------------------------
## Noun List
663

Jishnu - One of the 1008 names of the Lord.
Trijanmangaloday - One of the 25.104 names of the Lord.
Tanunirmukt - One of the 1008 names of the Lord.
Jishnu - One of the 108 names of the Lord.
Jishnu - One of the 25.210 names of the Lord.
Jishnu - One of the 25.110 names of the Lord.
Jetu Shila Tantrakrid - One of the 1008 names of the Lord.
Trijagatpatipujyaadhi - One of the 1008 names of the Lord.
Jishnu - 24.35
Jetu - One of the 108 names of the Lord.
Tapanianim - One of the 1008 names of the Lord.
Jetu - One of the 25.190 names of the Lord.
Jetu - One of the 25.129 names of the Lord.
Jetu - One of the 108 names of the Lord.
Tapanianim - One of the 1008 names of the Lord.
Jetu - One of the 24.40 names of the Lord.
Trijagatparameshwar - One of the 1008 names of the Lord.
Jetu - One of the 1008 names of the Lord.
Saptajambunadadyuti - One of the 1008 names of the Lord.
Jetu - One of the 25.106 names of the Lord.
Jetu - One of the 25.110 names of the Lord.
Trideshadhyaksh - One of the 1008 names of the Lord.
Jnanagarm - One of the 1008 names of the Lord.
Trideshadhyaksh - One of the 25.20 names of the Lord.
Jnanagarm - One of the 25.182 names of the Lord.
Tatchamikaragchhavi - One of the 1008 names of the Lord.
Trinetra - One of the 1008 names of the Lord.
Jnanachakshus - One of the 1008 names of the Lord.
Tatchamikaragchhavi - One of the 25.215 names of the Lord.
Trinetra - One of the 25.198 names of the Lord.
Jnanachakshus - One of the 25.204 names of the Lord.
Tripurar - One of the 1008 names of the Lord.
Tamso'ari - One of the 108 names of the Lord.
Jnanadharmaramprabhu - One of the 1008 names of the Lord.
Tripurar - One of the 25.215 names of the Lord.
Tamso'ari - One of the 25.132 names of the Lord.
Tamso'ajnanadharakarsya arih shatrur iti - Meaning of the name. 24.36
Trilokaprashigvamani - One of the 100 names of the Lord.
Jnanniprash - One of the 1008 names of the Lord.
Trilokaprashigvamani - One of the 25.190 names of the Lord.
Page #754:
---------------------------
## 664
.. Adipuranam
|
Dayagarm-Bhagavan's 1008 | Durdarshan-Bhagavan's 1008 names- | Dhanamitra-
names- |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  
Page #755:
---------------------------
## Personal Noun List

**5665** Dharmasena - Eleventh Anga, ten previous. Dhyatamaha Dharman - Lord's 1008. Nanakatavarsha - Lord's 1008.
**Known** One Muni 21144. **1008** Names, one name. **Names** one name 25.187. Dharmacharya - Lord's 1008. 25.162.
**Nandimitra** - Fourteenth previous. Known, one name 25.216.
| **Dhyanagamy** - Lord's 1008. One Muni 21141. Dharmatman - Lord's 1008.
**Names** one name 251173.
**Nami** - Fourteenth Kulkar 3.152. **Names** one name 25.115. Dhyeya - Lord's 1008. **Names**
**Namij** - Lord's 1008. **Names** Dharmadi - Lord's 108. **Names** | one name 25.108.
one name 25.171. one name 24139.
**Dhruvasena** - Eleventh Anga. Known | **Nabhinandan** - Lord's 1008. Dharmadhyaksha - Lord's 1008.
One Muni 20146.
**Names** one name 25.170. **Names** one name 25.111.
**Namiraj** - Lord Rishabhdev's Dharmaram - Lord's 1008. **Nakulariya** - Nakula's being who
father 124 . . **Names** one name 25.137.
became part of the earth | **Nabheya** - Nabhi Kulkar's son
9.192. **Dharmya** - Lord's 1008. **Names**
First Tirthankar Vrishabhnath. **Nakshatra** - Eleventh Anga. Known. One one name 25.115.
1115.
Muni 21146. **Dhata** - Lord's 1008. **Names** **Nand** - Lord's 1008. **Names**
**Nabheya** - Lord Adinath   one name 25.102.
15.222.
one name 25.167. **Dhatu** - Lord's 1008. **Names** . **Mand** - Nagadatta and Sumatika
**Nameya** - Lord's 1008. **Names** one name 25.174. - son 6129.
. - one name 25.171. **Dhisan** - Lord's 1008. **Names** **Mandan** - Lord's 1008. **Mamas** **Nitya** - Lord's 108. **Names** one name 25.179.
one name 25.167. ... one name 24144. **Dhindra** - Lord's 1008. **Names** one name 25.167. ...
one name
Page #756:
---------------------------
666
Nirdhūtagam - One of the 1008 names of Bhagwan 25.139 Nirnama - The second name of Shrikant, the younger daughter of Nagadatta and Sumati 6.130 Nirnimēsha - One of the 1008 names of Bhagwan 25.139 Nimanda - One of the 1008 names of Bhagwan 25.138 Nirmala - One of the 1008 names of Bhagwan 25.184 Nirmala - One of the 1008 names of Bhagwan 25.128 Nirmoha - One of the 1008 names of Bhagwan 25.138 Nirambar - One of the 1008 names of Bhagwan 25.204 Nirlepa - One of the 1008 names of Bhagwan 25.128 Nirvighna - One of the 1008 names of Bhagwan 25.211 Nirastainas - One of the 1008 names of Bhagwan 25.139 Nirabadha - One of the 1008 names of Bhagwan 25.113 Nirashansa - One of the 1008 names of Bhagwan 25.204 Nirastrava - One of the 1008 names of Bhagwan 25.139 Nirahara - One of the 1008 names of Bhagwan 25.139 Nirukta Vachu - One of the 1008 names of Bhagwan 25.209 Niruktokti - One of the 1008 names of Bhagwan 25.114 Niruttara - One of the 1008 names of Bhagwan 25.173 1008 Nirutsuka - One of the 1008 names of Bhagwan 25.172 Niruddhava - One of the 1008 names of Bhagwan 25.185 Niruddhava - One of the 1008 names of Bhagwan 24.38 Nirupadrava - One of the 1008 names of Bhagwan 25.138 Niruppaplava - One of the 1008 names of Bhagwan 25.139 Nishcala - One of the 1008 names of Bhagwan 25.211 Nishkala - One of the 1008 names of Bhagwan 25.113 Nishkalanka - One of the 1008 names of Bhagwan 25.139 Nishkalankaramana - One of the 1008 names of Bhagwan 25.185 Nishtapta Kanakacchaya - One of the 1008 names of Bhagwan 25.199 Nikichana - One of the 1008 names of Bhagwan 25.204 Nishkriya - One of the 1008 names of Bhagwan 25.139 Nihsapatna - One of the 1008 names of Bhagwan 25.186 Nirajaska - One of the 1008 names of Bhagwan 25.185 Nilajanja - A celestial dancer 17.7 Netri - One of the 1008 names of Bhagwan 25.1
Page #757:
---------------------------
##  Individual Word Index

.667
**Param-Bhagavan**'s 1008 names
One name 25.165 **Param-Bhagavan**'s 1008 names
One name 25.142 **Paramjyotish-Bhagavan**'s 1008
names in one name 25.111 **Paramjyotish-Bhagavan**'s 108
names in one name, with **utkrushtkevalgyanajyoti**
**Tvat** **Paramjyoti** 24||30 **Parmatman-Bhagavan**'s 108 names
in one name, **para utkrusht** or **lakshmi** **yasy** **sa** **param**, **param** **atma** **yasy** **sa** **parmatma**
24||33 **Parmatman-Bhagavan**'s 1008
names in one name 25.110 **Paramanand-Bhagavan**'s 1008
names in one name 25.170 **Paramanand-Bhagavan**'s 1008
names in one name 25.189 **Parameshwar-VagarthSangrah Puran**'s
author one **acharya** 1162 **Parameshwar-Bhagavan**'s 1008
names in one name 25.149 **Parmeshtin-Bhagavan**'s 108 names
in one name, **parme** **sarvotkrusht** **pade** **tishtati** **iti** **parmeshti** **arhatparamoshtarup** **ityarth**
24132 **Parmeshtin-Bhagavan**'s 1008
names one name 251105 **Paramoday-Bhagavan**'s 1008
names in one name 25.165 **Parasmajna-Bhagavan**'s 1008
names in one name 25||181 **Paradhya-Bhagavan**'s 1008 names in
one name 251149
**Para** **par** ( **paratpar**)-**Bhagavan**'s
1008 names in one name
25.189 **Parivrid-Bhagavan**'s 1008 names
in one name 25141 **Paranjyotish-Bhagavan**'s 1008
names in one name 25.110 **Parambrahman-Bhagavan**'s 1008
names in one name 25.131 **Pavitra-Bhagavan**'s 1008 names in
one name 25.142 **Pandu**-eleven **ang**'s knower one
**muni** 21146 **Patru-Bhagavan**'s 1008 names in
one name 25.142 **Patrakesari**-one previous **acharya**
1153 **Papavagraha**-**papr**-shaped **varsha**'s
**pratibandh** 25.228 **Papapet-Bhagavan**'s 1008 names
in one name 25.
Page #758:
---------------------------
## Translation:

668
Adipuranam
1008 names of Puranapurushottama Bhagavan, 1008 names of  Putavach Bhagavan. 
One name among 1008 names of Pratyay Bhagavan is 25.132. One name among 1008 names of Pratyay Bhagavan is 25.111. One name among 1008 names of Pratyay Bhagavan is 25.172. 
One name among 1008 names of Puranach Bhagavan is 25.192. One name among 1008 names of  Putaasman Bhagavan is 25.111. One name among 1008 names of  Putaasman Bhagavan is 25.203. 
One name among 1008 names of Puratan Bhagavan is 25.192. One name among 1008 names of Purva Bhagavan is 25.110. One name among 1008 names of  Prathiyas Bhagavan is 25.203. 
One name among 1008 names of Puru Bhagavan, Rishabhdev is 3.239. One name among 1008 names of Prithivimurti Bhagavan is 25.110. 
One name among 1008 names of Pradipt Bhagavan is 25.126. One name among 1008 names of Puru Bhagavan, Adinath is 15.71. One name among 1008 names of Puru Bhagavan, Adinath is 25.200. 
One name among 1008 names of Prithu Bhagavan is 25.165. One name among 1008 names of Pradhan Bhagavan is 25.203. 
One name among 108 names of Puru Bhagavan is 25.203. One name among 1008 names of Prabuddharamn Bhagavan is 24.30. 
One name among 1008 names of Puru Bhagavan is 25.108. One name among 1008 names of Prakashatm Bhagavan is 25.226. 
One name among 1008 names of Purudev Bhagavan is 25.143. One name among 1008 names of Pramanjan (a deity, a name of a priest) is 25.196. 
One name among 1008 names of Prakriti Bhagavan is 25.165. One name among 1008 names of Prabhanjan (a king of Videha) is 25.192. 
One name among 1008 names of Purusha Bhagavan is 25.192. One name among 1008 names of Prakshonbandh Bhagavan is 25.165. 
One name among 1008 names of Prabhav Bhagavan is 25.115. One name among 1008 names of Puruhut (Indra) is 14.163. One name among 1008 names of Prajapati Bhagavan is 25.113. 
One name among 1008 names of Prabhakar (a deity, a
Page #759:
---------------------------
##  Personal Noun List
666
Balahak - A Deva's name
22.15 Bahi-Laukantik Deva - A type of Deva
17148 Batimurti - One of the 1008 names of Bhagwan 25.126 Bahushruta - One of the 1008 names of Bhagwan 25.120 Balarkaam - One of the 1008 names of Bhagwan 25.198 Bahubali - Son of Bhagwan Adinath born from Sunanda 
Pramaan - One of the 1008 names of Bhagwan 25.166 Praajn - One of the 1008 names of Bhagwan 25.213 Pravaktr - One of the 1008 names of Bhagwan 
Praan - One of the 1008 names of Bhagwan 25.166 Praanateshwar - One of the 1008 names of Bhagwan 25.210 Praanad - One of the 1008 names of Bhagwan 25.163 Prashmaakar - One of the 1008 names of Bhagwan 25.166 Prashmaatman - One of the 1008 names of Bhagwan 25.132 Prashant - One of the 1008 names of Bhagwan 25.166 Praaptamahakalyanapanchak - One of the 1008 names of Bhagwan 25.155
Prashantmadan - Son of Prabhajan and Chitramalini, Nukul - A Jiva 10.152
Praanshu - One of the 1008 names of Bhagwan 25.214 Prashantarashsailush - One of the 1008 names of Bhagwan 
Priyadatta - Wife of King Vibhishan 101149 
Priyavrata - A Shravaka 24.179 Priyaseen - King of Pushpaklavati, Kininaagari in Jambudweep, Videhakshetra 9.108
Pritikar - A Muni (Jiva of Swayambuddha Arayah Karmashatravo Yasya Sah) 102 25.107
Pritikar - Jiva of Swayambuddha Mantri, Manichul Deva 
“Naam” - Son of Priyaseen and Sundari, King Bor (Tapaswi Muni) 9.109
Praha - One of the 1008 names of Bhagwan 25.122
Prasannaramn - One of the 1008 names of Bhagwan 25.132
Prasenajit - Thirteenth Kulkar 
Pritiwain - A King 8/201 Prahasit - Son of Amritamati and Satyamama, Vatsakavati Susomanagar 7.61
Presht - One of the 1008 names of Bhagwan 25.122 Praakrit - One of the 1008 names of Bhagwan 25.168
Proshtikacharya - A Muni, knower of eleven Anga, ten Dasha 21143
Praagrahar - One of the 1008 names of Bhagwan 25.150 Praapray - One of the 1008 names of Bhagwan 25.15
Page #760:
---------------------------
## Adi Purana

**2242**

**Brahmayooni-Bhagavan** 1008 names, one name **2.106**

**Brahmapadashwar-Bhagavan** 108 names, one name **24.45**

**Brahmavid-Bhagavan** 1008 names, one name **110**

**Brahmavidadhyaya-Bhagavan** 108 names, one name **2049**

**Brahmasambhav-Bhagavan** 1008 names, one name **25131**

**Brahmanman-Bhagavan** 1008 names, one name **254131**

**Grosh-Bhagavan** 1008 names, one name **25.131**

**Brahmandavid-Bhagavan** 1008 names, one name **25.107**

**Brahmana**

**Vedityavyam Avatiti** 25.107

**Maaji-Bhagavan Adinathki**

**Patri 65**

**Bharat-Bhagavan Adinathka Jyeshtha**

**Bhuvan Kapitamaha-Bhagavan** 15158 names, one name **25.1183**

**Bharan-Pratham Tirthankar Rishabhdev** 1008 names, one name **25.1183**

**Jyotipura-Pratham Chakravarti**

**Bhunnath-Bhagavan** 1008 names, one name **25.1118**

**Bhartru-Bhagavan** 1008 names, one name **2.116**

**Bhootbhavya Bhavadbhat-Bhagavan** 1008 names, one name **21.121**

**Bhootbhavan-Bhagavan** 1008 names, one name **25.117**

**Bhav-Bhagavan** 1008 names, one name **25.117**

**Bhubhrud-Bhagavan** 1008 names, one name **25.117**

**Mavatarak-Bhagavan** 1008 names, one name **25.149**

**Bhootatman-Bhagavan** 1008 names, one name **25.117**

**Bhavantka-Bhagavan** 1008 names, one name **25.117**

**Bhusnu-Bhagavan** 108 names, one name **24.44**

**Bhavantka-Bhagavan** 108 names, one name **24.44**

**Bhog Bhudanshya-Bhog Bhumi** 7.60

**Bhanypetak Nayak-Bhagavan** 1008 names, one name **2.109**

**Bhraji-Bhagavan** 1008 names, one name **25.208**

**Mamyabandhu-Bhagavan** 1008 names, one name **25.104**

**Makjyeshtha-Bhagavan** 108 names, one name **24.40**

**Bhanjabjini Bandhu-Bhag
Page #761:
---------------------------
## Noun List
671
Madanakānta-Nāgadatta and Sumati- Mantriṇ- Bhagavān's 1008 names. || Mahākrodharipu- Bhagavān's 1008 names. 6.130
One name in 25.129
One name in 25.160 Madhyama- Bhagavān's 108 names. Mandaramāli- Gandharvapura's king Mahākṣama- Bhagavān's 1008 One name in 24.42 Vidyādhara 8192
One name in 251156 Maniṣiṇ- Bhagavān's 1008 names- Mandarasthavira- a Muni 752. ||
One name in 25.179 Mārici- Bhagavān Ādināth's Mahāśānti- Bhagavān's 1008
One name in 25.153 Manu- Kulakara 390
name, Bharata's son
Mahāklesāṅkuśa- Bhagavān's 1008 Manu- Bhagavān Ādināyaka's name - 18061 Marudeva- twelfth Kulakara 31139
One name in 25.160 16.266
Malan- Bhagavān's 1008 names Manu- Bhagavān's 1008 names.
Mahāguṇa- Bhagavān's . 1008 One name in 25.171. One name in 25.209
One name in 25.154 Manogati - Mandaramālo and | Malahaṇ- Bhagavān's 1008
Mahāguṇākara- Bhagavān's 1008 Sundarī's son 8093 names. One name in 25.186
One name in 25.161 Manojñā- Bhagavān's 1008 Mahil- nineteenth Tirthankara 2.132
Mahāghosa- Bhagavān's 1008 One name in 25.182 Mahat- Bhagavān's 1008 names. One name in 25.158 Manoraṭha- a Deva, who is One name in 251148 Mahājyotiṣ- Bhagavān's 1008
Nakulārya's Jīva 9.192 Mahardhika- Bhagavān's 1008 names. One name in 25.152 Manorama- Bakravartī Abhayaghoṣa- One name in 251145 . Mahājñāna- Bhagavān's 1008
ko putro Suvidhika's strī Maharsi- Bhagavān's 1008 names.
One name in 25.154 10.143  _ One name in 25.159
Mahātāpas- Bhagavān's 1008 Manohara- a Deva who is Mahasāṁ Dhaman- Bhagavān's 1008 . Vānarārya's Jīva 9.191
One name in 25.151
One name in
Page #762:
---------------------------
672
Mahadhyan-Bhagavan's 1008 | Mahavak-Bhagavan's 1008 | Mahamaunin-Bhagavan's 1008
One name in 25,156 names One name in 25,152 names One name in 25,156 names Mahadhyanpati-Bhagavan's 1008 Mahabahu-Vajvaha and Shri. Mahayagna-Bhagavan's 1008
One name in 25,162 names Kantaka's son (Ananda One name in 25,156 names Mahadhvaradhar-Bhagavan's 1008. Purohit's jiva) 11112
Mahayati-Bhagavan's 1008 One name in 25,159 names Mahabodi-Bhagavan's 1008
One name in 25,158 names Mahan-Bhagavan's 108 names One name in 25,145 names
Mahayashas-Bhagavan's 1008 One name in 2444 Mahabrahma-pati-Bhagavan's 1008
- One name in 25,151 Mahananda-Vijayapura's king One name in 25,131 names
Mahayoga-Bhagavan's 1008 8॥227
Mahabrahma-padeshwar-Bhagavan's Mahananda-Bhagavan's 1008 1008 One name in
One name in 25॥154 names One name in 25,153 names 25,131 names
Mahayogishwar-Bhagavan's 1008 Mahanar-Bhagavan's 1008 Mahamavadhisantarin-Bhagavan's One name in 25,161 - One name in 25,158 1008 One name in
255161 Mahaniti-Bhagavan's 1008
One name in 251154 Mahabag-Bhagavan's 1008 One name in 25,153 names
.Mahavidya-Bhagavan's 1008
_ One name in 25,153 Mahaparakrama-Bhagavan's 1008
One name in 25,141 Mahabuti-Bhagavan's - 1008 One name in 25,160 names
Mahavira-Last Tirthankara 116
One name in 25,152 Mahapiith-Babasen and Shrikanta
Mahavira-Last Tirthankara of this era Mahabuti-Bhagavan's 1008 Kantaka's son (Panamitra Seth's
One name in 25,160 names wife) 11113 .
Vira, Ativira, Sanmati Mahamaka-Bhagavan's 1008 Mahaprabha-Bhagavan's 1008
. 160 . One name in 25,156 One name in 25,128 names
Mahavirya-Bhagavan's 1008 Mahamat-B
Page #763:
---------------------------
##  Noun List
**Of the Lord**
1008.
**Moharivjayin** - One name of the Lord's 1008 names
25.106 **Mohasurarari** - One name of the Lord's 108 names, the enemy of the demon Moharupa 24.36
**Mahasean** - One name of the Lord's 1008 names, the king of Prabhakari Nagari in the Videh Vatsakavati country in the Dhaatki Khand Purva 25.153
**Mahodak** - One name of the Lord's 1008 names 25.151
**Mahitoday** - One name of the Lord's 1008 names 25.157
**Mahopay** - One name of the Lord's 1008 names 25.159
**Mahishtavad** - One name of the Lord's 1008 names 25.157
**Mahomay** - One name of the Lord's 1008 names 25.159
**Mahikamp** - The eldest son of Maahidhar 7138
**Maahidhar** - A Vidhyadhar king 5.209
**Maahidhar** - The son of Vasav and Queen Prabhavati, the king of Gandharvanagar 7.29
**May** - One name of the Lord's 108 names 24.44
**Maahidhar** - The king of Ratnasanchyanagar 25.210
**Mahiyas** - One name of the Lord's 108 names, meaning extremely great 24.43
**Ma** - One name of the Lord's 1008 names 25.157
**Marjid** - One name of the Lord's 1008 names 25.113
**Mukt** - One name of the Lord's 1008 names 25.141
**Muni** - One name of the Lord's 1008 names 25.202
**Munijeha** - One name of the Lord's 1008 names 25.202
**Munisuvarat** - The 20th Tirthankar 2.132
**Munindra** - One name of the Lord's 1008 names 25.170
**Muniishwar** - One name of the Lord's 1008 names 25.183
**Mumukhu** - One name of the Lord's 1008 names 25.208
**Murtimant** - One name of the Lord's 1008 names 25.187
**Moolakartri** - One name of the Lord's 1008 names 25.209
**Moolaakaran** - One name of the Lord's 1008 names 25.155
**Mahayit** - One name of the Lord's 108 names 24.44
**Mahezy** - One name of the Lord's 1008 names 25.158
**Mahendra** - One name of the Lord's 100
Page #764:
---------------------------
## Translation:

**674**
**Adipurana**

**Yugajyestha-Bhagavan**'s 1008 names. **Yogin-Bhagavan**'s 108 names. **Lokadhatru-Bhagavan**'s 1008 names, one name is 25.193. One name is 24.37.
**Yugandhar-Videhakshetra**'s one **Yogivandit-Bhagavan**'s 1008 names, one name is 25.191. **Lokapati-Bhagavan**'s 1008 **Tirthankara** 5.194.
**Yugandhar** - one **Muniraj** 7.22. **Yogindra-Bhagavan**'s 1008 names, one name is 25.188. **Lokavassal-Bhagavan**'s 1008 names, one name is 25.212. **Yugandhar** - **Pushkarardha**'s **Purvaadha** **Videha**...
**Yogi-shwararchit-Bhagavan**'s 1008 names, one name is 25.170. **Lokadhyaksha-Bhagavan**'s 1008 names, one name is 25.211. **Mangalavati** **Desha** related.
**Ratnasamchayanagara**'s king **Ajitangaya** and queen **Vasumatoka**'s son (**Tirthankara**) **Lokalokaprakashaka-Bhagavan**'s 1008 names, one name is 25.107.
**Ratisan-Videha**'s one king 7.91. 10.151.
**Yugamukhya-Bhagavan**'s 1008 names, one name is 25.206.
**Rasnagarma-Bhagavan**'s 1008 names, one name is 25.193.
**Lokesha-Bhagavan**'s 1008 names, one name is 25.181. **Yugadai-Bhagavan**'s 1008 names, one name is 25.191. **Rajarshi-Raja** **Shrenik** **Rajaghi**...
**Rajaghi**'s king 2181.
**Lokoottara-Bhagavan**'s 1008 names, one name is 25.212. **Yugadhikrit-Bhagavan**'s 1008 names, one name is 25.147.
**Lolup-Supratisthitanagara**'s **Halayugadhipurusha-Bhagavan** **Rishabhdev** **Lakshanya-Bhagavan**'s 1008 names, one name is 25.144.
**Lohary-Prathama** **Anga**'s knower, one **Yugadhipurusha-Bhagavan**'s 108 names, one name is 25.105. **Lakshmi-Shatkumari** **Devis**'s one **Devi** 12.164. **Yugadhisthitideshaka
Page #765:
---------------------------
##  Person-Specific Word Index

**Vajraबाहु** - A name in the 1008 names of the Lord, a name in the city of Pushkala, a senior Dhi, a name in the 1008 names of the Lord, a name in the city of Vati, a name in the city of Utpalakhet, a name in the 25.123 names of the king, a name in the 729 names of the king, a name in the 628 names of the king, a name in the 108 names of the Lord, a name in the Mahapat Jinālaya, a name in the 24.37 names of the Lord, a name in the 1008 names of the Lord, a name in the 25.136 names of the Lord, a name in the 1119 names of the king, a name in the 7.112 names of the wise, a name in the 108 names of the Lord, a name in the 1008 names of the Lord, a name in the 24.38 names of the Lord, a name in the 25.160 names of the Lord, a name in the 1008 names of the Lord, a name in the 25.146 names of the Lord, a name in the 1008 names of the Lord, a name in the 25.194 names of the Lord, a name in the 1008 names of the Lord, a name in the 25.167 names of the Lord, a name in the 1008 names of the Lord, a name in the 25.194 names of the Lord, a name in the 8227 names of the women, a name in the 1008 names of the Lord, a name in the 25.1167 names of the Lord, a name in the 1008 names of the Lord, a name in the 25.194 names of the Lord, a name in the 1008 names of the Lord, a name in the 25.142 names of the Lord, a name in the 1008 names of the Lord, a name in the 25.172 names of the Lord, a name in the 1008 names of the Lord, a name in the 25.206 names of the Lord, a name in the 1008 names of the Lord, a name in the 25.145 names of the Lord, a name in the 1008 names of the Lord, a name in the 25.213 names of the Lord, a name in the 1008 names of the Lord, a name in the 25.209 names of the Lord, a name in the 1008 names of the Lord, a name in the 25.179 names of the Lord, a name in the 1008 names of the Lord, a name in the 25.124 names of the Lord, a name in the 1008 names of the Lord, a name in the 25.142 names of the Lord, a name in the 1008 names of the Lord, a name in the 25.123 names of the Lord, a name in the 108 names of the Lord, a name in the 24.39 names of the Lord, a name
Page #766:
---------------------------
676
Vidhata Bhagavan Adinath's name 16.267
Vidhatru - One of the 108 names of Bhagavan, Vidhata Vidhatatiti Vidhata from the arrangement of Karmabhoomi 24.30 Vidhatru - One of the 1008 names of Bhagavan 25.125 Vidhi - One of the 1008 names of Bhagavan 25.102
Vinami - Bhagavan
Adinath's
Son of Sale Mahakaachcha 1892 Vinayandhar - A Muniraj 7.34 Vinetru - One of the 1008 names of Bhagavan
One name 25.141 Vineyajanata Bandhu - Bhagavan's
One of the 1008 names 25.125
Vinayatman - One of the 1008 names of Bhagavan 25.138 Tripuljyotis - One of the 1008 names of Bhagavan 25.140 Tribhay - One of the 1008 names of Bhagavan
One name 25.124 Vibhav - One of the 1008 names of Bhagavan 25.124 Vibhav - One of the 1008 names of Bhagavan 25.117
1008
Vibhavasu - One of the names of Bhagavan 25.110 Vibhishan - Son of Shridhar and Manorama 7.15 Vibhishan - King of Videhakshetra Vatsakavati
Country 10.149 Vibhu Bhagavan's one of the 108 names, Visheshena Bhavatiti Vibhu 24/32
Adipuranam
Vibhu Bhagavan's one of the 1008 names
One name 25.102 Vimal - Thirteenth Tirthankar 2.131 Vimalvaah - A Tirthankar of Videha
10.154 Vimalvahan - Seventh Kulkar 3.117
Vimuktatman - One of the 1008 names of Bhagavan 25.186 Viyog - One of the 1008 names of Bhagavan, Vigato Yoga Atmaparishyando Yasya Sah 25.125
108
Vyonik - One of the names of Bhagavan, Punarjanmarahitatvad Vigata Yoniyasyasah Vyonik 24.32 Virajas - One of the 1008 names of Bhagavan
One name 25.112 Virat - One of the 1008 names of Bhagavan
One name 25.124 Viraag - One of the 1008 names of Bhagavan
One name 25.124 Vilina Shesh Kalmash - One of the 1008 names of Bhagavan 25.125
Vivi - One of the 1008 names of Bhagavan 25.124_ Viveed - One of the 1008 names of Bhagavan
One name 25.146 Vishal - One of the 1008 names of Bhagavan
One name 25.140 Vishisht - One of the 1008 names of Bhagavan 25.172
Vishuk - One of the 1008 names
Page #767:
---------------------------
##  Noun List

**Vishvabhu** - One name among the 1008 names of the Lord.
**Vishvasrij** - One name among the 1008 names of the Lord.
**Vitabhi** - One name among the 1008 names of the Lord.
**Vishvabhuthesh** - One name among the 1008 names of the Lord.
**Vishvatman** - One name among the 1008 names of the Lord.
**Veer** -  Lord Mahavira.
**Vora** - Son of Lord Adinath.
**Vishvarat** - One name among the 108 names of the Lord.
**Vishvabhrud** - One name among the 1008 names of the Lord.
**Vishvavisvamurti** - One name among the 1008 names of the Lord.
**Veerbahu** - Son of Shrimati and Vajrajangha.
**Vishvayoni** - One name among the 108 names of the Lord.
**Vishvasish** - One name among the 1008 names of the Lord.
**Vrush** - One name among the 1008 names of the Lord.
**Vishet** - One name among the 108 names of the Lord.
**Vrushketu** - One name among the 1008 names of the Lord.
**Vrushdhvaj** - One name among the 1008 names of the Lord.
**Vishvarish** - One name among the 1008 names of the Lord.
**Vished** - Lord Adinath, the master of the world.
**Vishesh** - One name among the 1008 names of the Lord.
**Vishvarupatman** - One name among the 1008 names of the Lord.
**Vrusham** - The first Tirthankara, also known as Adinath.
**Vishvalokesha** - One name among the 1008 names of the Lord.
**Vishtarshravas** - One name among the 1008 names of the Lord.
**Vishlochan** - One name among the 1008 names of the Lord.
**Vishnu** - The knower of the fourteen previous Kalpas, a Muni.
**Vishvivid** - One name among the 1008 names of the Lord.
**Vishnu** - One name among the 108 names of the Lord.
**Vishvidyamaheshwar** - One name among the 1008 names of the Lord.
**Visakhacharya** - A Muni who held the eleven Angas and ten Purvas.
**Vishvidyash** - One name among the 1008 names of the Lord.
**Vishvavyapin** - One name among the 108 names of the Lord.
**Vihtantaka** - One name among the 1008 names of the Lord.
**Vrusham** - One name among the 1008 names of the Lord.
**Vrushabhadhvaj** - One name among the 108 names of the Lord.
**Vitkalmash** - One name among the 1008 names of the Lord.
**Vitmassar** - One name among the 1008 names of the Lord.
**Vishvashirsh** - One name among the 1008 names of the Lord.
**Vitrag** - One name among the 1
Page #768:
---------------------------
## Adipurana

**In the 108 names of Lord Adinath, the first Tirthankara, as per the Shankar Bhagwan:**

* **Shankara:** Son of Lord Adinath, who later became his Ganadhara (follower). 24.36, 24.172
* **Shankara:** One name among the 1008 names of Lord Adinath. 25.189
* **Shankara:** One name among the 1008 names of Lord Vrishabhanka. 25.116

**In the 1008 names of Lord Vrishabhanka:**

* **Shatabal:** Son of Shatabal-Sahasraval. 5.147
* **Shatabal:** One name among the 1008 names of Lord Vrishabhanka. 25.116
* **Shatabal-Mahabal:** Father of Vidhyadhara. 5.139
* **Shatabal:** One name among the 1008 names of Lord Vrishayudh. 25.116
* **Shatamati:** Minister of King Mahabal. 4.191
* **Shatamati:** One name among the 1008 names of Lord Vrishodbhav. 25.116
* **Shatrughna:** One name among the 1008 names of Lord Vrishabhanka. 25.201
* **Shatrughna:** One name among the 108 names of Lord Vedavid. 24.38
* **Shatrughna:** One name among the 1008 names of Lord Vedavid. 25.100
* **Shammva:** One name among the 1008 names of Lord Vrishabhanka. 25.146
* **Shammva:** One name among the 1008 names of Lord Vrishabhanka. 25.146
* **Shammva:** One name among the 1008 names of Lord Vedavedya. 25.36
* **Shammva:** One name among the 1008 names of Lord Vedanga. 25.146
* **Shambhu:** One name among the 1008 names of Lord Vrishabhanka. 25.10
* **Shambhu:** One name among the 108 names of Lord Vrishabhanka. 24.36
* **Shambhu:** One name among the 1008 names of Lord Vedha. 25.146
* **Shambhu:** One name among the 1008 names of Lord Vedhas. 25.102
* **Shamatman:** One name among the 1008 names of Lord Vrishabhanka. 25.163
* **Shamatman:** One name among the 1008 names of Lord Vaikritantakrut. 25.168
* **Shamin:** One name among the 1008 names of Lord Vrishabhanka. 25.161
* **Sharanaya:** Son of Bajayanta-Vajrasena and Shrikant (Varaha's Jiva). 11.110
* **Sharanaya:** One name among the 108 names of Lord Sharanaya. 24.37
* **Sharan
Page #769:
---------------------------
##  Noun List
**679**

**Shivakoti** - The doer of the Mula-Arasana.
**Shrikant** - The one who is in the lotus pond.
**Shresh** - One of the 1008 names of the Lord.
**Shivary** - One of the 1008 names of the Lord.
**Rajavrajrasen** - The wife of King Vajrasen.
**Shivtati** - One of the 1008 names of the Lord.
**Shrisritpadaabja** - One of the 1008 names of the Lord.
**Shrigarm** - One of the 1008 names of the Lord.
**Shivpraad** - One of the 1008 names of the Lord.
**Bheeshan** - The king of Singhapur.
**Shridatt** - An ancient poet.
**Shripe** - The king of Singhapur.
**Shisht** - One of the 1008 names of the Lord.
**Shridhar** - A god who lives in the Baj-Janghka, a being of the Bhog-Bhoomi, after the Aishana-Swarga.
**Shrutakirti** - A Shravak.
**Shrutakirti** - The father of Anand Purohit, who was born in the Prabhavimaan of the Aishana-Swarga.
**Shishtabhuj** - One of the 1008 names of the Lord.
**Shrutaarman** - One of the 1008 names of the Lord.
**Shishtr** - One of the 1008 names of the Lord.
**Shridhar** - The king of the Ratnasanchayanagar in the Videha-Kshetra.
**Shrenik** - The king of Rajaghi.
**Shotal** - The tenth Tirthankara.
**Sheelsagar** - One of the 1008 names of the Lord.
**Shreyas** - The younger brother of King Soma Prabha of Hastinapur.
**Shreyans** - The one who first gave food to Lord Rishabhanath.
**Shuchi** - One of the 1008 names of the Lord.
**Shrinivas** - One of the 1008 names of the Lord.
**Shripati** - One of the 1008 names of the Lord.
**Suchitravass** - One of the 1008 names of the Lord.
**Shud** - One of the 1008 names of the Lord.
**Shripal** - A previous Acharya.
**Shreyas** - One of the 1008 names of the Lord.
**Shreyan** - The founder of the Dan-Tirth.
**Hastishuddha** - One of the 1008 names of the Lord.
**Shrimati** - The mother of the wise minister.
**Shrimati** - The being of the wise minister.
**Shrimati** - The daughter of King Vachdant and Queen Lakshmi-mati of the city of Pundarikin.
**Shubhalakshan** - One of the 1008 names of the Lord.
**Dhurmu** - One of the 1008 names of the Lord.
**Shreyonidhi** - One of the 1008 names of the Lord.
**Lalitaang** - The wife of Prabha.
Page #770:
---------------------------
This
Samyamama - Amritamati Mantri's wife 762
1008
Samyavach Bhagavan's names, one name 25.175 Satya Vigyan - Bhagavan's 1008 names, one name 25.175 Satya Shasan - Bhagavan's 1008
Sadagati - Bhagavan's
names, one name 25.175 Satya Sandhan - Bhagavan's 1008 names, one name 25.175 Satyatman - Bhagavan's 1008 names, one name 25.175 Satya Shish - Bhagavan's 1008 names, one name 25.175 1008 names, one name 25.177 Sadatrupt - Bhagavan's 1008 names, one name 25.177 Sadabhavins - Bhagavan's 1008 names, one name 25.188 Sadabhog - Bhagavan's 1008 names, one name 25.177 Sadayog - Bhagavan's 1008 names, one name 25.177 Sadavidh - Bhagavan's 1008 names, one name 25.177 Sadashiv Bhagavan's 1008 names, one name 25.177 Sada Saukhya - Bhagavan's 1008 names, one name 25.177 Sadoday - Bhagavan's 1008 names, one name 25177
Sadyajat - Bhagavan's 1008
- Sanatan -
names, one name 25.196 Bhagavan's 1008 names, one name 25.105 Sandhyabhrava bhru - Bhagavan's 1008 names, one name 25.198 Sanmati - Twenty-fourth
Tirthankar
2.132
|
Adipuranam
Sanmati - Second Kulkar 3.77 Samgradi - Bhagavan's
1008
names, one name 25.150 Samantbhadra - An ancient poet
143
Samantbhadra - Bhagavan's 1008 names, one name 25.216 Samayagya - • Bhagavan's 1008 names, one name 25.184 Samadhigupt - A Muni Raj 6.135
-
Samadhigupt - A Muni 7 83 Samahit - Bhagavan's 1008 names, one name 25.184 Samunmilita Karmaari - Bhagavan's 1008 names, one name 25.214
Sambhinna mati - King Mahabal's
Mantri 4.191 Sayog - Bhagavan's 1008 names, one name 24|38
Sarvaklesh |pah - Bhagavan's 1008
names, one name 25.163 Sarvag - Bhagavan's 1008 names, one name
25.195 Sarvash - Bhagavan's 1008 names, one name 25.119 Sarvatrag - Bhagavan's 1008 names, one
Page #771:
---------------------------
## Personal Noun List
'681

**In the 1008 names of Siddha-Bhagavan:**
* Sugati-Bhagavan 25.120
* Sundarananda-Susimanaraga Raja 25.108
* Sudrishtki 10.122
* Siddhasasan-Bhagavan 25.108
* Sugupta-Bhagavan 25.178
* Sundari-Singhpur Raja Shripen 5.204
* Siddhasankalp-Bhagavan 25.145
* Suguptatman-Bhagavan 25.140
* Sundari-Gandharva Pur Raja Mandaramalo 8.12
* Siddhasadhan-Bhagavan 25.1145
* Sudhap-Bhagavan 25.178
* Sundari-Singhpur Raja Shripen 8.181
* Siddhasadhya-Bhagavan 25.108
* Sutanu-Bhagavan 25.210
* Sundari-Raja Priyasan 9.109
* Siddhasen-Jinsen 1139, 42
* Sutramapujit-Bhagavan 25.127
* Sundari-Ratnasamchayanagar Raja Mahadhar 10.115
* Siddhatman-Bhagavan 25.145
* Sundari-Bhagavan Adinath 25.108
* Sutvan-Bhagavan 25.127
* Sunanda 167
* Siddhantavid-Bhagavan 25.108
* Sudatta-Dhanyapur Kubera 8.231
* Supach-Saptam Tirthankar 21129
* Sudarshan-Bhagavan 25.181
* Siddharth-Bhagavan Mahavira 11196
* Supram-Bhagavan 25.127
* Siddharth-Gyaraha Anga Das Purva 21143
* Suprabha-Ayodhya Raja Jayavarma 7.41
* Sudarshana-Aryika 7.44
* Siddharth-Hastinapur Raja 2069
* Suprasannm-Bhagavan 25.132
* Sudrisht-Susimanagar Raja 10.1122
* Subahu-Vajrasen 25.108
* Sudharm-Sudharm Kevali 1.199
* Shrikant 1112
* Siddhi-Bhagavan 25.145
* Anubaddh Kevali 21137
* Sumang-Bhagavan 25.184
* Sita-Videhakshetra 5.99
* Sudharm-Gautam 21137
* Samudra-Pratham Anga 21149
* Simandhar-Videhakshetra 7588
* Subhut-(Subhrit)-Bhagavan 25.200
* Simankar-Panch Kulkar 7
* Sukritin-Bhagavan 25.174
* Simandhar-Chhatha Kulkar 3.112
* Sudhautakaladhauta Shri-B
Page #772:
---------------------------
## English Translation:

**682**

**Sumedham** - One of the 1008 names of the Lord 25.172
**Suyajvan** - One of the 1008 names of the Lord 25.127
**Surup** - One of the 1008 names of the Lord 25.184
**Suvarnavarna** - One of the 1008 names of the Lord 25.197
**Suvach** - One of the 1008 names of the Lord 25.120
**Suvidhi** - Son of King Drishti and Queen Sundarnanda of Susimanagar (Vajrjangha Shridhar Dev's Jiva) 10.122
**Suvidhi** - One of the 1008 names of the Lord 25.125
**Subat** - One of the 1008 names of the Lord 25.175
**Sushrut** - One of the 1008 names of the Lord 25.120
**Sushrut** - One of the 1008 names of the Lord 25.120
**Sushamaduhshama** - The third time period of Avasarpini 3.17
**Susamvrit** - One of the 1008 names of the Lord 25.140
**Susanskar** (alternative) - One of the 1008 names of the Lord 25.168
**Susoumyatman** - One of the 1008 names of the Lord 25.128
**Susthit** - One of the 1008 names of the Lord 25.185
**Susthir** - One of the 1008 names of the Lord 25.203
**Suhit** - One of the 1008 names of the Lord 25.178
**Suhrit** - One of the 1008 names of the Lord 25.178

**Adipuranam**

**Sookshma** - One of the 1008 names of the Lord 24.38
**Sookshma** - One of the 1008 names of the Lord 25.105
**Sookshmadrishyin** - One of the 1008 names of the Lord 25.216
**Suti** - Producer 2.32
**Suneet Putvach** - One of the 1008 names of the Lord 25.212
**Surya Kotisam Prabha** - One of the 1008 names of the Lord 25.197
**Surya Purti** - One of the 1008 names of the Lord 25.128
**Suri** - One of the 1008 names of the Lord 25.120
**Srashtri** - One of the 108 names of the Lord, Creator due to the creation of Karmabhoomi Vyavasthaya 24.30
**Swasht** - Name of Lord Adinath 16.267
**Somprabha** - King of Kuruvansha, whose capital was Hastinapur 16.258
**Sommurti** -
Page #773:
---------------------------
##  Noun List
683

**Self-Luminous-Lalitanga-Devaki** is the main one.  One name, **Self-Luminous** is hers.  **Great-Joy**'s **Spring-Army** is a woman, a goddess 5.283 **Self-Born** 24.35
**Born** son 8.228 **Self-Enlightened**-king **Great-Strength**'s **Self-Born**-Lord's 1008 names- **Offering-Eater**-Lord's 108 names minister. 191
One name from 25.100  _ One name from 24.40 **Self-Luminous**-Lord's 1008 **Self-Born-Nourishing**-Lord's 1008 **Offering-Lord**'s 1008 names
Name one name from 25.113  _ Names one name from 25.110 one name from 25.127 **Self-Born**-Lord **Great-Hero** **Golden-Name** - Lord's 1008 **Offering-Lord**'s 108 names in 2.154
Names one name from 25.199 . One name from 24.40 **Self-Light**-Lord's 1008 **Self-Aware**-Lord's 1008  _ **Hataka-Light**-Lord's 1008
Names one name from 25.106 Names one name from 25.145 . Names one name from 25.200 **Self-Luminous**-one monk 5.208 **Healthy**-Lord's 1008 names- **Golden-Womb**-Lord's 108 **Self-Luminous-Jina**-**Videha**'s **Tathagatha** one name from 25.185
Names one name, **Golden** 9.110
**Healthy-Life**-Lord's 1008 **Womb** in whom he is.  In the womb **Self-Luminous**-one god who is **Diamond**-  _ Names one name from 25.185 **Golden-Rain** 24.33 **Shin**'s woman **Respected**
**Golden-Color**-Lord's 1008 was a being 101145 **Destroyed-Courtesy**-Lord's 1008 names one name from 25.199 **Self-Luminous**-Lord's 108 names- Names one name from 25.210 **Lord-of-the-Senses**- Lord's 1008
One name, **Self-Luminous** is his **Remover**-Lord's 1008 names one name from 25.134  **Self-Luminous** 24.135
One name, **Removes** karma-enemy **He**-six-daughters goddesses one of **Self-Luminous**- Lord's 1008 **Policy** **Remover** 24.36
Gods 12.160 Names one name from 25.100 **Remover**-Lord's 1008 names one name from 25.163 **Reason**-Lord's 1008
Page #774:
---------------------------
## Specific Word List

**Ativartī-svacchanda pravartanevala** -  One who acts according to his own free will.
**15.52 Akaly-napumsaka 1167** -  Impotent, sterile.
**Anṛju-kuṭila 1289** -  Crooked, deceitful.
**Akār-dhobi ādise bhinna** -  Different from a washerman.
**Pratyukt-chandonkī ek jāti - 16.185** -  A type of meter.
**161113 Akṛtt-acchinn 2015** -  Uncut, unbroken.
**Adabhṛ-viśāl 2017** -  Vast, immense.
**Prakṛṣṭapacya-binā hal jote bakhare** -  Unploughed, fertile land.
**Adevamātṛka-meghakō varṣāpar apne-āp paidā honevala** -  Rain-fed, not dependent on irrigation.
**Nirbhar nahīṁ rahnevale deś. Dhānya 166131** -  A country that is not dependent on others. Grain.
**183157 Akṣ-baheṛā 3249** -  A type of fruit.
**Adhar-śarīrake nīceka bhāg** -  The lower part of the body.
**Akṣagrām-indriyōnkā samūh 8.73** -  The group of senses.
**151200 Akṣaṇīya-acheḍya 131147** -  Indivisible, indestructible.
**Adhiśṛta-cūlhepar caṛhāyā huā** -  Placed on the stove.
**Agōṣpad-atyant nirjan jahāṁ** -  A very desolate place where.
**572 gāyōnkā pahūṁcnā bhī kaṭhin** -  Even cows find it difficult to reach.
**Adhītī-adhyayan kuśal 1.129** -  Skilled in study.
**Adhvayōg-chandasāstrakā ek prakaraṇ-pratyay 10.194** -  A chapter in the science of prosody.
**Anjitāsita-binā kājal lagāye hō kāle 149** -  Black without applying kohl.
**Aghṛip-vṛkṣ 11187** -  A type of tree.
**Aṅgabhṛt-prāṇī, pakṣ meṁ dvādaśāṅgake dhārī gaṇadhar dev 24.186** -  A creature, a god who holds the twelve limbs.
**Anantacatuṣṭaya-1 jñān 2 darśan 3 sukha 4 vīrya 25.221** -  The four infinite things: knowledge, vision, happiness, and energy.
**Alās-śarīrakī moṛ 10.206** -  A bend in the body.
**Anarjuna-kāle 1042** -  Black in color.
**Aṅgahār-aṅgavikṣepa nṛtyakālameṁ aṅgōnkā viśeṣ rītise calānā 133179** -  A
Page #775:
---------------------------
## Specific Word List

**Aaptpaash-praaptaabhas kritsitaah:**  Those who have attained the state of liberation and are free from all attachments.
**Aapnapaash:**  The bondage of attachments.
**Yaapye paashpa 172:**  The bondage of attachments, which is to be overcome.
**Aapyayan-santopkaarak:**  Beneficial, satisfying.
**Graamigamik-savke anukool:**  Suitable for all, universally applicable.
**Yaamutrik-paaralaukik 171216:**  Transcendental, beyond the worldly realm.
**Aayurved-vaidya vidya 16.123:**  The science of medicine, Ayurveda.
**Shrayupya-aayuvardhak 1.205:**  Life-enhancing, promoting longevity.
**Shraaram-udyaan 4.59:**  A garden, a park.
**Aaram-sharogadi paryaay 14.39:**  Rest, a synonym for relief from illness.
**Aasha-disha 6.288:**  Hope, direction.
**Aashushukhani-agni 25.214:**  Fire, the element of fire.
**Shraaharya-aabhooshan 22.62:**  Ornament, jewelry.
**Amirup-manojnya 7.208:**  Beautiful, pleasing to the mind.
**Avghaatak-yashti naamak haarka amishtav-naam 1138:**  A necklace called "Yashti" which is a type of ornament.
**Ek bhed 16.47:**  One type, one category.
**Amiseeshirsha-abhisar-sanbhogke avdhikshan-avdhijnyaani 51199:**  One who is aware of the consequences of sexual indulgence and desires.
**Lie gaman ki ichchha avnipa-raja 17.252 10148:**  The desire to go to the king of the earth.
**Avpaat-gat 113198:**  Fallen, lost.
**Abhut-ajnyaani 7178:**  Ignorant, unaware.
**Avabhrith (majan)-kaaryake ant mein honevaala snaan 13.200:**  The bath that takes place at the end of the ritual of immersion.
**Abhyast-gunit 10.155:**  Multiplied, increased.
**Abhyuday-swargadhika vaibhav 12.35:**  Prosperity, heavenly glory.
**Avalgna-madhya bhaag, kamar 5.20:**  The middle part, the waist.
**Shrama-saath 2.161:**  With effort, with exertion.
**Pravaava (avaavan)-door karnevaala, oon apnayane 111981:**  One who removes obstacles, one who takes away.
**Amedhyaadan - vishthaka bhakshan 15.149:**  Eating excrement, a taboo act.
**Amritpad-moksh 11159:**  Liberation, the state of being free from suffering.
**Ambhojavaasini-lakshmi 10.131:**  Lakshmi, the goddess of wealth, who resides in the lotus.
**Ashanaaya-bhookh
Page #776:
---------------------------
## Adipurana

**Indrastambara** - Indra's elephant. **Upshirshakayashti** - that which is in the middle. **Airavata** 22.32-52

**Kram** - gradually increasing three **kanaya** - a weapon's name **Ishudhi** - quiver 6.65

**Moti** - a pearl. **Ishti** - worship 13.202

**Valo** - garland 16.152

**Uphar** - secluded place 10.48

**Kanthirva** - lion 18.179. **Ida** - praise 31.73

**Upadhi** - acceptance 5.232 - **Kanthy** - uttered from the throat **Ida** - praise 24.46 **Upayan** - gift 5.11

**Idirishan** - desire to praise 16.38. **Upalambha** - fault finding 9.50.

**Kadvad** - speaking harsh words, doing 23.121 **Upoudghat** - introduction 201

**Kutsitam vadanti iti kada** - excessive rain, no rain, **Urasil** - broad-chested 10.104 **Mushak**, **Shalabha**, **Shuk** and 

**Kanakrajiv** - golden lotus 3.161

**Kapishirsha** - the front part of a fort 19.61 **Urdhvakaaya** - tall body 15.199 16.127

**Kapolandeka** - cheek-like mirror 10.1207 **Ukta** - a type of meter **Ekacharya** - one practice, alone **Karak** - thicket 7.246

**Karak** - **Prola** 13.161

**Karaj** - nail 19.132 **Ukshan** - strength 1.29

**Ekadvitrilaghookriya** - a chapter of Chanda Shastra - **Kar** - to do 11.166 16.113 **Udup** - moon 19.3100

**Karat** - elephant's cheek 7.304 **Ush** - bull 22.233

**Karan** - sense organ or body 2.91 **Utkar** - trunk raised **Ekadhya** - oneness 4.1188

**Karan** - **Karanayas** - movement of hands during praise 13.3179 **Ekavali** - a type of garland called **Yashti** 13.24 **Utproth** - whose nose is raised, a girl 10.72

**Karanagram** - group of sense organs 4.66 **Udanaya** - thirst 11.1168

**Karnasaptva** - gossip 12.048 **Udgam** - flower 15.49

**Kapatra** - **Karont** 10.101 **Ud** - **Prashast** - excellent 10.176

**Karasambadha** - pain in the hands 20.16 **Uhaah** - marriage 17.780

**Kalakanthi** - cuckoo 18.1179 **Airavati** - related to Airavata elephant
Page #777:
---------------------------
## Specific Word List
**687**
Kantaracharya - A play full of deceit, used to obtain food in the forest.
Gamka - A pointed shape.
1144
Vow to travel.
Gamuyati - A cell.
3154 8168
Krikavaku - A peacock.
12.132
Girvanadhip - Indra.
15
Kapil - Sanyamat.
18162
Krikavaku-yita - Like a peacock.
Guccha - A garland with 32 strands.
Kayaman - A tent.
8.166
A necklace worn by those who practice.
14.197
Karpannya - Cowardice.
7267
Guru - Father.
798
Kar - A sub-caste of Shudra (washerman, etc.).
16.185
Guru - Pihithasravamuni.
799
Kritayugarambha - The beginning of the Krita Yuga, which started on the first day of the dark fortnight of the Ashadha month.
Guru - Pita.
242
Kalakalam - Very dark days.
Gunaka - A specific deity.
17.101
10196
Bhagwan Adinath started the Krita Yuga.
Grihakokila - A lizard.
5.102
Katha - Boundary.
13185
Gokshur - Gokhuru - A thorny plant.
101101
Kimjask - Saffron.
12.113
Keshav - Narayan.
11170
Gom-bhika - A fly that sits on cows.
4.64
Kukkutasampaty - A battle fought close by.
3.114
Koko - Chavvi - A specific type of fly, called "Baghhi" by villagers.
24.48
Kunap - Dead body.
10100
Kon - A drum used in playing the "Bheri".
Kuspannyas - A punishment for musical instruments.
15.146
14.100
Kramapallava - Tender feet like the leaves of a tree.
144142
Thar - A covering for elephants.
3.119
Kuruva - Words with a false meaning.
Ghanatyaya - Autumn.
1982
Kramuk - Betel nut.
173252
Kshan - Festival.
15.99
Chakravan - Flags with the symbol of a wheel.
12.207
Kshanada - Night.
5.215
22.235
Kurushvaj - The best king of the Kuru dynasty, Soma Prabha and his younger brother Shreyans.
201120
Chakuraha - A type of bird.
650
Kshanadamul - Rajnimukh - The beginning of the night.
14157
Chaturkhaika - A person who knows the four Vedas.
22.174
Ismaik - The best king of the Hastinapur Kuru dynasty, Soma Prabha.
201111
Kshaj - Blood.
5.108
Chatuva - Right faith, right knowledge, right conduct, and right liberation. These are the four types of worship.
1549
Kshapag - A month-long fast.
820
Page #778:
---------------------------
## 6808
Adipuranam
Chopchumdhutava-questioning | Taralprabandha-yashti named necklace | Damyak-calf 1850 skill 767
One difference 16.47
Dar-something 12.123 Taspa-bed 9.24
Davathu-santanpa 9.160 Chandovichchiti-group of chandas Tanava-thinness 12.135 Davoyasi-very far away 16.113
Tantric-related to tantra, tantra this 10188 Shadow-brightness 9.29
Tantric 12.202
- Dasaprana-poetry's ten qualities 1 Tamitrapasha-Krishna paksha 201268 Slesh 2 Prasad 3 Samata
Tamitetarapasha-Krishna and Shukla 4 Madhury 5 Sukumarata Jagatraya-Urvaloka, Madhyaloka,
Paksha 3121
6 Arthavyakti 7 Udharata Adholka 21119 Tayin-protector 20197
8 Oj 9 Kanta and Janushandh-born blind 5.218 Taravi-tree-related
10 Samadhi Janya-son 127
14.150
Dasha - light, paksha state Jalavahi-cloud 3174
Tara-pupil of the eye 11118. 15.115. Jalashay-inert, paksha
Tiraskarini-curtain 19.118 Dashavatar - Lord Rishabha in water filled 4.72
Tiriat-(Kiriat)-crown 111133 Dev's great strength etc. 10 Jalpak-talkative, very speaking-arrow 99
Previous birth 25.223 one 17.147
Tunava-musical instrument 23.62 Datyuha-black colored bird 5.6 Jagal-water's scarcity 
Tustushu-desiring to praise Dwadashgana-Lord's countries in Samavasarana 16.159 25.12
all around 12 Sabhajatushi-made of lac 1169
Trunya-group of grass 8153 Janabhoomi-country 626
Mandap are there in which क्रमसेतोक-son 3.132.
1 Gandharad etc. Munis 2 Kalpa' Jami-sister 1570 Touyantiko-filled with water
Vasini. Devis 3 Ayijalm-low 22189
1956
Kaens and humans' women Jighrukshu-desiring to take
Trikuta-Lanka's base-mountain 4 Bhavanvasini Devis 5 2.87
4127 Jinjanansaparya-Jinendradev's
Vyantarini Devis 6 Tridosha-vata, pitta, kapha
Jyotishka Devis 7 Bhavan. Birth time worship 131212 15.30
Vasi Dev 8 Vyantardev Jimuta-cloud 479
Trirupamuktya -1 Samyagdarshan 9 Jyotishkadev 10 Kalpajeevakam 2 Bhed-1 Mukta 2 Sansari
2 Samyag
Page #779:
---------------------------
## Specific Word List

**Divyahams-Ahamindra Bhagwan** - Divine Swan-Self-Lord God
**Adi-Nakshatramala** - Beginning-Star-Garland, containing 27 stars
**Nirvapini-Sukhkariņi-Santosh** - Liberating-Drying-Contentment
**Mayaka** - Illusion
**Between 11.127** - Between 11.127
**Such a necklace 1660** - A necklace with 1660 beads
**Dayika 16140** - Nurse 16140
**Ribbashun-1** - Ribbashun-1
**Anant Gyan Madin-Samudra 15.156** - Infinite Knowledge Ocean 15.156
**Mirvinn-Virakt 7138** - Dispassionate-Detached 7138
**2 Anantdarshan** - 2 Infinite Visions
**3 Avya-Mamban-Putra 11114** - 3 Unborn-Mamban-Son 11114
**Mit-Samapt 131208** - Finished-Completed 131208
**Badhatva 4** - Bondage 4
**Samyaktva 5** - Right Faith 5
**Mamasvat-Vayu 233182** - Self-Wind 233182
**Miti-Nirvana-Moksha 21140** - Liberation-Nirvana-Moksha 21140
**Avgahanatva 6** - Immersion 6
**Sukshmav 7** - Subtle 7
**Aguruladhutava 8** - Heavy-Light 8
**Amant** - Unfinished
**Maychak-Meetise Yukt Sudarshan Miti-Mukha 5.94** - Maychak-Combined with Meeti, Sudarshan Liberation-Face 5.94
**Biry 254223** - Seed 254223
**Karatna (in the context of Nanga etc.)** - Jewel (in the context of Nanga etc.)
**Nivritti-Samapti 131200** - Cessation-Completion 131200
**Divyasthani-Samavasaranbhoomi** - Divine Place-Samavasaran Land
**Nayon ka Samuh** - Group of Principles
**241186** - 241186
**Nirareka Sandaharhit 5.86** - Doubtless 5.86
**23174** - 23174
**Nalin-Kamaka 1113** - Lotus-Desire 1113
**Niroti-Ativrushti, Anaavrushti, Smiopayog-1** - Niroti-Excessive Rain, Drought, Smiopayog-1
**Gyanopयोग** - Knowledge Use
**Sabkevalakavi-1** - All-Knowing Poet-1
**Kevalgyan** - Perfect Knowledge
**Darshanopयोग 25221** - Vision Use 25221
**2 Kevaldarshan** - 2 Perfect Visions
**3 Kshapik-Nikatvarti Shatru Raja** - 3 Enemy King Near
**Didhittimalin-Surya 1.13** - Sun with Rays 1.13
**Samy
Page #780:
---------------------------
## Adipurana

**Chapter 15.124:**  _In the time of the dance of circumambulation, the foot should not be moved._  _Lakshmi, who resides in the pond, is adorned with lotus flowers._

**Chapter 22.175:** _Or, to apply the thread._

**Chapter 13.179:** _Auspiciousness - 1. Conception, 2. Birth, 3. ..._

**Chapter 12.145:** _Pushpadhanva - Kamadeva._

**Chapter 18.200:** _Austerity - 4. Knowledge - 5. Nirvana._

**Chapter 3.57:** _Pushpavamti - Sun and Moon._

**Chapter 13.1210:** _Parigati - circumambulation._

**Chapter 13.165:** _Pushan - Sun._

**Chapter 8.51222:** _Pasabrahma - 1. Arhant, 2. Siddha._

**Chapter 17.4252:** _Parinat - Ripe._

**Chapter 23.17:** _Prithvi - Vast._

**Chapter 25.222:** _3. Acharya, 4. Upadhyaya, 5. Sadhu._

**Chapter 10.95:** _Pogana - Disabled._

**Chapter 14.144:** _Parivupsarga - with a prefix._

**Chapter 14.18:** _Paulami - Indrani._

**Chapter 15.71:** _Panjayanti - Expanding._

**Chapter 16.47:** _Prakandaka - A type of garland._

**Chapter 16.47:** _Prakandaka - A type of garland._

**Chapter 17.221:** _Parishvakta - Embraced._

**Chapter 18.132:** _Paval - Small pond._

**Chapter 3.105:** _Pakasal - Wild animal._

**Chapter 16.53:** _Panavik - A type of musical instrument._

**Chapter 8.174:** _Dhwani - Sound._

**Chapter 23.163:** _Bala - Child._

**Chapter 80.253:** _Prakriti - Creation._

**Chapter 14.88:** _Patavas - A powder used to perfume clothes._

**Chapter 16.125:** _Praja - Children._

**Chapter 80.36:** _Padat - Infantry._

**Chapter 6.200:** _Pranamya - Unsuitable._

**Chapter 11.19:** _Papma - Sinner._

**Chapter 24.1:** _Parthiv - Tree, in the context of a king._

**Chapter 24.1:** _Prithivyan - Earth._

**Chapter 21.6:** _Pratayini - Expanding._

**Chapter 22.202:** _Parthiva Vrksha - Trees._

**Chapter 23.162:** _Panav - A type of musical instrument._

**Chapter 23.1145:** _Pratayini - Expanded._

**Chapter 22.202:** _Prithivya Adhipa - Kings._

**Chapter 12.8:** _Patatpati - Garuda, the lord of birds._

**Chapter 20.1171:**
Page #781:
---------------------------
## Specific Word List

**b**
.
.
**prastār** - a chapter of Chanda Shastra 16.114
**prakaraṇa** - suffix 16.114
**bhagaṇa** - group of constellations 13.165
**prastuvānā** - giving milk 18584
**marghuva** - cowardly warrior 1134
**prājya** - best 24.10
**bharatātmaja** - first son of Bharat Chakravarti, Arka koti 1114
**prābodhika** - appointed by the world to work 12.121
**bhāgavata** - related to God 201161
**prālambha** - a type of garland 7234
**prālayādhu** - moon 13.165
**prāva** - of the rainy season 11016
**bhāgīrathī** - Ganga river 18.207
**mis** - lotus 13.153
**mādhū** - high 377
**bhīmamōgī** - terrible snake 5.210
**prītikara** - producing joy 1012
**bhujiyā** - daughter 81123
**bhūtavādī** - Charvaka, who believes in the origin of life through the four elements (earth, water, fire, air) 5.66
**phalakahār** - a garland of human skulls, if there is a gem in the middle, it is called a phalakahār
**mōktā (mōkt)** - one of the 1008 names of God 25.100
**paṭhara** - thick 23163
**barajīva** - a worldly being with eight karmas 2.118
**bandha** - bondage of soul and body 20118
**makārākāra** - ocean 2.116
**malāk** - eight auspicious substances, like milk, 1. umbrella 2. flag 3. pot 4. whisk 5. well-established 6. (thōunā) 7. mirror 8. palm leaf 22.15
**balāhakākāra** - shaped like a ram 22.15
**bahurūpaka** - having many roles 14.104
**maṇisōpāna** - a phalakahār with five gems on the bottom 16666
**bahusēyān** - endowed with great blessings 201117
**praśōchāha** - spoken by the omniscient 10.141
**madhanōskōpākārin** - stimulating desire 10.141
**bīmātu** - chosen 1133
**madhukṛt** - honeybees 10133
**buj** - mute 22.98
**madhuvanta** - bumblebee, a bird 22.126
**bubhutsa** - desire to know 2.30
**sumusu** - desirous of making 2030
**madhyēyavanikam** - within the curtain 22.126
**bōdhi** - the three jewels 106
**mā** - sun
Page #782:
---------------------------
692 Adipuranam, Mūṣā-Sāñcā (metal smelting / chariot group 24.13) 1043 Ratha-Gāḍīkā Pahiyā 5 / 127 Praja-Vajake Samān Sudṛḍh Mug-Paśu 3 / 93 Raśmikalāpa - in which 54 damsels with thighs, on the side Lord Mṛgayu-Shikāri 12202, such a garland 16359 Ṛṣabhadeva's previous birth's Medhāvinī - very intelligent Rasātak - hell 1027 name 14148 16.108 Rājak - group of kings 19352 Vananābhi - stable like a forest, Mairvī - Meru related 13 / 209 Rājat - made of gold 22 / 210 with a navel, on the side Lord Moch-Kadali 17 / 252 Rājavatī - adorned with the best, Ṛṣabhadeva's previous birth's  Mukh-sambandhi 14 / 119 2016 one name 1450 Rājanvatī - adorned with a worthy king, Banākar - made by 192 Yativaryā - food of the ascetics 480 Vanī - Indra 28 method 2012 Rājamvatī - adorned with a worthy king, Kyasyā - young age, Baviyās - young 185118. Pṛṣivo 1777 10 / 206 Yaśasva - increasing fame, Rāja - moon 5 / 204 Varṇa - Brahmin etc. caste, on the side Akshara 1205 Rām - Balabhadra 11170 24.186 Yādas - aquatic animals 14666 Hiṁsā - Raman - desire for play | Varṣadhar - Patakacchukī - inner palace's Yāminī - night 121147. 11 / 142 Karmachārī 6 / 95 Yāyak - worshipper 24 / 28 / Rūpaka - drama 141104 Varṣadidin - birthday, Yuga - gambler (four hands measure) Race - travel, dancing 20166 to put on a wheel 14 / 121 Varṣīyas - old 18 / 118 Bugyak - guardians 171100 Redhārā - stream of wealth 12288 Varman - measure, year, body measure, Yutasira - Pṛthvisiddha 5 / 55 Rairāṭ - Kubera 237 Ityamarah 3 / 14 Yoga - Samadhi-Maraṇa 5142 Rodasī - sky and earth's Varakak - poor creature - Vaichārā Yoga - unattainable attainable thing 17135 attainment 163168 / Antarāla 12288 Varārōhā - excellent woman 1578 Raukm - gold related 22 / 90 Yogabīja - meditation's purpose Vasabhūhi - overcooked 17 / 245 211221. Varīvṛddhi - excessive cutting 17 / 2
Page #783:
---------------------------
## Specific Word List 693

**Vachanyam** - to be read
**Maunavrata** - vow of silence 181
**Vimana** - without measure - extremely
**Visansthulasanastha** - sitting in various postures - Kinnara 19 / 167
**Vistrita** - expanded, whose pride is gone
**Vigatam** - gone
**Manam** - pride
**Yasy** - whose
**Ki** - what
**Batpate** - in a hurry
**Basanas** - clothes
**Se** - with
**Sthita** - situated
**Basarasan** - Digambar 2064 21170
**Sah** - he 101208
**Vimana** - measuring
**Vatawakala** - Digambar 2018
**Vritrahan** - Indra 11111
**Vrushamakavi** - best poet 12.8
**Vadin** - one who debates scriptures 14.113
**Hit** - elephant's roar 31167 1144
**Viyut** - ten lakhs 10 / 197
**Benudhma** - one who plays the flute
**Varsh** - related to trees
**Vriksasyedam** - this of the tree
**Viyutasu** - dead 9 / 29
**Vaksham** - tree 12 / 200
**Viyog** - work that is to be done according to rules
**Bethas** - God
**Vrushabhadev** - Lord Vrishabha
**Baladhi** - tail 1229
**Badhi** - tail 5 / 102
**Virupak** - inferior - low 6 / 137
**Vaidagdhi** - beauty 22 // 134
**Balkambalanchhan** - many marks of a husband
**Ka** - what
**Chinh** - mark
**Vivaksha** - desire to speak, to say
**Vakt** - speaker
**Vaidagdhi** - beauty - splendor 24 / 18
**Miccha** - wrong
**Vivekha** - understanding 7.113
**Vaivagdh** - cleverness 456
**Vastuvicha** - to build a house
**Vivaksha** - desire
**Tamivia** - like that
**Vaichaty** - boldness - shame 6 / 172
**Vidha** - method 166122
**Ka** - who
**Ichchhuk** - desirous 1127
**Vaishalatha** - standing with legs spread out
**Vikach** - blossomed 2340
**Vikruty** - by reacting 14.122
**Vivakshu** - one who desires to speak, one who desires to do 1127
**Myatikar** - work 6207
**Vichchhakshan** - wise 1962
**Vivikt** - pure 24184
**Mbalik** - false 18122
**Pichaturukrida** - special cleverness, complete play 18 / 184
**Gyatukshi** - spring 133140
**Viviras** - desirous of knowing 23 / 144
**Vijayachhand** -
Page #784:
---------------------------
694 Adipurana, Shalka-Khanda 23349 |  Sri Dhar-Lakshmi's holder, in the faction of Sadach-Satko, etc., taking Shwar-Mlechchhas' one caste, Bhagwan Rishabhdev's Sat, Sankhya, Kshetra, Sparshan, 16/161, in the previous birth tradition, one Dev-Kal, Antar, Bhav, Shaival-Hari-Hari grass-filled Paryaya's name, 14/49, Alp-Bahutva, Nirdesh, Swa221133, Shreyans (Shreyans)- Kuru-Jangala-Mitva, Sadhan, Adhikarana, Shatamat-ur-Sau mothers' letter, the country Hastinapur's king, Sthiti, Vidhan-ye.. Anu 11178, Somprama's younger brother - Yogadwar 2/101, Shatit-broken, fallen 20131, Sadharma-same 21137, 12/91, Shrota's eight qualities- 1 Shushrusha, 2 Sadhreechi-Sahachari, Shrimati 8/3, Shar-various colored 15/203, Shravan 3 Grahan 4 Dharan Sanami-bandhu 12/10, Sharvar-Sharvari-night related 5 Smriti 6 Uh 7 Apoh Saparya-puja 5/191, 12/134, 8 Nirniti Saptakasha-elephant, horse, chariot, Shuna-sthul 10142.. Padal, bull, Gandharva, dancer Shikhaval-Mayur 9/17, Shvabh-Naraka 11/204, Shikhaval-Mayur 19:120, 101199, Shwani-Naraka-Gati 5/114, Shillochchay-Parvat 131154, Saptanay-1 Naigam 2 Sangrah 3 Shiva-Shrigal 1077, Vyavhar 4 Rijusutra 5 Shvetmanu-Chandrama 136163, Sheetka-Mand-work in delay, word 6 Samabhirud 7 etc. 5/107, Shatkarma-Asi, Mashi, Krishi, Shilp, Bhut 25/222, Sasachinsh-Agni 2/9, Sheetalika-Vyajan-Panka 5/94, Vanijya and Vidya-these, Samapich-Agni 241170, Shirshak-Yashti named garland's one, six karma are 16/190.. Samavan-Puja 14//152, Bhed 16147, Shad-Bhed-Bhav-1 Jiva 2 Padgal 3 Samavana-Ahimsa, etc. Vratonko, Shoshak-Yashti-whose middle has one Dharma 4 Adharma 5 Akash 6, twenty-five Bhavanas with, big pearl attached, such, Kal 25/222, 10.65, one girl's garland 16.52 | Paigunya-Sandhi, Vigrah, Yaan, Sabhavna-Sabha's protector Dev, Shuchi-summer season-Ashadh 6/51, Asan,
Page #785:
---------------------------
Specific word list of Rishabhdeva's previous births - / white cloth with a white cloth / number - a birth covered in one of the traditions of Chanda Shastra, obtained from a birth covered in one of the traditions of Chanda Shastra, 17 / 205 battle-suffix 166114 in which they are all-meaning-fulfilling-sutra-Indra 151 anxious-world-frightened-named-unanswered-airplane-sutra (sutra-Indra) 12175 do renunciation-eager-to-be-master 14050 Sudati-beautiful-teeth-woman-male 24 / 177 Sarasvat-sea 20 // 36 19 / 129 Sanvruti-delusion 5 / 40 Saby-with-rhythm 13 / 179 / Sudhashi-deva 11 // 3 Sanyyan-northern-cloth 19 / 117 Sata-meaningful 14186 Supasuti-moon 683 Sansysya-special-creation 166144 Sachiy-help 8209 Suparva-with-excellent-citizens-destruction-time-of-destruction 20135 Savikbal-self-strength 15 / 210 14 / 143 Sopan-if-below-in-the-plank-row-means-army 4 / 124 Surakuj-kalpa-tree 201270 three-gold-grains-are-attached-means-army 8 / 41 Surami-Kamadhenu 15 / 42 then-it-is-called-sopan-a-kind-of-ordinary-country 16159 Surasdman-heaven 12689 Saugandhik-fragrant-substance Sadhvas-fear 33123 Surag-kalpa-tree 4182 Surag-kalpa-tree (Sura + Ag) 12 / 174 Dhi - nectar-related, born-of-nectar-this-is-beautiful 111150 Surag-kalpa-tree (Sura + Ag) 24.10 13 // 25. Saumukhya-favorableness 14.91 Samayik-a-kind-of-character 20 / 171 Surem-good-Rem-word-with-which-is-connected 101208 Sauri-sun-related 12 / 170 Sami-half 193172 Surem-Sura + Im-gods-hands-breast-milk-to-feed 143165 Sarav - Marav-word-with-which-is-connected 10 / 208 Stambaram-elephant-related (Stambe14 // 205 Ramasyedam Stambaram) Sar-Sarayu-river-related 25 // 35 in-favor-of-Lord-Rishabhdeva 14 // 205 Sthaniy-capital-second-previous-birth-a-name 16 / 163 14 / 49 Sarv-benefactor-of-all 7.315 Sarvamoumatva-ownership-of-the-whole-earth-chakravarti-hood (Sarv / 13 / 207 Syabhumershi
Page #786:
---------------------------
696 'Badipuranam' Svateeya-Bhaneej 10143 He is called Har, Sthapatyak-Pan 8/232 Hari-Indra 22113 16/58 Swayambhuvi-Adinath Bhagavan Harit-Disha 13/28. Harin-Sundar 9/24 Ko Vani 12194 Harin-Manohar 17//122 Swayambhuv-Swayambhu Bhagavan Harivicks-Simhasan 5/214 / Himani-Atyadhik Barf, Mahad Vrishabh Dev-Dvara Kaha Hua Har-Yashti-Ladiyonke Samuhse Bani / Himan Himani 20120 16/112. Mala Har Kahalati Hai Hiranymayi-Suvarnamaayi 12289 Bagghara-Mala Ko Dharan Karne Idishp-Kamdev 15497 Balo 233196 | Har-Jisme Sakso Path Ladiya | Seek-Indriya 213106 

Page #787:
---------------------------
Published by Bharatiya Jnanpith:

* **Adipurana (Sanskrit-Hindi)** Parts 1 & 2 - Acharya Jinsen
* **Uttarapurana (Sanskrit-Hindi)** - Acharya Gunabhadra
* **Harivamsapurana (Sanskrit-Hindi)** - Acharya Jinsen
* **Padmapurana (Sanskrit-Hindi)** Parts 1, 2 & 3 - Acharya Ravishena
* **Paumachariu (Apabhramsha-Hindi)** in five parts - Kavi Swayambhu
* **Virajiniindachariu (Apabhramsha-Hindi)** - Kavi Swayambhu
* **Mahapuraana (Apabhramsha-Hindi)** Parts 1, 2, 3, 4 & 5 - Mahakavi Pushpadanta
* **Nayakumarachariu (Apabhramsha-Hindi)** - Mahakavi Pushpadanta
* **Jasaharachariu (Apabhramsha-Hindi)** - Mahakavi Pushpadanta
* **Viravardhamanacharit (Sanskrit-Hindi)** - Mahakavi Pushpadanta
* **Vaddhamanachariu (Apabhramsha-Hindi)** - Bhattarak Sakalakirti
* **Jambusamicariu (Apabhramsha-Hindi)** - Vibudh Shridhar
* **Karakandachariu (Apabhramsha-Hindi)** - Kavi Vira
* **Siriwalachariu (Apabhramsha-Hindi)** - Kankaamar
* **Purudeva Champu (Sanskrit-Hindi)** - Narsenadeva
* **Dharmasharmabhyudaya (Sanskrit-Hindi)** - Arhaddas
* **Rittthanemichariu (Yadavakanda)** - Harichandra
* **Samaraicchakhaha (Prakrit-Hindi)** Parts 1 & 2 - Kavi Swayambhu
* **Suri** - Haribhadra 

Page #788:
---------------------------
Bharatiya Gyanpeeth, 18, Institutional Area, Lodi Road, New Delhi-110 003
Founder: Late Sahu Shantiprasad Jain, Late Smt. Rama Jain 

