Catalog link: https://jainqq.org/explore/003448/1

Page #1:
---------------------------
In memory of 
Sw. Pujya Gurudev Shri Joravarmalji Maharaj
-20
E
BOcts
2-22125
Coordinator and Chief Editor
NASI
Yuchary Shri Madhukar Muni
Annadasha
(Original-Translation-Discussion-Notes-Appendix-Included) 

Page #2:
---------------------------
ॐ
Aham
Jinagam-Granthamala: Granthank
[ In the auspicious memory of Paramashraddeya Gurudev Pujya Shri Joravarmalji Maharaj ]
Pancham Ganadhar Bhagavatsudharma-Swami-Pranit Ashtam Ang
| Antakrid Dasasutra
[ Original Text, Hindi Translation, Commentary, Appendix Included ]
Sanidhi Upapravartak Shasanasevi Swami Shri Brajlalji Maharaj
Coordinator and Chief Editor Yuvacharya Shri Mishrimalji Maharaj 'Madhukar'
Translation-Commentary-Editing Ba. Br. Jain Sadhvi Divyaprabha
M.A., Ph.D. [ Disciple of Acharya Samrat Shri Anandrishiji M. and
Antavasi of Mahasati Shri Ujjvalkumariji ]
Publisher Shri Agam Prakashan-Samiti, Byawar (Rajasthan) 

Page #3:
---------------------------
Jinagam-Granthamala : Granthank-5
Nirdéshan Mahasati Sadhvi Shri Umravakumarji M.Sa. 'Archana'
Sampadak Mandal Anuyog Pravartak Muni Shri Kanhaiyalal 'Kamal' Acharya Shri Devendramuni Shastri
Shri Ratnamuni
Samprerak Muni Shri Vinaykumar 'Bheem'
Sanshodhan Dev Kumar Jain
Tritiya Sanskaran : Veer Nirvan San. 2526,
Vi. San. 2056 January 2000 E.
Prakashan Shri Agam Prakashan Samiti Braj-Madhukar Smriti Bhavan
Pipaliya Bazaar, Byawar (Rajasthan)- 305 901 Durabhash : 50087
Mudrak Shrimati Vimlesh Jain
Ajantā Paper Converters Lakshmi Chowk, Ajmer-305 001
Computerized Type Setting
Aarushi Marketing
5, S.S. Market, Kacheri Road, Ajmer-305 001
Muly : 65) Rupees 

Page #4:
---------------------------
Yuvacharya Shri Madhukar Muni Ji Ma.Ma.
卐 Maha Mantra Namo Arihantaanam, Namo Siddhanam, Namo Ayariyanam, Namo Uvvajhayanam,
Namo Loesavva Sahoonanam, Eso Panch Namo-kkaro' Savvapavapanasano || Mangalanam Cha Savvesim, Padham Havai Mangalam || 

Page #5:
---------------------------
The five great vows (Mahavratas) are:
1. Ahimsa (non-violence)
2. Satya (truthfulness)
3. Asteya (non-stealing)
4. Brahmacharya (continence)
5. Aparigraha (non-attachment) 

Page #6:
---------------------------
Published at the Holy Remembrance occasion
of
Rev. Guru Shri Joravarmalji Maharaj
Fifth Ganadhara Sudharma Swami Compiled
Eighth Anga
ANTAGADA-DASAO
[Original Text, Hindi Version, Notes Annotations and Appendices etc.)
Proximity
Up-pravartaka Shasansevi Rev. Swami Shri Brijlalji Maharaj
Convener & Chief Editor
Yuvacharya Shri Mishrimalji Maharaj 'Madhukar'
Translator & Annotator
Sadhwi Divyaprabha M.A., Ph.D.
Publishers
Shri Agam Prakashan Samiti
Beawar (Raj.) 

Page #7:
---------------------------
Jinagam Granthmala Publication No. 5
Direction Mahasati Sadhwi Shri Umrav Kunwarji “Archana”
Board of Editors Anuyoga-Pravartaka Muni Sri Kanhaiyalal “Kamal” Acharya Shri Devendramuni Shastri
Shri Ratan Muni
Promotor Muni Shri Vinayakumar “Bhima” Corrections and Supervision
Dev Kumar Jain
Third Edition Vir-Nirvana Samvat 2526 Vikram Samvat 2056
January 2000
Publishers Shri Agam Prakashan Samiti Brij-Madhukar Smriti-Bhawan,
Pipaliya Bazar, Beawar (Raj.) - 305 901
Ph. : 50087
Printers Smt. Vimlesh Jain Ajanta Paper Converters Laxmi Chowk, Ajmer - 305 001
Laser Type Setting by : Aarushi Marketing
5, S. S. Market Kutchery Road, Ajmer - 305 001
Price: Rs. 65/ 

Page #8:
---------------------------
**Dedication**

To the illustrious ones, adorned with exceptional brilliance, whose self-control was their all, who infused vitality into established traditions with their profound teachings, who revealed the vast nature of Dharma, whose personality was unique, who were endowed with the eightfold wealth of the Ganis, to those epoch-making luminaries,

**To the revered Acharya Shri Jawaharlalji Maharaj,
at the lotus feet of whose hands,
with humble reverence,
- Madhukar Muni** 

Page #9:
---------------------------
The five great vows (Mahavratas) are:
1. Ahimsa (non-violence)
2. Satya (truthfulness)
3. Asteya (non-stealing)
4. Brahmacharya (continence)
5. Aparigraha (non-attachment) 

Page #10:
---------------------------
This third edition of the Antakrid Dasanga Sutra is being published by the committee for the benefit of the readers who are practitioners of the Bhagavadvani.
The committee is proud to acknowledge the contribution of the late revered Yuvacharya Shri Madhukaramuni Ji M.Sa., who was a member of the Shraman Sangh. He inspired the publication of the Bhagavadvani in its original language, Prakrit, along with its meaning, interpretation, discussion, and commentary in the widely accepted vernacular language, Hindi. Although he is no longer with us, his blessings and the outlined plan for publication continue to guide us. In accordance with this, we are publishing the Agam literature as a token of our gratitude and as a tribute to him.
On this occasion, we are pleased to mention that every member of the society has contributed to this endeavor, thereby approving the propagation of the Jinvani and inspiring us to work.
We express our gratitude to the scholars whose support has enabled the committee to successfully complete its task. The committee once again congratulates them.
The translation of the Antakrid Dasanga Sutra has been done by the learned Sadhvi Shri Divyaprabhaji M., M.A., Ph.D., who is a disciple of the late revered Sadhvi Ratna Shri Ujjvalkumariji M. and a follower of the late revered Acharya Samrat, the National Saint, Shri Anandrishiji M.Sa. Although her mother tongue is Gujarati, the impactful style in which she has presented the Hindi translation, etc., is a testament to her scholarship and linguistic expertise. The committee highly commends her and her efforts.
We remember with reverence the late revered Acharya Pravar Shri Devendramuni Ji M.Sa. Shastri, whose introduction to every Agam text is a literary piece in itself. He not only reveals the essence of the text but also presents many important references, which are useful and significant for those who study comparative literature.
Finally, the committee requests all its readers and fellow students to note that the publication of the third edition of the Agam texts is ongoing. We hope to make all the texts of the Agam Battisi available to you soon. We hope that your support will continue to inspire us.
Sagarmal Baitala
President
Ratanchand Modi
Working President
G. Sayramal Chordia
General Secretary
Gyanchand Vinaykia
Secretary
Shri Agam Prakashan Samiti, Byawar (Rajasthan)

Page #11:
---------------------------
The five great vows (Mahavratas) are:
1. **Ahimsa** (non-violence)
2. **Satya** (truthfulness)
3. **Asteya** (non-stealing)
4. **Brahmacharya** (continence)
5. **Aparigraha** (non-attachment) 

Page #12:
---------------------------
## Introduction

The foundation of Jain religion, philosophy and culture is the word of the omniscient. Omniscient means the one who sees the self. Only those who see the self completely can see the entire universe. Those who know the whole can truly describe the essence. They can truly preach the ultimate good and liberation.

The knowledge of the essence, self-knowledge and the right understanding of conduct and behavior as stated by the omniscient is known as 'Agam', scripture or sutra.

The words of the Tirthankaras are like a shower of fragrant flowers. Great wise men, the Ganadharas, compile them in the form of sutras and give them the form of organized 'Agam'.

What we call 'Agam' today was called 'Ganipitaka' in ancient times. The 'Ganipitaka' includes the entire twelve-fold scripture. Later, its parts, sub-parts, roots, etc. were divided into many categories.

When there was no tradition of writing, the Agams were preserved based on memory or through the Guru tradition. For almost a thousand years after Lord Mahavira, the 'Agam' followed the tradition of memory. Due to weakness of memory, the breaking of the Guru tradition and many other reasons, the knowledge of the Agam gradually disappeared. The water of the great lake dried up, leaving only the footprint of the cow. Then, Devardvigani Kshamasraman called a meeting of the Shramans and made a historic attempt to preserve the knowledge of the Agam, which was disappearing due to memory lapses, and to preserve the words of the Jinas. He compiled the words of the Jinas into books and did an indescribable favor to future generations. This was an amazing undertaking to keep the stream of Jain religion, philosophy and culture flowing. This first compilation of the Agams was completed 980 or 993 years after the Nirvana of the hero.

After being compiled into books, the form of the Jain Agams was preserved in its original form, but due to the passage of time, external attacks, internal differences of opinion, conflict, weakness of memory and negligence, the pure stream of Agam knowledge, the right understanding of the Guru tradition, gradually weakened. Many important references, words and hidden meanings of the Agams became fragmented. The Agams that were written were not completely pure. There were very few who could give the right understanding of their meaning. Due to many other reasons, the stream of Agam knowledge became narrow.

In the sixteenth century Vikram, Lonkashah made a revolutionary effort. A bold attempt to describe the pure and true meaning of the Agams was started again. But after some time, obstacles arose again. Communal hatred, theoretical conflict and the lack of knowledge of language among the scribes became a major obstacle in the achievement of the Agams and their correct understanding.

In the first phase of the nineteenth century, when the tradition of printing the Agams began, readers got some convenience... 

Page #13:
---------------------------
The ancient commentaries of the Agamas, Churni and Niyukti, were published and based on them, the simple and clear form of the Agamas was printed and made available to the readers, so naturally the study of Agam knowledge increased, hundreds of inquisitive people developed a tendency towards Agam self-study and non-Jain scholars from India and abroad also started practicing the Agamas.
It is difficult to mention the names of all the scholars and wise monks who played a historical role in the publication, editing and printing of the Agamas, due to lack of sufficient material. Nevertheless, I will definitely mention the names of some great monks of the Sthanakwasi tradition.
Reverend Shri Amolkarishiji Maharaj was a great courageous and determined monk of the Sthanakwasi tradition, who translated all thirty-two Sutras into Hindi and made them accessible to the common people, despite having limited resources. The editing and publication of the entire thirty-two was a historical work, which benefited the entire Sthanakwasi and Terapanthi society. A resolution of Gurudev Pujya Swami Shri Joravarmalji Maharaj
When I was studying the Agamas under the guidance of Gurudev Late Swami Shri Joravarmalji Maharaj, some Agamas published by the Agamoday Committee were available. Gurudev used to make me study based on them. Seeing them, Gurudev felt that although these editions were very laborious and quite pure among the editions available so far, yet many places were unclear. There is also a difference somewhere in the original text and its commentary, somewhere the commentary is very brief.
Gurudev Swami Shri Joravarmalji Maharaj himself was a great scholar of Jain Sutras. His intellect was very learned and argumentative. Seeing this state of Agam literature, he was very pained and he expressed many times that it would be a great blessing if the Agamas were published in a pure, beautiful and universally useful way. Due to some circumstances, his resolution remained limited to sentiment only.
Meanwhile, Acharya Shri Jawaharlalji Maharaj, Jain Dharma Divakar Acharya Shri Atmaramji Maharaj, Pujya Shri Ghasilalji Maharaj, etc. learned monks have fulfilled this deficiency by writing beautiful explanations and commentaries of the Agamas or by getting them written under their guidance.
Currently, Acharya Shri Tulsi of the Terapanth sect has also started this Herculean effort and their Agam work is going on at a good level. Muni Shri Kanhaiyalalji 'Kamal' is making a unique and important effort to classify the statements of the Agamas into Anuyogas.
Scholarly monks of the Svetambar Murtipujak tradition, Late Muni Shri Punyavijayji, had started a very systematic and excellent work in the direction of Agam editing. After his demise, this beautiful effort is going on under the guidance of Muni Shri Jambhuvijayji.
[10]

Page #14:
---------------------------
After a comprehensive overview of all the aforementioned works, a resolve arose in my mind. Today, somewhere the essence of the Agamas is being merely published, and somewhere extensive interpretations of the Agamas are being made. One is incomprehensible to the reader, while the other is complex. There should be an effort to unveil the essence of the Agamvaani by following the middle path, which is both easy to understand, simple, concise, yet comprehensive.
Gurudev desired the same. Keeping that sentiment in mind, I began contemplating this subject 4-5 years ago. After long contemplation, on the 10th day of the bright fortnight of Vaishakh, Vikram Samvat 2036, the day of Mahavir's liberation, I made a firm decision and began the work of editing and reviewing the Agambattisi, and now I am extremely happy that the Agam texts are in the hands of the readers.
This historic work of Agam editing has been organized in the auspicious memory of our revered Gurudev. Today, the remembrance of his virtues is filling my heart with joy. At the same time, the inspirations of my venerable Guru-brother, revered Swami Shri Hazarimallji Maharaj, his devotion to the Agamas, and his profound knowledge of the Agamas, along with ancient beliefs, have been my support. Therefore, I am overwhelmed with the auspicious memory of both these celestial souls.
The guidance of Shasansevi Swami Shri Brajlallji Maharaj, the encouragement of his enthusiasm, the companionship and strength of the service-oriented Shishyamuni Vinaykumar and Mahendra Muni, their service and cooperation, and the humble inspirations of Mahasati Shri Kanakunvarji, Mahasati Shri Jhankarkunvarji, and the highly learned Sadhvi Shri Umravkunvarji 'Archana' have always been instrumental in keeping me motivated and dedicated to my work.
I have firm faith that I will continue to receive full cooperation from all my collaborators, listeners, and scholars in completing this long and arduous task of editing the Agamvaani, and I will remain dynamic in achieving my goal. With this hope...
- Muni Mishrimal 'Madhukar' (From the first edition)
[11] 

Page #15:
---------------------------
President
Vice President
Secretary
Treasurer
Advisor
Member
Shri Agam Prakashan Samiti, Baywar (Executive Committee)
:
:
:
:
00
:
::
:
Shri Sagarmalji Baitala
Shri Ratanchandji Modi
Shri Dhanrajji Vinayakia
Shri Bhanwarlalji Gothi
Shri Hukmichandji Parkh
Shri Dulichandji Chordia
Shri Jasrajji Parkh
Shri G. Sayermalji Chordia
Shri Gyanchandji Vinayakia
Shri Gyanrajji Mootha
Shri Prakashchandji Chopra
Shri Janvarilalji Shishodia
Shri R. Prasannachandji Chordia
Shri Manakchandji Sancheti
Shri Tejarajji Bhandari
Shri S. Sayermalji Chordia
Shri Mulchandji Surana
Shri Motichandji Chordia
Shri Amarchandji Modi
Shri Kishnalalji Baitala
Shri Jatanrajji Mehta
Shri Devrajji Chordia
Shri Gautamchandji Chordia
Shri Sumermalji Medtiya
Shri Asulalji Bohra
Shri Buddharajji Bafna
Indore
Baywar
Baywar
Madras
Jodhpur
Madras
Durg
Madras
Baywar
Pali
Baywar
Baywar
Madras
Jodhpur
Jodhpur
Madras
Nagaur
Madras
Baywar
Madras
Medta City
Madras
Madras
Jodhpur
Jodhpur
Baywar 

Page #16:
---------------------------
Editorial (From the First Edition)
Salutations unto the Supreme Benefactor, the Supreme Soul, Mahavira, a hundred times over. By the mere remembrance of whom, the bonds of countless births of the seeker soul are broken, who, by ending the world of countless seeker souls, successfully made them luminous in the ultimate light of infinite Siddhas, becoming the immortal boon of liberation, and at the same time, for the sake of the Siddhi of other souls in the world, removed their tangled sorrows, becoming the life-giving force of unparalleled glorious tales. This Antagaddashaang Sutra, the eighth Anga Sutra in the Dvadashaangi, is the one that makes this tradition-received boon palatable and pure.

**Naming**
**Antakrit**
The name of this Anga is 'Antakrit + Dasha + Anga + Sutra', because this text contains the life stories of those ninety great souls who, by means of restraint-practice and austerity-practice, conquered the eight types of karmas and attained liberation from transmigration through eighty-four lakh species of beings, attaining the state of liberation in the final moments of their lives. Thus, the first element of the name of this scripture is 'Antakrit', because it gives prominence to the description of the life stories of those great souls who ended the cycle of life and death. 

Page #17:
---------------------------
## Antakritdasangasutra: A Translation

**Dasha**

The second component of the name, "Dasha," is a word with two established meanings in Jain culture:

(1) "Dasha" refers to the journey from the state of worldly enjoyment (bhogavastha) to the state of yoga (yogavastha), in other words, the continuous progress towards purity. 
In this sutra, every Antakrit sadhaka (practitioner) continuously progresses towards purity. Therefore, this text primarily describes the state of Antakrit sadhakas, hence the name "Antakrit Dasha."

(2) "Dasha" also refers to an Agam (scripture) that contains ten studies (adhyayan).
This Agam has eight sections (varga). The first (adi), fourth, fifth (madhya), and eighth sections (ant) each contain ten studies. Thus, due to the presence of ten studies in the beginning, middle, and end, this Agam is also called "Antakrit Dasha."

**Ang**

The teachings of the Tirthankaras (liberated souls) had two aspects: word (shabda) and meaning (artha). The Tirthankaras' direct disciples could only grasp the meaning aspect. Therefore, Agams are also called "Ang" because they are the meaning aspect of the Tirthankaras' words. This text is also the meaning aspect of Lord Mahavira's words, hence the third part of its name is "Ang."

**Sutra**

All Jain Agams are considered "Sutra" because they are concise in words but vast in meaning. Therefore, the fourth component of this Agam's name is "Sutra."

Thus, the name "Antakritdasangasutra" is formed by combining these four components.

The significance of its name becomes evident through its study. While the glorious tales of those seeking liberation are found in other scriptures, this scripture focuses solely on the lives of those saints who ended the cycle of birth, aging, and death in this very life, or who attained the state of Siddha, Buddha, and Mukta (liberated) by ending the eight types of karma. This scripture describes the state of those who have ended the cycle of worldly existence forever, hence the name "Antakrit-Dashao."

Reading, reciting, and contemplating this scripture inspires every soul to strive for liberation. Therefore, it is a scripture of ultimate welfare. The "Upasakadasha" describes the ascetics who attain liberation after one lifetime, but this eighth Ang, "Antakritdasha," describes the superior ascetics who attain liberation in the same life. Therefore, it is a scripture of ultimate auspiciousness and holds a significant place in the lives of people.

The "Antakritdasangasutra" describes the state of those souls who attained liberation in their final breath but could not demonstrate the objects they saw through their perfect knowledge and perfect vision due to the remaining lifespan karma. Therefore, they are called "Antakrit Kevali."

Page #18:
---------------------------
## Introduction

The *Samvayanga* mentions ten studies and seven sections in this *agama*. The *Nandi Sutra* mentions eight sections but not ten studies. Acharya Abhaydeva, in his commentary on the *Samvayanga*, attempts to reconcile the statements of both *agamas* by writing that the first section contains ten studies. From this perspective, the *Samvayanga Sutra* mentions ten studies and seven sections from the perspective of other sections. The *Nandi Sutra* does not mention studies, only eight sections. But how can this reconciliation be maintained until the end? Because the *Samvayanga* mentions ten *Antakrid Dasha* education periods (objective periods), while the *Nandi Sutra* mentions eight. In the commentary on the *Samvayanga*, Acharya Abhaydeva writes that we do not know the meaning of the difference in objective periods.

Acharya Jinasagar Mahत्तर in the *Nandi Churni* and Acharya Haribhadra in the *Nandi Vritti* have written that the name of this *agama* is *Antagaddasa* because the first section has ten studies. In the *Churni*, *dasha* also means state. The *Samvayanga* instructs ten studies but does not mention their names. For example, Nami, Matanga, Somil, Ramgupta, Sudarshan, Jamali, Bhogali, Kinkash, Chilvak, and Fal Anvadpatra.

In the *Tattvarth Sutra Rajavartika* and the *Angapannatti*, ten names are found with some variations in the text. For example, Nami, Matanga, Somil, Ramgupta, Sudarshan, Yamalok, Valik, Kambla, Pal, and Ambashthputra. It is written that this *agama* describes the ten *Antakrid Kevalis* who occurred during the time of each Tirthankara.

The *Jayadhwala* also supports this. The *Nandi Sutra* does not mention ten studies nor their names. The names mentioned in the *Samvayanga* and *Tattvarthavartika* are the current *Antakrid Dasha*. 

Page #19:
---------------------------
It is not there. The Nandi Sutra describes the form of the present available Agama. At this time, there are eight sections in the Antakrid Dasanga and ten studies in the first section. But their names are different from the Stananga, Rajavarttika and Angapannatti. For example, Gautam, Samudra, Sagar, Gambhir, Stimit, Achal, Kampilya, Akshobha, Prasenajit and Vishnu. Acharya Abhaydev has written this as a variant reading in the Stanangavritti. This shows that it is different from the reading mentioned in the Samavayanga.
The present Agama has one Shruta Skandha, eight sections, 90 studies, 8 Uddeshanakalas, Samuddeshanakalas and finite readings. It contains Anuyogadwar, Vedha, Shlokas, Niruktis, Sangrahanis and Prathipattis in number. It has been stated that there are thousands of words and letters in it. The present Anga is 900 shlokas in quantity.
It has eight sections and one Shruta Skandha. Each section has separate studies, such as -
1
The first and second sections have ten studies each, the third section has thirteen studies, the fourth and fifth sections also have ten studies each, the sixth section has sixteen studies, the seventh section has thirteen studies and the eighth section has ten studies, but in the introduction of each study, this subject is explained that 'the meaning of such and such study has been described by Shri Shraman Bhagwan Mahavira Swami in this way, then what is the meaning of this study?' In this way, in the solution of this doubt, Shri Sudharmaswami starts describing the meaning of the present study in relation to Shri Jambuswami, therefore, this scripture is completely acceptable because it is written by the omniscient.
Although the Antakrid Dasanga Sutra gives a glimpse of the brief life stories of the beings who lived in the time of Bhagwan Arishtanemi and Bhagwan Mahavira Swami, the life stories of the Antakrit Kevalis who lived in the reign of other Tirthankaras should also be known in the same way. Because the Dvadasangi Vani is Paurusheya in words and Apaurusheya in meaning.
This scripture is a guide to the path of liberation for the noble beings, therefore, every study of it is worth pondering. Although due to the defect of time, the present scripture has become slightly less in the number of shlokas and the number of words, yet each word of it is indicative of many meanings, this subject can only be understood through experience, its study done according to the rules will definitely be a guide to the path of Nirvana.
6
This is the eighth Anga of the reading of Ganadhar Shri Sudharmaswami. A glimpse of the brief life stories of some beings has been given in it for the understanding of the noble beings.
Language of the present Agama
Magadhi was the language of the Magadh country, to give it a literary form, some special words and provincial dialects were also mixed in it, therefore, the Agama language came to be called Ardhamagadi. The Agamakaras say that Ardhamagadi is the beloved language of Tirthankaras, Ganadharas and Devas, why not? The popularity of the vernacular language is universally accepted. The use of the vernacular language is also essential for the welfare of the people. The language of the present Agama is also Ardhamagadi. Style
The present Agama has been composed in a narrative style, this style is called 'Kathanyog' in ancient technical terminology, in this style, the story is started with the terminology 'Tenam Kalenam Tenam Samayenam'
Therefore, we should consider it in relation to other readings.
Stanangavritti, letter 483.
[ 16 ]
1.
.
Page #20:
---------------------------
I
The *Jñatadharmakathā*, *Upāsakadashāṅga*, *Anuttaraupapātika*, *Vipākasūtra* and *Antakṛddashāṅga* sūtras have been constructed in this same style in the Āgamas.
There are two forms of words in the Ardhamagadhi language - *parivasati*, *parivasar*, *rāyavaṇṇato*, *rāyavaṇṇao*, *egabīsāte* *egabīsāe*. In this Āgama, the style of adopting the vowel-ending form is mostly used.
In the Āgamas, the ancient style of expressing the remaining text by means of a dot or a number at the end of a word, while adopting the style of abbreviation, is prevalent. This style was adopted in the *Antakṛddashāṅga Sūtra* published by the Āgamoday Samiti, but the *Antakṛddashāṅga Sūtra* published by the Shri Amolakṛṣi Ji Maharaj Smārak Granthamālā has adopted the style of giving the full text. This style is very convenient to read. Keeping this convenience in mind, we have also had to adopt the style of presenting the original text in full.
In this sūtra, descriptions of many austerities are found in their respective places. In the eighth chapter, the nature and methods of austerities are discussed in detail. Many types of establishment instruments for these austerities are found. We have tried to make all these establishment instruments attractive by giving them an artistic form.
The style of description of the present text is very systematic. It mentions the city, garden, *caitya*, *vyantarāyatana*, king, parents, *dharmacārya*, *dharmakathā*, prosperity in this world and the next, acceptance of gifts, giving of gifts, renunciation of enjoyments, *pravrajyā*, initiation period, study of scriptures, practice of austerities, *sanlekhanā* and *anta-kriyā* of each practitioner.
From the introduction of the practitioner characters described in the *Antagaddasa*, it is evident that in the reign of Śramaṇa Bhagavān Mahāvīra, people of different castes and classes had equal rights in the practice of austerities. On the one hand, where dozens of princes, princesses and *gāthāpati* were walking side by side on the path of practice, on the other hand, some neglected people of the lower castes were also coming to this field of practice with respect and advancing equally. Even those who were very young, like the *ati-mukta* child muni, and those who were considered to be the darlings of the royal palace, like *gaja-sukumāra*, also came to this field and attained liberation.
1
From the contemplation of the *Antagaddasa Sūtra*, it is known that by practicing the *guṇaratnasamvatsar* austerity, like the 18 munis like Gautama, and the *bhikṣu-pratimā*, the practitioner destroys his karma and attains liberation. Munis like *anīkasenādi* attained liberation by destroying their karma through the austerity of *bele-bele* while dwelling in the knowledge of the fourteen *pūrvas*. *Arjunamālī* attained liberation by practicing the austerity of *bele-bele* for only six months, with the predominance of *upasambhāva* - forgiveness. On the other hand, *ati-mukta* kumāra attained liberation through the practice of the *guṇaratna* austerity with knowledge, and *gaja-sukumāla* attained liberation only by the power of pure meditation, without studying the scriptures and without practicing austerities for a long time. This shows that meditation is also a great austerity. Queens like *kālī* etc. practiced austerities with restraint and attained liberation after a long time. Thus, some attained liberation through ordinary austerities, some through severe austerities, some through the predominance of forgiveness, and some others by throwing their karma into the fire of self-meditation.
*Antakṛt Kevalī*: A Bird's Eye View
Study
There are thirteen studies in the third chapter of this scripture. Except for *gaja-sukumāla*, all the other twelve studies have characters who are all knowers of the fourteen *pūrvas* and have attained liberation. All the characters in the fourth chapter are *dvādaśāṅgī*
[१७] 

Page #21:
---------------------------
They have become **Antakrit** after studying **Vani**. **Gajsukumal Anugar** became **Antakrit** without studying any scripture. All the other eleven **Angas** were studied by the rest.
**Diksha**
There was an **Atimukt Kumar** with a long-term **Diksha** equivalent, who became **Antakrit** after observing **Samyam** for a longer period than other characters.
**Atimukt Kumar** is a character who took **Pravrajya** before puberty.
**Gajsukumal** is a character who became **Antakrit** after **Karma-Kshaya** within hours of taking **Pravrajya**. No other seeker has become **Antakrit** at such a young age.
**Arjun Anugar** received a six-month **Diksha** equivalent and a fifteen-day **Santhara**. All other characters have a year-long **Diksha** equivalent and a monthly **Santhara**.
**Life**
—
Two characters were **Abal Brahmachari**, while all other characters became **Antakrit** after renouncing worldly pleasures and taking up **Yoga**.
**Place**
-
Two kings became **Antakrit**, while all other princes, crown princes, and queens became **Antakrit**. **Gajsukumal** and **Arjun Anugar** had to endure **Parishha**, while other **Anugars** did not.
Except for **Arjun Anugar**, all other characters were born in royal families and wealthy families and became **Antakrit**.
One **Gajsukumal** attained **Nirvana** in the cremation ground, while all other **Anugars** attained **Nirvana** with **Santhara** on **Shatrunjaya** and **Vipulgiri**.
1
All **Sadhviyas** became **Antakrit** in the **Upashraya**.
**Male-Female**
-
The fifth, seventh, and eighth studies contain the life stories of thirty-three queens who became **Antakrit**.
**Rule**
—
**Arishta Nemiji**
Thirty-three **Anugars** became **Antakrit Kevali** during the rule of **Arishta Nemiji**, and sixteen **Anugars** became **Antakrit Kevali** during the rule of **Mahavira**.
Ten queens became **Antakrit** after taking **Diksha** during the rule of **Arishta Nemiji**, and thirty-three queens became **Antakrit** after taking **Diksha** during the rule of **Mahavira**.
During the rule of **Arishta Nemiji**, there was a **Sadhvi** named **Yakshini** who was a **Pravartini**, and during the rule of **Mahavira**, **Arya Chandanbala** was a **Pravartini Sadhvi**.
[१८]

Page #22:
---------------------------
## Teachings

The study of this sutra can benefit seekers with many invaluable teachings, which can make their lives ideal. For example:

1. Patience and firm faith should be like that of Gaja Sukumala.
Endurance should be like that of Arjuna Mali.
Lay people should emulate Sudarshan Shramanopasaka, whose spiritual radiance even the gods could not bear.
Faith in Dharma should be like that of Krishna Vasudeva.
The style of question and answer should be like that of Ati Mukta Kumar.
The spirit of renunciation should be like that of Krishna Vasudeva's eight chief queens.
Austerities should be like that of Maharaja Shrenik's ten queens, which are described in detail in the eighth chapter.

Thus, this scripture is adorned with many teachings. The noble being who embraces these teachings will have a meaningful human life and become an ideal figure in society.

## Acknowledgement

Although I was unable to fully edit this scripture, I was able to contribute a little to this sacred ritual organized by the young Acharya, Vidvadratna Muni Shri Madhukarji M.Sa. of the Shraman Sangh, with the grace of the revered Gurudev Anuyogapravartka Shri Kanhaiyalalji (Kamalamuniji) M.Sa., the blessings of the learned Manekkunvarji M.Sa., the insistent inspiration of Pandit Shobhachandji Bharill, the scriptural assistance of the supremely revered Agam Prabhakar Atmaramji M.Sa., and the complete cooperation of Sadhvi Ba. Br. Mukti Prabhaji M.Sa., Ba. Br. Darshan Prabhaji M.Sa., and Ba. Br. Anupamaji.

Therefore, I, who have become holy through the great grace, feeling, and inspiration of all these great beings and noble souls, take leave with the request for the purifying state that will end the world for me and my dear readers, and I seek forgiveness from the Shruta Devatas and all Shruta Dharas for any errors made due to carelessness, intellectual deficiency, or ignorance.

Arhadvatsala Sadhvi Divyaprabha
1980
Jain Upashraya Jamnadas Mehta Marg, Tinbatti
Walkeshwar-6 

Page #23:
---------------------------
The five great vows (Mahavratas) are:
1. **Ahimsa** (non-violence)
2. **Satya** (truthfulness)
3. **Asteya** (non-stealing)
4. **Brahmacharya** (continence)
5. **Aparigraha** (non-attachment) 

Page #24:
---------------------------
## Introduction (From the First Edition): Antakrid Dasha: A Study

When we delve deep into the golden pages of history, it becomes clear that Indian philosophy has flowed in two streams since prehistoric times, which we know as Brahman culture and Shraman culture. Both these cultures originated in India. On this sacred land, both cultures flourished. Both cultures co-existed, so it is natural and spontaneous for the ideology of one culture to influence the other. While there are many similarities in the fundamental ideologies of both cultures, there are also differences. The source of the fundamental thinking of Brahman culture is the 'Vedas'. The primary source of Jain tradition's thinking is the 'Agam'. The Vedas are known as 'Shruti', while the Agam is known as "Shruta"! The words Shruti and Shruta are very similar in meaning. Both are related to "Shravan" (hearing). What is heard is Shruta. And the same noun form of Shravan is Shruti. Simply hearing the word is not the desired meaning of Shruti and Shruta. Its implied meaning is - what is real, what is evidence-based, what carries the noble ideology of the well-being of all people, what is spoken by the wise men, the omniscient, all-seeing, dispassionate great men, that is Agam, Shruta, Shruti. The words of an ordinary person who is afflicted by attachment and aversion do not fall into the category of Shruta and Shruti. Acharya Vadideva, while defining Agam, wrote - "The meaning-perception that arises from the words of the wise is Agam."
a. Shruyate smeti Shrutam. b. Shruyate atmana taditi Shrutam shabdah. Aptvachanadaavibhrutamarthasanvedanamaagam.
- Tattvarthrajavartika. - Visheshaavashakabhaashya Maladhariyaavritti. - Pramananayatattvalok 4.1-2.
2. 

Page #25:
---------------------------
In the Jain tradition, the scriptures spoken by the Arhats, composed by the Ganadharas, Pratyekabuddhas, or Sthaviras are considered authoritative. Therefore, the credit for the authorship of the Agam scriptures belongs to the great sages. The Anga literature was initiated by the Tirthankaras themselves, and the Ganadharas were the wise men who compiled the sutras. The basis for the composition of the Anga-bahir literature are the Tirthankaras, and the compilers are the Chaturdashapurvi, Dashapurvi, and Pratyekabuddha Acharyas. Acharya Vattekar considered the sutras spoken by the Ganadharas, Pratyekabuddhas, and Abhinna Dashapurvis as authoritative in the Mulachar.

From this perspective, we arrive at the truth that the present available Anga-pravist literature was initiated by Tirthankara Bhagwan Mahavira himself, and the author is his disciple Ganadhara Sudharma. In the Anga-bahir literature, from the perspective of authorship, many Agams were composed by Sthaviras, and many were derived or quoted from the Dvadashaangas.

The Anga literature currently available is the composition of Ganadhara Sudharma, who was a contemporary of Bhagwan Mahavira. Therefore, the time of composition of the present Anga literature is confirmed to be the 6th century BCE. The Anga-bahir literature is not the work of a single person, therefore, they cannot have a single time period. Acharya Shayambhav composed the Dashavaikalika Sutra, while the author of the Prajnapanasutra is Shyamacharya. The author of the Cheda Sutras is Chaturdashapurvi Bhadrabahu, while the author of the Nandi Sutra is Devavachaka. Some modern Western thinkers consider the time of composition of the Jain Agams to be the time of Devarddhigani Kshamasraman, who lived 980 or 993 years after Mahavira's Nirvana. But this belief of theirs is not correct. Devarddhigani compiled the Agams, but the Agams are ancient. Many knowledgeable scholars mix the time of writing with the time of composition, and consider the time of writing of the Agams as the time of composition of the Agams.

Earlier, the Shruta literature was not written. Due to the prohibition of writing, it was being passed down orally. It remained memorized for a long time, which naturally led to changes in the Shruta verses. Devarddhigani Kshamasraman stopped the Shruta stream, which was flowing rapidly towards decline, by putting it into writing. After that, with some exceptions, 

Page #26:
---------------------------
Except for the Shruta literature, there has been no change. The credit for the preservation of the Agam literature currently available goes to Devarddhigani Kshamasraman. It can be said with authority that the originality of the Agam literature currently available is unquestionable. Although the text may have been interpolated and changed in some places, it does not make any difference to the authenticity of the Agams.
Antakrddasha is the eighth Ang Sutra. This Ang describes the specific holy-souled beings who end the cycle of birth and death, and because it has ten studies, it is called Antakrddasha. The Samavayang Sutra mentions the ten studies and seven categories of this Agam. Acharya Devavachka has mentioned eight categories in the Nandi Sutra, but not ten studies. Acharya Abhaydeva, in the Samavayang Vritti, has tried to reconcile the statements of both the above Agams, writing that there are ten studies in the first category, from this point of view, the Samavayang Sutra has mentioned ten studies and seven categories in comparison to other categories. The Nandi Sutrakar has not mentioned any studies, only eight categories. The question is, how can this reconciliation be maintained until the end? Because the Samavayang itself mentions ten education periods (Uddeśanakaal) for Antakrddasha, while the Nandi Sutra mentions their number as eight. Acharya Abhaydeva himself has admitted that we do not know the meaning of the difference in Uddeśanakaal.
Acharya Jindasgani Mahttar has written in the Nandi Churni and Acharya Haribhadra has written in the Nandi Vritti that the name of this Agam is 'Antagadadsaao' because it has ten studies in the first category. The Churnikar has interpreted Dasha as Avस्था (state). It should be remembered that the Samavayang does mention ten studies, but it does not indicate the names of those studies. The Stanang mentions the names of the ten studies as follows: Nami, Matang, Somil, Ramgupta, Sudarshan, Jamali, Bhogali, Kinksha, Chilvack, and Phal Ambadputra.
Acharya Akalank has given ten names in the Rajavartika and Acharya Shubhachandra has given ten names in the Angpannatti with some variations in the text. They are as follows: Nami, Matang, Somil, Ramgupta, Sudarshan, Yamalok, Valik, Kambla, Pal, and Ambashtputra! It is also written in this that this Agam describes the ten Antakrit Kevalis who occur in the time of each Tirthankara. This statement has also been supported by Jayadhavalakar Virsen and Jayasen. In the Nandi Sutra,
8. Samavayang Prakirnak Samavay 96.
9.
Nandi Sutra 88.
10. Samavayangvritti Patra 112.
11. Samavayangvritti Patra 112. 12. Nandi Sutra Churnisahit Patra 68. 13. Nandi Sutra Vritti Sahit Patra 83. 14. Nandi Sutra Churnisahit P. 68.
15. Stanang 10 | 113.
16. Tattvarthrajavartika 1 | 20 P. 73.
17. Angpannatti 51.
18. Kasayapahuḍ, Part 1, P. 130
[23]

Page #27:
---------------------------
There is no mention of the ten studies nor their names. The studies whose names are mentioned in Samavayanga and Tattvarthrajavartika are not available in the present Antakriddasha. The Nandisutr has the same description as is available in the present Antakriddasha. This proves that the present form of Antakriddasha is from before the time of Acharya Devavachka. There are eight sections in the present Antakriddasha and the first section has ten studies, but their names are different from those mentioned in the Stananga, Tattvarthrajavartika and Angapannatti. For example, Gautam, Samudra, Sagar, Gambhir, Stimit, Achal, Kampilya, Akshobha, Prasenajit and Vishnu. Acharya Abhaydev has called this a variant reading in the Stananga Vritti. This clearly shows that the present Antakriddasha is different from the reading mentioned in Samavayanga. Many scholars have also speculated that earlier this Agam would have had ten studies like Upasakadasha, just as Upasakadasha describes ten Shraman Upasakas, similarly this Agam would have also included stories of ten Arhats.

Antakriddasha has one Shrutaskandha, eight sections, 90 studies, eight Uddeshanakalas, eight Samuddeshanakalas and finite readings. It includes Anuyogadwar, Vedha, Shloka, Niyuktis, Sangrahanis and Pratipattis, which are counted. It has gone through the stages. The present Agam has 900 shlokas and eight sections. They have ten, eight, thirteen, ten, ten, sixteen, thirteen and ten studies respectively.

The first two sections describe the excellent tapasya of eighteen princes of the Vrishnikul, including Gautam. The first ten princes have a dikshaparaya of twelve years each, while the remaining eight princes have a dikshaparaya of sixteen years each. All these princes embrace Shramandharma and perform the intense tapasya of Gunaratnasamvatsar and attain liberation by performing a one-month sanlekhana at the end of their lives.

From the first to the fifth section, there is a description of Shri Krishna Vasudev. Shri Krishna Vasudev is highly revered in all three traditions: Jain, Buddhist and Vedic. In the Vedic tradition, Vasudev, Vishnu, Narayan, Govind, etc. are some of his names. Shri Krishna was the son of Vasudev, hence he was called Vasudev. In the Shantiparva of Mahabharata, Krishna is described as the form of Vishnu. In the Gita, Shri Krishna is the complete avatar of Vishnu. The author of Mahabharata has praised him by considering him Narayan. There, we see his divine and magnificent human form. In Shatapatha Brahmana, his name Narayan is mentioned. In Taittiriyaranyaka, he is called the possessor of all virtues. In the Narayaniy Upadhyayana of Mahabharata, Narayan is given the form of the Supreme Lord. Markandeya told Yudhisthira that Janardan himself is Narayan. In many places in Mahabharata, there are references to his Narayan form. 

Page #28:
---------------------------
The character of Shri Krishna is described in detail in the Kurma Purana, Brahma Vaivarta Purana, Harivamsa Purana and Shrimad Bhagavata.
The Chandogya Upanishad refers to Krishna as the son of Devaki. He studied near the great Angiras Rishi. Shrimad Bhagavata describes Krishna as the Supreme Brahman. He is unique in six qualities: knowledge, peace, strength, wealth, power and brilliance. His life in various forms has been depicted in literature. The Acharyas of the Vedic tradition have portrayed the character of Shri Krishna from their perspective. Jayadeva, Vidyapati, etc., embraced the loving form of Krishna and gave rise to Krishna Bhakti. Poets like Surdas and others of the Ashtachap group analyzed Krishna's childhood and youth in detail. The deities of the Ritikal poets were Shri Krishna, and they created a considerable amount of literature in the form of songs and free verses. Even in the modern era, scholars of the Vedic tradition have written many books like Priy-Pravas, Krishnavatar, etc.
The Ghatajataka in Buddhist literature describes the character of Shri Krishna. Although there are significant differences in the sequence of events and names, the essence of the Krishna story is similar.
In the Jain tradition, Shri Krishna is Vasudeva, a perfect being, noble, virtuous, extremely compassionate, loving to the surrendered, bold, courageous, humble, devoted to his mother, a great warrior, righteous, dutiful, intelligent, ethical and brilliant. The description of his brilliant personality in the Samavayanga is amazing. He is the ruler of the three worlds, the Ardhachakra. His body had one hundred and eight auspicious marks. He was like a bull among men and like Indra, the king of the gods. He was a great warrior. He fought three hundred and sixty battles in his life, but he was never defeated. He had the strength of twenty lakh Ashtapadas. But he never misused his power. Unlike the Vedic tradition, the Jain tradition does not consider Vasudeva Shri Krishna to be a part of God or an avatar. He was the best ruler. From a material perspective, he was the greatest ruler of that era. But because he was Nidankrit, he could not progress beyond the fourth Gunasthan from a spiritual perspective. He was a devout follower of the Tirthankara Arishtanemi. Arishtanemi was older than Shri Krishna in terms of age, but older than him in terms of spirituality. (One was a Dharmaveer, the other a Karmaveer, one was inclined towards renunciation, the other towards action). Therefore, whenever Arishtanemi visited Dwarka, Shri Krishna would go to worship him. His glorious and brilliant form is revealed in the Agamas like Antakrid Dasha, Samavayanga, Jnatadharmakatha, Stananga, Nirayavali, Prashnavyakaran, Uttaradhyayana, etc. There are many incidents related to his life in the commentary literature of the Agamas, in the Niyukti, Churni, Bhashya and Tika texts. The leading thinkers of both the Shwetambar and Digambar traditions have written more than a hundred books based on the incidents of Krishna's life. In terms of language, these compositions are in Prakrit, Apabhramsha, Sanskrit, Old Gujarati, Rajasthani and Hindi. 

Page #29:
---------------------------
This Agam presents the multifaceted personality of Shri Krishna. Despite being the ruler of three realms, he was a devoted son to his parents. To fulfill his mother Devaki's desire, he worshipped the Hariṇai-gameṣī Dev. He had immense affection for his brother and unwavering devotion to Lord Arishtanemi. While he displayed extraordinary valor on the battlefield, crushing his enemies and appearing as strong as a thunderbolt, his heart melted with compassion upon seeing an elderly person, and he even lifted him up to help. Upon hearing of the destruction of Dwarka, he inspired everyone to take Pravrajya (renunciation) under Lord Arishtanemi, assuring them that he would take care of their families. He readily granted permission to his own queens, sons, daughters, and grandsons who wished to embrace Pravrajya. The Āvaśyaka-cūrṇi mentions that he was deeply appreciative of virtues. He admired the shining teeth of a dog, even while it was infested with insects, which is a clear indication of his appreciation for virtues.

This Agam mentions the renunciants who took Pravrajya under Lord Arishtanemi until the fifth chapter. Lord Arishtanemi is the twenty-second Tirthankara. Although modern historians do not yet consider him a historical figure, his historicity is undeniable. History is moving towards accepting this. When Shri Krishna, who lived in the same era, is considered a historical figure, there should be no hesitation in accepting him as well.

Not only in the Jain tradition, but also in the Vedic tradition, Arishtanemi is mentioned in numerous places. The word Arishtanemi appears four times in the Rig Veda. In the verse "33. Swasti Nastārkshyo Arishtanemiḥ 34," the word Arishtanemi refers to Lord Arishtanemi. Additionally, the Rig Veda 34 mentions "Tārkshya Arishtanemi" in other verses. The Yajur Veda 25 and the Sama Veda 36 also refer to Lord Arishtanemi as Tārkshya Arishtanemi. The word Tārkshya is used in the Mahabharata 27, which should be another name for Lord Arishtanemi. The teachings he gave to King Sagara about the path to liberation closely resemble the teachings of Jainism on Moksha. 28 From a historical perspective, it is clear that the Vedic people during Sagara's time did not believe in Moksha. Therefore, these teachings must have originated from a sage belonging to a Shraman culture.

The Yajur Veda mentions Arishtanemi in one place as follows: "I offer an oblation to the omniscient Neminath, who revealed the Adhyatma Yajna, who gave true teachings to all the glorious beings in the world, and whose teachings strengthened the souls of beings." 39

33.
(a) Rig Veda 1.14.89.6. (c) Rig Veda 3.4.53.17.
Rig Veda - 1.14.89.91.9.16.1.12.178
(b) Rig Veda 1.24.180.10. (d) Rig Veda 10.12.17.8.1.
.1.
34.
35. Yajur Veda 25.19.
36. Sama Veda 3.9.
37.
Mahabharata Shanti Parva - 288.4.
38.
Mahabharata Shanti Parva - 288.5.6.
39. Vajasaneyi Madhyandina Shukla Yajur Veda, Chapter 9 Mantra 25, Satavalekar Edition (Vikram 1984).
[26] 

Page #30:
---------------------------
Dr. Radhakrishnan has clearly written that the Yajurveda mentions the three Tirthankaras, Rishabhdev, Ajitnath and Arishtanemi.40
In the Prabhas Khand of the Skanda Purana, there is a description - in his previous birth, Vamana did penance. Due to the effect of that penance, Shiva gave Vamana darshan. He was Shiva, Shyamvarn, Achel and seated in Padmasana. Vamana named him Neminath. This Neminath is going to destroy all sins in this terrible Kaliyuga. By his darshan and touch, the fruit of crores of yagnas is obtained. Arishtanemi is also praised in the Prabhas Purana. In the Anushasan Parva of the Mahabharata3, the word 'Shura Shourin Janeshwar' has come. The knowledgeable ones have interpreted it as 'Shura Shourin Jineshwar', meaning Arishtanemi.
In the third transformation of the Lankavatara, a list of the names of Tathagata Buddha is given. One name in it is 'Arishtanemi'.45 It is possible that Arishtanemi became very popular due to the divine light of non-violence shining brightly, due to which his name also came in the list of Buddha's names. Famous historian Dr. Ray Chaudhary has written in his Ancient History of Vaishnava Tradition that Shri Krishna was the cousin of Arishtanemi. Colonel Tod46 has written about Arishtanemi that I know that in ancient times there were four wise Buddhas, one of them was Adinath, the other was Neminath, Neminath was the first Odin of the inhabitants of Scandinavia and the first "Fo" deity of the Chinese. Famous lexicographer Dr. Nagenranath Basu, archaeologist Dr. Fahrer, Professor Barnett, Mr. Karva, Dr. Haridatt, Dr. Prananath Vidyalankar, etc. many scholars have a clear opinion that Lord Arishtanemi was an influential man. There is no obstacle in considering him a historical man.
In the Chandogya Upanishad, the name of Lord Arishtanemi has come as "Ghor Angiras Rishi", who taught Shri Krishna the knowledge of Atmayagna. Dharmanand Kausambi believes that Angiras was the name of Lord Arishtanemi.47. Angiras Rishi said to Shri Krishna - Shri Krishna! When the end time of a human being approaches, he should remember three things at that time
1. Twam Akshatamasi - You are imperishable. 2. Twam Achyutamasi - You are the one who dwells in one rasa.
3. Twam Pranasanshitimasi - You are the giver of life to beings.48 40. Indian Philosophy, Vol. I. P. 287. 41. Skanda Purana Prabhas Khand. 42. Prabhas Purana 49/50. 43. Mahabharata Anushasan Parva A. 149, Shlo 50, 82 44. Mokshamarg Prakash, Pandit Todarmal. 45. Buddhist Dharma Darshan, Acharya Narendradev, p. 162. 46. Annals of the Bhandarkar Research Institute Journal, Vol. 23, p. 122. 47. Indian Culture and Non-violence-p. 57. 48. Tadhaitad Ghoram Angirasah, Krishnaya Devakiputrayaovatovavachapipasa eva sa babhuva, so'anta velayametattryam pratipadyetakshatamasyachyutamasipranasanshiti. - Chandogya Upanishad Pra. 3, Khand 18.
[27]

Page #31:
---------------------------
This sermon made Shri Krishna thirsty for knowledge. He felt blessed. This statement can be compared to the statement of Lord Arishtanemi in Antakrid Dasha, when Lord Krishna's face turns pale after hearing about the destruction of Dwarka and his own death at the hands of Jaratkumar, the Lord says - Shri Krishna! Don't worry. In the next birth, you will become a Tirthankara named Amma.49 Hearing this, Shri Krishna became content and free from sorrow.

This Agam contains a very interesting and inspiring story of Shri Krishna's younger brother, Gajasukumar. He was so impressed by Lord Arishtanemi's first sermon that he renounced everything and became a Shraman. He accepted the Bhikshu Mahapratima in the Mahakal cremation ground and became absorbed in meditation. Somil Brahman saw that his future son-in-law had become a monk. He had messed with his daughter's life by not marrying her. The storm of anger extinguished the lamp of his wisdom. He put a mound of earth on the Muni's head and placed burning embers on it. The burning of the head, skin, marrow, and flesh caused excruciating pain, yet he did not deviate from his meditation. There was not even a hint of opposition or revenge in his mind. This was a glorious victory of tolerance over anger. An immortal victory of humanity over demoniacal nature; due to which he attained liberation by the four-fold virtues of a single day.

The 41 chapters of the four sections of the Antagad Sutra mention those princes who renounced the vast wealth and comforts of Shri Krishna Vasudeva and practiced intense austerities in the presence of Lord Arishtanemi, performed various types of austerities, and finally attained liberation with the knowledge of the Self.

The ten chapters of the fifth section describe the life of renunciation of Vasudeva Shri Krishna's eight queens, Padmavati, Satyabhama, Rukmini, Jambavati, etc., and two daughters-in-law. The royal queens who slept on beds of flowers adopted the royal path of intense spiritual practice. How different is the life of enjoyment of a queen from the austere life of spiritual practice of Shramanas! The study of these chapters makes it clear that a woman is as delicate as a flower, but she is also as tough as a lioness in spiritual practice.

Thus, the 51 chapters of the five sections depict the life of austerity of 51 great practitioners of Lord Neminath's era. The events of Dwarka city and its destruction, and the story of Gajasukumal, have been the subject of many independent poetic works by later writers. It contains living experiences and inspirations that are still guiding us on the right path, even in the deep darkness of fear, weakness, lust, and indulgence, it radiates the divine rays of fearlessness, self-confidence, and detachment.

The sixth, seventh, and eighth sections contain a vivid depiction of the heart-wrenching spiritual practices of 39 intense ascetics, embodiments of forgiveness, and simple souls during the reign of Lord Mahavira. It describes the life of spiritual practice of Mankai and Kinkam, who practiced the Gunaratnasamvatsar tapa for sixteen years and attained liberation by Santhara on the Vipulgari mountain. The third chapter of the sixth section describes Arjun Malakar of Rajgriha. Bandhumati was his wife.

49. Antakrid Dasha Sutra, Section 5, Chapter 1.
[28] 

Page #32:
---------------------------
He worshipped the Mudgarapaani Yaksha. Arjun Mali was filled with extreme rage when the six members of the Lalita Gosthi of Rajgriha city corrupted the character of Bandhumati, and with the help of the Mudgarapaani Yaksha, he killed them. He began to perform a naked dance of violence! He killed seven people every day. Hearing of the arrival of Lord Mahavira, Sudarshan Shreshthi goes to see him. He frees Arjun from the Yaksha-paash and brings him to the feet of the Lord.
Outside Rajgriha, there was terror because of the Yaksha-possessed Arjun Mali. Who dared to venture out of the city! But when Lord Mahavira arrived, Sudarshan did not stop even when his parents forbade him. He set out to see the Lord. On the way, he encountered Arjun. The victory of non-violence over violence.
This narrative also states that there may be many named devotees, but true devotees are very rare. When clouds gather in the sky and come in droves, someone might tell a peacock, "Don't coo, don't make a sound!" The peacock will say, "This is never possible." A true devotee, when the time comes, will even stake his life, but will not back down. He knows that gold cannot be refined without being bathed in fire. A diamond cannot shine without being polished! Similarly, devotion cannot shine without suffering.
Arjun Mali becomes a Shraman and engages in intense penance. The one whose name once made even the bravest tremble, whose heart beat with fear, who had killed 1141 humans in five months and thirteen days, when he accepts the Nirgranth penance, his life is completely transformed. People scorn him by speaking harshly to him. They torture him with sticks, stones, bricks, and slaps, yet he does not feel anger! He thinks to himself:
—
Kathai. Sanjaya 10
The Shraman is restrained and tamed, he suppresses his senses. If someone beats and hits him, he still thinks that this soul will never be destroyed, it is eternal, the body is fleeting. If it is destroyed, what is there for me to lose! Thinking in this way with equanimity, he endures even terrible calamities with calmness. Arjun attains liberation in just six months through his forgiving and intense penance.
Samana Sanjaya Danta Hanajj Koi Natthi Jeevasa Namutti Evam Pehejj
In the sixth chapter, there is also a description of the young monk who took vows at the tender age of six. From a historical perspective, he is the only monk who took vows at the youngest age during Mahavira's reign. Any other young monk
50. Uttaradhyayanasutra 2.27
51. 'Kumarasamane' tti Shadvarshjatasy Tasy Pravrajitatvat, Aha Cha 'Chhavariso Pavvaiyo Niggantham Hoiun Pavayanam' ti, Etadeva Cha Ascharyamiha Anyatha Varshashtkadarann Pravrajya Syad iti.
- Bhagavati Satikha Bha. 1. Sh. 5 U. 4, Su. 188, Patra 219-2
[29]

Page #33:
---------------------------
They were at least eight years old. Lord Mahavira did not give priority to age from the perspective of spiritual practice. A seeker who is qualified, even if he is young in terms of age, can become a monk. Lord Mahavira had initiated Ati Muktak Kumar only after observing his inner qualifications. There have been hundreds of such brilliant seekers in Jain history who, in their childhood, took the initiation of Ahuti Diksha and made a vast impact on Jainism. The fourteen-time-born Acharya Shayambhav initiated his son Manak52, and Arya Singhgiri initiated Vajraswami in their childhood. Acharya Hemchandra Upadhyay Yashovijayji etc. were also child initiates. Acharya Samrat Anand Rishiji M., Yuvacharya Shri Madhukar Muni Ji etc. also became monks at the tender age of nine or ten. There is no prohibition of such initiation anywhere in the Agam literature or subsequent literature. There is a prohibition of unqualified initiation. Nishita Bhashya53 prohibits giving initiation to a child at a very young age and the reasons given for it are more related to unqualified initiation. There is a similar prohibition in the Buddhist text Mahavagga54. Nishita Bhashya55 further allows initiation to a qualified child, even if he is young, because children are not only foolish but also intelligent, they are also endowed with strong talent, who have changed the pages of history. The story of Ati Muktak Muni is a vivid example of this fact. Ati Muktak Kumar said to his parents - "Respected ones! I know my immense power. I can walk smiling on embers and I can also walk on spikes. I know that whoever is born will surely die, but I do not know when and how I will die." In the face of his arguments, his parents also became silent.
_ Bhagavati56 Sutra contains an incident from Ati Muktak Muni's monastic life - Ati Muktak Muni goes out with the elders for the purpose of defecation. It had rained some time ago, so the water was flowing fast. Seeing the flowing water, his childhood memories surfaced. He built a mud dam to stop the flow of water. He left his vessel in it. He was overjoyed and said - 'My boat is anchored, my boat is anchored'. The wind was blowing merrily. Ati Muktak's boat was swaying. Nature was smiling. But how could the elders tolerate this act contrary to the monastic code? The anger within was reflected on their faces. Ati Muktak immediately recovered. He began to repent within himself for his mistake. Repentance made him holy.
The Lord said to the elders - Ati Muktak Muni will be liberated in this very life. The Lord said in a very sweet voice - Do not rebuke, criticize or condemn him. He is a pure soul. He is young in age but his soul is higher than the Himalayas.
In the seventh and eighth chapters, there is a description of Emperor Shrenik's twenty queens, Nanda, Nandavati, Nandottra, Nandshrenika etc., who, influenced by the holy sermons of Lord Mahavira, accepted the monastic dharma, studied the eleven angas and performed such excellent austerities that even reading them makes one's hair stand on end. With comforts
52. Parishishta Parva-Sarg 5, Acharya Hemchandra 53. Nishita Bhashya 11, -3531. 32 54. Mahavagga-1. 41-92, p. 80-81, compare. 55. Nishita Bhashya 11-3537. 39 56. Bhagavati Shatak 5. Udd. 4
[30]

Page #34:
---------------------------
The fact that delicate princesses nurtured in palaces can achieve such intense austerity and make their souls shine like pure gold is evident from the study of these two sections. Scattered throughout the Agamas and their commentaries are glimpses into the lives of these great queens. Due to the fear of excessive length, we are not including all those instances here. These queens performed various types of rigorous austerities, which are mentioned in these sections. Finally, they all complete their lifespan, including Sanlekhana, and attain Nirvana.

Thus, the Antakrid Dasang Sutra vividly describes the practices of various types of sadhakas and sadhikas. On one hand, there are young ascetics like Gaja Sukumar, while on the other hand, there are brilliant Shraman stars like Ati Mukta Kumar at a young age. On the third hand, the life stories of the queens of Vasudeva Shri Krishna and Emperor Shrenik are radiating bright rays of austerity. This is why, during the holy and auspicious moments of Paryushana, the speakers of the Sthanakwasi tradition recite this Agama. It is the eighth Anga in the Angas, divided into eight sections, and there are eight days of the Paryushana festival. It contains the sacred character of 90 sadhakas who ultimately destroy the eight karmas. It is capable of bestowing the eight-fold perfection.

It is unknown when the tradition of reciting this Agama during the golden occasion of Paryushana began. It is possible that it started with Veer Laungashah or after him! Whoever dared to start this tradition must have been a very brilliant person!

Two commentaries on the Antakrid Dasang Sutra are available in Sanskrit. One by Acharya Abhaydev and the other by Acharya Ghasilalji Maharaj. Three or four Gujarati translations have been published, and five Hindi translations have been released. In this way, twelve editions of this Agama have come to light. 57 English translations have also been printed.

This present edition has some distinct features compared to previous editions. It contains the pure original text, meaning, and occasional discussions that express the profound emotions found in the story. The appendix also includes very useful material such as notes to reveal the secrets of the Agama.

The credit for editing this Agama goes to Bahin Sadhvi Divyaprabhaji, who is a disciple of the supremely learned Sadhvi Ratna Ujjvalkumariji. The learned Mahasati Shri Ujjvalkumariji was a highly talented Sadhvi. The entire Jain community is well acquainted with her name. The strong talent of Mahasatiji can be easily seen in her disciples. The divine rays of Mahasati Shri Divyaprabhaji's talent are scattered in this present Agama. Her effort is commendable. Hopefully, she will continue to advance in the field of writing and dedicate the best works to the treasury of Saraswati!

Jain Agamas are a priceless treasure of Indian literature, upon which the grand palace of Jain governance is based. Efforts have been made from various places regarding its publication and editing. But there was a long-standing need for editions that could clarify the core essence of the Agama. They should be able to unlock the Guru Granth of the Agama in the light of the Agama's commentary literature. With this vision, Shraman Sangh's young Acharya Shri Madhukar Muni Ji has accomplished this great task.
57. See - Jain Agama Literature: Contemplation and Interpretation - Le. Devendramuni p. 713
[31]

Page #35:
---------------------------
A firm resolve was made, which was praised by all with open hearts. My most revered Sadguru, Upadhyay Shri Pushkarmuniji M., who was the closest friend and classmate of Yuvacharyashri, also had the same auspicious thought that the work of the Agamas is extremely necessary in today's age. By studying them, a person can save himself from the dazzling glare of materialism. I am extremely delighted that the work of editing and publishing the Agamas is progressing at a very rapid pace. Under the guidance of Yuvacharyashri, the new editions of the Agamas are reaching the hands of enlightened readers and they are being embraced by the readers with great affection.

The hard work of the wise, expert in the art of editing, Shri Shobhachandji Bharill, is also noteworthy in making this edition the best. It is hoped that this edition will be very useful for Agama practitioners, self-study lovers. May the fragrance of this fragrant flower spread freely in all directions, this is my auspicious feeling.

Devendra Muni Shastri
Jain Sthanak Neemuch City (Madhya Pradesh) Date: 28 March 1981
[32] 

Page #36:
---------------------------
## Subject

**First Study: Utshepa**
Sangrahni Gatha
Gautama
Bhikshu Pratimā
Gunaratnatap
**Studies 2-10: Siddhi of Samudra and other Kumaras**
Utshepa
Sangrahni Gatha: Description of Akshobha and others
Utshepa
Aṇiyasādi Pada: Seventy-two Kalās
Pritidan
**Subject Index**
**First Section**
Studies 2-6
**Second Section**
**Third Section**
**Chaudahpurva**
**Seventh Study: Sāran**
**Eighth Study: Gajasukumar**
Utshepa
**Six Anāgāras' Sankalpa**
**Six Anāgāras' Entry into Devaki's House**
**Devaki's Doubt about their Return and its Resolution**
**Identification of the Sons**
**Devaki's Desire for Sons**
**Krishna's Solution to her Worry**
**Assurance to Devaki Devi**
[33]

**Page Number**
1
6
7
13
17
18
19
19
20
20
21
24
27
28
29
30
30
30
31
33
34
41
41
45 

Page #37:
---------------------------
Gajsukumara's birth, Somila Brahmana's entry into Somilakanaya's inner palace. Arishtanemi's worship, Dharmadeshana and detachment. Gajsukumala's initiation, Gajmuni's Mahapratima-vahan, Somila's upsarga. Gajsukumala Muni's Siddhi, Vasudeva Krishna's assistance to the elderly. Information about Gajsukumala's Siddhi, Somila Brahmana's death, Somila-shava's misfortune, Nikshepa.

Navama Adhyayana: Sumukh 10-13 Adhyayana: Durmukha etc.
Chaturtha Varga
1-10 Adhyayana: Utksepa
Jali etc. Nikshepa
Panchama Varga Prathama Adhyayana: Padmavati
B. Arishtanemi's appearance: Dharmadeshana, Dwarkavinasha's cause, Shrikrishna's anxiety: its pacification, Shrikrishna's becoming a Tirthankara's prophecy, Shrikrishna's Dharmaghoshana.
Padmavati's initiation and Siddhi, 2-8 Adhyayana: Gauri etc. 9-10 Adhyayana: Mulasri-Muladatta
[34] 

Page #38:
---------------------------
105
107 108
110
WWW
Sixth Section 1-2 Study: Makai and Kinkam Third Study: Mudgarapani
Arjun Malakar Gosthik men's misconduct Arjun's revenge Rajgriha Nagar mein aatank Shravak Sudarshan Shreshthi B. Mahavira's arrival Sudarshan's visit for veneration Arjun's upsarga to Sudarshan Upsarga removal Sudarshan and Arjun's Bhagavatparyupasana Arjun's pravrajya.
Parishha-sahana and Siddhi 4-14 Study: Kashyap etc. Gathapati 15 Study: Atimukta -
Gautamswami's bhikchacharya and Atimukta Gautam and Atimukta's meeting Atimukta's visit for veneration with Gautam Atimukta's pravrajya: Siddhi
113 115 116
117
119
.120 125
127
129 130
131
16 Study: Alaksh
Seventh Section
1-13 Study: Nanda etc.
137
Eighth Section
First Study: Kali
139
Utksep Kali Arya's Ratnavali tap Kali Arya's final sadhana-siddhi
140
144
[35] 

Page #39:
---------------------------
## Second Study: Sukali - Sukali's Kankaavali Tapa
## Third Study: Mahakali - Mahakali's Laghusinghanishkridit Tapa
## Fourth Study: Krishna
Krishna Devi's Mahasinghanishkridit Tapa
## Fifth Study: Sukrishna
Sukrishna's Bhikshu-Pratima-Aradhana
## Sixth Study: Mahakrisha
Mahakrisha's Laghusarvtobhdra Tapa
## Seventh Study: Veerakrisha
Veerakrisha's Mahatsarvtobhdra Tapa
## Eighth Study: Ramakrisha
Ramakrisha's Bhadrottarpratima Tapa
## Ninth Study: Pitrusenakrisha
Pitrusenakrisha's Muktaavali Tapa
## Tenth Study: Mahasenakrisha
Mahasenakrisha's Ayambil-Vardhaman Tapa

## Conclusion
## Appendix-1: Special Names Mentioned in the Agamas
## Appendix-2: Personalities
## Appendix-3: Geographical Locations 

Page #40:
---------------------------
Panchamagana-Srisuhummasamipaniyam Atthamam Angam
Antagaddasaao
Panchamaganadhara-Srimatsudharmaswamipraneetam-Ashtamam Angam
Antakriddasha 

Page #41:
---------------------------
The five great vows (Mahavratas) are:
1. **Ahimsa** (non-violence)
2. **Satya** (truthfulness)
3. **Asteya** (non-stealing)
4. **Brahmacharya** (continence)
5. **Aparigraha** (non-attachment) 

Page #42:
---------------------------
## First Class
## First Study
## Introduction
## 1 -

- In that time, in that era, there was a city called Champa. Outside of it was a temple of the Yaksha, Punnabhadda. In that time, in that era, Aryasudharmma Swami arrived in the city of Champa. The people of the city [left the city to hear the Dharma discourse. As long as Aryasudharmma Swami gave the Dharma discourse (the Dharma was spoken). The people returned to the same direction] from which they had come. In that time, in that era, Aryajambhu, the attendant of Aryasudharmma Swami [was an Anugara (disciple). His gotra was Kashyap. His body was seven hands tall. His form was samchatursra - samchauras. His strength was like a vajra - rishabha naracha. He was golden in color, like a line of gold drawn on a touchstone and like the saffron of a lotus. He was a fierce ascetic, a radiant ascetic, a heated ascetic, a great ascetic, generous, terrible to the enemies of karma, possessing terrible qualities, a terrible ascetic, a terrible practitioner of brahmacharya, and therefore a renunciant of bodily modifications. He had condensed within his body the vast radiance that extended far and wide. He - Jambhu Swami, not too far and not too close to Aryasudharmma Swami, with his knees raised and his head lowered, that is, with both knees raised and his head bent downwards, entered the chamber of meditation, dwelling in restraint and austerity, cultivating his soul.
-
Thus.
Then, Aryajambhu, the Anugara, had faith (curiosity) in the truth, doubt, curiosity, especially faith, especially doubt, and especially curiosity. Faith 

Page #43:
---------------------------
##  [2]

The Antakrddasha was born, doubt arose, curiosity arose, especially faith, doubt, and curiosity arose. Then they rose and stood up and went to where the venerable Aryasudharma was. Arriving there, they circumambulated the venerable Aryasudharma three times, starting from the south. After circumambulating, they praised him with words and bowed with their bodies. After praising and bowing, they stood at a suitable place, neither too far nor too close to the venerable Aryasudharma, with their hands joined in front of them, humbly, and with a desire to listen, they spoke in this way:

**Discussion:**

In Jain literature, the Agamas hold a very important place, because the Agamas are the teachings of the Tirthankaras. The glorious, omniscient, and all-seeing Tirthankara Bhagwan establishes the path and preaches Dharma for the compassion and protection of all beings. Therefore, it is said in the **Prashnavyakarana Sutra**: "**Savva-jag-jiv-rakkhanadayatthayae Bhagavaya pavayanam sukahyam.**" Their meaning-based sermons are compiled in the form of the **Ganadhara Sutra**, which is divided into twelve parts, known as **Dwadashangi** in the Agamic language.

Bhagwan's teachings are divided into four **Anuyogas**: (1) **Dravyanuyoga**, (2) **Ganitanuyoga**, (3) **Charanakarananuyoga**, and (4) **Dharmakathanuyoga**. The **Sthananga** and other Agamas are contained within the **Dravyanuyoga**. The **Bhagavati Sutra** and other Agamas have more **Ganitanuyoga**. The **Charanakarananuyoga**, i.e., the discussion of the conduct and Dharma of the Sadhus and Shravakas, is found in the **Acharanga** and other Sutras. The special form of **Dharmakatha** is found in the **Jnatadharmakatha**, **Antakrddasha**, and other Agamas.

According to the Jain Agamas, the **Dwadashangi** is taught by the Tirthankaras. These twelve parts are: (1) **Acharanga**, (2) **Sutrakritanga**, (3) **Sthananga**, (4) **Samavayanga**, (5) **Bhagavati Sutra**, (6) **Jnatadharmakatha**, (7) **Upasakadashanga**, (8) **Antakrddasha**, (9) **Anuttaroppapatik**, (10) **Prashnavyakarana**, (11) **Vipaksutra**, and (12) **Dristivad**. Of these twelve parts, all except the twelfth, **Dristivad**, are available in the present time, and the **Antakrddasha Sutra** is the eighth part.

The subject matter of this Agama is presented in the form of a preface in the first Sutra, which is revealed in the well-known conversational style of the Agamas. This is also called **Upoddhat** or **Utksep**. This method of **Utksep** will continue for about four Sutras, after which the statement of the subject matter will begin.

In this first Sutra, the reader's attention is drawn to the time and place of the creation of the Agama by the words "**Tenam kalena tenam samaena**" etc. It mainly presents five topics: (1) **The field of description**, (2) **The situation at that time**, (3) **The presenter of the Agama**, (4) **The qualifications of the presenter**, and (5) **The questioner**.

In this Sutra, the time of the first creation of the Agama is first indicated, and then the place is indicated. It states that "in that time and at that time" there was a city called **Champa**, and outside it was a **Chaitya** called **Purnbhadra**, where the venerable Aryasudharma had taught this Agama to his beloved disciple, the venerable Aryajambhu. Here, the question may arise: "Time and time" are both indicative of the same meaning, then what is the intention of using two words? Generally, time and time are synonymous. But in reality, if we look closely, these two words have different meanings. The word **kal** refers to the **Utsarpini** and **Avasarpini** forms... 

Page #44:
---------------------------
[First Section] is the indicator of the time cycle and the word "time" is the indicator of the time of the person who happened in that time cycle. Here, the meaning of that "time" is that this Agam was recited in the fourth Ara of this Avasarpini. But it is not clear at what time it was recited in the fourth Ara? Because the fourth Ara is 42 thousand years less than one Koti-Koti Sagaropama. Therefore, this has been clarified by giving the words "Teṇam Samaeṇam". The meaning of that time is that when Ary Sudharma Swami was wandering and arrived in the city of Champa, at that time he recited the present Agam to Jambu Swami. This implies that the present Agam was recited after the Nirvana of Bhagwan Mahavira. In the Vritti, Abhaydevsuriji has interpreted "Kal" as the fourth division of Avasarpini, i.e., the fourth Ara, and "Samaeṇam" as the specific time.

After this, it has been told that at that time and at that time, Ary Sudharma Swami arrived in the city of Champa and stayed in the Purnabhadra Chaitya outside the city. His physical form, his lineage and his qualities have not been described in the present Agam, because it has been described in detail in the Nayadhammakhao. Therefore, only a hint has been given here. This makes it clear that the proponent of the present Agam was Ary Sudharma Swami, the fifth Ganadhar and the first Pattadhar of Bhagwan Mahavira, and his disciple Ary Jambu Swami was the questioner.

The present description raises a question: who are the creators of the Utshep-Upadhyay who present the wandering of Ary Sudharma Swami? The solution to this is that just as Sudharma Swami has mentioned the Ganadharas like Gautamadi, in the same way, the Acharyas like Prabhavadi who came after Ary Jambu Swami have described Ary Sudharma Swami in this Utshep. Therefore, it appears that the creators of this Upadhyay are Acharya Prabhavadi.

Thus, the Upalakshan-meaning of the word "Teṇam Samaeṇam" is that after the fourth Ara, Ary Sudharma Swami arrived in the city of Champa and stayed in the Chaitya named Purnabhadra outside the city of Champa. Hearing the auspicious news of his arrival, the citizens came to see him and returned after listening to the Dharma Upadesh. At that time, his disciple Ary Jambu Swami, with humility and devotion, stood at his feet and spoke in humble words. What he said will be told later.

In the present Sutra, the Sutrakar has only mentioned the name of the field of description and the describer, etc. To know the complete form of the place of description and the describer, a hint has been given to look at other Agams. Therefore, the description of the city of Champa and the Purnabhadra Chaitya located in it, and the description from the life history of Ary Sudharma Swami who arrived there to the arrival of the Parishad, should be known from the Aupapatik, etc. Agams. In it, the city of Champa and the Purnabhadra Chaitya have been described in detail. In such places, the word "Vaṇṇao" is the indicator of these described subjects.

"Vaṇṇao" is the indicator of the describer. The section that describes is used with the word "Vaṇṇak". Wherever the word "Vaṇṇak" is mentioned before any word, it will indicate the text that describes the object indicated by that word.

Here, the question may arise that even though the Ang Sutras have a prominent place in the Agams, why are the readers made dependent on the Anga-Bahya Agams for the texts described in the Ang Sutras? Agam 

Page #45:
---------------------------
4]
[ Antakrid Dasha
According to the composition, the limbs were created first and then the appendages. In such a situation, how can the 'Vannao' text be appropriate in these Angasutras? Antakrid Dasha is an Angasutra and Aupapatik Sutra is an Upanga, then how can the reference of Aupapatik Sutra be desired in Antagad?
The Angasutras have the highest place in the Agamas. It is an undeniable truth that these Angasutras are also the basis for the composition of the Upangas. Nevertheless, the main reason for the Angasutras to instruct the Upangasutras is that this order was not taken care of while writing down the Agamas. Four roots, four holes, Aupapatik Sutra, Acharang Sutra, Stanang Sutra, no reference is given in any of these Sutras. It appears that these were written down first. Subsequently, while writing down, it was not considered appropriate to describe the subject in detail in one Sutra again and again.
2–““If, O Venerable! by the Samana, the Aigarena, as far as [the Tithayarena, the Self-Enlightened, the Best of Men, the Lion of Men, the Lotus of Men, the Gandahastina of Men, the Best of the World, the Lord of the World, the Benefactor of the World, the Lamp of the World, the Special Exertion of the World, the Giver of Fearlessness, the Giver of Refuge, the Giver of Eyes of Faith, the Giver of the Path of Dharma, the Giver of Enlightenment, the Giver of Dharma, the Preacher of Dharma, the Leader of Dharma, the Charioteer of Dharma, the Wheel-Turning King of Dharma, the Holder of Unhindered Perfect Knowledge and Vision, the Destroyer of the Falsehood of Karmic Bonds, the Conqueror of Passion, etc., and the Victor of Other Beings by Preaching, the One who has Crossed the Ocean of Samsara Himself and the One who Saves Others, the One who has Attained Enlightenment Himself and the One who Gives Enlightenment to Others, the One who is Free from Karmic Bonds Himself and the One who Liberates Others by Preaching, the Omniscient, the All-Seeing, the Shiva - Free from Troubles, the Achalachalan - Free from Actions, etc., the Aruz - Free from Physical and Mental Pain, the Infinite, the Imperishable, the Uninterrupted, and the Non-Recurring - Free from Recurrence, the Eternal Place called Siddhigathi] the Samana Bhagavan has attained, this is the meaning of the seventh Anga Upasakadasang, which I have just heard from your lotus mouth. O Venerable! Now please tell me what meaning the Samana Bhagavan Mahavira has given to the eighth Anga Antakrid Dasang?"
1. Nayadhammakhao
-
- Shruta. 1, A. 1 - Page 5, the original text is "Thanamuvagaean" instead of "Thanam Sampattenam". 

Page #46:
---------------------------
[First Chapter]
[5  Arya Sudharma Swami said - "Jambu! The Shraman Bhagwan has expounded the eight sections of the Ashtama Antakrid Dashaang."
Discussion - It is clear from the observation of the Agam-Paripati that all the Agams are in the form of questions and answers of Arya Jambu Swami and Arya Sudharma Swami. Arya Jambu Swami asks questions and Arya Sudharma Swami answers them. These questions and answers appear before us today in the form of Agams. This clarity is reflected in the present Sutra. The Antakrid Dashaang Sutra begins with such questions and answers. In this Sutra, Arya Jambu Swami has presented the curiosity of hearing the Ashtama Antakrid Dashaang Agam through questions and answers.
Actually, there are three types of Agams - (1) Atmagam, (2) Anantaragam and (3) Paramparagam:
The knowledge of Agams without the teachings of the Gurus is called Atmagam. For the Tirthankar Paramatma, Arthagam is Atmagam and for the Ganadharas, Sutraagam is Atmagam. (The original Agam is called Sutraagam, the Agam in the form of the meaning of the Sutra is called Arthagam and the Agam in the form of both Sutra and meaning is called Tadubhayagam).
The knowledge of Agam obtained from a person who is himself an Atmagamdhari is called Anantaragam. For Ganadhar Bhagwan, Arthagam is Anantaragam and for Jambu Swami and other Ganadhar-Shishyas, Sutraagam is Anantaragam.
The knowledge of Agam which is not obtained from the Atmagamdhari Mahapurush but is obtained from the tradition of his disciples, disciples etc., is called Paramparagam. For example, Arthagam is Paramparagam for Jambu Swami and other Ganadhar Shishyas and both Sutra and meaning of Agam are Paramparagam for all the Sadhakas after them.
Therefore, it is clear that the present Antakrid Dashaang Sutra is Atmagam for the Tirthankar Paramatma, Anantaragam for the Ganadharas and Paramparagam for the Ganadhar-Shishyas from the point of view of meaning. Similarly, this Agam is Atmagam for the Ganadharas, Anantaragam for the Ganadhar-Shishyas and Paramparagam for the Ganadhar-Prishishyas from the point of view of the Sutra.
The Tirthankar Paramatma expounds the Agams in the form of meaning, the Ganadharas weave them into the form of Sutras. Actually, Ganadhar Bhagwan are the preachers of the substance obtained from the Tirthankar Paramatma, they are not the viewers or creators of it themselves.
The present Sutra states that Arya Sudharma said to Jambu Anugar - "O Jambu! Bhagwan Mahavira has expounded the eight sections of the Antagad Sutra."
The word "Vagga" used in this Sutra means section. Section means a division of the scripture, a chapter or a group of studies.
The request presented by Arya Jambu Swami after knowing the present views of Arya Sudharma Swami is now shown in the third Sutra.
1. Anuyogadwar Praman Vishay-Sutra-147

Page #47:
---------------------------
"Jaina, Venerable! The Samana, having attained liberation, has expounded eight sections of the eighth Anga, Antakṛddasa. Venerable! How many studies has the Samana, having attained liberation, expounded in the first section of the Antakṛddasa?"

"Thus, Jambū! The Samana, having attained liberation, has expounded ten studies in the first section of the eighth Anga, Antakṛddasa. They are, as follows:

(1) Gautama, (2) Samudra, (3) Sāgara, (4) Gambhīra, (5) Sthimita, (6) Acala, (7) Kampilya, (8) Akṣobha, (9) Prasenajit, and (10) Viṣṇukumāra.

"Jaina, Venerable! The Samana, having attained liberation, has expounded ten studies in the first section of the eighth Anga, Antakṛddasa. Venerable! What is the meaning of the first study in the first section of the Antakṛddasa, as expounded by the Samana, having attained liberation?" 

Page #48:
---------------------------
[7
First Class] Gautama
5- "Thus, Jambū! At that time, at that time, there was a city named Dwārakā. It was twelve yojanas long, nine yojanas wide, built by the skill of the wealth-god Kubera, with golden ramparts (forts), adorned with canopies studded with five-colored gems, resembling the city of Kubera, Alkapuri, a place of joy and play, truly like the heavenly realm, worth seeing, pleasing to the mind, beautiful, and exemplary.
Outside that Dwārakā city, in the northeast direction, there was a mountain named Revat. On that Revat mountain, there was a garden named Nandana. The description of that garden should be understood as similar to the description of the forest in the Aupapātika Sutra. There was a temple of the Yaksha named Surapriya, it was very ancient, and surrounded on all sides by a forest tract full of trees. In the middle of that forest tract was a beautiful Ashoka tree."
Discussion-"Dwārakā"– The Sanskrit form of this word is Dwāravati. This is the name of the city of Krishna Maharaj. In the Vedic tradition, this is called Dwārakā. Thus, both Dwāravati and Dwārakā are words that refer to the same city.
According to this sutra, the city of Dwārakā was "Duwalasajoyanaayāma (Dwādashayोजनाayāma) i.e. twelve yojanas long. In the present context, the measure of yojana is to be done with "ātmāngula". In the time of the people who are there, their finger is called ātmāngula. 96 angulas make one dhanuṣ, and two thousand dhanuṣ make one kos, and four kos make one yojana. Thus, the length of the city of Dwārakā was 48 kos. The city of Dwārakā was built in a vast area of 48 kos.
'Dhanavai-mai-nimmāyā' i.e. - the city whose construction was done by the intelligence of Kubera, is called Dhanapatiमतिनिर्माता. The question arises, do any gods like Kubera come to build cities in the mortal realm?
The solution to this lies in a mystery-"When the Yadavas were terrified by the terror of Jarasandha, the enemy of Vasudeva, and left Shauryapur and reached Saurashtra near the sea, then seeing a suitable and safe place for the city, Krishna Maharaj performed the eighth penance there, worshiped the wealth-god Vaishramana. Pleased by the worship, the god Vaishramana appeared. Then Krishna Maharaj requested him to build a city. Thereafter, the wealth-god built a city there quickly according to the divine plan of the divine beings. The gates of the city were very large, hence it was named Dwāravati. Later, this Dwāravati came to be called Dwārakā. 

Page #49:
---------------------------
8]
The Sutrakar has described this Dwarka city as "Alkapurisankasa", meaning similar to Alkapuri. Alkapuri is the name of the city of Vaishramana Deva. This Alkapuri is of unparalleled beauty. Dwarka city was built by Kubera himself. He brought all the features of his city to Dwarka, he did not leave any deficiency in it. Therefore, it is appropriate to compare Dwarka to Kubera's city or to say that it is equal to Kubera's city.
The meanings of the four words Pasadiya etc. are as follows: The city that creates joy and happiness in the heart is 'Pasadiya'. The city which does not make the eyes feel tired or weary on seeing it, but continues to have a desire to see it, is called 'Darsaniya'. The city whose walls are adorned with beautiful paintings of swans, chakravakas, sarasas, elephants, buffaloes, deer etc. and crocodiles etc. aquatic creatures (while moving) in the water, or the city which, even after seeing it once, makes the viewer want to see it again, is called 'Abhirupa'. The city which, whenever you see it, shows something new to the viewer, is called 'Pratirupa'.
6-Tath na baravaiye nayarie kanhe naam vasudeve raya parivasai. Mahayao rayavanno.
Se na tath samuddavijaypamokkhanam dasanham dasaranam baldevpamokkhanam panchanham mahaviranam, panjunnapamokkhanam adhutthanam kumarakodiinam, sambpamokkhanam satthie dudantasahassianam, mahasenapamokkhanam chappanaye balavaggasahasianam, virasenapamokkhanam egavisae virasahasianam, uggasenapamokkhanam solasanham rayasahassianam, ruppinipaamokkhanam solasanham devisahassianam anangsenapamokkhanam aneganam ganiyasahasianam, anne sim cha bahunam, isar jav [talavar-madambiy-kodumbiy-ibbh-setthi-senavai] satthavahaanam baravaiye nayarie addhabarahass ya samathass ahevaccham jav [porevaccham bhattittan samittan mahayartan anaaisarasenavanccham karemane palemane, mahayaa ahay-natta-giya-vaiya-tanti-tal-tal-tudiya-ghan-muyanga-paduppavaiyaravena viulai bhogabhogaim bhujmane] viharai.
In that Dwarka city, King Vasudeva, named Krishna, ruled, he was great. (His special description should be known from the Uvvai Sutra.) He (Vasudeva Shri Krishna) was the head of the ten Dasha, ten Pujyajan, the five Mahavirs headed by Baldev, the three and a half crore princes headed by Pradyumna, the sixty thousand Durdant Kumaras headed by Shamb, the fifty-six thousand brave soldiers headed by Mahasen, the twenty-one thousand brave warriors headed by Virsen, the sixteen thousand kings headed by Ugrasen, the sixteen thousand goddesses-queens headed by Rukmini, the thousands of courtesans headed by Anangsen, and many other wealthy, as far as [sword, Madambik, Kautumbik, Ibby, Shreshthi, Senapati], Sarthavaha - on all these and on Dwarka and half of India, as far as [Purovartitvam (forwarding), Bhartritvam (nourishment), Swamitvam, Mahattarattvam (greatness) and Agyakarak Senapatitvam doing - protecting, the great sound arising from the playing of the story-dance, song-drama, music, veena, kartal, tury, mridanga by skilled men, enjoying abundant pleasures] wandered. 1. Pathantar-'Samantass'- Angasuttani-Bhag 3 p. 543.
'Sammatass'-Samyaggyan Pracharak Mandal-Jaipur edition p. 12

Page #50:
---------------------------
[9
First Chapter]
This sutra describes the grandeur of the kingdom of Dwarkadheesh Krishna Maharaj. This description makes it clear that all the things necessary for a king were available in Maharaj Krishna's capital and his kingdom was prosperous in all aspects - economic, social, and military.
While explaining the words 'Dasanham Dasaraanam', the commentator Abhaydevsuri says - 'Samudravijayokshobhyastimitah sagarastatha. Himavanchalaschchaiva, dharana puranastatha ||1|| Abhichandrashcha navamo, vasudevascha veeryavan. Vasudevanuje kanye, kunti madri cha vishrute ||2|| Dasha cha te'shchi -pujyaah iti dasaarhaah.'
Meaning - Krishna Maharaj's father Vasudev had ten brothers. (1) Samudravijay, (2) Akshobhya, (3) Stimit, (4) Sagar, (5) Himavan, (6) Achal, (7) Dharan, (8) Puran, (9) Abhichandra, (10) Vasudev. All ten were very strong. Samudravijay was the eldest and Vasudev was the youngest. Kunti and Madri were their two sisters.
'Pajunnapaamokkhanam adhutthanam kumarakodinam' - meaning there were three and a half crore Kumaras and among them, Pradyumna was the chief.
Here a question may arise - were all these Kumaras present in Dwarka city? Or were some princes in Dwarka and some outside Dwarka? The solution is that the number of Kumaras mentioned by the sutrakar is not only of the princes residing in Dwarka. Rather, it is of all the princes. They resided in the entire kingdom of Maharaj Krishna. At that time, the kingdom of Krishna Maharaj extended up to the Vaithadya mountain, hence the said number of Kumaras resided in all three parts of Bharatavarsha.
The sutrakar further gives the words 'Uggasenpaamokkhanam solasanham rayasahassiinam'. This means - there were sixteen thousand kings, and Maharaj Ugrasen was their chief. Their kingdoms were also in all three parts and they resided in all three parts.
The sutrakar has given the number of Kumaras, kings, and other people with the intention that all these people lived in the kingdom of Krishna Maharaj and Krishna Maharaj ruled over them. Just as nowadays the population is ascertained through census and information about the caste, religion, and language of the residents of the country is obtained, similarly, at that time, the sutrakar has clearly mentioned how many Kumaras were there in the kingdom of Vasudev Krishna? How many kings were there? How big was the army? How many queens were there? How many courtesans were there? etc. This should not be understood to mean that all the people introduced by the sutrakar lived in Dwarka. 'Duddantasahassiinam' - meaning those who could not be subdued by enemies, who could not be defeated. There were 60,000 such ferocious people in the kingdom of Maharaj Krishna. 

Page #51:
---------------------------
[10]
'Balavaggasahaasini' - meaning 'strong army'. 'Bal' means army and 'vagg' means group. Combining both, the meaning is 'army group'. The meaning is that Vasudeva Krishna had 56,000 army groups. Mahaasen was the head of that army group.
Vasudeva Krishna's kingdom was divided into three parts. How can there be only 56,000 soldiers in such a large territory? Millions of soldiers are needed to protect all three parts. Then what is the reason for the sutrakar mentioning 56,000 soldiers? The solution to this question can be that the word 'Balavarg' refers to an army group. An army group means a community of soldiers, so the word 'Balavarg' given by the sutrakar is a symbol of military groups - military units. Then, even if there are thousands of soldiers in one military group. Therefore, the meaning here is that Krishna Maharaj had 56,000 military communities.
Iser (Ishwar) means Yuvaraj. Talwar - those who are favored by the king or who have received a high seat (special rank) from the king, such citizens are called Talwar. A region where there is no village within two yojanas is called Madamb, and the ruler of Madamb is called Madambik. Kautumbik - the owner of families is called Kautumbik and the leader of the group of merchants and travelers is called Sarthavaha.
'Addhabharahass' - it has two parts - one is Ardh and the other is Bharat. Ardh means half, Bharat means Bharatavarsha. The shape of Bharat Kshetra is like a crescent moon. It is bounded by the salt sea on three sides and the Challahimanvant mountain in the north. That is, its boundary is bounded by the salt sea and the Challahimanvant mountain. In the middle of India is the Vaithadya mountain. This divides Bharat Kshetra into two parts. The southern part of Vaithadya is Dakshinardh Bharat and the northern part is Uttarardh Bharat. The Ganga and Sindhu rivers, which flow from above the Challahimanvant mountain, flow out of the caves of Vaithadya and meet the salt sea. This creates six divisions of Bharat. These six divisions are called six parts. The kingdom of the Chakravarti is in these six parts and that of Vasudeva is in three parts, i.e., in Ardh Bharat. Maharaj Krishna was Vasudeva, so he was ruling over Ardh Bharat.
7-Tathh Nam Baravaie Nayarie Andhagavani Naam Raaya Parivasai. Mahaya Himavant01 Vannao. Tae Nam Sa Dharini Devi Annaya Kayaai Tansi Tarisgansi Sayanijansi Evam Jaha Mahbabale
Suminadansan-Kahana, Jamm Balattan Kalam Yo.
Jovvan-Paniggahan, Kanna Vasa Ya Bhoga Ya ||2 Navaram Goyamore Aththanham Rayavarakannanam Egadivasena Panim Genharveti, Aththatto Dao.
In that Dwarka city, a king named Andhakavrishni resided. He was great like the Himavan-Himalaya mountain. (His prosperity is described in the Aupapatak Sutra.) Andhakavrishni
Angasuttani-Bhag 3, p.543. In this text, the text is as follows: Himavant-[Mahant-Malay-Mandar-Mahindasare] Vannao. [ ] This much text is extra. This verse is not in Angasuttani. In Antagad edited by M.C. Modi, the text is 'Goyamo Namenam'.
3. 

Page #52:
---------------------------
[First Chapter]
[11] There was a queen named Dharini, the wife of the king. Once upon a time, she was sleeping on a magnificent bed, which should be understood as being similar to the bed described in the story of Mahabal (the bed described in the Mahabal episode). Afterwards,
(the description of) the dream-vision, the birth of the son, his childhood play, learning of arts, youth, marriage, beautiful palace and enjoyment etc. (all this description should also be understood as similar to Mahabal).  In particular, the boy was named Gautam, and on the same day, he was married to eight noble princesses, and eight types of items were given as dowry for each.
Discussion - This sutra describes the birth of Gautam Kumar, his marriage and the enjoyment of worldly pleasures. Now, the sutrakar describes Gautam Kumar's initiation into the order of monks by reaching the feet of the Supreme Lord Arishta Nemis in the next sutra -
8- At that time, at that time, the Arhat Arishta Nemis was wandering [while cultivating himself with restraint and austerity]. Four types of gods came. They entered his ears. The Dharma thought, 'Oh, the beloved of the gods! I will ask my mother and father. The beloved of the gods [will become a monk at the end of his life, I will initiate him into the order of monks].' Just as Meha [will do the same for himself, he will make the five-fingered world. Having made it, he will go to the monk, the Bhagavan Arishta Nemis. Having gone, he will do the three-fold prostration to the monk, the Bhagavan Arishta Nemis. Having done so, he will bow down, he will pay homage. Having bowed down and paid homage, he will say,
'Oh, venerable one! In the world, Oh, venerable one! In the world, Oh, venerable one! In the world, where there is old age and death. Just as someone who is called by name in the house, while being called, if there is a burden there, a heavy burden, he will go and take it, he will go alone, he will be free from that burden, and afterwards, he will be happy, forgiving, free from attachment, and will follow the path. Similarly, I have a burden, a beloved one, a dear one, a human being, a man, this is my burden, I will be free from this burden, I will be free from the cycle of birth and death. I wish, Oh, beloved of the gods, that you yourself will initiate me, you yourself will shave my head, you yourself will teach me, you yourself will make me a monk, you yourself will make me a monk, you yourself will make me a monk, you yourself will make me a monk, you yourself will make me a monk, you yourself will make me a monk, you yourself will make me a monk, you yourself will make me a monk, you yourself will make me a monk, you yourself will make me a monk, you yourself will make me a monk, you yourself will make me a monk, you yourself will make me a monk, you yourself will make me a monk, you yourself will make me a monk, you yourself will make me a monk, you yourself will make me a monk, you yourself will make me a monk, you yourself will make me a monk, you yourself will make me a monk, you yourself will make me a monk, you yourself will make me a monk, you yourself will make me a monk, you yourself will make me a monk, you yourself will make me a monk, you yourself will make me a monk, you yourself will make me a monk, you yourself will make me a monk, you yourself will make me a monk, you yourself will make me a monk, you yourself will make me a monk, you yourself will make me a monk, you yourself will make me a monk, you yourself will make me a monk, you yourself will make me a monk, you yourself will make me a monk, you yourself will make me a monk, you yourself will make me a monk, you yourself will make me a monk, you yourself will make me a monk, you yourself will make me a monk, you yourself will make me a monk, you yourself will make me a monk, you yourself will make me a monk, you yourself will make me a monk, you yourself will make me a monk, you yourself will make me a monk, you yourself will make me a monk, you yourself will make me a monk, you yourself will make me a monk, you yourself will make me a monk, you yourself will make me a monk, you yourself will make me a monk, you yourself will make me a monk, you yourself will make me a monk, you yourself will make me a monk, you yourself will make me a monk, you yourself will make me a monk, you yourself will make me a monk, you yourself will make me a monk, you yourself will make me a monk, you yourself will make me a monk, you yourself will make me a monk, you yourself will make me a monk, you yourself will make me a monk, you yourself will make me a monk, you yourself will make me a monk, you yourself will make me a monk, you yourself will make me a monk, you yourself will make me a monk, you yourself will make me a monk, you yourself will make me a monk, you yourself will make me a monk, you yourself will make me a monk, you yourself will make me a monk, you yourself will make me a monk, you yourself will make me a monk, you yourself will make me a monk, you yourself will make me a monk, you yourself will make me a monk, you yourself will make me a monk, you yourself will make me a monk, you yourself will make me a monk, you yourself will make me a monk, you yourself will make me a monk, you yourself will make me a monk, you yourself will make me a monk, you yourself will make me a monk, you yourself will make me a monk, you yourself will make me a monk, you yourself will make me a monk, you yourself will make me a monk, you yourself will make me a monk, you yourself will make me a monk, you yourself will make me a monk, you yourself will make me a monk, you yourself will make me a monk, you yourself will make me a monk, you yourself will make me a monk, you yourself will make me a monk, you yourself will make me a monk, you yourself will make me a monk, you yourself will make me a monk, you yourself will make me a monk, you yourself will make me a monk, you yourself will make me a monk, you yourself will make me a monk, you yourself will make me a monk, you yourself will make me a monk, you yourself will make me a monk, you yourself will make me a monk, you yourself will make me a monk, you yourself will make me a monk, you yourself will make me a monk, you yourself will make me a monk, you yourself will make me a monk, you
Page #53:
---------------------------
[12]
[ Antakrid Dasha
When they were seated in the garden outside, four types of gods were present in their assembly. Krishna Vasudeva also came there. Thereafter, Gautam Kumar was also ready to see them. Just as Megha Kumar had gone to the Shraman Bhagwan Mahavira Swami, so too Gautam Kumar went to the feet of Bhagwan Arishtanemi and listened to the Dharma. Notably, he said to Bhagwan Arishtanemi - Devanupriya! I will ask my parents and then take initiation from you. Just as Megha Kumar was initiated by Shraman Bhagwan Mahavira Swami, so too [Gautam Kumar himself] performed Panchmusthik Loch. After performing Loch, he came to where Arishtanemi Bhagwan was. Arriving there, he circumambulated Shraman Bhagwan Arishtanemi three times, starting from the right side. Then he offered his obeisance - Namaskar and said
Bhagwan! This world is ablaze, illuminated by old age and death (by the fire of old age and death). Bhagwan, this world is ablaze and illuminated. Just as a householder, when fire breaks out in his house, takes the light and valuable things from that house and moves himself to one side. He thinks, "This material saved from burning in the fire will be for my benefit in the future, for my happiness, for my ability, for my well-being, and for future use." Similarly, this soul-like vessel (object) of mine is dear to me, beloved, pleasing, attractive, and extremely beautiful - I will take out this soul - I will save it from being consumed by the fire of old age and death, then this world - birth - death will be destroyed. Therefore, I want Devanupriya! (you) to initiate me yourself - give me the robes of a monk, shave my head yourself - perform my Loch, teach me writing and other things yourself, teach me by providing sutras and their meanings yourself, teach me the principles of Dharma like knowledge, conduct, discipline, the fruits of discipline, Charanasattari, Karanasattari, the path of restraint, and the quantity (of food) yourself.
After that, Shraman Bhagwan Arishtanemi himself initiated Gautam Kumar and taught him the Dharma, including conduct and other principles, saying - Devanupriya! You should walk on the earth with only your eyes, you should stand on the lifeless ground, you should sit after cleaning the ground, you should sleep after reciting Samayik and cleaning your body, you should eat food that is free from faults due to pain and other causes, you should speak in a beneficial, moderate, and sweet manner. You should practice restraint by protecting the life (of the disabled), the plants (vegetation), the living beings (with five senses), and the beings (with one sense) with vigilance and caution. You should not be negligent in this matter at all.
After that, Gautam Kumar Muni, having heard this Dharma-related instruction from Shraman Bhagwan Arishtanemi and having held it in his heart, accepted it completely. He walked according to the Bhagwan's instructions, stood in the same way, sat in the same way, slept in the same way, ate in the same way, and spoke sweetly in the same way, abandoning negligence and sleep, taking care of life, plants, living beings, and beings, and practicing restraint. After becoming an Anagari, Gautam, keeping the Nirgrantha in front of him, began to wander, following the Bhagwan's instructions.
Preach
To
9 - Then, in that Gotama, another person, a worthy one, was the last of the Theras who were preaching Arishtanemi. 

Page #54:
---------------------------
[First Section]
[13 Samayik, 11 Angas, Ahimsa, Ahimsa, Bahu, Chauth, Jav [Chhatth-Dasam-Duvalasehin Masadhamaskamanehin Vivihehin Tavokammehin]  He dwells, cherishing himself. Then the Arhat Arishthanemi, leaving the Nandana forest of the city of Dwaraka, goes to other places, dwells in the company of the people. Bhikshu-pratima
Then, in that country, the Anugara, at some other time, goes to where the Arhat Arishthanemi is, and having gone, he performs the auspicious acts of arrival and departure to the Arhat Arishthanemi, and having performed them, he bows and prostrates. Having bowed and prostrated, he says thus:
"I wish, Master! that you, having been well-established in the month, may dwell, having been ordained in the Bhikshu-pratima. Just as the Skandhak, so also the twelve Bhikshu-pratimās are to be observed. The Gunaratna, also, the Tavokamma, is to be observed in the same way, without any exception. Just as the Skandhak, so also he contemplates, so also he inquires, so also he dwells with the Theras, so also he endures the difficult, for twelve years, in the month, in the Sanlehana, until [he cherishes himself, having cherished himself, he cuts off the food and drink for the sake of the body, having cut off, he performs the Jassatta, in the state of nakedness, in the state of shaved head, in the state of hair-cutting, in the state of celibacy, in the state of non-possession, in the state of non-attachment, in the state of non-vehicle, in the state of non-possession of land, in the state of non-possession of fruit, in the state of non-entry into another's house, in the state of non-receiving of what is given and not given, in the state of non-honoring and non-dishonoring, in the state of non-killing of others, in the state of non-slandering, in the state of non-violence, in the state of non-stealing, in the state of non-grasping, in the state of non-pride, in the state of non-anger, in the state of non-envy, in the state of non-hatred, in the state of non-greed, in the state of non-lust, in the state of non-attachment, in the state of non-delusion, in the state of non-ignorance, in the state of non-doubt, in the state of non-fear, in the state of non-shame, in the state of non-laziness, in the state of non-sleep, in the state of non-forgetfulness, in the state of non-stupidity, in the state of non-foolishness, in the state of non-madness, in the state of non-confusion, in the state of non-intoxication, in the state of non-illness, in the state of non-death, in the state of non-decay, in the state of non-change, in the state of non-destruction, in the state of non-disappearance, in the state of non-separation, in the state of non-scattering, in the state of non-dispersion, in the state of non-dissolution, in the state of non-destruction, in the state of non-annihilation, in the state of non-extinction, in the state of non-cessation, in the state of non-ending, in the state of non-stopping, in the state of non-stopping, in the state of non-stopping, in the state of non-stopping, in the state of non-stopping, in the state of non-stopping, in the state of non-stopping, in the state of non-stopping, in the state of non-stopping, in the state of non-stopping, in the state of non-stopping, in the state of non-stopping, in the state of non-stopping, in the state of non-stopping, in the state of non-stopping, in the state of non-stopping, in the state of non-stopping, in the state of non-stopping, in the state of non-stopping, in the state of non-stopping, in the state of non-stopping, in the state of non-stopping, in the state of non-stopping, in the state of non-stopping, in the state of non-stopping, in the state of non-stopping, in the state of non-stopping, in the state of non-stopping, in the state of non-stopping, in the state of non-stopping, in the state of non-stopping, in the state of non-stopping, in the state of non-stopping, in the state of non-stopping, in the state of non-stopping, in the state of non-stopping, in the state of non-stopping, in the state of non-stopping, in the state of non-stopping, in the state of non-stopping, in the state of non-stopping, in the state of non-stopping, in the state of non-stopping, in the state of non-stopping, in the state of non-stopping, in the state of non-stopping, in the state of non-stopping, in the state of non-stopping, in the state of non-stopping, in the state of non-stopping, in the state of non-stopping, in the state of non-stopping, in the state of non-stopping, in the state of non-stopping, in the state of non-stopping, in the state of non-stopping, in the state of non-stopping, in the state of non-stopping, in the state of non-stopping, in the state of non-stopping, in the state of non-stopping, in the state of non-stopping, in the state of non-stopping, in the state of non-stopping, in the state of non-stopping, in the state of non-stopping, in the state of non-stopping, in the state of non-stopping, in the state of non-stopping, in the state of non-stopping, in the state of non-stopping, in the state of non-stopping, in the state of non-stopping, in the state of non-stopping, in the state of non-stopping, in the state of non-stopping, in the state of non-stopping, in the state of non-stopping, in the state of non-stopping, in the state of non-stopping, in the state of non-stopping, in the state of non-stopping, in the state of non-stopping, in the state of non-stopping, in the state of non-stopping, in the state of non-stopping, in the state of non-
Page #55:
---------------------------
[14]
He performed the Antakrid Dasha. He contemplated in the same way as the Skandhaka, asked the Lord, and climbed Mount Shatrujaya with the elder monks. He completed the 12-year initiation period and then, through a one-month Sanlekhana, he worshipped the soul. He abandoned sixty meals through fasting, and for the purpose of [worshipping the soul], he practiced nakedness, shaved his head with a razor, renounced possessions in thought, plucked out his hair with his hands (Kes Loch), practiced celibacy, did not bathe (Asnanak), did not use an umbrella (Achhatrak), did not use shoes (Upanah), slept on the ground (Bhumishayya), slept on a wooden plank (Phalakshayya), entered other people's homes for alms (Parghar Pravesh), accepted and rejected things (Labhalab), experienced honor and dishonor (Manapaman), endured insults, slander, and humiliation (Heelna), revealed the secrets of people's caste, etc. in front of others (Khinsna), endured beatings, dust, slander, and various kinds of suffering from the 22 senses (Tadnamaarna, Gardaa, Ninda, Unch-Neech). He endured all these 22 types of painful afflictions of the senses, and finally achieved his goal. With his last breaths, he became a Siddha, a Buddha, a liberated soul, free from all karmic afflictions and all kinds of suffering. Sudharma Swami said to his disciple Jambu, "O Jambu! The liberated Lord Mahavira has explained the meaning of the first study of the first section of the eighth Antagad Sutra."

**Discussion:** This Sutra presents the story of Gautam Anugar's studiousness, austerity, and righteous conduct from the time of his initiation to the attainment of the Siddha state through the final rites.

"Taharuaan Theraan" means "such an elder." "Tatharoop" means one who follows the conduct described in the scriptures, and "Sthavir" means an elder monk. The Stananga Sutra describes three types of Sthavirs: (1) Vayah-Sthavir - one who is 60 years old, (2) Sutra-Sthavir - one who knows the Anga Sutras like Stananga, Samavayanga, etc., and (3) Pravrajya-Sthavir - a monk who has completed 20 years of initiation.

There are five well-known meanings of Samayik: (1) Samayik Charitra - freedom from all sinful actions, (2) the ninth vow of a Shravak, Samayik Charitra in the form of Deshaviriti, (3) Samayik Shruta - Acharaanga, etc., (4) the first study of the Aavashyak Sutra, and (5) the result arising from the essence of matter (Dravya Leshya) - determination (Adhyavasaya).

Of these meanings, "the first study of the Aavashyak Sutra" is the most desirable. Therefore, Muni Gautam studied the eleven Angas, starting with Samayik. Now the question arises: the eleven Angas also mention the Antakrid Dasha Anga. The first study of its first section presents the life of Shri Gautam Kumar. Was he the same Gautam Kumar or someone else? If he was the same, how did he study the Antakrid Dasha Anga, which was created later?

The solution to this is that the Gautam Kumar described in the first study is the same as our Dwarkadheesh Maharaj, the son of Andhakavrushti. Now, regarding the matter of reading, the solution is that the Ganadhar of Lord Arishtanemi, Anupam, was a holder of knowledge and other qualities. He had many recitations, which were known by the same names as the aforementioned Angas and Upangas. Each one had a different subject matter, and their order of study was also different. The recitation that is available today is that of Shri Sudharma Swami, the revered disciple of Lord Mahavira. The eleven Angas that Gautam Kumar studied were the eleven Angas of some Ganadhar's recitation at that time. He did not study the Angasastra of the recitation available today. This recitation did not exist at that time, so the question of reading this recitation does not arise. 

Page #56:
---------------------------
[First Class]
[15 is not present.
Acharya Abhaydeva Suri, in his commentary on the Bhagavati Sutra, raised a similar doubt regarding the episode of Skandhak Kumar and presented a solution, which is worth pondering and reading for resolving the doubt arising in the present case.
'Ekkāras angāi ahijjai' - This is a question - Does the eleventh anga exist before the Skandhak Charita, and the Skandhak Charita is found within the fifth anga, how is there no contradiction? It is said - Shri Mahavira Tirtha had nine recitations. In all those recitations, the meanings that are called Skandhak Charita, which existed before the Skandhak Charita, are known through other charitas. At the time of the origin of the Skandhak Charita, Sudharmaswami, by accepting Jambū as his disciple, authorized him to recite, and in this recitation, he relied on the Skandhak Charita and presented its meaning, so there is no contradiction. Or, due to their extraordinary nature, the Ganadharas have compiled the charitas of the future, which are not faulty. The indication of the past is also not faulty in relation to the future lineage.
Meaning - This question arises that the 11 angas were already created before the Skandhak Charita. The Skandhak Charita is available in the fifth anga (Bhagavati Sutra). Then what does it mean that Skandhak read the 11 angas? Did he read his own life? The answer is as follows:
In the Tirthankara of Bhagwan Mahavira, there were nine recitations. In each recitation, the meaning (educational purpose) of Skandhak's life was present in the same form. The only difference was that all the companions of the protagonist of life were different. The meaning is that the education that is obtained from Skandhak's life is also found in the collection of other life-charitas that give the same education in the contemporary recitations. Sudharmaswami, aiming at his disciple Jambuswami, in his recitation, presented the meaning from Skandhak's life-charita, which was implicit in other recitations, therefore, it is clear that the angadi scriptures that Skandhak read were not from Sudharmaswami's recitation.
Secondly, it may also be that the Ganadhar Maharaj are holders of extraordinary (special knowledge). Therefore, they have also compiled the charitas of the future. In addition, the indication of the past cannot be said to be faulty in relation to the future disciple tradition.
In 'Chautham jav bhavamāne', the word 'chautham' used is indicative of the vow - one fast, and 'jav' means 'yāvat' and 'bhavamāne' means - 'bhavayann - vāsayann' - that is, using it in one's life.
'Māsiyam bhikkupadim' means monthly bhikkhu pratima. The meaning of pratima is pledge. The pledge of a bhikkhu is called bhikkhu-pratima. These pratima are twelve. Their detailed discussion is done in the Dasha-shruta-skandha.
The sadhu who holds this pratima takes one grain and one water datti (the uninterrupted flow of grain and water given by the donor is called datti). He takes food from where food is made for one person, he does not take food made for a pregnant woman or a mother of a small child. He does not take food from a woman who has weaned her child and gives alms, and from a woman who is about to give birth and gets up from her seat to give food. He does not take food from someone whose both feet are inside or outside the threshold. He goes for alms in one part of the three parts of the day, beginning, middle, and end. He stays for one night in a familiar place. 1. Bhagavati Sutra-Shatak-2, Uddeshak-1, Sutra 93
]
Page #57:
---------------------------
## Chapter 16

**Antakrid Dasha:** A monk who stays in an unfamiliar place for one or two nights, speaks four languages: (1) **Yachani** - begging for food, (2) **Pricchni** - asking for directions, (3) **Anugyanapni** - seeking permission for places, etc., (4) answering questions. He can stay in these places with the permission of the owner: (1) **Adha Aaramgriha** - a place surrounded by a garden, (2) **Adho Vikatgriha** - open on all sides, covered from above, (3) **Adho Vriksh ka Mool ya Vahaan par bana Sthan** - the root of a tree or a place built there. If someone sets fire to these places, the monk does not leave the place himself for the safety of his life. If a thorn gets stuck in his foot during Vihar, he does not remove it. If dust falls into his eyes, he does not remove it either. He stays where the sun sets. He does not use water except for bodily purification. If a violent creature comes in front of him during Vihar, he does not retreat in fear. If a creature is afraid of him, he moves aside. He does not use warm places, clothes, or similar things to avoid cold. He does not go to a cold place to avoid heat. By this method, the **Maasiki Pratima** is observed. Its duration is one month. This is how the special **Abhigha** of a Sadhu is called **Bhikshu Pratima**. The first is called **Maasiki**, the second **Dwaimasiki**, the third **Traimasiki**, the fourth **Chaturmasiki**, the fifth **Panchamasiki**, the sixth **Shanmasiki**, and the seventh **Saptamasiki**. In the first Pratima, one **Datti** of food and water is taken, in the second two, in the third three, in the fourth four, in the fifth five, in the sixth six, and in the seventh seven Dattis are taken. The eighth Pratima lasts for seven days and nights. The ninth also lasts for seven days and nights. In the eighth, **Chauihar** fasting is done. In the ninth, **Chauihar Bele-Bele Parana** is done. The duration is seven days. The tenth also lasts for seven days and nights. In this, **Chauihar Tele-Tele Parana** is done. The eleventh Pratima lasts for one day and night. The twelfth Pratima is only for one night. Its worship is done with **Chauihar Tele**. All these Pratiamas were worshipped by **Shri Gautam Muni Ji**.

**'Gunrayanan Pitavokamman'** means - **Gunratna Tapa Karma**. **Gunratna** is one type of **Tapa** among the various types of **Tapa**. It is also called **"Gun-Ratna-Samvatsar Tapa"**. This **Tapa** is completed in sixteen months. The **Tapa** in which the whole year is spent with **Gun** like **Ratnas** is called **"Gun-Ratna Samvatsar" Tapa**. This **Tapa** takes sixteen months. Out of which 407 days are for **Tapasya** and 73 days for **Parana**. As follows:

**Panneras Vīs Chauvvīs Chev Chauvvīs Pannaviśā Ya. Chauvvīs Ekkavīsā, Chauvīs Sattavīsā Ya. ||1|| Tīsā Tetīsā Vi Ya Chauvvīs Chhavvīs Aṭṭhavīsā Ya. Tīs Vattīsā Viya Sollasamāsesu Tavadīvasā. ||2|| Panneras Daṣṭṭha Chha Panch Chaur Panchasu Ya Tiṇṇi Tiṇṇi Tti. Panchasu Do Do Ya Tahā Sollasamāsesu Pāraṇagā. ||3||**

Meaning: In the first month, fifteen, in the second month, twenty, in the third month, twenty-four, in the fourth month, twenty-four, in the fifth month, twenty-five, in the sixth month, twenty-four, in the seventh month, twenty-one, in the eighth month, twenty-four, in the ninth month, twenty-seven, in the tenth month, thirty, in the eleventh month, thirty-three, in the twelfth month, twenty-four, in the thirteenth month, twenty-six, in the fourteenth month, twenty-eight, in the fifteenth month, thirty, and in the sixteenth month, thirty-two days are for **Tapasya**. All these add up to 407 days of **Tapasya**. The days of **Parana** are as follows:

In the first month, fifteen, in the second month, ten, in the third month, eight, in the fourth month, six, in the fifth month, five, in the sixth month, four, in the seventh month, three, in the eighth month, three, in the ninth month, three, in the tenth month, three... 

Page #58:
---------------------------
[First Class]
[There are three paranas in the eleventh month, two in the twelfth month, two in the thirteenth month, two in the fourteenth month, two in the fifteenth month, and two in the sixteenth month. All these add up to 73 paranas. There are 407 days of tapasya and 73 days of parana, which together make 480 days, meaning this tapasya is completed in sixteen months. In this tapasya, the days of tapasya and parana combined in a month may exceed thirty, and in some months may be less than thirty, but the excess and deficit compensate each other, making a total of thirty. In this way, this tapasya is completed in sixteen months.
In short, in this tapasya, alternate fasting is done in the first month, belebele parana is done in the second month, and tele-tele parana is done in the third month. In this way, increasing the number of fasts, in the sixteenth month, sixteen-sixteen fasts are done and parana is performed. In this tapasya, during the day, one sits in the utkutuk asana and takes the sun's rays, and at night, one sits in the virasana without clothes and meditates. The yantra of the Gunaratnasamvatsara tapasya is also seen, which is as follows:
Tapasya days Parana days
All days 32/16 | 16
30/15 | 15 |
24/12
|12
11/11
3010 | 10|10
27 9 | 9 | 9
248 8 8
217 | 77 

Page #59:
---------------------------
[18]
The term "Antakṛddasha Sanlehanāe" means a special type of austerity performed in the final moments of life, which aims to reduce the body and the kṣayās (passions).
2-10 Ajjhayanāni 10- Just as Gautama is described, so too should the remaining nine Ajjhayanāni be understood: Samudde, Sāgare, Gambhire, Thimie, Ayale, Kampille, Akkhobe, Paseṇati, and Viṇhue. All of them had Andhakavṛṣṇi as their father and Dhāriṇī as their mother. Their descriptions are all similar. In this way, the first group, consisting of ten Ajjhayanāni, has been described. 

Page #60:
---------------------------
The Second Section of the Antagaddasha

"If, Venerable Sir, the Ascetic Bhagavan Mahavira has expounded the meaning of the first section of the Antagaddasha, the eighth Anga, then how many studies has the Ascetic Bhagavan Mahavira expounded for the second section?"

"Thus, Jambū, the Ascetic Bhagavan Mahavira has expounded eight studies for the second section of the Antagaddasha, the eighth Anga. The Sangahani-Gatha:

Akshobha, Sagara, Samudra, Himavant, Acala, Dharana, Purna, and Abhichanda, these eight are the names.

Just as the first section describes Gautama Kumar, so too should one understand the description of these eight studies. They also practiced the Gunaratna Tapa, observed restraint for sixteen years, and finally attained Siddhipada through a one-month Sanlekhana on Mount Shatrujaya. 

Page #61:
---------------------------
## Third Class
## First Study: Aṇīyas Utkṣepa

**1.  **"If so, what is the Utkṣepa of this?" "Indeed, Jambū! There are thirteen studies within the Antagadaśā of this class, as follows:
(1) Aṇīyas, (2) Anaṃtaseṇa, (3) Aṇihaya, (4) Viū, (5) Devayaśa, (6) Sattuseṇa, (7) Sāraṇa, (8) Gāe, (9) Sumuhe, (10) Dummuhe, (11) Kūvae, (12) Dārue, (13) Aṇāḍiṭṭhī.

"If so, Venerable Sir! There are thirteen studies within the Antagadaśā of this class, as taught by the Śramaṇa who has attained liberation. What is the meaning of the first study of this class, Venerable Sir?"

**Indeed, Jambū!** At that time, in that era, there was a city named Bhaddilpura. In the north-east direction of that Bhaddilpura, there was a garden named Śrīvana. There, King Jitasatru ruled. In that city of Bhaddilpura, there lived a merchant named Nāga. He was very wealthy, with many wives, beautiful houses, comfortable beds, and luxurious chariots. He had many servants, slaves, cows, buffaloes, and horses. He was very respected. His wife was named Sulasa. She was beautiful, with perfect limbs, a charming face, and a pleasant voice. She was a perfect woman.

**The liberated Śramaṇa Bhagavān Mahāvīra Swami has taught thirteen studies in the third class of the Antagadaśā, as follows:**

(1) Aṇīyasakumāra, (2) Anaṃtaseṇakumāra, (3) Aṇihatakumāra, (4) Vidvatkumāra, (5) Devayaśakumāra, (6) Śatruseṇakumāra, (7) Sāraṇakumāra, (8) Gajakumāra, (9) Sumukhakumāra, (10) Durmukhakumāra, (11) Kūpakakumāra, (12) Dārukakumāra, (13) Anāḍṛṣṭikumāra.

**Venerable Sir!** If the Śramaṇa who has attained liberation, Bhagavān Mahāvīra, has taught thirteen studies in the Antagadaśā, then, Venerable Sir! What is the meaning of the first study of the third class of the Antagadaśā, as taught by the Śramaṇa who has attained liberation, Mahāvīra Swami?

**Aṇīyasādi-pada-Sudharmā Swami said:** "O Jambū!

**1.** Understand the Utkṣepa word as before. 

Page #62:
---------------------------
[Third Class]
[21 There lived a Nag named Gahapati. He was extremely wealthy, as rich as he was, with bright, spacious and vast buildings, beds, seats, vehicles and conveyances, and was endowed with an abundance of gold, silver, etc. He successfully used the means of earning wealth. Even after eating, there was a lot of food left over at his place. His house had servants, maids, etc., and cows, buffaloes, goats, etc., and he was not defeated by many. That Nag Gahapati had a wife named Sulasa. She had very delicate hands and feet. Her five senses and body were free from defects and perfect. She was endowed with (swastika, etc.) signs, (sesame, mash, etc.) dishes and qualities. Her body was full of measure, weight and size, and had all beautiful limbs. Her form was gentle like the moon, radiant and pleasing to behold. Thus, her appearance was very beautiful.
Discussion-This sutra describes the studies of this class and the parents of Aneyaskumar, who was discussed in the first study.
2-That Nag Gahapati's son by his wife Sulasa was named Aneyas. He was born in a beautiful [body with five perfect senses, endowed with signs, dishes and qualities, full of measure, weight and size, with all beautiful limbs, gentle like the moon, radiant and pleasing to behold] and was nurtured in five ways, as follows: strong, [milk-based, decoration-based, bathing-based, mark-based, and ornament-based, with many foreigners, including Chinese, Chelas, Vamania, Vadhbia, Babbara, Lasiya, Lausya, Damila, Sinhala, Murandi, Sabari, Parsi, and people from various countries, with clothes and ornaments obtained from various countries, with a beautiful and well-dressed entourage, with a garland of flowers, with a beautiful and well-dressed entourage, with a garland of flowers, with a beautiful and well-dressed entourage, with a garland of flowers, with a beautiful and well-dressed entourage, with a garland of flowers, with a beautiful and well-dressed entourage, with a garland of flowers, with a beautiful and well-dressed entourage, with a garland of flowers, with a beautiful and well-dressed entourage, with a garland of flowers, with a beautiful and well-dressed entourage, with a garland of flowers, with a beautiful and well-dressed entourage, with a garland of flowers, with a beautiful and well-dressed entourage, with a beautiful and well-dressed entourage, with a beautiful and well-dressed entourage, with a beautiful and well-dressed entourage, with a beautiful and well-dressed entourage, with a beautiful and well-dressed entourage, with a beautiful and well-dressed entourage, with a beautiful and well-dressed entourage, with a beautiful and well-dressed entourage, with a beautiful and well-dressed entourage, with a beautiful and well-dressed entourage, with a beautiful and well-dressed entourage, with a beautiful and well-dressed entourage, with a beautiful and well-dressed entourage, with a beautiful and well-dressed entourage, with a beautiful and well-dressed entourage, with a beautiful and well-dressed entourage, with a beautiful and well-dressed entourage, with a beautiful and well-dressed entourage, with a beautiful and well-dressed entourage, with a beautiful and well-dressed entourage, with a beautiful and well-dressed entourage, with a beautiful and well-dressed entourage, with a beautiful and well-dressed entourage, with a beautiful and well-dressed entourage, with a beautiful and well-dressed entourage, with a beautiful and well-dressed entourage, with a beautiful and well-dressed entourage, with a beautiful and well-dressed entourage, with a beautiful and well-dressed entourage, with a beautiful and well-dressed entourage, with a beautiful and well-dressed entourage, with a beautiful and well-dressed entourage, with a beautiful and well-dressed entourage, with a beautiful and well-dressed entourage, with a beautiful and well-dressed entourage, with a beautiful and well-dressed entourage, with a beautiful and well-dressed entourage, with a beautiful and well-dressed entourage, with a beautiful and well-dressed entourage, with a beautiful and well-dressed entourage, with a beautiful and well-dressed entourage, with a beautiful and well-dressed entourage, with a beautiful and well-dressed entourage, with a beautiful and well-dressed entourage, with a beautiful and well-dressed entourage, with a beautiful and well-dressed entourage, with a beautiful and well-dressed entourage, with a beautiful and well-dressed entourage, with a beautiful and well-dressed entourage, with a beautiful and well-dressed entourage, with a beautiful and well-dressed entourage, with a beautiful and well-dressed entourage, with a beautiful and well-dressed entourage, with a beautiful and well-dressed entourage, with a beautiful and well-dressed entourage, with a beautiful and well-dressed entourage, with a beautiful and well-dressed entourage, with a beautiful and well-dressed entourage, with a beautiful and well-dressed entourage, with a beautiful and well-dressed entourage, with a beautiful and well-dressed entourage, with a beautiful and well-dressed entourage, with a beautiful and well-dressed entourage, with a beautiful and well-dressed entourage, with a beautiful and well-dressed entourage, with a beautiful and well-dressed entourage, with a beautiful and well-dressed entourage, with a beautiful and well-dressed entourage, with a beautiful and well-dressed entourage, with a beautiful and well-dressed entourage, with a beautiful and well-dressed entourage, with a beautiful and well-dressed entourage, with a beautiful and well-dressed entourage, with a beautiful and well-dressed entourage, with a beautiful and well-dressed entourage, with a beautiful and well-dressed entourage, with a beautiful and well-dressed entourage, with a beautiful and well-dressed entourage, with a beautiful and well-dressed entourage, with a beautiful and well-dressed entourage, with a beautiful and well-dressed entourage, with a beautiful and well-dressed entourage, with a beautiful and well-dressed entourage, with a beautiful and well-dressed entourage, with a beautiful and well-dressed entourage, with a beautiful and well-dressed entourage, with a beautiful and well-dressed entourage, with a beautiful and well-dressed entourage, with a beautiful and well-dressed entourage, with a beautiful and well-dressed entourage, with a beautiful and well-dressed entourage, with a beautiful and well-dressed entourage, with a beautiful and well-dressed entourage, with a beautiful and well-dressed entourage, with a beautiful and well-dressed entourage, with a beautiful and well-dressed entourage, with a beautiful and well-dressed entourage, with a beautiful and well-dressed entourage, with a beautiful and well-dressed entourage, with a beautiful and well-dressed entourage, with a beautiful and well-dressed entourage, with a beautiful and well-dressed entourage, with a beautiful and well-dressed entourage, with a beautiful and well-dressed entourage, with a beautiful and well-dressed entourage, with a beautiful and well-dressed entourage, with a beautiful and well-dressed entourage
Page #63:
---------------------------
## 22]
[Antakṛddaśā Paḍivūhaṁ (48) Cāraṁ (49) Paḍicāraṁ (50) Cakkavūhaṁ (51) Garulavūhaṁ (52) Sagadavūhaṁ (53) Juddhaṁ (54) Nijuddhaṁ (55) Juddhatijuddhaṁ (56) Aṭṭhijuddhaṁ (57) Muṭṭhijuddhaṁ (58) Bāhujuddhaṁ (59) Layājuddhaṁ (60) Īsatthaṁ (61) Chharuppavāyaṁ (62) Dhanuvveyaṁ (63) Hirannapāgaṁ (64) Savannapāgaṁ (65) Sattakheḍaṁ (66) Vakheḍaṁ (67) Nāliyākhaḍaṁ (68) Patacchhejj (69) Kaṭagacchhejj (70) Sajīvaṁ (71) Nijjīvaṁ (72) Sauṇiruamiti.
Tae ṇaṁ se kalāyariē aṇīyasaṁ kumāraṁ lehaīyāo gaṇiyapphaṇāo sauṇiruappajjavaśānāo bāvattareṁ kalāo suttao ya atthao ya karaṇao ya sihāveī, sikkhāveī, sihāvettā sikkhāvettā ammapīuṇaṁ uvaṇeī.
Tae ṇaṁ aṇīyasa kumārassā ammāpiyaro taṁ kalāyariyaṁ madhurehiṁ vayaṇehiṁ vipuleṇaṁ vatthagandha-mallālankāreṇaṁ sakkārenti, sammāṇeiti, sakkāritta sammāṇitta vipulaṁ jīviyārihaṁ pīḍāṇaṁ dalayanti. Dalaiṭṭā paḍivisajjenti.
Tae ṇaṁ se aṇīyase kumāre bāvattarekalāpaṇḍiē navaṅgasuttapaḍibōhiē aṭṭhārasavihīpphagāradeśībhasāvisārae gīīraī gandhavvanatṭakusale hayajōhī gayajōhī rahajōhī bāhujōhī bāhuppamāddī] alaṁ bhoga samatthe jāe yāvi hotthā.
Usa nāga gāthāpati kā putra sulasā bhāryā kā ātmāj aṇīyas nāmak kumāra thā. (Vah) sukōmal thā yāvat usakī pāñcoṁ indriyāṁ pūrṇa evaṁ nirdoṣa thīṁ. Usakā śarīra vidyā, dhana aura prabhutva ādi ke sūcak sāmudrik lakṣaṇoṁ, massā-tilādi vyajanoṁ aura vinaya, suśīlatā ādi guṇoṁ se yukt thā. Māna, unmāna aura pramāṇa se paripūrṇa evaṁ angopāṅga-gat saundarya se paripūrṇa thā. Candramā ke samāna saumya (śānta), kānta, manohar, priyadarśana aura pāñc dhāyamātāoṁ se parirakṣit vah dṛḍhapratijña kumāra kī tarah yāvat 1 kṣīradhātrī- dūdh pilāne vāli dhāy 2-maṇḍanadhātrī-vastrabhūṣaṇa pahnāne vāli dhāy, 3-majjandhātrī-snāna karāne vāli dhāy, 4-krīḍāpanadhātrī-khel khilāne vāli dhāy aura 5 - aṅkadhātrī-god meṁ lene vāli dhāy; inake atirikta vah aṇīyas kumāra anyānna kubjā (kubṛī), cilātika (cilātakiṛāt nāmak anārya deś meṁ utpann), vāmana (baunī), vaḍabhī (baḍe pet vāli), barbarī (barbar deś meṁ utpann), bakuś deś kī, yōnak deś kī, palhavik deś kī, Īsinik, dhaurukin, lhāsak deś kī, lakuś deś kī, draviḍ deś kī, siṁhal deś kī, arab deś kī, pulind deś kī, pakkaṇ deś kī, vahal deś kī, muruṇḍ deś kī, śabar deś kī, pāras deś kī, is prakār nāna deśoṁ kī parades-apne deś se bhinn rājagṛha ko suśōbhit karne vāli, iṅgit (mukhadī kī ceṣṭā), cintīt (mānasik vicār) aura prārthīt (abhilṣit) ko jānne vāli, apne-apne deś ke veṣ ko dhāraṇa karne vāli, nipuṇoṁ meṁ bhī atinipuṇa , vinayayukt dāsīoṁ ke dvārā tatha svadeśīya dāsīoṁ dvārā aura varṣadharoṁ (prayōga dvārā napuṁsak banāye hue puruṣoṁ), kancukiyoṁ aura mahattaroṁ (antaḥpura ke kārya kī cintā rakhne vāloṁ) ke samudāya se ghirā rahnē lagā. Vah ek ke hāth se dūsre ke hāth meṁ jātā, ek kī god se dūsre kī god meṁ jātā, gāgā kar bahalāyā jātā, uṅgalī pakṛṛ kar chalāyā jātā, krīḍā ādi se lālan-pālan kiyā jātā evaṁ ramaṇīya maṇijatīt pharṣa par chalāyā huā vāyurahit aura vyāghātarahīt) giriguphā meṁ sthit campak vṛkṣ ke samāna sukhapūrvaṁ baṛhnē lagā.
Tattpaścāt aṇīyas kumāra ko āṭh varṣa se kuchh adhik umra vāla huā jānakr mātā-pitā ne

Page #64:
---------------------------
[Third Chapter]
[23]
He was sent to the art teacher. Thereafter, the art teacher taught and made Aneyaskumar proficient in seventy-two arts, starting from writing, which is primarily mathematics, and ending with the interpretation of bird calls (shakuniruta), through the sutras (original text), meaning, and practice.

These arts are as follows: (1) Writing, (2) Mathematics, (3) Changing form, (4) Drama, (5) Singing, (6) Playing musical instruments, (7) Knowing the notes, (8) Tuning musical instruments, (9) Knowing the same rhythm, (10) Gambling, (11) Debating with people, (12) Playing with dice, (13) Playing chaupad, (14) Protecting the city, (15) Creating objects from the combination of water and soil, (16) Harvesting grain, (17) Generating new water, purifying and heating water, (18) Making new clothes, dyeing, sewing, and wearing them, (19) Identifying, preparing, and applying ointments, (20) Making beds, knowing the method of sleeping, etc., (21) Recognizing and creating Arya Chanda, (22) Creating and solving riddles, (23) Creating stories, etc., in Magadhika, i.e., the language of the Magadh country, (24) Creating stories, etc., in the Prakrit language, (25) Creating Geeti Chanda, (26) Creating Shloka (Anushtup Chanda), (27) Making gold, making ornaments from it, wearing them, etc., (28) Making new silver, making ornaments from it, wearing them, etc., (29) Making powders like rose, abir, etc., and using them, (30) Making ornaments, wearing them, etc., (31) Serving a young woman, applying cosmetics, (32) Knowing the characteristics of a woman, (33) Knowing the characteristics of a man, (34) Knowing the characteristics of a horse, (35) Knowing the characteristics of an elephant, (36) Knowing the characteristics of a cow and bull, (37) Knowing the characteristics of a rooster, (38) Knowing the characteristics of an umbrella, (39) Knowing the characteristics of a staff, (40) Knowing the characteristics of a sword, (41) Knowing the characteristics of a gem, (42) Knowing the characteristics of a Kakani gem, (43) Vastu Vidya - the science of buildings like houses, shops, etc., (44) Knowing the evidence of the army's encampment, etc., (45) The art of establishing a new city, etc., (46) Creating a formation, a front line, (47) Creating a front line for one's army in front of the enemy's formation, (48) Commanding the army, (49) Counterattack - moving one's army in front of the enemy army, (50) Chakravyuha - creating a formation in the shape of a wheel, (51) Creating a formation in the shape of a Garuda, (52) Creating a Shakatavyuh, (53) Engaging in general warfare, (54) Engaging in special warfare, (55) Engaging in highly special warfare, (56) Fighting with a stick (yashti or asthi), (57) Fighting with fists, (58) Fighting with arms, (59) Fighting with vines, (60) Making the small appear large and the large appear small, (61) Making the hilt of a sword, etc., (62) Having skill in archery, (63) Making silver paste, (64) Making gold paste, (65) Piercing a thread, (66) Plowing a field, (67) Piercing the stalk of a lotus, (68) Piercing a leaf, (69) Piercing a bangle, an earring, etc., (70) Reviving the dead (unconscious), (71) Making the living dead (like dead), and (72) Recognizing the calls of birds like crows, owls, etc.

Thereafter, the art teacher makes Aneyaskumar proficient in seventy-two arts, starting from writing, which is primarily mathematics, and ending with the interpretation of bird calls (shakuniruta), through the sutras (original text), meaning, and practice. After making him proficient and teaching him, he takes him to his parents.

Then, Aneyaskumar's parents honored the art teacher with sweet words and abundant clothes, fragrances, garlands, and ornaments. After honoring him, they gave him a generous gift of affection, which was suitable for his livelihood. After giving him the gift of affection, they bid him farewell. 

Page #65:
---------------------------
## Chapter 24

[At the end of the ten days, Aneyas Kumar became a scholar in seventy-two arts. His nine organs - two ears, two eyes, two nostrils, tongue, skin and mind - which were dormant due to childhood, were awakened. He became proficient in eighteen native languages. He developed a fondness for music, became skilled in singing and dancing. He became adept in horse warfare, elephant warfare, chariot warfare and hand-to-hand combat. He became capable of subduing his opponents with his arms. He gained the ability to enjoy pleasures.

**Discussion:** In this sutra, after mentioning the infancy and educational life of Aneyas Kumar, the sutrakar now describes his further life, saying -

3 - Then, knowing that Aneyas Kumar had grown out of his childhood, his mother and father, along with [similar to them, similar to them, similar to them, similar in form, youth, and qualities, similar to them] thirty-two relatives, took him in their hands on one day.

Then, the Nagas, who were the guardians of Aneyas Kumar, gave him this kind of drink to drink, which was like thirty-two golden coins, like the great strength of [thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden coins, thirty-two golden
Page #66:
---------------------------
##  The Third Class

[25 Uvvaiya, 32 Parisiya, 32 Chhatte, 32 Chhatdhariyo Chediya, 32 Chamarao, 32 Chamaradhario Chediya, 32 Taliyantao, 32 Taliyantdhario Chediya, 32 Karodiya, 32 Karodiadhario Chediya, 32 Khirudhaiyo, 32 Ankudhaiyo, 32 Angamaddiya, 32 Ummahiyao, 32 Pahaviya, 32 Pasahiya, 32 Vannagpesiya, 32 Chunnagpesiya, 32 Kottaagariya, 32 Davakariya, 32 Uvattaniya, 32 Nadaijja, 32 Kedumbini, 32 Mahanasini, 32 Bhandagarini, 32 Azzhadharini, 32 Pushpadharini, 32 Panidharini, 32 Balikari, 32 Sejjakari, 32 Abhin Padhihari, 32 Bahiriya Padhihari, 32 Malakari, 32 Pesankari, and other things like silver, gold, bronze, lead, and various kinds of precious stones, up to the essence of the universe, and also the families of the most devoted, to be given, to be enjoyed, to be used.]

Therefore, those young men, being brothers to each other, gave each other a crore of silver, a crore of gold, a crown, a crown of jewels, and so on, up to giving each other a gift of a Pesankari, and other things like silver, up to being used. Then those young men, going to the top of the mountain, enjoyed themselves, eating and drinking, and being happy.

At that time, at that moment, the Arhat, Arhitthnemi, up to the Sami, Samosadhe, Sirivane, Ujane, up to the Pariruva, was living in restraint, controlling his senses, and being mindful of himself. The assembly departed.

Then, to that young man, that great (with the sound of people and the sound of people talking, and hearing and seeing, and thinking and desiring, and the mind arising in the form of a thought), as in the case of a cow, he went to the forest, and was ordained by the fourteen previous ones. He lived for twenty years as a Paria. The rest is the same, up to the time of the seventh month, when he was perfected in the assembly.

Thus, Jambū, this is the explanation of the eighth limb, the inner part of the eight limbs, and the first part of that class.

2-6. The explanations are as follows: The young men, and the rest, up to the seven armies, have six explanations in common. There are thirty-two in total. They live for twenty years as Pariya, and are ordained by the fourteen previous ones. They are perfected in the seventh month.

Then, the parents, knowing that the young man had passed through childhood, gave him a wife, (of equal age and complexion, equal beauty, form, youth, and qualities, brought up in equal families) thirty-two 

1. In the texts published by Poo. Atmaramji M.Sa., M.C. Modi, and Bhavnagar, the text is "Jha Jav Viharai". But "Aha" is more appropriate than "Jha", so "Aha" is used here. 2-3. First Class Sutra 9. 4. Third Class, Sutra 1. 

Page #67:
---------------------------
[26]
The Antakrid Dasha gave the daughters of the Uttama clan in marriage on the same day.
After the marriage, while giving the Pritidan to Nag Gathapati Aniyas Kumar, he gave thirty-two crore silver coins and many other things like Mahabal Kumar, including thirty-two koti gold, thirty-two superior crowns, thirty-two superior pairs of earrings, thirty-two superior necklaces, thirty-two superior half-necklaces, thirty-two superior single-string necklaces, thirty-two pearl necklaces, thirty-two gold necklaces, thirty-two gem necklaces, thirty-two superior pairs of bangles, thirty-two superior pairs of armlets, thirty-two superior pairs of silk garments, thirty-two pairs of sashes, thirty-two pairs of cotton garments, thirty-two Shri, thirty-two Hi, thirty-two Dhi, thirty-two Kirti, thirty-two Buddhi and thirty-two Lakshmi Devi images, thirty-two Nand, thirty-two Bhadra, thirty-two Tal-Tad trees. All these should be known as gem-studded. In his own house, Ketu, thirty-two superior flags, thirty-two superior Gokul according to the calculation of one herd (Gokul) of ten thousand cows, thirty-two superior plays performed by humans, thirty-two superior horses (all these should be known as gem-studded), thirty-two superior elephants like a treasury, treasury, thirty-two superior vehicles made of all gems, thirty-two superior Yugya (a type of vehicle), thirty-two Shivika, thirty-two Syandamanika, thirty-two Gilli (elephant's Ambadi), thirty-two Thilli (horse's Palankaathi), thirty-two superior Vikat (open) vehicles, thirty-two Pariyanik (for playing) chariots, thirty-two superior horses, thirty-two superior elephants, thirty-two villages where ten thousand families live, thirty-two superior servants, thirty-two superior maids, thirty-two superior attendants, thirty-two Kanchuki (doorkeepers), thirty-two Varshadhar (protectors of the inner palace), thirty-two Mahattarak (those who consider the work of the inner palace), thirty-two gold, thirty-two silver and thirty-two gold-silver Avlamban lamps (hanging lamps-pots), thirty-two gold, thirty-two silver, thirty-two gold-silver Utkanchan lamps (lamps with a stick-torch), similarly gold, silver and gold-silver, thirty-two Panjar lamps of all three types. Gold, silver and gold-silver, thirty-two Thals, thirty-two Thalis, thirty-two Mallak (bowls), thirty-two Talika (plates), thirty-two Kalachika (spoons), thirty-two Tapika-Hastak (sandals), thirty-two Taves, thirty-two Padapiith (footrests), thirty-two Bhishika (special seat), thirty-two Karotika (lota), thirty-two beds, thirty-two Prati-shayya (small beds), thirty-two Hansasan, thirty-two Krounchasan, thirty-two Garudasana, thirty-two Unnatasana, thirty-two Awnatasana, thirty-two Dirghasana, thirty-two Bhadraasana, thirty-two Pakshasana, thirty-two Makrasana, thirty-two Padmasana, thirty-two Dikswastikasana, thirty-two oil cans, etc. should all be known according to the Rajprasniya Sutra, including thirty-two mustard seed cans, thirty-two Kubja maids, etc. should all be known according to the Aupapattik Sutra, including thirty-two maids from the Paras country, thirty-two umbrellas, thirty-two umbrella-holding maids, thirty-two chamars, thirty-two chamar-holding maids, thirty-two fans, thirty-two fan-holding maids, thirty-two Karotika (tambul's karandaye), thirty-two Karotika-holding maids, thirty-two Dhaatri (milk-feeding nurse), including thirty-two Ank-Dhaatri, thirty-two Angamardika (maids who massage the body), thirty-two maids who bathe, thirty-two maids who adorn, thirty-two maids who grind sandalwood, thirty-two maids who grind tambul-churn, thirty-two maids who protect the storehouse, thirty-two maids who entertain, thirty-two maids who stay near the assembly, thirty-two maids who act, thirty-two Kautumbik (maids who live together), thirty-two maids who cook, thirty-two maids who protect the storehouse, thirty-two young women, thirty-two maids who wear flowers, thirty-two maids who perform Bali karma, thirty-two maids who spread the bed, thirty-two inner and thirty-two outer guards, thirty-two maids who make garlands and thirty-two maids who grind. This... 

Page #68:
---------------------------
[Third Class]
[27]  A great deal of gold, silver, bronze, cloth, and abundant wealth, including gold, was given, which was sufficient for seven generations to give and enjoy willingly. Similarly, Aniyaskumar also gave each woman one koti of gold, one koti of silver, etc., all the aforementioned things, as well as one grinding maid and a lot of gold, silver, etc., divided among them. Aniyaskumar began to live in high palaces, enjoying abundant pleasures with the sound of drums.
At that time, Lord Arishtanemi Swami arrived in the garden called Srivan. He requested the proper reception, and began to wander, inspiring his soul with restraint and penance. The people reached the garden to hear his Dharmadesha, and after hearing the Dharmadesha, they returned to their homes.
Hearing the noise of the crowd, Aniyaskumar also resolved to go near the Lord. He reached the service of the Lord. He also heard the Lord's discourse. The effect of the discourse produced detachment in his heart. Finally, like Gautamkumar, he was initiated into the Lord's feet. After taking initiation, he studied the Samayik to the fourteen Purvas. He followed the initiation for twenty years. At the end, he performed a one-month Sanlekhana and attained Siddha-Gati on Shatrujaya mountain.
_ Sudharma Swami said, "O Jambu! In this way, Shraman Bhagwan Mahavira Swami had explained the meaning of the first study of the third class of the eighth anga Antagad."
2-6 One should also know the description of the studies from Anantasen to Shatrusen. All of them were married to thirty-two excellent daughters, and all of them were given thirty-two of the aforementioned things. They followed restraint for twenty years and studied the fourteen Purvas. Finally, they attained the five Siddha-Gatis on Shatrujaya mountain by performing a one-month Sanlekhana.
Discussion - This sutra describes the remaining life of Aniyaskumar and the five Shreshthi-sons, Anantasen, etc.
'Peeidaan' means 'pritidan', which is given due to joy. Here, the meaning of 'dan' is 'paritoshik-premopahar'. Generally, 'pritidan' is especially famous in the sense of dowry. Currently, the money and respect given by the girl's side to the boy's side on the occasion of marriage is called dowry, but this sutra reveals that this dowry was given by the father of the groom to the groom on the occasion of marriage. Which was distributed by the groom among the married girls.
'Navaram samaaiyamaaiyaaiin chaudas puvvaai' - The word 'Navaram' read in this sentence is an indeclinable word that reveals the difference in the study of Gautamkumar and Aniyaskumar. The meaning of the word 'Navaram' is "so special or so different." The difference in the study of Aniyaskumar and Gautamkumar has been expressed by the sutrakar through the words Samaaiya....... Puvvaai. The meaning is that Gautamkumar had only studied eleven angas, but Aniyaskumar had studied eleven angas as well as fourteen Purvas.
14 Purvas - When establishing the Tirtha, the Tirthankara Bhagwan first explained the meaning to the Ganadharas. 

Page #69:
---------------------------
##  [28]

The Antakṛddasa Upadesa or the Ganadhara Deva first weave the meaning into a sutra form, which is called the Purva. These Purvas are 14 in number, which are as follows:

1. **Utpāda Purva:** This Purva elaborates on the production of all substances and all Paryayas.
2. **Agrayani Purva:** This describes the magnitude of all substances, all Paryayas, and all living beings.
3. **Virya-Pravada Purva:** This describes the Virya (power) of beings with and without karma, as well as non-living beings.
4. **Asti-Nasti-Pravada Purva:** This Purva describes all things that exist in the world, such as Dharma-Astikaya, and all things that do not exist, such as Akasha-Kusuma.
5. **Jnana-Pravada Purva:** This elaborates on the five types of knowledge, including Mati-Jnana.
6. **Satya-Pravada Purva:** This elaborates on the true form of restraint or the true word.
7. **Atma-Pravada Purva:** This describes the soul from the perspective of various Nayas and Matas.
8. **Karma-Pravada Purva:** This elaborates on the eight karmas, their nature, state, division, and region.
9. **Pratyakhyana-Pravada Purva:** This describes the various types of Pratyakhyanas.
10. **Vidya-Anuvada Purva:** This describes various Vidya and Mantras.
11. **Avandhya Purva:** This describes actions that bear good fruits, such as knowledge, penance, and restraint, and actions that bear bad fruits, such as negligence, which are not futile.
12. **Pranayuṣya-Pravada Purva:** This elaborates on the ten Pranas and the various types of Aayu.
13. **Kriya-Vishala Purva:** This describes bodily actions, actions related to the authority, and actions that are beneficial in restraint.
14. **Loka-Bindusar-Purva:** This is the most excellent point in the Shruta-Jnana, like a point in a scripture. 

Page #70:
---------------------------
Seventh Study
Saran
4 - At that time, in that era, there was the city of Dwaraka. As before, Vasudeva was the king. His queen was Dharini. She saw a lion in a dream after conception. When the time came, she gave birth to a son and named him Saran Kumar. He received a dowry of fifty-fifty items in his marriage. Saran Kumar studied from Samayik to fourteen Purvas. He observed the twenty-year Diksha Paryaya. The rest of the story is like that of Gautam. He attained Siddhi after performing a one-month Sanlekhana on Shatrunjaya mountain.
1. The supplementary text of the present Jāv is included in the 9th Sutra of the first section. 

Page #71:
---------------------------
## Eighth Study
### The Elephant Prince
### Exposition
5- Jambū asked Ārya Sudharma Swami: "If the Śramaṇa Bhagavān Mahāvīra has explained the meaning of the seventh study of the third section of the Antagadaśā, then what meaning has the Śramaṇa Bhagavān Mahāvīra explained for the eighth study of the third section of the Antagadaśā?"
Sudharma Swami replied: "O Jambū! In that time, in that era, in the city of Dwārkā, as described in the first study, until the Arhat Ariṣṭanemi arrived..."

### The Resolve of Six Ascetics
6- "In that time, in that era, there were six ascetics, brothers, who were the disciples of the Arhat Ariṣṭanemi. They appeared to be of similar size, skin, and condition. Their complexion was like a blue lotus, the inner part of a buffalo's horn, a special type of red, and the flower of the flax plant. They had chests marked with a Śrīvatsa, and their hair was soft like flowers and curly like earrings. All of them appeared to be like Nalakūbara (the son of Vaiśravaṇa).

"Then (after being initiated), those six ascetics, on the day they were to be shaved and leave their homes to become ascetics, would go to the Arhat Ariṣṭanemi, pay their respects, and bow down. After paying their respects and bowing down, they would say: 'We desire, O Bhagavān! to live for the rest of our lives, following your teachings, with the sixfold restraint, with the sixfold restraint, with the sixfold restraint, with the sixfold restraint, with the sixfold restraint, with the sixfold restraint, with the sixfold restraint, with the sixfold restraint, with the sixfold restraint, with the sixfold restraint, with the sixfold restraint, with the sixfold restraint, with the sixfold restraint, with the sixfold restraint, with the sixfold restraint, with the sixfold restraint, with the sixfold restraint, with the sixfold restraint, with the sixfold restraint, with the sixfold restraint, with the sixfold restraint, with the sixfold restraint, with the sixfold restraint, with the sixfold restraint, with the sixfold restraint, with the sixfold restraint, with the sixfold restraint, with the sixfold restraint, with the sixfold restraint, with the sixfold restraint, with the sixfold restraint, with the sixfold restraint, with the sixfold restraint, with the sixfold restraint, with the sixfold restraint, with the sixfold restraint, with the sixfold restraint, with the sixfold restraint, with the sixfold restraint, with the sixfold restraint, with the sixfold restraint, with the sixfold restraint, with the sixfold restraint, with the sixfold restraint, with the sixfold restraint, with the sixfold restraint, with the sixfold restraint, with the sixfold restraint, with the sixfold restraint, with the sixfold restraint, with the sixfold restraint, with the sixfold restraint, with the sixfold restraint, with the sixfold restraint, with the sixfold restraint, with the sixfold restraint, with the sixfold restraint, with the sixfold restraint, with the sixfold restraint, with the sixfold restraint, with the sixfold restraint, with the sixfold restraint, with the sixfold restraint, with the sixfold restraint, with the sixfold restraint, with the sixfold restraint, with the sixfold restraint, with the sixfold restraint, with the sixfold restraint, with the sixfold restraint, with the sixfold restraint, with the sixfold restraint, with the sixfold restraint, with the sixfold restraint, with the sixfold restraint, with the sixfold restraint, with the sixfold restraint, with the sixfold restraint, with the sixfold restraint, with the sixfold restraint, with the sixfold restraint, with the sixfold restraint, with the sixfold restraint, with the sixfold restraint, with the sixfold restraint, with the sixfold restraint, with the sixfold restraint, with the sixfold restraint, with the sixfold restraint, with the sixfold restraint, with the sixfold restraint, with the sixfold restraint, with the sixfold restraint, with the sixfold restraint, with the sixfold restraint, with the sixfold restraint, with the sixfold restraint, with the sixfold restraint, with the sixfold restraint, with the sixfold restraint, with the sixfold restraint, with the sixfold restraint, with the sixfold restraint, with the sixfold restraint, with the sixfold restraint, with the sixfold restraint, with the sixfold restraint, with the sixfold restraint, with the sixfold restraint, with the sixfold restraint, with the sixfold restraint, with the sixfold restraint, with the sixfold restraint, with the sixfold restraint, with the sixfold restraint, with the sixfold restraint, with the sixfold restraint, with the sixfold restraint, with the sixfold restraint, with the sixfold restraint, with the sixfold restraint, with the sixfold restraint, with the sixfold restraint, with the sixfold restraint, with the sixfold restraint, with the sixfold restraint, with the sixfold restraint, with the sixfold restraint, with the sixfold restraint, with the sixfold restraint, with the sixfold restraint, with the sixfold restraint, with the sixfold restraint, with the sixfold restraint, with the sixfold restraint, with the sixfold restraint, with the sixfold restraint, with the sixfold restraint, with the sixfold restraint, with the sixfold restraint, with the sixfold restraint, with the sixfold restraint, with the sixfold restraint, with the sixfold restraint, with the sixfold restraint, with the sixfold restraint, with the sixfold restraint, with the sixfold restraint, with the sixfold restraint, with the sixfold restraint, with the sixfold restraint, with the sixfold restraint, with the sixfold restraint, with the sixfold restraint, with the sixfold restraint, with the sixfold restraint, with the sixfold restraint, with the sixfold restraint, with the sixfold restraint, with the sixfold restraint, with the sixfold restraint, with the sixfold restraint, with the sixfold restraint, with the sixfold restraint, with the sixfold restraint, with the sixfold restraint, with the sixfold restraint, with the sixfold restraint, with the sixfold restraint, with the sixfold restraint, with the sixfold restraint, with the sixfold restraint, with the sixfold restraint, with the sixfold restraint, with the sixfold restraint, with the sixfold restraint, with the sixfold restraint, with the sixfold restraint, with the sixfold restraint, with the sixfold restraint, with the sixfold restraint, with the sixfold restraint, with the sixfold restraint, with the sixfold restraint, with the sixfold restraint, with the sixfold restraint, with the sixfold restraint, with the sixfold restraint, with the sixfold restraint, with the sixfold restraint, with the sixfold restraint, with the sixfold restraint
Page #72:
---------------------------
[Third Class]
[31 Having become ascetics, on that very day, they bowed and paid homage to the Arhat Arishtanemi and spoke thus:
'O Bhagavan! We desire that, having received your command, we may wander continuously throughout our lives, purifying our souls through the practice of the Bele-Bele tapas.'
Arhat Arishtanemi said: 'Devanupriyo! Do as you please, there should be no delay in doing good deeds.'
Then, upon the Bhagavan's saying this, those six monks, having received the command of Bhagavan Arishtanemi, began to wander, practicing the Bele-Bele tapas for the rest of their lives. The entry of the six ascetics into the house of Devaki
7-Then those six ascetics, on another occasion, on the day of the completion of the Bele-Bele tapas, in the first watch, performed their study, and like Gautama Swami (in the second watch, they became absorbed in meditation, in the third watch, they remained free from physical and mental agitation, and they copied the mouth-cloth, the vessel, and the garments. After that, they placed the vessels in their bags, and taking up their bags, they went to the service of Bhagavan Arishtanemi Swami. They bowed and paid homage, and then they made a request)-.
'O Bhagavan! We desire to wander for alms in the city of Dwaraka, in three groups of two, with your permission, on the day of the completion of the Bele-Bele tapas, throughout [according to the virtuous conduct, in the houses of the rich and the poor, etc.].'
Then those six ascetics, having received the command of Arhat Arishtanemi, bowed and paid homage to Arhat Arishtanemi. Having bowed and paid homage, they departed from the presence of Arhat Arishtanemi, from the Sahasambavana garden. Then, in three groups of two, they moved with ease, throughout [free from agitation and confusion, seeing the ground for four hands' length, following the rules of walking, they came to where the city of Dwaraka was. Arriving there, in the city of Dwaraka, 

Page #73:
---------------------------
[32]
[Following the virtuous conduct of the Antakṛddasa, they began to wander for alms in all houses, rich and poor.]
Discussion: This sūtra states that the six muni-bhagawan, having received permission from Bhagavan Ariṣṭanemi, divided themselves into three groups and went to Dwarka city to partake of the bēla parana. This sūtra explains when and how the sadhus go for alms.
8. There, one of the groups, consisting of twelve, wandered through the city, from house to house, in the high, low, and middle classes, seeking alms. They came to the palace of King Vasudeva and his queen Devaki.
_ At that time, the queen Devaki saw the group of two munis coming towards her. Seeing them, she was delighted and her heart was filled with joy. [Her mind was filled with supreme bliss, and her heart blossomed like a lotus.] She rose from her seat and went seven or eight steps towards the muni-yugal. Going forward, she circumambulated them three times from the south. After circumambulating them, she bowed and prostrated herself. After bowing and prostrating herself, she went to the food hall. Entering the food hall, she filled a plate with lion-mane modakas and offered it to the munis. She bowed and prostrated herself, and then dismissed them.
After that, the second group of twelve, consisting of two, wandered through the city, from the high to the low classes.
Of those three groups, one group of twelve wandered through the city of Dwarka, from house to house, in the high, low, and middle classes, seeking alms. They entered the palace of King Vasudeva and his queen Devaki.
At that time, Queen Devaki saw the group of two munis coming towards her. Seeing them, she was delighted and her heart was filled with joy. [Her mind was filled with supreme bliss, and her heart blossomed like a lotus.] She rose from her seat and went seven or eight steps towards the muni-yugal. Going forward, she circumambulated them three times from the south. After circumambulating them, she bowed and prostrated herself. After bowing and prostrating herself, she went to the food hall. Entering the food hall, she filled a plate with lion-mane modakas and offered it to the munis. She bowed and prostrated herself, and then dismissed them.
After the first group returned, the second group of twelve, consisting of two, also wandered through the city of Dwarka, from house to house, in the high, low, and middle classes, seeking alms. They entered the palace of Queen Devaki.
Discussion: This sūtra describes how the first and second groups of six sadhus of Bhagavan Ariṣṭanemi were honored and respected by Queen Devaki, the wife of King Vasudeva, and how they were given lion-mane modakas as alms according to the proper procedure. The two groups of munis left Devaki's house after receiving food. The sūtrakar then continues to speak about the third group:
1.
This is included in the previous paragraph. 

Page #74:
---------------------------
[Third Class]
[33 Devaki's Doubt About Returning and Its Solution
9-After that, the third Sanghāḍa of the twelve yojanas long city came to Devaki Devi, and she gave them a return gift. After giving them the return gift, she spoke to them in this way:
"Devāṇuppiya! Does Krishna Vasudeva, in this twelve yojanas long city, nine yojanas wide, which is like a direct heaven, not get food and water from the Shraman Nigranthas who are high and low, and in the middle class families, while they are wandering for alms? If so, then why do they have to go back to the same families for food and water?"
Hearing this, the monks said to Devaki Devi: "Devāṇuppiya! It is not true that in this twelve yojanas long city, which is like a direct heaven, the Shraman Nigranthas do not get food and water from the high, low, and middle class families while they are wandering for alms. And the monks do not go back to the same houses for food a second or third time."
1. 3. 5.
99
Sutra-7 of Class-3 Sutra-7 of Class-3 Sutra-6 of Class-3 Sutra-3 of
2. 4. 6.
Sutra-6 of Class-1 Sutra-6 of Class-3 Sutra-6 of Class-3 
"Devāṇuppiya! We, in the city of Bhaddilpur, are the sons of Naga, who is the son of Sulasa, and we have six brothers, who are like our own selves, and we are like Nal and Kubbera, and we are Arhat Arishthanemi, and we have renounced the world, and we are free from birth and death, and we are like the mountains. So, we worship and bow down to Arhat Arishthanemi every day, and we have this vow: We wish, O Lord! that you may be happy and prosperous, and that you may be free from all suffering, Devāṇuppiya.
So, we, the Arhats, worship Arishthanemi, and we go to the temple every sixth day. Today, we are on the sixth day of the fast, and we have come to your house for alms, after having gone to the first house, and then to the second house, and then to the third house, and then to the fourth house, and then to the fifth house, and then to the sixth house, and then to the seventh house, and then to the eighth house, and then to the ninth house, and then to the tenth house, and then to the eleventh house, and then to the twelfth house, and then to the thirteenth house, and then to the fourteenth house, and then to the fifteenth house, and then to the sixteenth house, and then to the seventeenth house, and then to the eighteenth house, and then to the nineteenth house, and then to the twentieth house, and then to the twenty-first house, and then to the twenty-second house, and then to the twenty-third house, and then to the twenty-fourth house, and then to the twenty-fifth house, and then to the twenty-sixth house, and then to the twenty-seventh house, and then to the twenty-eighth house, and then to the twenty-ninth house, and then to the thirtieth house, and then to the thirty-first house, and then to the thirty-second house, and then to the thirty-third house, and then to the thirty-fourth house, and then to the thirty-fifth house, and then to the thirty-sixth house, and then to the thirty-seventh house, and then to the thirty-eighth house, and then to the thirty-ninth house, and then to the fortieth house, and then to the forty-first house, and then to the forty-second house, and then to the forty-third house, and then to the forty-fourth house, and then to the forty-fifth house, and then to the forty-sixth house, and then to the forty-seventh house, and then to the forty-eighth house, and then to the forty-ninth house, and then to the fiftieth house, and then to the fifty-first house, and then to the fifty-second house, and then to the fifty-third house, and then to the fifty-fourth house, and then to the fifty-fifth house, and then to the fifty-sixth house, and then to the fifty-seventh house, and then to the fifty-eighth house, and then to the fifty-ninth house, and then to the sixtieth house, and then to the sixty-first house, and then to the sixty-second house, and then to the sixty-third house, and then to the sixty-fourth house, and then to the sixty-fifth house, and then to the sixty-sixth house, and then to the sixty-seventh house, and then to the sixty-eighth house, and then to the sixty-ninth house, and then to the seventieth house, and then to the seventy-first house, and then to the seventy-second house, and then to the seventy-third house, and then to the seventy-fourth house, and then to the seventy-fifth house, and then to the seventy-sixth house, and then to the seventy-seventh house, and then to the seventy-eighth house, and then to the seventy-ninth house, and then to the eightieth house, and then to the eighty-first house, and then to the eighty-second house, and then to the eighty-third house, and then to the eighty-fourth house, and then to the eighty-fifth house, and then to the eighty-sixth house, and then to the eighty-seventh house, and then to the eighty-eighth house, and then to the eighty-ninth house, and then to the ninetieth house, and then to the ninety-first house, and then to the ninety-second house, and then to the ninety-third house, and then to the ninety-fourth house, and then to the ninety-fifth house, and then to the ninety-sixth house, and then to the ninety-seventh house, and then to the ninety-eighth house, and then to the ninety-ninth house, and then to the one hundredth house, and then to the one hundred and first house, and then to the one hundred and second house, and then to the one hundred and third house, and then to the one hundred and fourth house, and then to the one hundred and fifth house, and then to the one hundred and sixth house, and then to the one hundred and seventh house, and then to the one hundred and eighth house, and then to the one hundred and ninth house, and then to the one hundred and tenth house, and then to the one hundred and eleventh house, and then to the one hundred and twelfth house, and then to the one hundred and thirteenth house, and then to the one hundred and fourteenth house, and then
Page #75:
---------------------------
[34]
[Antakruddasha "Devanupriya! The truth is that we are six brothers, sons of the Naga Gathapati of Bhaddilpur city and his Sulsa wife. All of us, six brothers, are exactly alike, like the Nalkubbara. After hearing the Dharma-Upadesha from the Arihant Arishtanemi, we were filled with fear of the world and fear of birth and death, and we became monks, taking the vows of Shraman Dharma. After that, on the very day we took the vows, we paid our respects to Arihant Arishtanemi and, after paying our respects, we asked for his permission to do this: "O Bhagavan! With your permission, we wish to wander for the rest of our lives, constantly engaging our souls in the austerities of Bele-Bele." The Lord said, "Devanupriya! Do what brings you happiness, do not be careless."
After receiving the permission of Arihant Arishtanemi, we began to wander, constantly engaging in the austerities of Bele-Bele for the rest of our lives. So today, we six brothers, on the day of the Parana of the Bele austerities, have come to your house after studying the scriptures in the first watch, meditating in the second watch, and receiving the permission of Arihant Arishtanemi in the third watch, and after begging for alms in the three Sanghatakas, in high, low, and middle castes. So Devanupriya! It is not that we are the same monks who came to your house in the first two Sanghatakas. In fact, we are different. Those monks told Devaki Devi this, and after saying this, they went in the same direction from which they had come.
Discussion- The third group of Sadhu-Yugal also came to Devaki's house for alms, and because of the similarity in their appearance and form, Devaki thought that the same Yugal who had come before had come again for the third time. This is because disciplined monks do not come to the house of a householder again and again for specific alms. In the present Sutra, the Yugal has resolved the doubt that arose in Devaki's mind.
The Sutrakar further describes the new turmoil that this resolution created in Devaki's mind, saying:
The identification of the sons
10-Therefore, Devaki Devi, with this appearance, thought about it, pondered it, and many thoughts arose in her mind- "Indeed, I was told by the young monk in the city of Polaspur- "Devanupriya! You will have eight sons, similar to the Nalkubbara, and no other sons like them will be born in your house." That is wrong. This is clearly visible- in your house, there are indeed other sons like them [similar, similar, similar, like blue lotus, white lotus, iron flower, like the Nalkubbara, with a crown like a crown, with flowers, earrings, and a beautiful face]. I will go to Arihant Arishtanemi, pay my respects, and after paying my respects, I will ask him about this appearance." With this thought, she became restless, and with this restlessness, she went to the Koḍambīya Pariṣad, and after informing them, she said this- "It is a great thing to do [with equal, suitable, even, hooves, and tails, with horns that are equal in size, with a body made of Jambunaya, with a beautiful face, with a beautiful face, with a beautiful face, with a beautiful face, with a beautiful face, with a beautiful face, with a beautiful face, with a beautiful face, with a beautiful face, with a beautiful face, with a beautiful face, with a beautiful face, with a beautiful face, with a beautiful face, with a beautiful face, with a beautiful face, with a beautiful face, with a beautiful face, with a beautiful face, with a beautiful face, with a beautiful face, with a beautiful face, with a beautiful face, with a beautiful face, with a beautiful face, with a beautiful face, with a beautiful face, with a beautiful face, with a beautiful face, with a beautiful face, with a beautiful face, with a beautiful face, with a beautiful face, with a beautiful face, with a beautiful face, with a beautiful face, with a beautiful face, with a beautiful face, with a beautiful face, with a beautiful face, with a beautiful face, with a beautiful face, with a beautiful face, with a beautiful face, with a beautiful face, with a beautiful face, with a beautiful face, with a beautiful face, with a beautiful face, with a beautiful face, with a beautiful face, with a beautiful face, with a beautiful face, with a beautiful face, with a beautiful face, with a beautiful face, with a beautiful face, with a beautiful face, with a beautiful face, with a beautiful face, with a beautiful face, with a beautiful face, with a beautiful face, with a beautiful face, with a beautiful face, with a beautiful face, with a beautiful face, with a beautiful face, with a beautiful face, with a beautiful face, with a beautiful face, with a beautiful face, with a beautiful face, with a beautiful face, with a beautiful face, with a beautiful face, with a beautiful face, with a beautiful face, with a beautiful face, with a beautiful face, with a beautiful face, with a beautiful face, with a beautiful face, with a beautiful face, with a beautiful face, with a beautiful face, with a beautiful face, with a beautiful face, with a beautiful face, with a beautiful face, with a beautiful face, with a beautiful face, with a beautiful face, with a beautiful face, with a beautiful face, with a beautiful face, with a beautiful face, with a beautiful face, with a beautiful face, with a beautiful face, with a beautiful face, with a beautiful face, with a beautiful face, with a beautiful face, with a beautiful face, with a beautiful face, with a beautiful face, with a beautiful face, with a beautiful face, with a beautiful face, with a beautiful face, with a beautiful face, with a beautiful face, with a beautiful face, with a beautiful face, with a beautiful face, with a beautiful face, with a beautiful face, with a beautiful face, with a beautiful face, with a beautiful face, with a beautiful face, with a beautiful face, with a beautiful face, with a beautiful face, with a beautiful face, with a beautiful face, with a beautiful face, with a beautiful face, with a beautiful face, with a beautiful face, with a beautiful face, with a beautiful face, with a beautiful face, with a beautiful face, with a beautiful face, with a beautiful face, with a beautiful face, with a beautiful face, with a beautiful face, with a beautiful face, with a beautiful face, with a beautiful face, with a beautiful face, with a beautiful face, with a beautiful face, with a beautiful face, with a beautiful face, with a beautiful face, with a beautiful face, with a beautiful face, with a beautiful face, with
Page #76:
---------------------------
[Third Class]
[35
......
"We should get up to hear the Dharma, the one who gets up will get rid of his pride. So, those Koḍumbiya men, having heard this, were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up, they were determined to get up
Page #77:
---------------------------
[36]
Thinking thus, you called your family men and said to them, "Prepare a chariot of the best quality, with two excellent young bulls, swift-moving, having the same form, the same hooves and tails, the same horns, adorned with golden neck ornaments, of excellent speed, with silver bells, tied with a golden nose rope, with a blue lotus headrest, equipped with an excellent wooden yoke adorned with a group of various kinds of gem-studded bells, and two excellent ropes for yoking, and bring it here. And after completing the task, inform me." Upon hearing this command from Devaki Devi, those servant men were delighted and joyful, and placing their hands in a gesture of respect on their foreheads, they said, "Your command is acceptable to us." Accepting the command with humility, they quickly brought the chariot of the best quality, with two swift-moving bulls.

Then, like the Brahmani Devananda, Devaki Devi also bathed in the inner chambers, performed the Bali ritual, and applied the auspicious mark (mashi-tilak). Then, adorning her body with beautiful anklets, a gem-studded girdle, a necklace, excellent bangles, rings, a unique gem-studded necklace, a neck chain, a long necklace worn on the chest, a waist chain, and ornaments of various gems and jewels, she wore a fine silk garment over her body, adorned her hair with fragrant flowers of all seasons, applied sandalwood to her forehead, adorned her body with excellent ornaments, and was fragrant with the incense of the black guru. She adorned her body with ornaments of little weight and great value, like Lakshmi, and with a family of many hunchbacked maidservants, maidservants from the Chilat country, and maidservants gathered from various countries, both domestic and foreign, who wore the attire of their own country, were skilled in understanding the meaning of gestures, and were humble and efficient, along with the maidservants of her own country, the searchers, the old Kunchuki, and a group of respected men, she left her inner chambers and came to the place where the outer reception hall was and where the chariot of the best quality was standing. She mounted the chariot of the best quality.

(She came to where Arishta-nemi Bhagavan was, and seeing the extraordinary qualities of the Tirthankara) she descended from the chariot of the best quality and, surrounded by her maidservants and other family members, began to approach Bhagavan Arishta-nemi with five types of approaches. These approaches are: (1) giving up possessions with attachment, (2) not giving up possessions without attachment, (3) bowing the body with humility, (4) joining both hands upon seeing Bhagavan, and (5) focusing the mind. With these five approaches, Devaki Devi came to where Arishta-nemi Bhagavan was and, circumambulating Bhagavan three times in the clockwise direction, offered her respects and salutations. Offering her respects and salutations, she began to worship with humility, joining her hands.

Then, the Arhant Arishta-nemi addressed Devaki, saying, "O Devaki! Did you have this kind of spiritual, thoughtful, prayerful, mental, and resolved thought arise in your mind upon seeing these six non-householders: that in the city of Pola-shapur, Ati-mukta-kumara gave birth to eight sons, all equal, like the Nala-kubera, and that in the Bharat-kshetra, other mothers did not give birth to such sons?" 

Page #78:
---------------------------
[Third Chapter]
[37] The prophecy was proven false, because other mothers in the Bharat Kshetra have also given birth to such sons. Knowing this, you went out to ask about this matter and came to me quickly.
Devaki Devi! Is this true? Devaki said - 'Yes Lord, it is true.'
Discussion - When Devaki Devi saw the disciples of Lord Arishtanemi coming to her house for the third time, a resolve arose in her heart. To ascertain the subject of this resolve, she went to the feet of Lord Arishtanemi. The Lord described her heart's resolve in clear words. All these things have been shown in the present sutra.
"Ajzhathie Samuppanne" .......... means - Ajzhathie means spiritual - internal. Kappie - imagined, meaning various kinds of imaginations arising in the heart. Chintiye - contemplated, meaning thought repeatedly. Patthie - prayed, meaning "What is the root cause of this situation?" This curiosity happening again and again. Manogae - mental, meaning the thoughts that are in the mind are not yet revealed. Sankalp - resolve, meaning general thought.
- 'Aimumutteṇ Kumārasamaṇeṇam' means - Ati Mukta named Kumar Shraman. Ati Mukta Kumar Shraman (Shraman with a delicate body, or Shraman in the state of youth) was the younger brother of Kansa. When Kansa's wife Jiwayasha was playing with Devaki, Ati Mukta Kumar went to Jiwayasha's house for alms. Jiwayasha, engrossed in amusement and pleasure, began to mock her brother-in-law, seeing him as a muni. She said, "Brother-in-law! Come, you also play with me, participate in this amusement and pleasure." On this, Muni Ati Mukta Kumar said to Jiwayasha - 'Jiwayashe! From the womb of this Devaki, with whom you are playing at this time, eight sons will be born. These sons will be so beautiful and virtuous that no other woman in Bharatvarsha will have such sons. But the seventh son of this Devaki will kill your husband and rule over half of Bharatvarsha.' Devaki Devi had heard this in her childhood. Therefore, to resolve this, she decided to go to Lord Arishtanemi.
The necessary rules to be followed when going to the Arihant Paramatma or Sadhu-Sadhvis are called 'Abhigam'.
In the present sutra, the sutrakar has depicted the heart's resolve and doubts of Devaki Devi. Devaki Devi went to the feet of Arishtanemi Bhagwan to express her heart's feelings and was present there. Thereafter, the sutrakar says, describing what Arishtanemi Bhagwan said to pacify Devaki Devi's mind in the next sutra.
11-Evam Khalu Devaṇuppie! Teṇam Kāleṇam Teṇam Samaeṇam Bhaddilpure Nayare Nāge Nāma Gāhāvai Parivasai Aḍḍe. Tassa ṇam Nāgassa Gāhāvaissassa Sulasa Nāmam Bhāriyā Hotthā. Tae ṇam Sā Sulasa Bālattane Ceva Hariṇegamesibhattayā Yāvi Hotthā. Nemittiyeṇ Vāgariyā-Es ṇam Dāriyā Niṇḍū Bhavisai. Tae ṇam Sā Sulasa Bālapphabhiī Ceva Hariṇegamecissassa Paḍiman Karei, Karettā Kallākalim 

Page #79:
---------------------------
[38]
[ Antakrid Dasha ]
"Devanupriye! In those days, in the city of Bhaddilpur, there lived a Gahapati named Nag. He was very wealthy and had a great reputation among the citizens. Nag Gahapati had a wife named Sulasa. When Sulasa was a child, a fortune teller had said, 'This girl will be a Nindu, meaning she will give birth to dead children.' After that, Sulasa became a devotee of Harinegamesi Dev from her childhood. She had a statue of Harinegamesi Dev made. After making the statue, she would bathe every morning and perform atonement to ward off bad dreams. She would wear a wet (goli) saree and worship the statue with precious flowers. After worshipping with flowers, she would kneel down and prostrate with all five limbs, then she would eat, look at the statue, and do her other daily tasks.

Then, Harinegamesi Dev was pleased with Sulasa Gahapati's devotion and respect. After being pleased, Harinegamesi Dev made Sulasa Gahapati and you both reach the age of menstruation at the same time. Then, you both conceived at the same time, carried the pregnancy at the same time, and gave birth to children at the same time. During childbirth, Sulasa Gahapati gave birth to a dead child. Then, Harinegamesi Dev, out of compassion for Sulasa, took the dead child in his hands and brought it to you. At the same time, you also gave birth to a healthy child after nine months. Devanupriye! The children who were yours, Harinegamesi Dev took them from you with both his hands and brought them to Sulasa Gahapati. Therefore, Devaki, these are actually your children, not Sulasa Gahapati's children."

Discussion: Lord Arishtanemi, to console Devaki Devi, explained that Sulasa, the wife of Nag, was a Nindu, her devotion to Harinegamesi Dev, the Dev being pleased and sending Devaki Devi's children to Sulasa, and Sulasa's dead children being sent to Devaki Devi. 1. See the previous Sutra. 

Page #80:
---------------------------
[Third Section]
[39 This is described in the present sutra. The word 'Nemittiena' means Naimittika. An astrologer who predicts the future is called Naimittika.
The word 'Nindu' means dead-born. A woman whose children are born dead is called Nindu. There are two types of dead children - one is born dead in the womb, the other dies after birth. In the present case, the first meaning of Nindu seems to be the desired one.
In the Kalpasutra (in the section on the change of womb in the Pradeepika commentary), the word Harinaigameshi is explained as follows: 'Hareh Indrasya Naigamam Aadeshimchchatiti Harinaigameshi, Kecit Hareh Indrasya Sambandhi Naigameshi, Nama Deva iti' - meaning that there are two meanings of the word Harinaigameshi - 1. A god who desires the Naigama - order of Hari-Indra and 2. A god who is related to Hari-Indra, i.e. Naigameshi. Harinaigameshi is the commander-in-chief of the gods in the Saudharma heaven, the king Maharaja Shakrendra. It was this god who changed the womb of Bhagwan Mahavira on receiving the order of Indra.
'Ull-pad-sadaya' means - one who wears a wet (soaked) pat and shatika. Pat is the name of a garment worn on the upper body. The word shatika refers to a dhoti or saree worn on the lower body.
'Ahareiva, Nihareiva, Vareiva' means - she used to eat - she used to eat food. Nihareiva means she was relieved from the activities of defecation etc. The word Vareiva is derived from the root Vri, which means - to think, to choose, to get engaged, to beg, to cover, to serve. In the present case, the root Vri seems to be used in the sense of thinking. Then 'Vareiva' will mean she used to think, she used to think about other matters.
"Bhakti = Bahuman-Sususaae" means - by devotion, respect and service. The word Bhakti is indicative of affection, the word Bahuman is indicative of excessive respect and the word Sushrusha is indicative of service. By these words, the sutrakar has indicated three means of worshipping - proving or pleasing the Harinaigameshi god. These three things are required to prove the god. First of all, the devotee should have affection for the god in his heart, then there should be a feeling of excessive respect and honour for the god in the devotee's heart. The third means of proving the god is service to the god.
Sulsana worshipped the Harinaigameshi god, worshipped him, as a result she achieved her desired goal. This clearly proves that the worship done towards the deity can be helpful in fulfilling the desires of the devotee. The god is powerful to protect his devotee and to bestow grace upon him.
People worship gods to obtain sons etc. and due to the support of some past good deeds, they obtain sons etc. and due to excessive devotion, they consider it to be given by the god. They consider the god to be the main reason for obtaining sons etc. They are wrong, because if the god can be the instrumental cause in manifesting the fruits of past deeds, then on the contrary, if the past deeds are not supportive... 

Page #81:
---------------------------


Page #82:
---------------------------
[Third Chapter]
[41 Devaki's Desire for a Son]
. 13 - Then, in the heart of Devaki Devi, this thought, contemplation, and desire-filled mental resolve arose - "Alas! I have given birth to seven sons, all of them equal in form, like Nalakubara, yet I have not experienced the joy of even one's childhood. Even you, Krishna Vasudeva, come to me for obeisance after six months. Therefore, I consider those mothers blessed, whose sons, born from their own wombs, are greedy for breast milk, speak sweet words, babble with their lisping tongues, and whose breasts are filled with the milk that flows to their chests, and who, holding those charming children in their lotus-like, soft hands, place them in their laps and speak to them again and again with sweet and gentle words. I am surely unfortunate and devoid of merit, for I have not witnessed the childhood of even one of my sons." Thus, Devaki, with a heavy heart, placed her face in her palm (in a gesture of grief) and began to lament.
Discussion - This sutra presents a heart-wrenching depiction of the thoughts and feelings of Devaki Devi, who, despite being the mother of seven sons, is filled with sorrow at being deprived of their childhood joys.
Krishna's Solution to Devaki's Sorrow
14 - At that time, Krishna Vasudeva, adorned with all ornaments, [like those used in auspicious ceremonies, like the offering of oblations, and the auspicious reception of guests], came to Devaki Devi for obeisance. Then, Krishna Vasudeva saw Devaki Devi, and after seeing her, he took her feet in his hands. Having done so, he spoke to Devaki Devi as follows:
"Mother! You are filled with joy and happiness, [your mind is filled with bliss, you are experiencing the supreme joy, and your heart is overflowing with love for me], when you see me. Mother! Why are you filled with such sorrowful thoughts, [and why are you lamenting, with your face in your palm, and your mind filled with grief]?
Then, Devaki Devi spoke to Krishna Vasudeva as follows: "My son! I have given birth to seven sons, all of them equal in form, like Nalakubara, yet I have not experienced the joy of even one's childhood. Even you, my son, come to me for obeisance after six months. Therefore, I consider those mothers blessed..." 
1. Sutra-5 of Chapter 3.
2. Sutra-12 of Chapter 3. 

Page #83:
---------------------------
"The Antakrid Dasha Tana said to Vasudeva, 'O Dev! O Devi! You said to me, 'O Amma! I will come to you when I have finished my meal.' I will go now, just as my younger brother will come to me. O Dev! O Devi! I will go to the Posahala and meet you there.'

Then he left. As soon as he left the Posahala, he arrived at the Posahala. When he arrived, he was just as he was before. He took his eighth meal, which was a golden bowl filled with delicious food, and he ate it. He finished his meal and then he went to the Hari Negamesi Dev, thinking about him all the time.

[42]

Then, as Vasudeva was finishing his eighth meal, the Hari Negamesi Dev's seat moved. The Hari Negamesi Dev saw that his seat was moving, and he went to it. When he arrived, he sat down. Then, the Hari Negamesi Dev thought to himself, 'This is how it is. In the Jambudvipa, in the Bharata Varsha, in the city of Baravayi, there is a Posahala where a man named Vasudeva is eating his eighth meal. He is thinking about me all the time. This is why I have come to him.'

He thought this, and then he turned to the north-east direction. He turned and then he flew through the air, and he flew for many yojanas. He flew over:

(1) the land of the Rayanas, (2) the land of the Vairanas, (3) the land of the Veruliyas, (4) the land of the Lohiyakkhas, (5) the land of the Masaragallas, (6) the land of the Hansagabhas, (7) the land of the Pulgas, (8) the land of the Sogandhiyas, (9) the land of the Joirsas, (10) the land of the Ankas, (11) the land of the Anjanas, (12) the land of the Rayayas, (13) the land of the Jayaruvas, (14) the land of the Anjanapulayas, (15) the land of the Falhihas, (16) the land of the Ritthas.

He flew over all these lands, and then he arrived at the land of the Ahasuhumes. He flew over this land, and then he saw Vasudeva, who was trembling with fear. Then, from the sky, there came many beautiful chariots, adorned with jewels and precious stones, and they were driven by beautiful women. They were all shining brightly, and they were filled with beautiful music. They were all flying through the air, and they were all coming towards Vasudeva.

Then, the Hari Negamesi Dev, who was in the sky, saw Vasudeva, and he said to him, 'O Dev! O Devi! I am the Hari Negamesi Dev, and I have come to you. I have come to you because you were thinking about me while you were eating your eighth meal. I have come to you because you were thinking about me all the time. I have come to you because you were thinking about me. I have come to you because you were thinking about me. I have come to you because you were thinking about me. I have come to you because you were thinking about me. I have come to you because you were thinking about me. I have come to you because you were thinking about me. I have come to you because you were thinking about me. I have come to you because you were thinking about me. I have come to you because you were thinking about me. I have come to you because you were thinking about me. I have come to you because you were thinking about me. I have come to you because you were thinking about me. I have come to you because you were thinking about me. I have come to you because you were thinking about me. I have come to you because you were thinking about me. I have come to you because you were thinking about me. I have come to you because you were thinking about me. I have come to you because you were thinking about me. I have come to you because you were thinking about me. I have come to you because you were thinking about me. I have come to you because you were thinking about me. I have come to you because you were thinking about me. I have come to you because you were thinking about me. I have come to you because you were thinking about me. I have come to you because you were thinking about me. I have come to you because you were thinking about me. I have come to you because you were thinking about me. I have come to you because you were thinking about me. I have come to you because you were thinking about me. I have come to you because you were thinking about me. I have come to you because you were thinking about me. I have come to you because you were thinking about me. I have come to you because you were thinking about me. I have come to you because you were thinking about me. I have come to you because you were thinking about me. I have come to you because you were thinking about me. I have come to you because you were thinking about me. I have come to you because you were thinking about me. I have come to you because you were thinking about me. I have come to you because you were thinking about me. I have come to you because you were thinking about me. I have come to you because you were thinking about me. I have come to you because you were thinking about me. I have come to you because you were thinking about me. I have come to you because you were thinking about me. I have come to you because you were thinking about me. I have come to you because you were thinking about me. I have come to you because you were thinking about me. I have come to you because you were thinking about me. I have come to you because you were thinking about me. I have come to you because you were thinking about me. I have come to you because you were thinking about me. I have come to you because you were thinking about me. I have come to you because you were thinking about me. I have come to you because you were thinking about me. I have come to you because you were thinking about me. I have come to you because you were thinking about me. I have come to you because you were thinking about me. I have come to you because you were thinking about me. I have come to you because you were thinking about me. I have come to you because you were thinking about me. I have come to you because you were thinking about me. I have come to you because you were thinking about me. I have come to you because you were thinking about me. I have come to you because you were thinking about me. I have come to you because you were thinking about me. I have come to you because you were thinking
Page #84:
---------------------------
[Third Class]
[43 Sandisahi, O Devānuppeyā! What shall I do? What shall I give? What shall I offer? Or what is your heart's desire?"
. Then, that Kanha Vasudeva saw that Harinegamesi Dev, who was like an ant, was passing by. Having seen him, he offered him a seat, and having offered him a seat, he received him with folded hands and said thus:
"I desire, O Devānuppeyā! a younger brother, a beloved one, who is separated."
At that time, Shri Krishna Vasudeva, having bathed, performed the bali-karma, performed auspicious rituals and atonement, and adorned himself with clothes and ornaments, came quickly to pay his respects to Devaki Mata. He, Krishna Vasudeva, saw Devaki Mata, and having seen her, he bowed at her feet. Having bowed at her feet, he asked Devaki Devi thus:
"O Mother! Previously, whenever I came to pay my respects to you, you would be overjoyed and delighted upon seeing me. But Mother! Why do you appear sad, worried, and lost in thought today?"
Upon being asked this question by Krishna, Devaki Devi said to Krishna Vasudeva thus: "O Son! The truth is that I have given birth to seven sons who are of the same form and appearance. But I have not enjoyed the pleasure of their childhood or their childish play. Son! You also come to pay your respects to me at intervals of six months. Therefore, I am thinking that those mothers are blessed and virtuous who breastfeed their children, engage in sweet conversation with them, and experience the joy of their childish play. I am unfortunate and without merit. Thinking all this, I am sad and lost in thought."
Hearing his mother's words, Shri Krishna Vasudeva said to Devaki Maharani thus: "Mother! Do not be sad or worried and lost in thought. I will make an effort so that a younger brother of mine will be born." Saying this, Shri Krishna comforted and reassured his mother with kind, pleasant, and pleasing words. Having reassured his mother, Shri Krishna left his mother's palace and went to the place where the dispensary was. Having arrived there, he performed the Ashtama-bhakta tapa (fasting) just as Abhayakumar had done to worship his friend Dev. In particular, he worshipped Harinegamesi Dev. He performed the Ashtama-bhakta tapa, and having performed it, he stayed in the dispensary, taking medicine, observing celibacy, renouncing ornaments of gems and gold, renouncing garlands, dyes, and ointments, renouncing weapons, maces, etc., i.e., all beginnings and initiations, and becoming solitary, he sat on a dais of sand and performed the tapa of fasting, constantly thinking of Harinegamesi Dev in his mind.
Then, as Krishna Vasudeva's Ashtama-bhakta tapa was about to be completed, the seat of Harinegamesi Dev moved. Seeing his seat moving, he used his knowledge of intuition. Then, Harinegamesi Dev had this inner thought: "In the island called Jambudvipa, in Bharatavarsha, in the southern part of Bharat, in the city of Dwaraka, in the dispensary, Krishna Vasudeva is performing the Ashtama-bhakta tapa and constantly remembering me in his mind. Therefore, it is appropriate for me to appear (go) near Krishna Vasudeva." Thinking this, the Dev went in the northeast direction (Ishaan kona) and performed the Vaikriya-samudghāt. 

Page #85:
---------------------------
[44]
Antakruddasha, meaning the one who creates the Uttar Vaikriya body, extracts the Jiva-pradeshas to create a body of countless yojanas. He does so by discarding the non-essential pudgalas of the following gems: (1) Karketaan Ratna, (2) Vajra Ratna, (3) Vaidurya Ratna, (4) Lohitaksha Ratna, (5) Masaragalla Ratna, (6) Hansagarbha Ratna, (7) Pulaka Ratna, (8) Saugandhika Ratna, (9) Jyotir-asa Ratna, (10) Anka Ratna, (11) Anjana Ratna, (12) Rajata Ratna, (13) Jatarupa Ratna, (14) Anjanapulaka Ratna, (15) Sphatika Ratna, (16) Ristha Ratna, and then absorbing the essential pudgalas. After absorbing them, he creates the Uttar Vaikriya body. Then, out of compassion for Krishna Vasudeva, the deva, with his superior celestial vehicle made of gems, quickly moved towards the earth. At that time, he appeared magnificent with his pure gold-like ears, camphor, and a magnificent crown. He was adorned with a beautiful belt made of various gems, gold, and jewels, which filled him with joy. His bright face was illuminated by his beautiful, moving earrings, making his appearance very gentle. He was like the full moon of the Kartik Purnima night, situated between Shani and Mangal, giving joy to the eyes of the viewers. In other words, his face, illuminated like the autumn moon, was situated between his two shining earrings, which were like the planets Shani and Mangal. He was radiant with the brilliance of his crown and other ornaments, like the light of divine herbs. He was beautiful in form, adorned with the wealth of all seasons, and fragrant like the Meru mountain, making him appear very charming. The deva assumed this unique form. He traveled through countless islands and oceans, illuminating the Jiva-loka and the city of Dwaraka with his pure radiance. The deva, in his divine form, reached Krishna Vasudeva.

Then, the deva, wearing a fine garment of five colors and bells, stood in the sky and spoke to Krishna Vasudeva. [This is one version of the text. Another version is as follows:] The deva, with his excellent speed, agility, and strength, victorious over his enemies, skilled, and with divine speed, arrived at Jambudvipa, Bharatavarsha, and the southern part of Bharat. He stood in the sky, wearing a fine garment of five colors and bells, and spoke to Krishna Vasudeva. "O beloved of the devas! I am the great, powerful Harinaigameshi deva. Because you, while in the dispensary, took the eighth vow of devotion, keeping me in your mind, I have come here quickly. O beloved of the devas! Tell me, what can I do for you? What can I give you? What can I give to any of your relatives? What is your heart's desire?" Then, Krishna Vasudeva saw the Harinaigameshi deva standing in the sky, and seeing him, he was delighted. He completed the offering of the medicine, then joined his hands above his head and said, "O beloved of the devas! My wish is that my younger brother be born." 

Page #86:
---------------------------
[Third Section]
[45 Assurance to Devaki Devi]
15 - Then, the Hariṇegameṣī (divine being) told Vasudeva thus: "O Devānupriya (beloved of the gods)! A god from the celestial realm will be born as your younger brother after his lifespan in the celestial realm is complete. Your wish will be fulfilled. However, after his childhood, when he becomes wise and mature, and reaches youth, he will go to the great sage Ariṣṭanemi and get his head shaved, and become a monk." The Hariṇegameṣī told Vasudeva the same thing twice and thrice. After saying this, he returned to the same direction from which he had come.

Then, Vasudeva returned from the dispensary and went to Devaki Devi. After reaching her, he prostrated before her feet and said, "O Mother! I will have a younger brother. Now, you should not worry. Your wish will be fulfilled." Saying this, he comforted Devaki Devi with sweet and pleasing words, words that were charming, dear, and delightful. After comforting her, he returned to the same direction from which he had appeared.

**Explanation:** The Hariṇegameṣī, pleased, assures Krishna that he will have a younger brother, but also informs him that he will become a monk. Krishna goes to his mother Devaki and informs her about the fulfillment of her wish. This section describes Krishna's assurance to Devaki Devi.

**The Birth of Gaja-sukumara**
16 - Then, Devaki Devi, in her palace, surrounded by all kinds of comforts, with a beautiful and well-decorated interior, with a courtyard adorned with flowers, with a garden full of fragrant flowers, with a fragrant atmosphere, with a fragrant aroma, with a fragrant bed, with a beautiful and well-decorated bed, with a soft and comfortable bed, with a bed that was both cool and warm, with a bed that was deep and comfortable, with a bed that was decorated with flowers, with a bed that was decorated with a canopy, with a bed that was decorated with a beautiful and comfortable mattress, with a bed that was decorated with a beautiful and comfortable blanket, with a bed that was decorated with a beautiful and comfortable pillow, with a bed that was decorated with a beautiful and comfortable quilt, with a bed that was decorated with a beautiful and comfortable bedspread, with a bed that was decorated with a beautiful and comfortable bed sheet, with a bed that was decorated with a beautiful and comfortable bed cover, with a bed that was decorated with a beautiful and comfortable bed curtain, with a bed that was decorated with a beautiful and comfortable bed frame, with a bed that was decorated with a beautiful and comfortable bed stand, with a bed that was decorated with a beautiful and comfortable bed lamp, with a bed that was decorated with a beautiful and comfortable bed mirror, with a bed that was decorated with a beautiful and comfortable bed table, with a bed that was decorated with a beautiful and comfortable bed chair, with a bed that was decorated with a beautiful and comfortable bed stool, with a bed that was decorated with a beautiful and comfortable bed rug, with a bed that was decorated with a beautiful and comfortable bed cushion, with a bed that was decorated with a beautiful and comfortable bed blanket, with a bed that was decorated with a beautiful and comfortable bed coverlet, with a bed that was decorated with a beautiful and comfortable bedspread, with a bed that was decorated with a beautiful and comfortable bed sheet, with a bed that was decorated with a beautiful and comfortable bed cover, with a bed that was decorated with a beautiful and comfortable bed curtain, with a bed that was decorated with a beautiful and comfortable bed frame, with a bed that was decorated with a beautiful and comfortable bed stand, with a bed that was decorated with a beautiful and comfortable bed lamp, with a bed that was decorated with a beautiful and comfortable bed mirror, with a bed that was decorated with a beautiful and comfortable bed table, with a bed that was decorated with a beautiful and comfortable bed chair, with a bed that was decorated with a beautiful and comfortable bed stool, with a bed that was decorated with a beautiful and comfortable bed rug, with a bed that was decorated with a beautiful and comfortable bed cushion, with a bed that was decorated with a beautiful and comfortable bed blanket, with a bed that was decorated with a beautiful and comfortable bed coverlet, with a bed that was decorated with a beautiful and comfortable bedspread, with a bed that was decorated with a beautiful and comfortable bed sheet, with a bed that was decorated with a beautiful and comfortable bed cover, with a bed that was decorated with a beautiful and comfortable bed curtain, with a bed that was decorated with a beautiful and comfortable bed frame, with a bed that was decorated with a beautiful and comfortable bed stand, with a bed that was decorated with a beautiful and comfortable bed lamp, with a bed that was decorated with a beautiful and comfortable bed mirror, with a bed that was decorated with a beautiful and comfortable bed table, with a bed that was decorated with a beautiful and comfortable bed chair, with a bed that was decorated with a beautiful and comfortable bed stool, with a bed that was decorated with a beautiful and comfortable bed rug, with a bed that was decorated with a beautiful and comfortable bed cushion, with a bed that was decorated with a beautiful and comfortable bed blanket, with a bed that was decorated with a beautiful and comfortable bed coverlet, with a bed that was decorated with a beautiful and comfortable bedspread, with a bed that was decorated with a beautiful and comfortable bed sheet, with a bed that was decorated with a beautiful and comfortable bed cover, with a bed that was decorated with a beautiful and comfortable bed curtain, with a bed that was decorated with a beautiful and comfortable bed frame, with a bed that was decorated with a beautiful and comfortable bed stand, with a bed that was decorated with a beautiful and comfortable bed lamp, with a bed that was decorated with a beautiful and comfortable bed mirror, with a bed that was decorated with a beautiful and comfortable bed table, with a bed that was decorated with a beautiful and comfortable bed chair, with a bed that was decorated with a beautiful and comfortable bed stool, with a bed that was decorated with a beautiful and comfortable bed rug, with a bed that was decorated with a beautiful and comfortable bed cushion, with a bed that was decorated with a beautiful and comfortable bed blanket, with a bed that was decorated with a beautiful and comfortable bed coverlet, with a bed that was decorated with a beautiful and comfortable bedspread, with a bed that was decorated with a beautiful and comfortable bed sheet, with a bed that was decorated with a beautiful and comfortable bed cover, with a bed that was decorated with a beautiful and comfortable bed curtain, with a bed that was decorated with a beautiful and comfortable bed frame, with a bed that was decorated with a beautiful and comfortable bed stand, with a bed that was decorated with a beautiful and comfortable bed lamp, with a bed that was decorated with a beautiful and comfortable bed mirror, with a bed that was decorated with a beautiful and comfortable bed table, with a bed that was decorated with a beautiful and comfortable bed chair, with a bed that was decorated with a beautiful and comfortable bed stool, with a bed that was decorated with a beautiful and comfortable bed rug
Page #87:
---------------------------
[Having seen in a dream a being of this form, auspicious, prosperous, wealthy, and blessed, a great dream, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form, a being of this form
Page #88:
---------------------------
[Third Class]
[47]
"O Devi! You have seen a good dream. Tell us about it in detail."
The Devi, the queen of Vasudeva, thought about it for a while and then said, "This dream is auspicious! This dream is auspicious! This dream is very auspicious! This dream is fulfilled! This dream is desired! This dream is received! This dream is desired and received! This is what I saw in my dream."
She accepted the dream completely. After accepting it, she got up from her bed, adorned with precious jewels and adorned with the best clothes, and went to the place where Vasudeva, the king, was. After reaching there, she sat down on a comfortable seat and said, "May this auspicious dream, which I saw on this excellent bed, not be destroyed by other dreams."
She stayed awake, remembering the dream, and enjoyed the auspiciousness of the dream, along with the blessings of the gods, the gurus, the good people, and the righteous.
1
King Vasudeva, at the time of the afternoon, called the astrologer. After calling him, he said, "O astrologer! Please interpret this dream, which is auspicious and full of good omens, and which has many auspicious signs."
The astrologer, after hearing this, immediately left the king's palace and went to the place where the dream interpreters lived. After reaching there, he quickly went to the dream interpreters and told them about the dream.
The dream interpreters, after hearing the king's message, got up from their seats, happy and excited, and went to their homes, adorned with auspicious signs of victory and success. After reaching their homes, they went to the king's palace and praised Vasudeva with victory and joy.
The dream interpreters, after being praised and honored by the king, sat down on comfortable seats in the front of the palace.
The king then placed the Devi in a comfortable place and, with flowers and fruits in his hands, asked the dream interpreters, "O astrologer! What will be the result of this dream, which the Devi saw in her dream last night in her palace?"
The dream interpreters, after thinking about it for a while, accepted the dream and went to the place where the dream was interpreted. After reaching there, they interpreted the meaning of the dream, discussed it with each other, and then, after understanding the meaning of the dream, they told the king, "O king! We have seen 82 dreams, 30 great dreams, and 22 all-encompassing dreams. Of these 30 great dreams, 14 dreams were seen by the Devi, who was pregnant with a son or a daughter. These dreams are:
- Going, riding, lion, coronation, garland, moon, sun, fire, pot, lotus, ocean, flying chariot, palace, and a mountain of jewels.

Page #89:
---------------------------
[48]
If Vasudeva's wife dreams fourteen great dreams, she will understand seven of them. If Baldeva's wife dreams fourteen great dreams, she will understand four of them. If Mandalika's wife dreams fourteen great dreams, she will understand one of them. 

O Devānupāyā! If a Devī dreams one great dream, it means good health, happiness, and auspiciousness. O Devānupāyā! If a Devī dreams two great dreams, it means wealth and prosperity. O Devānupāyā! If a Devī dreams three great dreams, it means a son. O Devānupāyā! If a Devī dreams four great dreams, it means a kingdom. 

O Devānupāyā! If a Devī is pregnant for nine months, she will give birth to a child who will be a king. 

O Devānupāyā! If a Devī dreams a great dream, it means good health, happiness, long life, and prosperity.

If Vasudeva's wife dreams a great dream, the dream interpreters will be happy and satisfied. They will say, "O Devānupāyā! This is a good dream for you." They will accept the dream and offer the dream interpreter food, drink, clothes, flowers, perfumes, and ornaments. They will honor and respect the dream interpreter. They will give the dream interpreter a lot of wealth and then dismiss him. They will carry the pregnant woman with great care and respect.

After nine months, the Devī will give birth to a beautiful child. The child will be born with all the auspicious signs of a great king. The child will be healthy, strong, and beautiful. The child will be born with all five senses intact. The child will be born with all the auspicious signs of a great king. The child will be born with all the auspicious signs of a great king. The child will be born with all the auspicious signs of a great king. The child will be born with all the auspicious signs of a great king. The child will be born with all the auspicious signs of a great king. The child will be born with all the auspicious signs of a great king. The child will be born with all the auspicious signs of a great king. The child will be born with all the auspicious signs of a great king. The child will be born with all the auspicious signs of a great king. The child will be born with all the auspicious signs of a great king. The child will be born with all the auspicious signs of a great king. The child will be born with all the auspicious signs of a great king. The child will be born with all the auspicious signs of a great king. The child will be born with all the auspicious signs of a great king. The child will be born with all the auspicious signs of a great king. The child will be born with all the auspicious signs of a great king. The child will be born with all the auspicious signs of a great king. The child will be born with all the auspicious signs of a great king. The child will be born with all the auspicious signs of a great king. The child will be born with all the auspicious signs of a great king. The child will be born with all the auspicious signs of a great king. The child will be born with all the auspicious signs of a great king. The child will be born with all the auspicious signs of a great king. The child will be born with all the auspicious signs of a great king. The child will be born with all the auspicious signs of a great king. The child will be born with all the auspicious signs of a great king. The child will be born with all the auspicious signs of a great king. The child will be born with all the auspicious signs of a great king. The child will be born with all the auspicious signs of a great king. The child will be born with all the auspicious signs of a great king. The child will be born with all the auspicious signs of a great king. The child will be born with all the auspicious signs of a great king. The child will be born with all the auspicious signs of a great king. The child will be born with all the auspicious signs of a great king. The child will be born with all the auspicious signs of a great king. The child will be born with all the auspicious signs of a great king. The child will be born with all the auspicious signs of a great king. The child will be born with all the auspicious signs of a great king. The child will be born with all the auspicious signs of a great king. The child will be born with all the auspicious signs of a great king. The child will be born with all the auspicious signs of a great king. The child will be born with all the auspicious signs of a great king. The child will be born with all the auspicious signs of a great king. The child will be born with all the auspicious signs of a great king. The child will be born with all the auspicious signs of a great king. The child will be born with all the auspicious signs of a great king. The child will be born with all the auspicious signs of a great king. The child will be born with all the auspicious signs of a great king. The child will be born with all the auspicious signs of a great king. The child will be born with all the auspicious signs of a great king. The child will be born with all the auspicious signs of a great king. The child will be born with all the auspicious signs of a great king. The child will be born with all the auspicious signs of a great king. The child will be born with all the auspicious signs of a great king. The child will be born with all the auspicious signs of a great king. The child will be born with all the auspicious signs of a great king. The child will be born with all the auspicious signs of a great king. The child will be born with all the auspicious signs of a great king. The child will be born with all the auspicious signs of a great king. The child will be born with all the auspicious signs of a great king. The child will be born with all the auspicious signs of a great king. The child will be born with all the auspicious signs of a great king. The child will be born with all the auspicious signs of a great king. The child will be born with all the auspicious signs of a great king. The child will be born with all the auspicious signs of a great king. The child will be born with all the auspicious signs of a great king. The child will be born with all the auspicious signs of a great king. The child will be born with all the auspicious signs of a great king. The child will be born with all the auspicious signs of a great king. The child will be born with all the auspicious signs of a great king. The child will be born with all the auspicious signs of a great king. The child will be born with all the auspicious signs of a great king. The child will be born with all the auspicious signs of a great king. The child will be born with all the auspicious signs of a great king. The child will be born with all the auspicious signs of a great king. The child will be born
Page #90:
---------------------------
[Third Class]
[49
Adandimakudandimam adharim am adharanijjam anuddhayamuingam amilaayamalladamam ganiyavaranadaijjakaliyam anegtala - yaranucharitam pamujhyapakkiliyabhiram jahariham thiivadaiyam dasadivasaiyam kareh, karitta eyamanattiyam paccappinah.
Te vi karenti, karitta tahev paccappinanti.
Tanam se vasudeve raya bahiriaae uvattanasalaae sihasanavarage puratthabhimue sannisanne saiehi ya sahassiehi ya sayasahassiehi ya jaehim daaehim bhogehi dalayamane dalayamane padicchhemane padicchhemane evam ca nam viharai.
Tanam tassa ammapiero padhame divasae jatakammam karenti, karitta bitiyadivasae jagariyam karenti, karitta tatiya divasae chandasuradansaniyam karent, karitta evamev nivatte asuijatakammakaranae sampatte barasahadivase vipulam asanam panam khaim sam saim uvakkhadaveti, uvakkhadavitta mittanaai - niyag-sayan- sambandhi-parijanam balam ca bahave gananayag- dandanaayag jav ammante.
Tao paccha pahaya kaybalikamma kaykouy-mangal-payacchitta savvalankarabhibusiyaa mahimahalayansi bhoyanamandavansi tam vipulam asanam panam khaim sam saim mittanaai... gananayag jav sadhim asaemaana visaemana paribhaemaana paribhumjemana evam ca nam viharai.
Jimiyattuttaragaya vi ya nam samana ayanta chokkha paramasuibhuyaa tam mitt-nainiyag-sayanasambandhiparijano... gananayag... vipulenam pupphagandhamallalankaraenam sakkareti, sammanenti, sakkaritta sammanitta evam vayaasi " jamha nam amham ime darage gayatalusamane tam hou" nam amh eyass daragass namadhejjee gayasukumale 2. Tae nam tassa daragass ammapierae nam kareti gayasukumaloti sesam jaha mehe jav' alam bhogsamatthe jae yaavi hottha.
-
Thereafter, Devaki Devi was sleeping on her bed in her dwelling. That dwelling (bedroom) [was painted from inside, white from outside and made smooth by rubbing. Its upper part was adorned with various paintings and the lower part was decorated. Its darkness was destroyed by the light of gems and jewels. It was perfectly level, divided into sections, adorned with the treatment of five-colored, sweet-smelling flower-bunches. It was fragrant all around with the incense of excellent black aloeswood, kundaruk and turushk (rock-juice), fragrant with fragrant substances and like a lump of fragrant substance. The bed in it was with a pillow, with pillows on both sides of the head and the feet. It was elevated on both sides and slightly bent in the middle. It was covered with a soft, delicate, silky cotton sheet, like the sand on the bank of the vast Ganga, covered with a dust-proof cloth, with a mosquito net, a beautiful skin (a type of soft leather cloth), soft to the touch like cotton, wool, butter, arka-toul (cotton of the plant), adorned with fragrant, excellent flowers, powder and other bed-treatments. Devaki Devi, sleeping on such a bed, saw a generous, auspicious, auspicious, blessed, auspicious and beautiful great dream in a semi-conscious state in the middle of the night and woke up.
1
Necklaces of pearls, silver, milk ocean, moonbeams, water drops and silver-great mountains (Vaidhy mountain 1. class, 3 sutra 2. 

Page #91:
---------------------------
[50] She saw in her dream a lion, with a body like that of an Antakrid Dasha, white in color, vast, beautiful and spectacular, with a stable and beautiful chamber, round, plump, well-nourished, with distinct and sharp teeth, with its mouth open, with soft, well-cultured, excellent lotus-like lips, with a very soft tongue and palate like the leaf of a red lotus, with eyes like a round lightning, with a color like the best gold that has been heated in fire and is revolving in the furnace, with vast and strong thighs, with a complete and abundant chest, with soft, broad, subtle and well-defined marks of saffron, with its beautiful and raised tail hitting the earth, with a gentle form, playing and yawning, entering its mouth. ]
Devaki Devi, seeing such a generous and magnificent dream, woke up. She was delighted, with a satisfied heart, thrilled like the Kadamba flower blooming from the stream of clouds, remembering the dream. Then she got up from her bed and walked with the best speed, like a royal swan, without haste, agility, confusion or delay, to the bedroom of King Vasudeva. Coming there, she started to wake up King Vasudeva with a sweet, charming, beloved, pleasing, pleasant, generous, auspicious, auspicious, blessed, auspicious, beautiful, moderate, sweet and soft voice. The king woke up. On the king's command, the queen sat on a beautiful seat decorated with the creation of various gems and jewels. After sitting on the comfortable seat, Devaki Devi, healthy and calm, spoke in a sweet voice, "Devana Priya! Today, while sleeping in such a comfortable bed, I saw a lion entering my mouth in my dream. O Devana Priya! What will be the fruit of this generous great dream?" Hearing this from Devaki Devi and holding it in her heart, the king became delighted and with a satisfied heart. Thrilled like the fragrant flower of Kadamba blooming from the stream of clouds, he started to consider the dream in general and in particular. Doing so, he determined the fruit of that dream with his natural intelligence and wisdom. Then the king, speaking in a sweet, charming, auspicious, moderate, sweet voice, said, "O Devi! You have seen a generous dream. O Devi! You have seen an auspicious dream. O Devi! You have seen a beautiful dream. O Devi! You have seen a dream of health, satisfaction, long life, auspiciousness and auspiciousness. O Devana Priya! You will have wealth, enjoyment, son and kingdom. Devana Priya! After nine months and seven and a half days, you will give birth to a son who will be like a flag, a lamp, a mountain, a peak, a tilak, and a glory of your family, who will bring joy to your family, who will increase the glory of your family, who will be the foundation for your family, who will be like a tree in your family, who will increase your family, who will have soft hands and feet, who will be free from inferiority, who will have all five senses, who will have a complete body, who will have a gentle form like the moon, who will be charming, beloved, beautiful and radiant like a divine prince."
That child, freed from childhood, becoming wise and mature, attaining youth, will become a warrior, powerful, with vast and abundant strength (army) and vehicles, and will be the master of the kingdom. O Devi! You have seen a generous (main) dream. Thus, O Devi! You have seen a dream of health, satisfaction, auspiciousness. Thus, King Vasudeva told Devaki Devi this same thing two or three times with sweet words. Hearing and understanding the aforementioned words of King Vasudeva, Devaki Devi became delighted and satisfied and folded her hands and said, "O Devana Priya! What you have said is true, true and without doubt. I wish and 

Page #92:
---------------------------
[Third Chapter]
[51 Accepted. Again and again desired and accepted. Thus accepting the meaning of the dream, with the permission of King Vasudeva, she rose from the Bhadraasana and came to her bedchamber with a swift and non-hurried pace. The queen thought, 'May this auspicious, principal, and auspicious dream of mine not be destroyed by other sinful dreams.' Therefore, she remained seated, awakening from the dream with auspicious and auspicious religious stories and discussions related to the Devaguru.
When morning came, King Vasudeva summoned the domestic servants and said to them, "Devanupriyo! Go quickly and bring such dream interpreters - who are knowledgeable in the sutras and meanings of the Ashtaanga Mahaanimitta and are knowledgeable in various scriptures!" Accepting the royal command, the domestic servants went quickly, with agility, speed, and swiftness through the city of Dwaraka to the homes of the dream interpreters and conveyed the royal command to them. The dream interpreters were pleased. They bathed and adorned their bodies. They made auspicious marks on their foreheads with mustard seeds and green grass. They left their homes and reached the gate of the royal palace. Then all the dream interpreters gathered together and came to the outer waiting room. They joined their hands and greeted King Vasudeva with the words "Jai-Vijay." Having been saluted, worshipped, honored, and respected by King Vasudeva, the dream interpreters sat on the Bhadraasanas that had been prepared beforehand. King Vasudeva called Devaki Devi and seated her inside the curtain. Then, holding flowers and fruits in his hands, the king said to the dream interpreters with great humility, "Devanupriyo! Today, Devaki Devi, while sleeping in the dwelling described earlier, saw a lion in her dream. O Devanupriyo! What will be the fruit of such a dream?"
Hearing King Vasudeva's question and understanding it, the dream interpreters were pleased. They considered the dream in general, considered it in particular, determined the meaning of the dream, discussed it with each other, and knowing the meaning of the dream themselves, receiving it from others, and resolving doubts, they finally determined the meaning and addressed King Vasudeva, saying, "Devanupriyo! In the science of dreams, there are forty-two types of general dreams and thirty Mahaasvapnas, thus a total of seventy-two types of dreams are mentioned. Of these, the mothers of Tirthankaras and Chakravartis, when a Tirthankara or Chakravarti is in the womb, see fourteen Mahaasvapnas - (1) elephant, (2) bull, (3) lion, (4) Lakshmi who has been anointed, (5) garland of flowers, (6) moon, (7) sun, (8) flag, (9) kumbha (pot), (10) lotus pond, (11) ocean, (12) aircraft or building, (13) treasure of jewels, and (14) smokeless fire.
Of these fourteen Mahaasvapnas, the mother of Vasudeva, when Vasudeva is in the womb, sees seven dreams. The mother of Baldeva, when Baldeva is in the womb, sees four Mahaasvapnas out of these fourteen dreams.
And the mother of the Mandalik king sees one Mahaasvapna out of these fourteen dreams. O Devanupriyo! Devaki Devi has seen one Mahaasvapna. This dream is generous, auspicious, healthy, satisfying, and auspicious. It is indicative of happiness and prosperity. It will bring you wealth, enjoyment, sons, and kingdom. Nine months
and seven and a half days will pass, and Devaki Devi will give birth to a son like a flag in your lineage. This child, after passing through childhood and becoming a young man, will be the king of the kingdom or will be a future soul who will not marry. Therefore, O Devanupriyo! Devaki Devi has seen this generous and auspicious dream.
Hearing and understanding this dream-fruit from the dream interpreters, King Vasudeva was delighted, satisfied 

Page #93:
---------------------------
[52]
[Antakrid Dasha]
Hwa and joined his hands and spoke to the dream interpreters in this way - "Devanupriyo! As you have told the meaning of the dream, it is exactly the same. Saying this, he accepted the meaning of the dream well. Then he honored the dream interpreters with abundant food, drink, servants, delicious food, flowers, clothes, fragrance, garlands and ornaments, honored them and gave them a lot of pritidan worthy of livelihood and allowed them to leave.] After that, being happy and with a joyful and satisfied heart, Devaki Devi started to nurture her womb happily.
After that, Devaki Devi completed the nine-month gestation period and gave birth to a son who was like a Japa-Kusuma, a red Bandhujeevak flower, like a Laksharas, a superior Parijat and a morning sun, with a radiant glow, pleasing to the eyes of all, delicate [with hands and feet, without any limblessness, with a complete body with all five senses, (in terms of form) complete and pure (swastika etc.), signs (til mash etc.) ingredients and qualities, complete in measure, weight and size - extent and beautifully made with all limbs, with a gentle form like the moon, with a radiant glow and a beautiful face like a beautiful elephant's palate. Understand the description of the birth like that of Megha Kumar. It is like this - After that, the maids see Devaki Devi giving birth to a son after nine months are complete, seeing this, they are happy and quickly, with a mind full of haste, with a nimble and fast body, those maids come to where Vasudeva Raja is. Coming there, they congratulate Vasudeva Raja with the words "Jai-Vijay", congratulating him, they join both their hands, circumambulate their heads, offer anjali and say in this way, "O Devanupriyo! Devaki Devi has given birth to a son after nine months are complete. We are informing Devanupriyo of this good (news). May it be pleasing to you. After that, Vasudeva Raja, hearing this meaning from those maids and holding it in his heart, became happy and satisfied. He honored those maids with sweet words and with abundant flowers, fragrant garlands and ornaments, and honored them by washing their heads, i.e., freeing them from servitude. He gave them such a livelihood that it would continue for their sons, grandsons, etc. In this way, he gave them a lot of wealth and sent them off. After that, Vasudeva Raja calls the family men, calls them and gives this order - "O Devanupriyo! Quickly sprinkle fragrant water in the city of Dwarka, and let there be (auspicious songs sung everywhere. Release the prisoners from the prison. Do all this and return this order." The family men, according to the king's order, do the work and return the order. After that, Vasudeva Raja calls the potters and other castes, eighteen categories and their sub-divisions, eighteen sub-categories, calls them and says in this way - "Devanupriyo! You go and perform the ten-day sthitipathika (special ritual of the son's birth celebration according to the family tradition) inside and outside the city of Dwarka. It is like this - for ten days, the toll (tax) should be stopped, the annual tax should be waived, the entry of royal officials for taking forced labor in the houses of relatives, farmers, etc. should be prohibited, punishment (money taken according to the crime) and kudand (small punishment - a small amount of money taken even for a big crime) should not be taken, no one should be left in debt, i.e., all debts should be paid by the king. No debtor should be caught, make such an announcement. And play mridanga and other instruments everywhere. Hang garlands of fresh flowers all around. Have plays performed by actors, including the main ones, the courtesans. Have plays performed by many spectators. Do it in such a way that people are happy and play. In this way, perform the ten-day sthitipathika as appropriate, perform it and return this order to me. 

Page #94:
---------------------------
[Third Chapter]

Hearing this order of King Vasudeva, they do so and return the royal order.
Thereafter, King Vasudeva sat on the best throne in the outer assembly hall, facing east, and gave offerings (worship) and charity with hundreds, thousands, and lakhs of wealth. He gave a certain portion of his income and wandered around accepting the wealth received.
Thereafter, the parents of that child performed the Jatakarma (cutting the umbilical cord, etc.) on the first day. On the second day, they performed the Jagarika (night vigil). On the third day, they showed him the moon and the sun. Thus, the ritual of the impure Jatakarma was completed. Then the twelfth day arrived, so they prepared abundant food, drinks, edibles, and delicious food. After preparing it, they invited friends, relatives, kin, sons, etc., uncles, etc., relatives, fathers-in-law, etc., related people, servants, etc., and many accountants, punishment officers, etc.
After that, he bathed, performed the Bali karma, performed the auspicious rituals of applying tilak with musk, etc., performed auspicious rituals, performed atonement, and adorned himself with all ornaments. Then, in a very large dining hall, he enjoyed, tasted, shared, and consumed that food, drinks, edibles, and delicious food with friends, relatives, etc., and accountants, etc.
. After eating this way, they all came to the place to sit. They performed Achaman (rinsing the mouth) with pure water. They washed their hands and faces, became clean, and their clothes became pure. Then they honored, respected, and honored those friends, relatives, kin, relatives, related people, servants, etc., and accountants, etc., with abundant clothes, fragrances, garlands, and ornaments, and said this way] - "Because our child is as delicate and beautiful as the palate of an elephant, therefore, the name of our child will be Gajasukumal (Gaj-Sukumar)." Considering this, the parents of that child named him "Gajsukumara." Understand the rest of the description to be like Megha Kumar. Gradually, Gajsukumara became capable of enjoying pleasures.
Discussion- This sutra describes the mother Devaki seeing a lion in a dream, telling her husband about her dream upon waking up, the husband calling the dream interpreters, the dream interpreters presenting the description of the dreams and telling the result of the dream, protecting the womb, the birth of a son as red and delicate as the palate of an elephant at the appropriate time (after nine months), and his naming ceremony as Gajsukumara, and finally, Gajsukumara's transition from childhood to youth.
   When a Tirthankara and a Chakravarti are born, their mothers see fourteen great dreams. Among them, in the twelfth dream, they see a flying machine or a building. The meaning of the alternative of a flying machine or a building here is that the mother of a being who comes from the Devlok and takes birth as a Tirthankara sees a flying machine in her dream, and the mother of a being who comes from hell and takes birth as a Tirthankara sees a building in her dream.
Jassumana.................The explanation of the word Sampapbham is as follows- Jassumana-Jayasuman-Jaya is the name of a particular plant. It is also called Jassu or Adhul. The Sanskrit dictionary called Sanskrit-Shabdarthakostubh states that the meaning of Jaya is "evergreen rose flower or plant." The flowers of Jaya are called 'Jassumana', these flowers are red in color. 

Page #95:
---------------------------
## 54]

**Raktbandhujeevak** is a word composed of two terms: **Rakt** and **Bandhujeevak**. **Rakt** refers to the red color. **Bandhujeevak** means a specific type of plant, a kind of herb, that blooms in the rainy season and has red flowers. The combined meaning is a specific herb called **Duphariya** with red color. 

According to Acharya Abhaydev Suri, **Bandhujeevak** refers to a specific type of flower with five colors. In this context, the red color is desired, hence the use of **Rakt** with **Bandhujeevak**. 

The **Sachitra Ardhamagadi Kosh** defines **Raktbandhujeevak** as a red-colored creature called **Goglagay**, **Devgay**, or **Indragop** that is born in the rainy season. The **Ardhamagadi Koshkar** describes **Raktbandhujeevak** as **Indragop** or **Veer Bahuti** in common language. This creature is red in color and soft like velvet.

**Lakkharas** or **Laaksharasa** or **Mahavar** is the name of the color of lac. It is red and used by women to adorn their feet.

**Saras** in **Saras Parijatak** signifies **developed** or **bloomed**. **Parijatak** has multiple meanings: 1) a specific type of flower, 2) the flower of **Farhad** which is red and very beautiful, 3) a specific type of divine tree, 4) a specific type of **Kalpataru** (wish-fulfilling tree). In this context, the meaning of **Parijatak** as a red-colored flower seems most appropriate.

**Tarun Divaakar** uses the word **Tarun** which signifies youth. The sun is considered to reach its youth in the midday, hence the midday sun can be called **Tarun Divaakar**. However, this meaning is not desired here. The prince **Gajsukumara** has a red complexion, and there is no similarity between him and the midday sun. This is why Acharya Abhaydev Suri has defined **Tarun Divaakar** as the rising sun. This meaning is also appropriate because the rising sun is red, and this aligns well with the red complexion of prince **Gajsukumara**. Additionally, the word **Tarun** is also used in the sense of red. The 34th chapter of **Uttaraadhyayanasutra** in the **Tejoleshya** section states:

"Hingul Dhaau Sankaasa, Tarunaicchasannibha.
Suyatuandaphaiva nibha, Teulesa U Vannao."

This means that the **Hingul** metal, the young sun, the beak of a parrot, and the flame of a lamp have the same **Tejoleshya** (radiance). In this sutra, the word **Tarun** is used in the sense of red, otherwise, the meaning related to the color of **Tejoleshya** would not be consistent.

**Japasuman**, **Raktbandhujeevak**, **Laaksharasa**, **Saras Parijatak**, and **Tarun Divaakar** are all terms that describe something that has the same radiance, brilliance, shine, or color.

**Gajtaluy** - **Gaj** means elephant. **Taluy** means the hollow between the upper teeth and the palate. The palate of an elephant is called **Gajtaluy**. Someone with a palate similar to that of an elephant is called **Gajtaluy**.

1. **Vritti-patra-9** 

Page #96:
---------------------------
## Third Class]
[55] It is called "talu-saman". The palate of all beings is blood and soft, but the palate of the elephant is considered to be especially blood and soft.
What happened in relation to the marriage, etc., of the young Gaja-sukumara? In relation to this curiosity, the Sutrakar says:
[16] In that city, there lived a Brahmin named Somila. He was well-versed in the Rig Veda, [Yajur Veda, Sama Veda, Atharva Veda, the fifth, history, and the sixth, Nigantu, along with all their limbs and parts, and the secrets of all these four Vedas. He was the 'sarak' (memorial) of these, i.e., he taught them, therefore he was their originator, or he reminded those who had forgotten the Vedas, etc., therefore he was the memorial. He was the 'warak', i.e., he stopped those who pronounced the Vedas, etc., incorrectly, therefore he was the 'warak'. He was the 'dharak', i.e., he did not forget the Vedas, etc., that he had learned, but held them firmly, therefore he was the 'dharak'. He was the 'parak' - proficient in the Vedas, etc. He knew the six limbs. He was a scholar (pandit) in the 6th tantra (Kapiliya Shastra). He was very proficient in mathematics, education, ethics, grammar, prosody, etymology, astrology, and many other] Brahmin and Parivajak related scriptures. That Brahmin Somila had a Brahmin wife named Somashri. Somashri was beautiful, graceful, and youthful. That Brahmin Somila's daughter and Brahmin Somashri's daughter was named Soma, who was beautiful and graceful. She was flawless in terms of her form, shape, and beauty, therefore she was excellent and had an excellent body. That daughter Soma, on another day, went out of her house after bathing and adorning herself with ornaments, surrounded by many hunchbacks, etc., and greater ones. After going out of the house, she came to the royal road and started playing with a golden ball on the royal road.
2. See, the ninth sutra of the third class.
1. 3.
See, the first sutra of the third class. See, class 3, a. 1, sutra 2. 

Page #97:
---------------------------
[56]
The Entry of Soma into the Inner Palace
[Antakrddasha
18 - At that time, at that moment, the Arhat Arishthanemi was in Dwaraka. The assembly had gone out.
At that time, Krishna Vasudeva, having heard the news of the Lord's auspicious arrival, bathed, adorned himself with all kinds of ornaments, and mounted an elephant with his younger brother, Gajasukumal, riding with him. He was adorned with a garland of Korant flowers, a canopy held above him, and white, excellent chamaras waving on both sides. He was going through the middle of Dwaraka city to pay homage to the Arhat Arishthanemi. On the way, he saw Soma, a girl playing on the royal road. Seeing Soma's beauty, youth, and radiance, Krishna Vasudeva was astonished. Then he called his obedient men. Calling them, he said:
-
"O Devānupriya! Go to the Soma-Brahmana and ask him for this Soma girl. Obtain her and bring her to the inner palace of the girls. This Soma girl will be the wife of my younger brother, Gajasukumal." Then the obedient men did just that.
Discussion - 'Kannaṃteuraṃsi' - This word contains two words: 'kanya' and 'antaḥpura'. 'Kanya' is the name of a girl, a young woman, or an unmarried girl. 'Antaḥpura' refers to the royal dwelling place of women. Combining both words, the meaning is: the royal palace where unmarried girls reside. The use of the word 'Kannaṃteuraṃsi' in this sutra suggests that at that time, many young women were gathered for the marriage of Gajasukumal.
Worship of the Lord Arishthanemi
19 - Then Krishna Vasudeva went through the middle of Dwaraka city. As he went, he reached the garden where the Arhat Arishthanemi was. Reaching there, he saw the Arhat Arishthanemi, surrounded by canopies and umbrellas, with the gods praising him and offering him flowers. Seeing the Arhat Arishthanemi, he approached him with five types of approaches: (1) by scattering wealth, (2) by not scattering wealth, (3) by approaching with a single mind, (4) by offering anjali with his eyes, and (5) by unifying his mind. 
-

Page #98:
---------------------------
[Third Chapter]
[57 Arhat Arishthanemi, he came, having come, Arhat Arishthanemi, with great respect, performed the act of coming and going, having performed, he bowed, he prostrated, having bowed, having prostrated, Arhat Arishthanemi, not very close, not very far, listening attentively, prostrating, with folded hands, facing, with humility] he worshipped.
After that, Krishna Vasudeva, from the middle part of Dwaraka city, having come out, [having come out, where the Mahratram forest garden was and where Bhagwan Arishthanemi was, he came there. Having come, he saw the umbrella over the Arhat Arishthanemi Swami, the flags over the flags, and other such extraordinary things, and he saw the Vidyadharas, the Charanas, the Manis, and the Jambhaka Devas coming down and going up. Seeing, he performed five types of approaches and went in front of Arhat Arishthanemi Swami. These five approaches are as follows: (1) Giving up of fragrant flowers, drinks, etc., which are objects of consciousness, (2) Giving up of clothes, ornaments, etc., which are objects of non-consciousness, (3) Wearing a single shawl (dupatta), (4) Joining both hands as soon as the eyes fall on Bhagwan, and (5) Concentrating the mind. Having performed these approaches, he came where Arhat Bhagwan Arishthanemi was. Having come, he performed circumambulation (three times) starting from the south direction. Having performed circumambulation, he performed a praise-like bow and prostration to Bhagwan. Having bowed and prostrated, not very close to Bhagwan, not very far either, sitting in a suitable place, desiring to listen to the Dharma-deshana, prostrating, with folded hands, facing] he started worshipping. Dharma-deshana and detachment
20-Then, Arhat Arishthanemi, to Krishna Vasudeva, the son of Gaya-sukumala, spoke the Dharma, he listened. Then, that Gaya-sukumala, to Arhat Arishthanemi, thought deeply about the Dharma, [that I will ask my mother and father, just like a Meghkumar, just like a Mahaliya-vajja, until I reach the Vaddhiya-kula] with great respect, he performed the act of coming and going, having performed, he bowed, he prostrated, having bowed, having prostrated, he said thus: "I have received, O Master! the Niggantha-pavana, I have received, O Master! the Niggantha-pavana, I have received, O Master! the Niggantha-pavana, I have received, O Master! the Niggantha-pavana, I have received, O Master! the Niggantha-pavana. Thus, O Master! Thus, O Master! Not otherwise, O Master! I desire, O Master! I accept, O Master! I desire and accept, O Master! This is what I will say to you! O Deva-anuppiya! I will ask my mother and father. Then, after getting my head shaved, I will leave the household and become a homeless one.
Alas, O Deva-anuppiya! Do not restrain me.
Then, that Gaya-sukumala, bowed and prostrated to Arhat Arishthanemi, having bowed and prostrated, he came by the same path, having come, he went to the elephant-stable, having gone, he went to the middle of the city, which was adorned with great buildings, with a large number of chariots, and with a large number of flags, by the same path, having come, he went to the elephant-stable, having gone, he climbed up the elephant-stable, having climbed up, he went to his mother and father by the same path, having come, he performed the act of bowing at the feet of his mother and father, having performed, he said thus: "Thus, O Mother and Father! I have taken refuge in the Dharma of Arhat Arishthanemi, and I also desire and accept and am pleased with this Dharma.
Here, the Sutrakar has described the life of Gajasukumala as "just like a Meghkumar", and then he has given the reading "Mahaliya-vajja", which means without a wife or unmarried. In the Jnata, Meghkumar has been described as married. Therefore, the word presented here shows the difference in the situation of both. Here, to complete the reading "until", keeping this difference in mind, the appropriate completing readings have been started from a new paragraph. 

Page #99:
---------------------------
[58]
The mother and father of the noble youth, Gayasukumala, said to him, "You are blessed, son! You are perfect, son! You are worthy, son! You are virtuous, son! You have renounced the world for the sake of the Arhat, Arhat Ariṭṭhanemi, and you have taken refuge in the Dharma. You have desired, received, and embraced the Dharma."

The noble youth, Gayasukumala, replied to his mother and father, "Indeed, mother and father! I have renounced the world for the sake of the Arhat, Arhat Ariṭṭhanemi, and I have taken refuge in the Dharma. I have desired, received, and embraced the Dharma. I wish, mother and father, to become a monk for the sake of the Arhat, Arhat Ariṭṭhanemi, after being properly instructed and ordained."

The goddess, his mother, was deeply saddened by this, and she spoke in a voice choked with sorrow, her words filled with anguish, grief, and jealousy. Overwhelmed by the pain of losing her son, she became like a withered lotus, her body weak and pale, her hair disheveled, her ornaments loosened, her clothes torn, her hands trembling, her eyes filled with tears, her voice choked with sobs. She collapsed, her body heavy and lifeless.

The goddess, his mother, overcome with grief, her face wet with tears, her voice trembling, her body shaking, her eyes filled with sorrow, her heart heavy with pain, spoke to her son, Gayasukumala, in a voice filled with anguish:

"My son! You are our only child, our beloved son, our pride and joy, our hope and our future. You are like a precious jewel, a rare gem, a breath of fresh air, a source of joy and happiness. You are like a rare flower, a precious treasure. Why would you leave us? We cannot bear to be separated from you, even for a moment. Please stay with us, my son! Enjoy the pleasures of this world, the joys of life, while we are still alive. After we are gone, you can then renounce the world and become a monk for the sake of the Arhat, Arhat Ariṭṭhanemi, and continue the lineage of our family."

The noble youth, Gayasukumala, hearing his mother and father speak thus, replied, "Mother and father, I understand your feelings. You have said, 'My son! You are our only child, our beloved son, our pride and joy, our hope and our future. You are like a precious jewel, a rare gem, a breath of fresh air, a source of joy and happiness. You are like a rare flower, a precious treasure. Why would you leave us? We cannot bear to be separated from you, even for a moment. Please stay with us, my son! Enjoy the pleasures of this world, the joys of life, while we are still alive. After we are gone, you can then renounce the world and become a monk for the sake of the Arhat, Arhat Ariṭṭhanemi, and continue the lineage of our family.' But, mother and father, I cannot stay in this world, which is full of suffering, pain, and sorrow. I must renounce the world and become a monk for the sake of the Arhat, Arhat Ariṭṭhanemi." 

Page #100:
---------------------------
[Third Chapter]
[59]  When overcome by the delusion of the five senses, fickle, uncertain, like water bubbles, like a drop of water on a lotus leaf, like a swarm of bees attracted by the scent of flowers, like a dream, like a vision, in the nature of destruction, decay, and annihilation, then indeed, one should completely abandon the world. Who knows, mother, whether one will go to the next life or not? I desire, mother, that you, having been well-instructed, should, after the death of the Arhat, the great Arhat, the great Neminatha, become a monk, having renounced the household life.

Therefore, mother and father, say to this dear son, "My dear son, you have been born into a noble family, and you have enjoyed many riches, gold, silver, bronze, copper, jewels, conch shells, stones, corals, precious stones, and all kinds of wealth. You have enjoyed the pleasures of the world, and you have been honored by the people. Now, my dear son, enjoy the pleasures of the world, the great multitude of human beings, and the respect they give. Then, after you have enjoyed these pleasures, you will become a monk, after the death of the Arhat, the great Arhat, the great Neminatha, having renounced the household life."

Then, this dear son said to his mother and father, "Mother and father, as you have said to me, 'My dear son, you have been born into a noble family, and you have enjoyed many riches, and you will become a monk,' so, mother and father, I will enjoy gold, silver, bronze, copper, jewels, conch shells, stones, corals, precious stones, and all kinds of wealth, and I will enjoy the pleasures of the world, and I will be honored by the people. But, mother and father, I will not enjoy the pleasures of the world, the great multitude of human beings, and the respect they give. I will not enjoy the pleasures of the world, the great multitude of human beings, and the respect they give. I will not enjoy the pleasures of the world, the great multitude of human beings, and the respect they give. I will not enjoy the pleasures of the world, the great multitude of human beings, and the respect they give. I will not enjoy the pleasures of the world, the great multitude of human beings, and the respect they give. I will not enjoy the pleasures of the world, the great multitude of human beings, and the respect they give. I will not enjoy the pleasures of the world, the great multitude of human beings, and the respect they give. I will not enjoy the pleasures of the world, the great multitude of human beings, and the respect they give. I will not enjoy the pleasures of the world, the great multitude of human beings, and the respect they give. I will not enjoy the pleasures of the world, the great multitude of human beings, and the respect they give. I will not enjoy the pleasures of the world, the great multitude of human beings, and the respect they give. I will not enjoy the pleasures of the world, the great multitude of human beings, and the respect they give. I will not enjoy the pleasures of the world, the great multitude of human beings, and the respect they give. I will not enjoy the pleasures of the world, the great multitude of human beings, and the respect they give. I will not enjoy the pleasures of the world, the great multitude of human beings, and the respect they give. I will not enjoy the pleasures of the world, the great multitude of human beings, and the respect they give. I will not enjoy the pleasures of the world, the great multitude of human beings, and the respect they give. I will not enjoy the pleasures of the world, the great multitude of human beings, and the respect they give. I will not enjoy the pleasures of the world, the great multitude of human beings, and the respect they give. I will not enjoy the pleasures of the world, the great multitude of human beings, and the respect they give. I will not enjoy the pleasures of the world, the great multitude of human beings, and the respect they give. I will not enjoy the pleasures of the world, the great multitude of human beings, and the respect they give. I will not enjoy the pleasures of the world, the great multitude of human beings, and the respect they give. I will not enjoy the pleasures of the world, the great multitude of human beings, and the respect they give. I will not enjoy the pleasures of the world, the great multitude of human beings, and the respect they give. I will not enjoy the pleasures of the world, the great multitude of human beings, and the respect they give. I will not enjoy the pleasures of the world, the great multitude of human beings, and the respect they give. I will not enjoy the pleasures of the world, the great multitude of human beings, and the respect they give. I will not enjoy the pleasures of the world, the great multitude of human beings, and the respect they give. I will not enjoy the pleasures of the world, the great multitude of human beings, and the respect they give. I will not enjoy the pleasures of the world, the great multitude of human beings, and the respect they give. I will not enjoy the pleasures of the world, the great multitude of human beings, and the respect they give. I will not enjoy the pleasures of the world, the great multitude of human beings, and the respect they give. I will not enjoy the pleasures of the world, the great multitude of human beings, and the respect they give. I will not enjoy the pleasures of the world, the great multitude of human beings, and the respect they give. I will not enjoy the pleasures of the world, the great multitude of human beings, and the respect they give. I will not enjoy the pleasures of the world, the great multitude of human beings, and the respect they give. I will not enjoy the pleasures of the world, the great multitude of human beings, and the respect they give. I will not enjoy the pleasures of the world, the great multitude of human beings, and the respect they give. I will not enjoy the pleasures of the world, the great multitude of human beings, and the respect they give. I will not enjoy the pleasures of the world, the great multitude of human beings, and the respect they give. I will not enjoy the pleasures of the world, the great multitude of human beings, and the respect they give. I will not enjoy the pleasures of the world, the great multitude of human beings, and the respect they give. I will not enjoy the pleasures of the world, the great multitude of human beings, and the respect they give. I will not enjoy the pleasures of the world, the great multitude of human beings, and the respect they give. I will not enjoy the pleasures of the world, the great multitude of human beings, and the respect they give. I will not enjoy the pleasures of the world, the great multitude of human beings, and the respect they give. I will not enjoy the pleasures of the world, the great multitude of human beings, and the respect they
Page #101:
---------------------------
[60]
[When the ten virtues were completed, then that Gaja-sukumala Kumar said to his mother and father, "Mother and father, I have been told this by the Samana. Mother and father, I will say this to you. "This is the way, my dear! The Niggantha, the Pavayana, the true, the unsurpassed, the one who has conquered again and again, the Arhat, the Ariṣṭanemi, will be the last to shave his head and leave the household for the homeless life." Mother and father, the Niggantha, the Pavayana, the teachings of the cowardly, the wicked, the bound to this world, the ones who have not escaped from the next world, the ones who are difficult to teach, are not for the brave. For the one who is determined and resolute, what is difficult to do? I wish, mother and father, that you would be pleased with the Samana, the Arhat, the Ariṣṭanemi, the last to shave his head and leave the household for the homeless life.]
Then that Kanha Vasudeva, having heard these words, went to the Samana, and having gone to him, embraced Gaja-sukumala, and having embraced him, placed him on his lap, and having placed him there, said, "You are my younger brother, my dear. Do not, my dear, you who are beloved of the gods, go to the Arhat, the Ariṣṭanemi, the last to shave his head and leave the household for the homeless life. I will anoint you with the great, great royal anointing in the city of Dwaraka." Then that Gaja-sukumala, having heard these words from Kanha Vasudeva, was pleased and remained silent. Then that Gaja-sukumala said to Kanha Vasudeva, his mother and father, and to all the others,
"My dear, beloved of the gods, human desires, [enjoyments, anger, hatred, greed, jealousy, pride, arrogance, envy, lust, attachment, aversion, fear, worry, anxiety, sorrow, grief, pain, suffering, delusion, ignorance, doubt, uncertainty, confusion, restlessness, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement, agitation, excitement,
Page #102:
---------------------------
[61
Third Class] I will do. "]
The Lord said - Devānupriya! Do what gives you happiness, but do not delay in it.
Thereafter, Gajasukumāl (r) Kumār paid homage to the Arhant Ariṣṭanemi, that is, he praised him, bowed to him, and after paying homage and bowing, he went to where the Hastīratna was. Going there, he sat on the elephant's shoulder and with the great warriors and the family with a large group, he came through the middle of the city of Dwārkā to where his house was. Coming there, he got down from the elephant's shoulder, bowed at the feet of his parents and said thus - 'O Mother and Father! I have heard the Dharma from the Lord Ariṣṭanemi and I have desired to attain it, I have desired it again and again. It is pleasing to me.'
Thereafter, Gajasukumāl's parents spoke thus - 'Son! You are blessed, Son! You are virtuous, O Son! You are fulfilled, that you have heard the Dharma from the Lord Ariṣṭanemi and that Dharma is also pleasing to you, again and again pleasing and pleasing to you.'
Thereafter, Gajasukumāl said to his parents for the second time and the third time - 'Mother and Father! I have heard the Dharma from the Arhant Lord Ariṣṭanemi. I have desired that Dharma, I have desired it again and again, it has become pleasing to me. Therefore, O Mother and Father! With your permission, I want to get my head shaved near the Lord Ariṣṭanemi, renounce my household life and accept the vow of Anāgārīta.'
Thereafter, Devakī Devī, hearing that inauspicious (unwanted), unpleasant, unpleasing and unmanageable (not pleasing to the mind), never heard before, harsh speech and holding it in her heart, was afflicted with the great grief of the loss of her son. Sweat came out of her pores, causing sweat to flow from her limbs. Due to the excess of grief, her limbs began to tremble. She became weak. She became humble and dejected. She became like a lotus garland stained with palm. At the moment of hearing the words "I want to accept the vow", she became sad and weak. She became devoid of beauty, devoid of radiance, devoid of glory, her body became weak, her ornaments became very loose, the excellent rings worn on her hands slipped to the ground and broke into pieces. Her upper garment slipped. The delicate hair strands scattered. Due to fainting, her mind was lost, her body became heavy. She appeared like a champak tree cut by an axe and like an Indra flag (without glory) after the festival was over. The joints of her body loosened. Thus, Devakī Devī fell to the ground (floor) with a thud from all her limbs.
_ Thereafter, Devakī Devī, with confusion, quickly, was sprinkled with the pure stream of cold water that came out of the mouth of the golden pot. Therefore, her body became cool. She was reassured by the people of the inner apartments with the air produced by the utkshepak (a type of bamboo fan), tālavṛnta (a fan made of palm leaves) and vījanaka (a bamboo fan whose handle is held from inside) and containing water droplets. Then Devakī Devī began to weep, watering and soaking her breasts with a stream of tears like a string of pearls. She became pitiful, dejected and humble. She wept, cried, dripped sweat and saliva, grieved in her heart and lamented, saying to Gajasukumāl - 

Page #103:
---------------------------
[62]
Antakridasha began to speak in this way:
"O son! You are our only son. You are our beloved, dear, cherished, handsome, gem, and the abode of patience and faith. You are agreeable (accepted) in doing work, very much accepted in many works, and also permitted after doing work. You are like a box of ornaments. You are a gem because of being the best in the human race. You are the form of a gem. You are like the breath of life. You are the one who generates joy in our hearts. Even hearing your name is rare, like the flower of the banyan tree, so what to say about seeing you? O son! We do not want to bear your separation even for a moment. Therefore, O son! First, enjoy the abundant worldly pleasures as long as we are alive. Then, when we are gone by time and you become of mature age - your youth is complete, the work of the family lineage (son, grandson, etc.) has grown, when there is no need for worldly work, at that time you should get your head shaved and renounce household life and accept the vows of renunciation near Lord Arishtanemi."

After the parents spoke in this way, Gajasukumal said to his parents: "O mother and father! What you are saying to me, that 'O son! You are our only son,' etc., all that should be said as before, until you become free from worldly work and become a renunciant near Lord Arishtanemi - that is fine. But, O mother and father! This human existence is not permanent, that is, it is not something that is regularly obtained again and again like sunrise, it is not fixed, that is, there are changes in this life, it is impermanent, that is, it is perishable in a moment, it is filled with hundreds of troubles and disturbances, it is fickle like the flash of lightning, it is impermanent, it is like a bubble of water, it is like a drop of water hanging on the tip of a blade of grass, it is like the clouds at dusk, it is like a dream - it is there and it is not there, it is prone to decay from leprosy, etc., to be cut by a sword, etc., and to become weak. And it is definitely something that must be abandoned in the future or in the past. O mother and father! Who knows who will go first (die) and who will go later? Therefore, O mother and father! I want to accept the vows of renunciation near Lord Arishtanemi, having received your permission."

Then the parents said to Gajasukumal: "O son! This much gold, silver, bronze, fine cloth, gems, pearls, conch shells, stone, coral, red ruby, etc., essential substances, have come down from your grandfather, your father's grandfather, and your father's great-grandfather. It is so much that it will not be exhausted even in seven generations. You should give a lot of it in charity, enjoy it yourself, and distribute it. O son! You should enjoy all the wealth and respect that is available in the human world. After that, having experienced happiness, you should accept initiation near Lord Arishtanemi."

Then Gajasukumal said to his parents: "O mother and father! What you are saying is fine, that 'O son! This much excellent substance has come down from your grandfather, your father's grandfather, and your father's great-grandfather, you should enjoy it and then, having experienced happiness, accept initiation.' But, O mother and father! This gold, silver, etc., all worldly possessions are subject to fire - fire can burn it, a thief can steal it, a king can confiscate it, heirs can divide it, and when death comes, it does not remain ours. In the same way, this wealth is equal to fire, that is, the wealth belongs to its owner, and in the same way, it also belongs to fire, and in the same way... 

Page #104:
---------------------------
[63
Third Class] It is common for thieves, kings, partners and death. It is of the nature of decay, falling and destruction. It is to be abandoned before or after (death). O parents! Who knows who will go first and who will go last? Therefore, I want to take initiation as long as I can.
Thereafter, when the parents of Gajasukumal were unable to convince, address and persuade him with words that are conducive to the subjects, with knowledge, with instructions, with announcements, then they spoke in this way with knowledge that is unfavorable and generates fear and anxiety towards restraint.
'O son! This Nirgranth discourse is true (beneficial for the virtuous), unsurpassed (the best), unique, spoken by the omniscient, perfect, i.e., full of qualities that lead to liberation, logical, i.e., just or leading to liberation, pure, i.e., completely flawless, surgical, i.e., destroying delusions and other afflictions, the path to perfection, the path to liberation (the means to destroy sins), the path to Nirvana (the realm of perfection), the path to Nirvana, and the path to completely destroy all suffering. Just as a serpent keeps its gaze steady while catching its prey, so too must one keep one's gaze steady in this discourse. It is sharp like a knife, i.e., it lacks exceptions like a second edge. To follow this discourse is like chewing iron barley. It is tasteless like a mouthful of sand - devoid of worldly pleasures. To follow it is as difficult as crossing the Ganges, a great river, in flood, crossing the ocean with one's arms, attacking a sharp sword, tying heavy stones like a great rock around one's neck, walking on the edge of a sword.
O son! It is not proper for Nirgranth ascetics to consume food that is half-cooked, intentionally bought, established (left for the ascetic), prepared (powder of sweets, etc., prepared again for the ascetic), famine-food (food made for the ascetic during a famine), forest-food (food made in the forest for the ascetic), rainy-season food (food made in a shelter during the rainy season), sick-food (food given by a sick householder hoping to be cured), etc., contaminated food.
Similarly, it is not proper to eat root food, tuber food, fruit food, seed food or green food. Moreover, O son! You are fit to enjoy pleasures, not to endure suffering. You are not able to endure cold, you are not able to endure heat. You cannot bear hunger, you cannot bear thirst, various diseases (like leprosy, etc.) caused by wind, bile, phlegm and fever, attacks (sudden death-inducing pain, etc.), unfavorable words from high and low, the twenty-two types of trials and tribulations that arise, properly. Therefore, O dear one! Enjoy the pleasures of human relationships. Later, after having enjoyed them, accept the vows in the presence of the Arhat Arishta-nemi.
Thereafter, when the parents said this, Gajasukumar said to his parents, "O parents! What you are saying to me is right, that - 'O son! The Nirgranth discourse is true, 

Page #105:
---------------------------
[64]
The Antakrid Dasha is the best, the aforementioned statements should be repeated here, until one accepts the vows of renunciation after becoming a liberated soul. But O parents! This Nirgranth discourse is difficult for ordinary people, who are devoid of cleavages, lack stability in their cowardly minds, are detestable, desire worldly pleasures, and do not desire the happiness of the afterlife. It is not difficult for a man of fortitude and firm resolve to follow it. What is the difficulty in following it? Therefore, O parents! With your permission, I wish to accept the vows of renunciation in the presence of Arihant Arishtanemi.

Thereafter, Krishna Vasudeva came to Gajasukumar, having heard of his dispassion, and embraced him, seated him on his lap, and spoke to him in this way:
"O Devānupriya! You are my younger brother, therefore I say that do not accept the initiation of becoming a renunciate from the household at this time in the presence of Lord Arishtanemi. I will anoint you with the royal coronation in the city of Dwarka with great pomp and ceremony." Then Gajasukumar remained silent when Krishna Vasudeva spoke to him in this way. After remaining silent for some time, Gajasukumar spoke to his elder brother Krishna Vasudeva and his parents a second and third time in this way:
"O Devānupriya! In truth, the enjoyments and the body of a human being [are impure, impermanent, momentary, and repositories of excrement, urine, phlegm, vomit, bile, semen, and blood. They are filled with foul breath, bad urine, excrement, and pus. They are born from excrement, urine, phlegm, nasal mucus, vomit, bile, semen, and blood. This human body and these enjoyments are unstable, impermanent, and subject to decay, putrefaction, and destruction, and will inevitably be destroyed sooner or later. Therefore, O Devānupriya! I wish to accept the vows of renunciation (Shraman Diksha) in the presence of Arihant Arishtanemi, with your permission."

The Initiation of Gajasukumar
21-Then, Gajasukumar's parents, Krishna Vasudeva, and others, who were not persuaded, continued to persuade him in many ways, until he was convinced. Then, Gajasukumar, being dispassionate, spoke to them in this way: "I wish to go to the king's palace tomorrow."

Then, Gajasukumar, while being persuaded by Krishna Vasudeva and his parents, remained silent. Until [then, Gajasukumar's father, the head of the family, spoke to him, and having spoken, said: "Quickly, O Devānupriya! Let us arrange a great, magnificent, and grand royal coronation for Gajasukumar." Then, the head of the family continued to persuade him in this way. Then, Gajasukumar's parents seated him on a throne facing the east, as is done for a king, until they anointed him with the royal coronation with eight hundred golden pots filled with water, with great sound and great pomp.

Having anointed him with the royal coronation, they celebrated his victory with [1. This has already been mentioned in the previous sutra.] 

Page #106:
---------------------------
[Third Class]
[65. The Jain victor, having been adorned, spoke thus: "My dear, what shall we give, what shall we offer, or what is your wish?"
Then the son of Gayasukumala, his mother and father, spoke thus: "I desire, my dear, a house, a chariot, a horse, and a tortoise." The departure is like that of Mahabala.
_ Then the mother and father of the son of Gayasukumala, in the presence of the Koḍumbiya-purisa, spoke thus: "Quickly, O Devānupiya! Give three hundred thousand gold coins for the house, two hundred thousand for the chariot and horse, and one hundred thousand for the tortoise." Then those Koḍumbiya-purisa, having spoken thus to the father of the son of Gayasukumala, were pleased and agreed to give three hundred thousand gold coins, and so on, until they agreed to give the tortoise. Then the tortoise, having been given to the father of the son of Gayasukumala by the Koḍumbiya-purisa, was pleased and agreed to perform the sacrificial act until he reached the place. Having reached the place, he performed the act. The Jain victor, having adorned the son of Gayasukumala, spoke thus: "My dear, what shall I do?" Then the father of Gayasukumala spoke thus to the tortoise: "My dear Devānupiya! You shall cut the hair of the son of Gayasukumala with a four-finger-long blade." Then the tortoise, having heard this, was pleased and agreed, saying: "So be it! I will obey your command." Having heard this, he washed his hands and feet with fragrant water, and having washed them, he tied a clean cloth over his mouth. Having tied the cloth over his mouth, he cut the hair of the son of Gayasukumala with a four-finger-long blade.
Then the mother of the son of Gayasukumala, the goddess Devī, received the hair with a swan-like gesture. Having received the hair, she washed it with fragrant water. Having washed it with fragrant water, she anointed it with fragrant oils and perfumes. Having anointed it with fragrant oils and perfumes, she tied it in a clean cloth. Having tied it in a clean cloth, she placed it in a jewel casket. Having placed it in the jewel casket, she adorned herself with necklaces, armlets, anklets, earrings, and garlands of flowers, and with tears flowing from her eyes, she spoke thus: "This will be seen by our son Gayasukumala on many occasions, on festivals, on journeys, and in the future." Then she placed it in a strong, firm place.
Then the mother and father of Gayasukumala placed a double-backed, north-facing throne. Having placed the double-backed, north-facing throne, they bathed the son of Gayasukumala with fragrant water. Having bathed him with fragrant water, they anointed his body with fragrant sandalwood paste. Having anointed his body with fragrant sandalwood paste, they adorned him with a nose-ring, earrings, a necklace, a garland of flowers, a white turban, a jeweled crown, a magnificent robe, and a swan-like gesture. Having adorned him, they placed a necklace on him. Having placed a necklace on him, they placed a half-necklace on him. Having placed a half-necklace on him, they placed a crown on him, just as the sun is adorned with its rays. In short, they adorned him with four kinds of perfumes, with a garland of flowers, and with a jeweled crown.
2. In the description of Mahabala, for this text, "What shall we offer, the rest is like that of Jamali, and so on, until then" is given. Therefore, the supplementary text that follows is woven together from the descriptions of Mahabala, Jamali, etc., as needed.
]
Page #107:
---------------------------


Page #108:
---------------------------
[Third Chapter]
[67]
These eight auspicious signs were fulfilled in the presence of the king; such as - prosperity, wealth, etc. up to the mirror; after that, the auspicious pot-decoration, such as the one described, up to the sprinkling of water on the sky, was fulfilled in the presence of the king; as described, so it should be narrated, up to the time when the people, making offerings and shouting victory cries, were fulfilled in the presence of the king. After that, many other auspicious signs, such as the one described, up to the time when the king, surrounded by the great men of the royal court, and the son of the beautiful Geya, were fulfilled in the presence of the king.

Then, the king, seeing the son of the beautiful Geya, went to the sacrificial ceremony, up to the time when he was seated on the elephant's back, holding a parasol with a golden handle, and being fanned by a white chowrie, with his four-armed army, consisting of horses, elephants, chariots, and foot soldiers, surrounding him, and the king's flag following him.

Then, in the presence of the son of the beautiful Geya, there was a great crowd, with elephants and elephant-leaders on both sides, and the king's flag standing nearby. Then, the son of the beautiful Geya, with his hair adorned, wearing a garland of flowers, holding a royal parasol, and being fanned by a white chowrie, with all his ornaments, up to the time when he was adorned with a garland of flowers, and after that, many other auspicious signs, such as the one described, up to the time when he was adorned with a garland of flowers, and after that, many other auspicious signs, such as the one described, up to the time when he was adorned with a garland of flowers, and after that, many other auspicious signs, such as the one described, up to the time when he was adorned with a garland of flowers, and after that, many other auspicious signs, such as the one described, up to the time when he was adorned with a garland of flowers, and after that, many other auspicious signs, such as the one described, up to the time when he was adorned with a garland of flowers, and after that, many other auspicious signs, such as the one described, up to the time when he was adorned with a garland of flowers, and after that, many other auspicious signs, such as the one described, up to the time when he was adorned with a garland of flowers, and after that, many other auspicious signs, such as the one described, up to the time when he was adorned with a garland of flowers, and after that, many other auspicious signs, such as the one described, up to the time when he was adorned with a garland of flowers, and after that, many other auspicious signs, such as the one described, up to the time when he was adorned with a garland of flowers, and after that, many other auspicious signs, such as the one described, up to the time when he was adorned with a garland of flowers, and after that, many other auspicious signs, such as the one described, up to the time when he was adorned with a garland of flowers, and after that, many other auspicious signs, such as the one described, up to the time when he was adorned with a garland of flowers, and after that, many other auspicious signs, such as the one described, up to the time when he was adorned with a garland of flowers, and after that, many other auspicious signs, such as the one described, up to the time when he was adorned with a garland of flowers, and after that, many other auspicious signs, such as the one described, up to the time when he was adorned with a garland of flowers, and after that, many other auspicious signs, such as the one described, up to the time when he was adorned with a garland of flowers, and after that, many other auspicious signs, such as the one described, up to the time when he was adorned with a garland of flowers, and after that, many other auspicious signs, such as the one described, up to the time when he was adorned with a garland of flowers, and after that, many other auspicious signs, such as the one described, up to the time when he was adorned with a garland of flowers, and after that, many other auspicious signs, such as the one described, up to the time when he was adorned with a garland of flowers, and after that, many other auspicious signs, such as the one described, up to the time when he was adorned with a garland of flowers, and after that, many other auspicious signs, such as the one described, up to the time when he was adorned with a garland of flowers, and after that, many other auspicious signs, such as the one described, up to the time when he was adorned with a garland of flowers, and after that, many other auspicious signs, such as the one described, up to the time when he was adorned with a garland of flowers, and after that, many other auspicious signs, such as the one described, up to the time when he was adorned with a garland of flowers, and after that, many other auspicious signs, such as the one described, up to the time when he was adorned with a garland of flowers, and after that, many other auspicious signs, such as the one described, up to the time when he was adorned with a garland of flowers, and after that, many other auspicious signs, such as the one described, up to the time when he was adorned with a garland of flowers, and after that, many other auspicious signs, such as the one described, up to the time when he was adorned with a garland of flowers, and after that, many other auspicious signs, such as the one described, up to the time when he was adorned with a garland of flowers, and after that, many other auspicious signs, such as the one described, up to the time when he was adorned with a garland of flowers, and after that, many other auspicious signs, such as the one described, up to the time when he was adorned with a garland of flowers, and after that, many other auspicious signs, such as the one described, up to the time when he was adorned with a garland of flowers, and after that, many other auspicious signs, such as the one described, up to the time when he was adorned with a garland of flowers, and after that, many other auspicious signs, such as the one described, up to the time when he was adorned with a garland of flowers, and after that, many other auspicious signs, such as the one described, up to the time when he was adorned with a garland of flowers, and after that, many other auspicious signs, such as the one described, up to the time when he was adorned with a garland of flowers, and after that, many other auspicious signs, such as the one described, up to the time when he was adorned with a garland of flowers, and after that, many other auspicious signs, such as the one described, up to the time when he was adorned with a garland of flowers, and after that, many other
Page #109:
---------------------------
[68]
[ Antakrid-dasha
Valipp-ai bhogar-aenam no-valip-pad mitta-nai - niyag-sayan- sambandhi-parijane-nam. Es nam dev-appiya! Sansar-bhay-uvvigge bhie jamman-marane-nam; dev-anuppiya-nam antie mund-e bhavitta agara-o anagariyam pavvate-i; tam eyam nam dev-anuppiya-nam amhe sis-bhikkham dal-yamo, padich-chantu nam dev-anuppiya! Sis-bhikkham.
Tae nam araha aritt-hanemi gay-sukumalam kumaran evam vayasi - ahasuham dev-anuppiya! Ma padhi-bandham! Tae nam se gay-sukumale kumarae arahaya aritt-hanemina evam vutte samane hatth-tutthe araham arin-emi ttikkhutto jav namansitta uttar-puratthim disi-bhagam avakkam-ai, avakkamitta sayamev abharan-malla-lankaran omu-yai. Tae nam sa gay-sukumal - kumara-ssa maya hans-lakkhane-nam pad-saad-ae-nam abharan - malla-lankara padich-chai, padich-chitta har - vari jav vinimmu-yaman-i vinimmu-yaman-i gay-sukumalam kumaran evam vayasi- ghadi-yavvam jaya! Jay-yavvam jaya! Parikkam-iyavvam jaya! Assim cha nam att-he, no pama-eyavvam ti katta gay-sukumala-ssa kumara-ssa amma- piyaro aritt-hanemim vandanti namansanti, vanditta namansitta jamev disim pau-bbhuya tamev disim padhi-gaya.
Tanam se gas-sukumale kumarae sayamev panch-mutthi-yam loyam kare-i, karitta jenev aritt-hanemi tenev uv-agach-chai, uv-agach-chitta bhagavan aritt-hanemim ttikkhutto ayahi-napayahi-nam kare-i, karitta jav namansitta evam vayasi
A-litte nam bhan-te! Loe, palitte nam bhan-te! Loe, a-litta palitte nam bhan-te! Loe jarae marane-nam ya. Se jaha-na-mae kei gaha-v-ai agaransi jhi-yaman-si, je se tatth bhande bhavai app-bhare molla-guru-e, tam gahay ayae egantam avakkam-ai es me nith-tharie samane pacch-a pura ya hi-yae suhae khema-e nissey-sa-e a-nuga-miyatta-e bhavis-sai. Evamev dev-anuppiya! Majjh vi ege aya bhande itthe kante pie manun-ne man-ame thejje vess-asi-e sam-ae a-numae bahu-mae bhande-karand-ga-samane, ma nam siyam, ma nam unham, ma nam khuha, ma nam pi-vasa, ma nam chora, ma nam bala, ma nam damsa, ma nam masaga, ma nam vaiy-pitti-y- sembhi-y- sanni-vaiya viviha roga-yanka parisa-ho-vas-ga phusantu ti katta es me nith-tharie samane par-loya-ssa hi-yae suhae khema-e nise-sa-e a-nuga-miyatta-e bhavis-sai. Tam ich-chhami nam dev-anuppiya! Sayamev pavva-viyam, sayamev mund-aviyam, sayamev seha-viyam, sayamev sikkha-viyam, sayamev ayara-goyaram vinay-ven-ai-yacharan-karan-jaya - maya-vatti-yam dhamma-maikkhi-yam.
Tae nam aritt-hanemi araha gay-sukumalam kumaran sayamev pavva-ve-i, jav dhamma-maikkhai - evam dev-appiya! Gantavvam, evam chitthi-yavvam, evam nise-yavvam, evam tu-yatt-iyavvam, evam bhunji-yavvam, evam bhasi-yavvam, evam uttha-e uttha-y pane-him bhu-e-him jive-him satte-him sanjame-nam sanjam-iyavvam, assim cha nam att-he no kinchi pi pama-iyavvam. Tae nam se gay-sukumale kumarae arahao aritt-hanemi-ssa imam ey-aruvam dhammi-yam uv-aesam sammam sampad-ivvaj-jai ], tamana-ae taha jav [ gach-chai, tah chitth-ad, tah nise-yai, tah tu-yatt-hai, tah bhun-jai, tah bhas-ai, tah uttha-e uttha-y pane-him bhu-e-him jive-him satte-him sanjame-nam sanjam-e-i, ] se gay-sukumale anagare iriya-samiv [ bhasa-samie esana-samie aya-na-bhande-mattanikkh-evan-a-samie, uchar- pasavan - khel- jall-singha-na-paridva-vani-ya-samie man-samie vay-samie kay-samie man-gutte vay-gutte kay-gutte guttin-die ] gutta-bhamb-ayari, inamev nigantham pavayanam puro kaun vihar. 

Page #110:
---------------------------
[Third Chapter]
After that, when Krishna-Vasudeva and the parents were unable to convince Gaja-sukumala Kumar with many favorable and affectionate arguments, they became disappointed and spoke to him in this way:
"If this is the case, then O son! We wish to see your royal glory (splendor of royal magnificence) for just one day. Therefore, at least for one day, accept the royal fortune." Then Gaja-sukumala Kumar remained silent, following the wishes of Vasudeva Krishna and his parents.

After this, Gaja-sukumala's father called the family members and said: [Devanupriyo! Quickly sprinkle water inside and outside this Dwarka city. Clean the ground by sweeping and dusting, etc., as mentioned in the relevant sutra, and carry out the work accordingly.] After that, he told the servants: Devanupriyo! Quickly make preparations for Gaja-sukumala Kumar's grand, valuable, worthy (worthy of great men) and abundant coronation. The servants carried out the work as instructed and reported back. After this, Gaja-sukumala's parents seated him on a fine throne facing east and performed his coronation with one hundred and eight golden pots, according to the Rajaprashniya sutra, and with one hundred and eight earthen pots, using the words "Sarvariddhi" and "Yavat Mahashabda." After the coronation, they joined their hands and praised him with the words "Yavat Jay-Vijay." After praising him, they said: "O son! What shall we give you? What shall we do for you? What is your desire?" Then Gaja-sukumala said: "O parents! I want to have the Rajo-haran and the Patra brought from the Kutrikapan (Ku meaning earth, Trik meaning three, Apan meaning shop. A divinely appointed place where things from the three worlds of heaven, earth, and hell are found), and I want to call the barber." Then Gaja-sukumala's father called the family members and said: "Devanupriyo! Quickly bring out three lakh sonayas from the treasury. Give two lakh sonayas to bring the Rajo-haran and the Patra from the Kutrikapan, and give one lakh sonayas to call the barber." Hearing the above order, the servants, happy and pleased, joined their hands, accepted their master's words, and brought out three lakh gold coins from the treasury, brought the Rajo-haran and the Patra from the Kutrikapan, and called the barber.

The barber was very happy when he was called by Gaja-sukumala's father's servants. He bathed, adorned his body, and then went to Gaja-sukumala's father, praised him with the words "Jay-Vijay," and said: "Devanupriya! Tell me what I can do for you." Gaja-sukumala's father said to the barber: "Devanupriya! Cut Gaja-sukumala Kumar's forelock very carefully, leaving four fingers long, so that it can be removed." Hearing the order of Gaja-sukumala's father, the barber was very happy and joined his hands, saying: "Swamin! As you command." Saying this, he humbly accepted his words. Then he washed his hands and feet with fragrant water, tied his mouth with a pure cloth of eight stripes, and then very carefully cut Gaja-sukumala Kumar's hair, leaving four fingers of forelock for removal, and cut the rest of the hair.

After that, Gaja-sukumala's mother took those forelocks in a white cloth like a swan. She washed them with fragrant water, worshipped them with the best and chief fragrances and garlands, tied them in a pure cloth, and placed them in a jewel casket. After this, Gaja-sukumala Kumar's mother, weeping with grief over the separation from her son, ... 

Page #111:
---------------------------
[70]
[ Antakrid Dasha ]
She, shedding tears like a garland of pearls, a stream of water, a Sindhuvar tree's blossoms, and a broken garland of pearls, spoke thus: "These hairs will be for us, like the final darshan, or repeated darshan, of Gajasukumal Kumar, in many tithis, festivals, celebrations, and yajnas like Nagpujada." Thinking thus, she placed them under her pillow.

After this, Gajasukumal Kumar's parents had another throne placed in the north direction, and had Gajasukumal Kumar bathed with golden and silver kalashas. Then, they wiped his body with fragrant, gandhakaashyita (red, fragrant) cloth. They anointed his body with Gosirsha Chandan. After that, they dressed him in a patashaatak (silk cloth). He was so light that he could be blown away by the air of his nose, pleasing to the eyes, beautiful in complexion, and soft to the touch. The cloth was softer than the saliva of a horse, white, with gold threads on its edges. It was very valuable and had the mark of a swan. Then, they adorned him with a haar (eighteen-stringed) and an ardhahaar. What more can be said, he was adorned and decorated like a Kalpa tree with granthim (knotted), veshtit (woven), purim (filled), and sanghatim (interwoven) garlands.

After this, his father called the family men and said, "O Devanupriyo! Please prepare a shivika (palanquin) for me, like the vimanas described in the Rajprasniya sutra, which are adorned with hundreds of pillars, playing puppets, and groups of bells made of precious gems, and can be lifted by a thousand men." After this, Gajasukumal Kumar, adorned and decorated with four types of ornaments: keshalankar, vastralankar, malalankar, and abharanalanakar, rose from the throne. He circumambulated and ascended the shivika, and sat on the best throne facing east.

After that, Gajasukumal Kumar's mother, having bathed and adorned her body, took a patashaatak with the mark of a swan, circumambulated, ascended the shivika, and sat on the best bhadrasan to the right of Gajasukumal. Then, Gajasukumal's foster mother, having bathed and adorned her body, took a rajoharan and a vessel, circumambulated, ascended the shivika, and sat on the best bhadrasan to the left of Gajasukumal. After this, behind Gajasukumal, stood a young woman with a beautiful form and dress, beautiful gait, beautiful body, and adorned with the beauty and charm of youth, holding a white korantak flower garland, like snow, silver, kumud, mogra flowers, and the moon, and playfully wearing it. Then, on the right and left of Gajasukumal, stood two beautiful young women, like treasure houses of beauty, with beautiful dress, holding chamaras on both sides. The chamaras were made of gems, gold, precious stones, and pure, malleable (red gold), with intricate handles, and were white like conch shells, ankaratna, mogra flowers, the moon, water drops, and the foam of churned nectar. After this, Gajasukumal...

In the northeast direction (Ishaan kona), stood a beautiful woman with beautiful dress and adornment, holding a kalash filled with white, silver-colored, holy water, shaped like the mouth of a mad elephant. In the southeast direction (Agneya kona), stood a beautiful woman with beautiful dress, like a house of beauty, holding a fan with an intricate golden handle.

Then, Gajasukumal's father called the family men and said, "O Devanupriyo! 

Page #112:
---------------------------
[Third Class]
"Call one thousand excellent young men, all with the same skin color, the same age, the same beauty and youthfulness, and adorned with the same ornaments and clothes." The servants accepted their master's command and quickly summoned a thousand men. Those thousand men were delighted and pleased. They bathed, adorned themselves with the same ornaments and clothes, and came to the father of Gajasukumal, joining their hands and bowing, saying, "O Devānupriya! Tell us what task is worthy of us." Then the father of Gajasukumal said to them, "Devānupriya! All of you carry the palanquin of Gajasukumal." They carried the palanquin. When Gajasukumal mounted the palanquin, eight auspicious symbols led the way: (1) Svastika, (2) Śrīvatsa, (3) Nandāvarta, (4) Vardhamānaka, (5) Bhadrāsana, (6) Kalasa, (7) Matsya, and (8) Darpaṇa. Behind these eight auspicious symbols, a full Kalasa followed, and so on, as stated in the Aupapātika Sutra, until the Vijayanti (flag) touched the sky. People cheered and followed in procession. After that, men born in the Ugrakula and Bhogakula, as well as a multitude of men, followed Gajasukumal from behind, in front, and around him.
Gajasukumal's father, bathed and adorned, mounted the excellent shoulder of an elephant. He wore a canopy adorned with a garland of Koṛanṭaka flowers, was fanned by two white chamaras, and followed behind Gajasukumal with a fourfold army of horses, elephants, chariots, and soldiers, surrounded by a group of great soldiers.
In front of Gajasukumal, great and excellent horses ran, on both sides excellent elephants, and behind chariots and a group of chariots. Thus, Gajasukumal proceeded, accompanied by prosperity and the sounds of musical instruments. In front of him walked men carrying Kalasas and Tālavṛnta. They wore white canopies on their heads. On both sides, white chamaras and fans were being waved. Behind them walked many men carrying sticks, spears, books, and even vīṇās. Behind them walked one hundred and eight elephants, one hundred and eight horses, and one hundred and eight chariots. After that, infantrymen carrying wood, swords, and spears walked. Behind them walked many princes, wealthy men, swordsmen, and even merchants. Thus, passing through the middle of Dwārakā city, they went towards the Sahasrāmrvana garden outside the city, to the Arhant Ariṣṭanemi.
As Gajasukumal Kumar passed through the middle of Dwārakā city, many men seeking wealth, pleasure, and love, in the Śṛṅgāṭaka, Trika, Caturṣka, and other royal roads, greeted him and praised him, saying, "O Nanda (giver of joy)! May your good fortune (welfare) be. O Nanda! Conquer your unconquered senses with perfect, excellent knowledge, vision, and character, and follow the Śramaṇa Dharma. Strengthen the armor of patience and conquer all obstacles. Conquer your senses and win over the army of patience. Conquer the wrestlers of attachment and aversion through austerity, and crush the eight enemies of karma with excellent white meditation. O brave one! In the world-stage of the three realms, you should wander with the flag of worship, attain pure, unblemished, unsurpassed, perfect knowledge, and through the simple path of liberation taught by the Jinas, attain the supreme state of liberation. May there be no obstacle in your path of Dharma." Thus, people greeted and praised him.
Then Gajasukumal Kumar, passing through the middle of Dwārakā city, came to the Sahasrāmrvana garden outside the city, and seeing the canopy and other extraordinary things of the Tirthankara Bhagavan, he descended from the palanquin carrying a thousand men. 

Page #113:
---------------------------
## 72]
[ Antakrid Dasha
Utare. Then, bringing forward Gajasukumal, his parents presented him to the Arihant Arishta-nemi Bhagwan, and after circumambulating the Bhagwan thrice, they spoke as follows: "Bhagwan! This Gajasukumal Kumar is our only beloved and cherished son. Even hearing his name is rare, so seeing him is even rarer, what to say about his darshan? Just as a lotus, though born in mud and raised in water, remains detached from water and mud, similarly, Gajasukumal Kumar, though born from desire and raised by pleasures, is not attached to desires and pleasures in the least. He is not attached to friends, relatives, family, connections, and acquaintances. Bhagwan! This Gajasukumal is distressed by the fear of the world, terrified by the fear of birth and death. He wishes to accept the An-agar dharma by getting his head shaved in your presence. Therefore, O Bhagwan! We offer you the alms of a disciple. Please accept him."

After that, Bhagwan Arishta-nemi said to Gajasukumal Kumar: "O Dev-anupriya! Do as you please, but do not delay." Upon hearing this from the Bhagwan, Gajasukumal Kumar was delighted and pleased, and after circumambulating the Bhagwan thrice and offering salutations, he went to the northeast (Ishaan-kona). He himself removed his ornaments, garlands, and adornments. His mother received them in a pat-shaatak (garment) marked with the sign of a swan. Then, shedding tears like a string of pearls and a waterfall, she spoke to her son as follows: "O son! Be diligent in restraint, be valiant in restraint. Do not be negligent in restraint even for a moment." Saying this, Gajasukumal Kumar's parents offered salutations to the Bhagwan and returned in the same direction from which they had come.

After that, Gajasukumal Kumar himself performed the Panch-musti Loch and after performing the Loch, he came to where Arihant Arishta-nemi was. Upon arriving, he circumambulated Bhagwan Arishta-nemi thrice, starting from the right side. Then, he offered salutations and said:

"Bhagwan! This world is ablaze with the fire of old age and death. O Bhagwan! This world is ablaze. Just as a householder, upon a fire breaking out in his house, takes the least weighty and most valuable things from the house and goes into solitude himself. He thinks: 'This thing, saved from burning in the fire, will be for my benefit in the future, for my happiness, for my ability, for my well-being, and for my future use.' Similarly, this soul of mine is a vessel (thing) that is dear to me, beautiful, beloved, pleasing, and extremely charming. I will take out this soul - I will save it from being consumed by the fire of old age and death, then it will be the destroyer of this world. Therefore, I wish that Dev-anupriya (you) yourself initiate me - grant me the robes of a monk, yourself shave my head - perform my Loch, yourself teach me writing and other things, yourself teach me the sutras and their meaning, yourself teach me the principles of knowledge, conduct, conduct, humility, the fruits of humility, the seven steps of the feet, the seven steps of the hands, the journey of restraint, and the measure (quantity of food) etc., the form of dharma."

After that, Arihant Arishta-nemi himself initiated Gajasukumal and himself taught him the principles of dharma, conduct, etc.: "O Dev-anupriya! You should walk on the earth with only a glance, you should stand on the lifeless ground in this way, you should sleep after cleaning the ground in this way, you should take food free from the causes of pain, etc., in this way - 

Page #114:
---------------------------
[Third Section]
[73 One should speak in a way that is beneficial, moderate, and pleasant. In this way, one should practice restraint by protecting the life (vikaleendriya) of the bhutas (vanaspatikaaya), jivas (panchendriya), and sattvas (shesh ekaindriya) with mindfulness and caution. One should not be negligent in this matter even for a moment. After hearing this Dharma-related instruction from the Arhat Arishthanemi, and holding it in his heart, Gajasukumaal accepted it in the right way. He started to practice restraint by diligently protecting the lives of the bhutas, jivas, and sattvas, following the instructions of the Bhagwan, sitting in the same way, and remaining vigilant, i.e., by abandoning negligence and sleep.] Becoming an Anagaar, the Muni Gajasukumaal started to diligently follow the Iryasamiti, [Bhasasamiti, Eshanasamiti, Aadaan-Bhaandamaatranikshepanasamiti, and Ucchaar-Prasravan-Khel-Jall-Singhaan-Paristhapanikasamiti, and Manasamiti, Vachanasamiti, and Kaayasamiti. He started to remain guarded in thought, speech, and action. He became a Gupabrahmachaari, controlling his senses, and started to wander with this Nirgranthpravachan in front of him.
'Discussion - The present two sutras describe the arrival of Shri Krishna Maharaj and Prince Gajasukumaal at the feet of Bhagwan Arishthanemi, the development of detachment in the heart of the charmashareee Gajasukumaal after hearing the auspicious teachings of the Bhagwan, then obtaining permission from his parents to be initiated, Krishna Maharaj and his mother Devaki trying to convince him not to take initiation (detailed conversation on this topic), Gajasukumaal being crowned king for a day, the celebration of the Pravrajyaabhishek, and finally becoming an Anagaar and wandering accordingly. Many topics are described in this.
_ 'Maheliyavajan' - This word has two meanings. It means without a woman and unmarried. One who is not married is Maheliyavarj. The sutrakar has described the life of Gajasukumaal as 'Jaha Meho', comparing him to Meghakumar. In the first study of the 'Jnataadharmakathaang Sutra', Meghakumar is described as married, and Gajasukumaal was unmarried, therefore the sutrakar has indicated this difference with the word 'Maheliyavajj'.
Abhishek means - the act of sprinkling water on the head with sacred water containing all herbs, with mantras, to bestow a title - the act of crowning a king, the celebration of sitting on the throne, the ascension of the king to the throne, the coronation. Gajamuni carrying the Mahapratima
22 - Then, on the same day that Gajasukumaal was celebrating, in the early morning hours of that day, Arhat Arishthanemi arrived. After arriving, Arhat Arishthanemi performed the Tikkhutto Aayahiin-Payahiin, and after performing it, he bowed and paid respects. After bowing and paying respects, he said,
'I wish, Bhante! that you, who are worthy of being worshipped, would wander in the Mahakaal, in the cremation ground, after being adorned with the Mahapratima.'
Ahasuhum Devaanuppiya! Do not bind yourself.
1. Variant reading - Angasuttaani - "Pachvaavaranh0" 3/563. 

Page #115:
---------------------------
[74]
After being initiated into the Shraman Dharma, the monk Gajasukumal arrived at the place where the Arhat Arishta-nemi was residing, on the very day of his initiation, in the latter part of the day. Arriving there, he circumambulated the Lord Neminath three times from the south. After circumambulating, he said, "O Bhagavan! With your permission, I wish to perform a Mahapadima (great image) for one night in the Mahakal cemetery."
The Lord said, "O Dev-anupriya! Do whatever brings you happiness."
Then, after receiving the permission of the Arhat Arishta-nemi, the monk Gajasukumal bowed and prostrated to the Lord Neminath. After bowing and prostrating, he left the presence of the Arhat Arishta-nemi and went out of the Sahasramravan garden. From there, he went to the Mahakal cemetery. Arriving at the Mahakal cemetery, he made a record of the Prasauk Sthandila land. After making the record, he made a record of the land suitable for the discharge of excrement and urine. After making the record, he stood at one place, slightly bending his body, [with his hands extended to his knees, looking at the white pudgala, with unwavering eyes, keeping all his senses under control] with both his feet together (at a distance of four fingers), and performed a Mahapadima for one night, becoming absorbed in meditation.
Commentary: "Puvvavaranhakalasamayans-i" means the latter half of the day, from noon to sunset, which is called Aparah. The third watch of the day is called Parva-aparah. Time is general and moment is specific. In this chapter, the Sutrakar wants to use the word "kal" for the third watch and the word "samay" for the specific moment when this event occurred.
The word "Thandill-am" means Prasauk land, a place devoid of living beings, a place of seclusion, where there is no obstacle of any kind. By Somila's prefix
22-Imam cha nam Somile Mahane Samidheyass-a Atthaye Baravaiyo Nayariyo Bahiya Puvvaniggae. Samihao Yadabbey Kuse ya Pattamodam ya Genhai, Genhitta Tao Padiniyattai, Padiniyattaita Mahakalass-a Susanas-sa Adur-asamantenam Vee-ivayamane-Vee-ivayamane Sanjhakalasamayans-i Paviralamanussans-i Gayasukumal-am Anagar-am Pasa-i, Pasitta Tam Ver-am Sara-i, Saritta Asurutte Rutte Kuvie Chandikkae Misimisemane Evam Vayasi
"Es nam Bho! Se Gayasukumale Kumare Apathiya-jav [Patthie, Durant-pant-lakkhane, Heen-punna-chauddasiye, Siri-hiri-dhi-kitti] Parivadjjie, Je nam Mam Dhuyam Somasiriye
1. Pathantar-Kabhallenam. 

Page #116:
---------------------------
[Third Class]
[75 The ascetic Somila, having abandoned his wife and children, became a monk. This was a source of great anger for Gayasukumala's son. He thought to himself, "I must avenge this insult." He looked around to make sure no one was watching, then went to a nearby pond and took some wet mud. He went to Gayasukumala's hermitage and smeared the mud on his head. Then he took some burning embers from a funeral pyre and placed them on Gayasukumala's head.  Fearing that he might be seen, he quickly fled back the way he had come.]

Meanwhile, Somila, a Brahmin, had gone out of the city of Dwaraka to gather firewood for a sacrifice. He had already collected the firewood, darbha grass, kusha grass, roots, and leaves. He was returning home when he saw Gayasukumala meditating near the Mahakal cemetery.  Somila was filled with hatred at the sight of him. He thought to himself, "This is the same Gayasukumala who abandoned my daughter Soma, a beautiful and virtuous young woman, and became a monk. I must take revenge on him." He looked around to make sure no one was watching, then went to a nearby pond and took some wet mud. He went to Gayasukumala's hermitage and smeared the mud on his head. Then he took some burning embers from a funeral pyre and placed them on Gayasukumala's head.  Fearing that he might be seen, he quickly fled back the way he had come.

**Commentary:** Somila, blinded by anger and unaware of Gayasukumala's deep devotion, acted with great cruelty towards the meditating monk. This passage describes his demonic act in a heart-wrenching manner.

The commentator, Acharya Abhaydeva Suri, explains the term "samidheyassa" as "samitsamuhassa," meaning a collection of firewood. The words "dabbe, kuse, pattamodam" are explained as follows: "samidhauutti" refers to firewood, "dabbeti" refers to darbha grass with roots, "kuseti" refers to the tips of darbha grass, and "pattamodam" refers to leaves that are folded from the branches of trees, used for worship. 

Page #117:
---------------------------
[76]
**The Siddhi of Muni Gajasukumal**

23–Therefore, the naked ascetic Gajasukumal experienced intense pain in his body, which was [exceedingly painful, extremely terrible, fierce, intense, dreadful, and unbearable]. Even then, the naked ascetic Gajasukumal did not harbor any animosity towards the Brahmin Somila in his mind, and he endured that [heart-wrenching, terrible, fierce, intense, dreadful, unbearable] pain with equanimity. At that time, while enduring that [exceedingly painful, unbearable, scorching] pain with equanimity, due to auspicious results and noble aspirations, the karmas that covered his virtues were destroyed, and he became free from all karmic defilement, entering the state of A-puvva-karana, which destroys karmas. The naked ascetic Gajasukumal attained the infinite, unsurpassed [unobstructed, unhindered, complete, and perfect] state of Kevala-jnana and Kevala-darsana. After that, when his lifespan was complete, he became a Siddha, [a knower of all things, free from all karmas], and free from all suffering.

At that time, the nearby gods, knowing that the Muni Gajasukumal had performed the most excellent worship of the Shraman dharma, showered him with divine fragrant water, five types of divine flowers, and divine garments, using their divine powers. They also filled the sky with the sound of divine sweet songs and Gandharva musical instruments.

**Commentary:**

The Muni Gajasukumal, who was completely absorbed in his own self, in self-meditation, endured this extremely terrible, heart-wrenching, intense pain inflicted by the Brahmin Somila with complete equanimity and without any animosity. As a result, he attained Kevala-jnana and Kevala-darsana and attained liberation.

The two factors that are most helpful in attaining liberation, (1) auspicious results and (2) noble aspirations, are mentioned in the sutra with the words "Subhena parinaamena, pasatthajjhavasaanena". The difference in meaning between the two is as follows: 1. Generally, auspicious, pure thoughts are called auspicious results. 2. The state of being absorbed in self-meditation or engaged in deep self-reflection is called noble aspirations. 

Page #118:
---------------------------
[Third Section]
[77]
"Tadavaranijjaṇam Kammaṇam"- In this phrase, 'karma' is the object and 'tadavaranīya' is its adjective. The word 'karma' refers to the karman particles obtained from the soul's regions, and the word 'tadavaranīya' indicates the meaning of those that cover the soul's qualities like knowledge and vision.
"Kammarayavikiraṇakaram"- Kammarajovikiraṇakaram means one who destroys the radiation of karma-rajo-mala, which is the karma-form of rajo-mala, like jñāna-āvaraṇīya.
"Apuvvakaraṇam-Apūrvakaraṇam, Ātmano'bhūtapūrvam Shubhaparināmam"- The word 'apūrvakaraṇam' means that which has not been obtained before. This is also considered to be the characteristic of the eighth 'nivṛttibādar guṇasthāna'. From this guṇasthāna, two categories begin - the upasamaśreṇī and the kṣapakaśreṇī. The being of the upasamaśreṇī, while subduing the natures of mohanīya karma, stops at the eleventh guṇasthāna and falls down. The being of the kṣapakaśreṇī, from the tenth guṇasthāna, directly goes to the twelfth guṇasthāna and becomes apratipātī. The being who has ascended to the eighth guṇasthāna, increasing progressively from the kṣapakaśreṇī, when he reaches the twelfth guṇasthāna, destroys all the destructive karmas and attains kaivalya. Thereafter, he remains stable in the thirteenth guṇasthāna. Upon the completion of his lifespan, he attains the fourteenth guṇasthāna and obtains the supreme bliss, the state of mokṣa. In the present context, the sūtra-kāra, by giving the phrase "apūvvakaraṇam", has indicated the connection of the apūrvakaraṇam state with the gajasukumāla. The meaning is that the gajasukumāla muni, having entered the eighth guṇasthāna, had adopted the kṣapakaśreṇī.
Anate......dansaṇe etc. phrases are explained as follows: 1. Ananta-endless, that which never ends, that which remains forever. 2. Anuttara-pradhana-there is no knowledge greater than this, the highest. 3. Nirvyāghāta-vyāghāta-free from obstruction. 4. Nirāvaraṇa-that which has no covering-veil, showering knowledge-light from all sides. 5. Krtsna-complete, that which is not incomplete. 6. Pratipūrṇa-making all the knowable objects of the world its subject, from which no object of the world is hidden. The meaning of the words Siddha-Buddha etc. is as follows: 1. Siddha-those who have become accomplished, whose all actions have become accomplished-complete. 2. Buddha-those who know all the objects of the world and the non-world. 3. Mukta-those who have become free from all karmas. 4. Parinirvāta-those who are peaceful due to the destruction of all karma-born afflictions. 5. Sarvadukha-prahīṇa-those whose all physical and mental sufferings have been destroyed.
Vāsudeva Kṛṣṇa's help to the old man
, 24-Taye ṇam se kaṇhe vāsudeve kallāṁ pāuppabhāyāe raṇīye jāv [phulluppalaka-malako-malu-mmiliyammi, ahapandure pabhāe, rattāsogap-agās-kinsu-y-suyamuha-guṇjad-dhārāga-bandhu-jīvagap-ārāvay-calana-nayaṇa-parahu-yasuratta-loyaṇa-jāsumina-kusuma-jaliyajalaṇa-tavaṇijjakalasahingul-ayana-ir-rūvāire gare hanta-sassirīe divāgare ahakka-meṇa udiye, tassa diṇakara-parampārāvayār-pārāddhammi andhayāre, bālātavakunkumenaṁ khaie vv jīvaloē, loyaṇavisa-āṇu-āsaviga-sant-avisad-dansiyammi loē, kamalāgarasanda-bohae utthiyammi sūre sahasrassimmi diṇayare teyasa jalante] bahāe jāv' vibhūsie hatthikhandhavaragae sakorenta malla dāmenaṁ chhattenaṁ dharijja-māṇenaṁ 1. See-the thirteenth sūtra of the third section. 

Page #119:
---------------------------
[Antakrid Dasha
78]
While the white chamaras were being waved, Krishna Vasudeva, surrounded by a large crowd of soldiers and guards, set out from the middle of Dwaraka towards the place where the Arhat Arishthanemi was staying.
As he was leaving the middle of Dwaraka, Krishna Vasudeva saw a very old man, his body weakened by age, [extremely tired, withered, and weak], struggling to carry bricks from a large pile outside his house.
Krishna Vasudeva, out of compassion for the old man, picked up a brick from the pile while still seated on his elephant and carried it inside the house.
Seeing Krishna Vasudeva pick up a brick, many hundreds of men in the crowd carried the entire pile of bricks from the street into the house.
After that, on the next day, at dawn, when the sun rose [when the petals of the blooming lotuses opened, the eyes of the black deer, deprived of sleep, became wide open. Then the morning became pale white. The sun rose with a redness that surpassed the brilliance of the red Ashoka tree, the Palasha flower, the parrot's beak, the half of the Chirmi flower, the midday flower, the pigeon's feet and eyes, the Jasoda flower, the blazing fire, the golden pot, and the group of Hingula. The rays of the sun descended and began to destroy the darkness. The world seemed to be filled with saffron, like the young sun. The world, which had been awakened by the sight of the sun, became clearly visible. The sun, which caused the lotus forests in the lakes to bloom, shone brightly with its thousand rays. When this happened], Krishna Vasudeva, after bathing and adorning himself with clothes and ornaments, mounted his elephant. He wore a crown adorned with Korant flowers. White and bright chamaras were waved on his right and left. He set out for the place where the Lord Arishthanemi was staying.
Then, as Krishna Vasudeva was passing through the middle of Dwaraka, he saw a man who was very old, his body weakened by age, [extremely tired, withered, and weak], and exhausted. He was very sad. Outside his house, on the road, there was a large pile of bricks that the old man was carrying one by one into his house. Then Krishna Vasudeva, out of compassion for the man, picked up a brick while still seated on his elephant and carried it inside the house.
Then, when Krishna Vasudeva picked up a brick, (his followers) many hundreds of men carried the entire pile of bricks from the street into the house.
The Achievement of Gaja Sukumala
25 - Then Krishna Vasudeva left the middle of Dwaraka and went to where the Arhat Arishthanemi was staying. When he arrived, he [the Arhat Arishthanemi, with a joyful heart, welcomed him and] bowed and prostrated himself. After bowing and prostrating himself, he said:
"Tell me, Lord! My younger brother, Gaja Sukumala, who is adorned with ornaments, whom I bow to and prostrate myself to, what is his name?"
- 

Page #120:
---------------------------
[Third Section]
[79. Then Krishna Vasudeva said to the Arhat Arishta-nemi, "Sir, where is my younger brother, the monk Gaja-sukumala?" Then the Arhat Arishta-nemi said to Krishna Vasudeva, "Tell me, sir, where is your younger brother, the monk Gaja-sukumala?" Then the Arhat Arishta-nemi said to Krishna Vasudeva, "Indeed, Krishna, Gaja-sukumala, the monk, came to me in the early part of the afternoon yesterday and bowed and prostrated himself. After bowing and prostrating himself, he said, 'I wish to spend the night in the Maha-kala cremation ground, if you permit.' Having received my permission, he went to the Maha-kala cremation ground and stood there in meditation, assuming the form of a mendicant."
Then a man saw Gaja-sukumala, the monk, and became very angry. Thus, Krishna, Gaja-sukumala, the monk, has achieved his purpose.
26. Then Krishna Vasudeva said to the Arhat Arishta-nemi, "Sir, what kind of man was that, who, being devoid of the marks of a good man, and being of low character, and being devoid of shame, modesty, faith, and fame, tried to harm my younger brother, the monk Gaja-sukumala, and to cause him to die prematurely?"
1. Section 3, Sutra 21. 2. See Sutra 22. 

Page #121:
---------------------------
80]
Then the Arhat Arishthanemi said to Krishna Vasudeva,
"O Krishna! Do not harbor hatred towards that man. For that man has surely helped your younger brother, the monk Gajasukumal, in fulfilling his own purpose."
-
[End of the Chapter]
Hearing this, Krishna Vasudeva, the Lord, asked Neminath,
"Bhanta! Who is that man who desires the unaskable, that is, who desires death, [who has the characteristics of a distant shore, who was born on the inauspicious fourteenth day, who is devoid of shame and wealth] who is shameless, and who has taken the life of my younger brother, the monk Gajasukumal, before his time?"
Then the Arhat Arishthanemi said to Krishna Vasudeva,
"O Krishna! Do not harbor hatred towards that man. For that man has surely helped your younger brother, the monk Gajasukumal, in fulfilling his own purpose."
-
Discussion - "Akale cheva jiviao vavarovai" Here, the reading "vavarovai" seems more appropriate. However, the meaning of these words is - "He was deprived of life before his time." The word "akal mrityu" is used for untimely death. Death that occurs at the appropriate time, in a practical sense, after completing one's time, is not called "akal mrityu", it is "kal mrityu".
In Jain scriptures, there are two types of lifespan - one is "apavartaaniya" and the other is "anpavartaaniya". The lifespan that can be quickly consumed before the completion of the bondage period due to the cause of poison, weapons, etc., is "apavartaaniya" lifespan, and the lifespan that cannot be consumed before the completion of the bondage period is "anpavartaaniya" lifespan. This duality of lifespan is not natural, it is based on the intensity of the consequences. When binding the lifespan, if the consequences are slow, the binding of the lifespan will be loose, if the consequences are intense, the binding will be intense. The lifespan with loose binding decreases when the cause is found - it is consumed before the appointed time, and the lifespan with intense binding (extracted) does not decrease even when the cause is found. The "Sthananga Sutra" mentions seven causes of lifespan difference, which are as follows:
-
1. Ajzhavasan - Adhyavasana - When a strong mental shock in the form of affection or fear occurs, the lifespan ends before time.
2. Nimitta - When a cause like a weapon, stick, fire, etc., is found, the lifespan ends quickly.
-
3. Ahar - Eating too much food reduces lifespan.
4. Vedana - When there is unbearable pain in any part of the body, the lifespan arises before the appointed time and falls away from the soul.
5. Paraghāt - When a person falls into a pit, a roof falls on him, or suffers an external injury, the lifespan is stimulated.
6. Sparsha - When a person is bitten by a poisonous creature like a snake, or when he touches an object that is poisonous, 

Page #122:
---------------------------
[Third Class]
[81 Poison spreads in the body. Income ends prematurely.
7. When the movement of breath stops, there is a difference in lifespan. The lifespan that is consumed in a short period of time before the fixed time due to the attainment of causes is called irreversible lifespan. It is also called Sopakram lifespan. That which is with the beginning is Sopakram. The attainment of causes like sharp weapons, strong poison, intense fire, etc. is the beginning. Irreversible lifespan is of both Sopakram and Nirupkram types. In other words, this irreversible lifespan is the presence or absence of the aforementioned causes like the end of life that brings untimely death. Even if the aforementioned causes are present, the irreversible lifespan does not end before the fixed time.
It is important to note here that the जीव has to experience all the Dalik that are bound in the Bandhakal, only that experience is called untimely death in comparison to the Kalik situation when it happens in a short period of time.
27- "Bante! Did that man help the ascetic Gajasukumal?"
"Krishna! You saw a man in Dwarka city while coming to pay your respects to me [who was very old, decrepit from old age, very tired, withered, weak, and was carrying a brick from the highway to his house. Seeing you place a brick, all the men with you also picked up a brick and delivered it to the old man's house, and that huge pile of bricks immediately moved from the highway to the old man's house. In this way, your good deed relieved the old man's suffering.] Krishna! Just as you helped that man by relieving his suffering, Krishna! That man also helped the ascetic Gajasukumal, who was engaged in the eradication of a huge amount of karma accumulated over millions of births, in the complete eradication of those karmas."
Hearing this, Krishna Vasudeva asked again, "O Venerable One! How did that man help Gajasukumal Muni?"
Arhat Arishtanemi replied to Krishna Vasudeva in this way
"Krishna! While coming to pay your respects to me, you saw a man in Dwarka city [who was very old, decrepit from old age, very tired, withered, weak, and was carrying a brick from the highway to his house. Seeing you place a brick, all the men with you also picked up a brick and delivered it to the old man's house, and that huge pile of bricks immediately moved from the highway to the old man's house. In this way, your good deed relieved the old man's suffering.] Krishna! Just as you helped that man by relieving his suffering, Krishna! That man also helped Gajasukumal Muni, who was engaged in the eradication of a huge amount of karma accumulated over millions of births, in the complete eradication of those karmas."
Discussion- In this sutra, Lord Arishtanemi explained to Shri Krishna with an example from his own (Shri Krishna's) life that he actually became a helpful participant in the karma-destruction of Gajasukumal Muni.
1. See Sutra 24

Page #123:
---------------------------
## 82]

Acharya Shri Atmaramji Maharaj, in his commentary on the Antagad Sutra (page 189), has narrated a traditional story about the karmic connection between Somil Brahmana and Muni Gajasukumal in the past.

There were two wives of a man, one had a child and the other did not. The childless woman tried many remedies but did not conceive. Out of jealousy, she decided that if she ever got the chance, she would kill her co-wife's child.

Unfortunately, the child developed boils on his head, and despite many treatments, the pain did not subside. The child's mother asked her co-wife for a remedy, and seizing the opportunity, she cooked a hot 'pooda' (bread) and applied it to the child's head. As a result, the child died. This made her very happy.

After traversing through thousands of births and deaths, the same woman was born as Gajasukumal in the house of Mata Devaki, and the child was born as Somil Brahmana in the city of Dwaraka.

According to the storyteller, ninety-nine lakh births ago, Gajasukumal's soul had killed Somil Brahmana's soul by applying hot 'pooda' to his head. Therefore, in this birth, Somil took revenge by placing a burning brazier on him.

'Anegbhav...kamma-arthat' - 'Anegbhav' means many births, 'kamma' means karma, 'shatasahasra' means lakhs, and 'sanchit' means accumulated. Karma is the name of that material force which makes the soul wander in the forest of the world.

'Udiremane' - means to stir up. Jain scriptures describe four stages of karma: Bandha, Uday, Udirana, and Satya. The merging of karma-pudgalas with the soul like milk and water, due to Mithyatva, etc., in the form of Jnanavaraniya, etc., is called Bandha. When the period of Abadihakal ends and the time for Uday-kal-phaladan arrives, the giving of auspicious and inauspicious fruits of karma is called Uday. Even after the Abadihakal (the period during which the bound karma does not yield its fruit to the soul) has passed, the karma-dalik that are to arise later are pulled up by special effort and enjoyed along with the Uday-prapta dalik, this is called Udirana. The bound karma remaining attached to the soul without losing its form is called Satya. The difference between Uday and Udirana is that in Uday, the fruits of karma are enjoyed naturally without any effort, while in Udirana, the fruits of karma are enjoyed only through effort. The karma-phal that Muni Gajasukumal has enjoyed in the present case has not been enjoyed naturally, but has been made to be enjoyed by the special effort of Somil Brahmana, therefore, the meaning of Udirana of karma is intended here.

The death of Somil Brahmana:

28 - Then, that Kanha Vasudeva asked the Arhat Arithanemi, "How should I recognize that man?" Then, the Arhat Arithanemi told Kanha Vasudeva, "Kanha! When you see a man entering the city of Dwaraka, standing at the gate, and spending time there, then you should know that he is that man." Then, Kanha Vasudeva bowed and prostrated before the Arhat Arithanemi. After bowing and prostrating, he took the elephant chariot and went to the city of Dwaraka. After reaching there, he mounted the elephant and went to the gate of the city. 

Page #124:
---------------------------
[Third Chapter]
[83] Then, that Somila Brahmin, while his mind was filled with fear, thought, "I have committed a sin, I have committed a sin, I have committed a sin, I have committed a sin."  Thus, Krishna Vasudeva, having received the solution to his question from the Arhat Arishta-nemi, bowed at his feet and departed.  "O Arhat, will this be known, will this be known, will this be known, will this be known to Krishna Vasudeva?"  "Krishna Vasudeva will know it.  He will not be pleased with me, he will kill me with some evil means," thought Somila Brahmin, filled with fear.  He was overcome with fear and left his home.  Krishna Vasudeva, entering the city of Dwaraka, saw him.
The Bhagavan Arishta-nemi, having solved Krishna Vasudeva's question, said, "Krishna, when you return and enter the city of Dwaraka, you will see a man who will be terrified at the sight of you.  He will fall down right there.  He will die because his lifespan has ended.  At that time, you will know that this is the man."  Having heard the answer to his question from the Bhagavan Arishta-nemi, Krishna Vasudeva bowed to him and departed.  He mounted his chief elephant and set out for home.
On the other hand, the Somila Brahmin, as soon as the sun rose the next day, thought, "Krishna Vasudeva has surely gone to the feet of the Arhat Arishta-nemi.  The Bhagavan is omniscient, nothing is hidden from him.  He must have known about my evil deed regarding the death of Gaja-sukumala.  He must have known everything from beginning to end.  He must have understood everything clearly from the Arhat Arishta-nemi.  In that case, Krishna Vasudeva will be angry and kill me with some evil means."  Frightened by this thought, he left his home and entered the city of Dwaraka, where he came face to face with Krishna Vasudeva.
**Discussion:** This sutra explains that the Somila Brahmin was fleeing the city of Dwaraka to save his life from Krishna, but suddenly Krishna also came out on the same path, and they met unexpectedly.
The word "thitibheena" used in this sutra means "destruction of the state of lifespan." Just as sugar or candy dissolves in water, losing its hardness, and just as ghee becomes thin when it comes into contact with fire, so too does the lifespan, which is a gradual process, become destroyed when it encounters specific causes like death. Therefore, according to the practical point of view, the destruction of lifespan for worldly beings is called untimely death.
"Tan nayameyam arahaya... sitthameyam arahaya" - This phrase contains four words: known, recognized, heard, and refined.  To know in general that the Muni Gaja-sukumala has died is to know.  To know specifically that the Somila Brahmin killed the Muni Gaja-sukumala with fire for a certain purpose is to recognize.  The meaning is that both the words "known" and "recognized" are indicators of general and specific knowledge.  "Suyameyam" has two meanings: 1. "remembered this" and 2. "heard this."  Acharya Abhaydeva Suri has accepted the first meaning... 

Page #125:
---------------------------
[84]
The explanation of the term "Antakrid Dasha" is as follows: "Smritam purvakale jnatam sat kathavavasaare smritam bhavishyati". This explanation implies that Somil Brahmana thought that Bhagavan Arishta Nemiji must have witnessed the death of Gaja Sukumal with his own knowledge at the time of the incident, and he must have remembered it upon the arrival of Shri Krishna. Another interpretation, taking the meaning of "Shruta", would be: "Shrutam etad arhata kasmadapi devaviseshadva bhagavata shrutam bhavishyati". This means that Somil Brahmana thought that Shri Krishna Vasudeva must have heard the account of the death of Muni Gaja Sukumal from Bhagavan or some special deity. The meaning of the word "Shishta" is "said". This implies that Bhagavan Arishta Nemiji must have told Vasudeva Krishna about the death of Gaja Sukumal. The plight of Somil's corpse
- 29-Therefore, when Somil Brahmana saw Krishna Vasudeva suddenly, he was terrified and stood there petrified. While standing there, his lifespan ended due to a change in his state, and he fell to the ground with his body completely limp. At that time, Krishna Vasudeva saw Somil Brahmana falling and said:
"Oh Devanupriya! This is the same Somil Brahmana who desired death and was devoid of shame and dignity, who made my younger brother Gaja Sukumal Muni a victim of time prematurely." Saying this, Krishna Vasudeva had the corpse of Somil Brahmana dragged away by the Chandals and thrown outside the city. He also had the ground where the corpse had touched washed with water. After washing the ground with water, Krishna Vasudeva went to his royal palace and entered his chambers. Deposition
30-Thus, Jambhu! This is the meaning of the eighth study of the third section of the Antakrid Dasha Anga Sutra, as expounded by the liberated Shraman Bhagavan Mahavira.
Shri Sudharma Swami addresses his disciple Jambhu, saying: "Oh Jambhu! This is the meaning of the eighth study of the third section of the Antakrid Dasha Anga Sutra, as expounded by the liberated Shraman Bhagavan Mahavira."
1. See - Third section, Sutra 24. 2. See - First section, Sutra 2. 

Page #126:
---------------------------
## Ninth Study
##  Su-mukha Inquiry and Solution
## 31 - Navamas Ukkhevo - [If, O Venerable One! The eighth study of the eighth chapter of the eighth Anga, which is the Antagad-dasa, has been explained, then, O Venerable One! What has been explained in the ninth study?]

Thus, O Jambu! At that time, at that moment, there was a city called Dwaraka, as described earlier. At that time, there was a king named Baldeva in Dwaraka. Here, the description of the king should be understood according to the Aupapatik Sutra. That Baldeva king had a queen named Dharini. Her description should also be understood according to the Aupapatik Sutra. That Dharini queen saw a lion in her dream, and the subsequent birth of a son, etc., should be understood like the story of Gautam Kumar. Notably, she was a twenty-year-old Diksha-paryaya. The rest is the same, until she attained Siddhi on Mount Shatrunjaya.

Thus, O Jambu! This is the meaning of the ninth study of the third chapter of the Antagad-dasa, as explained by the Venerable One, Mahavira, until the attainment of liberation, so I say.

See - Sutra 6 of the first chapter. See - Sutra 2 of the first chapter. 

Page #127:
---------------------------
10-13 Study
The end of the third section, the end of the third section, 32- and Durmukha. Kuparaka. Tinni. Baldeva-Dharini-Suya.
Daruka. And also, Navaran-Vasudeva-Dharini-Sue.
And Anahitthi. Vasudeva-Dharini-Sue. And thus, Jambudvipa! By the Samana, the Bhagavan Mahavira, with the complete knowledge, the eighth Anga, Antagadadasana, the third section, the thirteenth study, this is the explanation.
In the same way, the description of Durmukha and Kuparaka Kumar should be known. Both their fathers were Baldeva and their mothers were Dharini.
Daruka and Anadhristi are also the same. The special thing is that Vasudeva was the father and Dharini was the mother.
Shri Sudharma Swami said - O Jambudvipa! The Shraman, the liberated Lord, has explained this meaning of the first to thirteenth studies of the third section of the eighth Anga, Antagadadasasutra.
1.
See - the second sutra of the first section. 

Page #128:
---------------------------
## Fourth Section

**1-10 Study of the Throw**

**1.**  "O Venerable! What were the ten throws, within the fourth section, declared by the Bhagavan Mahavira, with all the details?"

**Answer:** "O Jambū! The Bhagavan Mahavira, with all the details, declared ten throws within the fourth section. They are as follows:

**(1)** Jāli, **(2)** Mayāli, **(3)** Uvayāli, **(4)** Purisaseṇe, **(5)** Vāriseṇe, **(6)** Panjuṇṇa, **(7)** Sambha, **(8)** Aṇiruddha, **(9)** Saccaṇemi, **(10)** Daḍhaṇemi. ||1||

**2.** "O Venerable! What were the details of the first throw, declared by the Bhagavan Mahavira, with all the details?"

**Answer:** "O Jambū! At that time, in that era, there were twelve cities. In the first of those twelve cities, as in the first, there was a king named Vasudeva, who was a wanderer. In that city, Vasudeva was the king, Dhāriṇī was the queen, the color was white, the name was Go-yamo, the throw was Jāli, the number of dice was fifty, the throw was with the hand, the number of throws was sixteen, and the rest was as in Go-yamo, up to the Siddha.

**3.** "Similarly, in Mayāli, Uvayāli, Purisaseṇe, and Vāriseṇe, the throw was with the hand, the name was Piya, and the color was Rūppiṇī.

**4.** "Similarly, in Sambha, the throw was with the hand, the name was Jambavī, and the color was Māyā.

**5.** "Similarly, in Aṇiruddha, the throw was with the hand, the name was Panjuṇṇa, and the color was Vedabbhi.

**6.** "Similarly, in Saccaṇemi, the throw was with the hand, the name was Samuddavijaya, and the color was Sivā.

**7.** "Similarly, in Daḍhaṇemi, all were the same."

**1.2.3.4.** See - First Section, Sutra 2.

**5.** See - First Section, Sutra 5.

**6.** See - First Section, Sutra 6.

**7.** See - First Section, Sutra 7, 9. 

Page #129:
---------------------------
## 88]
[Antakṛddaśā Nikṣepa]

Thus, O Jambū! This is the explanation of the fourth section of the eighth Anga, Antakṛddaśā, as explained by the Bhagavan Mahāvīra.

Śrī Jambū Svāmī requested Sudharma Svāmī, "O Bhagavan! I have heard the description of the third section of Antakṛddaśā as explained by the Śramaṇa, the Lord who has attained liberation. O Venerable one, please tell me what the Śramaṇa Bhagavan has explained about the fourth section of Antakṛddaśā."

Sudharma Svāmī replied to Jambū Svāmī, "O Jambū! The Śramaṇa, the Lord who has attained liberation, has described ten studies in the fourth section of Antakṛddaśā, which are as follows:

(1) Jālī Kumāra, (2) Mayālī Kumāra, (3) Uvayālī Kumāra, (4) Puruṣaseṇa Kumāra, (5) Vāriṣeṇa Kumāra, (6) Pradyumna Kumāra, (7) Śāmba Kumāra, (8) Aniruddha Kumāra, (9) Satyanema Kumāra, and (10) Dṛḍhanema Kumāra.

Jambū Svāmī asked, "O Bhagavan! The Śramaṇa, the Lord who has attained liberation, has described ten studies in the fourth section. What is the meaning of the first study as explained by the Śramaṇa, the Lord who has attained liberation? Jālī, etc."

Sudharma Svāmī replied, "O Jambū! In that time and at that time, there was a city called Dvārakā, which has been described in the first study of the first section. Śrī Kṛṣṇa Vāsudeva was ruling there. In that city of Dvārakā, King 'Vāsudeva' and Queen 'Dhāriṇī' resided. The description of the king and queen should be understood according to the Aupapātika Sūtra. The description of Jālī Kumāra should be understood as similar to that of Gautama Kumāra. The special point is that Jālī Kumāra, after attaining youth, married fifty maidens and received fifty-fifty items as dowry. After becoming a monk, Jālī Muni attained knowledge of the twelve Angas, followed the sixteen-year period of initiation, and the rest of the description is similar to that of Gautama Kumāra, until he attained liberation on Mount Śatrujaya.

Similarly, the description of Mayālī Kumāra, Uvayālī Kumāra, Puruṣaseṇa, and Vāriṣeṇa should be understood.

Similarly, the description of Pradyumna Kumāra should also be understood. The special point is that Kṛṣṇa was his father and Rukmiṇī Devī was his mother.

Similarly, Śāmba Kumāra also; the special point is that his mother's name was Jāmbavatī. He was the son of Śrī Kṛṣṇa.

Similarly, the description of Aniruddha Kumāra is also there. The special point is that Pradyumna was his father and Vaidarbhi was his mother.

Similarly, the description of Satyanema Kumāra is there. The special point is that Samudravijaya was his father and Śivā Devī was his mother. Similarly, the description of Dṛḍhanema Kumāra should also be understood. All these studies are similar.

Sudharma Svāmī said, "Thus, O Jambū! This is the meaning of the fourth section with ten studies as explained by the Śramaṇa, the Lord who has attained liberation.

Discussion: The fourth section describes ten great personalities, Jālī, Mayālī, etc. Since their entire description is similar to that of Gautama Kumāra, it is clarified by the phrase "Jaha Goyamo Navaram" and Savve Egggama, meaning that the ten studies described in the fourth section, the texts explaining the lives of the princes described in them are all the same. The Sūtrakara has separately mentioned the differences in names, etc.

Page #130:
---------------------------
## The Fifth Section

**First Study: The Appearance of Padmavati and the Dharma-Deshana of Arishta-nemi**

1. "O Jambu! If the Blessed Lord Mahavira, the Ascetic, has explained the meaning of the fourth section of the Antagad Sutra, then what meaning has the Blessed Lord Mahavira, the Ascetic, explained for the fifth section of the Antagad Sutra?"

"O Jambu! The Blessed Lord Mahavira, the Ascetic, has explained ten studies for the fifth section of the Antagad Sutra. They are:

(1) Padmavati (2) Gauri (3) Gandhari (4) Lakshmana (5) Susima (6) Jambavati (7) Satyabhama (8) Rukmini (9) Mulasri (10) Muladatta."

"O Jambu! If the Blessed Lord Mahavira, the Ascetic, has explained ten studies for the fifth section of the Antagad Sutra, then what meaning has he explained for the first study?"

"O Jambu! At that time, in that era, there was a city called Dwaraka. As described in the first study, Vasudeva, the son of Kansa, was living there. At that time, a goddess named Padmavati, beautiful in form, was born to Kansa, Vasudeva.

At that time, in that era, the Arhat Arishta-nemi, the great ascetic, was living in the forest, practicing self-control and austerity. He was living in the forest, having left Kansa, Vasudeva. At that time, Padmavati, the goddess, was living in the forest, having been abandoned by her parents. She was living in the forest, like a goddess, beautiful and adorned.

At that time, the Arhat Arishta-nemi, seeing Padmavati, the daughter of Kansa, Vasudeva, preached the Dharma to her. She was pleased with his words." 

Page #131:
---------------------------
[90]
The Antakrid Dasha has already passed. At that time, Shri Krishna Vasudeva was ruling. Shri Krishna Vasudeva had a queen named Padmavati. Here, according to the Aupapatik Sutra, one should know about the description of the king.
At that time, Arihant Arishtanemi Tirthankara, while wandering, filled his soul with restraint and penance, arrived in Dwaraka city. Shri Krishna, to pay his respects, left the royal palace and reached the Lord. He began to worship Lord Arishtanemi. At that time, Padmavati Devi heard the news of the Lord's arrival, and she was very happy. Like Devaki Maharani, she also mounted a religious chariot and went to pay her respects to the Lord. She began to worship Neminath. Arihant Arishtanemi told a Dharmakatha to Krishna Vasudeva, Padmavati Devi, and the assembly of people. After listening to the Dharmakatha, the assembly of people returned.
The reason for the destruction of Dwaraka
2 - Tana said to Vasudeva, "Arham Arittanemi, I bow to you, I salute you, having bowed and saluted, I ask you this. O Master! What will be the reason for the destruction of this Dwaraka city, which is twelve yojanas long and nine yojanas wide, and is like the Devaloka?"
"Kanha!" Ariha Arittanemi said to Kanha Vasudeva, "Thus, O Kanha! This Dwaraka city, which is twelve yojanas long and nine yojanas wide, and is like the Devaloka, will be destroyed due to the fire of the Suraggini Diwayana."
Then Krishna Vasudeva bowed and saluted Lord Neminath and asked him this way,
"O Bhagavan! What will be the reason for the destruction of this Dwaraka city, which is twelve yojanas long and nine yojanas wide, and is like the Devaloka?"
44
-
-
"O Krishna!" Arihant Arishtanemi replied, addressing him thus,
"O Krishna! Certainly, this Dwaraka city, which is twelve yojanas long and nine yojanas wide, and is like the Devaloka, will be destroyed due to the anger of the wine (Sura), fire, and Dvaipayana Rishi." Shri Krishna's anxiety: its pacification
1. 2. See - Section 1, Sutra 5.
3 - Kanha Vasudeva, after hearing this from Ariha Arittanemi, became very sad and thought about it. He thought about it, searched for it, and a thought arose in his mind - "Blessed are those princes - Aniruddha - Dadhanemi - Sachchanemi - Prabhayu - who have given away wealth - gold, silver, and other wealth - horses, chariots, weapons, treasuries, cities, and outer cities - and have given away a lot of wealth, gold, jewels, gems, pearls, conch shells, stones, corals, and precious things - and have given away a lot of wealth, gold, jewels, gems, pearls, conch shells, stones, corals, and precious things - and have given away a lot of wealth, gold, jewels, gems, pearls, conch shells, stones, corals, and precious things - and have given away a lot of wealth, gold, jewels, gems, pearls, conch shells, stones, corals, and precious things - and have given away a lot of wealth, gold, jewels, gems, pearls, conch shells, stones, corals, and precious things - and have given away a lot of wealth, gold, jewels, gems, pearls, conch shells, stones, corals, and precious things - and have given away a lot of wealth, gold, jewels, gems, pearls, conch shells, stones, corals, and precious things - and have given away a lot of wealth, gold, jewels, gems, pearls, conch shells, stones, corals, and precious things - and have given away a lot of wealth, gold, jewels, gems, pearls, conch shells, stones, corals, and precious things - and have given away a lot of wealth, gold, jewels, gems, pearls, conch shells, stones, corals, and precious things - and have given away a lot of wealth, gold, jewels, gems, pearls, conch shells, stones, corals, and precious things - and have given away a lot of wealth, gold, jewels, gems, pearls, conch shells, stones, corals, and precious things - and have given away a lot of wealth, gold, jewels, gems, pearls, conch shells, stones, corals, and precious things - and have given away a lot of wealth, gold, jewels, gems, pearls, conch shells, stones, corals, and precious things - and have given away a lot of wealth, gold, jewels, gems, pearls, conch shells, stones, corals, and precious things - and have given away a lot of wealth, gold, jewels, gems, pearls, conch shells, stones, corals, and precious things - and have given away a lot of wealth, gold, jewels, gems, pearls, conch shells, stones, corals, and precious things - and have given away a lot of wealth, gold, jewels, gems, pearls, conch shells, stones, corals, and precious things - and have given away a lot of wealth, gold, jewels, gems, pearls, conch shells, stones, corals, and precious things - and have given away a lot of wealth, gold, jewels, gems, pearls, conch shells, stones, corals, and precious things - and have given away a lot of wealth, gold, jewels, gems, pearls, conch shells, stones, corals, and precious things - and have given away a lot of wealth, gold, jewels, gems, pearls, conch shells, stones, corals, and precious things - and have given away a lot of wealth, gold, jewels, gems, pearls, conch shells, stones, corals, and precious things - and have given away a lot of wealth, gold, jewels, gems, pearls, conch shells, stones, corals, and precious things - and have given away a lot of wealth, gold, jewels, gems, pearls, conch shells, stones, corals, and precious things - and have given away a lot of wealth, gold, jewels, gems, pearls, conch shells, stones, corals, and precious things - and have given away a lot of wealth, gold, jewels, gems, pearls, conch shells, stones, corals, and precious things - and have given away a lot of wealth, gold, jewels, gems, pearls, conch shells, stones, corals, and precious things - and have given away a lot of wealth, gold, jewels, gems, pearls, conch shells, stones, corals, and precious things - and have given away a lot of wealth, gold, jewels, gems, pearls, conch shells, stones, corals, and precious things - and have given away a lot of wealth, gold, jewels, gems, pearls, conch shells, stones, corals, and precious things - and have given
Page #132:
---------------------------
[Fifth Section]
[91 Arhat Arishthanemi said to [the last of the Mundas, who would become an ascetic, abandoning his home] "You are blessed."
'Kanhai!' Arhat Arishthanemi said to Kanha Vasudeva, "This thought, this desire, this mental resolve that has arisen in your mind, is indeed a blessing for you. You have become a monk, Kanhai! You have become a monk, Kanhai! Are you capable of this?"
"Yes, I am."
"Then, Kanhai! This will never happen, has never happened, and will never happen, that the Vasudevas will ever abandon their wealth and become monks."
"Why, Lord? Why is it said that this will never happen, has never happened, and will never happen?" 'Kanhai!' Arhat Arishthanemi said to Kanha Vasudeva, "This is how it is, Kanhai! All the Vasudevas in their previous births were attached to wealth. Therefore, Kanhai! It is said that this will never happen, has never happened, and will never happen."
The Arhat Arishthanemi, upon hearing about the destruction of the city of Dwaraka, felt a sense of sorrow and compassion. He saw that Sri Krishna Vasudeva was deeply troubled by the loss of his loved ones and the destruction of his kingdom. He saw that Krishna was contemplating the meaning of life and the impermanence of all things. He saw that Krishna was questioning his own purpose and destiny.
Arhat Arishthanemi, with his infinite wisdom and compassion, understood the turmoil in Krishna's heart. He knew that Krishna was struggling with the weight of his responsibilities and the pain of loss. He knew that Krishna was searching for meaning and purpose in a world that seemed to be filled with suffering and impermanence.
Arhat Arishthanemi, with his infinite wisdom and compassion, understood the turmoil in Krishna's heart. He knew that Krishna was struggling with the weight of his responsibilities and the pain of loss. He knew that Krishna was searching for meaning and purpose in a world that seemed to be filled with suffering and impermanence.
Arhat Arishthanemi, with his infinite wisdom and compassion, understood the turmoil in Krishna's heart. He knew that Krishna was struggling with the weight of his responsibilities and the pain of loss. He knew that Krishna was searching for meaning and purpose in a world that seemed to be filled with suffering and impermanence.
Arhat Arishthanemi, with his infinite wisdom and compassion, understood the turmoil in Krishna's heart. He knew that Krishna was struggling with the weight of his responsibilities and the pain of loss. He knew that Krishna was searching for meaning and purpose in a world that seemed to be filled with suffering and impermanence.
Arhat Arishthanemi, with his infinite wisdom and compassion, understood the turmoil in Krishna's heart. He knew that Krishna was struggling with the weight of his responsibilities and the pain of loss. He knew that Krishna was searching for meaning and purpose in a world that seemed to be filled with suffering and impermanence.
Arhat Arishthanemi, with his infinite wisdom and compassion, understood the turmoil in Krishna's heart. He knew that Krishna was struggling with the weight of his responsibilities and the pain of loss. He knew that Krishna was searching for meaning and purpose in a world that seemed to be filled with suffering and impermanence.
Arhat Arishthanemi, with his infinite wisdom and compassion, understood the turmoil in Krishna's heart. He knew that Krishna was struggling with the weight of his responsibilities and the pain of loss. He knew that Krishna was searching for meaning and purpose in a world that seemed to be filled with suffering and impermanence.
Arhat Arishthanemi, with his infinite wisdom and compassion, understood the turmoil in Krishna's heart. He knew that Krishna was struggling with the weight of his responsibilities and the pain of loss. He knew that Krishna was searching for meaning and purpose in a world that seemed to be filled with suffering and impermanence.
Arhat Arishthanemi, with his infinite wisdom and compassion, understood the turmoil in Krishna's heart. He knew that Krishna was struggling with the weight of his responsibilities and the pain of loss. He knew that Krishna was searching for meaning and purpose in a world that seemed to be filled with suffering and impermanence.
Arhat Arishthanemi, with his infinite wisdom and compassion, understood the turmoil in Krishna's heart. He knew that Krishna was struggling with the weight of his responsibilities and the pain of loss. He knew that Krishna was searching for meaning and purpose in a world that seemed to be filled with suffering and impermanence.
Arhat Arishthanemi, with his infinite wisdom and compassion, understood the turmoil in Krishna's heart. He knew that Krishna was struggling with the weight of his responsibilities and the pain of loss. He knew that Krishna was searching for meaning and purpose in a world that seemed to be filled with suffering and impermanence.
Arhat Arishthanemi, with his infinite wisdom and compassion, understood the turmoil in Krishna's heart. He knew that Krishna was struggling with the weight of his responsibilities and the pain of loss. He knew that Krishna was searching for meaning and purpose in a world that seemed to be filled with suffering and impermanence.
Arhat Arishthanemi, with his infinite wisdom and compassion, understood the turmoil in Krishna's heart. He knew that Krishna was struggling with the weight of his responsibilities and the pain of loss. He knew that Krishna was searching for meaning and purpose in a world that seemed to be filled with suffering and impermanence.
Arhat Arishthanemi, with his infinite wisdom and compassion, understood the turmoil in Krishna's heart. He knew that Krishna was struggling with the weight of his responsibilities and the pain of loss. He knew that Krishna was searching for meaning and purpose in a world that seemed to be filled with suffering and impermanence.
Arhat Arishthanemi, with his infinite wisdom and compassion, understood the turmoil in Krishna's heart. He knew that Krishna was struggling with the weight of his responsibilities and the pain of loss. He knew that Krishna was searching for meaning and purpose in a world that seemed to be filled with suffering and impermanence.
Arhat Arishthanemi, with his infinite wisdom and compassion, understood the turmoil in Krishna's heart. He knew that Krishna was struggling with the weight of his responsibilities and the pain of loss. He knew that Krishna was searching for meaning and purpose in a world that seemed to be filled with suffering and impermanence.
Arhat Arishthanemi, with his infinite wisdom and compassion, understood the turmoil in Krishna's heart. He knew that Krishna was struggling with the weight of his responsibilities and the pain of loss. He knew that Krishna was searching for meaning and purpose in a world that seemed to be filled with suffering and impermanence.
Arhat Arishthanemi, with his infinite wisdom and compassion, understood the turmoil in Krishna'
Page #133:
---------------------------
## 92]
[ Antakrid Dasha ]

Arihant Arishtanemi Bhagwan said, "O Krishna! Certainly, all Vasudevas are Nidankrit (those who have made a Nidana) in their previous births. Therefore, I say that it has never happened, does not happen, and will never happen that a Vasudeva will ever accept Pravrajya (renunciation)."

**Explanation:** This Sutra presents a description of some questions asked to Arishtanemi Bhagwan. After hearing about the destruction of Dwarka, Shri Krishna's affection for the ascetics increased, and at the same time, he felt remorse that he himself could not take initiation! To resolve his distress, Bhagwan said, "You are a Vasudeva, and no Vasudeva can ever take initiation in the three times, because they have made a Nidana in the past."

'Nidana' is a technical term in the Jain tradition. When the desire for sensual pleasures arises due to the rise of Mohaniya Karma, a Sadhu, Sadhvi, Shravak, or Shravika resolves in their mind that they will achieve a certain result through their penance. This is called Nidana. In common parlance, it is called Niyana. Nidana is not conducive to welfare. A person who dies after making a Nidana cannot attain Nirvana even after receiving its fruits. He wanders in the world for a very long time. The tenth Dasha of Dasha-Shruta-Skandha mentions nine causes of Nidana. They are as follows:

1. A man makes a Nidana after seeing a prosperous person.
2. A woman makes a Nidana to obtain a good husband.
3. A man makes a Nidana for a beautiful woman.
4. A woman makes a Nidana after seeing a happy and beautiful woman.
5. A being born in the Deva-Gati (heavenly realm) with a divine form makes a Nidana to enjoy himself and other goddesses through a Vaikriya body.
6. A being in the Deva-Bhavana makes a Nidana to enjoy only his own goddess.
7. A being makes a Nidana to become a Shravak in the next birth.
8. A being in the Deva-Bhavana makes a Nidana to enjoy his goddess without Vaikriya.
9. A being makes a Nidana to become a Sadhu in the next birth.

Of these, a being who makes the first four types of Nidana cannot even hear the Dharma preached by the Kevali Bhagwan. A being who makes the fifth Nidana can hear the Dharma but is Durlabha-Bodhi (slow to understand) and wanders in the world for a long time. A being who makes the sixth Nidana, even after hearing and understanding the Jin-Dharma, is interested in other religions. A being who makes the seventh Nidana can attain Samyaktva (right faith), can have faith in Dharma, but cannot accept vows. A being who makes the eighth Nidana can take the vows of a Shravak but cannot become a Sadhu. A being who makes the ninth Nidana can become a Sadhu but cannot attain Moksha in the same birth. 

Page #134:
---------------------------
[Fifth Section]
[93 Prophecy of Krishna becoming a Tirthankara]
4-Then Krishna Vasudeva asked the Arhat Arishthanemi, "O Venerable One! Where will I go and where will I be born at the time of my death?" Then the Arhat Arishthanemi said to Krishna Vasudeva,
"O Krishna! You will be destroyed by the wrath of the gods, fire, and Dvaipayana. After the destruction of your city of Dwaraka, and the separation from your parents and relatives, you will go with Rama and Balarama towards the southern sea coast, near the five Pandavas, the sons of Panduraja, towards Pandu Mathura. On the way, you will rest in the Kaushambavan garden, under a very large banyan tree, on a stone slab, wearing a yellow robe. At that time, a sharp arrow, shot by Jarakumar, mistaking you for a deer, will pierce your left foot. Pierced by this sharp arrow, you will die at the time of your death, and your body will be illuminated by the light of the sand. You will be reborn in the human world, in the land of Valukaprabha.
Then Krishna Vasudeva thought about this and became very sad.
Krishna! The Arhat Arishthanemi said to Krishna Vasudeva, "O Devānuppaiya! Do not be sad. You will be reborn in the human world, in the land of Valukaprabha, and after that, you will be born in Jambudvipa, in the land of Bharata, in the city of Ayodhya, in the family of the Pusundas, in the lineage of the Janavas, in the twelfth city, named Amme. There, you will live for many years, and you will attain Kevalijñāna, and you will become a Tirthankara. You will be liberated from all suffering.
Then Krishna Vasudeva thought about this and became very happy. He jumped up and down, and then he broke a branch of a tree, and then he made a lion's roar, and then he bowed down to the Arhat Arishthanemi, and then he was crowned by the Arhat Arishthanemi. Then he went to the twelfth city, and then he went to the hundred houses, and then he went to the hundred thrones. He sat on the throne, facing east, and then he spoke to the people of the city.
Then Krishna Vasudeva asked the Arhat Arishthanemi, "O Venerable One! Where will I go and where will I be born at the time of my death?" In response, the Arhat Arishthanemi said,
"O Krishna! You will be destroyed by the wrath of the gods, fire, and Dvaipayana. After the destruction of your city of Dwaraka, and the separation from your parents and relatives, you will go with Rama and Balarama towards the southern sea coast, near the five Pandavas, the sons of Panduraja, towards Pandu Mathura. On the way, you will rest in the Kaushambavan garden, under a very large banyan tree, on a stone slab, wearing a yellow robe. At that time, a sharp arrow, shot by Jarakumar, mistaking you for a deer, will pierce your left foot. Pierced by this sharp arrow, you will die at the time of your death, and your body will be illuminated by the light of the sand. You will be reborn in the human world, in the land of Valukaprabha.
1.2. See Section 3, Sutra 12. 

Page #135:
---------------------------
[Antakrid Dasha
94]  He will be born in the third earth called "Antakrid Dasha". Hearing this from the Lord's mouth, Krishna Vasudeva became sad and started meditating. Then the Arihant Arishtanemi said again,
"O Devānupriya! Do not be sad and meditate in sorrow. Certainly, O Devānupriya! In due course of time, you will leave the third earth and come to the Bharat Kshetra of this Jambudvipa in the Utsarpini Kal. In the city of Shatdwar in the Pundr Janapada, you will become the twelfth Tirthankara named "Amma". There, you will follow the Kevali Paryaya for many years and become Siddha-Buddha-Mukta.
Hearing this account of his future from the mouth of the Arihant Prabhu, Krishna Vasudeva was very happy and started tapping his arm. He shouted "Jay" and jumped three times on the earth. He stepped back a little and roared like a lion. Then he bowed to Lord Nemnath and mounted his royal elephant. He went through the middle of Dwarka city and reached his royal palace. He got down from the elephant and went to the place where the reception hall was outside and where his throne was. He sat on the throne facing east. Then he called his obedient men and servants and said,
Shri Krishna's Proclamation
5 - "Go now, O Devānupriya! Go to the Shringaटक, Trik, Chatushk, Chatvar, Chaturmuh Mahapath and paths of Dwarka city, and proclaim loudly from the elephant's back, saying, 'O people of Dwarka! This Dwarka city, which is as beautiful as a heavenly city, will be destroyed due to the wrath of Sura, Agni, and Dvaipayan. Therefore, O Devānupriya! Whoever in Dwarka city desires to be initiated, whether he be a king, a prince, a lord (master or prince), a sword (king's favorite), a Maḍambik (lord of a small village), a Kautumbik (lord of two or three families), an Ibh, a queen, a prince, a princess, a queen, a princess, whoever among them desires to be initiated by shaving his head near Lord Nemnath, Krishna Vasudeva gives him permission to do so. Krishna will also make arrangements for all the family members of the initiate and will celebrate his initiation ceremony with great pomp and ceremony.' Proclaim this twice or thrice and then inform me." Hearing this order of Krishna, those obedient royal men proclaimed it twice or thrice and returned to inform Krishna.
1. Varga 1, Sutra - 5
2. Varga 5, Sutra - 2 

Page #136:
---------------------------
[Fifth Chapter]
[95 Discussion - In the previous sutras, Lord Krishna Vasudeva asks Arishta-nemi about his death and where and in what situation he will be reborn. He then makes a religious declaration. In response to his question, Lord Arishta-nemi reveals that Krishna will be born on Earth for the third time and will become the 12th Tirthankara named Amma in the future cycle of 24 Tirthankaras.
Krishna is called Krishna Vasudeva. According to grammar, the word Vasudeva means "Vasudevasya apatyam puman Vasudevah." The son of Vasudeva is called Vasudeva. Krishna's father's name was Vasudeva, hence he is called Vasudeva. The word Vasudeva is generally used to refer to Krishna - it is another name for Krishna. However, even though the above meaning of Vasudeva is accepted, this word has become a technical term in Jain philosophy. Therefore, all Ardhachakravartis are called by the word Vasudeva. In Jain tradition, nine Vasudevas are mentioned - 1. Tripṛṣṭha, 2. Dviprṣṭha, 3. Svayambhū, 4. Puruṣottama, 5. Puruṣasiṃha, 6. Puruṣa-puṇḍarīka, 7. Datta, 8. Nārāyaṇa (Lakṣmaṇa), 9. Kṛṣṇa. Krishna is the last in this list. The technical meaning of Vasudeva is - one who is the lord of three of the six continents and seven jewels, and who is endowed with many kinds of riches. From the Jain perspective, Vasudevas conquer and kill their counter-parts (Prativa-Vasudeva) and rule over three continents. In addition, Jain tradition considers Vasudeva to be one of the 28 attainments. The one who is the master of three continents and seven jewels is called Vasudeva, and attaining this position is the Vasudeva attainment. Vasudevas have great strength. Describing this strength by way of analogy, Jain Acharyas say - If a Vasudeva sitting on the edge of a well and eating is bound with chains and sixteen thousand kings with their entire armies try to pull him, they will not be able to pull him. But if the Vasudeva holds the same chain in his left hand and pulls it towards himself, he can easily pull them.
The Krishna mentioned in the Jain Agamas is such a Vasudeva, endowed with the Vasudeva attainment. The Antagad Sutra describes a Vasudeva Krishna. In the literature of Sanatana Dharma, the Jain interpretation of the word Vasudeva is not found. There is no mention in Vedic literature of Vasudeva being a specific title or attainment.
It is clear from the Antagad Sutra and other Agamas that Vasudeva Krishna was a devoted follower and devotee of Lord Arishta-nemi. This is why when the Lord arrived in Dwaraka, he was present in his service with great pomp and ceremony, taking his family along, and listening to his sermons. Hearing about the burning of Dwaraka from the Lord, he was distressed because he could not be initiated by the Lord himself. He praises the princes like Jalikumar, etc., for being initiated and becoming self-liberated. All these things prove that Vasudeva Krishna was a follower of Lord Arishta-nemi. He supported those who walked on his path, and even though he was not capable, he desired to walk on that path himself. In short, Maharaja Krishna was a Jain.
The six sons of Seth Naga, a resident of Bhaddilpur, who were initiated at the feet of Lord Arishta-nemi, were the maternal uncles of Vasudeva Krishna. Gajasukumar was the younger brother of Vasudeva Krishna. Thus, these seven brothers of Maharaja Krishna became Jain monks at the feet of Lord Arishta-nemi.
Jalikumar, Mayalikumar, Upayalikumar, Purusha-sena-kumar and Varisha-sena-kumar - these five princes 

Page #137:
---------------------------
[96]
[Antakrid Dasha]
Vasudeva was the son of Vasudeva, hence Vasudeva was the brother of Krishna. His mother was Dharini. Prince Satyaneme and Dridhaneme, both these princes were the sons of Vasudeva Krishna's uncle. Pradyumna Kumar and Shambhu Kumar, both these were the sons of Vasudeva Krishna. Prince Aniruddha was the grandson of Vasudeva Krishna. All the princes became sadhus at the feet of Lord Arishtanemi.
Queen Padmavati, Gauri, Gandhari, Lakshmana, Susima, Jambavati, Satyabhama, Rukmini, these eight were the queens of Maharaja Krishna. Mulasri and Muladatta, both these were the queens of Krishna Maharaja's son Shambhu Kumar. All of them became Jain sadhvis after being initiated at the feet of Lord Arishtanemi. 1
According to the present sutra, Vasudeva Krishna had an announcement made by his servants in all the provinces of Dwarka city. The announcement said that Dwarka city would be burnt down by the sage Dvaipayan one day, therefore, whoever wants to do their welfare by being initiated at the feet of Lord Arishtanemi, they have the permission of Maharaja Krishna. If anyone is worried about those left behind, they should leave them behind, Maharaja Krishna will take care of all the arrangements for those left behind himself. In addition, the announcement also said that whoever wants to become a sadhu and do their welfare, all the arrangements for their initiation ceremony will be made by Maharaja Shri Krishna. This announcement was made not once, but three times.
From this discussion, it becomes clear that Krishna Vasudeva, who has been described as going to hell, has also been given the highest respect by being described as going to moksha after becoming a Tirthankara.
Now
Dvaipayan Rishi, who was tormented by the intoxicated Yadava princes, had decided that if my penance bears any fruit, I will burn Dwarka city to ashes. According to the decision, Dvaipayan Rishi became the Agni Kumar jati deva. On the other hand, he was remembering the old enmity and was looking for an opportunity to burn Dwarka, but he had no control over the effect of the daily Ayambil penance. He was unsuccessful in burning Dwarka city, but he did not give up his efforts, his efforts continued for twelve years. After twelve years, some people of Dwarka started thinking - years have passed while doing penance, what can Agni Kumar do to us? In addition, some people were also thinking that all the people of Dwarka are doing Ayambil, if we don't do it, what difference does it make? Understand the matter of time, one day came in Dwarka when no one did penance. Due to personal selfishness, everyone turned away from the crisis-removing Achamla penance. What better opportunity could there be for Agni Kumar Dvaipayan Rishi. He set fire to Dwarka. There were terrible sounds all around, a strong storm started, houses collapsed due to the earthquake, fire engulfed all of Dwarka. Vasudeva Krishna made many attempts to extinguish the fire, but the karma was so intense that the water poured on the fire was acting like oil. Water extinguishes fire, but as water was poured into it, the fire flared up even more. The fierce flames of the fire seemed to be trying to burn even the sky. Krishna Vasudeva, Balarama, all were disappointed, they watched Dwarka burn, they could not save it.
T
After Dwarka was burnt down, Krishna Vasudeva and Balarama started preparing to leave from there. The sutrakar has expressed this point with the word "Suraggidivayanakovnidddhaae". 

Page #138:
---------------------------
##  [Fifth Category]
[97]
"Amma-pii-niyag-vippahuune" - Ambapitru - nijakaviprheeṇaḥ - matṛpitṛbhyāṁ svajaneṣu ca vihīnaḥ - meaning, devoid of mother, father and relatives. Storytellers say that when Dwarka was burning, Krishna Vasudeva and his elder brother Balarama were both trying to extinguish the fire, but when they were unsuccessful, they reached their palaces and tried to save their parents. With great difficulty, they managed to get their parents out of the palace. They thought that they should put their parents on a chariot and take them to a safe place. To fulfill their intention, when Vasudeva Shri Krishna reached the stable, he saw that the stable had been destroyed by fire. He left from there and came to the chariot shed. The chariot shed was on fire, but one chariot appeared safe to him. He immediately brought it out, put his parents on it. Both brothers got on in place of the horses, but as soon as they crossed the lion gate and the chariot's wheel and both brothers came out of the gate, the upper part of the gate immediately broke and their parents were crushed under it. They died. Vasudeva Krishna and Balarama could not bear to see this poignant and terrible sight. They were impatient with the separation from their parents. Somehow they controlled their minds, patiently endured the great sorrow caused by the separation from their parents and other relatives. The storyteller has indicated this lack of parents and other relatives with the word "Ammapii - niyag-vippahuune".
44
44
1
"Rameṇa Baldeveṇa saddiṁ" - means - with Rama Baldeva. King Vasudeva had a queen named Rohini. Rohini gave birth to a virtuous and brilliant son. He was extremely beautiful and charming, so he was named "Rama". Later, due to being extremely strong and powerful, the epithet "Bala" was added to Rama and he became known by many names like Rama, Balarama, Balabhadra, and Bala. According to Jain scriptures, Baldeva is also a specific position. Every Vasudeva's elder brother is called Baldeva, they are destined for heaven or liberation. Balarama was the ninth Baldeva. The love between Baldeva and Vasudeva is unparalleled and unique. The storyteller has expressed Baldeva Rama, the elder brother of King Krishna, with the words "Rameṇa Baldeveṇa".
"Dahiṇaveyāliṁ abhimukhe juhiṭṭhillpaamokkhāṇaṁ, pañcaṇhaṁ paṇḍavāṇaṁ paṇḍurāyaputtāṇaṁ pāsaṁ paṇḍumahurāṁ sampatthie" means - towards the shore of the southern sea, the five Pandavas, the sons of Panduraja, went towards Pandu Mathura.
44
-
After the city of Dwarka was burnt, Krishna was very worried. He said to Balarama - Krishna, who gives shelter to others, where will he go for shelter today? In response, Balarama said - You have always helped the Pandavas, it is right to go to them. At that time, the Pandavas were living in Pandu Mathura, having been exiled from Hastinapur. Their story of exile should be known from the Gnatadharmakatha.
Hearing Balarama's words, Krishna said - It is shameful to seek shelter from those whom you have sheltered, moreover, Subhadra (Arjuna's wife) is my sister. It is also not appropriate to stay at my sister's house.
Hearing Krishna's logical argument, Balarama said - Brother! Kunti is your aunt, there is nothing disrespectful about going to your aunt's house. 

Page #139:
---------------------------
[98]
At the end, even though Krishna was reluctant, Balarama took Krishna with him and they set out towards Pandu Mathura, the Pandavas' capital, situated on the coast of the southern sea. The sutrakar has given the words "Dahiṇabeḷāe abhimūhe pāṇḍumahurṁ sampattiē" in the present sutra, which are pointing towards the above mentioned story.
"Jarākumāreṇṁ" means by Jarākumāra. Jarākumāra was a prince of the Yadava dynasty, who was the brother of Maharaja Śrī Kṛṣṇa. Bhagavan Ariṣṭanemi had prophesied that Vasudeva would die by the arrow of Jarākumāra. Knowing this, Jarākumāra was very sad. He decided that he would leave Dvārakā and go to Kośāṁśravan, where he would spend the rest of his life, thus avoiding becoming the cause of Śrī Kṛṣṇa's death. According to his decision, he started living in Kośāṁśravan. But who can escape destiny? When Dvārakā was about to be submerged in water, Śrī Kṛṣṇa was going to Pāṇḍu Mathura with his elder brother Balarama. On the way, they came to Kośāṁśravan. Maharaja Śrī Kṛṣṇa felt thirsty, so Balarama went to fetch water. Behind him, Śrī Kṛṣṇa was resting under a tree, wearing a yellow garment. He had placed one foot on top of the other. Vasudeva had a lotus mark on his foot. Just as the eye of a deer shines from a distance, in the same way, the lotus mark on Śrī Kṛṣṇa's foot was shining. On the other side, Jarākumāra was wandering in the same forest. He was looking for prey. When he came near the banyan tree, he saw from a distance what looked like a deer sitting there. He immediately put an arrow on his bow and released it. As soon as the arrow hit, Krishna writhed in pain. He thought, "Could this arrow be from Jarākumāra?" Seeing Jarākumāra in front of him, his thought was confirmed. When Jarākumāra apologized, he said,
"Jarākumāra! What is your fault in this? This was destiny. How could the prophecy of Bhagavan Ariṣṭanemi be otherwise?" Seeing that it was almost time for Balarama to arrive, Krishna said, "Jarākumāra! You run away from here, otherwise you will not be able to escape from Balarama's hands." The very act that Jarākumāra wanted to escape from, the sin from which he had left the city of Dvārakā and embraced the abode of Kośāṁśravan, he saw that same sin happening by his own hands, and his heart wept. But what could he do? Śrī Kṛṣṇa's pain intensified. At the same time, his peace was disturbed. He started saying, "My killer has escaped from my hands. I should have finished him off." Raudra dhyāna came to its youth, and in that same Raudra dhyāna-filled state, Śrī Kṛṣṇa's death occurred.
"Tacchāe bāluyappabhāe puḍhavīe ujjaliē narē"-Tṛtīyasyaṁ bālukāprabhāyāṁ pṛthivyāmujjvalitē narakē–meaning in the luminous hell of the third earth called Bālukāprabhā.
From the Jain perspective, this world is divided into three realms: Ūrdhvaloka, Madhyaloka, and Adholoka. In Adholoka, there are seven hells. The places in Adholoka where beings are born and experience the fruits of their sins are called hells. These are divided into seven earths, whose names are: Ghammā, Vaṁśā, Śailā, Anjanā, Riṭṭhā, Magha, and Māghavai. Their seven gotras are: Ratnaprabhā, Śarkarāprabhā, Bālukāprabhā, Paṁkaprabhā, Dhūmaprabhā, Tamaḥprabhā, and Mahātamaḥprabhā.
A name that does not have a connection with the meaning of the word is called a 'name', and the name given to an object keeping the meaning of the word in mind is called a 'gotra'. Bālukāprabhā is the third earth. There is a lot of sand, 

Page #140:
---------------------------
[Fifth Class]
[99. Its name is Balukaprabha. Due to its nature, it experiences intense heat. The land here is hotter than burning coals.
Krishna Vasudeva was born in the third earth called Balukaprabha. The word "Ujjwalit" has two meanings: first, the seventh Narakendraka-Narakasthan (a specific hell) of the third earth, and second, fierce and terrifying. The word "Ujjwalit" is an adjective for hell.
"Ussappiniye" - Utsarpiniyam - meaning in the Utsarpini period. Jain scholars have divided time into two parts, one called Avasarpini and the other Utsarpini. The period in which the beings' Sanhanan (specific bone structure), Sansthan (body structure), and other qualities gradually decline, and their lifespan and Avagahana (spiritual progress) decrease, is called the Avasarpini period. During this period, the color, smell, taste, and touch of Pudgalas (matter particles) become less refined. Auspicious emotions decrease, and inauspicious emotions increase. This period is equivalent to ten Koda-Kodi Sagaropama (a vast period of time).
Conversely, the period in which the beings' Sanhanan, etc., gradually become more and more auspicious, and their lifespan and Avagahana increase, is the Utsarpini period. The color, smell, taste, and touch of Pudgalas also become more auspicious during this period. This period is also equivalent to ten Koda-Kodi Sagaropama.
. Lord Arishtanemi said to Krishna Vasudeva, "O Krishna! In the coming Utsarpini period, you will be the twelfth Tirthankara in the city of Shatdwar in the country of Pundra, named Amma."
In the first chapter of the Prajnapanasutra, 25 and a half countries in Bharatavarsha are considered Aryas (noble). The birth of Arihants, Chakravartis, Baldevs, and Vasudevas is said to occur only in Arya countries. Here, the question arises: the names of the 25 and a half countries mentioned in the scriptures do not include Pundra. How can it be considered an Arya country? According to Lord Arishtanemi, Krishna Vasudeva will become the twelfth Tirthankara there, so Pundra cannot be considered an Anarya (non-noble) country either. If the birth of a Tirthankara makes a country Arya, then the count of 25 and a half becomes inconsistent. This contradiction requires reconciliation. The answer is that the countries where Tirthankaras and other great souls are born are Arya. This principle is logical and scriptural. Regarding the count of 25 and a half countries, it seems to have been made in relation to the time of Lord Mahavira. Therefore, there is no contradiction in considering Pundra an Arya country.
The word "Arha" indicates omniscience in its general sense and Tirthankaratva (the state of a Tirthankara) in its specific sense. "Rah" means secret, hidden, etc. Those who are free from "Rah" are "Arha," meaning those who are not hidden from any secret of the world are "Arha." Arha means worthy and revered. They are also called Arihants because they have ended their Ghatikarma (negative karmas).
'Apphodeï, Apphodeïtta Vaggäï, Vaggäïtta Tivaliṁ Chindaï, Chinditta Sihanāyam Kareï'
Through this verse, the Sutrakar (author of the sutra) has conveyed four points. Maharaja Krishna, overjoyed at the auspicious news of becoming the twelfth Tirthankara in the future, expresses his inner joy through various actions. These actions are divided into four parts: (1) Tirthankara in the future 

Page #141:
---------------------------
[100]
Hearing that he would attain the great spiritual state of Antakrid Dasha, Shri Krishna was delighted and flapped his arms. A thrill began to run through his limbs. (2) Shri Krishna uttered words expressing joy in a loud voice. (3) He performed three turns on the ground like a wrestler, or jumped three times in the Samavasaran of the Lord. (4) He roared like a lion.

6-Then that Padmavati Devi, having heard the Dharma preached by the Arihant Arishthanemi, was filled with joy and satisfaction, her heart was filled with joy, and she bowed and prostrated to the Arihant Arishthanemi, and having bowed and prostrated, she spoke thus:
"I have faith, Bhante! in the Nirgrantha preaching, as you say, so it is. O Navara-Devanupiya! I ask you, what did Kanha Vasudeva say? Then I, Devanupiya, will go to the Arihant and get my head shaved and take the vows."
"As you please, Devanupiya! Do not delay."
Then that Padmavati Devi, mounting a chariot fit for a Dharma-knowing person, went to her palace in the city of Dwaraka, and having arrived there, she descended from the chariot, and having descended, she went to where Kanha Vasudeva was, and having arrived there, she joined her hands, bowed her head, and with folded hands on her forehead, she spoke thus to Kanha Vasudeva:
"Devanupiya! If you permit, I wish to go to the Arihant Arishthanemi and get my head shaved and take the vows."
1.
Third Class, Sutra 7.
2-3. Fifth Class, Sutra 2. 

Page #142:
---------------------------
[Fifth Chapter]
[101
Krishna said - 'Devanupriye! Do as you please.'
Then Krishna Vasudeva called his obedient men and ordered them thus - 'Devanupriye! Soon make grand preparations for the initiation ceremony of Queen Padmavati and inform me when the preparations are complete.' Then the obedient men did the same and informed him of the completion of the preparations for the initiation ceremony.
7 - Then Vasudeva said to Padmavati Devi, 'Let the palanquin be brought.' Then he had her seated on the palanquin and had her sprinkled with water from one hundred and eight golden kalasas, [one hundred and eight silver kalasas, one hundred and eight golden and silver kalasas, one hundred and eight gem-studded kalasas, one hundred and eight golden gem-studded kalasas, one hundred and eight silver gem-studded kalasas, one hundred and eight golden and silver gem-studded kalasas, and one hundred and eight earthen kalasas - thus, from eight hundred and sixty-four kalasas filled with all kinds of water and adorned with all kinds of earth, all kinds of flowers, all kinds of fragrances, all kinds of garlands, all kinds of medicines, and mustard seeds, with all prosperity, radiance, and all armies, with the sound of the resounding drums, with the highest]  Nishkramanaabhisheka. After the abhisheka, he adorned her with all kinds of ornaments and had her seated in a palanquin carried by a thousand men. He then had her taken out through the middle of Dwaraka city and towards the direction of the Raivatak mountain and the Sahasramravan garden. Upon reaching there, Padmavati Devi descended from the palanquin. Then Krishna Vasudeva went to where Arishta-nemi Bhagavan was, circumambulated him three times from the right side, and offered him salutations and prostrations. After offering salutations and prostrations, he spoke thus -

'O Bhagavan! My chief queen, Padmavati Devi, is my beloved, dear, and charming one, [who is the life-breath of my heart, the source of joy, and a rare flower like the Umber flower]  Why then, O Bhagavan, should she be subjected to the test of fire? Therefore, O Devanupriye! I give her to you as a disciple. Please accept her as a disciple, O Devanupriye!'
'O Devanupriye! Do not be concerned.'

Page #143:
---------------------------
[102]
"O Bhagavan! This Padmavati Devi is my queen. She is my beloved, my dear, my favorite, my beautiful, and she follows my heart. O Bhagavan! She is like breath in my life, she brings joy to my heart. Such a woman-jewel is rare even to hear about, let alone see. O Devānupriya! I give you this beloved wife of mine as a disciple. Please accept her."

Hearing Krishna Vasudeva's prayer, the Lord said, "Devānupriya! Do as you please."

[8] Then Padmavati went to the north-east corner, removed her ornaments and decorations, and tied her hair in a five-knotted bun. Then she went to the Arhat Arihanemi, bowed and prostrated herself, and said, "O Devānupriya! This world is burning in the fire of birth, old age, death, and other sorrows. Please give me initiation."

Then the Arhat Arihanemi himself initiated Padmavati Devi and gave her to the Yakshini Arya as a disciple. Then the Yakshini Arya taught Padmavati Dharma, saying, "This is how one should practice restraint." Then Padmavati became Arya's disciple. She practiced [Iryāsamiti, [Bhāṣāsamiti, Eṣaṇāsamiti, Āyāṇabhaṇḍa-matta-nikkhevaṇāsamiti, Uccāra-pāsavaṇa-khela-siṁghāṇa-jalla-pāriṭṭhāvaṇiya-samiti, Maṇasamiti, Vaiṣamiti, Kāyasamiti, Maṇagutta Vaigutta Kāyagutta Gutta Guttindiya] Gutta-bhambhāyarini.

Then Padmavati, the disciple of the Yakshini Arya, practiced the eleven angas, and for many months, she practiced the fourth, sixth, eighth, tenth, and twelfth vows, and she lived with a sense of self-awareness.

Then Padmavati, the disciple, attained Samanna-pariyāga after twenty years. After attaining it, she practiced the monthly fast, and after that, she practiced the sixty-day fast. After that, she practiced the practice of nakedness [mundabhava, kesaloa, bhambacheravase, aṇhāṇagaṁ, acchattayam, aṇuvahaṇayam, bhūmisejjāo, phalagasejjāo, pargharapphavese, laddhavaladdhāiṁ, māṇavāmāṇāiṁ, paresim hīlaṇāo, nindaṇāo, khiṁsaṇāo, tālaṇāo, garahaṇāo, uccavaya virūvarūva bāvisam parisahovasaggā-gāmakantgā ahiyāsijjati tamaḍaṁ ārahei, carimusāsāhiṁ siddha. 

Page #144:
---------------------------
[Fifth Class]
The Adan-Bhand-Matra-Nikshepana Committee, the Uccar-Prasravan-Khel-Jall-Singhan-Paristhapanika Committee, the Man:Samiti, the VachanSamiti, the KaySamiti, these eight committees and the Manogupti, VachanGupti and KayGupti, the Gupteindriya, which keeps the senses hidden, like a tortoise, which controls the senses, the Brahmachariņi Arya became.
[103
Thereafter, that Padmavati Arya studied from Samayik to the eleven Angas from the Yakshini Arya, she began to wander, affecting the soul with many fasts - - Bele-Tele-Chole-Pachole-Mas and Ardhamass - Khaman, etc., various austerities.
In this way, Padmavati Arya observed the Dharma of character for twenty years and finally, affecting the soul with a month's Sanlekhana, completing sixty days of fasting, the meaning - purpose for which nakedness, [Mundabhav, Keshaloch, Brahmacharyavas, Asnanak, Achhatrak, Anupahanak, Bhumishayya, Falakshayya, Parigruhpravesh, Labhalab, Manapaman, Hilna, Avahelana, Ninda, Khinsna, Tadana, Garha, various types of high and low 22 Parishah and Upsarga are endured, worshiping that meaning, she became Siddha-Buddha-Mukta with her last breath.
2-8 Study Gauri etc.
9 - Tenam Kalena Tenam Samayena Baravai Nayari. Revaye Pavvae. Ujjane Nandana Vane. Tattha Nam Baravaiye Nayariye Kanhe Vasudeve. Tassa Nam Kanhasse Vasudevasse Gori Devi, Vannao. Araha Samosadhe. Kanhe Niggae. Gori Jaha Paumavai Taaha Niggayaa. Dhammakhaa. Parisaa Padigayaa. Kanhe Vi. Tae Nam Saa Gori Jaha Paumavai Taaha Nikkhantaa Jaav' Siddhaa.
Evam Gandhari, Lakkhana, Susima, Jambavai, Sachchabhama, Ruppini, Atthavi Paumavaisarisaaao, Attha Ajzhayanaa.
In that time and at that time, there was the city of Dwaraka. Near it was a mountain called Raivatak. On that mountain was a garden called Nandana Van. In the city of Dwaraka, Shri Krishna Vasudeva ruled. Those Krishna Vasudeva had a queen named Gauri, according to the Aupapatik Sutra, one should know the description of the queen. One time, Lord Arishtanemi arrived in that Nandana Van garden. Krishna Vasudeva went to see the Lord. The public also went. The public returned. Krishna Vasudeva also returned to his royal palace. Thereafter, Gauri Devi was initiated like Padmavati Rani, until she became Siddha.
Similarly, (3) Gandhari, (4) Lakshmana, (5) Susima, (6) Jambavati, (7) Satyabhama and (8) Rukmini's six studies should also be understood as being the same as Padmavati.
1. Class 5, Sutra 5, 6. 

Page #145:
---------------------------
[104]
[Antakrid Dasha 9-10 Study
Mulasri-Muladatta 10-At that time, in that era, in the city of Dwaraka, on the mountain called Raivatak, in the Nandana garden, Krishna-Vasudeva ruled. There, in the city of Dwaraka, Krishna-Vasudeva's son, born to Queen Jambavati Devi, was a prince named Shamb, who was perfect in all his senses and had a beautiful body. Shamb Kumar had a wife named Mulasri, who was very beautiful and delicate. One time, Arishtanemi arrived there. Krishna-Vasudeva went to see him. Mulasri Devi also went to see the Lord, like Padmavati. She spoke specifically, "O Devānupriya! I ask Krishna-Vasudeva (and have been initiated by asking) until I have become perfected."
Similarly, the entire story of Muladatta should be known. (She was the second queen of Shamb Kumar).
1. Class 5, Sutras 4-6 

Page #146:
---------------------------
Sixth Section 1-2 Study
Maokai and Kinkam 1- Jai, Bante! By the Ascetic, the Blessed Lord Mahavira, the eighth Anga, Antagadadasana, the fifth section, this has been explained. What, Bante!, has been explained in the sixth section?
Thus, Jambu! By the Ascetic, the Blessed Lord Mahavira, the eighth Anga, Antagadadasana, the sixth section, sixteen Ajjhayana have been explained. That, as the collection of verses,
(1) Maokai (2) Kinkam also, (3) Moggarapani also (4) Kasave. (5) Khemae (6) Dhiiharae, also (7) Kelase (8) Harichandane. ||1|| (9) Varatt (10) Sudansan (11) Punnabhadda also (12) Sumanabhadda (13) Supaite. (14) Mehe (15) Aimutta (16) Alakke, Ajjhayana, sixteen in number. ||2||
If sixteen Ajjhayana have been explained, what, Bante!, has been explained in the first Ajjhayana, Antagadadasana?
Thus, Jambu! At that time, at that moment, in the city of Rayagih. In the Gunasilae Cheiyae. The king was there. There, the Maokai named verse, dwelling, - from the beginning until the end, without being despised.
At that time, at that moment, the Ascetic, the Blessed Lord Mahavira, in the Gunasilae, until [Cheiyae, without being despised, the highest, the highest, having taken the highest, with restraint, with self-control, being pleased with oneself] dwells. The assembly went out. Then, that Maokai verse, in this story, having been obtained, as explained in the Panatti, in the Gangadatta, in the same way, this, the son of Vijettha, in the family, having placed, with a thousand men, with a chariot, went out, until, going to the Anagarae, - from the beginning until the end, with the Gutabhambayari.
Then, that Maokai, in the Anagarae, to the Ascetic, the Blessed Lord Mahavira, to the elders, in front of them, having come, eleven Anga, he touches. The rest, as in the Khandaya, the Gunarayan, the Tavokamma, the sixteen Vasai, the Pariyao. In the same way, in the Viule Siddhe.
Kinkam also, in the same way, until, in the Viule Siddhe.
The noble Jambu Swami said to Sudharma Swami - Blessed Lord! The Ascetic, the Blessed Lord Mahavira, explained the meaning of the fifth section of the eighth Anga, Antagadadasana. Then, Lord! The Ascetic, the Blessed Lord Mahavira, explained the sixth section
1. 2-3
Section 3, Sutra 1 Section 1, Sutra 18.
4. According to the above description of this Sutra. 

Page #147:
---------------------------
## 106]
[ Antakrid Dasha
What are the Bhavas (feelings) said? In response, Sudharma Swami said - "O Jambu! Shraman Bhagwan Mahavira has said sixteen studies of the sixth category of the eighth Anga Antagaddasha, which are as follows:
Gatharth - (1) Makai, (2) Kinkam, (3) Mudgarpani, (4) Kashyap, (5) Kshemak, (6) Dhriti Dhar, (7) Kailash (8) Harichandan, (9) Waratt, (10) Sudarshan, (11) Punyabhadra, (12) Sumanbhadra, (13) Supratisthit, (14) Meghkumar, (15) Atimuktakumar and (16) Alak (Alakshya) Kumar.
Jambu Swami said to Sudharma Swami - "Bhagwan! Shraman Bhagwan Mahavira has said sixteen studies of the sixth category, then what is the meaning of the first study?"
Sudharma Swami replied - "O Jambu! In that time, there was a city called Rajgriha. There was a Chaitya-Udyan named Gunashil. In that city, King Shrenik ruled. There lived a Gathapati named Makai, who was very rich, even immeasurable.
In that time, Shraman Bhagwan Mahavira, the founder of Dharma, arrived in the Gunashil Udyan [obtaining a suitable Avgraha for Sadhuvritti, inspiring the soul through restraint and penance]. Hearing the arrival of Prabhu Mahavira, the council came for darshan and to listen to Dharma Upadesh. Makai Gathapati also left his home, as described in the Bhagavati Sutra for Gangadatta. Hearing the Dharma Upadesh, he became detached. Coming home, he entrusted the burden of the house to his eldest son and himself sat in a Shivika (palanquin) carried by a thousand men, and came to the service of Bhagwan to accept Shraman Diksha, until he became an Angar. He became a Brahmachari, equipped with Irya and other committees, and hidden by secrets.
After this, Makai Muni studied the eleven Angas, including Samayik, from the virtuous and well-dressed Sthaviras of Shraman Bhagwan Mahavira, and performed the penance of Gunaratnasamvatsar like Skandakji. He remained in Dikshaparaya for sixteen years. Finally, he attained Siddhi on the Vipulagiri mountain, performing Santhar and other things like Skandakji.
Kinkam also attained Siddhi Buddha Mukta on Vipulachal, taking Diksha like Makai.
Sc

Page #148:
---------------------------
The Third Study
Mudgarapani Arjun Malakar
2- In that time, in that era, in the city of Rajagriha, there was a garden called Gunasila. King Srenic ruled there. His queen was Chelna. In that city of Rajagriha, there lived a gardener named Arjun, who was respected and honored. Arjun the gardener had a wife named Bandhumati, who was very beautiful and delicate. Arjun the gardener had a large flower garden outside the city of Rajagriha. This garden was [sometimes dark, sometimes blue like the neck of a peacock, sometimes green, sometimes cool to the touch, sometimes smooth, sometimes intensely shaded due to the abundance of color and other qualities, sometimes deeply shaded due to the dense intertwining of branches, beautiful and like] a gathering of great clouds. It was adorned with flowers of all five categories. This garden was extremely beautiful, pleasing and exhilarating to the heart.
1. Chapter 3, Sutra 1. 

Page #149:
---------------------------
##  [108]

The Yaksha shrine of Mudgarpani was located near the Pushparama, a flower garden, and was connected to the ancestral lineage of Arjun Mali, the gardener. It was as old as the Purnabhadra Chaitya, divine and imbued with truth. Inside the shrine was a statue of the Yaksha Mudgarpani, holding a mudgar (a mace) made of iron, weighing a thousand palas (approximately 62 seers or 57 kilograms in modern weight).

Arjun Mali, from his childhood, was a devotee of the Yaksha Mudgarpani. Every day, he would take a bamboo basket and go to his flower garden outside the city of Rajgriha, collecting flowers. He would then select the finest flowers and offer them to the Yaksha Mudgarpani. Thus, he would worship the Yaksha with the best flowers, prostrating himself before the deity. Afterward, he would sit in the market by the roadside and sell the flowers, earning his livelihood.

**Discussion:** This sutra marks the beginning of the third study of the sixth section. This study is called "Moggarapaani." The protagonist of this study is Arjun Mali. Mudgarpani is a Yaksha who brings a great storm into the life of his servant, Arjun Mali. However, the storm subsides through the contact of a Shravak named Sudarshan, a resident of the same city. The Yaksha mentioned in this chapter is named Mudgarpani because he possessed a special weapon called Mudgar in his hand (pani). This is why he was known by this name.

The sutrakar, describing Mudgarpani, says - "Palasahassanipfannm" - meaning that it was made from a thousand palas. The word "pala" means two karsha (one karsha is equal to 10 masha). "Kobhyam palam proktam, karshah syaddashamashaka" (Shangaadhar Samhita). Thus, one pala is equal to 20 masha. Other dictionaries state that "pala" is a very small weight, equal to four tola (Prakatashabdamahaarnavapaiyasaddamahaannavoo). One tola (a specific unit - Arddhamaagadhi Kosh) is equal to four tola. If one pala is considered to be four tola, then the Yaksha held a huge mudgar weighing 1 mana and 10 seers. Another interpretation is that one pala is equal to the weight of five rupees today. One seer is equal to 16 palas. Thus, 1000 palas are equal to 62 and a half seers. This is called "Palasahasar-nispann."

The word "Pachchipidagai" is composed of two words: "Pachchi" and "Pitak." "Pachchi" is a word from the local language used for a small basket. The word "Pitak" also signifies a box. The use of two synonymous words indicates various types of boxes or baskets. The meaning is that Arjun Mali would go to the flower garden with various types of baskets.

**The Immorality of the Gosthik Men**

3 - "Taththa nam Raayagihe nayare Lallia naamm gotthi parivasai - adda jaav aparibhuyaa jankayasukaya yaavi hottha."

"Tae nam Raayagihe nayare annayaya kayaai pamode ghudhe yaavi hottha."

"Tae nam se ajjuane maalaagaare kallan pabhuuyataraaehimm pupfhehimm kajjam iti katu pacchuusakaalasamayansi bandhumaee bariaae..." 

Page #150:
---------------------------
[Sixth Chapter]
[109] He (Arjunamali) takes his wife Bandhumati along with him, and after taking her, he goes out of the city of Rajagriha through the middle gate. After going out, he reaches the flower garden, and after reaching there, he collects flowers with his wife Bandhumati. Then, six men of the Lalita group, who are enjoying themselves in the temple of the Yaksha Mudgarapani, see him.
In the city of Rajagriha, there was a group (circle of friends) called 'Lalita'. It (its members) was prosperous with wealth, wealth, etc., and it did not suffer defeat from many. At one time, the king had given a grant of immunity to that group of friends, being pleased with them for having accomplished some desired work of the king, that it was free to do any work as it wished. It had full protection from the state, due to which this group became very arrogant and unrestrained.
One day, an announcement was made to celebrate a festival in the city of Rajagriha. On this, Arjunamali guessed that there would be a great demand for flowers on the occasion of this festival tomorrow. Therefore, he got up early that morning and, taking a bamboo basket, left home early with his wife Bandhumati. After leaving, he went to his flower garden in the city and started collecting flowers with his wife. At that time, the aforementioned six men of the 'Lalita' group came to the temple of the Yaksha Mudgarapani and started enjoying themselves.
4-Then, Arjunamali collects flowers with his wife Bandhumati in the flower garden, (fills the basket), and after filling it, he goes to the temple of the Yaksha Mudgarapani to offer flowers in the morning. Then, those six men see Arjunamali going to the flower garden with his wife Bandhumati, and after seeing him, they say to each other:
"This is the beloved of the gods! Arjunamali is coming here with his wife Bandhumati. So, this is the beloved of the gods! We will bind Arjunamali with ropes and throw him aside, and enjoy ourselves with his wife Bandhumati," they say harshly, and they hear each other's words. After hearing, they hide behind the doors, and they stand still, motionless, silent, and hidden. Then, Arjunamali reaches the temple of the Yaksha Mudgarapani with his wife Bandhumati, and he bows down to the idol, offers flowers, and bows down to the foot of the idol. Then, the six men come out from behind the doors one by one, and after coming out, they seize Arjunamali, and after seizing him, they bind him with ropes. They enjoy themselves with Bandhumati, the wife of the flower-seller, and enjoy various pleasures. 

Page #151:
---------------------------


Page #152:
---------------------------
[Sixth Chapter]
[111 Terror in Rajagriha City]
6-Then in Rajagriha city, in the [Tig-Chauk-Chaccar-Chaummuh] great squares, many people were looking at each other, speaking to each other, discussing and arguing.
"Oh, Devānupriyā! Today in the Mālagāra, the Muggarapāṇi Yaksha, possessed by another, is roaming outside Rajagriha city, killing a woman and six men, thus seven people."
Then the king, Śreṇika, hearing this, called his servants, the Koḍumbiyapurisas, and said to them,
"Oh, Devānupriyā! Today in the Mālagāra, the Muggarapāṇi Yaksha is roaming outside Rajagriha city, killing a woman and six men, thus seven people. Therefore, you all should not go out of the city for any reason, be it for wood, grass, water, or fruits and flowers. Do not let their bodies be destroyed. Oh, Devānupriyā! Announce this two or three times and inform me."
Then those Koḍumbiyapurisas went and announced the king's order throughout the city, and after announcing it, they informed the king. The Śrāvaka, Sudarśana, the Śreṣṭhi
7-Then in Rajagriha city, there was a Śreṣṭhi named Sudarśana. Then that Sudarśana, going to the Samana's residence, [Uvaladdhapuṇṇapāve, Āsava-Samvara-Nijjara-Kiriyāhigarana-Bandha-Mokkhakusalē, Asahejjadēva-Sura-Nāga-Suvaṇṇa-Jakkha-Rakkhasa-Kinnara-Kimpurisa-Garula-Gandhavva-Mahoragāiēhiṁ Dēvaganēhiṁ Nigganthāo Pāvayanaō Anaikkamanijjē, Nigganthē Pāvayane Nissankie Nikkankhie Nivvitigicchē, Laddhatē, Gahiyaddē, Pucchiyaddē, Ahigayaddē, Viṇicchiyaddē, Aṭṭhimimjapēmāṇurāgarattē. Ayamauso! Nigganthē Pāvayane Aḍē, Ayan Paramaḍē, Sēsē Aṇḍē, Usiyafalihe Avanguyaduvare, Chiyattanteurapargharadārappavēsē, Bahūhiṁ Sīlavvay-Guṇa-Vēramanapacchakkhāṇa-Posahopavāsēhiṁ Chauddassatṭhamuddiṭṭha-Puṇṇamāsinīsu Paḍipuṇṇam Posahṁ Sammṁ Aṇupālēmāṇē Samanē Nigganthē Phāsuēsaṇijjēṇam Asana-Pāṇa-Khāim-Sāimēṇam Vaththa-Paḍiggaha-Kambala-Pāyapuṁchhaṇēṇam Pīḍha-Phalaga-Sijjā-Santhārēṇam Osah-Bhēsajjēṇ Ya Paḍilābēmāṇē Ahapariggahiēhiṁ Tavokammēhiṁ Appāṇam Bhāvēmāṇē] lived. 1-2. See the above mentioned sūtra. 

Page #153:
---------------------------
##  [112]
[ Antakrid Dasha
In the city of Rajagriha, there lived a wealthy Seth named Sudarshan. He was a Shramanopasak - Shravak and knew the nature of Jiva - Ajiva [as well as the nature of punya and papa]. He was also knowledgeable about Asrava, Samvara, Nirjara Kriya (the twenty-five types of actions that are the cause of karma-bandha), Adhikarana (the means - weapons of karma-bandha), and the nature of Bandha and Moksha. He did not rely on others for any task. He was so steadfast in Nirgrantha-Pravachan that even Devas, Asuras, Suparnas, Yakshas, Rakshasas, Kinnaras, Kimpurushas, Garudas, Gandharvas, Mahoragas, and other Devatas could not distract him from Nirgrantha-Pravachan. He had no doubt, desire, or uncertainty (doubt in the result) in Nirgrantha-Pravachan. He had understood the ultimate meaning of the scriptures. He was firmly holding the meaning - the secret of the scriptures. He had inquired about the doubtful places in the scriptures, gained knowledge of them, and made a special decision about them. His bones and marrow were attached to the love of the Sarvagya Deva. He had an unwavering love for Nirgrantha-Pravachan. He had such faith that - "Ayushman! This Nirgrantha-Pravachan is the truth, the ultimate truth, the supreme truth, everything else is anarth (false form)." Due to his generosity, the door of his house remained open, his door was open to everyone. He would create joy in the house or the inner chambers of whoever he went to. He followed Sheelavrat (five Anuvrats), Gunavrat, Viraman (restraint from raga, etc.), Pratyakhyan, Poushadh, Upavas, etc., and observed a complete Poushadhavrat on the fourteenth, eighth, new moon, and full moon days. He received great benefit by donating blameless food, drink, Khadim and Swadim food, clothes, vessels, blankets, Rajoharan, back, plank, bed, Sanstarak, medicine, and Bheshaj, etc., to Shramans - Nirgranthas, and by cultivating his soul through the accepted tapas-karma] was wandering. The arrival of Bhagwan Mahavira
8 - At that time, at that time, the Shraman Bhagwan Mahavira was staying in Samoshadh. Then in the city of Rajagriha, in Shringatak, Rajmarg, etc., many people were talking to each other in this way - [especially they started saying, they expressed the same meaning in different words, they made reasoned statements with the explanation of cause and effect - "O Devanupriya! The fact is that Shraman Bhagwan Mahavira, who is self-enlightened, the founder of Dharma Tirtha and Tirthankara, is the best of men.... who are inclined to attain the Siddhigatirupa sthana, they are gradually wandering
1.
Varga 5 Sutra 1
2. Varga 6. Sutra 6. 
]

Page #154:
---------------------------
[Sixth Chapter]
[113 They have arrived here, they have come here, they are residing here. Outside this Rajagriha city, in the virtuous Chaitya, they are taking the place suitable for the ascetics, and are affecting the soul with austerity and penance. O Devanupriyo! By listening to the name (the name given in the world for identification) and lineage (the name given according to the qualities) of the Lord, who is endowed with the qualities of an Arihant, i.e., who is of the nature of bestowing the great fruit of Tatha-rupa, one attains great fruit, then what to say of the fruit that is obtained by going near them, praising them, bowing to them, inquiring about their ascetic journey, etc., and worshipping them? That is, certainly, great fruit is obtained. By listening to even one of their noble (bestowing the best qualities) and righteous excellent words] and by grasping the vast meaning, what to say of the fruit that is obtained? Sudarshan's departure to pay homage
9-Therefore, in the end, this thought arose in the mind of Sudarshan, who was surrounded by many people, and he thought, desired, and resolved in his mind - "Thus, indeed, the ascetic, the Lord Mahavira, is dwelling. I will go to the ascetic, the Lord Mahavira, and pay homage to him, bow to him; thus he thought, and whoever thought like this, he also understood, and having understood, he took the vow of conduct, and so on.
• "Thus, indeed, O mother! The ascetic, the Lord Mahavira, is dwelling. I will go to the ascetic, the Lord Mahavira, and pay homage to him, bow to him, and so on [I will honour him, respect him, and wish him well]. I will stay with him."
Then, the Seth Sudarshan said to his mother - "Thus, indeed, son! Today, in the garland market, and so on, he is dwelling, going from place to place. Son! Do not go to the ascetic, the Lord Mahavira, to pay homage to him, lest there be harm to your body. You should pay homage to the ascetic, the Lord Mahavira, here itself."
Then, the Seth Sudarshan said to his mother - "Mother! Shall I pay homage to the ascetic, the Lord Mahavira, by coming here, by reaching here, by staying here, by going here? I will go, mother! I will pay homage to the ascetic, the Lord Mahavira, who is praised by you, and so on, I will stay with him."
Then, the Seth Sudarshan said to his mother - "Mother! I will not go, for I am surrounded by many duties, and so on, I will go tomorrow."
Then, the Seth Sudarshan, praised by his mother, having taken a bath in pure water, and so on, having adorned his body with auspicious clothes, and with expensive ornaments, left his house, and having left, he went out of the city of Rajagriha through the middle, and having gone out, he went towards the place where the chariot of Moggarapani, the charioteer, was, not far from the place where the ascetic, the Lord Mahavira, was dwelling, in order to go there.
1. In this Sutra 3. In this Sutra 5. Chapter 3, Sutra 18.
2. Chapter 5. Sutra 4. 4. Chapter 6. Sutra 5. 

Page #155:
---------------------------
[114]
Hearing the news of the Lord's arrival from the mouths of many citizens, Sudarshan Seth's mind became filled with anxious thoughts, prayers, and resolutions. "Surely the Shraman Bhagwan Mahavira has arrived in the city and is residing in the Gunashilka garden outside. Therefore, I should go and pay my respects to the Shraman Bhagwan." Thinking this, he went to his parents and, with folded hands, said, "O Mother and Father! Shraman Bhagwan Mahavira Swami is residing in the garden outside the city. Therefore, I wish to go and pay my respects to him. I want to honor him, respect him, and humbly serve this benevolent, sin-removing, divine, and knowledgeable Lord."

Hearing this, his parents said to Sudarshan Seth, "O Son! Surely Arjun Malakar is roaming around killing people. Therefore, O Son! Do not go outside the city to pay your respects to Shraman Bhagwan Mahavira. Going outside the city may harm your body. Therefore, it is best that you pay your respects to Shraman Bhagwan Mahavira from here."

Then Sudarshan Seth said to his parents, "O Mother and Father! How can I pay my respects to Shraman Bhagwan Mahavira from here when he has arrived here, has held a Samvasaran, and is residing in the garden outside? Therefore, O Mother and Father! Please grant me permission to go there and pay my respects to Shraman Bhagwan Mahavira, to bow down to him, and to serve him."

When his parents could not convince Sudarshan Seth with various arguments, they reluctantly said, "O Son! Do as you please."

Thus, Sudarshan Seth, having obtained permission from his parents, bathed and donned pure, auspicious garments suitable for attending the Dharma Sabha. [He adorned his body with light, precious ornaments.] Then he left his house and walked through the middle of Rajagaha city, passing not too far or too close to the Yakshayatan of Mudgarpani Yaksha, towards the Gunashilka garden where Shraman Bhagwan Mahavira was.

**Discussion:** In this Sutra, the three terms "Ihamagayam, Iha Pattam, Iha Samoshadham" appear to be synonymous, but the commentator has explained the difference in meaning as follows:

"Ihamagayam, etc. - Even if someone has arrived in this city, this term can be used when they are close by. Therefore, it is said, 'Iha Sampraptam' - they have arrived. Even when they have arrived, a special term is used, 'Iha Samvasritam' - they are settled here, engaged in the explanation of Dharma. Or, 'Iha Nagare' - in this city, 'Iha Udyane' - in this garden, 'Iha Sadhuchita Avagrahe' - in a place suitable for the Sadhus."

In other words, "Ihamagayam" means - having arrived in this city. But this can also be said when someone is near the city. Therefore, the Sutrakar has used 'Iha Pattam'. This means - having arrived in this city. To make this point even clearer, "Iha Samoshadhe" is written. This means - engaged in the explanation of Dharma. Or, 'Ihamagayam' means - having arrived in this city, 'Iha Pattam' means - having arrived in this garden, and 'Iha Samoshadham' means - having settled in a place suitable for the Sadhus. 

Page #156:
---------------------------
[Sixth Chapter]
[115 Sudarsana by Arjuna]
10- Then that Mudgarpani Yaksha saw Sudarsana Shramanopasaka coming from a distance. Seeing him, he became angry, enraged, furious, fierce with excessive anger, burning with the flames of anger, grinding his teeth, he swung the iron mudgar weighing a thousand palas, and came towards Sudarsana Shramanopasaka. At that time, seeing the angry Mudgarpani Yaksha coming towards him, Sudarsana Shramanopasaka, knowing the possibility of death, did not experience any fear, terror, anxiety or agitation. His heart did not waver or become fearful. Fearlessly, he wiped the ground with the hem of his garment. Then he sat down facing the east! Sitting down, he raised his left knee and folded his hands, placing his palms on his forehead. Then he spoke as follows:
'I bow to all the Arihant Bhagavants who have attained liberation in the past and to the Tīrthankara Shraman Bhagavan Mahāvīra, the founder of Dharma, who will attain liberation in the future.
I have previously renounced gross Prāṇātipāta, gross Mṛṣāvāda, gross Adattādāna, Swadārasantoṣa and Ichchāparimāṇa vows for life. Now, in the presence of the same Bhagavan Mahāvīra Swami, I renounce Prāṇātipāta, Mṛṣāvāda, Adattādāna, Mithuna and all-possession for life. I renounce all anger [pride, illusion, greed, attachment,
1. Chapter 1. Sutra 2. 

Page #157:
---------------------------
[116]
I renounce forever all the eighteen sins, including the ten cardinal sins [Antakruddash, Dvesha, Kalaha, Abhyakhyan, Paishunya, Paraparivad, Arati-rati, Mayamrusa] and the sin of wrong belief [Mithyadarshan Shalya]. I also renounce all four types of food: Asan, Pan, Khadim, and Swadim. If I survive this impending death, I will break this vow and resume eating. If I do not survive this affliction, then let this complete renunciation be for the rest of my life. Having made this firm resolve, Sudarshan Seth took the Sagari Padima-Anashan Vrat.

Meanwhile, the Mudgarpani Yaksha, wielding the thousand-pound iron mace, arrived where Sudarshan the Shramanopasak was. However, he could not overpower Sudarshan the Shramanopasak with his might, nor could he cause him any harm.

- Commentary - Seeing Sudarshan the Shreshthi going towards the Gunashilka garden, the Mudgarpani Yaksha, gnashing his teeth in anger, raises his mace to strike him. But seeing the Yaksha, Sudarshan remains completely calm and fearless. He takes the Sagari Santhara. In this, he completely renounces anger, pride, and even the sin of wrong belief.

A question arises here: The twelve vows of the Shramanopasak are taken only with right belief, and in that, wrong belief is automatically renounced. Then how can the renunciation of wrong belief by Sudarshan while taking the Sagari Pratima (Sagari Santhara) be explained? After embracing the Shravak Dharma, there is no need to renounce wrong belief. In response, it is said that although the first thing a vow-taking Shravak must do is to renounce wrong belief, and it is only through the elimination of wrong belief that right belief is attained, the renunciation of the Deshvirati Shravak is partial, not complete. There are many sub-categories of wrong belief, such as Deshshanka, Sarvashanka, etc. Renouncing all of them completely is the goal of renouncing the sin of wrong belief here. The meaning is that even a slight doubt or other defect remaining in the acceptance of the Deshvirati Dharma is renounced in this vow.

"Sagaram Padimam Padivajjad" - The word "Sagaram" read here means "with exceptions," "with limitations." Here, Pratima-Santhara is the name of a fast unto death. The verb "Pratipadyate" is used in the sense of "to accept." A vow taken with exceptions is called Sagari-Pratima. When a person takes a vow, if they make an exception for a particular thing or time and say, "If this work is done, then I will break my fast. If the work is not done, then I will not break my fast, I will continue it," and if they take a rule with this kind of resolve, then that rule is called Sagari-Pratima. Upsarga-Nivaran

11 - Then, the Mudgarpani Yaksha, circling Sudarshan the Shramanopasak from all sides, did not even touch Sudarshan the Shramanopasak. Seeing him thus, Sudarshan the Shramanopasak stood before him, facing him directly, and looked at him steadily for a long time. Having looked, he saw the body of the Yaksha's mace-wielding form disappear. Having disappeared, 

Page #158:
---------------------------
[Sixth Chapter]
[117
The iron mace weighing a thousand palas, held by the Yaksha, circled around Sudarshan, but could not defeat him with its power. Then the Yaksha stood before Sudarshan, the Shramanopasaka, and stared at him with unwavering eyes. After that, the mace-wielding Yaksha abandoned the body of Arjun, the garland-maker, and went in the same direction from which he had come. 
As soon as Arjun, the garland-maker, was freed from the Yaksha, he fell to the ground with a sound of 'Dhas'. Then Sudarshan, the Shramanopasaka, knowing that he was free from the attack, broke his vow and opened his eyes.
Discussion - This sutra shows that when Arjun, the garland-maker, saw Seth Sudarshan, he threw his mace, but it remained suspended in the air. Due to the brilliance of Sudarshan's self-power, the mace could not strike him in any way. The sutra-writer has used the phrase "Teysa Sambhipadittae" for this reason. The mace-wielding Yaksha attacked Sudarshan, but due to his spiritual brilliance, he could not inflict any harm. He himself became devoid of brilliance.
Defeated by the extraordinary brilliance of Sudarshan, the mace-wielding Yaksha fled from the body of Arjun, the garland-maker, and Arjun fell to the ground. Then Sudarshan, understanding that the danger was over, ended his vow.
The devotion of Sudarshan and Arjun to the Bhagavan
12 - Then Arjun, the garland-maker, got up from his seat after a short while. Getting up, he addressed Sudarshan, the Shramanopasaka, saying -
"O Devānupiya! What do you desire?"
Then Sudarshan, the Shramanopasaka, addressed Arjun, the garland-maker, saying -
"O Devānupiya! I am Sudarshan, the Shramanopasaka - I desire to worship the Bhagavan Mahavira, the great sage, with devotion, following the path of right conduct and right livelihood, and with the qualities of a true disciple."
Then Arjun, the garland-maker, addressed Sudarshan, the Shramanopasaka, saying -
"O Devānupiya! I also wish to worship the Bhagavan Mahavira along with you, until [we have bowed down, paid homage, honored, respected, wished well, and offered auspicious offerings to the divine] we have completed our stay."
"O Devānupiya! Do not be bound by any restrictions."
Then Sudarshan, the Shramanopasaka, along with Arjun, the garland-maker, went to the place where the Bhagavan Mahavira was, following the path of right conduct and right livelihood. Reaching there, Sudarshan, the Shramanopasaka, along with Arjun, the garland-maker, bowed down to the Bhagavan Mahavira with great devotion, [approaching, departing, bowing down, paying homage, bowing down again, paying homage again, 
- 

Page #159:
---------------------------
## 118]
[ Antakrid Dasha
There are three types of Paryupasana (worship): Kayika (physical), Vaachika (verbal), and Manasika (mental). 

**Kayika:**  Involves physically positioning oneself in a respectful manner, such as standing with hands clasped in a respectful gesture, facing the object of worship, not too far or too close, and listening attentively to the teachings.

**Vaachika:**  Involves verbally affirming the teachings of the object of worship, such as saying "Evameyam Bhanta! Tahameyam Bhanta! Avitahmeyam Bhanta! Asandiddhameyam Bhanta! Ichhiyameyam Bhanta! Padicchhiyameyam Bhanta! Ichhiy-Padicchhiyameyam Bhanta! Se Jaheyam Tubbhe Vadah" (This is so, Bhanta! This is the truth, Bhanta! This is the reality, Bhanta! This is undoubtedly so, Bhanta! This is desirable, Bhanta! This is acceptable, Bhanta! This is desired and accepted, Bhanta! As you are saying, so be it), without contradicting the teachings.

**Manasika:**  Involves mentally engaging with the teachings, such as experiencing deep emotion (enthusiasm or a desire for liberation), and being intensely devoted to the teachings. ]

—

At that time, the Shraman Bhagwan Mahavira, in the presence of Sudarshan Shramanopasak, Arjun Mali, and the vast assembly, delivered a Dharmakatha (religious discourse). Sudarshan, having listened to the Dharmakatha, returned to his home.

**Discussion:** This Sutra describes how Sudarshan, after the threat posed by Mudgarpani Yaksha was resolved, ended his fast unto death. After ending his fast, Seth Sudarshan acted with great seriousness and foresight. He was not afraid when he saw Arjun Mali in an unconscious state, and he did not try to leave. Instead, he remained there peacefully. The reason... 

Page #160:
---------------------------
[Sixth Chapter]
[119] It is clear. His heart was compassionate, empathetic. Arjun Mali did not want to leave him in an unconscious state. He thought that Arjun Mali was now free from bondage, so it is my duty to take care of him and guide him. It was with this sense of duty that he did not leave from there.
Arjun Mali remained unconscious for a while, "Muhurtantaranam-Muhurtantaran-Stokakalen"-The word Muhurta means 48 minutes. Two ghadi are called muhurta and the time less than two ghadi is called antarmuhurta. The sutrakara means that when the yaksha left Arjun Mali's body, Arjun Mali fell to the ground with a thud and remained unconscious for some time. After that he regained consciousness.
Upon regaining consciousness, Arjun Mali saw Sudarshan standing in front of him, inquired about his identity, had some conversation with him, and reached the feet of Lord Mahavira in the Gunashil Garden with Seth Sudarshan. Arjun's Pravrajya
13-Then Arjun Mali, in the presence of the Shraman Bhagwan Mahavira, listened to the Dharma Upadesh and accepted it, became extremely happy and satisfied, and circumambulated the Lord Mahavira three times, bowed and prostrated, and said thus: "Bhagavan! I have faith in the Nirgranth Pravachan, I am interested in it, I want to take Pravrajya at your feet."
Bhagwan Mahavira said: "Devanupriya! Do as you please."
Then Arjun Mali went to the northeast corner and performed the Panchamoustik lunchan himself. After performing the lunchan, he became an Anagari. He began to live by cultivating his soul through restraint and austerity.
1.-2. Chapter 3, Sutra 18. 4. Chapter 3, Sutra 2.
3. Chapter 5, Sutra 2. 5. Chapter 3, Sutra 6. 

Page #161:
---------------------------
[120]
After this, on the day Arjun Muni took the vows of renunciation and became a monk, he paid homage to the Lord Mahavira and made this vow: "From today, I will constantly strive to purify my soul through the practice of austerities, and I will live my life in this way." Accepting this vow for life, Arjun Muni began to wander.

After this, on the day of the breaking of the fast of his austerities, Arjun Muni would study the scriptures in the first watch of the night and meditate in the second watch. Then, in the third watch, he would go begging for food in the city of Rajgriha. 

**Endurance and Attainment**

[14] Then, in the city of Rajgriha, while Arjun Muni, the homeless one, was begging for food in the houses of the high, middle, and low classes, many women, men, children, and old people would say to him: 
"This one killed my father. This one killed my mother. This one killed my brothers, sisters, sons, daughters, grandsons, and granddaughters. This one killed my other relatives." They would be filled with hatred, they would insult him, they would slander him, they would abuse him, they would despise him, and they would reject him.

Then, Arjun Muni, the homeless one, would endure all this abuse from those many women, men, children, and old people. He would bear it patiently, he would forgive them, he would tolerate them, he would be kind to them. While enduring, forgiving, tolerating, and being kind, he would beg for food in the city of Rajgriha, in the houses of the high, middle, and low classes. If he got food, he would not get a beating. If he got a beating, he would not get food.

Then, Arjun Muni, the homeless one, would remain undeterred, unmoved, unstained, unattached, unperturbed, and with his mind focused on his vows. He would leave the city of Rajgriha, and as soon as he would reach a place with good qualities, he would go to the Lord Mahavira. He would pay his respects to the Lord Mahavira, and he would stay close to him, going back and forth. He would take care of his food and drink, and he would serve the Lord Mahavira. The Lord Mahavira would accept his service with a smile, without any greed, without any attachment, without any pride, and without any desire for praise. He would eat his food like a bird, without any fuss. Then, the Lord Mahavira would leave the city of Rajgriha, and he would wander in the company of many people.

Then, Arjun Muni, the homeless one, would attain the state of a monk after six months, due to his great effort, his great determination, his great merit, and his great devotion. After attaining this state, he would purify himself for half a month. After purifying himself, he would fast for thirty days. After fasting, he would become a naked ascetic, and he would attain liberation. 

Page #162:
---------------------------
[Sixth Chapter]
[121]
"He killed my father. He killed my mother. He killed my brother, sister, wife, son, daughter, daughter-in-law, and my other relatives." Saying this, some would abuse, some would mock, some would disrespect, some would slander, some would criticize by pointing out caste or other flaws, some would threaten with fear, and some would beat with slaps, bricks, stones, sticks, etc.

Despite enduring such anger, abuse, mockery, disrespect, slander, and being beaten and threatened by many women, men, children, old people, and young people, Arjun Muni did not harbor any hatred in his heart. He patiently endured all the trials they put him through, accepting them with equanimity. He considered these hardships as a means to liberation. With right knowledge, he endured all these troubles, forgave, practiced forbearance, and considered these hardships as a means to benefit. While wandering for alms in the small, large, and middle-class families of Rajgriha city, Arjun Muni sometimes got food but not water, and sometimes got water but not food.

In such a situation, whatever little food was available, he accepted it with complete humility, without any desire, without any impurity, without any stain, without any anxiety or agitation, and without any resentment. He did not feel tired.

Thus, he wandered for alms. After wandering, he left Rajgriha city and came to the virtuous garden where the Lord Mahavira was residing. Upon arriving there, he performed the Pratikramana (reflection on his actions) regarding his coming and going, criticized the faults he had committed while begging, and then showed the food and water he had received to Lord Mahavira. After showing it to him and receiving his permission, he consumed it without fainting, without greed, without attachment, and without any desire. Just as a snake enters its hole straight, he consumed the food and water without any attachment or aversion.

Later, one day, the Lord Mahavira left that virtuous garden in Rajgriha city and went to wander in other regions.

Arjun Muni, with that generous, noble, and pure heart, having received the great benefit, and having inspired his soul with abundant penance, followed the Shraman Dharma for six months. Then, he inspired his soul with half a month of Sanlekhana (a fast leading to death) and completed the thirty-day fast of a devotee. He fulfilled the purpose for which he had taken the vow, and Arjun Muni became a Siddha, a Buddha, and a liberated soul.

**Discussion:** While wandering in Rajgriha city for alms, Arjun Muni suffered hardships at the hands of the people there. Yet, he remained steadfast in his virtuous conduct, did not harbor any hatred in his heart towards anyone, and instead, with equanimity, patiently endured all the hardships he faced. This equanimity resulted in his liberation from all karmic bonds and attainment of his desired ultimate welfare, Nirvana.

The meaning of the verbs "akkosanti, hilanti, nindanti, khinsanti, garihanti, tajjenti" is as follows: "akkosanti" - they criticize with harsh words. Criticism means - curse, blame, scold, speak ill of. 

Page #163:
---------------------------
## 122]

**Describing the ten types of abuse:**

* **"Heelanti"** - They disrespect and humiliate.
* **"Nindanti"** - They slander. Slander means to describe someone's faults.
* **"Khinsanti"** - They get angry, irritated, resentful, and try to provoke anger by using harsh words.
* **"Garihanti"** - They expose faults.
* **"Tajjenti"** - They scold, reprimand, and try to intimidate using fingers.
* **"Talenti"** - They beat with sticks, stones, etc.

**Explaining the terms "Samm Samhati, Samm Khamathi, Titikkhai, Ahiyaaseti":**

The commentator Abhaydeva Suri writes:

* "Some Acharyas consider all four terms 'Sahati' etc. to have the same meaning. Others differentiate their meanings, saying:
    * **"Sahati"** - They endure hardship without fear.
    * **"Kshamate"** - They remain calm, free from anger.
    * **"Titikkhate"** - They endure hardships without showing any weakness.
    * **"Adhisahati"** - They endure a lot.

These verbs indicate that the tolerance of Arjun Muni was appropriate and ideal. Tolerance born out of fear is not true tolerance. Forgiveness that contains anger, where anger is hidden in the heart, cannot be called forgiveness. And forbearance done out of weakness is not true forbearance. If even a little bit of passion arises in the mind while enduring insults, etc., then instead of progress, the soul will be driven towards downfall.

**To emphasize this point, the sutra uses the words "Adine, Avimane, Akluse, Anaile, Avisadi, Aparitantjogi".**

The commentator Abhaydeva Suri explains:

* **"Adine"** - Not being humble due to the absence of sorrow.
* **"Avinmane"** - Not being empty-minded due to a focused mind.
* **"Akluse"** - Not being tainted due to the absence of hatred.
* **"Anaile"** - Not being agitated due to being free from disturbance.
* **"Avisadi"** - Not being depressed due to not having thoughts like "What is the use of my life?"
* **"Aparitantjogi"** - Therefore, he is a continuous yogi, one who is constantly in samadhi.

This means that Arjun Muni was not humble due to the absence of sorrow in his mind. He was not empty-minded because his mind was focused. He was not tainted because there was no hatred in his mind. He was not agitated because he was free from disturbance. He was not depressed because he did not have thoughts like "What is the use of my life?" Therefore, he was constantly in samadhi. He is called "Aparitantjogi" because he was constantly engaged in samadhi. The word "Aparitantjogi" is formed by adding the suffix "in" to the word "Aparitantyoga".

**"Bilimiva Pannagabhuena Appaanenam Tamaharam Ahare"** - This means: Just as a snake enters a hole, so was the food consumed.

The commentator explains:

* **"Bilimiva Pannagabhu tena Atmana Tamaharam Aharayati"** - Just as a snake enters a hole without touching the sides, only through the middle, similarly, the food was consumed without touching the sides of the mouth, directly entering the throat.

This means that just as a snake enters a hole without touching the sides, only through the middle, similarly, Arjun Muni consumed food without touching the sides of his mouth, directly entering the throat. 

Page #164:
---------------------------
[Sixth Chapter]
[123
Just as food enters the mouth, in the same way, Arjun Muni, without touching either side of the mouth, only keeping the mouth, swallows it down the throat. The implication is that just as a snake does not touch its limbs while entering a hole, it enters with great hesitation, in the same way, Arjun Muni, without expecting any kind of taste, free from attachment and aversion, as if it had not touched the mouth, in this way, only for the purpose of satisfying hunger, Arjun Muni consumes food. This statement indicates the complete absence of their sensory perception of taste. The supreme practice of a restrained person is to conquer the sense of taste. Arjun Muni had understood the secret of this practice well and had also implemented it in his life.
'Teṇam Orāleṇam Viuleṇam Payatteṇam Paggahieṇam Mahāṇubhāgeṇam Tavokammeṇam' - Teṇam Pūrvabhaṇiten Udareṇam-Pradhānena, Vipuleṇam - Viśālena, Bhagavatā Dattena, Pragṛhītena, Utkṛṣṭabhāvataḥ Svīkṛtena, Mahāṇubhāgena Mahān Anuabhāgaḥ Prabhāvo Yasya, Teṇam Tapaḥ Karmaṇā. Here, the importance of the penance that Arjun Muni has performed is expressed. In the present text, Tapa Karma is the special and Udara etc. are its adjectives. Their meaning is as follows.
-
Teṇam - This word refers to the fully described penance. It was mentioned in the case of Arjun Muni's practice that when Arjun Muni went to the city for alms, he was abused by the people, he was insulted, he was beaten, yet he endured all these tortures peacefully. In addition, if he got food, he did not get water, if he got water, he did not get food. Even though all this happened, Arjun Muni never became restless, even after fasting for two days, he never felt dejected without getting satisfactory food. The sutrakara has indicated this type of penance with the word 'Teṇam'.
'Udara' - The word means - Pradhan. Pradhan is said to be the greatest. It is easy to stay hungry, control over the sense of taste can also be done, it is also possible to make a living by begging, but it is not a child's play to perform penance by being insulted by people and enduring beatings. This is a very difficult task, a very rigorous practice, which is why the sutrakara has called Arjun Muni's penance Udara, i.e. the greatest.
'Vipul' - It is said to be vast. One can endure hardship once, one can face hardship two or three times, but how difficult is it to live under the shadow of hardship for six months continuously? It is not difficult to understand. Wherever you go, there is insult, wherever you enter a house, there is a shower of disrespect, there is no sign of respect anywhere. In such a situation, to keep the mind calm, to keep anger away, is a great feat and a great penance, an unprecedented tolerance. It is possible that this is why the sutrakara has called Arjun Muni's penance practice Vipul - vast and great.
'Pradatt' - means - given. The penance that Arjun Muni was performing, he did not start it on his own without asking anyone, but he started it after receiving the command of Bhagwan Mahavira. Therefore, the sutrakara has called this penance Pradatt. 

Page #165:
---------------------------
## 124]
**Antakrid Dasha**

'Pragrihit' means 'taken, accepted'. The mental state of a person who undertakes a vow is not always the same. Sometimes there is an abundance of faith, sometimes faith weakens, and sometimes a vow is observed due to social pressure without any faith. Keeping all these things in mind, the sutrakar has characterized the tapas performed by the muni with the adjective 'pragrihit', which signifies 'taken with an excellent feeling'. Arjun Muni's faith did not weaken during times of crisis; he came into the world of sadhana as a strong sadhak and remained a strong sadhak till the end. He never let his mind waver.

If the Sanskrit form of 'payattenam' is 'prayatnena', then 'udhar' and 'vipula' both become adjectives of 'prayatna', then the meaning of these words would be 'taken with a great, vast effort'. Performing tapas is not an ordinary thing; it requires great effort. This great effort is called 'praadhan vishal prayatna'.

The word 'mahanubhag' signifies a powerful meaning. What doubt can there be about the impactful importance of the tapas by which Arjun Muni destroyed the karmas of countless births and attained the ultimate goal of nirvana?

To burn the karma-mal attached to the soul, the fire of tapas is absolutely necessary. When the karma-mal is burnt to ashes by the fire of tapas, the soul becomes pure and clear like a crystal. Therefore, after accepting restraint, Arjun Muni ignited the fire of tapas to purify his karma-mal-laden soul. As a result, after attaining kaivalya, he attained the state of nirvana.

In the Shrenik Charitra, it is written that the Mudgarpani Yaksha entered the body of Arjun Malakar for five months and thirteen days. During this time, he killed 1141 people. Of these, 978 were men and 163 were women. This clearly proves that he killed seven people every day. Here, there is a doubt that how could a person who committed such a great animal-slaughter and caused a great fall of the soul due to sinful karma attain liberation with only six months of sadhana?

The answer is that tapas has an inconceivable, illogical, and miraculous power. The Agam says, 'Bhavkodi sanchiyam kammam tavasa nijjarrijjai'. That is, the karmas accumulated and bound over millions of births can be destroyed by tapascharya. It is also said:

—
Annanni jam kammam khavei bhavasayasahasakodhihim.
Tam naani tihim gutto, khavei usasamettenam.
— Pravachansar

That is, the ignorant soul consumes the karmas that it accumulates over millions of births, while the wise soul, who keeps the mind, speech, and body secret, destroys them in a moment as short as a breath. When the fire of intense tapas is ignited, the groups of karmas are burnt to ashes like dry grass and straw.

In addition to this, it can also be said in this context that the killing done by Arjun Malakar was actually done by the Yaksha. Arjun was under the control of the Yaksha at that time. He was acting like a machine. Therefore, the intensity of the kashaya that makes killing humans appropriate was not possible in him. 

Page #166:
---------------------------
[Sixth Chapter]
[125 4-14 Study of Kashyap and other Gahapati]
15-At that time, in the city of Rajagriha, there was a garden called Gunasil. The king was named Srenic. There lived a Gahapati named Kashyap. He followed the Dikshaparaya for sixteen years, like Makai. He attained Siddhi on the Vipulagiri mountain.
Similarly, Kshemak Gahapati was also a resident of Kakandhi city. He followed the Dikshaparaya for sixteen years and attained Siddhi on the Vipulagiri mountain.
Similarly, Dhritihar Gahapati was also a resident of Kakandhi city. He followed the Muni-charitra for sixteen years and attained Siddhi on the Vipulagiri mountain.
Similarly, Kailash Gahapati was also a resident of Saketa city. He followed the Dikshaparaya for twelve years and attained Siddhi on the Vipulagiri mountain.
Similarly, the eighth, Harichandan Gahapati was also a resident of Saketa city. He followed the Shraman-charitra for twelve years and attained Siddhi on the Vipulagiri mountain.
Similarly, the ninth, Varatt Gahapati was a resident of Rajagriha city. He followed the charitra for twelve years and attained Siddhi on the Vipulagiri mountain.
Similarly, Sudarshan Gahapati was a resident of the city of Vanijagrama. He followed the Dikshaparaya for five years and attained Siddhi on the Vipulagiri mountain.
Similarly, Punnabhadda Gahapati was a resident of the city of Vanijagrama. He followed the Dikshaparaya for five years and attained Siddhi on the Vipulagiri mountain.
Similarly, Sumanbhadda Gahapati was a resident of the city of Savatthi. He followed the Dikshaparaya for many years and attained Siddhi on the Vipulagiri mountain.
Similarly, Supaita Gahapati was a resident of the city of Savatthi. He followed the Dikshaparaya for twenty-seven years and attained Siddhi on the Vipulagiri mountain.
Similarly, Meha Gahapati was a resident of the city of Rajagriha. He followed the Dikshaparaya for many years and attained Siddhi on the Vipulagiri mountain. 

Page #167:
---------------------------
##  [126]

**Antakrid Dasha**

Understand the description of the tenth Sudarshan Gaathapati in the same way. The special thing is that there was a garden called Tiplaash outside the city of Vanijyagram. He was initiated there. After observing the vows for five years, he attained Siddhi from Vipulagiri.

The description of Purnabhadra Gaathapati is also similar. The special thing is that he was a resident of the city of Vanijyagram. After observing the vows for five years, he also attained Siddhi on Vipulachal mountain.

Sumanabhadra Gaathapati was a resident of the city of Shravasti. He attained Siddhi on Vipulachal after observing the vows for many years.

Suप्रतिष्ठित Gaathapati was from the city of Shravasti and attained Siddhi on Vipulagiri after observing restraint for twenty-seven years.

Understand the story of Megh Gaathapati in the same way. Special - He was a resident of Rajgriha and attained Siddhi on Vipulagiri after observing the vows for many years.

**Discussion**

This sutra mentions eleven Shravakas. All of them, breaking the bonds of attachment and delusion, and connecting with detachment, reached the feet of the auspicious Karunasagar Bhagwan Mahavira and were initiated. The differences in their lives are given in the following table:

**Name** | **City** | **Garden** | **Years of Vows** | **Place of Initiation** | **Place of Nirvana**
------- | -------- | -------- | -------- | -------- | --------
1. Shri Kashyapji | Rajgriha | Gunashil | 16 years | Vipul Parv | Vipul Parvat
2. Shri Kshemakji | Kakand | Dyutipalaash | 16 years | Vipul Parvat | Vipul Parvat
3. Shri Dhriti Dharji | Kakand |  | 16 years | Vipul Parvat | Vipul Parvat
4. Shri Kailashji | Saketa |  | 12 years | Vipul Parvat | Vipul Parvat
5. Shri Harichandanji | Saketa |  | 12 years | Vipul Parvat | Vipul Parvat
6. Shri Varattji | Rajgriha |  | 12 years | Vipul Parvat | Vipul Parvat
7. Shri Sudarshanji | Vanijyagram |  | 5 years | Vipul Parvat | Vipul Parvat
8. Shri Purnabhadraji | Vanijyagram |  | 5 years | Vipul Parvat | Vipul Parvat
9. Shri Sumanabhadraji | Shravasti |  | Many years | Vipul Parvat | Vipul Parvat
10. Shri Suप्रतिष्ठितji | Shravasti |  | 27 years | Vipul Parvat | Vipul Parvat
11. Shri Meghkumarji | Rajgriha |  | Many years | Vipul Parvat | Vipul Parvat 

Page #168:
---------------------------
The Fifteenth Study
The begging of Ati Mukta Gautam Swami and Ati Mukta
16-At that time, in that era, in the city of Polapur, in the garden of Srivan, there was a king named Vijay. His queen was named Sri, here is a description of the king and queen.
1. Section 3, Sutra 13

Page #169:
---------------------------
[128]
[ Antakrid Dasha ]
This should be understood from the Auppapatika Sutra. The son of Maharaja Vijay and the son of Shridevi was a Kumar named Ati Mukt who was very delicate.
At that time and at that time, Shraman Bhagwan Mahavira was wandering, purifying one village after another, and staying free from physical pain - the obstacle to restraint - pain, and staying in the Shrivan garden of the city of Polaspur.
At that time, at that time, Shraman Bhagwan Mahavira's eldest disciple, Indrabhuti, was constantly performing tapasya according to the Vyākhyāprajñapti, cultivating the soul with restraint and tapasya. On the day of the par, in the first pauri, he performs swadhyay, in the second pauri, he meditates, and in the third pauri, he writes the Mukhavastrika without physical haste, mental fickleness, anxiety, and curiosity. Then he writes the vessels and clothes. Then, after cleaning the vessels and taking the vessels, he came to where Shraman Bhagwan Mahavira was seated, bowed to the Bhagwan, and said this:
'O Bhagwan! Today, on the day of the parana of the Shashthabhakta, I want to go to the city of Polaspur to take alms according to the method of alms-giving in the high, low, and middle castes, with your permission.'
Shraman Bhagwan Mahavira said - Devanupriya! Do as you please, do not delay.
With the permission of the Bhagwan, Gautam Swami left from the Bhagwan's side, from the Shrivan garden. Leaving, he looked at the Yuga (Dhusra) proof land without physical haste and mental fickleness, and without anxiety and curiosity, and came to the city of Polaspur with Iryasamit. There, he began to wander in the high, low, and middle castes according to the method of alms-giving.
On the other hand, Ati Mukt Kumar, after bathing and adorning his body, left his house with many boys and girls, children, and young men and women, and came to the Indra-sthana, that is, the playground. There, he began to play with those children.
At that time, Bhagwan Gautam was wandering in the city of Polaspur, in the rich, poor, and middle castes, and was passing by that playground.
Discussion - The present Sutra presents the description of the sweet meeting or first meeting of Ati Mukt Kumar, the prince of Polaspur, and Gautam, the first Ganadhar of Shraman Bhagwan Mahavira.
In this, the word 'Daraihi Ya, Dimbhahi Ya, Kumarahi Ya' is used for those with whom Ati Mukt plays. The words Darak, Dimbhak, and Kumar all seem to be synonymous, but the Vrittikar has explained their different meanings as follows: Darak - ordinary child, good age, Dimbhak - young age, Kumar - unmarried.
The place of playing is called 'Indatthan'. It means a playground, where a thick pillar called Indrastambha is planted and children play. 

Page #170:
---------------------------
[Sixth Chapter]
[129 The meeting of Gautama and Ati Mukta Kumar]
17. Then Ati Mukta Kumar saw Bhagavan Gautama walking in the distance. Seeing him, he went to where Bhagavan Gautama was and said to him, "Bhagavan Gautama, who are you? And why are you wandering?"
Then Bhagavan Gautama said to Ati Mukta Kumar, "We are Devānupriyā, Śramaṇa Nirgrantha, living as Iryāsamiti, etc., up to Brahmachārī, wandering for alms in small and large families."
Then Ati Mukta Kumar said to Bhagavan Gautama, "Bhagavan! Come, I will give you alms." Saying this, Ati Mukta Kumar took Bhagavan Gautama's finger and brought him to his house. Seeing Bhagavan Gautama coming, the queen Śrīdevī was very happy and got up from her seat and came before Bhagavan Gautama. She circumambulated Bhagavan Gautama three times from the right side, bowed to him, and offered him a plentiful offering of food, drink, and delicacies, and then dismissed him according to the proper procedure.
Then Ati Mukta Kumar said to Bhagavan Gautama, "Bhagavan, where do you live?" Then Bhagavan Gautama said to Ati Mukta Kumar,
"Devānupriyā, I live in the forest of Śrīvana, outside the city of Pōlāspur, in a secluded place, in a cave, practicing restraint and self-control, and living in accordance with the Dharma preached by the Śramaṇa Bhagavan Mahāvīra."
1.
Chapter 3, Sutra 18.
2. Chapter 1, A. 1, Sutra 2. 

Page #171:
---------------------------
[130]
"Devānupriya! Where do you reside?" Lord Gautama replied to Ati Mukta Kumar, "Devānupriya! My Dharma Acharya and Dharma Upadeshak, Lord Mahavira, the founder of Dharma, who desires the eternal abode of Moksha, resides in the Srivan garden outside this Polaspur city, taking a place according to the rules, and lives by restraining and meditating his soul. We reside there."

Discussion - From the study of this Sutra, it is clear that the boy Ati Mukta Kumar asked Lord Gautama three questions. Those questions are - Who are you? What is your purpose of travel? Where do you reside? The answers to all three are given in this Sutra. While answering the first question, Lord Gautama introduced himself and also described the rules of a Sadhu's life.

In response to the first question, Gautama Swami said, "We are Shramanas, Nirgrantha, Iryasmita, and Brahmachari." In fact, these four words are indicative of the rules of a Sadhu. Their explanation is as follows - A great person who is an ascetic or who treats all beings equally is called a Shramana. Those who are free from possessions or who do not have the knot of attachment and aversion are called Nirgrantha. Irya-Gaman related Samiti-Vivek, i.e., walking with foresight and caution, is Iryasmita. The Sadhak who follows the fourth great vow of Brahmacharya is called a Brahmachari.

While resolving the second question, Lord Gautama told Ati Mukta Kumar, "Vats! I am traveling for alms."

In response to the third question, Gautama Swami did not say that his residence is in the Srivan garden, but said that our residence is with Lord Mahavira in the Srivan garden. This reflects his unparalleled devotion to his Guru.

Viulenam..........Saimenam - This word has many meanings - abundant, plentiful, vast, huge, excellent, best, etc. In this context, the meaning "excellent" should be taken. Ati Mukta's journey with Gautama for worship
18 - Then that Ati Mukta Kumar said to Lord Gautama, "I will go with you, Lord! I will go with you to see the Shramana, Lord Mahavira." "Ah, Devānupriya! Do not be bound."

Then that Ati Mukta Kumar went with Lord Gautama to the Shramana, Lord Mahavira, and upon reaching there, he performed the Tikkhutta Ayahin-Payahin, and after performing it, he worshipped and stayed there.

Then Lord Gautama went to the Shramana, Lord Mahavira, and upon reaching there, he stayed there (and after reaching the Shramana, Lord Mahavira, he performed the ritual of going and coming, and after performing it, he performed the ritual of eating and drinking, and after performing it, he performed the ritual of eating and drinking, he performed the ritual of eating and drinking, he performed the ritual of eating and drinking, he performed the ritual of eating and drinking, he performed the ritual of eating and drinking, he performed the ritual of eating and drinking, he performed the ritual of eating and drinking, he performed the ritual of eating and drinking, he performed the ritual of eating and drinking, he performed the ritual of eating and drinking, he performed the ritual of eating and drinking, he performed the ritual of eating and drinking, he performed the ritual of eating and drinking, he performed the ritual of eating and drinking, he performed the ritual of eating and drinking, he performed the ritual of eating and drinking, he performed the ritual of eating and drinking, he performed the ritual of eating and drinking, he performed the ritual of eating and drinking, he performed the ritual of eating and drinking, he performed the ritual of eating and drinking, he performed the ritual of eating and drinking, he performed the ritual of eating and drinking, he performed the ritual of eating and drinking, he performed the ritual of eating and drinking, he performed the ritual of eating and drinking, he performed the ritual of eating and drinking, he performed the ritual of eating and drinking, he performed the ritual of eating and drinking, he performed the ritual of eating and drinking, he performed the ritual of eating and drinking, he performed the ritual of eating and drinking, he performed the ritual of eating and drinking, he performed the ritual of eating and drinking, he performed the ritual of eating and drinking, he performed the ritual of eating and drinking, he performed the ritual of eating and drinking, he performed the ritual of eating and drinking, he performed the ritual of eating and drinking, he performed the ritual of eating and drinking, he performed the ritual of eating and drinking, he performed the ritual of eating and drinking, he performed the ritual of eating and drinking, he performed the ritual of eating and drinking, he performed the ritual of eating and drinking, he performed the ritual of eating and drinking, he performed the ritual of eating and drinking, he performed the ritual of eating and drinking, he performed the ritual of eating and drinking, he performed the ritual of eating and drinking, he performed the ritual of eating and drinking, he performed the ritual of eating and drinking, he performed the ritual of eating and drinking, he performed the ritual of eating and drinking, he performed the ritual of eating and drinking, he performed the ritual of eating and drinking, he performed the ritual of eating and drinking, he performed the ritual of eating and drinking, he performed the ritual of eating and drinking, he performed the ritual of eating and drinking, he performed the ritual of eating and drinking, he performed the ritual of eating and drinking, he performed the ritual of eating and drinking, he performed the ritual of eating and drinking, he performed the ritual of eating and drinking, he performed the ritual of eating and drinking, he performed the ritual of eating and drinking, he performed the ritual of eating and drinking, he performed the ritual of eating and drinking, he performed the ritual of eating and drinking, he performed the ritual of eating and drinking, he performed the ritual of eating and drinking, he performed the ritual of eating and drinking, he performed the ritual of eating and drinking, he performed the ritual of eating and drinking, he performed the ritual of eating and drinking, he performed the ritual of eating and drinking, he performed the ritual of eating and drinking, he performed the ritual of eating and drinking, he performed the ritual of eating and drinking, he performed the ritual of eating and drinking, he performed the ritual of eating and drinking, he performed the ritual of eating and drinking, he performed the ritual of eating and drinking, he performed the ritual of eating and drinking, he performed the ritual of eating and drinking, he performed the ritual of eating and drinking, he performed the ritual of eating and drinking, he performed the ritual of eating and drinking, he performed the ritual of eating and drinking, he performed the ritual of eating and drinking, he performed the ritual of eating and drinking, he performed the ritual of eating and drinking, he performed the ritual of eating and drinking, he performed the ritual of eating and drinking, he performed the ritual of eating and drinking, he performed the ritual of eating and drinking, he
Page #172:
---------------------------
## Sixth Chapter

Then, the Samana Bhagavan Mahavira told this Dharmakatha to the Ati Mukta Kumar.

Then, the Ati Mukta Kumar spoke to Bhagavan Gautam in this way - "O Venerable one! I too will go with you to pay homage to the Samana Bhagavan Mahavira."

Sri Gautam said - "O Devānupriya! Do as you please!"

Then, the Ati Mukta Kumar went with Gautam Swami to the Samana Bhagavan Mahavira Swami and after arriving, he circumambulated the Samana Bhagavan Mahavira three times from the right side. Then, he paid homage and started to perform Paryupasana.

[131]

Meanwhile, Gautam Swami was present in the service of Bhagavan Mahavira and performed the Pratikramana related to going and coming, and criticized the faults in taking alms. Then, he showed the brought food and water to Bhagavan and after showing it, he started to wander, influencing his soul with restraint and penance.

Then, the Samana Bhagavan Mahavira told the Dharmakatha to the Ati Mukta Kumar and the great assembly.

**The Initiation of Ati Mukta**

19. Then, the Ati Mukta Kumar, after listening to the Dharma of the Samana Bhagavan Mahavira, became very happy and said - "O Devānupriya! I will go to my parents and inform them."

"O Devānupriya! Do not be bound by them."

Then, the Ati Mukta Kumar went to his parents and after arriving, he paid homage to his parents and said - "O Mother and Father! I have listened to the Dharma of the Samana Bhagavan Mahavira and I desire, accept, and am pleased with this Dharma."

Then, his parents said - "You are blessed! You are fulfilled! You are fortunate! You have listened to the Dharma of the Samana Bhagavan Mahavira and you desire, accept, and are pleased with this Dharma."

Then, the Ati Mukta Kumar said to his parents - "O Mother and Father! I have listened to the Dharma of the Samana Bhagavan Mahavira. I desire, accept, and am pleased with this Dharma. I wish, O Mother and Father! to become a monk, having my head shaved, and leave the household life for the homeless life, after being blessed by you."

Then, his parents said to the Ati Mukta Kumar -

"You are still a child, my son! You are not enlightened, my son! Do you understand the Dharma?"

Then, the Ati Mukta Kumar said to his parents - "O Mother and Father! I know what I know and I don't know what I don't know. I know what I don't know and I don't know what I know."

Then, his parents said to the Ati Mukta Kumar -

2. Chapter 5, Sutra 4.
1.
3.
Chapter 3, Sutra 18.
Chapter 3, Sutra 18. 

Page #173:
---------------------------
[132]
[ Antakrid Dasha ]
'How do you know, son? What you know, you don't know? What you don't know, you know?'
The young prince said to his parents, 'I know, mother and father! Just as I know that I will die, I don't know, mother and father! - Why, what, how, or for how long? I don't know, mother and father! By what karmas do beings transmigrate to hell, animal, human, and heavenly realms? I know, mother and father! Just as I know that by certain karmas beings transmigrate to hell, etc. Thus, mother and father! What I know, I don't know, and what I don't know, I know. I desire, mother and father! To be ordained by you.'
Then the parents of the young prince, unable to dissuade him, despite many attempts, finally agreed. One day, they took him to the king. The young prince, with a mind filled with the teachings of the Tirthankara, remained silent. The king, seeing his determination, performed the abhisheka ceremony. He left the palace and, after many years, attained the Samaya-Maaya-Aaya-Ekadasa-Anga, and achieved great perfection in the virtues, knowledge, and conduct.
The young prince, now a monk, was very happy and satisfied after listening to the teachings of the Tirthankara Mahavira and embracing them. He said, 'Devanupriya! I will ask my parents. Then I will take the vows from Devanupriya.'
The Tirthankara Mahavira said, 'O Devanupriya! Do as you please. But do not be negligent in your religious duties.'
Then the young prince went to his parents. He bowed at their feet and said, 'Mother and father! I have listened to the teachings of the Tirthankara Mahavira. I find them pleasing, very pleasing, and very attractive.'
The young prince's parents said, 'Son! You are blessed, son! You are virtuous, son! You are fortunate to have listened to the teachings of the Tirthankara Mahavira and found them pleasing, very pleasing, and attractive.'
Then the young prince said the same thing a second and third time, 'Mother and father! I have listened to the teachings of the Tirthankara Mahavira and found them pleasing, very pleasing, and attractive. Therefore, mother and father! With your permission, I wish to be ordained by the Tirthankara Mahavira, renounce the world, and take the vows of a monk.'
His parents said to him, 'Son! You are still a child, immature. How can you understand the teachings?'
Then the young prince said to his parents, 'Mother and father! What I know, I don't know, and what I don't know, I know.'
1. In this
3 - 4, Section 3, Sutra 18
2. Section 6, Sutra 18
5. Section 1, Sutra 9 

Page #174:
---------------------------
[Sixth Chapter]
[133]
Then the parents spoke to the liberated prince in this way: "Son! You do not know what you know, and you know what you do not know, how is this?"
Then the liberated prince said to his parents in this way: "Parents! I know that whoever is born must die, but I do not know when, where, how, and after how many days he will die? Then I also do not know why the soul is born in hell, animal, human, and divine realms due to what karmas, but I know that the soul is born in hell and up to the divine realms due to its own karmas. Thus, certainly, O parents! I do not know what I know, and I know what I do not know. Therefore, O parents! I wish to accept the renunciation with your permission."
When the parents of the liberated prince were unable to convince him with many strategies and tactics, they said: "O son! We want to see the splendor of your kingdom for one day." Then the liberated prince remained silent, following the words of his parents. Then his coronation took place like that of Mahabal, and then he received initiation from the Lord and studied the eleven angas from Samayik. He followed the conduct of a Shraman for many years. He practiced the austerities of Gunaratnasamvatsar. He attained Siddhi on the Vipulachal mountain.
**Discussion:** In the present sutra, a beautiful description of the question and answer between Prince Atimukta Kumar and his parents is obtained. When Atimukta Kumar told his parents that he knew and did not know the same thing, his parents were surprised. For this reason, the parents asked their son to explain it to them. Then he presented two points before his parents:
1. I do not know what I know.
2. I know what I do not know.
The parents were very surprised to hear these words of Prince Atimukta. They started thinking: "What is the meaning of not knowing what has been known? And what is the meaning of knowing what has not been known? When knowledge is not called ignorance and ignorance is not called knowledge, then what could be the purpose of Atimukta Kumar saying this? Finally, they said to Atimukta Kumar: "Son! Clarify your statement. We do not understand this riddle of yours."
Clarifying his statement, Atimukta Kumar said that it is not that I am completely ignorant about religion. I do not know the complete definition of religion, but I do know something. Do not consider me a small child and think that I am completely unfamiliar with the principles of religion. I am aware that whoever is born will die one day, there is an eternal relationship between birth and death. Whoever is born has to become food for death one day. I know this, but I do not know when? Where and how? After how much time will I have to endure the blow of death? I do not understand why the soul is born in the four realms due to what karma-bonds, but I do know that the soul is born in hell and other realms due to its own actions.
In the present story of Atimukta Kumar, the clear difference between limited knowledge and omniscience is evident. 

Page #175:
---------------------------
[134]
In the present sutra, the word 'kammayayanehi' has been interpreted by the commentator as follows: 'Kammayayanehi, karmaṇām jñānāvaraṇīyādināmāyatānāni ādānanī bandhahetava ityārthaḥ. Pāṭhantarēṇa 'kammavayaṇehi' tatra karmāpatānāni yaiḥ karmāpatati-ātmani sambhavati, tāni tatha'- meaning 'karma' refers to the karmas like jñānāvaraṇīya, darśanāvaraṇīya etc. and 'āyatana' refers to the causes of bondage. In some places, 'kammavayaṇehi' is found as a variant reading in place of 'kammayayanehi'. The reasons due to which karmas fall into the lake of the soul, are connected with the regions of the soul, are called karmāpatana. Both have the same meaning.
_ In addition to this description of the Antagad Sutra regarding the life of Atimukta Kumar, a very beautiful discussion of an incident in the life of Muni Atimukta is found in the fourth uddeśaka of the Bhagavati Sutra. It is being mentioned here as it is necessary.
. 'Teṇa kālenaṁ tēṇaṁ samaēṇaṁ samaṇassa bhagavao mahāvīrassāṁtevāsī aimuttē nāmaṁ kumārasamaṇē pagai bhaddae, jāva-viṇīē. Tae ṇṁ se aimuttē kumārasamaṇē aṇṇayā kayāī mahāvutṭhikāyansi ṇivayamāṇansi kakkhapaḍiggaha-rayaharaṇamāyāē bahiya sampatṭhiē vihārāē. Tae ṇṁ aimuttē kumārasamaṇē vāhayaṁ vahmāṇaṁ pāsai, pāsitttā maṭṭiyāē pāliṁ bandhai, bandhittā 'ṇāviyā mē ṇāviyā mē' ṇāviō viv ṇāvamāyaṁ paḍiggahaṁ udagaṁsi kaṭu pavvāhamāṇē pavvāhamāṇē abhiramaī, taṁ ca thērā adakkhu, jēṇēv samaṇē bhagavaṁ mahāvīrē tēṇēv uvāgacchai, uvāgacchittā evaṁ vayāsī
Evaṁ khalu devāṇuppiyāṇāṁ āṁtevāsī aimuttē nāmaṁ kumārasamaṇē bhagavaṁ, se ṇṁ bhanṭē! aimuttē kumārasamaṇē kaihiṁ bhavaggahaṇēhiṁ sijjhihii jāva antaṁ karehii?
Ajo! tti samaṇē bhagavaṁ mahāvīrē tē thērē evaṁ vayāsī– evaṁ khalu ajo! mamaṁ āṁtevāsī aimuttē nāmaṁ kumārasamaṇē pagai bhaddae, jāva-viṇīē, se ṇṁ aimuttē kumārasamaṇē imēṇa cēv bhavaggahaṇēṇaṁ sijjhihii jāva antaṁ karihii taṁ mā ṇṁ ajo! tubbhē aimuttaṁ kumārasamaṇṁ hīlēh, nindah, khiṁsah, garahah, avamanṇah, tubbhē ṇṁ devāṇuppiyā! aimuttaṁ kumārasamaṇṁ agilāē saṁgiṇhah, agilāē uvagiṇhah, agilāē bhattēṇaṁ pāṇēṇaṁ viṇēṇaṁ vēyāvaḍiyaṁ kareh. Aimuttē ṇṁ kumārasamaṇē antakarē cēv, antimasarīriē cēv; tae ṇṁ tē thērā bhagavanto samaṇēṇaṁ bhagavayā mahāvīrēṇaṁ evaṁ vuttā samāṇā samaṇṁ bhagavaṁ mahāvīraṁ vandai, namasai; aimuttaṁ kumārasamaṇṁ agilāē saṁgiṇhaṁti, jāva vēyāvaḍiyaṁ karentī.'
Meaning – At that time, at that time, there was a disciple of the Shraman Bhagavan Mahavir Swami named Atimukta Kumar Shraman. They were naturally blessed and virtuous. One day, when there was heavy rain, Atimukta Kumar Shraman went out to the field for the purpose of collecting alms, carrying his alms bowl under his arm and a vessel. While going, Atimukta Kumar Shraman saw a small stream of flowing water on the way. Seeing it, they built a mud dam on that stream. After that, just as a boatman releases his boat into the water, in the same way, they also released their vessel into that water and said, 'This is my boat, this is my boat' - saying so, they played by floating the vessel in the water. Seeing Atimukta Kumar Shraman doing this, the elder monks came away without saying anything and asked Shraman Bhagavan Mahavir Swami
O Bhagavan! How many births will your disciple Atimukta Kumar Shraman take before he becomes a Siddha? Until when will he end all suffering? 

Page #176:
---------------------------
[Sixth Section]
[135] The Venerable Lord Mahavira addressed those senior monks, saying, "O Aryas! From nature, the one who is virtuous, from nature, the one who is humble, my Antyavasī, Atimukta Kumāra, will attain Siddhi in this very birth, and will end all sorrows. Therefore, O Aryas! Do not mock, slander, harm, criticize, or insult the Atimukta Kumāra Śramaṇa. But you should accept the Atimukta Kumāra Śramaṇa with a cheerful mind. Help him and offer him food and water with humility. The Atimukta Kumāra Śramaṇa is a Charmaśarīrī and will destroy all karmas in this very birth." Hearing this account from the Venerable Lord Mahavira, those senior monks paid homage and bowed to the Venerable Lord Mahavira. Then, they accepted the Atimukta Kumāra Śramaṇa with a cheerful mind and began to serve him.

Sixteenth Study: Alaka
20- At that time, in that era, there was a garden called Kāmamāhvana in the city of Vārāṇasī. In that city of Vārāṇasī, there was a king named Alaka.

At that time, in that era, the Venerable Lord Mahavira was staying in the Kāmamāhvana garden. The assembly went out. Hearing that the Venerable Lord Mahavira had arrived, King Alaka was delighted and, like King Kuṇika, he began to worship the Lord. The Lord preached the Dharma.

Then, King Alaka, like Udayana, took Śramaṇa-dīkṣā from the Venerable Lord Mahavira. Notably, he placed his eldest son on the throne. He studied the eleven Angas. He followed the Śramaṇa-charitra for many years, until he attained Siddhi on the Vipulagiri mountain.

Thus, O Jambū! The Venerable Lord Mahavira has explained this meaning of the sixth section of the eighth Anga, Antagada-daśā.

Discussion: This sixteenth study mentions the life of King Alaka of the city of Vārāṇasī. King Alaka was a devout devotee of the Venerable Lord Mahavira. To illustrate his devotion and faith in the Lord, the Sūtra-kāra has pointed to King Kuṇika of Champa, whose story is found in: 1. Section 6, Sūtra 15, 2. Uvvaiya 3, Section 1, Sūtra 9. 

Page #177:
---------------------------
[136]
The story of the ten stages of death is described in the *Aupapatik Sutra*.
The meaning of "Jaha Udayane taha Nikkhanta" is - Just as Maharaja Udayan took initiation, so did the king of Alaksh.
The description of King Udayan is found in the *Bhagavati Sutra*, Shatak 13, U. 6. According to it, Udayan was the lord of sixteen countries including Sindhu and Sauvira.
One day he was sitting in the dispensary, taking medicine. While reflecting on Dharma, he remembered Lord Mahavira. He started thinking - that city, that forest is blessed where the Lord resides. Those kings, etc. are blessed who listen to the Lord's words, worship him, and give him pure food, clothes, vessels, etc. with their own hands. Where is my such fortune? I don't even get the opportunity to see those great lords. The stream of contemplation turned upwards. He thought - if the Lord comes to my city, I will serve him and at the same time leave this impermanent world and become initiated.
At that time, the Lord was residing in the Purnabhadra garden of Champa. There was a distance of seven hundred kos between Vitabhayapur and Champa, but the compassionate, devotee-loving Lord Mahavira, to fulfill the desire of his devotee, left Champa and slowly traveling, he reached Udayan's city. On receiving the good news of the Lord's arrival, Udayan was overjoyed. With great ceremony, the king, queen, and Kumar all appeared at the Lord's feet. They listened to the Dharma-katha, and hearing the Lord's auspicious words, Udayan became detached. To decide his successor, he returned to the palace. He should have entrusted all the responsibilities of the kingdom to Abhich Kumar, but Udayan thought - I am renouncing the kingdom considering it a bondage, then why should I trap my son Abhich Kumar in this bondage? To put my bondage on Kumar's neck would be an injustice to him. Finally, the king announced throughout the kingdom - my successor is my nephew Keshi Kumar, I will become initiated after his coronation. This announcement caused great sorrow to the heir prince and he left his kingdom in anger. Here, Udayan made his nephew king and became initiated.
Once, Muni Udayan became ill. While traveling, he came to his city Vitabhayapur, but Keshi Kumar had changed. He was afraid that Udayan might want to take back the kingdom! Therefore, he ordered everyone in the city - no one should give food to Udayan, nor should he be allowed to rest. Anyone who disobeys this order will be put to death along with his family. Out of fear of death, no citizen gave him shelter. Udayan wandered all over the city, then a potter was moved with compassion. He gave him shelter. On receiving this information from his spies, the king sent a physician to kill Udayan. The physician gave Udayan poison in the guise of treatment. There was immense pain in his body, but Muni Udayan endured the poison-pain peacefully. Due to the unperturbed state of his mind, Muni Udayan attained *avadhi jnana*. As soon as the light of knowledge shone, he understood the situation, but he did not let his mind become disturbed. He crossed the steps of *dharma dhyana* and *shukla dhyana* and finally attained *keval jnana* and became liberated. 

Page #178:
---------------------------
## Seventh Section

**1-13 Study of Nanda etc.**

1. **"O Venerable One!**  The Venerable Lord Mahavira, in the eighth Anga, Antagadadasana, has explained the sixth section. Now, please explain the seventh section of the eighth Anga, Antagadadasana."

**"O Jambū!** The Venerable Lord Mahavira, in the eighth Anga, Antagadadasana, has explained thirteen studies in the seventh section. They are, as follows:

1. Nanda
2. Nandavai
3. Nanduttara
4. Nandiseniya
5. Maruta
6. Sumaruta
7. Mahamaruta
8. Marudeva
9. Bhadda
10. Subhadda
11. Sujaya
12. Sumanaia
13. Bhuya-dinna, who are to be understood, and are known by the name of Seniya Bhajana.

**"O Venerable One!** The Venerable Lord Mahavira, in the eighth Anga, Antagadadasana, has explained thirteen studies in the seventh section. Now, please explain the first study of the seventh section."

**"O Jambū!** At that time, in that era, in the city of Rayagih, in the Gunasil, there was a king named Seniya. He had a queen named Nanda. She was very beautiful. She was very kind and compassionate. She was very generous and charitable. She was very wise and intelligent. She was very strong and powerful. She was very brave and courageous. She was very patient and forgiving. She was very humble and modest. She was very pure and holy. She was very peaceful and serene. She was very loving and compassionate. She was very happy and joyful. She was very grateful and thankful. She was very devoted and faithful. She was very righteous and just. She was very truthful and honest. She was very merciful and compassionate. She was very kind and gentle. She was very loving and caring. She was very wise and intelligent. She was very strong and powerful. She was very brave and courageous. She was very patient and forgiving. She was very humble and modest. She was very pure and holy. She was very peaceful and serene. She was very loving and compassionate. She was very happy and joyful. She was very grateful and thankful. She was very devoted and faithful. She was very righteous and just. She was very truthful and honest. She was very merciful and compassionate. She was very kind and gentle. She was very loving and caring. She was very wise and intelligent. She was very strong and powerful. She was very brave and courageous. She was very patient and forgiving. She was very humble and modest. She was very pure and holy. She was very peaceful and serene. She was very loving and compassionate. She was very happy and joyful. She was very grateful and thankful. She was very devoted and faithful. She was very righteous and just. She was very truthful and honest. She was very merciful and compassionate. She was very kind and gentle. She was very loving and caring. She was very wise and intelligent. She was very strong and powerful. She was very brave and courageous. She was very patient and forgiving. She was very humble and modest. She was very pure and holy. She was very peaceful and serene. She was very loving and compassionate. She was very happy and joyful. She was very grateful and thankful. She was very devoted and faithful. She was very righteous and just. She was very truthful and honest. She was very merciful and compassionate. She was very kind and gentle. She was very loving and caring. She was very wise and intelligent. She was very strong and powerful. She was very brave and courageous. She was very patient and forgiving. She was very humble and modest. She was very pure and holy. She was very peaceful and serene. She was very loving and compassionate. She was very happy and joyful. She was very grateful and thankful. She was very devoted and faithful. She was very righteous and just. She was very truthful and honest. She was very merciful and compassionate. She was very kind and gentle. She was very loving and caring. She was very wise and intelligent. She was very strong and powerful. She was very brave and courageous. She was very patient and forgiving. She was very humble and modest. She was very pure and holy. She was very peaceful and serene. She was very loving and compassionate. She was very happy and joyful. She was very grateful and thankful. She was very devoted and faithful. She was very righteous and just. She was very truthful and honest. She was very merciful and compassionate. She was very kind and gentle. She was very loving and caring. She was very wise and intelligent. She was very strong and powerful. She was very brave and courageous. She was very patient and forgiving. She was very humble and modest. She was very pure and holy. She was very peaceful and serene. She was very loving and compassionate. She was very happy and joyful. She was very grateful and thankful. She was very devoted and faithful. She was very righteous and just. She was very truthful and honest. She was very merciful and compassionate. She was very kind and gentle. She was very loving and caring. She was very wise and intelligent. She was very strong and powerful. She was very brave and courageous. She was very patient and forgiving. She was very humble and modest. She was very pure and holy. She was very peaceful and serene. She was very loving and compassionate. She was very happy and joyful. She was very grateful and thankful. She was very devoted and faithful. She was very righteous and just. She was very truthful and honest. She was very merciful and compassionate. She was very kind and gentle. She was very loving and caring. She was very wise and intelligent. She was very strong and powerful. She was very brave and courageous. She was very patient and forgiving. She was very humble and modest. She was very pure and holy. She was very peaceful and serene. She was very loving and compassionate. She was very happy and joyful. She was very grateful and thankful. She was very devoted and faithful. She was very righteous and just. She was very truthful and honest. She was very merciful and compassionate. She was very kind and gentle. She was very loving and caring. She was very wise and intelligent. She was very strong and powerful. She was very brave and courageous. She was very patient and forgiving. She was very humble and modest. She was very pure and holy. She was very peaceful and serene. She was very loving and compassionate. She was very happy and joyful. She was very grateful and thankful. She was very devoted and faithful. She was very righteous and just. She was very truthful and honest. She was very merciful and compassionate. She was very kind and gentle. She was very loving and caring. She was very wise and intelligent. She was very strong and powerful. She was very brave and courageous. She was very patient and forgiving. She was very humble and modest. She was very pure and holy. She was very peaceful and serene. She was very loving and compassionate. She was
Page #179:
---------------------------
[138]
[Antakṛddaśā _Ārya Jambū asked Sudharmāsvāmī - 'Bhagavan! The Lord has spoken of thirteen studies in the seventh category, so what is the meaning of the first study, O venerable one, that the Śramaṇa, the liberated Lord, has spoken of?'
- Ārya Sudharmāsvāmī said - 'O Jambū! In that time and at that time, there was a city called Rājagṛha. Outside it was a garden called Guṇasīla, outside it was a garden called Gaṇasīla. There, King Śreṇika ruled. Here, one should know the description of the king. King Śreṇika had a queen named Nandā, her description should also be understood as similar to the description of the king in the Aupapātika Sūtra. The Lord Mahāvīra arrived in the garden of Rājagṛha city. The assembly went out to pay homage. Nandā Devī, hearing the news of the Lord's arrival, was very happy and called an obedient servant and ordered him to bring a religious chariot. Like Padmāvatī, she also took initiation, studied all eleven angas. She observed the conduct for twenty years, and finally became a Siddha. ... Nandavatī and the remaining twelve studies are like Nandā. 

Page #180:
---------------------------
## Eighth Section, First Study: Kali

**Utkṣepa**

1. **Jada:** "O Venerable One! What did the Great Hero, the Ascetic, the Liberated One, declare as the meaning of the first study of the eighth section of the Antagaddadasa of the eighth anga?"

**Evam Khalu Jambu:** "O Jambu! The Great Hero, the Ascetic, the Liberated One, declared ten studies of the eighth section of the Antagaddadasa of the eighth anga, which are as follows:

(1). Kali (2). Sukali (3). Mahakali (4). Kanha (5). Sukanha (6). Mahakanha (7). Virakanha, who is also known as Bodhavva (8). Ramakanha, likewise (9). Pitusenakanha, the ninth (10). Mahasekanha, the tenth. ||1||

**Jada:** "O Venerable One! If the Great Hero, the Ascetic, the Liberated One, declared ten studies of the eighth section of the Antagaddadasa, then what did he declare as the meaning of the first study of the Antagaddadasa?"

**Evam Khalu Jambu:** "O Jambu! In that time and at that time, there was a city named Champa. There was a garden called Punnabhadde. In that city of Champa, there was a king named Konika. In that city of Champa, there was a queen named Kali, the daughter of the king Seniya, the younger sister of Konika. Just as Nanda, up to the Samaiya, has eleven limbs, and dwells in many forms, up to the fourth, being attached to her own form."

**Sri Jambuswami** asked **Arya Sudharmaswami:** "O Venerable One! What did the Ascetic, the Liberated One, the Great Hero, declare as the meaning of the eighth section of the Antagaddadasa of the eighth anga?"

**Sri Sudharmaswami** replied: "O Jambu! The Ascetic, the Liberated One, the Great Hero, declared ten studies of the eighth section of the Antagaddadasa of the eighth anga, which are as follows:

**Gatha-arth:** (1). Kali (2). Sukali (3). Mahakali (4). Krishna (5). Sukrishna (6). Mahakrisha (7). Virakrishna (8). Ramakrishna (9). Pitusenakrishna and (10). Mahasekanha.

**Sri Jambuswami** asked again: "O Venerable One! If there are ten studies of the eighth section, then what did the Ascetic, the Liberated One, the Great Hero, declare as the meaning of the first study?"

**Arya Sudharmaswami** replied: "O Jambu! In that time and at that time, there was a city named Champa. There was a garden called Punnabhadde. In that city of Champa, there was a king named Konika. In that city of Champa, there was a queen named Kali, the daughter of the king Seniya, the younger sister of Konika. Just as Nanda, up to the Samaiya, has eleven limbs, and dwells in many forms, up to the fourth, being attached to her own form."

**Footnotes:**

1.  **Varga 5, Sutra 4, 6**
2.  **Varga 1, Sutra 9** 

Page #181:
---------------------------
[140]
The younger mother of Antakrid Dasha and Maharaja Konik was a goddess named Kali. According to the Aupapatik Sutra, her description should be told. Like Nanda Devi, Queen Kali also took Shramanidiksha near Lord Mahavira and studied the eleven Angas from Samayik to the end. She wandered, affecting her soul with many fasts, Bales, Teles, etc. Kali Arya's Ratnavalli Tapa
2-Then she, Kali, said to Ajachandana, "I wish, Ajachandana, that you would grant me the Ratnavalli Samadhi, which is adorned with jewels, and I would wander."
The Devauppias said, "Do not be bound."
Then Kali, Ajachandana, adorned with jewels, received the Ratnavalli Samadhi and wandered. It is as follows:
She performs the fourth, and by performing it, she crosses all desires. She performs the sixth, and by performing it, she crosses all desires. She performs the eighth, and by performing it, she crosses all desires. She performs the eighth and sixth, and by performing it, she crosses all desires. She performs the fourth, and by performing it, she crosses all desires. She performs the sixth, and by performing it, she crosses all desires. She performs the eighth, and by performing it, she crosses all desires. She performs the tenth, and by performing it, she crosses all desires. She performs the twelfth, and by performing it, she crosses all desires. She performs the fourteenth, and by performing it, she crosses all desires. She performs the sixteenth, and by performing it, she crosses all desires. She performs the eighteenth, and by performing it, she crosses all desires. She performs the twentieth, and by performing it, she crosses all desires. She performs the twenty-second, and by performing it, she crosses all desires. She performs the twenty-fourth, and by performing it, she crosses all desires. She performs the twenty-sixth, and by performing it, she crosses all desires. She performs the twenty-eighth, and by performing it, she crosses all desires. She performs the thirtieth, and by performing it, she crosses all desires. She performs the thirty-second, and by performing it, she crosses all desires. She performs the thirty-fourth, and by performing it, she crosses all desires. She performs the thirty-fourth and sixth, and by performing it, she crosses all desires. She performs the thirty-fourth, and by performing it, she crosses all desires. She performs the thirty-second, and by performing it, she crosses all desires. She performs the thirtieth, and by performing it, she crosses all desires. She performs the twenty-eighth, and by performing it, she crosses all desires. She performs the twenty-sixth, and by performing it, she crosses all desires. She performs the twenty-fourth, and by performing it, she crosses all desires. She performs the twenty-second, and by performing it, she crosses all desires. She performs the twentieth, and by performing it, she crosses all desires. She performs the eighteenth, and by performing it, she crosses all desires. She performs the sixteenth, and by performing it, she crosses all desires. She performs the fourteenth, and by performing it, she crosses all desires. She performs the twelfth, and by performing it, she crosses all desires. She performs the tenth, and by performing it, she crosses all desires. She performs the eighth, and by performing it, she crosses all desires. She performs the sixth, and by performing it, she crosses all desires. She performs the fourth, and by performing it, she crosses all desires. She performs the eighth and sixth, and by performing it, she crosses all desires. She performs the eighth, and by performing it, she crosses all desires. She performs the sixth, and by performing it, she crosses all desires. She performs the fourth, and by performing it, she crosses all desires.
Thus, this Ratnavalli, with its Tapa Karma, is performed in one year, three months, and twenty-two days and nights. It is performed with the body, speech, and mind, and it is performed with the right faith, right knowledge, and right conduct. It is performed with the right effort, right mindfulness, and right concentration. It is performed with the right speech, right action, and right livelihood. It is performed with the right effort, right mindfulness, and right concentration. It is performed with the right speech, right action, and right livelihood. It is performed with the right effort, right mindfulness, and right concentration. It is performed with the right speech, right action, and right livelihood. It is performed with the right effort, right mindfulness, and right concentration. It is performed with the right speech, right action, and right livelihood. It is performed with the right effort, right mindfulness, and right concentration. It is performed with the right speech, right action, and right livelihood. It is performed with the right effort, right mindfulness, and right concentration. It is performed with the right speech, right action, and right livelihood. It is performed with the right effort, right mindfulness, and right concentration. It is performed with the right speech, right action, and right livelihood. It is performed with the right effort, right mindfulness, and right concentration. It is performed with the right speech, right action, and right livelihood. It is performed with the right effort, right mindfulness, and right concentration. It is performed with the right speech, right action, and right livelihood. It is performed with the right effort, right mindfulness, and right concentration. It is performed with the right speech, right action, and right livelihood. It is performed with the right effort, right mindfulness, and right concentration. It is performed with the right speech, right action, and right livelihood. It is performed with the right effort, right mindfulness, and right concentration. It is performed with the right speech, right action, and right livelihood. It is performed with the right effort, right mindfulness, and right concentration. It is performed with the right speech, right action, and right livelihood. It is performed with the right effort, right mindfulness, and right concentration. It is performed with the right speech, right action, and right livelihood. It is performed with the right effort, right mindfulness, and right concentration. It is performed with the right speech, right action, and right livelihood. It is performed with the right effort, right mindfulness, and right concentration. It is performed with the right speech, right action, and right livelihood. It is performed with the right effort, right mindfulness, and right concentration. It is performed with the right speech, right action, and right livelihood. It is performed with the right effort, right mindfulness, and right concentration. It is performed with the right speech, right action, and right livelihood. It is performed with the right effort, right mindfulness, and right concentration. It is performed with the right speech, right action, and right livelihood. It is performed with the right effort, right mindfulness, and right concentration. It is performed with the right speech, right action, and right livelihood. It is performed with the right effort
Page #182:
---------------------------
[Eighth Chapter]
[141] One day, Kali Arya approached Chandana Arya and, joining her hands, spoke humbly, "O Arya! If I may have your permission, I wish to practice the Ratnavati Tapa."
Arya Chandana said, "Devanupriye! Do as you please, do not be careless."
Then Kali Arya, having received the permission of Arya Chandana, began to practice the Ratnavati Tapa, which is as follows:
She performed a fast, followed by a Parana with all auspicious qualities. After the Parana, she performed a Bela, followed by a Parana with all auspicious qualities. After the Parana, she performed a Tela, followed by a Parana with all auspicious qualities. After the Parana, she performed eight Belas, followed by a Parana with all auspicious qualities. After the Parana, she performed a fast, followed by a Parana with all auspicious qualities. After the Parana, she performed a Bela, followed by a Parana with all auspicious qualities. After the Parana, she performed a Tela, followed by a Parana with all auspicious qualities. After the Parana, she performed a Dasham Chola, followed by a Parana with all auspicious qualities. After the Parana, she performed a Dwadashma-Panchola, followed by a Parana with all auspicious qualities. After the Parana, she performed six fasts, followed by a Parana with all auspicious qualities. After the Parana, she performed seven fasts, followed by a Parana with all auspicious qualities. After the Parana, she performed eight fasts, followed by a Parana with all auspicious qualities. After the Parana, she performed nine fasts, followed by a Parana with all auspicious qualities. After the Parana, she performed ten fasts, followed by a Parana with all auspicious qualities. After the Parana, she performed eleven fasts, followed by a Parana with all auspicious qualities. After the Parana, she performed twelve fasts, followed by a Parana with all auspicious qualities. After the Parana, she performed thirteen fasts, followed by a Parana with all auspicious qualities. After the Parana, she performed fourteen fasts, followed by a Parana with all auspicious qualities. After the Parana, she performed fifteen fasts, followed by a Parana with all auspicious qualities. After the Parana, she performed sixteen fasts, followed by a Parana with all auspicious qualities. After the Parana, she performed thirty-four Belas, followed by a Parana with all auspicious qualities. After the Parana, she performed sixteen fasts, followed by a Parana with all auspicious qualities. After the Parana, she performed fifteen fasts, followed by a Parana with all auspicious qualities. After the Parana, she performed fourteen fasts, followed by a Parana with all auspicious qualities. After the Parana, she performed thirteen fasts, followed by a Parana with all auspicious qualities. After the Parana, she performed twelve fasts, followed by a Parana with all auspicious qualities. After the Parana, she performed eleven fasts, followed by a Parana with all auspicious qualities. After the Parana, she performed ten fasts, followed by a Parana with all auspicious qualities. After the Parana, she performed nine fasts, followed by a Parana with all auspicious qualities. After the Parana, she performed eight fasts, followed by a Parana with all auspicious qualities. After the Parana, she performed seven fasts, followed by a Parana with all auspicious qualities. After the Parana, she performed six fasts, followed by a Parana with all auspicious qualities. After the Parana, she performed a Panchola, followed by a Parana with all auspicious qualities. After the Parana, she performed a Chola, followed by a Parana with all auspicious qualities. After the Parana, she performed a Tela, followed by a Parana with all auspicious qualities. After the Parana, she performed a Bela, followed by a Parana with all auspicious qualities. After the Parana, she performed a fast, followed by a Parana with all auspicious qualities. After the Parana, she performed eight Belas, followed by a Parana with all auspicious qualities. After the Parana, she performed a Tela, followed by a Parana with all auspicious qualities. After the Parana, she performed a Bela, followed by a Parana with all auspicious qualities. After the Parana, she performed a fast, followed by a Parana with all auspicious qualities.
In this way, Kali Arya performed the first cycle of the Ratnavati Tapa.
According to the scriptures, this first cycle (series) of the Ratnavati Tapa was completed in one year, three months, and twenty-two days, (as per the scriptures, according to the meaning, according to both, according to the path, according to the plan, in a perfectly correct manner, by the body, touching, maintaining, purifying, crossing, commendable). 

Page #183:
---------------------------
[142]
[Antakrid Dasha
OTHA
000000000
Tapasya Kaal/Ek Paripati Ka Kaal 1 year, 3 months, 22 days
'Four Paripati Ka Kaal 5 years, 2 months, 28 days of Tapasya [.
One Paripati Ke Tapodin 1 year, - 24 days
Four Paripati Ke Tapodin 4 years, 3 months, 6 days per one Paripati Ke Parane 88
Four Paripati Ke Parane 352
500000
Ratnavali Tapas
Ka . Sthapana-Yantra
9000
(૨
૨ ૨ ૨ ૨ ૨)
Vivechan-Rayanavali Ka Arth Vrittikar' Ke Shabdon Mein Is Prakar Hai-Rayanavali Tti, Ratnavali Abharnavishish: Ratnavali Tapas Ratnavali. Yathahi Ratnavali Ubhayatah Aadau Sukshma-Sthul-Sthulatar-Vibhagkahaalikakhya-Sauvarnavayavadvayyukta Bhavati, Punarmध्यदेशे Sthulvishistamannyalankrita Cha Bhavati, Evam Yattapah Pattadavupadaryamanamimamakaram Dharayati Tadratnavali Tyuchyate-Arthath Ratnavali Ek Abhushan Vishishta Hota Hai. Uski Rachna Ke Saman Jis Tap Ka Aradhan Kiya Jaye Usko Ratnavali Tapas Kahte Hain. Jaise Ratnavali Bhushan Dono Or Se Aarambh Mein Sukshma Fir Sthul, Fir Us Se Adhik Sthul, Madhy Mein Vishishta Sthul Maniyon Se Yukt Hota Hai, Vaise Hi Jo Tap Aarambh Mein Swalp Fir Adhik, Fir Vishishta Adhik Hota Chala Jata Hai,
1.
Antagad Sutra-Savritti-Patra-25 

Page #184:
---------------------------
[Eighth Section]
[143] This is the Ratnavali. Just as ornaments enhance the beauty of the body, the Ratnavali tapa adorns the soul with virtues. The Ratnavali tapa lasts for five years, two months, and twenty-eight days.
The mechanism of this tapa is given on the previous page.
3. After that, on the fourth day of the Parivadi, one should perform the Tapa, and after performing it, one should perform the Vigayavajan Parana. On the sixth day, one should perform the Tapa, and after performing it, one should perform the Vigayavajan Parana. Similarly, as in the Parivadi, so also in the Biya, and in the Navaran-Savvaparana, one should perform the Vigayavajan Parana. (Thus, in this Ratnavali, the Biya Parivadi of the Tapa Karma lasts for one year, three months, and twenty-two days, until it is completed.)
After that, on the fourth day of the Taccha Parivadi, one should perform the Tapa, and after performing it, one should perform the Alevadi Parana. The rest is the same. One should perform the Alevadi Parana for the Navaran.
Thus, the fourth Parivadi. For the Navaran-Savvaparana, one should perform the Ayambila Parana. The rest is the same.
**Gatha**
_In the first, all virtues, in the second, Vigayavajan Parana. In the third, Alevadi, and in the fourth, Ayambila Parana._
Therefore, that Kali Arya performed the Ratnavali Tapa Karma for five years, two months, and twenty-eight days, until the Ajachandana became Ajja. Having become Ajja, she worshipped and bowed to the Ajachandana. After worshipping and bowing, she lived, considering herself to be in many fourth, sixth, tenth, and twelfth Tapa Karmas.
In this one practice, there are three hundred and eighty-four days of Tapa and eighty-eight days of Parana. Thus, there are a total of four hundred and seventy-two days. After that, in the second practice, Kali Arya fasted and performed a Vigayavajan Parana, performed the Bela, and performed a Vigayavajan Parana. Thus, this is also the same as the first practice. The only difference is that the Parana is Vigayavajan. Thus, according to the Sutra, this second practice is performed.
After that, in the third practice, that Kali Arya fasted and performed a Leparajan Parana. The rest is the same as before.
Similarly, Kali Arya performed the fourth practice. The special feature of this is that all the Paranas are performed with Ayambila. The rest is the same.
**Gatha Meaning**
_In the first practice, all virtues, in the second, Vigayavajan Parana. In the third, Leparajan, and in the fourth, Ayambila Parana._
In this way, Kali Arya performed the Ratnavali Tapa for five years, two months, and twenty-eight days, according to the Sutra.
2.-3. Section 8, Sutra 2. 

Page #185:
---------------------------
[144]
After completing the Antakrid Dasha period of worship, she went to where Arya Chandana was and paid her respects. After that, she began to wander, her soul moved by many fasts, belās, telās, chārs, pāñchs, and other types of anashan tapas.
**Explanation:**
* **'Alevaḍam'** refers to food that is not coated with any impurities, food that is not greasy with ghee, etc., and is completely dry.
* **'Āyambil'** is a Prakrit word. In Sanskrit, it has three forms: Āchāml, Āchāmāml, and Āyāmāml. It involves eating a bland meal once, devoid of ghee, milk, yogurt, oil, jaggery, sugar, etc. Examples include rice, black gram, sattu, roasted chickpeas, etc.
The Ratnavāli tapa takes five years, two months, and 28 days to complete. Kali Ārya's final practice: Siddhi
4. So, she, Kali, with that Urāl-principal, [vast, long-lasting, extensive, adorned with splendor, given by a guru or achievable through effort, accepted with honor, beneficial, health-giving, due to Shiva-mukti, blessed, auspicious, destroyer of sin, intense, selfless, generous, excellent, free from ignorance and darkness, and having a great impact, with a dry and bland body due to tapasya, hungry,
1. Section 3. Sutra 22. 2. Already mentioned above.
3. Section 5. Sutra 6. 

Page #186:
---------------------------
[Eighth Chapter]
[145
Rough, without flesh] and filled with veins. Just as a cart filled with coals, a cart filled with dry wood, a cart filled with leaves, dried in the sun, that is, coal, wood, leaves, etc. are thoroughly dried and then loaded into the cart, then that cart moves with a rattling sound and stops, in the same way the black Arya walked with the rattling of bones and stood with the rattling. She had attained the increase of merit through austerity, but she had attained the decrease of merit due to flesh and blood.] Like fire covered with a group of ashes, she was shining brightly with the intensity of austerity, and she was extremely radiant with the wealth of austerity.
One day, in the last watch of the night, a thought arose in the heart of the black Arya, like Skanda Muni - "Due to this rigorous austerity, my body has become extremely emaciated. However, as long as there is upliftment, karma, strength, vigor, and courage in this body of mine, and faith, patience, and detachment in my mind, it is appropriate for me to eat the Sanlekhanā Jhūshanā after sunrise tomorrow, after asking Arya Chandanā and obtaining her permission, and to renounce food and drink, becoming indifferent to death." Thinking this, she went to where Arya Chandanā was as soon as the sun rose the next day, and after bowing and greeting Arya Chandanā, she spoke as follows - "O Arya! If you permit, I wish to wander while wearing the Sanlekhanā Jhūshanā." Arya Chandanā said - "O Devānupriyā! Do as you please. Do not delay in doing good deeds." Then, having received the permission of Arya Chandanā, the black Arya took the Sanlekhanā Jhūshanā and began to wander. The black Arya studied the eleven Angas from Samayika to Arya Chandanā Arya, and for eight years she followed the Dharma of conduct, and after purifying her soul with a month-long Sanlekhanā, she completed the fast of sixty meals, and fulfilled the purpose for which she had taken the vow, until her last breath, and became a Siddha, a Buddha, and a liberated soul.
Discussion - The black Arya studied the eleven Anga scriptures from her teacher, this statement clearly proves that just as a Sadhu has the right to study the Anga scriptures, so does a Sadhvi. In addition, the biography of the black goddess also proves that both Sadhus and Sadhvis have an equal right to attain the state of Nirvana, which is the ultimate bliss.
The tenth Uddesaka of the Vyavahāra Sutra describes the curriculum of Sadhus and Sadhvis. It is written there that a Sadhu who has been initiated at the age of ten can read the Vyākhyāprajñapti - (Bhagawti) Sutra, but not before. But the black goddess was initiated at the age of eight, and she read the eleven Angas. In such a situation, it is natural to ask why the black goddess studied the Anga scriptures even though she was not entitled to do so according to the Vyavahāra Sutra?
In response, it is submitted that five types of Vyavahāra are mentioned in the Sthānānga Bhagawti and other Sutras. Vyavahāra refers to the specific knowledge that is the cause of the inclination and disinclination of souls seeking liberation. The five Vyavahāras are as follows:
1. Āgama Vyavahāra - The study of Kevalajñāna, Manahparyavajñāna, Avadhijñāna, fourteen Pūrvas, ten Pūrvas, and nine Pūrvas is called Āgama. The Vyavahāra that is the inclination and disinclination arising from Āgama is called Āgama Vyavahāra. 

Page #187:
---------------------------
##  Translation:

**146]**

**2.** The knowledge of *Shrutavyavahar*, *Acharprakalpad*, etc. is *Shruta*. The conduct based on this knowledge is *Shrutavyavahar*. The knowledge of the past nine, ten, and fourteen *Pūrvas* is also *Shruta*, but it is considered *Aagama* because it is the cause of special knowledge related to *Ateeindriya* objects.

**3.** *Aagnavyawahar* - If two *Geetaarth* Sadhus reside in different regions and are unable to travel due to their weakened bodies, and one of them needs to perform *Prayashchitta*, he sends his disciples to the *Geetaarth* Muni in the absence of a qualified disciple. The disciple then criticizes the *Geetaarth* Muni. Upon hearing the criticism in a cryptic language, the *Geetaarth* Muni considers the *Dravya*, *Kshetra*, *Kaal*, *Bhaav*, *Sanhanan*, *Dhairya*, and *Bala* and either comes himself or sends a qualified disciple. If even such a disciple is not available, the messenger delivers the message of criticism and performs the purification of the transgression, i.e., *Prayashchitta*, in a cryptic manner. This is *Aagnavyawahar*.

**4.** *Dharnavyawahar* - The practice of applying the same *Prayashchitta* for the same offense based on the understanding of the *Dravya*, *Kshetra*, *Kaal*, and *Bhaav* of the *Geetaarth* Muni who has committed the offense is *Dharnavyawahar*.

**5.** *Jeetvyavahar* - The *Prayashchitta* given considering the *Dravya*, *Kshetra*, *Kaal*, *Bhaav*, *Purush* service, and the loss of *Sanhanan*, *Dhriti*, etc. is *Jeetvyavahar*.

- The provision in the *Vyavahar Sutra* for teaching the *Bhagawti Sutra* to a *Deekshit* Muni after ten years is written considering the *Prayashchitta Sutra Vyavahar*. This provision does not apply to the *Mahapurushas* who follow *Aagama Vyavahar*. What they say is considered appropriate. There is no room for impropriety in their conduct.

- In relation to *Kali Devi*, the study of *Ang Shastra* is mentioned in the eight-year *Deeksha Paryaya*, but in relation to *Dhannya Anagaar*, it is written that he studied *Ang Shastra* in the nine-month *Deeksha Paryaya*. This clearly shows that *Sutra Vyavahar* is insignificant in front of *Aagama Vyavahar*. In the same vein, *Vyakhya Pragyapti*, *Sthananga Sutra*, and *Vyavahar Sutra* state, "**Aagama Baliya Samana Niggantha**."

- This discussion clarifies that according to the *Vyavahar Sutra*, *Ang* is taught to a *Deekshit* Sadhu after ten years, but this provision does not apply to the Munis who follow *Aagama Vyavahar*. 

Page #188:
---------------------------
## Second Study
## Sukali's Kankaavali Tapa

In those days, in that time, there was a city named Champa. There was the Punnabhadde garden and King Konika ruled there. In that city, Queen Sukali, the wife of King Sreniya and the younger mother of King Konika, was there. Like Kali, Sukali also renounced the world and wandered, cultivating her soul through many fasts and other austerities.

Then, one day, Sukali went to Arya Chandana and said, "Oh Arya! If you permit, I wish to practice the Kankaavali Tapa." Having received Arya Chandana's permission, Sukali, like Ratnavali, practiced the Kankaavali Tapa. The difference was that she performed the Ashtama-tele in all three places, while Ratnavali performed the Shashtha-bele. 

One Paripaati takes one year, five months, and twelve days. In this one Paripaati, there are 88 days of Parana and one year, two months, and twelve days of Tapa. The duration of all four Paripaatis is five years, nine months, and eighteen days. The rest is the same as for Kali Arya. She practiced her vows for nine years until she became Siddha, Buddha, and liberated.

## Discussion

The only difference between the Kankaavali Tapa and the Ratnavali Tapa is that the Ratnavali Tapa performs Ashtama-bele and Chaturth-bele, while the Kankaavali Tapa performs Ashtama-tele and Chaturth-tele. The rest of the days of Tapa are the same. The Parana is also the same. One Paripaati of the Kankaavali Tapa takes one year, five months, and twelve days. Thus, all four Paripaatis take five years, nine months, and eighteen days. The outline of the first Paripaati of the Kankaavali Tapa is clearly shown by the instrument on the next page.

1. Varga 5, Sutra 5-6
2. Varga 5, Sutra 6
3. Varga 8, Sutra 4
4. Varga 5, Sutra 6 

Page #189:
---------------------------
[148]
(10)
(11)
12
(13)
3 Om
(14)
Tapasya Kala - One Paripati Kala - 1 year, 5 months, 12 days - Four Paripati Kala - 5 years, 9 months, 18 days
Days of Tapasya { One Paripati Tapasya Days - 1 year, 2 months, 14 days
- Four Paripati Tapasya Days - 4 years, 9 months, 26 days - One Paripati Parana - 88 - Four Paripati Parana - 352
Parana
15
1
16
3
3
3 | 3
3
2 3 3
3
3 3
(33)
3
3
3
3
3
333
3 3
3
PE
Coe ooooo
Kankaavali Sthapana - Yantra
(15)
3
14
13
3
4
(10
12
[ Antakrid Dasha 

Page #190:
---------------------------
## Third Study
## Mahakali
## Mahakali's Laghusinghanishkridit Tapa

6 - Thus Mahakali, having attained the auspiciousness of the Khuddagasīhanikkīliyā tapa, did as follows:

She performed a **vihara**, followed by a **sarvakaamguṇiyā pāraṇā**. She performed a **chautha**, followed by a **sarvakaamguṇiyā pāraṇā**. She performed a **chhattha**, followed by a **sarvakaamguṇiyā pāraṇā**. She performed an **aṭṭhama**, followed by a **sarvakaamguṇiyā pāraṇā**. She performed a **chhattha**, followed by a **sarvakaamguṇiyā pāraṇā**. She performed a **dasama**, followed by a **sarvakaamguṇiyā pāraṇā**. She performed an **aṭṭhama**, followed by a **sarvakaamguṇiyā pāraṇā**. She performed a **duvālasama**, followed by a **sarvakaamguṇiyā pāraṇā**. She performed a **dasama**, followed by a **sarvakaamguṇiyā pāraṇā**. She performed a **chaudasama**, followed by a **sarvakaamguṇiyā pāraṇā**. She performed a **duvālasama**, followed by a **sarvakaamguṇiyā pāraṇā**. She performed a **sollasama**, followed by a **sarvakaamguṇiyā pāraṇā**. She performed a **chaudasama**, followed by a **sarvakaamguṇiyā pāraṇā**. She performed an **aṭṭhārasama**, followed by a **sarvakaamguṇiyā pāraṇā**. She performed a **sollasama**, followed by a **sarvakaamguṇiyā pāraṇā**. She performed a **vīsaima**, followed by a **sarvakaamguṇiyā pāraṇā**. She performed an **aṭṭhārasama**, followed by a **sarvakaamguṇiyā pāraṇā**. She performed a **vīsaima**, followed by a **sarvakaamguṇiyā pāraṇā**. She performed a **sollasama**, followed by a **sarvakaamguṇiyā pāraṇā**. She performed an **aṭṭhārasama**, followed by a **sarvakaamguṇiyā pāraṇā**. She performed a **chaudasama**, followed by a **sarvakaamguṇiyā pāraṇā**. She performed a **sollasama**, followed by a **sarvakaamguṇiyā pāraṇā**. She performed a **bārasama**, followed by a **sarvakaamguṇiyā pāraṇā**. She performed a **chaudasama**, followed by a **sarvakaamguṇiyā pāraṇā**. She performed a **dasama**, followed by a **sarvakaamguṇiyā pāraṇā**. She performed a **bārasama**, followed by a **sarvakaamguṇiyā pāraṇā**. She performed an **aṭṭhama**, followed by a **sarvakaamguṇiyā pāraṇā**. She performed a **dasama**, followed by a **sarvakaamguṇiyā pāraṇā**. She performed a **chhattha**, followed by a **sarvakaamguṇiyā pāraṇā**. She performed an **aṭṭhama**, followed by a **sarvakaamguṇiyā pāraṇā**. She performed a **chautha**, followed by a **sarvakaamguṇiyā pāraṇā**. She performed a **chhattha**, followed by a **sarvakaamguṇiyā pāraṇā**. She performed a **chautha**, followed by a **sarvakaamguṇiyā pāraṇā**.

Thus, there are four **parivāḍī**s. In one **parivāḍī**, there are six months and seven days. In four **parivāḍī**s, there are two years and twenty-eight days until **siddha**.

1.
Like Kali, Mahakali also accepted **dīkshā**. Notably, she performed the **laghusinghanishkridit tapa**, which is as follows:

She performed a **upavāsa**, followed by a **sarvakaamguṇiyā pāraṇā**. She performed a **bela**, followed by a **sarvakaamguṇiyā pāraṇā**. She performed a **upavāsa**, followed by a **sarvakaamguṇiyā pāraṇā**. She performed a **tela**, followed by a **sarvakaamguṇiyā pāraṇā**. She performed a **bela**, followed by a **sarvakaamguṇiyā pāraṇā**. She performed a **chaula**, followed by a **sarvakaamguṇiyā pāraṇā**. She performed a **tela**, followed by a **sarvakaamguṇiyā pāraṇā**. She performed a **pachौla**, followed by a **sarvakaamguṇiyā pāraṇā**. She performed a **chaula**, followed by a **sarvakaamguṇiyā pāraṇā**. She performed six **upavāsa**s, followed by a **sarvakaamguṇiyā pāraṇā**. She performed seven **upavāsa**s,

**Varg 8, Sutra 2** 

Page #191:
---------------------------
[150]
She performed the **Parana** with all auspicious qualities after completing ten **Antakrid Dasha** (periods of ten days), then performed eight **Upavasa** (fasts), then performed the **Parana** with all auspicious qualities, then performed seven **Upavasa**, then performed the **Parana** with all auspicious qualities, then performed nine **Upavasa**, then performed the **Parana** with all auspicious qualities, then performed eight **Upavasa**, then performed the **Parana** with all auspicious qualities, then performed nine **Upavasa**, then performed the **Parana** with all auspicious qualities, then performed seven **Upavasa**, then performed the **Parana** with all auspicious qualities, then performed eight **Upavasa**, then performed the **Parana** with all auspicious qualities, then performed six **Upavasa**, then performed the **Parana** with all auspicious qualities, then performed seven **Upavasa**, then performed the **Parana** with all auspicious qualities, then performed five **Upavasa**, then performed the **Parana** with all auspicious qualities, then performed six **Upavasa**, then performed the **Parana** with all auspicious qualities, then performed **Chaula** (a type of fast), then performed the **Parana** with all auspicious qualities, then performed **Pachoula** (a type of fast), then performed the **Parana** with all auspicious qualities, then performed **Tela** (a type of fast), then performed the **Parana** with all auspicious qualities, then performed **Chaula**, then performed the **Parana** with all auspicious qualities, then performed **Vela** (a type of fast), then performed the **Parana** with all auspicious qualities, then performed **Tela**, then performed the **Parana** with all auspicious qualities, then performed **Upavasa**, then performed the **Parana** with all auspicious qualities, then performed **Vela**, then performed the **Parana** with all auspicious qualities, then performed **Upavasa**, then performed the **Parana** with all auspicious qualities.

In this way, all four **Paripatis** (cycles) should be understood. One **Paripati** takes six months and seven days. The duration of all four **Paripatis** is two years and twenty-eight days, until the **Arya Mahakal** attained **Siddhi** (liberation).

**Discussion:** **Arya Mahakal** performed the **"Laghu Singh Nishkridit Tap"** (minor lion-like penance). In this sutra, it is called **"Khuddaga Sihanikkiliyam"**, which means - just as a lion, while walking, looks back at its traversed path, similarly, in this penance, the days of **Upavasa** that were transgressed are consumed again and then one moves forward.

**Singh Nishkridit Tap** is of two types, one **"Laghu Singh Nishkridit"** and the other **"Maha Singh Nishkridit Tap"**. In the present study, **Arya Mahakal** performed the **Laghu Singh Nishkridit Tap**. This penance also has four **Paripatis**. One **Paripati** takes six months and seven days. Thirty-three days are spent in **Parana**. In this way, the first **Paripati** is completed in six months and seven days. All four **Paripatis** take two years and twenty-eight days.

This is clearly evident from the **establishment mechanism** shown on the next page.

Just as **Kali Devi** consumed milk, ghee, and all other substances during the **Parana** of the first **Paripati** of the **Ratnavali Tap**, she abandoned these juices during the **Parana** of the second **Paripati**, she abandoned even the **lepamatra** (a small amount) in the third **Paripati**, and she performed the **Parana** of the **Upavasa** with **Ayambila** (a type of food) in the fourth **Paripati**, similarly, **Mahakal Devi** consumed **Vigya** (a type of food) in the first **Paripati** of the **Laghu Singh Nishkridit Tap**, she abandoned it in the second, she abandoned even the **lepamatra** in the third, and she performed the **Parana** of the **Upavasa** with **Ayambila Tap** in the fourth.

1. **Antakrid Dasha Ang Sutra - Patra 28/1** 

Page #192:
---------------------------
[151
925308335915888058
0000000000000000
3
Tapasya Kaal
Car
Khuddaga-Singhnikiliyam
599359933
Days of Tapasya
[One Paripati Kaal 6 months, 7 days
Four Paripati Kaal 2 years, 28 days [One Paripati's Tapodin 5 months, 4 days
Four Paripati's Tapodin 1 year, 8 months, 16 days [One Paripati's Parane 33
Four Paripati's Parane 132
Parane
BASESABREE
TERRRRRRREEEETEERIES
0000000000000000
Ashtam Varga] 

Page #193:
---------------------------
Krishna Devi's Mahasinhnishkridit Tapa
7 - Thus, Kanha. Navaran - Mahalayam Sihanikkiliyam Tavokamma, Jahev Khuddagam. Navaran Chottisaim Jam Navv. 'Tahev Osareyavvam'. Ekkae Varisan Chhammasa Attarasa Ya Divasa. Chaunham Chavvarisa Do Masa Barasa Ya Ahoratta. Sesam Jaha Kalie Jav' Siddha.
Fourth Study
Krishna
is.
. Class-5, Sutra -6
-
Similarly, understand about Krishna Rani. Especially, Krishna did Mahasinhnishkridit Tapa. It is different from Laghusinhnishkridit Tapa in that it involves fasting from one to sixteen days and then gradually reducing the fast. In one cycle, it takes nine years, six months, and eighteen days. In all four cycles,
10
1.
1
2
1
3
2
4
3
11
it takes six years, two months, and twelve days. 10
12
Discussion - Special information presented by this device is clear
11
13
12
14
13
15
14
16
4
6
5
7
6
8
7
9
8
Mahaliy
Sihanikkiliyam
Parane
Tapa ke Din
Tapasya Kaal
One cycle
Four cycles' Parane 244
Ka
Kaal
One cycle's Parane 61 Four cycles' Tapaodin 5 years, 6 One cycle's Tapaodin 1 year 4 months, 17 days Four cycles' Kaal 6 years, 2 months, 12 days
1
Masa, 8 Din
Varsha, 6 Masa, 18 Din
15
1
2
1
3
2
4
3
5
4
6
5
7
6
8
7
9
8
10
9
11
10
12
11
13
12
14
13
15
14
1.6 

Page #194:
---------------------------
## Fifth Study
## Sukrushna
## Sukrushna's Worship of the Bhikshu Pratimā

8 - Thus, Sukrushna, the noble one, practiced the Sapta Saptamika Bhikshu Pratimā. In the first week, she received one datti of food and one datti of water. In the second week, she received two dattis of food and two dattis of water. In the third week, she received three dattis of food and three dattis of water. In the fourth week, she received four dattis of food and four dattis of water. In the fifth week, she received five dattis of food and five dattis of water. In the sixth week, she received six dattis of food and six dattis of water. In the seventh week, she received seven dattis of food and seven dattis of water.

Thus, in forty-nine nights and days, there are one hundred and ninety-six dattis of alms. Arya Sukrushna, following the prescribed method, performed the perfect worship of this 'Sapta Saptamika' Bhikshu Pratimā penance. In this, the total food and water received in the first week was seven dattis, in the second week fourteen, in the third week twenty-one, in the fourth week twenty-eight, in the fifth week thirty-five, in the sixth week forty-two, and in the seventh week forty-nine. 1. Chapter 8, Sutra 2

I wish, noble ones, that you, the enlightened ones, may practice the Ashtamika Bhikshu Pratimā, having attained it.

Devānupiya, the divine one, do not be attached. 

Page #195:
---------------------------
[154]
[Antakrid Dasha]
There are 196 Dattis in total. Thus, according to the Sutra, Sukrushna Arya came to Arya Chandana Arya after worshipping this image and, after bowing and saluting her, spoke as follows: "O Arya! If you permit, I will accept the 'Ashta-Ashtamika' Bhikku-Pratima Tapa."

Arya Chandana said, "O Devanupriya! Do as you please. Do not be negligent in your religious duties."

**Discussion:** This Sapta-Saptamika Bhikku-Pratima is different from the Bhikku-Pratima mentioned in the 19th Sutra of the third category. It has no connection with it. The duration of the seventh Bhikku-Pratima is one month, and in it, seven Dattis of food and seven Dattis of water are taken. However, the Sapta-Saptamika Bhikku-Pratima described in the present study has a duration of 49 days and nights. It is completed in seven weeks (7 x 7 = 49). In the first week, one Datti of food and one Datti of water are taken, in the second, two each, in the third, three each, and so on, increasing by one each in the fourth, fifth, sixth, and seventh, until seven Dattis of food and water are taken in the seventh. The total number of Dattis in this Sapta-Saptamika Bhikku-Pratima is 196. Therefore, this Bhikku-Pratima has no connection with the aforementioned twelve Bhikku-Pratimas. Its establishment mechanism is as follows:

1
2
3
Satta-Saptamika Bhikku Padima
1
1
1
2
3
1
2
1
49 Days 196 Dattis

9 - Then, Sukrushna Arya, having accepted the Ashta-Ashtamika Bhikku-Pratima, dwells in the presence of Arya Chandana Arya.

In the first Ashta, she takes one Datti of food and one Datti of water, in the second, two each, and so on, until in the eighth Ashta, she takes eight Dattis of food and eight Dattis of water. 

Page #196:
---------------------------
## Eighth Group ]
[155
Thus, this eighth group of the Bhikkhu-pratima, with sixty-four nights and two hundred and eighty-eight Bhikshas, is completed. After completing this, the Bhikkhu-pratima enters the ninth group. - In the first nine, one takes one Datti of food and one Datti of water. In the second nine, two Dattis of food and two Dattis of water. In the ninth nine, nine Dattis of food and nine Dattis of water.
Thus, this ninth group of the Bhikkhu-pratima, with eighty-one nights and four hundred and five Bhikshas, is completed. After completing this, the Bhikkhu-pratima enters the tenth group. - In the first ten, one takes one Datti of food and one Datti of water. In the second ten, two Dattis of food and two Dattis of water. In the tenth ten, ten Dattis of food and ten Dattis of water.
Thus, this tenth group of the Bhikkhu-pratima, with one hundred nights and one hundred and fifty-six Bhikshas, is completed. After completing this, the Bhikkhu-pratima enters the stage of many months, where one practices various types of Tapas, such as the fourth, sixth, eighth, tenth, and twelfth months, and the half-month, with the intention of self-development.
Then, that virtuous one, through that Tapas, becomes perfected. End.
Aryachandana, having received the order, began to practice the Ashta-Ashtamika Bhikkhu-pratima. The form of the Ashta-Ashtamika Bhikkhu-pratima is as follows:
For the first eight days, Arya Sukrushna took one Datti of food and one Datti of water. In the second Ashtaka, she took two Dattis of food and two Dattis of water. In this way, she continued to increase the number of Dattis, taking three in the third, four in the fourth, five in the fifth, six in the sixth, seven in the seventh, and eight in the eighth Ashtaka.
This Ashta-Ashtamika Bhikkhu-pratima took sixty-four days to complete and involved two hundred and eighty-eight Bhikshas. After completing the Ashta-Ashtamika Bhikkhu-pratima according to the Sutra, Arya Sukrushna began to practice the Nava-Navamika Bhikkhu-pratima.
While practicing the Nava-Navamika Bhikkhu-pratima, Arya Sukrushna took one Datti of food and one Datti of water each day in the first Navaka. In this way, she continued to increase the number of Dattis, taking nine Dattis of food and nine Dattis of water in the ninth Navaka.
This Nava-Navamika Bhikkhu-pratima was completed in eighty-one days. It involved four hundred and five Bhikshas and eighty-one days. After completing the Nava-Navamika Bhikkhu-pratima according to the Sutra, Arya Sukrushna began to practice the Dasha-Dashamika Bhikkhu-pratima. While practicing the Dasha-Dashamika Bhikkhu-pratima, Arya Sukrushna took one Datti of food and one Datti of water each day in the first Dashaka.
1- 2 - 3 Groups 8, Sutra 2
Group 8, Sutra 4
4.
"
Page #197:
---------------------------
[156]
In the same way, increasing the number of *dattis* one by one, in the tenth decade, she accepts ten *dattis* of food and ten of water.
The *Dasha-Dashamika Bhikhu-Pratima* takes one hundred nights and days. In this, five hundred and fifty (550) *bhikshas* and eleven hundred *dattis* have to be taken. According to the method described in the scriptures, after performing the *Dasha-Dashamika Bhikhu-Pratima*, Arya Sukrushna, in addition to the austerities of *upavas*, *bela*, *tela*, *choula*, *pachoula*, six, seven, eight, up to fifteen, and *mashakhaman*, also performed many other types of austerities to purify her soul.
Due to this difficult austerity, Arya Sukrushna became extremely weak, until she destroyed all her karmas and attained liberation.
. Discussion - Like the *Sapta-Saptamika Bhikhu-Pratima*, this sutra mentions the *Ashta-Ashtamika*, *Nava-Navamika*, and *Dasha-Dashamika Bhikhu-Pratimas*. The difference between the three is clear from the instruments.
*Ashtamika Bhikhu-Pratima*
22222222 16 33333333 24
32
64 days 288 *dattis* 

Page #198:
---------------------------
## Eighth Section ]
mr x 5 w
5
3 3
4
4
2
1
7
3
6
6
S
9
7
026
7
4
5
1
2
7
mr x s w 9 v
6
8 8 8
4
5
3
Navamiyabhickhoopdima
1
2 2 2
3
4 4
6
7
9 9
8
4
5
1
2
3
6
1 1 1
5
^ 6 m £
6 ू
6
9 9 9
81 days
7
8
3
4
5 Ww 9 v
5
7
1
2 2
8
62 mr x 3 w 9
3
5
6
7
8
m x 5 9
r m x 5 7 9
4 4
5
1
6
8
2
3 3
3
9 9
4
5
8
7 | 7 | 7
Dasadasamiyabhickhoopdima
9
7
1 1 1 1 9
0^6 m sα
6 mr x 5 w 9
100 days
20 0 0 6 m s & w
5
2
3
4
8 8
6
5
1 1 1 1 1 1 10
'6
9
3
4
x 5 7 9 ||
9
405 Dattiyas
9
8
r m x 5 w 9
2 2
7
3
4
5
2 2 18
7
8
4
5
6
3 27
4 36
5 45
6 54
7 63
7
8
V
mr x
mr to s
m x 5 w 9 0 0 2
s w |9 |v | w 9 0 0 2
2
3
4
5
9 81
72
9 9
8
2
550 Dattiyas
3
4
7 7
5
6
8
9
20
0 0 6 0 6 0 0 0
9
10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 100
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
[157 

Page #199:
---------------------------
## Sixth Study
**The Short Sarvatobhadra Tapas of Mahakrisna**

10. Thus, Mahakrisna, having received the Khuddaga Sarvatobhadra, lived as follows:
She performed the **Upavasa** (fast), and then performed the **Sarvakamagunya Parana** (breaking of the fast with auspicious food). She performed the **Bela** (a specific type of fast), and then performed the **Sarvakamagunya Parana**. She performed the **Tela** (another type of fast), and then performed the **Sarvakamagunya Parana**. She performed the **Chaula** (another type of fast), and then performed the **Sarvakamagunya Parana**. She performed the **Pacaula** (another type of fast), and then performed the **Sarvakamagunya Parana**. She performed the **Tela**, and then performed the **Sarvakamagunya Parana**. She performed the **Chaula**, and then performed the **Sarvakamagunya Parana**. She performed the **Pacaula**, and then performed the **Sarvakamagunya Parana**. She performed the **Upavasa**, and then performed the **Sarvakamagunya Parana**. She performed the **Bela**, and then performed the **Sarvakamagunya Parana**. She performed the **Pacaula**, and then performed the **Sarvakamagunya Parana**. She performed the **Upavasa**, and then performed the **Sarvakamagunya Parana**. She performed the **Bela**, and then performed the **Sarvakamagunya Parana**. She performed the **Tela**, and then performed the **Sarvakamagunya Parana**. She performed the **Chaula**, and then performed the **Sarvakamagunya Parana**. She performed the **Bela**, and then performed the **Sarvakamagunya Parana**. She performed the **Tela**, and then performed the **Sarvakamagunya Parana**. She performed the **Chaula**, and then performed the **Sarvakamagunya Parana**. She performed the **Pacaula**, and then performed the **Sarvakamagunya Parana**. She performed the **Upavasa**, and then performed the **Sarvakamagunya Parana**. She performed the **Bela**, and then performed the **Sarvakamagunya Parana**. She performed the **Pacaula**, and then performed the **Sarvakamagunya Parana**. She performed the **Upavasa**, and then performed the **Sarvakamagunya Parana**. She performed the **Bela**, and then performed the **Sarvakamagunya Parana**. She performed the **Tela**, and then performed the **Sarvakamagunya Parana**. She performed the **Chaula**, and then performed the **Sarvakamagunya Parana**. She performed the **Pacaula**, and then performed the **Sarvakamagunya Parana**.

Thus, this is the first **Parivadi** (cycle) of the **Khuddaga Sarvatobhadra Tapas** (short Sarvatobhadra penance). It is performed for three months, ten days each. The **Aharasutta** (food intake) is to be performed until the **Arahett** (the time of the sun's setting). The **Dochcha** (a specific type of food) is to be taken during the **Parivadi**. The fourth **Parivadi** is performed, and then the **Vigaivajja** (a specific type of food) is taken. The **Parana** (breaking of the fast) is to be performed as in the **Rayanavali** (a specific type of food). Thus, there are four **Parivadi**s. The **Parana** is the same. The time is four **Kalas** (a unit of time), one year, one month, and ten days. The rest is the same as before. **Sidda** (perfected). **Nikkevo** (conclusion).

In the same way, Mahakrisna also took **Diksha** (initiation), specifically, she accepted the **Laghusarvatobhadra** (short Sarvatobhadra) **Pratima** (image) and lived accordingly. 

1. Chapter 8, Sutra 2. 2. Chapter 8, Sutra 3. 4. 

Page #200:
---------------------------
[Eighth Section]
[159] Performing a *kamguna*-infused *parana*, followed by a *pacaula*, then a *sarvakamguna*-infused *parana*, followed by a fast, then a *sarvakamguna*-infused *parana*, followed by a *bela*, then a *sarvakamguna*-infused *parana*, followed by a *tela*, then a *sarvakamguna*-infused *parana*. 
In this way, the first practice of this *laghu* (small, insignificant) *sarvatobhadra* penance-action is completed in three months and ten days. Following the *sutra*, with proper *samyagriti* (method), Arya Mahakrishna performed a fast in the second practice and a *vigaya*-free *parana*. Just as four practices are described in the *Ratnavali* penance, so too are there four practices in this one. The *parana* should be understood in the same way. The first practice takes a total of one hundred days, with twenty-five days of *parana* and seventy-five days of fasting. The combined duration of all four practices is one year, one month, and ten days.

**Discussion:** The word *khuddaga* in " *khuddaga* *savvaobhai* *padimam*" refers to something small in comparison to something great. *Sarvatobhadra* penance is of two types: one great and one small. This is the small one. The word *khuddaga* is used to indicate this. When the numbers are even, not odd, and the same from whichever direction they are counted, it is called *sarvatobhadra*. In this, numbers from one to five are given, and no matter which direction you count from, the total is always fifteen. Since the number is the same when counting from one to five in all directions, it is called *sarvatobhadra*. This is clear from the presented diagram.

*Khuddaga* *savvatobhadd* *padimam*
Penance days 75 *parana* 25. 

Page #201:
---------------------------
Seventh Study
The Great Sarvatobhadra Tapas of Virakrishna
11-Thus-Virakanha, having attained the Sarvatobhadra Tapa, dwells in the nine-fold Mahaalaya, as follows. He performs the fourth, and by performing it, he transcends all desires. He performs the sixth, and by performing it, he transcends all desires. He performs the eighth, and by performing it, he transcends all desires. He performs the tenth, and by performing it, he transcends all desires. He performs the twelfth, and by performing it, he transcends all desires. He performs the fourteenth, and by performing it, he transcends all desires. He performs the sixteenth, and by performing it, he transcends all desires. He performs the tenth, and by performing it, he transcends all desires. He performs the twelfth, and by performing it, he transcends all desires. He performs the fourteenth, and by performing it, he transcends all desires. He performs the sixteenth, and by performing it, he transcends all desires. He performs the fourth, and by performing it, he transcends all desires. He performs the sixth, and by performing it, he transcends all desires. He performs the eighth, and by performing it, he transcends all desires. He performs the sixteenth, and by performing it, he transcends all desires. He performs the fourth, and by performing it, he transcends all desires. He performs the sixth, and by performing it, he transcends all desires. He performs the eighth, and by performing it, he transcends all desires. He performs the tenth, and by performing it, he transcends all desires. He performs the twelfth, and by performing it, he transcends all desires. He performs the fourteenth, and by performing it, he transcends all desires. He performs the eighth, and by performing it, he transcends all desires. He performs the tenth, and by performing it, he transcends all desires. He performs the twelfth, and by performing it, he transcends all desires. He performs the fourteenth, and by performing it, he transcends all desires. He performs the sixteenth, and by performing it, he transcends all desires. He performs the fourth, and by performing it, he transcends all desires. He performs the sixth, and by performing it, he transcends all desires. He performs the fourteenth, and by performing it, he transcends all desires. He performs the sixteenth, and by performing it, he transcends all desires. He performs the fourth, and by performing it, he transcends all desires. He performs the sixth, and by performing it, he transcends all desires. He performs the eighth, and by performing it, he transcends all desires. He performs the tenth, and by performing it, he transcends all desires. He performs the twelfth, and by performing it, he transcends all desires. He performs the sixth, and by performing it, he transcends all desires. He performs the eighth, and by performing it, he transcends all desires. He performs the tenth, and by performing it, he transcends all desires. He performs the twelfth, and by performing it, he transcends all desires. He performs the fourteenth, and by performing it, he transcends all desires. He performs the sixteenth, and by performing it, he transcends all desires. He performs the fourth, and by performing it, he transcends all desires. He performs the twelfth, and by performing it, he transcends all desires. He performs the fourteenth, and by performing it, he transcends all desires. He performs the sixteenth, and by performing it, he transcends all desires. He performs the fourth, and by performing it, he transcends all desires. He performs the sixth, and by performing it, he transcends all desires. He performs the eighth, and by performing it, he transcends all desires. He performs the tenth, and by performing it, he transcends all desires. 
One time, eight months, five days. Four times, two months, eight months, twenty days. The rest is the same, until it is perfected.
1. Chapter 8, Sutra 34. 

Page #202:
---------------------------
[161
Eighth Chapter] - Just like Arya Kali, Arya Veerkrishna also took initiation.  The special thing is that he took the Mahatsarvatobhadra Tapa Karma, which is as follows:
He fasted, and performed a Parana with all auspicious qualities, and then performed a Bela, and performed a Parana with all auspicious qualities, and then performed a Tela, and performed a Parana with all auspicious qualities, and then performed a Chola, and performed a Parana with all auspicious qualities, and then performed a Pachola, and performed a Parana with all auspicious qualities, and then performed six fasts, and performed a Parana with all auspicious qualities, and then performed seven fasts, and performed a Parana with all auspicious qualities.
This was the first Lata.
He performed a Chola, and performed a Parana with all auspicious qualities, and then performed a Pachola, and performed a Parana with all auspicious qualities, and then performed six fasts, and performed a Parana with all auspicious qualities, and then performed seven fasts, and performed a Parana with all auspicious qualities, and then fasted, and performed a Parana with all auspicious qualities, and then performed a Bela, and performed a Parana with all auspicious qualities, and then performed a Tela, and performed a Parana with all auspicious qualities.
This was the second Lata. ... He performed seven fasts, and performed a Parana with all auspicious qualities, and then fasted, and performed a Parana with all auspicious qualities, and then performed a Bela, and performed a Parana with all auspicious qualities, and then performed a Tela, and performed a Parana with all auspicious qualities, and then performed a Chola, and performed a Parana with all auspicious qualities, and then performed a Pachola, and performed a Parana with all auspicious qualities, and then performed six fasts, and performed a Parana with all auspicious qualities.
This was the third Lata.
He performed a Tela, and performed a Parana with all auspicious qualities, and then performed a Chola, and performed a Parana with all auspicious qualities, and then performed a Pachola, and performed a Parana with all auspicious qualities, and then performed six fasts, and performed a Parana with all auspicious qualities, and then performed seven fasts, and performed a Parana with all auspicious qualities, and then fasted, and performed a Parana with all auspicious qualities. He performed a Bela, and performed a Parana with all auspicious qualities.
This was the fourth Lata.
He performed six fasts, and performed a Parana with all auspicious qualities, and then performed seven fasts, and performed a Parana with all auspicious qualities, and then fasted, and performed a Parana with all auspicious qualities, and then performed a Bela, and performed a Parana with all auspicious qualities, and then performed a Tela, and performed a Parana with all auspicious qualities, and then performed a Chola, and performed a Parana with all auspicious qualities, and then performed a Pachola, and performed a Parana with all auspicious qualities.
This was the fifth Lata.
He performed a Bela, and performed a Parana with all auspicious qualities, and then performed a Tela, and performed a Parana with all auspicious qualities, and then performed a Chola, and performed a Parana with all auspicious qualities, and then performed a Pachola, and performed a Parana with all auspicious qualities, and then performed six fasts, and performed a Parana with all auspicious qualities, and then 

Page #203:
---------------------------
[162]
She performed seven Antakrid Dasha fasts, followed by a Parana with all auspicious qualities, then another fast, followed by a Parana with all auspicious qualities. In this way, the sixth Lata was completed. 
She performed a Pachola, followed by a Parana with all auspicious qualities, then six fasts, followed by a Parana with all auspicious qualities, then seven fasts, followed by a Parana with all auspicious qualities, then a fast, followed by a Parana with all auspicious qualities, then a Bela, followed by a Parana with all auspicious qualities, then a Tela, followed by a Parana with all auspicious qualities, then a Chola, followed by a Parana with all auspicious qualities. This completed the seventh Lata.
Thus, the duration of the seven Latas, or the Pariparti, was eight months and five days. The duration of all four Paripatis is two years, eight months, and twenty days. The rest is as before. After completing the full Aradhana, she finally attained liberation through Sanlekhana and became a Siddha Buddha, Veerakrishna.

**Discussion:** In the first Paripati of the Mahatsarvatobhadra Tapa, there are 196 days of Tapa and 49 days of Parana. Thus, one Paripati has a total of 245 days. Multiplying this by four, we get 980 days for all four Paripatis. In the present Yantra, the number 28 appears repeatedly. For clarity, see the Yantra.

Mahaliya Savvato Bhadd-Padima 0000000 000000 0000000 (3 4 5 6 7 1 (2)
00000000 IDRB0000 0000000
Tapa days 196 Parana 49 

Page #204:
---------------------------
## Eighth Study
**Ramakrishna Ramakrishna's Bhadraottara Pratima Tapas**

12 - And Ramakanha, having adopted the Bhadraottara Padimam, lives thus:
She performs twelve fasts, and performs the **Parana** with all auspicious qualities. She performs fourteen fasts, and performs the **Parana** with all auspicious qualities. She performs sixteen fasts, and performs the **Parana** with all auspicious qualities. She performs eighteen fasts, and performs the **Parana** with all auspicious qualities. She performs twenty fasts, and performs the **Parana** with all auspicious qualities. She performs sixteen fasts, and performs the **Parana** with all auspicious qualities. She performs eighteen fasts, and performs the **Parana** with all auspicious qualities. She performs twenty fasts, and performs the **Parana** with all auspicious qualities. She performs twelve fasts, and performs the **Parana** with all auspicious qualities. She performs fourteen fasts, and performs the **Parana** with all auspicious qualities. She performs twenty fasts, and performs the **Parana** with all auspicious qualities. She performs twelve fasts, and performs the **Parana** with all auspicious qualities. She performs fourteen fasts, and performs the **Parana** with all auspicious qualities. She performs sixteen fasts, and performs the **Parana** with all auspicious qualities. She performs eighteen fasts, and performs the **Parana** with all auspicious qualities. She performs fourteen fasts, and performs the **Parana** with all auspicious qualities. She performs sixteen fasts, and performs the **Parana** with all auspicious qualities. She performs eighteen fasts, and performs the **Parana** with all auspicious qualities. She performs twenty fasts, and performs the **Parana** with all auspicious qualities. She performs twelve fasts, and performs the **Parana** with all auspicious qualities. She performs eighteen fasts, and performs the **Parana** with all auspicious qualities. She performs twenty fasts, and performs the **Parana** with all auspicious qualities. She performs twelve fasts, and performs the **Parana** with all auspicious qualities. She performs fourteen fasts, and performs the **Parana** with all auspicious qualities. She performs sixteen fasts, and performs the **Parana** with all auspicious qualities.

_One period is six months and twenty days. Four periods are two years, two months and twenty days. The rest is the same as the **Kali** period._

One should understand the story of Ramakrishna in the same way as the story of **Arya**. The special thing is that Ramakrishna adopted the **Arya Bhadraottara Pratima** and started living like this:

She performed five fasts, and performed the **Parana** with all auspicious qualities. She performed six fasts, and performed the **Parana** with all auspicious qualities. She performed seven fasts, and performed the **Parana** with all auspicious qualities. She performed eight fasts, and performed the **Parana** with all auspicious qualities. She performed nine fasts, and performed the **Parana** with all auspicious qualities.

This was the first **Lata**.

She performed seven fasts, and performed the **Parana** with all auspicious qualities. She performed eight fasts, and performed the **Parana** with all auspicious qualities. She performed nine fasts, and performed the **Parana** with all auspicious qualities. She performed five fasts, and performed the **Parana** with all auspicious qualities. She performed six fasts, and performed the **Parana** with all auspicious qualities.

This was the second **Lata**. She performed nine fasts, and performed the **Parana** with all auspicious qualities. She performed five fasts, and performed the **Parana** with all auspicious qualities.

1. Chapter 8, Sutras 3, 4. 

Page #205:
---------------------------
[164]
Antakrid Dasha with all auspicious qualities, Parana was done, six fasts were done, Parana with all auspicious qualities was done, seven fasts were done, Parana with all auspicious qualities was done, eight fasts were done, Parana with all auspicious qualities was done.
This is the third creeper completed.
Six fasts were done, Parana with all auspicious qualities was done, seven fasts were done, Parana with all auspicious qualities was done, eight fasts were done, Parana with all auspicious qualities was done, nine fasts were done, Parana with all auspicious qualities was done, five fasts were done, Parana with all auspicious qualities was done.
This is the fourth creeper.
Eight fasts were done, Parana with all auspicious qualities was done, nine fasts were done, Parana with all auspicious qualities was done, five fasts were done, Parana with all auspicious qualities was done, six fasts were done, Parana with all auspicious qualities was done, seven fasts were done, Parana with all auspicious qualities was done.
This is the fifth creeper completed.
In this way, there is one cycle of five creepers. There are four such cycles in this penance. The duration of one cycle is six months and twenty days. The duration of all four cycles is two years, two months and twenty days. The remaining description should be understood according to the festival.
Like Kali, Arya Ramkrishna also attained liberation by Sanlekhana and became a Siddha-Buddha.
Discussion- The meaning of Bhaddottara Pratima is - Bhadra - giver of auspiciousness, Uttara - principal. This statue is called Bhaddottara Pratima because it is the giver of supreme auspiciousness. It starts with five fasts and goes up to nine fasts.
Bhadduttara-Padima
Penance days 1757 Parana 25 All time 6 months 20 days 

Page #206:
---------------------------
## Ninth Study
## Pituśena-Kṛṣṇa's Muktāvalī Tapa

13. And Pituśena-Kṛṣṇa, having performed the Muktāvalī Tapa, dwells in the world. This is how it is:

He performs the fourth, and having performed it, he crosses over all the desires. He performs the sixth, and having performed it, he crosses over all the desires. He performs the fourth, and having performed it, he crosses over all the desires. He performs the eighth, and having performed it, he crosses over all the desires. He performs the fourth, and having performed it, he crosses over all the desires. He performs the tenth, and having performed it, he crosses over all the desires. He performs the fourth, and having performed it, he crosses over all the desires. He performs the twelfth, and having performed it, he crosses over all the desires. He performs the fourth, and having performed it, he crosses over all the desires. He performs the fourteenth, and having performed it, he crosses over all the desires. He performs the fourth, and having performed it, he crosses over all the desires. He performs the sixteenth, and having performed it, he crosses over all the desires. He performs the fourth, and having performed it, he crosses over all the desires. He performs the eighteenth, and having performed it, he crosses over all the desires. He performs the fourth, and having performed it, he crosses over all the desires. He performs the twentieth, and having performed it, he crosses over all the desires. He performs the fourth, and having performed it, he crosses over all the desires. He performs the twenty-second, and having performed it, he crosses over all the desires. He performs the fourth, and having performed it, he crosses over all the desires. He performs the twenty-fourth, and having performed it, he crosses over all the desires. He performs the fourth, and having performed it, he crosses over all the desires. He performs the twenty-sixth, and having performed it, he crosses over all the desires. He performs the fourth, and having performed it, he crosses over all the desires. He performs the twenty-eighth, and having performed it, he crosses over all the desires. He performs the fourth, and having performed it, he crosses over all the desires. He performs the thirtieth, and having performed it, he crosses over all the desires. He performs the fourth, and having performed it, he crosses over all the desires. He performs the thirty-second, and having performed it, he crosses over all the desires. He performs the fourth, and having performed it, he crosses over all the desires. He performs the thirty-fourth, and having performed it, he crosses over all the desires. He performs the fourth, and having performed it, he crosses over all the desires. He performs the thirty-sixth, and having performed it, he crosses over all the desires.

And so on, he continues until he performs the fourth, and having performed it, he crosses over all the desires.

The time is eleven months and fifteen days. The duration is three years and ten months. The rest is until the attainment of liberation.

The character of Pituśena-Kṛṣṇa should be understood like that of the Āryas. The special thing is that Pituśena-Kṛṣṇa performed the Muktāvalī Tapa, which is as follows:

He performed fasting, and having performed it, he performed the *parṇā* with all the qualities of the desires. He performed *belā*, and having performed it, he performed the *parṇā* with all the qualities of the desires. He performed fasting, and having performed it, he performed the *parṇā* with all the qualities of the desires. He performed *telā*, and having performed it, he performed the *parṇā* with all the qualities of the desires. He performed fasting, and having performed it, he performed the *parṇā* with all the qualities of the desires. He performed *caulā*, and having performed it, he performed the *parṇā* with all the qualities of the desires. He performed fasting, and having performed it, he performed the *parṇā* with all the qualities of the desires.

1. Chapter 8, Sutras 3-4

Page #207:
---------------------------
[166]
[ Antakrid Dasha ]
Performed a Pachaula, performed a Parana with all auspicious qualities, performed a fast after the Parana, performed a Parana with all auspicious qualities, performed six fasts, performed a Parana with all auspicious qualities, performed a fast, performed a Parana with all auspicious qualities, performed seven fasts, performed a Parana with all auspicious qualities, performed a fast, performed a Parana with all auspicious qualities, performed eight fasts, performed a Parana with all auspicious qualities, performed a fast, performed a Parana with all auspicious qualities, performed nine fasts, performed a Parana with all auspicious qualities, performed a fast, performed a Parana with all auspicious qualities, performed ten fasts, performed a Parana with all auspicious qualities, performed a fast, performed a Parana with all auspicious qualities, performed eleven fasts, performed a Parana with all auspicious qualities, performed a fast, performed a Parana with all auspicious qualities, performed twelve fasts, performed a Parana with all auspicious qualities, performed a fast, performed a Parana with all auspicious qualities, performed thirteen fasts, performed a Parana with all auspicious qualities, performed a fast, performed a Parana with all auspicious qualities, performed fourteen fasts, performed a Parana with all auspicious qualities, performed a fast, performed a Parana with all auspicious qualities, performed fifteen fasts, performed a Parana with all auspicious qualities, performed a fast, performed a Parana with all auspicious qualities, performed sixteen fasts, performed a Parana with all auspicious qualities, performed a fast, performed a Parana with all auspicious qualities, performed a fast, performed a Parana with all auspicious qualities, performed fifteen fasts, performed a Parana with all auspicious qualities.
In this way, the fasts are increased and decreased in the same order, until finally a fast is performed and a Parana with all auspicious qualities is performed.
This is one cycle. The duration of one cycle is eleven months and fifteen days. There are four such cycles in this penance. These four cycles take three years and ten months. The rest should be understood as before.
Discussion - The word Muktavali means a garland of pearls. Just as pearls are arranged when making a garland of pearls, similarly, the penance in which fasts are arranged is called Muktavali penance. For clarity, see the diagram (on the next page). 

Page #208:
---------------------------
[Eighth Chapter]
[167
0000000©©©©
The duration of one *tapasya* period is 11 months, 15 days
'The duration of four *tapasya* periods is 3 years, 10 months
The number of *tapo* days in one *tapasya* period is 285 days
'The number of *tapo* days in four *tapasya* periods is 3 years, 2 months
The number of *parana* days in one *tapasya* period is 60 'The number of *parana* days in four *tapasya* periods is 240
0000000000000
GOOGOOOS
00000000
*Muktavali* *tap*
The establishment-mechanism 

Page #209:
---------------------------
## The Austere Penance of Mahaseanakrishna

**Chapter 14: The Increasing Penance of Mahaseanakrishna**

Mahaseanakrishna, having attained the increasing penance of Ayambila, lived as follows:

**Tenth Study**

Mahaseanakrishna performed one Ayambila, then four. He performed two Ayambilas, then four. He performed three Ayambilas, then four. He performed four Ayambilas, then four. He performed five Ayambilas, then four. He performed six Ayambilas, then four.

When the Ayambila increased by one, the fourth part of the Ayambila was performed, and then the Ayambila was performed.

Thus, Mahaseanakrishna performed the increasing penance of Ayambila for fourteen days, three months, and twenty nights. He would wake up before sunrise, and after waking up, he would bow and pay homage. After bowing and paying homage, he would live with many fourth parts of the Ayambila.

Thus, Mahaseanakrishna would live with the Ayambila, and he would remain in the state of contemplation.

Thus, Mahaseanakrishna would contemplate on the past, present, and future, and he would ask himself about the time of the sunrise. He would live in the state of contemplation until the time of the assembly.

Thus, Mahaseanakrishna would assemble at the time of the sunrise, and he would perform eleven angas. He would perform the seventeen vows, and he would observe the assembly. He would purify himself, and he would eat only the prescribed food. He would perform the austerities, and he would live in the state of nakedness. He would perform the Ayambila, and he would attain liberation with his last breath.

**Summary**

**Verse 1:**

Eight days, one, then seventeen.
This is the vow, the vow of the Jain monks.

Thus, you should understand the story of Mahaseanakrishna. He performed the increasing penance of Ayambila, which is as follows:

**Verse 2:**

**Chapter 5, Verse 6** 

Page #210:
---------------------------
[Eighth Section]
[169 One Ayambil was performed, followed by a fast, then two Ayambils were performed, followed by a fast, then three Ayambils were performed, followed by a fast, then four Ayambils were performed, followed by a fast, then five Ayambils were performed, followed by a fast, then six Ayambils were performed, followed by a fast.
In this way, the Ayambils were increased one by one. Fasting was done in between, and in this way, fasting was done after performing one hundred Ayambils.
Thus, Arya Mahasenakrishna performed this 'Vardhaman-Ayambil' penance for fourteen years, three months and twenty days, according to the scriptures and in accordance with the prescribed rituals. After completing the penance, Arya Mahasenakrishna went to her Guru, Arya Chandanabala, and after paying her respects and receiving her blessings, she began to wander, her soul filled with the emotions of many fasts, etc.
Due to this great penance, Arya Mahasenakrishna, though physically weak, began to appear extremely radiant. Once, Arya Mahasenakrishna had a thought about Dharma, as vast as the sky. After asking Arya Chandana, she began to wander, free from the desire for life and death, and ready for Sanlekhana.
Arya Mahasenakrishna studied the eleven Angas from Samayik with Arya Chandana, followed the path of restraint for seventeen years, filled her soul with the emotions of a one-month Sanlekhana, completed sixty days of fasting, and finally achieved the purpose for which she had taken restraint. After completing the full penance, she attained liberation as a Siddha Buddha with her last breath.
Gatha-meaning: It should be known that the initiation period of Kali Devi, the first among the wives of King Shrenik, was eight years, and thereafter, it increased by one year each time, so that the initiation period of the tenth, Mahasenakrishna, was seventeen years.
Discussion: 'Ayambil Vaddaman' - Ayambil-Vardhaman is a penance in which the Ayambils are gradually increased. This penance takes fourteen years, three months and twenty days to perform.
Examining the previous penances, it is clear that the author of the scriptures has included all the days, including the days of penance and the days of breaking the fast, in the number of days mentioned for the penances. If the same method is followed, how can the duration be fourteen years, three months and twenty days? The solution is that there is no day of breaking the fast in this case. There are two reasons for this - firstly, the author of the scriptures has been instructing about breaking the fast in the past, but here, the author has not given any instructions, and secondly, if all the days of breaking the fast are also included, then the number of days of this penance would not be fourteen years, three months and twenty days, but fourteen years and ten days. Therefore, it is correct to understand that Arya Mahasenakrishna performed penance for fourteen years, three months and twenty days, without breaking the fast in between. The establishment mechanism of Ayambil-Vardhaman penance is as follows: 

Page #211:
---------------------------
[170]
11
31
41
51
a
21 1 22
1
1
91
1
12
1
32
1 42
52
61 1 62
71 1 72
81 1 82
1 92
ov
Ayambil-Vardhaman sthapana - yantra
3
1 13
1 23
1
1 43 1
1 24 1
1 33 1 34 1
1 53 1
1 63 1
1 83
4
1 73 1
14
2 2 2
54
64 1
74
1 84
1
1 93 1 94
44 1 45 1
1
5
1
15 1
25
1
55
on
35 1
1
85
65 1
75 1
1
3.
95 1
6 1 7
16 1 17
1 56
26
36
46
66
76
86
1 27
1 37
1 47
1 57
1 67
1 77
1 87
96 1 97
1 8 1
1 18 1
1
1
1
1
1
a
28 1
38
1 58 1
1
1 48 1 49
1
78
68 1
88
1
1
98 1
9 1 10 1
19
29
39
59
69
79
89
[ Antakriddasha
99
1 20
1 30 1
1 40 1
1 50
1 60
1 70
on
1 80
1 90
1
1
1
1
1 100 1
nikshepa : upasamhar
15 evam khalu jambu! samanenam bhagavayan mahaviran jav' sampattenam atthamasas angass antagadadasanam ayamatthe panatte.
Antagadadasanam angass ego suyakhando. atth vagga. atthasu cheva divasesu uddissijjanti. tattha padhama-biiyavagge das-das uddegasaga. taiyavagge teras uddegasaga. chauttha-panchamavagge das-das uddegasaga. chatthavagge solas uddegasaga. sattamavagge teras uddegasaga. atthamavagge das uddegasaga. sesam jaha nayadhammakahanam.
This way, O Jambu! I say that the liberated Shraman Bhagavan Mahavira has explained the meaning of the eighth Anga, Antakriddasha, in this way.
The Antakriddasha Anga has one Shruta Skandha. There are eight sections. These are read in eight days. In the first and second sections, there are ten uddegas each. In the third section, there are thirteen uddegas. In the fourth and fifth sections, there are ten uddegas each. In the sixth section, there are sixteen uddegas. In the seventh section, there are thirteen uddegas. In the eighth section, there are ten uddegas. The rest should be known according to the Nayadhammakatha.
1. Section 1, Sutra 2. 

Page #212:
---------------------------
Appendix - 1
Special Names Mentioned in the Agamas
1.
2.
Tirthankara Specifics
Individuals Conceived from the Word 'Jaha' Mentioned in the Agamas
Specifics
3. Agama Specifics
4. Individual Specifics - Muni etc.
5.
Deva Specifics
6. Individuals of the Kshatriya Varna
7. Individuals of the Vaishya Varna - Gathapati etc.
8. Individuals of the Brahmin Varna
9. Individuals of the Shudra Varna - Mandala Specifics
10.
11. Animal Specifics 12. Tapas Specifics
13. Dream Specifics
14. City Specifics
15. Island Specifics
16. Yakshayatan
17. Garden
18. Mountain
19. Tree Specifics
20. Flower Vines etc.
21. Metal Specifics
22.
Building Specifics
23.
Bondage Specifics
24. Object Specifics
25. Vehicle Specifics
26. Ornament Specifics
27. Cooked Food Specifics
Appendix
28. Planet Specifics 29. Gemstones etc. 30. Region Specifics

Appendix - 2
Individual and Geographical Introduction
1.
Specific Individual Introduction
Indrabhuti Gautam Ganadhar
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
Krishna
Konik
Chellana
Jambuswami Jamali
Jitashatru Raja Dharini Devi
8.
9.
Mahabalkumar
10.
Meghkumar
11. Skandkamuni
12. Sudharmaswami
13.
Shrenik Raja
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
2.
Geographical Introduction
1.
Kakandhi
2. Gunashil
3.
4.
Champa
Jambudvipa
Dwarka (Dwaravati)
Dutipalash Cha Purnabhadra Chaitya
Bhaddilpur
Bharat Kshetra
Rajgriha
Raivatak
Vipulghiri Parvat
Sahasramravan Udyan
Saketa
Shravasti 

Page #213:
---------------------------
## Appendix-1
**Special Names Mentioned in the Agamas - Category/Sutra**

**6. Kshatriya Varna Individuals**

**1. Tirthankara**

**Kings**

1. **Amam Tirthankara**
2. **Arishta Nemibhawan** - Category 3 to 5
3. **Mahavira Swami** - Category 3 to 8
4. **Konikraja** - Individual
5. **Jitashatru**
6. **Pradyumna**
7. **Vijayraja**
8. **Vasudeva Raja**
9. **Baldev**
10. **Samudravijay**
11. **Shrenikraja**

**Queens**

1. **Andhakavrushni Patni**
2. **Kali**
3. **Krishna**
4. **Gandhari**
5. **Gauridevi**
6. **Chellana**
7. **Jambavati** (who predicted the future of Devaki)
8. **Devaki**
9. **Dharini**
10. **Nandashenika**
11. **Nanda**
12. **Nandavati**
13. **Nandottara**
14. **Padmavati**
15. **Pitrusen Krishna**
16. **Baldev Patni**

**1. Abhaykumar**
**2. Udayan**
**3. Gangadatt**
**4. Gautam Swami**
**5. Devananda Brahmani**
**6. Mahabal Kumar**
**7. Meghkumar**
**8. Skandkamuni**

**3. Agamas**

**1. Uvasagadasa (Upasakadasang)**
**2. Pannatti (Pragyapti-Bhagavati Sutra)**

**Used Individuals - Muni etc.**

**1. Atimukta Kumar Shraman**
**2. Gautam Swami**
**3. Chandana Sadhvi**
**4. Yakshini Sadhvi**
**5. Devavishesha**
**1. Mudgarpani Yaksha**
**2. Vaishramana Kubera**
**3. Harinaigameshi**

**• 1/7 8/1-4**
**8/7 5/1 5/1**
**7**
**6/2 4/1**
**17**
**8/1**
**7/1**
**7/1**
**7/1**
**8/13 3/28** 

Page #214:
---------------------------
[Appendix 1]
17. Bhadra 18. Marutadevi 19. Marutadevi 20. Mahakali 21. Mahakrisna 22. Mahamaruta 23. Mahasenakrisna 24. Muladatta 25. Mulasri 26. Ramakrisna 27. Rukmini 28. Lakshmana 29. Vasudeva-patni 30. Virakrisna 31. Vaidarbi 32. Satyabhama 33. Sukalika 34. Sukrisna 35. Sujata 36. Subhadra 37. Sumanatika 38. Sumaruta 39. Susima 40. Sridevi
Prince 1. Achal Kumar 2. Atimukta Kumar 3. Anantasen Kumar 4. Anadrusti Kumar 5. Aniyas Kumar 6. Aniruddha Kumar 7. Anihit Kumar 8. Abhichandra Kumar
[173 7/1 9. Akshobha Kumar
1/10 10. Uvayali Kumar
4/1 11. Kampilya Kumar
1/10 8/6 12. Kupaka Kumar
3/4 8/10 13. Gajasukumal
3/4 7/1 14. Gambhira Kumar
1/10 8/14 15. Gautama Kumar
1/7 16. Jali Kumar
4/1 5/1
17. Dridhanemi Kumar 8/12 18. Daruka Kumar
19. Durmukha Kumar 5/1 20. Devayash Kumar 4/1 21. Dharana Kumar 8/11 22. Pradyumna Kumar
4/1 23. Prasenajit
1/10 24 Purushahena 8/5 25. Purna Kumar 8/9 26. Mayali Kumar
4/1 7/1 27. Varishena Kumar 28. Vidu Kumar
3/1 7/1 29. Vishnu Kumar
1/10 7/1 30. Satyanemi Kumar
4/1 5/1 31. Samudra Kumar
1/10 6/15 32. Sagar Kumar 33. Sarana Kumar
3/4 1/10 34. Stimit Kumar
1/10 6/15 35. Sumukha Kumar 3/1-5 36. Shatrusena Kumar
37. Shamba Kumar 38. Haimavanta Kumar
1/10 4/1 7. Vaishya Varna ke Vyakti-Gathapati adi 1. Kashyapa Gathapati
6/14 2/1 2. Kinkam Gathapati
2/1
4/1
7/1
3/4 3/1 4/1
3/1
3/1

Page #215:
---------------------------
8/6
174]
[Antakruddasha 3. Kailashji 6/14 7. Bhadrouttar Pratima
8/12 4. Dvaipayana Rishi 5/2 8. Mahaservatobhadra
8/11 5. Dhriti Dharaji 6/14 9. Muktavali
8/13 6. Nag Gathapati
10. Ratnavalli
8/13 7. Purnbhadraji 6/14 11. Laghuservatobhadra
8/10 8. Mankaati Gathapati
12. Laghusinghniskridit 9. Meghkumaraji
6/14 13. Saptasaptaamika Bhikshapratima 8/8 10. Varattakji
6/14 13. Swapna-Vishesh 11. Sudarshan Sheth (Pratham)
1. Kumbha (Kalash)
3/15 12. Sudarshan Sheth (Dvitiya) 6/14 2. Chandra
3/15 13. Supratisthitaji 6/14 3. Dhvaja
3/15 14. Sumanbhadraji 6/14 4. Nidhum Agni
3/15 15. Sulasa (Nag Gathapati ki Patni) 3/1 5. Padmasarovar
3/15 16. Harichandanji 6/14 6. Pushpamala
3/15 17. Kshemak Gathapati 6/14 7. Bhavan
3/15 8. Brahmanavarna ke vyakti vishesh
8. Ratnarashi
3/15 1. Somashri 3/16 9. Lakshmi
3/15 2. Soma 3/16 10. Vimaan
3/15 3. Somil Brahman 3/16 11. Vrishabha
3/15 9. Shudravarna ke vyakti vishesh
12. Samudra
3/15 1. Arjun Mali 6/2 13. Singh
3/15 2. Bandhumati (Uski Patni) 6/2 14. Surya
3/15 10. Mandali Vishesh
15. Hasti
3/15 1. Lalita Mitramandali
6/1 14. Nagari Vishesh 11. Pashu Vishesh
1. Alakapuri (Kubernagri) 1. Hastiratna
3/26 2. Kakandhi Nagari
6/14 12. Tap Vishesh
3. Kamandhi Nagari
6/14 1. Ashtaashtamaika, Navanavamiika 8/9 4. Champa Nagari
1/1, 8/1 2. Ayambilavardhamantap 8/14 5. Dwaraka Nagari 3. Ekaratri ki Mahapratima 3/19 6. Pandu-Mathura (Pandavo ki Rajdhani) 5/3 4. Kankaavali Tap 8/5 7. Polaspur
3/9, 6/15 5. Gunaratnatap 1/8, 2/1, 6/1, 6/18 8. Bhaddilpur 6. Barahmaasiki Bhikshupratima 1/9 9. Rajgriha Nagari
6/1

Page #216:
---------------------------
## Appendix 1

**[175 10. Commercial Village 6/14 5. Jasmine Flowers**
**3/15 11. Varanasi 6/19 6. Parijat**
**3/15 12. Saketa (Ayodhya) 6/14 7. Raktabandhujeevak Veer Bahuti 3/15 13. Shatadwar Nagari**
**5/3 21. Special Metal 14. Shravasti Nagari**
**6/14 1. Gold 15. Special Island**
**22. Special Building 1. Jambudweep**
**3/13, 5/3 1. Indrasthan (where children play) 6/15**
**2. Antahpur (Palace of Girls) 3/17 16. Yakshayatan**
**3. Upasthanashala**
**3/11 1. Purnabhadra**
**4. Paushdhashala**
**3/13 2. Surapriya**
**5. Vasagruh**
**3/11 17. Udyan**
**23. Special Bond 1. Kamamahavan**
**6/19 1. Avkotak Bandhan '2. Gunshilka 6/2 .. 2. Kanchuk Bandhan**
**3/11 3. Dootipalash**
**6/14 24. Special Item 4. Nandanvan Udyan**
**1. Various types of baskets**
**6/2 5. Sahasramravan**
**3/6 2. Umbrella of Korant tree flowers 3/17 6. Shrivan Udyan 3/1, 3/6, 6/15 3. Golden Ball**
**3/16 18. Mountain 4. White Chawar**
**3/17 1. . Raivatak**
**2. Vipulachal 6/1, 6/14, 6/18-19**
**3. Shatrujay 1/9, 2/1, 3/3-4, 3428 25. Special Vehicle 4. Himavan**
**1/7 1. Vrishabharath 19. Special Tree**
**2. Hastiskanth 1. Ashoka Tree**
**1/5 26. Special Ornament 2. Korant Tree**
**3/17 1. Valayabah (Hand Bracelets) 3/11 3. Koshamra Tree**
**5/3 27. Special Cooked Food 4. Nyagrodhavat Tree**
**5/3 1. Singhkeshar-Modak 20. Flower Vines etc.**
**28. Special Greatness 1. Kadambak Flower**
**1. Chandra**
**3/13 2. Kinshuk (Palash) Flowers 3/20 2. Mangal**
**3/13 3. Korant Flower 3/22 3. Shani**
**3/13 4. Champaklata 3/2 4. Surya**
**3/26**
**1/5**
**3/11** 

Page #217:
---------------------------
3/13
3/13 3/13 3/13
176] Maniratnadi
1. Ankaratna 2. Anjanaratna 3. Anjanpulaka Ratna 4. Indranila 5. Karketanaratna 6. Jataruparatna 7. Jyotisarasaratna 8. Padmaraga 9. Pulakaratna 10. Mani
[Antakriddasha 11. Masaragallararatna 12. Rajataratna
3/13 13. Rishta Ratna
3/13 14. Lohitakshararatna
3/13 15. Vajraratna
3/13 16. Vaiduryaratna
1/5, 3/13 17. Sphatikaratna
3/13 18. Saugandhikaratna
3/13 19. Hansagarbharatna
3/13 30. Kshetravishesha
1. Bharatkshetra (Bharatavarsha is said) 1/6
3/13 3/13 3/13 3/13 3/13 1/5 

Page #218:
---------------------------
Appendix-2
Personal and Geographical Introduction
Specific Personal Introduction _ This book mentions many Tirthankaras, Ganadharas, Kings, Princes and Queens etc. From the perspective of Agamas and history, many special introductions are presented here. The introduction of Bhagwan Arishtanemi and Tirthankara Mahavira, who are the life support of the Siddha souls, has not been given because they are well-known. (1) Indrabhuti Gautam Ganadhar
Indrabhuti Gautam was the chief disciple of Bhagwan Mahavira. Gobar village near Rajgriha, the capital of Magadh, was his birthplace', which is now considered a part of Nalanda. His father's name was Vasubhuti and his mother's name was Prithvi. His gotra was Gautam. - Jain Acharyas have written, explaining the etymological meaning of Gautam - the one whose darkness is destroyed by wisdom, he is Gautam. Thus, the word Gautam has been a symbol of clan and lineage. Seven types of Gautam are mentioned in the Stananga - Gautam, Garg, Bharadwaj, Angiras, Sharkarabha, Bhaskarabha, Udakatmabha. In Vedic literature, the name Gautam has also been associated with the clan and also with the Rishis. Many hymns are found in the Rigveda in the name of Gautam, which are related to Gautam Rahugana Rishi.
By the way, many Rishis, Dharmasutrakar, Naya Shastrakar, Dharmashastrakar, etc. have been individuals by the name of Gautam. The paternal name of Arunoudalaka, Aruni etc. Rishis was also Gautam. It is difficult to say what was the gotra of Indrabhuti Gautam, from which Rishi's lineage was he associated? But it is clear that his personality was as great and influential as the great glory of the Gautam gotra. 1. Magha Gubbargame Jaya Tinnev Goyamasugutta. Aavashyak Niyukti, Ga. 643 2. (a) Aavashyak Niyukti, Ga. 647-48
(b) Aadyanaam Trayanaam Ganabhutanam Pita Vasubhutih.  _Aadyanaam Trayanaam Ganabhutanam Mata Prithvi. Aavashyak Malay. 338
Gobhistamo Dhvastaam Yasy - Abhidhanarajendrakoosha Bha. 3 4. Je Goyama Te Satviha Pannaatta, Tam Jaha Te Goyama, Te Gagga, Te Bharadda, Te Angirasa, Te Sakarabha, Te
Udakattabha. Stananga 7/551.
Rigveda 1/62/13, Vedic Kosha, p. 134. 6. Bharatiya Prachin-Charitra Kosha, p. 193-195

Page #219:
---------------------------
[178]
Indrabhuti Somil Arya once went to the Yajna festival in Pawapuri at the invitation of the king. At the same time, Bhagwan Mahavira was also present in the Mahasen Garden outside Pawapuri. Seeing the glory of Bhagwan, Indrabhuti came to Bhagwan's Samavasaran with the intention of defeating him, but he himself was defeated. After his doubts were cleared, he became a disciple of Bhagwan along with his five hundred disciples. Gautam became the first Ganadhar.
There is much written about Gautam's life in the Agamas and the Agameत्तर literature.
Indrabhumi Gautam was 50 years old at the time of his initiation. He remained in the Sadhu-paryaya for 30 years and in the Kevali-paryaya for 12 years. At the time of his Nirvana, he handed over his Gan to Sudharma and attained Nirvana at the age of 92 years, 12 years after Bhagwan's Nirvana, by observing a monthly fast in the Gunashilak Chaitya.
The scriptures describe Ganadhar Gautam as follows: He was the eldest disciple of Bhagwan. He was seven hands tall. His body was well-built and strong. He was fair like a golden line. He was a fierce ascetic, a great ascetic, a severe ascetic, a severe celibate, and possessed a vast and brilliant radiance. He was detached from his body. He was a fourteen-time Purvadhar. He was the holder of four knowledges: Mati, Shruta, Avadhi, and Manah-paryaya. He was Sarvaaksharasannipati. He sat near Bhagwan Mahavira with his head bowed lower than the Ukkud Asana. He would walk around, remaining steady in the meditation posture, influencing the soul with restraint and penance. (2) Krishna
Krishna Vasudeva. His mother's name was Devaki, and his father's name was Vasudeva. Krishna was born in the prison of his maternal uncle Kansa in Mathura.
Due to the troubles of Jarasandha, Shri Krishna left the land of Braj and went to the distant Saurashtra, where he built Dwarka. Shri Krishna was a devout devotee of Neminath. In the future, he will be the Tirthankara named Amma. In Jain literature, the life of Shri Krishna is found in detail in both Sanskrit and Prakrit languages.
After the destruction of Dwarka, Shri Krishna died at the hands of Jarakumar. Shri Krishna's life was great. (3) Konik
The son of Queen Chellana, the wife of King Shrenik, the ruler of Champanagari, the capital of Angadesh. A devout devotee of Bhagwan Mahavira.
Konik Raja is a famous king. He is described in many ways in the Jain Agamas.
There is a detailed description of Konik in Bhagavati, Aupapatik, and Niryavalika.
Due to his greed for the kingdom, he imprisoned his father Shrenik. After Shrenik's death, Konik made Champanagari his capital in Angadesh. 

Page #220:
---------------------------
## Appendix 2]
[179 This also fought a fierce battle with Nana Chetak to seize the elephant of Har and Sechanak from his own brothers Hall and Vihall. The Konik-Chetak war is famous. (4) Chellana
Queen of King Shrenik and daughter of Chetak, the king of Vaishali.
Chellana was a beautiful, virtuous, intelligent, and religious woman. Chellana played a significant role in making King Shrenik religious and devoted to Jainism.
The 'Niryavalika' provides evidence of Chellana's deep affection for King Shrenik. Konik, Hall, and Vihall were all sons of Chellana. (5) Jambuswami
Jambhu, a disciple of Arya Sudharma, appears everywhere in the Agamas as a supreme seeker...
Jambhu was the son of a wealthy and prosperous Seth of Rajgriha city. His father's name was Rishabhdatta and his mother's name was Dharini. Jambhu's mother saw a Jambhul tree in a dream before his birth, hence the son was named Jambhukumar.
... Sudharma's words awakened dispassion in Jambhukumar's mind. However, he agreed to marriage due to his parents' insistence. Jambhukumar married the daughters of eight Sethas.
While Jambhukumar was enlightening his eight newlywed wives, a thief named Prabhav came to steal. He was also enlightened after listening to Jambhukumar's dispassionate words.
501 thieves, 8 wives, 16 parents of wives, his own parents, and Jambhukumar himself, thus 528 took initiation together from Sudharma.
Jambhukumar lived as a householder for 16 years, as a recluse for 20 years, and in the Kevali state for 44 years. After living for 80 years, Jambuswami became a Siddha, Buddha, and liberated, leaving Prabhav on his seat. (6) Jamali
He was a prince of the Kshatriya Kund of Vaishali. Once, the Lord arrived in the village of Kshatriya Kund, Jamali also came to listen to the sermon.
Returning home, Jamali asked his parents for permission to take initiation. His mother was frightened and fainted.
Jamali's parents could not dissuade him from his resolve. He renounced his eight wives and took initiation from the Lord along with five hundred Kshatriya Kumaras.
Jamali had performed Prarupana against the Lord's principles. (7) Jitashatruraja
The one who conquers enemies. Just as the name of King Brahmadatt often appears in Buddhist Jatakas, similarly... 

Page #221:
---------------------------
## 180]
**Antakrid Dasha**

The name of King Jitashatru often appears in Jain texts. The name Dharini is also often mentioned alongside Jitashatru. It has been an ancient practice of storytellers to mention the name of a king at the beginning of any story. Even if there is no such king, the storyteller uses this name at the beginning of their story. 

The name of King Jitashatru is mentioned many times in the narrative texts of Jain literature. The following cities are said to have been ruled by a king named Jitashatru:

**City** | **King**
------- | --------
1. Vanijya Gram | Jitashatru
2. Champa Nagari | Jitashatru
3. Ujjayini | Jitashatru
4. Sarvatobhadra Nagar | Jitashatru
5. Mithila Nagari | Jitashatru
6. Panchal Desh | Jitashatru
7. Amalakalpa Nagari | Jitashatru
8. Savatthi Nagari | Jitashatru
9. Vanarasi Nagari | Jitashatru
10. Alabhiya Nagari | Jitashatru
11. Polaspur | Jitashatru

**(8) Dharini Devi**

Dharini Devi was the queen of King Shrenik. The name Dharini is found abundantly in the Agamas. 

In Sanskrit literature, the epithet 'Devi' is often used before the name of the king's eldest queen, which means the greatest anointed queen, i.e., the chief queen. 

King Shrenik had many queens, among them Dharini was the main one. Therefore, the epithet 'Devi' has been used before Dharini. Devi means 'worshipful'.

Meghakumar was the son of this Dharini Devi, who took initiation from Lord Mahavira.

**(9) Mahabalkumar**

Mahabalkumar was the son of King Bal. He was the soul of Sudarshan Seth. There was a city called Hastinapur. The king there was Bal and the queen was Prabhavati. One night, in a state of semi-consciousness, the queen saw:

"A lion descending from the sky and entering her mouth." 

Page #222:
---------------------------
[Appendix 2]
'The dream is very good. You will become the mother of a brilliant son.'
In the morning, the king also asked the dream interpreters about the meaning of the dream in the royal court. The dream interpreters said, 'O King! There are 42 common and 30 great dreams in the science of dreams, thus a total of 72 dreams are mentioned.'
The Tirthankara mothers and Chakravarti mothers see these 14 dreams out of the 30 great dreams:
1. Elephant
2. Lion
3. Bull
4. Lakshmi
5. Moon
6. Flag
7. Lotus Pond
8. Sun
9. Pitcher
10. Sea
11. Heap of Jewels
12. Aeroplane
13. Smoke-free fire
14. Garland of Flowers
O King!  Pravathi Devi has seen this great dream. Therefore, its result will be wealth gain, enjoyment gain, son gain and kingdom gain.
In due course, a son was born, who was named Mahabalkumar. Mahabal became skilled by practicing 72 arts with the art teacher.
Mahabalkumar was married to eight princesses. Mahabalkumar became engrossed in material pleasures.
Once, Dharmaghoṣa Muni, a disciple of Tirthankara Vimalaṇāth, came to Hastinapur. Mahabal became detached after listening to the teachings. He became a Shraman, a monk, after taking initiation from Dharmaghoṣa Muni.
Mahabal Muni studied the 14 previous births. He performed various types of austerities, after observing the Shraman paryay for 12 years, he became a god in the Brahma Lok Kalpa in due course of time.
(10) Meghakumar
He was the son of Magadha Emperor Shrenik and Dharini Devi, who had taken initiation from Bhagwan Mahavira.
Once, Bhagwan Mahavira came to the Gunashila garden of Rajgriha. Meghakumar also listened to the teachings. He took initiation from Bhagwan after taking permission from his parents.
On the day he took initiation, that very night, Megha Muni became anxious and restless due to the movement of the monks, the dust from their feet and the bumping of their feet.
Bhagwan gave him teachings on patience in restraint, reminding him of his past lives, due to which Megha Muni became stable in restraint.
He performed a one-month Sanlekhana. He was born in the form of a god in the Sarvarthasiddha aeroplane. He will become a Siddha from Mahavidehavas. 

Page #223:
---------------------------
##  Skandaka Muni (11)

Skandaka Muni was a Sannyasi from Shravasti, a disciple of the Gadbhal Parivajak and a former friend of Gautam Swami. He was unable to answer the questions of Pingalak Nirgranth, a disciple of Lord Mahavira. Upon hearing from the people of Shravasti that Lord Mahavira was staying in the Chatra-Palash garden outside Kritangala Nagar, Skandaka went to see him. After finding his answers, he became a disciple of the Lord.

Skandaka Muni studied the 11 Angas while living with the Sthaviras. He practiced and worshipped the 12 Pratimas of a Bhikku in order. He performed the Gunaratna Samvatsar Tapa, which weakened, emaciated, and disabled his body. Finally, he went to Vipulgiri near Rajgriha and performed a one-month Sanlekhana. After his time, he went to the 12th Devaloka. From there, he will become a Siddha through the Chayaka Mahavidehavas.

Skandaka Muni's initiation period was 12 years.

## Sudharma Swami (12)

Sudharma Swami was a Brahmin from Kollag Sannivesh, belonging to the Agnivaishyayana gotra. His father was Dhammil and his mother was Bhaddhila. Five hundred students studied under him. At the age of fifty, he took Pravjaya along with his disciples. He remained in the Chhadmavastha for forty-two years. After twelve years of Mahavira's Nirvana, he became a Kevali and remained in the Kevali state for eight years.

Sudharma was the longest-living among all the Ganadharas of the Shraman Bhagwan. At the time of their Nirvana, other Ganadharas dedicated their respective ganas to Sudharma.

Twelve years after Mahavira's Nirvana, Sudharma attained Kevalgyan. Twenty years later, at the age of one hundred, he attained Nirvana in the Gunshil Chaitya of Rajgriha after a month of Anashan.

## Shrenik Raja (13)

Shrenik Raja was the emperor of the Magadh country. He became a devout follower of Lord Mahavira after being enlightened by Anathi Muni. This is a popular belief.

The description of King Shrenik is found in abundance in Jain and Buddhist scriptures. Historians say that King Shrenik belonged to the Haihaya clan and the Shishunaga dynasty.

In Buddhist scriptures, two names are found: 'Seniya' and 'Bimbisara'. In Jain scriptures, the names 'Seniya, Bhimbhisara, and Bhambhasara' are available.

1. (a) "Jivante Cheva Bhattare Navahin Janehi Ajja Sudhammas Ganho Nikkhitto Dihauggetit Natum." - Kalpasutra Churni 201.
(b) "Parinivvuy Ganahara Jivante Nayae Nav Jana U, Indabhui Suhammo A, Rayagihe Nivvuae Vire." - Aavashyak Niyukti Ga. 658.
2. Aavashyak Niyukti, 655. 

Page #224:
---------------------------
[Appendix 2]
[183 How did the names Bhimbisar and Bhambasar come about? A beautiful incident from the life of Shrenik in this regard.
King Prasenajit, the father of Shrenik, ruled in Kushagpur.
One day, a fire suddenly broke out in the royal palace. Every prince ran out with his favorite thing. Some took elephants, some took horses, some took jewels. But Shrenik only took out a 'Bhambha'.
Seeing Shrenik, the other brothers were laughing, but father Prasenajit was happy; because Shrenik had left everything else and protected only the symbol of the kingdom.
Therefore, King Prasenajit named him Bhimbisar. Bhimbisar probably later became Bimbisar due to a change in pronunciation.
Geographical Introduction This book mentions many countries, cities, mountains and rivers. The names of the countries and cities in the time of Lord Arishtanemi and Lord Mahavira have changed drastically today. They were prosperous at that time, but today they have become mere ruins, and many have been completely destroyed. Archaeologists have done a lot of research on many cities. Here we are briefly describing the main places. (1) Kankdi
This was a very famous city in North India during the time of Lord Mahavira. At that time, Jitashatru was the ruler there. There was Sahasramravan outside the city, where the Lord used to reside whenever he visited there. Many seekers like Dhanya, Sunaksha, Kshemak and Dhritidhara, the sons of Bhadra Sarthavahi, took initiation from Lord Mahavira.
According to Pandit Munishri Kalyanvijayji, the present Kankdi Tirth east of Lachhuaad is not the site of ancient Kankdi. Kankdi was in North India. The Digambar Jain consider the place two miles from Nunkhar station and thirty miles southeast of Gorakhpur, which they call Kishkidha or Khukhundoji Tirth, to be the ancient Kankdi. (2) Gunasil
There was a famous garden called Gunasil outside Rajgriha. Lord Mahavira had held Samavasaran here more than a hundred times. More than a hundred people had taken up the path of asceticism and the path of character here. Lord Mahavira's chief disciples, the Ganadharas, attained nirvana here by fasting. The present Gunava, which is about three miles from Nawada station, is the Gunasil of Mahavira's time. 1. Bheri, a special musical instrument that signifies victory in battle.

Page #225:
---------------------------
[184]
[Antakrid Dasha (3) Champa]
Champa was the capital of the Anga country. Cunningham wrote - There is a stone ghat just 24 miles from Bhagalpur. This is where Champa should be located. There is a large village to the west of it, called Champanagar, and a small village called Champapur. It is possible that these two are indicative of the true location of the ancient capital Champa.
Fa-Hien considered Champa to be located 18 yojanas east of Pataliputra on the south bank of the Ganga.
From the perspective of the Mahabharata, the ancient name of Champa was 'Malini'. Maharaja Champ renamed it Champa.
Champa is also one of the ten capitals mentioned in the Stananga and one of the six great cities described in the Dirghanikaya. It is described in detail in the Aupapatik Sutra. Acharya Shayambhav composed the Dasha Vaikalik Sutra here.
After the death of Emperor Shrenik, Kunik (Ajatashatru) did not like to stay in Rajgriha and settled in Champanagar after seeing the beautiful gardens of Champa. According to Ganin Kalyanvijayji, Champa was about one hundred kos east (slightly south) of Patna. Nowadays it is called Champanala. This place is three miles west of Bhagalpur.
To the north-east of Champa was a beautiful chaitya called Purnabhadra, where Bhagwan Mahavira stayed.
Champa was a major center of trade in that era, where merchants from far and wide came to buy goods, and merchants from Champa also went to Mithila, Ahikshetra, and Pihuṇḍ (a region of Chikakoṭ and Kalingapattam) for trade. There was a distance of sixty yojanas between Champa and Mithila.
2.
1. The Ancient Geography of India, pp. 546-547
Travels of Fa-Hien, p. 65. Mahabharata 12/5/134 Stananga 10/717 Aupapatik, Champa description
Jain Agam Literature in Indian Society, p. 464 7. Vividh Tirthakalp, p. 65 8. Shraman Bhagwan Mahavira, p. 369 9. (a) Jnatadharmakatha 8, p. 97, 9, p. 121-15 p. 157
(b) Uttaradhyayanasutra 21/2

Page #226:
---------------------------
[Appendix 2] (4) Jambudvipa

From the perspective of Jain Agamas, Jambudvipa is located in the center of this vast universe. It spans one lakh yojanas and is the smallest. It is surrounded by the Lavanasamudra (Salt Ocean). The Dhatukikhandadvipa surrounds the Lavanasamudra. Similarly, there is another island and another ocean beyond, and the number of all these islands and oceans is countless. The name of the last ocean is Swayambhuraman Samudra. The Lavanasamudra is twice the size of Jambudvipa, and the Dhatukikhandadvipa is twice the size of the Lavanasamudra. In this way, the islands and oceans continue to be twice the size of each other.

This island is named Jambudvipa because of the eternal Jambubhumi tree that exists here. In the center of Jambudvipa is the Sumeru mountain, which is one lakh yojanas high.

The diameter of Jambudvipa is one lakh yojanas. Its circumference is 3,16,227 yojanas, 3 kosas, 128 dhanush, 13 angulas, 5 yavas, and 1 yuka. Its area is 7,90,56,94,150 yojanas, 1 kosa, 15 dhanush, and 2 hathas.

The Srimad Bhagavata describes seven islands, with Jambudvipa being the first.

From the Buddhist perspective, there are four continents, with Sumeru at their center. To the east of Sumeru is Puvva Videha, to the west is Apargoyan or Apar Godan, to the north is Uttar Kuru, and to the south is Jambudvipa. 

Page #227:
---------------------------
[186]
According to the Buddhist tradition, this Jambudvipa is ten thousand yojanas in size. It is called the ocean because it is filled with water for four thousand yojanas, and humans live in three thousand yojanas, while the remaining three thousand yojanas are occupied by the Himavan mountain, which is adorned with eighty-four thousand peaks (peaks) and is higher than the 500 rivers flowing around it.
_ It is clear from the above description that what we know as India is known as Jambudvipa among the Buddhists. (5) Dwaraka (Dwaravati)
_ Dwaraka has held a special place among the ancient famous cities of India. Both the Shraman and Vedic literatures discuss Dwaraka in detail.
(1) According to Jnatadharmakatha and Antagadadasao, Dwaraka was in Saurashtra. It was twelve yojanas long from east to west and nine yojanas wide from north to south. It was itself built by Kubera with a golden rampart, which had Kapishirshak-Kanguri adorned with various gems of five categories. It was very beautiful, like Alkapuri and directly like Devalok. It was a magnificent and exemplary sight. To the north-east of it was a mountain called Raivatak. Near it was a beautiful garden called Nandavan, which was laden with fruits and flowers throughout the year. In that garden was a Yaksha temple called Surapriya. In that Dwaraka, Shri Krishna Vasudeva lived with his entire royal family.
According to Brihatkalpa, there was a stone rampart around Dwaraka. The same description of Dwaraka is found in Vanhidasaao.11
_ Acharya Hemchandra, while describing Dwaraka, wrote that it was twelve yojanas in size and nine yojanas wide. It was made of gems. Around it was 18 hands high, 9 hands underground and 12 hands
5. Ibid. Vol. 1, p. 941 6. Ibid. Vol. 2, p. 1325-1326 7. (a) India As Described In Early Texts Of Buddhism And Jainism p.1, Written by Vimalacharan Law,
(b) Jataka First Volume, p. 282, Ishanchandra Ghosh (c) Outline of Indian History Bha.1 p. 4, Author-Jayachandra Vidyalaankar (d) Pali English Dictionary p.112, T.W. Rhys Davids and William Stede (e) Introduction to Suttanipata-Dharmarakshit p.1
(f) Jataka-Map-Bhadant Anand Kaushalyayan 8. (a) Jnatadharmakatha 1/16, Sutra 113
(b) Antagadadasao 9. Jnatadharmakatha 1/16, Sutra 58 10. Brihatkalpa Part 2, p. 251 11. Vanhidasaao 

Page #228:
---------------------------
[Appendix 2]
[187] The fort was surrounded by a moat on all sides. There were many palaces and forts in all directions. Near the palace of Rama-Krishna was an assembly called Prabhasa. To the east of it was the Raivatak Giri, to the south was the Malyaavan Shail, to the west was the Saumanas Parvat, and to the north was the Gandhamadana Giri. [3] _Acharya Hemchandra, Acharya Sheelank, Devprabhasuri, Acharya Jinsen, Acharya Gunabhadra, etc., both Svetambara and Digambara writers, as well as the Vedic Harivansh Purana, Vishnu Purana and Shrimad Bhagavat [11], etc., have considered Dwarka to be on the seashore, and many writers have described the construction of Dwarka with twelve yojanas of land from the sea.
Shakrajnya Vaishramana created a city of jewels. Twelve yojanas long and nine yojanas wide. [399] Eighteen hastas high and nine hastas underground. He made a beautiful moat twelve hastas wide. [400]
-Trishakti. Parva 8, Sarg 5, p. 92 Trishakti, Parva 8, Sarg 5, p. 92 Chauppannamahapurishcharit, Pandavcharitra, Sadyo Dwaravati, Kubera created the supreme city. The city is twelve yojanas long and nine yojanas wide. With a diamond wall and surrounded by a sea moat.
-Harivansh Purana 41.18-19. Mounting the horse-shaped god, he went into the ocean. In the middle, there was a city of twelve yojanas. [20] Thus said by Naigama with his voice, Madhusudan. He created it thus, being certain, in that holy place, who is his friend? [21] The sea, like a fearsome enemy, divided itself into two.
-Uttara Purana 71.20-23, p. 376 9. Harivansh Purana 2.54 10. Vishnu Purana 5.23.13 11. Thus, having consulted, the Lord created a city of twelve yojanas. A wonderful city, entirely within the sea.
-Shrimad Bhagavat 10.50.50 (a) That place, given by the earth, is the city of the four. You are the one who has established the abode of Vasudeva on the banks of the Sindhu.
-Bhav-Bhavana 2537 

Page #229:
---------------------------
[188]
In the Mahabharata, Shri Krishna told Yudhishthira about his arrival in Dwaraka: "Leaving Mathura, we came to a city called Kushalasthali, adorned by the Raivata mountain. There, we built an impregnable fort, which was called Dwaravati or Dwaraka because of its many gates." ... In the Mahabharata Jana-Parva, Neelakantha has interpreted Kushavarta as Dwaraka.
In 'Braj ka Sanskritik Itihas', Prabhudayal Mittal has written that the Yadavas' arrival in the Shursena Janapada led to the great progress of the small kingdom of Dwaraka. There, an impenetrable fort and a vast city were built, and it was organized as a powerful Yadava kingdom of the Andhaka-Vrishni clan. That strong kingdom on the coast of India also became a vigilant sentinel of the country against the invasion of foreign non-Aryans. In the Gujarati language, 'Dwar' means port. Thus, Dwaraka or Dwaravati means the city of ports. From those ports, the Yadavas traveled to distant seas and earned vast wealth. In Dwaraka, there was no person who was poor, unfortunate, weak in body, or impure in mind.
(1) Rhys Davids has written that Kamboja was the capital of Dwaraka.
(2) In Petavaththu, Dwaraka is considered a city of Kamboja. Dr. Malashekhara, explaining this statement, has written that it is possible that this Kamboja is 'Kansabhoj', which was the country of the ten sons of Andhaka-Vrishni.
(2) Dr. Motichandra considers Kamboja to be the Pamir region and calls Dwaraka the city of 'Darvaaj', located north of the Vadarvansha.
"Kushalasthali Puri, beautiful, adorned by Raivata. There, we built a dwelling, O King! || 50 || ... And also a fort, impregnable even to the gods. Even women would fight there, what to speak of the Vrishni warriors! || 51 || ... Leaving Mathura, we went to Dwaravati Puri. || 67 ||"
-Mahabharata Sabhaparva, Chapter 14 (a) Mahabharata Janaparva, Chapter 160, Verse 50
(b) Atit ka Anavaran, Page 163. 3. Second Volume, Braj ka Itihas, Page 47. 4. Harivansha Purana 2.5.65.
Buddhist India, P. 28
Kamboja was the adjoining country in the extreme North-West, with Dvaraka as its Capital. 6. Petavaththu Part 2, Page 9. 7. The Dictionary of Pali Proper Names, Part 1, Page 1126. 8. Geographical and Economic Studies in the Mahabharata, Pages 32-40. 

Page #230:
---------------------------
## Appendix 2]
**(189 (4))** The Ghat Jataka states that on one side of Dwaraka, the vast ocean was frolicking, while on the other side stood a towering mountain. Dr. Malashekhara also holds this view.
**(5)** According to Upadhyaya Bharatsingh, Dwaraka was a city in Saurashtra. Currently, twenty miles beyond the town of Dwaraka, in the Gulf of Kutch, there is a small island. There is another Dwaraka there, known as 'Bet Dwaraka'. It is believed that Lord Krishna used to visit this place for excursions. Both Dwaraka and Bet Dwaraka have temples dedicated to Radha, Rukmini, Satyabhama, etc.
**(6)** In the Bombay Gazetteer, several scholars have speculated that Dwaraka was located in Punjab.
**(7)** Dr. Anant Sadashiv Altekar has written - Ancient Dwaraka sank into the sea, therefore, it is doubtful to determine the location of Dwaraka. 
**(6)** Dootipalash Chaitya
The garden called Dootipalash was outside the commercial town. Here, Lord Mahavira initiated Anand Gathapati, Sudarshan Shreshthi, etc., into the Shravak Dharma.
**(7)** Purnabhadra Chaitya
This was a famous garden in Champa. Here, Lord Mahavira initiated over a hundred people into the Shraman and Shravak Dharma. King Kunik went to pay homage to the Lord with great pomp and ceremony.
**(8)** Bhaddilpur
Bhaddilpur was the capital of Malayadesh. It is counted among the most important regions. According to Muni Kalyanvijayji, near the villages of Harria and Dantara in Gaya district, about one hundred miles south of Patna and twenty-eight miles southwest of Gaya, was the ancient Bhaddilnagari, which in the past was a sacred pilgrimage site for Jains known as Bhaddilpur. 
According to the necessary sutra, Shraman Lord Mahavira spent a Chaturmas in Bhaddilpur.
Dr. Jagdishchandra Jain believes that the village called Bhadia in Hazaribagh district was Bhaddilpur. This place is six miles from Hunterganj, near the Kulua hill. 
1. Jataka (Fourth Volume) p. 284
2. The Dictionary of Pali Proper Names, Part 1, p. 1125.
3. Buddhist Period Indian Geography, p. 487
4. Bombay Gazetteer Part 1 Part 1, p. 11 Note 1
5. Indian Antiquary, 1925, Supplement p. 25.
6. Shraman Lord Mahavira, p. 380
7. Jain Agam Literature in Indian Society, p. 477 

Page #231:
---------------------------
##  [190]
**Antakrid Dasha (9) Bharat Kshetra**

The landmass at the southern end of Jambudvipa is known as Bharat Kshetra. It is crescent-shaped. According to Jambudvipaprajnapti, it is surrounded by the Lavanasamudra (salt sea) on the east, west, and south. In the north, it is bordered by the Chulhaimvant mountain. The length of Bharat Kshetra from north to south is 526 yojanas and 6 kala, and from east to west, it is 14471 yojanas and slightly less than 6 kala. Its area is 53,80,681 yojanas, 17 kala, and 17 vikala.

The boundaries of Bharat Kshetra are marked by the Chulhaimvant mountain in the north, the Ganga river in the east, and the Sindhu river in the west. In the middle of Bharat Kshetra lies the Vaitalya mountain, which is 50 yojanas wide. The Lavanasamudra lies to the east and west of this mountain. The Vaitalya mountain divides Bharat Kshetra into two parts, known as Uttar Bharat (North Bharat) and Dakshin Bharat (South Bharat). The Ganga and Sindhu rivers, which originate from the Chulhaimvant mountain, flow through the Vaitalya mountain and then empty into the Lavanasamudra. Due to these rivers, Uttar Bharat is divided into three parts, and Dakshin Bharat is also divided into three parts.

The three parts of Uttar Bharat are called Anarya. The parts of Dakshin Bharat that are adjacent to the Anarya regions are also inhabited by Anarya people. The middle part of Dakshin Bharat is considered to be inhabited by Aryas, and it is divided into 25 countries. Uttar Bharat is 238 yojanas and 3 kala from north to south, and Dakshin Bharat is also 238 yojanas and 3 kala from north to south.

According to Jinasena, the following countries are located in Bharat Kshetra: Sukoshal, Avanti, Pundr, Ashmak, Kuru, Kashi, Kalinga, Anga, Bang, Suhm, Samudraka, Kashmir, Ushinar, Anart, Vatsa, Panchal, Malava, Dasharna, Kachchh, Magadh, Vidarbha, Kurujangal, Karhat, Maharashtra, Surashtr, Abhir, Konkan, Vanavas, Andhra, Karnatak, Kaushal, Chola, Kerala, Das, Abhisar, Sauvir, Shurasen, Aparantaka, Videh, Sindhu, Gandhar, Yavan, Chedi, Pallava, Kamboj, Aratt, Valhik, Turushk, Shak, and Kekaya.

In Buddhist literature, the names of the following sixteen Janapadas are found: Anga, Magadh, Kashi, Kaushal, Vajji, Malla, Cheti, Vatsa, Kuru, Panchal, Matsya, Shurasen, Ashmak, Avanti, Gandhar, and Kamboj. 

Page #232:
---------------------------
[Appendix 2]
[191 (10) Rajgir
The capital of Magadha was Rajgir, which was also known by many other names such as Magadhapur, Kshitipratisthata, Chanakpur, Rishabhpur, and Kushagrapur.
According to the Aavashyak Churni, fires frequently broke out in Kushagrapur. Therefore, King Shrenik established Rajgir. During the Mahabharata era, Jarasandha ruled in Rajgir. In the Ramayana era, the twentieth Tirthankara, Munisuvrat, was born in Rajgir.
According to Digambar Jain texts, Bhagwan Mahavira's first sermon and the establishment of the Sangha took place in Rajgir. The birthplace and nirvana place of the last Kevali, Jambu, was also Rajgir. Dhanna and Shalibhadra, wealthy Kubera, were residents of Rajgir.6 The great and courageous devotee Seth Sudarshan also lived in Rajgir. Rajgir had the honor of giving birth to many great souls like Abhaykumar, a personification of talent.
Surrounded by five hills, it was also called Giribraj. The names of these hills are different in Jain, Buddhist, and Vedic traditions. These hills are still present in Rajgir today. The Vaibhar and Vipul hills are specifically mentioned in Jain texts. They were lush green with trees and so on. Many Jain Shramanas attained nirvana there. Below the Vaibhar hill were Tapoda and Mahatapopanir Prabha. 1. Aavashyak Churni 2, p. 158 2. Bhagwan Arishtanemi and Karmayogi Shri Krishna: An Investigation, 3. (a) Rajighe Munisuvvaydeva Pauma Sumittra Raahim.
-Tiloaypannatti (b) Harivansh Purana, Sarg 60
(c). Uttar Purana, Parva 67 4. (a) Harivansh Purana, Sarg 2, Shlok 61-62
(b) Padma Purana, Parva 2, Shlok 113
(c) Maha Purana, Parva 1, Shlok 196 5. Uttar Purana, Parva 76
Jambu Sami Chariyam, Parva 5-13 6. Trishashti. 10.1.90. 136-148 7. Antakritdasang
Trishashti 9. Jain-Vipul, Ratna, Uday, Swarg, and Vaibhar
Vedic-Vaihar, Baraah, Vrishabh, Rishigiri, and Chaityak Buddhist-Chandan, Mijjhakut, Veebhar, Isgiti, and Vepunn.
-Suttanipata's Atthakatha 2, p. 382

Page #233:
---------------------------
[192]
There was a vast pond of hot water called Antakrid Dasha. It is still famous in Rajgir as Tapovan.
- Bhagwan Mahavir spent many Chaturmas there. The Agam literature mentions more than two hundred instances of his Samavasaran there. There were gardens like Gunashil, Mandicuchch and Moggaripaani. Bhagwan Mahavir often stayed in Gunashil (now called Gunava) garden.
Rajgir was a major center of trade. Merchants used to come from far and wide. There were routes from there to famous cities of India like Taxila, Pratistan, Kapilvastu, Kushinara, etc. [6] Buddhist texts describe the beautiful paddy fields there.
Agam literature describes Rajgir as a direct Devlok and similar to Alakapuri. Maha Kavi Pushpadant wrote - Rajgiri made of gold and silver appeared as if Alakapuri from heaven had come to earth. Ravishena Acharya called Rajgir the youth of the earth. Many other poets have elaborated on the importance of Rajgir.
Not only Jains but also Buddhists had a sweet relationship with Rajgir. It is clear from Vinayapitaka that Buddha came to Rajgir after leaving home. Then King Shrenik encouraged him to stay in Rajgir with him. But Buddha did not agree. Buddha came to Rajgir many times to preach his religion.
1. (a) Vyakhyaprajnapti, 2.5, p. 141
(b) Brihatkalpa Bhashya, Vritti 2. 3429 (c) Vayupuran, 1.4.5 (a) Kalpasutra, 4. 123 (b) Vyakhyaprajnapti, 7.4, 5.9, 2.5
(c) Aavashyak Niyukti, 473. 492. 518 3. (a) Jnatadharmakatha, p. 47
(b) Dasha Shruta Skandh, 109. p. 364
(c) Upasak Dasha, 8. p. 51 4. Vyakhyaprajnapti, 15. 5. Antakrid Dashaang 6, p. 31
Jain Agam Literature in Indian Society, p. 462 7. Pacchakkham Devlokabhuya evam Alakapurisaankasa.
Tahim Paruvaru Name Rayagihhu Kanayarayan Kodihim Ghadiu. Baliband Gharam Taho Sukhaihim Suranayaru Gayanpadiu.
- Nayakumar Chariu, 6 Tatrasti Sarvatah Kantam Namna Rajagriham Puram. Kusumamodasubhagam Bhuvanasyava Yauvanam. Padma Puran 33.2 

Page #234:
---------------------------
[Appendix 2]
[193] They often stayed in the Gridhrakuta mountain, Kalandaka Nivaaya and the bamboo forest. Once, when the Buddha was in the mango grove of Jivaka Kumarabhritya, Abhayakumar discussed the relationship between violence and non-violence with him.
When they were in the bamboo forest, Abhayakumar had a discussion with them. Sadhu Sakalodayi also had a conversation with the Buddha here. Once, the Buddha stayed in the Tapodaram where there were hot water springs. After the Buddha's Nirvana, Rajgriha began to decline. When the Chinese traveler Xuanzang came here, Rajgriha was not the same as before. Today, its residents are poor and destitute. Nowadays, Rajgriha is known as 'Rajgir'. Rajgir is located in the state of Bihar, east of Patna and northeast of Gaya. (11) Raivatak -
Parjitar identifies Raivatak with the Vardha mountain in the western part of Kathiawar. According to the Jnatasutra, there was a mountain called Raivatak in the north-east of Dwarka. The same is described in Antakritdasha. According to the Trishatishalaka Purushcharitra, near Dwarka, there is Raivatak Giri in the east, Malyaavan Shail in the south, Saumanas mountain in the west and Gandhamadana Giri in the north. From the perspective of the Mahabharata, Raivatak was near Kushasthali. According to the Vedic Harivansh Purana, the Yadavas left Mathura and went to Sindh and settled Dwarka near the sea, not too far or too close to the Raivatak mountain. The Agam literature gives a very natural description of the Raivatak mountain.
Lord Arishtanemi set out for his departure, he mounted the Shivikaratna surrounded by gods and humans and stayed on the Raivatak mountain. 11 Rajimati also went to the Raivatak mountain from Dwarka with restraint.
my 3
,
1. Majjhimanikaya, (Sarnath 1633) 2. Majjhimanikaya, Abhayarajakumar Suttanta, p. 234
Majjhimanikaya, Chalasaklodayi, Suttanta, p. 305. 4. History of Dharmashastra, Volume 4, pp. 794-95. 5. Jnatadharmakatha, 1/5, Su. 58 6. Antakritdasha
Tasyah:puro Raivatako'pachyamasiittu Malyaavan. Somanaso'drih pratichyamudichaam Gandhamadana.
-Trishatishti, Parva 8, Sarga 5, Shloka 418 8. Kushasthali Purim ramyam Raivatenoposhobhitam.
-Mahabharata, Sabhaparva, A. 14, Shloka 50 9. Harivansh Purana 2/55. 10. Jnatadharmakatha 1/5, Sutra 58 11. Dev-Manuss-Parivudo, Siyarayanam Tao Samarudo.
Nikkhamiy Bargao, Revayami Thio Bhagavan.
-Uttaraadhyayana 22.22 

Page #235:
---------------------------
##  Translation:

[194]
Antakritdasha was on her journey.  In the middle of her journey, she was caught in the rain and took shelter in a cave to dry her clothes. This cave is still identified today as the Rajimati cave. The Revatak mountain in Saurashtra still exists today. It is possible that ancient Dwarka was situated at its foot. 

The Revatak mountain is also known as Urjayant. It is mentioned in the Girnar inscriptions of Rudradaman and Skandagupta. There was a Nandavan (heavenly garden) there, which housed the Yakshayatan of the Yaksha Surapriya. This mountain was adorned with many birds and creepers. There were also waterfalls here, and every year thousands of people gathered here to perform Sankhadi (feast, Jimenwar). Lord Arishtanemi attained Nirvana here.

According to the Digambar tradition, Acharya Dharasen performed penance in the Chandragupha of the Revatak mountain. It was here that the Acharyas Bhootbali and Pushpadanta ordered the remaining Shrutagyan to be written down. 

The Mahabharata mentions a battle between the Pandavas and the Yadavas on the Revatak.

In Jain scriptures, this mountain is referred to by names like Revatak, Ujjayant, Ujjwal, Girinal, and Girnar. The Mahabharata also mentions another name for this mountain, Ujjayant.

(12) Vipulgari Mountain
A mountain near the city of Rajgriha. It is mentioned in the Agamas at many places. Severe ascetics would come here under the supervision of the Sthaviras and perform Sanlekhana.

1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.

These five mountains are mentioned in Jain scriptures:

- Vaibhargiri
1.
2. Vipulgari

"Girin Revayam Janti, Vasenu Ulla Antara.
Vasante Andhyarammi Anto Layanas Sa Thiya."

- Vividh Tirthakalp, 3.19
- Jain Agam Sahitya mein Bharatiya Samaj, p. 472
- Brihatkalp Bhashya Vritti, 1.2922
- (a) Aavashyak Nirukti, 307
- (b) Kalpasutra, 6.174, p. 182
- (c) Jnatadharmakatha, 5, p. 68
- (d) Antakritdasha, 5, p. 28
- (e) Uttaradhyayana Teeka, 22, p. 280
- Jain Agam Sahitya mein Bharatiya Samaj, p. 473
- Adipurana mein Bharat, p. 109
- B. Mahavir Ni Dharmakathaao, p. 216, Pan. Bechradasji 

Page #236:
---------------------------
## Appendix 2

[195 3. Udayagiri 4. Suvarnagiri 5. Ratnagiri]

The names of the five mountains in the Mahabharata are - Vaibhar, Varaha, Vrishabha, Rishigiri and Chaityak.
The Vayupurana also mentions five mountains. For example - Vaibhar, Vipul, Ratnakoot, Girivraja and Ratnachal.
The Bhagavati Sutra, Shatak 2, Uddeshya 5, mentions a hot water spring called Mahatapopetirpraभव, located at the foot of the Vaibhar mountain in Rajgriha. This spring still exists today.
In Buddhist texts, this spring is called 'Tpaade', which is probably derived from 'Taptodak'.
The Chinese traveler Fa-Hien also saw it. (13) Sahasramravan Garden
The Agamas mention this garden extensively. There was also a beautiful garden of the same name outside the city of Kakand, where Dhanakumar and Sunakshastrakumar were initiated.
The Sahasramravan is also mentioned outside the following cities: 1. Outside Kakand 2. On Mount Girnar 3. Outside the city of Kampilya 4. Outside Pandu Mathura 5. Outside the city of Mithila
6. Outside Hastinapur - etc. (14) Saketa
An ancient city of India. It was the capital of the Kosala country. Acharya Hemchandra has called Saketa, Kosala and Ayodhya all the same.
Near Saketa was a beautiful garden called 'Uttarakuru', which had a Yaksha shrine called 'Pashamriga'.
The king of Saketa was named Mitranandi and the queen was named Shrikant.
The ancient Saketa will be near present-day Ayodhya, located on the southern bank of the Sarayu river, six miles northeast of Faizabad in the present-day Faizabad district. (15) Sravasti
It was the capital of the Kosala kingdom. Modern scholars have identified it with Saher-Maher. 

Page #237:
---------------------------
[196]
[ Antakrid Dasha ]
Sahehr is in Gonda district and Maher is in Bahraich district. Maher is in the north and Sahehr is in the south. This place is ten miles away from the road that goes from Balrampur station of the North Eastern Railway. It is located 29 miles from Bahraich.
According to scholar B. Smith, Sravasti is in the Khajura province of Nepal and it is in the north of Balpur and near the north-east of Nepalganj. 2 Yuan Chuang has considered Sravasti as a Janpad and its extent is six thousand li, its capital is called 'Prasad Nagar', whose extent is considered to be twenty li. 3
Jain perspective, this city was situated on the banks of the Achiravati (Rapti) river. There was very little water in it, which Jain monks used to cross for alms. Sometimes there were very heavy floods in it. Sravasti has been a center of Buddhist and Jain culture. The historical dialogue between Keshi and Gautam took place here. Many historical events are associated with that land. Bhagwan Mahavira had spent his tenth Chaturmas in the state of Chhadmasthav in Sravasti. Even after attaining Kevalgyan, he had visited there many times and had given Pravrajya to hundreds of people and made thousands of people devotees. In the Kosthakodyan of Sravasti, Goshalak had killed Sunakshatra and Sarvanubhuti Munis from Tejoleyshya and had also projected Tejoleyshya on Bhagwan Mahavira. Goshalak's supreme devotee Ayampul and Halahal Kumharin were residents of this place.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
The Ancient Geography of India, pp. 469-474.
Journal of Royal Asiatic Society, Part 1, Jan. 1900
Yuan Chuang's Travels in India, Part 1, p. 377
(a) Kalpasutra
(b) Brihatkalpa Sutra, 4 | 33.
(c) Brihatkalpa Bhashya, 4 | 5639, 5653,
(a) Aavashyak Churni, p. 601
(b) Aavashyak Haribhadriya Vritti, p. 465.
(c) Aavashyak Malayagiri Vritti, p. 567
(d) Tauni's Katha Kosh, p. 6.
Uttaraadhyayana
See the present text. 

Page #238:
---------------------------
**Aagam Prakashan Samiti, Byawar**

**List of Benefactor Members with their Contributions**

**Patron**

1. Shri Seth Mohanmalji Chordia, Madras
2. Shri Seth Khivrajji Chordia, Madras
3. Shri Sayaramalji Jethamalji Chordia, Madras
4. Shri S. Kishanchandraji Chordia, Madras
5. Shri Gumanmalji Chordia, Madras
6. Shri Kanwarlalji Betala, Guwahati
7. Shri Pukharajji Shishodia, Byawar
8. Shri Premrajji Bhanwarlalji Shrisrimal, Durg
9. Shri Gulabchandji Mangilalji Sarana, Bagalkot

**Column**

1. Shri Hira Lalji Pannalalji Chopra, Byawar
2. Shri Deepchandji Chandanmalji Chourdia, Madras
3. Shri Gyanrajji Mootha, Pali
4. Shri Khubchandji Gadia, Byawar
5. Shri Ratanchandji Uttamchandji Modi, Byawar
6. Shri Pannalalji Bhagchandji Bothra, Changatola
7. Shri Mishrilalji Dhanrajji Vinaykia, Byawar
8. Shri Premrajji Jatanrajji Mehta, Medta
9. Shri Jadavamalji Manakchandji Betala, Secunderabad

**Column**

1. Shri Bastimalji Mohanlalji Bohra (K.G.F.)
2. Shri Jasrajji Ganeshmalji Sancheti, Jodhpur
3. Shri Amarchandji Fatehchandji Parkh, Jodhpur
4. Shri Poosalalji Kisturchandji Surana, Balaghat
5. Shri Tilokchandji Sagarmalji Sancheti, Madras
6. Shri J. Doolichandji Chordia, Madras
7. Shri Hirachandji Chordia, Madras
8. Shri S. Ratanchandji Chordia, Madras
9. Shri Vardhman Industries, Kanpur
10. Shri S. Sayarchandji Chordia, Madras
11. Shri S. Badalchandji Chordia, Madras
12. Shri S. Rikhabchandji Chordia, Madras
13. Shri R. Parsanchandji Chordia, Madras
14. Shri Annarajji Chordia, Madras
15. Shri Deepchandji Bokardia, Madras
16. Shri Mishrilalji Tilokchandji Sancheti, Durg
17. Shri Mohanrajji Walia, Ahmedabad
18. Shri Chetanmalji Surana, Madras

**Column**

1. Shri Nemichandji Lalwani, Changatola
2. Shri Birdichaandji Prakashchandji Telesara, Pali
3. Shri Sirekanwar Bai, wife of late Shri Sumanchandji Jhamar, Madurantakam
4. Shri Moolchandji Chordia, Katangi
5. Shri Thanchandji Mehta, Jodhpur
6. Shri Moolchandji Sujanmalji Sancheti, Jodhpur
7. Shri Lalchandji Mohanlalji Kothari, Gothan
8. Shri Bherudanji Labhchandji Surana, Dhowri and Nagaur
9. Shri Ravatmalji Bhikhamchandji Pagaria, Balaghat
10. Shri Sagarmalji Noratmalji Pincha, Madras
11. Shri Dharmichaandji Bhagchandji Bohra, Jhutha
12. Shri Motichandji, Madras
13. Shri Motichandji, Madras
14. Shri Motichandji, Madras
15. Shri Motichandji, Madras
16. Shri Motichandji, Madras
17. Shri Motichandji, Madras
18. Shri Motichandji, Madras
19. Shri Motichandji, Madras
20. Shri Motichandji, Madras
21. Shri Motichandji, Madras
22. Shri Motichandji, Madras
23. Shri Motichandji, Madras

Page #239:
---------------------------
[198]
[Antakrid Dasha 24. Shri Ganeshmalji Dharmicandji Kankaria, Nagaur 6. Shri Ratnalalji Chatar, Byaver 25. Shri Badalchandji Mehta, Indore
7. Shri Janvarilalji Amarchandji Kothari, Byaver 26. Shri Harkachandji Sagarchandji Betala, Indore 8. Shri Mohanlalji Gulabchandji Chatar, Byaver 27. Shri Suganchandji Bokardia, Indore 9. Shri Badarmalji Pukharajji Bant, Kanpur 28. Shri Inderchandji Baid, Rajnandgaon 10. Shri K. Pukharajji Bafna, Madras 29. Shri Mangilalji Dharmicandji Chordia 11. Shri Pukharajji Budhrajji Bohra, Pipaliya Changatola
- 12. Shri Champalalji Budhrajji Bafna, Byaver 30. Shri Raghunathmalji Likhmichandji Lodha, 13. Shri Nathmalji Mohanlalji Luniya, Changatola.
Chandaval 31. Shri Bhanvarlalji Mulchandji Surana, Madras 14. Shri Mangilalji Prakashchandji Runwal, Bar 32. Shri Siddhakarnaji Baid, Changatola 15. Shri Mohanlalji Mangalchandji Pagaria, Raipur 33. Shri Jalmachandji Rikhbachandji Bafna, Agra 16. Shri Bhanvarlalji Gautamchandji Pagaria, 34. Shri Bhanvarimalji Chordia, Madras
Kushalapura 35. Shri Hiralalji Pannalalji Chopra, Ajmer 17. Shri Dule Rajji Bhanvarlalji Kothari, 36. Shri Ghevarchandji Pukharajji, Guwahati
Kushalapura. 37. Shri Mangilalji Chordia, Agra
Tha, Agra
18. Shri Phoolchandji Gautamchandji Kanthad, Pali 38. Shri Bhanvarlalji Gothi, Madras
19. Shri Rupchandji Jodhrajji Mootha, Pali 39. Shri Gunachandji Dallichandji Kataria, Bellary 20. Shri Pannalalji Motilalji Surana, Pali 40. Shri Amarchandji Bothra, Madras
21. Shri Devkarnaji Shrichandji Dosi, Medtacity 41. Shri Chhogmalji Hemrajji Lodha, Dondi Lohara 22. Shri Manakrajji Kishenrajji, Medtacity 42. Shri Mohanlalji Parsamalji Pagaria, 23. Shri Amritrajji Jaswantrajji Mehta, Medta Bangalore
City 43. Shri Jadavamalji Suganchandji, Madras 24. Shri V. Gajrajji Bokardia, Salem 44. Shri Pukharajji Vijayrajji, Madras 25. Shri Bhanvarlalji Vijayrajji Kankaria, 45. Shri Jabarchandji Gelda, Madras
_ Villipuuram 46. Shri Surajmalji Sajjanrajji Mehta, Kuppal 26. Shri Kanakrajji Madanrajji Golia, Jodhpur सहयोगी सदस्य
27. Shri Harkarajji Mehta, Jodhpur 1. Shri Poonamchandji Nahta, Jodhpur
28. Shri Sumermalji Medtiya, Jodhpur 2. Shri Amarchandji Balchandji Modi, Byaver 29. Shri Ghevarchandji Parsamalji Tantia, Jodhpur 3. Shri Champalalji Mithalalji Saklecha, 30. Shri Ganeshmalji Nemichandji Tantia, Jodhpur Jalna
31. Shri Champalalji Hiralalji Bagrecha, 4. Shri Chhaganibai Vinaykia, Byaver
Jodhpur 5. Shri Bhanvarlalji Chopra, Byaver
32. Shri Mohanlalji Champalalji Gothi, Jodhpur 

Page #240:
---------------------------
## Upaliyam
**Members List**

1. Shri Jasrajji Janvarilalji Dhariawal, Jodhpur
2. Shri Bhanwarlalji Motha, Jaipur Jodhpur
3. Shri Sardarmallji Surana, Bhilai
4. Shri Mulchandji Parkh, Jodhpur
5. Shri Bhanwarlalji Dungarmallji Kankaria, Bhilai
6. Shri Asumal & Co., Jodhpur
7. Shri Devrajji Lalchandji Medtiya, Jodhpur
8. Shri Ganeshmallji Hemrajji Soni, Bhilai
9. Shri Ravtamallji Chajed, Bhilai
10. Shri Ghevarchandji Kishorimallji Parkh, Jodhpur
11. Shri Hira Lalji Hastimallji, Bhilai
12. Shri Pukharajji Bohra, Jodhpur
13. Shri Pukharajji Chhallani, Karan Guddi
14. Shri Bachhrajji Surana, Jodhpur
15. Shri Lalchandji Siremallji Bala, Jodhpur
16. Shri Premrajji Mithalalji Kamdar, Chawandia
17. Shri Tarachandji Kevalchandji Karnavat, Jodhpur
18. Shri Mishrilalji Likhmichandji Sand, Jodhpur
19. Shri Bhanwarlalji Manakchandji Surana, Madras
20. Shri Uttamchandji Mangilalji, Jodhpur
21. Shri Bhanwarlalji Navratanmallji Sankhla, Jodhpur
22. Shri Mangilalji Rekchandji Parkh, Jodhpur
23. Shri Udayrajji Pukharajji Sancheti, Jodhpur
24. Shri Suraj Karanji Surana, Lamba
25. Shri Sardarmall & Co., Jodhpur
26. Shri Ratnalalji Lakhpatrajji, Jodhpur
27. Shri Harakchandji Jugrajji Bafna, Bangalore
28. Shri Raychand Mohanlalji, Jodhpur
29. Shri Lalchandji Motilalji Gadiya, Bangalore
30. Shri Nemichandji Dakalia, Jodhpur
31. Shri Ghevarchandji Ruparajji, Jodhpur
32. Shri Sampatrajji Kataria, Jodhpur
33. Shri Munnilalji, Mulchandji, Pukharajji Gulechha, Jodhpur
34. Shri Pukharajji Kataria, Jodhpur
35. Shri Chiman Singhji Mohansinghji Lodha, Byawar
36. Shri Akhechandji Bhandari, Kolkata
37. Shri Mangilalji Chordia, Kuchera
38. Shri Sundarbai Gothi, Mahamandir
39. Shri Pukharajji Lodha, Jodhpur
40. Shri Balchandji Dhanmallji Bhurat (Kuchera), Kolkata
41. Shri Indrachandji Mukundchandji, Indore
42. Shri Bhanwarlalji Bafna, Indore
43. Shri Chandanmallji Premrajji Modi, Bhilai
44. Shri Jethamallji Modi, Indore
45. Shri Tilakchandji Premprakashji, Ajmer
46. Shri Bhikmachandji Ganeshmallji Choudhary, Dhullia
47. Shri Sohnalalji Sojatiya, Thanwala
48. Shri Suganchandji Sancheti, Rajnandgaon
49. Shri Vijaylalji Premchandji Golechha, Rajnandgaon
50. Shri Jeevrajji Bhanwarlalji, Bhaisanda
51. Shri Motilalji Madanlalji, Bhaisanda
52. Shri Jeevrajji Parsamallji Kothari, Medta City
53. Shri Gheesulalji Lalchandji Parkh, Durg
54. Shri Asakaranji Jasrajji Parkh, Durg
55. Shri Bhivraji Wagmar, Kuchera
56. Shri Okhchandji Hemrajji Parkh, Durg
57. Shri Gangaramji Inderchandji Bohra, Kuchera
58. Shri Fakirchandji Kamalchandji Shrisrimal, Kuchera 

Page #241:
---------------------------
[200]
[Antakrid Dasha] 91. Shri Sohनलालजी लूणकरणजी सुराणा, Kucheara Badi 92. Shri Prakashचंदजी Jain, Nagaur
111. Shri Maangilalजी शांतिलालजी Ruणwal, 93. Shri Bhanvarlalजी Rikhbachandजी Nahata, Nagaur Harsolav 94. Shri Gudarmalजी Champalalजी, Gothan 112. Shri Kamalakavnr Lalvani Dharmpatni Shri Sw. 95. Shri Parsamalजी Mahavirchandजी Bafna, Gothan Parsamalजी Lalvani, Gothan 96. Shri Ghisulalजी, Parsamalजी, Janvarilalजी 113. Shri Lakshmichandजी AshokKumarजी Shrisrimal, Kucheara _ Kothari, Gothan
114. Shri Bhanvarlalजी Maangilalजी Betala, Deh 97. Shri Mohनलालजी Dhаriwal, Pali 115. Shri Kanchandevi v Nirmaladevi, Madras 98. Shri Kanmalजी Kothari, Dadia
116. Shri Pukharajजी Naharmalजी Lalvani, Madras 99. Shri Vardhaman Sthanakvasi Jain, Shravak Sangh, Dalli
117. Shri Chandmalजी Dhanrajजी Modi, Ajmer Rajhara 100. Shri Janvarilalजी ShantiLalजी Surana,
118. Shri Maangilalजी Uttamchandजी Bafna, Bangalore
119. Shri Inderchandजी Jugrajजी Bafna, Bangalore 101. Shri Faterajजी Nemichandजी Karnavat, Calcutta 120. Shri Champalalजी Manakchandजी Singhi, Kucheara 102. Shri Riddkarणजी Ravtamलजी Bhurt, Guwahati
121. Shri Sanchalalजी Bafna, Aurangabad 103. Shri Jugrajजी Barmecha, Madras
122. Shri Bhuramलजी Dulleechandजी Bokardia, Medta 104. Shri Kushalchandजी Rikhbachandजी Surana, Bularam
City 105. Shri Manakchandजी Ratnalalजी Munot, Nagaur 106. Shri Sampatrajजी Chordia, Madras
123. Shri. Pukharajजी Kishnarajजी Tateड़,
Secunderabad 107. Shri Kundanmalजी Parsamalजी Bhandari, Bangalore
124. Shrimati Ramkunvar Dharmpatni Shri Chandmalजी 108. Shri Ramprasann Gyan Prasar Kendra, Chandrapur
Lodha, Mumbai. 109. Shri Tejarajजी Kothari, Mangaliya Vas 125. Shri Bhikamchandजी Manakchandजी Khabia 110. Shri Amarchandजी Champalalजी Chajeder, Padu (Kudaloor), Madras
Bularam 

Page #242:
---------------------------
## Anadhyayakala [Quoted from Nandī Sūtra edited by Ācārya Pravara Śrī Ātmārāmaji M.]

One should study the scriptures only during the time prescribed in the Āgamas for study. Studying during Anadhyayakala is prohibited.

The Manusmṛti and other Smṛtis also describe Anadhyayakala in detail. Vedic people also mention the Anadhyayas of the Vedas. Similarly, other Ārya scriptures are also considered Anadhyaya. Since the Jain Āgamas are also Sarvajñokta, Devādhiṣṭhita, and Svaravidyā combined, their Anadhyayakala is also described in the Āgamas, such as:

**Ten Anadhyayas related to the sky:**

1. **Ukkāvāte** - If there is a great fall of stars, one should not study for one prahara.
2. **Disidāghe** - As long as the direction is red, as if there is fire in the direction, one should not study.
3. **Gajjite** - Do not study for two praharas when there is thunder.
4. **Nigghāte** - Do not study for one prahara when there is lightning.
5. **Juvate** - Do not study for two praharas when there is a loud thunder without clouds, or thunder with clouds.
6. **Yakṣādīpta** - When there is a light in a direction, like lightning, that appears intermittently, it is called Yakṣādīpta. One should not study as long as the Yakṣa-like light is visible in the sky.
7. **Jakkhālitte** - Do not study for one prahara when there is a sudden flash of light.
8. **Dhūmita** - Do not study for one prahara when there is smoke in the sky.
9. **Mahita** - Do not study for one prahara when there is a great cloud in the sky.
10. **Rayugghaate** - Do not study for one prahara when there is a great wind in the sky.

**Ten Anadhyayas related to the body:**

1. **Aṭhi** - Do not study when there is a bone in the body.
2. **Mansaṁ** - Do not study when there is flesh in the body.
3. **Soṇite** - Do not study when there is blood in the body.
4. **Asutisāmante** - Do not study when there is a discharge of urine.
5. **Susāṇasāmante** - Do not study when there is a discharge of feces.
6. **Candovarāte** - Do not study when there is a discharge of semen.
7. **Sūrovarāte** - Do not study when there is a discharge of menstrual blood.
8. **Paḍane** - Do not study when there is a fall.
9. **Rāyavuggahe** - Do not study when there is a loss of consciousness.
10. **Uvassayassa Anto Orālie Sarīrage** - Do not study when there is a discharge of any other bodily fluid.

**Four Mahāpratipadā:**

1. **Āṣāḍhapratipadā**
2. **Indamahāpratipadā**
3. **Kattiyāpratipadā**
4. **Sugimhapratipadā**

**Four Mahāpratipadā Pūrṇimā:**

1. **Āṣāḍha Pūrṇimā**
2. **Inda Pūrṇimā**
3. **Kattiyā Pūrṇimā**
4. **Sugimha Pūrṇimā**

**Four Sandhyā:**

1. **Paḍimāte** - Evening
2. **Paccimāte** - Night
3. **Majjhaṇhe** - Midday
4. **Aḍṭeratte** - Dawn

Thus, there are thirty-two Anadhyayas, which are described briefly as follows:

**Ten Anadhyayas related to the sky:**

1. **Ukkāvāte** - If there is a great fall of stars, one should not study for one prahara.
2. **Disidāghe** - As long as the direction is red, as if there is fire in the direction, one should not study.
3. **Gajjite** - Do not study for two praharas when there is thunder.
4. **Nigghāte** - Do not study for one prahara when there is lightning.
5. **Juvate** - Do not study for two praharas when there is a loud thunder without clouds, or thunder with clouds.
6. **Yakṣādīpta** - When there is a light in a direction, like lightning, that appears intermittently, it is called Yakṣādīpta. One should not study as long as the Yakṣa-like light is visible in the sky.
7. **Jakkhālitte** - Do not study for one prahara when there is a sudden flash of light.
8. **Dhūmita** - Do not study for one prahara when there is smoke in the sky.
9. **Mahita** - Do not study for one prahara when there is a great cloud in the sky.
10. **Rayugghaate** - Do not study for one prahara when there is a great wind in the sky.

**However, the Anadhyayas of thunder and lightning should not be considered during Cāturmās, as they are often due to the nature of the season. Therefore, Anadhyaya is not considered from Ārdrā to Svāti Nakshatra.**

**Note:** The text mentions that the Anadhyayas related to the sky should not be considered during Cāturmās, as they are often due to the nature of the season. Therefore, Anadhyaya is not considered from Ārdrā to Svāti Nakshatra. This is a significant point to remember when applying the rules of Anadhyayakala.
Page #243:
---------------------------
## Translation:

8. **Dhūmikā:** The period from Krishna-Kārttik to Māgh is the womb-month of the clouds. During this time, a subtle, smoky-colored, water-like mist falls, which is called Dhūmikā-Krishna. As long as this mist falls, one should not engage in svādhyāya.
9. **Mihikā-Śveta:** In the winter, a subtle, white-colored, water-like mist falls, which is called Mihikā. As long as this falls, it is a time of asvādhyāya.
10. **Rāja Udghata:** Due to the wind, dust spreads all over the sky. As long as this dust remains spread, one should not engage in svādhyāya.

The above ten reasons are related to the sky and are considered asvādhyāya. The following ten reasons are related to the material world and are also considered asvādhyāya.

11-13. **Bones, Flesh, and Blood:** If the bones, flesh, and blood of a five-sensed, non-human being are visible, then asvādhyāya continues until these objects are removed. The commentator considers asvādhyāya to be present within a radius of sixty cubits from these objects.

Similarly, asvādhyāya is considered for the bones, flesh, and blood of a human being. However, the duration of asvādhyāya is one hundred cubits and one day and night. For a woman's menstrual cycle, asvādhyāya lasts for three days. For the birth of a boy and a girl, asvādhyāya lasts for seven and eight days respectively.
14. **Impurity:** Asvādhyāya continues until excrement and urine are visible.
15. **Cremation Ground:** Asvādhyāya is considered to be present within a radius of one hundred cubits around a cremation ground.
16. **Lunar Eclipse:** During a lunar eclipse, asvādhyāya should not be performed for eight, twelve, or sixteen praharas, depending on the severity of the eclipse.
17. **Solar Eclipse:** During a solar eclipse, asvādhyāya is also considered to be present for eight, twelve, or sixteen praharas, depending on the severity of the eclipse.
18. **Fall:** When a great king or a national leader dies, asvādhyāya should not be performed until his cremation is completed. Alternatively, asvādhyāya should be performed gradually until a new leader takes over.
19. **Royal Conflict:** When there is a war between nearby kings, asvādhyāya should not be performed until peace is restored. Even after peace is restored, asvādhyāya should not be performed for one day and night.
20. **Material Body:** If a five-sensed being dies within a shelter, asvādhyāya should not be performed until the body is removed. If the lifeless body is lying within a radius of one hundred cubits, asvādhyāya should not be performed.

The above ten reasons are related to the material body and are considered asvādhyāya.

21-28. **Four Festivals and Four Mahā-Pratipadās:** The four festivals are Āṣāḍha-Pūrṇimā, Āśvina-Pūrṇimā, Kārttika-Pūrṇimā, and Chaitra-Pūrṇimā. The pratipadā that comes after these pūrṇimās is called Mahā-Pratipadā. Asvādhyāya is prohibited during these periods.
29-32. **Morning, Evening, Midday, and Midnight:** Asvādhyāya should not be performed one ghaḍī before and one ghaḍī after sunrise. Asvādhyāya should not be performed one ghaḍī before and one ghaḍī after sunset. Asvādhyāya should not be performed one ghaḍī before and one ghaḍī after midday. Asvādhyāya should not be performed one ghaḍī before and one ghaḍī after midnight. 

Page #244:
---------------------------
##  Life Sketch of Yuvacharya Shri Mishrimalji M.Sa. 'Madhukar' Muni

**Birth:** 
* **Father:**  
* **Date:**  Margashirsha Shukla Chaturdashi, Vikram Samvat 1970
* **Place:**  Tinwari Nagar, Jodhpur District, Rajasthan

**Mother:**  Shrimati Tulsibai

**Family:**  Shri Jamnalalji Dhaadiwal

**Initiation:**
* **Date:**  Vaishakh Shukla 10, Vikram Samvat 1980
* **Place:**  Bhinay Gram, Ajmer District
* **Initiation Guru:**  Shri Joravarmalji M.Sa.
* **Teaching Guru (Guru-Bhrata):**  Shri Hazarimlalji M.Sa.

**Acharya Parampara:**  Poojya Acharya Shri Jaymallji M.Sa.

**Acharya Pad:**
* **Jay Gachch:**  Vikram Samvat 2004
* **Renunciation of Acharya Pad for the unity of the Shraman Sangh:**  Vikram Samvat 2009

**Upadhyaya Pad:**  Vikram Samvat 2033

**Yuvacharya Pad:**
* **Announcement:**  Shravan Shukla 1, Vikram Samvat 2036 (July 25, 1979), Hyderabad
* **Chadar Mahotsav:**  Chaitra Shukla 10, Vikram Samvat 2037 (March 23, 1980), Jodhpur

**Nirvana:**  Mrigasira Vad 7, Vikram Samvat 2040 (November 26, 1983), Nasik (Maharashtra)

**Personality and Knowledge:**

* **Appearance:**  A glorious, majestic, and radiant forehead, bright large eyes, a smile that illuminated his face, a gentle and affectionate voice, a radiance of spiritual energy, immense devotion to his Gurus, humility along with knowledge, wisdom along with authority, and a disciplined Shraman.
* **Knowledge:**  He was proficient in Prakrit, Sanskrit, Grammar, Prakrit Grammar, Jain Agamas, Nyaya Darshan, etc.
* **Skills:**  He was a highly skilled orator, novelist, storyteller, and commentator.

**Published Works:**

* **Pravachan Sangrah (Discourse Collections):**
    1. Antar Ki Aur, Part 1 & 2
    2. Sadhana Ke Sutra
    3. Paryushana Parva Pravachan
    4. Anekanta Darshan
    5. Jain-Karmasiddhanta
    6. Jain Tattva-Darshan
    7. Jain Sanskrit-Ek Vishleshan
    8. Grihasth Dharma
    9. Aparigraha Darshan
    10. Ahimsa Darshan
    11. Tap Ek Vishleshan
    12. Adhyatma-Vikas Ki Bhoomika
* **Katha Sahitya (Story Literature):**  Jain Katha Mala, Part 1 to 51
* **Upanyas (Novels):**
    1. Pinjare Ka Panchhi
    2. Ahimsa Ki Vijay
    3. Talash
    4. Chhaya
    5. Aan Par Balidan
* **Other Books:**
    1. Agam Parichay
    2. Jain Dharma Ki Hazar Shikshaen
    3. Jiyo To Aise Jiyo

**Special:**  He was the coordinator and chief editor of Agam Battisi.

**Disciple:**  He had one disciple: Muni Shri Vinaykumarji 'Bheem'. 

