Catalog link: https://jainqq.org/explore/003449/1

Page #1:
---------------------------
In memory of the revered Gurudev Shri Joravarmalji Maharaj
Coordinator and Chief Editor
Yuvacharya Shri Madhukar Muni
Anuttarauṣapātikaśā
Original - Translation - Analysis - Notes - Appendix - Youth

Page #2:
---------------------------
ॐ Arhat
Jinagam-Granthamala: Granthank - 6
[Organized in the auspicious memory of Param Shraddhey Gurudev Pujya Shri Joravarmalji Maharaj]
Pancham Ganadhar Bhagavat Sudharmaswami-Pranit: Navam Ang
Anuttaroupapatikadasang
[Original Text, Hindi Translation, Discussion, Appendix Included]
Inspiration Up-Pravartak Shasansevi Sw. Swami Shri Brajlalji Maharaj
First Coordinator and Chief Editor
(Sw.) Yuvacharya Shri Mishrimalji Maharaj 'Madhukar'
Translator - Discussant Sadhvi Muktiprabhaji
M.A., P-H.D.
[Disciple of Acharya Samrat Shri Anandrishiji M. and Antavasini of Mahasati Shri Ujjvalkumariji]
Publisher
Shri Agam Prakashan Samiti, Byawar (Rajasthan)

Page #3:
---------------------------
Jinagam-Granthamala : Granthank-6
Nirdéshan Sadhvi Shri Umravkunvar Ji M.Sa. 'Archana'
Sampadak Mandal Anuyogpravartak Muni Shri Kanhaiyalalji 'Kamal' Acharya Shri Devendramuni Ji Shastri
Shri Ratnamuni Ji Pan. Shobhachandra Ji Bharill
Samprerak Muni Shri Vinaykumar 'Bhim'
Sanshodhan Shri Devkumar Jain
Tritiya Sanskaran Veer Nirvan San. 2525 Vikram San. 2056 E. San. 1999
Prakashan Shri Agam Prakashan Samiti Braj-Madhukar Smriti Bhavan
Pipaliya Bazaar, Byawer (Rajasthan)-305901
Durbhash: 50087
Mudrak Shrimati Vimlesh Jain
Ajantā Paper Converters Lakshmi Chauk, Ajmer-305001 Computerized Type Setting
Sunrise Computers Nahar Mohalla, Ajmer-305011
Muly: 41/- Rupees

Page #4:
---------------------------
Guvacharya Shri Madhukar Muni ji M.Sa.
卐 Maha Mantra Namo Arihantaanam, Namo Siddhanam, Namo Ayariyanam, Namo Uvvajhayanam,
Namo Loesavva Sahoonanam, Eso Panch Namo-kkaro' Savvapavapanasano. Mangalanam Cha Savvesim, Padham Havai Mangalam.

Page #5:
---------------------------
The five great vows (Mahavratas) are:
1. **Ahimsa** (non-violence)
2. **Satya** (truthfulness)
3. **Asteya** (non-stealing)
4. **Brahmacharya** (continence)
5. **Aparigraha** (non-attachment)

Page #6:
---------------------------
Published on the Holy Remembrance occasion of Rev. Guru Shri Joravarmalji Maharaj
Fifth Ganadhara Sudharma Swami Compiled
Ninth Anga
ANUTTAROVAVĀIA-DASÃO
[Original Text, Hindi Version, Notes, Annotations and Appendices etc.)
Proximity Up-Pravartaka Shasansevi Rev. (Late) Swami Sri Brijlalji Maharaj
Convener & Founder Editor Yuvacharya (Late) Sri Mishrimalji Maharaj 'Madhukar'
Translator & Annotator Sadhwi Muktiprabha
M.A., Ph.D.
Publishers Shri Agam Prakashan Samiti
Beawar (Raj.)

Page #7:
---------------------------
Jinagam Granthmala Publication No. 6
Direction
Sadhwi Shri Umrav Kunwar 'Archana'
Board of Editors
Anuyoga-Pravartaka Muni Sri Kanhaiyalal Ji 'Kamal' Acharya Sri Devendra Muni Ji Shastri
Sri Ratan Muni Ji
Pandit Shobha Chand Ji Bharil
Promotor
Muni Sri Vinay Kumar 'Bhima'
Corrections and Supervision Sri Dev Kumar Jain
Third Edition
Vir-Nirvana Samvat 2525 Vikram Samvat 2056 1999
Publishers
Sri Agam Prakashan Samiti, Brij-Madhukar Smriti Bhawan,
Pipalia Bazar,
Beawar (Raj.) - 305 901 Phone-50087
Printers
Smt. Vimlesh Jain Ajanta Paper Converters Laxmi Chowk, Ajmer-305 001
Laser Type Setting by: Sunrise Computers Ajmer-305 001
Price: Rs. /- 41/

Page #8:
---------------------------
**Dedication**

When the inquisitive seekers of Agam-study, the Agam-Swadhyaya-premi, yearned for the study of Agams, in that era, the entire thirty-two who, as solitary and helpless individuals, translated and rendered a great service to the Sangha and the Shaasana, and created other vast literature, establishing a new era, who were the Agam-Yug-Pravartak in the present time, who were the living symbols of simplicity, humility, and scholarship, whose sacred memory still evokes reverence and devotion in the hearts of the noble,

To those most revered Acharyas,
Shri Amolkarishiji Maharaj,
at the lotus feet of
Madhukar Muni.

Page #9:
---------------------------
The five great vows (Mahavratas) are:
1. **Ahimsa** (non-violence)
2. **Satya** (truthfulness)
3. **Asteya** (non-stealing)
4. **Brahmacharya** (continence)
5. **Aparigraha** (non-attachment)

Page #10:
---------------------------
This is the third edition of the Anuttaraupapatikadasanga Sutra being published after the publication of the third edition of the Prakashakaya Acharanga 1, 2 parts, Upasakadasanga, Jnatadharmakathanga, Antakriddasanga Sutras.
Anuttaraupapatikadasanga Sutra is the ninth Anga Agama among the Anga-entered Agamas. It describes the life of the famous Jain emperor Shrenik's princes Jali, Mayali, etc., and the life of Dhannya, the son of Bhadra Sarthavahi, filled with sadhana. This makes it clear that the enjoyment of worldly pleasures cannot be the goal of man, but the success of human life lies in striving towards the ultimate goal of all beings - liberation (moksha). This is the objective of this Agama. Lovers of self-study should study it with this perspective.
The editing and translation of this Agama has been done with utmost diligence by the learned Mahasati Shri Muktiprabhaji M. M.A., Ph.D., making it comprehensive. Along with this, Acharya Shri Devendramuni Ji M. Shastri has revealed the inner secrets of the scriptures in his preface and guided the readers. The committee expresses its heartfelt gratitude and appreciation to Sadhviji and Acharya Shriji for this.
The plan to publish Agama Battisi was initiated under the able guidance of the late Yuvacharya Shri Madhukar Muni Ji, keeping in mind the publication of original Jain literature. At this time, all kinds of gentlemen contributed to making this laborious plan successful, and with the publication, the circle of readers expanded, becoming like a drop of water turning into an ocean. For this reason, the committee is trying to publish the third edition of all its inaccessible texts.
We are pleased to request that this holy ritual of Agama publication is the result of the inspiration of our collaborators, and it is only through the grace of the all-auspicious late Yuvacharya Shriji's reign, devotion to the Agamas, and love for literature that we have received this fortune.
Sagarmal Baitala, President
Ratanchand Modi, Working President
Shri Agama Prakashan Samiti, Byawar (Rajasthan)
Sayaramal Chordia, General Secretary
Gyanchand Binayakiya, Secretary

Page #11:
---------------------------
The five great vows (Mahavratas) are:
1. **Ahimsa** (non-violence)
2. **Satya** (truthfulness)
3. **Asteya** (non-stealing)
4. **Brahmacharya** (continence)
5. **Aparigraha** (non-attachment)

Page #12:
---------------------------
## Introduction
(From the First Edition)

The fundamental basis of Jain religion, philosophy, and culture is the word of the Vitaraga Sarvagna. Sarvagna means one who has self-realization. Only those who have complete self-realization can have a complete vision of the world. Those who know the whole can truly explain the essence of knowledge. They can truly preach the ultimate good, the liberation.

The essence of knowledge, self-knowledge, and proper conduct as stated by the Sarvagnas is known as 'Agam Shastra' or Sutra.

The word of the Tirthankaras is like a shower of liberated flowers. The great wise Ganadharas compile it in the form of Sutras and give it the form of a systematic 'Agam'.

What we call 'Agam' today was known as 'Ganipitaka' in ancient times. 'Ganipitaka' includes the entire Dvadasangi. Later, its parts, sub-parts, roots, holes, etc. were divided into many categories.

When there was no tradition of writing, the Agams were preserved through the Guru-Parampara based on memory. For almost a thousand years after Bhagwan Mahavira, the 'Agam' followed the tradition of memory. Due to weakness of memory, the break in the Guru-Parampara, and many other reasons, the knowledge of Agam gradually disappeared. The water of the great lake dried up and only a small puddle remained. Then, Devarddigni Kshamashraman called a meeting of the Shramans and made a historic attempt to preserve the knowledge of Agam, which was disappearing due to memory lapses, and to preserve the word of the Jinas. He compiled the word of the Jinas into a book and did an invaluable service to the future generations. This was an amazing initiative to keep the stream of Jain religion, philosophy, and culture flowing. This first compilation of the Agams was completed 980 or 993 years after the Nirvana of the Veer.

After being compiled into books, the form of the Jain Agams was preserved in its original form. However, due to the passage of time, external attacks, internal differences of opinion, conflicts, weakness of memory, and negligence, the pure stream of Agam knowledge, the correct Guru-Parampara of understanding, gradually weakened. Many important references, words, and profound meanings of the Agams became fragmented. The Agams that were written were not completely pure, and those who could give the correct meaning of the Agams were rare. Due to many other reasons, the stream of Agam knowledge became narrow.

In the sixteenth century Vikram, Lokashah made a revolutionary effort. A bold initiative to explain the pure and true meaning of the Agams was started again. But after some time, obstacles arose again. Communal hatred, theoretical conflicts, and the lack of knowledge of language among the scribes became a major obstacle in the achievement of the Agams and their correct understanding.

1. "The meaning is explained by the Arha, the Sutras are compiled by the wise Ganadharas."
[9]

Page #13:
---------------------------
In the early stages of the nineteenth century, when the tradition of printing Agamas began, readers found some convenience. When the ancient commentaries, Churnis and Niyuktis of the Agamas were published and based on them, the simple and clear understanding of the Agamas was printed and made available to the readers, the study of Agam knowledge naturally increased, hundreds of curious people developed a tendency towards Agam self-study and Jain and non-Jain scholars from India and abroad also started practicing the Agamas.
It is difficult to mention the names of all the scholars and wise Shramans who did historical work in the publication, editing and printing of the Agamas, due to lack of sufficient material. Nevertheless, I will definitely mention the names of some great monks of the Stanakwasi tradition.
Reverend Shri Amolkarishiji Maharaj was a great courageous and determined monk of the Stanakwasi tradition, who, with the strength of meager resources, translated all thirty-two Sutras into Hindi and made them accessible to the masses. The editing and publication of all thirty-two was a historical work, which benefited the entire Stanakwasi and Terapanthi society. A resolution of Gurudev Pujya Swami Shri Joravarmalji Maharaj -
When I was studying the Agamas under the guidance of Gurudev Late Swami Shri Joravarmalji Maharaj, some Agamas published by the Agamoday Committee were available. Gurudev used to make me study based on them. Seeing them, Gurudev felt that although these editions are quite laborious and are also quite pure in the available editions so far, yet many places are unclear. There is also a difference somewhere in the original text and its commentary, somewhere the commentary is very brief.
Gurudev Swami Shri Joravarmalji Maharaj himself was a great scholar of Jain Sutras. His intellect was very learned and argumentative. Seeing this state of Agam literature, he was very pained and many times he also expressed that if the Agamas were published in a pure, beautiful and universally useful way, then many people would be benefited, due to some circumstances, his resolution remained limited to just a feeling.
Meanwhile, Acharya Shri Jawaharlalji Maharaj, Jain Dharmadiwakar Acharya Shri Atmaramji Maharaj, Pujya Shri Ghasilalji Maharaj etc. learned monks have fulfilled this deficiency by writing beautiful explanations and commentaries of the Agamas or by getting them written under their guidance.
At present, Acharya Shri Tulsi of the Terapanth sect has also started this Herculean effort and their Agam work is going on at a good level. Muni Shri Kanhaiyalalji 'Kamal' is making a unique and important effort to classify the statements of the Agamas into Anuyogas.
The learned Shraman Late Muni Shri Punyavijayji of the Shwetambar Murtipujak tradition had started a very systematic and excellent work in the direction of Agam editing. After his demise, this beautiful effort is going on under the guidance of Muni Shri Jambhuvijayji.
After taking a panoramic view of all the above works, a resolution arose in my mind. Today, somewhere the original of the Agamas is being published and somewhere the vast explanations of the Agamas are being done. One is incomprehensible for the reader, while the other is complex. There should be such an effort to reveal the essence of Agamvani by following the middle path, which is also understandable, simple, concise, but meaningful and easy.
Gurudev wanted the same. Keeping that feeling in mind, I started thinking about this subject 4-5 years ago.
[१०]

Page #14:
---------------------------
After long contemplation, on the 10th day of the bright fortnight of Vaishakh, Vikram Samvat 2036, the day of Mahavira's Kaivalya, I made a firm decision to begin the work of editing and interpreting the Agam-Battissi. Now, the Agam texts are gradually reaching the hands of the readers, and I am extremely happy about it.

This historic work of Agam editing has been undertaken in the auspicious memory of our revered Gurudev. Today, the remembrance of his virtues is filling my heart with joy. At the same time, the inspirations of my venerable Guru-brother, the revered Swami Shri Hazarimallji Maharaj, his devotion to the Agams, his profound knowledge of the Agams, and his ancient beliefs have been my strength. Therefore, I am overwhelmed with the auspicious memory of both these celestial souls.

The guidance of Shasansevi Swami Shri Brajlallji Maharaj, his encouragement, the companionship and strength of the service-minded disciples Muni Vinaykumar and Mahendramuni, their service and cooperation, and the humble inspiration of Mahasati Shri Kanakunvarji, Mahasati Shri Jhankaakunvarji, and the highly learned Sadhvi Shri Umravkunvarji 'Archana' have always helped me to remain motivated and dedicated to my work.

I have firm faith that in completing this long and arduous task of editing the Agam-vani, I will continue to receive full cooperation from all my colleagues, listeners, and scholars, and I will remain dynamic in reaching my goal.

With this hope...
– Muni Mishrimal 'Madhukar'
[11]

Page #15:
---------------------------
Shri Agam Prakashan Samiti, Bayar (Executive Committee)
President Vice-President Vice-President
Indore Bayar Bayar Madras Jodhpur Madras
Durg
General Secretary
Secretary
Joint Secretary Treasurer
Shri Sagarmalji Baitala Shri Ratanchandji Modi Shri Dhanrajji Vinayakia Shri Bhanwarlalji Gothi Shri Hukmichandji Parkh Shri Dulichandji Chordia Shri Jasrajji Parkh Shri G. Sayermalji Chordia Shri Gyanchandji Vinayakia Shri Gyanrajji Mootha Shri Prakashchandji Chopra Shri Janvarilalji Shishodia Shri R. Prasannachandji Chordia Shri Manakchandji Sancheti Shri Tejarajji Bhandari Shri S. Sayermalji Chordia Shri Mulchandji Surana Shri Motichandji Chordia Shri Amarchandji Modi Shri Kishnalalji Baitala Shri Jatanrajji Mehta Shri Devrajji Chordia Shri Gautamchandji Chordia Shri Sumermalji Medtiya Shri Asulalji Bohra Shri Budhrajji Bafna
Advisors
Members
Madras Bayar Pali Bayar Bayar Madras Jodhpur Jodhpur Madras Nagaur Madras Bayar Madras Medta City Madras Madras Jodhpur Jodhpur Bayar

Page #16:
---------------------------
## Editorial
(From the First Edition)

**Name:**
Anuttaroupapatikadasha is the ninth anga of the Dvadasanga. According to the meaning of the words, the word Anuttaroupapatikadasha is formed from the words 'Anuttar, Upapat and Dasha'. Anuttar means - Anuttar Vimana, Upapat means - to be born and Dasha means - state or indication of the number ten. Since this sutra has ten studies, the word Dasha should be used. It describes those seekers who have completed their lifespan here and taken birth in the Anuttar Vimana and will then attain liberation after taking birth as humans. Samavayangasutra mentions its ten studies but does not give the names of the ten studies. According to the Stanangasutra, their names are as follows - Rishi Das, Dhanya, Sunaksha, Kartik, Swasthana, Shalibhadra, Anand, Tetali, Dasharnabhadra and Atimukta. According to Tattvarthrajwartik, their names are as follows - Rishi Das, Vanya, Sunaksha, Kartik, Nand, Nandan, Shalibhadra, Abhay, Varishen, Chilatputra. In Angpannatti, their names are as follows - Rishi Das, Shalibhadra, Sunaksha, Abhay, Dhanya, Varishen, Nandan, Nand, Chilatputra, Kartik. In Dhavala, the names Kartikeya and Anand are found in place of Kartik and Nand respectively.

Currently, the presented Agam is divided into three sections, which have 10, 13 and 10 studies respectively. Thus, 33 studies describe 33 great souls in brief. Of these, 23 princes are the sons of Shrenik.

The form of Anuttaroupapatikadasha that is currently available is different from the readings of Stananga and Samavayanga. Acharya Abhaydev has called it a different reading in Stanangavritti.

**Subject Matter:**
Samavayanga Sutra mentions the subject described in Anuttaroupapatik Sutra and its verse-quantity, word count, etc. as follows:

Soudharm, Ishana, etc. are considered to be twelve heavens. Above the twelfth heaven come the nine Graivaik Vimana and above them come the five Anuttar Vimana - Vijay, Vaijayant, Jayant, Aparajit and Sarvarth Siddha. These Vimana are called Anuttar Vimana because there are no other Vimana above them that are superior in the north. Those seekers who attain birth (Upapat) in these Vimana through their excellent penance and restraint are called 'Anuttaroupapatik'.

Anuttaroupapatik describes the cities, gardens, chaityas, forest tracts, Samavasaran, contemporary kings, parents, religious teachers, Dharmacharayas, Dharmakatha, worldly prosperity, enjoyment and consumption, penance, renunciation, pravrajya, utsarga, sanlekhana, final time's padopgaman (Santhara), etc. of the Anuttaroupapatik, birth (Upapat) in the Anuttar Vimana, birth in a noble family from there, attainment of enlightenment and final actions, etc. 1. Stananga 10/114. 2. Tattvarthrajwartik 1/20, p. 73. 3. Angpannatti 55. 4. Shatkhandagam 1/1/2.
[13]

Page #17:
---------------------------
The Samvayanga and Nandī Sūtra introduce the Anuttaraupapātika, stating, "This Sūtra is described as such." This means that the Anuttaraupapātika has countless Anuyogadwār, countless Vedha, countless Śloka, countless Niyukti, countless Sangrahaṇī, and countless Pratipatti. This Sūtra contains one Śruta Skandha, three Varga, ten Adhyayana, countless Akshara, infinite Gam, and infinite Paryaya.

This Sūtra describes a finite number of Trasa Jīvas and an infinite number of Sthāvara Jīvas. All these substances are described in their essence and are also organized through examples and reasons. All these substances are also presented in the Sūtra through names, establishment, etc. Thus, the soul who understands this Sūtra becomes the knower, the cognizer, and the seer of these subjects. In this way, the Sūtra presents the form of Charanakaran.

The Nandī Sūtra also presents the subjects in a similar way to the Samvayanga Sūtra. However, the Nandī Sūtra does not mention the number of Adhyayana. According to the Nandī Sūtra, the Uddesana of the Anuttaraupapātika takes place in three days, while according to the Samvayanga, it takes ten days. The Nandī Sūtra mentions this subject as follows: "Ege Suyakkhande, Tinni Vagga, Tinni Uddesanakala." This means, "In this ninth Anga, there are three Varga and three Uddesana Kala." It is clear that the name Adhyayana is not mentioned here. However, the Samvayanga mentions ten Adhyayana. The commentators of the Samvayanga write that the reason for this difference is not known: "Iha tu Dṛśyante Daśa-iti Atra Abhiprāyo Na Jñāyate Iti." This difference clearly shows that the order or flow of our Āgama Śāstra has been particularly fragmented.

The Sthānānga Sūtra only mentions ten Adhyayana. According to the Tattvārtharāja Vārtika, this Āgama describes ten Anuttaraupapātika Śramaṇa who appear in the time of each Tīrthankara. The Kaṣāya Pāhuḍ also supports this.

What is the difference between this Sūtra available today and the one available in ancient times? The answer is as follows:

The existence of three Varga is not mentioned in the four texts, including the Rāja Vārtika. Some of the names mentioned in the Sthānānga and Rāja Vārtika are available in the current Sūtra. For example, the name Vāriṣeṇa (Rāja Vārtika) is in the first Varga. Similarly, the three names Dhanya, Sunakṣatra, and Ṛṣidasa (Sthānānga and Rāja Vārtika) are mentioned in the third Varga. These four names are available in the current Sūtra, but no other names are mentioned. The other names mentioned in the current text are not found in the Sthānānga or the Rāja Vārtika. The commentator of the Sthānānga Sūtra, Śrī Abhaydeva Sūri, states that the names mentioned in the Sthānānga may be found in another recitation of the current Sūtra. The current recitation is different from that recitation.

The number of words in the current Sūtra is mentioned as countless lakhs in the Samvayanga Sūtra, and its commentary mentions forty-six lakhs and eight thousand (46,08,000) words. The original Nandī Sūtra mentions countless thousands of words. The commentary also mentions countless thousands of words. The Dhavala and Jaya-Dhavala mention 92,44,000 (ninety-two lakhs forty-four thousand) words. The Rāja Vārtika does not mention the number of words anywhere.

The current Anuttaraupapātika Sūtra is slightly different from the ancient Anuttaraupapātika Sūtra. The first Varga has ten Adhyayana.

1. Nandī Sūtra p. 233, Sū. 54
2. Samvayanga Vṛtti p. 114
[14]

Page #18:
---------------------------
The **Anuttaraupapatik Sutra** describes the lives of 33 great souls (**Mahapurasha**) in three sections.

**Section One:**
This section details the lives of ten princes: Jali, Mayali, Upajali, Purusha-sena, Varisen, Dirghadant, Lashtdant, Vehall, Vehayas, and Abhayakumar. It provides information about their parents, cities, births, and the kings and gardens of their time. These ten princes embraced **sannyasa** (renunciation) under the guidance of Lord Mahavira, engaged in intense **tapasya** (austerities), and attained the **Anuttaravimana** (highest celestial realm). From there, they will be reborn as humans and ultimately achieve **siddha** (perfection), **buddha** (enlightenment), and **moksha** (liberation).

**Section Two:**
This section narrates the lives of thirteen princes: Dirghase-na, Maha-sena, Lashtdant, Gudhadant, Shuddhadant, Hall, Drum, Drum-sena, Maha-gum-sena, Singh, Singh-sena, Maha-singh-sena, and Punyase-na. Their stories are similar to that of Jali-kumar, highlighting their luxurious lives and subsequent **tapasya**. These princes also attained the five **Anuttaravimana** and will eventually be reborn as humans to achieve **siddha**, **buddha**, and **moksha**.

**Section Three:**
This section focuses on ten princes: Dhanyakumar, Sunaksha-trakumar, Rishi-das, Pell-ak, Rampu-tra, Chandrik, Prisht-imatrik, Pedhal-putra, Posht-ill, and Vehall. It depicts their luxurious lives followed by their **tapasya**. Dhanyakumar's story is elaborated upon.

Dhanyakumar, the son of Bhadra Sarthavahi of Kak-andi, was blessed with immense wealth and pleasures. He lived a life of luxury until he heard Lord Mahavira's teachings on **tyaga** (renunciation) and **vairagya** (detachment). This inspired him to renounce his worldly possessions and become a **muni** (ascetic).

His **tapasya** after becoming a **muni** was extraordinary. He vowed to perform **chhath-chhath** (six-day) **parana** (fasting) for the rest of his life, consuming only **ruksha bhojan** (dry food) with strict self-imposed restrictions. His intense **tapasya** reduced his body to mere bones.

Dhanyakumar was a remarkable **tapasvi** (ascetic) during Lord Mahavira's time, known for his **maha-dushkar-karak** (greatly difficult) and **maha-nirjara-karak** (greatly destructive) **tapasya**. Lord Mahavira himself declared Dhanyakumar to be the epitome of **tapasya** among fourteen thousand **shramanas** (ascetics). Through his intense **sadhana** (spiritual practice) over nine months, Dhanyakumar attained the **Sarvarth-siddha Vimana** (celestial realm of complete fulfillment). He will be reborn as a human and achieve **siddha**, **buddha**, and **moksha** through his **tapasya**.

Sunaksha-trakumar, Dhanyakumar's younger brother, had a similar life story. The remaining eight princes also followed a similar path of indulgence and **tapasya**.

The **Anuttaraupapatik Sutra** provides insights into the lives of these 33 **Mahapurasha**, reflecting the social and cultural context of ancient times. It holds historical significance due to its depiction of this period.

Page #19:
---------------------------
Although the young Acharya of the Shraman Sangha, the learned and venerable Pandit R. Munishri Mishrilalji M.S. 'Madhukar', under whose leadership the publication of Agambattisi is taking place, has personally reviewed it and Bharillalji has revised it, I am therefore at ease. This present sutra provides a brief introduction to the original Agam-vani and its explanatory literature, so that enlightened readers can understand the importance of the Agam.
For many years, my heart and soul, every atom of my being, has been deeply devoted to Agam seva. The study of the Agam is a panacea for separating oneself from the karma-vargana. The profound secrets that are found in the pure words of the omniscient, dispassionate Supreme Being cannot be found in the words of the ignorant. The grace of a knowledgeable guru is absolutely essential to know the true facts. Without a knowledgeable guru, it is impossible for the ignorant to understand the deep secrets of the Agams.
Even after obtaining the company of a guru, as long as there is a state of delusion, there is always a possibility of errors. Therefore, due to my lack of knowledge of the profound secrets, if there are any errors in meaning in this translation, please forgive me.
Despite not being fully capable, I have been able to complete this work due to the grace of the most revered Sadguru, Anuyoag-Pravartak Shri Kanhaiyalalji M. 'Kamal', and the most benevolent and worshipful Mother Goddess Shri Manekkunwarji M., the inspiration of Pandit Shobhachandji Bharill, the learned assistance of the most venerable Pujya Atmaramji M.S. and Shri Vijaymuniji M., and the immense support of my fellow Sadhvi-Samavay. May their support continue to be with me, and may I continue to receive the invaluable benefit of Agam seva in the future, this is my heartfelt wish.
I not only hope, but I have complete faith, that this Agam will generate deep devotion towards the dispassionate Supreme Being in the inner minds of all people. It will destroy the darkness of ignorance and spread the light of knowledge. With this hope and joy, I dedicate this Agam to the enlightened readers and experience immense joy.
[ 16 ]
Sadhyasadhika Sadhvi Muktiprabha

Page #20:
---------------------------
## Introduction
Anuttaropapatikadasha: A Contemplation
(From the First Edition) Jain Agam literature is a precious part of the vast treasure of Indian literature. It is available in the form of Angapravesht and Angabahya. The Angapravesht literature is considered original and authentic because its author is Ganadhar in the form of sutras and the interpreter is the Tirthankar himself. Dvadasangi is Angapravesht. The literature that the Sthavir creates based on the meaning interpreted by the Tirthankars is Angabahya. All the Agam literature besides Dvadasangi is Angabahya, it is also called Angabahya. Jinabhadragani Kshamasraman has also mentioned that to solve the strong curiosity of the Ganadharas, the Tirthankar gives the teachings of Tripdi-Utpada, Vyaya and Dhrauvya. The literature created based on that Tripdi is Angapravesht and the literature created based on the liberated grammar of the Bhagwan is Angabahya.

This division is the oldest in the Shwetambar literature like Sthananga, Nandi 2 etc. In Digambar literature also, there are these two divisions of Agams - Angapravesht and Angabahya. There is some difference in the names of Angabahya.

The nature of Angapravesht is always fixed at the time of all Tirthankars. It is fixed, constant, eternal. It is also called Dvadasangi or Ganipitaka. Ang-literature is divided into twelve parts - (1) Achar (2) Sutrakrut (3) Sthan (4) Samavay (5) Bhagwati (6) Jnatadharmakatha (7) Upasakadasha (8) Antakriddasha (9) Anuttaropapatikadasha (10) Prashnavyakaran (11) Vipak (12) Drishtivad.

Drishtivad is currently unavailable.

Anuttaropapatikadasha is the ninth Ang. This Agam mentions such great tapasvidhi sadhakas who, after completing their lifespan by performing the most excellent tapasya-aradhana, took birth in the Anuttara Vimanas. Vijay, Vaijayant, Jayant, Aparajit and Sarvarthasiddhi are these five Anuttara Vimanas. They are called 'Anuttara' Vimanas because they are superior to all other Vimanas. Those born in Anuttara are called Anuttaropapatik. There are ten studies in the first category, hence it is called Anuttaropapatikadasha. 1. Ganahar Therakayam Va, Aesa Mukta-Vagarano Va. Dhruv-Chal Visheso Va Anganangesu Nanattam ||
- Visheshavashyak Bhashya, Ga. 552 Nandi Sutra, 43. 3. (a) Shatkhandagam Bhag 9, p. 96 (b) Sarvarthasiddhi Pujyapad 1-20 (c) Rajavartika-Akalank 1-20
(d) Gommatasar Jivakand, Nemichandra, p. 134. (a) Samavayang, Samavay 148, Muni Kanhaiyalalji M. Edited, p. 138. (b) Nandi Sutra, 57. Samavayang Prakirnak Samavay Sutra 88. Tatranuttareshu Vimanavishesheshupapato-Janma Anuttaropapata:sa Vidhyate Yesham Te'nuttaropapatikastapratipadika Dasha: Dashadhyayanapratibandhaprathamavargayogaddasha: Grantha-Vishesho'nuttaropapatikadashastaasan Cha Sambandhasutram.
- Anuttaropapatikadasha Abhaydevavritti [17]

Page #21:
---------------------------
In other words, this state is called Anuttaraupapatikadsha because it describes the condition or state of such humans. A characteristic of Anuttar Vimānavāsī Devas is that they are parītasansārī. After being expelled from there, they are born in human form once or twice and attain nirvana.

The ancient Āgama and Āgametara texts mention that the Anuttaraupapatikadsha currently available has neither description nor characters. It is inexplicable when this change occurred. Navāngī commentator Ācārya Abhaydeva has called it a vācanāntara. I have discussed this in detail in my book "Jain Āgama Sahitya Manan aur Mīmānsā", so interested readers should refer to it.

The currently available Āgama is divided into three categories, which have ten, thirteen and ten studies respectively. Thus, in thirty-three studies, there is a very brief description of thirty-three great souls. The events and narratives that have come in it are not elaborated, they are only indicative. In the first category, the character of Jālikumāra and in the third category, the character of Dhanyakumāra has come in some detail. The remaining characters only have information. But all the characters who have come in this Āgama are of great historical importance, which shed light on the untouched aspects of history.

The present Āgama describes the life of twenty-three princes, namely Jāli, Mayāli, Upjāli, Puruṣasen, Vārisen, Dīrghadant, Laṣṭadant, Vihall, Vehāyas, Abhayakumāra, Dīrghaṣen, Mahāṣen, Laṣṭadant, Gūḍhadant, Ṣuddhadant, Hall, Dum, Drumṣen, Mahādrumṣen, Simha, Simhaṣen, Mahāsimhaṣen, Puṇyaṣen, of Emperor Śreṇik.

Emperor Śreṇik was the ruler of the Magadha empire. There are sufficient discussions about Śreṇik in all three traditions, Jain, Buddhist and Vedic. According to the Bhāgavata Mahāpurāṇa, he was born in the Śiśunāgavanshi clan. The great poet Aśvaghoṣa has written his clan as Haryang. Ācārya Haribhadra has considered his clan to be Yāhik. Rāyachoudhury believes that the Haryang clan mentioned in Buddhist literature is indicative of the Nāgavanshi. Kovilll has interpreted Haryang as Simha. But its meaning is also Nāga. Professor Bhāṇḍārkar has also included Bimbisāra in the Nāga Dashak and considered the lineage of all those kings to be Nāgavanshi. In Buddhist literature, this clan is called Śiśunāgavanshi. The Vāhik clan mentioned in Jain texts is also Nāgavanshi. The Vāhikjanapad was the main center of the Nāga tribe. Its area of operation was mainly Takṣaśilā, which was in the Vāhikjanapad. Therefore, it is not incongruous to consider Śreṇik as Śiśunāgavanshi.

7. (a) Nandī Sūtra 89
(b) Ṣṭhānāṅga 10/114 (c) Samvāyāṅga Prakīrṇaka Samvāya 97 (a) Tattvārtharājavārtika 1/20, p. 73 (b) Kaṣāyapāhuḍ Part 1, p. 130 (c) Aṅgapāṇṇattī 55 (d) Ṣaṭkhaṇḍāgama 1/1/2 Tadevam ihāpi vācanāntarāpekṣayā'dhyayanavibhāgaḥ ukto, na punarupalabhyamānāvācanāpekṣayeti. Bhāgavata Purāṇa, Dvi. Kh. p. 903
Jātasya hayangakule viṣāle-Buddhacaritra, Sarga 11, Śloka 2 12. Āvashyak Haribhadrīyā Vṛtti Patra 677 13. Studies in India Antiquities, p. 216 14. Mahāvaṃsa Gāthā 27-32
[18]
- -Ṣṭhānāṅgavṛtti Patra 483

Page #22:
---------------------------
Pandit Geiger and Bhandarkar have distinguished the Bimbisara and Sisunaga dynasties according to the Pali lineage of Ceylon. Bimbisara was before Sisunaga. 15 Dr. Kashi Prasad opines that the ancestors of Shrenik had a paternal relationship with the royal dynasty of Kashi, where Tirthankara Parshvanath was born. Therefore, Shrenik's family religion was Nirgranth (Jain) religion. Acharya Hemchandra has also written that King Shrenik's father Prasenjit was a Shravak of the tradition of Lord Parshvanath. 16

What was the birthplace of Shrenik? Jain, Buddhist and Vedic tradition texts are silent on this matter. In Jain Agamas, the names of Shrenik are found as Bhambasar, Bhimbasar, Bhimbisar. 17 Shrenik was a child, at that time there was a fire in the palace. All the princes fled with various precious items. But Shrenik considered only the Bhanbha as essential in the form of a royal insignia and accepted it. Therefore, his name became Bhambasar. "Abhidhan - Chintamani, 19 Upadeshamala, 20 Rishimandala Prakaran, 21 Bharateshwarbahubali Vritti, 22 Aavashyakachurni, 23 etc. Prakrit and Sanskrit texts have mainly used the word Bhambasar. Bhanbha, Bhimbha and Bhimbi all these words have been used in the sense of a war drum. 24

In the Buddhist tradition, Shrenik's name is prevalent as Bimbisara. 25 The meaning of Bimbi is "gold". Due to his golden complexion, his name became "Bimbisara". 26 The Tibetan tradition believes that Shrenik's mother's name was Bimbi, hence he is called Bimbisara. 27

The Jain tradition believes that his name became Shrenik from establishing military ranks. The Buddhist tradition
28
15. Studies in Indian Antiquities, pp. 215-216 16. Trishashti 10/6/8
17.
a -
b
c -
- Senie Bhambasare Gnatadharmakatha, Shruta. 1 a. 13
Dashashruta Skandha Dasha 10, Sutra - 1
- Senie Bhambasare, Senie Bhimbasare
d - 18. a -
-
• Senie Bhimbasare Thanang Sutra, Sthan. 9, Patra 458
- Seniyakumarena Punyo Jayadhakka Kaddiya Pavisiunam Pithana Tuttthen Tao Bhanio So Bhambasaro.
b -
• Sthanang Vritti, Patra 461-1
c - Trishashtishakalaka- 10/6/109-112
19. Abhidhanchintamani Kand 3, Shlok 376
Upadeshamala, Satikapatra 324
20. 21. Rishimandala Prakaran, Patra 143
22. Bharateshwarbahubali Vritti-patra Vibhag 122
23. Aavashyakachurni Uttarardha Patra 158
• Uvvai Sutra, Su 7 – p. 23, Su 6 - p. 19
24. Paiy-sadd - Mahannavo, p. 794-807
25. Indian Historical Quarterly, Vol. 14, No. 2, June 1938, p. 415
26. (a) Udan Atthakatha 104
(b) Pali English Dictionary p. 110
27. Indian Historical Quarterly, Vol. 14, No. 2, June 1938, p. 413 28. Shreni: Kayati Shreniko Magadheshwarah.
Upadeshamala Satik, Patra 334-1
-
• Abhidhan Chintamani Svopgyavritti, Martyakand Shlok 376
[19]

Page #23:
---------------------------
It is believed that he was called Bimbisara because he was made the master of eighteen categories by his father. 29
There are frequent discussions about categories and sub-categories in Jain, Buddhist and Vedic literature. The number of categories is considered to be eighteen in Jambudvipapannatti 30 Jataka Mugappakhajataka. The Mahavastu 32 mentions thirty categories. The Yajurveda 33 mentions thirty-three. Some believe that his name was Shrenik because of his large army or because he belonged to the Seniya gotra. 34 In the Srimad Bhagavata Purana, Shrenik is also called Ajatashatru 5 Vidhisara. In other places, he is also mentioned as Vindhyasen and Suvindhu. 37
35
According to the Aavashyak Haribhadriyaavritti 38 and Trishatshtisalaakapurushcharitra 9, Shrenik's father was Prasenajit. Digambar Acharya Harishena has written the name of Shrenik's father as Upshrenik. 40 Acharya Gunabhadra has written the name of Shrenik's father as Kunik in the Uttarapurana 1, which is not consistent with other Agamas and non-Agama texts. He is not the father of Shrenik but his son. 42 In other texts, the names of Shrenik's father are found as Mahapadma, Hemjit, Kshetroja, Kshetraproja.
XI
In Jain literature, the names of twenty-six queens of Shrenik are available. There is also a description of their 35 sons. In the Jnatasutra 45 Antakriddasha Nirayavali, 47 Aavashyakchurni, Nishitchurni, Trishatshtisalaakapurushcharitra, Upadeshamala Doghatti Tika, Shrenik Charitra etc., there are mentions of most of their sons, grandsons and maharanis taking pravrjya from Bhagwan Mahavira. They all attain heaven by practicing knowledge, meditation and excellent tapas-jap. Due to fear of expansion, we are not mentioning all of them.
29. Sa pitraastadasha-shreni-shvagtaaritah
Ato'sya shreyo bimbisar iti khyatah (?)
30. Jambudvipapannatti, Vakshaskara 3, Patra 193
31. Jataka, Mugappakhajataka, Bhag 6
32.
33.
(a) Mahavastu Bhag 3,
(b) Rishabhdev: Ek Parisheelan, Le. Devendra Muni (Parisheeshta 3, Pr. 15) Dwi.San. Shri Tarak Guru Jain Granthalaya, Udaipur (Raj.) (a) Yajurveda ka 30 vaa adhyaya
(b) Vaigyanik Vikas ki Bharatiya Parampara, Pr. 27-30 Dhammpaal- Udaan Tika, Pr. 140
34.
35. Srimad Bhagavata, Dvitiya Kand, Pr. 903
36. Srimad Bhagavata 12 / 1
37. Bharatavarsh ka Itihaas, Pr. 252, Bhagavadatta Aavashyak Haribhadriyaavritti, Patra 671
38.
39. Trishatshti 10/6/1
40. Vridhatkathakoosh, Katha 55, Shlo. 1-2
41. Uttarapurana 74/4/8, Pr. 471
42. Aupapattikasutra
43. Political History of Ancient India, Pr. 205
44. Dekhiye Bhagwan Mahavira • Ek Anusheelan, Pr. 473- 474 Devendramuni Shastri
45. Jnatasutra 1/1
46. Antakriddasha, Varga-7, A-1 se 13
47. Nirayavaliya - Pratham Shrutaskandha, Pratham Varga,
Vinayapitak, Gilgit Maanskript
Dusra Varga [20]

Page #24:
---------------------------
Mala ya
are doing. According to Uttaradhyayana, King Shrenik accepted Jainism after understanding the profound secrets of Nath and Anath from Anathi Muni. 48 King Shrenik was a holder of क्षायिक-सम्यक्त्व. He also bound the karma of being a Tirthankara, although he was neither a Bahushruta nor a knower of Agamas like Prajnapti, yet due to Samyaktva, he will attain the glorious position like a Tirthankara. 49
According to Buddhist texts, Shrenik had five hundred queens. 5. They have considered him a devotee of the Tathagata Buddha. Many scholars believe that he was a Jain in the first half of his life and became a Buddhist in the latter half, hence Jain texts mention his going to hell. But this belief of those scholars is not correct. We have already written earlier that in the coming twenty-four, he will be the first Tirthankara named Padmabh. 59 In our view, it is possible that when King Prasenajit exiled Shrenik, he first took rest in Nandigram. The leading Brahmins there, fearing the king's wrath, neither gave him food nor provided him with accommodation for rest. Forced, he had to stay in the Buddhist vihara outside Nandigram
and the Buddhist monks there may have shown him affection, which may have awakened a natural affection for Buddhism in his inner mind. Therefore, even though he was a supreme devotee of Nirgranth (Jainism), he also had affection for Tathagata Buddha, and due to that affection, he may have had religious discussions with Buddha. In the above lines, we have seen that Shrenik was a very brilliant ruler. He was going to influence the Jain religion greatly. He also passed the test conducted by the gods. 52 His unique work was going to add to the glory and dignity of Jainism.
This Agama describes the princes of King Shrenik, and there are discussions about their life incidents here and there. Vihallkumar is related to the incident of the elephant Har, with the great war Mahashila of that era, but due to fear of expansion, we are not mentioning all of them, but here we are presenting some thoughts about Abhaykumar.
Abhaykumar was a man of great talent. Both Jain and Buddhist traditions consider him their follower. According to Jain Agama literature, he accepts Ahati initiation from Lord Mahavira, and according to Tripitaka literature, he becomes a monk under Buddha.
From the perspective of Jain literature, he was the son of Shrenik's queen Nanda. 53 Nanda was the daughter of Dhanavah, the best of Vennaatapur. 54 Shrenik had reached there in his youth and had taken Nanda's hand in marriage. Abhaykumar stayed with his mother in his maternal home for eight years and after that, he came to Rajgriha. 55 48. Uttaradhyayana Sutra, A. 20 49. Na Senio Asi Taya Bahussuo, Na Yavi Pannaattidharo Na Vayago.
So Agamissai Jino Bhavisasai; Samikkha Pannai Varan Khu Dansanam || 50. Vinayapitaka Mahavagga 9/1/15 51. Jao Khaigassammiditthi Tumang Agamissae Ya Ussappinee Ya Tattho Uvattitta Padmanabhanamo Padmatitthayaro Bhavisassi.
- Mahavira Charitra (Gunachandra) 52. (a) Trishashti 10/9.
(b) Nirayavaliya Tika Patra-5-1 53. (a) Jnatadharmakatha 1/1
(b) Nirayavaliya-23
(c) Anuptaroppapatik 1/1 54. This city should be located where the Krishna river of the south meets the eastern sea,
See- Bhagwan Mahavira: An Exercise: Devendramuni Shastri 55. Bharateshwar-Bahubali, Vritti Patra 36
[21]

Page #25:
---------------------------
Abhaya was extremely handsome. He was proficient in the policies of Sama, Dama, Danda, Bheda, Pradan, and Vyapar. He was skilled in Iha, Apoha, Margana, Gaveshana, and Arthashastra. He was endowed with all four types of intelligence. He was a true advisor for every act of the Shrenikan emperor. He was the one who would bear the burden of the state. He took good care of the state (governance), nation (country), treasury, granary (food storehouse), army, vehicles, city, and inner palace. 56
Abhayakumar was the appointed minister of King Shrenikan. 57 He would solve even the most complex problems in a moment with his sharp intellect. He had fulfilled the wishes of Meghakumar's mother Dharini 58 and Kunik's mother Chelna 59 with his sharp intellect. He had also happily arranged the marriage of his younger mother Chelna and Shrenikan. Many incidents of the wonders of his intelligence are recorded in Jain literature. He had freed Shrenikan from the severe political crisis of King Chandrapradyot of Ujjayini. 60
Abhayakumar knew very well that it is extremely difficult to embrace the Shraman Dharma. Once a Drumak (woodcutter) took Pravrajya from Ganadhar Sudharma. People ridiculed him. When Abhayakumar came to know about it, he had three piles of one crore gold coins each placed in a public place and announced that anyone who renounced women, fire, and conscious water for life could take these three crore gold coins. Everyone's mind was tempted by the sight of the gold coins, but no one came forward after hearing the condition. Abhayakumar said to all those critics - How great is the Drumak Muni, who has renounced women, fire, and conscious water for life. You are ridiculing him. Everyone was impressed by the great sacrifice of Drumak Muni and they came to know the importance of Shraman Dharma. 61
-
According to Sutrakrutanga-Niyukti 62 and Trishashtisalakapurushcharitra 3, Abhayakumar had sent Ardhakumar as a Dharma-Upakarana gift, due to which he became enlightened and became a Shraman. 63 Only after coming in contact with Abhayakumar did the son of Kalashokar, the cruel butcher of Rajgriha, Sulaskumar, become a devout follower of Bhagwan Mahavira. 64 Many examples of Abhayakumar's religious spirit are highlighted in Jain literature. The storytellers say - Once Abhaya asked Bhagwan Mahavira a question - who will be the last king to attain Moksha? Bhagwan said - Udayan, the king of Vitabhaya, who has already accepted restraint near me. Hearing this, Abhaya thought to himself - If I become king, I will not be able to attain Moksha. Therefore, I should take initiation in my youth. He humbly requested Emperor Shrenikan to grant him permission. Shrenikan said - You are not yet old enough to take initiation. I am the one who is old enough to take initiation. You become king and enjoy the
56. Jnatadharmakatha 1/1
57. Bharateshwar Bahubali, Vritti Patra 38
58. Jnatadharmakatha 1/1
59. Nirayavaliya 1
60. (a) Aavashyakachurni, Uttarardha, Patra 159, 163
(b) Trishashti 10-11-124 to 293
Dharmaratnaprakaran - Abhayakumar Katha 1/30
61.
62. Sutrakrutanganiryukti with commentary 1/6/136
63. Trishashti 10/7/177-179, Indian History: A Perspective, page 67
64. Yogashastra-Svopgyavritti - 1/30, page 91 to 95
Acharya Hemchandra
-
[22]

Page #26:
---------------------------
Consume. At the insistent request of Abhaykumar, Shrenik said, "On the day I angrily tell you to get away, don't show me your face; on that day you shall become a Shraman."

Some time later, Bhagwan Mahavira arrived in Rajgriha. After seeing Bhagwan, the king was returning with Queen Chelna. On the bank of the river, King Shrenik saw a Muni meditating. The cold was very intense. The Queen's hand was outside the garment she was wearing in her sleep and her hand was shivering. She woke up and remembering the Muni, suddenly said, "What will they be doing!" The Queen's words created disbelief in the King's mind. In the morning, he went to see Bhagwan. While leaving, he ordered Abhaykumar to burn Chelna's palace, as immorality flourishes here. Abhaykumar removed the queens and precious items from the palace and set it on fire. King Shrenik questioned Mahavira. Mahavira said, "Chelna and all the other queens are completely devoted to their husbands and virtuous." King Shrenik began to repent in his heart. He quickly returned from the Samavasaran and headed towards the royal palace. On the way, he met Abhaykumar. When the king asked, Abhaykumar told him about burning the palace. The king said, "Did you not act with your intelligence?" Abhay said, "O King! I knew very well how terrible it is to break the king's order."

The king was angry at his unwise act. He could not control his anger and words came out of his mouth, "Get out of here. Don't show me your face ever again." Abhaykumar was waiting for these words. He bowed to the king and reached Bhagwan's feet and took initiation.

King Shrenik reached the palaces. Seeing all the queens and precious items safe, he was deeply saddened by his words. He went to Bhagwan. But Abhay had already become a disciple before King Shrenik arrived. 65

_In the Antakrid Dasang Sutra, there is a mention of Abhay's mother Nanda also becoming a disciple and attaining liberation. 16 Abhaykumar Muni studied the eleven Angas, worshipped Gunaratnatap. His body became very thin. However, the extraordinary brilliance of his practice was shining on his face. Abhaykumar had a strong intellect. He was rich in sharp intelligence. The meaningfulness of intelligence lies in the contemplation of the self-principle. -"Buddhe phalam tattvavicharnam cha" Even today, the merchant class remembers Abhay's intelligence. On the occasion of the new year, a wish is made in writing in the account books to obtain intelligence like Abhay's.

In Buddhist literature, Abhaykumar's name is found as Abhayrajakumar. His mother was Padmavati, a courtesan of Ujjayini. When Shrenik Bimbisara heard about her extraordinary beauty, he was attracted to her. He told his mind's desire to the royal priest. The priest worshipped a Yaksha named Kumpir. That Yaksha took Shrenik Bimbisara to Ujjayini. There, he came into contact with Padmavati, the prostitute. Abhayrajakumar stayed with his mother for seven years and then came to Rajgriha with his father. "
65. Bharateshwar Bahubali Vritti Patra 38 to 40 66. Antakrid Dasang Sutra, Class-7 67. Anuttaraupapatik Sutra 1/10 68. According to the Gilgit Manuscript, he was the son of Bimbisara born from Amrapali, a courtesan of Vaishali. (Volume 3,
2 p. 22) Theragatha-Atthakatha 64 mentions the name of Amrapali's son born from Shrenik as "Vimal
Kodanj" in the original Pali literature, who later became a Buddhist monk. 69. Therigatha Atthakatha 31-32
[23]

Page #27:
---------------------------
Even though he was a prince, Abhay was skilled in chariot warfare. Once, he solved a complex issue of boundary dispute with his exceptional talent, which pleased Bimbisara so much that he gifted him a very beautiful dancer.
In the Abhaykumarasutta of Majjhimanikaya 72, there is an incident - once the Tathagata Buddha was wandering in the Veluvana Kalandaka residence of Rajagriha. At that time, Prince Abhay reached Niganth Nayaputta. Niganth Nayaputta said to Abhay, "Prince! If you debate with the Shraman Gautam, your fame will spread throughout the universe and people will talk about how Abhay debated with the great Shraman Gautam." Abhay asked, "Bhanta! How should I start the debate?"
Niganth Nayaputta said, "You should ask the Buddha if the Tathagata can speak words that are unpleasant to others? If they agree, then ask what is the difference between a worldly being (samsari jiva) and the Tathagata? If they give a negative answer, then ask why did you predict that Devadatta will be a sinner, a nirayika, a hell-dweller for kalpas, and incurable? He is angry with your prediction. By asking questions from both sides, Shraman Gautam will neither be able to swallow nor spit. Just like a man's throat gets stuck with an iron rod, he cannot swallow or spit, the same will be the situation of the Buddha."
Prince Abhay saluted Niganth Nayaputta and went to the Buddha. He saluted and sat on one side, but it was not the time for debate. So Abhay thought, "Tomorrow I will invite the Tathagata Buddha home and debate with him!" He invited the Buddha for a meal and went to his royal palace. The next day at noon, wearing his robe and carrying his bowl, the Buddha reached Abhay's royal palace. Abhay offered him the best food with his own hands. When the Buddha was fully satiated, Prince Abhay sat down on the seat below and started the debate - "Bhanta! Can the Tathagata speak words that are unpleasant to others?"
Buddha - "It cannot be said so in isolation." Hearing this, Prince Abhay exclaimed, "Bhanta! Niganth is destroyed."
When the Buddha asked, he explained, "Bhanta! I went to Niganth Nayaputta. He encouraged me to ask you this tricky question. His opinion was that by asking such questions, Gautam would neither be able to swallow nor spit."
A little child was sitting in Prince Abhay's lap, playing. Aiming at him, the Buddha said, "Prince, if your (or your nurse's) carelessness causes this child to put a piece of wood or a stone in his mouth, what will you do?"
"I will take it out, Bhanta! If he doesn't let me take it out directly, I will hold his head with my left hand and bend my finger with my right hand and take it out even with blood! Because I have affection for him."
Buddha - "Prince! The Tathagata does not speak untrue, meaningless, and unpleasant words. Even if the words are true, if they are harmful, he does not speak them. The words that are true and meaningful, whether pleasant or unpleasant, are spoken by the Kalagya
70. Majjhimanikaya Abhayrajakumarasutta 71. Dhammapada Atthakatha 13-4 72. Majjhimanikaya Abhayakumarasutta Chapter-76
[24]

Page #28:
---------------------------
That is what they call a Tathagata. Because they have compassion for beings.
Abhaya prince
- Venerable! Do you already have this thought in your mind that if I ask this kind of question
-
I will give this answer?
Buddha - You are an expert in chariot-knowledge. Which part of the chariot is this, if someone asks you, will you
-
Do you already have the answer to that in mind? Or does it come to you at the time?
-
- Venerable! I am an expert in chariots. Therefore, I know it at that time.
Abhayakumar
Buddha — Prince! The Tathagata also knows it at that moment, because his mind is well-established.
Abhaya - Wonderful, Venerable! You have illuminated the Dharma in many ways. I take refuge in you. May the Dharma and the Sangha accept me as a refuge with folded hands.
The Samyutta Nikaya also mentions Abhayakumar's meeting with the Buddha. He asks the Buddha a question related to the belief of Purna Kashyapa. According to the 73 Dhammapada Atthakatha, Abhayakumar attained the Sotapanna fruit 74 at that time when he went to the Buddha, saddened by the death of the dancer, and the Buddha gave a Dharma talk. 75 According to the Theragatha Atthakatha, Abhaya attained the Sotapanna fruit when the Tathagata gave the Talachchigulupamasutta discourse. 76 He went to the Buddha, deeply saddened by the death of King Bimbisara, took ordination, and attained the Arhathood. After becoming a monk, he also enlightened his mother Padmavati, and she became a nun and attained Arhathood. 78
In light of Jain and Buddhist evidence, it is clear that Abhayakumar and Abhayaprinc were two different individuals, because from the Jain perspective, his mother is a merchant's daughter, he is the chief minister of King Shrenik, and he takes initiation from Mahavira, while from the Buddhist perspective, he is the son of a prostitute, a successful charioteer, abandons the Niganth Dharma and accepts Buddhism, and finally becomes a monk with the Buddha. If Abhaya were the same person, how could he have taken initiation from both Mahavira and the Buddha? It is possible that King Shrenik had many sons, one of whom was named Abhaya and the other Abhayaprinc. 79
The mention of Jain initiation is in the present Agam, which has been dated by scholars like Panditpravar Dalsukh Malvaniya, etc.
73. Samyutta Nikaya, Abhayasutta 44 / 6 / 6
74. Sotapanna - Entering the stream. Being established in the path of Nirvana, where there is no possibility of falling. A monk who practices yoga, when he breaks the three bonds of sakkayaditthi, vicikiccha, and silabbataparamsaka, is called a Sotapanna. A Sotapanna person takes birth at most seven times, then he surely attains Nirvana.
1
75. Dhammapada - Atthakatha 13/4
76. Theragatha- Atthakatha 1/58
77. (a) Theragatha - 26
(b) Theragatha - Atthakatha Volume 1, pp. 83-84
78. Theragatha - Atthakatha 31-32
79.
(a) Agam and Tripitaka: An Exploration, p. 359
(b) Bhagwan Mahavira: An Exploration
80. Anuttaraupapatik - 1 / 10
[25]

Page #29:
---------------------------
It is believed that the second century BCE is the time of Abhaya. The mention of Buddhist ordination is found in 'Theragatha' and 'Atthakatha'. In the Pitaka literature, 'Theragatha' is considered to be the latest composition and 'Atthakatha' is even later than that. Therefore, it is more logical and evidence-based that Abhaya was a Jain.
The seventh study in the first section of the present Agam is of the prince Lishtadant and the third study in the second section is also of the prince Lishtadant. Both have Dharini as their mother and Shrenik as their father. What is the consistency of this? It is worth investigating. It is possible that there were two princes named Lishtadant, one first and one second. Mahasati Muktiprabhaji has considered this in the commentary.
The third section describes ten Kumaras: Dhanyakumar, Sunakshastrakumar, Rishi Das, Pellka, Ramputra, Chandrika, Prishtmatri, Pedhalputra, Pottill and Vehall.
Dhanyakumar was the son of Bhadra Sarthavahi of Kakand. All around him was splendor and revelry. But, inspired by the renunciation and detachment of Lord Mahavira, he listened to the holy sermons and, like a valiant warrior, advanced on the arduous path of self-control. The wonderful description of his ascetic life is given here. Who will not bow their head in reverence after reading the description of Dhany's asceticism? In the Mahasinghanadasutta 4 of the Majjhimanikaya, the Tathagata Buddha had performed such excellent ascetic practices in one of his previous births. The penance that Buddha had performed for six years is also somewhat similar to this. Kavikulguru Kalidasa has also vividly described the fierce penance of Parvati in Kumarsambhava 5. After reading all those descriptions, when we read the description of Dhanyakumar, it seems clear that the description of Dhanyakumar is more vivid. He had vowed to perform penance for six years. He would only take coarse food in the form of Achaml Vrat in the Parana. He would take the food that a householder was about to throw away and wash it 21 times with water and then consume it and use the same water. His body had become a skeleton due to penance. See the figurative description of his penance - in which practical similes have been used and the subject matter has become vivid. His presented statement shows sufficient meaning - 'Akkhasuttamala Vivaganajjamanaihin Pittikarandagasandhihin, Gangatarangabhuenam Urakaadagadesabhaeanam, Sukasappasamanaihin Baahahin, Sidhilkadali-Viv Lambantehi Ya Aggahatthehi, Kampamanavaiye Viv Vevamaniye Sisaghadiye' i.e. 'The bones of the back of the ascetic Dhany Muni could be counted one by one like a rosary. The bones of the chest were visible separately like the waves of the Ganges. The arms had become thin like a dried snake. The hands were hanging loosely like a horse's muzzle bag and the head was shaking like the head of a person suffering from wind disease.'
In this way, it is full of many similes and illustrations.
Many people believe that Agam literature is dull. The stories of the Agams, with their monotonous style, similarity of subject matter, and lack of imagination and artistry, do not captivate readers. They are full of supernatural elements. But this belief of theirs is not entirely correct. There may be some truth in it. This notion may have arisen due to reading the Agam superficially, but when we delve deeper, new facts emerge from those stories. They have made an unprecedented contribution to the structure of Indian culture and the development of Indian oriental studies. 81. Jain Philosophy of the Agam Age, p. 28, Publisher - Sanmati Gyanapith, Agra 82. Theragatha: Bhaddiyavago, Abhayatherapadanan 83. Khudaknikaya Volume 7, Nalanda, Bhikshu Jagdish Kashyap 84. Bodhirajakumarasutta, Digha Nikaya Kassapasinhnaadasutta 85. Kumarsambhava Sarga - Parvatiprakaran
[26]

Page #30:
---------------------------
Although they may not be as interesting as modern stories and novels, and may not hold the reader's attention, they have been a source of profound inspiration for life upliftment and are a unique cultural heritage.
This Agam, from the perspective of the subject division, falls under the category of Dharmakathaanuyoag. It also represents Charanakarananuyoag. This Agam analyzes Tapasya according to the Jain tradition. In Jain culture, the practice of Tapasya has been paramount. All the Tirthankaras have embraced renunciation with Tapasya, attained Kevalgyan-Kevaldarshan with Tapasya, and begun their first sermons with Tapasya. Bhagwan Mahavira was a unique great soul, a master of Tapasya. He harmonized the external Tapasya of body-suppression prevalent in his time with internal practice. Mahavira himself and his disciples practiced excellent Tapasya. We find mention of it in this Agam and other Agams as well. This is why the Buddhist literature refers to Mahavira's disciples as Tapasvi and Dirgha Tapasvi. In Aavashyakaniyukti, "Anugar is called a hero in Tapasya." The renowned commentator Malayagiri, while defining Tapasya, wrote: "He who tempers the eight types of karma, who is capable of destroying them, is Tapasya." Tapasya destroys karma and reveals hidden powers. Just as the dark, sooty clouds hovering in the endless sky are shattered in an instant by the southern wind, so too do the clouds of karma, like clouds, begin to disperse with the wind of Tapasya.
—
—
This Agam presents an excellent practical depiction of Anashan Tapasya. Only a seeker who has little attachment to the body can perform Anashan Tapasya. In Anashan, not only is food abandoned, but also desires, passions, and worldly desires. Initially, the seeker abandons food and drink for a period of time, which is known as Itvarik Tapasya. In the final stages of life, he abandons food and drink for the rest of his life, which is called Yavatkathith Tapasya. Dhannya Anugar and other Anugars practiced both these types of Tapasya.
Sanlekhana is a process of Jain practice. Only a seeker who has practiced deep spirituality, who has understood the nuances of discrimination, can choose death through Sanlekhana and Samadhi. The abandonment of food and drink at the time of death does not involve a desire for death. All the actions of a restrained seeker are for restraint. A body that has become an obstacle rather than an aid in practice, which, when carried, does not lead to the purification and growth of spiritual qualities, becomes something to be abandoned. At that time, death is chosen voluntarily. There is a misconception that Santhara is suicide, but this is not true. Suicide is committed by a person who is oppressed by circumstances, whose desires are not fulfilled, who has been greatly insulted, or who has had a conflict, and who has become distraught due to intense anger. Such a person ends his life through various means. He commits suicide. His inner mind is filled with fear, desires, lusts, excitement, and passions. But in Santhara, all of these are absent, there is a strong desire to manifest the inherent qualities of the soul. Therefore, if there has been any ill will or discord with anyone in the past, he himself seeks forgiveness and also grants forgiveness on his part. In Santhara, there is neither a desire for fame nor any desire, therefore it is not suicide but a blessed and holy path of practice. 89
86. (a) Samavayanga -1, 9-8. (b) Aavashyakaniyukti, verse 150. (c) Uttarapurana 51/70, page 30 87. Tavsura Anagara - Aavashyakaniyukti, verse 450 88. Aavashyak Malayagiri Vritti, Volume - 2 Chapter 1
89. See the author's article on Sanlekhana in Jainachar-Granth (unpublished).
[27]

Page #31:
---------------------------
This Agam is written in a very simple language and deals with a simple subject. Therefore, no commentaries, annotations or summaries were written on it. Acharya Abhaydev was the first to write a commentary on it in Sanskrit, which is primarily based on word meanings and touches upon the sutras. The commentary consists of 192 verses. It was published in 1920 by the Agamoday Samiti, Surat, and earlier in 1875 by Dhanpatsingh from Calcutta. The English translation of this Agam was published in 1907 by L.D. Barnett. P.L. Vaidya published it in 1932 with a preface. In 1921, only the original text was published by the Atmanand Sabha, Bhavnagar. In Vikram Samvat 1990, a Gujarati translation was published from Bhavnagar along with the Abhaydev commentary. In Veer Samvat 2446, Acharya Amolkarishi published it along with the publication of 32 Agams in Hindi. In 1940, Gopaldas Jiwabhai Patel published it from the Jain Sahitya Prakashan Samiti, Ahmedabad, and the Shramani Vidyapeeth, Ghatkopar, Bombay, along with a Gujarati translation of the original text. Acharya Shri Ghasilalji M. published a Hindi and Gujarati translation along with a Sanskrit commentary in 1959 from the Jain Shastroddhar Samiti, Rajkot (Saurashtra). Acharya Shri Atmaramji M. published a brilliant edition with commentary from the Jain Shastramala Karyalaya, Lahore, in 1936. Shri Vijaymuni Shastri published a captivating edition with the original text, Hindi commentary and commentary. Thus, many editions of Anuttaraupapatikadasha have been published till date, each with its own significance.

This edition is a new edition of Anuttaraupapatikadasha. It contains the pure original text, meaning and a brief commentary, which clarifies the essence of the Agam. The appendix contains notes which are very comprehensive. The glossary, invariable words, verbs, and word meanings make it easy to understand the profound mysteries of the Agam.

The Jain community is well acquainted with the name of the highly learned Sadhviratna, the late Mahasati Shri Ujvalkumariji. Sadhvi Muktiprabaji is her disciple. Like her Guru, she is also talented. Her talent is evident in this Agam edited by her. This edition has its own uniqueness. It is a successful attempt to give concrete form to the sweet concept of the highly respected Yuvacharya Shri Madhukaramuniji. This first attempt of Bahin Muktiprabaji is commendable. It also clearly reflects the vast scholarship of the learned pen-wielder Shri Shobhachandraji Bharill.

For years, the wise and learned Munis of the Shraman Sangh had the concept of presenting the profound mysteries of the Agam in a simple and easy-to-understand language, suitable for the times. The Agam-Batteesi should be published in a grand manner, so that researchers and seekers can benefit from it. My highly respected Gurudev, Upadhyay Shri Pushkarmuniji M., who is an integral part of Yuvacharya Shri Madhukaramuniji, has been inspiring me from time to time. When Yuvacharya Shri decided to complete this Herculean task, Gurudev Shri was overjoyed. With the unprecedented support of the saints and sages of the Shraman Sangh and the learned, this work is progressing under the skillful guidance of Yuvacharya Shri. I have not only hope but firm belief that this commendable work of Shrutaseva by Yuvacharya Shri will make him famous for ages to come. This Anuttaraupapatikadasha is a beautiful and precious gem of the Agam Mala, which will provide divine light to the lost and wandering humans. It will establish Adhyatmavad in place of materialism. Like the previously published Acharang, Upasakadasha and Jnatadharmakatha, this Agam will also captivate the minds of the people, gain due recognition among scholars and general inquisitive people, this is the auspicious wish. Jain Sthanak
-Devendramuni Shastri Neemuch City (Madhya Pradesh) Dated 20-3-1981
[28]

Page #32:
---------------------------
Table of Contents
First Class First Study
Introduction
Jali Kumar 2-10 Study Mayali Adi Kumar
Second Class 1-13 Study
Introduction Dirghasean Adi Kumar
Third Class First Study
Introduction Dhanyakumar Seventy-two Arts Dowry (Dowry) Dhanyakumar's Pravrajya-Proposal Pravrajya-Sammati Dhany Muni's Tapascharya Dhany Muni's Physical Condition Description of Feet and Fingers Dhany Muni's Shanks, Knees and Thighs Description of Waist, Abdomen and Ribs Dhany Muni's Arms, Hands, Fingers, Neck, Beard, Lips and Tongue Dhany Muni's Nose, Eyes and Head Dhany Muni's Inner Radiance Praise by Bhagwan Mahavir Praise of Dhany Muni by Shrenik Dhany Muni's Sarvarth Siddha Gaman
[29]

Page #33:
---------------------------
## Second Study
Sunakṣatra 3-10 Study Isidas etc.
Appendix Notes - Rājagṛha, Sudharmā, Jambū, Anga, Antakṛddasā, Anuttaraupapātikadasā, Guṇasīla Caitya, Śreṇika Rāja, Dhāriṇī Devī, Siṃhasvapna, Meghakumāra, Skandaka, Gautama, Indrabhūti, Cellanā, Nanda, Vipulagiri, Ukameṇam Sesā, Laṭṭhadanta, Guṇasīlak, Kākaṇḍī, Sahassambavaṇa, Jitaśatru Rāja, Bhadrā Sārthavāhī, Pañcadhātrī, Mahābala, Koṇika, Jamālī, Thāvaccaputra, Kṛṣṇa, Mahāvīra, Silesaguliyā, Dhanya Anagāra, Cauranta, Vāṇijyagrāma, Hastināpura, Ṣaṣṭhabhakta, Āyambil, Samsṛṣṭa, Ujjhita-Dharmika, Ucca-Nīca-Madhyama Kula, Vilamiva Panagabhūeṇam, Sāmaiyamāiyāī. 53-68
Tap: Koṣṭhaka Śabdakosa Avyayapadasankalana Kriyapadasankalana Śabdārtha
[30]

Page #34:
---------------------------
Name
Acharangasutra [ Two Parts
Upasak Dasangasutra Jnatadharmakathangasutra
Ankrid Dasangasutra Anuttarovvaiayasutra
Sthanangasutra
Samavayangasutra
Agam Prakashan Samiti, Byawar by
Published Agam-Sutra
Sutrakrit
Vipaksutra
Nandisutra
Aupapatik Sutra
Vyakhyaprajnaptisutra [ Four Parts ]
Rajaprashniyasutra
Prajnapanasutra [ Three Parts ]
Prashnavyakaranasutra
Uttaradhyayanasutra Nirayavalikasutra
Dasavaikalikasutra
Aavashyak Sutra Jambudvipaprajnaptisutra
Anuyogadwarasutra
Suryaprajnapti, Chandraprajnaptisutra Jivajivabhigamsutra [ Two Parts ]
Nishitasutra
Chhedasutraani
Shri Kalpasutra (Patrakar)
Shri Antkrid Dasangasutra (Patrakar)
Translator-Editor
Shri Chandra Surana 'Kamal'
Dr. Chaganlal Shastri (M. A. P-H. D.) Pt. Shobhachand Bharill
Sadhvi Divyaprabha (M. A., P.H. D)
Sadhvi Muktiprabha (M.. A., P.H. D ) Pt. Hiralal Shastri
Pt. Hiralal Shastri
Shri Chandra Surana 'Surana'
Anu. Pt. Roshanlal Shastri Sampa. Pt. Shobhachand Bharill Anu. Sadhvi Umravakumar 'Archana' Sampa. Kamala Jain 'Gigi' M. A. Dr. Chaganlal Shastri
Shri Amarmuni
Vani Bhushan Ratnamuni, San. Devkumar Jain Jainbhushan Gyanmuni
Anu. Muni Pravin Rishi
Sampa. Pt. Shobhachand Bharill
Shri. Rajendramuni Shastri
Shri Devkumar Jain
Mahasati Pushpavati
Mahasati Suprabha (M. A. P.H. D. ) Dr. Chaganlal Shastri
Upadhyay Shri Kevalmuni, San. Devkumar Jain, Sampa. Muni Shri Kanhaiyalalji 'Kamal' Shri Rajendra Muni
Munishri Kanhaiyalal Ji 'Kamal', Shri Tilakmuni Munishri Kanhaiyalal Ji 'Kamal', Shri Tilakmuni Upadhyay Muni Shri Pyarchand Ji Maharaj Upadhyay Muni Shri Pyarchandji Maharaj
For Special Information Contact
Agam Prakashan Samiti
Shri Braj- Madhukar Smriti Bhavan, Pipaliya Bazaar, Byawar - 305901

Page #35:
---------------------------
The five great vows (Mahavratas) are:
1. **Ahimsa** (non-violence)
2. **Satya** (truthfulness)
3. **Asteya** (non-stealing)
4. **Brahmacharya** (continence)
5. **Aparigraha** (non-attachment)

Page #36:
---------------------------
Panchamagana-hara - Sri Sudharma-svami-virayam navam anga
Anuttaroupapattikadasao
Panchamagana-dhara - Sri Sudharma-svami-virachitam navam angam
Anuttaroupapattikadasa

Page #37:
---------------------------
The five great vows (Mahavratas) are:
1. **Ahimsa** (non-violence)
2. **Satya** (truthfulness)
3. **Asteya** (non-stealing)
4. **Brahmacharya** (continence)
5. **Aparigraha** (non-attachment)

Page #38:
---------------------------
In that time and at that time, there was a city called Rajagriha. Aryasudharma arrived there. The assembly came to listen to the Dharmadeshana and after listening to the Dharmadeshana, [they carried it in their hearts and returned to the same direction] from which they had come. Aryajambhu, an ascetic, was dwelling near Aryasudharma Swami, practicing restraint and austerity, cultivating his mind.

Page #39:
---------------------------
The [**Anuttaroupapatikadsha**] (**Vasit**) were dwelling while [**Arya Jambu Kashyap**] was of the [**Gotra**]. His body was seven [**Hasta**] high, and when sitting cross-legged, the height and width of the body were equal, he was of [**Samachaturasrasansthan**], his [**Vajrarishbhanaraach**] was [**Sanhanan**], he was like a line of gold and like a [**Padmarag**] (lotus-dust) in color, he was a fierce ascetic, a radiant ascetic, a heated ascetic, a great ascetic, generous, fearless in destroying his own enemies, a severe ascetic, a keeper of the terrible and dreadful [**Brahmacharyavrata**], one who absorbed the vast brilliance he had attained into his own body, a knower of the fourteen [**Purvas**], a holder of the four knowledges of [**Matijnanaadi**], a knower of all [**Aksharasanyog**], situated in a [**Utkutuk Asan**], facing downwards, having entered the [**Kosthak**] of [**Dharma**] and [**Shukla Dhyan**], dwelling while affecting the soul with [**Samyam**] and [**Tap**].]

Then [**Arya Jambu Swami**] arose from his seat, having arisen from [**Jatasraddha**], [**Jatasanshay**], [**Jatakoutuhala**], having arisen from [**Sanjatasraddha**], [**Sanjatasanshay**], [**Sanjatakoutuhala**], having arisen from [**Utpannashraddha**], [**Utpannashanshay**], [**Utpannkoutuhala**], having arisen from [**Samutpannashraddha**], [**Samutpannashanshay**], and [**Samutpannkoutuhala**], and came to where [**Sudharma Swami**] the elder was seated, and having arrived, he circumambulated [**Shri Sudharma Swami**] three times from the south, and having circumambulated, he praised and bowed, and having praised and bowed, he sat down in front of [**Arya Sudharma Swami**], not too far, not too near, serving and bowing, and with folded hands, he worshipped him with humility and spoke thus:

"O [**Bhagavan**]! If [**Shrautdharma**] is the beginning, [**Guruupadesh**] is the self-realization, [**Purusha**] is the best, [**Karma-Shatru**] is the destruction of the powerful, [**Purusha**] is like a lion, [**Purusha**] is like a [**Pundarika**] - the best white lotus, [**Purusha**] is like a [**Gandhasti**], that is, just as other elephants flee from the smell of a [**Gandhasti**], in the same way, by the virtuous influence of whom [**Iti**], [**Bhiti**], etc. are destroyed, [**Lok**] is the best, [**Lok**] is the lord, [**Lok**] is the benefactor, [**Lok**] is like a lamp, [**Lok**] is a special endeavor, [**Abhay**] is the giver, [**Sharanadata**] is the giver, [**Shraddha**] is the giver of the eye, [**Dharma**] is the preacher, [**Dharma**] is the leader, [**Dharma**] is the charioteer, [**Dharma**] is the emperor of the four [**Gatis**], the destroyer of the four [**Gatis**], the holder of [**Kevalgyan-Darshan**], the destroyer of the [**Ghatikarma**] form of deception, the conqueror of [**Ragaadi**] and the conqueror of other beings by [**Upadesh**], the one who has crossed the ocean of the world himself and who saves others, the one who has attained [**Bodh**] himself and who gives [**Bodh**] to others, the one who is free from [**Karmabandhan**] himself and who frees others by [**Upadesh**], the [**Sarvagya**], the [**Sarvadarshi**], the one free from [**Shivu-padrava**], the one free from [**Achal-chalan**], etc., the one free from the pain of [**Aruj**] - physical and mental ailments, the infinite, the inexhaustible, the unimpeded, and the one free from [**Apunaraavritti-punaraagaman**], the one who has attained the eternal abode called [**Siddhi Gati**], the [**Shraman Bhagavan Mahavir Swami**] has said this meaning of the eighth [**Ang**] [**Antakritdasha**], then [**Bhanta**]! What meaning has the [**Bhagavan**] said of the ninth [**Ang**] [**Anuttaroupapatikadsha**]?"

**Discussion:**

The [**Antakrit Sutra**] is the eighth and the [**Anuttaroupapatikadsha Sutra**] is the ninth [**Ang**] in the eleven [**Angas**]. The reason why the [**Anuttaroupapatikadsha Sutra**] comes after the [**Antakrit Sutra**] is that both [**Sutras**] describe the life of the great men, their splendor and luxury, their enjoyment and their penance and renunciation. The only difference is that the [**Antakrit Sutra**] describes 92 great men who have attained liberation through their penance, while the [**Anuttaroupapatikadsha Sutra**] describes 33 great men who have gone to the [**Anuttar Vimanas**] through their penance. Therefore, it is appropriate for this [**Ang**] to come after the [**Antakrit**]. 1. There are six [**Sanhanans**]. This [**Sanhanan**] is the strongest.

Page #40:
---------------------------
## First Chapter

This Sutra's introduction is based on a question asked by Jambuswami. After the liberation of the Shraman Bhagwan Mahavira, Jambuswami felt curious about the meaning explained by Shraman Bhagwan Mahavira in the ninth Anga. Seeing his curiosity, Shridharmaswami explains the subject of this Sutra.

The current eleven Angas are the contribution of Shridharmaswami. Because in the Angasutras, texts are found where Dhananagari studied eleven Angas, and this Sutra mainly describes Dhananagari in detail, therefore the question arises that which ninth Anga did he study? Currently, in the Anuttaroupapattik Anga, the complete description of Dhananagari from his birth through his death by fasting and his rebirth in the Anuttar Vimana is found. Therefore, it is undoubtedly proven that this is the recitation of Shridharmaswami, and it was done only after the attainment of Nirvana by Shraman Bhagwan Mahavira.

Even in the handwritten copies of this Sutra, there are variations in the text, such as:

"Teṇam kāleṇam teṇam samaeṇam rāyagihe nayare hotthā. Tassa ṇam rāyagihe nāma nayarasya seṇie nāmaṁ rāyā hotthā, vaṇṇao. Celanāe devī. Tattha ṇam rāyagihe nāmaṁ nayare bahiya uttar-puratthime disībhāe guṇaselae nāmaṁ ceie hotthā. Teṇam kāleṇam teṇam samaeṇam rāyagihe nāmaṁ nayare aj-suhamme nāma there jāva guṇaselae nāmaṁ ceie teṇeve samosaḍhe, parisā niggayā, dhammo kahiō, parisā paḍigayā?"

"Teṇam kāleṇam teṇam samaeṇam jambū pajjuvāsāmāṇe evaṁ vayāsī"

Here, the first text appears inconsistent both linguistically and in terms of meaning. Because this Sutra was composed only after the Nirvana of Shraman Bhagwan Mahavira, and King Shrenik had already passed away during the lifetime of Bhagwan. Therefore, the original Sutra in the pure copy obtained by the Shastroddhar Samiti appears to be correct.

The Sutra is adorned with the parables of Dhananagari, providing specific details. The remaining Sutras are considered simple and left without description. These Agamas, though easy to understand from the perspective of meaning, are of great importance historically.

In this Agama, only the name of the city of Rajgriha is mentioned. The detailed description of the city is found in the Aupapattik Sutra. Therefore, those who are curious to know should refer to the Aupapattik Sutra.

2- "Therefore, that Suhamme Anugare said to Jambū Anugare: "Thus, Jambū! By the Shraman, up to the attainment of the ninth Anga, the Anuttarovavaiyadasana, three sections are established.

"If, Bhante! By the Shraman, up to the attainment of the ninth Anga, the Anuttarovavaiyadasana, three sections are established, then Bhante! In the first section of the Anuttarovavaiyadasana, how many teachings are established by the Shraman, up to the attainment?

"Thus, Jambū! By the Shraman, up to the attainment of the Anuttarovavaiyadasana, in the first section, ten teachings are established. For example:

Jali-Mayali-Uvayali Purisaseṇe Ya Varisēṇe Ya. 1. 2. 3. 4. - See Sutra 1.

Page #41:
---------------------------
6
**Dīrghdante ya Laṭṭhadante ya Vehalle Vehāyase Abhae i ya Kumāre.**
"O Venerable One! The Samanas, by means of their attainment, have established ten studies in the first division of the Anuttaropapātika-daśā. Venerable One! What eight things have the Samanas, by means of their attainment, established in the first study of the Anuttaropapātika-daśā?"

Anantara Sudharma Anagāra Jambū Anagāra said thus: "Jambū! The Samanas, by means of their attainment of Nirvāṇa, the Bhagavān Mahāvīra, has spoken of three divisions of the Anuttaropapātika-daśā in the ninth Anga. Venerable One! If the Samanas, by means of their attainment of Nirvāṇa, the Bhagavān Mahāvīra, has spoken of three divisions of the Anuttaropapātika-daśā in the ninth Anga, then Venerable One! How many studies has the Bhagavān Mahāvīra, by means of his attainment of Nirvāṇa, spoken of in the first division of the Anuttaropapātika-daśā?"

Anuttaropapātika-daśā
—
"Jambū! The Samanas, by means of their attainment of Nirvāṇa, the Bhagavān Mahāvīra, has spoken of ten studies in the first division of the Anuttaropapātika-daśā, which are as follows:
-
1. Jāli Kumāra, 2. Mayāli Kumāra, 3. Upajāli Kumāra, 4. Puruṣaseṇa Kumāra, 5. Vāriṣeṇa Kumāra, 6. Dīrghdante Kumāra, 7. Laṣṭadante (Laṭṭharāṣṭradante) Kumāra, 8. Vehalle Kumāra, 9. Vehāyasa Kumāra, 10. Abhaya Kumāra.
Venerable One! If the Samanas, by means of their attainment of Nirvāṇa, the Bhagavān Mahāvīra, has spoken of ten studies in the first division, then Venerable One! What has the Bhagavān Mahāvīra, by means of his attainment of Nirvāṇa, spoken of as the meaning of the first study in the first division of the Anuttaropapātika-daśā?"
-

**Discussion** - The subject matter of this sūtra is very concise. Jambū Svāmī has expressed his curiosity to Ārya Sudharma Svāmī about how many divisions of the Anuttaropapātika-sūtra have been established. Ārya Sudharma Anagāra has established the said sūtra in three divisions and has listed the names of the ten studies in the first division. The names are as follows in order:
1. Jāli Kumāra, 2. Mayāli Kumāra, 3. Upajāli Kumāra, 4. Puruṣaseṇa Kumāra, 5. Vāriṣeṇa Kumāra, 6. Dīrghdante Kumāra, 7. Laṣṭadante Kumāra, 8. Vehalle Kumāra, 9. Vehāyasa Kumāra, and 10. Abhaya Kumāra.

If we consider how the meaningfulness or purposefulness of this sūtra is established, it appears that those auspicious beings who are unable to completely destroy their karmas in their present birth can, after this birth, experience the supreme, pleasant, vedanīya-born pleasures of the five Anuttara-vimānas and attain Nirvāṇa in the next birth.
1. 2. 
These sūtras also imply that knowledge acquired through respectful study can be successful. The teacher fills the disciple who wants to acquire knowledge respectfully from the teacher with perfect knowledge. And the one whose soul is filled with knowledge can easily be able to liberate other souls. Therefore, this sūtra proves that the knowledge of the scriptures is obtained only through devotion to the teacher.
See sū. 1.

Page #42:
---------------------------
## First Chapter
## Jali Kumar

- - And indeed, Jambū! At that time, in that era, there was a city called Rājagṛha. It was prosperous, stable, and wealthy. There was a virtuous Caitya (shrine) there. The king was Śreṇika, and his queen was Dhāriṇī. Dhāriṇī saw a lion in her dream. After some time, the queen gave birth to Jali Kumar, who was like Megha Kumar. Jali Kumar married eight daughters, like Megha Kumar, and gave them eight-eight dowries; as per the stories, you should understand it as eight-eight crore Hiranya (silver), eight-eight crore Suvarna (gold), etc.  And eight-eight Prekṣaṇakāriṇī (actresses) or Peṣaṇakāriṇī (grinders), and also abundant wealth, gold, gems, jewels, pearls, conch shells, coral, red gems, etc., the best of the essence, which was enough to give as charity, to enjoy, and to distribute for seven generations.
- Then, Jali Kumar gave each of his wives one crore Hiranya, one crore Suvarna, etc., and one Prekṣaṇakāriṇī or Peṣaṇakāriṇī. In addition, he gave them abundant wealth, gold, etc., which was enough to give as charity, to enjoy, and to distribute for seven generations.
- Then, Jali Kumar lived in a magnificent palace, as if the faces of the drums were bursting, with thirty-two bound plays performed by excellent women, singing, playing, and enjoying the abundance of pleasing words, touch, taste, form, and fragrance, the pleasures of human life.
- - The assembly was full. Śreṇika left. Just as Megha left, so did Jali. He left in the same way. Eleven Angas were present.
- Your virtue is like a sword. Just as the sword is to be used, so is this contemplation, this questioning. It is difficult to understand even with the elders. Sixteen years after receiving the Samanna-Pariyāga, the time...
- See this same committee's publication Antagaḍ, page 27, and the present Sutra, page 19.
- 1.

Page #43:
---------------------------
Anuttaroppapatikadasha
Kiccha udram chandimasoh ammi sana jav ["sanankumar-mahend-bhamb-lantg-mahasukk-sahasraranyapanayarannaccuae kappe navagevejayvimamapatthade udde durram veeivatta"] vijay-vimaane devattaa uvvanae.
Tae nan theraa bhagawantaa jalim anagaaram kalagayam janitta parinivvanavattiyam kaussaggam karentti, karitta pattacivarain gehnanti. Tahevu uttaranti jav[jenev samane bhagawan mahaavire tenev uvagacchanti, samanam bhagawan mahaaveeram vandamti namasanati, vanditta namasaitta evam vayaasi evam khalu devaanuppiyaanam atevaasi jaali naam anagaare pagai bhaddae pagai vinieae pagai uvsante pagai payanu koha-maan-maya-lobhe miumaddavasampanne alline bhaddae vinieae. Se nan devaanuppiehi abbanunnaae samane sayamev panch mahavvayaani arovita, samanaa ya samaniyo ya khameetta, amhehim saddihim vipulam pavvayam tan cev niravasesam jav aanupuvieae kalagae,] ime ya se ayarabhandae.
"Bhantae"! tti bhagawan goyame jav["samana bhagawan mahaaveeram vandai namasai, vanditta namansitta"] evam vayaasi
Bhagavan Mahavir arrived in Rajagriha city. King Shrenik, knowing this, went to see Bhagavan. Jali Kumar, like Megha Kumar, also set out to see Bhagavan. After seeing Bhagavan, like Megha Kumar, Jali Kumar also accepted the order of renunciation after taking permission from his parents. He studied the eleven angas while staying in the service of the elders.
He performed the tapas named Gunaratnasamvatsar like Skandak Muni. Thus, the statement (description) that is in the Bhagavati Sutra regarding contemplation and questioning should also be understood in relation to Jali Kumar. He went to Vipulagiri with the elders. Notably, Jali Kumar followed the Shraman path for sixteen years. At the end of his life, he attained death and ascended to the Chandra Saudharma Ishana (as far as Sanatkumar Mahendra Brahmalok Lantak Mahashukra Sahasrar Anat Pranat Aran and Achyut Kalpas and beyond the Navgraiveyak Vimana) and was born in the form of a deva in the Vijay, an Anuttar Vimana.
At that time, the Bhagavan elders, knowing that Jali Anagar had passed away, performed Kayotsarga for his Parinirvana. After that, they (the elders) took Jali Anagar's bowl and robes and then descended from Vipulagiri. (As they descended, they came to where Shraman Bhagavan Mahavir was seated. After bowing and paying homage to Bhagavan, those elder Bhagavants said this: Bhagavan! Your disciple Jali Anagar, who was naturally good, humble, peaceful, with little anger, pride, delusion, and greed, gentle and polite, with the qualities of softness and humility, who controlled his senses, good and polite, he, following your command, himself took on the five great vows, forgave the monks and nuns, and went with us to the Vipula mountain, until he passed away and attained the law of time.) These are his tools (clothes, bowls).
After that, Gautam Swami bowed and paid homage to Shraman Bhagavan Mahavir and asked: "Evam khalu devaanuppiyaanam antevaasi jaali naam anagaare pagai bhaddae. Senam jaali anagaare

Page #44:
---------------------------
First Class
"Where has the time gone, where has Jali gone?"
"Gautama! My Jali, who was an ascetic, is like a Skandaka. Just as he, with my permission, took upon himself the five great vows, and then, after performing Sanlekhana-Santhara, attained Samadhi, and then, in the course of time, became time itself, he ascended above the moon, sun, planets, constellations, and stars, passing through many yojanas, many hundreds of yojanas, many thousands of yojanas, many lakhs of yojanas, many crores of yojanas, and many kodi-kodi yojanas, and then, going up, he was born as a deva in the Vijay Maha-Vimana, having passed through the Saudharma, Ishana, Sanatkumar, Mahendra, Brahma, Lant, Maha-Shukra, Sahasrar, Anant, Pranat, Aran, and Achyut devlokas, as well as the three hundred and eighteen Navgraiveyak Vimana-Avasas."
"Bhanta! How long is Jali's time there?"
"Gautama! His time is thirty-two Sagaropama."
"Bhanta! Where will Jali go, where will he be born, when his time, his existence, and his position are exhausted in that devloka?"
"Gautama! He will attain Siddhi from there, by leaving the Maha-Videha Vas."
This is the first lesson of the first chapter of the Anuttaropavaiyadasana, as narrated by the Jamboo Samana.

Page #45:
---------------------------
## Chapter 10: The Unparalleled Descent (Anuttaroupapatikadasha)

**Deposit**

Jambū! Thus, the Arhat, the liberated Lord Mahāvīra, has explained the meaning of the first study of the first category of the Unparalleled Descent.

**Discussion:**

Here, the story of Jālī Kumāra is presented. This description is brief because the subject matter of this sūtra is similar to the first study of the *Jñātasūtra*, which deals with Megha Kumāra. Just as the first study of the *Jñātasūtra* describes Megha Kumāra, so too should this sūtra's first study be understood to describe Jālī Kumāra.

A question arises: Why is Megha Kumāra, like Jālī, born in the Unparalleled Plane, yet his story is found in the *Jñātasūtra* and not the *Anuttaroupapatikadasha*? The answer is that Megha Kumāra's story is included in the sixth *Anga* because it narrates the instructive life events of righteous individuals. Megha Kumāra's life contains many events that can greatly benefit everyone. However, the *Anuttaroupapatikadasha* only describes the fruits of following the right conduct. Therefore, to highlight the special qualities of Megha Kumāra's character, his story is placed in the sixth *Anga* instead of the ninth.

**Studies 2-10: Mayālī and other Kumāras**

* Six of them are to be described in this way. Seven are the sons of Dhāriṇī Rānī. Vehall and Vehāyas are the sons of Chelna. Abhaya is the son of Nandā.
* The first five Kumāras have a Shramaṇa-paryāya of sixteen years each, three have a Shramaṇa-paryāya of twelve years each, and two have a Shramaṇa-paryāya of five years each.
* The first five Anugāras are born in the following planes, in order of their descent: Vijay, Vaijayanta, Jayanta, Aparājita, and Sarvārthasiddha.

**Note:** See Sūtra 1, page 1.

Page #46:
---------------------------
## First Class

The first, **Dīrghdant Sarvārthasiddha**, was born in the **Anuttaraupapātika** state. The rest, in reverse order, were born in **Aparājita** etc., and **Abhaya** was born in the **Vimāna** state. The remaining descriptions should be understood as similar to the first study.

**Abhaya**'s special characteristic is that he was born in the city of **Rājagṛha**, his father was King **Śreṇika**, and his mother was **Nandādevī**. The remaining descriptions are the same as mentioned above.

**11**
"**Jambū!** In this way, the **Śramaṇa**, the **Jina Mahāvīra**, who has attained **Nirvāṇa**, has explained the meaning of the first class of the **Anuttaraupapātika** state."

**Discussion:** This sūtra describes the remaining nine studies of the first class. Their subject matter is also largely similar to the first study. The only difference is that seven of them were sons of **Dhāriṇī Devī**, while **Vehall Kuṁāra** and **Vehāyas Kuṁāra** were sons of **Cēlāṇā Devī**, and **Abhaya Kuṁāra** was born from the womb of **Nandā Devī**. The first five followed the **Samyama** path for sixteen years, three for twelve years, and the remaining two for five years. The first five were born in the five **Anuttar Vimānas** in sequence, and the last five were born in the five **Anuttar Vimānas** in reverse order. This is the result of the intense **Samyama** practice of these ten **Muni**s that they were born in the aforementioned **Vimānas** as **Ekāvatārī**s. This proves that following **Samyak Cāritra** always yields the best results. The smooth description of that result is given here. Anyone who practices **Samyak Cāritra** cannot be deprived of auspicious results. Therefore, **Samyak Cāritra** is beneficial for everyone.

**|| First Class Ends ||**

Page #47:
---------------------------
The Second Group
1-13 Study Introduction
Jambū asked, "If, Bhante, the Arhat, the Jina, the Perfect One, has explained the meaning of the first group of the Anuttaropapātika-daśā, then, Bhante, what is the meaning of the second group of the Anuttaropapātika-daśā, as explained by the Arhat, the Jina, the Perfect One?"
Sudharma replied, "Jambū, the Arhat, the Jina, the Perfect One, has explained thirteen studies of the second group of the Anuttaropapātika-daśā. They are:
Dīrghasen, Mahāsen, Laṭṭhadant, Gūḍhadant, Suddhadant, Halle, Dume, Dumesen, Mahādume-sen, Sīha, Sīhasen, Mahāsīhasen, and Puṇṇasen. These thirteen are the studies."
Jambū asked, "If, Bhante, the Arhat, the Jina, the Perfect One, has explained thirteen studies of the second group of the Anuttaropapātika-daśā, then, Bhante, what is the meaning of the first study of the second group of the Anuttaropapātika-daśā, as explained by the Arhat, the Jina, the Perfect One?"
Sudharma replied, "Jambū, at that time, in that era, in the city of Rājagṛha, in the Guṇasila cave, there was a king named Seniya, a queen named Dhāriṇī, and a lion named Sīha. The birth, childhood, and arts of Dīrghasen Kumāra were as follows:
It is true, as it happened, until the end, it is said.
Thus, in Rājagṛha, there were thirteen kings. The king was Seniya, the queen was Dhāriṇī. All thirteen kings ruled for sixteen years. There were two victories, two defeats, two victories, two undefeated, and five Mahādume-sen, all of whom were perfect.
Jambū, this is the meaning of the second group of the Anuttaropapātika-daśā, as explained by the Arhat, the Jina, the Perfect One. This is the summary of the second group of the Anuttaropapātika-daśā.

Page #48:
---------------------------
## Second Class

There are thirteen studies in the Second Class, which are as follows:

1.  **Dīrgha-sena**, 2. **Mahā-sena**, 3. **Laṣṭa-danta** (Laṭṭha-danta), 4. **Gūḍha-danta**, 5. **Śuddha-danta**, 6. **Halla**, 7. **Druma**, 8. **Druma-sena**, 9. **Mahā-druma-sena**, 10. **Siṁha**, 11. **Siṁha-sena**, 12. **Mahā-siṁha-sena**, 13. **Puṇya-sena** (Puṇya-sena or Pūrṇa-sena).

Venerable Sir! If the Śramaṇa, the Jina Mahāvīra, who attained Nirvāṇa, has spoken of thirteen studies in the Second Class of the Anuttaraupapātika-daśā, then, Venerable Sir! What meaning has the Śramaṇa, the Jina Mahāvīra, who attained Nirvāṇa, spoken of for the first study in the Second Class? Dīrgha-sena, etc.

Jambū! In that time and at that time, there was a city called Rājagṛha. There was a Guṇasīlaka Caitya. The king there was Śreṇika. The queen was Dhāriṇī Devī. She saw a dream of a lion. One should know the birth, childhood, and acquisition of arts, etc., similar to Jālī Kumāra. The special thing is that the Kumāra's name was Dīrgha-sena.

The rest of the description is the same as Jālī Kumāra. Until he ends all suffering.

In this way, there were thirteen princes in the city of Rājagṛha. Their father was Śreṇika and their mother was Dhāriṇī. The initiation ceremony of the thirteen Kumāras was at the age of sixteen. In sequence, they were born in two Vijaya Vimānas, two Vaijayanta Vimānas, two Jayanta Vimānas, two Aparājita Vimānas, and the remaining five, Mahā-druma-sena, etc., in the Sarvārtha-siddha Vimāna.

Jambū! In this way, the Śramaṇa, the Jina Mahāvīra, who attained Nirvāṇa, has spoken of this meaning for the Second Class of the Anuttaraupapātika-daśā.

One should understand that there is a one-month Sanlekhanā in both classes.

**Discussion** - After the completion of the First Class, Śrī Jambūsvāmī respectfully requested Śrī Sudharmasvāmī - Bhagavan! What meaning has the Śramaṇa, the Jina, who attained liberation, expounded for the Second Class of the Anuttaraupapātika-daśā? In response to the question, Sudharmasvāmī said - O Jambū! The Śramaṇa, the Jina, who attained liberation, has expounded thirteen studies in the Second Class of the Anuttaraupapātika-daśā. The thirteen princes were the sons of King Śreṇika and Queen Dhāriṇī Devī. These thirteen Maharshis practiced restraint for sixteen years each and were born in the Anuttar Vimānas.

The description taken here is taken in brief, because the description here is similar to that of Meghakumāra in the 'Jñātādharmākathāṅgasūtra'. The details about this have already been given in the first study. Therefore, those who wish to know more should study the first study of the said sūtra.

One thing to note here is that the twenty-three monks mentioned in both classes of this sūtra performed a one-month Pādap-op-agaman Anashan and then they were born in the said Anuttar Vimānas.

1.  Dīrgha-sena and Mahā-sena
2.  Laṣṭa-danta and Gūḍha-danta
3.  Śuddha-danta and Halla
4.  Druma and Druma-sena

Page #49:
---------------------------
## 14. Anuttaroupapatikadasha

This section reveals the auspicious fruits of practicing the right conduct (Samyakcharitra) with right faith (Samyagdarshan) and right knowledge (Samyagjnana). It is universally acknowledged that only the right actions performed with right faith and right knowledge can lead to the destruction of karmas.

Some variations in the text are found in different manuscripts, but they are not mentioned here as the Jnatadharmakathang Sutra serves as the authoritative source. Curious readers should refer to it for further information.

## End of the Second Section

Page #50:
---------------------------
This is the first chapter of the study.
**Blessed Outpouring**
1- Jambuswami asked Sudharmaswami - "Bante! If the Shraman, having attained Nirvana, the great Mahavira, has said this meaning of the second category of the Anuttaraupapatikadasha, then Bante! What meaning has the Shraman, having attained Nirvana, the great Mahavira, said for the third category of the Anuttaraupapatikadasha?"
Sudharmaswami replied - "Jambū! The Shraman, having attained Nirvana, the great Mahavira, has said ten studies for the third category of the Anuttaraupapatikadasha, which are as follows -
1. Dhanyakumar, 2. Sunakshatra, 3. Rishiadas, 4. Pellāk, 5. Ramputra, 6. Chandrik, 7. Pristimatrik, 8. Pedhalputra, 9. Postill, 10. Vehall.
Jambuswami then asked - "Bante! If the Shraman, having attained Nirvana, the great Mahavira, has said ten studies for the third category of the Anuttaraupapatikadasha, then Bante! What meaning has the Shraman, having attained Nirvana, the great Mahavira, said for the first study of the third category of the Anuttaraupapatikadasha?"
**Dhanyakumar**
2- "Jambū! At that time, in that era, there was a city named Kayandi, prosperous and wealthy. It was full of gardens, with all kinds of flowers and fruits, and a king named Jiyasattu."
1-2-3-4-5 – Sutra 2, Page 1

Page #51:
---------------------------
Here is the English translation, preserving the Jain terms:

In that place, in the city named Kakanadi, there lived a virtuous caravan leader (sarthavahi) named Bhadra. She was endowed with [extensive and spacious buildings, beds, seats, vehicles and conveyances, abundant wealth, jewels and gems, equipped with requisites and utensils, having discarded cooked food and drinks, with many male and female servants, cows, buffaloes, goats and sheep, respected by many people].

This caravan leader Bhadra had a son named Dhanna, who was [endowed with a five-sensed body, marked with auspicious signs and virtues, perfect in human dignity and stature, beautiful in all his limbs, moon-like in appearance, lovely to behold, handsome] and possessed the five types of attachments.

That is, just as the wet-nurse was extremely powerful up to seventy-two arts, in the same way, the young prince Dhanna was adorned in the womb itself, in the third month of gestation, by the teacher of arts. Then that teacher of arts trains and teaches Dhanna in (1) writing, (2) arithmetic, (3) painting, (4) dancing, (5) singing, (6) instrumental music, (7) archery, (8) swimming, (9) keeping time, (10) gambling, (11) public speaking, (12) magic, (13) eight-limbed (grammar, logic, etc.), (14) poetry, (15) ten types of wrestling, (16) other arts, (17) types of food, (18) types of clothes, (19) types of cosmetics, (20) types of beds, (21) goat, (22) riddles, (23) Magadhi, (24) verses, (25) songs, (26) Siloka, (27) gold-craft, (28) silver-craft, (29) conch-craft, (30) types of ornaments, (31) treatment of young women, (32) characteristics of women, (33) characteristics of men, (34) characteristics of horses, (35) characteristics of elephants, (36) characteristics of cows, (37) characteristics of chickens, (38) characteristics of umbrellas, (39) characteristics of sticks, (40) characteristics of swords, (41) characteristics of gems, (42) characteristics of crows, (43) knowledge of objects, (44) measuring of shoulders, (45) measuring of cities, (46) array, (47) counter-array, (48) march, (49) counter-march, (50) wheel-array, (51) bird-array, (52) chariot-array, (53) war, (54) non-war, (55) super-war, (56) eight-fold war, (57) fist-fight, (58) arm-fight, (59) wrestling, (60) archery, (61) javelin-throwing, (62) bow-shooting, (63) gold-craft, (64) silver-craft, (65) thread-weaving, (66) mat-weaving, (67) reed-weaving, (68) leaf-cutting, (69) knife-cutting, (70) animate, (71) inanimate, (72) listening to music.

Then that prince Dhanna became skilled in the sixty-two arts, well-versed in the nine canonical texts, proficient in various languages, an expert in singing, music, and dance, skilled in horse-riding, elephant-riding, and archery, capable of enjoying pleasures, courageous and adventurous.

Page #52:
---------------------------
## Third Class
17

She was skilled in conducting transactions (with those who took). Even after many people had eaten at her place, a lot of food and water would still be left over. Her house had many servants, including male and female slaves, and animals like cows, buffaloes, and goats. She was not defeated by many and was respected by the people.

This noble merchant had a son named Dhanyakumar, who was endowed with a body free from defects and complete with all five senses. That is, his body was free from flaws (in terms of characteristics) and complete (in terms of form). He possessed auspicious marks like the swastika, and had features like sesame seeds and lentils. He had all his limbs perfectly formed and beautiful, complete in measure, weight, and size. His form was gentle like the moon, his appearance was radiant and pleasing. Thus, his appearance was very beautiful.

Like Mahabal Kumar, five wet nurses, including the one who breastfed him, nurtured him. Just as Mahabal had studied seventy-two arts, similarly, his parents sent Dhanyakumar to an art teacher on an auspicious day, in a favorable time and moment. Afterward, the art teacher taught Dhanyakumar seventy-two arts, including mathematics, which is the main one, and writing, up to omens and bird calls, proving them through sutras, meaning, and practice.

These arts are as follows: (1) Writing (2) Mathematics (3) Changing form (4) Drama (5) Singing (6) Playing musical instruments (7) Knowing the notes (8) Tuning musical instruments (9) Knowing the same rhythm (10) Gambling (11) Debating with people (12) Playing with dice (13) Playing chaupar (14) Protecting the city (15) Creating objects from a combination of water and soil (16) Growing grain (17) Producing fresh water, purifying and heating water (18) Making, dyeing, sewing, and wearing new clothes (19) Identifying, preparing, and applying ointments (20) Making beds, knowing the method of sleeping, etc. (21) Recognizing and creating Arya Chanda (22) Creating and solving riddles (23) Creating stories, etc. in Magadhika, the language of the Magadha country (24) Creating stories, etc. in Prakrit language (25) Creating Geeti Chanda (26) Creating Shlokas (Anushtup Chanda) (27) Making gold, making ornaments from it, wearing them, etc. (28) Making new silver, making ornaments from it, wearing them, etc. (29) Making and using powders like gulal, abir, etc. (30) Making and wearing ornaments, etc. (31) Serving a young woman, applying cosmetics (32) Knowing the characteristics of a woman (33) Knowing the characteristics of a man (34) Knowing the characteristics of a horse (35) Knowing the characteristics of an elephant (36) Knowing the characteristics of a cow and a bull (37) Knowing the characteristics of a hen (38) Knowing the characteristics of an umbrella (39) Knowing the characteristics of a staff (40) Knowing the characteristics of a sword (41) Knowing the characteristics of a gem (42) Knowing the characteristics of a Kakani Ratna (43) Vastu Vidya - the science of buildings like houses, shops, etc. (44) Knowing the evidence of an army's encampment, etc. (45) The art of establishing a new city, etc. (46) Vyuha - forming a battle formation (47) Forming a battle formation for one's army in front of the enemy's formation (48) Conducting military operations (49) Leading one's army in front of the enemy's army (50) Chakravyuha - forming a battle formation in the shape of a wheel (51) Forming a battle formation in the shape of a Garuda (52) Creating a Shakatvyuha (53) Conducting a general war (54) Conducting a special war (55) Conducting a very special war (56) Fighting with a stick or bone (57) Fighting with fists (58) Fighting with arms.

Page #53:
---------------------------
(59) Engaging in vine combat (60) Showing much as little and little as much (61) Making the hilt of a sword, etc. (62) Possessing the skill of archery (63) Preparing silver alloy (64) Preparing gold alloy (65) Piercing threads (66) Plowing fields (67) Piercing the stem of a lotus (68) Cutting leaves (69) Piercing hard earrings, etc. (70) Reviving the dead and unconscious (71) Making the living dead (or lifeless) and (72) Recognizing the speech of crows, owls, and other birds.

In this way, Dhanyakumara became proficient in seventy-two arts. His nine limbs - two ears, two eyes, two nostrils, tongue, skin, and mind - which were dormant and had an indistinct consciousness in childhood, became awakened. He became skilled in eighteen regional languages. He became adept in horse-combat, elephant-combat, chariot-combat, and hand-to-hand combat. He gained the ability to crush his opponents with his own arms. He acquired the capacity to enjoy sensual pleasures. Due to his courage, he became a night-wanderer, i.e., one who can travel even in the middle of the night.

Explanation - After the completion of the second chapter, Jambusvami again asked Sudharmasvami - "Venerable one! I have heard the meaning of the second chapter. Now, kindly enlighten me about the meaning of the third chapter as well, so that I may also understand it."

In response, Sri Sudharmasvami expounded - "O Jambu! The omniscient ascetic Lord Mahavira, who attained liberation, has expounded ten studies in the third chapter. The first study is about the life story of Dhanyakumara."

By reading this study, we come to know about the advanced state of the female gender at that time. The women of that era were not dependent on men like the women of the present age, but rather they themselves engaged in trade and other activities, being equal to men. They had complete knowledge about trade and other matters. Here, the merchant woman named Bhadra herself conducted the trade business, and the remarkable thing is that she was not subdued by anyone - she was not suppressed. This description paints a picture of the female gender having reached the pinnacle of progress. They also attained liberation like the men.

Page #54:
---------------------------
Third Chapter
(The merchant-caravan leader) takes the hand of the thirty-two excellent maidens in a single day. The thirty-two gifts are as follows: [thirty-two gold coins, thirty-two gold coins, thirty-two excellent crowns, thirty-two excellent pairs of earrings, thirty-two excellent necklaces, thirty-two excellent half-necklaces, thirty-two excellent single-strand garlands, similarly excellent pearl garlands, similarly excellent gold garlands, similarly excellent gem garlands, thirty-two excellent bracelets, similarly excellent anklets, thirty-two excellent pairs of silk garments, similarly excellent pairs of cotton garments, similarly excellent pairs of muslin garments, thirty-two excellent sashes, similarly excellent modesty, similarly excellent wisdom, fame, intelligence, prosperity, thirty-two excellent ornaments, thirty-two excellent maidens, similarly excellent beds, thirty-two excellent couches, all-gem, the best of the palace, thirty-two excellent seats, thirty-two excellent beds with ten thousand mattresses, thirty-two excellent palanquins, thirty-two excellent horses, all-gem, the best of the palace, thirty-two excellent elephants, all-gem, the best of the palace, thirty-two excellent chariots, thirty-two excellent war chariots, thirty-two excellent horses, thirty-two excellent elephants, thirty-two excellent villages with ten thousand households, thirty-two excellent male servants, similarly excellent female servants, similarly excellent attendants, similarly excellent cooks, similarly excellent water-bearers, similarly excellent elders, thirty-two excellent golden lamps, thirty-two excellent silver lamps, thirty-two excellent gold-and-silver lamps, thirty-two excellent golden plates, thirty-two excellent silver plates, thirty-two excellent gold-and-silver plates, thirty-two excellent golden cups three times, thirty-two excellent golden bowls three, thirty-two excellent golden pitchers three, thirty-two excellent golden platters three, thirty-two excellent golden ladles three, thirty-two excellent golden spittoons three, thirty-two excellent golden vases three, thirty-two excellent golden footstools three, thirty-two excellent golden cushions three, thirty-two excellent golden beds three, thirty-two excellent golden couches three, thirty-two excellent swan-seats, similarly excellent peacock-seats, similarly excellent eagle-seats, similarly excellent lion-seats, similarly excellent elephant-seats, thirty-two excellent lotus-seats, thirty-two excellent seats facing the directions, thirty-two excellent oil-containers, as in the case of the royal palace, up to thirty-two excellent similar oil-containers, thirty-two excellent stools, as in the case of the celestial beings, up to thirty-two excellent similar stools, thirty-two excellent parasol-bearers, thirty-two excellent chowrie-bearers, thirty-two excellent fans, thirty-two excellent milk-maids, up to thirty-two excellent lap-sitters, thirty-two excellent body-massagers, thirty-two excellent hair-dressers, thirty-two excellent make-up artists, thirty-two excellent perfume-sprinklers, thirty-two excellent powder-sprinklers, thirty-two excellent garment-folders, thirty-two excellent water-carriers, thirty-two excellent seat-arrangers, thirty-two excellent flower-bearers, thirty-two excellent hand-bearers, thirty-two excellent offering-makers, thirty-two excellent bed-makers, thirty-two excellent attendants.

Page #55:
---------------------------
The Anuttaropapatikadashā Parihārī, thirty-two Bāhiriyā Parihārī, thirty-two Mālākarī, thirty-two Pesanakārī, and other things, such as much gold, silver, bronze, or lead, up to the essence of the essence, and also up to the most excellent families, were to be given, to be eaten, to be enjoyed.
Then those wealthy young men gave each other a koți of gold, a koți of silver, a garland, a garland of flowers, and so on, up to giving each other a Pesanakār, and other things, such as much gold, up to being enjoyed. Then those wealthy young men, having risen from the state of childhood, up to the state of being mature, up to the state of being youthful, became skilled in seventy-two arts, their nine senses (two ears, two eyes, two nostrils, one tongue, one touch, and one mind) became awakened, they became proficient in eighteen languages, they became passionate about music and love, they became skilled in Gandharva music and dramatic performance, and they became adorned with beautiful clothes like the house of love. They became skilled in proper behavior, proper enjoyment, eye-related defects, proper conversation, and proper speech, and they became skilled in proper conduct. They became skilled in fighting with horses, fighting with elephants, they became chariot warriors, they became arm warriors, they became arm fighters, they became able to break even hard objects with their arms, and they became able to enjoy. Knowing this, the noble Sārthavāhī built thirty-two beautiful palaces, which were vast and lofty.
Those buildings seemed to laugh with their group of bright lights. They were strange in their construction of jewels, gold, and gems. They were adorned with victory flags that fluttered in the wind and announced victory, and with umbrellas upon umbrellas. They were so high that their peaks surpassed the sky. In the middle of their lattices, there were cages of gems that seemed like their eyes. They had mounds of jewels and gold. They had blooming lotus flowers, either real or painted. They were adorned with tilak gems and half-moons, or they had inscriptions of sandalwood and other things on their walls. They were adorned with various kinds of jewel garlands. They were smooth inside and out. Their courtyards were paved with fine golden sand. Their touch was pleasant. Their form was very beautiful. They filled the mind with joy when they were seen. They were palaces, very beautiful.
In the middle of those palaces, a superior building was constructed, which was supported by many hundreds of pillars. In it, many playful statues were installed. In it, there was a high and well-made pedestal of diamond, and there were toranas. There were excellent, thick, and spacious pillars of vaidurya gem, with beautiful statues. It appeared bright because it was inlaid with various kinds of jewels, gold, and gems. Its ground was perfectly level, vast, paved, and beautiful. In that building, there were paintings of deer, bulls, horses, humans, and makara. It appeared beautiful because it was adorned with a pedestal of diamond on its pillars. Pairs of vidyadharas, situated in the same row, appeared to be moving by means of a machine. That building was radiant and full of thousands of rays and thousands of paintings.

Page #56:
---------------------------
Third Varga
21
It was extremely radiant. Merely by seeing it, the eyes of the spectators would get glued to it. Its touch was pleasurable, and its form was endowed with beauty. It had stupas (reliquaries) of gold, gems, and jewels built into it. Its main spire was adorned with various kinds of five-colored flags along with bells. It was radiating clusters of dazzling rays all around. It was plastered, washed, and adorned with canopies, so much so that it appeared like a temple lamp emitting fragrance. It was pleasing to the mind, visually appealing, beautiful, and a reflection of beauty—extremely enchanting.

Thereafter, the chief merchant Bhadra arranged the marriage (panigraha) of Dhanyakumara with the daughters of thirty-two Ibhyavara (eminent merchants) in a single day. He provided them with thirty-two sets of items, such as: [32 crore silver coins, 32 crore gold coins, 32 excellent crowns, 32 excellent pairs of earrings, 32 excellent necklaces, 32 excellent half-necklaces, 32 excellent single-strand necklaces, 32 pearl necklaces, 32 golden necklaces, 32 jeweled necklaces, 32 pairs of excellent bracelets, 32 pairs of excellent armlets, 32 excellent sets of silk garments, 32 excellent sets of cotton garments, 32 sets of Tussah silk garments, 32 sets of sashes, 32 sets of fine muslin, 32 Shri (goddesses of prosperity), 32 Hri (goddesses of modesty), 32 Dhrti (goddesses of fortitude), 32 Kirti (goddesses of fame), 32 Buddhi (goddesses of intellect), and 32 Lakshmi (goddesses of wealth) statues, 32 Nanda (auspicious objects), 32 Bhadra (auspicious objects), 32 palm trees, all of which are to be understood as jewel-like. The 32 excellent flags as the insignia (ketu) of his palace, 32 excellent cattle-pens (gokula) according to the count of ten thousand cows, 32 excellent dramas performed by thirty-two persons, 32 excellent horses, all of which are to be understood as jewel-like. Thirty-two excellent elephants, like a treasure-house, 32 excellent vehicles, all jewel-like, 32 excellent palanquins, 32 excellent chariots, 32 excellent gillis (elephant's howdah), 32 excellent thilli (horse's saddle), 32 excellent open vehicles, 32 pleasure chariots, 32 war chariots, 32 excellent horses, 32 excellent elephants, 32 villages according to the count of ten thousand families living in each, 32 excellent male servants, 32 excellent female servants, 32 excellent attendants, 32 doorkeepers, 32 eunuchs (antahpura guards), 32 ministers (mahattarakas), 32 golden, 32 silver, and 32 gold-silver hanging lamps, 32 golden, 32 silver, and 32 gold-silver standing lamps, similarly, 32 golden, 32 silver, and 32 gold-silver panjara-dipa (lamps with stands), as well as 32 golden, 32 silver, and 32 gold-silver plates, 32 bowls, 32 cups, 32 saucers, 32 spoons, 32 chamber pots, 32 griddles, 32 footstools, 32 special seats, 32 water pots, 32 beds, 32 small beds, 32 goose-shaped seats, 32 crane-shaped seats, 32 eagle-shaped seats, 32 elevated seats, 32 lowered seats, 32 long seats, 32 auspicious seats, 32 wing-shaped seats, 32 crocodile-shaped seats, 32 lotus-shaped seats, 32 crossed-leg seats, as well as 32 oil containers, etc., all are to be understood according to the Rajaprasniya-sutra, up to 32 mustard-seed containers, 32 hunchbacked female servants, etc., all are to be understood according to the Aupapātika-sūtra, up to 32 female servants from the Parasa country, 32 umbrellas, 32 umbrella-bearing female servants, 32 chāmaras (yak-tail fans), 32 chāmara-bearing female servants, 32 fans, 32 fan-bearing female servants, 32 betel-nut containers, etc.

Page #57:
---------------------------
## Chapter 22: The Unparalleled State of Abundance

The king gave thirty-two **Karondī** (female attendants), thirty-two **Karotīkādhārīṇī** (attendants who hold the Karotīkā, a type of fan), thirty-two **Dhātrī** (wet nurses), thirty-two **Aṅkadhātrī** (attendants who massage the body), thirty-two **Aṅgamardīkā** (attendants who gently massage the body), thirty-two attendants who bathe, thirty-two attendants who adorn with ornaments, thirty-two attendants who grind sandalwood, thirty-two attendants who grind **tāmbūla** (betel nut) powder, thirty-two attendants who guard the storehouse, thirty-two attendants who entertain, thirty-two attendants who stay close in the assembly, thirty-two attendants who perform plays, thirty-two **Kautumbīka** (attendants who accompany), thirty-two attendants who cook, thirty-two attendants who guard the treasury, thirty-two young women, thirty-two **Mālinī** (attendants who carry flowers), thirty-two attendants who fetch water, thirty-two attendants who perform sacrifices, thirty-two attendants who prepare the bed, thirty-two **Abhyantara** (inner) and thirty-two **Bāhya** (outer) **Pratihārī** (guards), thirty-two attendants who make garlands, and thirty-two attendants who grind. In addition, he gave a great deal of gold, silver, bronze, cloth, and abundant wealth, including **Kanaka** (gold) and other essential wealth, enough to give and enjoy for seven generations. Then, Dhanayakumāra gave each wife one **Hiranyakoṭi** (a crore of gold coins), one **Svarṇakoṭi** (a crore of gold coins), and all the other aforementioned items, including one **Peṣaṇakārī** (grinding) female attendant, and divided a great deal of gold, silver, etc., until he was immersed in pleasures in his high palaces where **Mṛdaṅga** (drums) were being played.

**Discussion:** This chapter describes Dhanayakumāra's childhood, education, marriage ceremony, and experience of worldly pleasures. This description is similar to the first or fifth study of the **Jñātā Sūtra**, so those who are curious should refer to it for more information.

**Dhanayakumāra's Proposal to Renounce the World**

At that time, the **Samana** (ascetic) **Bhagavan Mahāvīra** was in the vicinity. The king's entourage departed. The king, like a **Jīvasattū** (living being), also departed. Then, Dhanayakumāra, like a **Jamālī** (a type of bird), also departed. He went with a **Pāyacāra** (attendant) until he reached the **Uttarasanga** (northern part of the assembly hall). After reaching there, he stood with folded hands, with a pure heart, and with great respect, and approached the **Samana** **Bhagavan Mahāvīra**. After approaching, he bowed to the **Samana** **Bhagavan Mahāvīra** with great respect, and then performed the **Triviha** (threefold) **Pajjuvāsana** (prostration). Then, the **Samana** **Bhagavan Mahāvīra** spoke to Dhanayakumāra, praising his great qualities and explaining the **Dharma** (righteousness). The entourage also listened.

Then, Dhanayakumāra, in the presence of the **Samana** **Bhagavan Mahāvīra**, contemplated the **Dharma**, his heart filled with determination and unwavering resolve. He stood up and bowed, and then, with great respect, addressed the **Samana** **Bhagavan Mahāvīra** and said:

"I am ready, **Bhanta** (venerable sir), to become a **Niggantha** (Jain ascetic). I am ready, **Bhanta**, to become a **Niggantha**. I am ready, **Bhanta**, to become a **Niggantha**. I am ready, **Bhanta**, to become a **Niggantha."

"So be it, **Bhanta**! So be it, **Bhanta**! It is not in vain, **Bhanta**! It is not in vain, **Bhanta**! ... I will ask you what I should do. Then, I will go to the **Devāṇuppiyāṇa** (heavenly beings) ... I will renounce my home and become a **Niggantha**."

Page #58:
---------------------------
## Third Chapter

23. Devānupriyā! Do not delay.

Just as Jamālī inquired, so he asked [Then, that noble prince, having heard the words of the Samana Bhagavan Mahāvīra, was delighted and satisfied. He bowed to the Samana Bhagavan Mahāvīra with great respect, and went to his mother and father. Having gone to them, he greeted his mother and father with victory and joy. Having greeted them with victory and joy, he spoke to them in this way: "Oh, my mother and father! I have heard the Dharma from the Samana Bhagavan Mahāvīra, and it is pleasing to me, I desire it, I accept it, I am delighted with it." Then, that noble prince's mother and father spoke to him in this way: "Oh, dear son! You are blessed! You are fulfilled, dear son! You are virtuous, dear son! You are auspicious, dear son! You have heard the Dharma from the mouth of the Samana Bhagavan Mahāvīra, and it is pleasing to you, you desire it, you accept it, you are delighted with it."

Then, that noble prince's mother and father, again and again, spoke to him in this way: "Oh, my mother and father! I have heard the Dharma from the Samana Bhagavan Mahāvīra, and it is pleasing to me, I desire it, I accept it, I am delighted with it." Then, I, oh my mother and father! Being terrified of the cycle of birth and death, fearing birth, old age, and death, I desire, oh my mother and father! To be ordained by you, to become a monk, to leave the household and become a homeless one, to go to the Samana Bhagavan Mahāvīra.

_At that time, the Śramaṇa Bhagavan Mahāvīra, having attained Nirvāṇa, arrived in the city of Kākaṇḍī. The assembly came out. Like a Konika, the king Jitasatru also came out to see him. Like Jamālī, the noble prince Dhanayakumāra also came out with adornments. The special thing is that Dhanayakumāra walked on foot to reach the service of the Bhagavan.

Having heard the Dharma from the Śramaṇa Bhagavan Mahāvīra and having held it in his heart, Dhanayakumāra, with a joyful and satisfied heart, stood up and circumambulated the Śramaṇa Bhagavan Mahāvīra three times, offering salutations and prostrations. And he spoke in this way:

"Oh Bhagavan! I have faith in the Nirgrantha teachings. Oh Bhagavan! I believe in the Nirgrantha teachings. Oh Bhagavan! I am interested in the Nirgrantha teachings. Oh Bhagavan! I am eager to act according to the Nirgrantha teachings. Oh Bhagavan! This Nirgrantha teaching is true, factual, and unquestionable, as you say.

Oh Bhagavan! I want to leave my home, shave my head, and accept the homeless Dharma from you, with the permission of my mother, Bhadra Sārthavāhi.

The Bhagavan said, "Devānupriyā! Do whatever pleases you, do not be negligent even for a moment in the work of Dharma."

When the Śramaṇa Bhagavan Mahāvīra spoke to Dhanayakumāra in the aforementioned way, Dhanayakumāra was delighted and satisfied. He circumambulated the Bhagavan three times, offering salutations and prostrations. Then he went to his parents and, tying them with the words "victory and joy," spoke in this way: "Oh mother and father! I have heard the Dharma from the Śramaṇa Bhagavan Mahāvīra. That Dharma is pleasing to me, very pleasing to me, and...

Page #59:
---------------------------
## 24
## The Unparalleled State of Non-Arising

Dhanayakumar found it pleasing. Then, for the second and third time, Dhanayakumar spoke to his parents in the same way, saying, "O parents! I am troubled by the fear of the world, terrified by birth, old age, and death. Therefore, O parents! With your permission, I wish to accept the homeless dharma by becoming a monk, getting my head shaved, and renouncing my household life near the Lord Mahavira."

## Acceptance of Renunciation

Then, the virtuous Kumar's mother, hearing those unpleasant, unwelcome, disagreeable, displeasing, unpalatable, and unheard-of words, fainted. After regaining consciousness, there was a conversation and counter-conversation. She cried, wailed, grieved, and lamented, as Mahabala had said.

"O Dhanayakumar! You are our only son, our beloved, our dear, our treasure, our jewel, our pride, our trust, our agreement, our respect, our acceptance, our treasure trove, our precious jewel, our life's breath, our heart's joy, our delight, our rare flower, our precious gem! Why should you go? Why should you leave us? We do not want you to leave us even for a moment. Stay, my dear! As long as we live, we will arrange your marriage after our death. You will become a monk, get your head shaved, and renounce your household life and become a homeless one, following the teachings of the Lord Mahavira, the great one, who is the source of our lineage, our family tree, our birth, and our existence."

Then, Dhanayakumar said to his mother and father, "O mother! What you are saying to me, you are saying it because you are my mother. I am your only son, your beloved, and so on. But I will renounce my household life. O mother! In the human existence, there are countless births, old age, death, disease, bodily and mental suffering, desires, pain, sorrow, and constant fear of being overwhelmed. It is impermanent, unstable, and unreliable. It is like a mirage, a water bubble, a drop of dew, a dream, a lightning flash, unstable, impermanent, and subject to decay, destruction, and annihilation. It will surely be abandoned, either in this life or in the next. Who knows, O mother! Whether one will go to hell or heaven? Therefore, O mother! I wish to renounce my household life and become a monk with your blessings."

Then, the virtuous Dhanayakumar, the good and wise, went to the king, the protector of the dharma, and asked him, "O king! I wish to renounce my household life. I wish to have an umbrella, a crown, and a fly whisk for my departure."

Then, the king, the protector of the dharma, said to the virtuous one, "O protector of the dharma! You are a virtuous person. I will personally arrange for the departure of Dhanayakumar, the renunciant, without any delay."

The king himself arranged for the departure, just as he had done for the departure of his own son, Kanha. Then, Dhanayakumar, the renunciant, himself performed the five-fold prostration, and then he renounced his household life.

Then, Dhanayakumar, the homeless one, went to the forest, where he practiced austerities and became a silent monk.

Page #60:
---------------------------
## Third Chapter

The mother, similar to the third category, began to speak in this way: "Oh son! You are my beloved, dear, cherished, pleasing, agreeable, fundamental, trustworthy, accepted, majority, permitted, like a box of ornaments, a jewel, a jewel-like, like the breath of the living, and a joy to the heart, my only son. Even hearing your name is as rare as the flower of the Udumbara (Gular) tree, so what to say about seeing you? Therefore, oh son! I cannot bear your separation for even a moment. So, as long as we are alive, stay at home and increase the family lineage. When we attain the law of time and your age becomes mature, then, after increasing the family lineage, you should become free and accept the religion of the homeless by getting your head shaved in the presence of the holy Shraman Bhagwan Mahavir."

Then Dhanayakumar said to his parents: "Oh parents! What you just said, 'Oh son! You are our beloved, dear, etc., and when we pass away, you should accept initiation,' etc. But, oh parents! This human life is afflicted with immense pain from birth, death, illness, disease, many physical and mental sufferings, and hundreds of afflictions. It is impermanent, impermanent, and non-eternal. Like the colors of the evening, like the bubbles of water, like the water drop that remains on the sharp edge, like a dream vision, and like the flash of lightning, it is fickle and impermanent. To rot, to fall, to melt, and to be destroyed is its nature (characteristic). One day, sooner or later, one must leave; so, oh parents! Who can decide who will go first (die) and who will go later? Therefore, oh parents! Please give me your permission. With your permission, I wish to accept initiation in the presence of Shraman Bhagwan Mahavir."

When Dhanayakumar's mother, Bhadra Sार्थवाही, was unable to convince him, she gave him permission to take initiation. Just as the mother of Thavacchaputra requested a canopy, a fly whisk, etc., from Krishna, similarly, Bhadra also requested a canopy, a fly whisk, etc., from King Jitashatru. Then King Jitashatru said to Bhadra Sार्थवाही: "Devanpriye! Be at ease. I myself will perform the initiation ceremony of Dhanayakumar." Afterwards, King Jitashatru himself performed the initiation ceremony of Dhanayakumar, just as Krishna had performed the initiation ceremony of Thavacchaputra.

After that, Dhanayakumar himself performed the Panchmustik Loch and accepted initiation. Dhanayakumar also became homeless after becoming initiated. He became a secret celibate, equipped with the Eirya-Samiti and the Bhasha-Samiti.

## Discussion

This chapter describes how Dhanayakumar developed detachment. When Shraman Bhagwan Mahavir arrived in Kakandini Nagar, Dhanayakumar, along with the city council, was present in his service to see him and drink the nectar of his teachings. The teachings had such an impact on Dhanayakumar that he immediately renounced all worldly pleasures and became homeless.

In this chapter, we find four examples. Two of them are about Dhanayakumar, and the other two are about King Jitashatru's relationship with King Konik, and the fourth is about the initiation ceremony performed by Krishna Vasudeva for Thavacchaputra. All of these are taken from the 'Aupapatik Sutra', 'Bhagavati Sutra', and 'Jnatadharmakathang Sutra'. A detailed description of all of them can be found in these Sutras. Therefore, the inquisitive should definitely study these Agamas once. All these Agamas are very useful from a historical perspective. There is no need to repeat the descriptions here.

Page #61:
---------------------------
## 26

**Briefly explained.**

The text in brackets, which is given in the original text and its meaning, is related to Jamali's context, therefore it mentions 'Ammapiyaro' (parents), but it does not occur in the context of Dhanya Kumar, therefore only the mother should be considered here. The father is not mentioned anywhere in this incident. Readers should keep this in mind.

**Anuttara-upapaatika-dasha**

**Dhanya Muni's Tapascharya**

6A. On the day when Dhanya Anagaara became a monk, having renounced his household life [having renounced his household life], he bowed and prostrated to the Shraman Bhagavan Mahavira, and after bowing and prostrating, he spoke thus:

"Bhanta! With your permission, I wish to live for the rest of my life, constantly engaged in the sixth-fold austerity, with an unblemished mind, and with the acceptance of Ayambila. In the observance of the sixth-fold austerity, I wish to accept Ayambila, but not Anayambila. I wish to accept it with hands that have been in contact with things, but not with hands that have not been in contact with things. I wish to accept it if it is Ujjhitadharma (fit to be discarded), but not if it is Anujjhitadharma. I wish to accept it if it is food and drink that many other Shramans, Brahmanas, guests, miserly people, and beggars do not desire."

The Devana-priya (beloved of the gods) said: "Do as it pleases you, but do not be careless."

Then, Dhanya Anagaara, with the permission of Bhagavan Mahavira, lived for the rest of his life, constantly engaged in the sixth-fold austerity, with a joyful and contented mind, and with the acceptance of Ayambila.

**Explanation:** This sutra particularly describes Dhanya Anagaara's detachment from food and the body, and his restraint of the sense of taste. After receiving initiation, he became so engrossed in Dharma that from the day of his initiation, his inclination was towards intense austerity. On that very day, he decided and requested Bhagavan: "Bhagavan! With your permission, I will observe the sixth-fold austerity with the acceptance of Ayambila for the rest of my life." His such Dharma-interest...

Page #62:
---------------------------
## Third Class
27
Seeing this, the Lord granted permission. The blessed Anāgāra, according to his vow, accepted the austerity.
He is called 'Ujjhit-Dharmic', who eats food that is particularly unwanted. The commentary states, "Ujjhiy-Dhammiyanti, Ujjhitam - Parityaagaha sa eva Dharmaha - Paryayo yasyaastiti Ujjhitadharmaha", meaning that food which is completely worthy of being abandoned or thrown away is called 'Ujjhit-Dharma'. On the day of Ayambila, the blessed Anāgāra used to eat such food.
7 Therefore, the blessed Anāgāra, on the first day of the sixth-month fast, performed the first watch of study. Just as Gautama asked the Lord, so too did the blessed Anāgāra ask the Lord, until [in the second Pौरिसी he meditated, in the third Pौरिसी he was free from bodily haste, mental restlessness, anxiety and curiosity,
1.
Anuttaropavaiya Class 3, Sutra 6.

Page #63:
---------------------------
## Chapter 28: The State of Unwavering Resolve

The Blessed One, having cleansed the mouth-cloth, then cleansed the bowls and the clothes. After cleansing the bowls, he took them and went to where the Lord Mahavira was seated. Arriving there, he bowed and prostrated himself before the Lord and said, "Lord, today is the day of my fast-breaking. So, with your permission, I wish to go to the city of Kakanda to beg for alms, following the rules of begging in high, low, and middle-class families."

The Lord Mahavira said to the Blessed One, "O Beloved of the Gods! Do as you please, do not delay."

Having received permission, the Blessed One left the Lord and departed from the Sahasramravan garden. He walked with a steady pace, free from bodily haste and mental agitation, without anxiety or eagerness, observing the earth with equanimity. He arrived in the city of Kakanda. There, he wandered through the high, low, and middle-class families, accepting only the coarse food offered to him. He did not desire any delicious food.

Afterwards, the Blessed One, with a well-directed, excellent effort, guided by the instructions of his teachers and fully accepting the principles of right conduct, searched for alms. If he found food, he did not find water, and if he found water, he did not find food.

(Even in such a situation) the Blessed One remained humble, without resentment, joyful, free from passions, without sorrow, and constantly in meditation. He followed the path of conduct, striving in the practices he had attained and making efforts to attain the practices he had not yet attained. He accepted the alms he received and left the city of Kakanda. He returned to the Lord, and after performing the necessary rituals for his journey, he reflected on the faults he had committed while begging. He showed the Lord the food and water he had received.

Then, with the Lord Mahavira's permission, the Blessed One, free from fainting and greed, ate the food without attachment, just as a snake enters a hole without touching the sides, but only the middle. The Blessed One ate without any attachment to taste, just as a snake enters a hole directly. After eating, he continued to wander, cultivating his soul through restraint and austerity.

**Commentary:** Here, the author describes the unwavering resolve of the Blessed One. After taking the vow, when he went to the city to beg for alms, he wandered through the houses of the rich, poor, and middle class, accepting whatever food and water he found. He received alms that were difficult to obtain, guided by the instructions of his teachers, and accepted with enthusiasm, but he found food without water and water without food. Yet, the Blessed One never felt humility, sorrow, anger, or any other defilement or sorrow. Instead, he remained constantly in meditation, practicing the practices he had attained and striving to attain the practices he had not yet attained. He accepted whatever he received while begging.

Page #64:
---------------------------
Third Class
29
They used to accept it. - In this way, they remained firm on their vow and, making their soul steadfast and immovable, they continued to wander joyfully on the path of self-control. Whatever food they obtained in alms, they ate it with such detachment as a snake directly enters its burrow, that is, they did not eat the food with relish, but their only desire was to protect the body for the sake of self-control.
The commentator explains the meaning of the phrase "like a snake in its burrow" as follows - "Just as a snake enters the burrow without touching the sides, so this one accepts the food without any attachment, as if touching it with the mouth." That is, just as a snake enters the burrow without touching the sides, in the same way, the blessed monks made their soul steadfast in the practices of self-control without any attachment. Not only this, but they were also always striving to attain the unknown knowledge and the like.
Then the ascetic, the venerable Mahavira, withdraws from another city, Kakundika, with its thousand mango groves, and dwells in the outskirts.
Then that blessed houseless monk studies the eleven angas (scriptures) with the elders of the venerable Mahavira, and then, practicing self-control and austerity, he continues to wander. Then that blessed houseless one, with that great austerity, becomes like Skandaka [i.e., extremely emaciated] up to [being endowed with generosity, vastness, dedication, firmness, auspiciousness, welfare, blessedness, prosperity, splendor, exalted, elevated, supreme, noble, and of great power. He is shriveled, fleshless, his bones covered with skin, making a rattling sound as he walks. He walks and stands by the power of the soul alone, speaks with difficulty, and is about to speak].

Page #65:
---------------------------
Even the mere act of performing *Anuttaraupapatikadashā* would exhaust them. Just as a cart loaded with dry wood, a cart loaded with leaves, a cart loaded with leaves, sesame seeds, and dry goods, a cart loaded with castor oil wood, a cart loaded with coal, all these carts, when well dried in the sun, move with a rattling sound and stand with a rattling sound, similarly, when the blessed *Anugār* walked, their bones rattled and even when they stood still, they rattled. Although they were weak in body, they were strong in austerity. Their flesh and blood had become depleted. Like fire buried in a pile of ashes, they were adorned with austerity, brilliance, and the splendor of austerity.

The *Vivechana Sūtra* is clear. Its entire subject can be easily understood from the original meaning itself. It is only noteworthy that although the blessed *Anugār*’s body had become emaciated by the test of austerity and restraint, their soul had become supernaturally strong, due to which the brilliance of their face was increasing day by day, shining like fire.

**The Physical Condition of the Blessed Muni: Description of the Feet and Toes**

10. The feet of the blessed *Anugār* had become of this kind of form and color: just as the dry bark of a tree, or wooden sandals, or old shoes, so also the feet of the blessed *Anugār* were dry, rough, and devoid of flesh. They were recognized only by the bones, skin, and veins. Due to the depletion of flesh and blood, their feet were not recognizable.

The toes of the blessed *Anugār* had become of this kind of form and color: just as the pods of peas, the pods of mung beans, the pods of black gram, and when these tender pods are broken and put in the sun, they become dry and withered, so also the toes of the blessed *Anugār* had become dry, rough, and devoid of flesh, that is, they had withered. Only the bones, skin, and veins remained in them, flesh and blood were not (generally) present in them.

Here, the *Sūtrakār* has described how much change had come about in the physical condition of the blessed *Anugār*. Due to performing austerity, his two feet had become dry like the dry bark of a tree, wooden sandals, or old dry shoes. In their feet, flesh and blood were not even visible in name. Only bones, skin, and veins were visible. The same was the condition of the toes. They were also like peas, mung beans, black gram…

Page #66:
---------------------------
## Third Class

They had become like the pods of the Udda plant, which have been plucked while tender and laid out in the sun to wither. They too had no flesh and blood left. The thighs, knees and upper thighs of the Blessed Ascetic 
11- The thighs of the Blessed Ascetic had become of a colour like that of wood, like the thigh of a crow, or the thigh of a Kank bird, or the thigh of a Dhenik bird, and so on [until they were dry, withered, fleshless, and only bones, skin and veins remained, and there was no flesh and blood left].
The knees of the Blessed Ascetic had become of a colour like that of wood, like the joint of a Kali plant, or the joint of a peacock, or the joint of a Dhenik bird, and so on [until the knees of the Blessed Ascetic were dry, fleshless, and only bones, skin and veins remained, and there was no flesh and blood left].
The upper thighs of the Blessed Ascetic had become of a colour like that of wood, like the tender shoots of a Vadari, a Salyaki, or a Samali tree, which have been plucked and laid out in the sun to wither. In the same way, the upper thighs of the Blessed Ascetic [had become dry, withered, and there was no flesh and blood left].

**Explanation:**

This Sutra describes the thighs, knees and upper thighs of the Blessed Ascetic. Due to the intense heat of his austerities, the Blessed Ascetic's thighs had become so devoid of flesh and blood that they appeared like the stems of the Kakajanga plant, which is naturally dry. Or, you could say that they had become as thin and fleshless as the thighs of a crow. They are also compared to the thighs of the Kank and Dhenik birds. Similarly, his knees had become as dry as the joints of the Kakajanga plant, or the joints of the peacock and Dhenik birds. Both his upper thighs had become dry and withered due to the lack of flesh and blood, like the tender shoots of the Priyangu, Vadari, Karkandhu, Salyaki or Samali plants, which wither when they are plucked and laid out in the sun to dry.

Page #67:
---------------------------
The term "Anuttaroupapatikadasha" signifies that the blessed renunciates, due to the sole cause of their intense penance, became so absorbed in their austerities that they became detached even from their own bodies. They were completely free from any attachment to their bodies. They embraced the most rigorous forms of penance. As a result, no flesh or blood remained in any part of their bodies. Only bones, skin, and a network of veins were visible. Despite having a physical body, they attained a state of being bodiless.

The description of their waist, abdomen, and ribs:

* **Waist:** The waist of the blessed renunciates, due to their penance, had become as beautiful as the leg of a camel, the leg of an old bull, or the leg of an old buffalo. Only bones, skin, and veins remained; flesh and blood were no longer present.
* **Abdomen:** The abdomen of the blessed renunciates, due to their penance, had become as beautiful as a dry gourd, a pot for roasting chickpeas, or a kneading trough. Similarly, the abdomen of the blessed renunciates had dried up. Flesh and blood were no longer present.
* **Ribs:** The ribs of the blessed renunciates, due to their penance, had become as beautiful as a row of pillars, a row of cups, or a row of stakes. Just as these objects can be counted, so too could the ribs of the blessed renunciates be counted. Only bones, skin, and veins remained; flesh and blood were no longer present.
* **Back:** The upper part of the spine of the blessed renunciates had become as beautiful as the rims of crowns, a row of round stones stuck together, or a row of circles.

Page #68:
---------------------------
## Third Section

The children's toys made of lac were like the bones of the blessed Anugara, which had dried up and were devoid of flesh and blood. Only bones and skin remained.

The chest of the blessed Anugara, due to the austerity, had become like the bottom part of a basket made of bamboo, or a fan made of bamboo strips, or a fan made of palm leaves. In this way, the chest of the blessed Anugara had become thin, dry, devoid of flesh and blood, and only bones, skin, and veins remained.

This sutra describes the waist, abdomen, ribs, back, and chest of the blessed Anugara using similes. Their waist, due to austerity, was devoid of flesh and blood and appeared like the hoof of a camel or an old bull. Similarly, their abdomen had dried up. It had become like a dry gourd, a vessel for roasting chickpeas, or a special vessel called Kolomb.

This means that the abdomen of the blessed Anugara had dried up so much that it appeared hollow like the aforementioned objects. Similarly, their ribs had dried up and become like thorns. They could be counted like a row of mirrors, a row of vessels for grazing animals, or a row of nails used to tie them. There was no flesh or blood to be seen in them. The same was the case with the back. It was also devoid of flesh and blood and appeared like a row of crowns, round stones, or children's toys made of lac. Due to the austerity, the chest of the blessed Anugara had also changed. It was also devoid of flesh and blood, and the row of ribs appeared like pieces of Kiliñj, or a fan made of bamboo or palm leaves.

The description of all these parts, as mentioned earlier, is done using similes. This not only adds beauty to the description but also makes it easier for the readers to understand the reality. The subject matter presented with examples is understood by even the least intelligent without any effort.

One thing to note here is that although the body of the blessed Anugara had dried up and become like thorns, their spiritual brilliance had increased immensely. The arms, hands, fingers, neck, beard, lips, and tongue of the blessed Muni...

13 - The arms of the blessed Anugara, from the shoulder to the fingertips, were like... (continued)
The hands of the blessed Anugara, from the wrist to the fingertips, were like... (continued)
The fingers of the blessed Anugara, from the base to the tip, were like... (continued)
1-9 - See Section 3, Sutra 7.

Page #69:
---------------------------
34
The state of the neck of the Dhannya Anugara was like that of a Karaggiva, a Kundia Giva, or an Ucchaṭṭhavaṇa.
The state of the jaw of the Dhannya Anugara was like that of a Lauya Phala, a Hakuva Phala, or an Amba Gaṭṭhia.
The state of the Dhannya Anugara's rising (i.e., the upper part of the body) was like that of a Sukka Jaloiya, a Silesa Gulia, or an Alatta Gulia.
The state of the Dhannya Anugara's tongue was like that of a Vaḍa Patte, a Palasa Patte, or a Saga Patte.
The Dhannya Anugara's arms, from the shoulders down, had become emaciated due to austerity, like the dry pods of a Khajri tree, the dry pods of an Amaltas tree, or the dry pods of an Agati tree. Similarly, the Dhannya Anugara's arms had become dry, devoid of flesh and blood, leaving only bones, skin, and veins.
The Dhannya Anugara's hands, from the elbows down, had become emaciated due to austerity, like dry cow dung, dry leaves of a Banyan tree, or dry leaves of a Flamboyant tree. Similarly, the Dhannya Anugara's hands had become dry, devoid of flesh and blood, leaving only bones, skin, and veins.
The Dhannya Anugara's fingers had become emaciated due to intense austerity, like dry peas, dry mung beans, or dry black gram. Just as these tender pods become dry and withered when broken and dried in the sun, so too had the Dhannya Anugara's fingers become dry, devoid of flesh and blood, leaving only bones, skin, and veins.
The Dhannya Anugara's neck had become emaciated due to austerity, like the neck of a Karaka (a type of water vessel), the neck of a small Kundia (a water pitcher), or the neck of a tall water jug. Similarly, the Dhannya Anugara's neck had become dry and long, devoid of flesh and blood.
The Dhannya Anugara's jaw had become emaciated due to austerity, like the dry fruit of a Tumbe, the dry fruit of a Rakuba (a type of plant), or the dry kernel of a mango. Similarly, the Dhannya Anugara's jaw had become dry, devoid of flesh and blood.
The Dhannya Anugara's lips had become emaciated due to austerity, like a dry leech, a dry mucus ball, or a long, wax-like stick of incense. Similarly, the Dhannya Anugara's lips had become dry, devoid of flesh and blood. 1-12.—See Section 3, Sutra 7.

Page #70:
---------------------------
## Third Chapter
## 35

Due to the penance of the blessed ascetic's tongue, it had become like a dry leaf of a banyan tree, a dry leaf of a Palasha tree, or a dry leaf of a Shaka tree. Similarly, the blessed ascetic's tongue had also dried up, it had no flesh left, and no blood remained.

**Discussion:** This sutra describes the arms, hands, fingers, neck, chin, lips, and tongue of the blessed ascetic using the simile (Upma) alankara. Their arms, like other limbs, had dried up due to penance and appeared like the dried pods of Shami, Agastik, or Bahaya trees.

It is difficult to determine the meaning of the word 'Bahaaya'. It is difficult to say which tree it is and in which country it is prevalent. The Vrittikara Shri Abhaydevsuri has also written its meaning as a particular tree. It is possible that this name was prevalent in some province at that time.

The same condition was with the hands of the blessed ascetic. Their flesh and blood had also dried up and they appeared like dry dung (Chana-Kanda) or dry leaves of Banyan and Palasha trees. The fingers had also become extremely thin. The fingers, once full of blood and flesh, were now dry and had taken on a peculiar dryness and thinness. Due to drying, they had become like a Kalaay, Mung, or Masha (Urad pod - which is picked when tender and dried in the sun). The previous flesh and blood were no longer visible in them. If anyone could recognize them, it was only by the bones and skin that remained in them.

Although the word 'Bahuu' is Ukarant in Sanskrit, it becomes Akarant in Prakrit when it is intended to be feminine. Therefore, the word 'Bahaanam' in the sutra is correct from the point of view of Prakrit grammar.

The sutra is as follows:

**Bahooraat || 8 || 1 || 36 || Bahushbadsya striyaamakaarantaadesho bhavati, bahaaaye jena dhariao ekkaaye || striyaamityeva. Vaame aro bahoo' |**

The neck also lacked flesh and blood like other limbs. Therefore, it naturally appeared long. The sutrakar has compared it to long-mouthed pitchers like Surahi etc. For this, the word 'Ucchastapanaak' has come in the sutra, which is a similar type of vessel.

This was the condition of the blessed ascetic's chin. The chin, which was once full of flesh and blood, had become like a dry Tumbe or Hakub (a type of plant) fruit due to penance, or it appeared like a mango pit.

The lips, which were previously red like a Bimba fruit, had dried up and become completely pale due to penance. Their shape had now become like a dried henna bud. The tongue had also dried up and become dull and dry like a leaf of a Banyan tree or a leaf of a Palasha (Dhak) tree.

**Prakrit Grammar by Acharya Hemchandra**
**1.**

Page #71:
---------------------------
## Anuttara-upapaatika-dasha

This discussion clearly shows that the tapasya-anushtana of the blessed Anugara was only for self-purification. They were completely free from the attachment to the body. This description also proves that excellent tapasya alone has the power to purify the self and through it, the karmas can also be destroyed. It is important to remember here that appropriate tapasya can only be done with samyag-gyan and samyag-darshan. Tapasya done without samyag-gyan and samyag-darshan is balatapasya. It may lead to the attainment of koti-devagati, but not even the high devagati like vaimanika. In such a situation, how can it lead to the attainment of the most excellent, lokoत्तर and anupam pad like liberation?

## Blessed Muni's Nose, Eyes and Head

14. The nose of the blessed Anugara was like a dry stalk of mango, or a dry stalk of amratak (a particular fruit), or a dry stalk of matuling (a type of seed). Just as these tender stalks, when cut and dried in the sun, wither and shrink, so too the nose of the blessed Anugara dried up, devoid of flesh and blood.

The eyes of the blessed Anugara were like the holes of a veena, or the holes of a bansuri (flute), or a faint star in the morning. Thus, the eyes of the blessed Anugara also sank inwards, devoid of flesh and blood, and became devoid of light and radiance. Only a faint flicker remained in the eyes.

The ears of the blessed Anugara were like the peeled skin of a root, or the peeled skin of a cucumber, or the peeled skin of a bitter gourd. Similarly, the ears of the blessed Anugara also dried up. They were devoid of flesh and blood.

The head of the blessed Anugara was like a dry, withered, and lifeless tree, with only skin and bones remaining. It was not covered in flesh and blood.

This was the case everywhere. The mouth, tongue, ears, and nose, all eight, were not covered in flesh and blood, but only skin and bones remained.

1-12. See Section 3, Sutra 10.

Page #72:
---------------------------
Third Class
The ascetic form and beauty of the blessed Anagara's head (skull) had become like this - as if it were a dried gourd, a dried yam, a dried watermelon - when these tender fruits are cut and dried in the sun, they shrivel and wither away, similarly, the blessed Anagara's head also dried up and withered away due to the absence of flesh and blood. Only the bones, skin, and veins remained.

This is the general description of all the limbs of the blessed Anagara's purified body. The specialty is that the description of bones should not be given for the abdomen, ears, tongue, and lips. Their identification was only through the skin and veins.

In this sutra, the description of the nose, ears, eyes, and head is made through the simile ornament, similar to the aforementioned limbs of the blessed Anagara. The meaning is clear from the original text itself.

In this sutra, the limbs of the blessed Anagara are compared to various types of tubers, roots, and fruits. Among them, Amrataka, Mulaka Balunki, and Karellaka are the names of specific tubers and fruits.  Aluka is a type of tuber, which is famous in the present age by the name 'potato'.

In this way, the author has described all the limbs of the blessed Anagara from foot to head. The only specialty mentioned here is that the word 'bone' should not be associated with the abdomen, tongue, ears, and lips, as there are no bones in them. All other limbs should be used with adjectives like 'dry', 'emaciated', 'devoid of flesh', etc.

The inner radiance of the blessed ascetic

The blessed Anagara, with his dry, emaciated, and rough legs and thighs, his waist like a cracked pot, his back sunken, his abdomen visible through the protruding ribs, his spine-joints countable like a rosary of rudrakshas, his chest area prominent like the waves of the Ganga, his arms like withered creepers, his hands hanging loosely, his head shaking like a leaf in the wind, his lotus-like face sunken, his eyes deep-set, goes, stands, speaks, and swallows with great difficulty, as if he is a living corpse. As the fire in the funeral pyre, so he stands, completely covered by the radiance of his intense asceticism, shining and resplendent.

Page #73:
---------------------------
##  Translation:

38
The state of *Anuttaraupapatikadasha* was evident. Their arms were long and dry, like a dried-up serpent. Their forearms trembled like an iron horse bridle. Their head shook like a patient suffering from *Kampilanvata* (tremor). Their lotus-like face was withered. Their lips were dry, making their mouth appear distorted like a broken pot. Their eyeballs were sunken. Weakened by prolonged austerities, the blessed *Anugara* walked not by the strength of their body, but by the strength of their soul. They stood and sat by the strength of their soul. They grew weary from speaking, even the act of speaking caused them fatigue, even the thought of "I will speak" exhausted them. When they walked, their bones made a sound like a cart filled with charcoal.

The state that had befallen *Skandaka* had also befallen the blessed *Anugara*. Yet, they were radiant with inner spiritual fire, like fire covered with ashes. The blessed *Anugara* was adorned with austerity, brilliance, and the splendor of the aura of austerity (they were steadfast, unwavering, and unmoving in their practice).

Here, in a single thread, the sutra-maker has described all the limbs of the blessed *Anugara* in a different way. The blessed *Anugara's* feet, shanks, and thighs were extremely dry due to the lack of flesh and had become completely rough due to constant hunger. There was no trace of oiliness left in them. Their waist was like a *kataha* (tortoise shell or a special vessel used by confectioners). Due to the depletion of flesh and the protrusion of bones, it appeared terrifying, like the high banks of a river - high on both sides and deep in the middle. Their stomach was completely dry. The liver and spleen had also withered within it. Therefore, it had naturally merged with the back. The flesh on the ribs had also dried up completely, and they could be counted individually. The same was the case with the elevated regions of the back. They too could be counted individually, as if strung together like beads of a *rudraksha* garland. The chest region appeared like the waves of the Ganges. The arms had dried up like dried-up snakes. The hands were not under their control and moved on their own, like a loose horse bridle. The stability of the head was also lost. It trembled like the head of a man suffering from *Kampilanvata* (tremor), being devoid of strength. Due to this intense austerity, the face that once shone like a blooming lotus, was now withered. The lips had become distorted due to dryness. This made the mouth appear terrifying, like the mouth of a broken pot. Both their eyes were sunken. Physical strength had completely weakened. They walked and stood only by the power of their soul. Due to this complete weakness, their body had reached such a state that even speaking caused them great pain and fatigue. Even if they spoke, it was with great difficulty. The body was generally so weak that when they walked, the rubbing of bones against each other produced a sound like a moving cart filled with charcoal.

The implication is that just as the body of *Skandaka* Muni had become extremely weak due to austerity, so too had the body of the blessed *Anugara* become weak, emaciated, and feeble. But even with the depletion of their body, their spiritual radiance was increasing. Their state had become like fire covered with ashes. Their soul was acquiring an extraordinary beauty from the brilliance of austerity and the radiance it produced.

Page #74:
---------------------------
Third Varga
They were radiant with spiritual splendor.
In this sutra, the commentator has explained the term 'udbhataghanamukheti' as follows - 'udbhatam - fierce, whose face is like that of a pot, i.e., emaciated due to severe austerities.' Does this statement not prove that a face-covering (mukhavastrika) was worn? Such a doubt arises. The solution is that here the sutra-maker's intention is only to describe the emaciated body due to austerities, not the description of religious accessories. If they had described other bodily accessories and not the face-covering, then this doubt could have arisen. But here, no accessory has been described at all. Therefore, it is clear that the sutra-maker intends to describe their austerities independent of the body and the effect on the limbs of the body. If this is not accepted, then the description of the waist, etc. should have been accompanied by the description of the cloak, etc. Therefore, the description of the thinness of the face or lips does not in any way prove the absence of a face-covering on their face.

Praise by Lord Mahavira
16 - At that time, in the city of Rajagriha, in the Gunasila temple, there was a king named Seni. At that time, the ascetic Lord Mahavira arrived. The assembly went out. Seni also went out. There was a discourse on the Dharma. The assembly returned. Then that king, after hearing and understanding the Dharma from the ascetic Lord Mahavira, worships and pays obeisance to the ascetic Lord Mahavira, and after worshipping and paying obeisance, speaks thus -
'O Lord! Which of these fourteen thousand ascetic leaders, the Indrabhutas, is the most difficult to perform austerities and the greatest in attaining Nirjara (shedding of karmas)?'
'Indeed, Seni! Of these fourteen thousand ascetic leaders, the Indrabhutas, the ascetic is the most difficult to perform austerities and the greatest in attaining Nirjara.'
'O Lord! Why is it said that of these [fourteen thousand ascetic leaders, the Indrabhutas], the ascetic is the most difficult to perform austerities and the greatest in attaining Nirjara?'
'Indeed, Seni! At that time, in the city of Kayandi, a great palace-like dwelling is being inhabited.'
39
Then, another one, wandering from village to village, comes to the Sahsambavana garden near the city of Kayandi. After arriving, 'I will take an appropriate vow and live with self-control and austerity.' The assembly went out, and in the same way, 'he became an ascetic' and 'lives on alms like a heron.' The radiance of the body of that ascetic, from head to foot, was all... shining, shining, standing.

1. Anuttaroavadayadas Varga 3, Sutra 4.
2. Anuttaroavadayadas Varga 3, Sutras 4-5-6.
3. Anuttaroavadayadas Varga 3, Sutra 7.
4. Anuttaroavadayadas Varga 3, Sutras 7 to 15.

Page #75:
---------------------------
40
From the *Anuttaroppapatikadashā*, thus it is said, O Seniya! These fourteen thousand ascetics, headed by Indra-bhūti, are indeed *dhana* *anagāra*, the great doer of difficult deeds, and the great destroyer of impurities.

In that time and at that time, there was a city called Rājagṛha. There was the Guṇasilka Caitya. Śreṇika was the king there. In that time and at that time, the Śramaṇa Bhagavān Mahāvīra arrived. The assembly went out. King Śreṇika also went out. There was a discourse on Dharma. The assembly returned. Afterwards, King Śreṇika, having heard the Dharma in the presence of Śramaṇa Bhagavān Mahāvīra, having reflected, bowed to Śramaṇa Bhagavān Mahāvīra, and prostrated himself. Having bowed and prostrated himself, he said to the Bhagavān thus:

"Bhanta! Among these fourteen thousand ascetics, headed by Indra-bhūti, who is the *anagāra* who is the great doer of difficult deeds, and the great destroyer of impurities?"

The Bhagavān replied, "Śreṇika! Among these fourteen thousand ascetics, headed by Indra-bhūti, *dhana* *anagāra* is indeed the great doer of difficult deeds, and the great destroyer of impurities."

Śreṇika asked again, "Bhanta! From what perspective do you say that among these fourteen thousand ascetics, headed by Indra-bhūti, *dhana* *anagāra* is indeed the great doer of difficult deeds, and the great destroyer of impurities?"

In reply, the Bhagavān said thus: "Śreṇika! In that time and at that time, there was a city called Kākaṇḍī. There, *dhana* *kumāra* was immersed in pleasures in high palaces.

Afterwards, I, moving in sequence, dwelling in one village after another, came to where the city of Kākaṇḍī was, and where the Sahasrāmrāvana garden was. Arriving, I requested a place suitable for a sage. I remained, moved by restraint and austerity. The assembly went out, *dhana* *kumāra* became an ascetic. He ate without attachment. *Dhana* *anagāra*, from his feet to his head, the description of his entire body, as before, the Bhagavān told Śreṇika, you should understand, he is adorned with the intense brilliance of austerity.

Śreṇika! From this perspective, I say that among these fourteen thousand ascetics, headed by Indra-bhūti, *dhana* *anagāra* is indeed the great doer of difficult deeds, and the great destroyer of impurities."

Praise of *Dhana* Muni by Śreṇika

17. Then, O Seniya, the king, at the end of the Śramaṇa Bhagavān Mahāvīra, with a mind filled with joy, went to the Śramaṇa Bhagavān Mahāvīra, and performed the *tikkhutta* *āyāhiṇa-payāhiṇa*, having performed it, he bowed and prostrated himself. Having bowed and prostrated himself, he went to *dhana* *anagāra*, having gone to *dhana* *anagāra*, he performed the *tikkhutta* *āyāhiṇa-payāhiṇa*, having performed it, he bowed and prostrated himself. Having bowed and prostrated himself, he said thus:

"Dhana, you are indeed a *devāṇuppiya*! Well-born, well-intentioned, with excellent qualities, well-obtained, indeed a *devāṇuppiya*! Your human birth, life, and fruits!" Thus, he bowed and prostrated himself. Having bowed and prostrated himself, he went to the Śramaṇa Bhagavān Mahāvīra, having gone to the Śramaṇa Bhagavān Mahāvīra, he performed the *tikkhutta* *āyāhiṇa-payāhiṇa*, having performed it, he bowed and prostrated himself. Having bowed and prostrated himself, he went to...

Page #76:
---------------------------
## Third Chapter

The Digambara, he himself went to that direction. 
After hearing this meaning from the Shraman Bhagwan Mahavira, King Shrenik, after contemplating and being pleased, circumambulated Shraman Bhagwan Mahavira thrice, paid obeisance and offered salutations. After paying obeisance and offering salutations, he went to where the blessed Digambara was. Arriving there, he circumambulated the blessed Digambara, paid obeisance and offered salutations. After paying obeisance and offering salutations, he began to speak, 
"O Devānupriya! You are blessed, you are virtuous, you are fulfilled, you are of good deeds, O Devānupriya! You have made human birth and human life successful."
Saying this, he paid obeisance and offered salutations to the blessed Digambara. After paying obeisance and offering salutations, he went back to where Shraman Bhagwan Mahavira was. Reaching there, he paid obeisance and offered salutations to Shraman Bhagwan Mahavira and then went in the direction from which he had come.

**Discussion:** The meaning of this Sutra is clear from the original text itself. However, it is necessary to say that one should describe the qualities of a person without hesitation and encourage the virtuous person with gratitude, as Shraman Bhagwan Mahavira did. He described the extremely intense penance of the blessed Digambara truthfully and praised him.

From all this description, we learn another lesson, that once the attachment to the world is abandoned, one should definitely purify oneself through right penance. Because penance is the only main way to destroy karma. This is the fruit of renouncing worldly pleasures. A person who becomes a Sadhu but remains trapped in attachment should not expect any success from that renunciation. By doing so, he becomes nowhere and both his this world and the next world are ruined. The blessed Digambara has presented an ideal example before us. When he once renounced all the pleasures of a householder and embraced the life of a Sadhu, he performed the most excellent penance to make it successful and showed the monks through his duty how self-purification happens through penance and how the soul is adorned through that penance.

The third lesson we learn from this is that when praising a person, one should describe only the qualities that are actually present in him. This means that it is appropriate to praise by keeping in mind only the qualities that are present in that person, not by attributing other non-existent qualities. Because such praise sometimes becomes ridiculous. Therefore, one should not falsely praise someone and make them feel superior. Excessive praise can lead to self-deception in the person being praised, and can hinder his progress. These are the three lessons we learn from this Sutra.

The blessed Muni truly proved to be a true name. Who else can be more blessed than the one whom the Tirthankara Dev himself praises profusely from his lotus mouth?

Page #77:
---------------------------
## Chapter 42: The Blessed Ascetic's Journey to Perfect Bliss

**18.**  Then, that blessed ascetic, due to his previous virtuous conduct, experienced a spiritual awakening in the following manner:

He thought, "I have become emaciated through this austere practice," and so on, just as the Skandaka had thought. He questioned, and ascended the Great Mountain with the elders. He performed a one-month Sanlekhana. He observed the nine-month Diksha Paryaya, and then, after a period of time, he ascended above the moon, and beyond the sun, planets, constellations, and stars, and the nine celestial vehicles, and finally, he attained the state of a Deva in the Sarvarthasiddha Vimāna.

The elders, after the blessed ascetic's departure to heaven, descended from the Great Mountain and said, "These are the religious articles of the blessed ascetic."

"Bhanta!" said Bhagavan Gautama, and asked Bhagavan Mahavira the same question as Skandaka had asked.

Bhagavan Mahavira replied, "Bhanta! The blessed Deva's state is said to last for thirty-three Sagaropama." "Bhanta! Where do those Devas go? Where do they attain liberation?" "Gautama! They attain liberation in the Mahavideha."

Thus, this is the account of the first teaching, as narrated by the Samanas, and as recorded in the scriptures.

**End of the First Teaching.**

**Note:** The text uses several Jain terms, including:

* **Anuttaropapatikadasha:** The state of a liberated soul.
* **Anugara:** An ascetic.
* **Sarvarthasiddha:** A state of perfect bliss.
* **Vimāna:** A celestial vehicle.
* **Deva:** A celestial being.
* **Sanlekhana:** A fast unto death.
* **Diksha Paryaya:** A period of intense spiritual practice.
* **Sagaropama:** A unit of time, equivalent to a vast period.
* **Mahavideha:** The state of liberation.

Page #78:
---------------------------
## Third Section

"Bhanta! Where will the blessed deva go, where will he be born, after leaving that deva-loka?"

"He Gautama! He will be born as a Siddha in Mahavidehavarsha."

43

Shree Sudharmaswami said - O Jambu! Thus, the Shraman, the liberated Bhagwan Mahavira, has explained the meaning of the first study of the third section.

|| First Study Ends ||

**Discussion** - This sutra describes the final samadhi of the blessed anagaara, and the sutrakar has compared him to a Skandaka Sannyasi. The blessed anagaara, immersed in knowledge, meditation, austerity, and renunciation, one night while meditating, thought to himself, "I still have the strength to rise, and the Shasanapati Shraman Bhagwan Mahavira is still present, so why not complete the ultimate practice of this life while all these favorable conditions are present?" As soon as this thought arose, he received the permission of Shraman Bhagwan in the morning and, for self-purification, recited the five great vows again. He then sought forgiveness from the present Shramans and Shramanis and, along with the Tatha-rupa sthaviras, slowly ascended the Vipulagiri. Upon reaching there, he spread a layer of darbha grass on a black-colored earth-stone slab, sat in padmasana, joined his hands, and circled them over his head. Facing the east, he first saluted all the Siddhas with the chant "Namotthunan," and then saluted Shree Shraman Bhagwan Mahavira with the same chant. He said, "Bhagwan! You, who are seated there, are seeing everything, so please accept my salutations. I had already renounced the eighteen sins in your presence. Now, in your presence, I renounce them again for the rest of my life. Along with this, I also renounce food, drink, edibles, and palatable substances for the rest of my life. I also finally relinquish my body, which has been my aid in restraint. Now, I am taking the vow of Anashan called Padupopagaman." Thus, he saluted Shree Shraman Bhagwan, made him a witness, and took Santhara, and began to live accordingly. He studied the eleven Angas, starting with Samayika, remained in the Dikshaparaya for nine months, and spent one month in the Anashan Vrat. He achieved the ultimate samadhi-death after sixty bhakta anashan-chedan, with introspection and repentance.

Here, it is said that the blessed muni renounced sixty bhakta. One might wonder what a bhakta is? The answer is that each day's two bhakta are the food or meals. Thus, there are sixty bhakta in a month. In this regard, the Vrittikar says, "The renunciation of two meals each day makes sixty bhakta renounced in thirty days." Thus, when the blessed anagaara took Anashan for a month, there is no doubt about the renunciation of sixty bhakta. After that, the blessed anagaara, after relinquishing his body, was born in the most excellent divine realm, the Sarvarth Siddha Vimana, etc. This is clear.

When the sthaviras who went with him saw that the blessed anagaara had completed his earthly play and attained heaven, they performed Parinirvana-pratyayika kayotsarga, meaning, "Parinirvana is death, the dissolution of the body is also Parinirvana, the belief that is the cause of this is Parinirvana-pratyaya." The meaning is that after death, the meditation that is done...

Page #79:
---------------------------
44
The state of Anuttaroppapatikadasha is called Kayotsarga with the perception of Parinirvana. The disposal of the body of a deceased Sadhu is also called Parinirvana. Here, the nearby Sthaviras, seeing the death of the blessed Anagara, performed this Kayotsarga (meditation). Then they brought his clothes, utensils, and other equipment and came to the Shraman Bhagwan Mahavira and told him the whole story of the Anagara's death in Samadhi. They sang his praises, praised his Upasham-bhava, and handed over his clothes and other equipment to Sri Bhagwan.
At that time, Gautam Swami bowed to Shraman Bhagwan Mahavira and asked him, "O Bhagwan! Where has your humble disciple, the blessed Anagara, gone after attaining Samadhi-death? Where has he been born? How long will his state be there, and where will he be born after that?" In reply, Shraman Bhagwan said, "O Gautam! My humble disciple, the blessed Anagara, has attained Samadhi-death and has been born in the Sarvarth Siddha Vimana. There, his state will be for thirty-three Sagaropama. From there, he will be born in the Mahavideha Kshetra and attain Moksha, that is, he will become Siddha, Buddha, and Mukta, and attain Parinirvana, ending all suffering."
From this Sutra, we learn that every Sadhak should face death with Samadhi, by performing actions like criticism, etc., so that he remains a true devotee until his last breath and becomes eligible for Moksha, either directly or through tradition.

Page #80:
---------------------------
## Second Study: Sunakṣatra

"If, Venerable Sir, the first study of the third section has this meaning (as stated before), then what is the meaning of the second study?" Jambū asked Ārya Sudharma.

Ārya Sudharma replied to Jambū, "Oh Jambū! In that time and at that time, there was a city called Kākaṇḍī. The king there was Jitasatru. In that Kākaṇḍī city, there lived a merchant woman named Bhaddā. She was prosperous and respected. This Bhaddā, the merchant woman, had a son named Sunakṣatra. He was handsome, with perfect limbs and features. He was nurtured with five kinds of nourishment. Like Dhanna, he was given a dowry of thirty-two. He lived in the palace, indulging in pleasures."

"At that time and at that time, the Samosaraṇa (the preaching of the Dharma) took place. Like Dhanna, Sunakṣatra also went out to hear the Dharma. Like Thavaccaputra, he left his home and became an Anugāra (a renunciant). He became an Īryāsamita (a celibate) and a Brahmacārī (a monk)."

"Then, Sunakṣatra, on the very day he was shaved and ordained by the Lord Mahāvīra, took the Abhigraha (vow). He ate without attachment. He lived in restraint and practiced the right conduct. He practiced the eleven Angas (parts of the Jain path) and lived in restraint, cultivating his own self."

"Then, Sunakṣatra, like a tree, grew in that way."

Page #81:
---------------------------
## Chapter 46: The State of Anuttaropapathika

The text describes the travels of the monk Sunakṣatra in various regions. He studied the eleven Angas and, through self-discipline and austerity, cultivated his soul. As a result, he became emaciated like a Skandaka, a type of ascetic known for their extreme austerity.

The author here begins to describe the remaining studies of the third category. This chapter focuses on the story of Sunakṣatra, a monk who renounced worldly life. The meaning of the chapter is clear from the original text. For example, the author mentions Thavaccaputra and Dhanya, both monks who renounced worldly life. To learn more about Thavaccaputra, readers should refer to the fifth study of the *Jñatadharmakathāṅgasūtra*. The story of Dhanya has already been discussed in the first study of this category.

The chapter begins with the phrase "Ukkhevo-utkṣepaḥ," which means that the following text should be connected to the previous chapters. In other words, the reader should understand the context of the following text in relation to the previous chapters.

The text then asks: "If, Venerable Sir, the Blessed Lord Mahāvīra, while attaining the ninth Anga, the state of Anuttaropapathika, had this study as the first study of that category, then what study would be the second study of the ninth Anga, the state of Anuttaropapathika, of that category?"

This type of question appears at the beginning of almost every study. It is called "Ukkhevo" or "Utkṣepa," which means introduction or beginning. To shorten the text, the word "Ukkhevo" is used here. The same style is followed in other chapters.

Just as Dhanya, after being initiated by the Blessed Lord Mahāvīra, observed the Ācāṁlavrata on the day of his initiation, so did Sunakṣatra. Similarly, just as Skandaka, in the second century of the *Vyākhyāprajñapti*, after being initiated by the Blessed Lord, emaciated his body through austerity, so did Sunakṣatra.

This chapter teaches us that when someone sets a suitable goal, they should always strive to achieve it. They should be determined to overcome any obstacle, no matter how great, and never waver in their efforts. Without such determination, one cannot reach their goal. However, those who strive with a focused mind to achieve their objective will surely succeed, and quickly.

At that time, in the city of Rājagṛha, there was a caitya called Guṇasilka. The king was Śreṇika. The Blessed Lord Mahāvīra arrived. The assembly came out. The king also came out. There was a discourse on Dharma. The king returned. The assembly also...

Page #82:
---------------------------
## Third Class
47

She went back.
Sunakṣatra took the vow of *pravrajyā*. Afterwards, Sunakṣatra, at some other time, in the middle of the night, while engaged in *dharma-jāgaraṇa*, pondered, just as Skandaka had done. For many years, she practiced *samyama*. Gautama's inquiry. As long as Sunakṣatra was an *anagāra*, she was born from a *deva-rūpa* in the *sarvārtha-siddh* aircraft. The state of thirty-three *sāgara-upamas* occurred.
Gautama asked, "O Bhagavan! Where will that Sunakṣatra deva be born after leaving the *deva-loka*?" As long as, "Gautama! She will be a *siddh* from the *Mahā-Videha-varṣa*."

**Discussion:** In this sūtra, the word "pūrva-rātra-para-rātra-kāla" appears, which means midnight. This is the time when the atmosphere is completely calm. Therefore, the minds of those engaged in *dharma-jāgaraṇa* become focused at this time, and complete stability is present in them. At such a time, thoughts are very clear, and very high thoughts arise in the mind. This is the reason why the thoughts of Dhanya and other *anagāras* at that time led them towards the righteous path.

Page #83:
---------------------------
3-10 Study Isidas etc.
21- And the remaining eight Kumaras should also be understood like Sunakṣatra.  The special thing is that in sequence, two were born in Rājagṛha, two in Sāketa, two in Vāṇijyagrāma, the ninth in Hastināpura and the tenth in Rājagṛha.  The mother of nine was Bhadrā.  Nine were given a dowry of thirty-two each.  The renunciation of nine should be known like Thāvaccaputra.  The renunciation of Vehalla was done by his father.  The initiation period of Vehalla was six months, and the initiation period of Dhanya was nine months.  The initiation period of the rest was for many years.  The Sanlekhanā of all was for one month.  Birth in the Sarvārthasiddha Vimāna.  All will become Siddhas from the Mahāvideha region.  Thus, ten studies are complete.

Discussion: Here, it is only necessary to say that in the present Āgama, Skandaka Anagāra is repeatedly presented as an example.  Where do we get his description?  And the same can be said about Thāvaccaputra.  The answer is that the description of the first, i.e., Skandaka Muni, is found in the second Śataka of the fifth Anga Bhagavati, and the description of Thāvaccaputra is found in the fifth study of the sixth Anga.  This 'Anuttaraupapātika Sūtra' is the ninth Anga.  Therefore, the Sūtrakara did not consider it appropriate to repeat the same description here, and instead, he simply mentioned both and ended the matter.  Readers should definitely study the aforementioned Sūtras to gain complete knowledge about them.  Here, the subject of going to hear the Dharma-kathā from Śrī Śramaṇa Bhagavān Mahāvīra, the birth of vairāgya there, the Dikshā Mahotsava, the highest level of tapas karma, the body becoming thin, the feeling of the Anashana Vrata arising due to it, while doing Dharmajagaran in the middle of the night, becoming born in the Sarvārthasiddha Vimāna after doing Anashana, being born in the Mahāvideha region in the future and attaining Siddhagathi, etc., has been briefly stated.  Nikkṣepa

• 22- Thus, Jambū! By the Samana Bhagavān Mahāvīra, the Āigara, the Tīrthagara, the Sayamsambuddha, the Logaṇāha, the Logapadīva, the Logapajoyagara, the Abhayadaya, the Saraṇadaya, the Chakkhudaya, the Maggadaya, the Dhammadaya, the Dhamma-desaya, the Dhammavarachauraṇtachakwattīṇā, the Appadhiha-vara-ṇāṇa-daśaṇadhara, the Jina, the Jāva, the Buddha, the Boha, the Mutta, the Moya, the Tiṇṇa, the Tāra, the Siva, the Ayala, the Aruya, the Ananta, the Akkhaya, the Avvābāha, the Apuṇarāvattaya, the Siddhigaināmādheya, the Thāna.

Page #84:
---------------------------
## Third Class

This is the meaning of the third class of the Anuttaropapatikadasa, as stated by the Shraman Bhagwan Mahavira.

**Commentary:**

This sutra is in the form of a conclusion. From this sutra, we first understand that every disciple should have complete devotion towards the Dev-Guru-Dharma and should manifest good qualities through Guru-Bhakti. Just as in the final sutra, Shri Sudharmaswami, while concluding, has revealed the virtues of Shraman Bhagwan Mahavira. He says to his disciple Jambu, "O Jambu! This sutra has been expounded by those Bhagwans who are the Adikar, that is, the interpreters of the scriptures related to Shruta-Dharma, who are Tirthankaras, that is, (Taranti Yena Sansarasagaramiiti, Tirtham-Pravachanam, Tadavyatirekaadihi Sangha Titham, Tasyakaranashiilatvaat Tirthakarastena) by whom people cross the ocean of Samsara, that is called Tirth. That Tirth is Bhagwat Pravachan and the Sangha, being inseparable from it, is also called Tirth. The great person who established it has shed light on the meaning of this sutra. By revealing this, the authenticity of the Agam has been revealed. With this purpose, Sudharmaswami Bhagwan shows all the qualities displayed in 'Namotthu Nam' here. When a person becomes Sarvagya and Sarvadarshi, at that time he becomes the bearer of infinite and unparalleled qualities. The one who follows his path can also one day become transformed in the same way. Therefore, every person should try to emulate them as much as possible. Bhagwan is the one who grants us fearlessness in the ocean of Samsara and is the one who gives refuge, that is, (Sharanam-Tranam, Ajnanophatanaam Tadrakshaasthanam, Taccha Paramartatho Nirvanam, Taddadati Iti Sharanadah) the one who gives Nirvana, the only place of protection for ignorant and deluded individuals, by attaining which the soul becomes established in its own realm in the Siddha-pad. Bhagwan has also been described as 'Aapratihat-Gyan-Darshan-Dhar'. Its meaning is (Aapratihate Katakudyaparvatadaibhiraskhaliite'visanvadake Va Kshayikatvaad Vare-Pradhane Gyan-Darshane Kevalalaksane Dharayatiiti-Aapratihatavargyan-Darshanadharastena) that is, the Sarvagya and Sarvadarshi Bhagwan, who holds the supreme Kevalgyan and Kevaldarshan, which is not in any way fallible, when worshipped with a pure heart, the soul will surely attain Nirvana-pad and become one with it. Remember that for attaining this position, the practice of Samyaggyan-Darshan and Charitra is absolutely necessary. When we worship a person, our goal should always be to become like them. Only then can we succeed in it. It has already been said that karma is the cause of Samsara. Their destruction should be the first goal of the seeker of liberation. As long as karma remains, then...

Page #85:
---------------------------
## Anuttaropapatikadasa

The state of Anuttaropapatikadasa does not allow for the attainment of the transcendental state of Nirvana. Their decay occurs either through the experience of Vipaka (consumption) or through the fire of Tapas (austerity). If one solely relies on consumption, their complete destruction is impossible, as new karmas accumulate alongside the consumption of existing ones. Therefore, their decay must be achieved through the fire of Tapas. It is clear that along with Samyagdarshan (right faith), Samyagjnana (right knowledge) and Samyakcharitra (right conduct), and especially Tapas (austerity) are essential.

**50**

Thus, with the help of knowledge and conduct, blessed Anugars and other great men like them either attain liberation upon the complete exhaustion of their karmas, or if some karmas remain and their lifespan ends, they are born as Devas in the Anuttara Vimanas. Those born in these Vimanas are bound to attain liberation in one or two births. Therefore, this Agam describes those great individuals who have been born in these Vimanas.

The final lesson in this Sutra is that these great sages, even while performing intense austerities, studied the Ekadasanga Sutras. Therefore, every seeker should strive to study the scriptures with competence, so that they can attain the state of Nirvana in due course.

**Epilogue**

Anuttaropapatikadasa is a Shruta-Skandha. It has three sections. It is taught over three days. The first section has ten Uddesakas, the second section has thirteen Uddesakas, and the third section has ten Uddesakas. The remaining details, which are not explicitly mentioned in this Anga, should be understood in the same way as the Jnatadharmakathasutra.

Page #86:
---------------------------
Appendix
000000
O
Note
Brackets - First Class, Second Class and Third Class
Technical Terms - Lexicon
Indeclinable-Word-Compilation
Verb-Word-Compilation
O Word Meanings

Page #87:
---------------------------
The five great vows (Mahavratas) are:
1. **Ahimsa** (non-violence)
2. **Satya** (truthfulness)
3. **Asteya** (non-stealing)
4. **Brahmacharya** (continence)
5. **Aparigraha** (non-attachment)

Page #88:
---------------------------
## Notes
**Rajgriha**

Rajgriha was a beautiful, prosperous, and glorious city in India. It was the capital of the Magadha kingdom and a major center of Jain and Buddhist culture. In this holy and sacred city, Lord Mahavira spent 14 years of his life and over 200 Samavasaranas were held here. Thousands and millions of people listened to Lord Mahavira's teachings here and accepted the Shravak Dharma and Shraman Dharma. This city was known as Kshitipratisthita in ancient times. After its decline, the city of Rishabhpur was established there. After its destruction, the city of Kushagrapur was established. When this city also burned down, King Shrenik's father, King Prasenjit, established Rajgriha, which is currently known as "Rajgir". Its other name was Girivraja, because it is surrounded by five mountains. Rajgir is located in the state of Bihar, southeast of Patna and northeast of Gaya. Rajgriha is frequently mentioned in Buddhist texts.

**Sudharma**

Sudharma was the fifth Ganadhara of Lord Mahavira and the guru of Jambuswami. His previous life is as follows: He was a Brahmin of the Agnivaishyayana gotra, residing in the Kollag Sannivesh. His father's name was Dhammil and his mother's name was Bhaddhila. He was a profound scholar of the Vedas and a master of many sciences. He was the revered, worshiped, and respected guru of five hundred disciples. He believed in the doctrine of rebirth and similarity (Janmantara-Sadrisyavad). "Puruso vai purushatvamashrute pashavaha pashutvam" - meaning, in the afterlife, a man remains a man and an animal is born as an animal. Sudharma also found supporting statements for the doctrine of rebirth and similarity in the Vedas, such as - "Shrigala vai esha jayate, yah sapurisho dahyate". Sudharma was confused by these contradictory statements. Lord Mahavira reconciled the contradictory statements of the Vedas and proved the doctrine of rebirth and similarity. After his doubts were resolved, Lord Mahavira explained to Sudharma using the Vedic scriptures and dispelled his misconceptions. He took initiation at the age of 50 and remained in the state of Chhadmastha for 42 years. He became a Kevali 12 years after Mahavira's Nirvana and remained in the Kevali state for 18 years.

Sudharma Swami was the fifth among the Ganadharas. He was the longest-lived among all the Ganadharas. Therefore, Lord Mahavira entrusted his Gan to him, and other Ganadharas also entrusted their respective Gans to Sudharma Swami at the time of their Nirvana. Sudharma is frequently mentioned in the Agamas.

**Jambhu**

Jambhu was the chief disciple of Ary Sudharma and the one who awakened Ary Prabhava. Jambhu is often portrayed as a highly inquisitive person in the Agamas.

Jambhu was the son of a wealthy and prosperous Seth of Rajgriha. His father's name was Rishabhadatta and his mother's name was Dharini. Before Jambhu's birth, his mother saw a Jambu tree in a dream, hence the son was named...

Page #89:
---------------------------
## 54
## Anuttaroupapatikadasha
## Jambhukumar

Jambhukumar was named by Sudharma Swami.  Jambhukumar's mind was awakened to detachment by the divine words of Sudharma Swami.  Although Jambhukumar was unattached, he was forced to accept marriage due to the intense insistence of his parents.  He was married to the daughters of eight wealthy merchants.

On the first night of his marriage, Jambhukumar was giving advice to his eight newlywed wives.  At that time, a thief named Prabhav came to steal.  He was also enlightened by hearing Jambhukumar's words of detachment.

501 thieves, 8 wives, 16 parents of the wives, 2 parents of Jambhukumar, and Jambhukumar himself - a total of 528 people took initiation together from Sudharma.

Jambhukumar lived as a householder for 16 years, as a recluse for 20 years, and in the Kevali state for 44 years.  After living for 80 years, Jambhuswami established Prabhav on his seat and became a Siddha, Buddha, and liberated.  He was the last Kevali of this Avasarpini.

## Anga

The Jain scriptures directly spoken by the Jinas and compiled by the Ganadharas are called Angas.  Eleven Angas, from Acharanga to Vipakshrut, still exist today.  However, the twelfth Anga, called "Drishtivad", is currently unavailable.  After the fourteenth Purvadhara Acharya Bhadrabahu and the tenth Purvadhara Vajraswami, all the previous scriptures, that is, all of "Drishtivad", were lost.

## Antakrid Dasha

This is the eighth Anga-sutra, which beautifully describes the life of ascetics who achieve complete self-realization in their present lifetime by developing their soul to the fullest and ultimately become liberated.

## Anuttaroupapatikadasha

This is the ninth Anga-sutra, which beautifully describes the life of ascetics of the thirty-three Mahapurushas.  It gives a detailed account of the great ascetic practices of the blessed Anugara.  The men described in this Anga are Anuttaroupapati, meaning they were born in the Vijay etc. Anuttar Vimanas and will achieve Siddha, Buddha, and liberation in the future after one birth, that is, a human birth.

## Gunashilka (Gunashil) Chaitya

There was a Chaitya (garden) outside the city of Rajgriha in the Ishaan direction.

There will be many other gardens outside Rajgriha, but Lord Mahavira resided only in the Gunashilka garden.

Hundreds of Shramans and Shramanis and thousands of Shravaks and Shravikas gathered here in front of the Lord.  The present-day "Gunava", which is about three miles from the Nawada station, is believed to be the ancient Gunashilka Chaitya.

Page #90:
---------------------------
Appendix - Notes
King Shrenik
He was the emperor of the Magadha country. He became a devout follower of Lord Mahavira after being enlightened by Anathi Muni. This is a popular belief.
The description of King Shrenik is found in abundance in Jain scriptures and Buddhist scriptures.
Historians say that King Shrenik belonged to the Haihaya clan and the Shishunaga dynasty.
In Buddhist scriptures, two names are found: 'Seniya' and 'Bimbisara'. In Jain scriptures, the names Seniya, Bhimbhasara and Bhambhasara are available.
55
How did the names Bhansar and Bhambhasara come about? There is a beautiful incident in Shrenik's life in this regard - Shrenik's father, King Prasenajit, ruled in Kushagara. One day, a fire suddenly broke out in the royal palace. Every prince ran out with his favorite thing. Some took elephants, some took horses, some took jewels. But Shrenik only took a 'bhambha' outside.
Seeing Shrenik, the other brothers were laughing, but father Prasenajit was happy, because Shrenik had left everything else and protected only the symbol of the kingdom.
On this, King Prasenajit named him 'Bhimbhasara', or 'Bhambhasara'. The word Bhimbhasara probably later became Bimbisara due to pronunciation differences.
Dharini Devi
She was the queen of King Shrenik. Dharini is mentioned in abundance in the Agamas.
In the plays of Sanskrit literature, the name of the king's eldest queen is often preceded by the epithet 'Devi', which means - the greatest anointed queen among the queens, that is, the queen consort.
King Shrenik had many queens, among them Dharini was the main one. That is why the epithet 'Devi' is used before Dharini. Devi means - worshipable.
Meghakumar was the son of this Dharini Devi, who took initiation from Lord Mahavira. Lion Dream
When a great man is born in the womb, his mother sees a great dream. This kind of description is full of Indian literature. There are abundant descriptions of this kind in Jain literature and Buddhist literature.
Maya Devi, the mother of Buddha, saw a silver elephant with six tusks when Buddha was born in her womb.
The mother of a Tirthankara and a Chakravarti sees 14 great dreams. The mother of Vasudeva sees any seven of the fourteen dreams. The mother of Baldev sees four dreams. Similarly, the mother of a Mandalik king sees one great dream.
The dream of a lion is considered to be a sign of bravery and auspicious.
Meghakumar
He was the son of Magadha emperor Shrenik and Dharini Devi, who took initiation from Lord Mahavira.

Page #91:
---------------------------
Anuttaroppapatikadsha once Bhagwan Mahavir arrived at the Gunashilka garden in Rajgriha. Meghakumar also preached. After taking permission from his parents, he took initiation from Bhagwan.
On the day he took initiation, that very night, Meghamuni became distressed due to the movement of the monks, the dust from their feet, and the stumbling.
Bhagwan reminded him of his past lives and preached to him to be patient in his restraint, which made Meghamuni stable in his restraint. He performed a one-month Sanlekhana. He was born in the Devarupa form in the Sarvarthasiddha Vimana. He will become a Siddha from Mahavidehavas.
- Jnatasutra, Study 1 Skandaka
Skandaka Sannyasi was a resident of Shravasti Nagar, a disciple of the Gadbhal Paribrajak, and a former friend of Gautam Swami. He was a disciple of Bhagwan Mahavir, Pingalak Nirgranth, who could not answer his questions; therefore, when he heard from the people of Shravasti that Bhagwan Mahavir had arrived here, he went to him. Upon finding a solution, he became a disciple of Bhagwan.
Skandaka Muni studied the 11 Angas while staying with the elders. He practiced the 12 images of the Bhikshu in order. He worshipped. He performed the Ganaratnasamvatsar tapas. His body became weak, thin, and disabled. Finally, he went to Vipalgiri near Rajagah and performed a one-month Sanlekhana. He passed away and went to the 12th Devaloka. He will become a Siddha from Mahavidehavas. Skandaka Muni's initiation was for 12 years.
- Bhagavati, Shatak 2, Uddeshak 1. Gautam (Indrabhuti)
Your original name is Indrabhuti, but by lineage, you are known as Gautam by the young and old.
Gautam was the greatest disciple of Bhagwan Mahavir. He was a skilled teacher of Dharma-Shastra in Bhagwan's presence, the first Ganadhar.
He was the eldest son of Vasubhuti, a Brahmin of the Gautam gotra, who lived in the village of Gover in the Magadh country. His mother's name was Prithvi.
Indrabhuti was a sharp scholar of Vedic Dharma, a serious thinker, and a great philosopher.
Once, Indrabhuti went to the Yajna festival in Pava Puri at the invitation of Arya Somil. On the same occasion, Bhagwan Mahavir was also present in the Mahasen garden outside Pava Puri. Seeing the glory of Bhagwan, Indrabhuti came to Bhagwan's Samavasaran with the intention of defeating him. But he himself was defeated. After the doubts in his mind were cleared, he became a disciple of Bhagwan along with his five hundred disciples. Gautam became the first Ganadhar.
A lot is written about Gautam's life in the Agamas and post-Agama literature.
Indrabhuti Gautam was 50 years old at the time of his initiation. He remained in the Sadhu Paryaya for 30 years and in the Kevali Paryaya for 12 years. At the time of his Nirvana, he handed over his Gan to Sudharma and attained Nirvana at the age of 92 years after 12 years of Bhagwan's Nirvana by performing a monthly fast in the Gunashilka Chaitya.

Page #92:
---------------------------
**Appendix - Notes**

The scriptures describe Ganadhara Gautama as follows: He was the senior disciple of the Lord. He was seven hands tall. His physique and strength were excellent. He had a fair complexion like a golden line. He was a fierce ascetic, a great ascetic, a severe ascetic, a strict celibate, and possessed immense radiance. He was detached from the body. He was a fourteen-time previous holder of the body. He was the holder of four knowledges - Mati, Shruta, Avadhi, and Manahparyaya. He was a master of all letters. He used to sit near Lord Mahavira with his head bowed in the Ukad posture. He would wander, meditating in a state of stillness, influencing the soul with restraint and austerity.

A specific incident from the life of Ganadhara Gautama is mentioned as follows:

The Upasakadasanga mentions that when Anand Shravak told him that he had attained Avadhi knowledge up to a certain limit, he said, "A Shravak cannot attain Avadhi knowledge up to that limit." Then Anand said, "I see it so clearly. Therefore, my statement is true." Hearing this, Ganadhara Gautama became doubtful and went to the Lord to resolve his doubt. The Lord confirmed Anand's statement and asked Ganadhara Gautama to apologize to Anand Shravak. Ganadhara Swami went to Anand and apologized.

The Vipaksutra describes the life of Prince Mrigaputra. It states that he was afflicted with a terrible disease. His body emitted an unbearable stench, due to which he was kept in a basement. Once, Ganadhara Gautama went to see Mrigaputra. Seeing his repulsive diseased state, Ganadhara Gautama, the holder of four knowledges, the fourteen-time previous holder of the body, and the originator of the twelve-part speech, said, "I have not seen hell, but this is hell." - Vipaksutra

Another incident related to Gautama is prevalent, which is not mentioned in the original text but in later literature.

The 10th study of the Uttaradhyayanasutra states that Lord Mahavira said, "The Ashtapadi is a Siddha mountain, therefore, only the one who has attained the ultimate body can climb it, not another." When the gods came out of the Dev Samavasaran after hearing the Lord's statement, they were discussing among themselves, "The Ashtapadi is a Siddha mountain." Ganadhara Gautama heard this conversation of the gods. The disciples who were enlightened by Ganadhara Gautama attained Kevalgyan, but Gautama did not. This made Gautama upset. Then the Lord said, "Gautama! After I leave my body, you and I will become equal. Don't be impatient."

Gautama was not satisfied with the Lord's statement and remained impatient. Even after hearing the Lord's words, Ganadhara Gautama went to the Ashtapadi and when he returned to the Lord, the Lord said, "Kin Devanam Vaynam Gijjham Ahava Jinavaranam?"

Meaning, "Is the word of the gods acceptable, or the word of the Jinas?"

Hearing this statement of the Lord, Gautama apologized for his conduct. - Paiya Tika, p. 323

The commentator of the Uttaradhyayanasutra, Acharya Nemichandra, has also quoted this story of Gautama related to the Ashtapadi. He writes: "Tath Goyamassamiss Sammattamohaniyakammodayavasen Chinta Jaya'ma Nan Sejjhijjami' fa"I

Nemichandra Tika, p. 154

Page #93:
---------------------------
##  58

Even after receiving definite assurance from the Bhagwan (the enlightened one), Ganadhar Gautam was troubled by the arising of Samyaktvamohaniya karma (karma that obscures right knowledge) and thought, "Perhaps I will not be able to attain Siddha-pada (the state of liberation)." To overcome this anxiety, he went to Ashtapad (a place of pilgrimage).

There are many accounts available about Ganadhar Gautam's life. Scholars and researchers should investigate the facts of these accounts from a historical perspective.

Whatever the case may be, it is a definite fact that Indra-bhuthi Gautam was a great seeker of truth. He forgot everything else and completely dedicated himself to the Bhagwan's feet.

Chellana was the queen of King Shrenik and the daughter of Chetak, the ruler of Vaishali.

Chellana was a beautiful, virtuous, intelligent, and pious woman. She played a significant role in making King Shrenik religious and devoted to Jainism.

The "Niryaavlika" provides evidence of Chellana's deep affection for King Shrenik.

Konik, Hall, and Vihall were the three sons of Chellana.

- Jain Agam Katha Kosh, Nanda

She was the queen of Shrenik. She took initiation from Bhagwan Mahavira. She studied the 11 Angas (Jain scriptures). She practiced restraint for 20 years. Finally, she attained liberation through Santhara (a Jain practice of voluntary fasting unto death).

Vipulgiri is a mountain near Rajgriha city. It is mentioned in many places in the Agamas. Many ascetics performed Sanlekhana (a Jain practice of gradual fasting) and Santhara here. Under the supervision of the elders, severe ascetics would come here and perform Sanlekhana.

Five mountains are mentioned in Jain texts: 1. Vaibhargiri 2. Vipulgiri 3. Udaygiri 4. Suvarnagiri 5. Ratnagiri.

The Mahabharata mentions five mountains: Vaibhar, Varaha, Vrishabha, Rishigiri, and Chaityak.

The Vayupurana also mentions five mountains: Vaibhar, Vipul, Ratnakoot, Girivraja, and Ratnachal.

The Bhagavati Sutra, Shatak 2, Uddesh 5, mentions a hot spring called Mahatapo-pitir-Prabhav at the foot of Vaibhargiri in Rajgriha, which still exists today.

Buddhist texts refer to this spring as "Tapod," which is probably derived from "Taptodak" (hot water). The Chinese traveler Fa-Hien also saw it.

Page #94:
---------------------------
## Appendix
**Ascending and Descending Order**

"Ascending and Descending". Ascending order means increasing from bottom to top, and descending order means decreasing from top to bottom. Ascending order is called (In Serial Order) and descending order is called (In the Upward Order).

-
- **Note**
44
59
In the first study of the first category of *Anuttaraupapatikadasha*, the *Devalok* related *upapat* (Rebirth) description of the ten princes is given, which is as follows:

-
Jali, Mayali, Upajali, Purusha-sena and Varishena were born in Vijay, Vaijayant, Jayant, Aparajit and Sarvarthasiddha respectively in ascending order.

Dirghadant was born in Sarvarthasiddha.

The remaining four were born in descending order, such as Lashtdant in Aparajit, Behall in Jayant, Vehayas in Vaijayant, and Abhay in Vijay.

The remaining descriptions related to the ten princes should be understood as similar to the description of Jalikumara mentioned in the first study.

Lashtdant
• This name has already been mentioned in the first category. There, the mother is Dharini and the father is Shrenik, and the *upapat* is mentioned in the Jayant Vimana. In the second category, the name Lashtdant is also mentioned, and there too, the mother is Dharini and the father is Shrenik, and the *upapat* is mentioned in the Vaijayant Vimana. The question arises, is this Lashtdant the name of the same person or different people? If it is the name of one person, it cannot be consistent in any way. One person cannot have different *upapats*, and the number should be 23, combining 10 from the first category and 13 from this category. How can this be possible if it is one person? The author of "Shraman Bhagwan Mahavira", archaeologist Acharya Kalyanvijayji, has written on page 93 of his aforementioned book in the chapter on the life of the Tirthankara - "Shrenik's aforementioned declaration had a great and beautiful effect. In addition to other citizens, Jalikumara, Mayali, Upajali, Purusha-sena, Varishena, Dirghadant, Lashtdant, Behall, Vehayas, Abhay, Dirghasean, Maha-sena, Lashtdant, Gudhadant, Shuddhadant, Hall, Drum, Drum-sena, Maha-drum-sena, Singh, Singh-sena, Maha-singh-sena and Purn-sena - these twenty-three sons of Shrenik and Nanda, Nandamati, Nandottra, Nand-seniya, Maruya, Sumaruta, Maha-maruta, Marudeva, Bhadra, Subhadra, Sujata, Sumana and Bhootdatta, the thirteen queens of Shrenik, took initiation and entered the Shraman Sangha of Bhagwan Mahavira." Thus, the name Lashtdant appearing in different places cannot be of one person, but of different people, only then can the mention in the sutras be consistent.

In this regard, the consistency that has been found after thinking seriously is as follows:

Prakrit words can have different pronunciations in Sanskrit: for example, the Sanskrit transformation of 'kay' is Kaj, Kach, Krit. 'Kai' is Kapi, Kavi. 'Punna' is Puny or Purn. Similarly, it is not inconsistent for the word 'Lashtdant' to have different pronunciations. For example, Lashtdant and Rashtradant. Lashtdant means - one who has beautiful teeth. Another pronunciation

Page #95:
---------------------------
## 60
## Anuttaroupapatikadasha

"Rashtradant" means one who has suppressed the nation, i.e., one who has brought the nation under his control. Another name that comes up is "Punnaseen," just as there is no inconsistency in the pronunciations "Punnaseen" or "Poornaseen," similarly, there is no inconsistency in the different pronunciations "Latthadant" and "Rashtradant" appearing in the first and second categories. Considering this, the possibility of two individuals named "Latthadant" can be considered, and similarly, there can be consistency in the number 23.

There is another approach in this regard, which is that the father's name is indeed "Shrenik," but the mothers of both could be different. Although the name of both mothers is given as "Dharini" in the original text, there could be two queens named "Dharini." It is undeniable that King Shrenik had many queens, so it is not impossible for two queens to have the same name. Even today, this is very possible in many families. In a Punjabi Jain family we know, two brothers' wives have the same name "Nirmala," so they manage by distinguishing them as "Big Nirmala" and "Small Nirmala." Similarly, if we assume that King Shrenik had two queens with the same name, then the mother of the "Latthadant" in the first category was "Dharini," and the mother of the "Latthadant" in the second category was another "Dharini," then it is not inconsistent, but rather consistent and possible, for the sons to have the same name and the mothers to be different. Or, there could be two sons named "Latthadant" of the same "Dharini." The point is that there should be two "Latthadants" in any case.

If any expert presents another solution in this regard, it will be welcomed.

## Gunasil: Gun-Shilak

It should be noted that the "shi" in "Shilak" in the word "Gun-Shilak" is short. The meaning of the word "Gunashil" or "Gun-Shilak" should be:

"Gunapradhanam Shilan Yat Tat Gunashilkam." "Shil" means to collect the grains - the grains of the crop that have fallen in the field.

There are some among those who are renunciants, monks, munis, and ascetics, who collect and live on the grains of the crop that have fallen naturally in the field.

This type of conduct reduces the burden of the sadhu-sannyasi on society. Where the "Gun-Shilak" is found, it is "Gun-Shilak." The name of living by "Shil" is "Rit."

There was a sage named "Kanad" who lived by "Shil." His name "Kanad" is actually "Kanon ko - Anaj ke Danon ko ektrit karke, 'Ad' khane wala."

"Uncham Shilan Tu Ritam" - Amar Kosh, 19 Vaishya Varga, Kand 2, Shlok 2. "Kanishadyajanam Shilan, Rit Tat" - Abhidhan, Martyaka, Shlok 865-866.

Another etymology of the word "Gunasil" can be done as follows: "Gunah Shirasi Yasya Yasmin Va Tat Gunashirah." Its Prakrit form "Gunasil" is naturally evident. The word "Gunashil" is also used for this garden. Because the qualities of the garden are always present, it is also called "Gunashil."

Page #96:
---------------------------
Appendix - Notes
-
Kakandī
The capital of King Jitashatru and the birthplace of the blessed Anāgāra, a great ascetic.
This was an ancient and famous city in North India. During the time of Lord Mahāvīra, King Jitashatru ruled this city.
Outside the city of Kakandī was a beautiful garden called 'Sahasrāmrvana'. The Samvasarana of the Lord was held here. The initiation of the blessed Anāgāra also took place in this garden.
Currently, Kakandī would have been somewhere two miles from Nūnkhār station, thirty miles southeast of Gorakhpur. Sahasrāmrvana
Sahasrāmrvana. This garden is mentioned extensively in the Āgamas. There was also a beautiful garden of the same name outside the city of Kakandī, where the initiation of Dhanayakumāra and Sunakṣatrakuṁāra took place.
Sahasrāmrvana is also mentioned outside the following cities:
1. Outside Kakandī.
2. On Mount Girnār.
3. Outside the city of Kāmpilya.
4. Outside Pāṇḍu Mathurā.
5. Outside the city of Mithilā.
6. Outside Hastināpura, etc.
King Jitashatru
The one who conquers enemies. Just as the name of King Brahmadatta often appears in Buddhist Jātakas, so too does the name of King Jitashatru often appear in Jain texts. The name Dhāriṇī is also often associated with Jitashatru. It has been an ancient practice of storytellers to mention the name of some king at the beginning of any story.
Even if there was no king by this name, the storyteller uses this name at the beginning of his story. However, the name of King Jitashatru is mentioned a lot in the story-texts of Jain literature. The following cities are said to have been ruled by a king named Jitashatru:
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
City Vāṇijyagrāma Cāmpānagarī
Ujjayinī
Sarvatobhadra Nagar
Mithilā Nagarī
Pāñcāla Deśa
Āmalakalpā Nagarī
King
Jitashatru
Jitashatru
Jitashatru
61
Jitashatru
Jitashatru
Jitashatru

Page #97:
---------------------------
## English Translation:

**62**
8.
9.
10.
11.
Bhadra Sarthavahi
Savathi Nagari
Vanarasi Nagari
Alabhiya Nagari
Polaspur
The resident of Kakandhi Nagari, Dhanakumar and Sunakshastrakumar's mother.
Bhadra Sarthavahi was honored in Kakandhi Nagari. Bhadra's husband is not mentioned.
The epithet Sarthavahi attached to Bhadra proves that she was not only involved in ordinary trade but also played a significant role in public works and engaged in large-scale trade both within and outside the country. Panchadhatri
Five types of foster mothers who nurture the infant.
Raising a child is an art of human life. It is also a great responsibility. Just giving birth to a child does not make the parents glorious. The true glory of parents can be assessed only by the method of raising the child.
1. Dhiradhatri - The one who breastfeeds.
2. Majjandhaatri
- The one who bathes.
3. Mandandhatri
4. Kriddhadhatri
5.
Ankdhatri
- The one who adorns.
- The one who plays and entertains.
- The one who holds in the lap.
The study of ancient literature reveals that in ancient times, foster mothers, called Dhatri, were kept in royal households and wealthy homes for raising children. There were five types of foster mothers:
1. Gaj
2. Vrishabha
-
-
Anuttaroupapatikadasha
Jitashatru
Jitashatru
Jitashatru
Jitashatru
Mahabal
Bal Raja's son. Sudarshan Seth's life, Mahabalkumar. The king of Hastinapur was Bal and his queen was Prabhavati. Once at night, in a state of semi-sleep, the queen saw 'a lion descending from the sky and entering her mouth.' Seeing the lion in her dream, the queen woke up and went to King Bal's bedroom and told him about the dream. The king said in a sweet voice,
44
Son
"The dream is very good. You will become a mother." In the morning, in the royal court, the king asked the dream interpreters, "O King! There are 42 common and 30 great dreams in the science of dreams, this
46
Tirthankara Mata and Chakravarti Mata see these 14 dreams out of the 30 great dreams.
-
-

Page #98:
---------------------------
Appendix-Note
63
3. Lion 4. Lakshmi 5. Garland of Flowers 6. Moon 7. Sun 8. Flag 9. Pot 10. Lotus Pond 11. Ocean 12. Airplane 13. Treasure 14. Smokeless Fire

King! Queen Prabhavati had a great dream. Therefore, its result will be wealth gain, enjoyment gain, son gain and kingdom gain. .. In due course, a son was born, who was named Mahabalkumar.

Mahabal became skilled by practicing 72 arts with Kalacharya.

Mahabalkumar was married to eight princesses. Mahabalkumar became engrossed in material pleasures.

He became a disciple by listening to the teachings of the Lord and embraced the monastic dharma. Thereafter, Mahabal Muni studied the 14 Purvas. He performed many kinds of austerities. After observing the Shramanaparyaya for 12 years, he was born as a deity in the Brahma Lok Kalpa.
- Bhagavati, Shatak 11, Uddes 11 Konik

The son of Queen Chellanana of King Shrenik, the ruler of Champanagari, the capital of Angadesh, a devout devotee of Lord Mahavira.

Konik Raja is a famous king. His description is found in many places in Jain Agamas in many ways. Bhagavati, Aupapatik and Niryaavlika have detailed descriptions of Konik.

Due to his greed for the kingdom, he had imprisoned his father Shrenik. After Shrenik's death, Konik made Champanagari his capital in Angadesh.

He also fought a fierce battle with his maternal grandfather Chetak to snatch the elephant Har and Sechanak from his brothers Hall and Vihall. The Konik-Chetak war is famous.
—Jain Agam Katha Kosh

Page #99:
---------------------------
## Anuttaraupapatikadasha

**Jamali** was a prince from the Kshatriya Kund of Vaishali. Once, the Lord arrived in the village of Kshatriya Kund. Jamali also came to listen to the sermon.

Abandoning his eight wives, he took initiation from the Lord along with five hundred Kshatriya Kumaras. Jamali had made a declaration against the Lord's principles. Therefore, he was called **Nihnav**.

- **Bhagavati, Shatak 9, Uddesh 33 Thavacchaputra**

The son of the wealthy Thavaccha Gathapattni of Dwarka Nagari, who took initiation from Lord Nemnath along with a thousand men. The initiation ceremony was performed by Shri Krishna.

Thavacchaputra studied the fourteen Purvas. He performed many types of austerities. In the end, he became a Siddha, Buddha, and liberated, ending all kinds of suffering.

— **Jnatasutra, Adhyayan 5 Krishna**

**Krishna Vasudeva**. His mother's name was Devaki, and his father's name was Vasudeva. Krishna was born in Mathura, in the prison of his maternal uncle Kansa.

Due to the troubles of Jarasandha, Shri Krishna left the land of Braj and settled in the distant Saurashtra, establishing the city of Dwarka.

Shri Krishna was a devout follower of Lord Nemnath. In the future, he will be the Tirthankara named 'Amam'. In Jain literature, the life of Shri Krishna is found in detail in both Sanskrit and Prakrit languages.

After the destruction of Dwarka, Shri Krishna died at the hands of Jarakumar. — **Jainagamakthakosh Mahavir**

**Mahavira** is the last Tirthankara of the current Avasarpini Kalchakra. In Agam literature and post-Agam texts, Lord Mahavira is known by many names:

1. Vardhaman, 2. Mahavira, 3. Mahashraman, 4. Charam Tirthakrit, 5. Sanmati, 6. Mahativira, 7. Videhadinna, 8. Vaishalik, 9. Jnatputra, 10. Devary, 11. Dirghatapasvi, etc.

Lord Mahavira's parents were followers of the Parsvanathiya tradition of Shramanas.

Lord Mahavira was born in Vaishali, which is famous as 'Basar' or 'Basad', 27 miles north of Patna.

_Mahavira's father was King Siddhartha, his mother was Trishaladevi, and his elder brother was Nandivardhan. Mahavira's mother Trishaladevi was the sister of Chetak, the chief king of the Vaishali republic.

After the death of his parents, Mahavira took initiation at the age of thirty, with permission from Nandivardhan._

Page #100:
---------------------------
Appendix-Note
65
12|| He performed severe austerities for twelve years. He practiced rigorous penance. After attaining omniscience, he preached Dharma for the welfare of the people for 42 years. He attained Nirvana at the age of 72 in Pavapuri.
In the texts of Buddhist literature, Lord Mahavira is called the long-austerity Niggantha Nataputta.
Elder, old. Three types of elders are mentioned in the scriptures - (1) Vayasthavir - a monk aged 60 years or more is a Vayasthavir. (2) Pravrajyastavir - a monk who has been initiated for 20 years or more is a Pravrajyastavir.
(3) Srutastavir - a monk who knows the Stananga, Samavayanga, etc. is called a Srutastavir. Siles-Gulia: Slesh-Gutika
The actual meaning of the word 'Slesh' is - to stick, to stick. When two pieces of paper are to be glued together, then glue etc. is used. That is Slesh.
It appears that in the present context, the meaning of the word 'Slesh' is glue etc. sticking substance. 'Slesh' means a lump of glue, i.e. a vatka (wick). It means - a long wick of glue. This meaning fits here. The commentator has interpreted it as 'Sleshmano Gutika'. According to this, if the meaning of 'lump of phlegm' is to be applied in the present context, then it will have to be reduced in this way - as if a long wick-like lump of phlegm is lying somewhere, it is pale. Similarly, Dhyan Kumar's lips had become. But the word 'Slesh' is not found to be indicative of the meaning of phlegm.
The Amarakoshkar and Acharya Hemachandra have given the synonyms of phlegm as follows - Mayu: Pittam Kapah Sleshma.
-Dwi. Kan. 16, Manushya Varga Shlok 62. Pittam Mayu: Kapah Sleshma Valash: Snehabhu: Kharah.
_-Abhi. Martya Ka., Shlok 462. According to Acharya Hemachandra - Kapah, Sleshman, Valash, Snehabhu and Khar, these five names are of Sleshma. The word 'Slesh' does not appear in it. Dhyan Anugar: Dhyandev
A creature who is born in the Deva-gati from the human gait or the animal gait does not have a new name there. But the name of his previous birth continues.
Dhyan Muni's name was Dhyan Dev. When Dardur died and became a Dev, his name also became Dardur Dev. It seems that there is no custom of naming in the Deva caste like the human caste. There is only the practice of the name created by humans or the name famous in the animal world. Chaurant: Chaturant
The meaning of the word 'Chaurant' is - four ends. The whole earth comes in four directions. Just as a Chakravarti king, while following the Kshatriya-dharma in the best way, ends those four directions - conquers the four directions, establishes his dominion over the whole earth, in the same way Lord Mahavira, while following the real Lokottara Dharma, on the four-ended - human gait, Deva-gati, animal gait and hell gait form - the world

Page #101:
---------------------------
## English Translation:

66
He attained victory over the Anuttaroppapatikadashā. By conquering his inner enemies, such as attachment, aversion, anger, pride, delusion, and greed, he achieved complete victory through the transcendent Kshatriya-Dharma.

Here, a Maha-bhogi Chakravarti is compared to a Maha-yogi (Lord Mahavira). Lord Mahavira is the Chakravarti of Dharma, so this comparison is appropriate.

**Vanijyagram**
An ancient city in the Magadha country. It was the capital of the Kosala country. Acharya Hemchandra has considered Saketa, Kosala, and Ayodhya as one and the same.

Near Saketa, there was a beautiful garden called "Uttarakuru," which had a Yaksha shrine called "Pashamriga."

The king of Saketa was named Mitranandi, and his queen was named Shrikantā.

Historians believe that ancient Saketa must have been located near present-day Ayodhya, on the southern bank of the Sarayu River, six miles northeast of Faizabad in the Faizabad district.

**Hastinapur**
The name of a famous ancient city in India. It was a beautiful and important city of Kurukshetra during the Mahabharata period. Many names of this city are found in ancient Indian literature: (1) Hastini, (2) Hastinapur, (3) Hastinapur, (4) Gajpur, etc.

Today, Hastinapur is located on the southern bank of the Budhi Ganga River, 22 miles northeast of Meerut and southwest of Bijnor.

**Shashtha (Chhath)**
Not eating for six days (fasting for the first day, fasting for the second and third days, and fasting again on the fourth day, this is called Chhath (Bela)).

Similarly, not eating for eight days is called Attham (Tela). Not eating for four days is called Chauthabhat; that is, fasting.

This explanation suggests that the practice of Dharana and Parana was not prevalent in that era, as it is today. The current practice of Dharana and Parana is not scripturally appropriate, either in comparison to the practice of austerity or in comparison to the explanation of Chauthabhat, Chhath, etc., as prescribed in the scriptures.

**Ayambil**
The word "Ayambil" is a compound word. It consists of two words: Ayam and Amla. Ayam means "Mand" or "Osaman." Amla means "sour" (fourth taste). The food made by combining these two is called Ayam-Amla; that is, Ayambil. Ayambil is made from three grains: Odan, Urad, and Sattu. This is the Jain definition.

In Pravachana-saroddhara, the word "Acham" is used in place of the word "Ayam."

Page #102:
---------------------------
Appendix
- Note
67
Acharya Haribhadra uses the terms Ayamāml, Ācāml and Ācāmāml.
It is known from the old commentaries that Ayambil used to include rice, black gram and sattu as food and was suitable from the point of view of taste.
Today, almost twenty things are used in Ayambil. How is this scripturally ordained? This is worth considering.
It is necessary for wise seekers who practice taste-joy to pay attention to the scriptural explanation. But what is the connection of the word 'amla' which has been used and its meaning of the fourth taste, with food? This is not clear. Scholarly researchers should consider this.
Because there seems to be no connection of sourness in the ingredients of Ayambil food, therefore, from the word amla, it seems that before Shri Haribhadrasuri, there may have been a connection of buttermilk in Ayambil.
|
The Buddhist text Majjhimanikaya, in the 12th Mahasīhanādasutta, describes the severe penance of the Buddha. There, the Buddha is called 'Ayāmbhakṣī' or 'Ācāmbhakṣī'. There, the word Ayām means gruel. This ancient mention shows that the word Ayām meant gruel and the ascetics called Ayāmbhakṣī only drank gruel. In Jain terminology, the word Ayām is taken as rice, black gram and sattu. But these three do not fit in the meaning of Ayām. It should be remembered that Acharya Haribhadra etc. have explained the main meaning of Ayām as gruel.
- Āvश्यकनिर्युक्तिवृत्ति, Gāthā 1603 - Acharya Siddhasena's Pravachana Sāroddhāra Vṛtti - Ārya Devendra's Śrāddhapratikramāṇa Vṛtti
If a householder is eating food and a monk arrives at the householder's house for alms, then while eating, the donor's hand is stained with greens, lentils, rice etc. or with its juicy water - it is stained and that donor is ready to give alms with that stained hand, then such alms food is called stained food. The present text is about the intention of accepting such stained food given by a blessed homeless person. The scriptures have discussed this in detail by breaking it down into many parts.
Ujjhatdharmik
Food and drink that is only fit to be thrown away, which no one likes to eat or drink, such food or drink is called Ujjhatdharmik.
High, Low, Middle Caste
In the present text, the words high, low or middle are not intended with respect to any caste or lineage, only people call a wealthy family a high caste, a poor family a low caste and an ordinary family a middle caste. If it were intended for caste or lineage, then the word middle would not be consistent in the present text. In Jainism, caste-based high-low feelings are not acceptable from the point of view of conduct and principles. Jainism is based on qualities, any person of any caste can practice Jainism. The present text mentions alms-begging in high, low and middle castes.

Page #103:
---------------------------
## Chapter 68: The State of Uninterrupted Descent

This clearly indicates the general rule of the Muni's [Jain monk] ability to go to all families without any discrimination based on caste. This has been the system of the eternal Jain tradition from the beginning.

**Like a Snake Entering a Hole**

Just as a snake, when entering a hole, descends directly into it, similarly, a Muni, desiring to conquer the taste buds, swallows the received food immediately upon putting it in his mouth, but does not chew it by moving it from one jaw to the other. This means that they swallow without savoring the taste of the food. This is the meaning of the phrase "Bilmiv Pannang" [like a snake entering a hole].

The main point is that a Muni should not have any attachment to food. There should not be even a trace of desire for taste. He should only eat for the purpose of sustaining his body, following restraint.

**Samaiyamiai**

This phrase indicates that the study of the eleven Angas [Jain scriptures] starting from Samayik [a Jain ritual] was done. The first name in the eleven Angas is the Acharanga Sutra. Therefore, in the present context, "Ayaramiai" [Acharanga etc.] should be the correct reference for the eleven Angas. Why then is the reference "Samaiyamiai"? Here is the solution:

- From the very first verse of the Acharanga, there is a discussion of Anarambha [non-beginning], and here in Samayik, there is also a discussion of Anarambha and the emphasis is on Charya [conduct]. Therefore, there is an extraordinary similarity, a unity, between the Acharanga and Samayik. Hence, the reference "Samaiyamiai" instead of "Ayaramiai" is not inappropriate.

- Or, the Muni first accepts Samayik, and in it, the Acharanga, which embodies the principles of Anarambha Dharma, is also included. For this reason, this reference does not seem inappropriate.

- Or, "Sam" means Samayik and "Azaiyan" means Acharanga Sutra. In the verse where the Acharanga is established, the words "Ayar", "Achal", etc. are described as synonyms for "Achar". In the same verse, the word "Ajati" is also described as a synonym for the Acharanga. Therefore, "Samaiy" means Samayik and Acharanga, etc. (eleven Angas) combined together. By planning in this way, Samayik will be included, and so will the Acharanga. Along with this, the word "Ai" will bring in the other remaining Angas, starting from the first.

- Or, the meaning of this phrase should be understood as follows: "Samayikadicani" [Samayik and the rest of the eleven Angas]. The "ma" between the two words is alakshanik [non-significant], like the use of "Annam Annam" [food, food].

Page #104:
---------------------------
First Class - Bracket . Guru Diksha | Tapas
Order | Person | Mother | Father | Place |
Sanlekhana | Place | Plane | Moksha.
1. Jalikumar | Dharini | Shrenik | Rajgriha | Bhagwan Mahavira | 16 years Gunaratna. One month | Vipul | Vijay | Mahavideha
Appendix - First Class - Bracket
2. | Mayali
Vaijayant
Upjali
Jayant
Purushaisen
Aparajit
5. Varishen
Sarvarth Siddha
6. Dirghadant
7.
Lashtdant
Aparajit
Vehallkumar | Chelna | "
Jayant
9. | Vehayaskumar | " | " |
"
Vaijayant
10. Abhaykumar Nandadevi
" |
"
Vijay

Page #105:
---------------------------
## Order

**Second Class - Bracketed Person** | **Mother** | **Father** | **Place** | **Guru Initiation** | **Austerity Sanlekhana Place** | **Vimana** | **Moksha Dirghaseen Dharini** | **Shrenik** | **Rajagriha** | **Bhagwan Mahavira** | **16 Years** | **Gunaratna. One Month** | **Vipul** | **Vijay**
**Mahaseen**
:
FEE
: : : :
:
3. **Lashtdant**
**Vaijayant**
:
"
**Gudhdant**
:
5. **Shuddhdant**
**Jayant**
:
6. **Hallkumar**
:
**Drumkumar**
**Aparajit**
| **Drumseen**
:
| **Mahadrumseen**
:
**Sarvarth Siddha**
:
"
| **Singhseen**
:
: : : : :
: : :
| **Mahasinghseen**
**Anuttaroupapattikadasha**
**Punysen**
:

Page #106:
---------------------------
## Third Category - Bracketed Order | Person | Mother | Father | Place | Guru | Diksha | Tapas | Sanlekhana Place | Vimana | Moksha

1. **Dhanayakumar** | Bhadra | - Kakkandi | Bhagwan Mahavira | 9 Months | Gun | One Month | Vipul | Sarvarthasiddha | Mahavideha
**Appendix - Third Category - Bracketed**
2. | Sunakshatra | Rishi Das | Rajgriha | 
4. | Pelluk | 
5. | Ramputra | | Saketa | Chandrikumar | 
7. | Prishtimatrik | | Vanijya Gram | 
8. | Pedhalputra | 
9. | Postill | Hastinapur | 
10. | Vehallkumar | Rajgriha | 6 Months

Page #107:
---------------------------
## English Translation:

1.
2.
4.
**Antagadadasa**
The 8th Angasutra. It describes the lives of those who end their worldly existence with their final breath - the sadhakas.
-
3.
5.
6.
7.
**Anga**
Jain Agamic literature compiled by Ganadhara. According to the Drishtivada, there are twelve Angas.
8.
**Glossary**
**Anagaar**
One who has no "agar" - home - a renunciant, sadhu, bhikshu.
**Aparitant Yogi**
A yogi free from sorrow, one who has attained sorrowless samadhi, a sadhaka who does not tire in the practice of restraint.
**Abhiggah**
Vow, a limit imposed on oneself regarding food and other things, a specific type of rule.
**Ayar-Bhanday**
Tools for observing conduct - vessels, face coverings, and cleaning materials, etc.
**Ayambil**
A specific type of austerity, consuming rough food, practice of taste control.
10. **Uvvay**
**Aukkhaya, Bhavakkhaya, Thikkhaya**
The decay of the karmic particles of lifespan. The end of existence, the end of the present human, naraka, etc. states. The state of the lifespan karma being consumed, i.e., the end of the time limit.
9.
[Drishtivada is lost.]
**Iryasamiy**
One who uses (discretion) in walking, coming and going, i.e., one who walks with care and caution.
The soul is aupapatik, born in the deva and naraka realms.
11. **Ujjhiyaddhammiy**
A substance that is contemptible, i.e., worthy of being abandoned, which has been abandoned by others.
- Attaining liberation
12. **Kaussagg**
Kayotsarga, the abandonment of bodily attachment, and the abandonment of bodily functions.

Page #108:
---------------------------
## Appendix - Glossary of Terms

**13. Gunarayan Tavokamma**
Gunaratan Tapa. This tapa is for 16 months, with one fast in the first month, two in the second, and so on, increasing to 16 fasts in the 16th month.

**14. Guttabhambhayari**
A Brahmacharin monk who controls his mind, speech, and body.

**15. Chhatt**
Two fasts together, meaning abstaining from all food for two days and then eating only once a day for the next six days, thus abstaining from food six times.

**16. Jayan-Ghadhan Jog-Charitt**
Yatan - effort, exertion, discernment, protecting beings. Ghatan - effort, endeavor, striving. Yog - union, joining. A person with this type of character or conduct, who has exertion and endeavor.

**17. Tuv Tapa:**
Wherein there is destruction of karmas, suppression of desires.

**18. Ther**
Sthavir, elder. The Agamas describe three types of Sthavir: (1) Vayastavir - a monk who is 60 years old. (2) Pravrajyastavir - a monk who has been initiated for 20 years. (3) Shrutastavir - a knower of the Stananga etc.

**19. Patt - Chivar**
Patra - vessel, Chivar - cloth.

**20. Parinivvanavattiy**
The performance of Kayotsarga (a posture of complete relaxation) upon the death of a Shraman.

**21. Porisi**
One watch of time. The time of a man's shadow.

**22. Samyam**
Control, restraint, suppression of the senses, diligent abandonment of violence towards living beings etc.

**23. Samudhan**
High, low, and middle class alms, gochari.

**24. Sajjhay**
Self-study, reading and repetition of scriptures etc.

**73**
Relationship.

Page #109:
---------------------------
74
Anuttaroppapatikadasha
25. Saman
Shraman - Shramshil Muni, Nirgranth. 26. Sanlehana
Sanlekhana, to make the body and mind lean by austerities and to eliminate kshaya and other mental defilements. Fasting before death, Santhara. 27. Samann-Pariyay
Shramanya-paryaya, the time of sainthood, the practice of restraint. 28. Samosaran
Samavasaran, the arrival of the Tirthankara. The meeting of 12 types of assemblies. The special creation made by the gods where the Lord resides. 29. Sagaroavam
Sagaropama, a specific time, Dasha Kodakodi Palyopamaparimit Kala, by which the lifespan of Narakas and Devas is measured.

Page #110:
---------------------------
##  Avyaya-pada-sankalana (Collection of Indeclinable Words)

**A**

25. **Chev** -  Exactly, precisely

**Thik hi** -  Exactly, precisely

1. 2. **De** -  (Indeclinable particle used in various contexts)

26. **Jai** -  If, when

**Antam** -  End, termination, death

**Antiye** -  End, termination, death

**Annayā** -  Otherwise, at some other time

**Alan** -  Able, capable, complete

**Avi** -  Also, too

**Ah** -  (Indeclinable particle used in various contexts)

**Ahapajjattā** -  With ease, comfortably

**Ahapaḍirūrv** -  With ease, comfortably

**Ahasuhā** -  With ease, comfortably

28. **Jayā** -  Which, who

29. **Jahā** -  As, like

30. **Jahānāmae** -  As named, as it is

31. **Jāmev** -  Which, who

32. **Jāv** -  Until, as long as

33. **Jāvjjīvāe** -  As long as life lasts

34. **Jāhe** -  When

35. **Jeṇev** -  Which, who

**Ā**

11. **Āṇupuvvīe** -  In sequence, in order

**Jisa ora** -  Towards which, in which direction

**Ṇ**

12. **I, iti** -  End, completion

13. **Imeyarūve** -  In this way, thus

14. **Ucchaṁ** -  High, elevated

15. **Uḍḍe** -  Above, upwards

16. **Uppin** -  Above, upwards

36. **Ṇaṁ** -  Thus, in this way

37. **Ṇ** -  (Indeclinable particle used in various contexts)

38. **Ṇavarāṁ** -  High, elevated

39. **Ṇāṇattāṁ** -  Knowledge, wisdom

40. **Ṇāmaṁ** -  Name

41. **Ṇo** -  Not

**Vākyālaṁkāra** -  Figure of speech

**Nāhi** -  Not

**Viśeṣa** -  Special, particular

**Nānātva** -  Diversity, variety

**Bhinnatā** -  Difference, distinction

**Nāma** -  Name

**Ūpara** -  Above, upwards

42. **Tae** -  Therefore, hence

17. **Evaṁ** -  Thus, in this way

18. **Ev** -  Thus, in this way

19. **Evāmev** -  Exactly, precisely

**Taṁ jahā** -  As it is, in this way

**Anantar** -  After, afterwards

**Vaha** -  That, he, she, it

**Tathā** -  Thus, in this way

**Usi prakar** -  In the same way

**Usi** -  The same

20. **Kai** -  How many, how much

21. **Kadāi, Kayāi** -  Sometimes, ever

**Kahi** -  Where

23. **Kevayāṁ** -  How many, how much

44. **Taththa** -  There, in that place

45. **Tahā** -  Thus, in this way

**Taheva** -  Thus, in this way

47. **Tāmev** -  That, he, she, it

48. **Tik?** -  (Indeclinable particle used in various contexts)

50. **Teṇāṁ** -  By that, by him, by her, by it

51. **Teṇeva** -  By that, by him, by her, by it

**Ti** -  End, completion

**Samapt** -  Finished, completed

**Is prakar karake** -  By doing this, in this way

**Us** -  That, he, she, it

**Us ora** -  Towards that, in that direction

**Kha**

24. **Khalu** -  Certainly, indeed

Page #111:
---------------------------
Anuttaroppapatikadasha
Far
58. Or 59. Or
Alternative also, fear
Special name
Same
60. Truly 61. With 62. Self 63. Everywhere 64. That
Together self, by itself
Everywhere
No, negation
That, then
And
65. Indeed, surely
Certainty

Page #112:
---------------------------
**Verb Compilation**

**To Move Around**
* **Ghumana**
* **Jana**
* **Adhi Adamanne Ahijj Ahijjai Ahijjitta Ahie (Adhitah)**
* **Niggaya Gachch Gachchai Gachchitta Gachchihi Gachchittae Uvagachchai Ganeez**
* **Ganeezmane 10. Genh**
* **Uggindhami 11. Gil**
* **Charamane 13. Char**
* **Ghumana**

**To Do**
* **Kar**
* **Karana**
* **Karei**
* **Ginna**
* **Grahan Karna**
* **Glani Karna**
* **Gilai**
* **Grahan Karna**
* **Karenti Kareh Karei Kahi Karitta Karittae Kiccha Katte Kah Kahei Kapp Kappi Kam Nikkhamai Nikkhamitta Padinikkhamai Padinikkhamitta Nikkhanto Veeivitta (Vi Ati Vraj) Lang Kar**
* **Chalna**
* **Thaharna**
* **Genhti Genhavei Kahna Padhigahitte**
* **Padhigahitta Yogya**

**To Stay**
* **12. Gih**

**To Speak**
* **Padhigahitta**

**To Know**
* **14. Chitt**
* **Chitt'ai 15. Jan**
* **Janitta 16. Joijj**
* **Joijjmane 17. Tar Jana**
* **Uttaranthi Avyaranthi**
* **Oyaranti 18. Duijj**
* **Duijmane**

**To See**
* **Janna**
* **Dikhai Dena**

**To Go**
* **Gati Karna**
* **Gam**
* **Uvagae Uvagamitta Padigaye Padigaya**

Page #113:
---------------------------
## 78
Anuttaripapatikadasha

**Speaking**
To speak
To stay
To go
To be able
To be accomplished
To show
To tell
Etc. is intended
To be spoken 20. Dansas
To show 35. Vay padidamse
To bow, to greet
To bow
36. Vas namansitta
To serve (pari, up, as)
To serve 37. Vay pajjuvasai
To serve
To serve 23. Pannay
To recognize
To recognize 38. Sanchae 24. Paoun
To follow
To follow 39. Sijjh 25. Pannatte (Prajnapta)
To say
To say 26. Puccha
To ask
To ask
To ask
To ask 40. Samm 27. Bhan
To say
To hear
41. Soccha-Shrutva Bhaniyaavam
42. Sobh
To be happy
To be 43. Samosadhe (Sam, Av, Srut) Bhavitta
44. Har Bhas
To speak
To speak
To be tired
To be tired 31. Ruh
To climb
To climb 32. Labh
To obtain
To obtain 45. Ho
To hear
To hear
To be happy
To be
Various
To come, to arrive
To take
To take
To bow
46.
To take
33. Vand
To bow
To bow 34. Vagar
To be
To be
To say

Page #114:
---------------------------
Word Meanings:

a - and
aṇagāre - anāgāra (renouncer)
aṅgass- - of the body
aṇajjhovvaṇṇe - unattached to objects
aṅgāi- - body (plural)
aṇāyambilṁ - anācāṁla, a type of tapasya (austerity)
antaṁ - end, death
ante - near, close
aṇikkhiṭṭeṇaṁ - anikṣipta (continuous), without any
antevāsi - disciple
amb-guṭṭhia - mango seed
aṇujjhiya-dhammiyaṁ - useful, worth keeping
ambagapeśia - mango branch
aṇuttarovavaiya-dasāṇaṁ - having the characteristics of the Anuttaropapātika-daśā (the ninth stage of spiritual development)
ambaḍaga-peśia - mango branch
akaluse - free from defilements like anger
aṇega-khambasayasannviṭuṁ - adorned with hundreds of pillars
akkhayaṁ - imperishable
akkha-sutta-mālā - Rudraksha mala (rosary)
aṇṇaya - anyada, at some time
agatthiya-saṅgalia - wood of the Agastik tree
adīṇe - free from humility
aggahatthehiṁ - with the palms of the hands
apara-jite - in the Aparajita, a type of vimāna (flying vehicle)
acchīṇa - of the eyes
aparitaṁta-jogi - tireless, constantly in samadhi
ajja - Ārya (noble one)
ajjhayaṇass- - of study
aparibhūa - not despised, not looked down upon
ajjhayaṇa - study
ajjhayaṇe - in study
apuṇarāvattaṁ - from which there is no return
aṭṭha - eight
appaḍihaya-vara-nāṇa-daśaṇa-dha-reṇaṁ - having unhindered (unobstructed) supreme knowledge and vision
aṭṭhao - eight-eight
aṭṭaṇhaṁ - of the eight (in relation to)
aṭṭhamaśś- - of the eighth
appāṇaṁ - one's own soul
aṭṭhi-camma-chiraṭṭāe - bones, skin, and nerves
appāṇeṇaṁ - by the soul
aṭṭhī - bone
abbhaṇuṇṇāte - upon being commanded, upon receiving a command
aṭe - meaning
abbhatthite - thought arising within
aḍamaṇe - revolving
abbhuggata-mussite - large and high
aḍḍa - prosperity, wealth
abbhujatāe - enterprising
aṇantaṁ - endless
abhao - Abhayakumāra
aṇagāraṁ - to the renouncer
abhaya-daeṇaṁ - one who gives fearlessness
aṇagārass - - of the renouncer - one who has renounced the world, abandoning māyā (illusion) and mamatā (attachment)
abhayass - - of Abhayakumāra
abhye - Abhayakumāra

Page #115:
---------------------------
## 80
Anuttaraupapatikadasha
Ayahiṇam-Ādakṣiṇa Ayahiṇam-Pāyāhiṇam - Starting from the south direction
Hui Pradakṣiṇā
Spādāṇā
Abhiggaham - The limit of making vows, taking food, etc.
Bāndhanā Amucchite - Without any desire. Anāsakta Ammayam - Mother to Ayam - This Ayalam - Immovable, stable Aruyam - Free from disease, ailment Alam - Complete Alattaga-Guliya- Mahendi (Mahāvar) nodules Avakankhanati – Want Avi - Also Avimaṇe-Without a sorrowful mind Avisādī - Without sorrow (regret) Avvābāham - Free from obstacles Asansatṭha- Without full hands Asi-Is Ah(ham)-I Ah - Ath, an indeclinable word indicating a change of side or beginning Ahā-Pajjattam - As needed Ahāpaḍirūvam - As appropriate, proper Ahāsuham - According to happiness Ahijjati - Studies Ahie - Read, learned Ahiṇ - Free from inferiority, complete Aigareṇam- The one who starts Aillāṇam - Of the beginning, of the first Aukkhaeṇam - Due to the decay of life Āṇupuvvīe – In sequence Āpucchai (ti) — Asks, asks Āpucchaṇam- Asking Āpucchāmi-I ask Āyambilam- A type of penance Āyambila-Pariggahieṇam - Taken by the method of Āyambila penance Āyave - In the sun Āyār-Bhaṇḍae - Instruments for observing restraint Āraṇṇaccuae - Āraṇ- Eleventh heaven,
Acyuta-Twelfth heaven Āharati – Eats Āhāram - Food Āhāreti – Eats Āhite - It has been said I- Iti, an indeclinable word indicating introduction or ending Ingāl-Sagḍiyā – Wagon of cuckoos Indabhūti-Pāmokkhāṇam – In Indrabhūti etc. Icchāmi – I want Iti - An indeclinable word indicating ending, introductory indeclinable word Ibhavar-Kannagāṇam - Of the daughters of wealthy, noble people Imāsin - In these Ime-These Imeṇam - By this Imeyārūve- Of this type Isidāse - Ṛṣidāsa Kumāra Īriyā-Samite – One who walks with effort, with care Ukkameṇam - In reverse order, from bottom to top Ukkhevao- Objection, taking the meaning of unsaid sentences from later sentences Ugghaham - Respect, honor, worship, etc. Ucca.- (Ucca-Majjhama-Niya) High, medium and
Low kalas from Uccatṭhavṇate – A special vessel with a high neck Ujjāṇāto- From the garden, from the orchard Ujjāṇe – Garden, orchard Ujjhiya-Dhammīyam-Useless, fit to be thrown away Uṭṭ-Pāda - Camel's foot Uṭṭhāṇam- Lips

Page #116:
---------------------------
Appendix
-
Udduṁ – High, they in the summer udaram. Stomach
—
-
- Meaning
Udara- Bhayan Udara- Bhayanenaṁ
-
Ūrussa
Ūrū -
Udara- Bhayanassa
Uppi — Above
Ubbaḍ - Ghaṭāmukhe – Like the mouth of a pot, fierce
Gone are
-
-
Mouth-like Ummuka-Bālhabhāvaṁ • Having crossed childhood, one who has passed childhood Uyaranti - Ura- Kaḍga - Desa - Bhāyeṇaṁ Chaṭāī ke Vibhāgōṁ se
• Descend
- Chest (chest) like
Ura- Kaḍyassa – Chest-like mat
Uvayāli - Upajālikumāra Uvvajjhihinti - Will be born Uaaṇe, Ne
- Born Upapāta, Origin
Uvavāyo Uvasobhemāṇe Uvāgachchati • Comes
-
Uvāgave – Came
Uvvūḍ - Yaṇakōse - Whose eyes are sunken inward
-
-
Udara-Bhājana, - From Udara-Bhājana
Udara Bhājana ki
-
-
- Shining
Stomach-like vessel
- Of the thighs
- Both thighs
Asiṁ - About them, their
-
Eleven
Ekkārasaegadivaseṇaṁ Evaṁ Isa Yāve - Evaṁ - Thus
Eva – Only, an indeclinable word indicating certainty
Evāmeva – In the same way
Eṣaṇāe
In one day
• This kind of
- Eṣaṇā - Samiti – By the use of food, etc.
Oyaranti Orāleṇaṁ Kai – How many
- The thigh of the bird called Kank
-
Kank- Jaṅghā Kampana-Vātiyo - A person suffering from the disease of trembling air Kaṭṭha-Kolambaē – Wooden Kolomb - Kaṭṭha- Pāṭhayā- - Wooden sandals Kaḍikaḍāheṇaṁ. - Kaṭi (waist) like Kaṭāhi ne Kaḍipattassa - - Kaṭi-patra ki, waist ki
- Special vessel
-
- Descend
Karenti
Kareti
Kareha
- Generous
Kaṇṇa - Ear
Kaṇṇāṇaṁ
Kaṇhō Katare . Which one
-
Kadāti - Sometimes, perhaps
Kannavali
Kappati
Kappe
—
- Of the ears
- Krishna Vasudeva
- A row of ear ornaments
– Is fit, is suitable
—
- Kalpa, the Sudharma - etc. airplanes of the celestial beings
Chief
-
Kaya-Lakkhaṇa - Successful sign
Kayai (ti) — Perhaps, sometimes Karga - Gīvā - Karve (small earthen vessel) ki Grīvā i.e. neck
-
- Do
- Does
- Do
Kala - Sangaliya Kalātō – Arts
Kalāya - Sangaliya Kahiṁ—Kahaṁ Kaheti -
८१
- Kalāya - A special kind of grain pod
• Kalāya pod
- Says
Kaussaggṁ - Kāyotsarga, Dharma-Dhyāna
Kākaṁ (gaṁ) Dī - The city of Kākandi Kākajāṅghā - - Crow's thigh, a special medicine called Kāka- Jaṅghā
Kāgandi
- In the city of Kākandi

Page #117:
---------------------------
## 82
Anuttaraupapatikadasha
Kayandiyo - Kakandī nagarī se Kāreti - causes Karallay - Challiya - Bitter gourd peel 1. Kālam - time, period 2. Kālam - death (from) Kāla-gate - attained death Kālagayam - attained death Kāla-māse - at the time of death Kāli-porā - Kāli - a particular type of plant
Perv (Sandhi-sthān) Kāleṇam - by time, by period (in) Kāhiti - will do Kicchā - by doing Kuṇḍiyā-gīvā - the neck of a Kamandalu Kumāre - Kumāra's - which Keṇṭeṇ - for what reason Kevatiyam - how many Koṇito - Koṇika king Khandao (to) - Skandaka Sannyasi Khandag-vattavvyā - Skandaka related statement Khandayass - Skandaka Sannyasi's Khalu - certainly Khir - dhāti - milk-feeding nurse Ganga - tarang - bhūeṇam - like the waves of the Ganga Gachchati - goes Gachchihiti - will go Gaṇij-mālā - counting mala Gaṇejj-māṇehim - counted Gate - gone Gāmanugāmam - from one village to another Gilāti - feels sorrow, is distressed Gīvāe - of the neck, of the throat Guṇarayaṇ - Guṇaratna named tapas Guṇasilae (te) - Guṇ-śila named garden
Gūḍhadante - Gūḍhadantkumāra Geṇhanti - take Geṇhāveti - causes to take (s/he) Gevejjavimānapatthade - Graiveyak devās' dwelling place
from the boundary part Gotampuccha - Gautama's questioning Gautamasāmī - Gautama Swami, Śrī Mahāvīra Swami
the main disciple Got(ya)mā - he Gautama! Gotame - Gautama Swami Goyame - Gautama Swami Golāvalī - a type of round stones' row Chaudasanh - fourteen's Chandim - Chandravimāna Chandimā - Chandrikākumāra Chakkhudaeṇam - giving knowledge-eye Chammchchhirattāe - due to skin and veins Chare māṇe - walking, roaming Chalantehi - walking, moving Chintaṇā - Dharmacinta Chintā - thought Chitthati - is situated, stays, remains Chitta-katare - below the cow's grazing pond
part Chetiye (te) - Chaitya, garden, orchard Chellaṇāe - Chellaṇā rānī's Chev - this, rightly Chōdasanh - fourteen's Chhatuṃchhade - sixth sixth tapas from, time to time Chhatthasvi - on the sixth (devotee) also Chhattachāmarāto - by umbrella and chamaras Chhamāsā - six months Chinnā - broken Jan - which Janghāṇam - of the thighs Jambum - Jambūsvāmī to

Page #118:
---------------------------
Appendix - Glossary
83 Jambu - Jambu Swami, the main disciple of Sudharma Swami Jenev - towards Jananio - mothers
Joijjamanhehin - visible Janavayvihar - in the country Vihar
Than - place Jdha - like
Thiti - position Jamali - Jamalikumar
Dhenalia - thigh - Dhenik bird's thigh Jamm - birth
Dhenaliapora - Dhenik bird's joint Jammjivifale - fruit of birth and life N - no, negative particle Jayante - in Jayant Vimana
Nagari - city Jayanghardanjogcharitte - Jayan (effort in acquired yogas) Nagarie - in the city (from)
Ghatan (effort to acquire unacquired yogas) and Nagari to - from the city Yog (restraint of mind etc. senses) with Nagare - city character
Namansati - salutes Jargg-Ovanha - dry shoe
Navaran - special - indicative particle Jargg-pad - old bull's foot (hoof)
Nanatt - diversity, difference Jaha - like, as
Naam - name Jahaaname (te) - Yatha-named, anything named Naam - named Ja - like
Nikkhanto - came out, became a monk after leaving household life Janeen - knowing
Gaya Januun - knowing
Nikkhaman - exit, becoming a monk Janeta - knowing
Niggata (ya) - came out - child
Niggate - came out - became
Niggato (o) - came out - which
Nimmans - meatless Jali - Jali to the homeless
No - no. Negative particle Jali - Jalikumar
Tae - thereafter Jalis - Jali's
Tao - three Jalikumaro - Jalikumar
Tan - that Javjjivae - for life
Tan Jaha - like Jahe - when
Tacchas - third Jinen - Jin who has completely conquered anger and hatred Tate - thereafter Bhagwan
Tato - thereafter Jiyasattu - Jitshatru king
Tarunae (te) - tender Jibbaae - tongue's, tongue's
Tarungae Lalue - tender Aal Jiven - by the power of the soul
Tarung - Lauae - tender Tumba Jiha - tongue, tongue
Tarunika - small, tender

Page #119:
---------------------------
84
tava - - your
tava tey - Siri
tava - ruv-lavanne
tavasa - - by tapas
—
tavo-kammam tavo-kammenaṁ
-
tassa - - his
taha - in the same way taha-ruvaṇam.
-
-
Sadhus endowed with virtues
• By the wealth of tapas and tejas
-
- tapas kriya
taheva - in the same way
- by tapas-karma
-
tae – that
tao
that
tameva that
taraeṇam- - those who liberate others taliyant-patte ti – ti kattu - by doing this
tinni -
tikkhutto – three times - three tinham - three's titthagareṇam
teṇadveṇam. teneva -
tetiśam
teras - . thirteen
-
- beauty born of tapas
- tatha-rupa, described in the scriptures
- palm tree
- iti ending or introductory adverb
-
-
teeṇam – by tejas
-
teṇam
by that
dvara
tineṇam - crossed the ocean of samsara tise him • by you
tubbheṇam
you
- of the one who established the four tirthas
in the same direction
- tetiś
leaves of the palm tree
for this reason
terashavi - thirteen
-
-
terasame – thirteenth terasavi - thirteen's
-
tesim- their
to - then
tti - iti
-
thavaccaputtassa – son of Thavaccaputra, son of Thavacca, a gathapattini who took initiation with a thousand men
thavaccaputto. thasayavali – row of mirrors
- Thavaccaputra
thera - sthavira Bhagavan theranam.
therehiṁ
-
das -
dasame
dasamo
dao
- sthavira Bhagavants
- of the sthaviras (by)
· ten
- tenth, dasham
-
-
-
- dasham, tenth
- dowry
-
darae balak
darayam
dinna - given divasam - day disam-direction
dihadante – dirghadantkumar
-
-
dihaseṇe – dirghaseṇakumar dumaseṇe dume - drumkumar
- drumasen
- child
-
duruhanți – ascend, climb - ascends, climbs
duruhati -
duram – far
devassa - of the deva
anuttarīpapapātikadaśā
- in the form of a deva
devattae -
deva- logao – from the devaloka
devāppiyaṇam – beloved of the devas (you)
devāppiya – beloved of the devas (you)
-
devi – queen, consort
deve – deva
-

Page #120:
---------------------------
Appendix-Glossary

Doccasssa - other
Pancha-dhaati-pariggahita - taken by five dhatis
Donhan-do ka - of two
Doni-do ka - of two
Pagati-bhaeae - of good, gentle nature from prakriti
Dhannssa - of the blessed Kumar or the blessed Anugara
Paggahiyaa - accepted, taken
Dhanne (nne) - blessed Kumar or Anugara
Pajjuvasati - serves
Dhanne - blessed
Padigeae - went away
Dhanno (no) - blessed Anugara
Padig'o - went away
Dhan - blessed Kumar
Padigata - went away
Dhannssa - blessed Kumar or Anugara
Padigaya - went away
Dhamma-kaha - dharma-katha
Padig'aheti - takes
Dhamma-jagariyam - dharma-jagaran
Padiggahittate - to take
Dhamma-daenam - giver of dharma in the form of shruti and charitra
Padinikkhmati - comes out
Dhamma-desae'nam - preacher of dharma
Padidanseti - shows
Dhamma-var-chaurant-chakkavatti'na - the best dharma ruling in all four directions
Padibandha - restriction, obstacle, delay
Padham-chhatth-kkhaman-paranganssi - first sixth vrata (bele) chakravarti
Dharini - queen of the Shrenik king
Padhamssa - first
Dharini-su'a - Dharini Devi
Padhamae - first
Nandadevi - queen with this name
Padhame - first (study)
Nagari - city
Pann'aga-bhueten'nam - like a serpent
Nagari'e - in the city
Pann'a (n) tta - have been expounded
Nagare - city
Pann'a (tr) tte - has been expounded, said
Nav - nine
Pann'a (na) yanti - are recognized
Navan'han - nine
Patta-chivara'i - vessels and clothes
Navan'havi - nine
Payyay'a'e - with great effort
Navamssa - ninth
Parinivvan'a-vattiyam - done in the context of death
Nav-mas-pariyato - nine months of restraint
Navame - ninth
Pariyato - state of restraint or sadhu-vrutti
Navamo - ninth
Parivasai (ti) - stays (was)
Navaran - special-indicating adverb
Paris'a - parishad, group of listeners
Nama - name
Palas-patte - palas (dhaak) leaf
Nasa'e - of the nose
Pavvai (ti) te - became a monk
Nissamma - listening attentively
Pavvay'ami - I have become a monk, I take initiation
Pancha - five
Pavvay'a-vadan-kamale - whose mouth-lotus
Panchan'han - five
Murjha gaya ho - has withered
Pancha-dhaati-parikkhitto - surrounded by five dhatis
Pau'nitta - nurture

Page #121:
---------------------------
86
Pabbhute
Appeared
Paansuli - Kadaehin . - From the row of ribs Paansuliya-Kadaaṇam - - The joints of the bones (bones) of the sides
 
Paaṇam - Water
Paaṇavali Paaṇi – Hand
Paat - Janghorunaa – Foot, shin and thighs from Paadaaṇam - Of the feet
Paaṇ - - A row of a type of vessels
-
Paabhaatiya-Taariga
• Morning star
Paayanguliyaanam - Of the toes
Paay - Chaareṇam.
- By walking
Paaya - Foot
-
-
-
-
Paaraṇayansi Paaraṇ to do, in Paaraṇaa Paasaayavaḍiṁ(ḍeṁ)sae (te)
In the best palace
Also
Pi
Piṭṭhi - Karanḍaga- Sandhihin - - The joints of the back-Karanḍaka (of the elevated regions of the back) Piṭṭhi - Karanḍayaaṇam regions of
-
- The elevated regions of the bones of the back
-
Piṭṭhi - Mavassieeṇam. - Joined with the back
-
Piṭṭhimaaiyaa - Pṛṣṭhimaatṛkakumaar
-
Pitaa (yaa) - Father - Asks
Pucchati
Poṭṭhile – Poṣṭillkumaar Putte -
– Son
Punnaseṇe – Puṇyaseṇakumaar Purisaseṇe – Puruṣaseṇakumaar
-
Puvvarattaavarattkaalasamayansi - - In the time of midnight
-
- In midnight
Puvvarattaavarattkaale Puvvaaṇupuvvīe- In order
Peḍaalputte - Peḍaalputrakumaar
Pellae – Pellakkumaar
Porisiie – Paurauṣī, Prahar day or night's fourth part
Anuttaripapaatikadaśaa
Fuṭṭantehin - With the sound of Mṛdaṅga etc. instruments being played loudly
Naad se yukta - Brahmacārī
Bhambhayarī -
Battisam - Thirty-two
Battisaae - Battisaao
- Thirty-two - Thirty-two
-
Baddhisaga - Chiddḍe – Hole of the instrument called Baddhisaka
Bahve.
- Many
Bahiya
-
- Outside
Bahū
Baaras - Twelve Baalatṭaṇam
Baavattaram - Seventy-two Baahaanam
Bhattaṁ
- Much
Bhaddam - Of the arms
Bahaaya - Sangaliya - Fruit of the tree called Bahaya
Bilamiv . Like a hole
-
Bīṇaa - Chiddḍe - Hole of the Veena Buddheṇam – Buddha, knowledgeable Boddhhavvve - - Should know Boori-Karill bud of the jujube tree Bohaṇam – Those who teach others Bhanṭe – O Bhagavan!
-
Bhagavam - Bhagavan Bhagavantaa Bhagavan Bhagavataa (yaa) Bhagavato Bhajjaṇayakabhalle Bhaat, food
-
-
- Childhood
-
-
-
Ne Bhagavan
Of Bhagavan
• Frying pan for roasting chickpeas etc.
- To Bhadraa Sārthavaahī
Bhaddā - Bhadraa named
-
-
Bhaddāae - Of Bhadraa Sārthavaahī Bhaddāo Bhadraa named by Bhanṇati - It is said
Bhavanaṁ
Building

Page #122:
---------------------------
Appendix - Glossary
-
Bhavitta - becoming
-
Bhaaniyavvam, vva – should be said, meaning "speaking while feeling"
Bhasha,
Bhasam - Bhas - Rasi - Palicchhinne
Bhasissami – I will speak, from hunger.
- From hunger
Bhog- Samathe – Bhog, capable of enjoying
-
-
—
Mans - Soniyattaae – due to flesh and blood, Maggadaeṇam - showing the path to liberation
Majjhe – in the middle
-
Maman - mine
Mayali – Mayalikumar
Mayur - Pora – peacock's feathers (joint-place) - very heavy
Mahta
• Mahabalakumar
—
Mahabbale Mahanijjaratraae - one who destroys many karmas, Maha- Dukkar- Karae - • one who performs very difficult austerities, Mahadumaseṇamaati - Mahadrumasena etc. Mahadumaseṇe – Mahadrumasenakumar Mahavidehe – in Mahavideha (region) Mahaviran - • Lord Mahavira Swami, Mahavirass Mahavira Swami's
-
Mahavire - Mahavira Swami
Mahavireṇam. - by Mahavira
-
Mahaasihaseṇe - Mahasinhaseṇakumar
Mahaseṇe – Mahasena Kumar
Ma- - no, negative particle
Maṇussae
- related to humans
Matulungpesiya – branch of Matulung-Bijapur
Maya (ta) – mother Mas - Sangaliya
Masika Milayamaani Mundavali - • row of pillars
- wilting
-
-
- covered with a pile of ashes
-
-
Urad pod
One month's
Munde - shaved
Mugga- Sangaliya - mung pod Muchhiya - fainted Mulachhalliya - radish peel Meho– Meghakumar Mukkeṇam – self-liberated Moyaeṇam.
-
giver
and
Ya -
Raayagihe
- liberating others from the ocean of samsara
-
Raya - king
Ridd (dhi?) Tthimiy- Samiddhe, Riddhi
Laṣṭadanta Kumar
Laṭṭadante Labhati - obtains. Lauy-phale
wealth-grain
filled with, fearless and endowed with all kinds of wealth
- Rajagriha city
-
Lukkha - rough
Log- Naheṇam - lord of the three worlds
Log - Pajjoyagareṇam – Lokoudhyotkar, in the world or world
Vandati
Vaggass -
Vagga   - class
-
one who illuminates
Log- Ppdiveṇam – like a lamp in the worlds, light
-
doer
Vad - leaves
Va -
-
Vattavvyaya Vayasi
- fruit of the gourd
• salutes
Vaṭṭayaavali. - row of toys made of lac etc. for children
Vad leaf
- statement, subject
- started to speak, spoke
- alternative meaning- indicative particle
-
. of the class
८७
-
Warisenē – Warisenakumar
Valunk - Challiya - bark of the chirberry
Vavi (va+avi)
also
Vasa year

Page #123:
---------------------------
88
Vasai, (Tin)
Vasse - in the field
-
Viulan - Vipulgiri mountain past - Tadi - Karale Nam praant bhagon se
Vijay (Ye) Vijay Vimaan mein Vijay - Vimaane
Viyan - leaves
—
. Year till
Vipulan - Vipulgiri named mountain Vimaane - in the plane
-
Bamboo etc. fan
-
Viharati - wanders Viharami - I wander Viharitte - to wander
-
-
Vativatiita Vyatikrant kar, Atikraman kar,
-
- River bank like terrible
-
- Vijay named plane
Laangkar
- It is said
Vucchati Vruttapdiviutthaya - Vutte - It is said
Vejayante - Vaibjayant plane
-
-
-
- Ukti - Pratyukti
Vehallass - Vehallkumar's
Vehalle - Vehallkumar
-
Vehayase - Vehayaskumar
-
Sanchaaeti - is capable
-
Sanjame
Sanjamena
Sampattenam - attained liberation
-
Sanlehana - Sanlekhana, physical and mental penance
- In restraint, in virtuous conduct
- With restraint
Destruction of passions etc., fasting vow
Sansadvam - given by food-stained (hands) etc. Sachcheva - the same
-
Satt - seven
Saththavahim - Sarthavahi to
Saththavahi - Sarthavahi, skilled woman in business
Sadhim - with
Samaena Samanam
- In time (in)
Shraman to
―――――
Saman-Mahan- Atihi-Kivan - Vanimaga - Shraman,
Mahan (Shravak), Atithi, Kripana and Vanipka (special beggar)
Vevamaanie - trembling
- Shalya tree's bud
Vehall-Vehayasa - Vehallkumar and Vehayaskumar Savvatth Siddhe - Sarvarth Siddha plane
-
Samnass Shraman Bhagwan's
-
Samane - Shraman Bhagwan Samanena. Samaani - on being Samaane - on being
—
Sami - Sangaliya
Samosadhe Samosaranam Sayam • by itself
-
――
Shraman Bhagwan has
• Shami tree's fruit
- Arrived, resided
Arrival, Tirthankar's arrival
-
Anuttaroupapattikadasha
Sayam-Sambuddhena - self-enlightened
-
- Same
Saran-Daena - Sarisan Sarira - Vannao Sallati-Karille
- Shelter giver
- Body's description
—
Savath - - Everywhere, about everything Savvo all
Savvodue - green in all seasons Sahasambavane - Sahasramravan named garden Sahassambavanato — Sahasramravan garden from
Sa - that
Sae - in Saketapur Sag - leaves - vegetable leaf
Sagarovamai. - Sagaropama, a division of time Sam - Karille - Priyangu tree's bud Samann- Pariyagan - Sadhu's synonym, Sadhu's feeling,
-
-
Sanjam-Vritti Samann- Pariyato - Sanjam - Vritti Samali - Karille
-
-
- Semal tree's bud

Page #124:
---------------------------
Appendix-Glossary

Samaiyamāiyāi - Samayik etc. Sami-Swami
Sāhassiṇam - in thousands (of thousands)
Sijjhaṇā - Siddhi
Sijjhahīti - will be Siddhi
Siḍhil-kaḍālī - loose reins
Siṇhāl'ae - Sefalak, a special fruit
Siddhi-gati-nāmadheyam - named Siddhi-Gati
Silēs-guliyā - phlegm nodules
Sivam - auspicious form
Sīs - head
Sīs-ghaḍi'ae - from the head-shaped pot
Sīsass - of the head
Sīhsen'e - Singhsenakumar
Sīhe - Singhkumar
Sīho - lion
Sukayatte - for the sake of good deeds, successful
Sukkam - dried
Sukkam-chagaṇiyā - dried dung, cow dung
Sukkam-chhallī - dried bark
Sukkadī'e - dried musk
Sukkam-sapp-samāṇāhiṁ - like a dried snake
Sukkā - dried, dried
Sukkāto - from the dried
Sukkeṇam - dried
Suṇakkhatt-gamēṇam - like Sunakshatra
Suṇakkhattass - of Sunakshatra
Suṇakkhatte - Sunakshatra Kumar
Supuṇṇe - with good merit
Sumine - in a dream
Surūpe - beautiful, with good form
Sul'addhe - obtained well
Suhammass - of Sudharma, a Ganadhar
Suhammē - Sudharmaswami
Suhuy⁰ (Suhuy-huyas'aṇ iv) - like a well-lit fire
Suddadante - from Shuddhadantkumar
Se - he, from him
Se - ath, beginning-indicating particle
Seṇi'e (te) - from the king Shrenik
Seṇi'o - king Shrenik
Seṇiyā - O Shrenik!
Sesam - remainder (description), rest
Sesā - remainder
Sesāṇam - of the remainders
Sesāṇavi - also of the remainders
Sesāvi - also the remainder
Sochchā - hearing
Soṇiyattā'e (te) - due to blood
Solas - sixteen
Sohammīsāṇ - Saudharma and Ishana, the first and second Devaloka
Haku-phale - fruit of the Haku plant
Haṭṭh-tuṭṭh - happy and satisfied
Haṇuyā'e - chin, jaw
Hatthanguliyāṇam - of the fingers of the hands
Hatthāṇam - of the hands
Hatthiṇāpure - in Hastinapur
Halle - Hallkumar
Huyas'aṇe (iv) - like fire
Hoti - are
Hotthā - was, were

Page #125:
---------------------------
##  Anadhyayakala

[ Excerpted from Nandī Sūtra, edited by Acharya Pravara Shri Atmaramji Maharaj ]

One should study the scriptures only during the time prescribed in the Agamas for study. Studying during the Anadhyayakala is prohibited.

The Manusmriti and other Smritis also describe the Anadhyayakala in detail. Vedic people also mention the Anadhyayas of the Vedas. Similarly, other Ārya texts are also considered Anadhyayas. Since the Jain Agamas are also considered to be Sarvajñokta, Devadhiṣṭhita, and Svaravidyā, their Anadhyayakala is also described in the Agamas, such as:

**Ten Anadhyayas related to the sky:**

1. **Ukkavāte** - Meteor shower: If there is a large meteor shower, one should not study the scriptures for one prahar.
2. **Disidāghe** - Red sky: As long as the sky is red, as if it is on fire, one should not study.
3. **Gajjite** - Thunder: One should not study for one prahar after thunder.
4. **Vijuute** - Lightning: One should not study for one prahar after lightning.
5. **Nigghāte** - Strong wind: One should not study during a strong wind.
6. **Juvate** - Earthquake: One should not study during an earthquake.
7. **Jakkhālitte** - Eclipse: One should not study during an eclipse.
8. **Dhūmita** - Smoke: One should not study during smoke.
9. **Mahita** - Fog: One should not study during fog.
10. **Rayugghaate** - Hailstorm: One should not study during a hailstorm.

**Ten Anadhyayas related to the body:**

1. **Aṭṭhi** - Bones: One should not study when bones are exposed.
2. **Mansaṁ** - Flesh: One should not study when flesh is exposed.
3. **Soṇite** - Blood: One should not study when blood is exposed.
4. **Asucisamānte** - Unclean place: One should not study in an unclean place.
5. **Susāṇasamānte** - Cemetery: One should not study in a cemetery.
6. **Candovārāte** - Lunar eclipse: One should not study during a lunar eclipse.
7. **Sūrovārāte** - Solar eclipse: One should not study during a solar eclipse.
8. **Paḍane** - Falling: One should not study when falling.
9. **Rāyavugghe** - Death: One should not study after death.
10. **Uvassayassa anto orālie sarīrage** - End of life: One should not study when the body is at the end of life.

**Four Mahapratipadās:**

1. **Āsāḍhapratipadā** - The first day of the Āsāḍha month.
2. **Indamahapratipadā** - The first day of the Indramaha month.
3. **Kattiyapratipadā** - The first day of the Kattiya month.
4. **Sugimhapratipadā** - The first day of the Sugimha month.

**Four Mahapratipadā Purnimās:**

1. **Āsāḍhapratipadā Purnimā** - The full moon of the Āsāḍha month.
2. **Indamahapratipadā Purnimā** - The full moon of the Indramaha month.
3. **Kattiyapratipadā Purnimā** - The full moon of the Kattiya month.
4. **Sugimhapratipadā Purnimā** - The full moon of the Sugimha month.

**Four Sandhyās:**

1. **Puvvaṇhe avaranhe** - Dawn.
2. **Paose** - Morning.
3. **Paccose** - Evening.
4. **Paccūse** - Night.

According to the above Sūtra text, there are thirty-two Anadhyayas: ten related to the sky, ten related to the body, four Mahapratipadās, four Mahapratipadā Purnimās, and four Sandhyās. These are briefly described as follows:

**Ten Anadhyayas related to the sky:**

1. **Ukkavāte** - Meteor shower: If there is a large meteor shower, one should not study the scriptures for one prahar.
2. **Disidāghe** - Red sky: As long as the sky is red, as if it is on fire, one should not study.
3. **Gajjite** - Thunder: One should not study for one prahar after thunder.
4. **Vijuute** - Lightning: One should not study for one prahar after lightning.
5. **Nigghāte** - Strong wind: One should not study during a strong wind.
6. **Juvate** - Earthquake: One should not study during an earthquake.
7. **Jakkhālitte** - Eclipse: One should not study during an eclipse.
8. **Dhūmita** - Smoke: One should not study during smoke.
9. **Mahita** - Fog: One should not study during fog.
10. **Rayugghaate** - Hailstorm: One should not study during a hailstorm.

**Ten Anadhyayas related to the body:**

1. **Aṭṭhi** - Bones: One should not study when bones are exposed.
2. **Mansaṁ** - Flesh: One should not study when flesh is exposed.
3. **Soṇite** - Blood: One should not study when blood is exposed.
4. **Asucisamānte** - Unclean place: One should not study in an unclean place.
5. **Susāṇasamānte** - Cemetery: One should not study in a cemetery.
6. **Candovārāte** - Lunar eclipse: One should not study during a lunar eclipse.
7. **Sūrovārāte** - Solar eclipse: One should not study during a solar eclipse.
8. **Paḍane** - Falling: One should not study when falling.
9. **Rāyavugghe** - Death: One should not study after death.
10. **Uvassayassa anto orālie sarīrage** - End of life: One should not study when the body is at the end of life.

**Four Mahapratipadās:**

1. **Āsāḍhapratipadā** - The first day of the Āsāḍ

Page #126:
---------------------------
## Anadhyaya Kaal

**But the thunder and lightning should not be considered as Anadhyaya during Chaturmas. Because thunder and lightning are often due to the nature of the season. Therefore, from Ardra to Swati Nakshatra, it is not considered Anadhyaya.**

**5. Nirghat - When there is a loud thunder in the sky without clouds, or when there is a clap of thunder in the sky with clouds, it is Anadhyaya for two Praharas.**

**6. Yupaka - The evening of Pratipada, Dwitiya, and Tritiya in the Shukla Paksha, when the moonlight is visible, is called Yupaka. During these days, one should not study from Prahara to night.**

**7. Yakshadeepta - Sometimes, a light appears in a direction, like lightning, which appears in intervals. This is called Yakshadeepta. Therefore, one should not study as long as the Yaksha-like light is visible in the sky.**

**8. Dhumika - The time from Krishna-Kartik to Magh is the womb month of the clouds. During this time, a fine, water-like mist of smoky color falls. This is called Dhumika-Krishna. One should not study as long as this mist falls.**

**9. Mihika Shweta - In winter, a fine, water-like mist of white color is called Mihika. One should not study as long as this falls.**

**10. Raj-Udghāt - Due to the wind, dust spreads all over the sky. One should not study as long as this dust remains spread.**

**The above ten reasons are related to the sky. The following ten Anadhyayas are related to the generous.**

**11-12-13. Bone, Flesh, and Blood - If the bone, flesh, and blood of a five-sense Tiryanch are visible, it is Anadhyaya until those things are removed from there. The commentator considers it Anadhyaya if these things are present within 60 hands around.**

**Similarly, Anadhyaya is considered for the bone, flesh, and blood of a human being. The difference is that their Anadhyaya is for 100 hands and one day and night. The Anadhyaya for a woman's menstrual period is for three days. The Anadhyaya for a boy and a girl is considered for seven and eight days respectively.**

**14. Ashuchi - It is Anadhyaya until the excrement and urine are visible.**

**15. Shmashan - Anadhyaya is considered for 100 hands around the cremation ground.**

**16. Chandra Grahan - During a lunar eclipse, one should not study for eight Praharas for the lowest, twelve Praharas for the medium, and sixteen Praharas for the highest.**

**17. Surya Grahan - During a solar eclipse, Anadhyaya is considered for eight, twelve, and sixteen Praharas respectively.**

Page #127:
---------------------------
## Anuttaraupapatikadasha 18-32:

**18. Patan:** When a great king or national leader dies, one should not perform *svadhyaya* until their cremation is completed. Alternatively, one should gradually resume *svadhyaya* after the ten officials take charge.

**19. Rajavyudgraha:** When there is a war between nearby kings, one should not perform *svadhyaya* for one day and night, even after peace is restored.

**20. Audarik Sharira:** When a five-sense being dies within the *upaashraya*, one should not perform *svadhyaya* as long as the body remains there. If the lifeless body remains within a hundred *haath* (cubits), *svadhyaya* should be avoided.

The above ten reasons for avoiding *svadhyaya* are related to the *audarik sharira* (physical body).

**21-28. Four Mahotsav and Four Mahapratipada:** The four *mahotsav* (festivals) are Ashadh Purnima, Ashwin Purnima, Kartik Purnima, and Chaitra Purnima. The *pratipada* (first day) following these full moons are called *mahapratipada*. *Svadhyaya* is prohibited during these days.

**29-32. Pratah, Sayam, Madhyahna, and Ardharatri:** One should not perform *svadhyaya* one *ghadi* (hour) before and after sunrise, one *ghadi* before and after sunset, one *ghadi* before and after midday, and one *ghadi* before and after midnight.

Page #128:
---------------------------
**Shri Agam Prakashan Samiti, Byawar**
**List of Benefactor Members**
**Maha Stambh**
1. Shri Seth Mohanmalji Chordia, Madras 2. Shri Gulabchandji Mangilalji Surana, Secunderabad 3. Shri Pukharajji Shishodia, Byawar 4. Shri Sayermalji Jethamalji Chordia, Bangalore 5. Shri Premrajji Bhanwarlalji Shrisrimal, Durg 6. Shri S. Kishanchandji Chordia, Madras 7. Shri Kanwarlalji Baitala, Guwahati 8. Shri Seth Khivrajji Chordia, Madras 9. Shri Gumanmalji Chordia, Madras 10. Shri S. Badalchandji Chordia, Madras 11. Shri J. Doolichandji Chordia, Madras 12. Shri S. Ratanchandji Chordia, Madras 13. Shri J. Annarajji Chordia, Madras 14. Shri S. Sayerchandji Chordia, Madras 15. Shri R. Shanti Lalji Uttamchandji Chordia, Madras 16. Shri Siremalji Hirachandji Chordia, Madras 17. Shri J. Hukumchandji Chordia, Madras
**Stambh Members**
1. Shri Agarchandji Fatechandji Parkh, Jodhpur 2. Shri Jasrajji Ganeshmalji Sancheti, Jodhpur 3. Shri Tilokchandji Sagarmalji Sancheti, Madras 4. Shri Poosalalji Kisturchandji Surana, Katangi 5. Shri R. Prasannachandji Chordia, Madras 6. Shri Deepchandji Chordia, Madras 7. Shri Moolchandji Chordia, Katangi 8. Shri Vardhman Industries, Kanpur 9. Shri Mangilalji Mishrilalji Sancheti, Durg
**Patrons**
1. Shri Birdichaandji Prakashchandji Telesara, Pali 2. Shri Gyanrajji Kevalchandji Motha, Pali 3. Shri Premrajji Jatanrajji Mehta, Medta City 4. Shri Sh. Jadavmalji Manakchandji Baitala, Bagalkot 5. Shri Hiralalji Pannalalji Chopra, Byawar 6. Shri Mohanlalji Nemichandji Lalwani, Changaitola 7. Shri Deepchandji Chandanmalji Chordia, Madras 8. Shri Pannalalji Bhagchandji Bothra, Changaitola 9. Shrimati Sirekunwar Bai, wife of Late Shri Suganchandji Jhamar, Madurantakam 10. Shri Bastimalji Mohanlalji Bohra (KGF) Jadan 11. Shri Thanchandji Mehta, Jodhpur 12. Shri Bhairaudanji Labhchandji Surana, Nagaur 13. Shri Khoobchandji Gadiya, Byawar 14. Shri Mishrilalji Dhanrajji Vinaykia, Byawar 15. Shri Indrachandji Baid, Rajnandgaon 16. Shri Ravatmalji Bhikmachandji Pagaria, Balaghat 17. Shri Ganeshmalji Dharmichaandji Kankaria, Tangla 18. Shri Suganchandji Bokdia, Indore 19. Shri Harkachandji Sagarmalji Baitala, Indore 20. Shri Raghunathmalji Likhmichandji Lodha, Changaitola 21. Shri Sidhkarannji Shikharchandji Baid, Changaitola

Page #129:
---------------------------
Member List
| 22. Shri Sagarmalji Nortamlaji Pincha, Madras 7. Shri B. Gajrajji Bokdia, Salem 23. Shri Mohanrajji Mukanchandji Baliya, 8. Shri Phoolchandji Gautamchandji Kanted, Pali Ahmedabad
9. Shri K. Pukharajji Bafna, Madras 24. Shri Keshrimalji Janvarilaji Talesara, Pali 10. Shri Rupraji Jodhrajji Mootha, Delhi 25. Shri Ratanchandji Uttamchandji Modi, Byawar 11. Shri Mohanlalji Mangalchandji Pagaria, 26. Shri Dharmicandji Bhagchandji Bohra, Jhutha Raipur 27. Shri Chhogmalji Hemrajji Lodha Dondi Lohara 12. Shri Nathmalji Mohanlalji Lunia, 28. Shri Gunchandji Dalichandji Kataria, Bellary Chandawal 29. Shri Mulchandji Sujanmalji Sancheti, Jodhpur 13. Shri Bhanvarlalji Gautamchandji Pagaria, 30. Shri C. Amarchandji Bothra, Madras
Kushalpura 31. Shri Bhanvarlalji Mulchandji Surana, Madras 14. Shri Uttamchandji Mangilalji, Jodhpur 32. Shri Badalchandji Jugrajji Mehta, Indore 15. Shri Mulchandji Parkh, Jodhpur 33. Shri Lalchandji Mohanlalji Kothari, Gothan 16. Shri Sumermalji Medtiya, Jodhpur 34. Shri Hiralalji Pannalalji Chopra, Ajmer 17. Shri Ganeshmalji Nemichandji Tantia, Jodhpur | 35. Shri Mohanlalji Parsamalji Pagaria, 18. Shri Udayrajji Pukharajji Sancheti, Jodhpur Bangalore
19. Shri Badarmalji Pukharajji Bant, Kanpur 36. Shri Bhanvarimalji Chordia, Madras 20. Smt. Sundarbai Gothi Dharmpatnishri Tarachandji 37. Shri Bhanvarlalji Gotha, Madras
Gothi, Jodhpur 38. Shri Jalmachandji Rikhbachandji Bafna, Agra. 21. Shri Raychandji Mohanlalji, Jodhpur 39. Shri Ghevarchandji Pukharajji Bhurat, Guwahati 22. Shri Ghevarchandji Rupraji, Jodhpur 40. Shri Jabarchandji Gelda, Madras
23. Shri Bhanvarlalji Manakchandji Surana, Madras 41. Shri Jadavmalji Suganchandji, Madras 24. Shri Janvarilaji Amarchandji Kothari, 42. Shri Pukharajji Vijayrajji, Madras
Byawar 43. Shri Chenmalji Surana Trust, Madras 25. Shri Manakchandji Kishnalalji, Medtacity 44. Shri Lunakaranji Rikhbachandji Lodha, Madras 26. Shri Mohanlalji Gulabchandji Chatar, Byav 45. Shri Surajmalji Sajjanrajji Meheta, Koppal 27. Shri Jasrajji Janvarilaji Dhariawal, Associate Member
Jodhpur 1. Shri Devkaranji Shrichandji Dosi, Medtacity 28. Shri Mohanlalji Champalalji Gothi, Jodhpur 2. Smt. Chhaganibai Vinaykia, Byawar 29. Shri Nemichandji Dakalia Mehta, Jodhpur 3. Shri Poonamchandji Nahata, Jodhpur
30. Shri Tarachandji Kevalchandji Karnavat, Jodhpur 4. Shri Bhanvarlalji Vijayrajji Kankaria, 31. Shri Asumal & Co., Jodhpur   Villipuuram
32. Shri Pukharajji Lodha, Jodhpur 5. Shri Bhanvarlalji Chopra, Byawar
33. Smt. Suganibai Dharmpatni Shri Mishrilalji 6. Shri Vijayrajji Ratnalalji Chatar, Byawar Sand, Jodhpur
Ppur

Page #130:
---------------------------
34. Shri Bachhrajji Surana, Jodhpur 35. Shri Harkachandji Mehta, Jodhpur 36. Shri Devrajji Labhchandji Medtiya, Jodhpur 37. Shri Kanakrajji Madanrajji Golia, Jodhpur 38. Shri Ghevarchandji Parsamalji Tantia, Jodhpur 39. Shri Mangilalji Chordia, Kuchera 40. Shri Sardarmalji Surana, Bhilai 41. Shri Okchandji Hemrajji Soni, Durg 42. Shri Surajkaranji Surana, Madras 43. Shri Ghisulalji Lalchandji Parkh, Durg 44. Shri Pukharajji Bohra, (Jain Transport Co.) Jodhpur 45. Shri Champalalji Saklecha, Jalna 46. Shri Premrajji Mithalalji Kamdar, Bangalore 47. Shri Bhanwarlalji Mootha & Sons, Jaipur 48. Shri Lalchandji Motilalji Gadia, Bangalore 49. Shri Bhanwarlalji Navratnamalji Sankhla, Mettupalayam 50. Shri Pukharajji Chhallani, Karanguli 51. Shri Asakaranji Jasrajji Parkh, Durg 52. Shri Ganeshmalji Hemrajji Soni, Bhilai 53. Shri Amritrajji Jaswantrajji Mehta, Medtacity 54. Shri Ghevarchandji Kishoramalji Parkh, Jodhpur 55 Shri Mangilalji Rekchandji Parkh, Jodhpur 56. Shri Munnilalji Mulchandji Gulechha, Jodhpur 57. Shri Ratnalalji Lakhpatrajji, Jodhpur 58. Shri Jivrajji Parsamalji Kothari, Medtacity 59. Shri Bhanwarlalji Rikhabchandji Nahata, Nagaur 60. Shri Mangilalji Prakashchandji Runwal, Mysore 61. Shri Pukharajji Bohra, Pipaliya Kalan 62. Shri Harkachandji Jugrajji Bafna, Bangalore 
Members - List
63. Shri Chandanmalji Premchandji Modi, Bhilai 64. Shri Bhimrajji Baghmar, Kuchera 65. Shri Tilokchandji Premprakashji, Ajmer 66. Shri Vijaylalji Premchandji Gulechha, Rajnandgaon 67. Shri Ravatmalji Chajed, Bhilai 68. Shri Bhanwarlalji Dungarmalji Kankaria, Bhilai 69. Shri Hira Salalji Hastimalji Deshlhara, Bhilai 70. Shri Vardhaman Sthanakwasi Jain Shravak Sangh, Dalli - Rajhara 71. Shri Champalalji Budhrajji Bafna, Byawer 72. Shri Gangaramji Indachandji Bohra, Kuchera 73. Shri Fatehrajji Nemichandji Karnavat, Calcutta 74. Shri Balchandji Thanchandji Bhurt, Calcutta 75. Shri Sampatrajji Kataria, Jodhpur 76. Shri Javrilalji Shantillali Surana, Bolaram 77. Shri Kanmalji Kothari, Dadia 78. Shri Pannalalji Motilalji Surana, Pali 79. Shri Manakchandji Ratnalalji Munot, Tangla 80. Shri Chimmansinghji Mohansinghji Lodha, Byawer 81. Shri Riddhakaranji Ravatmalji Bhurt, Guwahati 82. Shri Parsamalji Mahavirchandji Bafna, Gothan 83. Shri Fakirchandji Kamalchandji Shrisrimal, Kuchera 84. Shri Mangilalji Madanlalji Chordia, Bhairunda 85. Shri Sohनलालजी लूणकरणजी सुराणा, Kuchera 86. Shri Ghisulalji, Parsamalji, Javrilalji Kothari, Gothan 87. Shri Sardarmalji & Company, Jodhpur 88. Shri Champalalji Hiralalji Bagrecha, Jodhpur

Page #131:
---------------------------
Member - Name List
89. Shri Pukharajji Kataria, Jodhpur 90. Shri Indrachandji Mukanchandji, Indore 91. Shri Bhanwarlalji Bafna, Indore 92. Shri Jethamalji Modi, Indore
93. Shri Balchandji Amarchandji Modi, Byawar 94. Shri Kundanmalji Parsamalji Bhandari, Bangalore 95. Smt. Kamalakunwar Lalwani, wife of Shri Parsamalji Lalwani, Gothan 96. Shri Akhechandji Loonkaranji Bhandari,
Kolkata
97. Shri Suganchandji Sancheti, Rajnandgaon 98. Shri Prakashchandji Jain, Nagaur
99. Shri Kushalchandji Rikhabchandji Surana, Bolaram
100. Shri Laxmichandji Ashok Kumarji Shrisrimal, Kuchehra
101. Shri Guddarmalji Champalalji, Gothan 102. Shri Tejarajji Kothari, Mangliyawas 103. Shri Sampatrajji Chordia, Madras 104. Shri Amarchandji Chajed, Padu Bari 105. Shri Jugrajji Dhanrajji Barmecha, Madras 106. Shri Pukharajji Naharmalji Lalwani, Madras 107. Smt. Kanchandevi and Nirmala Devi, Madras 108. Shri Dulairajji Bhanwarlalji Kothari, Kushalpura
109. Shri Bhanwarlalji Mangilalji Betala, Deh 110. Shri Jivrajji Bhanwarlalji Chordia, Bhairunda 111. Shri Mangilalji Shanti Lalji Runwal,
Harsolav
112. Shri Chandmalji Dhanrajji Modi, Ajmer 113. Shri Ramprasanna Gyanprasar Kendra, Chandrapur. 114. Shri Bhurmalji Dulichandji Bokardia, Medtacity
115. Shri Mohanlalji Dhariawal, Pali 116. Smt. Ramkunwarbai, wife of Shri Chandmalji Lodha, Bombay
117. Shri Mangilalji Uttamchandji Bafna, Bangalore 118. Shri Sanchalalji Bafna, Aurangabad 119. Shri Bhikhamchandji Manakchandji Khabia, (Kuddalore) Madras
120. Smt. Anopkunwar, wife of Shri Champalalji Sanghvi, Kuchehra
121. Shri Sohनलालji Sojatiya, Thanwala 122. Shri Champalalji Bhandari, Kolkata
123. Shri Bhikhamchandji Ganeshmalji Chaudhary, Dhullia
124. Shri Pukharaji Kishनलालji Tated, Secunderabad
125. Shri Mishrilalji Sajjanlalji Kataria, Secunderabad
126. Shri Vardhaman Sthanakwasi Jain Shravak Sangh, Bagar Nagar
127. Shri Pukharajji Parsamalji Lalwani, Bilara
128. Shri T. Parsamalji Chordia, Madras 129. Shri Motilalji Asulalji Bohra & Co., Bangalore
130. Shri Sampatrajji Surana, Manmad
17

Page #132:
---------------------------
##  Life Sketch of Yuvacharya Shri Mishrimalji M.Sa. 'Madhukar' Muni

**Birth:** Margashirsha Shukla Chaturdashi, Vikram Samvat 1970 (1913 CE), Tinwari Nagar, Jodhpur District, Rajasthan.
**Parents:** Mother - Shrimati Tulsibai, Father - Shri Jamnalalji Dhaadiwal.
**Initiation:**  Vaishakh Shukla 10, Vikram Samvat 1980 (1923 CE), Bhinay Gram, Ajmer District.
**Initiation Guru:** Shri Joravarmalji M.Sa.
**Teaching Guru (Guru-Bhrata):** Shri Hazarimlalji M.Sa.
**Acharya Parampara:** Pujya Acharya Shri Jaymallji M.Sa.
**Acharya Pad:** Jay Gachchh, Vikram Samvat 2004 (1947 CE).
**Resignation from Acharya Pad:** Vikram Samvat 2009 (1952 CE) for the unity of the Shraman Sangh.
**Upadhyaya Pad:** Vikram Samvat 2033 (1976 CE).
**Declaration of Yuvacharya Pad:** Shravan Shukla 1, Vikram Samvat 2036 (1979 CE), July 25, 1979, Hyderabad.
**Yuvacharya Pad Chadar Mahotsav:** Chaitra Shukla 10, Vikram Samvat 2037 (1980 CE), March 23, 1980, Jodhpur.
**Nirvana:**  Mrigasira Vad 7, Vikram Samvat 2040 (1983 CE), November 26, 1983, Nasik (Maharashtra).

**Personality and Knowledge:**

Muni Shri possessed a glorious, majestic, and radiant forehead, bright large eyes, a smile that illuminated his face, and a gentle voice that showered affection and courtesy. He was a shining example of spiritual brilliance, profound devotion to his Gurus, humility alongside knowledge, wisdom alongside authority, and a disciplined Shraman. He was well-versed in Prakrit, Sanskrit, Grammar, Prakrit Grammar, Jain Agamas, Nyaya Darshan, etc. He was a highly skilled orator, novelist, storyteller, and commentator.

**Published Works:**

**Pravachan Sangrah (Discourse Collection):**

1. Antar Ki Aur, Part 1 & 2
2. Sadhana Ke Sutra
3. Paryushana Parva Pravachan
4. Jain-Karmasiddhanta
5. Jain Tattva-Darshan
6. Jain Sanskrit - Ek Vishleshan
7. Grihasth Dharma
8. Aabha Aur Sneha
9. Ahimsa Darshan
10. Tap Ek Vishleshan
11. Adhyatma-Vikas Ki Bhoomika

**Katha Sahitya (Story Literature):**

1. Jain Katha Mala, Part 1 to 51
2. Upanyas (Novels):
    * Pinjare Ka Panchhi
    * Ahimsa Ki Vijay
    * Talash
    * Chhaya
    * Aan Par Badhi

**Other Books:**

1. Agam Parichay
2. Jain Dharma Ki Hazar Shikshaen
3. Jiyo To Aise Jiyo

**Special:**

* He was the coordinator and chief editor of Agam Battisi.

**Disciple:**

* Muni Shri Vinaykumarji 'Bheem'

