Catalog link: https://jainqq.org/explore/003464/1

Page #1:
---------------------------
In memory of the revered Gurudev, Shri Joravarmalji Maharaj
Coordinator and Chief Editor
Yuvacharya Shri Madhukar Muni
Essential Sutras.
* (Original-Translation-Interpretation-Notes-Appendix-Included)

Page #2:
---------------------------
Jinagam-Granthamala: Granthank 24
Om Arha
[ In the auspicious memory of the revered Gurudev Pujya Shri Joravarmalji Maharaj ]
Aavashyak Sutra
[ Original Text, Hindi Translation, Discussion, Notes ]
Inspiration
Up-Pravartak Shasansevi Sw. Swami Shri Brajlalji Maharaj
Aady-Samyojak Tatha Pradhan Sampadak
Sw. Yuvacharya Shri Mishrimalji Maharaj 'Madhukar'
Translator
Discussant
Editor
Siddhantacharya Mahasati Dr. Suprabha 'Sudha' M.A.; Ph.D.
-
-
Publisher
Shri Aagam Prakashan Samiti, Byawar ( Rajasthan )

Page #3:
---------------------------
Jinagam-Granthamala: Granthank 24
D
O
O
•
Nirdéshan
Adhyatmayogini Vidushi Sadhvi Shri Umravakumarji M. Sa. 'Archana'
Sampadak Mandal
Acharya Shri Devendramuni Ji M. Sa. Shastri
Anuyogapravartka Muni Shri Kanhaiyalalji 'Kamal'
Shri Ratnamuni
Samp्रेरक
Muni Shri Vinaykumar 'Bhim'
Sanshodhan
Devkumar Jain
Tritiya Sanskaran
Viranirvan Samvat 2527
Vikram Samvat 2057 E. San 2001
Prakashka
Shri Agam Prakashan Samiti,
Shri Braj- Madhukar Smriti Bhavan
Pipaliya Bazaar, Byawar (Rajasthan)
-
Mudrak
Shrimati Vimlesh Jain,
Ajantā Paper Converters
Lakshmi Chauk,
Ajmer
305 001, Phone: 420120
Shabd-Sanyogan
Rohit Computers, Ajmer
Muly: 55/- Rupaye
305101,
-
Phone: 50087
305 008, Phone: 660916

Page #4:
---------------------------
Youthful Acharya Shri Madhukar Muni Ji Ma.Ma.
卐Mahamantra Namō Arihantāṇam, Namō Siddhaṇam, Namō Āiriyāṇam, Namō Uvvajhaȳāṇam,
Namō Loesavva Sāhūṇam, Eso Panch Namōkkārō' Savvapāvapanaasano || Mangalaṇam Cha Savvesim, Padham Havai Mangalam ||

Page #5:
---------------------------
The five great vows (Mahavratas) are:
1. Ahimsa (non-violence)
2. Satya (truthfulness)
3. Asteya (non-stealing)
4. Brahmacharya (continence)
5. Aparigraha (non-attachment)

Page #6:
---------------------------
Published on the Holy Remembrance occasion of
Rev. Guru Shri Joravarmalji Maharaj
AVASHYAK SUTRA
(Original Text, Hindi Version, Notes, Annotations and Appendices etc.)
Inspiring Soul Up-pravartaka Shasansevi (Late) Swami Shri Brijlalji Maharaj
Convener & Founder Editor (Late) Yuvacharya Shri Mishrimalji Maharaj Madhukar
Translator & Annotator Siddhantachrya Sadhwi Dr. Suprabha 'Sudha', M. A.; Ph. D.
Publishers Shri Agam Prakashan Samiti
Beawar (Raj.)

Page #7:
---------------------------
Jinagam Granthmala Publication No. 24
Direction Sadhvi Shri Umravkunwarji 'Archana'
Board of Editors Acharya Shri Devendra Muni ji Shartri Anuyogapravartaka Muni Shri Kanhaiyalalji 'Kamal' Shri Ratan Muni
Promotor Munishiti Vinayakumar 'Bhima'
Correction & Supervision Dev Kumar Jain
Third Edition Vir-Nirvana Samvat 2527 Vikram Samvat 2057, Nov., 2001
Publishers Shri Agam Prakashan Samiti, Shri Brij Madhukar Smriti Bhawan Pipaliya Bazar, Beawar (Raj.) [India] Pin - 305901 Phone : 50087
O
Printer Smt. Vimelesh Jain, Ajanta Paper Convertors Laxmi Chowk, AJMER 0 : 420120
a
Graphics ROHIT Computers, Ajmer - 305901
Phone : 660916
Price : Rs. 551

Page #8:
---------------------------
**Dedication**

To the noble soul of the late
-
Shri Mishrilalji Maharaj 'Madhukar'
-
Young Acharya of the Shraman Sangh,
Whose indomitable courage and devotion to the Shruta gave birth to the Jinagam-Granthamala, who during their lifetime composed numerous texts, rendering immeasurable service to humanity, whose high conduct and pure thoughts became their natural state, whose scholarship was renowned among the learned, who were established by countless saints and sages as the future leaders of the Shraman Sangh,
Who were the embodiment of Samyak Sankalp, Sambhashan, and Samadhi in thought, word, and deed.
[From the First Edition]

Page #9:
---------------------------
The five great vows (Mahavratas) are:
1. **Ahimsa** (non-violence)
2. **Satya** (truthfulness)
3. **Asteya** (non-stealing)
4. **Brahmacharya** (continence)
5. **Aparigraha** (non-attachment)

Page #10:
---------------------------
This is the third edition of the **Āvaśyaka Sūtra**, the 24th text in the **Śrī Jināgama-Granthamālā**, being presented to the readers. The **Āvaśyaka Sūtra** is related to religious practices and is always useful and necessary for every aspiring seeker. This sūtra has been diligently edited and translated by Dr. Śrī Suprabhāji M. 'Sudhā' Siddhāntācārya, Sāhityaratna, M.A., Ph.D., a disciple of the highly learned **Mahāsatiji Śrī Umrāvakuṁvarji M. 'Arcā'**, an **Adhyātmayogīni**. Therefore, we are grateful for this significant contribution by **Mahāsatiji**.

**Mahāsatiji** has made every effort to make this text useful for everyone. The translation has been embellished by providing the meaning and significance of specific words.

**Sāhityavācaspati** and learned scholar **Muni Śrī Devendramuniji M. Śāstrī** has made this sūtra more useful by writing a detailed introduction. In the introduction, he has shed light on the nature of **Āvaśyakas** and has also presented a comparison of essential practices in different religions.

The publication of **Āgama** texts was initiated through the **Śrī Āgama Prakāśana Samiti**. The second editions of all the texts have been published. However, as the publication of the texts progressed, the number of readers increased beyond expectations. Therefore, even when the second edition texts became unavailable, the demand for all the texts of **Āgama Battisi** continued to grow. To fulfill this demand, it was decided to publish the third edition under the guidance of **Adhyātmayogīni Mālavjyoti Sādhvī Śrī Umrāvakuṁvarji M. 'Arcā'**.

According to the decision, the work of publishing the texts that were becoming unavailable is ongoing. In this sequence, this third edition of the **Āvaśyaka Sūtra** is being published. We request **Āgama** lovers to cooperate in the propagation of these **Āgamas**. With this request, we express our heartfelt gratitude to all our collaborators on behalf of the committee.

Sāgaramal Baitālā
Knowledge Chand Vinayakiya
Ratan Chand Modi
Acting President
Sardarmal Chordia
Minister
President
Minister

Page #11:
---------------------------
## Generous and Supportive - 
Shri Jethamalji Sa. Chordia

A famous saying is - "ज्ञानस्य फलं विरतिः" - The fruit of knowledge is detachment. Similarly, there is another saying - "वित्तस्य फलं वितरणं" - The fruit of wealth is charity.

Chandavat's Nokha, a small but picturesque village, is located in Nagaur district and Medta tehsil. There are many houses of the Chordia family in this village. There are also families like Bothra, Lalvani, etc. Almost all the families are skilled in business.

Shri Udaychandji was the ancestor of the Chordia family. He had three sons - Shri Harkachandji, Shri Rajmalji and Shri Chandmalji. Shri Harkachandji's son was Shri Ganeshmalji and his mother's name was Shrimati Rupibai. Shri Ganeshmalji's wife's name was Sundarbai. They had ten sons and one daughter, whose names are as follows - Shri Jogilalji, Shri Parsamalji, Shri Amarchandji, Shri Madanlalji, Shri Sayaramalji, Shri Pukharajji, Shri Jethamalji, Shri Sampatrajji, Shri Mangalchandji and Shri Bhurmalji. The daughter's name is Ladkankwarbai.

Shri Jethamalji Sa. is the seventh son. His wife's name is Shrimati Reshamkwar. He is always interested in religious and social work. He is always at the forefront of social service, religious festivals, charity, etc.

His business area is Bangalore. He has a very large shop of English medicines named "Mahaveer Drug House". This shop is number one in the distribution of medicines in South India. He is the General Secretary of the Pharmaceutical Business Association. He is the co-secretary of the All India Pharmaceutical Business Association. He is a trustee of the Bangalore Shri Sangh and the president of the Bangalore Yuva Jain Parishad. He is the vice-president of the Bangalore City Station. He has three sons - Shri Mahaveerchandji, Shri Premchandji, Shri Ashokji and one daughter - Snehlata. All the sons are graduates and capable. They are going to take over his responsibilities.

His entire family is a follower of the tradition of Acharya Pravar Shri Jayamalji M. Sa. and is a devoted devotee of the late revered Gurudev Shri Hazarimlalji M. Sa., Shri Up-Pravartak Swami Shri Brijlalji M. Sa., revered Yuvacharya Shri Madhukar Muniji M. Sa. and currently Up-Pravartak Shri Vinaymuniji M. Sa. etc. Munirajas.

He has unwavering faith in _Adhyatmayogini, Malavjyoti, Kashmirpracharika Mahasatiji Shrimati Umravkwarji M. Sa. "Archana". For the past 5-7 years, he has spent most of his time in the service of Mahasatiji M. Sa. Overall, if we say, he is an institution in himself.

He has been contributing since the establishment of the Shri Aagam Prakashan Samiti. He has been eager to develop the activities of the committee with his guidance from time to time and is still doing so. For this, we express our heartfelt gratitude to you.

Gyanchand Vinayakiya
Minister

Page #12:
---------------------------
From their side.............
[From the first edition] All beings in the vast universe desire happiness. In the Acharanga Sutra, Shraman Bhagwan Mahavira said - "Savve pana ...... Suhasaya dukkhapaddicula" All beings, whether they are an insect or an elephant, a poor human or the king of heaven Indra, all desire happiness. No one desires suffering. 'Sukkhakamani bhutani' - The desire of all beings is to attain happiness. But the question is, how to attain happiness? It is not a fruit that hangs on a tree, which can be plucked or bought from somewhere! If it were so, all the rich people would have bought it long ago. Then the poor would not have been able to get happiness! But it is not so. Happiness manifests from within oneself. The seeds of happiness and suffering are hidden within the soul. The action that is essential to attain that happiness - one should contemplate, ponder and implement that action. The action of life, without which we cannot move forward on the path of spiritual happiness, is called essential. Just as breathing is necessary to stay alive, in the same way, in the spiritual realm, the action or practice that is necessary, essential for the purity of life, is called 'essential' in the Agam. Essential Pratikraman etc. are obligatory duties.
The literal meaning of Pratikraman is - to abstain from sins. Pratikraman is to bring the soul's attitude, which has become unrighteous, to a righteous state. Or the meaning of Pratikraman is - a genuine and meticulous examination of past life. Pratikraman is a medicine in the Jain tradition for the atonement of all the small and big distortions of the mind, which fall under the category of sin in some form or the other. Just as bodily distortions are diseases, so are anger, pride, deceit, greed etc. distortions of the mind are diseases of the mind. Its treatment is also necessary. Bodily disease can cause pain for at most one birth, but once the disease of the mind starts, if the person remains careless, it troubles him not only for thousands, but for lakhs of births. Thousands of Jain, Buddhist and Vedic stories from Indian mythological literature are witness to this. Therefore, it is paramount to immediately rectify mental distortions through Pratikraman.
In Anuyogadwar, eight synonyms of essential are given - essential, obligatory, Dhruvanigraha, Vishodhi, Adhyayan Shatkvarg, Nyaya, Aradhana and Marg.
1. Acharanga Sutra, 1/2/3 2. Udana 2/3 3. Avassayam Avassakaranij, Dhvaniggaho Visohi ya.
Ajzhayana-Chakkavaggo, Nao Arahana Maggo ||
[9]

Page #13:
---------------------------
For Sadhus, Sadhvis, Shravaks, and Shravikas, Pratikraman is absolutely essential for the atonement of actions performed during the evening and morning. There are six essential sutras for study: (1) Samayik (2) Chaturvinshati Stav (3) Vandana (4) Pratikraman (5) Kayotsarga (6) Pratyakhyan.

1. Samayik
Regarding the practice of Samayik, the great Gautama Swami asked the Lord Mahavira:
Q: "Bante! What does Samayik create in a being?"
A: "Samayik creates detachment from the path of worldly attachments."

What a poignant question and answer that touches the soul! What joy does the soul experience that has drunk the nectar of equality? The question seems serious, but the answer is even more profound.

O Gautama! Through Samayik, the soul becomes detached from the tendency of worldly attachments. The soul's inclination has been running towards the inauspicious for a long time. The practice of Samayik removes the soul from the inauspicious inclination, connects it to the auspicious, and leads it towards purity.

Just as a person, when he ties animals with a nail, has no fear of them running away, similarly, those who practice equanimity tie the inauspicious inclination with Samayik, and then there is no fear of going towards vices. The meaning of Samayik is not just to stop physical actions, but also to stop inauspicious mental actions. The main foundation of Samayik is the mind. Until Samayik comes into the mind, the Samayik of the body has no special significance. King Prasannacandra's body was in Samayik, but his mind was entangled in other adverse emotions. The body was in equanimity, but the mind was inclined towards destruction. The instability of the mind bound him in a bond worthy of the seventh hell, but as soon as the mind also became inclined towards equanimity along with the body, he attained liberation by destroying all karmas.

2. Chaturvinshati-Stav
The second study of the essential sutras is Chaturvinshati Stav. Before reaching the field of criticism, it is necessary to purify the field. The seeker should first become stable in equanimity, then praise the great men of virtue. The praise of the virtues of great men is a source of inspiration for every seeker. Until the human mind takes refuge in the present twenty-four, who have become the twenty-four best artists of spiritual life, it will not be able to learn spiritual art. In this regard, Ganadhar Gautama asks the Lord Mahavira:
Q: "Bante! What does Chaturvinshati create in a being?"
A: "Chaturvinshati creates the knowledge of the twenty-four."

1. Uttaraadhyayana, A. 29 Sutra 9
2. Uttaraadhyayana A. 29 Sutra 10
[10]

Page #14:
---------------------------
Lord, what is the place of the twenty-four **stava** in life, and what spiritual quality does the soul attain when it receives the light of **stavan-stuti** in life?
O Gautama! The light of prayer, **stuti**, purifies the soul's vision-knowledge. The darkness of **mithyatva** destroys the brilliance of the **darshanaguna**, but the **stuti** of **beetarag** removes the **mithyatva** and leads the seeker towards **samyaktva**.

3. **Vandana**
The third study of the **avashyak sutra** is **vandana**. It is essential to have devotion to the guru and humility when entering the field of criticism. In the **jnatasutra**, there is an important question and answer. The connoisseur of life, Seth Sudarshan Muni, asks Thavachaputra, what is the root of Jainism, Jain philosophy? - 'What is the root of Dharma?' That great **anagar** did not say that **kshama** etc. qualities are the root of Dharma, but said that '**vinaya**' is the root of Dharma - 'Sudansana! **Vinaya** is the root of Dharma.' **Vinaya** is like the foundation brick of the building of life. **Vinaya** is a hypnotic mantra. Through **vinaya**, through humility, even gods are subdued and enemies become friends. Therefore, the seeker, after praising the **tirthankara**, bows to the guru. On this subject, the disciple asks -
Q - **Vandana** by whom, sir? What does it generate in the soul?
A - **Vandana** destroys the **niyagoy** karma, binds the **uchagoy** karma, and removes the **sohagga** and **appadhihaya** **anaphala**, and generates **dahiṇabhava**.
O Bhagavan! What is the fruit obtained by the soul from **vandana**?
Gautama! Through **vandana**, the soul destroys the **niyagoy** karma, binds the **uchagoy** karma, and attains such good fortune that its command does not fail, i.e., its speech becomes so refined that everyone obeys its command. Also, **vandana** gives the soul **dahiṇabhava**.

4. **Pratikraman**
**Pratikraman** is the fourth study of the **avashyak sutra**. **Pratikraman** is necessary for the purification of transgressions committed in vows. Every day, one should contemplate how much the soul has gone from vow to non-vow today? How many times did the flame of **kṣaya** ignite? And if it did, what was the cause? Was that **kṣaya** **anantaanubandhi**, **apratyakhyani**, **pratyakhyani**, or **sanjwalan**? Were the words spoken in the heat of anger appropriate or inappropriate? Thus, by contemplating and reflecting in a subtle way, purifying it is **pratikraman**.
In **pratikraman**, the seeker remembers his mistakes and sheds tears of repentance. The blackness of sin cannot be washed away by hundreds of maunds of water from the river, but two drops of tears of repentance wash it away in a minute. A thinker has said - He who makes a mistake is human, but to be proud of that mistake is the work of a demon. It is natural to make mistakes, but to feel proud of mistakes, i.e., to consider mistakes as flowers and sit on them, is the work of a demon.
1. **Uttaraadhyayanasutra** A. 29 Sutra 11
[11]

Page #15:
---------------------------
To err is the greatest mistake, and this mistake later becomes a thorn in life.
What is Pratikraman? What is its relationship with the soul? The disciple asks - Q - Paddikkamaṇeṇam bhanta! Jīve kiṁ jaṇayai? A - Paddikkamaṇeṇam vayachiddāṇi pihei pihiyavayachiddē puṇ jīve niruddhasavē, asabalacaritē aṭṭhasu
payavaṇamāyāsu uvauṭṭē apuhatṭē suppanihiē biharai॥
O Lord! What specific quality does the soul attain by performing Pratikraman? Resolving the disciple's curiosity, the Lord says - Through Pratikraman, the practitioner covers the holes in his vows. He removes the lapses that occur in his vows due to negligence. The pure-vowed soul, by stopping the influx of karmas, becomes free from the defects of the body, etc., and with pure restraint, becomes vigilant in the eight Pravachanamatras and, engrossed in restraint, directs his senses towards the right path and wanders in the path of restraint.
From the perspective of time, there are five types of Pratikraman - (1) Daivasik, (2) Ratrik, (3) Paakshik, (4) Chaturmasik and (5) Saavatsarik.
1. Daivasik - Pratikraman performed at the end of the day is Daivasik.
2. Ratrik - Pratikraman performed at the end of the night, i.e., criticizing the faults committed during the night.
3. Paakshik - Criticizing the sins at the end of fifteen days.
4. Chaturmasik - Performing Pratikraman for the faults committed in four months on the full moon days of Kartik, Falgun and Ashadh after four months.
5. Saavatsarik - Criticizing the faults committed throughout the year on the fiftieth or fiftieth day from Ashadh Purnima.
In the field of sadhana, Mithyatva, Avrat, Pramad, Kashay and Ashubh Yoga are considered to be five defects. Every day during Pratikraman, the practitioner introspects his life and sees whether he is not leaving the path of Samyaktva and moving towards the thorny path of Mithyatva? Is he not forgetting the true nature of the vow and going towards Avrat? Is his mind not getting trapped in the stressful environment of Pramad, leaving the peaceful environment of Apramattatva? Is he not going towards the foul-smelling enclosure of Kashay, leaving the fragrant garden of Akashay? Is the tendency of the yogas not engaged in Ashubhyoga, leaving Shubhyoga? If I have gone into Mithyatva, Avrat, Pramad, Kashay and Ashubh Yoga, then I should again engage in Samyaktva, Vrat, Akashayata, Apramad and Shubh Yoga.
Pratikraman is an unparalleled art of the life of a practitioner and the essence of Jain sadhana. There is no action in which faults cannot be committed due to negligence. One should perform Pratikraman to get rid of those faults. In Pratikraman, the practitioner
1. Uttaraadhyayanasutra A. 29 Sutra 12
[12]

Page #16:
---------------------------
Every tendency of life, when observed and contemplated, becomes light by renouncing these faults. 5. Kayotsarga
Kayotsarga is the fifth study of the Aavashyak Sutra and the eleventh tapa. It means renouncing attachment to the body. As long as there is attachment to the body, the seeker cannot move forward firmly in the field of life. Therefore, Kayotsarga has an amazing, fundamental and unique importance in the Jain practice. In the Anuyogadwar, Kayotsarga is called 'Vranachikitsa'. Even with caution, faults creep into practice due to negligence etc. Kayotsarga is a balm to heal these wounds, which heals the wounds of excess. Kayotsarga is performed to refine the life of restraint, to atone, to purify oneself, to free the soul from Maya, Mithyatva and Nidana surgery, and to destroy sinful karmas.
Regarding Kayotsarga, the disciple asks - Q - Kausaggenam Bhanta. What does it create in the soul?
A - Kausaggenam Tiya - Paduppanna Payachitta Bisohei, Visuddhapayachitte Ya Jive Nivvuhahiyae Ohariya Bharuvva Bharavahe Pasatthajjhanovagae Suham Suhenam Viharai.
Q - Bhagavan! What fruit does the soul obtain from Kayotsarga?
A - Through Kayotsarga, the soul becomes pure from the excesses of the past and present. After being purified from excesses, the seeker experiences such joy in his mind, as a laborer experiences when the weight is removed from his head.
6. Pratyakhyan
Pratyakhyan is the sixth study of the Aavashyak Sutra. After criticizing the excesses of the past, the seeker performs Kayotsarga as atonement and becomes free from the faults of the past. But it is necessary to reject future faults. Pratyakhyan also has an important place in the seeker's life. Because in this vast universe there are so many substances that it is impossible to count them. No matter how long a person's life may be, he cannot consume all the things in the world. But human desires are infinite like the sky. There is a desire to enjoy one after another, due to which there is always dissatisfaction and unrest in the human mind. The only way to quench the fire of that dissatisfaction is Pratyakhyan. Pratyakhyan stops the related sins that will be committed in the future and the seeker's life begins to shine in the golden light of restraint. Pratyakhyan stops all the actions of Aviriti that will come in the future and the seeker follows the rules of restraint properly.
Regarding Pratyakhyan, it is said -
1. Uttaraadhyayanasutra A. 29, Sutra 13
[13]

Page #17:
---------------------------
Q. Venerable one, what does the soul manifest through renunciation?
A. Through renunciation, the soul stops the doors of influx. As long as the doors of influx are not stopped, the flow of karma continues to enter the soul. As long as something is not renounced, the attachment to it does not go away and the karma-dust continues to come. Renunciation leads to the cessation of desires, because renunciation is not possible without limiting desires. Another great benefit of renunciation is that the thirst of the mind, the birth state and the fickleness are eliminated and the seeker experiences supreme peace.
-
In conclusion, the six essentials are necessary actions for the seeker. Whether the seeker is a monk or a lay person, they perform these actions, but the intensity of their experience may vary. A monk can perform these actions with more intensity than a lay person, because monks are completely detached from the beginning. This necessary action is performed daily by the monk seeker.
The order of the six essentials is scientifically presented. The first, 'Samayik', teaches the practice of equanimity in life. Through the 'Twenty-Four Stavas', he develops the feeling of being free from attachment like the Tirthankaras. Through 'Vandanā', he adorns himself with the virtue of humility. Through 'Pratikramaṇa', he becomes introspective by detaching himself from all external and internal changes. Through 'Kayotsarga', he reduces the attachment to the body and dwells in the self. And in 'Pratikyāṇa', he accepts various types of renunciations for the future. In this way, the seeker awakens his spiritual life through the six essentials and takes steps on the path of liberation.
It is mandatory for the monks of the first and last Tirthankaras to perform the essentials regularly. If they do not perform the essentials, they are deviated from the monk dharma. Even if there is a fault, and even if there is no fault, one should perform Pratikramaṇa.
-
Thoughts on the Shraman Sutra
The only religion that fulfills the desires of the aspiring souls is the one that can reside in the pure soul. Just as a farmer plows his land, adds manure, removes stones and weeds before sowing seeds, only then does he sow seeds in the field. Seeds cannot be sown in barren land or in stony, rocky land. Similarly, the heart is also a field. In it,
1. Uttaraadhyayanasutra A. 29 Sutra 14
2. Sapaddiccammano Dhammō, Purimassā Ya Pacchhimassā Ya Jiṇassā. Majjhimayāṇa Jiṇāṇaṁ, Kāranajāe Paḍikkamanāṁ ||
Āvashyakniryaakti, Ga. 1244
[14]
-

Page #18:
---------------------------
Before sowing the seed of Dharma, it needs to be purified. As it is said, "Dhammo Suddhassa Chitthai." Dharma resides only in a pure heart. To purify the soul and establish it in Dharma, certain rules are prescribed in the Agamas. One of the main rules is "Aavashyak." "Aavashyak" is the lifeblood of Jain practice and a great means of examining and testing one's soul. As the name suggests, it contains essential topics. The nature of the daily duties to be performed by the fourfold sangha - Sadhu, Sadhvi, Shravak, and Shravika - is expounded in the Aavashyak Sutra. This Sutra concisely describes the potential for faults to arise in daily life, in a way that everyone can easily understand. However, there are some points to consider regarding the Shraman Sutra.

**Doubt (1):** Since the name Shraman belongs to the Sadhu, is it appropriate for only the Sadhu to read the Shraman Sutra, or should the Shravak also read it?

**Solution (1):** The narrow interpretation that Shraman is only the name of the Sadhu is not scripturally sound. The Vyākhyāprajñapti (Bhagavati) Sutra, in the eighth Uddeshak of the twentieth Shatak, states: "Titt'ham Puṇ Chauvvaṇṇaiṇṇe Samaṇasaṁghe, Taṁ Jaha - Samaṇā, Samaṇīo, Sāvagā, Sāviyāo." This means that the Sadhu, Sadhvi, Shravak, and Shravika, all four, are called the Shraman Sangha. Although in practice, Shraman is the name of the Sadhu, the Bhagavan has referred to all four Tirthas as the Shraman Sangha. Every seeker should accept this word of the Aapta.

**Doubt (2):** The Shraman Sutra only speaks of the conduct of the Sadhu, so it is appropriate for only the Sadhu to read it. What use is it for the Shravak?

**Solution (2):** The text of the Shraman Sutra is extremely useful in many Dharma practices performed by the Shravak. For example:

(1) When a Shravak is asleep during a Poushadh Vrat or Sanvar, to be free from the faults that arise during sleep, one should first recite the Margshudhi (Iriyavahyam), then recite the Kayotsarg (Tass Uttari), then recite the Kayotsarg of the two Logas, and then recite the first text of the Shraman Sutra, "Ichchhami Padikkaamiuṁ Pagamasijjaye." There is no other text to be free from the faults of sleep.

(2) The eleventh (eleventh) Padima Dharis Shravak are only Bhikshopajivis, and in many places, Shravaks who observe the Dayavat (holders of the tenth Vrat) also perform Gochari. To be free from the faults that arise in it, one must recite the second text, "Padikkaamami Goyaraggachariya."

(3) The twenty-first Adhyayan of the Shri Uttaradhyayanasutra states: "Niggan'the Paavayane Saave Se Vi Kovie." This means that the Shravak who observes the Vrats was a Kovid (scholar) in the Nirgranth Pravachan (scripture). This text proves that the Shravak is a scholar of the scriptures. And in the twenty-second Adhyayan, "Silavanta Bahussuya," it is said that Shri Rajamatiji had read many Sutras at the time of her initiation. This proves that the Shravika is a scholar of the scriptures. If they have not performed Samayik, Poushadh Vrat, or written down clothes, money, etc., then to be free from that fault, one should recite the third text, "Padikkaamami Chaukalam Sajjhayass Akaranyaye."

(4) From the first to the thirty-third verses in the fourth text, all are to be known (Jney). Some are to be abandoned (Hey) and some are to be accepted (Upadeya). Each action is very useful. Therefore, knowledge of them is also essential for the Shravaks.

Page #19:
---------------------------
(5) The fifth lesson is "Nirgranth Pravachan" (Namo Chauvvisaaye), which contains the glory of the Jina Pravachan (scripture) and Jainism, and the statement of the despicable and desirable in eight speeches. It is also very useful for the Shravakas. Thus, there is not a single subject or lesson in the Shraman Sutra that is useless for the Shravaka.
Doubt (3) - The Sadhu should also be told the Shravaka Sutra in the Pratikraman, like the Shravaka, because it also contains the statement of all three types of substances, namely, knowable, despicable, and desirable.
Solution (3) - It is essential to tell the vows and transgressions of the Shravaka together. But this subject is very debatable. (1) The Shravaka's Anuvratas are included in the Mahavrata of the Sadhu, so there is no need to tell the Sadhu the Shravaka's vows. (2) The Shravaka should definitely aspire to become a Sadhu, so there is a need to tell the Shraman Sutra, but if it is said that the Sadhu should also feel like a Shravaka and tell the Shravaka Sutra in the Pratikraman, then this statement will be completely inappropriate.
Doubt (4) - Is there any evidence that the Shravaka used to or does perform Pratikraman including the Shraman Sutra?
Solution (4) - Shravakavaristha Shri Lokashah, the restorer of the Jain religion who had fallen from Dharma due to the twelve-year Mahaduhkala, happened in the city of Ahmedabad in the country of Gujarat. In that country, i.e., Gujarat, Jhalawar, Kathiawar, Kutch, etc. - all the Shravakas of six and eight kotis used to and do perform Pratikraman including the Shraman Sutra. The Shravakas of the sect of Param Pujya Shri Kahanaji Rishiji Maharaj, who is seated on the third part of Param Pujya Shri Lavji Rishiji Maharaj, the restorer of the Sanatan Jain Sadhumarg Samaj, speak the Shraman Sutra.
The Shravakas of the sect of Param Pujya Shri Dharmadasaji Maharaj, the Mulacharya of the twenty-two sects, and the Shravakas of the sect of Pujya Shri Ekalingadasaji Maharaj, the Dharmapravartak of the Mewar country, perform Pratikraman including the Shraman Sutra.
It is proved from the above doubt-solution that the Shravaka should perform Pratikraman including the Shraman Sutra. The Shravaka's actions cannot be completely pure without the lessons of the Shraman Sutra. Because the Shravaka Sutra contains the subjects that the Shravakas must know and the subjects that they must act upon. The Shravakas of ancient times used to perform Pratikraman including the Shraman Sutra, even today some Shravakas perform Pratikraman including the Shraman Sutra, and those who do not perform Pratikraman including the Shraman Sutra should now do so. The present edition
The present edition of the Avashyak Sutra is being published by the Agam Prakashan Samiti. This committee was organized by our late Gurudev Pujya Yuvacharya Shri 'Madhukar' Muniji Maharaj. It was Gurudev's idea that the original Agamas should be published in such a way that even ordinary Agam-loving people could easily study them. This was not an ordinary resolution. It was a Bhagirath Anushthan, but Gurudev, who was rich in great resolve, turned it into a work, and under your guidance, many Agamas were also published. But the sad thing is that Gurudev passed away in the middle. Even after that, the publication work designated by Gurudev is progressing with the significant cooperation of many Munivar and generous Sadgrihasthas. Now this publication work should be considered as a tribute to Gurudev Yuvacharya Shri in a way.
[16]

Page #20:
---------------------------
In the editing of the *Aavashyak Sutra*, our Guruji, M. Adhyatmayogini, embodiment of boundless affection, sweet-tongued, supremely learned, revered Shri Umravkunvarji M. Sa. has guided me. I received the support of the ascetic embodiment Shri Ummedkunvar M. and other Sadhvi Mandal. The editions edited by Upadhyaya Kavivarya Shri Amarmuniji M. etc. have also been used in this as they are. I am deeply grateful for the cooperation of all of them.
Sahithya Vachaspati Shri Devendramuniji M. has adorned this edition by writing an extensive preface. It is natural to be grateful to him.
Despite taking utmost care, if any error has remained anywhere, then the generous reader should inform us, so that it can be rectified in the next edition.
Sadhvi Suprabha 'Sudha'
[17]

Page #21:
---------------------------
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.
25.
26.
Aagam Prakashan Samiti, Byaver
(Executive Committee)
Shriman Sagarmalji Baitala
Shriman Ratanchandji Modi
Shriman Dhanrajji Vinayakia
Shriman Bhanwarlalji Gothi
Shriman Hukmichandji Parkh
Shriman Dulichandji Chordia
Shriman Jasrajji Parkh
Shriman Sardar Malji Chordia
Shriman Gyanrajji Mootha
Shriman Gyanchandji Vinayakia
Shriman Prakashchandji Chopra Shriman Janvarilalji Shishodia
Shriman R. Prasannchandji Chordia
Shriman Manakchandji Sancheti
Shriman Rikhbachandji Lodha
Shriman S. Sayermalji Chordia
Shriman Mulchandji Surana Shriman Motichandji Chordia
Shriman Amarchandji Modi
Shriman Kishnalalji Baitala
Shriman Jatanrajji Mehta
Shriman Devrajji Chordia Shriman Gautamchandji Chordia Shriman Sumermalji Medtiya
Shriman Prakashchandji Chordia
Shriman Pradeepchandji Chordia
President
Acting President
Vice President
Vice President
Vice President
Vice President
Vice President
General Secretary
Secretary
Secretary
Joint Secretary
Treasurer
Treasurer
Advisor
Advisor
Member
Member
Member
Member
Member
Member
Member
Member
Member
Member
Member
Indore
Byaver
Byaver
Chennai
Jodhpur
Chennai
Durg
Chennai
Pali
Byaver
Byaver
Byaver
Chennai
Jodhpur
Chennai
Chennai
Nagaur
Chennai
Byaver
Chennai
Medtacity
Chennai
Chennai
Jodhpur
Chennai
Chennai

Page #22:
---------------------------
## Introduction
**Essential Sutras: A Critical Study**
[From the First Edition]

In Indian literature, the word "Agam" is synonymous with scripture. The **Aavashyakachurnikar** defines the word "Agam" as: "That by which the understanding of substances is achieved, is Agam." The **Anuyogadwarachurni** states: "That which is the word of the **Aapta** (omniscient being) is Agam." In the **Anuyogadwar Maladhariya Tika**, the Acharya, while contemplating the word "Agam", clarifies that "That which comes from the Guru Parampara (lineage of teachers) is Agam." Acharya **Vachaspati Mishra** writes: "That scripture by the practice of which the means of **Abhyudaya** (worldly prosperity) and **Nishreyas** (spiritual liberation) are known, is Agam." According to **Abhinavagupta Acharya**, "That which, upon reading, provides comprehensive understanding, is Agam." Similarly, Acharya **Jinabhadragani Kshamasraman**, in the **Visheshaavashyak Bhashya**, defines scripture as: "That by which the true, real form of the knowable, the soul, is understood and disciplined, is scripture."

The word "Sutra" is also used in the same sense as "Agam" and "Shastra". **Sanghadasagani**, in the **Brihatkalpa Bhashya**, explains the word "Sutra" as: "That by following which the shedding of karmas occurs, is Sutra." In the **Visheshaavashyak Bhashya**, using the **Nirukta** method of interpretation, it is written: "That which irrigates the meaning, is Sutra." Acharya **Abhaydeva**, in the **Sthananga Vritti**, writes: "That by which meaning is strung together, is Sutra." The **Brihatkalpa Tika** states: "By following the Sutra, the shedding of eight types of karma-dust occurs, hence it is called Sutra."

**Essential: The Life Force of Jain Practice**

The **Aavashyak Sutra** holds a unique place in Jain Agam literature. The **Anuyogadwarachurni**, while defining **Aavashyak**, states: "That which makes the **Gunashunya Atma** (soul devoid of qualities) reside in auspicious emotions, is **Aavasak**."

1. **Njjati Attha Jene So Agamo.** - Aavashyakchurni 1/36
2. **Attass Va Vayanam Agamo.** - Anuyogadwarachurni, page 16
3. **Guruparamparayenagachchatiityagamaha.** - Anuyogadwar Maladhariya Tika, page 202
4. **Aasamantat Arth Gamayati iti Agamha.**
5. **Sasajjiti Tene Tahim Va Neyamayato Satyam.**
6. **Anusarai Tti Suttam.** - Brihatkalpa Bhashya, 311
7. **Sinchati Kharai Jamattham Tamha Suttam Niruttavihina.** - Vi.Bha. 1368
8. **Suryante Anenetti Sutram.** - Sthananga Vritti, page 49
9. **Sutramanusaran Raj:-Ashta Prakaram Karma Apanayati Tatah Saranat Sutram.** - Brihatkalpa Tika, page 95
[19]

Page #23:
---------------------------
It is essential. The Anuogadwar Maldhariy Tika states that the one who is the abode of all virtues is Avasak. It is an essential sutra. In other words, it can also be said that the one who makes the soul prosperous with excellent virtues is Avasak. It is the lifeblood of essential Jain practice. It is a living commentary on life purification and fault correction. Whether the practitioner is literate or illiterate, whether a common inquirer or a great sage with extraordinary brilliance, knowledge of the essential is not only necessary but mandatory for all practitioners. Through the knowledge of the essential sutra, the practitioner examines and tests his soul. Just as there is Sandhyakarma in the Vedic tradition, worship in the Buddhist tradition, Khor Deh Avesta in the Parsis, prayer in the Jews and Christians, and Namaz in Islam, so too in Jainism, there is the essential for the purification of faults and the increase of virtues.

The essential is the main part of Jain practice. It is the basis of spiritual equality, humility, and other virtues. The goal of an insightful practitioner is not external matter, but self-purification. The practice and worship through which the soul experiences eternal happiness, destroys karma-mala, and attains the light of spirituality through right faith, right knowledge, and right conduct, is the essential. It is necessary to do something to refine those mistakes after seeing one's own mistakes. The provision of the essential is for everyone, whether a monk or a nun, a layman or a laywoman. The Anuogadwar Sutra gives eight synonyms for the essential - essential, necessary, Dhruvanigraha, Vishudhi, Adhyayan Shatkvarg, Nyaya, Aradhana, and Marg. Although there is a slight difference in meaning in these names, all the names express the same meaning.

It is a rule for the monks of the first and last Tirthankaras that they must perform the essential. If monks and nuns do not perform the essential, they are deviated from the monastic dharma. Even if there is a stain of fault in life, or even if there is no stain, the essential should be performed. The Essential Appointment clearly states that in the reign of the first and last Tirthankaras, dharma was formulated including Pratikraman. Knowledge of the essential is also considered essential for lay people. This is why in the Svetambar tradition, the religious studies of children begin with the Essential Sutra. The Essential Sutra has six parts -
1. Samayik - practice of equality, 2. Chaturvinshati Stav - praise of the twenty-four Tirthankara Devas
- Anuogadwar Churni, p. 14   Anuogadwar Maldhariy Tika, p. 28
1. Sunnamappaṇam tam pasatthabhaavehiṁ āvāsetiiti āvāsam. 2. Samagrasyaapi gunagraamasyaavasakamityavasakam. • 3. Samaṇeṇa sāvaena ya, avassa kāyavvayam havaī jamhā.
Ante aho-nisassa ya, tamhā āvassaṁ nāma|| 4. Sapaḍikkamaṇo dhammo, purimasssa ya pacchimasssa ya jiṇassa.
Majjhimayaṇ jiṇāṇam, kāraṇajāe paḍikkamaṇam ||
- Avasyavritti, Gatha 2, page 53
- Avasyanyukti, Gatha 1244
[20]
.

Page #24:
---------------------------
3. Vandana - Salutations to the Sadgurus, their praise, 4. Pratikramana - Criticism of faults, 5. Kayotsarga - Renunciation of attachment to the body, 6. Pratiakhyana - Renunciation of food etc.
In Anuyogadwar, their names are given as follows - 1. Savadha Yogavirat (Samayik), 2. Utkiirtan (Chaturvinshati Stav), 3. Gunavatpratipatti (Guru - Upasana or Vandana), 4. Skhalitnindana (Pratikramana - Criticism of past sins), 5. Vranachikitsa (Kayotsarga - Meditation, renunciation of attachment to the body) and 6. Gunadharana (Pratiakhyana - Renunciation for the future, acceptance of rules etc.).
In Jnanasar, Acharya, while expounding the importance of Aavashyak Kriya, wrote - Aavashyak Kriya does not allow the soul to fall from the purity of emotions already attained. For the growth of virtues and for the non-slippage of attained virtues, the practice of Aavashyak Kriya is very useful. The practice of Aavashyak Kriya leads to the progressive development of life. In his life, the ocean of virtues starts to roar.
The order of sadhana that is kept in Aavashyak is based on the chain of cause and effect and is completely scientific. For the seeker, it is necessary to attain equality first. Without equality, the beautiful flowers do not bloom and the thorns of vices do not fall. When the flames of inequality are burning in the inner heart, how can the virtues of the great men be praised? Only the person who holds equality in life praises the virtues of the great men and brings their noble qualities into life. Therefore, Chaturvinshati Stav Aavashyak is kept after Samayik Aavashyak. When a person holds virtues in his heart, then his head bows at the feet of the great men. Overwhelmed with devotion, he salutes them, hence the third Aavashyak is Vandana. The heart of the seeker who performs Vandana is simple, like an open book, everyone can read the pages of his life. Only a simple person criticizes his own faults, hence the description of Pratikramana Aavashyak after Vandana. To remember the mistakes and to get rid of those mistakes, stability in body and mind is necessary. In Kayotsarga, the body and mind are concentrated and the practice of stable attitude is done. When the body and mind are stable, then Pratiakhyana can be done. When the mind is in a wavering state, then Pratiakhyana is not possible. Therefore, Pratiakhyana Aavashyak is placed sixth. Thus, this Shad Aavashyak is the best way of self-reflection, self-examination and self-elevation.
In Anuyogadwar Sutra, there are two divisions of Aavashyak - Dravya Aavashyak and Bhava Aavashyak. In Dravya Aavashyak, only the recitation of the texts is done without thinking, with a distracted mind. The mind wanders here and there without being engaged in the text that is being recited. In Dravya Aavashyak, only external action takes place, due to lack of use, internal brilliance does not manifest from that action. It is lifeless sadhana. In Bhava Aavashyak, the seeker performs the action with use. With that action, his mind, his speech, his body are completely concentrated.
1. Jan nan ime samano va samani va savao va savia va tacchitte, tammane, talleese, tadajjavasie, tattivyajjavasanae, tadattovaute, tadappiyayakaranee, tabbavanaabavie, annattha katthai manam akaremane ubhaokalam avassayam karenti se tam logujariyam bhavaavassayam.
[21]

Page #25:
---------------------------
He practices with single-mindedness and equanimity. When the material essentials are matched with the emotional essentials, the material essentials become a radiant essential. This is why the scholars have given great importance to the emotional essentials. Emotional essentials are transcendental practice and the fruit of that practice is liberation.

**Samayik Essentials**

Samayik holds the first place in the six essentials. It is the essence of Jain conduct. Samayik is essential for both monks and lay people. All lay people, when they accept the path of practice, first adopt the Samayik conduct. There are five types of conduct. Samayik conduct is the first among them. Samayik conduct has been present throughout the reign of all twenty-four Tirthankaras, but the other four conducts are not present. For monks, Samayik is the first conduct, while for lay practitioners, Samayik is the first of the four vows. The grand edifice of Jain ethical philosophy is based on the solid foundation of Samayik. The practice of equanimity is not the heritage of any particular individual or group. It is for all practitioners, and whoever practices equanimity is a Jain. Acharya Haribhadra has clearly stated that whether the practitioner is a Svetambara, a Digambara, a Buddhist, or of any other faith, whoever is in equanimity will undoubtedly attain liberation. One person gives away one hundred thousand gold coins every day, another person practices equanimity yoga. Who is greater among these two? In resolving this curiosity, the wise men of truth have said - whoever practices equanimity yoga - Samayik, is great. The karma that a person who practices penance continuously for millions of years cannot destroy, the practitioner of equanimity destroys in a few moments. No practitioner has been liberated without equanimity, nor will he be. Those who have been liberated in the past, those who are being liberated in the present, and those who are to be liberated in the future, the basis of their liberation was Samayik. It is. It will remain.

Samayik is a pure practice. In Samayik, the practitioner's mind remains completely calm like the ocean of milk, therefore he does not bind new karma. Due to being situated in his own nature, he destroys the remaining karma. Therefore, Acharya Haribhadra has written that through the pure practice of Samayik, the being destroys the destructive karma and attains omniscience.

- Haribhadra

1. Whether a Svetambara or a Digambara, a Buddha or another.
Whoever is in equanimity will attain liberation, no doubt.
2. One gives away a piece of gold every day.
Another, however, practices Samayik, he does not fall short.
3. What does not get destroyed even by millions of years of penance.
The mind of equanimity destroys that karma in a moment.
4. Samayik - pure soul, completely destroys destructive karma.
From its destruction, one attains omniscience, the illuminator of the world and the beyond.
- Haribhadra Ashtak-Prakarana, 30-1
[22]

Page #26:
---------------------------
Acharya Pujyapada, in his work Sarvarthasiddhi, defines Samayika as follows: The word "Samaya" is derived from the root "In" which means "motion" with the prefix "Sam". "Sam" signifies unity, "Ay" means movement, therefore, "Samaya" is the movement of the soul back towards itself, after being diverted by external influences. The feeling of "Samaya" is Samayika. Acharya Malayagiri writes: "Sam" is to be in the middle of the causes of attachment and aversion. The presentation of the seeker, who is in a state of "Sam", towards liberation is Samayika. Jinabhadragani Kshamasraman has also accepted this definition in his Visheshavashakabhashya. The various interpretations of Samayika are given in the Niyukti, Churni, Bhashya and Haribhadriya Vritti of the Avashakasutra, as well as in the Malayagiri Vritti. To have a feeling of friendship towards all beings is "Sam", and the benefit that comes from "Sam" is Samayika. To abandon the tendencies of sin is called the abandonment of "Savadhayoga". The practice of virtues like non-violence, equality, etc. is called "Niravadhayoga". To abandon "Savadhayoga" and to dwell in pure nature is called "Sam". The practice by which one attains this "Sam" is Samayika. The word "Sam" means "best" and "Ayan" means "conduct". Therefore, the name of the best conduct is Samayika. The practice of non-violence, etc., which is the best practice, done at the right time, is Samayika.

By contemplating the various etymologies of Samayika, it becomes clear that they all emphasize equality. To remain in one's own nature, when various situations of attachment and aversion arise, is truly Samayika. Equality means: stability of mind, suppression of attachment and aversion, and remaining unmoved in happiness and sorrow, being present in equanimity. Due to the causes of karma, unequal feelings of attachment and aversion arise. To remove oneself from these unequal feelings and to dwell in one's own nature is equality. Equality is called Yoga in the Gita.

To stop the evil tendencies of mind, speech, and body, and to focus the mind on one's definite goal is Samayika. The seeker who performs Samayika controls his mind, speech, and body. He remains in a state of equanimity, detached from objects, passions, and attachment and aversion. He does not feel anger in his inner mind when he sees an opponent, nor does he feel joy from attachment when he sees a friend. He dives into the deep ocean of equality, so that the flames of inequality cannot destroy his practice. He is not bitten by the mosquitoes of slander, nor does he get stung by the scorpions of envy. Whether the situation is favorable or unfavorable, whether the flowers of happiness are blooming or the sharp thorns of sorrow are piercing, he always remains in equanimity. His contemplation is always awake.

1. 'Sam' means unity. For example, "Sangata Ghrita", "Sangata Taila" means that they are united. Unity is the meaning of "Ayan", "Ayan" means movement. "Samaya" is the movement of the soul back towards itself, after being diverted by external influences. "Samayika" is the feeling of "Samaya". "Samayika" is the purpose of this. - Sarvarthasiddhi, 7,21
2. "Sam" is the one who is in the middle of attachment and aversion. "In" means motion, "Ayan" means movement. "Sam" means unity, "Ay" means movement. "Samaya" is the presentation of the seeker, who is in a state of "Sam", towards liberation. - Avashakasutra Malayagiri Vritti, 854
3. "Sam" means free from attachment and aversion. "Ayan" means movement. "Samaya" is the movement of the soul back towards itself, after being diverted by external influences. "Samayika" is the feeling of "Samaya". - Visheshavashakabhashya, 3477
4. - Visheshavashakabhashya, verse 3481
5. "Samayika" is the benefit that comes from "Sam". - Visheshavashakabhashya, verse 3480
6. Equality is called Yoga. - Bhagavad Gita, 2-48
[23]

Page #27:
---------------------------
He remains in equanimity. He thinks that conjunction and disjunction - both are not the nature of the soul. These are the fruits of the rise of auspicious and inauspicious karmas. The soul cannot be benefited or harmed by the conjunction and disjunction of external objects. Therefore, he remains in constant equanimity. Acharya Bhadrabahu said - The sadhak who has equanimity towards all living beings, both mobile and immobile, his Samayik is pure. The Samayik of the one whose soul is engaged in restraint, austerity, and rules is pure.
Acharya Haribhadra has written - Just as sandalwood makes even the axe that cuts it fragrant, so too is the Samayik of the one who spreads the fragrance of equanimity towards the opponent.
Through equanimity, the sadhak concentrates his soul powers and manifests his great energy. Man is entangled in the whirlpool of many desires, which destroys his personality. An atmosphere of duality and tension persists. The vices of barbarity, animality, narrow-mindedness, and attachment-aversion flourish. When man deviated from equanimity, then there was distortion in nature, tension in the individual, inequality in society, and elements of violence in the age. To stop all of them, to maintain balance and order, Samayik is necessary. Samayik is the pure ocean of equanimity that waves. The sadhak who takes a dip in it is freed from the steps of attachment and aversion.
The practice of Samayik is a very excellent practice. All other practices are included in it. Acharya Jinabhadragani Kshamasraman called Samayik the fourteen-fold meaning-mass. Upadhyaya Yashovijayaji described Samayik as the essence of the complete twelve-fold Jinvani. The essence of colorful blooming flowers is fragrance. If the flower does not have fragrance, only form, then it can only satisfy the eyes of the viewers, but it cannot provide freshness to the heart and mind. The essence of milk is ghee. Milk that does not have ghee is only milk in name. It is ghee that gives milk its nourishment. It gives strength to the body. Similarly, the essence of sesame is oil. If the oil is extracted from the sesame seeds, the juice from the sugarcane, the rice from the paddy, then it becomes useless. Similarly, if equanimity, that is, Samayik, is removed from the practice, then that practice is also useless. It is only a practice in name. Without equanimity, worship is mockery. The sadhak is caught in the web of Maya
- Necessary Appointment, 799
1. (a) Who is the same in all beings, both mobile and immobile.
His Samayik is pure, says the Kevali-Bhasiya. (b) Anuyogadwar 128 (c) Niyamasar 126 2. (a) Whose soul is engaged in restraint, austerity, and rules.
His Samayik is pure, says the Kevali-Bhasiya. (b) Anuyogadwar 127 (c) Niyamasar 127 3. Haribhadra Ashtak-Prakarana 29-1 4. Samayik is the essence of fourteen-fold meaning-mass. 5. Tattvarthavritti 1-1
- Necessary Appointment, 788
- Special. Commentary, Ga. 2796
[24]

Page #28:
---------------------------
He gets trapped. Seeing the progress of others, the fire of envy starts burning in his inner mind, the poisonous germs of hatred and opposition start churning. That is why emphasis has been placed on the need for Samayik.
The Bhagavati Sutra describes that in front of the Anugar of Parsva Pathy Kalasya Vesi, the Shraman Upasakas of Tungiya Nagari had presented the curiosity that what is Samayik? And what is the meaning of Samayik?
Kalasya Vesi Anugar clearly said, "The soul is Samayik and the soul is the meaning of Samayik."
The implication is that when the soul abandons sinful activities and resides in equanimity, then Samayik happens. The soul's separation from the Kashayik disorders and dwelling in its own nature is Samayik and that is the culmination of the soul. In Samayik, the seeker abandons external vision and adopts internal vision, abandons disparity and resides in equanimity, removes attachment from material objects and resides in his own nature, just as the infinite sky is the basis for the animate and inanimate beings of the world, in the same way, Samayik Sadhana is the basis for spiritual Sadhana.
1
Analyzing the nature of Samayik, Samayik has been propounded from various perspectives. Its nature is propounded from name, establishment, substance, time, area and feeling etc. The seeker who performs Samayik is so stable in Sadhana that whether it is a good name or a bad name, that name has no effect on the inner mind of that seeker. He thinks that the soul is nameless, the soul has no name, the name is of the presented body, this body is the creation of name karma. Therefore, why should I make vain resolutions and alternatives? The seeker of Samayik does not rejoice by looking at an attractive object, nor does he feel disgust by looking at a disgusting form. He thinks that the soul is beyond form. Beauty and ugliness are the transformation of Pudgal atoms, which are sometimes good and sometimes bad. I am separate from the Pudgal element. Thus, he contemplates and remains in equanimity. This establishment is Samayik. The seeker who observes the Samayik vow does not get mesmerized by the beauty of objects and does not get distressed by ugliness. Similarly, he does not get happy by seeing a valuable object and does not get distressed by seeing a low-value object. He contemplates that the beauty and ugliness of objects is just a human imagination. The same object appears beautiful to one person and not beautiful to another. Humans have imagined value in diamonds, emeralds, rubies, pearls etc., otherwise they are just stones like other stones. Thinking this way, the seeker maintains equanimity in all material objects. This is the substance Samayik. Whether it is the scorching heat of summer, the terrible chilling cold of the month of Paush, the rain in the form of thousands of streams in Shravan, Bhadrapad or the drizzle of drops, whether it is a favorable time or an unfavorable time, the seeker who observes the Samayik vow wanders in equanimity. Cold, heat etc. are the touches of Pudgal and all these Pudgal affect only Pudgal. I am the soul, no touch can have any effect on me. I have to stay away from these Vaibhav situations and reside in the soul nature. This is the time Samayik.
For the seeker who is devoted to Samayik, whether it is a pleasant place or an unpleasant place, whether it is a beautiful fragrant garden or a barren land, whether it is a high attic of a huge city or a thorny land of a deserted forest, it makes no difference.
[25]

Page #29:
---------------------------
He remains in equanimity everywhere. His contemplation goes on that my dwelling place is neither the forest nor the city, my dwelling place is the soul itself, then why should I bind myself to karma by falling into the delusion of the field in vain? Every substance remains in its own nature, so I have to remain stable in the nature of the soul, this field is temporary.
The contemplation of the भाव सामायिकधारी is upward-looking. He always wanders in the nature of the soul. His contemplation goes on - "I" am imperishable and immortal, I am the essence of consciousness, life and death, honor and dishonor, union and separation, profit and loss, all these are the disorders caused by the ripening of karma. I have no real connection with them. To attain the pure, wise, liberated soul essence by thinking in this way is भाव सामायिक. Acharya Nemichandra has said in Gommatasar - When the seeker's knowledge consciousness is directed towards the nature of the soul, leaving behind the possessions of others, then भाव सामायिक takes place. The soul that is free from attachment and aversion, that is filled with the middle path, is called सम. To go into that सम is भाव सामायिक.
Acharya Jindasgani Mahत्तर has contemplated भाव सामायिक in detail. He has compared the गुणनिष्पन्न भाव सामायिक to a vast city. Just as a vast city is rich in people, wealth, grain, etc., adorned with various forests and groves, so the life of a seeker who performs भाव सामायिक is adorned with virtues. There is a brilliance of various virtues in his life, there is a kingdom of peace.
Acharya Jindasgani Mahत्तर has considered सामायिक necessary as आधमंगल'. All the material blessings in the world can be transformed into material misfortunes, but सामायिक is such a भावमंगल that can never become a misfortune. The practice of equanimity is the central point of all blessings. The soul, which has been wandering in this vast universe for an infinite time, if it once performs भाव सामायिक, then it does not wander in the world for more than seven or eight births. सामायिक is such a touchstone, by the touch of which the soul is freed from the darkness of falsehood, etc., of infinite time.
There are two main divisions of सामायिक: द्रव्य सामायिक and भाव सामायिक. The rituals that are performed before performing सामायिक, such as spreading a seat for सामायिक, cleaning the place, collecting religious equipment like मुखवस्त्रिका, etc., and being present at one place, this is द्रव्य सामायिक. In द्रव्य सामायिक, the seat, clothes, cleaning, मुखवस्त्रिका, mala, etc. should be clean and simple, they should be white, not colorful. White color is a symbol of purity and auspiciousness. Modern science has also considered white color as a symbol of peace. In सामायिक, neither dirty and disgusting religious equipment should be kept nor glittering luxurious items. भाव सामायिक is that in which the seeker remains stable in the nature of the soul. Both द्रव्य and भाव are necessary in सामायिक. भावशून्य द्रव्य is only a stamped clay, it cannot get value in the market like a gold coin, it can only entertain children. द्रव्यशून्य भाव is only gold, on which no stamp is imprinted. It can get value as gold but not as a coin. द्रव्ययुक्त भाव is a gold coin. It holds its value and moves freely everywhere. Therefore, भावयुक्त द्रव्य सामायिक is also important.
1. आदिमंगलं सामाइयज्झयणं ।...... सव्वमंगलनिहाणं निव्वाणं पाविहित्ति काऊण सामाइयज्झयणं मंगलं भवति ।
- आवश्यकचूर्णि
[26]

Page #30:
---------------------------
There are two types of Samayik based on the eligibility of the practitioner: 1. Samayik for householders and 2. Samayik for ascetics. According to tradition, Samayik for householders should be for one Muhurta (48 minutes), but they can also observe Samayik for longer durations based on their situation. Samayik for ascetics is for their entire lifetime.

Acharya Bhadrabahu has described three types of Samayik: 1. Samyaktv Samayik, 2. Shruta Samayik, and 3. Charitra Samayik. Both Samyaktv and Shruta are essential for the practice of equanimity. Without Samyaktv, Shruta cannot be pure, and neither can Charitra. First, firm faith leads to the purification of belief. Samyaktv does not involve blind faith. It involves the knowledge of discrimination. Shruta purifies thoughts. When belief and thoughts are pure, then Charitra becomes pure.

Samayik is a spiritual practice, therefore the question of caste does not arise in it. Harikeshi Muni was an Antyaj by caste, but through the practice of Samayik, he became worthy of being worshipped by the gods. Arjun Malakar, who was a cruel murderer one day, embraced liberation through the influence of Samayik practice.

Jain literature provides an incident of a Punia Shravak to illustrate the importance of Samayik. When Emperor Shrenik inquired, Lord Mahavira told him that he would be born in the first hell after death because he had accumulated such karmas. Emperor Shrenik asked for a way to escape hell. The Lord gave him four solutions. One of those solutions was to buy the Samayik of the Punia Shravak. When Shrenik went to buy the Samayik, the Punia Shravak said to him, "What is the price of one Samayik? You can ask Lord Mahavira." In response to King Shrenik's question, Lord Mahavira said, "O King! You have such vast wealth, but all this wealth is not enough to buy even a fraction of Samayik. The value of Samayik is far greater than that." The essence is that Samayik is a priceless practice. Spiritual practice cannot be compared to material wealth. In the face of spiritual wealth, material possessions are not only insignificant but negligible.

**Comparison: Buddhist and Vedic Tradition**

Samayik is the pure practice of Jain sadhana. This practice can be partially compared to the practices of other religions. Buddhism is a stream of Shraman culture. In that stream, the Eightfold Path is described for practice. The word Samyak is used before each element of the Eightfold Path, such as Samyakdrishti, Samyak-sankalp, Samyak-vachan, Samyak-karmanta, Samyak-ajiva, Samyak-vyayama, Samyak-smriti, and Samyak-samadhi.

1. Aavashyak Niyukti, Gatha 796
2. Samaiyam cha tiviham, sammattam suyam taha charittam cha. Duviham cheva charittam, agaram anagariyam cheva.
- Aavashyak Niyukti, 796
3. Uttaradhyayanasutra, Harikeshi Adhyayan, 12
4. Antakrit Dashaang, 6 Varga, Tritiya Adhyayan
5. (a) Digha Nikaya - Mahasatipatthana - Sutta (b) Samyutta Nikaya 5, p. 8-10
[27]

Page #31:
---------------------------
Buddhist scholars believe that the word "samyak" used here means "sam" because the Pali word "samma" has both "sam" and "samyak" forms. The word "samyak" used here refers to reducing the tendencies of attachment and aversion. Only when the amount of attachment and aversion is reduced can the seeker take steps towards equanimity yoga. The last path in the Eightfold Path is called "samyak samadhi". In samadhi, the mind becomes free from attachment and aversion. Until the mind becomes free from attachment and aversion, samadhi is not realized. In the Samyutta Nikaya, the Tathagata Buddha said - Those who have truly understood the Dharma, who are not entangled in any opinion or later, are enlightened, have equal vision, and their conduct remains equal even in unequal situations. In another place in the Samyutta Nikaya, Buddha clearly stated - The path of the Aryans is equal. Aryans conduct themselves equally even in unequal situations. In the Majjhima Nikaya, the pacification of attachment, aversion, and delusion is considered the ultimate. In the Suttanipata, it is said that just as I am, so are all beings in the world. Therefore, one should conduct oneself by considering all beings as equal to oneself. The emphasis on the middle path in Buddhist philosophy is also based on equanimity. Thus, references to equanimity are found here and there in Buddhism. This makes it clear that Buddhism also considers equanimity to be an essential part of practice. It is true that they did not describe Samayik, but they did mention the fundamental equanimity of Samayik.

The Vedic tradition's texts also mention equanimity yoga here and there. The Bhagavad Gita is a representative text of the Vedic tradition. In it, while discussing yoga, equanimity is called yoga. The goal of knowledge, action, devotion, and meditation is equanimity. Without equanimity, knowledge is ignorance. The one who has equanimity is truly the knower of reality. Without equanimity, action does not become inaction, and in the absence of equanimity, action will remain bound. Without equanimity, a devotee is not a true devotee. Equanimity has that extraordinary power by which ignorance transforms into knowledge, and that knowledge is known as yoga. From the Gita's perspective, the Supreme Self, Brahman, is equal. The person who remains in equanimity is in the state of being the Supreme Self. In the ninth chapter, Shri Krishna told the valiant Arjuna - O Arjuna! I am present in all beings in the form of equality. What is the meaning of equanimity from the Gita's perspective? Pondering on this question...

Page #32:
---------------------------
Acharya Shankar has written that the meaning of equality is equivalence, it is the view of self. Just as happiness is dear to me, so too does he see happiness and sorrow as favorable and unfavorable to all beings, he does not act. He is the one who is equal-sighted. To have the view of self towards all beings is equality. The yogi practitioner of equality, whether in a favorable situation or an unfavorable situation, whether he receives respect or scorn, whether he receives unfavorable things, whether he sees the attainment of perfection or receives imperfection, even then his inner mind remains equal in all those situations. Krishna said to Arjuna that he who remains equal in happiness and sorrow, he who is not agitated or disturbed by the objects of the senses, he is the one who is entitled to liberation/immortality. In the eighteenth chapter of the Gita, Shri Krishna said in very clear words that he who is situated in the state of equality, he alone can attain my supreme devotion. Thus, the tone of equality yoga is expressed here and there in the Gita.

Today, in the absence of equality yoga in the world, the dark clouds of inequality are hovering. Due to which the individual, society and nation are troubled. Equality yoga establishes harmony in various aspects of life in such a way that not only the struggle of individual life ends, but also the struggles of social life are destroyed, if all the members of society and nation strive for it. Equality yoga eliminates intellectual prejudice and the sweet stream of affection begins to flow. All the struggles of life end, the root cause of the struggle of the intellectual world is insistence and prejudice. Freed from the poison of prejudice, man readily accepts truth. The yogi practitioner of equality is neither narrow-minded in his intellectual view nor does he have any attachment to enjoyment. Therefore, his conduct is pure and his thoughts are noble. He believes in the principle of "live and let live". Thus, we see that through equality yoga, the Gita author has emphasized the practice of equanimity.

In Samayik, neither attachment plays its own tune nor does hatred play its magical tune. This is an undertaking to become free from attachment and aversion. This is the alchemy that, holding the finger of discrimination, places the practitioner on the golden earth of equality. This is the practice of decorating and adorning life.

Chaturvinshati stava
The second essential in the six essentials is Chaturvinshati stava. We have seen in the previous lines that Samayik prescribes the practice of abstaining from faulty conduct. By abstaining from faulty conduct, the practitioner necessarily takes refuge in some support, so that he can remain steady in equanimity. For this purpose, the practitioner praises the Tirthankaras in Samayik.

Chaturvinshati stava is a unique creation of devotional literature. In it, the Ganges of devotion is flowing. If the practitioner takes a dip in that Ganges, he cannot remain without being intoxicated with joy. The Tirthankaras are great in terms of renunciation and detachment, in terms of the practice of restraint. By extolling their virtues, spiritual strength is infused into the practitioner's inner heart. If for some reason faith becomes weak, then it infuses new inspiration.
-
1. Shrimad Bhagavad Gita, Shankar Bhashya 6/32
2. Gita 2/15
3. Gita 18/54
[29]

Page #33:
---------------------------
It happens. Before his eyes, a blazing reflection of renunciation and detachment appears, melting his ego like ice.
Remember, the body of a Tirthankara is made up of the most auspicious atoms in the world, therefore, from the point of view of form, the Tirthankara is great. Among all the beings in the world, the Tirthankara is the most powerful. Even the greatest heroes cannot stand before his strength. Tirthankaras are born with Avadhijnana. As soon as they accept the Shraman-Diksha, they attain Manahparyavgyan and after that, the divine light of Kevalgyan starts shining in them, therefore, from the point of view of knowledge, the Tirthankara is great. From the point of view of Darshan, Tirthankaras are the holders of Kshayik Samyaktva. Their character develops progressively. Their results are always increasing. No one can match them in terms of knowledge, Darshan, and character, as well as in charity. Before entering the Shraman Dharma, they donate one crore eight lakh gold coins every day for one year. They are secret Brahmachari. Even during the time of Sadhana, the Devanganas cannot attract them with their wonderful forms. Tirthankaras set a record in the field of Tapasya. They do not even drink water during the time of Tapasya. In the field of Bhavana, the Bhavana of Tirthankaras becomes progressively pure and purest.
Thus, the life of Tirthankaras is a holy institution of various characteristics. There can be many Arihants at one place at one time, but there is only one Tirthankara. Every Sadhak can become an Arihant by trying, but to become a Tirthankara, the Sadhana of not one but many Bhavas is required. Tirthankaratva is an excellent Puny nature. By engraving the qualities of Tirthankaras, the heart becomes pure, desires are calmed. Just as a cold compress calms fever during a high fever, in the same way, when the fever of desire creates restlessness in life, the remembrance of Tirthankaras provides peace like a cold compress. By praising Tirthankaras, accumulated Karma is destroyed. Just as a tiny spark can burn a pile of cotton, in the same way, the praise of Tirthankaras destroys Karma.
When we praise Tirthankaras, a bright ideal of each Tirthankara remains before us. As soon as the remembrance of Bhagwan Rishabhdev comes, the picture of the Adimyug starts shining on the mental canvas. He starts thinking that Bhagwan created this human culture. He ran the administration of the state. He taught man the lessons of art, civilization, and religion. He left royal splendor and became a Shraman. Even after not getting alms for a year, joy played on his face. The life of Bhagwan Shantinath is a great symbol of peace. The life of Bhagwati Malli is a shining example of women's life. Bhagwan Arishtanemi is the very incarnation of compassion. For the protection of the lives of animals and birds, he even abandons the beautiful Rajimati. As soon as the remembrance of Bhagwan Parsva comes, a form of the Tapasya tradition of that era comes before us, in which there is no light of knowledge, the flames of Kshayas are burning in the inner mind, and the flames of Panchagni are also burning outside. He saves the snake burning in those flames. Even when tortured by Kamath, no anger arose in his mind, and even when praised by Dharanendra Padmavati, no happiness arose in his mind. This is his Vitaragi form. The life of Bhagwan Mahavira is a great revolutionary life. Even from many hair-raising Upsargas, he does not deviate even a little. In the Upsargas given by Aryas and Anaryas, by Devas and Danavas, by animals and birds, he remains unshakable like Mount Meru. He refutes caste and creed and emphasizes the importance of qualities. He gives respect to women.
[30]

Page #34:
---------------------------
Thus, the praise of the Tirthankaras inspires humans to awaken their own valor. The soul is the Supreme Soul. The karma-bound being is the karma-free Shiva. One day, the soul of the Tirthankar was also trapped in the mire of worldly desires, just like ours. But as soon as he understood his true nature, he abandoned it and became Narayana from a human. He became the Supreme Soul from the soul. If I also strive like the Tirthankar, I can become like him. Shri Krishna had clearly told Arjuna, "Do my devotion, I will free you from all sins." Shraman Bhagwan Mahavira also said, "I am the protector from fear." The Tathagata Buddha said, "He who sees me, sees the Dharma." However, it is clear that according to both Jain and Buddhist ideologies, a person ascends to the highest peak of his own effort and falls into the abyss of his own misdeeds. Jainism does not give place to the idea of being freed by the grace of the Lord without trying to free oneself from sin. It has not considered such mindless prayer to be appropriate. Its clear intention has been that such prayers make humans humble and dependent. The devotee who does not make his own effort, the praise of the Tirthankaras alone cannot grant him liberation. The effort of the individual can only lead him towards the palace of liberation.
The Tirthankaras are the pillars of light on the path of sadhana. The lighthouse guides the ship, but it is the ship that does the work of sailing. Similarly, it is the duty of the seeker to progress towards sadhana. From the Jain perspective, the goal of devotion is self-realization. It is to express the power that lies within oneself. The kind of faith/feeling that is strong in the seeker's inner mind, his life will be like that. That is why the Gita-kar said, "This man is made of faith, whatever he is devoted to, he becomes that." In the house where the Garuda bird resides, there cannot be a snake. Snakes flee from the shadow of Garuda. Where the praise of the Tirthankaras, like Garuda, is seated in the hearts, there the snakes of sin cannot stay. The holy remembrance of the Tirthankaras destroys sin. A disciple asked with curiosity - Bhagwan! What virtue is attained by doing the twenty-four stava? Bhagwan Mahavira, while solving, said - By doing the twenty-four stava, the purity of vision is attained. There are many benefits of the twenty-four stava. It purifies faith, makes rightness pure. It develops the power to bear hardships and trials with equanimity, and the holy inspiration to become a Tirthankar is awakened in the mind. That is why the twenty-four stava or the praise of the Tirthankar has been given a place in the six essentials.
Vandan
In the field of sadhana, after the Tirthankar, the second place is that of the Guru. The Tirthankar is a god. After the god, the Guru is bowed to. He is praised and greeted. In the necessary appointment, the words like chitikarma, poojakarma etc. have been used in the sense of Vandan. The seeker is dedicated to virtue with all his mind, speech and body.
1. Gita 18/66 2. Sutra Kritanga 1/16 3. (a) Majjhimanikaya (b) Itivrittak 3/43 4. Shrimad Bhagavad Gita 17/3
[31]

Page #35:
---------------------------
It is said that the virtuous are worthy of respect. Humility is essential in life. Jain Agamas consider humility as the foundation of religion. The Agam literature elaborates on humility, but it is true that Jainism is not about blind subservience. In the time of Lord Mahavira, there was a sect whose followers would bow to any animal or bird they encountered on their path. Lord Mahavira clearly stated, "Human! Your mind is not meant to bow to the feet of the unworthy." Being humble is one thing, but bowing to every individual as if they are divine is another. Jainism emphasizes the worship of virtues. It bows to the feet of the virtuous. To bow to virtues means to embrace them. If a seeker bows to an unrestrained, degenerate person whose life is filled with misconduct, desires, and flames of attachment and aversion, it means encouraging those vices. Acharya Bhadrabahu, in his work "Aavashyak Niyukti," clearly states that such unworthy individuals should not be bowed to, as they are unworthy of respect. Bowing to unworthy individuals does not lead to the shedding of karmas nor does it enhance one's reputation. Approving of unrestraint and misconduct leads to the binding of new karmas. Therefore, bowing to them is futile. An unworthy individual who knows that their life is a storehouse of vices, if they receive a bow from virtuous individuals, they pollute their own life. They increase their unrestraint and bring about their own downfall.

From the Jain perspective, both material and emotional character are essential in a seeker. If there is no material character, only emotional character, it is not commendable. Because for ordinary seekers, their pure character is their guide. If there is only material character and no emotional character, it is also not praiseworthy. It is merely a facade. A seeker needs a guru whose material and emotional character are both pure, whose life is complete in both behavior and conviction. Only such a virtuous guru is worthy of respect and praise. From such a virtuous guru, a seeker can receive pure inspiration. The practice of bowing in "Aavashyak Niyukti" is to bow to such a virtuous guru.

Bowing eliminates ego, leads to humility, and expresses unwavering devotion to virtuous teachers. Following the commands of the Tirthankaras leads to the worship of pure religion. Therefore, a seeker should constantly be aware and bow. There should be no negligence in bowing. When the source of devotion flows in the seeker's inner mind, they spontaneously bow to the feet of the virtuous teachers. Bowing that is not primarily driven by devotion, but by fear, temptation, reputation, or other such emotions, is merely material bowing, not emotional bowing. Material bowing often leads to the binding of karmas. Bowing done with pure and unblemished emotions is the true bowing. Acharya Malayagiri wrote, "Material bowing is a sign of false vision, but emotional bowing is a sign of right vision."

- Aavashyak Niyukti 1108
1. Pasatthai vandamanassa neva kitti na nijjarahoai.
Kayakilesam emeva kunai tah kammabandham cha.
2. Je bhamchearabhatta pae uddanti bhambayarinam.
Te honti kunt muntaa bohi ya sudulhaa tesim.

- Aavashyak Niyukti 1109
[32]

Page #36:
---------------------------
It does. The act of worshipping matter by a person with a wrong view is merely a mechanical process, it does not bring any spiritual benefit. Both matter and feeling are necessary for worship.
In the 'Dhammapada', the Tathagata Buddha said,
"The fruit of the sacrifice and offering that a person performs throughout the year with the desire for merit is not even a fourth part of the fruit of saluting the virtuous souls. Therefore, one should bow down to the great souls with simple minds. The man who always serves the elders and is respectful, his four things increase: longevity, beauty, happiness and strength." Thus, worship is given importance in Buddhism. There also,
-
There has been a tradition of worship based on seniority and juniority in the life of a Shraman.
In the Vedic tradition also, worship is considered necessary for the growth of virtues. In the Shrimad Bhagavata, there is a mention of Navdha Bhakti. In that Navdha Bhakti, worship is also described as a type of devotion. In the eighteenth chapter of the Shrimad Bhagavad Gita, Shri Krishna has encouraged the devotees for worship by saying "Maam Namaskuru".
-
Jain sages have thought very extensively and deeply about worship. Acharya Bhadrabahu has described 32 defects of worship. Only a seeker who avoids those defects can perform true worship. In short, those defects are as follows:
-
1. Anadrita 2. Stabdha 2. Prasiddha 4 Paripindita 5. Tolgati 6. Ankusha 7. Kachchparigat 8. Matsyodavritta 9. Manasa Pradwishta 10. Vedikabaddha 11. Bhaya 12. Bhajaman 13. Maitri 14. Gaurav 15. Karan 16. Stainya 17. Pratyanik 18. Rusht 19. Tarjit 20. Shatha 21. Hilita 22. Viparikunchita 23. Drishttadrisht 24. Shringa 25. Kar 26. Mochan 27. Ashlist Anashlist 28. Un 29. Uttar Chuda 30. Muk 31. Dhadar 32. Chudali.
The essence is that while worshipping, there should not be any kind of selfish feeling/aspiration/fear or disrespect towards anyone in the inner mind. We should give due respect to those whom we worship. Mind, speech, and body, all three should be bowed down at the feet of the worshipable.
Pratikraman
All the spiritual traditions of India provide strong inspiration for self-realization. Due to negligence and carelessness in the soul since time immemorial, vices and desires have established their dominance. They have to be removed and Godhood has to be awakened. The animalistic tendency in man is not his own, but has come from outside. The seeker's
1. Dhammapada, 108
2. Dhammapada 109
3. Manusmriti, 2/121
4. Shrimad Bhagavata Purana 7/5/23
5. Shrimad Bhagavad Gita 18/65
6. (a) Aavashyakaniyukti 1207-1211
(b) Pravachansaro uddhar Vandanaadwar
[33]

Page #37:
---------------------------
The soul is like the sun, surrounded by dark clouds. Due to the black clouds of karma, the soul's supreme brilliance is not visible. It considers itself lowly and insignificant. The mistakes made in the past due to ignorance and carelessness can only be rectified through **pratikraman**. **Pratikraman** is like a panacea for destroying the disease of sin.

**Pratikraman** is a unique term in the Jain tradition. The literal meaning of **pratikraman** is to return. We have transgressed our limits, moved away from our natural state and entered a state of deviation. Therefore, returning to the limits of our natural form is **pratikraman**. **Pratikraman** is the criticism and condemnation of sins committed by oneself, by others, or by approving of sins committed by others, for the purpose of eliminating all sins committed through mind, speech, and body. Acharya Hemchandra wrote, "**Pratikraman** is to return oneself to the auspicious from the inauspicious among the auspicious yogas." Acharya Haribhadra also said the same in his **Aavashyakavritti**.

Returning from the transgression of the accepted rules and limits is **pratikraman**. In the field of sadhana, there are five terrible defects: **mithyatva**, **avrata**, **pramada**, **kṣaya**, and **ashubha yoga**. The sadhaka introspects his life during the pleasant times of morning and evening. At that time, he deeply contemplates whether he has strayed from the path of **samyaktv** and become entangled in the thorny bushes of **mithyatva**? Has he forgotten the nature of **vrata** and embraced **avrata**? Instead of wandering in the blissful garden of **aprammatta**, has he wandered in the scorching desert of **pramada**? Has he left the fragrant, verdant garden of **akṣaya** and walked on the blazing path of **kṣaya**? Has the tendency of mind, speech, and body, which should be engaged in **shubha yoga**, become engaged in **ashubha yoga**? If I have gone into **mithyatva**, **avrata**, **pramada**, **kṣaya**, and **ashubha yoga**, then I should return to **samyaktv**, **vrata**, **akṣaya**, **aprammatta**, and **shubha yoga**. **Pratikraman** is performed with this very vision.

-

**Aavashyak Nirukti**, **Aavashyak Churni**, **Aavashyak Haribhadravriti**, **Aavashyak Malaya Giri Vriti**, etc. have discussed **pratikraman** in great detail. They have also given eight synonyms for **pratikraman**, which express the different meanings of **pratikraman**. Although the meaning of all eight is the same, they are:

1. **Pratipam kramanam pratikramanam**, **ayam artha shubhayoghebhyo'shubhayogantaraṁ krāntasya shubheshu evaṁ kramanātpratipam kramanam**. - **Yoga Shastra**, Third Light, **Svopjnavritti**
2. **Svasthanad yat parasthanam pramadasya vashad gatah**.
**Tatraiva kramanam bhuyah pratikramanamuchyate**.
3. (a) **Prati prativartanaṁ vā, shubheshu yogeshu mokshaphaladeshu**. **Nishalyasya yateryat tadva jneyam pratikramanam**. (b) **Aavashyak Nirukti**, Verse 1250
4. **Padikamanam padiyarana, pariharaṇa varana niyatti ya ninda gariha sohi, padikamanam atthaha hoi**.
[34]
**Aavashyak Nirukti** 1233

Page #38:
---------------------------
The words are helpful in understanding the complete meaning of Pratikraman. They are as follows:

1. **Pratikraman** - This word has the prefix "Prati" and the root "Kramu". "Prati" means - adverse and "Kramu" means - stepping. The return of the seeker from the state of Mithyatva, Agnana, Asanyam, which is the opposite of Samyagdarshan, Samyagjnana, Samyakcharitra, to his own state is Pratikraman or repetition.
2. **Praticharana** - To practice restraint with utmost care, staying away from the field of Asanyam, with purity is Praticharana, i.e., to progress in the practice of restraint is Praticharana.
3. **Pratiharana** - While the seeker is diligently advancing on the path of practice, he encounters many obstacles in his path. Sometimes the attraction of Asanyam wants to distract him from practice, sometimes favorable and unfavorable circumstances arise. If the seeker does not maintain Pariharana (Pratiharana), he may go astray. Therefore, he constantly abandons inauspicious yoga, inattention and misconduct. This is Pariharana.
4. **Varana** - Varana means prohibition (stopping). The seeker can attain liberation only by practicing restraint, restraining himself from objects and passions. Therefore, the word Varana has been used in the sense of Pratikraman to renounce objects and passions.
5. **Nivritti** - Nivritti has been of paramount importance in Jain practice. Even if there is a tendency towards inauspicious yoga due to negligence, even while being constantly vigilant, one should quickly come to the auspicious. The word Nivritti has come here as a synonym for Pratikraman to renounce the inauspicious.
6. **Ninda** - The seeker keeps introspection. Whatever sinful tendencies have occurred in his life, he should condemn those sins with a pure heart. Self-condemnation is for polishing life. It creates remorse in the mind towards sins and the seeker resolves that I will not commit the sins that I committed carelessly in the future. Thus, the word Ninda has been used in the sense of Pratikraman to condemn sins.
7. **Garda** - Ninda is done by oneself, it does not require a witness and Garda is done in front of the gurus. It is very difficult to reveal one's sins to the gurus without any reservation. A seeker who does not have self-strength cannot do Garda. There is intense remorse for sins in Garda. Garda is a Garudi mantra that removes the poison of sin, by using which the seeker becomes free from sin. Therefore, Garda is called a synonym for Pratikraman.
8. **Shuddhi** - Shuddhi means purity. Just as the stain on the utensil is cleaned with sourness, the dirt on the gold is purified by heating, the dirt of the woolen garment is cleaned with petrol, in the same way the dirt of the heart is cleaned.

Page #39:
---------------------------
It is purified by **pratikraman**. Therefore it is called **shuddhi**.
Acharya Bhadrabahu has encouraged the seeker to deeply contemplate on four main topics in **pratikraman**. From this perspective, there are four types of **pratikraman**:
1. For **Shraman** and **Shravak**, there are provisions for **mahavrata** and **anuvrata** respectively. To avoid any faults, constant vigilance is necessary. Although **Shraman** and **Shravak** remain constantly vigilant, sometimes due to carelessness, there may be lapses in non-violence, truthfulness, non-stealing, celibacy, and non-possession. In such cases, **Shraman** and **Shravak** should perform **pratikraman** for their purification.
2. A code of conduct for **Shraman** and **Shravak** is laid down in the **Agam** literature. For **Shraman**, there are many provisions like **swadhyay**, **dhyan**, **pratilikhan**, etc., while for **Shravak**, there is also a provision for daily practice. If there is a lapse in following these provisions, then **pratikraman** should be performed in that regard. Even a slight carelessness towards one's duties is not right.
3. It is very difficult to prove abstract substances like the soul through direct evidence. They can only be proved through evidence like **Agam**. If doubt arises in the mind regarding these abstract elements, whether they exist or not, then the seeker should perform **pratikraman** for its purification.
4. The sages have forbidden harmful actions like violence, etc. The seeker should not perform these harmful actions. If, due to carelessness, they are performed, then purification should be done.
In the **Anuyogadwar Sutra**, two types of **pratikraman** are mentioned: **dravya pratikraman** and **bhav pratikraman**. In **dravya pratikraman**, the seeker performs **pratikraman** while sitting in one place, without any use, with the desire for fame. This **pratikraman** works like a machine, lacking contemplation. There is no remorse in the mind for sins. He continues to commit those lapses again and again. From a real perspective, the purification that should happen does not happen through that **pratikraman**. **Bhav pratikraman** is that in which the seeker experiences intense remorse in his inner mind for his sins. He thinks, why did I commit these lapses? With firm determination, he criticizes those sins usefully. He makes a firm resolve that these faults will not occur again in the future. Thus, **bhav pratikraman** is the real **pratikraman**. In **bhav pratikraman**, the seeker neither indulges in false beliefs and other evil thoughts himself, nor encourages others to do so, nor approves of indulging in evil thoughts.
Generally, it is understood that **pratikraman** is for the purification of faults committed in the past. But Acharya Bhadrabahu has explained that **pratikraman** does not only purify faults committed in the past, but also purifies those committed in the present and future.
1. **Padisiddhanam karane, kicchanam akaranepaddikamanam. Asaddahaneyatha, viviriyaparuvanaye a.**
- **Aavashyakaniyukti Gatha 1268**
2. **Micchattai na gacchai na ya gacchavei na anujane. Jam man-vay-kaehin tam bhaniyam bhavpaddikamanam.**
- **Aavashyakaniyukti (Ha.Bha.Vr.)**
3. **(a) Aavashyakaniyukti (b) Pratikraman shabdo hi atra ashubhayoganivrittimatrartha samanyatah parihrigrite, tatha cha satyateetavishayam pratikramanam nindadwarena ashubhayoganivrittireveti, pratyupannavishayapi sanvardwarena ashubhayoganivrittireva anagatavishayam api pratyakhyanadwarena ashubhayoganivrittireveti na dosha iti.**
- **Acharya Haribhadra**
[36]

Page #40:
---------------------------
It also purifies the faults. The purification of the faults incurred in the past is done in the **Aalocna Pratikraman**, and even in the present, the seeker, by remaining engaged in **Sanwar Sadhana**, becomes free from sins. Along with this, in **Pratikraman**, he accepts **Pratyakhyan**, which saves him from future faults as well. He resolves, "I will be free from the inauspicious yoga of the past, I will be inclined towards the auspicious yoga in the present, and I will also be inclined towards the auspicious yoga in the future."

From the perspective of time, there are five types of **Pratikraman** - 1. **Daivaasik**, 2. **Raatrik**, 3. **Paakshik**, 4. **Chaaturmaasik**, and 5. **Saanvatsarik**.

1. **Daivaasik** - **Pratikraman** done at the end of the day is **Daivaasik**. 2. **Raatrik** - At the end of the night, to purify the faults incurred during the night.

3. **Paakshik** - At the end of fifteen days, on the days of **Amavasya** and **Poornima**, to contemplate the sins committed throughout the fortnight and perform **Pratikraman** is **Paakshik Pratikraman**.

4. **Chaaturmaasik** - After four months, on the days of **Kartik Poornima** and **Phalguni Poornima**, to criticize the faults incurred in the four months and perform **Pratikraman** is **Chaaturmaasik**.

5. **Saanvatsarik** - On the fiftieth or fifty-first day of **Aashaadhi Poornima**, to perform **Pratikraman** for the faults incurred throughout the year.

Here, there may be a natural curiosity - when the seeker performs **Pratikraman** regularly every morning and evening, then what is the need for **Paakshik**, **Chaaturmaasik**, and **Saanvatsarik Pratikraman**? The solution is - just as a house is cleaned daily, but on festival days, special cleaning is done, similarly, in daily **Pratikraman**, the transgressions are criticized, but on festival days, with special awareness, life is observed, examined, and the sins are washed away.

In **Sthanaanga**, six types of **Pratikraman** are described from other perspectives. They are as follows -

1. **Uchchar Pratikraman** - **Pratikraman** for the faults incurred while walking on the way while defecating and cleaning the stool with awareness.

2. **Prasravan Pratikraman** - **Pratikraman** for the act of urinating after cleaning the urine with awareness.

3. **Itvar Pratikraman** - Performing **Pratikraman** for short periods like daily, nightly, etc.

4. **Yaavatkath Pratikraman** - The resolution to be free from sin for the entire life, which is taken for the duration of **Mahavrat** etc., is **Yaavatkath Pratikraman**.

5. **Yatkinchit-Mithya Pratikraman** - Even while living life with caution, if any kind of uncontrolled behavior occurs due to carelessness or inattentiveness, to accept that mistake at that moment and to repent for it.

6. **Swapnaantik Pratikraman** - To repent for a bad dream seen in a dream, which is in the form of a vice or desire.

1. **Sthanaanga 6/5/37**
[37]

Page #41:
---------------------------
The six types of *pratikramna* that have been expounded are primarily related to the life-conduct of a *shraman*.
In brief, the *pratikramna* that is necessary for all seekers can be classified as follows: *pratikramna* of 25 *mithyatva*, 14 *jnana-atichar*, and 18 *papasthanas*. Secondly, *pratikramna* of the five great vows, *asanyam* of mind, speech, and body, faults related to walking, speaking, begging, receiving and depositing, and excretion of stool and urine, etc., is also necessary for *shraman* seekers. *Pratikramna* of transgressions in the five *anu-vratas*, three *guna-vratas*, and four *shiksha-vratas* is necessary for *vrati* *shravakas*. For those seekers who have taken the *sanlekhana* vow, *pratikramna* of the five transgressions of *sanlekhana* is necessary.
*Pratikramna* is the lifeblood of Jain practice. There is no action in which a slip-up due to carelessness cannot occur. Whether while relieving oneself of minor excretions, while performing ablutions, while copying, or while going here and there for alms, the seeker should be constantly aware of these slip-ups. Without neglecting these slip-ups even in the slightest, one should perform *pratikramna* to be free from these faults. Because *pratikramna* is an unparalleled action for polishing life.
In *pratikramna*, the seeker deeply examines his life, there is unity in his mind, speech, and body. While practicing, the seeker sometimes becomes deviated from his practice due to anger, pride, delusion, or greed, he makes a mistake, then at the time of *pratikramna*, he deeply observes his life and refines each and every fault. If he could not reveal the hidden faults in his mind due to shame, he reveals those faults too in the presence of the *sadguru* or in the presence of the Lord. Just as a skilled physician examines and reveals the remaining disease in the body through X-rays, etc., similarly, in *pratikramna*, the seeker observes each tendency, expresses those faults, and becomes light.
*Pratikramna* is an unparalleled action in the life of a seeker. It is that diary in which the seeker writes down the list of his faults and undertakes to be free from each and every fault. He is called a skilled businessman who looks every evening to see how much profit he has made today. A businessman who does not know his income cannot be a successful businessman. The seeker should see what duty I should have done today, but due to carelessness I could not do it? I should not have been alienated from my duty. In this way, he remembers his mistakes. Remembering his mistakes makes him aware of his true situation. Until the mistakes are remembered, the mistakes are not understood, then they cannot be refined. The seeker often does not consider his mistakes as mistakes, but considers them right, but in reality, they are his mistakes. Many people, even though they understand the mistake, do not accept it. But when the seeker introspects, he becomes aware of his mistake. It is said that the famous thinker Franklin improved his life through a diary. He had many vices in his life. He used to write his vices in his diary and then deeply contemplate them, thinking how many mistakes I have made this week. I will not repeat these mistakes next week. In this way, through the diary, he gradually removed the vices of life and became a great virtuous thinker.
*Pratikramna* is the best undertaking to improve life, the axis of spiritual life. After criticizing one's own faults, a feeling of repentance arises, and all faults are burnt and destroyed by the fire of that repentance.
[38]

Page #42:
---------------------------
Pāpāchāran is like a surgical wound. If it is not removed, but kept hidden in the mind, its poison will continue to grow inside and that poison will ruin the life of the seeker.
A major weakness of humans is that they always remember their virtues but forget their vices. They also forget the virtues of others and remember their vices. This is why they rarely present a list of their virtues and never tire of singing the tales of others' vices. While the seeker should see the virtues of others and their own vices. The eight synonyms of Pratikraman include the words "ninda" and "garha". Condemnation of others leads to karma bondage and self-condemnation leads to the destruction of karma. When the seeker examines their life, they see thousands of vices in their life. They try to remove those vices gradually. This is the characteristic of a seeker's life that they are a seeker of virtues. Their vision is like that of a swan. Like a swan, they accept the path of virtues, they pick up the pearls. They do not put their mouth on excrement like a crow.
Pravarana in Buddhism
Just as there is a provision for seekers to perform Pratikraman at the end of the night and the end of the day in Jainism, there are also provisions for liberation from sin in other traditions. The word Pratikraman is not used in Buddhism, but instead the words Pratikarma, Pravarana and Papadeshana etc. are used. In Udāna, the Tathagata Buddha said
Papadeshana is necessary for the purity and divinity of life. By criticizing the conduct of sin, a person deeply examines the faults of sin in relation to our life
Pravarana has been of great importance in Buddhism. The burden becomes lighter. After the rainy season, the monastic community gathers and presents what faults they have committed in the rainy season? This is Pravarana. In this, the seen, heard and suspected offenses are rectified. This leads to mutual humility. The method of Pravarana was as follows - the chief monk informs the monastic community that today is Pravarana. First, the senior monk sits on the Kukkuta seat with the Uttarasangha on his shoulder. With folded hands, he requests the community that I am performing Pravarana before you of the seen, heard, suspected offenses. The community should tell me my offenses, I will explain them. He repeats this three times. After that, the younger monk and then all the monks in turn repeat their sins. In this way, fortnightly purification is done through Pravarana. Pravarana is done on the fourteenth and full moon. Earlier, at least five monks were considered necessary for Pravarana. Later, four, three, two and finally one monk was also allowed to perform Pravarana. In special circumstances, Pravarana could be done very briefly and at other times as well.
-
-
-
In the text 'Bodhicharyavatara', Acharya Shantideva has written - One should repeat Triskandha, Papadeshana-Punyanumodana and Bodhiparinamana three times at night and three times during the day, so that unintentional mistakes are mitigated.
1. Udāna 5/5, Translator Jagdish Kashyap, Maha Bodhi Society, Sarnath
2. Anujānami bhikkhave, vassam, buṭṭhānaṁ, bhikkhūṁ tīhi ṭhānehi pakāretu diṭṭhena vā sutena vā parisankāya vā.
Sā vo bhavissati ajñāmajñānulomata āpattivuṭṭhānata vinayapurekkhā ratā.
Mahāvagga, p. 167
3. Bodhicharyavatara 5/98
-
[39]

Page #43:
---------------------------
It goes. Acharya Shantideva has explained two types of Papadeshna - Prakritisavadya and Prajnaptisavadya. Prakritisavadya is that which is inherently blameworthy, such as violence, falsehood, theft, etc., and Prajnaptisavadya is the violation of a vow after taking it, such as Vikal food, possessions, etc. In Bodhicharyavatara, Acharya Shantideva writes - "Whatever Prakritisavadya and Prajnaptisavadya sins I, the ignorant fool, have committed, I bow down to the Lord with folded hands, trembling with sorrow, for the atonement of all of them. O heroes! Accept the offense as an offense. I will not commit this sin again." Buddhist Pravarana, as the senior monk recites the Acharya Samhita, and after reading each rule, he expects the monks present to reveal it to the Sangha if anyone has violated the rule. In the Jain tradition, there is a provision for criticizing sins before the Guru or the Geetarth. But there is no tradition of revealing sin before the Sangha. Revealing sin before the Sangha can also be misused by the Agiitarth person. It can also lead to a situation of condemnation. Therefore, Jainism has made a provision for criticism before the Geetarth. The Pravarana before the Sangha can be compared to the collective Pratikraman prevalent today. Pratikraman and Sandhya
Like Pratikraman in the Vedic tradition, there is a provision for Sandhya. It is a religious ritual performed both in the morning and evening. Sandhya means - Sam - to meditate in the best way possible. To meditate with devotion, with faith, being engrossed in the devotion of one's Ishtadev. The second meaning of Sandhya is union/conjunction/relationship. The union or relationship of the devotee with the Supreme Being during worship. The third meaning is the religious rituals performed at the junction of night and day, that is Sandhya. In this Sandhya, an attempt is made to purify the body by sprinkling water on the body with the Vishnu mantra. The seat is purified by sprinkling water on it, chanting the praise of Mother Earth. Then there is contemplation on the order of creation, then the cycle of Pranayama begins. The glory and dignity of Agni, Vayu, Aditya, Brihaspati, Varuna, Indra and Vishwa Devas have been sung. Saptavyahriti is for these Devas only. The Vedic sages have praised water with great emotion. They said - "O water! You wander in the midst of all living beings, your movement is everywhere in the cave of the universe. You are the Yajna, the Vashatkar, the Ap, the Jyoti, the Rasa and the Amrit too." In Sandhya, the Sun is offered water three times. In the first offering, the riding of three demons is imagined, in the second, the weapons of the demon, and in the third, the destruction of the demons. After that, the Gayatri Mantra is recited. In it, the Sun is prayed for intelligence and inspiration. There is also a practice of sprinkling water in these praises, which is based on external rituals. There is no attempt to touch the emotions of the inner world and liberate the soul from the dirt of sin. In one mantra, such sentiments have definitely been expressed -
"Sun Narayana, Yakshapati and Devas, I pray to you - protect me from sins committed due to Yaksha, subject and anger. I offer the sins committed by mind, speech, hands, feet, stomach and penis in day and night to the Sun, the immortal womb. Therefore, may he destroy those sins. 21. Om Antascharasi Bhuteshu, Guhayaam Vishvato Mukhah.
Twam Yajnastam Vashatkar, Apo Jyotir Aso Amritam. 2. Om Surya Cha Ma Manyu Cha Manyupataya Cha Manyukritebhyah Papebhyo Rakshantaam. Yad Ahra Yad Ratrya Paapam Akaan Manasa Vaacha Hastabhyam
Padbhyam Udarena Shishna Ratris Tadavalumpatu, Yat Kinchid Duritam Mayi Idam Ahamapo Amritayoni Suryey Jyotishy Juhoomi Swaha."
[40]

Page #44:
---------------------------
There is a mantra in the Krishna Yajurveda that says, "I surrender whatever misconduct has occurred from my mind, speech, and body." In this way, the Vedic tradition seeks forgiveness from the Lord for sins committed through the evening ritual. This is similar to the concept of Pratikraman.

In the Parsi religion, there is also a provision for confessing sins. The Khordah Avesta is the main scripture of the Parsi religion. It states, "I repent for the evil thoughts that have arisen in my mind, the use of vulgar language from my speech, and the wrongdoings of my body. I repent for all the wrong deeds I have done. I repent for arrogance, slander of the dead, greed, anger, envy, looking with evil intent, self-indulgence, laziness, whispering, violation of purity, false testimony, theft, adultery, and all sins that I have committed knowingly or unknowingly. I confess these wrongdoings with a pure heart and separate myself from them."

The founder of Christianity, Jesus, considered it necessary to confess sins. Hiding sins makes them grow, while confessing them reduces or destroys them. This method of confessing sins to be free from faults is similar to Pratikraman. Pratikraman is the best way to purify life. Some religions discuss it in detail, while others mention it briefly. But it is true that all religions have considered it necessary.

Kayotsarga also holds a significant place in the Jain practice. Kayotsarga is called Vranachikitsa in the Anuyogadwar Sutra. Constant vigilance is necessary because negligence can lead to faults in practice. Kayotsarga is a kind of balm for healing the wounds caused by these faults. It heals the wounds caused by excesses. If a garment becomes very dirty, it needs to be cleaned. It won't be clean in one wash; it needs to be cleaned repeatedly with soap. Similarly, the garment of restraint also gets stained with the dirt of excesses and the stains of mistakes. These stains are cleansed through Pratikraman. The stains that don't disappear through Pratikraman are removed through Kayotsarga. In Kayotsarga, deep contemplation is undertaken to destroy the fault.

Why is Kayotsarga performed? The Necessary Sutra, while contemplating this question, states that Kayotsarga is performed to refine the life of restraint, to free the soul from Maya, Mithyatva, and Nidana Shalya, and to destroy the effects of sinful karmas.

Kayotsarga consists of two words: Kaya and Utsarga. It means the abandonment of the body. However, it is not possible to abandon the body while alive. Here, the abandonment of the body means the abandonment of physical restlessness and attachment to the body. The practitioner remains isolated from the material objects of the world for some time and immerses themselves in their true self. Kayotsarga is a way of turning inward.

Page #45:
---------------------------
This is a sacred practice. Through it, the practitioner moves from an outward-oriented state to an inward-oriented one, becoming detached and rising above attachment and aversion. Kayotsarga reduces physical attachment. Attachment to the body is the biggest obstacle to spiritual practice. By reducing attachment to the body through Kayotsarga, the practitioner is freed from the desire to adorn and beautify the body and becomes absorbed in the Self. This is why Kayotsarga is said to be the end of suffering for the practitioner. Whatever the practitioner does, they are advised to perform Kayotsarga after the action, so that they can be free from attachment to the body.

Kayotsarga is given a separate place in the six essentials, which expresses the sentiment that every practitioner should contemplate morning and evening that this body is separate and I am separate. I am eternal, immortal, imperishable. This body is transient. Like a dewdrop on a lotus leaf, it is impossible to say when this body will be destroyed. For the sake of the body, a human being also performs actions that are not conducive to their spiritual progress. They are unable to discern between edible and inedible food for the nourishment of the body. Kayotsarga reduces attachment to the body. When the practitioner is in Kayotsarga, they endure any kind of affliction, such as bites from insects, mosquitoes, or cold and heat, with a peaceful mind. They remain in the body but are beyond the body. Acharya Dharmadas has written in the Upadeshamala that one should not wear any covering during Kayotsarga.

In Kayotsarga, the practitioner is completely still and motionless like a rock. They remain in the posture in which they abandon attachment to the body and become absorbed in the Self. Acharya Bhadrabahu has written that in the state of Kayotsarga, if someone applies sandalwood to the practitioner out of devotion, or if someone pierces their body with a needle out of hatred, whether they live or die, the practitioner remains the same in all situations. Only then is Kayotsarga pure. During Kayotsarga, if any kind of affliction arises from gods, humans, or animals, the practitioner who endures them with equanimity, their Kayotsarga is truly correct.

The facts that Acharya Bhadrabahu has presented for the practitioners of Kayotsarga infuse strength into the practitioner's inner mind, and they become immersed in Kayotsarga with determination. However, this does not mean that they should fall into the trap of false beliefs and sacrifice their lives. Because the situation of all practitioners is not the same. Some practitioners may be exceptional, they are not afraid of hardships, they move forward courageously like lions. But there are also some weak practitioners, for them the Necessary Sutras instruct on the use of shelters. In Kayotsarga, there may be various bodily ailments such as coughing, sneezing, belching, fainting, etc. Sometimes there may also be tremors in the body. Even then, Kayotsarga is not broken. At some point, the practitioner may be standing in Kayotsarga, and at that time, the wall or roof of the house may also collapse. There may also be a fire in the house or where they are standing. There may also be afflictions from thieves and kings. At that time, the practitioner can leave Kayotsarga and go to a safe place. Their Kayotsarga will not be broken, because the main purpose of Kayotsarga is Samadhi. If Samadhi is broken, it turns into Artha and Raudra meditation. This transformation breaks Kayotsarga. The Kayotsarga in which Samadhi increases is beneficial. But the action that increases Asamadhi
1. Aavashyakaniyukti, Gatha 1548 2. Tivihanuvasagganam Manusaanam Tiriyaanam.
Sammamahiyasanaae Kaussaggo Havai Sumro ||
- Aavashyakaniyukti, Gatha 1549
[42]

Page #46:
---------------------------
If there is intense and fierce meditation, it is called *kayotsarga* done in the name of *kayaklesha*. Acharya Bhadrabahu has even said that if a practitioner is absorbed in *kayotsarga-mudra* and another practitioner is bitten by a snake, then in such a situation, that practitioner should immediately leave *kayotsarga* and help the bitten practitioner. At that time, it is more meritorious to help than to do *kayotsarga*.

The meaning of *kayotsarga* is not just that the practitioner should abandon physical restlessness and stand still like a tree, like a mountain, or like dry wood. The stillness related to the body can also be found in one-sense beings. No matter how many blows you strike on a mountain, when does it become restless? It does not even get angry at anyone. The stability that is in it is the stability of an undeveloped being, but the stability that occurs in *kayotsarga* is of a different kind. Acharya Jinadasagani Mahttar has described two types of *kayotsarga* - 1. *dravya-kayotsarga* and *bhava-kayotsarga*. In *dravya-kayotsarga*, the body is first restrained. Abandoning physical restlessness and attachment, becoming stable in the *jin-mudra*, restraining bodily movements, this is *kaya-kayotsarga*. It is also called *dravya-kayotsarga*. After this, the practitioner becomes absorbed in *dharma-dhyana* and *shukla-dhyana*. He binds the mind with pure thoughts and resolutions, so that he does not experience any kind of physical pain. He lives in the body but remains separate from the body in the state of the self. This is the feeling of *bhava-kayotsarga*. This type of *kayotsarga* is the one that destroys all kinds of suffering.

To understand the difference between *dravya* and *bhava*, the Acharyas have described four types of *kayotsarga* - 1. *utthit-utthit* 2. *utthit-nivist* 3. *upavist-utthit* 4. *upavist-nivist*.

1. *Utthit-utthit* - In this *kayotsarga-mudra*, when the practitioner stands, his consciousness also stands with him. He abandons inauspicious meditation and becomes absorbed in auspicious meditation. He is a first-class practitioner. His body is also raised and his mind is also raised. He is raised from both the *dravya* and *bhava* perspectives.

2. *Utthit-nivist* - Some practitioners close their eyes and stand up for the sake of practice. They appear to be standing physically, but there is no awakening in them mentally. Their minds are entangled in various worldly things. They keep diving into the stream of intense and fierce meditation. Even though their body is standing, their mind is seated. Therefore, even though he is standing, that practitioner is seated.

3. *Upavist-utthit* - Sometimes, due to physical illness or old age, the practitioner cannot stand for *kayotsarga*. He does *kayotsarga* sitting in a comfortable posture like *padmasana* or *sukha-asana* for the sake of physical comfort. From the perspective of the body, he is sitting, but a strong stream of auspicious and pure feelings is flowing in his mind, due to which he is mentally raised even though he is sitting. The body may be sitting, but the practitioner's mind is raised.

4. *Upavist-nivist* - Some practitioners, even though they are physically capable, do not stand up due to laziness.

1. *So pun kaussaggo davvato bhavato ya bhavati.*
*Davvato kayachetttha niroho, bhavato kaussaggo jhanam.*
2. *Kaussagan tao kujja savvadukkhavimokkhano.*
- *Aavashyakachurni* - *Uttaraadhyayana* 26-42
[43]

Page #47:
---------------------------
Standing
Sitting
He performs Kayotsarga while sitting. From the perspective of the body, he is sitting, and from the perspective of the mind, he is not awake. His mind is entangled in worldly desires or attachment and aversion. Both his body and mind are still. Of these four types of Kayotsarga, the first and third types are the true Kayotsarga. Through these Kayotsargas, the practitioner can attain the great goal of practice.
From the perspective of physical posture and mental thought process, Acharya Bhadrabahu has described nine types of Kayotsarga in the Aavashyakaniyukti -
Physical Posture
Mental Thought Process
Standing
Dharma-Shukla Dhyana 2. Utsrita
Standing
Neither Dharma-Shukla nor Aarta-Roudra, but a state of thoughtlessness 3. Utsrita-Nishanna
Sitting
Aarta-Roudra Dhyana 4. Nishanna-Utsrita
Sitting
Dharma-Shukla Dhyana
Neither Dharma-Shukla Dhyana nor Aarta-Roudra, but a state of thoughtlessness 6. Nishanna-Nishanna
Lying Down
Aarta-Roudra Dhyana 7. Nishanna-Utsrita
Lying Down
Dharma-Shukla Dhyana
Neither Dharma-Shukla nor Aarta-Roudra, but a state of thoughtlessness 9. Nishanna-Nishanna
Kayotsarga can be performed in all three postures: standing, sitting, and lying down. The method of performing Kayotsarga in the standing posture is as follows: Let both hands hang towards the knees, keep the feet in a straight line, the heels should touch, and there should be a gap of four fingers between the toes of both feet. The one performing Kayotsarga in the sitting posture should sit in Padmasana or Sukhasana. Keep the hands either on the knees or place the right hand on the left palm and keep them on the lap. The one performing Kayotsarga in the lying down posture should first stretch and then stabilize the limbs from head to toe. Do not keep the hands and feet close together. In all of these, it is essential that the limbs are stable and relaxed.
There has been a special tradition of performing Kayotsarga while standing. Because the Tirthankaras often perform Kayotsarga in this posture. Acharya Aparajit has written that the practitioner performing Kayotsarga should become inactive from the body and stand like a pillar. Extend both arms towards the knees. Become absorbed in profound meditation. Do not stand with the body completely stiff, nor should it be bent. He should stand in Samamudra. In Kayotsarga, bear the hardships and trials with equanimity. Kayotsarga
Lying Down
1. Aavashyakaniyukti, Gatha 1459-60 2. Yogashastra 3, Patra 250
[44]

Page #48:
---------------------------
The place where it is performed should be secluded, peaceful and devoid of living beings.
_ It is an attempt to move towards *dravya-kayotsarga* and *bhava-kayotsarga*. *Dravya* is gross, it moves from grossness to subtlety. In *dravya-kayotsarga*, external objects are abandoned, such as - abandoning *upadhi*, abandoning *bhakta-pan* etc., but in *bhava-kayotsarga*, three things are necessary - *kashaya-vyutsarga*, *sansara-vyutsarga* and *karma-vyutsarga*.
In *kashaya-vyutsarga*, all four types of *kashayas* are avoided. *Krodha* is conquered by *kshama*, *mana* by *vinaya*, *maya* by *saralata* and *lobha* by *santosha*.
In *sansara-vyutsarga*, the world is abandoned. The world is of four types - *dravya-sansara*, *kshetra-sansara*, *kala-sansara* and *bhava-sansara*. *Dravya-sansara* is of four *gati* forms. *Kshetra-sansara* is in the form of *adhah*, *urdhava* and *madhya* lokas. *Kala-sansara* is from one time to the time of *pudgala-paravartan*. *Bhava-sansara* is the form of the soul's attachment to objects, which is the root cause of worldly wandering. *Dravya*, *kshetra*, *kala* sansara cannot be abandoned. In *Acharanga*, it is said - those who are the objects of the senses, they are truly the world
and the soul attached to them wanders in the world. In *Agam* literature, the word 'sansara-kantare' is used here and there. Which means - the four *gati* forms of the world are the shores. To abandon the root causes of worldly wandering. To abandon *mithyatva*, *avrata*, *pramada*, *kashaya* and *ashubha* yoga is *sansara-vyutsarga*.
The *kayotsarga* performed to destroy the eight types of *karmas* is called *karma-vyutsarga*. The various types of *kayotsarga* that have been described have been classified from the physical point of view and from the point of view of thought. From the point of view of purpose, *kayotsarga* has been divided into two types - *cheshta-kayotsarga* and *abhibhava-kayotsarga*.
_ *Cheshta-kayotsarga* is performed for the purification of defects. When the *shraman* goes out for *shaucha*, *bhiksha* etc. and there is a tendency towards *nidra* etc., this *kayotsarga* is performed for the purification of the defects that arise in it. *Abhibhava-kayotsarga* is performed in two situations - firstly, to concentrate the mind for *atma-chintan* for a long time or for *atma-shuddhi*, and secondly, in the event of a crisis. Such as revolution, fire, famine etc. The time of *cheshta-kayotsarga* is based on *uchchvasa*. This *kayotsarga* is performed in various situations for 8, 25, 27, 300, 500, and 1008 *uchchvasas*. The time of *abhibhava-kayotsarga* is the least *antar-muhurta* and the best is one year. *Bahubali* performed *kayotsarga* for one year.
1. There, the body is free from desire, standing like a pillar, with arms hanging down, well-versed in meditation, with a raised and bent body, enduring all kinds of hardships, standing in a place devoid of living beings, desiring the destruction of *karma*, in a secluded place.
- *Mularadhana* 2-113, *Vijayoday* p. 278-279 2. In this world, there are four types of *sansara*, abandon them -
*Dravya-sansara*, *kshetra-sansara*, *bhava-sansara*, *kala-sansara*. - *Sthananga* 4,12,61 3. Which qualities are attached to it.
- *Acharanga* 1/1/5 4. That *utsarga* is of two types, *abhibhava* and *nayavya*.
The first is for the purification of *utsarga* in *bhiksha-riya*, the second is for the purification of *utsarga*. - *Aavashyak-niyukti*, verse 1452 5. (a) There, *cheshta-kayotsarga* is from eight to twenty-five to twenty-seven to three hundred to five hundred to one thousand and eight *uchchvasas*.
*Abhibhava-kayotsarga* is from *muhurta* to one year, like *Bahubali*. - *Yoga-shastra* 3, page 250 (b) *Antar-muhurta* is the least time for *kayotsarga*, one year is the best.
- *Mularadhana* 2, 116, *Vijayodayavritti*
[45]

Page #49:
---------------------------
There are five types of *Kayotsarga* performed for purification of *doshas*: daily, nightly, fortnightly, four-monthly, and yearly.

The *Kayotsarga* in the six essentials involves meditation on the *Chaturvinshati stava*. The *Chaturvinshati stava* has seven verses and twenty-eight lines. One line is meditated upon in one breath. Meditation on one *Chaturvinshati stava* is completed in twenty-five breaths. While inhaling, one should mentally recite 'Logass Ujjoyagare' and while exhaling, 'Dhammatithayare Jine'. While inhaling the second time, one should recite 'Arihante Kittaissan' and while exhaling, 'Chauveesam Pi Kevali'. In this way, the *Kayotsarga* of the *Chaturvinshati stava* is performed.

The objective, quantity, and time duration of *Kayotsarga* are given in *Pravachana Saroddhara* and *Vijayodayavritti* as follows:

**Pravachana Saroddhara**

*Chaturvinshati stava*

| Verse | Line | Breath |
|---|---|---|
| 1. Daily | 1. Yoga Shastra, 3 | 2. Four, two, twelve, twenty, four, these are the breaths. |
| 2. Nightly | 3. Twenty-five, thirteen, with 'Loga' twenty-three are to be meditated upon. | 4. One hundred and twenty-five, two hundred and fifty-two in a year. |
| 3. Fortnightly | 5. Evening and morning, three hundred each are to be done in a fortnight. | 6. Five in four months, eight thousand and eighty in a year. |
| 4. Four-monthly | 7. One hundred breaths in the evening, five hundred in the morning, three hundred in a fortnight. | 8. Four hundred in four months, five hundred in a year. |
| 5. Yearly | 9. Eight in *Pratikrama*, two in *Yogabhakti*, these two are mentioned. |  |

- *Mularadhana-Vijayodayavritti*, 1,116

Page #50:
---------------------------
## Translation:

1. Daily
2. Nightly
3. Fortnightly
4. Chaturmasik (Four-month period)
5. Annual

24
2
12
16
20
Vijayodaya
Verse
25
12%,
75
100
125
500
500

There is no uniformity in the number of breaths given for Kayotsarga in Pravachansaroththar and Vijayodaya Vritti. This can be easily understood from the chart given in the above lines.

1. Ashtotarashatoচ্ছ্বাসঃ Kayotsargaḥ pratikrame | Sandhye prabhaatike vaardhamananyastat saptavimshatiḥ || Saptavimshatiruchchvasaḥ samsaroonmoolanakshame | Santi panchanamaskaare navadha chinitte sati || 2. Ashtavimshati sankhyanaḥ Kayotsargaḥ mata jinaiḥ. Ahoratra gataḥ sarva shadavashyakakaarinaam || Swaadhyaaye dvaadasha praajnaiḥ vandanaayaam shadiritaḥ. Ashtau pratikrame yoghabhaktau tau dvaavudaahritau || 3. Moolaraadhana 2, 116 Vijayodaya Vritti
4. Uttaraadhyaayana 26, 39-51

Acharya Amitagati, belonging to the Digambar tradition, has laid down the rule that one should focus on 108 breaths for daily Kayotsarga and 54 breaths for night Kayotsarga. And for other Kayotsargas, one should focus on 27 breaths. In 27 breaths, there are nine repetitions of Namaskara, because one Namaskara Maha Mantra is focused on in 3 breaths. 'Namo Arihantaanam, Namo Siddhaanam' in one breath, 'Namo Aayariyaanam Namo Uvvajjaayaanam' in the second breath, and 'Namo Loe
"
Savvasahuunam' in the third breath - in this way, one Namaskara Maha Mantra is completed in 3 breaths. Acharya Amitagati believes that one should perform Kayotsarga a total of 28 times a day and night. 12 times during Swaadhyaaya, 6 times during Vandana, 8 times during Pratikramana, and 2 times during Yoghabhakti, making a total of 28 times.

Acharya Aparajit believes that one should perform Kayotsarga with 108 breaths if there is a transgression related to the five great vows. If there is doubt due to the mind's fickleness or in counting the number of breaths while performing Kayotsarga, then one should perform Kayotsarga for eight more breaths.

-
Foot Note
-
[ 47 ]
100
50
300
400
—
Upon examining the literature of both the Shwetambar and Digambar traditions, it is clear that Kayotsarga has been a special rule for Shraman Sadhakas in the past. In the study of Bhramana Samachari in Uttaraadhyaayana and
Breath
100
50
300
400
Amitagati Shravakaachar 8, 68-69
Amitagati Shravakaachar 8, 66-67

Page #51:
---------------------------
The "Dashavaikalik Chulika" mentions that the Shraman should perform Kayotsarga repeatedly. Mental concentration is essential for Kayotsarga. Kayotsarga is performed for many purposes. The main purpose of Kayotsarga is to alleviate anger, pride, delusion, and greed. Kayotsarga is also prescribed for the removal of inauspiciousness, obstacles, and hindrances. If any kind of inauspiciousness, obstacle, or ill omen occurs at the beginning of a good work or journey, one should perform Kayotsarga for eight breaths. In that Kayotsarga, one should contemplate the Namaskar Mahamantra. If the obstacle arises again for the second time, one should perform Kayotsarga for sixteen breaths and contemplate the Namaskar Mahamantra twice. If the obstacle arises again for the third time, one should perform Kayotsarga for thirty-two breaths and contemplate the Namaskar Mahamantra four times. If the obstacle arises again for the fourth time, one should understand that the obstacle is sure to come and should not start the good work or journey. The process of Kayotsarga is not painful. Kayotsarga provides complete rest to the body and an unprecedented feeling of peace in the mind. Therefore, Kayotsarga can be performed for a long time. In Kayotsarga, the mind is focused on the breath, hence its duration is also measured by counting the breaths.
The main purpose of Kayotsarga is to attain the proximity of the soul and its natural quality is to maintain mental balance. Maintaining mental balance purifies the intellect and makes the body completely healthy. Acharya Bhadrabahu has described many benefits of Kayotsarga: 1. Dehajadya Buddhi - Due to phlegm etc., there is inertia in the body. Kayotsarga destroys the doshas of phlegm etc. Therefore, the inertia arising from them is also eliminated.
2. Matijadya Buddhi - In Kayotsarga, the mind's tendency becomes focused, which makes the mind concentrated. Intellectual inertia is eliminated and sharpness comes in it.
3. Sukha-Dukha Titiksha - Kayotsarga gives an unprecedented ability to bear happiness and sorrow. 4. Anupreksha - The person in Kayotsarga practices Anupreksha or contemplation steadily. 5. Dhyana - Kayotsarga naturally leads to the practice of good meditation.
- Dashavaikalik Chulika 2-7
1. Abhikhanam Kaussagkari 2. Kayotsarga Shataka, Gatha 8 3. Savvesu Khaliyadisu Jhaejjha Panch Mangalam.
Do Siloge Va Chintejja Egggo Vavi Takkhanam || Biijyam Pun Khaliyadisu, Ussasa Hati Tah Ya Solas Ya.
Taiyammi U Battisa, Chauthammi Na Gachchae Annam || 4. (a) Dehamaijadassuddhi, Suhadukkhatitikkhaya Anuppeha.
Jhaiya Ya Suham Jhanam, Egggo Kaussaggammi. (b) Manaso Eggaggattam Janayi, Dehass Hanai Jaddattam.
Kaussaggaguna Khalu, Suhaduhamajjatthaya Cheva || (c) Prayatnavisheshatah Paramalaghavasambhavaat.
- Vyavahar Bhashya Peethika, Gatha 118, 119
- Kayotsarga Shataka, Gatha 13
- Vyavahar Bhashya Peethika, Ga. 125
- Vahi, Vritti
[48]

Page #52:
---------------------------
In Kayotsarga, along with the immersion of physical restlessness, there is also an immersion of physical attachment, which prevents the generation of tension in the body and mind. Physiologists believe that stress gives rise to many physical and mental ailments. For example, due to physical activity:
1. Sugar levels in the muscles decrease.
2. Lactic acid accumulates in the muscles.
3. An increase in lactic acid leads to an increase in body temperature.
4. Fatigue is experienced in the nervous system.
5. The amount of oxygen in the blood decreases.
But with Kayotsarga:
1. Acid is converted back into sugar.
2. The accumulation of lactic acid in the muscles decreases.
3. The decrease in lactic acid leads to a decrease in body temperature.
4. The nervous system experiences renewed freshness.
5. The amount of oxygen in the blood increases.
Thus, Kayotsarga is of great importance from a health perspective. The mind, brain, and body are deeply interconnected. When there is no harmony between these three, nervous tension arises. When we perform any action, there should be balance. When there is no balance, nervous tension increases. If the body is working separately and the mind is wandering elsewhere, then nervous tension arises. Kayotsarga is a beautiful way to relieve this nervous tension.
In Kayotsarga, relaxation is required first. If the practitioner wants to perform Kayotsarga while sitting, then they should sit in Sukhasana or Padmasana. Then straighten the spine and neck, ensuring there is no bending or tension. The limbs should be relaxed and straight. After that, take a deep breath. Try to take as long a breath as possible without discomfort. This will greatly help in the relaxation of both the body and mind. After taking eight to ten deep breaths, the process will become natural. By sitting still, some relaxation can happen on its own, and then focus the mind on the part of the body that needs to be relaxed. For example, first relax the muscles of the neck, shoulders, chest, abdomen, right and left back, arms, hands, palms, fingers, waist, legs, etc.
In this way, by relaxing the physical parts and muscles, the connection with the gross body is severed and a connection is established with the subtle body - the Taijas and Karman. The Taijas body provides radiance. By establishing a connection with the Karman body, the practice of discrimination is done. In this way, the delusion of body-self unity is dispelled by discrimination. The body is like a vessel. It contains many powers like breath, senses, mind, and brain. Kayotsarga is a simple way to become familiar with those powers. Through Kayotsarga, the breath becomes subtle. The breath is between the body and mind. Breath
[49]

Page #53:
---------------------------
Five types of breath have been described - 1. Sahaja Shwas 2. Shanta Shwas 3. Ukhadi Shwas 4. Vikshipt Shwas and 5. Tez Shwas.
In the first practice, the practitioner takes a deep and long breath. In the second practice, rhythmic breathing is practiced. In the third stage, subtle, calm and frozen breathing is practiced. In the fourth practice, there is a state of natural Kumbhaka. This state is created by Pranayama, Pralamb Jap and meditation. Pranayama has a direct effect on the body, but to strike the mental knot, it is necessary for the mind to be determined. Many Jain Acharyas have considered long breath to be useful, but not fast breath. Their opinion is that due to the injury of fast breath, the body and mind become weak due to excessive fatigue, there is no state of alertness towards consciousness. In that state, it becomes difficult to save oneself from the emptiness of drowsiness that comes due to fainting and fatigue. Therefore, the breath should not be pulled out. It should be made long and deep. The slower the breath, the less activity in the body. The subtlety of breath is peace. In the beginning, there is no expansion of energy and new production. Only energy is conserved and after a few days, that accumulated energy makes the mind unidirectional and engages it in a goal. Due to the slowness of breath, the body also becomes inactive, the breath becomes calm. The mind becomes thoughtless and intense dispassion arises in the inner mind. As the breath becomes fickle, so does the mind. When the breath becomes stable, the fickleness of the mind is also destroyed. Breath is a machine that remains in the body, when it becomes more active, there is turmoil in the body centers and when it becomes normal, a kind of peace prevails in it. The inactivity of breath is the peace and samadhi of the mind. When we get angry, our breathing rate increases, but in meditation, the breathing rate becomes calm, which makes the mind stable.
The ability of Kayotsarga comes after Pratikraman. In Pratikraman, the mind becomes completely pure due to the criticism of sins, due to which the practitioner can achieve concentration in Dharma Dhyan and Shukla Dhyan. If the practitioner performs Kayotsarga without purifying the mind, then he does not get that much success. For this reason, Kayotsarga has been ordained after Pratikraman in the Shadavasya.
To perform Kayotsarga correctly, it is necessary to avoid the defects of Kayotsarga. In the texts like Pravachansarothhar, 19 defects of Kayotsarga are described - 1. Ghotak Dosha 2. Lata Dosha 3. Stambh Kudya Dosha 4. Mal Dosha 5. Shabri Dosha 6. Vadhu Dosha 7. Nigad Dosha 8. Lambothar Dosha 9. Stan Dosha 10. Urdhika Dosha 11. Sanayati Dosha 12. Khalin Dosha 13. Vayas Dosha 14. Kapitya Dosha 15. Shirshothkampit Dosha 16. Muk Dosha 17. Angulika Bhru Dosha 18. Varuni Dosha and 19. Prajna Dosha.
These defects are mainly related to the body and the posture of sitting and standing etc. Therefore, the practitioner should practice Kayotsarga free from these defects.
Just as Kayotsarga is ordained in Jainism, it has been given great emphasis, in the same way, it has been accepted in other religious traditions to a greater or lesser extent. Acharya Shantirakshit has written in the 'Bodhicharyavatara' text - All beings who have a body,
1. If the breath moves, the mind moves, if the breath is still, the mind is still.
One should know that the breath that has gone into rhythm is useless. || 2. Bodhicharyavatara 3. 12-13
[50]

Page #54:
---------------------------
The body has been offered as a sacrifice, just like the type of happiness it is. Let them kill it, slander it, or throw dust on it, let them play, laugh, or indulge. What do I care? Because I have given the body to them. Thus they speak of body renunciation. Kayotsarga is a type of meditation practice. The Tathagata Buddha emphasized meditation practice. Meditation practice has been prevalent in the Buddhist tradition since ancient times. Even in Vipassana, etc., there is an attempt to remove attachment to the body.

**Rejection**

The name of the sixth essential is **pratyakhyana**. **Pratyakhyana** means renunciation. The word **pratyakhyana** is formed by the combination of the three words **prati-a-akhyana**. Accepting vows with restraint, contrary to **avirat** and **asanyama**, is **pratyakhyana**. In other words, **pratyakhyana** is the statement, in an all-encompassing way, towards one's own nature, which gives rise to the quality of **anasamsa**. In even clearer words, **pratyakhyana** is the statement of renunciation from inauspicious yoga and inclination towards auspicious yoga, with restraint towards the future.

In this vast universe, there are so many substances that it is impossible to count, and it is also impossible for one person to enjoy all those things. No matter how long a lifespan may be, a human being cannot enjoy all the things in the world. Human desires are limitless. He wants to have all things. Even if a Chakravarti Emperor gets all things, his desires cannot end. Desires keep increasing day by day and night by night. Due to desires, there is always unrest in the human mind. The only way to destroy that unrest is **pratyakhyana**. In **pratyakhyana**, the practitioner destroys the root cause of unrest, attachment and craving. As long as attachment remains, peace cannot be attained. **Samayik**, **Chaturvinshati stava**, **vandana**, **pratikramana**, and **kayotsarga** purify the self, but **pratyakhyana** is absolutely necessary to prevent the thief king of attachment from entering the mind again. Once a garment is cleaned, it is kept in a cupboard to prevent it from becoming soiled again. Similarly, **pratyakhyana** is done to prevent the mind from becoming soiled. In **Anuyogadvara**, **pratyakhyana** is called **gunadharana**. **Gunadharana** means to hold the qualities of vows. By restraining the actions of the mind, speech, and body, the inclination towards auspicious actions is focused. Focusing on auspicious actions restrains desires. Cravings are pacified. Many virtues are attained. For this reason, Acharya Bhadrabahu said, "**Pratyakhyana** leads to restraint. Restraint leads to the cessation of **asrava**, and the cessation of **asrava** leads to the end of craving. The end of craving gives rise to the incomparable state of **upshamabhava**, and from that, **pratyakhyana** becomes pure. From the purity of **upshamabhava**, the virtue of **charitra** is revealed. From **charitra**, karma...

1. **Pratyakhyanam** - **Pratyakhyana** is the statement of renunciation with restraint towards the future, contrary to the inclination. - **Yogashastravritti**
2. **Pratyakhyana** is the statement, in an all-encompassing way, towards one's own nature, contrary to **avirat** and **asanyama**, etc., which gives rise to the quality of **anasamsa**. - **Pravachansaro uddharavritti**
3. **Pratyakhyana** is the renunciation of craving, which leads to the cessation of **asrava**. - **Aavashyakaniyukti** 1594
**Pratyakhyana** becomes pure from the cessation of craving, and humans become free from suffering. - **Aavashyakaniyukti** 1595
[51]

Page #55:
---------------------------
They are **nirjīna** (non-living). From them, only the divine light of **kevalgyan** (omniscience) and **kevaldarshan** (omniscient vision) shines brightly, and the eternal bliss of **mukti** (liberation) is attained.

There are two main types of **pratyakhyan** (renunciation): 1. **Mūlaguṇa-pratyakhyan** and 2. **Uttaraguna-pratyakhyan**. **Mūlaguṇa-pratyakhyan** is adopted for life. There are also two types of **Mūlaguṇa-pratyakhyan**: 1. **Sarvamūlaguṇa-pratyakhyan** and 2. **Deshamūlaguṇa-pratyakhyan**. **Sarvamūlaguṇa-pratyakhyan** includes the five **mahavrata** (great vows) of a **shraman** (ascetic), and **Deshamūlaguṇa-pratyakhyan** includes the five **anuvrata** (minor vows) of a **shramanopasaka** (lay follower). **Uttaraguna-pratyakhyan** is adopted daily or for a few days. There are also two types of **Uttaraguna-pratyakhyan**: **Desh Uttaraguna-pratyakhyan** and **Sarv Uttaraguna-pratyakhyan**. For **grihastha** (householders), there are three **gunavrata** (virtue vows) and four **shikshavrata** (instruction vows), these seven are **Uttaraguna-pratyakhyan**. For both **shraman** and **shramanopasaka**, there are ten types of **pratyakhyan**. The **Bhagawatisutra**, **Sthananga-vritti**, **Aavashyak-niyukti**, and **Mulachar** describe these ten **pratyakhyan**. Their brief summary is as follows:

1. **Anagat**: The **tapa** (austerity) that should be done during festivals like **Paryushana**, should be done beforehand so that the service of the elderly, sick, and ascetics can be easily done in the future. **Vasunandi**, the commentator of **Mulachar**, has written: "The fast that is to be done on the fourteenth day should be done on the first day."
2. **Atikrant**: The **tapa** that should be done during the festival days, if it cannot be done due to the occasion of service, etc., should be done later on the non-festival days. **Vasunandi** has written: "The fast that is to be done on the fourteenth day should be done on the first day."
3. **Kotisahita**: Starting the next **tapa** without completing the previous **tapa** that is ongoing. **Acharya Abhaydev** has also given the same meaning in **Sthananga-vritti**. **Acharya Vattakera** has written the meaning of **Kotisahita pratyakhyan** in **Mulachar** as: "To resolve to do fasting, etc., according to one's strength." According to **Vasunandi**, this resolution is **Samanvita pratyakhyan**. For example, if there is strength after the **svadhyayavela** (time for self-study) the next day, then I will fast, otherwise not.
4. **Niyantrit**: Even if there are special obstacles like illness, etc., on the day when one intends to do **pratyakhyan**, one should do the **pratyakhyan** that one has resolved to do in the mind, without caring about those obstacles. In **Mulachar**, it is called **Vikhandit**, but there is no difference in meaning between the two. This **pratyakhyan** is for **Chaturdasha Purvadhari Jinakalp Shraman** and **Dasha Purvadhari Shraman**, because their resolve is so strong that no obstacle of any kind can deter them from their determination. After the **nirvana** (liberation) of **Jambuswami**, the **Jinakalp** was broken, so this **pratyakhyan** is also not present today.

- **Aavashyak-niyukti 1596**
. 1. **Tatto Charitta-dhammo, Kamma-vivega Tao Apuvva Tu.**
**Tatto Keval-naanam, Tao Ya Mukkho Saya-sukkho.** || 2. **Bhagawatisutra 7.2** 3. **Sthananga-vritti Patra 472-473** 4. **Aavashyak-niyukti, Adhyayan 6** 5. **Mulachar, Shat-aavashyak Adhikar, Gatha 140-141**
[52]

Page #56:
---------------------------
## Translation:

**5. Sakara:** When making a pratyakhyana, the sadhaka imagines a specific form in their mind - "If this type of situation arises, I will renounce it." In other words, the pratyakhyana made by imagining an exception in the mind is called Sakara-pratyakhyana.

**6. Nirakara:** This pratyakhyana is made without any exceptions. This pratyakhyana requires strong willpower. Acharya Abhaydev wrote about the fifth and sixth pratyakhyanas, stating that in Sakara pratyakhyana, all types of exceptions can be applied, but in Nirakara pratyakhyana, even exceptions like the command of a superior cannot be applied. However, the exceptions of Anabhoga and Sahasakara remain in both. Vasunandī, explaining the meaning of Aakara, wrote that one should perform penance in a particular constellation. The pratyakhyana made by performing penance for a long time based on the difference in constellations, etc., is Aakara. Performing fasting, etc., voluntarily without considering constellations, etc., is Nirakara pratyakhyana.

**7. Parimanavat:** When going for alms or taking food, the Shraman makes a vow, "I will only consume this much today." Or, when going to a householder's house to eat, they think, "If I get this type of food, I will eat it, otherwise not." For example, Shraman Datti, who holds the image of a monk, takes food only after determining the quantity. In Mulachar, the word Parimanagat is used instead of Parimanakrit.

**8. Niraveshesh:** Complete renunciation of all four types of food: Asan, Pan, Khadim, and Swadim. Vasunandī Shraman believes that this pratyakhyana is for life. However, there is no such description in the Svetambar Agam literature.

**9. Sanketik:** The pratyakhyana made with a signal is called Sanketik pratyakhyana. For example, by making a fist or tying a knot in a cloth - "Until I open my fist or the knot, I will not put anything in my mouth." The pratyakhyana in which the sadhaka renounces according to their convenience is called Sanketik pratyakhyana. In Mulachar, it is called Adhanagat. Vasunandī Shraman has interpreted Adhanagat pratyakhyana as a pratyakhyana related to the path. It indicates the practice of fasting while crossing a forest, river, etc. The meaning of Sahetuk pratyakhyana is fasting done when an upsurge, etc., occurs.

**10. Adha:** Making a pratyakhyana by setting a specific time limit. This pratyakhyana includes ten pratyakhyanas: (including Namokkar) Navkarsi, Porsi, Purvardha, Ekashan, Ekasthan, Achaml, Upvas, Divascharim, Abhigha, Nirvikrutik. The meaning of Adha is time. Acharya Abhaydev has interpreted Adha as the pratyakhyana made based on the time limit of Porsi, etc.

In pratyakhyana, the sadhaka restrains the evil tendencies of the soul, mind, speech, and body and engages in good tendencies. Due to the restraint of Asrava, the sadhaka becomes completely detached, which brings them peace. While taking the things that the sadhaka is allowed to take in pratyakhyana, they do not become attached to them. Pratyakhyana awakens a special awareness of non-attachment in the sadhaka's life.

Pratyakhyana has a special significance in the field of sadhana. The sadhaka should remain constantly vigilant so that no fault occurs in pratyakhyana. Therefore, there is a mention of six types of purity in the necessary.

Page #57:
---------------------------
These purifications are as follows:
1. **Shraddhanavishuddhi** - To follow with faith the form of the five great vows, twelve vows, etc., which is renunciation.
2. **Jnānavishuddhi** - To know the nature of the renunciation as it is, like the Jina Kalpa, the Sthavira Kalpa, the Mulaguna, the Uttaraguna, etc.
3. **Vinayavishuddhi** - Renunciation happens with the mind, speech, and body. In renunciation, as many salutations are prescribed, so many salutations should be done.
4. **Anubhashanashuddhi** - While accepting renunciation, stand in the posture of humility in front of the Sadguru and pronounce the pure text.
5. **Anupalanashuddhi** - In a terrible forest or in a famine, etc., or in a sick state, follow the vow with enthusiasm and in the right way.
6. **Bhavavishuddhi** - To recite the text of renunciation with a pure feeling free from attachment and aversion.

In the Necessary Appointment, Acharya Bhadrabahu has written that there is a possibility of three types of defects in renunciation. Therefore, the seeker should avoid those defects. Those defects are as follows:

1. A certain person has accepted renunciation, due to which he is being respected in society. I should also do renunciation in the same way, so that I will be respected. To do renunciation with such a feeling of attachment.
2. I should do such renunciation that the fame and glory of those who have accepted renunciation will be dimmed. To do renunciation motivated by ill will towards others in this way. In this type of renunciation, intense hatred is manifested.
3. To do renunciation motivated by the feeling that I will get fame in this world and in the next world also, the flute of happiness and peace will play in my life. In this, there is a desire for fame, a desire to gain wealth, etc.

The disciple presented the inquiry - Gurudev! Whose renunciation is good renunciation and whose renunciation is bad renunciation?

The Lord gave the solution - The renunciation of that seeker who has knowledge of the living and the non-living, who has complete knowledge of the purpose for which renunciation is being done, is good renunciation. The renunciation of that seeker who does not have knowledge of the living and the non-living, who, due to the predominance of ignorance, even while doing renunciation, does not know the essence of renunciation, is bad renunciation. Therefore, such a renunciant is unrestrained, restless, and a solitary child.

1. Thus, indeed, with the wrong perception, with the right hand, even with all beings,
He speaks of perception, but he does not speak the truth, he speaks deception .......
- Bhagavati || 2
[54]

Page #58:
---------------------------
## Translation:

**The texts like Pravachana Saroddhara and Yogashastra have expounded the fourfold truth (Chaturbhangi) by considering the qualifications and disqualifications of the seeker who accepts the renunciation and the seeker who grants it.**

1. **When the seeker who accepts the renunciation is wise and the guru who grants it is knowledgeable, then it is a completely pure renunciation.**
2. **If the seeker who accepts the renunciation does not know the secret of renunciation, but the guru who grants it knows the essence of renunciation and explains it to the disciple in a proper way, then the disciple's renunciation becomes a correct renunciation. If he does not understand its essence, then his renunciation is impure.**
3. **If the guru who grants the renunciation does not know the essence of renunciation, but the one who is accepting it knows the secret of renunciation, then that renunciation is pure renunciation. Even if knowledgeable gurus are present, it is inappropriate to accept renunciation from an ignorant person due to tradition or other reasons.**
4. **If the seeker who accepts the renunciation does not know the essence of renunciation and the one from whom he is accepting it is also ignorant of the secret of renunciation, then his renunciation is an impure renunciation.**

**Renunciation is in place of Mount Meru in the six essentials (Shadavashyak). Renunciation stops all future actions of non-observance (Avrata) and the seeker follows the rules and sub-rules properly.**

**Uttaradhyayanasutra, while contemplating on renunciation, has explained it in the following ways:**

1. **Samyoga-Pratyakhyana:** Abandoning the practice of eating together in a group, the food brought by the ascetics. This makes the being self-reliant and satisfied with the benefits he receives.
2. **Upadhi-Pratyakhyana:** Abandoning clothes and other equipment. This prevents obstacles in self-study (Swadhyay) etc. Being free from desires, he does not have the desire to ask for clothes etc. or to protect them, and there is no mental distress.
3. **Ahar-Pratyakhyana:** Abandoning food eliminates attachment to life. Being free from attachment, he does not experience any suffering even in the absence of food.
4. **Yoga-Pratyakhyana:** Restraining the tendencies of mind, speech, and body is Yoga-Pratyakhyana. This is attained in the fourteenth quality stage. Such a seeker does not create new karmas but destroys the accumulated karmas.

**References:**

1. Pravachana Saroddhara Vritti
2. Yogashastra, Swopagna Vritti
3. Uttaradhyayanasutra 29/33
4. Uttaradhyayanasutra 29/34
5. Uttaradhyayanasutra 29/35
6. Uttaradhyayanasutra 29/37

Page #59:
---------------------------
5. **Sadbhaav-pratyakhyaan** - To attain the state of **vitraag** by abandoning all kinds of tendencies. In this, the soul becomes free from all kinds of karmas.
6. **Shariir-pratyakhyaan** - In this, the state of **ashariiri siddha** is attained.
7. **Sahay-pratyakhyaan** - Not taking the help of anyone in one's work. This makes the soul attain **ekatva bhaav**. By attaining **ekatva bhaav**, it becomes wordless, free from strife, full of restraint and full of samadhi.
8. **Kashaay-pratyakhyaan** - Generally, the **saamyami sadhak** conquers **kashaay**, due to which the sadhak does not bind karmas. By conquering **kashaay**, he does not have attachment or hatred towards pleasant and unpleasant objects. Thus, the types of **pratyakhyaan** and their fruits are described in **Uttaraadhyaayan**. **Pratyakhyaan** stops the sinful acts that will happen in the future and the sadhak's life starts to shine with the pleasant light of restraint.

Thus, **Shadaavashyak** are essential for the sadhak. Whether the sadhak is a **shraavak** or a **shraman**, he does these actions. Yes, the depth and intensity of their experience can be and is different. A **shraman** can do these actions with more dedication than a **shraavak** because he is a renunciate of the world, completely detached from the beginning. This is why his sadhana has more brilliance than that of a **shraavak**. **Shadaavashyak** have a very important place in the life of a sadhak. Where **aavashyak** brings spiritual purity, there is also an increase in virtues like equality, humility, forgiveness, etc. in worldly life, due to which the springs of joy start flowing.

**Vyakhyasaahitya**

**Aavashyak Sutra** is such an important sutra that the most commentaries have been written on it. Its main commentary texts are - **Niyukti**, **Bhaashya**, **Churni**, **Vritti**, **Stabak** (Tabba) and **Hindi Vivechan**.

Ten **niyukti** are available on the **aagam**. The name of the first **niyukti** among those ten **niyukti** is **Aavashyak Niyukti**. **Aavashyak Niyukti** discusses many important topics in detail. In the subsequent **niyukti**, it is indicated to look at **Aavashyak Niyukti** without discussing those topics. To understand other **niyukti**, it is necessary to understand **Aavashyak Niyukti**. It first has an **upoudghaat**, which is in the form of an introduction. It has 880 **gaathaa**. It is a detailed description of the first five **gyaan**.

After the description of **gyaan**, **niyukti** describes **Shadaavashyak**. It first has **samaayik**. **Chaaritra** begins with **samaayik**. Both **gyaan** and **chaaritra** are necessary for liberation. The one who is eligible for **samaayik** is **shrutagyani**. He attains **kshay**, **upsham**, **kshayopsham**, **kevalgyaan** and **moksh**. The one who is eligible for **samaayik shruta** attains a glorious position like **tirthankar**. The **shruta** that the **tirthankar** preaches after attaining **kevalgyaan** is **Jinpravachan**. That
1. **Uttaraadhyaayan** 29/41
2. **Uttaraadhyaayan** 29/38
o०
3. **Uttaraadhyaayan** 29/39
4. **Uttaraadhyaayan** 29/36
[56]

Page #60:
---------------------------
After detailed contemplation, the purpose, instructions, and outcomes of Samayik have been discussed through 26 points. While contemplating how to eliminate Mithyatva, the author has described Mahavira's previous births, the conduct of the Kulkaras in those births, the life story of Bhagwan Rishabhdev, etc., in detail. The Nihavas have also been explained.

After contemplating Samayik from the perspective of Nay, Samyaktva, Shruta, and Charitra have been identified as the three aspects of Samayik. The one whose soul delights in restraint, rules, and austerity, whose inner mind is filled with an ocean of equanimity towards all beings - they are the true recipient of Samayik. The Samayik Sutra begins with the Namaskar Maha Mantra. Therefore, the origin, deposition, words, meaning, form, object, objection, fame, order, purpose, and fruit of the Namaskar Mantra have been contemplated from these eleven perspectives, which is very beneficial for the seeker. (Sarvavirat) In Samayik, the three Karans and three Yogas lead to the abandonment of the conscious tendency.

The second study is of the Chaturvinshati Stav. It sheds light on the six depositions of name, establishment, substance, field, time, and feeling.

The third study is of Vandana. Chitikarma, Kritikarma, Pujakarma, and Vinayakarma are synonyms for Vandana. Who should be worshipped? By whom should it be done? When should it be done? How many times should it be done? How many times should one bow their head? How many essentials are required for purification? How many faults should one be freed from? Why should Vandana be done? These nine points have been considered. The Shraman who has excellent conduct and pure thoughts is worthy of Vandana. Vandana should be performed when the Shraman is calm, assured, and tranquil.

The fourth study is called Pratikraman. Pratikraman is the return of the soul to its own place, which has gone astray into Mithyatva, etc., due to carelessness. Praticharana, Pariharana, Varana, Nivritti, Ninda, Garha, Shuddhi - these are synonyms for Pratikraman. Many examples have been given in the text to understand their meaning. The stories of Nagadatta, etc., have been given. After this, a collection of 32 Yogas like Alochana, Nirapalap, Aapatti, Dridhadharmata, etc., has been compiled and examples of Mahagir, Sthulbhadra, Dharmaghoosh, Surendradatt, Varattak, Vaidhanvantari, Karkandu, Arya Pushpabhooti, etc., have also been given to explain them. Along with this, light has been shed on Swadhyaya-Aswadhyaya.

The fifth study is the explanation of Kayotsarga. Kayotsarga and Vyutsarga are synonymous. Some faults are corrected by Alochana, some by Pratikraman, and some by Kayotsarga. Kayotsarga eliminates the inertia of the body and mind. It develops the ability to endure pleasure and pain. It involves contemplation of the twelve Anuprekshas like Anitya, Asharan, etc. The fickleness of the mind is destroyed and the practice of Shubhadhyan continuously increases. While contemplating Shubhadhyan, the author has said that the concentration of the mind for a moment is called Dhyan. He has described four types of that Dhyan: Art, Raudra, Dharma, and Shukla. The first two Dhyans are called Apadhyan because they are for the purpose of worldly advancement, and the last two Dhyans are praiseworthy because they are the cause of liberation. A lot of information has been given about the relationship between Dhyan and Kayotsarga, which is knowledge-enhancing. The Shraman should perform Kayotsarga according to his ability. Performing Kayotsarga for longer than one's capacity can lead to many kinds of faults. It is not appropriate to sleep deceitfully during Kayotsarga, to ask questions about the Sutra and its meaning, to remove thorns, to go to the toilet, etc. This shows neglect towards the task. Kayotsarga
[57]

Page #61:
---------------------------
They have also mentioned 19 defects like *ghotk* etc. The person who is beyond the body and mind is the true owner of *kayotsarga*.
The sixth study, *pratyakhyana*, has been discussed from six perspectives: *pratyakhyana*, *pratyakhyata*, *pratyakhyeya*, *pardshad*, *kathana-vidhi*, and *phal*. There are six types of *pratyakhyana*: name, establishment, substance, *aditsa*, prohibition, and feeling. The purity of *pratyakhyana* comes from six types: faith, knowledge, humility, *anubhashana*, observance, and feeling. *Pratyakhyana* stops the flow of *ashrava*. It leads to immersion in the river of equality. By worshipping character, the *karma* is destroyed. By performing *apuurvakarana*, one ascends to the *kshapka* category and attains *kevalgyan*. Finally, one gets the uninterrupted happiness of liberation. The person who is not distracted and uncorrupted is the owner of *pratyakhyana*.
In *avashyakaniyukti*, all the rules and regulations that make the life of a *shraman* brilliant and dominant have been discussed in detail. This *niyukti* also presents ancient historical facts. The author of this *niyukti* is Acharya Bhadrabahu. Historians believe that there were many Acharyas named Bhadrabahu in Jain history. One of them, the fourteenth *purvadhari* Acharya Bhadrabahu, went to Nepal to practice *mahapranayama* yoga. From the perspective of the Svetambara tradition, he was the author of *chedasutra*. According to the Digambara tradition, he went to the south instead of Nepal. From our perspective, these two Bhadrabahus must have been separate individuals. Because the one who went to Nepal did not go to the south, and the one who went to the south did not go to Nepal. The author of *niyukti*, Bhadrabahu, was the brother of the famous astrologer Varahamihira. His time is the sixth century of the Vikram era. Punyavijayaji, the author of *Agam Prabhakar*, believes that Shrutakevali Bhadrabahu started the *niyuktis*, and they continued to develop until the second Bhadrabahu. Thus, some of the *niyuktis* are very ancient, while others are more recent. The current *niyuktis* are not entirely composed by the fourteenth *purvadhara* Bhadrabahu. Because the author of *niyukti*, Bhadrabahu, has saluted the author of *chedasutra*, Bhadrabahu. According to our opinion, in *Samavayanga*, *Sthananga*, and *Nandi*, where the introduction of *dwadasanga* is given, the text "sankejjau nijjuttio" is found. This makes it clear that the tradition of *niyuktis* existed even during the *agam* period. Each Acharya or *upaadhyaya* would have created *niyuktis* from their own perspective to make their disciples understand the secrets of the *agam* by heart. Just like professors today make their students write notes, *niyuktis* would have been like that. The second Bhadrabahu would have given the final form to the *niyuktis* based on them.
After the *niyuktis*, commentary literature was written. The style of commentary of *niyuktis* was very cryptic and concise. They lacked the expansion of the subject. Their main goal was to explain the technical terms. The commentaries, written in Prakrit language in detail to reveal the deep secrets of *niyuktis*, are known by that name. The credit for expressing the abundance of meaning hidden in the words of *niyuktis* goes to the commentators. In the commentary, the use of Magadhi and Shaurseni is visible in many places. The main meter is *arya*. The commentary literature presents many ancient traditions, worldly stories, and the methods of conduct and thought of traditional *shramans*.
**Commentary**
The name of the commentator Jinabhadragani Kshamasraman is engraved in Jain history with honor. He wrote *Vishesh Avashyak Bhashya* on *Avashyak Sutra*. Three commentaries were written on *Avashyak Sutra*: 1. *Mula Bhashya*, 2. *Bhashya*, and 3. *Vishesh Avashyak Bhashya*. The first two commentaries are very concise. Many of their verses are found in *Vishesh Avashyak Bhashya*. Therefore, *Vishesh Avashyak Bhashya* also represents both commentaries. This commentary is only on the first study, *Samayik*. It has 3603 verses.
.. [58]

Page #62:
---------------------------
This commentary reflects upon almost all the important topics described in Jain Agam literature. It is a compilation and assessment of detailed material on knowledge, proof, ethics, Syadvada, Nayavada, and Karmavada. Its greatest feature is that Jain philosophical principles are compared with other philosophical principles. It analyzes the beliefs of Jain Agam literature from a logical perspective. This commentary is very useful for understanding the deep secrets of Agam and has been followed by later scholars. First, the sermons are greeted, and then it is written that liberation is attained through both knowledge and action. The necessary is itself knowledge-action-filled. From it, perfection is attained. Just as a skilled physician allows a suitable diet for a child, so too has the Lord granted permission for the necessary for seekers. Various obstacles arise in the best work. There is a provision for auspiciousness for their peace. Auspiciousness occurs in three places in the text. The word auspiciousness has been contemplated from the perspective of deposition. Knowledge feeling is auspicious. Therefore, there is a very detailed description of the five types of knowledge.

The necessary has been contemplated from names, etc., deposits. There are two types of necessary: substance-necessary and Agam and non-Agam forms. The example of Prince Kunal is given for the high-letter text. The example of the Vidyadhar is given for the low-letter text. The example of a child is given for both, and for the eager, examples of excessive food and medicine are given. To clarify the nature of the non-Agam form of the substance-necessary, the example of the Sadhvabhas is given. The feeling-necessary is also of two types: Agam form and non-Agam form. The use of the meaning of the necessary, which is the result of form, is the Agam form of feeling-necessary. The knowledge-action, which is the result of both forms, is the non-Agam form of feeling-necessary. The synonyms of the six necessities and their meaning-authority have been considered.

While contemplating Samayik, it has been said - equanimity is the characteristic of Samayik. Just as space is the basis of all substances, so too is Samayik the basis of all virtues. There are three types of Samayik: vision, knowledge, and character. There are many gates to enter a great city, so too are there four gates to the study of Samayik: undertaking, deposition, following, and Nay. All four gates have been described in detail. The essence of Samayik scripture is Samayik. Character is the direct cause of liberation. The purity of character comes from the true knowledge of the object through knowledge. Even with perfect knowledge, the being does not become liberated until it receives the benefit of complete purification. When does the being receive the benefit of Samayik? While contemplating this, it has been written that the being cannot receive the benefit of Samayik while the eight karma natures are in their excellent states. The excellent state of name, lineage is twenty koți-koți sagaropama. The excellent state of the deluding is seventy koți-koți sagaropama. The excellent state of knowledge-obscuring, vision-obscuring, painful, and hindrance is thirty koți-koți sagaropama. The excellent state of life-karma is thirty-three sagaropama. When the excellent state of the deluding karma is bound, the excellent state of knowledge-obscuring, vision-obscuring, painful, name, lineage, and hindrance karma is bound, but there is no fixed rule for the state of life-karma. It can be bound in all three states: excellent, medium, and inferior. When the excellent state of any karma other than the deluding is bound, the excellent state of the deluding or other karma is bound, but the state of life-karma can also be bound in the inferior state. Of these Samayik: rightness, scripture, country-vow, and all-vow, whoever has bound the excellent karma state, cannot attain even one Samayik. But it also happens and does not happen from the previously accepted alternative. For example, in the Uttara-Vimana-dwelling gods, there is previously accepted rightness, scripture, but not in the rest. Those who have the inferior state of knowledge-obscuring, etc., do not even receive the benefit of one of these four Samayik, because they have already received it. Therefore, the question of receiving it again does not arise. The inferior state of life-karma
[59]

Page #63:
---------------------------
This is not attainable by the one who is going to attain it, nor can he attain it.
After this, the nature of granthi-bhed has been explained by contemplating the causes of samyaktvaprapti. Except for ayukarma, the remaining seven karmas remain in the state of desh nyun kota-koti sagaropama, then the soul becomes inclined towards samyaktv. He attains samyaktv. When the palyopama separation is destroyed from it, deshvirati-shravaktv is attained. When the sankhyat sagaropama is destroyed from it, sarvavirati charitra is achieved. When the sankhyat sagaropama is destroyed from it, upshamshreni is attained. When the sankhyat sagaropama is destroyed from it, kshapak shreni is attained.
Due to the rise of kshaya, darshan etc. samayik cannot be attained. If it is attained by chance, it is destroyed again. Kshaya is that which benefits karmas. The destruction, upsham or kshayopahsam of these twelve types of kshayas, anantanubandhi-chatushk, apratyakhyani-chatushk, pratyakhyani-chatushk, leads to the attainment of charitra. In samayik, there is abandonment of savadha yoga. It is of two types, itvar and pavatkathic. Itvar samayik is short-lived and yavatkathic is for life. The bhashyakar has elaborated on samayik, chedopa sthapana, parihara vishuddhi, sukshmasampray and yathakyat charitra in detail.
Samayik charitra has been described through these twenty-six doors: udदेश, nirdesh, nirgam, kshetra, kal, purush, karan, pratyay, lakshan, nay, samavatar, anumata, kim, katividh, kasy, kutr, keshu, katham, kiyachir, kati, santar, avirahit, bhav, aakarsh, sparshan and nirukti. All the important things related to samayik are included in these doors. While considering the origin of samayik in the third nirgam door, the acharya has discussed the eleven ganadharas of Bhagwan Mahavira. While discussing the eleventh door of samayik, samavatar, the acharya has discussed the separation of charan karananuyog, dharmakathananuyog, ganitanuyog and dravyanuyog, and there is also a description of nihnvas. There is an elaborate discussion on nihnvavada. In the end, the original words of the samayik sutra, 'karemi bhanta' etc., have been considered.
Who will not be fascinated by the strong logical power, skill in expression, fluency in presentation and uniqueness of discussion of Jinbhadragani Kshamasraman? Visheshavashakbhashya has a unique place in language literature. Visheshavashakbhashya is the last work of Acharya Jinbhadra. He had also started writing his own commentary on it, but his lifespan was completed before it could be completed, due to which that commentary remained incomplete. The opinion of the knowledgeable is that the later period of Jinbhadragani should be around 650 to 660 Vikram Samvat. Churnisahitya
After the creation of niyukti and bhashya, a desire arose in the minds of Jain sages to write a commentary literature on the agamas. They composed commentaries in pure Prakrit and in Sanskrit-mixed Prakrit, which are now known as Churnisahitya. Jinadasagani Mahttar has a prominent place among the creators of Churnisahitya. He wrote seven churnis. Among them, Avashak Churni is an important work.
This churni is written according to niyukti, bhashya gathas have also been used here and there. The language is mainly Prakrit, but Sanskrit shlokas, prose and prose lines have also been quoted. The language is fluent. The style has elegance and vigour.
[60]

Page #64:
---------------------------
This is a detailed commentary. It is extensive compared to other commentaries. It mentions many texts like Oghanuyukti Churni, Govindanuyukti, Vasudeva Hindi, etc. It first discusses auspiciousness. Bhavamangal describes knowledge. It considers the essential aspects from the perspective of scriptural knowledge and from the perspective of deposition. It sheds light on the essential aspects of substance and essence. The Tirthankaras are the embodiments of the scriptures. It answers the question of who the Tirthankaras are and discusses the previous births of Lord Mahavira to explain how his soul was liberated from falsehood. In the birth of Marichi, Mahavira's soul was the grandson of Rishabhdev. Therefore, it sheds light on the previous birth of Lord Rishabhdev and his life. The entire life of Emperor Bharat is also included in it. After many births, Mahavira's soul became Mahavira. The commentary details all the hardships that Mahavira faced in his life. Like the appointment, it also describes nihilism. After that, it describes the distinctions of Samayik from the perspective of substance, synonyms, and Nayadristi, its owner, its area of attainment, time, direction, the one who performs Samayik, the reasons for its attainment, joy, the example of Kamadeva, compassion, Indra Nag, Punyashal, Shivraj Rishi Gangadatt, Dasharnabhad, Ilaputra, etc. It gives examples of the state of Samayik, the number of Samayik practitioners, the difference in Samayik, the attraction of Samayik, and the importance of equanimity by giving the example of Damdatt and Metary. It clarifies the subject by giving the example of Tetaliputra for summary, brevity, and flawlessness, and for religious interest and rejection. After this, there is the commentary of Sutrasparshik appointment. In it, the example of Arhantr, Dharmaruchi, and Jamgni is given for the great mantra of salutation, affection from the perspective of deposition, attachment, and hatred respectively. It sheds light on the salutation to Arhants and Siddhas, the four types of intellect, karma, liberation, yoga restraint, the unparalleled joy of Siddhas, salutation to Acharyas, Upadhyayas, and Sadhus, and its purpose. After that, it explains the six types of karma in detail by explaining the text 'Karemi Bhanta' of Samayik.
In Chaturvinshati Stav, it considers the words like Stav, Lok, Udyot, Dharma-Tirthankar, etc. from the perspective of deposition. In the third Vandana study, it describes the nature of the Shraman worthy of salutation and explains Chitikarma, Kritikarma, Poojakarma, and Vinayakarma by giving examples. It prohibits saluting the blind.
In the fourth study, the definition of Pratikraman is given from the perspective of Pratikramak, Pratikraman, and Pratikrantyavya. It presents examples while discussing Praticharana, Pariharana, Varana, Nivatti, Ninda, Garha, Shdhi, and Alochana. It describes the excesses that occur in Kayik, Vaachik, Mansik, Atichara, Iryapathiki Viradhana, Prakam Shayya, Bhikshacharya, Swadhyay, etc., the four Vikathas, the four Dhyanas, the five Kriyas, the five Kamagunas, the five Mahavratas, and the five Samitis. It has made two distinctions of education: reception and service. It gives a detailed biography of Abhay Kumar. It also gives the characters of historical figures like Emperor Shrenik, Chellana, Sursa, Konik, Chetak, Udayi, Mahapadmanand, Shakdala, Vararuchi, Sthulbhadra, etc. While describing the importance of vows, it says - it is better to enter a blazing fire than to live by deviating from virtue.
The fifth study describes Kayotsarg. Kayotsarg is a kind of spiritual wound healing. Kayotsarg has two words: Kay and Utsarg. Kay is described from twelve types of depositions like name, establishment, etc., and Utsarg from six depositions. There are two types of Kayotsarg: Cheshta Kayotsarg and Abhibhav Kayotsarg. Cheshta Kayotsarg is performed to get rid of the sin of the fault that has been committed in walking, etc. Abhibhav Kayotsarg is performed when one is defeated by the Huns, etc. There are two types of Kayotsarg: praiseworthy and unpraiseworthy, and then there are nine types like Ucchrit, etc. Shruti, Siddha
[61]

Page #65:
---------------------------
The text sheds light on the method of *kshamana* by explaining *stuti*. Finally, it also sheds light on the faults, fruits, etc. of *kayotsarga*.
The sixth study deals with *pratyakhyana*. It discusses the excesses of *samyaktva*, the excesses of the twelve vows of a *shravaka*, *pratyakhyana*, six types of purity, the qualities of *pratyakhyana*, *agaras*, etc. with many illustrations.
Ten
Thus, *Aavashyakachurni* by Jinadasagani Mahattara is a great work. The *churni* explains in detail all the topics covered in *Aavashyakaniyukti*. It highlights the lives of many legendary and historical great men, which are of great importance from historical and cultural perspectives.
Commentary Literature
The original *agama*, *niyukti* and *bhashya* literature is written in Prakrit language. The *churni* literature mainly uses Prakrit language and secondarily Sanskrit language. After that came the era of Sanskrit commentary. The era of commentary is the golden age in Jain literature. *Niyukti* explains the etymology and interpretation of the words of the *agamas*. *Bhashya* literature elaborates on the profound meanings of the *agamas*. *Churni* literature attempts to explain the esoteric meanings based on folk tales, while commentary literature analyzes the *agamas* from a philosophical perspective. The commentators not only used the ancient *niyukti*, *bhashya* and *churni* literature in their commentaries, but also strengthened the subject with new arguments. The study and research of commentaries also gives a proper understanding of the social, cultural, political and geographical conditions of that era. The first commentator among the commentators is Jinabhadragani Kshamasraman. He wrote his own commentary on his *Visheshaavashyakbhashya*, but he could not complete it in his lifetime. He could only write commentary up to the sixth *ganadhara*. His style was simple, elegant and full of *prasadguna*. His presented commentary was completed by Kotyacharya after him. This is indicated by Kotyacharya at the end of the sixth *ganadharavad*.
Among the Sanskrit commentators, Acharya Haribhadra's name can be taken with pride. He was a great scholar of Sanskrit language. His time was from Vikram Samvat 757 to 827. He also wrote a commentary on *Aavashyakaniyukti*, but instead of following the verses of *Aavashyakachurni*, he presented the subject independently. Seeing this commentary, the learned have concluded that Acharya Haribhadra wrote two commentaries on *Aavashyakasutra*. The commentary which is not available at present was bigger than the available commentary because Acharya himself has written 'Vyasarthastu Visheshvivaranadavagantavya iti'. Even after searching, this commentary has not been found yet. While presenting the nature of knowledge in the commentary, he has discussed *abhinibodhak* knowledge from six perspectives. He has also discussed the difference between *shruta*, *avadhi*, *manahparyaya* and *kevalgyan* from the perspective of etc.
1
-
The twenty-three gates of *samayik* etc. have been discussed according to *niyukti*. In the exit gate of *samayik*, information has been given about the *kulkaras* and their relationship with their previous births. The topics which are briefly mentioned in *niyukti* and *churni* have been elaborated here. In the context of meditation, all the verses of *Dhyanashataka* have also been discussed. While shedding light on the method of *paristhapana*, the entire text of *paristhapana* related *niyukti* has been quoted. In this commentary, illustrations in Prakrit language have also been given to clarify the subject. This commentary is named *Shishyahita*. Its volume is 22,000 verses. The author has also given a brief introduction of himself at the end.
[62]

Page #66:
---------------------------
Kotyacharya completed the incomplete commentary of Acharya Jinabhadragani Kshamasraman on the *Svopagyabhashya* and also wrote a new commentary on the *Visheshavasyakabhashya*. However, the author has not mentioned Acharya Haribhadra anywhere in that commentary. This suggests that he would have been a contemporary or predecessor of Haribhadra. Kotyacharya has remembered Jinabhadragani Kshamasraman with reverence and affection. Maladhari Acharya Hemchandra has mentioned Kotyacharya as an ancient commentator in his commentary on the *Visheshavasyakabhashya*. The *Prabhavakacharitra* has considered Acharya Shilank and Kotyacharya as one. However, the times of Shilank and Kotyacharya are not the same. The time of Kotyacharya is the 8th century Vikram era, while the time of Shilank is the 9th-10th century Vikram era. Therefore, they are distinct from each other. The commentary of Kotyacharya on the *Visheshavasyakabhashya* is neither too brief nor too extensive. The stories included in the commentary are in Prakrit language. The size of the commentary is 13,700 verses.

Acharya Malayagiri was a brilliant and eminent thinker. He wrote very important commentaries on the *Agam* texts. His vast scholarship is clearly reflected in those commentaries. The depth of the subject, the simplicity of the language, the elegance of the style and the clarity of the analysis are his characteristics. He was a profound scholar of *Agam* literature, and was also proficient in mathematics, philosophy and *Karmasiddhanta*. He wrote commentaries on many *Agams*. He also wrote a commentary called *Avasyakavivarana* on the *Avasyakasutra*. This commentary is not on the original sutra, but on the *Avasyakaniyukti*. This commentary is available only in an incomplete form. It discusses in detail the auspicious beginning, etc., and reflects on its utility. It discusses the verses of the *niyukti* in a simple and understandable style. The uniqueness of the commentary is that the Acharya has not independently discussed the verses of the *Visheshavasyakabhashya*, but has summarized them in his commentary. All the verses that appear in the commentary support the statement of the commentary. The commentary also mentions the *Svopagyavritti* of the *Visheshavasyakabhashya*, as well as Prajnakaragupta, *Avasyakachurnikar*, *Avasyakamula-tikakar*, *Avasyakamula-bhashyakar*, *Laghiyastrayalankar*, Akalanka-Nyayavatar-vrittikar, etc. Stories have also been quoted here and there to clarify the subject. The language of the stories is Prakrit. The commentary available today ends with the discussion of 'Thubham Rayanavichittam Kunthu Suminamammi Ten Kunthujino' in the second study called *Chaturvinshatistava*. After that, the commentary on the mention of Bhagwan Aranath is not found. This commentary is only up to the second study called *Chaturvinshatistava*, and that too is incomplete. The size of the available commentary is 18,000 verses.

Maladhari Acharya Hemchandra was a great genius and a scholar of the *Agams*. He was a skilled orator and eloquent. He created many texts. The *Avasyakavritti-Pradeshavyaakhya* was written on the commentary of Acharya Haribhadra, hence its other name is *Haribhadriya-Avasyakavritti-tippanak*. The disciple of Maladhari Acharya Hemchandra has also written a commentary on the *Pradeshavyaakhya*.

The second commentary on the *Visheshavasyakabhashya* by Acharya Maladhari Hemchandra is *Shiष्यहिता*. This is a very large work. The Acharya has tried to explain all the topics that have come in the commentary in a very simple and easy way. Despite the predominance of philosophical discussions, the style is not difficult. This is its great feature. The Sanskrit narratives have brought sweetness and simplicity to the subject. It would not be an exaggeration to say that the present commentary has made it easy to read and study the *Visheshavasyakabhashya*.

Many other thinkers have also written commentaries on the *Avasyakasutra*. Their details are as follows:
[63]

Page #67:
---------------------------
Nibhatta, Maṇikyasekhara, Kulaprabha, Rājavallabha, etc. have composed commentaries on the Āvaśyaka Sūtra. In addition to these, in Vikram Samvat 1122, Nami Sadhu, in Samvat 1222, Śrī Candrasūri, in Samvat 1440, Śrī Jñānasāgara, in Samvat 1500, Dhīrasundara, in Samvat 1540, Śubhavardhanagiri, in Samvat 1697, Hitaruci, and in 1958, Pūjya Ghāsilālji Mahārāj also composed commentaries on the Āvaśyaka Sūtra, showcasing their brilliance. After the end of the commentary era, concise commentaries were created for the common people to understand the meaning of the Āgamas, which are known as Stavak or Tabva, and they were written in simple and understandable styles in vernacular languages. Dharmasimha Muni wrote Balavabodha Tabve on 27 Āgamas in the 18th century, his Tabve explain the original meaning. He also wrote a Tabva on the Āvaśyaka. After the Tabve, the translation era began. Āgama literature is mainly available in three languages: English, Gujarati, and Hindi. The Āvaśyaka Sūtra has not been translated into English, it has only been translated into Gujarati and Hindi. In the research-oriented era, scholars like Pandit Sukhlālji Singhavi and Upādhyāya Amaramuni ji, etc. have also published research papers in Hindi to analyze the subject.

The modern era is the era of printing. In this era, vast literature has been printed and reached the hands of the common people. The work of publishing the Āgamas has been done by various institutions from time to time. The Āvaśyaka Sūtra and its commentary literature have been published as follows:

In 1928, the Āgamoday Samiti, Bombay, published the first part of the Āvaśyaka Sūtra with the Bhadrabahu commentary and the Malayagiri commentary. Its second part was published in 1932 and the third part in 1936 by Devchand Lalbhai Jain Pustakoddhār, Surat.

In 1916-17, the Āvaśyaka with the Bhadrabahu commentary and the Haribhadrīya commentary was published by the Āgamoday Samiti, Bombay.

In 1920, the Āvaśyaka Sūtra with the Maladhārī Hemacandra commentary, Pradeshāvyākhyā, was published by Devchand Lalbhai Jain Pustakoddhār, Bombay.

In 1939 and 1941, the Bhadrabahu commentary on the Āvaśyaka, the Dīpikā by Maṇikyasekhara, was published by the Vijayadānasūriśvara Jain Granthamālā, Surat.

In 1928 and 1929, the Āvaśyaka Cūrṇi by Jīnādās, the eastern part and the western part respectively, were published. From Vīra Samvat 2427 to 2441, the Viśeṣāvaśyaka Bhāṣya, Śiṣyahitākhya Bṛhadvṛtti, with the commentary of Maladhārī Ācārya Hemacandra, was published by the Yaśovijaya Jain Granthamālā, Banaras. In 1923, 'Viśeṣāvaśyaka Gāthānām Akāradīkramḥ Tathā Viśeṣāvaśyaka Viṣayānām Anukramaḥ' was published by the Āgamoday Samiti, Bombay.

In 1966, the Viśeṣāvaśyaka Bhāṣya with the Svopājñavṛtti was published in three parts by the Lalbhai Dalpatbhai Bharatiya Saṃskṛti Vidyāmandir.

In 1936 and 1937, the Viśeṣāvaśyaka Bhāṣya Vivaraṇa by Koṭyācārya was published by the Ṛṣabhadevaji Kesarimaji Pracārak Saṃsthā, Ratlām. In 1936, the Āvaśyaka Namisāra Vṛtti was published by the Vijayadānasūriśvara Granthamālā, Bombay.

Page #68:
---------------------------
In 1958, the Jain Shastroddhar Samiti, Rajkot, published the *Aavashyak Sutra* with Sanskrit commentary, Hindi and Gujarati translations, authored by Pujya Ghasilalji Maharaj.
In 1986, *Aavashyak Sutra* with Gujarati translation was published by Bhimshi Manek, Bombay, and from 1924 to 1927, the Agamoday Samiti, Bombay, published the Gujarati translation, showcasing their literary interest. In Veer Samvat 2446, Acharya Amolkarishiji published the Hindi translation of 32 Agams, and *Aavashyak Sutra* was also published in this series.
The original text of *Aavashyak Sutra* has also been published from various places. In 1954, Muni Phoolchandji 'Pupphabhikkhu' published *Suttagame* from Gurgaon Cantonment, which included the original text, and the original text was also published in *Angpavitthasuuttaani*, published in 1984 from Sailana. Under the Jain Agamgranthamala, Muni Punyavijayji Maharaj published *Dasaveyalisuuttam Uttarjjhayanai Aavassayasuttam* from Shri Mahavira Jain Vidyalaya, Bombay, in 1977. This is published with many appendices like commentaries on various texts, sutra index, word index, special name index, etc. It is very useful for researchers.
In Samvat 2007, *Samayik Sutra* and *Shraman Sutra* were published from Sanmati Gyanpeeth, Agra, with Hindi commentary. This edition and editing
A lot has been written about *Aavashyak Sutra* from time to time, and it has also been published from various places. This publication is also in the same tradition of publication. It was the heartfelt desire of the young Acharya, the late Panditpravar Madhukar Mishrimalji Maharaj, that the 32 Agams be published. The work of publishing the Agams began under his leadership and chief editorship. In a short time, many Agams were published in a grand manner. But it is a matter of regret that the young Acharya's beautiful vision could not be fulfilled during his lifetime. He passed away in 1983. His passing away was a loss of a great sage. It was the responsibility of the editorial board and the publication committee to give concrete form to his heartfelt desire. It is a matter of joy that the editorial board and the publication committee have fulfilled their responsibility with dedication and have resolved to complete this work with the cooperation of many eminent scholars. The credit for editing *Aavashyak Sutra* goes to the learned Mahasati Shri Suprabhaji M.A., Sahityaratna, Siddhantacharya, a disciple of the highly learned Sadhviratna Umravkunwarji 'Archana'. It contains the pure original text, the meaning of specific words, the meaning, and also the necessary commentary, therefore, this edition will prove useful for the general public. She has edited this treasure of a text with great dedication. Sadhvi Suprabhaji is an emerging writer and a scholar of various subjects. The great sage, the lifeblood of the Agam Prakashan Mala, Pandit Shobhachandji Bharill, has polished the editing with the touch of his pen. Bharillji's sharp vision has added luster to the editing. It is hoped that this Agam will also be revered by the masses like other Agams.
I had planned to write a very detailed introduction to *Aavashyak Sutra*, but due to being busy writing other texts, I have written only briefly, all the credit for which goes to the great grace and vision of the great saint, Adhyatmayogi Pujya Gurudev Upadhyay Shri Pushkarmuniji Maharaj. It is only by his great grace that I have been able to do some work in the field of writing. This introduction will be useful in understanding the mystery of *Aavashyak Sutra*, then I will consider my labor worthwhile. Today
[65]

Page #69:
---------------------------
In the storm of materialism, humanity is becoming increasingly extroverted. Forgetting oneself, it is yearning for material possessions. And for this, it is embracing injustice, oppression, and corruption, which is making it restless itself, and the flames of unrest are blazing everywhere in the family, society, and nation. Humanity is distressed, society is troubled, and the nation is worried. This is not progress, but an illusion flourishing in its name. Today there is a need to return to our nature from the encroachment that has taken place. The *Aavashyakasutra* provides the message of removing the seeker from external influences and bringing him to his own nature. Let us implement this message in our lives and purify ourselves, this is the inner desire!
- Devendramuni Shastri
Jain Sthanak
Veer Nagar, Delhi-7
18-7-85
[66]

Page #70:
---------------------------
**Essential Sutras: Table of Contents**

**Guru Vandana**
**Namaskara Sutra**
**First Study:**
* Samayika Pratigya Sutra
* Mangala Sutra
* Uttama Chatushtaya
* Sharan Sutra (Abridged)
* Pratikramana Sutra
* Eryapathika Sutra
* Explanation of Specific Words
* Agam Sutra
* Reading on Excesses of Knowledge
**Second Study:**
* Chaturvinshati Stava
* Reading of Chaturvinshati Stava
**Third Study:**
* Vandana Ichchhami Khamasamano
* Vandana Vidhi
* Thirty-Three Types of Ashatanas
**Fourth Study:**
* Pratikramana
* Reading on Excesses
* Shayya Sutra
* Bhikshadoshanivritti Sutra
* Swadhyaya and Pratilekhana Doshanivritti Sutra
* Reading of Thirty-Eight Sentences
**One Asanyama**
**Two Bandhana**
**Three Danda**
**Three Gupti**
**Three Shalya**
**Three Gaurav**
**Three Viradhana**
**Four Kashaya**
**Four Sanjna**
**Four Vikatha**
**Four Dhyana**
**Five Kriya**
**Five Kamguna**
**Five Mahavrat**
**Five Samiti**
**Six Jeevanikaya**
**Six Leshya**
**Seven Bhayasthan**
**Eight Madasthan**
**Nine Brahmacharya Gupti**
**Ten Shraman Dharma**
**Eleven Upasaka Pratima**
**Twelve Bhikshu Pratima**
**Thirteen Kriyasthan**
**Fourteen Bhootgram**
**Fifteen Parmadharmic**
**Sixteen Gatha Shodashak**
**Seventeen Asanyama**
**Eighteen Abrahmacharya**
**Nineteen Jnata Sutra Study**
**Twenty Asamadhiasthan**
[67]

Page #71:
---------------------------
##  

**121**
**Twenty-one Shabaldoshas**
**4.  Excesses of Brahmacharya Anuvrata**  **113 Twenty-two Parishha**
**5.  Excesses of Parigrahaparimaana Vrata**  **114 Twenty-three Sutra Kritaanga Study**
**6.  Excesses of Digvrata**  **114 Twenty-four Dev**
**7.  Excesses of Upbhog-Paribhogparimaana Vrata**  **115 Twenty-five Bhavana**
**8.  Excesses of Anarthadandaviramana Vrata**  **117 Brihatkalpa, Vyavhaar Sutra**
**9.  Excesses of Samayik Vrata**  **118 Trayi's Twenty-six Studies**
**10. Excesses of Deshavakashik Vrata**  **118 Twenty-seven Anagaar Guna**
**11. Excesses of Paushdha Vrata**  **119**
**12. Excesses of Atithi Sambhibhag Vrata**  **120 Twenty-eight Aachaar Prakalpa Twenty-nine Paap Shruta Prasanga**

**Fifth Study: Kayotsarga**  **Thirty Mahamohaniya Sthan**
**Explanation of Kayotsarga**  **Thirty-one Siddha Guna**

**Sixth Study: Pratyakhyan**  **Thirty-two Yoga Sangraha**
**Types of Pratyakhyan**  **123 Thirty-three Ashaatana**

**Namaskara Sahit Sutra**  **Pratigya Sutra (Nirgranth Pravachan's Text)**
**Paurushi Sutra**  **125 Big Sanlekhana's Text**
**Poorvaardha Sutra**  **126 Five Vandan of the Five Pads**
**Ekaashan Sutra**  **127 Darshan Samyaktva's Text**
**100 Eggaathaan Pacchakhaan**  **129 Guru-Guna Smaran Sutra**
**Aachaaml - Ayambil Pratyakhyan Sutra**  **130 Kshamana Sutra**
**102**
**Abhaktarth - Upvaas Sutra**  **Eighty-four Lakh Jeevoyoni's Text**  **105**
**Divas Charim Sutra**  **Kulkodi Khamane's Text**
**Abhigraha Sutra**  **133 Pranipat Sutra**
**Nirvikruti Sutra**  **134 Utility of Vratas**
**111 Pratyakhyan Parana Sutra**  **135 Twelve Vratas' Excesses' Pratikraman**

**Appendix 1. Excesses of Ahimsa Anuvrata**  **112 2. Excesses of Mrushavad Viraman Vrata**  **112**
**Method of Necessary**  **3. Excesses of Adattadaan Viramana Anuvrata**  **113**

**[68]**
**124**
**101**
**W**
**106 106**
**137**

Page #72:
---------------------------
Āvaśyaka Sutta
Āvaśyaka Sūtram

Page #73:
---------------------------
The five great vows (Mahavratas) are:
1. **Ahimsa** (non-violence)
2. **Satya** (truthfulness)
3. **Asteya** (non-stealing)
4. **Brahmacharya** (continence)
5. **Aparigraha** (non-attachment)

Page #74:
---------------------------
**Essential Sutra: Guru Vandan Sutra**

I offer obeisance to the Guru, I bow down, I prostrate, I pay homage, I respect, I offer auspiciousness and blessings, I consider you as a deity, I offer my salutations to the Chaitya (knowledge). I offer my obeisance with my forehead.

**Meaning:** O Great Guru! I offer my salutations by placing my joined palms three times, starting from the right side and rotating them to the right, and then placing them on my forehead. I bow down with five limbs, I offer my salutations, I pay homage, I respect (with clothes, food, etc.), you are the embodiment of auspiciousness, you are the embodiment of blessings, you are the embodiment of divinity, you are the Chaitya (knowledge).

Therefore, O Gurudev! I offer my worship, service, and devotion to you with my mind, speech, and body. I humbly bow down and offer my salutations at your lotus feet.

**Discussion:** In Indian culture, the Guru holds a significant position. If one does not have the guidance of a true Guru in life, even attaining the vision of the Lord becomes difficult. At the beginning of every auspicious work, the Guru is worshipped with devotion and faith.

In a way, the Guru is even more important than God. A Vedic sage has even said: If God is angry, the Guru can save you, but if the Guru is angry, even God's power cannot save you.

**Harau ruste guru straata, gurau ruste na vai shivah.**
**Tasmat sarvaprayatnena, gurumeva prasadayet.**

Indeed, the importance of a true Guru is immeasurable. Just as oil is needed to light a lamp, a key is needed to run a clock, and food is needed to nourish the body, so too is a true Guru needed to make life progressive. True Gurus are the true artists of life. Therefore, Gurudev is like a boat in the ocean of existence, who brings the noble beings to the shore. For a being lost in the darkness of ignorance, the Guru is like a lamp, a source of light. There is no one more benevolent in the world than the Guru. Many devotees have even said: "I will abandon God, but I will not abandon the Guru." Because it is the Guru who teaches us about right and wrong. A disciple should offer salutations, service, and worship to such a benevolent Gurudev with devotion, only then can he understand the mystery of life and the world.

Page #75:
---------------------------
##  [4]
**Essential Sutras**
**Meaning of Specific Words**
* **Tikkhutto** - **Trikrutva:** Three times.
* **Ayahiṇam** - From the right side. Its Sanskrit form is 'Aadakshinam'. **Payahiṇam** - The Sanskrit form of this is 'Pradakshinam'. Meaning, clockwise from the right side.
* **Vandami** - I bow. The meaning of bowing is to praise.
* **Namansami** - I salute. Its Sanskrit form is 'Namasyami'. There is a difference between bowing and saluting. Bowing means praising with the mouth, and saluting means bowing with the body, prostrating.
* **Kallaṇam** - **Kalyanam** - Kaly means one who grants liberation or peace.
* **Mangalam** - Auspicious, prosperity, auspicious and auspicious.

Based on the necessary instructions, Acharya Haribhadra wrote in the commentary of the first verse of the first study of the Dasha Vaikalika Sutra -
"Mangyate - Adhigamyate Hitam Anena Iti Mangalam" Meaning, that which brings benefit to the seeker is auspicious.
"Maam Gaalayati Bhavad iti Mangalam - Sansaraad Apanayati" That which separates me (the soul) from the bondage of the world, liberates me, is auspicious. The famous commentator of the Visheshaavashyak Bhashya, Shri Hemchandracharya says - "Makyate Alankriyate Atma Yenetti Mangalam" That which makes the soul radiant is auspicious. Or, that which brings heaven and liberation or destroys sin is called auspicious.

**Salutation Sutra**
Namo Arihantaanam, Namo Siddhaanam, Namo Aariyaanam.
Namo Uvvajjaayaanam, Namo Loe Savvasahuuṇam. ||

**Meaning** - Salutations to the Arihants, salutations to the Siddhas, salutations to the Acharyas, salutations to the Upadhyayas, salutations to all the virtuous beings in the human world.

Eso Panch Namokkaroo, Savva-Paav-Ppanasanoo.
Mangalaanam Cha Savvesim, Padham Havai Mangalam ||

**Meaning** - This salutation to the five supreme beings, the great souls, is the destroyer of all sins. It is the most auspicious of all auspicious things.

Page #76:
---------------------------
[Namaskarasutra]
[5
It is the one that completely destroys sins and is the first auspiciousness in all the auspiciousnesses of the world.
Discussion - Jain culture has an important place in Indian culture, and Jainism has an important place in Jain culture. There is no mantra greater than the Namaskaramantra or Navkaramantra in the Jain tradition. Jainism is a spiritual religion. Therefore, its mantra is also imbued with spiritual feeling. The Jain tradition believes that the Navkaramantra is the essence, the essence of the entire Jain literature or the fourteen Purvas. The Navkaramantra is the best mantra of Jain literature. It is the main symbol of divine equality. It explains the importance of only virtue-worship, without any sectarian discrimination, without any particular country, caste or religion. In ancient religious texts, the Navkaramantra is also called the Paramesthimantra. Those great souls who are in the supreme position, that is, in the highest form, are called Paramesthis.
The Navkaramantra has many names like Namaskaramantra, Paramesthimantra etc. But the most famous name is Navkaramantra. There are nine verses in the Navkaramantra, hence it is called Navkaramantra. Five verses are of the original verses and the remaining four verses are of the Chulika. The five verses of Arihant etc. are of the role of the seeker and the Siddha, and the last four verses are indicative of the glory of the Maha Mantra.
_Mumuksha humans have considered Namaskar very important. Namaskar is a pure symbol of humility and virtue-receptivity. The tradition of greeting the superior and elder souls has been uninterrupted since time immemorial. Arihants have twelve, Siddhas have eight, Acharyas have thirty-six, Upadhyayas have twenty-five and Sadhus have twenty-seven virtues. The speech of these five verses, endowed with these virtues, is the greeting given to the great souls, which liberates from this mortal world forever and bestows eternal Shiva-Sukha.
The first verse is of Arihant. There are two words in Arihant - 'Ari' and 'Hant'. Ari means - internal enemies like attachment and aversion, and Hant means - destroyer.
The second meaning of the word Arihant is - the one who has destroyed the four destructive karmas of knowledge-veil, vision-veil, mohaniya and antaray, and has attained perfect knowledge and perfect vision, that liberated soul is Arihant.
The Acharyas of the Arihant verse have mentioned many readings, such as - Arhant, Arhant, Aru Hant, Arohant etc. Those for whom there is no secret in the world, those whose perfect knowledge and vision hide nothing, they are Arhants. Those who are worshipped by miracles like the Ashoka tree etc. are Arhants. Those who are never to be born again, that is, those who have been liberated from birth and death forever, are called 'Aruhant' or 'Arohant'.

Page #77:
---------------------------
## Necessary Sutra

The second phrase is "Namo Siddhanam". Siddha means "perfect", that is, those whose practice is complete. Those great souls who are completely free from karmic defilement, who have forever escaped the cycle of birth and death, who have become immortal, imperishable, Siddha-Buddha-Mukta, and attained liberation, are addressed by the term Siddha. According to Buddhist belief, the Siddhahood of the Siddhas is not like the extinguishing of a lamp, a state of non-existence, nor is it merging into a cosmic entity, but rather a state of pure being. The happiness of the Siddhas is boundless. While emperors and other humans, as well as all gods, experience happiness, which is dependent, the Siddhas always experience a unique, infinite, uninterrupted, and indescribable spiritual happiness. To learn more about this happiness in detail, one should refer to the Aupapatik Sutra (Aagam Prakashan Samiti, Byawar, pp. 180-181).

## Third Phrase

The third phrase is "Namo Ayariyanam". The Acharya is the true protector, guide, and beacon of Indian culture. The Acharya is not an ordinary practitioner, but a special one. The Acharya is called the father of the Dharma-based Shraman-Sangha, "Acharya: Parama: Pita". He is not a Tirthankara, but he is like a Tirthankara. He himself firmly adheres to the five principles of conduct: Jnanaachar, Darshanachar, etc., and guides other practitioners. Like a lamp, he burns himself to illuminate other self-lamps. The Sadhu, Sadhvi, Shravak, and Shravika, these four types of Sangha, are led in their spiritual practice by the Acharya. Through this phrase "Namo Ayariyanam", we pay homage to countless past, present, and future Acharyas.

## Fourth Phrase

The fourth phrase pays homage to the Upadhyayas. This phrase is also very important. In the life of a practitioner, there is an essential need for wisdom and knowledge. Through the knowledge of discrimination, one can understand the distinction between the inert and the conscious, between virtue and vice, between the world and liberation, and only then can a practitioner build a noble and ideal life and reach the highest peak of practice. Therefore, the responsibility of teaching spiritual knowledge lies with the Upadhyaya. 
"Up-samepe'dhyayate yasmat iti Upadhyaya". Upadhyayas unravel the inner complexities of human life with a subtle method and teach detachment from evil conduct and attachment to good conduct. Through this phrase "Namo Uvjjhayaanam", we pay homage to countless past, present, and future Upadhyayas. The Upadhyayas are worthy of our respect because they are endowed with knowledge, vision, and character, and because they are benefactors by teaching the Sutras.

## Fifth Phrase

The fifth phrase pays homage to the Sadhus. The seeker of Nirvana, that is, the one who possesses the jewels of right knowledge, right vision, and right conduct, and who uses them to attain liberation, or the one who holds all beings with equanimity, and who aspires for liberation...

Page #78:
---------------------------
[Namsakarsutra]
[7
Salutations to all the omniscient, Jnana-Anuvratin Sadhus who are the helpers of the Bhavyas and reside in the Lok of the two and a half islands. "Sadhayati Mokshamargamiti Sadhu" - meaning those who practice the three jewels of Right Faith, Right Knowledge, and Right Conduct, the path to liberation, are Sadhus.

Page #79:
---------------------------
[1]
First Study: Samayik Vrata Sutra
I accept, O Venerable One, the Samayik Vrata. I renounce all sinful actions, for the duration of my life, with my mind, speech, and body. I will not commit them, nor cause others to commit them, nor will I approve of those who commit them.
O Venerable One, I repent for my past sins, I condemn them in my mind, I denounce them in your presence, and I completely abandon them.
Meaning: O Lord! I accept the Samayik Vrata. Therefore, I renounce all sinful actions.
For the duration of my life, I will not commit any sinful actions with my mind, speech, and body, nor will I cause others to commit them, nor will I approve of those who commit them.
O Venerable One! I repent for my past sins, I condemn them in my mind, I denounce them in your presence, and I completely abandon them.
Discussion: When a seeker aspiring for liberation moves from household life towards the path of complete renunciation and virtue, this Samayik Sutra is recited. According to Jain tradition, it is mandatory to take refuge in this Samayik Sutra to attain the position of a world-benefactor saint.
The purpose of Samayik is the practice of equanimity. To hold equanimity towards all living beings is a great and noble ideal. The scriptures say:
"He who is equal to all beings, both mobile and immobile, he alone attains Samayik."
- The Kevali Bhagavan, in the Anuyogadwar, has said - He (the seeker) who holds equanimity towards all mobile and immobile beings, he alone attains Samayik.
Jainism is a religion based on equality. Samayik is the practice of equality. The etymology of the word Samayik is as follows: 'Samasyah ayah samaayah, sah prayojanam yasya tat samaayikam' - that is, the practice whose purpose is to bring equality in life.
When a householder Shravak accepts Samayik, he generally renounces the sinful actions for one Muhurta, that is, 48 minutes, with two Karana and three Yoga. In Jainism, it is essential to have Karana and Yoga in any renunciation or rule. Karana means -

Page #80:
---------------------------
## First Study: Samayik

**Introduction:** Samayik has three forms: (1) doing it oneself, (2) causing others to do it, and (3) approving it. Yoga refers to mind, speech, and body.

**The Highest Renunciation:** The highest renunciation is achieved through the abandonment of all three karmas and three yogas. A muni's Samayik involves all three karmas and three yogas, hence it is considered the most excellent renunciation. A householder's Samayik involves two karmas and three yogas. When reciting the Samayik text, if a householder is observing the Samayik vow themselves or a sadhu is causing them to observe it, the phrase "duviham tivihenam" should be used, and "javjivaae" should be replaced with "javniyam".

**Causes of Decline:** Jainism identifies two causes of decline: yoga and kshaya. Yoga refers to the activity of mind, speech, and body. Kshaya refers to anger, pride, deceit, and greed. These four are the uneven states of the soul. Anger is the state where we view others with hatred or aversion and desire to harm them. In pride, even though the feeling of hatred is less, there is still a sense of discrimination, we consider ourselves superior and others inferior, ourselves big and others small, ourselves righteous and others sinful and wicked. Deceit refers to the desire to fulfill one's self-interest through hidden means or deception. Greed is the desire for excessive gain. In greed, one's own self-interest is given more importance than the interests of others. Samayik is a practice to rise above these unfavorable yogas and kshayas.

**Potential Errors:** While performing Samayik, householders contemplate potential errors, which are called "atichaar" in Jain terminology. These atichaars are of five types: 1. Manodushpranidhan, 2. Vachodushpranidhan, 3. Kayadushpranidhan, 4. Smrityantardhan, 5. Anvasthita. Pranidhan means investment. Dushpranidhan means wrong investment. Mind, speech, and body are the most valuable possessions of every practitioner. Smrityantardhan means forgetting that one is in Samayik and engaging in useless talk. The practitioner should always be vigilant. Anvasthita means fickleness or distraction. One should complete the vow with steadiness for the duration it was taken.

**Mangal Sutra:**
Four Auspicious Things: Arihant is auspicious, Siddha is auspicious, Saahu is auspicious,

Page #81:
---------------------------
## 10]
**Kevali-pannatto dhammo mangalam.**
**Meaning:** There are four auspicious things in the world.
(1) Arihant Bhagwan is auspicious.
(2) Siddha Bhagwan is auspicious.
(3) Sadhu-Maharaj is auspicious.
(4) Dharma, in the form of the omniscient, is auspicious.

**Worldly and transcendental auspiciousness.** Curd, rice, and garlands of flowers.

**Discussion:** Auspiciousness is of two types. The first is worldly auspiciousness. The Arihant, etc., mentioned in the sutras, are transcendental auspiciousness. Worldly auspiciousness is not absolute or ultimate auspiciousness. Therefore, the great souls who are devoted to spirituality and self-realization have sought out transcendental auspiciousness, separate from worldly auspiciousness. Transcendental auspiciousness is never inauspicious. Worldly auspiciousness, filled with worldly entanglements, has never brought lasting peace to anyone, nor will it ever. What kind of auspiciousness is it if it does not bring lasting joy? Therefore, transcendental auspiciousness is the true auspiciousness.

**[Essential Sutra]**
In the four auspicious things presented here, the first two are ideal forms. The ultimate goal of our life is to attain the Arihant and finally the Siddha state. Arihant and Siddha are the ideal forms of perfect self-purification, i.e., enlightenment, and are auspicious, while Sadhu is the ideal form of spiritual practice. The Sadhu state includes Acharya and Upadhyaya.

Finally, Dharma-mangal comes. The establishment of the previous states is due to its influence or the fruit of Dharma. The power of Dharma is supreme.

**Uttama Chatushtaya**
**Cattari logutama**
**Arihanta logutama,**
**Siddha logutama,**
**Sahuu logutama,**
**Kevali-pannatto dhammo logutama.**
**Meaning:** There are four supreme, i.e., the best, in the world.
(1) Arihant Bhagwan is the best in the world.
-

Page #82:
---------------------------
## First Study: Samayik

**(11 (2))** The Siddha Bhagwan is the best in the world. **(3)** The Sadhu-Maharaj is the best in the world. **(4)** The Dharma, embodied in the omniscient, is the best in the world.

**Discussion:** The Agamkaras have said that there are four best things. The Arihant, Siddha, Sadhu, and Dharma are the four best things that lead the wandering souls, who have been wandering for an infinite time, on the path of upliftment. And whatever is best is also auspicious. It is world-renowned that every enlightened being in the world today is engaged in the search for the best, whether it be in the social sphere, the political sphere, or the spiritual sphere. Among the four best things, the Arihant and the Siddha are the best in the form of the Supreme Soul. The pure light form of the soul after the removal of karmic impurities is the Supreme Soul. The Sadhu is the best in the form of the Acharya, Upadhyaya, and Muni, the Mahatmas. Dharma is the only best and excellent means to become a Mahatma from the soul and a Supreme Soul from the Mahatma. It is also said - 'Dharanaad Dharma' - that is, the Dharma that sustains and saves the souls falling into misery is the best Dharma.

The Agamkar has shed light on this principle that Dharma is the root of all auspiciousness. If there is no fragrance in the flower, no heat in the fire, no coolness in the water, no sweetness in the sugar, then what will be their form? Nothing. The same is the condition of a man without Dharma. It is also said - "Dharmena Heenaah Pashubhih Samanaah" - that is, there is no difference between a man without Dharma and an animal - both are equal. The practice of Dharma is the practice of good. There are two types of practice - 1. Practice of morality and 2. Practice of Dharma. The practice of morality is the practice of virtue. This practice can only lead to morality and lays the foundation for Dharma-prasad. The practice of Dharma leads to liberation.

**Sharan Sutra:**
Chattari Saranam Pavajami - Arihante Saranam Pavajami, Siddhe Saranam Pavajami, Saahu Saranam Pavajjami, Kevali-Pannattam Dhammam Saranam Pavajami.

**Meaning:** I take refuge in the four - (1) I take refuge in the Arihants,

Page #83:
---------------------------
##  [12]
**[Essential Sutra]**
(2) I take refuge in the Siddhas, (3) I take refuge in the Sadhus, (4) I take refuge in the Dharma embodied in the omniscient.

**Discussion:** No material object in the world can truly provide refuge to a human being. Be it a mother, father, son, wife, wealth, or any other relative. But, not knowing this fact, ignorant humans consider these perishable objects of the world as refuge.

The reality is that in the world, there is no other refuge giver besides the Arihants, Siddhas, Sadhus, and the Dharma embodied in the omniscient. All the wicked people who have become virtuous in the past and present have become so only by taking refuge in these four. A human being wants to take refuge in Dharma. Dharma has the capacity to provide refuge. "Dhammo. Diivo Paitttha Nan" - meaning Dharma is a lamp, a light, a foundation, a base, a movement. There may be many other refuge givers, but the best refuge is the one that saves us, rescues us from difficulties, frees us from fear, and makes us fearless. What object in the world can save us from the fear of death forever? Can it protect us from the undesirable consequences of sinful actions? This power lies only in taking refuge in the four mentioned in the sutra. Therefore, these four are the true refuge from a transcendental perspective.

**[Pratikraman Sutra]**
I wish to renounce, with a steady mind, staying in one place, all other activities except meditation and silence. [But before that, the disciple criticizes his own faults -] In knowledge, in perception, in conduct, and especially in the knowledge of the scriptures, in the form of right conduct and the form of conduct in Samayik, 'Jo Me Devasio' - meaning, whatever transgression I have committed due to negligence, regarding the rules of conduct for the day (and night), whether it be physical, mental, verbal, or mental transgression, may the sin of that transgression be nullified for me.

That transgression is against the sutra, against the path, against the tradition, against the unthought-of conduct,

Page #84:
---------------------------
## First Study: Samayik [13]

What is not to be done, is the form of inattentive-distracted mind, is the form of ill-conceived-angry mind, is not to be acted upon, is not to be desired, in short, is completely opposite to virtuous conduct - is not to be done by the virtuous.

The three Gutis (internal organs) that are conducive to restraint, the cessation of the four passions, the five great vows, the protection of the six earth bodies, water bodies, etc., the seven types of bodily pain (1. Unsoiled, 2. Soiled, 3. Extracted, 4. Lightly covered, 5. Not taken, 6. Taken, 7. Abandoned Dharma), the eight teachings of the mother (five committees, three Gutis), the nine vows of celibacy, the ten duties of a Shraman (duties related to a Shraman) - if these are broken or violated, then all that sin shall be nullified for me.

**Discussion:**

Man is the link between gods and demons. He can attain godhood through his virtuous conduct and can also fall to the lower level of demons through his unvirtuous conduct. Man has three great powers - mind, speech, and body. By the strength of these powers, he can create any kind of life, whether prosperous or unprosperous. Saints and sages should be mindful of the good and bad actions of their mind, speech, and body at every step. Even a little carelessness in this matter can lead to a terrible downfall. The text of this Pratikraman Sutra cleanses the mistakes made day and night through these three powers-yogas and creates a strong determination to be careful in the future. This is the initial sutra of Pratikraman. It briefly performs Pratikraman for mistakes related to conduct and thoughts.

**Explanation of some technical terms:**

* **'Ussutto'**: The Sanskrit form of 'Ussutto' is 'Utsutra'. The meaning of Utsutra is - Sutra, i.e., conduct contrary to the Agamas.
* **'Ummago'**: The form of 'Ummago' is 'Unmarg', i.e., transgression of the state of pacification of passions and entering into the state of arising passions is 'Unmarg'. When the Karmic covering of conduct is pacified, then conduct arises, and when the Karmic covering of conduct arises, then conduct is destroyed. Therefore, the seeker should constantly move in the state of arising: pacification of passions. The meaning of 'Marg' is also tradition.
* **'Akkapo'**: The Dharma-business in the form of conduct and action, i.e., conduct, is called 'Kalpa'. To act against conduct and action is 'Akkapo'.
* **'Sue'**: The meaning of 'Shruta' is Shruta-knowledge. The Agama literature is called 'Shruta' because it is heard from the mouth of the liberated Tirthankara Bhagwan. Before being written down, the Agamas were received only through the Shruti tradition, i.e., the Guru would give the Agamas to his disciple, and the disciple would give them to his disciple orally. Therefore,

Page #85:
---------------------------
## 14]

**Essential Sutras**

This is also called **Agam Shruta**. The meaning of **Atichara** related to **Shruta** is - faith and representation contrary to **Shruta**.

**'Sattanha Pindesaanham'** - Taking pure and faultless **Prasauk** food and water is **Eshana**. There are seven types of **Pindeshana**:

1. **Asansrushta** - Taking food with hands and utensils that are not stained by the offered food.
2. **Sansrushta** - Taking food with hands and utensils that are stained by the offered food.
3. **Udhrita** - Taking food that the householder has taken out for themselves from the vessel into a plate, etc.
4. **Alplepa** - Taking roasted chickpeas, etc., which are not oily and therefore cannot be smeared.
5. **Avagrihita** - Taking food that the eater has served on a plate, etc., for eating, but has not yet started eating.
6. **Pragrihita** - Taking food that has been touched by the eater's hand, etc., for the first time, but has not become stale because the eater has not taken another bite.
7. **Ujjhitdharma** - Taking food that is being thrown away because it is too much or for some other reason.

**'Atthanham Pavayanmaunam'** - Five **Samiti** and three **Gupti** together make eight **Pravachan-Matas**. The foundation of the entire **Shramanachar** is the five **Samiti** and three **Gupti**. Proper effortful **Pravritti Samiti** and proper restraint of **Yogas** is called **Gupti**.

Five **Samiti**: 1. **Iryasamiti**, 2. **Bhasasamiti**, 3. **Eshanasamiti**, 4. **Ayanbhandamattnikkhevanasamiti**, 5. **Uccar-Pasavan-Khell-Jall-Sanghan-Paritthavan-Iyasamiti**.

Three **Gupti**: 1. **Manogupti**, 2. **Vachanagupti**, and 3. **Kayagupti**.

**'Jam Khandiyam Jam Virahiyam'** - That which is broken and that which is violated. A minor violation of a vow is called **Khandan**, and a complete violation is called **Viradhana**. In some places, violation of the majority, but not the entirety, is called **Viradhana**.

**'Miccha Mi Dukkadam'** - My evil deeds are false and futile. The word **'Miccha Mi'** is divided into **'Mi' 'Chha' 'Mi'** and interpreted as follows: **'Mi'** - abandoning physical and mental pride, **'Chha'** - covering up the fault of **Asanyam**, **'Mi'** - I who remain within the limits of **Charitra**.

Page #86:
---------------------------
English translation with Jain terms preserved:

First study: Samayika [15]
'Du'- I denounce the blamable soul, 'Ka'- the performed cautious karmas, 'Dang'- I renounce through equanimity. That is, being humble in substance and sentiment, and established in the limits of conduct, I denounce the blamable soul-activity and relinquish the committed misdeeds (sins) through the sentiment of equanimity. However, this is a distressed imagination. Acarya-pathika-sutra
I wish to perform pratikramana for the transgressions in the movement, coming and going, stepping on living beings, stepping on seeds, stepping on green vegetation, crushing the anthills, spider-webs, and other living beings' habitats,
which my jivas (souls) have violated - the one-sensed, two-sensed, three-sensed, four-sensed, five-sensed, abhihata (struck), vattiya (covered), lesiya (stained), sanghata (aggregated), sanghattiya (collided), pariyapanna (surrounded), kilama (fatigued), uddaviya (disturbed), shifted from one place to another, deprived of life,
for that mistaken deed of mine.
Meaning - I perform pratikramana (confession and repentance). If due to carelessness or inattentiveness while walking on the path or observing the vow of restraint, any harm or violation has been caused to any living being, then I wish to abstain from that sin.
- While going out from the upashraya (abode) for svadhyaya (self-study) etc. and then returning to the upashraya, or while moving on the path, if I have crushed the living beings under my feet or in any other way, or have trampled upon the grains of corn, wheat or any other seeds, or have crushed the green vegetation like grass, sprouts etc., then may that entire sin born out of transgression be false-void and ineffective.
And if I have violated or harmed any living being from the one-sensed to the five-sensed, obstructed the ones coming in front, covered with dust etc., crushed on the ground or among themselves, heaped them up, touched them carelessly in a distressing manner, fatigued, disturbed, shifted from one place to another, deprived of life, then may all that sin be false-void and ineffective.
Explanation - A human being is a wanderer. He keeps moving all the time. Sometimes he moves with the body, sometimes he explores the world with his speech, and sometimes he measures the sky-underworld with his mind. His one yoga (union) remains perpetually dynamic. His journey begins from the first breath of life and continues till the last breath. The ascetic is especially a wanderer. The meaning is that movement in life is an inevitable activity.

Page #87:
---------------------------
## 16]
[Essential Sutra]
And it is natural for other beings to suffer from it.
This Aryapathic Sutra describes in great detail how and to which beings suffering is caused during activities like walking, moving, etc. It provides a powerful method for purifying oneself by sincerely repenting for the suffering caused to all subtle and gross beings, from one-sensed to five-sensed.
Jainism is a religion based on wisdom. All the interpreters of religion in the world have tested every practice, whether small or great, ordinary or special, on the touchstone of wisdom. The practice that has wisdom is the right practice, the practice with good karma, and the one that lacks wisdom is the wrong practice, the practice with bad karma. The Acharanga Sutra clearly states - 'Vivege Dhammamahie' meaning that Dharma lies in wisdom, wisdom is the divine eye that tests truth and falsehood. What is to be rejected, what is to be known, what is to be adopted, what is duty, what is non-duty? A wise man decides all these things only through wisdom. Yatanā, meaning to walk, stand, sit, sleep, etc. with wisdom, does not lead to the bondage of sinful karma, because the root cause of the bondage of sinful karma is Ayatanā. The Dasha Vaikalika Sutra says -
Jayam Chare Jayam Chithe, Jayamase Jayam Saye.
Jayam Bhumjato Bhasanto, Pav-Kamman Na Bandhai || This passage is a shining example of the tenderness of the heart. It is a living picture of the resolutions of wisdom and Yatanā. If one has to move around for essential needs and unintentionally causes suffering to any being, even while being careful, this Sutra expresses repentance for it.
'Ichchhami Padikkaumiu Iriya Vahiyaa Virahanaae' This is the initial Sutra, the Ajnā Sutra. Through this, permission is sought from the Gurudev for Aryapathic Pratikraman.
The word 'Ichchhami' signifies that there is no external pressure on the seeker. He wants to perform Pratikraman for self-purification out of his own free will and inner inspiration. He is seeking permission from the Gurudev for this. This is the difference between atonement and punishment. In atonement, the offender himself accepts his crime and is eager to atone for it to purify himself again. In punishment, there is no room for free will.
The passage from 'Gamanagamanē' to 'Jiviyaaō Vavaroviyaa' is the Alochanā Sutra. Alochanā means to reveal one's offenses one by one in front of the Guru Maharaj. One's mistakes...

Page #88:
---------------------------
## First Study: Samayik [17]

To acknowledge is a great thing, and then to humbly present it to the Guru in its true form is even greater. Only courageous and valiant men who have an inner desire for self-purification can do this.

**Explanation of Specific Words**

* **Abhihaya** - Its Sanskrit form is 'Abhihataḥ', which means to have stopped something coming towards you. That is, to have stopped creatures coming towards you and obstructed their free movement.
* **Vattia** - (Vartitaḥ) meaning covered with dust etc.
* **Lesia** - means to crush living beings on the ground, and **Sanghattia** means to touch living beings and cause them pain.
* **Utting** - means the nest of ants or a burrow made by ants. Acharya Haribhadra has also defined its meaning as a particular type of creature with the shape of a donkey - Uttinga Gardhabhaakrutiyojivaḥ, Kiitikanagaraani va. From the mention of Acharya Jinas Das Mahत्तर, it is known that this is a creature that digs holes in the ground. 'Uttinga naam Gaddhabhaakiti Jiva Bhoomie Khaddayam Karenti' - Aavashyakachurni.
* **Dag** - water with consciousness.
* **Matti** - earth with consciousness.
* **Thaanao Thaanam Sankamia** - pushed from one place to another.
* **Vavarovia** - an ambush has been laid. Aagarsutra

**Therefore, by:**

* **Uttarikarana** (rectification)
* **Payachchittkarana** (atonement)
* **Visohikarana** (separation)
* **Visallikarana** (dispersion)
* **Pavaanam Kammaanam Nigghayanaṭṭhae** (for the destruction of the karmas of the past)
* **Thaami Kaussaggam** (I will remain steadfast)

**And by:**

* **Annattha Usasieṇam** (not by eating)
* **Nisasieṇam** (not by sitting)
* **Khaasieṇam** (not by coughing)
* **Chhieṇam** (not by sneezing)
* **Jambhaaiieṇam** (not by yawning)
* **Uḍḍueṇam** (not by flying)
* **Vayanisaggeṇam** (not by speaking)
* **Bhamalie** (not by wandering)
* **Pittmuchchaae** (not by vomiting)

**And by:**

* **Suhumehi Ang-Sanchalehi** (not by moving the body)
* **Suhumehi Khel-Sanchalehi** (not by moving in play)
* **Suhumehi Ditthi-Sanchalehi** (not by moving the eyes)

**And by such Aagaras (refuges), I am:**

* **Abhaggho** (unbroken)
* **Aviraaheo** (unwavering)

**My Kaussagga (steadfastness) is:**

* **Jaaav Arihantaanam Bhagavantaanam** (until I attain the state of an Arihant)
* **Namukkareṇam Na Paaremi** (I will not transgress by disrespect)

Page #89:
---------------------------
[18]
Thus, by means of restraint, silence, and meditation, I purify myself.
[Essential Sutra]
The meaning is that I perform Kayotsarga for the sake of the soul's special excellence, purity, and superiority, for atonement, for being free from blemishes, and for the complete destruction of sinful karmas.
In Kayotsarga, I abandon all bodily activities and become still. However, I exclude those bodily functions that are unavoidable due to their natural occurrence. (These functions are as follows:)
High breath, low breath, cough, sneeze, yawn, belch, expulsion of apan vayu, dizziness, fainting due to bile disorder, subtle movement of limbs, subtle expulsion of phlegm, subtle movement of eyes, i.e., circulation, etc. My Kayotsarga is not broken or devoid of restraint from these sources.
Until I have bowed to the Arihant Bhagwans, I remain motionless in one place, silent, with my mind fixed in Dharma-dhyana, and I separate my body from sinful activities.
This sutra explains the nature of Kayotsarga as a method for the special purification of transgressions.
Here, the word "tass" refers to the soul that is tainted with transgressions. Some people interpret "tass" as referring to transgressions, but that is not appropriate. In reality, it is connected to the phrase "tass miccha mi dukkadam." It is not connected to "uttarikaraneṇam" and "visallikaraneṇam." The reason is that Kayotsarga is not performed to purify transgressions, nor do they contain Maya-adi blemishes. Maya-adi blemishes are the vibhava parinamas of the soul, so it is clear that "tass" can only mean the soul. The purpose of this sutra is to abandon all bodily activities for the attainment of soul development.
This is an Uttari-karana Sutra. Through it, in the Aryapathic Pratikramana, a special refinement in the form of Kayotsarga is resolved to remove the remaining subtle impurities in the pure soul. In brief, we can say that atonement is necessary for the purification of vows and the soul. Atonement cannot occur without the purification of emotions. For the purification of emotions, it is necessary to abandon blemishes (Maya, Nidana, Mithyadarshan). The abandonment of blemishes and the destruction of sinful karmas can only be achieved through Kayotsarga. Therefore, performing Kayotsarga is paramount.

Page #90:
---------------------------
## First Study: Samayik

**Meaning of Specific Words**

* **'Tass'**:  A soul contaminated by transgressions.
* **'Uttarikaraneṇam'**:  Due to belching.
* **'Visallikaraneṇam'**:  For excellence or purity, to remove impurities.
* **'Thāmi'**:  I do.
* **'Uḍḍuēṇam'**:  Due to dizziness.
* **'Bhamaliē'**:  Due to dizziness.
* **'Khelasanchālehiṁ'**:  Due to the movement of phlegm (khel - śleṣ - kph).

**Lesson on Transgressions of Knowledge**

**1. Sutra**

There are three types of Agamas: 1. Suttagam, 2. Atthagam, 3. Tadubhayagam.

The one with few words but comprehensive meaning, concise, free from doubt, flawless and detailed is called 'Sutra' by the learned.

The Agama in the form of Sutra is called 'Sutragam' and the one requested by the seekers of liberation is called 'Arthagam'. Only Sutragam cannot fulfill the purpose, therefore, the one with both Sutra and meaning is called 'Tadubhayagam'.

The fruit of reading this Agama with transgressions is false. These transgressions are as follows:

1. The words are read in reverse order.
2. The words are read with missing letters.
3. The words are read with extra letters.
4. The same meaning from different parts of the same scripture is read together, or a pause is taken at an inappropriate place, or a Sutra is created from one's own intellect and added to the Sutra.
5. The words are read without understanding.

**2. Conclusion**

If any transgression is committed in the knowledge of these three types of Agamas, then I condemn it.

**3. 'Tass micchā mi dukkadaṁ'**:  If there is a desire for knowledge and the knowledgeable, while considering their qualities, then 'Tass micchā mi dukkadaṁ'.

Page #91:
---------------------------
##  Translation:

**20]**

6.  Studied without discipline.
7.  Studied without yoga (lacking concentration of mind). Or, studied without performing the austerities prescribed for the study of that scripture. Or, taught without discerning the worthy and unworthy.
8.  Studied without the proper pronunciation of vowels like *udatta* etc.
9.  Studied beyond the capacity of the student to grasp the scripture.
10.  Studied the scriptures with a corrupt mind.
11.  Studied the scriptures at a time different from the time prescribed in the scriptures for their study.
-
-
12.  Did not study the scriptures at the time prescribed in the scriptures for study.
13.  Studied the scriptures at a time when it was not prescribed to do so.
[Essential Sutra]
14.  All my sins arising from not studying the scriptures at the prescribed time are nullified.

**Discussion:**

The knowledge that is free from doubt and supernatural, being taught by the Tirthankara Bhagwan, and which astounds the *bhavya* beings, or the knowledge that emanated from the mouth of the Arhant Bhagwan and was received by the *Ganadhar* Dev, and which the *bhavya* beings accepted with a right mind, is called *Aagam*.

I criticize any transgression regarding the three types of *Aagam* knowledge: *Mulapath* form, *Arth* form, and *Mulapath* and *Arth* combined form. If the sutras are not studied in order, for example, instead of "Namo Arihantaanam", "Arihantaanam Namo" is read. If it is studied without proper pronunciation, for example, if the "a" sound in the word "Anala" is reduced, it becomes "Nala", and if the "k" sound in the word "Kamala" is reduced, it becomes "Mala", etc. The example of the *Vidhyadhar* and *Abhaykumar* is famous in this regard.

-

Seeing a *Vidhyadhar* flying and falling, King Shrenik asked the Bhagwan along with his son *Abhaykumar*, "Bhanta! Why is this *Vidhyadhar* flying and falling like this?" Then the Bhagwan said, "This *Vidhyadhar* has forgotten one letter of his knowledge, due to which his aircraft falls repeatedly like a bird without wings."

Hearing this, *Abhaykumar*, the son of King Shrenik, by his *Padanusaarini* attainment, saw the *charan* of his aircraft...

1.  There are three types of vowels: *Udatta*, *Anudatta*, and *Svarit*. "Uccairupalabhyaman Udatta, Nichair Anudatta, Samavrytya Svarit" - meaning, speaking with a loud voice is *Udatta*, speaking softly is *Anudatta*, and speaking in a medium voice is *Svarit*.

Page #92:
---------------------------
[First Study: Samayika]
[21
By completing the mantra, he perfected his manortha and learned the means of attaining the Siddhi of Akashagamini Vidya from that Vidhyadhara.
If more letters are added and read, then - as for example, if 'a' is added before the word 'nal' and read, it becomes 'anal', which means fire. If the word is spoken with fewer or more letters, if it is read without respect, if it is read without yoga, if it is read without udattādi svaras, if it is read with more power than necessary, if it is read, if the Agam is received with bad intentions.
If one studies at an inappropriate time, or if one does not study at the appointed time for study, if one studies at the time of non-study, if one does not study at the time of study, and if one does not show respect and reverence to knowledge and knowledgeable people while studying or wandering, then may all that sin of mine be nullified.
|| First Samayikaavashyak Sampanna.
1. For Asvadhyaya, see Appendix.

Page #93:
---------------------------
[2]
I will praise the twenty-four Tirthankaras, the Jinas, who are the conquerors of the fourfold afflictions. || 1 ||
I bow to the first Tirthankara, Rishabhadeva, and to Ajitanatha. I bow to Sambhava, Abhinandan, Sumati, Padma Prabha, Suparshva, and Chandraprabha, the conqueror of passions. || 2 ||
I bow to Pushpadanta (Suvidhinatha), Sheetal, Shreyans, Vasupujya, Vimalanatha, Ananta, the conqueror of passions, Dharmanatha, and Shantinatha. || 3 ||
I bow to Kunthunatha, Aranatha, Mallinatha, Munisuvrata, and Naminatha. In the same way, I bow to Arishta Nem, Parshvanatha, and Vardhamana. || 4 ||
I have praised these twenty-four Tirthankaras, who are free from the dust of karma, who are free from old age and death, and who are the conquerors of internal enemies. May they be pleased with me. || 5 ||
May the Siddhas, who are the best in the world, who are worthy of praise and respect, grant me the highest benefit, the benefit of liberation. || 6 ||
May the Siddhas, who are pure and radiant, who are the masters of their senses, who are deep like the ocean, grant me liberation. || 7 ||

-
**Meaning**
I will praise the twenty-four Tirthankaras, who are the conquerors of the fourfold afflictions, who are the establishers of the path of righteousness, and who are the conquerors of passions. || 1 ||
I bow to Rishabhadeva and Ajitanatha. I bow to Sambhava, Abhinandan, Sumati, Padma Prabha, Suparshva, and Chandraprabha, the conqueror of passions. || 2 ||
I bow to Pushpadanta (Suvidhinatha), Sheetal, Shreyans, Vasupujya, Vimalanatha, Ananta, the conqueror of passions, Dharmanatha, and Shantinatha. || 3 ||
I bow to Kunthunatha, Aranatha, Mallinatha, Munisuvrata, and Naminatha. In the same way, I bow to Arishta Nem, Parshvanatha, and Vardhamana. || 4 ||
I have praised these twenty-four Tirthankaras, who are free from the dust of karma, who are free from old age and death, and who are the conquerors of internal enemies. May they be pleased with me. || 5 ||
May the Siddhas, who are the best in the world, who are worthy of praise and respect, grant me the highest benefit, the benefit of liberation. || 6 ||
May the Siddhas, who are pure and radiant, who are the masters of their senses, who are deep like the ocean, grant me liberation. || 7 ||

Page #94:
---------------------------
## Second Study: The Twenty-Four Stotras [23

**5.** Those who have been praised, worshipped, and reverently adored by Indra and other gods, as well as by humans, and who are the most excellent in the entire universe, may those Tirthankara Bhagavans grant me health, that is, self-health or Siddhatva, that is, self-peace, the full benefit of the Triratna, that is, Right Faith, Right Knowledge, and Right Conduct, and the highest Samadhi. **6.** Those who are more pure than the moons, more radiant than the suns, and as profound as the great ocean like the Self-born, may those Siddha Bhagavans grant me Siddhi, that is, may I attain liberation through their support. **7.**

**Discussion:** In the first study, Samayika, which is the cessation of all harmful actions, was explained. Now, in this second study, the Twenty-Four Stotras, the cessation of all harmful actions is taught. Therefore, the purity of Right Conduct and the destruction of all karmas, which leads to enlightenment and liberation in this and future lives, is praised through the glorification of the Tirthankara Bhagavans.

The word "Lok" (universe) is used here, which, according to Jain terminology, refers to the five aggregates (Pancha-Astikaya). The scriptures also mention four types of Lok: substance, space, time, and state. Here, all of these should be understood. I praise the twenty-four Tirthankaras who illuminate this entire universe with the lamp of their teachings, who liberate beings from suffering and lead them to a good destiny, who establish the path of Dharma, and who conquer the enemies of karma, such as attachment, aversion, and delusion.

After making a general vow to praise the twenty-four Tirthankaras, they are praised specifically by name. I bow to Shri Rishabhadeva Swami, who knows the nature of the universe and the beyond, who has attained the highest state, who is the foundation of the noble ones, who waters the garden of Dharma with the water of his teachings, and who is adorned with the symbol of the bull.

I bow to Shri Ajitanatha, who conquered attachment and aversion, and whose name "Ajit" (unconquered) was given because his mother did not lose when playing dice while he was in her womb.

I bow to Shri Sambhavanatha, who is the embodiment of infinite bliss, and whose birth brought an end to famine and ushered in an era of abundance.

I bow to Shri Abhinandan Swami, who brings joy to the noble beings, and whose birth was celebrated by Indra with repeated praise and greetings.

Thus, there are twenty-four Tirthankaras, the best among the knowers of the ultimate truth, who are adorned with various qualities. May they be pleased with me.

Page #95:
---------------------------
## 24]
[Essential Sutra
Yes. In 'Chauvaisaampi', the word 'api' refers to the Tirthankaras who reside in the Mahavideha realm. I bow to all of them.
Explanation of some words - Kittiy - individually named or praised, Vandiy - praised in mind, speech, and body, Mahiya - honored, respected by all beings due to qualities like superior knowledge, etc. The meaning of puja is to honor and respect. The Acharyas have categorized puja into two types - Dravya puja and Bhava puja. For Prabhu puja, flowers are needed, but they should be flawless, non-sentient Bhava-flowers. Regarding this, the renowned Jain Acharya Haribhadra has described the Bhava-flowers suitable for Prabhu puja in the Ashtak Prakaran as follows:
Ahimsa satyamasteyam, brahmacharyamasangata. Guru bhaktistapyo jnanam, satpushpani prachakshate ||
- Ashtak Prakaran 3.6
Meaning - Non-violence, truth, non-stealing, celibacy, non-attachment, devotion, austerity, and knowledge are the flowers that make life fragrant. These are the Bhava-flowers of the heart.
Arug - meaning health, self-wellbeing, or self-peace. Health is of two types - Dravyaarogya and Bhavaarogya. Dravya-arogya means being free from diseases and ailments like fever, etc. Bhava-arogya means being free from karmic afflictions. It means attaining self-peace, being in one's true self, or becoming a Siddha. In this sutra, the primary meaning of 'arogya' is Bhava-arogya. Dravya-arogya is also required for the practice of Bhava-arogya, because until the body and mind are healthy, self-realization will be difficult, but it is not intended here. Alternatively, the meaning of the phrase 'Aruggabohilaabham' is - health, meaning the benefit of Bodhi, Samyagdarshan, etc. for liberation.
The true Tirtha is the Dharma that takes us across the ocean of Samsara and protects us from misfortune. Those who establish the Dharma-Tirtha of non-violence, truth, etc. are called Tirthankaras. All twenty-four Tirthankaras have established Dharma in their respective times, and have stabilized the people who had deviated from Dharma back into Dharma.
The last words in this text are - Siddha Siddhi Mam Disantu - meaning - May the Siddha Bhagwan grant me Siddhi. There may be a doubt here - Siddha Bhagwan is free from attachment, has accomplished everything, does not give or take anything from anyone, then why is such a request made to them? The solution is that, in reality, this means that devotees can attain Siddhi only by taking refuge in Bhagwan. || Second Essential Sutra Ends ||
00

Page #96:
---------------------------
I seek forgiveness, O Ascetic! I wish to pay homage to you, the one who has conquered the senses. Please grant me permission to enter this limited space. I touch your feet with my head, having restrained myself from sinful actions. Forgive me if my touch has caused you any discomfort.

**Body Journey Inquiry**
**Discipline Journey Inquiry**
Are you free from suffering?
-
-
Have you spent the day in a state of non-attachment, engaging in virtuous actions? Is your journey of discipline unimpeded? And is your body, mind, and senses...

**Apology for Offenses**
O Ascetic! I seek forgiveness for any offenses committed during the day. I renounce any actions that went against the proper conduct. For any of the thirty-three types of transgressions committed during the day, through any of the ten types of wrong conduct, whether done through false speech, evil thoughts, harmful actions, anger, pride, deceit, greed, or any other transgression committed in the past, present, or future, through any violation of the Dharma, I seek forgiveness, O Ascetic! I renounce it, I condemn it, and I especially condemn it, I condemn it in the presence of the Guru.

Page #97:
---------------------------
[26]
I renounce (myself) from the business of sins.
-
Discussion - In the second study, the Tirthankaras, who are the preachers of the Samayik vow, which is the renunciation of the Savadya Yoga, such as Pranatipat, etc., have been praised. The Samayik vow, as instructed by the Tirthankaras, can only be obtained by the grace of the Guru Maharaj. For this reason, and because it is the etiquette to perform Pratikraman after paying respects to the Guru, it is necessary to pay respects to the Guru. Therefore, we begin the third study called 'Guru Vandana'.
'Icchami' - Jainism is a religion based on desire. Every sadhak performs every sadhana of his own free will, there is no pressure on him. Sadhana performed without the joy of the mind, or out of reluctance or pressure, is not actually sadhana, but a kind of punishment. Lifeless religious practices, laden with pressure or fear, crush the life of the sadhak instead of elevating it. This is why the word 'Icchami' is used first in every sadhana of Jainism, in the form of 'Icchami Khamasamano', 'Icchami Padikkamami', etc. The meaning of Icchami is - I want, that is, I am desirous of performing this action from the inspiration of my inner mind.
'Khamasamano'
The four words Shramanah, Shamanah, Samanaah, Samanah become 'Samano' in Prakrit. Although there is a slight difference in the meaning of these four words, there is no difference in the meaning.
2. 'Shaman'
is called 'Shaman'.
1. 'Shraman' - One who labors, that is, who works hard in twelve types of austerities, or who suppresses the senses and mind, is called 'Shraman'.
-
[Essential Sutra
-
• One who pacifies the fire of Kshaya and Nokashaya, which are anger, pride, deceit and greed
-
3. 'Saman'
One who has equal regard for enemy and friend is called 'Saman'.
4. 'Saman' One who teaches the Jina's teachings well, or who lives by conquering the Kshaya by the power of restraint, is called 'Saman'.
—
The root 'Shramu' is used in the sense of penance and sorrow. Therefore, one who performs penance and remains completely detached from the world is called a Shraman. A Shraman who is full of forgiveness is called a Kshamasraman.
In the Anuyogadwar Sutra, six types of essentials are mentioned
-
'Samaiyam Chauveesatthao, Vandayanam, Padikkamaman, Kaussaggo Pacchakkhanam.'
Of these, Vandana is the third essential. In this, the disciple addresses the Gurudev and says
O Kshamasraman Gurudev! I, with my strength, offer my respects with a body free from the Savadya business, such as Pranatipat, etc.
-

Page #98:
---------------------------
##  [27
Third Study: Vandan]

I wish to enter the Mitavgrah (the area of three and a half cubits around where the Guru Maharaj is seated), therefore please grant me permission to enter.

The Guru grants permission to the disciple by saying "Anujanami" (I permit). Upon receiving permission, the disciple says: "O Guru Maharaj! I stop all my worldly activities and touch your feet with my head and hands. If I have caused you any discomfort by this act of Vandan, please forgive me. Khamemi Khamasamano! Devasiyam Vaikkaman Avassiae Padikkamami" (O Forgiving Ascetic! I seek forgiveness for any offenses committed related to the day and I will remain free from offenses in the future by performing the necessary actions of worshiping your commands, i.e., I will try not to commit any offenses).

## Vandan Method

- While saying "Ichchami Khamasamano Vandioum Javanijjaae Nisihiyaa" during Vandan, stand outside the Avgrah with both hands placed on the forehead and bow your head in front of the Guru, seeking permission to enter the Avgrah. This signifies that the disciple is committed to always carrying the Guru's commands on their head.

## First Three Cycles

"Aho" - "Kaayam" - "Kaaryam" - These are completed with two letters each. Touch the Guru's feet with both hands joined in Kamalmudra and say the letter "A" in a soft voice. Then, place the joined hands on your forehead and say the letter "Ho" in a loud voice. This is the first cycle. Similarly, the remaining two cycles of "Ka....yam" and "Ka....yam" are also performed.

## Next Three Cycles

1. "Jatta Bhe," 2. "Javanni," 3. "Jjam Cha Bhe" - These are completed with three letters each. Touch the Guru's feet with both hands joined in Kamalmudra and say the letter "J" in a soft, low voice. Then, bring the joined hands to your heart and say the letter "Tta" in a medium, accented voice. Finally, touch your forehead and say the letter "Bhe" in a high voice. This is the first cycle. Similarly, the remaining two cycles of "Jav Ni..." and "Jjac..." should also be performed. There are six cycles for the first "Khamasamano" and similarly six for the second "Khamasamano," totaling twelve cycles.

In this way, the disciple stands outside the Avgrah in the first place of request, with both hands holding a Rajoharan in the Yathajat Mudra, bowing half their body and performing Vandan by reciting from "Ichchami Khamasamano" to "Nisihiyaa." The disciple expresses their desire to perform Vandan. After the disciple's request, they should perform Vandan from outside the Avgrah by reciting "Tikkhutto." Alternatively, the Guru...

Page #99:
---------------------------
##  28]
**Essential Sutra**

The word 'Chhandena' means to give consent to perform obeisance as desired.

After receiving permission from the Gurudev to perform obeisance through the aforementioned method, the disciple should move forward, outside the Avgraha area but nearby, to another place called 'Avgraha-Pravesha-Ajna-Yachana'. There, they should again bow slightly and ask for permission to enter the Avgraha by saying 'Anujanaha Me Miuggaham'. Upon receiving the request, Gurudev should grant permission by saying 'Anujanama'. After receiving permission, the disciple should enter the Avgraha with the 'Yathajat Mudra', which is the same posture as when they accepted initiation, with both hands joined in Anjali mudra placed on the head, while saying 'Nisihi-Nisihi'. 

Later, after cleansing the ground with Rajoharan, the disciple should sit in front of Gurudev in the 'Ukdu' or 'Goduhasan' posture. They should then perform the first three 'Avarta' by saying 'Aho Kayam Karyam' according to the aforementioned method, and perform 'Samphasan' by touching their forehead to Gurudev's feet.

After that, they should ask for forgiveness for any inconvenience caused to Gurudev while touching their feet by saying 'Khamanijjo Bhe Kilamo'. Then, they should inquire about Gurudev's well-being for the day by saying 'Appakilantanam Bahusubhena Bhe Divaso Vaikkato?'. Gurudev should then respond with 'Tatha' and inquire about the disciple's well-being. Subsequently, the disciple should perform the three 'Avarta' - 'Jatta Bhe', 'J Va Ni', and 'Jjam Cha Bhe' - and inquire about the disciple's peace of mind regarding their journey, practice, and body. In response, Gurudev should inquire about the disciple's peace and well-being regarding their journey and livelihood. Finally, the disciple should say 'Avassiae' and exit the Avgraha.

In the present text, the phrase 'Divaso Vaikkato' in 'Bahusubhena Bhe Divaso Vaikkato' should be replaced with 'Rai Vaikkata' during the night Pratikraman, 'Pakkhovaikkato' during the Pakshik Pratikraman, 'Chaummaasi Vaikkata' during the Chaturmasik Pratikraman, and 'Sanvatcharo Vaikkato' during the Sanvatsarik Pratikraman.

In the Samvayanga Sutra, the 12th Samvay, while describing the form of obeisance, Bhagwan Mahavir has mentioned 25 types of obeisance:

**Oon Jahajayam Kitikamm Barasavayam.**
**Chausiram Tiguttam Cha, Dupavesam Ega Nikkhamanam.**

Meaning: Two Avenant, one Yathajat, twelve Avarta, four Shiras, three Gupti, two Pravesha, and one Nikkhaman, totaling 25 essentials.

The third obeisance in the essential actions holds a significant place. It is the disciple's paramount duty to perform obeisance to Gurudev with a humble heart and inquire about their well-being for the day and night, because...

Page #100:
---------------------------
## Third Study: Salutations

[29] After the Arhats, the Gurudev is the ruler of the spiritual kingdom. Saluting them is equivalent to saluting the Lord. Salutations bring humility. The principle of humility was highly emphasized in ancient India. It is said, "Vinayo Jinasaasanamoolam," meaning humility is the root of the Jain teachings. The Jain Siddhanta Deepika states, "Anashaatana bahumaan karanam cha vinayaha." Not doing Ashatana and showing respect is humility.

**Meaning of Specific Words:**

* Jaavanijaae - According to strength, in accordance with power.
* Nisihiyaa - From the cessation of careful business.
* Anujaanah - Please permit.
* Miuuggham - Mitaavagraha, meaning the area around where the Guru Maharaj is seated, a space of three and a half hands wide.
* Aho Kaayam - Adha:kaay - Part of the body, feet.
* Kaayasamphasaam - Kaay, meaning by hand, proper touch (of the feet).
* Khamanijjo - Worthy of forgiveness.
* Bhe - By you.
* Appakilantaanam - Free from bodily labor or hindrance.
* Vaikkham - Excess.
* Avassya - Necessary, action in the form of foot-touching.
* Aasaayana - Disrespect, disregard.
* Teteesaanayaraae - Any of the thirty-three types (of Ashatana).
* Savvakaliyaae - All beings, present, future, and past.
* Savvamichchovayaraae - Filled with all kinds of false treatments.

There are thirty-three Ashatanas, they are as follows:

1. If a Saikhya (newly initiated or one with a lesser degree of initiation) Sadhu walks very close to a Raatnika (one with a higher degree of initiation) Sadhu, this is the first Ashatana of the Saikhya.
2. If a Saikhya Sadhu walks ahead of a Raatnika Sadhu, this is the second Ashatana of the Saikhya.
3. If a Saikhya Sadhu walks alongside a Raatnika Sadhu, this is the third Ashatana of the Saikhya.
4. If a Saikhya Sadhu stands in front of a Raatnika Sadhu, this is the fourth Ashatana of the Saikhya.
5. If a Saikhya Sadhu stands alongside a Raatnika Sadhu, this is the fifth Ashatana of the Saikhya.
6. If a Saikhya Sadhu stands very close to a Raatnika Sadhu, this is the sixth Ashatana of the Saikhya.
7. If a Saikhya Sadhu sits in front of a Raatnika Sadhu, this is the seventh Ashatana of the Saikhya.
8. If a Saikhya Sadhu sits alongside a Raatnika Sadhu, this is the eighth Ashatana of the Saikhya.
9. If a Saikhya Sadhu sits very close to a Raatnika Sadhu, this is the ninth Ashatana of the Saikhya.
10. If a Saikhya Sadhu and a Raatnika Sadhu are leaving the meditation ground together, and the Saikhya Sadhu performs Achaman (purification) before the Raatnika Sadhu, this is the tenth Ashatana of the Saikhya.

Page #101:
---------------------------
##  [Essential Sutras]

**11.**  A *Shaiksha* monk, while going out with a *Ratnik* monk to the *Vichara Bhoomi* or *Vihar Bhoomi*, if the *Shaiksha* monk criticizes first and the *Ratnik* monk later, this is the eleventh *Ashatana* of a *Shaiksha*.

**12.** If a monk is already talking with a *Ratnik* monk, and the *Shaiksha* monk speaks before the *Ratnik* monk, and the *Ratnik* monk speaks later, this is the twelfth *Ashatana* of a *Shaiksha*.

**13.** If a *Ratnik* monk asks a *Shaiksha* at night or during the *Vikal* (twilight), "Arya! Who is sleeping and who is awake?", and the *Shaiksha* ignores it and does not answer, this is the thirteenth *Ashatana* of a *Shaiksha*.

**14.** If a *Shaiksha* monk brings food, drink, *Khadim* (food offered to a monk), or *Swadim* (delicious food) and first criticizes in front of another *Shaiksha* and then in front of the *Ratnik* monk, this is the fourteenth *Ashatana* of a *Shaiksha*.

**15.** If a *Shaiksha* monk brings food, drink, *Khadim*, or *Swadim* and first shows it to another *Shaiksha* and then shows it to the *Ratnik* monk, this is the fifteenth *Ashatana* of a *Shaiksha*.

**16.** If a *Shaiksha* monk brings food, drink, *Khadim*, or *Swadim* and first invites another *Shaiksha* to eat and then invites the *Ratnik* monk, this is the sixteenth *Ashatana* of a *Shaiksha*.

**17.** If a *Shaiksha* monk brings food, drink, *Khadim*, or *Swadim* with a *Ratnik* monk and gives it to someone without asking the *Ratnik* monk, this is the seventeenth *Ashatana* of a *Shaiksha*.

**18.** If a *Shaiksha* monk brings food, drink, *Khadim*, or *Swadim* and eats with a *Ratnik* monk, and eats the best food quickly in large bites, this is the eighteenth *Ashatana* of a *Shaiksha*.

**19.** If a *Shaiksha* monk ignores something said by a *Ratnik* monk, this is the nineteenth *Ashatana* of a *Shaiksha*.

**20.** If a *Shaiksha* monk listens while sitting in his place when something is said by a *Ratnik* monk, this is the twentieth *Ashatana* of a *Shaiksha*.

**21.** If a *Shaiksha* monk says, "What was said?" when something is said by a *Ratnik* monk, this is the twenty-first *Ashatana* of a *Shaiksha*.

**22.** If a *Shaiksha* monk speaks to a *Ratnik* monk using the word "you" (a disrespectful term), this is the twenty-second *Ashatana* of a *Shaiksha*.

**23.** If a *Shaiksha* monk speaks rudely to a *Ratnik* monk with a clicking sound, this is the twenty-third *Ashatana* of a *Shaiksha*.

Page #102:
---------------------------
## Third Study: Respect 

[31]

**Aspirations:**

24. If a student, while listening to a Ratnik Sadhu, expresses approval with words like "Yes, yes," it is the twenty-fourth aspiration of a student.

25. If a student, while listening to a Ratnik Sadhu's Dharmakatha, says "You don't remember," it is the twenty-fifth aspiration of a student.

26. If a student, while listening to a Ratnik Sadhu's Dharmakatha, says "Stop it," it is the twenty-sixth aspiration of a student.

27. If a student, while listening to a Ratnik Sadhu's Dharmakatha, creates division in the assembly, it is the twenty-seventh aspiration of a student.

28. If a student, while listening to a Ratnik Sadhu's Dharmakatha, does not stand up when the assembly does, and the Ratnik Sadhu repeats the same story a second or third time, it is the twenty-eighth aspiration of a student.

29. If a student kicks the bed or bedding of a Ratnik Sadhu, it is the twenty-ninth aspiration of a student.

30. If a student stands, sits, or sleeps on the bed or seat of a Ratnik Sadhu, it is the thirtieth aspiration of a student.

31, 32. If a student sits on a seat higher than or equal to that of a Ratnik Sadhu, it is the thirty-first and thirty-second aspiration of a student.

33. If a student, while sitting on their seat, answers a Ratnik Sadhu's question, it is the thirty-third aspiration of a student.

**Discussion:**

It is the duty of a newly initiated Sadhu to always be mindful of the respect and humility due to their Acharya, Upadhyaya, and senior Sadhus in their Dikshaparaya, whether they are walking, standing, sitting, being asked a question, or during Gochari. If they fail in this duty, they commit aspirations and break their means of liberation. These thirty-three aspirations are mentioned to keep this in mind. The original text mentions four aspirations and indicates the rest with the word "etc." Their nature is explained according to the Dasha-Shrutaskandha.

## Third Essential Completed.

Page #103:
---------------------------
[4]
Fourth Study: Text of Pratikramana Transgressions
Regarding the first Iryasamiti, if any transgression has occurred, then consider:
- From the perspective of Dravya (substance), whether the body or the living being has not been observed properly.
- From the perspective of Kshetra (space), whether it has not been observed properly within a radius of three and a half cubits.
- From the perspective of Kala (time), whether it has not been observed properly without seeing the day and without spending the night.
- From the perspective of Bhava (emotion), whether it has not been observed properly with the use of the senses.
- From the perspective of Guna (quality), whether the Samvaraguna (virtuous quality) has not been observed properly. If any sin or fault has occurred regarding the first Iryasamiti, then it is a transgression against the Devas (gods).
Regarding the second Bhasasamiti, if any transgression has occurred, then consider:
- From the perspective of Dravya (substance), whether harsh, cruel, decisive, violent, piercing, divisive, tormenting of parasites, and all-sinful language mixed with filth has been spoken.
- From the perspective of Kshetra (space), whether it has been spoken while walking on the road.
- From the perspective of Kala (time), whether it has been spoken in the evening or at night with loud and harsh words.
- From the perspective of Bhava (emotion), whether it has been spoken with anger or hatred.
- From the perspective of Guna (quality), whether the Samvaraguna (virtuous quality) has not been observed properly. If any sin or fault has occurred regarding the second Bhasasamiti, then it is a transgression against the Devas (gods).
Regarding the third Eshanasamiti, if any transgression has occurred, then consider:
- From the perspective of Dravya (substance), whether the sixteen transgressions of Udgaman (departure), the sixteen transgressions of Utpat (origin), and the ten transgressions of Eshana (perception), along with the forty-two transgressions related to food and water, have been committed.
- From the perspective of Kshetra (space), whether it has been consumed after being taken beyond two kosas (a unit of distance).
- From the perspective of Bhava (emotion), whether the five transgressions of the five mandalas (circles) have not been avoided.
- From the perspective of Guna (quality), whether the Samvaraguna (virtuous quality) has not been observed properly. If any sin or fault has occurred regarding the third Eshanasamiti, then it is a transgression against the Devas (gods).
Regarding the fourth Ayanabhandamattanikkhvevana Samiti, if any transgression has occurred, then consider:
- From the perspective of Dravya (substance), whether it has been taken or kept with negligence.
- From the perspective of Kshetra (space), whether it has been kept in the house or courtyard of a householder.
- From the perspective of Kala (time), whether the proper time for discarding it has not been observed.
- From the perspective of Bhava (emotion), whether it has been enjoyed with attachment and delusion.
- From the perspective of Guna (quality), whether the Samvaraguna (virtuous quality) has not been observed properly. If any sin or fault has occurred regarding the fourth Samiti, then it is a transgression against the Devas (gods).
Regarding the fifth Uccara-Pasavana-Khel-Jall-Singhan-Paritthavana Samiti, if any transgression has occurred, then consider:
- From the perspective of Dravya (substance), whether it has been discarded in a high or low place.
- From the perspective of Kshetra (space), whether it has been discarded in the house or courtyard of a householder.
- From the perspective of Bhava (emotion), whether it has not been done with proper care and attention.
- From the perspective of Kala (time), whether the permission of Sakrendra Maharaj has not been taken before discarding it.
- From the perspective of Dravya (substance), whether it has been discarded with a small amount of capital.
- From the perspective of Kala (time), whether it has not been washed three times after discarding it.
- From the perspective of Bhava (emotion), whether it has not been done with proper care and attention.
- From the perspective of Kshetra (space), whether it has not been done with proper care and attention.
- From the perspective of Guna (quality), whether the Samvaraguna (virtuous quality) has not been observed properly. If any sin or fault has occurred regarding the fifth Samiti, then it is a transgression against the Devas (gods).

Page #104:
---------------------------
## Fourth Study: Pratikraman

**[33]**

**1.** For the subject of *Managupti*, if any transgression occurs, then the *Aaloo*, *Aarambh-Samarambh*, *Vishay-Kashaya* are the subjects. If the mind is inclined towards wrong thoughts, then for the *Devasya* related to this, *Tass Miccha Mi Dukkadam*.

**2.** For the subject of *Vachanagupti*, if any transgression occurs, then the *Aaloo*, *Vachan Aarambh*, *Sarambh*, *Samarambh*, *Rajkatha*, *Deshkatha*, *Streekatha*, *Bhattkatha* are the subjects. If any of these four stories are involved, then for the *Devasya* related to this, *Tass Miccha Mi Dukkadam*.

**3.** For the subject of *Kayagupti*, if any transgression occurs, then the *Aaloo*, *Kaya Aarambh*, *Sarambh*, *Samarambh*, *without Puja*, *Ajyanapan*, *Asavadhanapan*, *spreading hands and feet*, *contracting*, *without Puja*, *fear etc. taking support* are the subjects. Then for the *Devasya* related to this, *Tass Miccha Mi Dukkadam*.

**1.** For *Prithvikaaya*, if there is harm to the living beings of *Prithvikaaya* like *Mitti*, *Mardi*, *Khadi*, *Geru*, *Hingalu*, *Hadtaal*, *Hadmachi*, *Loon*, *Bhodal*, *Paththar* etc., then for the *Devasya* related to this, *Tass Miccha Mi Dukkadam*.

**2.** For *Apkaaya*, if there is harm to the living beings of *Apkaaya* like *Thaar ko Pani*, *Os ko Pani*, *Him ko Pani*, *Ghada ko Pani*, *Talaab ko Pani*, *Nivaan ko Pani*, *Sankal ko Pani*, *Mishra Pani*, *Varshad ko Pani* etc., then for the *Devasya* related to this, *Tass Miccha Mi Dukkadam*.

**3.** For *Teukaaya*, if there is harm to the living beings of *Teukaaya* like *Khira*, *Angira*, *Bhobal*, *Bhadrsaal*, *Jhaal*, *Tootti Jhaal*, *Bijli*, *Ulkaapat* etc., then for the *Devasya* related to this, *Tass Miccha Mi Dukkadam*.

**4.** For *Vaukaaya*, if there is harm to the living beings of *Vaukaaya* like *Ukkaliyaavaay*, *Mandaliyaavaay*, *Ghanavaay*, *Ghanagunjavaay*, *Tanavaay*, *Shuddhavaay*, *Saptavaay*, *Vejane Kari*, *Taalikari*, *Chamrikari* etc., then for the *Devasya* related to this, *Tass Miccha Mi Dukkadam*.

**5.** For *Vanaspatikaaya*, if there is harm to the living beings of *Vanaspatikaaya* like *Hari Tarkari*, *Beej*, *Ankur*, *Kan*, *Kapas*, *Gumma*, *Guccha*, *Lata*, *Leelan*, *Phoolan* etc., then for the *Devasya* related to this, *Tass Miccha Mi Dukkadam*.

**6.** For *Beindriya*, if there is harm to the living beings of *Beindriya* like *Lat*, *Gindola*, *Alasiya Shankh*, *Sancholia*, *Kori*, *Jaloak* etc., then for the *Devasya* related to this, *Tass Miccha Mi Dukkadam*.

**7.** For *Teindriya*, if there is harm to the living beings of *Teindriya* like *Kidi Makori*, *Joun*, *Leenkh*, *Chanchan*, *Maankan*, *Gajai*, *Khajuriya*, *Udhai*, *Dhaneriya* etc., then for the *Devasya* related to this, *Tass Miccha Mi Dukkadam*.

**8.** For *Chaturindriya*, if there is harm to the living beings of *Chaturindriya* like *Teed*, *Patangia*, *Makkhi*, *Machchar*, *Bhanvra*, *Tigori*, *Kasari*, *Bichchu* etc., then for the *Devasya* related to this, *Tass Miccha Mi Dukkadam*.

**9.** For *Panchendriya*, if there is harm to the living beings of *Panchendriya* like *Jalchar*, *Thalchar*, *Khechar*, *Urpar*, *Bhujpar*, *Sanni Asanni*, *Garbhj*, *Samucchim*, *Paryapta Aparyapta* etc., then for the *Devasya* related to this, *Tass Miccha Mi Dukkadam*.

Page #105:
---------------------------
##  [34]
[Essential Sutras]
If there is a violation of the five-sense beings, then it is a great misfortune for the Devasiya.
**First:** If any transgression occurs regarding the first great vow, then consider it a violation: (1) Indrathavarakaya (2) Bambhathavarakaya (3) Sippathavarakaya (4) Sammathithavarakaya (5) Payavachathavarakaya (6) Jangamakaya. Violence against these substances, in the field of all beings, from the time of the beginning of life to the end of life, with the three karmas and three yogas, if any sin or fault occurs regarding the first great vow, then it is a great misfortune for the Devasiya.
**Second:** If any transgression occurs regarding the second great vow, then consider it a violation:  Kohā vā, Lohā vā, Hāsā vā, Kridā Kutuhalakārī.  Speaking lies through these substances, in the field of all beings, from the time of the beginning of life to the end of life, with the three karmas and three yogas, if any sin or fault occurs regarding the second great vow, then it is a great misfortune for the Devasiya.
**Third:** If any transgression occurs regarding the third great vow, then consider it a violation:  Kāmarāga, Dṛṣṭirāga, Devata Sambandhi, Manusya - Tiryanch Sambandhi.  Enjoying sensual pleasures through these substances, in the field of all beings, from the time of the beginning of life to the end of life, with the three karmas and three yogas, if any sin or fault occurs regarding the third great vow, then it is a great misfortune for the Devasiya.
**Fourth:** If any transgression occurs regarding the fourth great vow, then consider it a violation:  Sachitta Parigraha, Achitta Parigraha, Misra Parigraha.  Having attachment to things, desiring things, keeping needles, thread, and metal as possessions, in the field of all beings, from the time of the beginning of life to the end of life, with the three karmas and three yogas, if any sin or fault occurs regarding the fourth great vow, then it is a great misfortune for the Devasiya.
**Fifth:** If any transgression occurs regarding the fifth great vow, then consider it a violation:  Char Ahar Asan, Pan, Khayan, Saim, Sitamatra, Lepamatra.  Eating at night, keeping food, knowing that keeping it is good, in the field of all beings, from the time of the beginning of life to the end of life, with the three karmas and three yogas, if any sin or fault occurs regarding the fifth great vow, then it is a great misfortune for the Devasiya.
**Sixth:** If any transgression occurs regarding the vow of abstaining from food at night, then consider it a violation:  Char Ahar Asan, Pan, Khayan, Saim, Sitamatra, Lepamatra.  Eating at night, keeping food, knowing that keeping it is good, in the field of all beings, from the time of the beginning of life to the end of life, with the three karmas and three yogas, if any sin or fault occurs regarding the vow of abstaining from food at night, then it is a great misfortune for the Devasiya.
**Eighteen Sins:** (1) Prāṇātipāta (2) Mṛṣāvāda (3) Adattādāna (4) Maithuna (5) Parigraha (6) Krodha (7) Māna (8) Māyā (9) Lobha (10) Rāga (11) Dveṣa (12) Kalaha (13) Abhyākhyāna (14) Paiśunya (15) Paraparivāda (16) Rati-arati (17) Māyāmoso (18) Mithyādarśana.  If any sin or fault occurs regarding these eighteen sins, then it is a great misfortune for the Devasiya.
If any sin or fault occurs regarding the five main vows, then it is a great misfortune for the Devasiya. If any sin or fault occurs regarding the five virtues, then it is a great misfortune for the Devasiya. If any sin or fault occurs regarding the thirty-three Ashātanās, including those of the Guru and elders, then it is a great misfortune for the Devasiya.

Page #106:
---------------------------
## Fourth Study: Pratikramana

[35]
**Shayyasutra**

I wish to perform Pratikramana for sleeping. If I have slept for a long time, or slept repeatedly for a long time, turned over in bed with effort, or turned over repeatedly, contracted or stretched my limbs with effort, caused pain to six-legged creatures like lice by harsh touch, coughed without effort or forcefully, said that the bed is too hard, or made other complaints about the bed, sneezed or yawned with effort, scratched my body without a purpose, or touched any object, touched a wet object with awareness, (all these are transgressions while awake during sleep).

Now, transgressions related to the dream state during sleep are mentioned: If I have been agitated or disturbed by seeing a dream of war, marriage, etc., if my mind has been deluded in a dream, if I have engaged in sexual activity with a woman in a dream, if I have looked at a woman or other beings with lustful intent, if I have experienced mental defilement, if I have consumed food or water in a dream, or desired to consume them, then all these transgressions related to sleep that I have committed, "Tass miccha mi dukkadam" - may they be nullified.

**Explanation:**

Every part of our soul is bound to matter. On each part of the soul, there are infinite layers of karma-worms, and the soul is polluted by this karma-stain. As long as the karma-stain remains, birth and death, disease and sorrow, and the pain of union and separation will continue. This has been happening since time immemorial. Only by removing the karma-worms bound to the soul and making the soul pure and spotless can the cycle of suffering be destroyed. As the saying goes, "Jalabindunipaten kramaśaḥ pūryate ghaṭaḥ," a pot is filled drop by drop, and a treasury is filled by saving penny by penny. The same is true for spiritual practice.

Although all religious founders and preachers have discussed the importance of wisdom for spiritual practice from their own perspectives, the depth and sensitivity of the analysis and discussion found in Jain scriptures is unmatched. Every action in Jain culture is guided by wisdom. The Dasha Vaikalika Sutra states:

1. Female practitioners should read "Purisa vippariyasiaye" instead of "Itthi vippariyasiaye."

Page #107:
---------------------------
[36]
[Essential Sutra]
Jayam care, jayam chitte, jayam mase, jayam saye.
Jayam bhujanta bhasanta, pavakammam na bandhai. ||
One who walks with effort, stands with effort, sits with effort, sleeps with effort, eats with effort and speaks with effort, does not bind the karma of sin.

Even the most ordinary seeker, if he keeps his focus on small practices, does not forget the effort of discernment, one day he can become a very high seeker. And conversely, neglecting even ordinary mistakes and not being discerning can lead to the downfall of even a higher seeker. This is why Jain ethics emphasizes paying attention to even subtle mistakes.

This sutra is for the atonement of excesses related to sleep. Whatever physical, verbal and mental mistakes have been made while sleeping, whatever transgression of restraint has been made, whatever kind of emotional imbalance has occurred, this sutra provides a provision for repentance - for giving 'miccha mi dukkad' for all of it.

Meaning of specific words - Pagamasijae - the Sanskrit form is 'prakamashayya'. Prakamashayya means - sleeping more than the limit. Nigamasijae - sleeping repeatedly for a long time, is nikamashaya. Kuiye - coughing. Kakkaraiye - the word 'karkarayit' means to grumble. If the bed is uneven or hard, the sadhu should use it with equanimity and peace. The seeker should not grumble or mutter about the defects of the bed. Amose - touching the body or other objects without wiping them. Sasarakkhamose - touching an object that is contaminated with conscious dust. Aulmaulaae - with anxiety and agitation. Sovanvattiae - due to the perception of a dream.

This bed-sutra should be read by the seeker whenever he wakes up from sleep. It is also called the text for the removal of sleep defects. After reading this text, one should also read the text of one person or four people.

Bhikshadoṣanivṛttisūtra
Padikkhamāmi goyaraggachari yae, bhikkaayariyae ugghāḍa k vāḍ-ugghāḍanāe, sāṇāvacchādārāsaṁghaṭṭanāe, maṇḍī-pāhuḍiāe, balipahuḍiāe, uvaṇāpāhuḍiāe, saṁkie, sahasāgāre, aṇeṣaṇāe, pāṇeṣaṇāe pāṇabhoyanaae, biyabhōyanaae, hariyabhōyanaae, pacchākammiāe, purekammiāe, adiṭṭhaḍāe, dagasaṁsaṭṭhaḍāe, rayasaṁsaṭṭhaḍāe, pārisāḍaniāe, pāriṭṭhāvaniāe, ohāsaṇa-bhikkhāe, jaṁ uggemeṇaṁ, uppayaneṣaṇāe aparisuḍḍhaṁ pariggahiyam, paribhuṭṭa vā jaṁ na pariṭṭhaviyam, tassa miccha mi dukkad.

Page #108:
---------------------------
## Fourth Study: Pratikraman

[37 Meaning - In the form of Gocharcharya Bhikchacharya, I repent for any transgression-fault that has been committed, whether known or unknown.

Playing with half-open doors, touching a dog, calf, or child, taking Mandipraabhratik Agrapind, taking food prepared for Bali, taking food kept aside for Bhikshus, taking food with doubts like Adhakarma, taking food hastily without thinking, taking food without Aeshna (investigation), making any mistake in Aeshna of drinking water, food, etc., taking food containing any living being, taking Beejbhushan (food containing seeds), taking Haritbhushan (food containing sentient plants), taking food after giving food to Sadhu, taking food before giving food to Sadhu, taking food without seeing, taking food touched by sentient water, taking food touched by sentient dust, taking food given in the way of Parishaatanika, taking food given in the vessel of Parishthapanika, or taking food without reason, taking food that is not fit for consumption, taking food without reason, taking food with 16 Udgam Doshas, taking food with 16 Utpada Doshas, taking food with 10 Doshas related to Aeshna and Grahaneshna.

If I have taken food or water contrary to the Sadhumaryada, knowing it to be impure, but not repenting, then all my sins are false.

Discussion - Jainism is a religion based on non-violence. It is an ocean of compassion, a storehouse of mercy, a lake of goodwill, a source of sweetness, and a source of compassion. It takes care in every practice and gives great importance to the purity of food, conduct, and behavior for the progress of practice.

Human life is essential for the practice of restraint, and food and water are essential for sustaining life. Food and water cannot be prepared without the beginning and end, and the Sadhu is a renunciant of the beginning and end. What should be done in such a situation? Jain Agamas have provided a very beautiful solution to this problem. The present text is indicative of that solution. Firstly, the Sadhu should earn a living through Bhikhavritti and should take only pure food in Bhikhavritti. The faults from which he has to abstain are mentioned in this text.

Page #109:
---------------------------
## 38]
[Essential Sutra]

For a Jain monk, the provision of consuming food with nine types of purity (Navakoti) is made. The nine types are as follows:

* Not cooking food oneself.
* Not asking others to cook for oneself.
* Not approving of the cooking process.
* Not buying ready-made food.
* Not asking others to buy food for oneself.
* Not approving of the purchase of food.
* Not causing harm oneself.
* Not causing harm through others.
* Not approving of the act of causing harm.

In this way, Jainism emphasizes the observance of very subtle non-violence.

**Meaning of Specific Terms:**

* **Gocharacharya:** Just as a cow in the forest does not uproot grass from the ground but eats it from above while moving forward and satisfies its hunger, similarly, a monk also satisfies his hunger by consuming a little food without causing any harm to a householder. The Dasha Vaikalik Sutra uses the analogy of a bee (Madhukar) for this. A bee also satisfies its own needs by consuming a little nectar from flowers without causing any harm to them.

* **Kapatodghatan:** Opening the closed doors of a householder's house to take food and water is considered faulty, because there is a possibility of harming living beings due to the opening of the doors without cleaning them. Entering the house and taking food also indicates the rudeness of the seeker, because the householder may be engaged in some special work inside his house and if the seeker suddenly opens the door and enters, it is not appropriate. This is the path of discharge. If it is necessary to take something for a specific reason and the doors have to be opened carefully, then they can be opened by oneself or by someone else. This is the path of exception.

* **Mandipraabhratika:** This means taking the first portion (Agripinda). The first portion of the prepared food that is kept aside for the sake of merit is called Agripinda.

* **Bali praabhratika:** Food prepared for the worship of deities, etc., is called Bali. It is not appropriate for a monk to consume such food.

* **Sankie:** While taking food, one should never consume food that is suspected of having any kind of fault related to food, such as half-cooked food, etc.

* **Sahsaakar:** Acting hastily, whether in worldly or spiritual matters, is harmful in both respects.

* **Adrishtahat:** When a monk arrives at a householder's house, he should take whatever he needs by seeing it with his own eyes. Taking something without seeing it leads to the fault of Adrishtahat. The meaning is that the object to be given may be placed on some sentient being, and therefore, taking it may lead to the fault of harming living beings. Therefore, taking anything without seeing it is not acceptable.

Page #110:
---------------------------
## Fourth Study: Pratikramana

[39 _ Avabhasana Bhiksha - Begging for a specific item in food.  Svadhyaya and Pratilekhana Dosha Nivritti Sutra]

"I do Pratikramana for Svadhyaya and Pratilekhana. If, due to carelessness, I have not done Svadhyaya in the four periods of the day and night, the first and last periods, or if I have not done Pratilekhana of clothes, utensils, etc. in the morning and evening, or if I have not done it properly, or if I have not done the cleaning, or if I have not done it properly, then all these transgressions, violations, excesses, or misconducts are false and void for me."

**Meaning:** I do Pratikramana for Svadhyaya and Pratilekhana. If, due to carelessness, I have not done Svadhyaya in the four periods of the day and night, the first and last periods, or if I have not done Pratilekhana of clothes, utensils, etc. in the morning and evening, or if I have not done it properly, or if I have not done the cleaning, or if I have not done it properly, then all these transgressions, violations, excesses, or misconducts are false and void for me.

**Discussion:** (Q) "Venerable Sir, what does Pratilekhana of time generate in a being?" (A) "Pratilekhana of time destroys the karma that obscures knowledge. It leads to the attainment of knowledge."

- Uttaraadhyayanasutra, Chapter 29. The above sutra is about Pratilekhana of time. The Agamas state that one should do regular Svadhyaya in the early and late parts of the day, and similarly in the early and late parts of the night, i.e., in all four periods of day and night. It is also necessary to do Pratilekhana of clothes, utensils, cleaning, etc. If, due to carelessness, one makes a mistake in these two essential duties, there is a provision for doing Pratikramana to purify oneself.

Time plays a crucial role in the creation, sustenance, destruction, separation of the united, and union of the separated. Therefore, it is essential to keep track of time to illuminate every aspect of life's progress. One should perform the actions that are appropriate for the time. Therefore, in the Uttaraadhyayanasutra, the scholar has set a timetable for the Sadhus. It has also been specified that "each action should be done at the appointed time." The first and last periods of the day and night are designated for Svadhyaya. Thus, there are four periods of Svadhyaya in a day and night.

Page #111:
---------------------------
##  [40]

**Self-study (Swadhyay) is the supreme austerity.** It is a powerful tool for acquiring new knowledge, preserving acquired knowledge, and for the eradication of the karma that obscures knowledge. A major characteristic of self-study is the concentration of the mind. Self-study stops the restless mind from wandering and makes it focused. This is why four periods of the day are designated for it.

Abhaydeva Suri, the commentator of the **Sthananga Sutra**, defines self-study as "studying with proper decorum" - '**Suṣṭhu āmaryādayā adhiyate iti svādhyāyaḥ**'.

The **Sthananga Sutra** (2.130) compares self-study to a **Nandanavana** (heavenly garden). Just as in the Nandanavana, every direction offers magnificent views that delight the mind, and a person forgets all their troubles upon entering it, similarly, in the Nandanavana of self-study, one finds beautiful and instructive sights, and the mind, freed from worldly worries, begins to wander in a transcendental realm. Self-study is like a lamp for our dark life path.

**Transcription (Pratilekhana):** A monk must transcribe all their possessions, such as clothes, utensils, etc., in the morning and evening. Using these possessions without looking at them leads to the sin of violence. Not performing self-study or transcription at the prescribed time, performing it at a forbidden time, not having faith in self-study and transcription, falsely representing them, or not performing them in the proper way, are all transgressions (**Aticara-dosha**) related to self-study and transcription.

This **Kal-Pratilekhana Sutra** should be read after performing self-study and transcription. The meaning of the terms **Atikrama**, etc., that appear in this text is as follows:

1. **Atikrama:** To think of breaking a vow or promise.
2. **Vyatikrama:** To be inclined to break a vow.
3. **Aticara:** To partially break a vow.
4. **Anacara:** To completely break a vow.

**Thirty-three Verses:**

I renounce the one-fold un-restrained. I renounce the two-fold bonds - the bond of attachment (raga) and the bond of aversion (dvesha). I renounce the three-fold punishments - the punishment of the mind (manadanda), the punishment of the body (kayadanda), and the punishment of the lifespan (vayadanda).

Page #112:
---------------------------
Fourth Study: Pratikramana

I repent for the three types of Gupptis - Manoguppti, Vachanaguppti, and Kayaguppti.

I repent for the three types of Sallis - Mayashally, Niyanashally, and Micchadansanasally.

I repent for the three types of Garavas - Iddhigaurav, Rasagaurav, and Sayagaurav. I repent for the three types of Viradhanas - Nanaviradhana, Dansanaviradhana, and Charittaviradhana.

**Meaning:**

I repent for all the transgressions and faults that I have committed due to the non-observance of the principle of Avirati, which is one form of Asanaya.

I repent for the faults that have arisen due to the two types of bonds - Raga Bandhan and Dvesha Bandhan.

I repent for the faults that have arisen due to the three types of punishments - Manodanda, Vachandanda, and Kayadanda.

I repent for the faults that have arisen due to the three types of Gupptis - Manoguppti, Vachanaguppti, and Kayaguppti.

I repent for the faults that have arisen due to the three types of Sallis - Mayashally, Niyanashally, and Micchadansanasally.

I repent for the faults that have arisen due to the three types of Garavas - Iddhigaurav, Rasagaurav, and Sayagaurav.

I repent for the faults that have arisen due to the three types of Viradhanas - Nanaviradhana, Dansanaviradhana, and Charittaviradhana.

I repent for the four types of Kasayas - Kohakasaya, Manakasaya, Mayakasaya, and Lobhakasaya.

I repent for the four types of Sannahas - Aharasannaha, Bhayasannaha, Mehunasannaha, and Pariggahasannaha.

Page #113:
---------------------------
[42]
I repent for the four types of Vikatha - Itthikaha, Bhattakha, Desakha, and Rayakha. I repent for the four types of Dhyana - Attena Dhyana, Ruddena Dhyana, Dhammena Dhyana, and Sukkena Dhyana.
**Meaning:**
Kashaya Sutra - I repent for the transgressions caused by the four Kashayas - Krodha Kashaya, Mana Kashaya, Maya Kashaya, and Lobha Kashaya.
Sanjna Sutra - I repent for the transgressions caused by the four types of Sanjna - Ahar Sanjna, Bhaya Sanjna, Maithuna Sanjna, and Parigraha Sanjna.
Vikatha Sutra - I repent for the transgressions caused by the four types of Vikatha - Itthikaha, Bhattakha, Desakha, and Rayakha.
Dhyana Sutra - I repent for the transgressions caused by the practice of Arta Dhyana and Raudra Dhyana, and the non-practice of Dharma Dhyana and Shukla Dhyana.
I repent for the five types of Kriya - Kayika, Ahigarika, Pausya, Paritavana, and Panaiva Kriya. I repent for the five types of Kamaguna - Sadde, Rive, Gandhe, Rase, and Phase.
I repent for the five types of Mahavrata - Sarva Panaivaaya Veraman, Sarva Musavaaya Veraman, Sarva Adinna Daana Veraman, Sarva Mehunaa Veraman, and Sarva Parigraha Veraman.
I repent for the five types of Samiti - Iriya Samiti, Bhasa Samiti, Esana Samiti, Aayana Bhandamatta Nikkhevana Samiti, and Uccara Pasavana Khel Jall Singhana Paritthavana Samiti.
**Meaning:**
Kriya Sutra - I repent for the transgressions caused by the five types of Kriya - Kayika, Ahigarika, Pausya, Paritavana, and Panaiva Kriya.
Kamaguna Sutra - I repent for the transgressions caused by the five types of Kamaguna - Sadde, Rive, Gandhe, Rase, and Phase.
Mahavrata Sutra - I repent for the transgressions caused by the five Mahavrata - Sarva Panaivaaya Veraman (non-violence), Sarva Musavaaya Veraman (truthfulness), Sarva Adinna Daana Veraman (non-stealing), Sarva Mehunaa Veraman (celibacy), and Sarva Parigraha Veraman (non-attachment).
Samiti Sutra - I repent for the transgressions caused by the non-observance of the five types of Samiti - Iriya Samiti, Bhasa Samiti, Esana Samiti, Aayana Bhandamatta Nikkhevana Samiti, and Uccara Pasavana Khel Jall Singhana Paritthavana Samiti.

Page #114:
---------------------------
[43
Fourth Study: Pratikraman] I do pratikraman for the transgressions committed by me.
_I do pratikraman for the six Jivnikayas - Prithvikaaya, Apkaaya, Agni kaaya, Vayu kaaya, Vanaspatikaaya, and Traskaaya. I do pratikraman for the six Leshas - Krishna lesha, Neel lesha, Kapoot lesha, Tejo lesha, Padam lesha, and Shukl lesha.
Jivnikayasutra - I do pratikraman for the transgressions committed by me due to violence against the six Jivnikayas - Prithvikaaya, Apkaaya, Agni kaaya, Vayu kaaya, Vanaspatikaaya, and Traskaaya.
Leshyasutra - I do pratikraman for the transgressions committed by me due to the practice of the first three Adharma Leshas - Krishna lesha, Neel lesha, Kapoot lesha, and not practicing the last three Dharma Leshas - Tejo lesha, Padam lesha, and Shukl lesha.
I do pratikraman for the seven Bhayathanas, eight Mayathanas, nine Bambhchegutis, ten Samanadhammaekkaras, eleven Uvasagpadimas, twelve Bhikkhupadimas, thirteen Kiriyathanas, fourteen Bhuyyagamas, fifteen Parmahammas, sixteen Gaahasolas, seventeen Asanjamas, eighteen Abambhas, nineteen Nayajjhanas, twenty Asamahithanas, twenty-one Sabalas, twenty-two Parisahas, twenty-three Suygajjhanas, twenty-four Devas, twenty-five Bhavanas, twenty-six Dasakappavavaharanam Uddesanakaalas, twenty-seven Anagaragunas, twenty-eight Ayarappakappas.

Page #115:
---------------------------
[44]
[ Necessary Sutra ]
From the 7 places of fear, the 8 places of pride, the 9 secrets of celibacy, the 10 violations of Shraman Dharma like forgiveness, the 11 vows of the Upasaka-Shravaka, the 12 vows of the Bhikshu, the 13 places of action, the 14 groups of beings, the 15 holy ones, the 16 studies including the study of the first Shruta Skandha of the Sutra Kritanga Sutra, the 17 types of non-restraint, the 18 types of non-celibacy, the 19 studies of the Jnata Sutra, the 20 places of non-concentration,
the 21 weaknesses, the 22 tolerances, the 23 studies of the Sutra Kritanga Sutra, the 24 Devas, the 25 thoughts of the 5 great vows, the 26 occasions of the Dasha Shruta Skandha, Brihat Kalpa and Vyavahar, the 27 qualities of the Sadhu, the 28 studies of the Achar Prakalpa, Acharanga and Nishita Sutra, the 29 instances of sinful Shruta, the 30 places of the Maha Mohaniya Karma,

Page #116:
---------------------------
## Fourth Study: Pratikraman

[From the thirty-one primary or most excellent qualities of the forty-five Siddhas, the thirty-two Yogasangrahas, the thirty-three Ashatanas, such as Arihant, Siddha, Acharya, Upadhyaya, Sadhu, Sadhvi, Shravak, Shravika, Dev, Devi, Ihalok, Parlok, Kevaliprरूपित Dharma, the entire world including Devas, Manushayas, Asuras, all Pran-Vikal-tray, Bhut-Vanaspati, Jiva-Panchendriya, Sattwa-Prithvikaaya and other four Sthavar, as well as time, Shruta-Shastra, Shruta-Devata, and Vachanacharya - from all these Ashatanas,

And from the diverse - the texts of the Sutra or the letters of the Sutra being reversed, reading them repeatedly with a mind devoid of Vyatyaneḍita, mixing the text of one Sutra with another, reading by omitting letters, adding extra letters, reading without proper words, not showing proper respect to the Shastra and the Shastradhyapaka, reading without proper pronunciation - devoid of Udattādi Swaras, reading without Yoga - without the special Tapas of Upadhanadi or without its use, giving too much text to a student who is not capable of receiving it - Sushṭhudatt, receiving the Agam-path given by the Vachanacharya with a bad attitude - Dusṭhupratichchhit, reading the Kalik, Utkalik Sutras during their prohibited time - Akalsvadhyaya, studying during the time of Asvadhyaya, not studying during the time of Svādhyāya.

From these fourteen Ashatanas of Shruta-Jnana, and from all the thirty-three Ashatanas, whatever transgressions have been committed, may my related Duskrut-Pap be Mithya.

**Discussion - Asanayam Sutra - Asanayam is the opposite of Sanayam. Asanayam is the root of all worldly suffering. The name Asanayam is given to the emotions like Raga-Dvesha, Kshaya, etc., which arise from the rise of Charitramohaniya Karma. These are the evil tendencies of the mind due to greed and desire. He who does not practice restraint over these tendencies, or does not control them, is their slave, their servant. He can never become a conqueror of himself. Therefore, self-restraint is absolutely essential to become a conqueror of oneself. He who cannot practice self-restraint, who does not establish control over his mind and senses, becomes enslaved by his desires and can never attain peace and Samadhi. And desires are infinite like the sky. They can never be fulfilled. The Shastrakar says - 'Iccha hu agas sama anantiya.'

- Uttaraadhyayanasutra, Adhyaya 9 - Although there are 17 types of Sanayam, there are also 17 types of Asanayam, its opposite, and due to the desire for expansion, there may be other types as well, which are mentioned later. But here, only one type has been mentioned for the sake of general understanding and collection.
]

Page #117:
---------------------------
## 46]
**Essential Sutra**
**Bondage Sutra**

This sutra states that attachment and aversion are bondage. Attachment and aversion lead to the binding of the eight types of karma. The tendency towards attachment and aversion arises from the emergence of *charitramoha*, which is a contaminant and destroyer of the life of restraint. As long as the impurity of attachment and aversion exists, the purity of *charitra* cannot be achieved in any way.

Attachment and aversion are two seeds, the disease of karmic bondage. Through the knowledge-born dispassion, one attains liberation and samadhi.

- Brihadaloyana (by Ranjit Singh)

Attachment is the culmination of delusion, by which the soul is stained by karma. Aversion is the ill-will, hatred, anger, etc., towards someone. Out of the four *kṣayās*, anger and pride are categorized under aversion, and delusion and greed are categorized under attachment.

**Danda Sutra**

- The punishment that the soul receives due to its evil tendencies, i.e., becoming a recipient of suffering, is called *danda*. There are three types of *danda*: 1. *Manodanda*, 2. *Vachanadanda*, and 3. *Kayadanda*.

1. **Manodanda** - 1. Feeling despondent, 2. Thinking cruel thoughts, 3. Having useless fantasies, 4. Wandering aimlessly without purpose, 5. Holding impure thoughts, 6. Feeling hatred, aversion, etc., towards someone. These evil tendencies cause the soul to be punished in the twenty-four *dandakas*.

2. **Vachanadanda** - 1. Speaking untruthfully, 2. Slandering others, gossiping, 3. Speaking harshly, 4. Praising oneself, 5. Speaking uselessly or without purpose, 6. Presenting a false image against the principles, etc.

3. **Kayadanda** - 1. Causing pain to someone, 2. Indulging in immoral behavior, 3. Stealing someone's belongings, 4. Being arrogant and haughty, 5. Wandering aimlessly, 6. Walking carelessly, etc.

Through these three, the soul performs evil actions and is punished. It wanders in the twenty-four *dandakas*, becoming a recipient of afflictions. Therefore, these are called *danda*.

**Gupti Sutra**

*Gupti* - To refrain from evil actions and engage in virtuous actions is *gupti*. Alternatively, to protect the soul properly from the causes of the world, to stop the evil tendencies of the three *yogas*, and to prevent the incoming *karma* like garbage is *gupti*. There are three types of *gupti*: 1. *Manogupti*, 2. *Vachanagupti*, 3. *Kayagupti*.

**Manogupti** - The resolve related to the beginning, commencement, and initiation of *artha*, *raudriya*, and *dhyana* related to the mind.

Page #118:
---------------------------
## Fourth Study: Pratikraman

[47]

Not engaging in alternatives, contemplating Dharma-Dhyana, maintaining a neutral attitude is Manogupti.

There are four types of Manogupti:

* **Dravya:** The mind should not be involved in the beginning and end of the activity.
* **Kshetra:** Throughout the entire world.
* **Kala:** Throughout life.
* **Bhaava:** The mind should not be involved in the subject, Kshaya, Artha-Roudra Dhyana, Raga-Dvesha.

There are four types of Vachanagupti:

* **Dravya:** Not engaging in four types of Vikatha.
* **Kshetra:** Throughout the entire world.
* **Kala:** Throughout life.
* **Bhaava:** Not speaking carelessly.

There are four types of Kayagupti:

* **Dravya:** Not taking care of the body.
* **Kshetra:** Throughout the entire world.
* **Kala:** Throughout life.
* **Bhaava:** Not engaging in careless Yoga.

**Shalya Sutra:**

Maya, Nidana, and Mithyadarshan, these three faults are called Shalya in the language of Agam. Anything that causes internal pain and suffering, like a thorn, arrow, etc., is a Dravya Shalya. Maya, etc., are Bhaava Shalya. According to Acharya Haribhadra, the etymology is: "Shalyate'neneti Shalya." Maya, Nidana, and Mithyadarshan are called Shalya in the spiritual realm because just as a thorn, nail, or arrow, etc., piercing a part of the body, disturbs a person, similarly, the three Shalya mentioned in the Sutra, residing within, also torment the inner soul of the seeker. All three Shalya are the cause of intense Karma-bandha.

1. **Maya Shalya:** Maya means deception. Maya is a sharp-edged sword that cuts off the bond of affection in an instant. The Dasha Vaikalika Sutra says: "Maya Mitrani Nasei," meaning that engaging in Maya destroys friendships and feelings of friendship.
2. **Nidana Shalya:** Desiring worldly fruits of Dharmacharan, craving for pleasures is Nidana Shalya.
3. **Mithyadarshan Shalya:** Not having faith in truth and clinging to falsehood is Mithyadarshan Shalya.

I repent for the faults arising from these three Shalya.

**Gaurav Sutra and Viradhana Sutra:**

Pride in the form of attaining the position of an Acharya, etc., and pride in the form of attaining sweet, etc., pleasant tastes, etc.

Page #119:
---------------------------
[48]
[Essential Sutra]
I renounce any transgression that may have been committed due to the pride arising from the enjoyment of taste and the attainment of physical pleasure, which is called "Saata-Gaurav," and due to the contradiction of knowledge, that is, the knowledge by which the soul and other substances are known, the contradiction of perception, and the contradiction of conduct. These three contradictions are the cause of any transgression.
The meaning of "Gaurav" is "heaviness." Gaurav is of two types: 1. Dravya-Gaurav, 2. Bhaava-Gaurav. The heaviness of stone, etc., is Dravya-Gaurav, and the inauspicious feeling of the soul due to pride and greed is Bhaava-Gaurav.
To follow conduct in its pure form without any fault is called "Aaraadhana," and the opposite of this, not following knowledge, etc., in their proper form, and finding fault with them, is called "Viraadhana."
Kashaya Sutra -
"Kohang Maanang Cha Maayang Cha, Lobhang Cha Paav-Vaddhanang. Vame Chattari Dosse U, Ichchhanto Hiyampano."
- Dashavaikalika Sutra, A.8
That is, a seeker who desires the welfare of his soul should abandon the four Kashayas: anger, pride, deceit, and greed, which increase sin.
The soul is harmed more by Kashayas than by any other enemy. Kashayas are the strong causes of karma-bandha. They are the ones that make the soul wander in the cycle of birth and death. The soul that is polluted by Kashayas cannot contain knowledge, perception, conduct, etc., just as no other color can be applied to a black cloth. Kashayas are the root cause of the soul's rise and fall. With the intense arousal of Kashayas, the soul falls into the deep pit of degradation, because when Kashayas gain control over the mind, all the virtues that are opposed to them are gradually lost.
"Kohu Peeing Panasei, Maano Vinayanasaano. Maaya Mittaani Nasei, Lobho Savvavinaasano."
- Dashavaikalika, A.8, 38, 39
Anger destroys love, pride destroys humility, deceit destroys friendship, and greed destroys all virtues.
Forgiveness destroys anger, humility, i.e., gentleness, destroys pride, simplicity destroys deceit, and contentment destroys greed.

Page #120:
---------------------------
## Fourth Study: Pratikraman

[49]

**What should be conquered?**

**Samjnasutra:**

Desire in beings is called Samjna. Samjna also means 'consciousness'. In the present context, when the power of consciousness becomes tainted by the arising of Mohaniya and Asata Vedaniya karma, it is called 'Samjna'.

Shri Pannavan's eighth verse describes ten types of Samjna. Sixteen distinctions are also outlined in many sutras. The original distinctions are four: 1. Ahar, 2. Bhay, 3. Maithun, 4. Parigraha.

1. **Ahar Samjna:** Ahar Samjna arises due to four reasons: 1. Empty stomach, 2. Arising of Kshudha Vedaniya, 3. Seeing food, and 4. Thinking about food.

2. **Bhay Samjna:** Bhay Samjna arises due to four reasons: 1. Impatience, 2. Arising of Bhay-Moh, 3. Seeing an object that causes fear, 4. Thinking about fear. The feeling of fear that arises in the soul due to the arising of Bhay Mohaniya is Bhay Mohaniya.

3. **Maithun Samjna:** The sensation of Ved Moh Uday is called Maithun Samjna. It also arises due to four reasons: 1. Strengthening the body, 2. Arising of Ved Mohaniya karma, 3. Seeing a woman, etc., and 4. Thinking about sexual pleasure.

4. **Parigraha Samjna:** The desire to accumulate or the awakening of greed due to the arising of Lobh Mohaniya is Parigraha Samjna. It also has four causes: 1. Increasing possessiveness, 2. Arising of Lobh Mohaniya, 3. Seeing wealth, and 4. Thinking about acquiring wealth.

**Vikathasutra:**

Conduct that contaminates restraint and meaningless conversation is called Vikatha. I refrain from any excess caused by the four types of Vikatha: Streekatha, Bhaktakatha, Deshkath, and Rajakath. (For a female seeker, it is appropriate to speak about male stories).

1. **Streekatha:** A certain woman from a certain country, caste, and family is beautiful or ugly. She wears very beautiful clothes and jewelry. She also sings very beautifully. Such thoughts are considered to be a cause of excess because they can lead to defects in vows like Brahmacharya.

2. **Bhaktakatha:** Bhaktakatha is of four types based on Aavap, Nirvap, Aarambh, and Nishtan: 1. Ahar Samjna, 2. Bhay Samjna, 3. Maithun Samjna, 4. Parigraha Samjna, 5. Krodh Samjna, 6. Man Samjna, 7. Maya Samjna, 8. Lobh Samjna, 9. Lok Samjna, 10. Ogh Samjna.

Page #121:
---------------------------
## 50]
**To do.**
**Aavaap**
In such and such a kitchen, this much ghee, this much greens, this much spice will be fine.
**Nirvaap** - There were so many dishes, so many greens, it was sweet, thus the story of the seen food.
—
**Aaraambh**
In such and such a kitchen, this much greens and fruits etc. will be needed, etc.
**Nishtaan**
Such and such food items will cost this much rupees, etc.
3. **Deshaktha** - Praising or criticizing the diverse dress, adornment-creation, food practices, house construction art, customs and traditions of countries is Deshaktha.
-
4. **Rajaktha**
Describing the army, queens, art of war, enjoyment and luxury of kings is called Rajaktha. Rajaktha is of four types - 1. Atiyaan, 2. Niryaan, 3. Balvaahan, 4. Kosh.
**Dhyansutra**
**Aavashyakasutra**
Still like a steady lamp-flame in a windless, i.e. vacuum place, contemplation of only one subject, devoid of the resolve of other subjects, is called meditation. That is, steady determination and concentration of mind till the end of a moment is meditation. Due to the absence of the mind of the Vीतराग, Yoga-Nirodh is their meditation. Meditation is of two types, praiseworthy and not praiseworthy. Artt and Raudra are not praiseworthy meditations, therefore they are to be rejected. Dharma and Shukla are praiseworthy meditations, they are to be followed.
-
Acharya Jinas Das Mahत्तर has quoted a verse on this very subject in the Pratikram Manaadhyaayan of Aavashyakachurni
**Hinsaanooranjitam Raudram, Attam Kaamanuranjitam. Dhammaranjijam Dhamam, Shuklajjaananam Niranjanam.**
That is - :- Meditation influenced by desire is called Artt. Meditation colored by violence is Raudra, meditation influenced by Dharma is Dharma Dhyaan and Shukla Dhyaan is completely Niranjan.
1. **Artdhyaan** - Artt means sorrow, distress, pain or suffering. Meditation that happens due to the cause of Artt is called Artdhyaan. Due to the association of undesirable things, due to the separation from desirable things, due to illness etc. and also due to the desire for enjoyments, a kind of distortion, i.e. pain, occurs in the mind and when it
1
**"Antomuhutimittam, Chittaavaththaanamegavaththumi.
Chhaumatthaanam Na Joganiroho Jinaananti."**

Page #122:
---------------------------
## Fourth Study: Pratikramana

**1. Arta-Dhyana:** When concentration takes the form of sorrow, it is called Arta-Dhyana.

**2. Raudra-Dhyana:** A person who harbors extremely cruel thoughts like violence is called Rudra. The mental state of a Rudra person is called Raudra-Dhyana. Alternatively, when there is an arising of attachment and aversion due to cutting, piercing, burning, binding, killing, striking, suppressing, and cutting, and there is no compassion, then such a self-result is called Raudra-Dhyana.

**3. Dharma-Dhyana:** Meditation imbued with the Dharma, which is the form of the command of the Vitaraga, is called Dharma-Dhyana. Alternatively, contemplation of the study of Agamas, observance of vows, bondage-liberation, restraint of senses, and compassion for beings is called Dharma-Dhyana.

**4. Shukla-Dhyana:** Meditation that purifies karmic impurities and removes sorrow is called Shukla-Dhyana. Dharma-Dhyana is the means of Shukla-Dhyana. It is also said: "The meditation of a great person whose senses are devoid of worldly desires, who is free from the three yogas (which are full of defects like resolve, imagination, and fluctuation), is called 'Shukla-Dhyana'."

**-**

**Kriya Sutra:**

According to Jain definition, in this context, the evil business, especially the one that is primarily based on violence, is called 'Kriya'. There are 25 types of Kriya according to the detailed method, but all other Kriyas are included in the five Kriyas mentioned in the sutras, therefore, the original Kriyas are considered to be only five.

**1. Kayiki Kriya:** The action that takes place through the body is called Kayiki. There are three types of this. The action of Mithyadristi and Avirat Samyak-Dristi is called Avirat-Kayiki. The action of a Pramattasanyami Muni is:

1. **Sanchhedan-airedhana-bhanjan-maran-aishcha, bandha-prahar-daman-airvinikrintan-aishcha.** Rago-dayo bhavati yena na chanukampa, dhyanam tu raudramiti tatpravadanti tajjnaah.

2. **Sutrarth-sadhan-mahavrata-dharaneshu, bandha-pramoksha-gamana-agama-hetu-chinta.** Panchendriya-vyuparamashcha daya cha bhute, dhyanam tu dharmyamiti sampravadanti tajjnaah.

3. **Shodhayatyashta-prakaram karma-malam shucham va klamayatiti shuklam.**

4. **Yasyendriyani vishayeshu paraangmukhani, sankalpa-kalpana-vikalapa-vikar-doshaih.** Yogais tatha tribhiraho! Nibhritantaraatma, dhyanam tu shuklamidamasya samaadishanti.

**-**

**Acharya Nami.**

Page #123:
---------------------------
##  Translation:

**[52]**

1. **Uparatkayiki** is a type of action that is abandoned due to **Savadyoga**.
2. **Aadhikarini Kriya** is the action that makes the soul eligible for hell or other lower realms. It is the specific act of performing rituals with instruments like swords or incantations, which are considered means of sin.
3. **Praadveshiki Kriya** - **Praadvesha** means envy, jealousy, and malice. This is considered a strong cause of binding karma with unfavorable results. Therefore, harboring animosity towards any living or non-living being is **Praadveshiki Kriya**.
4. **Paritapaniki Kriya** - **Paritapan** refers to suffering inflicted through means like beating. The action arising from **Paritapan** is called **Paritapaniki Kriya**. There are two types of **Paritapaniki Kriya** based on the distinction between self and others. Inflicting suffering upon oneself is **Swaparitapaniki** and inflicting suffering upon others is **Par-Paritapaniki Kriya**.
[**Aavashyak Sutra**]
5. **Praanaatipataki Kriya** - The killing or destruction of living beings is called **Praanaatipat**. The action arising from **Praanaatipat** is called **Praanaatipataki Kriya**. There are two types of this: killing oneself due to passions like anger is **Swahastpraanaatipataki Kriya**, and killing others in the same way is **Parpraanaatipataki Kriya**.

**[Kaamgun Sutra]**
**Subject**
This Sutra states that if during the journey of self-control, the mind gets distracted by **Kaamgun** (the five senses: sound, form, smell, taste, and touch), abandoning neutrality and becoming attached to likes and dislikes, getting caught in the web of delusion, i.e., developing attachment to pleasant sounds, etc., and aversion to unpleasant ones, then it should be removed from there and directed back to the path of self-control. This is the **pratikraman** of the soul from **Kaamgun**.

**[Mahavrat Sutra]**
A **Sadhu** completely abandons violence, falsehood, stealing, etc., i.e., they constantly and fully practice the nine aspects of the **Mahavrat** (great vows) like non-violence, etc. Therefore, the vows of non-violence, etc., of a **Sadhu** are called **Mahavrat**. **Mahavrat** are considered the five fundamental virtues of a **Sadhu**. The remaining conduct is called **Uttargun**. The utility of **Uttargun** lies in protecting the fundamental virtues; they have no independent purpose. **Mahavrat** are taken through three **Karan** (means) and three **Yoga** (union). To not inflict violence on oneself, not cause others to inflict violence, and not approve of those who inflict violence, through mind, speech, and body, these are the **Mahavrat** of non-violence. Similarly, one should understand the meaning of the nine-fold pledge regarding the abandonment of falsehood, stealing, sexual misconduct, and possessions.

Page #124:
---------------------------
## Fourth Study: Pratikramana

**[53]**

**Important to Know:**

After the present Mahavrat Sutra, the mention of Samiti Sutra is found in almost all the available copies and the commentary books of the Aavashyak Sutra. But Acharya Jinasena Mahत्तर has written - "Ettha kevi anna pi pathanti" meaning here some Acharyas read other texts also. Such as - five Asrava, five Samvara doors, five Nirjara doors etc.

**Samiti Sutra:**

The necessary blameless conduct of a Muni completely free from violence to living beings is called Samiti. The effort for the best results is also called Samiti. Samiti is a symbolic word of the Agamas. The meaning of Samiti is - to act with discretion. Samiti is of five types:

1. **Iryasamiti:** To walk with discretion when work arises and to walk in a useful way so that no harm is done to other living beings.
2. **Bhasasamiti:** To speak blameless words when necessary, meaning to speak words that are beneficial, moderate, truthful and clear.
3. **Eshan asamiti:** To avoid the forty-two faults related to food etc. and to accept alms blamelessly, to enjoy by avoiding the faults related to the five mandalas is Eshan asamiti.
4. **Adan-Bhandamaatraniksepanasamiti:** To accept clothes, utensils, books etc. equipment usefully and to deposit them on a living-being-free, cleansed ground is Adan-Bhandamaatraniksepanasamiti.
5. **Parishthapanikasamiti:** To dispose of excrement, urine, phlegm, saliva, nasal mucus etc. or leftover food and broken utensils etc. in a living-being-free secluded ground, to dispose of them with proper effort so that no living beings are born, is Parishthapanikasamiti.

**Jivanikayasutra:**

The word 'Jivanikaya' is made up of two words: 'Jiva' and 'Nikaya'. The meaning of 'Jiva' is - sentient being and the meaning of 'Nikaya' is - a group, a collection. The collection of living beings is called Jivanikaya. Earth, water, fire, air, plants and Tris, these are the six Nikayas. In these six Nikayas, i.e. groups, all the worldly living beings are:

1. "Padikkhamami panchahi asavadaarehi - micchat-avirati-pamad-kasayajogehi, panchahi anasavadaarehi - sammatt-virati appamad akasayitt-ajogittehi, panchahi nijar-thanhehi, nan-dasan-charitt-tav-sanjamehi."
2. "Bhasasamiti ma hitamitasandighdharthabhasanam."

- Acharya Haribhadra.

Page #125:
---------------------------
## 54]

**Essential Sutra**
This Sutra encompasses the situation where one has caused harm, of any kind, to any of the six groups of living beings through negligence. This act is considered a transgression.

**Leshya Sutra**
The concise meaning of Leshya is mental attitude or thought-wave. The Uttaradhyayanasutra, Bhagavati Sutra, Prajnapana Sutra, etc., describe Leshya in detail and in a subtle manner.

Explaining Leshya, Acharya Jinasena Mahत्तर states that the results of the soul, through which good and bad karma are synthesized with the soul, are called Leshya. The results of the combination of mind, speech, and body are referred to as Leshya. Since the liberated soul without any combination is considered devoid of Leshya. There are six main types of Leshya:

1. **Krishna Leshya:** This mental attitude is the most heinous. Those with Krishna Leshya have extremely petty, cruel, harsh, and merciless thoughts. They despise non-violence, truth, etc. They are not afraid of this world or the next, nor of the adverse consequences of the afterlife. They are only concerned with their own happiness and do not care about the lives of others. They are extremely cruel and sinful.

2. **Neela Leshya:** This mental attitude is slightly better than the first, but still not desirable. Those with this Leshya are envious, intolerant, deceitful, shameless, and greedy for pleasure. They are engrossed in their own happiness. However, they do take some care of the beings who provide them with happiness, according to the principle of 'Ajaposhana'.

3. **Kapot Leshya:** This mental attitude is also undesirable. Those with this Leshya are crooked in their thoughts, speech, and actions. They are harsh-tongued and try to cover up their faults.

4. **Tejo Leshya:** This mental attitude is pure. Those with this Leshya are humble, thoughtful, compassionate, and interested in religion. They prioritize the well-being of others over their own comfort and have a generous spirit.

5. **Padma Leshya:** Those with Padma Leshya have a life that is like a lotus, spreading fragrance to others. Their mind is calm, steady, and prevents evil tendencies. They fear sin, conquer attachment and sorrow. They are moderate in speech, gentle, and self-controlled.

1. 'Lish sansleshene, sanshlishyaate aatmaa tais-tais: parinaamantairai: yathaa shleeshena varna-sambandhee bhavati evaa leshyaabhiraatmani karmaanisanshlishyantae. Yoga-parinaamo leshya, jamhaa ayogikevali alessso.' - Aavashyak - Churni

Page #126:
---------------------------
## Fourth Study: Pratikraman

[556. Shukla Leshya - This attitude is called Shukla because it is the most pure. The body with this Leshya takes food for its sustenance. It does not cause any harm to any living being. It removes the culmination of attachment and aversion and adopts the state of being free from attachment. The one with the ultimate Shukla Leshya remains free from attachment and maintains constant equanimity.

The first three Leshyas - Krishna, Neel and Kapoth are to be abandoned, and the last three Leshyas - Tejo, Padma and Shukla are to be adopted. Without the final Shukla Leshya, the completion of self-development is impossible. If the conduct of the Adharma Leshyas and the conduct of the Dharma Leshyas have not been performed on the path of life purification, then Pratikraman is performed through the present sutra.

Bhayaadisutra -

Some of the words from fear to desire are adoptable, some are knowable, and some are to be abandoned. There are seven types of fear:

1. Ihalokabhaya - Fear of a creature of one's own species is Ihalokabhaya, such as - fear of a human from another human, fear of a Tiryanch from another Tiryanch.
2. Parlokabhaya - Fear of a creature of another species is Parlokabhaya, such as - fear of a human from a god or a Tiryanch etc.
3. Adanabhaya - Fear of being robbed of wealth etc. by a thief etc.
4. Akasmatbhaya - Sudden fear without any reason.
5. Aajivkabhaya - Fear of the misfortune of not getting food etc. for the journey of life in times of famine etc.
6. Maranabhaya - Fear of death.
7. Apayash-Ashlokabhaya - Fear of the fear of disgrace.

Fear is a specific result of the agitation of the soul caused by the rise of the Bhayamohaniyakarma. A Sadhu should not bow down to any fear. To be fearless means neither to be afraid oneself nor to make others afraid. Fear corrupts the life of restraint, therefore Pratikraman is performed for fear.

Page #127:
---------------------------
## 56]
[Essential Sutras]
Eight types of pride:
1. **Jatimad:** Pride in one's high and noble caste (maternal side).
2. **Kulmad:** Pride in one's high lineage (paternal side).
3. **Balmad:** Pride in one's strength.
4. **Rupmad:** Pride in one's appearance and beauty.
5. **Tapomad:** Pride in being a rigorous ascetic.
6. **Shrutad:** Pride in one's knowledge of scriptures, being a scholar.
7. **Labhpradad:** Pride in gaining desired objects, profit.
8. **Aishwaryamad:** Pride in one's dominion.

**Discussion:** These eight types of pride are mentioned in the Samavayanga Sutra. Ganadhar Gautam asked Sri Mahavira Swami:
"O Bhagavan! What benefit does a being gain by conquering pride?"
The Lord answered: "Conquering pride brings gentleness, no new karma is bound, and the previously bound karma is destroyed." - Uttara.Su.A.29.

Meaning: Conquering pride brings gentleness, no new karma is bound, and the previously bound karma is destroyed.

Pride makes a person's mind soar high, and when they fall, there is a risk of their head being crushed.

In the world, pride, arrogance, and vanity are considered like dogs. Just as a dog licks and makes impure when loved, and bites when beaten, similarly, nurturing pride leads to disgrace, and when pride is shattered, it can lead to the end of one's life. Therefore, it is said:
"The pain of death is momentary, but the pain of pride being shattered is a constant torment."

Page #128:
---------------------------
## Fourth Study: Pratikraman

[57 Nine Brahmacharya Secrets -

- Brahmacharya is the strength of the body. It is the supreme wealth of life. It is the subduing of the mind. It is the upliftment of the soul. It is the best among vows. It is the foundation of sadhana and the basis of Dharma worship. It is the means of success and the source of peace. It is the ocean of forgiveness and the storehouse of humility. The sixth study of the Sutra Kritanga Sutra states - 'Tavesu Va Uttama Bhamchearam' meaning Brahmacharya is the best among austerities. The meaning of Brahmacharya -

Jivo Bhamho Jivammi Chev Chariya, Havij Ja Jadino? Tam Janam Bhamchearam, Vimuk Pardehatittiss.
- Bhagavati Aradhana 81 meaning - Brahma means the soul, to dwell in the soul is Brahmacharya.

Brahmacharya is the foundation of Dharma sadhana. Through its practice, the path to self-salvation is paved. The Prashnavyakaran Sutra states - Brahmacharya is the embankment of the lotus pond of Dharma. It is the storehouse of qualities like compassion, forgiveness, etc. and the basis of the branches of Dharma. Devotees and kings worship the Brahmachari. It is the auspicious path of the world.

Dev-Danav-Gandhavva Jakkha-Rakkhas-Kinnara. Bhamhyarim Namsanti Dukkaram Je Karanti Te.
- Uttaraadhyayanasutra meaning - Even gods like Dev, Danav, Gandharva, Yaksha, Rakshasa, and Kinnara bow down to the Brahmachari who practices the difficult Brahmacharya.

The American sage 'Thoro' said - "Brahmacharya is the flower of the tree of life and its beautiful fruits are many, including brilliance, purity, courage, etc." In the words of Vyasa - "Brahmacharya is nectar." The person who enjoys the nectar of Brahmacharya becomes immortal forever. Brahmacharya is the great sadhana of life.

If, while practicing sadhana, one inadvertently transgresses the nine Brahmacharya secrets, then pratikraman is performed through this sutra.

Nine secrets have been established in the scriptures to keep Brahmacharya well protected. In short, their meaning is as follows -

Page #129:
---------------------------
##  58]
**Essential Sutras**

1. **Avoiding secluded dwelling:** Do not stay in a place inhabited by women, animals, or eunuchs.
2. **Avoiding conversations about women:** Do not engage in discussions about women, their stories, beauty, etc.
3. **Avoiding sitting together:** Do not sit on the same seat with a woman, and even after she leaves, do not sit in that place for a muhurta (48 minutes).
4. **Avoiding gazing at women's bodies:** Do not look at the attractive limbs and features of women. If by chance your gaze falls upon them, immediately avert it as you would from the sun.
5. **Avoiding hearing sounds from behind walls:** Do not listen to or see a woman's words, songs, laughter, appearance, etc., from behind a wall or any other cover.
6. **Avoiding recalling past pleasures:** Do not remember past sensual experiences.
7. **Avoiding prescribed food:** Do not consume heavy food that stimulates desires.
8. **Avoiding excessive food:** Do not eat even dry and bland food in excess. According to texts on diet, fill half your stomach with food, leave two parts for water, and one part for air. According to scriptures, the ideal diet for a male practitioner is 32 kavala, and for a female practitioner, 28 kavala. The measure of a kavala is the size of a peacock's egg.
9. **Avoiding adornment:** Do not adorn your body.

In these nine secrets of celibacy, and in the ten virtues of patience, liberation, non-attachment, honesty, humility, lightness (freedom from attachment to material possessions), truth, self-control, austerity, celibacy, and renunciation, I renounce any transgression.

**Eleven Images of the Devotee**

The special type of attachment of a desavirata (one who has renounced worldly attachments) is called pratima (image). A shraman who worships gods and gurus is called a shramanopasaka (devotee of shramans). When a devotee worships images, he is called a pratimadhari shravaka (devotee who holds images). These images are eleven:

1. **Darshan Pratima:** In this image, the shravaka, without holding any kind of royal office or other position, follows pure, untainted, and proper right faith. The main aspect is the renunciation of falsehood and transgression. This image lasts for one month.
2. **Vrata Pratima:** After attaining right faith, the devotee practices vows. He fulfills the vows of the five anuvrata (minor vows) and other vows properly. However, he does not observe samayika (a daily meditation) properly at the right time...

Page #130:
---------------------------
## Fourth Study: Pratikramana

**[59]**

**1. Pratikramana Pratima:** This pratima involves the practice of pratikramana, but the individual is unable to fully observe the vows of non-violence, truthfulness, non-stealing, celibacy, and non-attachment. This pratima lasts for one month.

**2. Samyak Pratima:** This pratima involves the practice of pratikramana and the observance of the vows of non-violence, truthfulness, non-stealing, celibacy, and non-attachment, but the individual is unable to fully observe the vow of non-possession. This pratima lasts for two months.

**3. Samayik Pratima:** This pratima involves the practice of Samayik and the observance of the vows of non-violence, truthfulness, non-stealing, celibacy, and non-attachment, but the individual is unable to fully observe the vow of non-possession during festival days. This pratima lasts for three months.

**4. Paushdhopavas Pratima:** This pratima involves the practice of all the aforementioned rules, including the complete observance of the Paushdha fast on the eighth, fourteenth, full moon, and new moon days. This pratima lasts for four months.

**5. Kayotsarga Pratima:** This pratima involves the practice of all the aforementioned vows and the following specific rules:

1. No bathing.
2. Abstinence from all four types of food at night.
3. Keeping the dhoti loose.
4. Observing celibacy during the day.
5. Limiting sexual activity at night.

This pratima can be practiced for a minimum of one, two, or three days, and a maximum of five months. It is also known as the "Nitya Pratima."

**6. Brahmacharya Pratima:** This pratima involves the complete observance of celibacy. This pratima lasts for a minimum of one night and a maximum of six months.

**7. Sachittatyaga Pratima:** This pratima involves the complete abandonment of food with conscious awareness. This pratima lasts for a minimum of one night and a maximum of seven months.

**8. Aarambhatyaga Pratima:** This pratima involves refraining from initiating any action and practicing compassion towards all six types of living beings. This pratima lasts for a minimum of one, two, or three days, and a maximum of eight months.

**9. Preshyatyaga Pratima:** This pratima involves refraining from initiating any action, even when prompted by others. The individual does not initiate any action themselves, nor does they allow others to initiate actions for them, but they do not abandon the practice of approval. This pratima lasts for a minimum of one, two, or three days, and a maximum of nine months.

**10. Uddishtabhaktatyaga Pratima:** This pratima involves refraining from consuming food prepared for oneself and abandoning the practice of Uddishta Bhakt. The individual must completely shave their head with a razor. When asked about matters related to the household, they should only say "I know" if they know, and "I don't know" if they don't know. This...

Page #131:
---------------------------
##  [60]
[Essential Sutras]

The duration of a pratima (vow) is one night for the least severe and ten months for the most severe.

11. Shramanabhootpratima - The holder of this pratima is not a Shraman (ascetic) but is like a Shraman. He wanders around wearing the attire of a Sadhu (holy man) and carrying the utensils suitable for a Sadhu. If he has the strength, he performs Keshalunchana (shaving of the head and beard), otherwise he gets his head shaved with a razor. The duration of this pratima is one day and night for the least severe and eleven months for the most severe.

The common meaning of Upasak is Shravak (lay follower) and the meaning of Pratima is Pratijna-Abhiggraha (vow-acceptance). The pratima of an Upasak is called Upasakpratima.

It should be noted here that there is some difference of opinion regarding the duration of Shravak's pratima. Some Acharyas (teachers) consider their duration to be one, two, three, up to eleven months. They do not consider one, two, three days, etc. as the least severe duration.

Twelve Bhikshu Pratima -

It is an offense to not practice the twelve Bhikshu Pratima as much as possible, to not have faith in them, and to misrepresent them.

1. The first pratima-holder Bhikshu is allowed to take one datti (portion) of food and one datti of water. The flow of food and water given by the donor in the Sadhu's bowl is considered one datti as long as it remains unbroken. When the flow is broken, the datti ends. One should take food from where it is prepared for one person, but not from where it is prepared for two, three, or more people. This first pratima is for one month.

2. to 7. The second to seventh pratima are each for one month. In these, one datti increases progressively. Two datti of food and two datti of water are taken in the second pratima. Similarly, in the third, fourth, up to the seventh pratima, three, four, five, six, and seven datti of food and the same amount of water are taken respectively.

8. The eighth pratima is for seven days and nights. In this, one should practice Chavivihar (four types of conduct) with alternate fasting. One should meditate outside the village in Uttanasana (lying on the back), Pasin (lying on one side), and Nisadyasana (sitting with legs straight). If any upsarga (obstacle) arises, one should bear it with a calm mind.

9. This pratima is also for seven days and nights. In this, one should practice Chavivihar with Shashthabhakta Tap (fasting with six portions). One should meditate in a secluded place outside the village in Dandasana, Lagandasana, or Utkatukasana.

10. This is also for seven days and nights. In this, one should practice Chavivihar with Tele-Tele Parana (fasting with oil). Outside the village...

Page #132:
---------------------------
## Fourth Study: Pratikraman

**[61]** Meditation is performed in the Godohasan, Virasan or Amrakubjasan postures outside.

**[11]** This pratima is for one day and one night. Its practice is done for one day and one night. Its worship is done by the Bele with the offering of Chaubihara. Kayotsarga is performed outside the village.

**[12]** This pratima is for only one night. Its worship is done by offering Bele and performing Chaubihara with oil. Standing outside the village, with the head slightly bowed, keeping the gaze fixed on a single particle, Kayotsarga is performed with unwavering eyes.  Devas, humans, and animals related upsargas are tolerated with equanimity. One should not be swayed by upsargas. If one is swayed by upsargas, one becomes mad or develops a chronic disease. If one remains steadfast, one attains Avadhijnana, Manahparyavgyana and Kevalgyana.

**Thirteen Kriyasthanas:**

Kriya here means action. Its thirteen types are as follows:

**1. Arthakriya:**  To inflict violence on, cause violence to, or approve of violence against a being for one's own purpose is Arthakriya.

**2. Anyakriya:**  Sinful karma performed without any purpose is called Anyakriya.

**3. Hinsakriya:**  To inflict violence on a being because someone is harming, will harm, or has harmed me or my loved ones, or to inflict violence on a being out of anger is Hinsakriya.

**4. Aksamkriya:**  Sin committed hastily without knowing is Aksamkriya.

**5. Drishtiviparyayakriya:**  Sin committed due to delusion, such as punishing an innocent man under the delusion that he is a thief.

**6. Mrishkriya:**  To lie.

**7. Adattadanakrima:**  To steal.

**8. Adhyatmakriya:**  Grief, etc., that arises in the mind without any external cause.

**9. Mankriya:**  To praise oneself, to be arrogant.

**10. Mitrakriya:**  To punish loved ones harshly.

**11. Mayakriya:**  To be hypocritical.

**12. Lobhkriya:**  To be greedy.

Page #133:
---------------------------
##  62]
[ Necessary Sutra
13. *Iryapathiki kriya* is the action that a non-negligent, wise, and restrained person performs for the purpose of movement.
Fourteen *Bhootgram*
*Sukshma kendriya*, *badar ekendriya*, *dwiindriya*, *triindriya*, *chaturindriya*, *asangni panchendriya*, and *sangni panchendriya* - these seven have sufficient and insufficient, making a total of fourteen categories. To harm them, to inflict any kind of pain on them, is an act of violence.
-
Discussion - Jain scriptures mention the different categories of living beings in detail to ensure the meticulous observance of non-violence and to avoid violence. This is because one cannot avoid harming a living being without properly identifying it. Here, fourteen groups of living beings, *Bhootgram*, are mentioned, which encompass all living beings in the world.
*Sukshma* beings are those that are present throughout the universe but are not visible to the naked eye. They are so subtle that they do not die when killed and do not get cut when cut. They are beings with the *sukshma* karma arising, and they are all *ekendriya* stationary beings. Keep in mind that beings with small bodies like *kunthuva* are not counted among these *sukshma* beings. *Kunthuva* and other such beings have *badar* karma arising, therefore they are counted among *badar* - *tras* beings.
*Paryapti* means the fullness of a being's power. When a being takes a new birth, it needs *pudgalas* that are useful for the formation of its new body, senses, etc. The fullness of the power to absorb those *pudgalas* and transform them into the form of body, senses, language, etc. is called *paryapti*. Beings that have achieved this fullness are called *paryapt*. Until that power is complete, they are called *aparyapt*. There are four *paryaptis* in *ekendriya* beings, five in beings from *dwiindriya* to *asangni panchendriya*, and six in *sangni* - *samansk* beings. The fulfillment of all the *paryaptis* possible for a being happens in a single *antarmuhurt* (a very short period of time).
Fifteen *Parmadharmic*
1. *Amb*, 2. *Ambarish*, 3. *Shyam*, 4. *Shabal*, 5. *Roudra*, 6. *Uparoudra*, 7. *Kal*, 8. *Mahakal*, 9. *Asipatra*, 10. *Dhanuh*, 11. *Kumbh*, 12. *Baluk*, 13. *Vaitarani*, 14. *Kharswar*, 15. *Mahaghoosh*. These are the supreme *adharmic*, sinful, cruel, and merciless *asura* deities. They torture the beings in hell for no reason, just for their own amusement. Their specific characteristics are as follows:
1. *Amb* takes the beings of hell to the sky and throws them down, grabs them by the neck and throws them into pits.
-

Page #134:
---------------------------
## Fourth Study: Pratikramana

**1. Giraane Vaale**
Those who throw down, those who throw up into the sky with their mouths upside down and fall down, those who bark like spears, etc.

**2. Ambareesh**
Those who make half-dead.

**3. Shyam**
Those who beat with whips, etc., those who cut off limbs, etc., those who pierce with spikes, needles, etc.

**4. Shabal**
Those who tear apart.

**5. Raudra**
Those who are fierce.

**6. Uparaudra**
Those who are extremely fierce.

**7. Kaal**
Those who feed.

**8. Mahakaal**
Those who roast.

**9. Asipatra**
Those who, by twisting the forest of sharp leaves like swords, drop those leaves like the edge of a sword on the Naraki beings who have come to the forest seeking shade, and tear them apart with the Vikriya Vayu.

**10. Dhanush**
Those who pierce with bows.

**11. Kumbh**
Those who break the joints of the Naraki beings limb by limb with maces, etc.

**12. Baluk**
Those who cook in pots, etc.

**13. Vaitarani**
Those who twist the Vaitarani river, which is filled with foul-smelling blood and iron, boiling zinc and kathera, and extremely alkaline hot water, and throw the Naraki beings into it, causing them to suffer in many ways.

**14. Kharaswar**
Those who climb high, thorny, vajra-like Salmali trees, and drag the Naraki beings who are screaming, and those who place a karot on their heads and tear them apart.

**15. Mahaghosh**
Those who, with a loud roar, stop the Naraki beings who are running around like deer in fear of extreme pain, like animals in a pen.

I renounce any transgression that may have been committed by the approval of the sin committed by them, etc.

Page #135:
---------------------------
[64]
[Essential Sutras]
[Sixteen Verses]
The sixteen studies of the first Shruta Skandha of the Sutra Kritanga are as follows:
1. Self-Time-Other Time, 2. Vaitaliya, 3. Prefix-Recognition, 4. Woman-Recognition, 5. Hell-Division, 6. Hero-Praise, 7. Kushila-Definition, 8. Vigor, 9. Dharma, 10. Samadhi, 11. Liberation Path, 12. Samavasarana, 13. As It Is, 14. Text, 15. Acceptable, 16. Verse.
I repent for any transgressions in their faith or presentation. Seventeen Asanyamas - 1-9. Violence, causing violence, and approving violence towards Earth-bodied, Water-bodied, Fire-bodied, Air-bodied, and Plant-bodied beings, as well as two-sensed, three-sensed, four-sensed, and five-sensed beings. 10. Ajiva-Asanyama - Accepting valuable clothes, vessels, etc., which are not Ajiva, even though they are not Ajiva, is Ajiva-Asanyama. 11. Preksha-Asanyama - Getting up, sitting down, etc., in a place with living beings. 12. Utpreeksha-Asanyama - Approving the sinful deeds of householders. 13. Pramardana-Asanyama - Not cleaning clothes, vessels, etc. 14. Paristhapanika-Asanyama - Eating improperly. 15. Mind-Asanyama - Holding evil thoughts in the mind. 16. Speech-Asanyama - Speaking false, harsh, cruel, and painful words. 17. Body-Asanyama - Being careless in bodily actions such as walking, etc.
These seventeen Asanyamas are mentioned in the Samavayanga Sutra. Acharya Haribhadra has mentioned 'Sanjame' in place of 'Asanjame' in the Essentials. The meaning of Sanjame is restraint. There are also seventeen types of restraint, namely Earth-bodied restraint, etc.
If one has committed any Asanyama, has not practiced restraint, or has had a contrary faith or presentation, then Tass Miccha Mi Dukkadam. Eighteen Abrahmacharya -
Self-indulgence in the pleasures of the gods through mind, speech, and body, causing others to indulge, and approving indulgence, thus nine types are related to the Vikriya body, and human and animal beings.

Page #136:
---------------------------
## Fourth Study: Pratikramana

[65]

Nine types of Audarik Bhogas should be understood in the same way. In total, there are eighteen types. The 19 studies of Jnata Dharma Katha are:

1. Meghkumar (Utksipt), 2. Dhannah Sarthavaha (Sanghat), 3. Mayuraand, 4. Karma, 5. Shailak, 6. Tumbalep, 7. Rohini, 8. Malli, 9. Makandee, 10. Chandra, 11. Davadavvriksh, 12. Udak, 13. Manduk, 14. Tetali Pradhan, 15. Nandiphal, 16. Avarakanka, 17. Akirnak, 18. Susuma, 19. Pundarik.

_Not practicing Sadhu Dharma according to the meaning of these nineteen examples is Atichar. Twenty Asamadhi Sthanas:_

Being situated in the path of Moksha with focused mind is called Samadhi. The opposite of this is Asamadhi. The twenty Sthanas of Asamadhi are:

1. Davadav - Walking hurriedly. 2. Walking without a staff. 3. Cleaning without purpose. 4. Having an unorganized bed and seat. 5. Disrespecting Gurus. 6. Ignoring elders. 7. Bhootopghat - Thinking about killing beings. 8. Getting angry every moment. 9. Speaking ill of others indirectly. 10. Speaking decisively about doubtful matters repeatedly. 11. Creating new conflicts daily. 12. Rekindling settled conflicts. 13. Studying at an inappropriate time. 14. Accepting alms with hands etc. with a conscious mind and with impurities. 15. Speaking loudly after midnight. 16. Creating divisions and differences in the Gachch etc.

Page #137:
---------------------------
[Aavashyaka Sutra]
17. To speak in a way that causes distress to the gana (monastic community). 18. To dispute with everyone. 19. To keep eating and drinking something or the other throughout the day.
20. To consume inauspicious food and the like. Twenty-one Shvabala Dosha -
The Shvabala Dosha are entirely to be abandoned by the sadhus (ascetics). The actions that cause the character (charitra) to become impure (shvabala) and get destroyed are called Shvabala Dosha. They are as follows:
1. Performing manual work. 2. Engaging in sexual misconduct, transgression, and excessive sexual indulgence. 3. Eating at night. 4. Accepting Aadhakarm - food prepared for the sake of the sadhus. 5. Accepting Rajapinda (food from the king).
6. Accepting Auddeshika - food brought, purchased, or borrowed for the sake of the sadhus, etc. 7. Repeatedly breaking the vow of abstinence. 8. Leaving one's gana (monastic community) and joining another within six months. 9. Taking a bath (entering a river, etc.) three times in a month. 10. Consuming Matristhana (related to illusion) three times in a month. 11. Consuming Shayya-tarpinda. 12. Intentionally committing violence. 13. Intentionally speaking falsehood. 14. Intentionally committing theft. 15. Intentionally sitting on or sleeping on earth or stones with life forms. 16. Consuming food, bedding, or seat with life forms. 17. Intentionally consuming tubers, bark, coral, flowers, seeds, etc.

Page #138:
---------------------------
## Fourth Study: Pratikramana

[67]

18. Applying ten udak-lep (water paste with awareness) in a year. 19. Consuming food from Maya-sthana (places of illusion) ten times in a year.
20. Knowingly consuming food with a hand that has touched water with awareness, or with a brush etc. that has touched water with awareness.
21. Knowingly sitting, sleeping, or performing Kayotsarga (body relaxation) in places inhabited by living beings, in places with seeds, greenery, insect nests, flowers, mud, and spider webs.

Twenty-two Pariṣaha:

The hardships that a Sadhu (Jain monk) must endure for the sake of remaining steadfast in their vows and for the exhaustion of karmas, due to hunger, thirst, or any other reason, are called Pariṣaha. Because the life of a Sadhu is not a life of ease. It is a life of struggle for the complete purity of the soul, turning away from comfort. The Samvayanga and Uttaradhyayanasutra describe 22 Pariṣaha. One should strive to conquer them. The details are as follows:

1. Kṣudhā - Enduring the hardship of hunger. 2. Pipāsā - Enduring the hardship of thirst when pure water is not available. 3. Śīta - Enduring the hardship of extreme cold due to wearing minimal clothing. 4. Uṣṇa - Enduring the hardship of heat. 5. Daṃśamaśaka - Enduring the hardship of insects like flies, mosquitoes, and bedbugs. 6. Acela - Enduring the hardship of not having clothes. 7. Arati - Overcoming the aversion to vows due to fear of difficulties. 8. Strīpariṣaha - Conquering the temptation of women. This is a favorable Pariṣaha. 9. Carya Pariṣaha - Enduring the hardship of travel and movement during journeys. 10. Niṣadyā - Enduring the disturbance in places of study and meditation. 11. Śayyā - Enduring the hardship of not having a comfortable place to sleep. 12. Ākrośa - Maintaining equanimity when someone insults, threatens, or humiliates you. 13. Vadh - Enduring the beating of wood etc. with equanimity.

Page #139:
---------------------------
##  68]
[Essential Sutras
14. **Yachana** - Even if someone disregards your request, do not be upset. 15. **Alaabha** - Even if you do not receive something after requesting it, do not be distressed. 16. **Roga** - When illness arises, bear it patiently. 17. **Trinasparsha** - Endure the pain caused by thorns or sleeping on grass. 18. **Jalla** - Bear the discomfort of bodily waste. 19. **Satkara** - Do not become arrogant when receiving honor and respect, and do not be distressed when not receiving it. 20. **Prajna** - Do not be proud of your intellect. 21. **Agnana** - Bear the sorrow of ignorance with equanimity.
22. **Darshan** - Do not be influenced by the alluring environment of false beliefs that corrupt **Samyaktva** (right faith). 23 Studies of **Sutrakritanga Sutra** -
The aforementioned sixteen studies of the first **Shruta Skandha** and the seven studies of the second **Shruta Skandha** - (17) **Pundarika**, (18) **Kriyasthan**, (19) **Aharparijna**, (20) **Pratyakhyan Kriya**, (21) **Achar Shruta**, (22) **Ard Kumar**, (23) **Nalandeeya**, together make twenty-three studies.
According to the statements of these twenty-three studies, not living a life of restraint is an **Atichara** (transgression). Twenty-four Devas -
The ten **Bhavana Patis** like **Asura Kumar**, the eight **Vyantara** like **Bhoot** and **Yaksha**, the five **Jyotishka** like **Surya** and **Chandra**, and the **Vaimanika Devas**, making a total of twenty-four types of Devas. They are the greatest representatives of the life of enjoyment in the world. Praising them is praising the life of enjoyment, and criticizing them is a sign of hatred. Therefore, a **Mumukha** (aspirant for liberation) should remain neutral. If neutrality is ever broken, it is an **Atichara**.
The renowned commentator of **Uttaraadhyayanasutra**, Acharya Shantisuri, includes the twenty-four **Tirthankara Devas** in the term "Deva". Accepting this meaning would make it an **Atichara** - not showing respect or reverence towards them, not following their instructions, etc. Twenty-five thoughts of the five **Mahavratas** -
The scriptures have outlined five thoughts for each **Mahavrat** for the pure observance of the **Mahavratas**. The nature of these thoughts is very heart-touching and life-inspiring. For the pure observance of **Shraman Dharma** (Jain way of life),

Page #140:
---------------------------
## Fourth Study: Pratikramana

**[69]** One must definitely focus on the emotions. The five emotions of the Ahimsa Mahavrat are:

1. **Iryasamiti:** Moving and going in a useful manner.
2. **Alokita Panabhojan:** Eating in a well-lit place with care.
3. **Adananiksepsamiti:** Picking up and placing objects with discernment.
4. **Manogupti:** Restraint of the mind.
5. **Vachanagupti:** Restraint of speech.

The five emotions of the Satya Mahavrat are:

1. Speaking after consideration.
2. Abandoning anger.
3. Abandoning greed.
4. Abandoning fear.
5. Abandoning laughter and jokes.

The five emotions of the Asteya Mahavrat are:

1. Consuming after requesting from eighteen types of pure places.
2. Taking daily avagraha of grass, wood, etc.
3. Not cutting trees for backrests, planks, etc.
4. Not consuming excessive amounts of ordinary food.
5. Performing the duties of a Sadhu.

The five emotions of the Brahmacharya Mahavrat are:

1. Living in a place devoid of the presence of women, animals, and eunuchs.
2. Avoiding stories about women.
3. Not observing the limbs of women.
4. Not remembering past sexual experiences.
5. Not eating delicious food daily.

The five emotions of the Aparigraha Mahavrat are:

1-5. When the five senses come into contact with their objects - sound, form, smell, taste, and touch - maintaining indifference, without generating attachment towards the pleasant and aversion towards the unpleasant.

Page #141:
---------------------------
## 70]
**Essential Sutras**

The 26 study periods of the Dasha Shruta, Brihat Kalpa and Vyavahar Sutra - 
Ten from the Dasha Shruta Skandha, six from the Brihat Kalpa and ten from the Vyavahar Sutra, transgression occurs from deviating from the study periods of these twenty-six studies and not acting according to them. 

**Twenty-seven Qualities of an Ascetic**

Not properly following the twenty-seven qualities of an ascetic according to the scriptures is transgression. To purify oneself, there is the Pratikramana of the qualities of a Muni.

1. - 5.  Properly observing the five great vows of Ahimsa, Satya, Asteya, Brahmacharya and Aparigraha, 6.  Renunciation of night meals, 7. - 11.  Controlling the five senses, 12.  Purity of the inner self (Bhavasatya), 13.  Karanasatya - properly recording clothes, vessels, etc., 14.  Forgiveness, 15.  Vitaragata - detachment, 16.  Good inclination of the mind, 17.  Good inclination of speech, 18.  Good inclination of the body, 19. - 24.  Protection of the six types of living beings, 25.  Being virtuous, 26.  Enduring pain like cold, etc., and 27.  Enduring even a fatal attack with equanimity.

Acharya Haribhadra has described these twenty-seven qualities in his commentary on the Aavashyak Sutra, according to an ancient verse of the Sangrahani-kar. However, in the Samavayanga Sutra, the twenty-seven qualities of a Muni are mentioned slightly differently - five great vows, control of the five senses, renunciation of the four kshayas, Bhavasatya, Karanasatya, Yogasatya, forgiveness, detachment, mind-concentration, speech-concentration, body-concentration, knowledge-fullness, vision-fullness, virtue-fullness, endurance of pain, endurance of a fatal attack.

**Twenty-eight Achar Prakalpas**

There are different beliefs regarding the explanation of Achar Prakalpa. According to Acharya Haribhadra, Achar itself is called Achar Prakalpa - 'Achar ev Achar Prakalpa'.

The meaning of Achar is the first Anga Sutra. Its Prakalpa, i.e., special study, is called Nishita Sutra. Or, the Prakalpa, i.e., arrangement of knowledge, etc., of virtuous conduct is called Achar Prakalpa.

'Acharah Prathamaangam Tasy Prakalpah Adhyayanavishesho Nishitamittyaparabhidhanam. Acharasy Va Sadhvacharasya Jnanadivishaysya Prakalpo Vyavasthapanamiti Achar Prakalpah'

- Abhaydeva Samavayanga Sutra Commentary

There are twenty-five studies of the Acharanga Sutra, including Shastraparijna, and the Nishita Sutra is also a chapter of the Acharanga Sutra.

Page #142:
---------------------------
## Fourth Study: Pratikramana

[71]

The three studies are considered to be the essence, therefore, together they make up the twenty-eight studies of the Acharanga Sutra.

1. Shastraparijna, 2. Lokavijaya, 3. Shitooshniya, 4. Samyaktva, 5. Lokasar, 6. Dhutaadhyayan, 7. Mahaparijna, 8. Vimokhsa, 9. Upadhanashruta, 10. Pindaishaana, 11. Shayya, 12. Iryaadhyayan, 13. Bhasha, 14. Vastraishaana, 15. Patraishaana, 16. Avgrahapratima, 17. Sapta Sthanaadi-Saptaikikaadhyayan, 18. Naishadikisaptaikikaadhyayan, 19. Ucchaaraprasravanasataikikaadhyayan, 20. Shabdasataikikaadhyayan, 21. Roopasataikikaadhyayan, 22. Parkriyaasaptaikikaadhyayan, 23. Anyonyakriyaasataikikaadhyayan, 24. Bhavana, 25. Vimukti, 26. Udghta, 27. Anudghta, 28. Aaropaana.

According to the Samavayanga Sutra, the twenty-eight divisions of Acharaprakalpa are as follows:

1. One month of Pratikramana, 2. One month and five days of Pratikramana, 3. One month and ten days of Pratikramana. In this way, one should increase by five days until five months. (This makes 25) 26. Upadghta-Anupaddhata, 27. Aaropaana, 28. Kritsnaakritsna. If there is any transgression in the faith, form, etc. of these twenty-eight studies, then "Tass Miccha Mi Dukkadam".

## Twenty-Nine Divisions of Papashruta

-

That which causes the soul to fall into a state of misery is called "Pap" (sin), and that which is heard from the Guru's mouth is called "Shruta" (scripture). Similarly, the scripture that describes sin is called "Papashruta". It is mainly of twenty-nine types.

1. Utpat - The science of omens that tells the auspicious and inauspicious nature of the rain of blood, etc., which happens spontaneously.
2. Bhoum - The science that tells the results of earthquakes, etc.
3. Swapnashashtra - The science that tells the auspicious and inauspicious results of dreams.
4. Antariksha Shastra - The science that describes the celestial battles, etc., that occur in the sky.
5. Angashashtra - The science that tells the results of the twitching of different parts of the body.
6. Swarashashtra - The science that explains the results of the lunar, solar, etc., sounds of living beings.
7. Vyanjanashashtra - The science that describes the results of moles, freckles, etc.
8. Lakshanashastra - The science that tells the auspicious and inauspicious results of the characteristics (beauty, ugliness, size, etc.) of women and men.

-

-

-

These eight become twenty-four due to the divisions of Sutra, Vritti, and Vartika.

25. Vikthanuyoga - The science that tells the means of achieving meaning and desire. For example, the Vatsyayana-written...

Page #143:
---------------------------
[72]
Aavashyaka Sutra
26. Vidyanuyoga - A scripture that explains the means to attain proficiency in various sciences like Rohini, etc.
27. Mantrānuyoga - A scripture that explains the accomplishment of tasks through the use of mantras, etc.
28. Yogānuyoga - A scripture that explains various yogic practices like vashikarana, etc.
29. Anyatīrthikānuyoga - Scriptures of other faiths that advocate and approve of violence-oriented conduct.

- Samavayangasutra. By having faith in, and expounding upon, these 29 types of sinful scriptures, one becomes free from the transgressions committed. The 30 stages of the most deluding karmic bondage are:
1. Drowning and killing mobile beings in water.
2. Killing mobile beings by obstructing their breathing, etc.
3. Killing mobile beings by confining them in buildings and suffocating them with smoke.
4. Killing mobile beings by inflicting deadly blows on their heads.
5. Killing mobile beings by wrapping their heads in wet leather, etc.
6. Deceiving and robbing travelers.
7. Secretly indulging in unethical conduct.
8. Falsely defaming others.
9. Deliberately speaking a mixed language in the assembly.
10. Destroying the kingdom of the king.
11. Claiming to be a celibate student of scriptures, though not being one.
12. Pretending to be a celibate, though not being one.
13. Stealing the wealth of the one who provides shelter.
14. Being ungrateful for the help received.
15. Killing the householder or the leader of the community.

Page #144:
---------------------------
## Fourth Study: Pratikraman

16. Killing a king, a wealthy merchant, or a national leader.
17. Killing a man who is a special benefactor to society.
18. Corrupting a Diksha Sadhu from their vows.
19. Slandering a Kevaljnani.
20. Insulting or denigrating the path to liberation (Moksha).
21. Slandering an Acharya or Upadhyaya.
22. Not serving an Acharya or Upadhyaya.
23. Claiming to be a Bahushruta (one who has vast knowledge) when one is not.
24. Claiming to be a Tapaswi (one who practices austerities) when one is not.
25. Having the ability to serve but not serving one's dependent elders, sick, etc.
26. Repeatedly engaging in violence and lustful speech.
27. Engaging in magic, sorcery, etc.
28. Being excessively attached to and immersed in sensual pleasures.
29. Slandering the Devas (divine beings).
30. Claiming to have had a darshan (vision) of the Devas when one has not, out of a desire for prestige.

Page #145:
---------------------------
[74]
[Necessary Sutra]
I renounce that. The 31 qualities of Siddhas -
_ The qualities that reside in Siddhas from the very beginning of the Siddha state, i.e., from the time of attaining the Siddha state, are called Siddhaadigunas. These qualities manifest due to the destruction of the 31 natures of the eight karmas. These 31 qualities are as follows: 1. Due to the destruction of the five natures of the Jnanavaraniya karma -
1. Ksheenamatigyanavarana, 2. Ksheenshrutgyanavarana, 3. Ksheenavadhigyanavarana, 4. Ksheenmanahparyavgyanavarana,
5. Ksheenkevalgyanavarana. 2. Due to the destruction of the nine natures of the Darshanavaraniya karma -
1. Ksheenchchhuxudarshanavarana, 2. Ksheenachchhuxudarshanavarana, 3. Ksheenavadhidarshanavarana, 4. Ksheenkevaldarshanavarana, 5. Ksheennidra, 6. Ksheennidranidra, 7. Ksheenprachala, 8. Ksheenprachalaprachala,
9. Ksheenstyanagrudhi. 3. Due to the destruction of the two natures of the Vedaniya karma -
1. Ksheensataavedaniya, 2. Ksheenasataavedaniya.

Page #146:
---------------------------
Fourth Study: Pratikramana]
4. From the destruction of the two natures of Mohaniya Karma:
1. Kshina Darshan Mohaniya,
2. Kshina Charitra Mohaniya.
5. From the complete destruction of the four natures of Ayu Karma:
1. Kshina Nairyaika Ayu, 2. Tiryancha Ayu, 3. Manushya Ayu, 4. Deva Ayu.
From the destruction of the two natures of Gotra Karma:
1. Kshina Uchcha Gotra,
2. Kshina Nicha Gotra.
From the destruction of the two natures of Nama Karma:
1. Kshina Shubha Nama, 2. Kshina Ashubha Nama.
8. From the destruction of the five natures of Antaraya Karma:
1. Kshina Dana Antaraya,
2. Kshina Labha Antaraya,
3. Kshina Bhoga Antaraya,
4. Kshina Upbhoga Antaraya,
32 Yoga Sangraha
-
5.
5. Kshina Virya Antaraya.
I renounce any transgression that may have been committed in relation to these.
-
-
―
- Samavayanga Sutra
[ 75
1. Criticizing faults in the presence of Gurus.
2. Not telling anyone else about someone's faults after hearing them.
3. Remaining steadfast in Dharma even in the face of adversity.
4. Performing austerities without attachment.
The practice of Achar Shiksha, which includes the assimilation of the meaning of the sutras, the assimilation of the form, education, and transcription, etc.

Page #147:
---------------------------
[76]
[Necessary Sutras]
6. Not engaging in beautification or adornment. 7. Abandoning attachment to worship and installation, and practicing secret austerities. 8. Renouncing greed. 9. Enduring hardships, persecutions, and afflictions with patience. 10. Maintaining purity, self-control, and truthfulness. 11. Straightforwardness and simplicity. 12. Purity of right faith. 13. Samadhi and serenity of mind. 14. Not being deceitful in the observance of conduct. 15. Practicing the ten types of humility related to Arhats, etc. 16. Patience - maintaining composure in the face of favorable and unfavorable circumstances. 17. Awe - fear of worldly pleasures or a longing for liberation. 18. Not engaging in deceitful conduct. 19. Remaining engaged in virtuous practices. 20. Restraint - stopping the inflow of karmic impurities. 21. Purification of faults. 22. Detachment from worldly pleasures. 23. Pure observance of the fundamental virtues. 24. Pure observance of the secondary virtues. 25. Renunciation - not being attached to the body. 26. Not being careless. 27. Being vigilant in the journey of self-control every moment. 28. Being devoted to auspicious contemplation, Dharma, and pure contemplation. 29. Not becoming impatient even in the face of death-like pain.

Page #148:
---------------------------
## Fourth Study: Pratikraman

[77]

30. Abandoning the company of the wicked. 31. Performing atonement for committed faults. 32. Cultivating knowledge and other virtues until death.

**Discussion:** I renounce any transgression that may have been committed due to the lack of proper observance of these thirty-two Yogasangrahas.

The activities of the mind, speech, and body are called Yoga. There are two types of Yoga: auspicious Yoga and inauspicious Yoga. Restraint consists of engaging in auspicious Yoga and abstaining from inauspicious Yoga. In this sutra, the auspicious Yoga, which is the form of virtuous conduct, is the subject of discussion. Only this can preserve the purity of a restrained life. "Yoga is the activity of mind, speech, and body, and here only the auspicious ones are intended."

- Acharya Abhaydeva, Samvayanga Tika, Thirty-three Ashatanas

Jain Acharyas have beautifully explained the etymology of the word Ashatana. The attainment of spiritual qualities like right faith, etc., is called 'Aaya', and the meaning of Shatana is 'destruction'. Insulting Gods, Gurus, scriptures, etc., leads to the destruction of good qualities like right faith, etc. "Aaya - is the characteristic of attaining right faith, etc., and its Shatana - destruction is explained as Ashatana."

- Acharya Abhaydeva, Samvayanga Tika, "Ashatana is the destruction of Aaya, which is right faith, etc. By dropping the 'Ya' sound, it becomes Ashatana."

- Acharya Jinadas, Aavashyakachurni, The thirty-three Ashatanas related to the Guru have been mentioned earlier. Here, the thirty-three Ashatanas of Arhanta, etc., are described in the original text. Their meaning is as follows:

**Ashatana of Arhanta:** The first Ashatana mentioned in the sutra is that of Arhanta. It is the Arhanta Bhagwan who, for countless eons, has shown the light of truth to beings wandering in darkness. They are the ones who preach Dharma and explain the path of righteousness. Therefore, one should not commit Ashatana towards the supremely benevolent Arhanta.

_If someone says that there are no Arhanta in Bharatavarsha, then how can there be Ashatana towards them? The answer is that 'Arhanta do not have any existence. They have preached a strict Dharma. They are free from attachments..._

Page #149:
---------------------------
## 78]
**Essential Sutra**

**Arhats' Asatana:** To have doubts like, "Why do they use golden thrones, etc.?"

**Siddhas' Asatana:** To disregard them, saying, "There are no Siddhas. If there is no body, how can there be infinite happiness?"

**Acharya-Upadhyaya's Asatana:** To think, "These are children, of low lineage, with little intelligence. They preach to others but don't practice themselves." Similarly, one should understand the Upadhyaya's Asatana.

**Sadhus' Asatana:** To criticize them, saying, "Cowardly people, unable to support their families, renounce their homes and beg. They live off the earnings of householders."

**Sadhvis' Asatana:** To belittle them because they are women. To call them the root of conflict and strife, and to disregard them in such ways.

**Shravak-Shravika's Asatana:** Jainism is a very generous and vast religion. Here, not only are Arhats and other great souls revered, but also ordinary householders who practice the Deshaviriti Dharma. To disregard these Shravaks and Shravikas is also a sin. Every Acharya, Upadhyaya, and Sadhu must repent for any known or unknown disregard towards Shravaks and Shravikas during daily morning and evening Pratikraman. They must say, "Micchami Dukkadam." Jain Agamas compare Shravaks and Shravikas to "Ammapiyaro." Jainism emphasizes virtues. There, virtues are worshipped, not anyone considered superior or inferior based on attire, gender, etc.

**Devas-Devis' Asatana:** To think, "Devas are attached to worldly desires, unable to resist them, constantly engaged in them, and despite being powerful, they don't improve governance." Similarly, one should understand the Devis' Asatana.

**Asatana of This World and the Next:** This world and the next refer to: for humans, humans are this world, and hell, Tiryanch, and Devas are the next world. To misrepresent this world and the next, to not believe in rebirth, to not believe in the principle of the four paths of hell, etc., is the Asatana of this world and the next.

Page #150:
---------------------------
## Fourth Study: Pratikramana

[79] **Aspiring to the Well-being of All Living Beings (Pran-Bhoot etc.)** - The terms Pran-Bhoot etc. are considered synonymous. They all refer to a living being (Jiva). Acharya Jinadas says - "Egatthita va ete." However, Acharya Jinadas Mahत्तर and Acharya Haribhadra etc. have also accepted some specific meanings for these words.  

Dwi-Indriya etc. beings are called Pran, and Prithvi-Kaya etc. Eka-Indriya beings are called Bhoot. The term Jiva is used for all worldly beings, and the term Sattwa is used for all infinite beings, both worldly and liberated.

"Praninah Dwi-Indriyaadayah. Bhootani Prithvyaadayah ... Ji-vanti Jivaa-Ayuh-Karma-Anubhava-Yuktaah Sarva Eva."  Sattvaa - Saansarik - Saansara-Atit-Bhedah."

- This sutra, which emphasizes aspiring to the well-being of all infinite beings in the universe, is very important. The infinite compassion of Jainism is not limited to only familiar and beloved beings. Rather, it is a great ideal to seek forgiveness from all living beings. Whether a being is near or far, gross or subtle, known or unknown, enemy or friend, in any form, it is completely forbidden for a seeker to aspire to its ill-being or disregard it.

**Aspiring to the Well-being of the Dharma as Exemplified by the Kevali** - Before becoming a Kevali, a seeker becomes completely free from attachment (Veetrag). Therefore, because of being Veetrag and omniscient, the Dharma exemplified by them is beneficial to all and true. Even then, to speak ill of the Dharma exemplified by them is to speak ill of the Dharma exemplified by the Kevali. Similarly, I refrain from aspiring to the ill-being of the world, including gods, humans, and Asuras, in the form of false representation.

**Aspiring to the Well-being of Time (Kal)** - I refrain from aspiring to the ill-being of time in the form of believing that "Time is not the characteristic of change" or "Time does everything, it digests beings, destroys them, and even when the world is asleep, it is awake, therefore time is unstoppable."

**Aspiring to the Well-being of the Shruta** - I refrain from aspiring to the ill-being of the Shruta, which is the nectar of words, in the form of false representation, which emanated from the mouth of Lord Mahavira, reached the ears of the Ganadharas, is the explainer of general and specific matters, and makes the noble beings immortal.

**Aspiring to the Well-being of the Shruta-Devata** - Shruta-Devata means the Tirthankaras and Ganadharas who created the Shruta. They are the original custodians and creators of the Shruta, hence they are Shruta-Devata. I refrain from aspiring to their ill-being, as well as the ill-being of the Vaachanaacharya (who, according to the instructions of the Upadhyaya, 
Kal: Pachati Bhootani, Kal: Sanharate Prajah. Kal: Supteshu Jagarti, Kalo Hi Duratikram: ||

Page #151:
---------------------------
[80]
[Necessary Sutra]
I am freed from the desire to teach the Shruta to the disciples in the form of a text.
Vyatyaneḍita - The Sanskrit form of Vaccameliyam is 'Vyatyaneḍita'. It means - to speak twice or thrice with a blank mind. Some Acharyas have interpreted the meaning of Vyatyaneḍita differently. For example, Vyatyaneḍita is to combine together similar synonymous words that have come in different Sutras and places.
The meaning of these words has already been given in the previous knowledge-related excesses.
From 'Paḍikkammami Egavihe Asanjame' to 'Tetisae Asayanahin', the vast form of one-type of non-restraint is described. All this group of excesses is basically a description of non-restraint. 'Paḍikkammami Egavihe Asanjame' is a brief-pratikramana of non-restraint. And this pratikramana gradually becomes vast from 'Dohi Bandhanehin' onwards to 'Tetisae Asayanahin'.
_ This Lokaloka Pramana is an infinite vast universe. In it, there are infinite forms of non-restraint like violence, falsehood, etc., which are despicable, infinite forms of restraint like non-violence, etc., which are desirable, and infinite forms of pudgala, etc., which are knowable. The seeker has to perform pratikramana of all these. Thus, if one has not practiced infinite restraint-places and has practiced non-restraint-places, then it is pratikramana. In this way, just like the words from one to thirty-three, other infinite words should also be kept in mind, whether they are known or unknown. The seeker should not only perform pratikramana of the known, but also of the unknown. Only then is it said in the final text ahead - "Jan Sambharami, Jan Cha Na Sambharami". That is, I perform pratikramana of the faults that are coming to mind and also of the faults that are not coming to mind, but have happened.
Pratijna-Sutra Nirgrantha-Pravachana text -
Namo Chauvīsae Tittthayaraṇam Usabhaimahavīrapjjavasaṇāṇam. Iṇameva Niggantham Pāvaṇam Saccham, Aṇuttaram, Kevaliyam, Paḍipuṇṇam, Neyāuyam, Sansuddham, Sallagattan, Siddhimaggan, Muttimaggam, Nijaṇamaggam, Nivvāṇamaggam, Avithamavisandhi, Savvadukkhapphīṇamaggam. Ittham Ṭhiā Jīvā Siṇhanti, Buṇhanti, Muccanti, Parinivvāyanti Savvadukkhāṇamantā Karenti. Tam Dhammam Saddahāmi Pattiyāmi, Roemi, Phāsemi, Pālemi, Aṇupālemi. Tam Dhammam Saddahato, Pattianto, Roanto, Phāsanto, Palanto, Aṇupalanto. Tassa Dhammassa Kevalipannattassa Abbuṭṭhiomi Ārāhaṇāe Viroemi Virāhaṇāe, Asanjam Parīyāṇāmi, Sanjam Uvasampjjammi.

Page #152:
---------------------------
[81
Fourth Study: Pratikramana]

I renounce the impure, I adopt the pure. I renounce the non-spiritual, I adopt the spiritual. I renounce ignorance, I adopt knowledge. I renounce non-activity, I adopt activity. I renounce wrong belief, I adopt right belief. I renounce non-enlightenment, I adopt enlightenment. I renounce the wrong path, I adopt the right path. What I have accumulated, and what I have not accumulated. What I have renounced, and what I have not renounced.

I repent for all these to the omniscient Arihant. I, the ascetic, have renounced sinful activities, I am free from delusion, right-visioned, devoid of deceit and falsehood.

I bow down with my head, mind and speech to all the Tirthankaras, from Bhagavan Rishabhadeva to Bhagavan Mahavira, who are present in the fifteen continents and oceans, some of whom are adorned with the garland of jewels, some who observe the five great vows, and some who observe the eighteen virtuous practices, and who have attained the state of Akshayakaracharitra (the conduct that is imperishable).

Meaning - I pay obeisance to the twenty-four Tirthankaras, from Bhagavan Rishabhadeva to Bhagavan Mahavira.

This Jain doctrine preached by the Tirthankaras is the ultimate truth, unparalleled, expounded by the Kevali-Kevalins (omniscient beings), complete with the qualities leading to liberation, unobstructed by logic, reasoning and arguments, completely pure i.e. absolutely flawless, destroys the afflictions like delusion, is the means to attain the path of liberation and freedom from karmic bondage, is the path to liberation from the cycle of birth and death, is the path to attain complete peace i.e. Nirvana, is devoid of false beliefs, is eternal and without beginning or end, and is the path to completely eliminate all sufferings.

The aspirants who abide by and practice this Jain doctrine become enlightened, attain omniscience, become liberated, attain complete peace of the soul, and eternally end all their sufferings.

I have faith, belief, interest, experience, and observe this Jain doctrine with utmost dedication.

I, while having faith, belief, interest and experience in this Jain doctrine, engage in its practice.

Page #153:
---------------------------
## 82]
[Essential Sutra]

I strive for the worship of that only-perfect religion, and I am detached and withdrawn from opposition. I know non-restraint through *jñāparijñā* and abandon it through *pratyākhyānaparijñā*, and I accept restraint. I know non-chastity and abandon it, and I accept chastity. I know the *akalpya* (unrighteous) and abandon it, and I accept the *kritya* (righteous). I know ignorance and abandon it, and I accept knowledge. I know inaction-nihilism and abandon it, and I accept action-right-view. I know falsehood and abandon it, and I accept right-view-non-violence.

I know the unrighteous path of violence, etc., through *jñāparijñā* and abandon it through *pratyākhyānaparijñā*. I accept the righteous path of non-violence, etc.

I perform *pratikramaṇa* for the transgressions of the day, those I remember, those I recall, and those I do not recall, those I have already performed *pratikramaṇa* for and those I have not been able to perform *pratikramaṇa* for.

I am an ascetic, I am restrained, I am withdrawn from worldly affairs and the world, I am one who represses sinful actions, I am free from the root-cause of attachment, I am endowed with right-vision, I am one who avoids falsehood and untruth along with delusion.

I bow down to all the *sadhu* *muniraj* who are in the limited human realm of two and a half islands and two oceans, that is, in the fifteen *karmabhūmis*, who are adorned with *rajohaṛaṇa*, *guccak*, and *pātra*, and who uphold the five great vows, the eighteen thousand *śīlāṅga* - the limbs of good conduct, and who are renunciants who follow the path of non-transgression. I bow down to them with my mind and my head.

**Discussion:** Jainism primarily presents the ideal of avoiding sins. Therefore, it does not consider it sufficient to simply repent for past actions, but also instructs on taking precautions to ensure that sins are not committed again in the future.

Before making the vow, the great travelers of the path of restraint, from Ādinātha Śrī Ṛṣabha to Mahāvīra, the twenty-four *tīrthaṅkara* deities, have been saluted. Warriors remember warriors, and heroes remember heroes. This is a righteous war, therefore, only righteous heroes are remembered here. It has been an unwavering rule that the devotees of the practice and those who have attained perfection in that practice are remembered according to the practice one wishes to perform. Therefore, the remembrance of the twenty-four *tīrthaṅkara* of Jainism is what stabilizes our self-purification. The *tīrthaṅkara* are for us like...

Page #154:
---------------------------
## Fourth Study: Pratikraman

**Lighthouses are:**

**Lord Rishabhdev**

Among the twenty-four Tirthankaras in the present Kalchakra, Lord Rishabhdev is the first. Human civilization originated with him. Before him, humans lived in forests, ate fruits, and wandered without any social life. They had no knowledge of Dharma or Karma. Lord Rishabhdev was the first to reveal the true nature of the soul.

Lord Rishabhdev is the founder of Jainism in this Avasarpini Kal. Those who consider Jainism to be entirely modern should pay attention to this. The praises of Lord Rishabhdev are sung in the Vedas and Puranas. He was the original redeemer of human culture, therefore he has been revered by all humans. Ancient Vedic Rishis did not forget his great favors, they have sung his praises with open hearts.

-
[ 83
-
Anarvaanam Vrishabham Mandrajivham, Brihaspatim Vardhaya Navyam Arke.
-
- Rig Veda 1.190.1
-

Meaning: Worship Rishabh, who is sweet-tongued, knowledgeable, and worthy of praise, with mantras that enhance him.

Lord Mahavira, at the beginning of this age, enhanced the dignity of Jainism established by Lord Rishabhdev, with the help of the twenty-two intermediate Tirthankaras and the final Tirthankara, Lord Mahavira. But at that time, they had to grapple with many difficult problems in both social and religious spheres. More than twenty-six hundred years ago, although the island of Dharma was lit, the state of the country was very deplorable. Violence was rampant, and humanity was groaning under the weight of exploitation and immorality. Rivers of animal blood flowed in the name of religion, and terrible atrocities were committed against Shudras and women. In that difficult time, the savior of the world, the valiant Lord, was born and with his inner strength, he sounded the drum of non-violence.

India owes an infinite debt to Lord Mahavira, a debt that we can never repay in any way. He was completely selfless, he did not want anything in return. But as his followers or servants, it is our duty to walk on the path he showed us and bow our heads in reverence and devotion at his lotus feet.

-

Niggantham Pavayanam - 'Pavayanam' is the noun and 'Niggantham' is the adjective. The word 'Nigganth' is famous in Jain literature. The Sanskrit form of Nigganth is 'Nirgranth'. Nirgranth means - free from external attachments like wealth and possessions, and internal attachments like false beliefs, non-restraint, anger, pride, and delusion, i.e., completely renounced and...

Page #155:
---------------------------
[84]
[Essential Sutra
The restrained sage.
The discourse of the Nirgranthas, the Arihantas, is the Nairgranthya Pravachana.
The word Niggantha in the original is not a synonym for Nirgrantha, but rather for 'Nairgranthya'. The word 'Pavayanam' has two Sanskrit transformations - Pravachana and Pravachana. Acharya Jinadas calls it Pravachana and Haribhadra calls it Pravachana. Although there is a difference in words, both Acharyas mean the same thing. In which the true nature of the Jivadi substances and the practice of the Ratna-tray of knowledge, etc. is described, that from Samayika to the beginning of Bindusar, the Agam-literature is contained in the Nirgrantha Pravachana or Nairgranthya Pravachana.
'Prakarshena Abhividhina Uchyante Jivaadayo Yasmin Tatpravachanam.' - Acharya Haribhadra.
From Shri Rishabhdev Swami to Shri Mahavira Swami, my salutations to all the twenty-four Tirthankara Bhagavants. Thus, saluting, they praise the discourse of the Tirthankaras - this is Nirgrantha, i.e., free from the silver, etc., material form and the false, etc., mental form - the Muni-related Samayika, etc., to the end of the Pratyakhyana, the twelve-fold Ganipitaka form, the discourse taught by the Tirthankaras is true.
Saccam - Truth is the nature of the soul, the subject of experience and the ideal of conduct. Just as the sweetness of sugar can only be experienced by tasting it, similarly, the importance of truth is known only by putting it into practice. The devotee of truth keeps truth with him at all times in every field of life. Truth is a universal principle. Truth cannot be separated from religion.
Truth adorns morality. When truth is reflected in life and conduct, man's life automatically becomes religious. In religious and moral scriptures, the glory of truth has been extolled without hesitation. Truth is the best, the most excellent. Religion cannot be imagined without truth.
_ 'Na'sau Dharmo Yatra Na Satyamasthi' i.e., that religion is not religion which is far from truth. Truth is the essence of practice, the thread of man's philosophical thinking and the door to the goal of liberation. The entire essence of the world is contained in it. In the Prashnavyakarana Sutra, truth is called the form of God.
The basis of life is truth, the mine of happiness. See Prashravyakarana, truth itself is God.
1. 'Nirgranthanaamidam Nairgranthyam Pravachanamiti.'
- Acharya Haribhadra 2. 'Pavayanam Samaiyaadi Bindusarapjjavasanam Jaththa Nan-Dasan-Charittsaahanavaavara Anegadha Vanijjati.'
- Acharya Jinabhadra, Aavashyakachurni

Page #156:
---------------------------
## Fourth Study: Pratikramana

**[85 Kevaliya** - The word 'Kevaliya' in the original text can be translated into two Sanskrit forms - 'Kevala' and 'Kaivalika'. 'Kevala' means unique. The principles of Samyagdarshana, etc., are unique and supreme.
'Kaivalika' means - formulated or propounded by the Kevalis.

**Padipunnam** - Samyagdarshana, Samyagjnana and Samyakcharitra are the essence of Jainism. It is complete in itself.

**Neyauyam** - The Sanskrit form of 'Neyauyam' is 'Naiyayika'. Acharya Haribhadra defines 'Naiyayika' as - one who is 'nayansheel', a carrier, is 'Naiyayika'. Samyagdarshana, etc., lead to liberation, therefore they are called 'Naiyayika'. 'Nayansheelan Naiyayikam Mokshagamakametyartha'.
Shri Bhava Vijayji defines 'Nyaya' as 'Moksha'. Because definite income-profit is 'Nyaya' and such 'Nyaya' is only 'Moksha' and for the seeker there is no other benefit greater than 'Moksha' - "Nishchit Ayo Laabho Nyayo Muktiryartha, Sa Prayojanamasyeti Naiyayika".
- Uttaraadhyayana Vritti, Adhy. 4, Ga. 5. One meaning of this can also be - 'युक्त-तर्क से युक्त-अबाधित' (equipped with logic and reasoning, unobstructed).

**Sallkattan** - In the language of the Agamas, 'Shalya' means - 'Maya, Nidana and Mithyatva'. External 'Shalya' cause pain only for a short time, but these internal 'Shalya' are very terrible. Since time immemorial, countless souls have been suffering due to these 'Shalya'. Even reaching heaven does not provide liberation from them. Acharya Umaswati has written in the Tattvarth Sutra - 'Nishalya Vrati'. For a 'Vrati', it is paramount to be 'Nishalya', i.e., free from 'Shalya'.

**Nijanamgam** - Acharya Haribhadra has defined 'Niryana' as the state of 'Moksha'. The place where one goes is called 'Yana'. Unique knowledge is called 'Niryana'. 'Moksha' is the only state that is the best 'Yana-Sthan'. Therefore, it is also called 'Niryana' in Jain Agamic literature.

**Avisandhi** - 'Avisandhi' means without 'Sandhi'. 'Sandhi' refers to the gap in between. The meaning is that Jainism has been continuously uninterrupted since time immemorial. It may not be present in a particular time in the Bharatadi Kshetra, but it always remains uninterrupted in the Mahavideha Kshetra. The boundaries of time cannot hinder the progress of Jainism. Jainism is 'Nijadharma', i.e., the religion of the soul. Therefore, it will always be found somewhere in the three times and three realms.

**Savva-Du:khpaheenamgam** - The final attribute of Dharma is 'Sarvadukhapraheenamarg'. Every being in the world is tormented by suffering, afflicted by pain. He desires happiness for himself, desires joy, but the world...

Page #157:
---------------------------
## 86]
[Essential Sutras
1
There is no happiness that is not intertwined with sorrow. Because an individual, under the influence of ignorance and delusion, seeks happiness in external objects. But those objects that appear pleasant and enjoyable today, in due course, become painful, distressing, and the cause of increased sorrow and grief. The wealth that an individual acquires through deceit, fraud, and illusion, for which he works day and night, becomes the cause of the destruction of life. He also becomes a guest of the prison due to theft of taxes, etc. The son who is the apple of his parents' eye, the piece of their heart, the darling of their heart in childhood, becomes a thorn in their heart, a thorn in their eyes, a stain on their family when he grows up and becomes immoral. Even hearing his name causes pain. The head hangs in shame. If there were happiness in objects, how could one object be the cause of happiness at one time and sorrow at another? In the true sense, it is not true happiness, but an illusion of happiness. 'The cycle of suffering experienced by the soul is rooted in association.' The truth is that the soul has been suffering from time immemorial due to association with external objects that are different from the self. True happiness can only be attained through the practice of Dharma, which is in the form of the three jewels, namely right faith, right knowledge, and right conduct. Therefore, Acharya Haribhadra writes: "The path that is free from all suffering, the liberation that is the cause of it."
Sijjhanti - In Jainism, the complete development of the infinite qualities of the soul is considered to be Siddhatva. Until knowledge is infinite, vision is infinite, character is infinite, energy is infinite, i.e., until every quality is infinite, Jainism does not accept liberation. 'Sijjhanti' means that the living beings who are situated in the path mentioned become Siddhas.
Bhagavan's
-
Bujjhati - They become Buddhas. Buddha means the one who has complete knowledge. There may be a doubt here that Buddhahood is attained even before becoming a Siddha. In the course of spiritual development, in the fourteen Gunasthanas, infinite knowledge, infinite vision, etc. qualities are attained in the thirteenth Gunasthana itself, and liberation takes place after the fourteenth Gunasthana. So what is the meaning of saying Bujjhati after Sijjhanti? The solution is that complete knowledge is attained in the thirteenth Gunasthana, so according to the order of development, the place of Buddhahood is first and the place of Siddhatva is second, but the Buddhahood mentioned here after Siddhatva means that even after becoming a Siddha, Buddhahood remains, it is not destroyed. Some philosophers say that there is a lack of knowledge in liberated souls, this particular description negates their belief.
Muccianti - The word 'Muccianti' means - to be liberated from karmas. Until even a single karma-particle remains associated with the soul, liberation cannot take place. Acharya Umaswati has written in the first sutra of the tenth study of Tattvarth Sutra - "Kritsnakarmakshaya Moksha" i.e., liberation takes place when all karmas are destroyed.

Page #158:
---------------------------
## Fourth Study: Pratikraman

[87] For those seeking liberation, it is essential to first destroy the harmful karmas of Gnanavaraniya, Darshanavaraniya, Mohaniya, and Antaray. This should be done with knowledge and through the practice of Shabhakriya, as the soul purifies itself through Shabha and progresses towards purity. Eventually, through arduous practice, the light of knowledge blossoms within the soul. The remaining non-harmful karmas, namely Vedaniya, Nama, Gotra, and Ayukarma, are like a burnt rope, and they are destroyed in the short time it takes to utter five short syllables. Only then can the soul attain Siddhi.

The essence is that the soul can only become stable in its true state by breaking free from the karmic bonds that have been associated with it since time immemorial.

The principles of Karmavad and Atmavad, as propounded by Mahavira, are profound. Every seeker should gain complete knowledge about all the principles before embarking on the path of practice. This will enable the seeker to become fearless and naturally engage in practice, ultimately becoming a Siddha and a Buddha. In other words, they will attain eternal and imperishable liberation by becoming free from karma.

Liberation is one. It is the separation of the soul from the karmic bonds. Although liberation is of eight types, corresponding to the eight karmas (Gnanavaraniya, etc.), it is still one in terms of the general liberation. There is no difference. The liberation of a soul happens only once. A soul that attains liberation once will not be reborn, as the causes for rebirth are absent. Therefore, the state attained is permanent and irreversible. There is no need to regain it. Hence, liberation is one.

Parinivvayan: The soul is inherently upward-moving. Through right knowledge, right faith, and right conduct, the soul becomes pure, enlightened, perfectly pure, spotless, clear, radiant, and elevated. The soul, in its form of knowledge and faith, is the eternal principle. All other emotions, such as attachment and aversion, and the karmic body, are external and caused by association. "Anno jivo annam sariram" - the soul is different, and the body is different.

- Sutra Kritanga Sutra (2-1-9) The soul, devoid of material elements like words, forms, and sensual pleasures, is the one that can attain liberation. Jainism firmly believes that every soul possesses a great light that shines brightly. An ocean of bliss and eternal peace surges within it. When the consciousness of every dormant soul awakens, it becomes the Supreme Soul, free from attachment, and transforms from the small to the vast, from the insignificant to the great. Ultimately, it attains Parinirvana.

Nirvana cannot be praised. It is a place of indescribable, unparalleled, extraordinary supreme bliss that cannot even be imagined.

Page #159:
---------------------------
## Necessary Sutras

The **Acharanga Sutra** states: "O Gautama! There are no words to describe the bliss of liberation. Just as a mute person knows the taste of jaggery but cannot describe it, similarly, the liberated souls who have attained the **Niranjan** state experience the bliss of liberation but have no words to express it. After attaining the **Niranjan** state, all suffering ends."

## The Bliss of Liberation

Thirty-two thousand crowned kings stand in service, hands folded, awaiting orders. Is the happiness of the **Chakravarti**, the ruler of six continents, greater than the bliss of liberation? If the **Chakravarti's** happiness were greater, why would he himself abandon his vast empire and embrace the life of a mendicant? The **Chakravarti** himself considers his happiness insignificant, even trivial, compared to the bliss of liberation. The devotee, through righteous practice, attains liberation and ends all physical and mental suffering. Acharya Jinadas says, "They become the end of all bodily and mental suffering, they become free from all afflictions."

## The Importance of Faith

**Sad Dhaami** - I have faith. Faith is the foundation of life. Without faith, no human being can cross the ocean of this world. No matter how learned, knowledgeable, wise, or philosophical a person may be, if they lack **Samyaktva** (right faith) and faith in their soul, knowledge of various languages and mastery of various arts cannot liberate them from the ocean of this world. Therefore, faith is the nectar of life. Achieving any goal is not difficult, but faith or belief is rare.

"**Sad Dhaami** is extremely rare." - Uttara Sutra, Chapter 3

Without faith, a person cannot even recognize themselves. Without faith, knowledge becomes like a cripple. The truly intelligent and great are those whose every fiber is imbued with faith. Dedicated practice with unwavering focus on the goal leads to success. Single-mindedness in achieving the goal is the foundation upon which success sprouts, grows, flourishes, and bears fruit, leading to fulfillment. A person lacking single-mindedness, firm belief, and unwavering faith in their goal, no matter how hard they strive, will never succeed. Whether it be education, artistic pursuit, business, industry, or religious practice, success can only be achieved through dedicated effort with faith and belief.

There are two forms of faith: **Samyak Shraddha** (right faith) and **Andh Shraddha** (blind faith). **Samyak Shraddha** is based on reason, while **Andh Shraddha** is based on unreason. Both originate in the human heart. Just as a cow's udder...

Page #160:
---------------------------
## Fourth Study: Pratikramana

[89]

Milk is obtained from a cow, and a leech obtains blood. The location is the same. Diamond and coal are obtained from the same mine, and flowers and thorns from the same plant. What one receives depends on their vision.

There are two types of Samyak Shraddha: 
* **Vyavahar-Samkit (Shraddha)** is faith in a good Guru, good Devata, and good Dharma.
* **Nischya Samyaktv** is the faith of a Sadhak who is steadfast in Samyak Darshan, Samyak Gyan, and Samyak Charitra. This Sadhak has realized the true nature of the soul and has faith in its infinite power.

Shraddha is the first step in entering the palace of liberation.

The foundation of Sadhana is truly Samyak Darshan. Without it, the word "Dharma" cannot be associated with any action. In this text, the Sadhak vows that they have faith, understanding, and belief in the Dharma taught by the Vitarag. They also vow to have affection and interest in it.

**Fasem-Palem-Anupalem:** Jain Darshan does not consider only faith and understanding as the cause of achieving the goal. Climbing the first step and staying there will not allow entry into the palace of liberation. The Agamkaras have instructed the Sadhak to move forward with Samyak Shraddha, to climb higher, and to vow to touch the Dharma, to follow it in every situation throughout life, and to protect the accepted Dharma even in favorable and unfavorable circumstances. They vow to firmly follow the Dharma practiced by the previous Aaptapurushas.

The Mumukhu Sadhak repeats this vow again and again. Only then can they succeed in their goal. Just as a tailor uses thread along with a needle to make a piece of cloth whole, similarly, conduct is essential along with Samyaktv (Shraddha).

**Abbhuttiomi:** In this text, the Sadhak vows to be fully prepared for the worship of Dharma, standing firm in the field of Dharma worship, with faith, affection, understanding, touch, following, and adherence to Dharma.

**Jn-Parijna and Pratyakhyan-Parijna:** The Acharaanga and other Agam literature mention two types of Parijna: 
* **Jn-Parijna:** Knowing the nature of the Heya, Upadeshya, and Jneya substances.
* **Pratyakhyan-Parijna:** Rejecting and abandoning the Heya.

There are two types of Pratyakhyan: 
1. **Supratyakhyan**
2. **Dushtpratyakhyan**

Knowing the nature of Pratyakhyan and the nature of the substances that are rejected...

Page #161:
---------------------------
## 90]
**Essential Sutra**

Rejection that is done with proper understanding is called **Supratyakhyan**. Rejection done without understanding the nature of the object is called **Duspratyakhyan**.

It is essential to first understand the nature of **Asanyam** (non-restraint), **Pranatipat** (violence), **Abrahmacharya** (non-celibacy), **Maithunavritti** (sexual activity), **Akalp-Akrit** (non-virtuous actions), **Agnan-Mithyagnan** (ignorance-false knowledge), **Akriya-Asatkriya** (non-action-false action), **Mithyatva** (falsehood), etc., which are all self-defeating and unfavorable behaviors. Only then can we abandon them and embrace **Sanyam** (restraint), **Brahmacharya** (celibacy), **Krit** (virtuous actions), **Samyaggnan** (right knowledge), etc. How can we abandon something without knowing what it is, its nature, the harm it causes, and the benefits of abandoning it? Therefore, **Gyan-Parigya** (knowledge-understanding) is absolutely essential before **Pratyakhyan-Parigya** (rejection-understanding). Even the most rigorous actions and intense external practices of an ignorant seeker only lead to further worldly wandering.

In the text "**Asanjam parianami, sanjam uvasampjjam**", the action "**parianami**" signifies not just knowing or abandoning, but a combined meaning of "**knowing and abandoning**".

Acharya Jinasena also says, "**Parianamitti gyan-parinaya janami, pacchakkhan-parinaya pacchakkhami**".

**Akapp-Kapp** - **Kapp** means conduct. Therefore, conduct in the form of **charan-karan** (actions and speech) is called **Kapp** in the language of the scriptures. **Akkapp** is the opposite. The seeker vows that they know and abandon **Akkapp-Akrit** (non-virtuous actions) and embrace **Kapp-Krit** (virtuous actions).

Acharya Jinasena has divided the single **Asanyam** (non-restraint) into two categories based on specific intentions: **Mulagun-Asanyam** (non-restraint of the root qualities) and **Uttaragun-Asanyam** (non-restraint of the secondary qualities). He then uses the word **Abrahm** to refer to **Mulagun-Asanyam** and **Akkapp** to refer to **Uttaragun-Asanyam**. According to Acharya Shri, the form of the vow is: "I abandon **Mulagun-Asanyam** with discernment and embrace **Mulagun-Sanyam** (restraint of the root qualities)."

**Annan-Nan** - **Agnan** (ignorance) here does not refer to the absence of knowledge due to the arising of **Gnanavaranakarma** (karma that obscures knowledge), but rather to **Mithyagnan** (false knowledge). If we interpret it as the absence of knowledge, then the question of abandoning it does not arise. How can we abandon something that does not exist?

Knowledge is obtained through the destruction or suppression of **Gnanavaranakarma**, and **Mithyatva** (falsehood) arises, making it false.

1. "**Akalp-akritma-akhyayate kalpastukritamiti**" - Acharya Haribhadra
2. "**So ya asanjam visesato duviho-mula-gun-asanjamo uttaragun-asanjamo ya. Ato samannena bhanuun sanvegadya-arth visesato cheva bhanati abham abham-ggahnena mula-gun bhananti tti evam .... akapp-ggahnena uttaragunati**" - Avasyakachurni

Page #162:
---------------------------
## Fourth Study: Pratikramana

[91]

This false knowledge is called ignorance here. The knowledge that accompanies right faith is called right knowledge. It is called knowledge here.

Akriya-Kriya - I know and abandon non-action, which is nihilism. Acharya Haribhadra considers non-action as a special kind of ignorance and action as a kind of knowledge - "Akriya Nastikavada: Kriya Samyagvada." Not believing in the world, the afterlife, dharma, and adharma is nihilism. Conversely, believing in the world, the afterlife, dharma, and adharma is theism.

According to Acharya Jinadas - "Appasatta Kiriya Akriya, Itara Kiriya Iti." That is, inappropriate action is called non-action and appropriate action is called action.

Michchatt-Sammatt - There are eighteen types of sins. The last, eighteenth sin is false belief. False belief is the only sin that nourishes, protects, and increases all other sins. It is the result of this that the soul has had to endure all the suffering of birth, death, etc. from time immemorial. As long as there is false belief, all sins are safe.

False belief keeps one trapped in the cycle of existence, while right belief grants the ultimate happiness of liberation and makes the soul a supreme soul. False belief is destructive, while right belief is liberating and protective. Thus, the seeker understands the nature of false belief and right belief, abandons false belief, and accepts right belief.

Abodhi-Bodhi - "Abodhih - Mithyatvakarya, Bodhistu Samyaktvasyeti."
- Acharya Haribhadra

Abodhi is the work of false belief, and Bodhi is the work of right belief.

Holding onto false beliefs, being attached to worldly pleasures, criticizing dharma, speaking ill of the liberated Arihant Bhagwan, etc. are the works of false belief. Holding onto truth, being indifferent to worldly pleasures, having firm faith in dharma, having love and compassion for all beings, etc. are the works of right belief. To know and understand Abodhi and abandon it, and to accept Bodhi.

Amagga-Magga - I know and abandon the wrong path, such as violence, and accept the right path, such as non-violence, the path of liberation. Or, I abandon the wrong path, which is opposed to Jainism, such as the path of the Parsva sect and the path followed by the heretics, and accept the path of the three jewels, knowledge, faith, and conduct.

What I hold, and what I do not hold.

Page #163:
---------------------------
## 92]
[Essential Sutra]
What I remember, and what I do not remember - the desire of the human mind from time immemorial has been to move its steps towards progress. Whether a student or a businessman, whether an artist or any other seeker, he wants his continuous development and his steps to move forward. But one thing to keep in mind is that the real progress of man is not in increasing wealth, gaining fame, becoming a scholar by acquiring material knowledge, or becoming a leader, but in increasing spiritual qualities. To increase spiritual qualities, it is necessary to keep observing one's mistakes or faults. As long as the seeker is in a state of delusion, filled with karmic actions, it is natural for faults to exist in life. That mistake or fault may be in knowledge or unknowingly, i.e. there is a memory of restraint or fault and sometimes there is no memory. The seeker repents for all of them. Thus, by repenting knowingly, the seeker progresses.
The portion of the sutra from 'Jan Sambharami' to 'Jan Cha Na Padikkamami' is related to 'Tass Savvas Devasiyass Aiyarass Padikkamami'. The meaning of the present sutra is that I repent for all those daily transgressions that I remember or do not remember, that I repent for or do not repent for.
Doubt - What does it mean to repent for those I repent for? Repenting for repentance itself does not seem logical?
Acharya Jinasena has given a beautiful solution to the above doubt. He interprets 'Padikkamami' as 'Pariharami' - 'Sanghayanaadi-Daurballyaadin Jan Padikkamami-Pariharami Karanijan, Jan Cha Na Padikkamami Akaranijan.'
- Aavashyakachurni - i.e. if due to some special circumstances like physical weakness etc., I have left a good deed that I should have done - i.e. not done, and done a deed that I should not have done, then I repent for all that transgression.
Samanoham Sanjay-Viray Padihay... The meaning of this portion of the sutra is - "I am a Shraman, I am a restrained, abstinent, restrained, rejected sinner, I am without attachment, I am endowed with vision, and I am free from illusion and falsehood."
The word 'Shraman' is derived from the root 'Shram'. It means to work hard. Acharya Haribhadra, while revealing the essence of the third verse of the first study of the Dashaevaalik Sutra, interprets Shraman as an ascetic. One who...

Page #164:
---------------------------
## Fourth Study: Pratikraman

Those who attain liberation through effort and penance are called Shramanas.

The meaning of "Sanjata" is "one who makes proper effort in restraint." The seeker should always make proper effort in duties like non-violence, truthfulness, etc. "Sanjato-samman jato, karaniyeshu yogeshhu samyak prayatnapara ity arthah."

One who is "Virat" is free from all kinds of harmful yogas, meaning they denounce past sins and remain free from all sins by being vigilant for the future.

The meaning of "Virat" is:

- **Pratihat-pratyakhyat-papakarma:** One who destroys past sins through denouncement and condemnation, and abandons future sins through the vow of renunciation. This symbolizes the seeker's purification of life in all three times.

The meaning of "Sadhana" is:

- **Trikal vijayi:** To be victorious over sinful karma in all three times. As it is said: "Padihatan atita nidanam - garhanadinihim, pacchakkhatam sesam akaranataya pavakarma pavacharam yena sa tatha." - Acharya Jinadas

**Anidana:** The meaning of "Nidana" is the desire for complete attainment with certainty. The meaning of "Anidana" is penance and other practices performed without attachment. For example, if a merchant wants to buy goods worth a lakh rupees, he can buy the desired goods if he has more than a lakh rupees or exactly a lakh rupees. But if he has less than a lakh rupees, he will not be able to buy goods worth a lakh rupees. Similarly, if the seeker has an abundance of virtuous karma, he can attain complete Siddhi by performing "Nidana." Otherwise, he cannot. But that Siddhi is exhausted in the same birth. As a result of "Nidana," the soul has to be born in a lower realm. According to the Agamkaras, Vasudevas and Prativa-sudevas attain Siddhi like the kingdom of Trikhand through "Nidana." After that, they descend. Therefore, the instruction of the Lokottara Aapta Purushas for the seekers is that they should perform penance without "Nidana" and vow that they have no attachment to the alluring enjoyments of the world, their practice is only for self-purification, their goal is not bondage but liberation. With such a firm resolve, the seeker can achieve the goal through his practice.

**Drishtisampanna:** The meaning of "Drishtisampanna" is one who is endowed with pure vision in the form of Samyagdarshan. It is essential for the seeker aspiring for liberation to have pure vision. Because without Samyagdarshan, the seeker cannot have true discernment of what is beneficial and what is harmful. Only a seeker with Samyagdarshan can avoid the ten types of false beliefs. Only a seeker with pure vision can investigate truth and reality. Samyagdarshan is indeed the root of all virtues. "Ditthisampanno" - meaning "Savvaguna-mulbhaataguṇayuktatvam." - Acharya Jinadas

A soul with Samyagdarshan can see everything as it is, even while living in the world, not with a false vision. For example...

Page #165:
---------------------------
## 94]
[Essential Sutra]

Even when enclosed in a box of pure glass, a person can see the objects outside, but a person enclosed in an iron box cannot see. A swimmer, who remembers the art of swimming, can reach the bottom of deep water and even with tons of water on his head, he will not drown, but one who is ignorant of the art of swimming can drown in a little water. In Jainism, sadhana (spiritual practice) begins only from the fourth gunasthana (stage of spiritual progress) called Aviratsamyaagdristi.

Maya-Mrishvivarjit - Maya devoid of falsehood. Maya-Mrish is the seventeenth Mahapapa (great sin) among the eighteen Mahapapas. It is the first of the three Shalya (spiritual thorns). Just as a thorn pierces deep into the foot and is not visible, but the traveler cannot move forward on the path due to the prick of the thorn, similarly, a Mayaavi (deceitful) sadhak, who hides his faults, cannot take even a single step on the path of sadhana for the attainment of his goal. Just as a snake and a rope cannot be recognized in the dark, similarly, a person deluded by Maya cannot recognize Adharma (unrighteousness) and Dharma (righteousness). Therefore, a sadhak should purify himself by criticizing and atoning for his past sins in the present. If there is a boil in a healthy body, a doctor can remove the pus by surgery with a scalpel. If only ointment is applied without surgery, the pus can spread throughout the body.

Adhhaijjesu Deevasamuddesu

At the end of this text, all the sadhus (ascetics) residing in the two and a half islands and fifteen karmabhoomis (fields of action) are saluted with a bow of the head. The meaning is:

1. Jambudweep, Dhaatki Khandadweep and Ardha Pushkardweep, and in comparison to them, the Lavana and Kalodadhi oceans and the fifteen regions - karmabhoomis are the fields of sadhana of Shraman Dharma. There are no humans in the further regions, nor is there any sadhana of Shraman Dharma. Therefore, I bow to all the sadhus, sadhvis, rajoharan, punjani and pratigrah (those who accept offerings), the followers of the five great vows and the holders of eighteen thousand sheelangarath, and those who are Akshat Aacharavan - Adhakarma etc. who avoid 42 doshas (faults) while taking food, those who avoid 47 doshas while taking food, those who follow the Akhand Aachar (unbroken conduct), such sthavirakalpi, jinkalpi muniraj with my head, mind and forehead.

-

In the present sutra, the text 'Shirasa, Manasa, Matthaena Vandami' comes. It means - I bow with my head, mind and forehead. The question may arise that head and forehead are the same, then why are they mentioned separately? The answer to this question is: The head is the main part of the whole body. Therefore, bowing with the head means bowing with the body. Mind is the inner consciousness, therefore it is indicative of mental bowing.

Page #166:
---------------------------
##  95
**Fourth Study: Pratikraman**

"Matthaena Vandami" means "I bow my head in reverence." This is a form of verbal veneration, therefore, there is no repetition error as it indicates the nature of mental, verbal, and physical veneration.

According to Jainism, ego is the cause of bondage of the lower-caste karma, and humility leads to the bondage of the higher-caste karma. Therefore, those who are humble, respect elders, and hold a reverent attitude towards the virtuous are the highest and the best. Jainism is a worshipper of virtues. In Jainism, humility and modesty are called penance. It is said, "Vinayo Jinasaasanamulam," "Vinayamolo Dhammo."

Humility is the root of the Jain teachings, humility is the root of Dharma.

The Dashavaikalik Sutra also praises the virtue of humility. In the study of humility, it is said using the metaphor of a tree:

"Khandhao Paccha Samuventi Saaha. Tao Se Pushpancha Phalam Raso Ya. Mulam Paramo Se Mokkho. Kitti Suyam Sigdham, Nisssansam Chaabhigacchai."

"Just as from the root of a tree, the trunk, from the trunk the branches, from the branches the sub-branches, and then in order, leaves, flowers, fruits, and juice are produced, in the same way, the root of the Dharma tree is humility, and its final fruit and juice is liberation."

"Vinayo Saasane Mulam, Vinio Sanjao Bhawe. Vinayaou Vippamukkasssa, Kao Dhammo Kao Tavo."

The root of the Jain teachings is humility. Only a humble seeker can be a true ascetic. What is the Dharma and what is the penance of one who is devoid of humility?

The ego, arrogance, and lack of discipline of a disciple make the Guru's mind unhappy. The Uttaradhyayanasutra states:

"Ramae Pandie Saasan, Hayam Bhaddam Va Vahaae. Balam Sammai Saasantho, Galiyassan Va Vahaae."

"Just as the teacher of a good horse is happy, so too, the Guru is happy in teaching humble disciples. But the teacher of a bad horse and the Guru of an undisciplined disciple are unhappy."

Humility is a beautiful ornament of human life. It makes a person's virtues fragrant. Humility...

Page #167:
---------------------------
## 96]
[Essential Sutra]

This sutra pays homage to the Muni Rajas, who uphold the unbroken conduct and character, with the head, mind, and heart, or vows to do so. Eighteen thousand Shilaangas - the scholars have explained the eighteen thousand Shilaangas in this way:

"Joga karane sanna, indiya bhommai samandhamme ya.
Annonnehi abbatha, attarasa sila sahasai."

Meaning, three Yogas, three Karanas, four Sanjnas, five Indriyas, ten types of Prithvikaaya and other beings, and ten Shraman Dharma - multiplying all these together results in eighteen thousand types of Shila.

The meaning of "Shila" is "Achar" (conduct). From the perspective of difference and non-difference, there are eighteen thousand types of Achar. The ten types of Shraman Dharma are: Kshama (forgiveness), Nirlobhata (non-greed), Saralata (simplicity), Mrudutva (gentleness), Laghva (lightness), Satya (truthfulness), Samyama (self-control), Tap (austerity), Tyaga (renunciation), and Brahmacharya (celibacy).

The Muni, who upholds the ten Shraman Dharmas, does not begin with the five stationary beings like Prithvikaaya, the four Trasas like Dwiindriya, and the one Ajeeva - thus, there are ten beginnings.

The eighteen thousand Shilaanga chariot is as follows: 1. Prithvikaaya beginning, 2. Apkaaya beginning, 3. Tejaskaaya beginning, 4. Vayukaaya beginning, 5. Vanaspatikaaya beginning, 6. Dwiindriya beginning, 7. Triindriya beginning, 8. Chaturindriya beginning, 9. Panchendriya beginning, 10. Ajeeva beginning. These ten types are for Shanti (peace). Similarly, for Mukti (liberation), Arjava (straightforwardness), and Brahmacharya, there are 100 types each with Shrotrendriya. Similarly, there are 100 types each with Chakshusindriya, Ghranendriya, Rasnendriya, and Sparshendriya. All these are 500 types for Aharasanjna. Similarly, there are 500 types each for Bhayasanjna, Maithunasanjna, and Parigrahasanjna. All these are 2000 types. By not doing, not causing to do, and not approving, these are tripled to 6000 types. Then, by tripling these with mind, speech, and body, there are 18000 types of Shilaanga chariot.

The text of the Great Sanlekhana:

"Ah Bhanta! Apchhimmaraananthiya Sanlehana Jhushana Arahana Paushadhashala Punje, Punje ke Ucchaarpasaavanbhumika Padhilehe, Padhileh ke, Gamanagaman, Padikkama, Padikkama ke, Darbhadik Santhara Santhare, Santhara ke Darbhadik Santhara Duruhe, Duruhe ke Purva tatha Uttar Disha Sanmukh Palyankadik Asan se Baithe, Baithe ke 'Karayalsanpariggihiyam Siraasavattm Matthaaye Anjali Kattu Evam Vayasi 'Namotthunan Arihantaan Bhagavantan Jaav Sampattan' Aise Anant Sidd Bhagavan Ko Namaskar Karke, 'Namotthunan Arihantaan Bhagavantan Jaav Sampaviukamaan' Jayavante Vartaman Kale Mahavideh Kshetra mein Vicharate Huye Tirthankar Bhagavan Ko Namaskar Karke Apne Dharmaacharyaji Maharaj Ko Namaskar Karta Hoon. Sadhu Sadhvi Pramukh Charon Tirth Ko Khamakar, Sarva Jeeva Rashee Ko Khamakar, Pehle Jo Vrat Adare Hain Unmein Jo Atichara Dosha Lage Hon, Ve Sarva..."

Page #168:
---------------------------
Fourth Study: Pratikramana

[97]

Alochana, Parikarma, Nindana - becoming free from blemish, I renounce all injury to living beings, all falsehood, all taking of what is not given, all sexual pleasure, all attachment, all anger, pride, and so on up to the delusion of false belief, all inauspicious activities. For as long as I live, I will not do, cause to be done, or consent to these eighteen iniquities in any of the three ways (by mind, speech, or body).

I renounce all food, drink, edibles, and beverages. For as long as I live, I renounce these four kinds of sustenance.

This body of mine, which is dear, pleasant, agreeable, and charming, may it not be affected by cold, heat, hunger, thirst, insects, thieves, weapons, wind, bile, phlegm, or any kind of ailment or calamity.

With my last breaths, I relinquish this body. Thus is my faith, thus is my exposition. When I touch (the earth), may I be purified. Such is my final Sallekhana, Jhusana, and Aradhana. The five Aticaras (transgressions) are to be known and not to be committed, namely, those related to this world, the next world, life, death, and sensual pleasures. That is a grave offense.

The meaning is: When death is imminent, one should lovingly practice the austerity of Sallekhana. First, one should clean the place of penance. One should renounce the act of evacuation. After performing Pratikramana, facing the east or north, one should sit on a seat of Darbha grass, etc., and joining the palms, bowing the head, recite "Namo-tthuna Arihantanam Bhagavantanam..." and pay obeisance to the Siddha Bhagavans. Then, reciting "Namo-tthuna Arihantanam Bhagavantanam..." one should pay obeisance to the Tirthankaras currently residing in the Mahavideha region. Next, one should pay obeisance to one's spiritual preceptor. One should seek forgiveness from the fourfold Sangha (of monks, nuns, laymen, and laywomen) and then seek forgiveness from all living beings. One should confess and denounce the transgressions committed in the vows previously observed. One should renounce the five sins (of violence, falsehood, theft, sexual pleasure, and attachment) and the eighteen iniquities (of anger, pride, deceit, greed, and so on up to the delusion of false belief) in the three ways (of mind, speech, and body). For the rest of one's life, one should renounce the four kinds of sustenance. After that, one should detach oneself from the affection for this body, which is dear, pleasant, agreeable, and charming, and, purifying oneself through Sallekhana, Jhusana, and Aradhana, one should undertake pure fasting.

Page #169:
---------------------------
[98]
[Essential Sutras]
Beloved, dear. Manuṇṇam - pleasing, beautiful. Maṇām - extremely beautiful. Dhijam - worthy of bearing, courageous. Visāsiyam - trustworthy. Sammayam - honored. Aṇumayam - highly honored. Bahumayam - greatly honored. Bhaṇḍakaraṇḍagasamaṇam - like a casket of ornaments. Rayaṇakaraṇḍagabhūyam - like a casket of jewels. Mā ṇam sīyam - may there be no cold. Mā ṇ uṇham - may there be no heat. Mā ṇam khuhā - may there be no hunger. Mā ṇam pivāsā - may there be no thirst. Mā ṇam vālasarpa na kāṭe - may there be no snake bite. Mā ṇam corā - may there be no fear of thieves. Mā ṇam dansamasagā - may there be no torment from mosquitoes and flies. Māṇ vāhiyam - may there be no diseases. Pittiyam - bile. Kapiyam - phlegm. Sambhiyam - fearful. Sannivāiyam - epidemic. Viviha - various kinds of. Rogāyankā - disease and terror. Parisahā - suffering from hunger etc. Uvassaṇgā - upsarga (suffering inflicted by gods, animals etc.). Phāsā phusantu - may they be connected. Caramehiṁ - in the end. Ussāsanissāsehiṁ - with breaths (inhalation and exhalation). Vosirāmi - I renounce. Tti kaṭu - by doing so. Kālam aṇavakankhamane - not desiring time. Viharami - I wander, I roam. Ihalokāsansappaoge - desiring the pleasures of this world, such as emperors. Paralokāsansappaoge - desiring the pleasures of the other world, such as Indra. Jīviyāsansappaoge - desiring to live. Maraṇāsansappaoge - desiring to die without seeing glory, worship, or due to extreme suffering. Kāmabhogāsansappaoge - desiring sensual pleasures. Mā - do not. Majjha - my. Huja - be. Maraṇante vi - even after death. Saḍḍhāparūvaṇammi - in the establishment of faith. Annabhāvo - opposite feeling. Salutations to the five categories:

First category: Sri Arihant Bhagwan, the least twenty Tirthankaras, the most excellent one hundred sixty and one hundred seventy Devadhidevajis, among them, in the present time, twenty Viharmanjis wander in the Mahavideha Kshetra. The bearer of one thousand eight Lakshanas, thirty-four Atishayas, thirty-five Vani Gunas, seated in majesty, worthy of worship by sixty-four Indras, free from eighteen faults, possessing twelve qualities, infinite knowledge, infinite character, infinite strength and power, infinite happiness, divine sound, Bhamandala, crystal throne, Ashoka tree, flower rain, divine drums, umbrella held, chowri waved, the bearer of the power of human form, wandering in two and a half islands and fifteen Kshetras, the least two crore Kevalis and the most excellent nine crore Kevalis, the bearer of Kevalgyan, Kevaldarshan, the knower of all substances, fields, time, and emotions -

Such Sri Arihant Bhagwan Maharaj, if you have any disrespect or desire for my day and night, then O Arihant Bhagwan! Forgive my offense repeatedly. With folded hands, bowed head, and bowed head, I offer salutations one thousand eight times with the Tikkhutto text.
(Here, recite the Tikkhutto text)

Page #170:
---------------------------
## Fourth Study: Pratikraman

**[99]**

You are auspicious, supreme, O Lord! O Master! You are always a refuge in this life, the next life, and all lives.

**Second Verse:**

The glorious Siddha Bhagavan are infinite in number, classified into fifteen categories: Tirtha Siddha, Atirtha Siddha, Tirthankara Siddha, Atirthankara Siddha, Swayambuddha Siddha, Pratyekabuddha Siddha, Buddhabodhita Siddha, Strilinga Siddha, Purushaling Siddha, Napumsakaling Siddha, Swaling Siddha, Anyaling Siddha, Grihasthalingsiddha, Ekasiddha, Anekasiddha. They are born without birth, without aging, without death, without fear, without disease, without sorrow, without suffering, without poverty, without karma, without body, without delusion, without Maya, without servant, without master, without hunger, without thirst, they are the light within the light, they have accomplished all tasks, and have become infinite Siddha Bhagavan in fourteen ways, classified into fifteen categories. They possess eight qualities: infinite knowledge, infinite vision, क्षायिक सम्यक्त्व, infinite bliss, unshakeable अवगाहना, formless, without weight, infinite energy.

O glorious Siddha Bhagavan, if I have committed any unintentional offense against you during the day, please forgive me. I fold my hands, bow my head, and offer salutations with the Tikkhutto mantra one thousand and eight times. May you be my refuge in all lives, forever.

**Third Verse:**

The glorious Acharya Maharaj are adorned with thirty-six qualities, they observe the five great vows, the five conducts, they have conquered the five senses, they have abandoned the four passions, they observe pure celibacy with the nine restraints, they are pure in the five समिति, the three गुप्ति, and in their worship. They possess these thirty-six qualities and eight possessions: (1) आचारसम्पदा, (2) श्रुतसम्पदा, (3) शरीरसम्पदा, (4) वचनसम्पदा, (5) वाचनासम्पदा, (6) मतिसम्पदा, (7) प्रयोगमतिसम्पदा, (8) परिज्ञासम्पदा.

The glorious Acharya Maharaj are just, benevolent, renunciant, detached, great in qualities, and devoted to qualities. O glorious Acharya Maharaj, if I have committed any unintentional offense against you during the day and night, please forgive me. I fold my hands, bow my head, and offer salutations with the Tikkhutto mantra one thousand and eight times. May you be my refuge in all lives, forever.

**Fourth Verse:**

The glorious Upadhyaya Maharaj possess twenty-five qualities (including the eleven Angas, twelve Upangas, Charanasattari, Karanasattari) and know the Angas and Upangas Sutras with their original meaning.

The eleven Angas are: Acharanga, Suyagadaanga, Thanaanga, Samavayaanga, Vivahapannaati (Bhagavati), Nayaadhammakah (Jnatadharmakatha), Upasakadasa, Antagadadasa, Anuttarovavai, Panhavaagaran (Prashnavyakaran), Vivaagsu (Vipak Shruta).

The twelve Upangas are: Uvavai, Rayappaseni, Jivajivabhigam, Pannavanaa, Jambudvippapannaati, Chandapannaati, Surapannaati, Nirayavaliya, Kappavadansya, Pufphya, Pufph Chuliya, Vahnidasha.

Page #171:
---------------------------
## Essential Sutras
Four main sutras: Uttarajjhayana (Uttaraadhyayana), Dasaveyalisuutta (Dashavaikalika Sutra), Nandisuuta (Nandi Sutra), Anuoagaddaar (Anuyogadwar).
[100]
Four Chhed Sutras: Dasasuyaakkhando (Dasha Shruta Skandha), Vihadakkappo (Vridhatkalpa), Vavhaarasuutta (Vyavahar Sutra), Nisiihasuutta (Nishith Sutra) and Battisavaan Aavssagan (Aavashyak) and seven Nayas, four Nipekshas, knowing one's own opinion and others' opinions, not a Jina but like a Jina, not a Kevali but like a Kevali.

Such Shri Upadhyaya Ji Maharaj, who removes the darkness of Mithyatva, who illuminates the light of Samkiti, who stabilizes the beings who are falling from Dharma, who possesses many qualities like Saare, Waare, Dhaare, etc. If you have any desire for my service day and night, then repeatedly, O Upadhyaya Ji Maharaj! Forgive my offenses. With folded hands, bowing my head, I offer salutations one thousand and eight times with the recitation of Tikkhutto. May I be your refuge forever in all births.

In the fifth verse, "Namo Loe Savvasahunam", in the world of two and a half islands and fifteen regions, all the Sadhu Ji Maharaj, the lowest two thousand crore, the highest nine thousand crore, dwell in victory. They have five great vows, conquer five senses, avoid four passions, are true in thought, true in action, true in yoga, forgiving, detached, have control over mind, control over speech, control over body, are endowed with knowledge, endowed with vision, endowed with conduct, are free from the fear of birth, free from the fear of death, possess these twenty-seven qualities. They follow five principles of conduct, protect six bodies, abandon eight types of pride, practice ten types of Yati Dharma, perform twelve types of austerities, follow seventeen types of restraints, conquer twenty-two types of temptations, avoid forty-two faults while taking food and water, avoid forty-nine faults while enjoying, avoid fifty-two types of misconduct, are not affected by the three types of desires, are not bound by the three types of attachments, are renunciants in thought, enjoyers in action, etc., free from attachment and ego.

Such Muni Raj Maharaj, if you have any desire for my service day and night, then repeatedly, O Muni Raj! Forgive my offenses. With folded hands, bowing my head, I offer salutations one thousand and eight times with the recitation of Tikkhutto. May I be your refuge forever in all births.

The recitation of Darshan Samyaktva:
Arihanto Mah Devo, Javjjiivam Susahuno Guruno. Jinpannatta Tatta, Iya Sammatta Mae Vahiyam. Paramatthasanthavo Va Sudiṭṭhaparamatthasevana Vaavi. Vaavanna- Kudansana- Vajjana Gna Sammattasaddahana.

Iya Sammattasssa Panch Aiyaara Peyala Janiyavva Na Samayriyavva, Tan Jaha Te Aaloum Sanka, Kankha, Vitigicchha, Par- Pasandapasanssa, Parapasandasanthavo.

Page #172:
---------------------------
## Fourth Study: Pratikraman

[101]
If any transgression has been committed regarding the subject of the Samyak Ratna substance, then I criticize: 1. Doubt in the words of the Jina, 2. Desire for display, 3. Praise of the heretic, 4. Introduction to the heretic, 5. Doubt in the fruits of Dharma. If such a stain of falsehood has been attached to my Samyakta-Ratna, then may it be destroyed.

**Meaning:** The Tirthankara, the victorious one, who has conquered the internal enemies like attachment and aversion, is my deity. The Nirgrantha Guru, who practices restraint throughout life, is my teacher. And the Dharma, as taught by the Jineshwara Deva, the liberated one, that is, non-violence, truth, etc., is my religion. I have accepted this vow of Samyakta, which is the essence of faith in the deity, guru, and Dharma, for my entire life. May I have the knowledge of the soul and other substances, may I receive the service of the sadhus who are well-versed in the soul and other principles and the secrets of the doctrine, may I never associate with those who are corrupted from Samyakta and are false, may my faith in Samyakta remain steadfast.

I criticize myself if I have doubted the words of the liberated one, if I have desired something that is not taught by the liberated one, if I have doubted the fruits of Dharma, or if I have felt disgust upon seeing the clothes, utensils, or body of the sadhus and sadhvis, the great souls, if I have praised the heretic upon seeing his miracles, and if I have introduced myself to the heretic. May all my sins be nullified.

**Guru-Guna-Smaraṇa-Sutra**

Panchidhiya-Samvarano, Tah Navavih-Bhambache-Guttidharo. Chauvvih-Kasaya-Mukko, Ia Attarasa-Gunahin Sanjutto. Panch Mahavvaya-Jutto, Panch Vihayar-Palana-Samatyyo. Panch-Samio-Tigutto, Chhattisguno Guru Majjha.

**Meaning:** My Guru is the supreme sadhu who controls the outward movement of the five senses, who holds the nine secrets of celibacy, the nine enclosures, who is free from the four types of passions, who is endowed with eighteen qualities, who is united with the five great vows, who is capable of upholding the five conducts, who holds the five samitis and three secrets, and who possesses these thirty-six qualities.

Page #173:
---------------------------
##  English Translation:

**[Necessary Sutra]**

**Doha**

Infinite are the twenty-four Tirthankaras, infinite are the Siddhas.
The Kevala Jnani, the Ganadharas, I bow to them with folded hands. ||1||

Two types of Kevala Jnani, twenty Tirthankaras wandering.
Thousands of pairs of Tirthankaras, the Sadhus, the Nishidis. ||2||

Wealth is the Sadhu, wealth is the Sadhvi, wealth is the Jain Dharma.
These destroy all sins, break all eight karmas. ||3||

Always remember the Arihants, the Siddhas, the Acharyas, the Upadhyayas.
I bow to the feet of all the Sadhus, with my head bowed. ||4||

Remember the Shasana Nayaka, the Bhagvant Veer Jinendra.
He removes all obstacles, grants supreme bliss. ||5||

Amrit resides in the thumb, the treasure of attainment.
Remember Shri Guru Gautam, the giver of desired fruits. ||6||

Guru and Govind both stand, to whom should I bow?
I am indebted to Gurudev, who showed me Govind. ||7||

A greedy Guru cannot save you, he is not your savior.
If you desire liberation, then embrace a selfless Guru. ||8||

The Sadhu, the Sati, the warrior, the Jnani, the elephant tusk.
They do not leave you, even if you fall into the abyss of time. ||9||

The Guru is the lamp, the Guru is the moonlight, without the Guru, there is utter darkness.
Do not forget this, the Guru is the foundation of my life. ||10||

**[Forgiveness Sutra]**

**Aayari-Uvajjae**

With folded hands, I bow to the entire Kula-Gana.
If I have committed any offense, I forgive all with my whole heart. ||1||

To the entire Saman Sangha, I offer my salutations with folded hands.
I forgive all, even the unforgivable. ||2||

To all living beings, with a mind filled with Dharma,
I forgive all, even the unforgivable. ||3||

Page #174:
---------------------------
## Fourth Study: Pratikraman

**(Mranasamadhi - Prakirnak and Sanstarak - Prakirnak)**

I seek forgiveness with my mind, speech, and body for whatever I have done wrong due to anger, hatred, or ungratefulness, or due to attachment. || 4 ||

**Meaning:** I seek forgiveness from the Acharya, Upadhyaya, Shishya, Sadharmik, Kula, and Gan for any wrong I have done to them with my mind, speech, and body. || 1 ||

With folded hands, I seek forgiveness from all the revered Muni-gan for my offenses, and I also forgive them. || 2 ||

[103]

With my mind fixed on Dharma, I seek forgiveness from all beings for my offenses, and I also forgive them. || 3 ||

I seek forgiveness from all with my mind, speech, and body for whatever I have said due to attachment, hatred, ungratefulness, or insistence. || 4 ||

May all beings forgive me. I have no enmity towards anyone. I bow to the twenty-four Tirthankaras, acknowledging my blame, criticism, reproach, and disgust.

I seek forgiveness from all beings, I am a friend to all beings. Thus, I am aware, I have performed Pratikraman with my mind, speech, and body.

**Meaning:** If I have wronged any being, I seek forgiveness from them. May all beings forgive me. I am a friend to all beings in the world, I have no enmity or opposition towards anyone.

I perform Pratikraman with my mind, speech, and body, acknowledging my sins through criticism, blame, reproach, and disgust. I am free from sins and bow to the twenty-four Tirthankaras.

**Discussion:** The mind is a storehouse of emotions. It contains countless auspicious and inauspicious emotions. As a result of these auspicious and inauspicious emotions, countless karma particles bind with the soul every moment. Auspicious emotions lead to auspicious karma, and inauspicious emotions lead to inauspicious karma. Due to these bonds, the soul has been wandering in the fourteen realms of the universe, in the eighty-four lakh species of beings, experiencing temporary pleasures and pains since time immemorial. The soul has endured much pain and suffering compared to pleasure. After countless births, the soul has attained the ten boons of the Aryakshetra, the noble lineage, the human birth, etc. It has also received the opportunity to hear the words of the liberated ones and to associate with the saints.

1. **Savva jive su, iti jinadas mahattarah.**

Page #175:
---------------------------
## 104]

[This is an essential sutra. Now there is a need to understand the nature of karma and the soul, i.e., the inert and the conscious, with unwavering faith, and to implement the motives for self-elevation in life.
The first motive in the causes of self-welfare is the virtue of forgiveness. The scripture says -
There are ten types of ascetic virtues, as follows: 1. Patience, 2. Liberation, 3. Non-attachment, 4. Humility, 5. Lightness, 6. Truthfulness, 7. Self-control, 8. Austerity, 9. Compassion, 10. Brahma-charia.
- Samvayanga Sutra Lord Mahavira, the क्षमाश्रमण, has mentioned forgiveness as the first among the ten types of ascetic virtues. Forgiveness is an essential need in the life of a seeker. Without forgiveness, a person cannot live a happy and peaceful life in any field. In fact, 'forgiveness' is a natural quality of man, which should not be abandoned by man in any situation. The influence of forgiveness and love can change even cruel hearts - "Forgiveness is the power of control in the world, what is not achievable by forgiveness?"
- Subhashit Sanchay i.e. Forgiveness is the mantra of control in the world, what is not achieved by forgiveness? The greatest penance is forgiveness itself. 'Kshantitulyaṁ tapo nāsti' - There is no penance equal to forgiveness.
Seekers who have a firm resolve for the upliftment of their soul are certainly able to control their mind, i.e., to forgive. The temptations of pleasures cannot attract them, desires cannot affect them, and even severe calamities and crises cannot disturb them. The attacks of greed on the heart of a controlled person become ineffective, and the fire of anger is extinguished in his ocean of forgiveness. Such a man, by coordinating physical, mental, moral and spiritual principles, remains engaged in sadhana according to the formulated rules. If a seeker engaged in sadhana unknowingly makes a mistake due to a state of delusion, he immediately apologizes for his offenses with a simple heart.
At the end of the Pratikraman, it is essential to have a coordination of mind, speech and body while reciting the presented forgiveness sutra. It is necessary to repent for past mistakes to make life pure and spotless, but if repentance remains mere repentance, it is of no use. When there is repentance, there should also be a firm resolve in the mind to correct the mistake, and efforts should be made not to repeat the mistakes that have already been made. Only then can the seeker's true forgiveness sutra be useful in life upliftment. This apology eliminates the criminal tendencies of life and establishes the kingdom of peace in life, and new rays of light sprout in the heart. Like the Chakravarti's gem (while conquering the six continents) in the dark cave that has been shrouded in darkness for millions of years, ]

Page #176:
---------------------------
## Fourth Study: Pratikraman

[105]

Just as light spreads in an instant, so too does the light of self-knowledge shine brightly in the life of a being united with the virtue of forgiveness. The text of eighty-four lakh (8.4 million) living beings:

- Seven lakh (700,000) Earth-bodied, seven lakh (700,000) Water-bodied, seven lakh (700,000) Fire-bodied, seven lakh (700,000) Air-bodied, ten lakh (1 million) each of plant-bodied, fourteen lakh (1.4 million) ordinary plant-bodied, two lakh (200,000) two-sensed, two lakh (200,000) three-sensed, two lakh (200,000) four-sensed, four lakh (400,000) hellish, four lakh (400,000) celestial, four lakh (400,000) five-sensed non-human, fourteen lakh (1.4 million) human.

In these four realms, I have unknowingly, knowingly, intentionally, or unintentionally, through my actions or inaction, caused harm to any living being, whether subtle or gross, in their state of being, walking, standing, sitting, or lying down. I have also approved of such harm, pierced, broken, or caused pain. Through my mind, speech, and body, I have committed eighteen lakh twenty-four thousand one hundred twenty (1,824,120) types of *Tass Miccha Mi Dukkadam*.

**Explanation:**

There are eighty-four lakh (8.4 million) types of births (yoni) for all beings in the four realms. Yoni means the place of birth for living beings. There are 8.4 million types of birthplaces for all living beings. Although there are even more places, all those places that are similar in terms of color, smell, taste, touch, and form are considered as one.

There are 350 basic types of Earth-bodied beings. Multiplying these types by five colors gives 1750 types. Multiplying again by two smells gives 3500 types. Multiplying again by five tastes gives 17500 types. Multiplying again by eight touches gives 140,000 types. Multiplying again by five forms gives a total of seven lakh (700,000) types.

Similar to Earth-bodied beings, there are 350 basic types each for Water-bodied, Fire-bodied, and Air-bodied beings. Multiplying these by five colors, etc., gives a total of ten lakh (1 million) types for each. There are 700 basic types of root and stem plants. Multiplying these by five colors, etc., gives a total of 14 lakh (1.4 million) types.

Similarly, there are 100 basic types each for two-sensed, three-sensed, and four-sensed beings. Multiplying these by five colors, etc., gives a total of four lakh (400,000) types for each. There are 700 basic types of human beings. Multiplying these by five colors, etc., gives a total of 14 lakh (1.4 million) types for humans.

1. Multiplying the 563 types of the living being principle by the countries of Abhihayadi, etc., gives 5630 types. Then, multiplying these by attachment and aversion gives 11260 types. Then, multiplying these by mind, speech, and body gives 33780 types. Then, multiplying these by the three karmas gives 101340 types. Then, multiplying these by the three times gives 304020 types. Then, multiplying these by six: Arhant, Siddha, Acharya, Upadhyaya, Guru, and Atma, gives 1824120 types.

In this way, I confess to *Tass Miccha Mi Dukkadam* and vow to refrain from committing sinful actions.

Page #177:
---------------------------
[106]
[Essential Sutra - Total Number of Souls - 
There are twelve lakh souls in the Earth realm, seven lakh souls in the Hell realm, three lakh souls in the Fire realm, seven lakh souls in the Air realm, twenty-eight lakh souls in the Plant realm, seven lakh souls in the two-sense beings, eight lakh souls in the three-sense beings, nine lakh souls in the four-sense beings, twelve and a half lakh souls in the aquatic beings, ten lakh souls in the terrestrial beings, twelve lakh souls in the aerial beings, ten lakh souls in the creeping beings, nine lakh souls in the crawling beings, twenty-five lakh souls in the hell realm, twenty-six lakh souls in the god realm, twelve lakh souls in the human realm. Thus, there are one crore seventy-nine and a half lakh souls in total. If one denies this, then it is a great sin. Pranipat Sutra - 
Salutations to the Arhats, the Bhagavants. [1] Salutations to the Atigaras, the Tirthankaras, the Self-Enlightened Ones. [2] Salutations to the Purushottama, the Purush-Soha, the Purush-Var-Padma, the Purush-Var-Gandha-Hatthi. [3] Salutations to the Loguttama, the Log-Naha, the Log-Hiya, the Log-Paiva, the Log-Pajjoyaga. [4] Salutations to the Abhaya-daya, the Chakkhu-daya, the Magga-daya, the Saran-daya, the Jiva-daya, the Bohi-daya. [5] Salutations to the Dharma-daya, the Dharma-Desaya, the Dharma-Nayaga, the Dharma-Sara-hi, the Dharma-Var-Chaur-Ant-Chakkavatti. [6] Salutations to the Di-vo-Tana-Saran-Gai-Paitthana, the Appadhi-Var-Nana-Dasan-Dhara, the Viyatta-Chhau-Mana. [7] Salutations to the Jinas, the Javayas, the Tinnas, the Tarayas, the Buddhas, the Bohayas, the Muttas, the Moyagas. [8] Salutations to all the omniscient ones, all the Arihant, the Siva-Mayala-Maruya-Mananta-Makkhaya-Mavva-Baha-Mapunara-Vitti-Sidhi-Gai-Namadheyam-Thana-Sampatta. Salutations to the Jinas, the Jiva-bhaya. Meaning - Salutations to the Arhat Bhagavants. (How are the Arhat Bhagavants?) The beginning of Dharma...

Page #178:
---------------------------
## Fourth Study: Pratikramana

[107]

They are the ones who do (good deeds). They are the ones who establish religious pilgrimages. They are self-enlightened (without preaching). They are the best among men, they are lions (in their strength) among men, they are like the pure white lotus among men, they are like fragrant elephants among men. They are the best in the world, they are the lords of the world, they are the benefactors of the world, they are the lamps in the world, they are the ones who illuminate the world.

They are the ones who give fearlessness, they are the ones who give the eyes of knowledge, they are the ones who give the path of righteousness, they are the ones who give refuge, they are the givers of life in the form of restraint, they are the preachers of righteousness, they are the leaders of righteousness, they are the charioteers-drivers of righteousness.

They are the best, the wheel-turners of righteousness, who end the four states of existence. They are the ones who possess unhindered and supreme knowledge-vision. They are free from karmas like knowledge-obscuration and other destructive karmas, or from negligence.

They are the ones who have conquered their own attachment and aversion, they are the ones who conquer others. They are the ones who have crossed the ocean of the world themselves, they are the ones who save others. They are the ones who have attained enlightenment themselves, they are the ones who give enlightenment to others. They are the ones who are free from karma themselves, they are the ones who liberate others.

They are omniscient, they are all-seeing, and they are of the form of auspiciousness and welfare, unshakeable and stable, free from decay and disease, infinite and endless, inexhaustible and imperishable, free from obstacles and pain, free from rebirth and return, that is, free from birth and death. They have attained the place called Siddha-Gati. They are the ones who have conquered fear, they are the ones who have conquered attachment and aversion. To such Jina Bhagavants, my salutations.

**Discussion:**

This passage pays homage to Arihant and Siddha Bhagavants. From time immemorial, countless Arihants and Siddhas have existed. Therefore, to express their importance and excellence, the original text uses the plural form. Arihants are those who destroy the internal enemies like attachment, etc. Siddhas are those who completely burn away the eight karmas bound to the soul. To attain the same position as them, and to travel on the same path that they traveled to attain the supreme position, we pay homage to them to awaken the resolve and ability within our hearts.

The original text also contains some special adjectives whose meaning we should pay special attention to. Bhagavants are called "Abhaydayanam", etc., meaning that Bhagavants are givers of fearlessness, givers of eyes, givers of the path, givers of enlightenment, etc. However, according to Jainism, according to Bhagavants themselves, no one can give anyone auspicious or inauspicious results. The Agamas say, "Atta Katta Vikatta Ya." This means that a person is the doer, the enjoyer, and the creator of his own karma and happiness and sorrow. Acharya Amitagati has expressed this same fact in clear words -

Page #179:
---------------------------
## 108]
[Essential Sutra]
The good or bad fruits of actions performed by the soul in the past are experienced by it. If one receives the fruits of actions performed by another, then the actions performed by oneself become meaningless. 
In other words, the soul receives the good or bad fruits of the actions it performed in the past. If one receives the fruits of actions performed by another, then it is clear that the actions performed by oneself become useless.

Further, the same text says:
No one gives anything to anyone except the karma earned by the embodied soul. 
Thinking thus, become single-minded, focus on yourself. Abandon the notion that someone else gives something.

This is the true soul-doctrine of Jainism, and it awakens the infinite, boundless potential of the soul. This is the great mantra of not becoming a beggar by showing weakness before anyone. This is the ultimate perspective. Then why are the Tirthankaras called the giver of fearlessness, etc.?

The solution to this question is that there are two types of causes for every action - material and instrumental. The accomplishment of an action is due to both types of causes, not just one. Just as clay is essential for making a pot, similarly, the potter, the wheel, etc., are also essential instrumental causes. According to this rule, the material cause of one's own liberation - moksha - is the soul itself, and the instrumental causes are the Tirthankaras, the Dharma Sangha, etc., who embody the Dharma. From a practical perspective, the instrumental cause is also called the doer. Therefore, in the present text, the Tirthankaras are called "givers" from the perspective of practical reality, because they are the teachers of the path, by following which the soul becomes fearless for all time. The word "fearlessness" also means "self-control." Since the Tirthankaras are the teachers of self-control, they are also the givers of fearlessness. Similarly, one should understand the meaning of the epithets "giver of sight," etc.

Meaning of specific words - Bhagavantam - to the Tirthankaras. The word "Bhag" has six meanings - 1. Aishwarya - wealth, 2. Form, 3. Fame, 4. Beauty, 5. Dharma, and 6. Effort. Those who possess these six qualities in their entirety and in the most excellent form are called Tirthankaras.

Aigara Adikara - the one who does the first action. Dharma, although being the nature of a thing, is timeless.
1. Aishwaryasya samgrasya rupasya yashasas shriyah.
Dharmasya ath prayatnasya, shannām bhag iti ingana.
- Dashavaikalikachurni-Jinadas

Page #180:
---------------------------
## Fourth Study: Pratikramana

[109]

Though infinite, the true nature of Dharma, its boundaries, are distorted in various ages due to the corruption of conduct like non-violence, penance, and restraint.  Therefore, those who remove these distortions and establish the true form of Dharma, its boundaries, in accordance with time, are called Bhagwan Adikar.

**Purisa-Singh:**  Among wild animals, the lion is considered the most powerful and roams fearlessly. Similarly, Bhagwan is infinitely powerful and fearless, hence like a lion among men (Purusha-Singh).

**Purisa-Varga-Gandha-Hasti:**  A Gandha-Hasti is an elephant whose trunk exudes a fragrant musk. The intense fragrance of this musk frightens other elephants, causing them to flee. The Gandha-Hasti is also considered auspicious.  In the presence of Bhagwan, other opponents become meek, unable to stand their ground, and Bhagwan is also supremely auspicious. Therefore, Bhagwan is like the best Gandha-Hasti among men.

**Loka-Nath:**  A Nath is one who grants what is not attained (yoga) and protects what is attained (kshema).  Bhagwan grants the attainment of auspicious Dharma, which is not yet attained, and protects it through the teachings of various methods. Bhagwan teaches Dharma to all beings of the world with equanimity, hence they are the Nath of the entire world.

**Loka-Pradeep:**  A Loka-Pradeep is an excellent lamp for the world. A worldly lamp illuminates a limited area, destroying external darkness. However, Bhagwan is a Pra-deep, a superior lamp, who eternally removes the darkness of ignorance caused by falsehood, which has been present in the soul since time immemorial.  A worldly lamp illuminates only those objects that are visible to the eye, which are small and gross. However, Bhagwan's Loka-uttar (transcendental) lamp of Kevala-Jnana (perfect knowledge) illuminates all objects, both subtle and gross, perceivable and imperceptible, related to all three times (past, present, future).  A worldly lamp cannot show the complete form of even gross objects, only their shape and form are visible. However, in Bhagwan's Jnana-Pradeep, every object is reflected with its infinite qualities and modifications.  A worldly lamp is extinguished due to factors like depletion of oil, wind speed, etc. However, Bhagwan's Jnana-Pradeep, once ignited, remains eternally lit. Therefore, Bhagwan is not a lamp, but a Loka-uttar Deenaka (transcendental illuminator). Bhagwan's knowledge is inseparable from Bhagwan, and it is the source of light for all worlds. Therefore, Bhagwan is Loka-Pradeep.

**A-Punara-Avitti:**  Many epithets are used here for the Siddhi-Gati-Sthan (state of liberation). These epithets are easy to understand. Moksha is Shiva (free from all kinds of troubles), Achal (stable), Aruj (free from all kinds of internal and external diseases), Anant (infinite), Akshat (never diminished), Avya-badh (free from all obstacles), and A-Punara-Avitti (non-repetitive).

Page #181:
---------------------------
[110]
It means that once one attains liberation, one never has to return from there.
Here it is worth considering why the adjective 'apunaavrtti' (non-return) was used after using the adjectives 'ananta' (infinite) and 'akshta' (imperishable)? The solution is that some philosophers believe that when a liberated soul sees its Tirtha (sacred place) being neglected, it leaves liberation and returns to the world to protect it. This adjective was used to show that this belief is wrong. Just as a seed cannot sprout after being burnt, similarly, a bhavanakur (seed of rebirth) cannot sprout after the karma-bija (seed of karma) is burnt. The implication is that past karma gives rise to new karma, once karma is completely destroyed, new karma cannot arise, and in the absence of karma, rebirth is not possible. In fact, the state of liberation is eternal and infinite. The word 'apunaavrtti' was used to express this meaning.
1
[ Necessary Sutras
The text 'Namotthunan' is read twice - once with the aim of Arhant Bhagavants and once with the aim of Siddha Bhagavants. When it is read with the aim of Arhants, it is said 'Thaanampaaviukamaanam'. And when the praise of Siddha Bhagavants is done, the text 'Thaanamsampattaanam' is said. The difference in meaning between the two texts is as follows - 'Thaanampaaviukamaanam' means those who aim to attain liberation, those who have a goal. 'Thaanamsampattaanam' means those who have attained liberation.
00

Page #182:
---------------------------
1. The rules that make life smooth and lead towards enlightenment are called **meryaadaayen** (rules) or those **meryaadaayen** that are universal, beneficial to all beings, and lead to the welfare of oneself and others, can be called rules or **vrata** (vows).
2. The firm resolve to abandon the faults that arise in one's life experience is the origin of **vrata**.
**The usefulness of vrata**
3. Two banks are necessary to control the continuous flow of a river, similarly, **vrata** are necessary to control, limit, and keep life dynamic. Just as the flow becomes fragmented in the absence of banks, similarly, the life force of a person without **vrata** becomes fragmented. Therefore, **vrata** are extremely necessary to focus life force and use it in the right direction.
4. A kite flying high in the sky thinks, "What need do I have for the string's restraint? If this string were not there, I could fly freely in the sky." But we know what happens to the kite when the string breaks. As soon as the string breaks, the kite's dream of free flight in the sky is shattered and it has to fall into the dust. Similarly, to keep the kite of life elevated, it is necessary to remain bound by the string of **vrata**.
**Four ways in which faults occur in vrata**
1. **Atikram** - Desire to break the accepted **vrata**.
2. **Vyatikram** - Being ready to break the accepted **vrata**.
3. **Atichaar** - Breaking the accepted **vrata** partially.
4. **Anaachaar** - Breaking the accepted **vrata** completely.
It is necessary to protect **vrata** from these faults, and if a fault occurs by mistake, it should be rectified by **pratikraman** (atonement). It is from this perspective that the **atichaar** (partial transgressions) are mentioned here. Remember that this **pratikraman** text is related to the **vrata** of **shravak** (male lay follower) and **shravika** (female lay follower).

Page #183:
---------------------------
##  Repentance for the transgressions of the twelve vows: 1. Transgression of the vow of non-violence

The first Anuvrata - **Thulao Panaivaayaao Veramanam**,  to refrain from harming any living being, whether two-sensed, three-sensed, four-sensed, or five-sensed, with the intention of harming them, knowing that they are living beings, except for those who are harmful and criminal, and to refrain from harming them with the intention of harming them, with the mind, speech, and body. This is the first **sthula pranatipat veraman** vow, which has five transgressions that should be known and avoided. These are: **aloou-bandhe** (binding), **vahe** (hitting with a whip or stick), **chhavi-chheee** (piercing the skin), **aibhare** (overloading), and **bhat-paan-vichcheh** (depriving of food and water). These are all **michcha mi dukkad** (bad karma).

**Meaning:** A Shravak has twelve vows, of which five are called Anuvratas and seven are called Uttargunas. The transgression of these vows in the world is called **atichaar**. Each vow has five transgressions. Here, the method of purification for the five transgressions of the vow of non-violence is described. I will not harm, nor will I cause harm, with my mind, speech, and body, to any two-sensed, three-sensed, four-sensed, or five-sensed living beings, except for those who are harmful and criminal, knowing that they are living beings. If I have bound any living being, beaten them with a whip or stick, pierced their skin, overloaded them, or deprived them of food and water, then all these sins will be nullified.

**Implication:** A householder Shravak renounces the intentional harming of innocent living beings in the vow of non-violence. He does not renounce the harming of stationary living beings, but he does renounce the unnecessary harming of them. He also renounces the harming of criminal living beings, but only the harming of innocent living beings. He renounces the intentional harming of innocent living beings, even with the intention of harming them, such as "I will kill this." In agriculture, construction, and business, innocent living beings are also harmed, but this is initial violence, not intentional. Therefore, a householder Shravak does not renounce it. This is why his first vow is called **sthula pranatipat veraman**. This is accepted with two actions and three yogas.

## 2. Transgressions of the vow of refraining from false speech

The second Anuvrata - **Thulao Musavaayaao Veramanam**, to refrain from speaking big lies, such as **kanaliye** (deceitful), **govaliye** (deceitful), **bhomaliye** (deceitful), **nasavaharo** (false promises), **koodsakkhije** (false witness), etc., with the mind, speech, and body. This is the second **sthula mrishavaad veraman** vow, which has five transgressions that should be known and avoided. These are: **aloou** (false accusation), **sahasabbakkhaane** (speaking in front of many), **rahasabbakkhaane** (speaking in secret), **sadaramantbhee** (speaking with a deceitful intention), **mosovaese** (deceitful behavior), and **koodlehakarane** (deceitful action). These are all **michcha mi dukkad** (bad karma).

Page #184:
---------------------------
##  [Twelve Vows and Their Transgressions]
[113]

**Meaning**
I will not speak or cause others to speak gross lies with my mind, speech, and body throughout my life. I will not speak falsely regarding the relationship of a bride and groom, or about cows, buffaloes, and other animals. I will not speak falsely about someone's entrusted property (such as deposited money), nor will I undervalue it or give false testimony. If I have falsely defamed someone, falsely accused individuals during private discussions, revealed the secret thoughts of my wife, given false advice, or written false documents (such as stamp papers, accounts, etc.), may all those sins be nullified.

**3. Transgressions of the *Adattadanaviramananu* Vow**

- **Third Anuvrata - *Thulao Adinnadanao Veramanam*:** I will not engage in gross *Adattadan* (taking what is not given) throughout my life, in two or three ways, with my mind, speech, and body. I will not engage in gross *Adattadan* such as digging a pit, opening a knot, unlocking a lock, looting while walking on the road, taking a large object found lying around, etc. I will not engage in *Adattadan* related to relatives, business, or objects found lying around without any doubt. I condemn these actions. May all those sins be nullified.

**Meaning**
I will not steal anyone's belongings by digging a pit in their house, breaking a wall, opening a knot, unlocking or breaking a lock, or looting while walking on the road. I will not take a large object found lying on the road. I will not engage in gross theft related to relatives, business, or objects found lying around without any doubt, with my mind, speech, and body. If I have taken stolen goods, helped a thief, or suggested ways to steal, gone to an enemy kingdom during war, used false weights and measures, or shown a good product but given a bad one (adulterated goods), I condemn these evil deeds. May all those sins be nullified.

**4. Transgressions of the *Brahmacharyanu* Vow**

- **Fourth Anuvrata - *Thulao Mehunao Veramanam*:** I will not engage in gross sexual misconduct throughout my life, in two or three ways, with my mind, speech, and body, related to gods and goddesses. I will not engage in sexual misconduct with humans and animals in one way, with my body. This fourth vow is about being content with one's own spouse and avoiding others' spouses.

1. A man should say "content with my own spouse," and a woman should say "content with my own husband."

Page #185:
---------------------------
## 114]
[Essential Sutras]
The five transgressions of the *Maithuna* (sexual intercourse) vow within the *Achar* (conduct) are to be known and not to be committed. These are as follows: - 
* Engaging in conversation with a woman who is already married to another man, or with an unmarried woman,
* Engaging in sexual play with another person,
* Attempting to marry another person's wife,
* Having a strong desire for sexual pleasure,
* Engaging in sexual intercourse with a woman who is not one's wife.
I condemn these transgressions. May all my sins be nullified.

**Meaning:** The fourth *Anuvrata* (minor vow) involves abstaining from gross sexual intercourse. I will be content with my own wife for life and renounce all other forms of sexual activity. I will not engage in sexual activity with deities, nor will I encourage others to do so. I will not engage in sexual activity with humans or animals. If I have engaged in conversation with a woman who is already married to another man, or with an unmarried woman, if I have attempted to engage in sexual play with another person, if I have attempted to marry another person's wife, or if I have had a strong desire for sexual pleasure, then I condemn these transgressions. May all my sins be nullified.

## 5. Transgressions of the *Parigraha* (Possession) vow
The fifth *Anuvrata* - Abstaining from excessive possessions. I will limit my possessions to the following:
* Land and buildings,
* Gold and silver,
* Wealth and grain,
* Two-legged and four-legged animals,
* Metals and their products.
I will not increase my possessions beyond the limits I have set for myself. I will not increase my possessions in any way, through my mind, speech, or body.
The five transgressions of the *Parigraha* (possession) vow within the *Achar* (conduct) are to be known and not to be committed. These are as follows: - 
* Exceeding the limit of land and buildings,
* Exceeding the limit of gold and silver,
* Exceeding the limit of wealth and grain,
* Exceeding the limit of two-legged and four-legged animals,
* Exceeding the limit of metals and their products.
I condemn these transgressions. May all my sins be nullified.

## 6. Transgressions of the *Digvrata* (Direction) vow
The sixth *Digvrata* - I will limit my movement to the following directions:
* East,
* South,
* West.

Page #186:
---------------------------
English Translation (preserving Jain terms):

[Pratikramana of the transgressions of the twelve vows]
[Having done the yathaparimaana (as per the prescribed measure), thereafter, going beyond the body, I renounce the five asrava (influx of karmic matter) for as long as I live. The sixth [vow], ekaviha (single-garment vow), triviha (threefold vow) - I shall not do by mind, speech, and body. And the five aticaras (transgressions) of the sixth dishivrata (direction vow) are to be known, not to be practiced, that is - uddhadishippamaanaikkarame (transgression of the upward direction), ahodishippamaanaikkarame (transgression of the downward direction), tiryagdishippamaanaikkarame (transgression of the transverse direction), khittavuddhī (extending the area), saiiantaraddhā (doubt about the limits of the area), tassa micchā mi dukkadam (may those [transgressions] be false and sinful for me).

Bhavaartha (meaning) - What I have measured in the upward, downward, and transverse directions, I will not perform activities like going and coming, etc. by mind, speech, and body beyond that. If I have transgressed the measure I have taken of the upward, downward, and transverse directions, have extended the area, or have doubts about the limits of the area and have proceeded further, then I confess that. May those [transgressions] be false and sinful for me.

The transgression of the high, low, and transverse directions is called aticaras here. The implication is that he is desiring to go beyond the prescribed limits of the land, but has not gone out yet, then it is an atichara, and when he has gone out, it is an anachara.

7. Transgressions of the vow of limiting consumption and use

The seventh vow - In renouncing the use and consumption [of things], [the transgressions are] - 1. Ullaniavihim (using excessively), 2. Dantanavihi (using toothbrush), 3. Phalavihi (using fruits), 4. Abbhanganavihi (using oil for massage), 5. Uvattanavihi (using unguents), 6. Majjanavihi (using bathing water), 7. Vatthavihim (using clothes), 8. Vilevanavihi (using perfumes), 9. Pupphavihi (using flowers), 10. Aabaranavihi (using ornaments), 11. Dhuvavihim (using incense), 12. Pejavihi (using beverages), 13. Bhakkhanavi (using food), 14. Odanavihi (using cooked rice), 15. Supavihi (using curries), 16. Vigayavihi (using sweets), 17. Sagavihi (using salt), 18. Mahuravihim (using honey), 19. Jiimanavihi (using food), 20. Panoavihi (using drinks), 21. Mukhavaasamvihi (using mouth fresheners), 22. Vaahanavi (using vehicles), 23. Uvaahanavihi (using footwear), 24. Sayanavihim (using beds), 25. Sacittavihim (using living things), 26. Dravyavihim (using substances), etc. - I have done the yathaparimaana (as per the prescribed measure). Thereafter, I renounce the use and consumption of things for the purpose of enjoyment, for as long as I live, in the ekaviha (single-garment vow), triviha (threefold vow) - I shall not do by mind, speech, and body.

And the two types of upahhoga-paribhoga (use and consumption) are prescribed - bhojanaao (food) and kammao (activities). The five aticaras (transgressions) to be known, not to be practiced by the samanopasaka (Jain ascetic) regarding bhojanaao (food) are - sacittaahare (consuming food with life), sacittapatibbaddhahare (consuming food connected with life), appauliosahihhakkhanaiya (consuming food not properly sifted), duppauliosahihhakkhanaiya (consuming food not properly cleaned), tucchhisohihhakkhanaiya (consuming food without proper consideration). And the fifteen kammadaana (occupations) to be known, not to be practiced by the samanopasaka (Jain ascetic) regarding kammao (activities) are - ingaalakamme (making charcoal), vanakamme (working in the forest), saadikamme (weaving cloth), bhaadikamme (making baskets), phodikamme (making pots), dantavaanijje (trading in ivory), lakkhaavaanijje (trading in lac), rasavaanijje (trading in juices), kesavaanijje (trading in hair), visavaanijje (trading in poison), jantapiilanakamme (torturing living beings), nillamcchanakamme (branding), davaggiidaavanaya (kindling fire), saradahatalaayasosanaya (drying up lakes and ponds), asaijjanaposanaya (not supporting the needy), tassa micchaa mi dukkadam (may those [transgressions] be false and sinful for me).

Bhavaartha (meaning) - I have done the yathaparimaana (as per the prescribed measure) for using towels and other clothes for wiping the body, using toothbrush, washing hair with amla and other fruits, massaging with oil, applying unguents, using bathing water, wearing clothes, using perfumes, using flowers, using ornaments, using incense, using beverages, using food, using cooked rice, using curries, using sweets, using salt, using honey, using food, using drinks, using mouth fresheners, using vehicles, using footwear, using beds, using living things, using substances, etc. Thereafter, I renounce the use and consumption of things for the purpose of enjoyment.

Page #187:
---------------------------
## 116]
[Essential Sutra]
I renounce the use and consumption of all objects, except those that have been measured, such as: applying sandalwood paste, smelling flowers, wearing ornaments, burning incense, drinking milk and other beverages, eating rice, wheat, etc., lentils, milk products (milk, yogurt, ghee, jaggery, etc.), vegetables, sweet juices, chewing, drinking water, cardamom, cloves, etc. (items that make the mouth fragrant), riding horses, elephants, chariots, etc., wearing shoes, etc., beds, etc., consuming objects with sentience, and all other remaining objects.

There are two types of use and consumption: food-related and karma-related (the trades that lead to the acquisition of food). There are five types of food-related use and consumption and fifteen types of karma-related use and consumption, making a total of twenty transgressions of this vow. I criticize them as follows:

If I have consumed: 1. more than the prescribed amount of objects with sentience, 2. gum, etc., attached to sentient trees, etc., 3. uncooked food, 4. half-cooked food, 5. trivial medicine, and if I have engaged in fifteen karma-related activities, then I criticize them and wish that all my sins be nullified.

_ Objects used once, such as food, are counted as consumption, and objects used repeatedly, such as clothes, are counted as use. The occupations or businesses that lead to the binding of intense karma are karma-related activities. There are fifteen of them, and their meaning is as follows:

1. **Angarakarma:** Making charcoal from wood, working as a blacksmith, potter, goldsmith, cobbler, and brick-maker is called 'Angarakarma'.
2. **Vanakarma:** Selling unchopped or chopped leaves, flowers, or fruits of plants, or working as a miller or grinder is called 'Vanajivica'.
3. **Shaktakarma:** Making, getting made, driving, and selling carts, wagons, or their parts is called 'Shakatjivica'.
_ 4. **Bhatakkarma:** Loading goods on carts, oxen, buffaloes, donkeys, camels, mules, etc., and earning a living by charging rent for them is called 'Bhatakjivica'.
5. **Sphotkarma:** Earning a living by digging ponds, wells, stepwells, etc., and breaking and shaping stones, etc., which are acts of great violence towards the earth, is called 'Sphotjivica'.
1. Cutting and selling grass and wood from the forest.
2. Digging up and selling minerals from the earth.

Page #188:
---------------------------
##  [Transgressions of the Twelve Vows]
[117
6. **Dantvaanijya** - To obtain or purchase in advance, by going to the place of origin, the teeth of an elephant, the hair of a cow, the nails of an owl, the bones of a conch, the skin of a lion or cheetah, the feathers of a swan, and other parts of tormented beings, is called 'Dantvaanijya'.
7. **Laakshavaanijya** - Lac, menasil, indigo, flowers of dhataki, bark, etc., and tankan khar, etc., are causes of sin, therefore, their trade is also a cause of sin. This is called 'Laakshavaanijya' karmadaan. 8-9. **Ras-Kesh Vaanijya** - Selling butter, fat, honey, and alcohol, etc., is called 'Rasvaanijya', and doing the business of selling bipeds and quadrupeds, i.e., animals and birds, etc., is called 'Keshvaanijya'. 10. **Vishvaanijya** - Trading in poisonous substances, weapons, ploughs, instruments, iron, and orpiment, etc., which are deadly, is called 'Vishvaanijya'.
11. **Yantrapeedanakarma** - Grinding sesame, sugarcane, mustard, and castor, etc., and operating a well-wheel, etc., doing the business of taking oil in exchange for sesame, etc., and making a living by making such instruments is called 'Yantrapeedanakarma'.
12. **Nirlanchanakarma** - Piercing the nose of animals, putting a ring in it, branding, applying a mark, castrating, rubbing the back of a camel, and piercing the ear and the neck-blanket is called 'Nirlanchanakarma'.
-
13. **Asatiposhanakarma** - Keeping a myna, parrot, cat, dog, rooster, and peacock, nourishing a maid servant - keeping someone as a slave or maid servant and keeping immoral women for earning money is called 'Asatiposhanakarma'.
-
14-15. **Davdav and Sarshoshanakarma** - Setting fire to the forest out of habit or considering it virtuous is called 'Davdav', and drying up ponds, rivers, and lakes, etc., is called 'Sarshoshanakarma'.
Note - The above fifteen karmadaans are for guidance. There are other similar violent businesses that are also to be avoided by a Shravak. The same should be understood in relation to the transgressions of other vows. Similar to the five transgressions of each vow, other transgressions are also to be avoided for the protection of the vow. - Yogashastra, Third Chapter, 101-113
8. **Anarthadandaviramanavrat's Transgressions**
The eighth Anattaadandaviramanavrat - Chauvvihe Anattaadande Panatte Tam Jaha Avajjhaanaayarie Pamayaayarie Hinsappaayaane Paavakkammovaese (in which eight agars come, or, or, or, family

Page #189:
---------------------------
##  Translation:

[118]
(I do not commit, nor cause to be committed, any act of *Anarthadanda* through the mind, speech, or body, in two ways, in three ways, whether it be through the agency of the necessary, or through the agency of gods, or through the agency of serpents, or through the agency of Yakshas, or through the agency of Bhutas, or through the agency of these very things.)  I hold these as exceptions:  (If I have to resort to *Anarthadanda* for self-defense, or by the order of the king, or for the sake of my caste, or for the sake of my family, or for the sake of my relatives, or if I am compelled by gods, Yakshas, or Bhutas, then I hold these as exceptions.)  Except for these exceptions, I will not commit, nor cause to be committed, any act of *Anarthadanda* through the mind, speech, or body, for the rest of my life.  If I have told stories that arouse lust, or have made others laugh like a clown, or have imitated others, or have engaged in meaningless chatter, or have collected weapons of violence like swords, pestles, and mortars without purpose, or have preached the initiation of violence like building houses, or have accumulated food, clothing, and other things beyond my own needs and those of my family, then I criticize myself for these actions and I wish that all my sins may be nullified. 9.  Transgressions of the *Samayika* Vow

The ninth *Samayika* vow:  I will observe the *Samayika* vow according to the rules I have established, for as long as I have vowed.  I will not commit, nor cause to be committed, any act of *Anarthadanda* through the mind, speech, or body.  This is the form of the vow.  When the occasion for *Samayika* arises, I will perform it, and then I will purify myself by repentance.  These are the five things that should be known and avoided in the ninth *Samayika* vow:  (1)  Injury to the mind, (2)  Injury to speech, (3)  Injury to the body, (4)  Not performing the *Samayika* vow, (5)  Performing the *Samayika* vow without proper understanding.  These are the things that are wrong and harmful.

Meaning:  I will observe the *Samayika* vow according to the rules I have established, for as long as I have vowed, by abandoning the evil tendencies of the mind, speech, and body.  By not allowing evil thoughts to arise in the mind, by not speaking harsh or sinful words, and by restraining the actions of the body, peace and tranquility will arise in the soul.

Page #190:
---------------------------
##  [The Transgressions of the Twelve Vows]
[119]
Samayika is the practice of abstaining from all sinful actions of mind, speech, and body, and not causing others to do so. If I have had evil thoughts, spoken harsh or sinful words, moved my body, stretched or contracted my limbs, or performed any other action in a way that is not in accordance with the principles of Samayika, or if I have forgotten the time of Samayika, or if I have performed Samayika for a short time or in an unstable manner, then I confess my transgression. May all my sins be nullified. 

10. Transgressions of the Desavakasika Vrat
The tenth Desavakasika Vrat - From dawn onwards, I will not go beyond the limits of the area that has been set for the six directions, nor will I send others beyond those limits. I will not do this with my mind, speech, or body. I will not consume or use anything beyond the limits of the area that has been set for the use of material things. I will not do this with my mind, speech, or body. 

There are five transgressions of the Desavakasika Vrat that should be known and avoided. These are: 
- Seeking something from outside the limits.
- Sending someone outside the limits.
- Making someone aware of your presence by speaking to them.
- Making someone aware of your presence by showing yourself or your belongings.
- Making someone aware of your presence by throwing stones or other objects. 

If I have committed any of these transgressions, then I confess my transgression. May all my sins be nullified. 

11. Transgressions of the Paushdha Vrat
The eleventh Paushdha Vrat - I will not eat any food that is not permitted, drink any drink that is not permitted, wear any jewelry or gold that is not permitted, wear any garlands, perfumes, or cosmetics that are not permitted, or use any tools, weapons, or other objects that are not permitted. I will not do this with my mind, speech, or body. I will not do this for the entire day and night. This is my vow. I will observe the Paushdha Vrat on the occasion of the Paushdha Vrat.

Page #191:
---------------------------
## 120]
[Essential Sutra]
If I become pure by performing the Rasa (fasting) and know the five Ayara of the eleventh Pratipurna-Paushdhavrat, but do not follow them, then I criticize myself. These Ayara are:
- Appadhilehi-Duppadhilehi Sejjasantharae (not cleaning the bed)
- Appamjjiya-Duppamjjiya Sejjasantharae (not cleaning the bed)
- Appadhilehi-Duppadhilehi Uccarapasaavanabhoomi (not cleaning the place for urination and defecation)
- Appamjjiya-Duppamjjiya Uccarapasaavanabhoomi (not cleaning the place for urination and defecation)
- Posahassa Samma Ananupalanaya (not following the rules of the fast)

**Meaning:** I vow to abstain from all four types of food - Asan (food), Pan (drink), Khaim (edible), and Saim (tasty) - for one day and night, for the Pratipurna-Paushdhavrat. I also vow to abstain from sexual misconduct, wearing ornaments like gems and gold, wearing garlands, applying powders and sandalwood paste, using weapons like swords and tools like ploughs and pestles. I will not engage in these sinful activities with my mind, speech, or body, nor will I make others do so. This is my vow, but I will become pure only when I follow the fast properly. If I have not cleaned the bed, the place for urination and defecation, or if I have not followed the rules of the fast according to the scriptures, then I criticize myself and wish for my sins to be nullified.

## 12. Atithisanvibhagawat's Transgressions
The twelfth Atithisanvibhagawat: I vow to give pure donations of food, drink, edibles, tasty food, clothes, utensils, blankets, foot-cloths, stools, mats, bedding, medicines, and other things to the Niggantha ascetics when they come together, and I will become pure by doing so. If I know the five Ayara of the twelfth Atithisanvibhagawat but do not follow them, then I criticize myself. These Ayara are:
- Sachittnikkhevanaya (placing an impure object on a pure object)
- Sachittpihanaya (covering an impure object with a pure object)
- Kalaikkame (asking for alms before or after the proper time)
- Paravavaese (giving alms to someone else instead of the ascetic)
- Macchariaye (giving alms with envy or jealousy)

**Meaning:** I vow to give pure donations of food, drink, edibles, tasty food, clothes, utensils, blankets, foot-cloths, stools, mats, bedding, medicines, and other things to the Niggantha ascetics when they come together, and I will become pure by doing so. If I have placed an impure object on a pure object, covered an impure object with a pure object, asked for alms before or after the proper time, given alms to someone else instead of the ascetic, or given alms with envy or jealousy, then I criticize myself and wish for my sins to be nullified.

Page #192:
---------------------------
[5]
**Kayotsarga:** The fifth essential Kayotsarga. This is a technical term from the Nirgrantha tradition. While the word is formed by combining "kay" (body) and "utsarga" (release), its meaning is not the release of the body, but the release of attachment to the body. The root of attachment to all worldly things is the body. A seeker whose mind is free from attachment to the body cannot be attached to other seemingly different objects. The seeker on the path of liberation prays to the Lord:

"May I have the power to separate myself, my soul, from the body, like a sword from its sheath, by your grace, O Jinendra!" - Acharya Amitagati

Through such prayers, the seeker one day reaches the state described in the Agamas:

"A seeker does not consider their body as 'mine'." - Dasha Vaikalika

Thus, to attain a state beyond the body while still residing in it is a significant practice. Kayotsarga is performed with this desirable goal in mind and is considered essential. It is also a form of atonement that destroys past sins and purifies the practice:

"I perform Kayotsarga to elevate my restraint, to atone, to purify, to free myself from impurities, and to completely destroy sinful actions."

Page #193:
---------------------------
## 122]
[Essential Sutra
Meditation.]

Kayotsarga is of two types - Dravyakayotsarga and Bhavakayotsarga.  Standing still in one place with the Jin-mudra, abandoning all bodily movements and activities, is Dravyakayotsarga.  Abandoning Artha and Raudra dhyanas and engaging in Dharma and Shukla dhyanas, letting the flow of auspicious thoughts in the mind, establishing the soul in its pure original form - this is Bhavakayotsarga.  _ 'So Pun Kaussaggo Davvato Bhavato Ya Bhavati, Davvato Kayachettan Niroho, Bhavato Kaussaggo
- Acharya Jinadas in Uttaradhyayanasutra has said that Kayotsarga is completely free from all suffering.

Whether it is Kayotsarga or any other action, it is only fruitful when done with feeling.  The importance of Kayotsarga that has been shown above is actually the importance of Kayotsarga done with feeling.  Bhavavihin, mere Dravyakayotsarga is not the cause of self-purification.  To clarify this fact, an Acharya has mentioned four forms of Kayotsarga, which are as follows:

1. **Uthit-Uthit:** When the practitioner doing Kayotsarga stands with both body and feeling, i.e., when he abandons Durdhyana and engages in Dharma-Shukla dhyana, then he performs Uthit-Uthit Kayotsarga.  This form is completely desirable.
2. **Uthit-Niviṣṭ:** Standing with the body but not with feeling, i.e., doing Durdhyana.  This form is undesirable.
3. **Upaviṣṭ-Uthit:** A weak or very old practitioner may not be able to stand, but he stands with feeling - he is absorbed in auspicious dhyana, then his Kayotsarga is called Upaviṣṭ-Uthit.  This form is also desirable.
4. **Upaviṣṭ-Niviṣṭ:** When a careless practitioner does not stand with either body or feeling, then this is the form of Kayotsarga.  This is not actually Kayotsarga, but only a pretense of Kayotsarga.

While performing the fifth essential form of Kayotsarga, although other texts are also recited, the focus on 'Logass' is the main part.  This will be clear from the method mentioned elsewhere.

Page #194:
---------------------------
To take.
To do.
The ten types of Pratyakhyana are explained, as follows:
In the previous chapters, the destruction of past karma through Pratikramana and Kayotsarga was explained. In this sixth chapter, the prevention of new binding karma is explained. Or, in the fifth chapter, the treatment of the Atichar form of Vrat through Kayotsarga was explained. After the treatment, the attainment of Gun occurs, therefore, in this Pratyakhyana study called 'Gunadharak', the concept of the fundamental Gun is explained.
To renounce a harmful object with the witness of a Guru or the self, in order to be free from future sins, is called Pratyakhyana. Pratyakhyana is a preventive of future sins. It is of ten types:
(1) Anagat - due to any unavoidable reason, to perform penance before the fixed time.
(2) Atikrant - due to unavoidable reasons, to perform penance after the fixed time.
(3) Kotisahita - to perform penance starting and ending with the same Koti (order of Chaturthabhakta etc.).
(4) Niyantri - even if strong reasons like Vyavritti etc. arise, not to abandon the planned penance. (This Pratyakhyana can only be performed by Vajrarishbhanaraachasanahananadhari Anagar).
(5) Sakar - in which Utsarga (necessary Annatthanabhog and Sahasagararup) and Aagars in the form of exceptions are kept, is called Sakar or Sagar.
(6) Anakar - in which Aagars in the form of exceptions are not kept, is called Anakar.
(7) Parimanakrit - in which the quantity of Datti etc. is specified.
(8) Niraveshesh - in which there is complete renunciation of Anadi.
(9) Sanket - in which there is a signal like opening the fist etc., for example, "As long as I do not open my fist, my Pratyakhyana is valid".

Page #195:
---------------------------
## 124]
[Essential Sutra
(10) Adhhapratyakhyana - The rejection made with the duration of time like Muhurta, Paurushi etc. 1. Namaskarasahitasutra
Uggaye sure namokkarasahiyam pacchakkhami cauvviham pi aharam - asanam, panam, khaim, saim. Annath'anaabhogena, sahasagarenam, vosirami.
_Meaning - Upon sunrise, I accept the rejection with Namaskar - for two ghadi (hours) after sunrise (nokarasi) and I renounce all four types of food - asanam, panam, khaim, and saim.
In this pratyakhyana, there are two exceptions - anaabhoga - extreme forgetfulness and sahasagarenam - sudden urgency. Except for these two exceptions, I renounce all four types of food.
Discussion - Namaskarasahita means not consuming food without reciting Namaskar from sunrise to two ghadi after sunrise, i.e., for the duration of Muhurta. In common language, it is called 'Navakarasi' (Nokarasi). Four types of food
(1) Asanam - This includes all types of food like roti, rice etc.
(2) Panam - Milk, water, etc., all drinkable things are included in panam. But according to tradition, only water is consumed here.
(3) Khadim - Nuts, fruits etc. Some Acharyas include sweets in asanam and some in khadim.
(4) Swadim - Cloves, cardamom, betel nut etc. are considered as Swadim for mouth freshener. In this food, the main focus is on the taste of the mouth, not on the filling of the stomach.
The Sanskrit word 'Aakar' is called 'Aagar' in Prakrit language. The meaning of Aakar - exception is considered. The meaning of exception is - if in a particular situation, the renounced item is consumed or has to be consumed, then the pratyakhyana is not broken. Therefore, it is necessary to keep the necessary Aagar while accepting the vow. If this is not done, there is a possibility of breaking the vow -
_ 'Akiyate vidhiyate pratyakhyanabhangaparihararthamitayaakarah' - 'Pratyakhyanam cha apavadarupaakarasahitam karttavyaam, anyatha tu bhangah syat.' - Acharya Hemachandra (Yogashastra)

Page #196:
---------------------------
## Sixth Study: Renunciation

**[125]**

This is the case with both the *Anabhoga* and *Sahasakara* receptacles: as long as one is unaware, the fast is not broken. However, if one becomes aware but has already taken food into the mouth and does not spit it out and stop eating, then the fast is broken. Therefore, it is the duty of the practitioner to stop eating as soon as they become aware and to spit out everything that is in their mouth with effort. If they do not do this, the fast is broken.

**2. The Pauraushi Sutra**

I renounce the *Pauraushi*. From sunrise until one *prahar* after sunrise, I renounce all four types of food: *ashan*, *pan*, *khadim*, and *swadim*. I renounce it through *Anabhoga*, *Sahasakara*, *Prachchhannakaal*, *Dishamoh*, *Sadhuvachan*, and *Sarvasamadhipratyayakara*. Except for these six receptacles, I renounce all four types of food completely.

**Meaning:** Renouncing the *Pauraushi* means abstaining from all four types of food from sunrise until one *prahar* after sunrise.

**Explanation:** The literal meaning of *Pauraushi* is "the shadow of a man." When one *prahar* has passed after sunrise, the shadow of a man becomes as long as his body. This meaning is used figuratively to refer to a specific period of time, one *prahar* after sunrise.

The six receptacles of *Pauraushi* are:

1. **Anabhoga:** Eating due to forgetfulness or lack of awareness of the renunciation.
2. **Sahasakara:** Accidentally taking water or something else into the mouth.
3. **Prachchhannakaal:** Mistakenly believing that the *Pauraushi* is complete due to the sun being obscured by clouds or a storm.
4. **Dishamoh:** Mistaking east for west and believing that the *Pauraushi* has not yet arrived, but then eating due to the sun being high in the sky.
5. **Sadhuvachan:** Eating based on the word of a trustworthy person who says, "The *Pauraushi* has arrived," even though it has not.
6. **Sarvasamadhipratyayakara:** Eating due to being completely absorbed in meditation and not being aware of the time.

Page #197:
---------------------------
## 126]
[ Necessary Sutra
This is the observance of Pauraushi.
(6) Sarvasamadhipratyayakara - Taking medicine etc. for the relief of an accidental pain or other severe illness.
Pratchchhannakaal, Dishamoh and Sadhuvachan, the meaning of these three Aagaras is that if due to delusion, Pauraushi is not complete, but one eats thinking it is complete, then the fast is not broken. If one comes to know while eating that Pauraushi is not yet complete, then one should stop eating at that time.
Just like Pauraushi, there is also Sārdhapauraushi-pratyākhyāna. In this, one has to abstain from food till one and a half Prahar of the day has passed. Therefore, when one wants to reject the said Sārdhapauraushi, one should say 'Saddhaporisin' instead of 'Porisin'. 3. Purvardhasutra
Uggaye Sure, Purimadde Pacchakkhami; Chauvviham Pi Aharam-Asanam, Panam, Khaim, Saim.
Annatth'anaabhogena, Sahaasagaarena; Pacchhannakaalena, Dishaamoha, Saahuvaayane, Mahattaragaare, Savvasamahivattiyaagaare Vosirami.
Meaning - From sunrise till the first half of the day, i.e. till two Prahar, I abstain from all four types of food - Asana, Pan, Khadim, Swadim.
I abstain from food completely except for these seven Aagaras - Anaabhog, Sahaasakaar, Pratchchhannakaal, Dishamoh, Sadhuvachan, Mahattarakaar and Sarvasamadhipratyakaar.
Discussion - This is the Sutra of Purvardha-pratyākhyāna. In this, from sunrise till the first half of the day, i.e. till two Prahar of the day, one abstains from all four types of food.
Seven Aagaras are considered in this pratyākhyāna. Six are the same Aagaras as mentioned earlier for Pauraushi, the seventh Aagara is Mahattarakaar. The word 'Mahattar' in 'Mahattarakaar' has two meanings - Mahattar means a great person, Acharya, Upadhyaya etc. the head of the Gachchha or Sangh, and also a great purpose or work with a lot of Nirjara. Accordingly, the meaning is that for the sake of a great purpose - a purpose with a lot of Nirjara, one should complete the pratyākhyāna before the stipulated time for the service of a patient etc. or for any other important work of the Shraman Sangh. Here, the meaning of Mahattar is - a great purpose that is conducive to Nirjara. As Acharya Siddhasen has written -
'Mahattaram - Brihattar Nirjaralaabhetu bhootam, purushantara by pratyākhyānapalanavashal labhya nirjara apekshya,

Page #198:
---------------------------
## Sixth Study: Renunciation

[127]

It is impossible to fulfill the purpose of a sick monk's service or a purpose related to the Sangha, which is a greater cause than the renunciation itself. This is the greater cause - the exception to renunciation.

**Meaning:** The renunciation itself leads to a certain level of depletion. However, a greater depletion arises from a purpose that cannot be fulfilled by anyone else, such as the service of a sick monk or a purpose related to the Sangha. In such a situation, if food is consumed before the prescribed time, the vow is not broken. According to this meaning, the vow-taker can consume this food based on their own discretion, even without the order of the Acharya or others.

However, Acharya Nami writes in the Pratikramana Sutra Vritti:

"The greater cause is what is done with the permission of the Acharya or other great ones, who are very great. For example, if a virtuous person has renounced food, and then a purpose arises related to the family, the gana, or the Sangha, which cannot be fulfilled by anyone else, and if the person is appointed by the Acharya or other great ones for this purpose, then if they are able to fulfill the purpose while adhering to the renunciation, they should do so. If they cannot fulfill the purpose while adhering to the renunciation, then they should eat according to the order of the greater cause. In this situation, the renunciation is not broken."

**Meaning:** Those who are very great are called Acharya or other great ones. What is done with their permission and within the limits is called the greater cause. For example, if a sadhu has renounced food, and then a purpose arises related to the family, the gana, or the Sangha, which cannot be fulfilled by anyone else, then if they are able to fulfill the purpose while adhering to the renunciation, they should do so. If they cannot fulfill the purpose while adhering to the renunciation, then they should eat. In this situation, the renunciation is not broken. According to this meaning, the Acharya or other great ones are the "greater" ones. This food can be consumed only with their permission.

Just like the renunciation of the first half of the day, there is also the renunciation of the second half of the day. The renunciation of the second half of the day means not consuming food until three praharas have passed. When observing the renunciation of the second half of the day, the word "avaddham" should be recited instead of "purimaddham". The rest of the recitation is the same for both renunciations.

4. The One-Seat Sutra

I accept the one-seat penance. Therefore, I renounce all three types of food: asana, khadim, and svadim.

The eight causes of this vow are:

* Food
* Desire for food
* Desire for delicious food
* Eating and distributing food
* Serving a guru
* Food for the sake of hospitality
* The greater cause
* Food for the sake of all beings

Page #199:
---------------------------
[128]
[Essential Sutra]
(1) Anabhoga, (2) Sahasagar, (3) Sagarikaakar, (4) Akunchana-Prasaran, (5) Gurvabhyuththan, (6) Parishthapanikaakar, (7) Mahattarakaar, (8) Sarvasamadhipratyayakaar. I renounce food except for these eight Agars.
Discussion - Eating once a day is called Ekashan tapa. Ekashan means - ek + ashan, i.e. eating once.
Rejection is the same for both householders and monks. However, householders should keep in mind that they should only consume uncooked food and water in Ekashan. Monks, on the other hand, renounce uncooked food for life. A Shravak should not recite the Pariṭṭhāvaṇiāgareṇaṁ' text while reciting the original text.
While eating in Ekashan and Dwikashan, all four types of food can be taken at will, but after eating, food is renounced for the rest of the time. If one wants to do Trivihar Ekashan, then water can be drunk for the rest of the time. If one wants to do Chaurivihar, then even water cannot be drunk. If one wants to do Duvihar, then water and mouth freshener can be taken after eating. Nowadays, Trivihar Ekashan is the prevalent practice, hence the text 'Triviham' is given in the original text. If one wants to do Chaurivihar, then one should recite the text 'Chauriviham pi aharam asanam, panam, khaim, saim'.
The tradition of Duvihar-Ekashan was prevalent in ancient times. In today's age, its practice is very rare, although it is not completely absent.
There are eight Agars in Ekashan. Four have already been mentioned, the remaining four are as follows:
1. Sagarikaakar - In the language of the Agamas, a Sagarik is a householder. It is forbidden to eat in front of a householder. Therefore, if a monk has to stop eating and go to a secluded place to eat again after a Sagarik arrives, the fast is not broken.
1. 'Egashan' is a Prakrit word, which has two Sanskrit translations - 'Ekashan' and 'Ekasana'.
(1) 'Ekashan' means - eating once. (2) 'Ekasana' means - eating from one seat. Both meanings are acceptable in 'Egashan'. Ekansakṛt ashanam-bhojanam ekam vā āsanam-putācalanato yatra pratyākhyāne tadekāśanam ekāsanam vā, prākṛte dvayor api egāśanam iti rūpam.
- Acharya Haribhadra explains in the Pravachanasaroḍdhāravṛtti that eating once and not getting up again. 'Ekāśanam nāma sadu-paviṣṭa patācalanena bhojanam.'
- Aavashyakavṛtti

Page #200:
---------------------------
## Sixth Study: Refutation

[129]

2. **Akunchanaprasaran:**  Contracting or expanding limbs like hands and feet when feeling numb while eating.

3. **Gurvabhyuththan:**  Rising and standing up to show respect to a teacher or a special guest upon their arrival.

The meaning of this section is very important. When a teacher or guest arrives, one should definitely stand up. At that time, one should not have the delusion that "There is no rule to stand up from one's seat. Therefore, I will be guilty of breaking my vow if I stand up." There is no fault in standing up for teachers, it does not break the vow, but rather it is the worship of the virtue of humility. Acharya Siddhasen writes:

"Because it is necessary to rise for teachers, one should definitely stand up even while eating. There is no breaking of the vow in this." - Pravachansaroaddharavritti 4.

**Paristthapanikakar:**  It is a rule for Jain monks to take only a limited amount of food to satisfy their essential hunger, not more. However, if by mistake a monk has more food than necessary and needs to discard some, then the monk should accept the food with the permission of the Gurudev.

Acharya Siddhasen has said: "There is a possibility of many faults in discarding food, and there is merit and benefit in accepting and consuming it according to the scriptural law. Therefore, accepting it again with the permission of the Guru does not break the vow."

5. **Egaththanapacchakkhan:**

"I accept the vow of Ekashan, Egaththan, Pacchakkham. I refuse all three types of food: Asan, Khadim, and Saim."

(1) Anabhog, (2) Sahasakar, (3) Sagarikakar, (4) Gurvabhyuththan, (5) Paristthapanikakar, 1. Pravachansaroaddharavritti. 2. If one wants to renounce all four types of food, then one should say "Chauvviham pi".

Page #201:
---------------------------
## 130]
[Necessary Sutra (6) Mahattarakar, (7) Sarvasamadhipratyayakara. Except for the aforementioned seven Aagaras, I completely renounce food.]

**Discussion:** This is a Sutra of Ekasthan. The word 'Sthan' within Ekasthan refers to 'position'. Therefore, the implied meaning of Ekasthan is - 'Without moving any other limbs except the right hand and mouth, eating only once a day in the same posture. That is, the posture, the arrangement of limbs, and the posture that is present at the beginning of the meal should be maintained until the end of the meal.'

Acharya Jinadas has defined Ekasthan in the same way in the Aavashyakachurni - 'Jatha anguvangam thaviyam taheva samuddisitavvam, aagare se aountanasaranam natthi, sesa satta taheva.'

All other methods of Ekasthan are similar to Ekashan. Only the Aagara of contraction and expansion of hands, feet, etc. is not present. Therefore, 'aountanasaranenam' is not mentioned in the present Sutra.

6. Aachaml-Ayambilpratyakhyanasutra
_ I accept the Ayambil tapa. I renounce food except for the eight Aakaras, namely Anaabhog, Sahasakar, Lepalepa, Utkshiptvivek, Grihasthasanssrusht, Parishthapanikakar, Mahattarakar, and Sarvasamadhipratyayakara._

**Meaning:** Ayambil means Aachaml tapa. I accept the Aachaml tapa. I renounce food except for the eight Aakaras, namely Anaabhog, Sahasakar, Lepalepa, Utkshiptvivek, Grihasthasanssrusht, Parishthapanikakar, Mahattarakar, and Sarvasamadhipratyayakara.

**Discussion:** In the Aachaml Vrat, only one dry, bland, and unadulterated meal is taken in a day. Milk, curd, ghee, oil, jaggery, sugar, cooked food, etc., any kind of sweet food cannot be taken in the Aachaml Vrat. In ancient Aacharyagranths, there is a provision for performing Aachaml only by one of rice, black gram, or sattu.

Ayambil is more important than Ekashan and Ekasthan. In Ekashan and Ekasthan, one can eat delicious food in one meal, but in Ayambil, only bland food like boiled black gram, etc., without salt, is taken in one meal. The meaning is that Aachaml tapa is a great ideal for conquering the desire for taste. Restraint of the tongue is a great restraint.

Ayambil is performed as Chaturvidhahar and Trividhahar according to the wish of the Sadhak. If one wants to perform Chaturvidhahar, one should say, 'Chauvviham pi aharam asanam, panam, khaim, saim' and in Trividhahar, one should not say 'panam'.

Page #202:
---------------------------
## Sixth Study: Rejection

[131]

Eight Agars (exceptions) are mentioned in the Ayambil. Five of these Agars are the same as the previous rejections, while the three new Agars are as follows:

1. **Lepalepa:** If a vessel or hand is contaminated with ghee or other impurities, and the householder wipes it clean and offers food that is fit for Achaml, then there is no breach of the vow if it is accepted.
_The word 'Lepalepa' is formed from 'Lep' and 'Alep'. 'Lep' means to be contaminated with ghee, etc. 'Alep' means to wipe it clean and remove the contamination. Even after wiping, some residue of the impurity remains. Therefore, the Agar of Lepalepa is included in Achaml. 'Lepasch Alepasch Lepalepaṁ Tasmadanyatra, Bhajane Vikṛtyādyavayavasadbhave'pi Na-bhanga Ityarthaḥ.'_ - Pravachanasaroḍdhāravṛtti 2.

2. **Utkṣipta-Viveka:** If dry rice or bread, etc., has been previously contaminated with jaggery or sugar, etc., and a Muni observing the Achaml vow is offered that food, it can be accepted. 'Utkṣipta' means to lift, and 'Viveka' means to remove - not to leave it behind after lifting.

3. **Gṛhasthasamsṛṣṭa:** Taking Kulmāṣa, etc., that has been touched by ghee or oil, etc., is the Agar of Gṛhasthasamsṛṣṭa. In this Agar, it is important to note that if the amount of impurity is small, then there is no breach of the vow, but if the impurity is in large quantities, then accepting it becomes a cause for breach of the vow.

Some Acharyas believe that the four Agars of Lepalepa, Utkṣipta-Viveka, Gṛhasthasamsṛṣṭa, and Pariṣṭhāpanikāgāra are only for Sadhus, not for householders.

7. **Abhaktārtha-Upvāsa Sutra:**

Uggaye Sūre, Abhatṭhaṁ Paccakkhāmi, Cauvvihaṁ Pi Āhāra-Asanaṁ, Pāṇaṁ, Khāimaṁ, Sāimaṁ.
Annattha'ṇābhōgeṇaṁ, Sahasāgāreṇaṁ, Pāriṭṭhāvaṇiāgāreṇaṁ, Mahattarāgāreṇaṁ, Savvasamāhivattiāgāreṇaṁ Vōsirāmi.

Meaning: From sunrise, I observe the Abhaktārtha-Upvāsa, therefore I renounce all four types of food: Asana, Pāna, Khādima, and Svadima.
_I renounce all types of food except for the five Agars of Anābhōga, Sahasākāra, Pāriṣṭhāpanikākāra, Mahattarākāra, and Sarvasamādhipratyayākāra._

Page #203:
---------------------------
## 132]
**Essential Sutra**

**Explanation - Meaning of Abhakta -** The meaning of "bhakta" is food. The meaning of "artha" is "purpose". The meaning of "a" is "not". Combining all three, the meaning is - the purpose of "bhakta" is not present in the vow, that is, fasting. "There is no rejection of food in which vow, that is fasting." - Shraddhapratikramanavritti, by Devendra

Fasting is of two types: Chauvvihahar and Trivihahar.  

**Chauvvihahar Abhattatha** is when one abstains from all four types of food from sunrise to sunrise the next day.

**Trivihahar** (Trividhahar) fasting allows for the consumption of water. Therefore, the six water-related categories in the original text should be expanded after "Savvasamahivattiyaagarenam" as follows:

"Paanass Levaadeṇ Va, Alevaadeṇ Va, Acchheṇ Va, Bahaleṇ Va, Sasittheṇ Va, Asittheṇ Va Vosirami."

These six categories have been mentioned by almost all ancient Acharyas, including Jinadasamhattar, Haribhadra, and Siddhasena. This rule applies not only to fasting but also to other renunciations where Trividhahar is to be observed. Although Acharya Jinadasa, etc., have mentioned this only in the context of Abhakta.

The meaning of these water-related categories is as follows:

1. **Lepkrit:** Water from lentils, dates, tamarind, etc., and any water that is thick enough to coat a vessel. This type of water can be consumed during Trividhahar.

2. **Alekpkrit:** Water from buttermilk, etc., that is clear and water from kanji, etc. One should use Alepkrit water for washing that does not leave a coating on the vessel.

3. **Acch:** Acch means clean. Only heated water is considered Acch. However, Acharya Siddhasena, the author of the Pravachansaroaddhar Vritti, mentions hot water, etc. "Apichchalaat Ushnodakaadeh." But Acharya Shri has not clarified what other water is acceptable besides hot water. It is possible that clean water used for washing fruits, etc., is acceptable. A Gujarati commentator has also written this.

4. **Bahal:** Smooth paste from sesame seeds, rice, and barley, etc., is called Bahal. Some Acharyas also use the word Bahulep in place of Bahal.

5. **Sasikth:** Water used for washing hands and vessels that are coated with flour, etc., and contains particles of flour, etc. This type of water does not break the fast during Trividhahar.

Page #204:
---------------------------
## Sixth Study: Renunciation

[133]

6. **Asiktha** - The washing of hands and vessels, etc., soiled with flour, etc., which is strained, so that it does not contain particles of flour, etc.

Pandit Sukhlalji says - If one wishes to observe a **Chauvvihahar** fast from the beginning, then one should say "**Paritthavanniagarenam**". If one has taken **Trividhahar** at the beginning, but wishes to observe a **Chauvvihahar** fast in the evening due to not taking water, then one should not say "**Paritthavanniagarenam**".

8. **Divascharimsutra**

I renounce **Divascharim** (or **Bhavacarim**) and all four types of food - **Asan**, **Pan**, **Khaim**, and **Saim**. I renounce food except for **Anabhoga**, **Sahasagar**, **Mahattaragar**, and **Savvasamahivattiagar**.

**Meaning** - I am taking the vow of **Divascharim** (or **Bhavacarim**), therefore I renounce all four types of food - **Asan**, **Pan**, **Khaim**, and **Saim**. I renounce food except for the four **Agars** - **Anabhoga**, **Sahasagar**, **Mahattaragar**, and **Savvasamahivattiagar**.

**Discussion** - This is the **Charampratyakhyanasutra**. "**Charam**" means "final". It is of two types - the final part of the day and the final part of life (**Bhavam**). Renouncing all four or three types of food from before sunset until sunrise the next day is **Divascharampratyakhyan**.

**Bhavacarimpratyakhyan** means - when a seeker is certain that their life is short, they renounce all four or three types of food for the rest of their life and take **Santhara** to practice **Sanjam**. **Bhavacarimpratyakhyan** is a bright symbol of success in the practice of **Sanjam** throughout life.

If one wishes to renounce **Bhavacarim**, then one should say "**Bhavacarim**" instead of "**Divascharim**". The rest of the text is the same as **Divascharim**.

For a **Muni**, there is a renunciation of **Trividham** with **Trividham** for the night meal. Therefore, they renounce the rest of the day's food through **Divascharim** and remember the renunciation of the night meal as a reminder. The same applies to householders who renounce the night meal. Those who do not renounce the night meal renounce food for the rest of the day and night through **Divascharim**.

9. **Abhigrahasutra**

I renounce **Abhigraha** and all four types of food - **Asan**, **Pan**, **Khaim**, and **Saim**. I renounce food except for **Anabhoga**, **Sahasagar**, **Mahattaragar**, and **Savvasamahivattiagar**.

Page #205:
---------------------------
## 134]
**Essential Sutra**
**Meaning:** I take the vow of non-attachment, therefore I renounce all four types of food: ashan, pan, khadim, and svadim (for the stipulated time).
I renounce all four types of food, except for the four stores: anabhog, sahasakar, mahattarakar, and sarvasamadhipratyayakara, until the fulfillment of non-attachment.
**Discussion:** After fasting, etc., or even without fasting, etc., one should make a firm resolve in one's mind that one will only partake in food when certain things are available, otherwise one will not eat for the duration of the vowed days, such as a vow or a fast. This type of vow is called 'abhigraha'.
After firmly deciding in one's mind what things one must adhere to in abhigraha, one should renounce them through the above text. The vow of abhigraha is difficult. Only patient and courageous practitioners can follow it. Students of Jain history know that one ascetic took the abhigraha of lion-saffron sweets, and when that abhigraha was not fulfilled, he went mad and wandered around with a bowl, day and night, without regard for time. This example is found in the commentaries of the Kalpasutra, therefore, one should definitely consider one's strength when taking abhigraha.

## 10. Sutra of Non-Corruption
**Meaning:** I renounce corruptions. I renounce corruption except for the nine stores: anabhog, sahasakar, lepalepa, grihasthasansrisht, utkshiptvivek, pratiityamrakshit, parishthapanik, mahattarakar, and sarvasamadhipratyayakara.
**Discussion:** Food items that cause mental defilement are called vikriti.
'Because they are the cause of mental defilement, they are called vikriti' - Acharya Hemachandra's Yogashastravritti (Third Light). Vikriti includes food items like milk, yogurt, butter, ghee, oil, jaggery, and honey.
The real purpose of food is to strengthen the body and mind. The strength of the mind means keeping it pure, i.e., free from defects. A healthy mind resides in a healthy body. However, we cannot deny that even when the mind is not healthy, to a great extent, what we call physical health remains. But it does not benefit the soul, but rather harms it. Therefore, it is necessary to give the body pure nourishment so that the body and mind remain healthy, and the purity of both...

Page #206:
---------------------------
## Sixth Study: Renunciation

[135]

The soul can become elevated. Therefore, the scriptures have stated that one should maintain sattvic qualities in food. Food that causes defilement cannot remain in the body without polluting it.

There are nine repositories of non-defilement. The description of eight repositories has already been covered in previous chapters. The repository called "Pratiityamrakshit" is new. Consuming items like bread, etc., on which ghee, etc., has been applied only with the finger, is called the Pratiityamrakshit repository. The meaning of this repository is that a seeker who renounces defilement like ghee, etc., cannot consume ghee, etc., in the form of a stream. They can consume bread that has been lightly smeared with ghee.

"Pratiityamrakshit is when, for the purpose of slight delicacy, one takes a little ghee with the finger and applies it to dry bread, etc. It is not to be consumed in a stream." - Devendra Pratikramanavritti, Tilakacharya

11. Sutra on Renunciation Completion

"Upon sunrise, I have completed the renunciation, along with the salutation. That renunciation has been properly touched, nurtured, purified, crossed, declared, and worshipped. Whatever has not been properly worshipped, may its misdeeds be false for me."

Meaning: This is a sutra for the completion of renunciation. Whatever renunciation has been undertaken, its completion should be done through this sutra. In the original text above, "Namukkarsahyam" is a general word indicating a salutation. In its place, the name of the renunciation that has been undertaken should be used. For example, if one has undertaken the renunciation of "Paurushi," then one should say "Paurusipaccakhaanam kayam."

There are six limbs of observing renunciation:

1. **Fasayam (Touched or Splashed)** - Receiving renunciation from the Guru or oneself, according to the proper procedure.
2. **Paliyam (Nurtured)** - Continuously protecting it.
3. **Sohiyam (Purified)** - If any defilement occurs, immediately purifying it. Alternatively, the Sanskrit word for "Sohiyam" is "Shobhit," which means "adorned." In this case, the meaning would be to eat after offering food to the Gurus, companions, or guests.

Page #207:
---------------------------
[136]
(4) **Tiriyam** (Tirita)
Eating food.
-
[Aavashyakasutra]
Even after the time for the renunciation taken has elapsed, after staying for some time,
(5) **Kittiyam** (Kirtita) before starting to eat food, to say with deliberation, considering the renunciation taken, that I had taken such and such renunciation in such and such way, it has been fulfilled well.
(6) **Arahiyam** (Aradhita) 1
To worship the renunciation according to the [teachings].
-
Staying completely away from all faults, according to the method mentioned above,
00
1. Acharya Jinadas has said 'Anupalita' in place of 'Aradhita'. The meaning of Anupalita is - to follow the renunciation while repeatedly remembering the words of the Tirthankara - 'Anupaliyam naam anusmṛtya anusmṛtya tīrthankaravacanam pratyākhyānam pāliyatvam.'
Aavashyakachurni

Page #208:
---------------------------
**Appendix**

The method of the necessary is to spread an asana by cleaning and sweeping a spotless place free of living beings. Then, standing on it, offer three salutations to the Lord Shasana Pati Bhagwan Mahavir Swami and to one's present Guru Maharaj with the recitation of 'Tikkhutto'. Then, taking the permission of the Chaubis Stav, perform the Chaubis Stav. In the Chaubis Stav, perform Kaussagg by reciting 'Ichchakarenam' and 'Tass Uttari'. In the Kaussagg, meditate on the two 'Logass'. Recite 'Namo Arihantaanam' and perform the Kaussagg. If the mind, speech, and body are moving during the Kaussagg, or if there is Aarthadhyan or Raudra dhyan, then say 'Tass Miccha Mi Dukkadam' and speak it aloud to one 'Logass'. Then, take permission to perform Pratikraman. Recite one Navkar and say 'Ichchami Nam Bhanta' and first take permission for the necessary.

In the first necessary, perform Kaussagg by reciting 'Karemi Bhanta', 'Ichchami Thami', and 'Tass Uttari'. In the Kaussagg, meditate on the following: Agame Tivihe, San-Samakit, Atichara (five Samiti, three Gupti, six Kay, five Mahavrata, sixth Ratribhojanatyag Vrata), Chhoti Sanlekhana, Eighteen Papasthan, Ichchami Thami, and one Navkar mantra. In all the sections, instead of 'Micchami Dukkadam', say 'Tass Aloou'. Recite 'Namo Arihantaanam' and perform the Kaussagg. Recite the four dhyan and complete the first necessary. Then, take permission for the second necessary.

In the second necessary, speak aloud to one 'Logass'. Then, take permission for the third necessary.

In the third necessary, recite 'Ichchami Khamasamano' twice. When the word 'Nisihiyaa' comes, sit with both knees bent and both hands joined. When the word 'Titissannayaraye' comes, stand up and complete the recitation. Similarly, recite 'Ichchami Khamasamano' twice. Then, take permission for the fourth necessary.

In the fourth necessary, stand up and speak aloud the following which were meditated upon in the Kaussagg: Agame Tivihe, Dansan Samakit, Atichara, Chhoti Sanlekhana, Eighteen Papasthan, Ichchami Thami. In all the sections, say 'Micchami Dukkadam'. Then, recite 'Tass Savvas'. Then, take permission for the 'Shraman Sutra' and sit with the right knee bent. Then, recite one Navkar, Karemi Bhanta, Chattari Mangalam, Ichchami Thami, Ichchakarenam, Agame Tivihe, Dansan Samakit. After that, recite the following: Nidra Dosh Nivritti (Pagamasijaaye), Bhiksha Dosh Nivritti (Goieraggchariyaaye), Swadhyay and Pratilekhan (Chaukalasijjaaye), and Tetis Bol. Afterwards, bend both knees, join both hands, bow the head, and recite the Nigranth Pravachan (Namo Chauvisaaye). When the word 'Abbhuttiomi' comes, stand up and recite the entire text. Then, sit in Padmasana and recite the following: Badi Sanlekhana, Eighteen Papasthan. Then, stand up and recite 'Tass Dhamas' and repeat the previous steps twice.

Page #209:
---------------------------
[138]
[Essential Sutras]
Recite the phrase "Icchami Khamasamano". Then, bow down with both knees, join both hands above the knees, bow your head low, recite one Navkar Mantra, and then recite the five-fold salutation. Then, sit down and recite the Anant Chaubis, Ayariyauvjjhae Dhaai Dweep, Chauraasi Lakh Jeevoyoni, Kul Kodi, Khamemi Savve Jeeva, and the eighteen Papasthanak. Then, take the command of the fifth essential.

In the fifth essential, recite the Pratikraman, one Navkar, Karemi Bhanta, Icchami Thami, Tass Uttari, and then focus on the Logass in Kaussagg (in Devasiy-Rayasiy Pratikraman, four Logass should be done in Kaussagg, in Pakkhi Pratikraman, eight, in Chaumasi Pratikraman, twelve, and in Sanvatsarik Pratikraman, twenty). Recite "Namo Arihantaanam" and complete the Kaussagg. Then, recite one Logass Prakat and say "Icchami Khamasamano" twice. Then, take the command of the sixth essential.

In the sixth essential, stand up and receive the Pacchakkhan from the Sadhuji Maharaj according to your ability. If the Sadhuji Maharaj is not present, then receive the Pacchakkhan from the Jyeshtha Shravak. If they are also not present, then accept the ten Pratyakhyan according to your ability. Then, recite two Namotthunan, face the east and north directions, and salute Simandhar Swami, Mahavira Swami, and the Muni Rajas. Afterwards, apologize to everyone from the heart and recite the Chaubisi and other hymns.

Page #210:
---------------------------
##  Anadhyaya Kaal

[Quoted from Nandi Sutra, edited by Acharya Pravara Shri Atmaramji Maharaj]

One should study scriptures only during the time prescribed in the Agamas for self-study. Studying during the Anadhyaya Kaal is prohibited.

The Manusmriti and other Smritis also describe Anadhyaya Kaal in detail. Vedic people also mention the Anadhyayas of the Vedas. Similarly, other Arsha Granthas are also considered Anadhyaya. Jain Agamas, being Sarvajnokt, Devadhisthit and Swaravidya combined, also have their Anadhyaya Kaal mentioned in the Agamas, such as:

**Ten Anadhyayas related to the sky:**

1. **Ulkapaat:** If there is a great fall of stars, one should not study scriptures for one Prahar.
2. **Digdaah:** As long as the direction is red, meaning it appears as if there is fire in the direction, one should not study.
3. **Garjit:** Thunder
4. **Vidyut:** Lightning
However, Garjan and Vidyut are not considered Anadhyaya during Chaturmas, as they are often a natural occurrence during this season. Therefore, from Ardra to Swati Nakshatra, it is not considered Anadhyaya.
5. **Nirghaat:** When there is a loud roar in the sky without clouds, or when there is thunder with clouds, there is an Anadhyaya period of two Prahar.
6. **Yupaka:** In the Shukla Paksha, the Sandhya of Pratipada, Dwitiya, and Tritiya, when the moonlight is visible, is called Yupaka. One should not study during these days, until the night.
7. **Yakshadeepta:** When there is a light in a direction, like lightning, but with a slight delay, it is called Yakshadeepta. One should not study as long as the Yaksha-like light is visible in the sky.

**Ten Anadhyayas related to the body:**

1. **Atthi:** Bone
2. **Mansam:** Flesh
3. **Sonite:** Blood
4. **Asuchi Samante:** In the presence of impurity
5. **Susanasamante:** In the presence of a cremation ground
6. **Chandovarate:** During the lunar eclipse
7. **Surovarate:** During the solar eclipse
8. **Padane:** During a fall
9. **Rayavuggahe:** During a robbery
10. **Uvassayassa Anto Oralie Sarirage:** During the final moments of life

**Four Mahapratipada:**

1. **Ashadhapadivaa**
2. **Indamahapadivaa**
3. **Kattiapadivaa**
4. **Sugimhapadivaa**

**Four Mahapratipada Purnima:**

1. **Ashadhapadivaa Purnima**
2. **Indamahapadivaa Purnima**
3. **Kattiapadivaa Purnima**
4. **Sugimhapadivaa Purnima**

**Four Sandhya:**

1. **Pradhumate:** Dawn
2. **Pachchimate:** Evening
3. **Majjhane:** Noon
4. **Addarate:** Midnight

**Four Kaal:**

1. **Puvvane:** Morning
2. **Avarane:** Afternoon
3. **Paose:** East
4. **Pacchuse:** West

According to the above Sutrapath, there are 32 Anadhyayas, which are divided into ten related to the sky, ten related to the body, four Mahapratipada, four Mahapratipada Purnima, and four Sandhya. These are briefly described below:

**Sky-related Anadhyayas:**

1. **Ulkapaat:** If there is a great fall of stars, one should not study scriptures for one Prahar.
2. **Digdaah:** As long as the direction is red, meaning it appears as if there is fire in the direction, one should not study.
3. **Garjit:** Thunder
4. **Vidyut:** Lightning
However, Garjan and Vidyut are not considered Anadhyaya during Chaturmas, as they are often a natural occurrence during this season. Therefore, from Ardra to Swati Nakshatra, it is not considered Anadhyaya.
5. **Nirghaat:** When there is a loud roar in the sky without clouds, or when there is thunder with clouds, there is an Anadhyaya period of two Prahar.
6. **Yupaka:** In the Shukla Paksha, the Sandhya of Pratipada, Dwitiya, and Tritiya, when the moonlight is visible, is called Yupaka. One should not study during these days, until the night.
7. **Yakshadeepta:** When there is a light in a direction, like lightning, but with a slight delay, it is called Yakshadeepta. One should not study as long as the Yaksha-like light is visible in the sky.

**Body-related Anadhyayas:**

1. **Atthi:** Bone
2. **Mansam:** Flesh
3. **Sonite:** Blood
4. **Asuchi Samante:** In the presence of impurity
5. **Susanasamante:** In the presence of a cremation ground
6. **Chandovarate:** During the lunar eclipse
7. **Surovarate:** During the solar eclipse
8. **Padane:** During a fall
9. **Rayavuggahe:** During a robbery
10. **Uvassayassa Anto Oralie Sarirage:** During the final moments of life

**Mahapratipada:**

1. **Ashadhapadivaa:** One should not study during the Ashadhapadivaa.
2. **Indamahapadivaa:** One should not study during the Indamahapadivaa.
3. **Kattiapadivaa:** One should not study during the Kattiapadivaa.
4. **Sugimhapadivaa:** One should not study during the Sugimhapadivaa.

**Mahapratipada Purnima:**

1. **Ashadhapadivaa Purnima:** One should not study during the Ashadhapadivaa Purnima.
2. **Indamahapadivaa Purnima:** One should not study during the Indamahapadivaa Purnima.
3. **Kattiapadivaa Purnima:** One should not study during the Kattiapadivaa Purnima.
4. **Sugimhapadivaa Purnima:** One should not study during the Sugimhapadivaa Purnima.

**Sandhya:**

1. **Pradhumate:** One should not study during the Pradhumate.
2. **Pachchimate:** One should not study during the Pachchimate.
3. **Majjhane:** One should not study during the Majjhane.
4. **Addarate:** One should not study during the Addarate.

**Kaal:**

1. **Puvvane:** One should not study during the Puvvane.
2. **Avarane:** One should not study during the Avarane.
3. **Paose:** One should not study during the Paose.
4. **Pacchuse:** One should not study during the Pacchuse.

**Note:** The translation attempts to preserve the Jain terms while providing a clear and understandable explanation of the Anadhyaya Kaal.

Page #211:
---------------------------
##  Translation:

**8. Dhūmikā-Kṛṣṇa-Kārttika:** The period from Kṛṣṇa-Kārttika to Māgha is the gestation period of the clouds. During this time, a fine, water-like mist of smoky color falls, which is called Dhūmikā-Kṛṣṇa. As long as this mist falls, one should not engage in svādhyāya.

**9. Mihikāśveta:** In winter, a fine, water-like mist of white color falls, which is called Mihikā. As long as this falls, it is a time of asvādhyāya.

**10. Raja-Udghāta:** Due to the wind, dust spreads all over the sky. As long as this dust remains spread, one should not engage in svādhyāya.

The above ten reasons are related to the sky and are considered asvādhyāya. The following ten reasons are related to the generous (audārika) and are also considered asvādhyāya.

**11-12-13. Bones, Flesh, and Blood:** If the bones, flesh, and blood of a five-sensed animal are visible, then as long as those things are not removed from there, it is asvādhyāya. The commentator considers asvādhyāya for a distance of 60 cubits around these things.

Similarly, asvādhyāya is considered for the bones, flesh, and blood of a human being. The difference is that asvādhyāya for these lasts for 100 cubits and one day and night. Asvādhyāya for a woman's menstrual period lasts for three days. Asvādhyāya for the birth of a boy and a girl is considered to last for seven and eight days respectively.

**14. Aśaci-Mala-Mūtra:** As long as excrement and urine are visible, it is asvādhyāya.

**15. Śmaśāna:** Asvādhyāya is considered for a distance of 100 cubits around a cremation ground.

**16. Candragrahaṇa:** During a lunar eclipse, one should not engage in svādhyāya for eight, twelve, or sixteen praharas, depending on the severity of the eclipse (jghanya, madhyama, utkrṣṭa).

**17. Sūryagrahaṇa:** During a solar eclipse, asvādhyāya is also considered for eight, twelve, or sixteen praharas, depending on the severity of the eclipse.

**18. Patana:** When a great king or national leader dies, one should not engage in svādhyāya until his cremation is completed. Alternatively, one should gradually resume svādhyāya until a new leader takes over.

**19. Rājavyuḍgraha:** When there is a war between nearby kings, one should not engage in svādhyāya until peace is restored. Even after peace is restored, one should not engage in svādhyāya for one day and night.

**20. Audārika Śarīra:** If a five-sensed being is killed within a shelter, one should not engage in svādhyāya as long as the body remains there. If the lifeless body remains within a distance of 100 cubits, one should not engage in svādhyāya.

The above ten reasons are related to the generous (audārika) body and are considered asvādhyāya.

**21-28. Four Mahotsava and Four Mahāpratipadā:** The four Mahotsava are Āṣāḍha Pūrṇimā, Āśvina Pūrṇimā, Kārttika Pūrṇimā, and Caitra Pūrṇimā. The pratipadā that comes after these Pūrṇimā is called Mahāpratipadā. It is forbidden to engage in svādhyāya during these days.

**29-32. Prātaḥ, Sāyam, Madhyāhna, and Ardharātri:** One should not engage in svādhyāya one ghaḍī before and one ghaḍī after sunrise, one ghaḍī before and one ghaḍī after sunset, one ghaḍī before and one ghaḍī after midday, and one ghaḍī before and one ghaḍī after midnight.

Page #212:
---------------------------
• Member List /
Shri Agam Prakashan Samiti, Byawer
List of Benefactor Members
Mahastamh
Patron
1. Shri Birdicandji Prakashchandji Telesara, Pali
1. Seth Mohanmalji Chordia, Madras 2. Shri Gulabchandji Mangilalji Surana, Secunderabad
2. Shri Gyanrajji Kevalchandji Mootha, Pali
3. Shri Pukharajji Shishodia, Byawer
3. Shri Premrajji Jatanrajji Mehta, Medta City 4. Shri S. Jadawmalji Manakchandji Betala, Bagalkot
4. Shri Sayermalji Jethamalji Chordia, Bangalore 5. Shri Premrajji Bhanwarlalji Shrisrimal, Durg 6. Shri S. Kishanchandji Chordia, Madras 7. Shri Kanwarlalji Betala, Guwahati 8. Seth Khivrajji Chordia Madras 9. Shri Gumanmalji Chordia, Madras 10. Shri S. Badalchandji Chordia, Madras 11. Shri J. Doolichandji Chordia, Madras 12. Shri S. Ratanchandji Chordia, Madras 13. Shri J. Annarajji Chordia, Madras 14. Shri S. Sayerchandji Chordia, Madras 15. Shri R. Shantillalji Uttamchandji Chordia,
Madras
16. Shri Siremalji Hirachandji Chordia, Madras 17. Shri J. Hukumchandji Chordia, Madras
Stambh Member
1. Shri Agarchandji Fatechandji Parkh, Jodhpur 2. Shri Jasrajji Ganeshmalji Sancheti, Jodhpur 3. Shri Tilakchandji Sagarmalji Sancheti, Madras 4. Shri Poosalalji Kisturchandji Surana, Katangi 5. Shri R. Prasannachandji Chordia, Madras 6. Shri Deepchandji Chordia, Madras 7. Shri Moolchandji Chordia, Katangi 8. Shri Vardhman Industries, Kanpur 9. Shri Mangilalji Mishrilalji Sancheti, Durg
5. Shri Hiralalji Pannalalji Chopra, Byawer 6. Shri Mohanlalji Nemichandji Lalwani, Changatola .
7. Shri Deepchandji Chandanmalji Chordia, Madras 8. Shri Pannalalji Bhagchandji Bothra, Changatola 9. Smt. Sirekunwar Bai Dharm Patni Sw. Shri Suganchandji Jhamar, Madurantakam
10. Shri Bastimalji Mohanlalji Bohra (KGF) Jadan
11. Shri Thanchandji Mehta, Jodhpur
12. Shri Bhairudanji Labhchandji Surana, Nagaur 13. Shri Khubchandji Gadiya, Byawer
14. Shri Mishrilalji Dhanrajji Vinaykia,
Byawer
15. Shri Indrachandji Baid, Rajnandgaon 16. Shri Ravtamlaji Bhikamchandji Pagaria,
Balaghat
17. Shri Ganeshmalji Dharmicandji Kankaria, Tangla 18. Shri Suganchandji Bokdia, Indore
19. Shri Harkachandji Sagarmalji Betala, Indore 20. Shri Raghunathmalji Likhmichandji Lodha, Changatola
21. Shri Sidhkarnajji Shikharchandji Baid, Changatola

Page #213:
---------------------------
• Member List /
22. Shri Sagarmalji Nortamlaji Pincha, Madras 23. Shri Mohanrajji Mukanchandji Baliya, Ahmedabad
24. Shri Kesharimalji Janvarilalji Talesara, Pali 25. Shri Ratanchandji Uttamchandji Modi, Baywar 26. Shri Dharmichadji Bhagchandji Bohra, Jhutha 27. Shri Chhogmalji Hemrajji Lodha Dondi Lohara 28. Shri Gunachandji Dalichandji Kataria, Bellary 29. Shri Mulchandji Sujanmalji Sancheti, Jodhpur 30. Shri C. Amarchandji Bothra, Madras 31. Shri Bhanvarlalji Mulchandji Surana, Madras 32. Shri Badalchandji Jugrajji Mehta, Indore 33. Shri Lalchandji Mohanlalji Kothari, Gothan 34. Shri Hiralalji Pannalalji Chopra, Ajmer 35. Shri Mohanlalji Parsamalji Pagaria, Bangalore
36. Shri Bhanvarimalji Chordia, Madras 37. Shri Bhanvarlalji Gothi, Madras 38. Shri Jalmachandji Rikhbachandji Bafna, Agra 39. Shri Ghevarchandji Pukharajji Bhurt, Guwahati 40. Shri Jabarchandji Gelda, Madras 41. Shri Jadavmalji Suganchandji, Madras 42. Shri Pukharajji Vijayrajji, Madras 43. Shri Chenmalji Surana Trust, Madras 44. Shri Lunakaranji Rikhbachandji Lodha, Madras 45. Shri Surajmalji Sajjanrajji Mehta, Koppal Associate Members
1. Shri Devkaranji Shrichandji Dosi, Medtacity 2. Smt. Chaganibai Vinaykia, Baywar 3. Shri Poonamchandji Nahata, Jodhpur
4. Shri Bhanvarlalji Vijayrajji Kankaria, Chillipuram
5. Shri Bhanvarlalji Chopra, Baywar
6. Shri Vijayrajji Ratnalalji Chatar, Baywar
7. Shri B. Gajrajji Bokdia, Salem 8. Shri Phoolchandji Gautamchandji Kanted, Pali 9. Shri K. Pukharajji Bafna, Madras 10. Shri Rupraji Jodharajji Mootha, Delhi 11. Shri Mohanlalji Mangalchandji Pagaria, Raipur
12. Shri Nathmalji Mohanlalji Lunia,
Chandawal
13. Shri Bhanvarlalji Gautamchandji Pagaria, Kushalpura
14. Shri Uttamchandji Mangilalji, Jodhpur 15. Shri Mulchandji Parkh, Jodhpur 16. Shri Sumermalji Medtia, Jodhpur
17. Shri Ganeshmalji Nemichandji Tantia, Jodhpur 18. Shri Udayrajji Pukharajji Sancheti, Jodhpur 19. Shri Badarmalji Pukharajji Bant, Kanpur 20. Smt. Sundarbai Gothi Dharmpatni Shri Tarachandji Gothi, Jodhpur
21. Shri Raychandji Mohanlalji, Jodhpur 22. Shri Ghevarchandji Rupraji, Jodhpur 23. Shri Bhanvarlalji Manakchandji Surana, Madras 24. Shri Janvarilalji Amarchandji Kothari, Baywar
25. Shri Manakchandji Kishnalalji, Medtacity 26. Shri Mohanlalji Gulabchandji Chatar, Baywar 27. Shri Jasrajji Janvarilalji Dhariawal,
28. Shri Mohanlalji Champalalji Gothi, Jodhpur 29. Shri Nemichandji Dakalia Mehta, Jodhpur 30. Shri Tarachandji Kevalchandji Karnavat, Jodhpur 31. Shri Asumal & Co., Jodhpur 32. Shri Pukharajji Lodha, Jodhpur
33. Smt. Suganibai Dharmpatni Shri Mishrilalji Sand, Jodhpur

Page #214:
---------------------------
Member List /
Suraana,
Jodhpur
34. Shri Bachhrajji 35. Shri Harkachandji Mehta, Jodhpur
36. Shri Devrajji Labhchandji Medtiya, Jodhpur 37. Shri Kanakrajji Madanrajji Golia, Jodhpur 38. Shri Ghevarchandji Parsamalji Tantia, Jodhpur 39. Shri Mangilalji Chordia, Kuchera 40. Shri Sardarmalji Suraana, Bhilai 41. Shri Okchandji Hemrajji Soni, Durg 42. Shri Surajkaranji Suraana, Madras 43. Shri Ghisulalji Lalchandji Parkh, Durg 44. Shri Pukharajji Bohra, (Jain Transport Co.) Jodhpur
45. Shri Champalalji Saklecha, Jalna 46. Shri Premrajji Mithalalji Kamdar, Bangalore 47. Shri Bhanwarlalji Motha & Sons, Jaipur 48. Shri Lalchandji Motilalji Gadia, Bangalore 49. Shri Bhanwarlalji Navratnamalji Sankhla, Mettupalayam
50. Shri Pukharajji Chhallani, Karanguli 51. Shri Asakaranji Jasrajji Parkh, Durg 52. Shri Ganeshmalji Hemrajji Soni, Bhilai 53. Shri Amritrajji Jaswantrajji Mehta,
54. Shri Ghevarchandji Kishoramalji Parkh, Jodhpur 55 Shri Mangilalji Rekchandji Parkh, Jodhpur 56. Shri Munnilalji Mulchandji Gulechha, Jodhpur 57. Shri Ratnalalji Lakhpatrajji, Jodhpur 58. Shri Jivrajji Parsamalji Kothari, Medta
City
59. Shri Bhanwarlalji Rikhabchandji Nahata, Nagaur 60. Shri Mangilalji Prakashchandji Runwal,
Mysore
61. Shri Pukharajji Bohra, Pipaliya Kalan 62. Shri Harkachandji Jugrajji Bafna, Bangalore
63. Shri Chandanmalji Premchandji Modi, Bhilai 64. Shri Bhivrajji Baghmar, Kuchera
65. Shri Tilokchandji Premprakashji, Ajmer 66. Shri Vijaylalji Premchandji Gulechha Rajnandgaon
67. Shri Ravatmalji Chajed, Bhilai 68. Shri Bhanwarlalji Dungarmalji Kankaria, Bhilai
69. Shri Hiralalji Hastimalji Deshlhara, Bhilai
60. Shri Vardhaman Sthanakwasi Jain Shravak Sangh, Dallirajhara
71. Shri Champalalji Buddharajji Bafna, Byaver 72. Shri Gangaramji Indrachandji Bohra, Kuchera 73. Shri Fatehrajji Nemichandji Karnavat, Calcutta
74. Shri Balchandji Thanchandji Bhurt, Calcutta 75. Shri Sampatrajji Kataria, Jodhpur 76. Shri Javrilalji Shanti Lalji Suraana, Bolaram 77. Shri Kanmalji Kothari, Dadia 75. Shri Pannalalji Motilalji Suraana, Pali 79. Shri Manakchandji Ratnalalji Munot, Tangla 80. Shri Chimman Singhji Mohansinghji Lodha, Byaver 81. Shri Riddhakaranji Ravatmalji Bhurt, Guwahati 82. Shri Parsamalji Mahavirchandji Bafna, Gothan 83. Shri Fakirchandji Kamalchandji Shrisrimal, Kuchera
84. Shri Mangilalji Madanlalji Chordia, Bhairunda
85. Shri Sohनलालji Lunakaranji Suraana, Kuchera 86. Shri Ghisulalji, Parsamalji, Javrilalji Kothari, Gothan
87. Shri Sardarmalji & Company, Jodhpur 88. Shri Champalalji Hiralalji Bagrecha,
Jodhpur

Page #215:
---------------------------
89. Shri Pukharajji Kataria, Jodhpur 90. Shri Indrachandji Mukanchandji, Indore 91. Shri Bhanwarlalji Bafna, Indore 92. Shri Jethmalji Modi, Indore
93. Shri Balchandji Amarchandji Modi, Byawar 94. Shri Kundanmalji Parsamalji Bhandari, Bangalore 95. Smt. Kamalakunwar Lalwani, wife of late
115. Shri Mohanlalji Dhariawal, Pali 116. Smt. Ramkunwarbai, wife of Shri Chandmalji Lodha, Bombay
117. Shri Mangilalji Uttamchandji Bafna, Bangalore 118. Shri Sanchalalji Bafna, Aurangabad 119. Shri Bhikhamchandji Manakchandji Khabia, (Kudalore) Madras
97. Shri Suganchandji Sancheti, Rajnandgaon 98. Shri Prakashchandji Jain, Nagaur
120. Smt. Anopkunwar, wife of Shri Champalalji Sanghvi, Kuchera
99. Shri Kushalchandji Rikhabchandji Surana,
Bolaram
121. Shri Sohनलालji Sojatiya, Thanwala 100. Shri Lakshmichandji Ashok Kumarji Shrisrimal, 122. Shri Champalalji Bhandari, Calcutta
Kuchera
123. Shri Bhikhamchandji Ganeshmalji Chaudhary, Dhulea
124. Shri Pukharajji Kishनलालji Tateड़, Secunderabad
101. Shri Gudarmalji Champalalji, Gothan 102. Shri Tejarajji Kothari, Mangaliyaवास 103. Shri Sampatrajji Chordia, Madras 104. Shri Amarchandji Chajed, Padu Bari 105. Shri Jugrajji Dhanrajji Barmecha, Madras 106. Shri Pukharajji Naharmalji Lalwani, Madras 107. Smt. Kanchandevi and Nirmala Devi, Madras 108. Shri Dulerajji Bhanwarlalji Kothari, Kushalपुरा
125. Shri Mishrilalji Sajjanlalji Kataria, Secunderabad
126. Shri Vardhaman Sthanakwasi Jain Shravak Sangh, Bagar Nagar
109. Shri Bhanwarlalji Mangilalji Betala, Deh 110. Shri Jivrajji Bhanwarlalji Chordia, Bhairunda 111. Shri Mangilalji Shanti Lalji Runwal,
Harsolаv
112. Shri Chandmalji Dhanrajji Modi, Ajmer 113. Shri Ramprasanna Gyanprasar Kendra, Chandrapur 114. Shri Bhurmalji Dulichandji Bokardia, Medta City
Shri Parsamalji Lalwani, Gothan 96. Shri Akhechandji Lunकरणji Bhandari,
Calcutta
127. Shri Pukharajji Parsamalji Lalwani, Bilara
128. Shri T. Parsamalji Chordia, Madras 129. Shri Motilalji Asulalji Bohra & Co., Bangalore
130. Shri Sampatrajji Surana, Manmad

Page #216:
---------------------------
##  Life Sketch of Yuvacharya Shri Mishrimalji M.Sa. 'Madhukar' Muni

**Birth:** 
* Date: 14th Margashirsha Shukla, Vikram Samvat 1970
* Place: Tinwari Nagar, Jodhpur District, Rajasthan
* Mother: Smt. Tulsibai
* Father: Shri Jamnalalji Dhaadiwal

**Initiation:**
* Date: 10th Vaishakh Shukla, Vikram Samvat 1980
* Place: Bhinay Gram, Ajmer District
* Diksha Guru: Shri Joravarmalji M.Sa.
* Shiksha Guru (Guru Brother): Shri Hazarimlalji M.Sa.

**Acharya Parampara:**
* Pujya Acharya Shri Jaymallji M.Sa.

**Acharya Pad:**
* Jay Gachch - Vikram Samvat 2004
* Renunciation of Acharya Pad for the unity of the Shraman Sangh - Vikram Samvat 2009

**Upadhyaya Pad:**
* Vikram Samvat 2033

**Yuvacharya Pad:**
* Announcement: 1st Shravan Shukla, Vikram Samvat 2036 (25th July 1979, Hyderabad)
* Chadar Mahotsav: 10th Chaitra Shukla, Vikram Samvat 2037 (23rd March 1980, Jodhpur)

**Nirvana:**
* Date: 7th Migsar Vad, Vikram Samvat 2040 (26th November 1983, Nashik, Maharashtra)

**Personality and Knowledge:**
* A glorious, majestic, and radiant forehead, bright large eyes, a smile that illuminated his face, a gentle and affectionate voice, a radiance of spiritual brilliance, profound devotion to his Gurus, humility along with knowledge, wisdom along with authority, and a disciplined Shraman.
* He possessed profound knowledge of Prakrit, Sanskrit, Grammar, Prakrit Grammar, Jain Agamas, Nyaya Darshan, etc.
* He was a highly skilled orator, novelist, storyteller, and commentator.

**Published Works:**
* **Pravachan Sangrah:**
    1. Antar Ki Aur, Part 1 & 2
    2. Sadhana Ke Sutra
    3. Paryushana Parva Pravachan
    4. Anekanta Darshan
    5. Jain-Karmasiddhanta
    6. Jain Tattva-Darshan
    7. Jain Sanskrit - Ek Vishleshan
    8. Grihasth Dharma
    9. Aparigraha Darshan
    10. Ahimsa Darshan
    11. Tap Ek Vishleshan
    12. Adhyatma-Vikas Ki Bhoomika
* **Katha Sahitya:**
    * Jain Katha Mala, Part 1 to 51
* **Upanyas:**
    1. Pinjare Ka Panchhi
    2. Ahimsa Ki Vijay
    3. Talash
    4. Chhaya
    5. Aan
* **Other Books:**
    1. Agam Parichay
    2. Jain Dharma Ki Hazar Shikshaen
    3. Jiyo To Aise Jiyo
* **Special:**
    * Compiler and Chief Editor of Agam Battisi

**Shishya:**
* Muni Shri Vinaykumarji 'Bheem'

**Website:**
* gyanmandirdkobatiron.org

