Catalog link: https://jainqq.org/explore/090177/1

Page #1:
---------------------------
|| Śrīvītarāgāya namaḥ ||
Śrīmannēmicandra-siddhāntacakravartī-viracita
Gommatasāra-jīvakāṇḍa
* Hindītīkā-prērak se (sva) Prācāryakalpa 108 Śrī Śrutasāgara Jī Mahārāj
* Hindītīkākara ke (sva) A. Pa. Ratanacanda Jain Mukhtār, Saharanpur
ke sampādaka * Pa. Jawaharalāl Jain Siddhāntashāstrī, Bhīṇḍar
* Prakāśaka ॐ Prācāryashrī Śivasaagara Digambara Jain Granthamālā
Śāntivīranagara, Śrīmahāvīrajī (Rāj.)

Page #2:
---------------------------
## Editorial

**Book Name:** 'Gommatasar'

According to the 'Uttanika' of the Sanskrit commentary of 'Gommatasar', the composition of this book was a result of Chamundaraya's question. Chamundaraya was a disciple of Ajit Senaacharya. He also became a disciple of Nemichandraacharya. Inspired by Chamundaraya, Nemichandraacharya composed 'Gommatasar'. 'Gommat' was Chamundaraya's household name, which in Marathi and Kannada languages means excellent, beautiful, attractive, and pleasing. 'Raya' was his title. Due to the name 'Gommat', the statue of Bahubali built by Chamundaraya became famous as Gommatesvara or 'Gommatdeva'.  The book was named 'Gommatasar' due to the prominence of this name, which means the essence of the 'Dhavla' and other texts extracted for Gommat (Chamund).  This affection is also reflected in the book's other name, 'Gommatsangrahasutra'.

**Gommatsang Suttam Gommatsihuvari Gommatjiro Ya.**
**Gommatrayaviniymiy Dakkhin-Kukkudajino Jayau.** || 666 || Karmakanda

It is also noteworthy that the names of both parts of the book, 'Jivakanda' and 'Karmakanda', were given by the commentators. (Gommatasarnameya Panchasangraham Shastram Prarabhamanah Mandaprabodhika Tika, Pu. 3 | Tadgommatasarprathamavayavabhutam Jivakanda Virchayan Mandaprabodhika Tika). The original author did not name the book 'Gommatasar'. He named the second part of the book 'Gommatsangrahasutra' (Karmakanda Ga. 665, 668) or 'Gommatasutra'. The name 'Gommatasar' is found only in the commentaries. The commentators have also given another name - 'Panchasangrah' (M. Prabodhika Tika, Page 2, 3), but the reason for this name is not mentioned. It is possible that this name was given due to the 'Panchasangrah' of Amitagati Acharya and seeing similar statements in this book.

The author of this book is Shriman Nemichandra Siddhantachkravarti. He had deeply contemplated and recited the 'Shatkhandagam Sutras' composed by Pushpadanta Bhootbali Acharya. Due to this, he received the title of Siddhantachkravarti. He himself has mentioned that just as a Chakravarti conquers the six regions of the Bharat Kshetra without any obstacles, similarly, I have also conquered the 'Graha Khand' (Shatkhandagam - Jivasthan, Khuddabandh, Bandhaswamitva Vichay, Vedana, Vargana, and Mahabandh) without any obstacles through the wheel of wisdom.

Nemichandraacharya was an extraordinary scholar in his field. He was a renowned Acharya of the 'Deshiya Gan' and a profound scholar of mathematics. Many scholars have written commentaries on 'Gommatasar'. Shri Madhavachandra...

1. Jain Sahitya Ka Itihas Prathamabhag, Page 386 (Ganeshvarni Jain Granthamala)
2. Jah Chakke Ya Chakki Chakkhand Sahiyam Shravi Gra.
Tah Mahchavan Maya
Chakkad Sahiyam Sammam. || 363 || Go. Ka. Ka.
[8]

Page #3:
---------------------------
Vidyadeva has called you a transmigrant of the four Anuyogas and a Bhagavan, saying "Bhagavan Nemichandra Siddha, Ntadeva, Chaturanuyoga Chaturudadhiparaga, Trilokasara Tika 10." Shrimad Rajchandra also specifically requested the reading and recitation of Gommatasara from the Mabhakshyas, which establishes the usefulness and importance of this text.

The composition of Gommatasara was done while sitting in front of a one-hand-sized statue of Shri Neminath Bhagavan made of Indranilamani, established in the Chanupasachdwar Vimpit Jinalaya on Prapan Pandragiri. He was a transmigrant scholar of the six-part Agamas, as well as the Kashaya Pahud (including the Chuni Sutras), Tiloyapannatti, and other texts. In the form of an essence of these principle texts, you composed Gommatasara, as well as Labdhisara, Kshapanasara, and Trilokasara.

The time of the author - In the initial statement of his Gommatasara text, Keshavavarni Pradi, the author of the Karnatakiya Pradivritti, writes that Shri Nemichandra Siddhantachkravarti composed the Gommatasara text based on the first principle text (Shatkhandagama) for Chamundaraya, who was adorned with many titles. Acharya Dev himself has celebrated Raja Gommat, i.e., Chamundagaya, in the final praise of Gom.K. Chamundaraya was the Prime Minister and Menapati of Ganga king Shri Rachmall. Chamundaraya completed his Chamundaraya Purana in Mak. Sam. 600, according to which it was completed in Vik. Sam. 1031. It is known that the reign of Sachmall lasted until Vik. Sam. 1041. The Bahubali Charit mentions the time of the installation of Gommadeva as Vik. Sam. 1037-38. Nemichandracharya himself was present at the installation of Gommatesha. Therefore, the time of Nemichandracharya is proven to be the 11th century of Vikram.

Other authors - In the final verse of Trilokasara, Shri Nemichandra Siddhantachkravarti refers to himself as the guru or disciple of Abhayanandi. In addition, he mentions Acharya Viranandi, Indranandi, and Kanakanandi with great reverence. The Gommatasara Karmakanda gives an impression of the initiation guru of the author in the light of the following verse:

"Jass Ya Payapasaena Nanatsansarjalhimuttino.
Viravarnavivachcho, Namami Tam Abhayanandiguru ||436||"

Viranandi, the son of Indranandi, I (Nemichandra) bow to Abhayanandi guru, by whose grace I have crossed the ocean of the endless cycle of births and deaths. The meaning of crossing the ocean of the endless cycle of births and deaths is only through initiation. Therefore, it seems that his initiation guru is Prabhayanandi.

Text Summary - The present text, Jivakanda, contains a total of 734 Prakrit verses. It is not the case that all these verses were composed by Acharya Nemichandra. However, the author has taken verses from earlier texts like Dhavala, Jayadhavala, etc., as per the context and made them a part of his text.

1. "Idi Michandamrinivappa Sudena Mayanadivachchega.
Raiyo Tiloyasaro Khamanthu Bahugunaairiya." ||101-11|| 2. Batvadao Parish, Page 307 (Jnanapeeth).

Page #4:
---------------------------
As per the text, the following verses from the *Jivakanda* of the *Dhavla* have been directly incorporated into the *Gommatasar*: 2, 8, 17, 18, 20, 22, 27 to 26, 31, 33, 34, 46, 51, 55, 5.4, 56, 57, 61 to 68, 122, 128, 146 to 148, 150, 151, 166, 173, 185, 186, 161, 162, 164, 166, 167, 201, 202, 217 to 221, 230, 231, 233, 238 to 240, 242, 272 to 275, 283 to 286, 288, 268, 302 to 305, 314, 366, 437, 456, 466 to 471, 473 to 477, 482 to 485, 508 to 516, 555, 556, 560, 566, 573, 574, 581, 588, 601, 624 to 628, 632, 641, 645 to 646, 648, 646, 652, 666. Some of these verses have been slightly modified to suit the context. 

In this way, the *Gommatasar* has incorporated many verses from previous texts, but it does not provide any information about the source of these verses using phrases like "the author of this text" or "as stated in...". 

Therefore, the *Gommatasar* (both *Jivakanda* and *Karmakanda*) is a compilation. This is evident from the phrase "Gommatasanghamuutta" in verse 665 of the *Karmakanda*. This compilation is very well-organized, balanced, and complete. This is why it has held a special and important place in Digambara literature for a long time. 

These 34 verses contain a vast amount of knowledge, like a vast ocean contained in a small pitcher. The essence of the *Dhavla* text is largely captured in this *Jivakanda*.

**Introduction to the Subject:** The *Gommatasar* is divided into two parts: (1) *Jivakanda* and (2) *Karmakanda*. The *Karmakanda* provides a comprehensive description of the eight karmas (actions) in their various states. The *Jivakanda* describes the impure soul through its qualities and states of existence in twenty-two chapters. Although the main focus is on the soul's state of existence in the cycle of birth and death, it also sheds light on the pure and natural state of the soul. This can be easily understood from the concluding verses of the twenty chapters that describe the twenty forms of the soul. Verses 68, 66, 152, 203, 243, 276, 286, 460, 475, 486, 556, 556, 731 also describe the pure soul or the soul's pure state of liberation.

The first verse of the text is an invocation, and the last verse is a concluding statement.

**Language and Commentary:**

**Inspiration:** In September 1678, the revered Guruji (Mukhtar Ma.) was in Anandpur. At that time, the revered Acharya Kalpa 108 Shri Shruta Sagarji Maharaj was residing there with his disciples. Guruji was busy editing the *Gommatasar Karmakanda*. He wanted to complete it quickly because he wanted to finish this work before his departure (death). Therefore, 

1. Gommatasanghamuutta Gommatadevairan Gommatam raiyan.
Kamma gij ratam taccadruvadharana talam ca. || 665 Go. Ka. and verse 668 ||
[10]

Page #5:
---------------------------
They worked 10-12 hours daily. In those days, Acharya Kalpshri said, "You have to do the work of Jeevakanda and Labdhisar-Kshapanasar, because if this work of purification is done in your lifetime, it is fine, otherwise, no one will complete this work later." So, only with the above inspiration of Acharya Kalpshri and the strong support request of Muni Vardhamansagarji (currently Acharya Shri), after the completion of the work of Karmakanda, the work of Labdhisar-Kshapanasar was also done, and finally, Guruji also wrote the commentary of Jeevakanda.

Previous Commentaries (Sanskrit/Kannada) - (a) The first commentary on Gommatasar is a Panjika commentary which is 5000 verses long, the language is Sanskrit mixed with Prakrit. Its author is Girikiti. The name of the commentary is Panjika or Gommatasar Tipparan. This commentary was created in Shaka Samvat 1016 (Vikram Samvat 1151) in Kartik Shukla. Mandaprabodhikakar wrote his Jeevakanda commentary with the help of this commentary. A copy of this unpublished text is with Pandit Paramanandji Shastri in Delhi.
(b) Mandaprabodhika commentary is only on the first 382 verses of Go. Ji., i.e., this commentary is incomplete. The language is Sanskrit and the author of this commentary is Shrabhayachandra Siddhantachkravarti. Keshavavarati created his commentary (Kantaki language Kannada commentary) with the help of this commentary.
(c) The third commentary is Jeevatattvapradipika written by Keshavavarni. Its language is Sanskrit mixed with Kannada and the time of creation is AD 1356.

(d) Jeevatattvaprayopika Sanskrit - This is the fourth commentary which was written in Sanskrit by Nemichandra. This commentary is just a Sanskrit translation of Keshavavarni's Sanskrit mixed with Kannada commentary. Nemichandra was a disciple of Gyan Bhushan. The commentary is from the beginning of the 16th century AD.

If Nemichandra had not translated Keshavavarati's commentary into Sanskrit, then Pandit Todarmalji would not have been able to create Samyaggyan Chandrika (Bhashatika), this is true.

Bhasha Commentaries - (1) The first time a Bhasha commentary was published was about seven decades ago in Gandhi Haribhai Devkaran Granthamala.
The editors of this scholarly text were Pandit Gajadharlalji Nyayatirith and Pandit Shrilalji Kayati. This commentary is in 1330 pages. It included the original text (Prakrit verses) along with two Sanskrit commentaries (Abhayachandriya Mandaprabodhika and Nemichandriya Jeevatattvapradipika) and a Dhoondhari Bhasha commentary. This Dhoondhari (similar to Hindi) language commentary is by Pandit Todarmalji, the name of the commentary is Samyaggyanchandrika. Todarmalji wrote this commentary at the inspiration of Rajmal Sadharmi, which was completed in Vikram Samvat 1818.

1. Go. Ji. Mandaprabodhika verse 83 commentary.
2. Many years 4 Kiran 1. 113.
[11]

Page #6:
---------------------------
(2) Based on the aforementioned language commentary, Late Shri Daulatramji composed a Hindi paraphrase. This remains unpublished.
(3) Inspired by Guru of Gurus, Shri Gopaladasji Bareya, in 1916, Pandit Khubchandji Siddhanta Shastri wrote a concise, examination-oriented, student-friendly commentary on Go. Ji. which has seen numerous editions.
Many corrections related to this commentary were sent by Guruji (Mukhtar Sa.) to Pandit Khubchandji, which he gratefully accepted and accordingly, the third revised edition was published by Rayachandra Jain Shastramala.
(4) In 1927, the Jivakanda was published with an English commentary edited and translated by Rai Bahadur J.L. Jaini M.A. (Editor - Jan Gazette). Shri Sheelal Prasadji also assisted in this. It has 347 pages and was published by Ajitasram, Lucknow.
(5) Pandit Shri Kailashchandra Si. Shastri translated the Jotrkaanda and Karmakaanda based on Nemichandra's Sanskrit commentary and opened up the references from Samyaggyanachandrika. This commentary was published in 4 volumes by Gyanapeeth in 1977 (Vikram Samvat 2034). (Go. Ji. in two volumes and Go. Ka. in two volumes.)
All the aforementioned language commentaries are based on the Todarmalliya Samyaggyanachandrika, and the Todarmalliya commentary is not straightforward. He did not receive the Darshan of Dhaval, Jayadhaval, and Maha Dhaval, otherwise, he would have refined the Samyaggyanachandrika himself. This is the main reason why Mukhtar Sa. composed this new commentary based on Dhaval, Jayadhaval, and Maha Dhaval, with the inspiration and support of Pujya Pra. 108 Shri Shruta Sagarji Maharaj and Pra. Vardhaman Sagarji Maharaj.
Pandit Todarmalji did not receive the Darshan of Dhaval etc., in support of this, see:
(a) In the Uthanika of the first verse of Labdhisar, the composition of Labdhisar is mentioned from the fifteenth chapter (Charitramohakṣapaṇa) of Jayadhaval. But this is incorrect, because the composition of Labdhisar, i.e., Labdhisar-Kṣapaṇasara, is from the chapters Darshanamoha Upaśamana, Kṣapaṇa, and Charitramoha Upaśamana and Kṣapaṇa of Jayadhaval, not just from the fifteenth chapter. That Uthanika is worth noting: "Shriman Nemichandra Siddhanta Chakravarti Samyaktv Chudamani Prabhriti Gunanamanikita Chamunda Raya Prasnanuroopena Kashaya Prabhriti Shya Jayadhavalaya Dvitiya Siddhanta Shya Panchavashaanam Mahaadhikaranam Madhye "Paschim
1. Go. Ji. Prasta. P.11 Ramchandra Shastramala. 2. Late Nemichandraji Vakil of Osmanabad wrote a beautiful composition in Marathi on the part of Karmakaanda, which has also been printed. (Go. Ji. Prasta. P.11 Sayachandra Shastramala Fourth Edition)
[12]

Page #7:
---------------------------
"The treatise named 'Samdhisar' which is a collection of the meaning of the fifteen Skandhas, begins with the praise of the five supreme beings, the vow of duty, and the dedication." (b) He has written in the praise on page 634 of Labdhisar (Rayachandra Shastramala Publication)
"The three great works of Muni Bhootbali and Yativrishabh are very difficult to understand. The first is the Dhavala, which is also known as the Ayapvala, and is famous for its great knowledge."
It is written in this that Bhootbali and Yativrishabh composed the Dhavala, Jayadhavala, and Maha Dhavala. While the Dhavala and Jayadhavala were composed by Bhagavad Veersen Swami and Jinsen Swami, the Maha Dhavala was composed by Bhootbali.
Bhootbali was the head of the Pushpadant Vikram's first century, while Yativrishabh was of the sixth century. While Veersen Swami completed the Dhavala commentary in the 8th century of Vikram. After that, the Jayadhavala was composed. Thus, the Dhavala and Jayadhavala did not exist during the time of Bhootbali and Yativrishabh.
There are many other points in the Jeevakand commentary that are not in the original form. Therefore, Guruji has composed this detailed commentary based on the Dhavala etc.
The time of the present commentary - Guruji started writing the commentary on 22-10-76 AD, Kartik Shukla 2, VS 2036, Veer Nirvana Samvat 2506, in an auspicious time. The first chapter of this commentary was completed on 16.12.76 AD, Paush Vadi 12. Working at this pace, the commentary up to 666 verses was completed on 26.11.80 AD.
Due to complete inability of the body, Guruji (Mukhtar Sa.) could not complete the remaining commentary. He knew that he would not be able to complete this work, so Guruji sent this commentary to me through Shri Vinod Kumar Shastri, so that I could complete it. Revered Guruji passed away on the night of 28.11.80 at 7:06 pm, with complete restraint. Alas! Where is that Karananuyog Prabhakar now?
The style of the present commentary - The original Gommatasar Jeevakand is in Prakrit verses. Below it, only the meaning of the verse is given. Then the meaning is explained by special meaning. This method has been adopted throughout the book. The subject is explained in the commentary by 1084 doubts-solutions in accordance with the Agamanusari. The evidence from other books is given in Hindi language and the name of the book, chapter, chapter or verse or page number is marked in the footnote below (see page 110-11 etc.). In some places, the sentences from other books have been quoted in the commentary in the original Prakrit or Sanskrit form (see page 112-13 etc.) and the name of the book, verse and page have also been given there, while in some places the original text, sentence is given in the commentary and then the name of the book etc. is quoted in the footnote below (as
[ 13 ]

Page #8:
---------------------------
If (referring to page 130 onwards), then in some places, the citations from the texts are given in Hindi in the original commentary, and then the original sentence and the text citation etc. are given in the notes. In this way, the Guruji has remained uncommitted! A fixed method has not been followed uniformly everywhere. In the commentary, the enumerable topics have been explained as far as possible by means of diagrams [e.g., pp. 41, 44, 45, 50, 51, 52, 56, 368 etc.] so that the subject matter may be clear.

**Uniqueness**

(1) This is the first commentary on the Jiva Kanda in which hundreds of proofs from the Dhavala etc. have been given, and it has been mainly composed on the basis of the same.

(2) In Ga. 5.18, the eight Madhya-amsas have been explained, which is not so clear in any previous commentary in any language.

(3) In Ga. 352-54, the breaks in Shruta-jnana have been explained in detail, which has not been explained in any previous commentary.

(4) Thousands of citations from various texts [a total of 2785 notes] will be seen in the commentary.

(5) It has not been possible for any part of any main principle-text to be missing from this commentary.

(6) The present commentary is larger than the language commentary by Todarmalji. Todarmalji's language commentary (of the original text) is about nineteen thousand verses long, whereas the present commentary, even if the preface (eighteen hundred verses long) and the Artha-sandrushti Adhikar (about five thousand verses long) are included, is only about twenty-five thousand verses long, so the present commentary is not less.

**Special Note:**

The commentary on Maatha 728 [in the Samyag-jnana-chandrika] is 88 pages long, but in the present text, the Guruji has not written such a detailed commentary, but has only written ... pages long [see p. 780] because all that subject matter has been fully explained in the Dhavala book with all the diagrams, and it is not so difficult.

In the present commentary, the auxiliary text Mukhtar Sa. has used the following scriptures while writing the language commentary on the Jiva Kanda: Shatkhandagama, Kashayapahudu-sutta, Dhavala, Jayabhava, Maha-dhavala, Jayadhavala (Phaltan), Prakrit Panchasangrah and its various commentaries, Sanskrit Panchamangrah, Labdhisar-kshapana-sar, Go. Ji., Go. Ka., their commentaries, Mandapracha-adhika, Samyag-jnana-chandrika, Tiloyapannatti [all publications], Trilokasar and commentary, Lok Vibhag, Siddhanta-sar-deepak, Siddhanta-sar-sangrah, Katikayana-nu-praksha, Adipurana, Harivansh-purana, Sushil Upanayas, Mulachar, its Prachar-vritti commentary, Mulachar Pradeep, Prachar-sar, Vamanandi-shravaka-char, Charitra-sar, Charitra-paid, Dwadash-anupreksha, Purushartha-siddhi, Ratna-kanda, Shastra-sar-samuchchay, Ratna-mala, Upasaka-adhyayan, Ashta-sahasri, Pariksha-mukha, Palap-paddhati, Pramaye-ratna-mala, Saptama-ngi-tarangini, Syavad-manjari,
[14]

Page #9:
---------------------------
Tattvartha Sutra, Sarvarthasiddhi, Rajavartika, Slokavartika, Tattvarthavritti, Sukhabodh Tika [ Mysore Publication] Vrihad Dravyasangraha, Laghudravyasangraha. Samayasara, Pravachansara, Pravachansara Tika, Panchastikaya, Samayavyakhya and Tatparyavritti named commentaries, Niyamasara, Atmanushasan Bhavaprabhrut, Yogasara Prabhrut, Jainendra Siddhanta Kosh, Shwe. Karma Prakriti and Shwe. Visheshavashak Bhashya.
The remaining commentary, the last effort in Shruta Seva: Late Guruvar Ratanchand Mukhtar was already in old age, and his physical condition was also weak. However, even in the last two and a half years of his life, he was busy commenting on the scriptures. The editing work of Karmakanda (commentator Prof. Shradimatiji) was completed by you in 1678 in Anandpur Kalu, sitting with the Sangha for 10-12 hours daily for 28 days. In the middle, on 9.6.78, you wrote a letter to me, "I am taking a risk and working so hard that the work of Karmakanda is completed before I leave. If I have any life left, then I will also do the work of Labdhisara and Jivakanda."
On 13.2.70, you wrote from Saharanpur - "My health is improving compared to before, but my mind and heart are still not able to function fully. After an hour, my mind gets tired and I start getting a headache. Blood circulation in the body is decreasing. Doctors say to take complete rest, but I can't do that. I am checking the press copy of Karmakanda, giving evidence of mistakes etc. in between. The work has to be done, my Jinvani will protect me. I am not worried about that, the success of life is in Shruta Seva." You wrote the same thing again on 31.3.76.
On 26.10.79, while picking me up, you wrote - "Now there is hope that you will uplift the scriptures of Karananuyoga. My time is coming to an end. The fruit of knowledge is restraint, which I have not attained. I have started writing a commentary on Jivakanda based on the Dhaval scripture. If it cannot be completed, you will have to complete it. Now I don't have the strength to work for 5-6 hours. After my body is disposed of, my Gommatasara Jivakanda and Panchasangraha will be sent to you by Shri Vinodkumarji. May the outcome be good in the end, this is my prayer to Veer Prabhu."
On 3.11.80, your letter came - "The commentary on the 651st verse of Jivakanda is being written. 86-87 verses are left. Due to my wife's respiratory illness, her knees, legs and hands have stopped working properly. She has difficulty even kneading dough. Her one eye is also working. Now the day is coming when she will not even be able to cook food. I want you to write and send the commentary on Jivakanda - Ahar Margana, but whatever is written, it should be written based on the scriptures. The names and page numbers of other scriptures should also be written along with it."
1 Note: - This was my test. I thought it was right to hand it over. So it is right.
After the test, I was given the task of the remaining commentary.
1
.
I sent the commentary as instructed, then on 12.11.80
[ 15 ]

Page #10:
---------------------------
A letter arrived from the revered Guru Shri: "I have received the commentary on Aharamargna. Your efforts are commendable, the commentary is very beautiful. I am writing the commentary based on it. Only the style of writing had to be changed. Now I have no worries. If the commentary remains incomplete, I will complete it. There are still 70 gathas left to be commented on. My health is weak, hence the pace is slow. After that, you wrote me your last letter on 14.11.80. You were writing the commentary till 26.11.80. On 28.11.80 at 7 pm, you left your body.
The remaining commentary was entrusted to me, a humble man, to write, therefore, I have completed the remaining work with enthusiasm and humility.
Alas! Where is that Karananuyoga - Prabhakar now?
The late Guru Shri had 16341 pages of Sanuavad Dhaval-Jayadhaval-Maha Dhaval (a total of 36 books) at his fingertips. The 'essence of the entire life' of such a man must be contained in the commentary written at the end of his life, therefore, there is no question of doubt in the authenticity of this commentary. The special evaluation will be done by the readers.
The completed commentary was read in Bhindar. At that time, the revered Ajipta Sagaracharya was engaged in Chaturmas. In the Sangha, there were also the revered Vardhamana Sagarji, Punyasagarji, Pra. Jinmatiji, Vishuddhamatiji, Shubhamatiji, and Prashantmatiji. I also sat at the feet of these seven pious souls. Thus, the reading of the Jeevakanda commentary began in the presence of a total of 6 Saraswati-Paradhakas. The reading took place for 2-3 hours daily. After some time, Pra. Jinmatiji and Shubhamatiji could not participate in the reading, so we were only 6. The reading was completed in about two months.
It is noteworthy that no one has made even a single change in Guru Shri's commentary. Only where some words were found missing while comparing the quotations from other texts with the original, they have been filled in or linguistic refinement has been done, or we have given a lot in the footnotes, nothing else has been done.
Acknowledgement: Many great souls have given their abundant encouragement and cordial cooperation in giving a concrete form to the present plan of creation and publication of the voluminous language commentary of 'Gommatasar Jiyakanda'. I express my heartfelt gratitude to all of them.
First of all, I respectfully remember the brilliance and ability of the language commentator of this text, the revered Guruji, the late Pandit Ratanchandji Mukhtar, and dedicate my tributes to that pious soul.
I offer my humble obeisance at the holy feet of the most revered (late) Acharya, 108 Shri Shruta Sagarji Maharaj, the inspirer of the present book creation.
[16]

Page #11:
---------------------------
I am eternally grateful to all the great souls who graced us with their presence on the occasion of the completion of this book in Bhindar and whose cooperation has refined this creation. No matter how much praise is given to them, it is not enough.

I am indebted to the venerable 108 Acharya Shri Varshamanasagarji Maharaj and the venerable Prayika 105 Shri Vishuddhamati Mataji, whose blessings have enhanced the glory of the book. Bowing down at the holy feet of these selfless souls who nurture the ancient path, I wish to be a speck of dust at their feet.

The complex and laborious task of presenting this book to you has been accomplished by Dr. Chetan Prakash Ji Patni, Jodhpur. His efforts cannot be valued in words. His work in promoting the book in all aspects has been more than that of an editor. You are the son of the late Pandit Mahendra Kumar Ji Patni, Kavya Tirth, Madan Ganj-Kishangarh. Your father, Shri Mahavirji, took monkhood from the venerable Acharya Shri Shruta Sagarji Maharaj and became Muni Samatasagar. His legacy, Chetan, is a combination of knowledge and sacrifice like his father. You have edited and translated many important books. May this Shruta-adoring, wise person attain Nirvana quickly by obtaining all three jewels.

At my request, the learned Prayika Prashantamati Ji, after looking at the printed pages of others, sent many corrections, which I have included in the errata. For this, I am humbly and respectfully grateful to her.

Similarly, Pandit Vinod Kumar Ji Shastri, Saharanpur, also took time out from his business activities to regularly scrutinize the printed pages and sent many corrections, which I have included in the errata. I am grateful to him from the heart and wish him all-round excellence.

Shri Dhulchand Hazarilal Jain Vora, Chavand, a Shruta-serving, supremely devoted and selfless servant, has always been helpful in my work. The affection and spirit of sacrifice of Shri Shripalji Bhavarlalji Dhakti, Bhindar, have also been a strong source of my enthusiasm. I am also very grateful to both these devout souls. I am grateful to Shruta-loving Lala Lakhmichand Ji Kagzi, Sumat Prasad Ji (Vardhman Drugs, Kucha Roth) and Pandit Surendra Kumar Ji (Valuation Officer, Dariba Kalan), Delhi, who treated me during this period, which gave me the special ability to do the work of 'Jivakand'.

To keep the price of the book low, we have received financial support from the generous donors Shri Hari Prasad Ji Jejani (Nagpur), Br. Sushila Bai Ji (on the occasion of Prayika Diksha), Jawaharlal Ji Sarraf, Indermal Ji Shah, Sobhagmal Ji Minta (Pratapgarh), Mul Chand Ji Luhadia (Kishangarh), Smt. Amri Bai Motilal Ji Bakliwal, Smt. Phoola Bai Daulatram Ji Bakliwal (Medta City) and Shri Mahavir Prasad Ji Rantrka (Ahmedabad). We are very grateful to all of them.

Page #12:
---------------------------
The staff of Hindustan Part Printers, Jodhpur, deserve my gratitude for the clean and quick printing of this book. 
Whatever achievement this book has is due to these hardworking, devout, and virtuous souls. 
I humbly apologize to the learned scholars for any errors that may have occurred during the editing process. 
May all be well. Enough for the wise.
Jawaharlal Motilal Jain Vaktavat, Bhindar
* Clarification of some difficult passages from the Jivakanda *
(1) Kevali - Samudhat (pp. 61-62; 726) Kevali Samudhat occurs in 8 times. (B. Pra. 2106) In the first time, there is Danda Samudhat. In the second time, there is Kapata Samudhat. In the third time, there is Pratar and in the fourth time, there is Lokapurana Samudhat. In the fifth time, the Atma-pradeshas become Pratar again. In the sixth time, they become Kapata, in the seventh time, they become Danda, and in the eighth time, they become the original body form. (B. Pra. 2106, Ra. Pa. 120/12/77 and Dhaval 185) These are the times of Samudhat, not otherwise:
Here, in the original text, on pages 61-62 and 726, it is said that in the fifth time, the Sayoga-kevali, who are spread throughout all the regions of the world (Lok), contract (Samvarga, contraction, shrinking, hiding, gathering) their Atma-pradeshas. The meaning of this sentence is that after the Lokapurana Samudhat in the fourth time, in the fifth time, they contract the Lokapurana and make the Atma-pradeshas Pratar again. In other words, there are two things that happen in the fifth time - the contraction (Samtroch) or conclusion (Upsamhar) or destruction or termination or stopping of the Lokapurana Samudhat, and the second thing is to make the Atma-pradeshas Pratar again. In reality, these two things are not two things but one thing. Because the destruction (i.e., Upsamhar) of the Lokapurana Paryaya is the production of the Pratar Paryaya, or the contraction (Samatana) of the Lokapurana Paryaya becomes the cause of the production of the Pratar form there. At the time when the previous Paryaya is destroyed, the production of the next Paryaya takes place. There is no difference in time between the Paryaya in the form of Nana (Upsamhar or Samkoch) and the Paryaya in the form of production. (Apt-Mimamsa 56, Dhaval 4335, Pancha-adhyayee Purvardha 234 etc.) Therefore, in the fifth time, there is the conclusion (=- destruction) or contraction (Samitav, stopping) of the Lokapurana Paryaya and the production of the Pratar Paryaya. Both these things happen. The simple meaning of this is that in the fifth time, there is the absence of the Lokapurana Paryaya and the appearance (production) of the Pratar Paryaya. Similarly, it should be said further. For example, in the sixth time, they contract the Pratar (do Upsamhar of Pratar) and make the Atma-pradeshas Kapata. In the seventh time, they destroy (destroy, destroy) the Kapata and make the Atma-pradeshas Danda. In the eighth time, they destroy (contract or contract) the Danda-rupa Atma-pradeshas and enter the original body in all regions, i.e., they become the original body form. (Kshapanasar 627, Jayadhaval 16/156-60)
Some Acharyas do not count the entry into the original body in the eighth time, because in the last (eighth) time, there is departure from the original body. In their view, there are only seven times of Samudhat. This
[18]

Page #13:
---------------------------
The difference is only in the intention, in principle there is no difference. (Jayadhaval 16:160 and Janagajat 16-8-62 AD, 20 No. Mukhtar Saharanpur)
This table shows which yoga occurs at what time in the context of these texts:
* Table of Prashta Samayik Samudghāt
Time
Samudghāt
Yoga
First
Dand
Audarik Kaya Yoga Audarik Misra Kaya Yoga
Kapāt
Second • Third • Fourth
Pratar
Kāmaran Kaya Yoga
Nokpūran
Fifth
Pratar-Manthan
Kapād
Audarik Misra Kaya Yoga Audarik Kaya Yoga
Seventh
Dand
• Eighth
Swasthan-Swagarira me Praveṇ.
[Pra. Panchasangrah 166 Jivasamās Adhikār, Dhaval 4/263, Jayadhaval 16/160, Go. K. 587, Kshapanasār p. 466 Ga. 627 Rāy Chandra Shastramala | The rest is all easy.
(2) Matsya-Rachana
A comparative study of the present picture (p. 21) and the picture in the original text (p. 154)
First of all, let us keep in mind that there are a total of 64 Avagahana places, which are mentioned in this text from page 143 to 145. The first place is that of the lowest Avagahana of Mu. Nigod Ap. The second place is that of Su. Vay. Aparyāpt. .......... and so on. In this way, the 64th, i.e., the last place, is that of the highest Avagahana of Panchindriya Paryāpt. Therefore, wherever it is said that the twentieth place or the twenty-fifth place or a certain place, then look at the place of that number (from p. 143 to 145) in these sixty-four places.
It should also be kept in mind that the Avagahana of any living being, whether it is Lādhya Paryāpt or Aparyāpt, starts from the lowest and ends at the highest Avagahana of its Nirvṛttyiparyāpnak (Aparyāpt).
[ 16 ]

Page #14:
---------------------------
The [**Labdhyaparyaptak**] have been exhausted and in every region, there is an increase from less to more. Remember that in these [**Alpabahutva**], the excellent [**Avgahana**] of the [**Labdhyaparyaptak**] has remained unnatural.
This entire subject of Go. Ji. has been taken from Dhaval Pu. 11 page 56 to 74 (Sutras 31 to 16).
The subtle [**Aaparyaptak**] increases from its inferior [**Avgahana**] to the excellent [**Avgahana**]. Its 34 [**Bindi**] are written. Similarly, the [**Aaparyaptak**] beings from the first to the sixteenth row increase from their own inferior to excellent [**Avgahana**]. These beings from row 1 to row 16 [see the presented picture] are all [**Aaparyaptak**]. The picture on page 154 of this original [**Nantha**] has three parts: - The first and second parts are upwards. The third part is downwards. The first part shows the inferior [**Avgahana**] of the [**Aaparyaptak**] ( [**Labdhyaparyaptak**]) beings. This is a picture of the first 16 places out of the 64 [**Avgahana**] places shown on pages 143 to 145. Then, in the picture on page 154 of the original text, the graph picture of the second part above is [**Aaparyaptak**] [i.e. [**Nirvatyaparyaptak**]] beings related to the excellent [**Avgahana**]. In this also, 16 [**Avgahana**] places have come, which are the places of the following numbers out of 64 places [see pages 143 to 145]: - 18th, 21st, 24th, 27th, 30th, 33rd, 36th, 39th, 42nd, 45th, 48th and 55th to 59th. Thus, in the upper part of the picture on page 154 of the original text, there are 16 inferior places of the [**Aaparyaptak**] and 16 excellent places of the [**Aaparyaptak**]. The picture that is formed from these 32 places is the depiction of the picture up to the 16th row of the picture printed in front.
Then, the part below in the picture on page 154, i.e. the third part, is only of the inferior and excellent [**Avgahana**] of the [**Paryaptak**] beings. Out of the 64 places, the remaining 32 places have come. These places are the places of the following numbers in 64 places: - 17, 19, 20, 22, 23, 25, 26, 28, 29, 31, 32, 34, 35, 37, 38, 40, 41, 43, 44, 46, 47, 49, 50, 51 to 54 and 60 to 64. This picture is of the lower part. Therefore, in the picture printed in front, below the 16 rows,
Note - It seems to me from my own understanding that the picture printed on page 154 (although taken from Dha, 11/71) is not a [**Matsya-Rachana**], nor is there any " [**Matsya Rachana**]" written anywhere in Dha, 11. But that picture is only a graphical representation of 64 [**Avgahana**] in an organized manner [first 16 [**Aaparyaptak**]'s inferior, then 16 [**Aaparyaptak**]'s excellent and below all [**Paryaptak**]'s inferior and excellent = 32]. From that, the [**Mukti Matsya-Rachana**] is not what we have described here. The same structure is also described in Go. Ji.'s Kannada and Sanskrit commentary. I have taken its entire basis.
According to the picture given on page 154 of the present text, if the form of [**Asankhyatagugaatva**] is made in order of the first 16 places and the remaining 48 [**Avgahana**] are marked in this way in order [given a shape], then the shape that is formed will also be in the form of a fish, it is not impossible, because in the entire universe, [**Matsya**] (fish) are available in wonderful and strange varieties.
[2]

Page #15:
---------------------------
**Fish - Creation**

**Place of Immersion**  Name of the Jina
LA
....FRAMMoh
nxsw.10-
0
101010१४१२३४५KRW.24nAmarna
Mat
.
 -
Sookshma Pa Aam ne Vaam Van Nadar
. N.
..
.
.
..
..
.
..
.
..
....
......
..
..
.......
..
..
..
.
..
-
..
........
..
......
.........
.............
.......
t
h
"
.
.
.
...
.
............
...
.................
......
2012
.........
.....
.......
...
.
.
.....................
.
.
2
Vapar Aj.
Ladhyaapatik
....
................
.....
Ni.. Ra .P. HAR
Vipay
.......
.....
.......
.....
...
..
....
..
.Ef
a.TA
Din
1
१.१-
Kingo Namah
-1-1
Sapi.-3..
Ati -
- Pakshik
................
3.1K
Mor - In this picture, upon seeing the group of Vindhyas, their nature is like that of a fish, it is the form of a fish, it is Matsya-Rachana.

Page #16:
---------------------------
The 17th Adi, with its 5 lines, depicts the 32 Avgahana names of all these sufficient beings, from the lowest to the highest. This creates the image on page 21, which is in accordance with the sentiments of the image creation presented on page 154 of this original text.

* **Explanation of the presented image of the creation of the fish** * Now the order of the establishment of all the Avgahana places is stated. From the lowest Avgahana place of the subtle Nigoda Labdhyaparyapta to its highest Avgahana place, there are sixteen places, which are in a multiplied order, and one place is Saadhi. The indicator for each place is two zeros. So, write fourteen zeros in two-two dots, writing them seventeen times. Here, the lowest place of the subtle Nigoda Labdhyaparyapta is the first, and the highest is the eighteenth. But the interval of the multiplier is seventeen. Therefore, seventeen is taken. Understand the same way further.

Similarly, in the second line below this line, there are nineteen places from the lowest Avgahana place of the Sushmalabhyaparyapta Vayu Kayika being to its highest Avgahana place. Write thirty-two dots for them. Since this is the second place, leave the two dots of the first place in the upper line and write thirty-two dots from the two dots of the second place onwards. In the third line, there are twenty-one places from the lowest Avgahana of the subtle Labdhyaparyapta Tejas Kayika to the highest Avgahana. Write forty-two dots for them. Since this is the third place, leave the place below the two dots of the second place in the second line above it, and write forty-two dots from the two dots of the third place onwards, two by two, in twenty-one places. In the fourth line below this third line, write forty-six dots for the thirty-three places from the lowest Avgahana of the subtle Labdhyaparyapta Prakayika to the highest Avgahana. Since this is the fourth place, leave the place below the two dots of the third place and write forty-six dots from the two dots of the fourth place onwards. Similarly, in the fifth line below this fourth line, there are twenty-five places from the lowest Avgahana of the subtle Labdhyaparyapta Prithvi Kayika to the highest Avgahana. Write fifty dots for them. Since this is the fifth place, leave the place below the two dots of the fourth place, and write fifty dots from the two dots of the fifth place onwards.

Similarly, in the sixth, seventh, eighth, ninth, tenth, eleventh, twelfth, thirteenth, fourteenth, fifteenth, and sixteenth lines below this line, there are twenty-seven, twenty-nine, thirty-one, thirty-three, thirty-five, thirty-seven, forty-six, forty-four, forty-one, forty-one, and forty-three places from the lowest place to the highest place of the Badralabhyaparyapta Vayu Kayika, Tejas Kayika, Akaya, Prithvi Kayika, Nigoda, Pratiṣṭhita Pratyek, Apratiṣṭhita Pratyek, Dveindriya, Teindriya, Chavindriya, and Panchendriya, respectively. Write fifty-four, forty-eight, sixty-two, sixty-six, seventy, seventy-four, eighty-two, eighty-eight, eighty-two, eighty-two, and eighty-six dots for them. Since these places are the sixth, seventh, etc., leave the place below the two dots of the beginning place of the upper line, and write from the two dots of the sixth, seventh, etc., places onwards in the line.

In the same way, in the seventeenth line below the line of the Panchendriya Labdhyaparyapta, there are two places from the lowest Avgahana place of the subtle Nigoda Paryapta to the highest Avgahana. Their four
1. Dhaval 11 Surya 47 in 46 page 59-60

Page #17:
---------------------------
Writing the dots. In the same way, in the next line, write the dots for the subtle non-pervasive air-bodied, fire-bodied, water-bodied, earth-bodied, again the pervasive air-bodied, fire-bodied, water-bodied, earth-bodied, Nigoda. Each of the established beings has two places, one for their lowest and one for their highest attainment place. Write four dots for each of these. In the same way, for each of the established beings, write twenty-six dots for thirteen places from their highest attainment place to the lowest attainment place of each of the non-established pervasive beings in the same line. The initial place of the subtle pervasive Nigoda is the seventeenth. Therefore, leaving the space below the dot of the sixteenth place, write four dots for the seventeenth and eighteenth places. The initial place of the subtle pervasive air is the twentieth. Therefore, in the same line, leaving the space below the two dots of the nineteenth place, write four dots for the twentieth and twenty-first places. In the same way, leaving the space below two dots for one place in between, write four dots for two places of the subtle pervasive fire-bodied, etc. In the same line, there are fifty places for each of the established beings. Therefore, write twenty-six dots for thirteen places starting from the dot of the fiftieth place. All this is said in one line. Below this line, in the eighteenth, nineteenth, twentieth, and twenty-first lines, write twenty-two, sixteen, sixteen, and twenty dots respectively for eleven, eight, eight, and ten places from the lowest attainment place to the highest attainment place of the pervasive two-sensed, three-sensed, four-sensed, and five-sensed beings. The pervasive two-sensed beings have places from the Pavan to the Dham. In the next line, below the twenty-six dots written for each of the non-established beings, write twenty-two dots leaving the space below the two dots of the fiftieth place of the beginning. In the same way, below the two dots of the beginning, write sixteen, sixteen, and twenty dots respectively for the forty-ninth, fifty-third, and fifty-fourth places. In this way, in the fish-like structure, the lowest attainment place of the middle Nigoda and the middle pervasive beings is connected to the highest attainment place of the five-sensed pervasive beings. The intention is to have two zeros for each of these attainment places. Therefore, the order of establishing zeros is described in the Anadinidhan Pragama, taking the higher meaning without relying on the counting of these places. When constructed according to this, the structure of all attainment places becomes fish-like.

**Summary:** The brief summary of the above description of the fish-like structure is as follows: From the lowest attainment place of the subtle non-pervasive Nigoda to its highest attainment place, there are sixteen places, and one more. Thus, there should be thirty-four zeros in the upper line, counting two zeros for each of the seventeen places. Below this, there should be nineteen zeros for the subtle non-pervasive air-bodied beings from their lowest to their highest attainment place. In the same way, from the subtle non-pervasive fire-bodied beings to the established beings, there are two more places for each, so there are four more zeros in each line. This...

n
1. Paval 11 Bhun 50 to 76 on page 60 to 66. 2. Dhaval 11 Bhutra 80 to Nak on page 6 to 68. 3. , , , 32 to 48 on page 56 to 56. 4. , , , 32 to 51 on page 56 to 60.
[ 23 ]

Page #18:
---------------------------
Thirty-two, thirty-six, fifty, fifty-four, forty-eight, sixty-two, sixty-six, seventy and seventy-four are zero. Further, one should know the zero count by place value from the lowest to the highest of their own category. The lowest of the lower row is two zeros away from the lowest of the upper row. In the seventeenth row, by writing the zeros from the lowest to the highest of their own category for the twelve types of beings in one, below that, in four rows, one should know the count of zeros by place value from the lowest to the highest of their own category for the two-sense, three-sense, four-sense and five-sense beings. When arranged in this way, all the Avagahaas take the form of a fish.
Therefore,
(3) On page 780, verse 729, the term "Doņi Shraahara" implies the Shaaharak Kayayog and the Aahaarak Mishr Kayayog. (Bal 22024) However, here, starting from the Aahaarak Mishr Kayayog and until the final moment of the existence of the Aahaarak Kayayog, the Graahaarak body and the Aahaarak limbs also arise according to the rules (Dhaval 7154-55). Therefore, the Graahaarak body and the Aahaarak limbs arise simultaneously, and both the Praahaarak and Graahaarak Mishr Yogas remain continuously. For those who have Man:paryay, Parihaarvishuddhi or Prathamopasham Samyaktva, the negation of the Praahaarak body or the Praahaarak limbs is also self-evident. Similarly, one should know that the Man:paryaygyani, Prathamopasham Samyaktvi or Parihaarvishuddhi Ridhidhari does not have Aahaarak Samudghaat, because the meaning of Aahaarak Samudghaat is the Aahaarak body coming out of the Pradaarik body. Therefore, when the remaining three are not present in the existence of the Aahaarak body, how can those remaining three (Man:paryaygyan, Upasham Samyaktva, Parihaarvishuddhi) be present in the Aahaarak Samudghaat? (Dhaval 7431, 71355, 454).
The Aahaarak Mishr Kayayogi does not have these three: Man:paryaygyan, Parihaarvishuddhi Samyam and Upasham Samyaktva. This is a certain truth. (Dhaval 2.666) The same should be said for the Aahaarak Kayayogi. Similarly, these remaining three, Man:paryay, Parihaarvishuddhi and Upasham Samyaktva, are not present with the Graahaarak body and limbs. [Dhaval 7.666, Dhaval 6.305 Shraval 14.246] It can also be said that the Aahaarakdvik, Man:paryaygyan, Parihaarvishuddhi Samyam, these Riddhis and Upasham Samyaktva, these four do not occur together, they occur one at a time. (Dhaval 2735, Dhaval 14.247) The special point is that Upasham Samyaktva is the bondage of the Aahaarak body [Dhaval 6380 and Jain Gazette Di. 5.12.66] but it cannot arise. Similarly, Man:paryaygyadi (Shraval 265-66) and Parihaar Vishuddhi Samyami can also bind the Aahaarak body, (Dhaval 8307) only the arising is prohibited. The rest should be said according to the Agamas.
-
(4) The commentary and meaning of verse 82 (page 126) states that Tirthankaras, two types of Chakravartis and Balabhadra are born in the Kurmonal Yoni. On this, one should know this special point that from the same Kurmonal Yoni from which Bharat Chakravarti was born, 66 other sons (Bharat's brothers) were also born. From the same Kaikasi from which Ravana Prativaasudeva was born, Bhanukaranam and Vibhishan were also born (Po. Pu. Parva 7 Shloka 164 to 228). From the same Yoni from which Devaki's Krishna (Vaasudeva) was born, Nripadatta, Devapal, Anikadatta, Ghanikapal, Shatrughna and Jinashatru were born.
[24]

Page #19:
---------------------------
Sons were also born (Harivamsha Purana 35/1 to 26). Thus, in this Hundavaspini, other beings have been born in the Kurmonnata Yoni. This much speciality should be known.
(5) On page 266, in the solution of the third doubt, it is said that the power born from that Pahar is born in the later born beings. The same is stated in the Graho Jata. Its explanation is that all beings in a Nigodasharira are not born simultaneously, but are born in sequence (Dhaval 14 p. 227, 226, 484 etc.). However, they are called born together by way of treatment. And the power of the beings born earlier (in the same Nigodasharira) is taken by the beings born later at the first time of their birth. Therefore, in the same Nimodasharira, the beings born earlier and the beings born later become sufficient together, etc. The rest is all easy.
(6) The solution of the last doubt on page 323 is incomplete. Therefore, the complete solution with elaboration is taken from the original D. 14/318. As follows:
Solution: This is not a fault, because the people of Uttar Kuru and Dev Kuru are only those with three Palyas, the result of saying this is to negate the options of the remaining lifespan there, and there is no other Sutra except this Sutra from which it is known that the people of Uttar Kuru and Dev Kuru are only those with three Palyas, therefore this adjective is successful. Or, the term "those with three Palyas" has been taken in the Sutra to negate the options of the situation from one time more than two Palyas to one time less than three Palyas. The lifespan of the Devas of Sarvarthasiddhi is not without options, as it is without options; because no Sutra and explanation is available that would make such a prototype. Thus, it is explained here that the term "Tipalidovamatridieras" means "those with three Palyas" has two meanings (1) There is only a situation of three Palyas there, (2) There are also other lifespan options (one time more than two Palyas etc.) there.
It is noteworthy here that it is written in Satkarma Panjika p. 78 that - "Bhogabhumie Kadali. Ghavamsthi ti Abhipyaena. Puno Bhogabhumie Praugass Ghadam Sthiti Bhanataiyanam Abhispaena".. (Dhaval 15 Pari. p. 78). Meaning - The above prototype is said from the intention of the Acharyas who say that there is Kadali Ghat in Bhogabhumie. Again, the prototype is such that there is no Kadali Ghat death in Bhogabhumie, according to the opinion of the Acharyas who say so.............|
Thus, there are Acharyas who believe in Kadali Ghat in Bhogabhumie, and according to the intention of those Acharyas, many lifespan options arise there. Or, by binding different lifespans, many lifespan options arise from being born there. See J, D. p. 16-102, Dhaval 16 p. 424-25.
The above opinions are different from Tattvarth Sutra 2/53 etc. The rest is all easy.
[ 25 ]

Page #20:
---------------------------
(7) The term "prasankhabhajikama" appearing in (Gatha 265, page 366) has been mistakenly explained in the special meaning. Therefore, its explanation is given here.
The four places, namely, district, earth, dust and water, are distinct from each other in terms of their countless number of Lokapramāṇa differences. However, these differences are in descending order of countless गुणे (guna). For example, all the Kṣaya Udayasthāna are countless Lokapramāṇa. However, starting from the highest place and going down to the lowest place, they are progressively countless गुणहीन (gunaheen). When all the Kṣaya Udayasthāna are divided by the prasankhyātalanka, only a large part are the highest power-filled Udayasthāna, similar to the stone difference. Again, the remaining one part is divided by the countless Lokas, and the large part obtained is the Udayasthāna with less power, similar to the earth difference. Again, the remaining one part is divided by the countless Lokas, and the large part obtained is the Udayasthāna with even less power, similar to the dust line. Finally, the remaining one part is the Udayasthāna with the least power, similar to the water line. These are also known Lokapramāṇa. Thus, these four places are progressively countless गुणहीन (gunaheen). In this way, the number of Udayasthāna in the power places has been stated (108 Acharya Abhayachandra Siddhantachkravarti).

(8) In the special meaning of Gatha 640, on page 709, it is said that "otherwise, those who have emerged from the third earth cannot become Tirthankaras." Then it is written that "due to the existence of the Tirthankara nature, such purity arises in them that they themselves can destroy the Darshanamoha." The explanation - the secret is that this being destroys the Darshanamoha at the feet of a Tirthankara Kevali, a common Kevali, or a Shruta Kevali. (Bhavana 6/246) In such a situation, the beings who bind the Tirthankara nature and are born in the second and third hells, and then are born as humans from there, attain Kṣayika Samyaktvā in such a way that such Tirthankara-natured beings, who are the ultimate human beings with Kṣayopana Samyaktvā, become Shruta Kevali themselves, that is, they are able to destroy the Darshanamoha themselves without the need for anyone else's grace. (Prastā. Pū. 1, Original page 4, Jainagajata 16.470 E.P. 7)

(Jayadhaval 13)
Shri Krishna had bound the Tirthankara nature in the Samavasarana of Shri Neminatha, but he did not attain Kṣayika Samyaktvā. Before attaining Samyaktvā, Shri Krishna had bound the Narakayu. Therefore, he died and was born in the third hell. From there, he will emerge as a Tirthankara with Kṣayopashama Samyaktvā. Now the question arises here, how will he attain Kṣayika Samyaktvā? To solve this, Dhaval has written that those who are themselves Jina, that is, Shruta Kevali, destroy the Darshanamoha themselves, they do not need the grace of any other Kevali or Shruta Kevali. Therefore, Krishna will come from hell, become a Muni, become a Shruta Kevali (Jina), and then destroy the Darshanamoha himself (without going to anyone's feet). The rest is easy.

Vi. 25.12.1662
Vidushaam Anuchara
Jawaharlal Jain Siddhanta Shastri

Page #21:
---------------------------
## शुद्धिपत्र

**Abhin**
**Prashuddha**
**Shuddha**
...

**Bhakti praadi tattvon ko chane, yah nimitt hai. Saakshat praatyaksh hetu mohaniya karma gunasthan yog ke sadbhaav prashraddhan pramattasanayat av aprmattasanayat arthaat sutra mein vivakshit nay vedakasamyaktva sahanavastha 436-637 800-55 586-637 250-264**

Bhakti and Anunata Mahavat praadi tattvon ke banen. Yah saakshat hetu darshanmohaniya karma gagasthan sadbhaav praddhan pramattasanayat arthaat parmagam mein mukhya vedak samyashti

**Mahaanavastha 14 kotha no. 1 436-630**
**6 kotha no. 5 800.885 12 kotha no. 4 585-637 20 kotha no. 5 350-264**

**(36 se 14) Isi pratham samanta ban jaati hai dasven gugamyan....paavshak hai. Mein hi pratham jis pushti ke ka vedak vibhag jeev ya kayayog ko karne wala prakriti kyonki, pehle mag jeevon kyon apeksha vruddhi jo pasanjhi sadharan**

Isi prakar pratham ekta kahi hai ye tinon panktiyan kaatni hain. Mein hi krodh ki pratham jis krishti ka bedan
Tribhag jeev
Yog ka upadesh karne wala
Pravritti
Kyonki, pehle mag sabhi jeevon kyonki apeksha prathava vruddhi jo prasanjhi (?) sadharan jeev

**1 27.**

Page #22:
---------------------------
Page
Row
Display
Happiness
25
30
123
145 147 151 151 112
To the Kritiyas
Of the Kritiyas, the two extremes are said to be
The two extremes, the time of the two extremes, take the remedy, add it to the end of row three - the number of multiplications is. In it, the non-returning suppressor is the multiplier
The multiplier is innumerable. From that, the subtle Samprayay
The multiplier of the Gurugashreringa is innumerable. From the twelve, the Ninisang
Like an arrow, the remaining six natures
The remaining karma natures, subtle Tejakayika, Badar, Vanaspati - subtle Jakayika, Badar, Vayukayika - subtle Kayika
Vayukavika Badarvanaspatika, more suitable for
Suitable food is. But the Mulachar
They are. Mulachar, the birth of the Uppaad, is one-sensory
The birth of the Uppaad, and the one-sensory state, is the most
The state of living beings is the most. This
It is, that is, the bumblebee is wide. In this healthy place, subtle
In this place, subtle, the most insignificant
The most insignificant 14-15, taking the Avgahana
Taking the Avgahana, in 20, the Pravali
From this, the Pravali, the subtle Prithvikaayika
The subtle Prithvikaayika, the sufficient, the Shadar, the Vanaspatikaayika body, the Badar, the Vanaspatikaayika, each body, the low-caste form
The low-caste, in the form of, the difference is made
The effect is made, first, the Sthitikaandaka
First; Sthitikaandaka, Bhavathi; 'Sanyam
Bhavathi'; that is, the law is an obstacle.
According to this rule, 'consistent results
The previous 13:14, 15; 17 senses
Note - Read the senses in place of the senses. In it, the form of mental strength
From that, the form of mental strength, 22-23, the Bhaashavaganga... power
"Bhavaganga .. power" Mathun, the name
Parigraha, it seems to be knowledge.
Knowledge form, it seems. These senses
Those senses (the form of use, Bhaavendriya) are born in the Narakiyas
In the Narakiyas, the living beings are born, add to the end of row 13
The subtle Samprayay, the restraint, the most insignificant difference is one time. Because the subtle Samprayayika, the restrained, without time, is seen in the world
xcx
Murhwor
166
176
181
181 187
~
161 166
[28]

Page #23:
---------------------------
## Page
PEE
166
201
223
225
128
238 24
245
**
24=
248
253
262
264 264
254
?co
283
284
285
262
304
305
/ot
308
## Row
26
28
5
15.
25
11
7
1-2
27
13
10
30
24
18-20
2-3
## De
24
**
25
30
2
17
£
1
## Impure
Pure
is. The excellent spread is six months, because the excellent difference of the removal-ascent is six months only. After six months, there is some subtle Saṃpārāya.
In the third, Kapota and Nīla, in the fourth, Nīla, in the fifth, Nīla and Kṛṣṇa Leśyā
In the third and fourth hell, Nīla
Kṛṣṇa Leśyā
500 Dhanuṣ
Hell-going Nārikī
6197084666664162....
The first square root a... to
The second square root x (the third
The said
Pudgala Dravya's... result is.
With expenditure
Without you
Subtle one-sensory sufficient, two-sensory... five-sensory
It becomes suitable. || 182 || Doubt - In every plant... is Anekāntika.
It has not happened, water
Mūlādika, which is established in the Āgama
Every
Reason (Bhāvakalank) these three quantities are Lok
Jalakāyika Jīva
Sufficient Prāvalī
Complete Bādar
Because the relation
Effect
Quality, it
And is being enjoyed
Those who have in the past
[ 29 ]
7] Yojana 3 Kos
Hell-going Nārikī
61670846668 164162... From the first square root, j. śre. to the second square root (the third
Specific institution, importance and excellent Vāśī etc. Pudgala Dravya's result is.
More than the expenditure form
Without you
Subtle one-sensory insufficient
Three-sensory, two-sensory, five-sensory, four-sensory suitable; in earth etc. it becomes. || 182 || Doubt - In every plant, the possibility of the existence of a subtle specific Jīva is possible, therefore this is Anekāntika due to the reason of Sattvanyathānupatti. 2
It has not happened; in these, water
Which is Mūlādika, established in the Āgama, from every-ness
Reason Bhāvakalank is, these three quantities are countless-sorrow
Jalakāyika sufficient Jīva
Sufficient Jīva-quantity Prāvalī
Complete Bādar
Because Karma relation
Absence
Quality, it
And in the end, is being enjoyed
Those who have in the past, in the Karma-kāya-yoga-kāla

Page #24:
---------------------------
Row
Page 317
27
326
11-12
370
380
389
22
The elder class is. .........
There are classes. Or atoms
Therefore, atoms are only of the gross body
Of the gross body, only the pudgalas are the culmination
The culmination of pudgalas from the complex in the one-sensed beings, the sorrows
From the one-sensed beings, the sorrows, one time........the time of rise is that third........
It is that third, equal to the praiseworthy qualities
Equal to the praiseworthy qualities, the thread, the beloved
The thread or the self, the beloved, by water
By the mixing of water, they are. ||265|| They are. Stone, earth, dust and water, these four places are separate-2
The praiseworthy world, being measured, are still countless
Qualityless-2 are. ||26|| Change only special
Change only, anger, special substances in the change of
Substances, almost
Now, in this way........given. In this way, all (11) options are
Explained. The object, the upper
The object, the upper 611...... 612th
6011.... .. 6012th, going to infinity
Infinite parts, the intellects, going to the proofs, the increases in
Proofs, infinite parts, the increases in, from the unchanging
Unchanged, below the numbered
Below the stem, the proof, numbered [(4x 45)
[(1445) the lowest place
The lowest place, the prabhritaprabhrit, as many as
The prabhritaprabhrit, as many as eighty-two
Eighty-three, the shrutajnana, one
Shrutajnana, one, one letter is
One break is, from one, to make
From one, to reduce, as per type
As per type
13-14
25
403
Wa man.
426 426
431
432
438
"210
26.27
436 443
14638 1953 Shrutajnana, one less, obtained, their tendency
6. 4 1630 Shrutajnana and tadabaran karma, one less, obtained, their tendency towards
[30]

Page #25:
---------------------------
**Impure**
**Page**
**Line**
**445**
The story of the Sadhu... is a graceful verse. The five bhutas are destroyed by the special method of destruction, the truth
**452**
is the cause - the category of the field-follower in the Sanyam, because it is the measure (proof) of subtle understanding. But above
*
The story of the Sadhu is a lakh of verses. The twelve bhutas are destroyed by the special method of destruction, the method of questioning, the special method of questioning, the truth is the cause - it is of three types - the category of the field-follower in the Sanyam, because it is the measure (proof) of subtle understanding. But above that, he knows them. He gets that much of the palyopama prasankhyatva, that is, the Acharya knows the least dhruvahar, the category, the multiplier, the five categories related to the options, the form of the paramanu prachay, the leprosy, the matter of one day.
**471**
they go, he knows this palyopama prasankhyatva part, that is, the least dhruvahar, the category, the multiplier, the five categories related to the options, the form of the paramanu prachay, the leprosy, the matter of one day.
**23-24**
**484**
**45**
Ac
**466**
is, the general number of the sankhyatva, only in the least dravya... happens
is. ||414||
**44**
**501**
is, the time-general number of the sankhyatva part, the number of paramanus are different. Among these, the excellent extreme difference is the dravyahaar (that is,
dhruvahar) proof. ||414|| The immediate time is less than this, in the same way, the time is much more than that, the number of the sankhyatva part related to the excellent field, the first earthless period or the whole... the innumerable part of the pavali
**505**
**506**
the immediate time is less than this, in the same way, the time is much more than that, the number of the sankhyatva part related to the field, the period with earth, the whole part of the pavali
**506**
**505**
**5.**
[31

Page #26:
---------------------------
## Pakti
526 126
526
xxxxxxxxx
5.26
5.26
23
54.6

**Knowable objects, Tiryanch, and Matijnanis, Praman, and Avadhijnana, these are more Vimangshani than Mithyasthi. Proch Mithyasthi, its arising and cessation, the cause of restraint in the past, false knife, poison, and the third Muravat Avadhi, Samayik Kshaya's cause, Asankhyata Chakshudarshan, Paramarth Achakshudarshan's origin, Kshayas, only Kusuma and Tanuvat, countable, (progressive) Svarga happens.** || 534-35 ||
570

**Knowable synonyms, Tiryanch, Matijnanis, Praman, and Pravadhijnana, these and Aयोगी are more Vimangshani than Mithyasthi. Proch, that is, all Mithyasthi, Apratyasthana Avarana's arising and cessation, the cause of restraint in the past, false knife, Dhenu, poison, Muravat Avadhi, Samayik Kshaya's cause, Kay Asankhyata Prachakshudarshan, Paramarth Pravakshjnana's origin, Kshayas, only Kusuma and Tanuvat, countable once, Svarga happens. Bhavanatrik Aparayapta's**
_**Ashubhatrik happens.** || 534-35 || **Asankhyal part's part, now Ashubha Leshya-filled, all Jivarathi**
**from the collective group of three, the part's division, Guhyakacharit (Yaksas' description**
**place), touch. Therefore, Pratarangrul multiplied**
**Jagpreerin's countable part, Praman Gunakar should be established. Everywhere**
|
10 16-20
512 56
|
600
2
**Asankhyat part, Ashubha Leshya-filled Jivarathi**
**collective group, the part's division, Guhyakacharit (Yaksas' wandering**
**place), these are synonymous. Touch. Everywhere**
*
*
610
[ 32 ]

Page #27:
---------------------------
## Clear
## Row
## Pure
## 11.
## 134
## 11
## Less Nine Divided By
## Less 8/14 and Nine Divided By. ||196||  Swasthana
## ||196|| Explanation-Swasthana Swasthana's
## Swasthana and Samridhayat's part or
## Path Prasankhyat Bahumag or wide path
## Fourth part Doubt-1:....this comes. x x x (all three rows to be cut.) taking the being
## taking the being restraint
## one should know the time. Sankhyat Sankhyat Prasankhyat and infinite difference Bala
## Prasannyat and infinite Pravalies' one time
## one time Mavalis teach
## Sidons to Mam time 1
## 6 months = time
## 643
## Six Pravali proof that big Vach Patla's should be. This
## Sankhyat Mavali proof that small-big Vana Prithvi's should be. Jghanya each Garira Vargana
## from Utkrishta Pra.Sh. Vargana is Asankhyat Guņi. Gunakar Pali's Prasankhyatwan Mar
## 667
## 18-19
## are. This way
## Eys
## are. From its Jghanya to Utkrishta Badar Nigod Vargana Prasankhyat Gurani. Jagamshreni's Asankhyat Mag Gunakar
## is this way Padi in Uttarottar Nyun Tah Su., Sa. Si., Rajavatik's
## Parampara: are. This way Path Gunasthana from 14th
## 680
## Madi in Nyun Nakshe's above this way heading
## to put: - are. Path Gunasthana 14 this order's Prosh Kal मिला Den Gunahani Karma is
## to Prosh Kal मिला one and a half times loss x Karma proof is.
## 504
## 705
## [ 33 3

Page #28:
---------------------------
Page
Pure
710
720 723 725
After becoming
Doing time
Time forms the price
Form, Daru is Bhajaneya. Darshan
Bhajaneya is, such is said in Magam.
Darshan Samyamhastya's desire is the amount. Samyagdristi are. Ko Paly
From Paly does he
Does, therefore he therefore
Mathaba do. Where
Do. Similarly, Maranantik Samu
Dadhat where Samudghāt श्रेणी
Samuddhāt in श्रेणि one being's expectation
Various beings' expectation Pranaharak all
Works are done. One being's expectation Manatmabhut Hetu Antaranga Nimitta is. Manatmabhut Hetu is and Vyoyognimittak
Bhavayog and Biryansray Gnanavaran Varnanavaran's decay, Kshayopaśama from the born Atmashakti Bhatmabhut Antaranga
Created is. Asankhyat........
Sankhyat Anubhay Piklendriyas
Anumay Vachan Biklendriyas Samyaktva
Samyaktti -Panchendriya Jeevas
Panchendriya till the beings believing in them, there is no such Ekant, that there are many defects; that is, Panekant is true.
Goes; because Samayik and Chhedopasthapana in Vivaksha-Bhed from only Bhed is, in reality it is not.
735
37.
26
744
22.23
74
22
[3
]

Page #29:
---------------------------
Gommatasara: Jivakanda
* Table of Contents *
Topic
Page
Topic
101
103
114
Mangalacharan Twenty Prarupaana Prodh and Paadesh Explanation of Different Prahapanas in Marganas
Antarman Gunasthan Lakshana Gugasthan Nirdesha Gunasthanas in Bhava Gunasthan Praalapaana Adhikar Midhyanva: Lakshana and Bhed Sasadan Sambhagmidhvatva Sayopaamik Samyaktava Aumik Kshaamik Samakita Pancham Musasthan Pramattasayat Pramada's 5 Bhed 37 Thousand Mangos' Map Apramattasapat Adhakarana Apurvakarana Anivrittikaraga New Sparadhak and
Krishtti Prarupaana Sukshma Samparaya Upshantapraay Ksheenakashaya Sayogabali
Prayajitkarana Kevali Samudghat Yoganirodh Yoga Krishttis Sakshamkriya Apratipaati Dhyan Nayogakevali Gunadhairignirajara's 11 Sthan Sikhon's Swaroop Anya Mat Parihar Jivasamaas Prarupaana Adhikar Nirukti Jivasamaas' Lakshana Jivasamaas' Bhed Sthan, Yoni, Avagahana, Kul Different Vonis in Janma Garbhaadi Janma Yoni Sankhya Gant and Janma in Sambandh Different Gattis in Ved Avagahana Matsya-Rachana Koolon Dwag Jivasamaason's Kathana Paryapti Prarupaana Adhikar
Lakshana and Bhed 74 | Mmaami 76 | Paryaptis' Prasthapan and Nishthapan 76 | Mein Kaal
118 116 121 128
133
134
135
154
157
161
[ 35 ]

Page #30:
---------------------------
Subject
Page
Subject
238
242
243
244
254 256 258 26. 263
273
Sufficient and non-determined in the great text. Doubt about the insufficiency of the Kevali. Gunasthana in the topics like Lakshyaparyapti etc. In Hundavaspiggi, Samyaktvi is not attained by women. Pranaprarpana Adhikara, Prana Lakshana Bheda, Utpatti ki Samgri, Svami Pradi Samjna Adhikara, Samjna ka Lakshana and Bheda, Mahanadisanjatras ke Hetu Lakshana Gunasthana etc.
185 Margana-Mahadhikara, Margana-Niruktartha and Sankhya
188 14 Names of Margananas, Mantar Marganae
165 Gati-Margana Prarrupana, Svarupa of Margati
16 Ayu, Leshya, Naraka-Duhkha, Gunasthana in Naraka: Who goes to which Naraka, Linga Gati-Svarupa, Mukha-Duhkha, Antar, Gunasthana and Jivasamasa
202. Manushya Gati: Svarupa, Kshetra-Seema
205 Duhkha of Manushya Gati
207 Bheda of Tiryancas and Manushyas
206 Devagati: Svarupa of Devas, Duhkha of Devas, Bheda and Ayusiksha
212 Sankhya of Jivas of Four Gatis in Pathakrama
214 Indriya-Margana Niruktartha, Bheda and Svarupa of Indriyas, Vishayakshetra of Indriyas, Grahana of Artha by Indriyas, Prakarana and Pravagahana of Indriyas, Anindriyas (Siddha) and Ekendriyadis Sankhya
Kayamargana Bheda, Varna Padi 36 Prakaras of Prithvi, Prithvi, Prithvikayika, Prithvijiva Sukshma and Badara Bheda, Avagahana of Four Sthavara, Vanaspatikayika Svarupa Bheda etc. Sadharan Svarupa (Detailed Nirupana), Shodashapadika, Alpabahutva, Nityanigroda Asamsthita Svarupa, Bheda, Kshetra, Kon-2 Nigroda Sharira Hain, Prakriti and Sthavara ke Prakaras Pradi, Samstha in Kayamargana, Yogamargana Lakshana, Svarupa of Three Yogas, Karmabandha Yogaprauda Bhava in Jivapradesas, Bheda of Yogas, Vachana Yoga and Bheda, Dasa Satya Vachana, Anubhaya Vachana, 4 Manovachana Yoga, Hetu Sayoga Kevali ke Manoyoga, Audarikas, Mithya Kayayoga, Vaikriyika, Mishras, Aharaka, Saharaka Mishras.
275 277 278
199
276
206 26.
261
262 264
266
mr
266
310
211
301
302 304
R

Page #31:
---------------------------
## Subject | Page
--- | ---
Kaganga | 378
Kayayoga | 380
Vaikrivik & Aharak | 380
Aयोगी शरीरों में कर्म-नोकर्म विभाग | 405
शरीरों के समय प्रबन व वगंगा की अवगाहना | 320
बिनसोपचय-स्वरूप जचन्य गुण में भी अनन्त प्रविभाग | 417
प्रतिच्छेद होते हैं | 417
5 शगैरों का उत्कृष्ट संचय | 426
पांच भी की उत्कृष्ट स्पिति | 426
पाँच शरीरों की गुणहानि | 432
मौदारिक प्रादि शरीरों का बंध, उदय व सत्त्व | 440
द्रष्य प्रमाण | 446
शरीरों के उत्कृष्ट संचय के स्वामी | 41
पांगमानणा में जीवों की संख्या | 453
वेदमागणा | 465
वेद का हेतु | 471
किस जीव के कोनसा वेद | 475
वेदों के लक्षण | 402
प्रवेदी सिद्ध | 358
वेदमार्ग में जीवसंख्या | 483
कवायमार्गणा | 466
कषाय का निरुक्यर्थ | 486
कषायों के भेद व कार्य | 466
कोध प्रादि कषायों के पर्यायवाचक नाम | 505
कपायों के 4, 14, 20 भेद | 507
नरकादि गति के प्रथम ममयों में कौनमी कषाय हो? | [ 37 ]
शक्ति, लेण्या व प्रायुबंध की अपेक्षा | 
4, 14, 20 भेद | 
छहों मेश्याओं में कुछ समान अश | 
काय मार्गणा में जीव | 
ज्ञानमार्गणा | 
निरुक्ति सिद्ध | 
लक्षण ज्ञान के भेद, स्वामी ग्रादि | 
मिश्रज्ञान का हेतु/मनःपर्यय का स्वामी | 
3 अज्ञानों के लक्षण | 
314 मतिझान विविध भेद, सविस्तर निरूपण | 
श्रुतज्ञान-लक्षगा, भेद, स्वरूप | 
षट्स्थान लि का स्वरूप | 
अक्षरात्मक श्रुतज्ञान | 
द्रव्यश्रुत | 
केवल ज्ञान समान नहीं | 
श्रुत के 20 भेदों का प्रपञ्च | 
323 द्वादशांग के सब पद | 
बाह्य अक्षरों की संख्या 13 | 
श्रुतज्ञान के 64 प्रक्षरों के एक्संयोगी मादि सर्व भंगों की गणित | 
अंगप्रविष्ट तथा अंगबाह्य में विभाजन | 
237 बारह अंगों के नाम व पद | 
338 दिव्यध्वनि का स्वरूप | 
बारहवें अंग के भेद इत्यादि | 
344 अंगवाह्य के भेद | 
345 धावक क्रर्म के उपदेशक तीर्थकर | 
345 अहिसक कैसे ? | 
श्रुनज्ञान के पर्यायवाचक शब्द | 
345 अवधिज्ञान : स्वरूप, भेद, स्वामी | 
अन्य भेद व स्वामी | 
351 अवधिजान का विषय | 
352 देशावधि के जघन्यादि | 
द्रव्य तथा ध्र बहार का स्वरूप, कार्मण  _ वर्गणा का गुणाकार प्रादि | 
देशावधि के द्रव्य विकल्प | 
363 क्षेत्र व काल के विकल्प कैसे बढ़ते हैं ? | 
देशावधि के 16 काण्डक | 
365 परमावधि | 
मविषि नरक में अवधिक्षेत्र | 
मनुष्य-तिर्यंच में अवधि | 
भवनत्रिक में अवषि का क्षेत्रकाल | 
375 । स्वगरें में अवधिज्ञान |

Page #32:
---------------------------
## Subject | Page | Subject | Page
------- | -------- | -------- | --------
| **Manahparyaya** | 511 | **Manahparyaya** | 580
| **Swarapa Bhed Maadi** | 585 | **Utpati Ke Pratma Pradesh** | 522
| **Kahaan Rijhu Vipulmati Mein Bhed** | 586 | **Manahparyaya Ka Vishay Roopi Padarth** | 581
| **Rijhu Mati Ka Jaganya** | 562 | **Utkrisht Dravya** | 563
| **Vipulmati Ka Dravya** | 567 | **In Dono Ke Kshetra** | 532
| **Dono Manahparyayo Ke Kal V Bhav** | 604 | **Kevalgyan** | 562
| **Gyanamaargana** | 563 | **Jivasankhya** | 567
| **Sanyam Maargna** | 532 | **Lakshaga V Hetu** | 604
| **Panch Sanyamo Ki Utpami** | 562 | **Sanyam** | 563
| **4 Hi Hain** | 567 | **Sanyamasanyam** | 532
| **Panchon Mayamo Ka Swaroop** | 604 | **Deshasanyam Ka Swaroop** | 562
| **Prasangaprapt** | 563 | **5 Anuvrano Ka Charananuyogiya** | 567
| **Vibhinn Gatiyo Mein Dravyaleshya Parimaran V Sankraman Adhikar** | 532 | **Kuchh Madhyam Ansh** | 604
| **Sabhi Leshyamo Mein** | 562 | **Saman Hain** | 563
| **321 Leshyakarm Ke 6 Dastant** | 567 | **6 Leshya Walon Ke Swabhav** | 532
| **Leshyaon Ke 26 Ansh** | 604 | **525 Apkarsh Swaroop** | 562
| **Path Madhyam Ansh Ka Naksha** | 563 | **8 Madhyam Granthon Ke Naam Tatha Khulasa** | 567
| **Kis Leshya Bala Kis Gati Mein Jave** | 532 | **530 Paron Gatiyo Mein Kahaan Kaun Leshya** | 604
| **Leshya (Dravya V Bhav) Ka Hetu** | 562 | **Lenya Mein Jivo Ki Sankhya Alpbahutva** | 563
| **Lenya Kshetra** | 567 | **541 ! 7 Samudghart Ka Swaroop** | 532
| **Leshya Mein Sparsh** | 604 | **542 Leshyayo Ka Kal** | 562
| **546 Leshyaon Mein Antar** | 563 | **Maleny Mithdo Ka Swaroop** | 567
| **Bhavya Maargna : Swaroop V Jivasankhya** | 532 | **Samyaktvamargana : Lakshna** | 604
| **Samyaktv Ke Is Bhed** | 562 | **Chhe Dravya Nirupan** | 563
| **Chhe Dravyo Mein Roopi-Aroopi** | 567 | **Chhe Dravyo Ke Lakshna** | 532
| **Paramanu, 1 Samay Mein 14 Raju Jata Hai** | 604 | **Kal Ke Samay, Pravali Aadi Bhed** | 562
| **Pavali Ka Prasandhyatvaan Bhag Bhi** | 563 | **Ansamuhurt Hai** | 567
| **6 Mas 8 Samay Mein** | 532 | **608 Jiv Mukt** | 604
| **573 Arth V Vyajan Paryay** | 562 | **576 Dravyo Ka Prachar** | 563
| **577 : Chhote Se Lok Mein Sab Jivo Ka Samavesh** | 567 | **106** | 532
| **610** | 604 | **615** | 562
| **620** | 563 | **550** | 567
| **625** | 532 | **628** | 604
| **626** | 562 | **Teen Gunavat Shikshatrat Shikshabato Ke Naam** | 563
| **Vibhinn Pracharo** | 567 | **Ke Mat Se Ganarah Pratimamo Ka Swaroop** | 532
| **Asanyat Ka Swaroop** | 604 | **Sanyam Maargna Mein Jiv** | 562
| **Darshanmaargna : Lakshna** | 563 | **Darshan Samagrahi Hai** | 567
| **Pranatmgyata Ka Dushan Kise ?** | 532 | **Shan Mein Darshan Adhik Hai.** | 604
| **Sabhi Darshanon Ka Swaroop** | 562 | **Darshanmaargna Mein Jivasankhya** | 563
| **Lenyamaargna : Lakshna** | 567 | **Lenya Ke Bhed** | 532
| **Lashya Ke Barg** | 604 | **642** | 562
| **645** | 563 | **572** | 567
| **650** | 532 | **652** | 604
| **[ 38 ]** |  |  |  |

Page #33:
---------------------------
##  Subject Page Subject
721 - 723 726 732 733 677 736 737
How? Six Dravyas' distinctions, Jiva Dravya's Chala-Chala Pratma Pradesh, Pudgala Trya-Chala, 23 Pudgala Vagangas' description, Pudgala's Madar-Badar etc. 6 distinctions, Skandha, Skandhadesh, Pradesh, Paramanu, 6 Dravyas' Upkar, Paramanu's Bandha's description, Avibhaga Prati-Chheda's Swaroop, Pancha-Astikaya, Nine Padarthas, Puny Jiva and Pap Jiva, Each Gunasthan's Jiva-Samkhya, Ved, Prabgahan etc. in relation to
Number of different Kshapaks at one time, Sakal-Samyami's number, First 4 Gunasthan's Pravahar-Kaal, Puny and Pap Prakriti, Pushya's Swaroop, Puny Moksha's Hetu, Pasrav Samvar etc.'s Lakshya, Sayik Samyaktva Praroopana, Kshayo-Pasham Samyaktva Praroopana, Upasham Samyaktva: Five Lavida
etc.'s description, Sasadan Samyaktva, Mithyatva Lakshana, Samyaktva-Marg-Ma, Jiva-Samkhya
653 Sanhi Margna: Swaroop and Samkhya
Prahar Margna: Swaroop and Swami 658
Seven Samudghatas' description with examples, Kevali Samahamat's In-Pati
Samudghatas' direction 666 Maharak/Panaharaka Kaal 670 Prahar-Margna's Jiva-Samkhya 671 Upayog Adhikar: Sakar and Anakar
Upayog
Upayog's 8,4 distinctions 650 Upayog-Adhikar's Jiva-Samkhya 582 Pramat-Bhava-Adhikar 683 Margna's Gunasthan 685 Ekendriya's Shra-Tashan
Sion's Kshayik Paritra is 662 Gunasthan's Jiva-Samas 663 Gunasthan's Paryapti and Pran
Gunasthan's Sanjna 666
Gunasthan's Margna, Gunasthan's Upayog, Malpa-Adhikar, Gunasthan's Malapa, Margna's Bhalapa 16, 38, 57 Jiva-Samas, some rules
Dvitiya-Upasham's Manah-Paryaya is 718 Where does Dvitiya-Upasham arise?
Siddh's Swaroop 719 20 distinctions' knowledge's Upay and Phal
757
756
665
768 766 77t
781 783
19
786
[ 36 ]

Page #34:
---------------------------
|| Shriman Nemichandraya Namah || + Gommatasarah ||
* Jivakandam *
Mangalacharan and Vastu-Nirupan ki Pratijna  Siddha Suddha Panamiya Jiringadvaranemichandamkalankam.
Gurgarayanbhusanuvayam Jivass Paruvanam Voccham ||1|| Gathaarth - Who are Siddha, Suddha, Akalank and whose qualities are like jewels, such Jinenadravar (best) Nemichandra (Neminath) Bhagavan ko Namaskar karke main (Nemichandracharya) Jiv ki Praruprana kahta hun. ||1||
Vishesharth - In this first Gatha, the author Shriman Nemichandracharya has done Namaskar to his Ishtadeva and promised to tell about Jivpraruparna.
Who are Kritakritya, therefore Siddha; who are devoid of Dravya-Bhavrupa Dhatiya-Karmas, therefore Suddha; who are devoid of Sudhaadi 18 doshas, therefore Akalank and whose qualities are like jewels, such Neminath Bhagavan ko Namaskar karke, or
Who are Jinenadra, because of their infinite knowledge which is revealed after the destruction of Ghatiya Karma, who are endowed with the unparalleled Aiswarya of the nine Kevala Labdhis, whose knowledge illuminates the three lokas and three kalas, who are like the axle of the chariot of Tirth, who are like the moon that makes the lotus eyes of the three lokas bloom, such Jinenadra Shreshtha Chatuviti Tirthavar Samudaya ko, or who are Jin who break the mountains of Karma, among them Indra-pradhan Indrabhuti Gautam Gagadhar ke var (guru) Shri Vardhaman Swami ko Namaskar karke, who is also Nemichandra, because he is "Nem" because he takes his disciples to the indestructible pad and he is also Chandra because he illuminates the world like the moon. In this way, Vardhaman Swami is Nemichandra; after doing Namaskar to him, who is Siddha because he has achieved his goal, who is Suddha because he is devoid of Dravya-Bhavrupa Karmas like Jnanavaran etc., who is Akalank because he is devoid of the doshas imagined by the Parvadis,

Page #35:
---------------------------
2) Go. Ma. Jivakanda
Salutations to the Siddhas, who are adorned with the jewels of virtues that manifest from the qualities of Samyaktva, etc., and who are the victorious Jina, the supreme Lord, Nemichandra (Jina - the conqueror of karma; Indra - the king adorned with supreme sovereignty; Vara - excellent; Nemichandra - the one with excellent knowledge, the enjoyer of supreme happiness; all these qualities are possessed by the special Siddhas). With salutations to such Siddhas, I (Nemichandracharya) will narrate the Jivanarupana.

The three verses of this chapter are auspicious, because they praise the qualities of the Jinadeva. The praise of the Jinadeva destroys obstacles, never causes fear, evil spirits cannot attack, and continuously grants the desired results. Therefore, one should perform auspicious rituals at the beginning, middle, and end of any work undertaken, because the praise of the Jina Guru is a fire that burns away obstacles and ensures the successful completion of the work.

There are two types of auspicious rituals - Nibaddhamangal and Anibaddhamangal. Nibaddhamangal is the auspicious verse composed by the author at the beginning of the text, which is a salutation to the desired deity. Anibaddhamangal is the auspicious verse that is not composed by the author himself.

The auspicious verse at the beginning of this Gommatasar Jivakanda text is Nibaddhamangal, because this verse, which is a salutation to the desired deity, is composed by the author himself.

Is the text itself auspicious or inauspicious? If the text itself is not auspicious, then it cannot be called a text, because the absence of auspiciousness leads to the creation of sin, which contradicts its nature as a text. If the text itself is auspicious, then why is there a need for separate auspicious rituals, because the auspicious text itself ensures the success of the work?

Solution - Auspicious rituals are performed at the beginning of the text, but the aforementioned flaws do not arise, because both the text and the auspicious rituals destroy sins separately. Nibaddhamangal and Anibaddhamangal remove the obstacles that arise during reading, and the text continuously destroys sins in countless ways, and then becomes the cause of the destruction of all karmas.

Salutation to the deity also destroys all karmas in the final stage, so both auspicious rituals and the text perform the same function. Why then are their functions described as different?

Solution - It is not the same, because without the knowledge of the subject matter described in the text, mere salutation to the deity does not have the power to destroy karmas. Liberation is attained through pure meditation, but salutation to the deity is not pure meditation.

-
-
1. Obstacles are destroyed, fear never arises, evil spirits cannot attack.
Other desired objects are always obtained, by praising the Jinadeva. || 2.
Wise men do not speak auspicious words at the beginning, middle, or end.
This praise of the Jinadeva is for the removal of all obstacles. || [P. Pu. 1 p. 42] 3. D. Pu 1 p. 43.

Page #36:
---------------------------
## Mangalacharasha/3

Although this verse offers a salutation to the deities as a form of auspiciousness, it also represents the six rights (Mangala, Nimitta, Hetu, Parimaan, Naam, and Karta) due to the "Talapralamb" sutra being a "Deshamarthak" (meaning it has a universal meaning). As it is said:

"Mangal-nimit-heuu parimaaranam naam tah ya kataaram.
Bageriya chh ppi pacchha vakkharan satthamahariya."

**Meaning:**  Explain the six rights - Mangal, Nimitta, Hetu, Parimaan, Naam, and Karta - and then explain the teachings of the Acharya.

The word "Mangal" is derived from the root "Mangi" (to purify). The etymological meaning of Mangal is that which purifies, destroys, burns, eliminates, cleanses, and annihilates. There are two types of "Mal" (impurity): Dravyamal (material impurity) and Bhavamal (mental impurity).

Dravyamal is further divided into two types: Baahya Dravyamal (external material impurity) and Abhyantar Dravyamal (internal material impurity). Sweat, dirt, etc., are examples of Baahya Dravyamal. Karmas like Jnanavarga, etc., which are bound to the living beings through the "Pradesha" (region), "Anubhag" (experience), "Sthiti" (state), and "Prakriti" (nature) are examples of Abhyantar Dravyamal. "Pragyan" (wisdom), "Adarshan" (non-perception), etc., are examples of Bhavamal. That which purifies, destroys, and eliminates these impurities is called "Mangal".

Alternatively, the word "Mangal" is also a "Mukhavachi" (meaning it has a literal meaning) and refers to that which is obtained or acquired.

"Mangal", "Punnya" (merit), "Puta" (pure), "Pavitra" (holy), "Prashamna" (calm), "Shiv" (auspicious), "Bhadra" (good), and "Saugya" (prosperity) are all synonyms for "Mangal". Ancient Acharyas have described the meaning of "Mangal" in various ways using different words in their respective scriptures. Alternatively, if the subject matter is not understood by one word, it can be understood by other words. Therefore, many synonyms for "Mangal" have been mentioned here.

All living beings are "Mangal" (auspicious), but not all living beings are "Mangal" in the same way. Because, in the context of "Dravyathikanaya" (the principle of substance), "Mangal" is considered to be the "Parigana" (group) of living beings, while in the context of "Paryayathikanaya" (the principle of synonyms), only those living beings who possess "Jnan" (knowledge), etc., are considered "Mangal".

**Question:** What causes "Mangal"?

**Answer:** "Mangal" arises from the "Bhavas" (emotions) of the living beings, such as "Praudyik" (worldly) and "Praupashmik" (spiritual).

**Question:** How can "Praudyik" emotions be the cause of "Mangal"?

**Answer:** "Praudyik" emotions like "Pooja" (worship), "Bhakti" (devotion), "Anuvrat" (minor vows), "Mahavrat" (major vows), etc., which are "Prashast" (noble) and "Raga" (attachment) in nature, and "Praudyik" emotions that arise from the "Prakriti" (nature) of the "Tirthankar" (liberated soul) are the causes of "Mangal".

**Question:** How long does "Mangal" remain in a living being?

**Answer:** "Mangal" remains forever in relation to all living beings, and in relation to a single living being, it remains "Anadi-Anant" (beginningless and endless), "Sadi-Anant" (beginningless and endless), and "Sadi-Sant" (beginningless and finite).

**Question:** How is it possible for "Mangal" to remain in a single living being from beginningless time to endless time?

...

1. A. P. 1 P. 8. 2. G. P. 10. 3. D. P. 1 P. 33-34. 4. D. P. 1 P. 32-33. 5. S. P. 1 P. 36.

Page #37:
---------------------------
## 4/Go. Sa. Jeevakash

**Solution:** Due to the principle of Dravyatmaka Nay, the soul (Jiva) exists eternally, from beginningless time to endless time, with the same nature. Therefore, auspiciousness (Mangal) also becomes beginningless and endless.

**Doubt:** Does this mean that even in the state of Mithyatva (false belief), the soul is auspicious?

**Solution:** This is not a fault, because it is desirable. Since the absence of soul-ness (Jivattva) prevents Mithyatva, Aviriti (non-restraint), and Pramada (carelessness) from becoming auspicious, the soul itself is the essence of auspiciousness. And that soul is characterized by infinite qualities like Kevalgyan (perfect knowledge) and so on.

**Doubt:** How is the auspiciousness of Kevalgyan and other qualities possible in the state of Samsara (worldly existence) where there are karmic bonds like Kevalgyan Avaran (veil of perfect knowledge) and so on?

**Solution:** If the auspiciousness of Kevalgyan and other qualities veiled by karma is not accepted, then the auspiciousness of the veiling factors like Kevalgyan Avaran and so on cannot be established.

**Doubt:** The knowledge and perception of a Chhadmastha (veiled) soul are limited, so they cannot be auspicious?

**Solution:** No, because if the limited knowledge and perception found in Tryasthas (three-fold beings) are considered auspicious, then the complete, all-encompassing knowledge and perception will also become inauspicious.

**Doubt:** The knowledge and perception of veiled souls cannot be considered as parts of the auspicious Kevalgyan and Kevaldarshan (perfect knowledge and perception)?

**Solution:** This is not correct, because there is no existence of knowledge and perception different from Kevalgyan and Kevaldarshan.

**Doubt:** Besides Kevalgyan and Kevaldarshan, there are other types of knowledge like Matigyan (intellectual knowledge) and perception like Chakshudarshan (visual perception). How are these considered auspicious?

**Solution:** The terms Matigyan and Chakshudarshan are simply names for specific states of knowledge and perception. In reality, the knowledge and perception residing in all these states are the same.

**Doubt:** If the knowledge and perception of Chhadmasthas, which are like seeds of Kevalgyan and Kevaldarshan, are considered auspicious, then even a Mithyatva-dristi (false belief) soul becomes auspicious, because those seeds are present in them too?

**Solution:** Even if a Mithyatva-dristi soul gains auspiciousness through knowledge and perception, this alone does not make Mithyatva, Aviriti, and other qualities auspicious.

**1. Gh. Pri. 1, Page 36-38.**

Page #38:
---------------------------
## Mangalacharan/5

**Doubt:**  How can the knowledge and vision of the Mithyadrishtis be auspicious, as they do not attain liberation, since without Samyagdarshan, their knowledge does not have the appropriate quality, and without the appropriate quality, they cannot attain liberation?

**Solution:**  Such a doubt should not be entertained, because the knowledge and vision of the Samyagdrishtis, who know the nature of liberation, who determine the knowledge and vision of the living beings in this world as mere components of Kevalgyan and Kevaldarshan, and who remember the soul endowed with the power of infinite knowledge and infinite vision without any covering, have the quality of destroying sin, just as the knowledge and vision of the Mithyadrishtis also have the quality of destroying sin. Therefore, there is no contradiction in the knowledge and vision of the Mithyadrishtis being auspicious.

The auspiciousness of the soul, which is not currently endowed with auspicious qualities but will be in the future, is infinite from the beginning and forever, in comparison to the power of the soul (No Aagam Bhavidravyamangal). The auspiciousness of the soul, which has attained the state of Siddha, is infinite from the beginning and forever, in comparison to the state of being naked (Nangamanaya), which is attained by the three jewels and never destroyed by the three jewels. In other words, the attainment of the three jewels is infinite from the beginning, and the attainment of the state of Siddha after attaining the three jewels is never-ending. Thus, the auspiciousness of the soul, which is the subject of both these Dharmas, is infinite from the beginning and forever, in comparison to the state of being naked (Nangamanaya).

The auspiciousness of Samyagdarshan should be understood as infinite from the beginning and forever. Its shortest duration is the last moment, and its longest duration is slightly less than sixty-four Sagara Pramaagas.

The cause for the beginning of this Gommatasar Jeevakand Granth is Shri Chamundaray. Or, the bound, the bondage, the cause of bondage; the liberated, liberation, and the cause of liberation - these six principles should be understood well through the deposits, Nayas, proofs, and Anuyogadwaras, and the Bhavyajanas should become knowledgeable about them. This Granth, in terms of its meaning, is descended from the Tirthankaras, and in terms of its composition, it is descended from the Ganadharas, and it was received by Shri Dharasen Bhattarak through the Guru-Parampara, and from him, it was received by Pushpadanta-Bhootbali Acharya. From these two Acharyas, it was received by Shri Nemichandra Siddhantachkravarti Acharya through the Shatkhandagam and the Dhavla Tika of Vora Senacharya.

The direct purpose of studying this Siddhanta Granth is the destruction of ignorance and the birth of Samyaggyan, the continuous worship by Devas, Manupyas, etc., and the continuous destruction of karmas in countless ways. The continuous worship by the disciple, the counter-disciple, etc., is the traditional-direct cause. The attainment of Abhyudaya Sukha and Nishreyasa Sukha is the indirect cause.

The quantity of Shruta is infinite in terms of letters, words, groups, understanding, and Anuyogadwaras, and the quantity of meaning is infinite. The name of this Granth is Gommatasar Jeevakand. The original author (Arthak) of this Granth is Shri Vardhaman Bhattarak, the researcher is Gautam Ganadhar, and the secondary author is Shri Nemichandra Siddhantachkravarti Acharya, who is free from attachment, aversion, and delusion. The statement of the author of the Granth is made to show the validity of the Nastra.

3. Gh. Pu. 1 Page 56.
4. Dh. Pu. 1 Page 52.
1. Sh. Pu. 1 38-36. 2. P. Pu. 1 Page 36.47. 5. Gh. Pu. 1 Page 61. 6. Dh. Pu. 1 Page 13.

Page #39:
---------------------------
6/Go. Sa. Jitrakanda
Twenty Forms of the Soul
Gurugajiwa pajjatti parana saga ya magganapo ya.
Udhogo vi ya kamaso vimsantu paruvarana bharinava. ||2||
Gathaarth - Gunasthan, Jeevasamaas, Paryapti, Pran, Sanjna, Maggana (14) and Upayog these twenty forms are said. ||2||
Vishesharth - Gunasthan 14, Jeevasamaas 14, Paryapti 6, Pran 10, Sanjna 4, Margana 14 and Upayog 12. Among these, 14 Marganas have sub-categories: Gati 4, Indriya 5, Kay 6, Yog 15, Ved 3, Kashay 16, Gyan 8, Samyam 7, Darshan 4, Lenya 6, Bhavya 2, Samyakta 6, Sanjita 2 and Pahara 2. The characteristics and specific details of Gunasthan, Jeevasamaas etc. will be explained by the author in their respective places.
Prarupana, Nirupana and Prajnapana or Nirdesha, Prarupan, Vidaran and Vyakhyan are all synonymous.
Shankha - What is Prarupana?
Samadhan - In Gunasthanas, Jeevasamaas, Paryaptis, Pranas, Sanjnas, Gatis, Indriyas, Kays, Yogas, Veds, Kashays, Gyans, Samyams, Darshanas, Lenya, Bhavya, Prabhavya, Samyakta, Sanji-Prasanji, Pahari-Anahari and Upayogs, the examination of souls by distinguishing them with the adjectives 'paryapt' and 'aparyapt' is called Prarupana.
Two types of Prarupana - Sankheso podho ti ya gunasanna sa cha mohajogbhava.
Vistharadeso ti ya magaranasanna sakambhava. ||3||
Gathaarth - Sankhepa or Ogh is the name of Gunasthan. The origin of Gunasthan is due to Moha and Yog. Visthar or Aadesh is the name of Margana. Karma is the cause of the origin of Margana. ||3||
Vishesharth - Mogh or Sankhepa, general or non-differentiated statement is Mogh Prarupana. Aadesh or Visthar, differentiated or specific description is the second type of Aadesh Prarupana. Apart from these two types of Prarupana, no other third type of object-discussion is possible, because apart from general and specific characteristics, no other third characteristic is found in the object.
_ Shankha - General is not found independently without the specific, therefore, the knowledge of general Prarupana will be obtained from the statement of Aadesh-Prarupana. Therefore, it is not necessary to explain in two ways.
1. Pra. Pa. San. Ga. 2, A. 1.
2. Dh. Pu. 1 Pu. 160-61.
3. Gh. Pu. 2 Pri. 413.

Page #40:
---------------------------
## Heterodoxy

**Solution:** This apprehension is not correct, because those who are interested in brevity want to know the truth through **dravyaathmika** (general representation), and those who are interested in detail want to understand the truth through **paryayaathmika** (specific representation). Therefore, for the benefit of both types of seekers, both types of representations are mentioned here.

**Doubt:** How is it possible to understand the meaning of a word by mentioning only a part of it? For example, how can we understand the meaning of the word "Baldev" by mentioning only the part "Dev"?

**Solution:** No, because the meaning of the word "Baldev" is also understood from its part "Dev". Therefore, it is futile to say "this cannot be said" in a matter of **praniti** (established principle), otherwise there would be chaos everywhere.

**Alternatively:** There are five qualities: **audhayika**, **praupashpika**, **kshaayika**, **kshayopaamika**, and **parinaamika**. The quality that arises from the **udaya** (arising) of karma is **audhayika**. The quality that arises from the **upashama** (subduing) of karma is **praupashpika**. The quality that arises from the **kshaya** (destruction) of karma is **kshaayika**. The quality that arises from the **kshaya** and **upashama** of karma is **kshayopaamika**. The quality that arises without the **udaya**, **upashama**, **kshaya**, or **kshayopaashama** of karma is **parinaamika**. Due to the association of these qualities, the **aatma** (soul) also acquires the designation of **guna** (quality).

The designation of **gunasthan** (quality-place) is given to the places where beings with the designation of **gurga** (quality) reside. There are 14 **gurgaasthan**. From the first **gunasthan** to the twelfth **gunasthan**, there is a dependence on the **udaya**, **upashama**, **kshaya**, and **kshayopaashama** of **darshanamohaanyokarma** (karma that obscures perception). The last two **gunasthan** depend on **sadbhaava** (harmony) and **abhava** (absence). The designation of **gunasthan** is called **mohajogbhaava** (arising from delusion and yoga).

**Maarggana**, **gaveshana**, and **anveshana** are all synonyms. The fourteen **gunasthan** that are found in or through **anayogadwaar** (non-yogic doors) like **sal** (number), etc., are called **maarggana**. **Maarggana** are caused by **karma**.

**_The remaining representations are included in gurgaasthan and maarggana, which are the places where the souls who have attained **pajjatti** (liberation) reside._**

**_There are twenty **paruva** (divisions) in the **bhed** (difference) of **upayoga** (use)._** ||4||

**Gathaarth:** The **aadesh** (command) or **maarggana** includes **jivaanmaas** (life-span), **pani** (hand), **praan** (breath), **sanjna** (consciousness), and **upayoga** (use). **Bhed** (difference) is mentioned in **vivaksha** (intention). ||4||

**The inclusion of **maarggana** in **pramaaggana** is the **loarana** (destruction) of the **indiyakaya** (sense organs), the **jiva** (soul), the **pajjatti** (liberation), and the **praanbhaasamarana** (memory of past lives). The **jog** (yoga) is the **gaana** (knowledge) of the **akkha** (whole) **gadi** (path) **maarggana** (path). ||5||

**The **maaya** (illusion) is the **radipuvahaar** (attachment to the senses), the **koha** (anger), the **maran** (death), and the **gammi** (going) **bhaya** (fear). The **vede** (knowledge) is the **mehunasanna** (union with the soul), the **loham** (metal), the **pariggraha** (acceptance), and the **sarana** (refuge). ||6||

Page #41:
---------------------------
8/Go. Ma. Jivakast
The Sagaro Uboggo Gane Maggammi Dasarane Magge. Aranagaro Uvanogo Logoatti Jinehin Rinahitto. ||7||
Gatharth- The Jivasamas, Paryapti, Shvamouchchu Vasaprarana, Vachanbalaprana and Manobalpraaye are included in the Indriyamargarna and Kayamargarna. The Krayabalaprana is included in the Yogamargarna, the five Indriyapranas are included in the Gyanamargarna and the Prayuprag is included in the Gatimargma. The Ratipurvak Pahaarasanjna is included in the Maya and Lobhkashyamargarna, the Bhayasanjna is included in the Krodh and Mankashyamargga, the Mathunasanjna is included in the Vedamargarna, and the Parigrahasanjna is included in the Lobhkashyamargarna. The Jinendradev has said that the Sakaroupayog is included in the Gyanamargarna and the Anakaroupayog is included in the Darshanamarggata. ||5-7||
Vishesharth- The Indriya and Kay are the Swaroop, the Jivasamas Swaroop is Bala. Therefore, the Swaroopvan is included in the Swaroop, so the Jivasamas is included in the Kayamargarna. The Indriya and Kay are Dharmi, the Paryapti is Dharma, therefore, due to the Dharma-Dharmi relationship, the Dharmaroop Paryaptis are included in the Dharmi, i.e., the Indriya and Kayamargarna. The Ucch Bas-Nishwas, Vachanbal and Manobal Pranas are Karya, and the Ucch Bas, Bhasha and Man:Paryapti are their Karan, therefore, the Karyaroop Ucch Bas-Nishwas, Vachanbal and Manobal Pranas are included in the Karanaroop Paryapti, and the Paryapti is included in the Indriya and Kayamargarna due to the Dharma-Dharmi relationship, therefore, the Unch Bas-Nishwas, Bachanbal and Manobalpraran are also included in the Indriya and Kayamargarna. The Kayabalmaran is the Karan in the Kayayogaroop Karya which has the characteristics of the Parispandan of the Jivapradeshas, therefore, the Kayabalaprana is included in the Yogamargarna due to the Karya-Karanbhav. Or, the Yog is Samany and the Kayabal is Vishesh, therefore, the Kayabal Prag is also included in the Yogamargasha due to the Samany-Visheshaapeksha. The Indriyas are included in the Gyanamargarna due to the Karya-Karan Sambandh, because the Indriyavar Rakam's Kshayopshyam is the Karan and the Gyan is Karya. The Gatimargarna and Payuprara are Sahchar Dharmi, because the Gatinamkarm and Prayukarm's Uday is found together, therefore, the Prayuprarana is included in the Gatimargarna.
The desire for Ahar is Ratikarmoudayapurvak, and the Ratikarm, Mayakaphay and Lobhkashyay are Ragaroop Kashyays, therefore, the Aharasanjna is included in the Maya and Lobhkashyamargarna. The Bhayasanjna has Dvesharoop, Krodhkashyay, Mankashyay Karan, therefore, the Bhayasanjna is included in the Krodh-Mankashyay Marggana due to the Karya-Karanbhav. The Vedakarm's Uday is the Karan and the Mathunasanjna is its Karya, therefore, the Mathunasanjna is included in the Vedamargma. The Parigrahasanjna is produced from the Lobhkashyay's Uday, therefore, the Parigrahasanjna is included in the Lobhkashyamargarna.
The Gyanakarga is produced from the Gyanavarana Karm and Kshayopshyam, and the Sakaroupayog is Karya, therefore, the Sakaroupayog is included in the Gyanamargarna. Similarly, the Darshan is the Karan produced from the Darshanavarana Karm's Kshayopshyam, and the Anakaroupayog is Karya, therefore, the Anakaroupayog is included in the Darshanamargarna.

Page #42:
---------------------------
##  Gunasthan/

**The Etymological Meaning of Gunasthan:** 1. That which can be known through the arising and other states of being. 
The Jivas are designated as Gunasthan by the omniscient ones due to their qualities. ||8||

**Meaning:** The cause of the origin of Gunasthan is explained in verse 3 by the words "mohajogbhava". Here, the word "udayadi" also explains the cause of the origin of the results related to Gunasthan. That is, from the arising of the mohaniya karma, there are two Gunasthan: Mithyatva and Samadan. From the destruction and pacification of the darshan mohaniya karma, there is the Mithya Gunasthan. (For details, see the special meaning of verses 11-12). From the pacification or destruction and pacification of the darshan mohaniya karma and the fourfold ananta anubandhi of the charitra mohaniya karma, there are four Gunasthan. From the absence of the arising of pratyakhyana avarna kshaya, there is the fifth Gunasthan. From the absence of the arising of pratyakhyana avarna kshaya, there are five Gunasthan from the sixth to the tenth. From the pacification of the charitra mohaniya karma, there is the eleventh Gunasthan, and from its destruction, there is the twelfth Gunasthan. From the destruction of the four ghatiya karmas, there are the thirteenth and fourteenth Gunasthan. However, in the thirteenth Gunasthan, there is yoga due to the arising of the sharira-namakarma, and in the fourteenth Gunasthan, there is no yoga due to the absence of the arising of the sharira-namakarma. Thus, these fourteen Gunasthan are caused by the arising, pacification, destruction and pacification, and destruction of the darshan moha and charitra moha karmas from the first to the twelfth. The thirteenth and fourteenth Gunasthan are caused by the presence and influence of yoga.

When the nature, state, section, and region of the four ghatiya and four aghatiya karmas are completely destroyed, the state of liberation arises. This state is beyond Gunasthan, because there is no longer any karma present.

**The Designation of Gunasthan:** 2. Mithyatva, Samadan, Misra, Avirat Samyagdrishti, Desh Virat, Pramat Virat, Apramat Virat, Apurva Karan Samyat, Anivattikaran Samyat, Sukshma Samparaya Samyat, Upashant Moha, Kshina Moha Sayog Kevali, Ayog Kevali - these are the fourteen Gunasthan in order. And the Siddhas should be known as beyond Gunasthan. ||6-10||

Page #43:
---------------------------
10 / Mo. Sa. Jivakanda
The fourteen Gunasthana and the feelings of Shrapashmika etc. in Siddhas are explained in this Purana. The feelings of Praprovidie, Purana, Parinamitra, and Khaprovas are mixed in the Aviratasammyagdristi Gunasthana. || 11 ||
It is wrong to say that these feelings are related to Darshanamohaniya Karma because Charitra does not exist until the Aviratasammyagdristi Gunasthana. || 12 ||
Meaning of the verse - In the Mithyatva Gunasthana, there is a Pradayik feeling by rule. Again, in the second Sasadan Gunasthana, there is a Parinamika feeling, in the Mishragunasthana, there is a Kshayopashmika feeling, and in the Aviratasammyagdristi Gunasthana, there are three feelings possible: Shramika, Kshayika, and Kshayopashmika. || 11 || These feelings are said in relation to Darshanamohaniya Karma because Charitra does not exist until the Aviratasammyagdristi Gunasthana. || 12 ||
Special meaning - Although there are Kshayopashmika knowledge, Darshan, Labh, Veerya etc. in the Mithyatva Gunasthana, there are also Parinamika feelings like Jivattva, Bhavya, and Abhavya. However, in relation to Darshanamohaniya Karma, there is only one Audayika feeling.
The word 'Micche' in the verse denotes Mithyatva. Out of the five feelings of Aupashmika etc., this is the Shridayika feeling. The feeling that arises from Karmaudaya is the Pradayika feeling. The Mithyatvabhav arising from the Udya of Mithyatvakarma is Karmaudayanit, therefore it is Pradayika.
The Udya of one Mithyatva nature of Darshanamohaniya Karma is the cause of Mithyatvabhav, therefore this feeling is Pradayika.
In the Sasadan Gunasthana, there is a Parinamika feeling.
Doubt - Sasadan Samyagdristipana also does not happen without the Udya of the four Anantanubandhi Chatushkas that are opposite to both Samyaktva and Charitra, so why is Sasadan Samyagdristi not considered Audayika?
Solution - It is true, but that is not the intention here, because in the description of the feelings related to the first four Gunasthana, there is an influence of the intention of the remaining Karmas besides Darshanamohaniya Karma. Therefore, the intended Darshanamohaniya Karma does not arise from Udya, Upashma, Kshaya, or Kshayopratham, therefore this Sasadan Samyaktva is Nishkaran and therefore its Parinamika pana also.
Doubt - According to this logic, all feelings should be considered Parinamika.
Solution - If according to the said logic, all feelings should be considered Parinamika, then let it be so, there is no fault, because there is no contradiction in this.
Sha - If this is the case, then why is Parinamika not used in other feelings?

Page #44:
---------------------------
Departure 19: There is no solution, because no other feeling is found except the feeling of *samyaktva* which is not produced by *vivishtikarma* except *sasadan samyaktva*.

*Samyagmithyatva* is a *kshayopashamic* feeling, because the part of the *jiva's* quality (aśa) that is found when the *pratibandhi karma* arises is called *gunāṁśa kshayopaśamic*.

Doubt: How?

Solution: The effect of the power of complete destruction of qualities is called *kshaya*. The *upaśama* which is in the form of *kshaya* is called *kshayopashama*. The feeling that arises in that *kshayopashama* is called *bhavakshayopaśamic*.

Doubt: While the *samyagmithyatva karma* is arising, even a particle of *samyaktva* does not remain, otherwise *samyagmithyatva* cannot become *sarvaghati* in nature, therefore, to say that *samyagmithyatva* is *kshayopashamic* is not correct?

Solution: When the *samyagmithyatva karma* arises, the *karamcit* result, which is *shraddhanashraddhanatmaka*, i.e., *shavalit* or mixed, is produced. The part of *shraddha* in it is a part of *samyaktva*, which is not destroyed by the arising of *samyagmithyatva karma*, therefore, *samyagmithyatva* is *kshayopashamic*.

Doubt: Without the part of *ashraddha*, only the part of *shraddha* is not called *samyagmithyatva*, therefore, *samyagmithyatva* is not *kshayopashamic*?

Solution: If there is such a desire, then *samyagmithyatva* may not be *kshayopashamic*, but it is *kshayopashamic* in comparison to the elimination of the constituent and the elimination of the constituent part, i.e., while the *samyagmithyatva karma* is arising, the constituent part of *samyaktva* is eliminated, but the part of *samyaktva* remains manifest. In this way, even though *samyagmithyatva* is *kshayopashamic*, the *dravya karma* of *samyagmithyatva* is *sarvaghati*, because the effect of *samyaktva* is *samyagmithyatva karma* which is *jatyantara*, but the part of *shraddha* does not become the part of *ashraddha*, because there is opposition of unity between *shraddha* and *ashraddha*. The part of *shraddha* is not also produced by the arising of *karma*, because there is an effect of opposition in it. There is also no effect of *samyagmithyatva* in it, because the words that are used in the communities are also seen to be used in their parts, therefore, it is proved that *samyagmithyatva* is *kshayopashamic*. 2

*Samyagmithyatvalabdhi* is *kshayopashamic*, because it is produced by the arising of *samyagmithyatva karma*.

Doubt: The competitors of *samyagmithyatva karma* are *sarvadhani*, therefore, how can *samyagmithyatva* produced by their arising be *ubhayapratyayika* (*kshayopashamic*)?

Solution: No, because the arising of the competitors of *samyagmithyatva karma* is not *sarvaghati*.

1. P. Pu. 5. p. 166-167 2. Śr. 5. 168-196.

Page #45:
---------------------------
12/Go. Ma. Jivakanda

**Doubt:** How is it known that Samyagmithyatva is not a complete destroyer (Sarvaghati)?

**Solution:** Because the element of Samyaktva in Samyagmithyatva cannot be generated otherwise, it is known that the competitors of Samyagmithyatva karma are not complete destroyers.

Samyagmithyatva is generated by the rise of the partial destroyers (Deshghati) of Samyagmithyatva and the absence of the rise of the complete destroyers (Sarvaghati) of the same. Therefore, it is called Tadubhayapratyathik (Kshayopa-shaamik). In the third Gunasthan, there is a Baadhishik Bhai.

**Doubt:** How is it possible for a Jiva who has attained the Samyagmithyatva Gunasthan from the Mithyadashti Gunasthan to have Kshayopa-shaamik Bhava?

**Solution:** It is possible in this way: In the present time, the complete destroyers of Mithyatva karma are destroyed by the absence of their rise (Kshaya), and the complete destroyers of the existing Mithyatva karma are destroyed by the absence of their rise (Upashama), and the complete destroyers of Samyagmithyatva karma rise, thus generating the Samyagmithyatva Gunasthan. Therefore, it is possible for it to be Kshayopa-shaamik.

**Doubt:** Why is the third Gunasthan not called Praudayik Bhava due to the rise of Samyagmithyatva Prakriti?

**Solution:** It is not called Praudayik Bhava because the rise of Mithyatva Prakriti destroys Samyaktva completely, but the rise of Samyagmithyatva Prakriti does not destroy Samyaktva completely. Therefore, the third Gunasthan is called Kshayopa-shaamik Bhava instead of Praudayik Bhava.

**Doubt:** The rise of Samyagmithyatva Prakriti does not completely destroy Samyagdarshan. Why is Samyagmithyatva Prakriti called a complete destroyer?

**Solution:** This doubt is not correct because Samyagmithyatva Prakriti restricts the completeness of Samyagdarshan. Therefore, Samyagmithyatva Prakriti is called a complete destroyer.

**Doubt:** Just as the rise of the Samyagmithyatva Gunasthan is explained by the Kshayopa-shama of Mithyatva, why is it not said that the Samyagmithyatva Gunasthan arises from the Kshayopa-shama of the complete destroyers of Anantanu-bandhi karma?

**Solution:** It is not said because it restricts the Anantanu-bandhi Charitra, i.e., it is the nature of Charitramohaniya. Therefore, the rise of the third Gunasthan is not said to be due to its Kshayopa-shama. [The first four Gunasthanas discuss Darshanmoha, not Charitramoha karma.] Those Acharyas who believe that the third Gunasthan arises from the Kshayopa-shama of Anantanu-bandhi karma would have to consider the Sasadan Gunasthan as Praudayik, but this is not the case because the second Gunasthan is not considered Praudayik. Or,

1. G. Pu. 14, p. 21.

Page #46:
---------------------------
## Gunasthana/13

The **Samyagmithyatva Gunasthana** arises from the absence of the arising of the deadly competitors of Mithyatva and Anantanubandhi, the destruction of these competitors, the arising and destruction of the country-destroying competitors of Samyaktva nature, the absence of the arising of the country-destroying competitors that are present in existence, and the arising of the deadly competitors of Samyagmithyatva karma. Therefore, it is **Kshayopaamik**.

Here, the term **Kshayopaamik** is used to explain the **Samyagmithyatva Gunasthana** to those who are just beginning to study the theory. In reality, **Samyagmithyatva karma** is incapable of destroying the **Mapt-Pagam** and **Padartha** related **Shraddha** in a definitive way. However, its arising gives birth to **Shraddha** that simultaneously considers both **Sat-Sameechin** and **Asat-Asameechin** substances. Therefore, the **Samyagmithyatva Gunasthana** is called **Kshayopaamik**.

If the **Kshayopaamik** nature of the **Samyagmithyatva Gunasthana** is not considered due to the arising of **Samyagmithyatva** nature in this **Mulastana**, then the **Kshayopaamik** nature cannot be established in the **Samyagmithyatva Gunasthana** attained by **Upshama Samyagdristi**. This is because, in such a state, the **Samyaktva** nature, **Mithyatva**, and **Anantanubandhi** do not experience the absence of arising and destruction.

**Doubt:** Does the **Upshama Samyaktva** experienced by a being in the third **Gunasthana** experience the absence of arising of **Samyaktva** nature, **Mithyatva**, and **Anantanubandhi**?

**Solution:** No, because this would imply the existence of **Praupaamik** nature in the third **Gunasthana**.

**Doubt:** Should we consider the existence of **Praupaamik** nature in the third **Gunasthana**?

**Solution:** No, because there is no supporting statement in the scriptures that supports the existence of **Praupaamik** nature in the third **Gunasthana**. In other words, the scriptures do not mention the existence of **Praupaamik** nature in the third **Gunasthana** in the past.

If we consider the arising of **Kshayopaamik** nature from the destruction of **Mithyatva** and other karmas in the third **Gunasthana**, then we would also have to consider the **Mithyatva Gunasthana** as **Kshayopaamik**. This is because, in the **Mithyatva Gunasthana**, the destruction of the competitors that have attained the state of arising of **Samyagmithyatva karma** in relation to **Samyaktva**, the absence of arising of these competitors that are present in existence, and the arising of the deadly competitors of **Mithyatva karma** lead to the birth of the **Mithyatva Gunasthana**.

The meaning of this statement is that the third **Gunasthana** does not experience **Kshayopaamik** nature from the destruction of **Mithyatva**, **Samyaktva** nature, and **Anantanubandhi karma**. Instead, it experiences a **Mishrabhav** (mixed state) due to the arising of **Mishra Prakriti** (mixed nature).

**Asanyata Samyagdristi** is a state that is **Aupaamik**, **Kshayik**, and **Kshayopaamik**. It arises from the absence of arising of the deadly competitors of **Mithyatva** and **Samyagmithyatva** nature, and the country-destroying competitors of **Samyaktva** nature. Therefore, **Asanyata Samyagdristi** is an **Aupaamik** state.

This state arises from the destruction of these three natures.

**Note:** This translation preserves the Jain terms as requested. It also includes the relevant references from the scriptures.

Page #47:
---------------------------
## Chapter 14: Jain Canon

A state that is subject to change is called **Kshayika**. The state of **Samyaktv** (right faith) that exists alongside the rise of **Deshghati** (country-betraying) competitors of **Samyaktv** nature is called **Kshayopa-shamik**.

Some **Acharyas** (teachers) say that **Kshayopa-shamik** arises from the absence of the rise of **Sarvaghati** (world-betraying) competitors of **Mithyatva** (false faith), from the **Upshama** (cessation) of their **Sadavastha** (permanent state), from the rise and fall of **Sarvaghati** competitors of **Samyag-mithyatva** (mixed faith) nature, from the **Upshama** of their **Sadavastha**, or from the **Upshama** of their non-rise, and from the rise of **Deshghati** competitors of **Samyaktv** nature. However, this statement is not valid because it leads to the fallacy of **Ativyapti** (over-inclusion).

**Doubt:** Then how can **Kshayopa-shamik** be considered a state?

**Solution:** The power that harms the **Shraddha** (faith) of the **Yatha-sthi-ta** (true) meaning is weakened in the competitors of **Samyaktv** nature. Therefore, they are called **Kshayika**. The **Upshama** of weakened competitors is called **Kshayopa-sham**. The **Vedak** (knower) **Samyaktv** that arises from this is **Kshayopa-shamik**. This statement is valid. Thus, there are three states of **Samyaktv**, and no other states exist.

**Doubt:** In **Asanyata-samyag-drishti** (uncontrolled right vision), states like **Gati** (motion), **Ling** (sign), etc., are found. Why are they not considered?

**Solution:** Even though states like **Gati**, **Ling**, etc., may exist in **Asanyata-samyag-drishti**, they do not give rise to **Samyaktv**. Therefore, **Samyag-drishti** does not receive the designation of **Audayik** (arising) states. This is the meaning that should be understood.

**Samyaktv-labdhi** (attainment of right faith) is **Kshayopa-shamik** because it arises from the rise of **Samyaktv** nature.

**Doubt:** The competitors of **Samyaktv** nature are **Deshghati**. How can **Samyaktv** arising from their rise be **Ubhayapratyayik** (both **Kshayika** and **Upshamik**)?

**Solution:** No, because **Samyaktv** arises from the rise of **Deshghati** competitors of **Samyaktv**. Therefore, it is **Arthik** (arising from a cause) and also **Upshamik** because there is an absence of the rise of **Sarvaghati** competitors.

**Samyaktv** nature is a type of **Darshan-mohaniya** (obscuring of vision). The **Vedak** **Samyaktv** (**Kshayopa-sham** **Samyaktv**) is the one who has attained **Upshama** from the **Sarvaghati** form of **Darshan-mohaniya** and has attained the rise of **Deshghati** form. Therefore, it is called **Tadu-bhayapratyayik** (both **Kshayika** and **Upshamik**). This is the meaning of the statement.

A being who has attained **Vedak** **Samyaktv** from **Upshama** **Samyaktv** does not experience the absence of the rise of **Sarvaghati** competitors of **Mithyatva** and **Samyag-mithyatva** natures in that state. This is because the competitors of these two natures are **Annarayam** (external) and only **Samyaktv** nature has been stimulated and risen. Alternatively, the being who has destroyed **Mithyatva** and **Samyag-mithyatva** natures by facing **Kshayika** **Samyaktv** does not have the existence of these two natures. Only the...

**1. Dh. Pu. 5 p. 207. 2. P. Pu. 14 p. 21-22.**

Page #48:
---------------------------
## Gumastahan/15

From the arising of the nature of Samyaktv, Vedak Samyaktv (Kshayopa-sham-Sampattv) arises. Thus, Vedak Samyaktv is the state of Kshayopa-shamik, therefore, merely from the arising of the nature of Samyaktv, Vedak Samyaktv (Kshayopa-sham Samyaktv) arises. Vedak Samyaktv is the designation of the decay of its competitors, because they lack the power to restrict Samyag Darshan. The absence of the arising of both the natures of Mithyatv and Mith is called Up-sham. Due to the arising of both Shay and Up-sham mentioned above, it is Kshayopa-mik.

It has been stated in the 'Gatha Ke Karya Dwar' that until the fourth Gunasthan called Aviral Padashti, there is no Charitra, because in these four Gunasthanas, there is Asan-yat due to the intense arising of Karmas that destroy Samyam, i.e., due to the arising of the fourfold A-pratyakhyana Avarana Kshayas, there is Asan-yat, therefore, Asan-yat is Praudayik.

In the Gunasthanas starting from Denasan-yat, the statement of the Bhavas is as follows: "Desavirat, Pramat San-yat, in these, there is Kshayopa-mik Bhava." Thus, Charitra-mohaniya Karma is destroyed, and there is a state of being filled with Charitra.

From the seventh Gunasthan onwards, in the Up-sham श्रेणी (series) of the eighth, ninth, tenth, and eleventh Gunasthanas, there is Propa-gamik Bhava for those who have overcome Charitra-mohaniya Karma, i.e., those who have overcome the Charitra-mohaniya Karma. And in the Kshapak श्रेणी (series) of the eighth, ninth, tenth, twelfth, thirteenth, and fourteenth Gunasthanas, and also in the Siddhas, there is Kshayik Bhava by rule.

**Special Meaning:**

What is the nature of San-yat, San-yat, Pramat San-yat, and A-pramat San-yat? It is Kshayopa-mik Bhava, because when the Charitra-mohaniya Karma (Desh-ghati competitors) called Kshayopa-sham arises, San-yat San-yat (Desavirat), Pramat San-yat, and A-pramat San-yat arise, therefore, all three are Kshayopa-shamik Bhavas.

The fourfold Pratyakhyana Avarana Kshayas, the fourfold Sajwalan Kshayas, and the nine Nav-no Kshayas lack the power to destroy Charitra in all ways, therefore, their arising is called Kshay. The absence of covering the Charitra arising from the arising of those very natures is called Up-sham.

Or, all-destroying competitors become inferior in infinite qualities and become transformed into Desh-ghati competitors and arise. The lack of infinite qualities in those all-destroying competitors is Kshay, and their transformation into Desh-ghati competitors is Up-sham. The arising combined with those Kshay and Up-sham is Kshayopa-sham. The Pramat San-yat and A-pramat San-yat arising from this Kshayopa-sham are also Kshayopa-shamik.

**References:**

1. Gh. Pu. 5, p. 211
2. Gh. Pu. 5, p. 201; Sutra 7
3. Gh. Pu. 5, p. 201; Sutra 6's commentary
4. Dh. Pu. 5, p. 203
5. Dh. Pu. 1.62

Page #49:
---------------------------
## 16/ Go. Sa. Jeevakanda

**Doubt:** Even when the *pratyakhyanavaran* kshayas are aroused, *desh-sanayam* (sanayam-sanayam) is attained. Therefore, they do not become *sarvaghati* (all-destructive), meaning their *sarvaghati* nature is destroyed?

**Solution:** Such a doubt should not be entertained, because the support for their *sarvaghati* nature is provided by taking recourse to *sakal-sanayam*.

Even if *desh-sanayam* (sanayam-sanayam) is accepted, the *sarvaghati* nature of *pratyakhyanavaran* kshayas is not destroyed, because *pratyakhyanavaran* kshayas destroy their opposite, the *sarvapratyakhyan* form of *sanayam* guna. Therefore, they are *sarvaghati* to that, but not to *sarva-apratyakhyan*, because *pratyakhyanavaran* does not operate in this regard. Therefore, in this way, the *sarvaghati* nature of the evolved *pratyakhyanavaran* kshaya is established. The nature that is seen to produce a particular guna is not considered *sarvaghati* in relation to that guna. If this is not accepted, then the fallacy of *pratiprasanga* arises.

*Deshsanayam* is produced by the arising and ceasing of the *sarvaghati* opponents of the *pratyakhyanavaran* chatushk, by their *sadavasthara* form of *upasham*, by the absence of arising of the *sarvaghati* opponents of the four *sanjwalan* and nine *nokashaya*, by their *sadavasthara* form of *upasham*, by the arising of *deshghati* opponents, and by the arising of the *sarvaghati* opponents of the *pratyakhyanavaran* kshaya chatushk. *Pramat* and *apramat* guna-sthana related *sanayam* is produced by the arising and ceasing of the *sarvaghati* opponents of the twelve *kshayas* including *anantaanubandhi*, by their *sadavasthara* form of *upasham*, and by the arising of *deshghati* opponents. Therefore, these three states are *kshayopa-shamic* (pacifying kshayas), as many Acharyas say. However, their statement is not logical, because by interpreting *upasham* as the effect of arising, *sarva-prakriti* devoid of arising, and their *sthiti* and *anubhag* related opponents, are considered *upasham*. Currently, there is no *kshaya*, because the *kshaya* nature of the existing arising is contradicted. Therefore, these three states are considered *udayopa-shamic* (pacifying arising). However, this cannot be accepted, because the effect of the sutra that establishes the *udayopa-shamic* nature of these three guna-sthana is present. It is also not logical to call these guna-sthana *kshayopa-shamic* by considering the *kshaya* nature of the *karma* skandha that has attained *nirjara* after yielding its fruit, because if this is accepted, then the *kshayopa-shamic* nature of all states like *mithyadrishti* will arise. Therefore, the previously mentioned meaning should be accepted, because it is free from faults. Here, *darshan-mohaniya* is not intended, because *sanayam-sanayam* etc. states are not produced by the *upasham* etc. of *darshan-mohaniya* karma.

The four guna-sthana-dwelling beings related to the *upasham* shreni, like *apuurvakaran*, are *pa-shamic* (pacifying), because they pacify the 21 prakriti of *charitra-mohaniya* karma.

**Doubt:** Even though the *pa-shamic* nature of the *chhadmastha* being, who is *upa-shanta-kshaya* and *vit-raga*, may be due to the *upasham* of all *kshayas* and *nokashayas*, the *pa-shamic* nature of the beings dwelling in the remaining guna-sthana, like *purvakaran* etc., should not be accepted, because the effect of the *upasham* of all *mohaniya* karma is present in those guna-sthana?

1. G.P. 11 p. 37. 2. P.P. 5. 201. 3. A.P. 5 p. 902-203.

Page #50:
---------------------------
## Verse 13-14

**Verse 13**
**Doubt:** Such a doubt is not correct, because the existence of the *upshamabhava* (state of pacification) of the *badarsampray* and *sukshmasampray* *sanayata* (restrained ones) who have pacified *kṣayās* (passions) and have *anivṛttikaraṇa* (non-return) is not contradictory.

**Solution:** Because in the *apūrvakaraṇa* (non-return) *guṇasthāna* (stage of qualities), there is no pacification of any *kṣayā*, how is their *aupaśamika bhava* (state of pacification) possible?

**Verse 14**
**Solution:** Because in the *apūrvakaraṇa* *guṇasthāna*, the *apūrvakaraṇa* *parināma* (results) continuously destroy the *karma* (karmic) *skandha* (aggregate) in the form of countless *guṇaveṇī* (streams of qualities), and by the *sthiti* (state) and *anubhāga* (section) *kāṇḍakghāta* (destruction of the section), they reduce the state and section of *kṣayās* to countless and infinite *guṇīnatva* (multiplicity), and initiate the process of pacification, there is no contradiction in accepting the *upshamabhava* of such *apūrvakaraṇa* *sanayata*.

**Doubt:** The state arising from the pacification of *karmas* is *aupaśamika*, but there is no pacification of *karmas* in the *apūrvakaraṇa* *sanayata*, therefore their *aupaśamika bhava* cannot be accepted?

**Solution:** Because there is no contradiction in accepting the existence of the *praupaśamika bhava* (state of being pacified) of the *apūrvakaraṇa* *sanayata* who are associated with the *upshama* (pacification) *ṣaṣṭi* (sixth).

Thus, it is said that the state arising from the pacification of *karmas* and the state of being pacified due to the pacification of *karmas* is *bhātra ninda* (a state of being worthy of praise). This is established. Or, the *apūrvakaraṇa* *aupaśamika bhava* arises from the treatment of the past in the future *upshamabhava* (states of pacification). Just as the designation 'Tīrthankara' arises for a *chakravarti* (universal monarch) who is engaged in all kinds of *asanayma* (unrestraint).

The four *kṣapaka* (destroyers) of the *kṣapaka* *śreṇī* (series of destroyers), the *sayogakevalī* (omniscient with knowledge of the self) and the *prayogakevalī* (omniscient with knowledge of the world) have *kṣayika bhava* (state of destruction).

It may be that the *sayogakevalī* and *ayogakevalī* (omniscient without knowledge of the self) who destroy *karmas* have *kṣayika bhava*, but the *kṣīṇakṣayavītarāga* (one who has destroyed the subtle passions) *chāya* (state) may also have *kṣayika bhava*, because their *mohaniya karma* (karma that causes delusion) has also been destroyed. But it is not reasonable to accept the *kṣayika bhava* of the remaining *kṣapaka* like *sukshmasampray* etc., because they do not destroy any *karma*?

**Solution:** Such a doubt is not correct, because the *badarsampray* and *sukshmasampray* *kṣapaka* who destroy a part of the *mohaniya karma* also have a state arising from the destruction of *karma*.

**Doubt:** How can the *apūrvakaraṇa* *sanayata* who do not destroy any *karma* have *kṣayika bhava*?

**Solution:** The *apūrvakaraṇa* *sanayata* also have *parināma* (results) that are the cause of the destruction of *karma*. Therefore, they also have *kṣayika bhava*.

Here too, the state arising from the destruction of *karmas* is *kṣayika*, and for the destruction of *karmas*:

1. P. P. 5 p. 204-205.

Page #51:
---------------------------
## Chapter 15-18
## 18 / Go. Sa. Jivakanda

Two types of word derivations should be accepted regarding the impermanence of the soul. Before treatment, one should believe in the impermanence of the soul of the restrained.

**Doubt:** Why will not the fault of excessive relevance be obtained by resorting to treatment everywhere?

**Solution:** The fault of excessive relevance will not be obtained because the relevance of the proximate meaning, i.e., the relevance of the proximate meaning, negates the relevance of the seed.

## Gunasthan - Praroopana Adhikar

||15||

The characteristic of the Mithyatva Gunasthan and its divisions:

> Mithchodaran, Mithchatamasadhanam tu tantrayatthanam.
> Eyant faati vinayam sansadma eyant buddhavrishi vivarishro brahma tavaso virashra.
> Indoviya sansaiyo sakadio che abhyarani. ||16||

> Ramichchatam vedato jivo divariyadasarago hodi.
> Ra ya dhammam rochedhi hu mahurang khu rasam jaha jarido. ||17||

> Micchaatti jivo ubatta pavayanam saddahadi.
> Sahaadi prasanbhav uvaitth ya pranuvaitt. ||18||

**Or**

In the Siddhas who have transcended the Gunasthans, there is impermanence in relation to the Charitramohaniya Karma, because the impermanence of the Charitra, which arises from the destruction of the Charitramohaniya Karma, is said to be impermanence even in the Siddhas due to its good nature.

Thus, the statement of the manifestation of the soul in the fourteen Gunasthans and the Siddhas is complete.

**Meaning of the verses:**

> Mithyatva is the disbelief in the true self that arises from the rise of the Mithyatva nature. Its five divisions are: Ekanta, Viparola, Vinaya, Sanshayit, and Pragyan. ||15||

> The Buddhists have Ekanta Mithyadrishti, the Brahmas have Viparita Mithyadrishti, the Tapas have Vinaya Mithyadrishti, the Indras have Sanshay Mithyadrishti, and the Maskaris have Pragyan Mithyadrishti. ||16||

> The soul that experiences Mithyatva is one with opposite faith. Just as a soul afflicted with bilious fever does not find even sweet taste palatable, similarly, the Mithyadrishti...

1. Gh. Pu. 5 p. 205-206. 2. Dh. Pu. 1 p. 162. Pra. Pan. San. 106, La. Sa. Gatha 108. 3. J. V. Pu. 12 p. 322, Pra. Pan. San. 148, La. Sa. Gatha 106.

Page #52:
---------------------------
##  Gama 15-18

**17.** The true Dharma is not appealing to the Jiva. **15.** The Jiva with Mithyadristi does not have faith in the true teachings as instructed by the rules, but has faith in the untrue (Asat) things, whether instructed or not.

**Explanation:**

Mithyatva (falsehood) arises from the manifestation of the Mithyatva-prakriti (nature of falsehood) of the Darshanamohaniya Karma (karma that obscures perception). Mithyatva cannot arise without the manifestation of Mithyatva-prakriti, because Mithyatva is Vibhava (non-existent) and Ashuddha (impure). Vibhava or Ashuddhata cannot exist without another substance.

**Kundakunda Acharya** has also said in the **Samayasara**:

> Just as a crystal ring is pure by itself, it does not become red, etc., by itself, but becomes red, etc., by other red, etc., substances. Similarly, the Jnanee (soul) is pure by itself, it does not become tainted by raga, etc., by itself, but is tainted by raga, etc., by other substances (by the manifestation of Mohaniya Karma) that are tainted by raga, etc.

**Amritachandra Acharya** has also said in the **Samayasara Kalasha**:

> The soul does not become tainted by raga, etc., by itself, just as the sunstone does not become a reflection by itself. The cause for this is the contact with another substance, and this is the nature of the object.

**Quote from the text:**

> "Sammatapadinibaddha micchatam jinavarehi parikahyam. Tassokshyena jivo micchaditvitti nadadhvo." [S.Sa. 161]

**Commentary:**

> "Samyaktva'sya moksha heto: svabhavasya pratibandhakam kila mithyatvam nattu svayam karmaiva tadudayadeva jnanasya mithyadristitvam." (Amritachandra Acharya)

**Meaning of the verse:**

The Jineendras have said that Mithyatva Karma is the obstacle to Samyaktva (right faith), which leads to liberation. (I, Kundakunda Acharya, have not said this on my own). Due to the manifestation of Mithyatva Karma, the Jiva becomes Mithyadristi.

**Meaning of the commentary:**

Mithyatva is definitely the obstacle to the nature of Samyaktva, which is the cause of liberation. This Mithyatva is in the form of Dravyakarma (substance karma). Due to its manifestation, the Jiva (knowledge) becomes Mithyadristi.

The Mithyatva of the Jiva is of five types:

1. Ekanta Vipreet (absolute opposite)
2. Vinaya (humility)
3. Sanshaya (doubt)
4. Agnana (ignorance)

Page #53:
---------------------------
## Chapter 20: The Soul (Jiva Kanda)
## Verses 15-16

1. **Ekant Mithyatva:**  To consider and believe that a substance (dravya) is completely uniform, without any opposing aspect. For example, believing that the soul is entirely non-existent or entirely existent, entirely eternal or entirely transient, entirely deterministic or entirely indeterministic.  "The statement of others, 'completely', is false." (Commentary by Shri Amritchandracharya, Pravachansara)

2. **Vipreet Mithyatva:** To believe the opposite of the true nature of a substance. For example, believing in the loss and gain of Kevali's (omniscient being) knowledge, the existence of heaven and hell, liberation through rituals, etc., in the context of the indivisible nature of perfect knowledge.

3. **Banyik Mithyatva:** To believe that liberation can be achieved solely through obedience. For example, believing that liberation can be attained by simply obeying the gods, kings, ignorant people, elders, children, mothers, and fathers through mind, speech, and body.

4. **Sanshay Mithyatva:** To remain uncertain about something, not being able to decide between two possibilities. For example, doubting the existence of heaven and hell, wondering if something is a shell or silver, questioning whether humans and other beings are living substances or non-living substances like matter.

5. **Agnan Mithyatva:** To be completely ignorant of the truth. For example, "Who knows that the soul exists?"  This means that no one knows the truth.  There are also 363 types of Mithyatva.

"There are 180 types for those who follow the theory of action (kriyavadi), 84 for those who follow the theory of process (prakriyavadi), 67 for those who follow the theory of non-action (achanavadi), and 32 for those who follow the theory of obedience (vinayavadi). Thus, there are a total of 363 types of Mithyatva (180 + 84 + 67 + 32)." (G.S. Karma Kanda, Verse 876)

Mithya, Vithath, Vyavlok, and Asaty are synonyms. The word "Drishti" means "vision" or "faith."  Those beings who have a false vision of the world due to the karma of Mithyatva, which manifests as opposing, uniform, obedient, doubtful, and ignorant views, are called Mithyadrishti beings.

"As many paths of speech (Vayanmarg) exist, so many types of Nayavada (theory of perspectives) exist, and as many Nayavada exist, so many Paramasaya (false views) exist." (All these perspectives, if considered absolute and used to determine the nature of reality, lead to false vision.)

There is no rule that there are only five types of Mithyatva, but it is true that Mithyatva is of five types.

(1) Pravachansara Commentary, Dhaval 1181, G.S. K. 864, S.T. 3/47.

Page #54:
---------------------------
##  Verses 16-20

**Verse 16-20**

These are merely characteristics. Alternatively, the meaning of the word *mithya* is *vitath* (false) and the meaning of the word *drishti* is *ruchi* (interest), *shraddha* (faith) or *pratyaya* (conviction). Therefore, those beings whose interest is false are *mithyadrishti* (false-sighted).

"**Tam michhas jamasadhanam tacchaan hoi pratyayanam.**
**Sansaidam abhigahiyam pranabhigghiharve ti tam tiviham.**" -  The one who develops disbelief in the subject of truth is *mithyatva* (falsehood). There are also three aspects of it: doubtful, accepted, and not accepted.

"**Sahahhha asbhavam**" - Due to the arising of *mithyatva*, this *mithyadrishti* has faith in the false nature of the true reality. "**Uvatth va anuvahatth**" - Due to the arising of delusion, the *mithyadrishti* has faith in the perception of the wrong path, whether it is taught or not. This verse-sutra statement explains the two aspects of *mithyadrishti* through the distinction between *vyuggrahit* (confused) and *itar* (other). 2 The rest is all easy.

**Verse 16**

The nature of *saamaadan* *gunasthan* is that it is overshadowed by *samayado* (time) from the time of *praadimasammatata* (initial right faith). It is *saasaranavakho* (a state of destruction) due to the arising of *arananandaru dayaado* (infinitely connected karmas).

**Verse 20**

From the peak of the mountain of the jewel of *samyagdarshan* (right vision), it falls down and faces the ground of *mithyatva* (falsehood). Therefore, *samyagdarshan* is lost. This should be known as the *saamaadan* *gunasthan*.

**Explanation:**

To oppose *samyaktva* (right faith) is the meaning of *saamaadan*.

**Question:** Why does *saamaadan* occur?

**Answer:** *Saamaadan* occurs due to the consequences, but those consequences are not without a cause, because they arise from the three arising of *anantaanubandhi* (infinitely connected karmas).

*Saamaadan* is the consequence that arises from the intense arising of *anantaanubandhi* karmas, which are born from turning away from *samyagdarshan* and are conducive to the intense *samklesha* (afflictions) of *mithyatva* (falsehood). (J.D.P. 7, p. 313)

**Question:** Is a being with the *saamaadan* *gunasthan* not a *mithyadrishti* in the absence of the arising of *mithyatvakarma* (false conduct)?

1. P.P. 1, p. 162 (First Edition). J.P.P. 12, p. 323. 2. J.P.P. 12, p. 323. 3. Pra. Pan. San. M. 1, Gha. Pu. 1, Pu. 166, Ga. 108. 4. "Michhabhav" is also a reading.

Page #55:
---------------------------
## Chapter 22: The Jiva Chapter
## Verses 16-20

**Without proper interest, there is no right vision, and without the influence of the right-wrong interest, which is the object of these two, there is no right-wrong vision. Besides these, there is no fourth vision, because there is no other object found besides the object of the right, wrong, and mixed vision, so is the Sasadanagunasthan not false?**

**Solution:** The Sasadanagunasthan does not have an effect, because the Sasadanagunasthan has a contrary attachment (opposite opinion), therefore it is not a true vision.

**Doubt:** If it is not a true vision, then it is a false vision, it should not be called Sasadan.

**Solution:** This doubt is not correct, because the contrary attachment arising from the infinite-bound karma, which restricts right vision and conduct, is found in the Sasadan Grihasthan, therefore the second-quality Jiva is a false vision, but the contrary attachment arising from the false-hood karma is not found there, therefore it is not called a false vision, but is called Sasadan right vision.

**Doubt:** Why is it not called a false vision?

**Solution:** The term false vision is not given because by calling Sasadan independent, the statement of the dual nature of the infinite-bound natures is proved.

The Sasadan-like result is not produced by the rise, subsidence, destruction, and destruction-subsidence of the vision-obscuring karma, therefore Sasadan is not called a false vision, right vision, or right-wrong vision. The infinite-bound, whose rise causes the contrary attachment in the second-quality, is not a division of the vision-obscuring, but a covering of conduct, therefore it is a division of the conduct-obscuring, therefore the second-quality is not called a false vision, but is called Sasadan right vision.

**Doubt:** If the infinite-bound is a restrictor of rightness and conduct, then it is justified to give it the mixed (vision-conduct-obscuring) name?

**Solution:** This accusation is not correct, because it is desirable, yet in the Param Agam, this kind of teaching is not given in relation to the main, but it is called conduct-obscuring.

All four of these infinite-bound karmas are opposed to rightness and conduct, because they are combined with two types of power that destroy both rightness and conduct.

**Doubt:** How is this known?

**Solution:** It is known from the Guru's teachings and from logic that the power of the infinite-bound karmas is of two types.

**1. Pra. Pu. 1 p. 163-165.**

Page #56:
---------------------------
## Chapter 16, Verses 16-20
## Gunasthan / 23

**Doubt:** What is the reasoning behind the statement that the power of the infinite-binding karmas (Anantanubandhi) is of two types?

**Solution:** These infinite-binding karmas, like anger, etc., which destroy both Right Faith (Samyaktv) and Conduct (Charitra), cannot be considered as destroyers of Right Faith, because their effect is to cover the Right Faith, which is covered by the nature of Right Faith, Wrong Faith, and Mixed Faith. Similarly, they cannot be considered as destroyers of Conduct, because their effect is not to cover the Conduct, which is covered by the karmas like A-pratyakhyana-avaran, etc.

Although the effect of these infinite-binding karmas is established in the above manner, they still have an effect, because their existence is found in the scriptures. The emergence of these infinite-binding karmas leads to the birth of Saasadan, otherwise it would not be possible. This proves that the infinite-binding karmas are destroyers of both Right Faith and Conduct. Also, the four infinite-binding karmas are not the four destroyers, because they make the flow of the karmas like A-pratyakhyana-avaran, etc., which destroy Conduct, infinite.

**The time period for Saasadan:** The minimum time period for a being to attain Saasadan-Samyakdrusti is one time period, and the maximum time period is six Avali-prasaran. The medium time period is from one time period to six Avali, increasing one time period at a time. It is also said:

> "The time period for Saasadan-Gunasthan for a being is equal to the remaining time period for the cessation of Right Faith. If the remaining time period for the cessation of Right Faith is six Avali-prasaran, then the being can attain Saasadan-Gunasthan. If the remaining time period is more than six Avali, then the being cannot attain Saasadan-Gunasthan." (31-32)

Although according to Shri Yativrishabhacharya, even a being who has attained the second cessation of Right Faith (Dvitiyopasham) by removing the three types of infinite-binding karmas, can fall from the second cessation of Right Faith and attain Saasadan, this is not the intention here, because the word "Pradimasammat" in verse 16 refers to the first cessation of Right Faith (Prathamopasham). Shri Bhootbali Acharya also holds the same view that a being can attain Saasadan-Gunasthan by falling from the first cessation of Right Faith, but not by falling from the second cessation of Right Faith. The verses of the Go.Jo. text are composed according to the Dhwala text.

**Birth after attaining Saasadan:** When a being attains Saasadan, if it dies in the first part of the Avali, then according to the rule, it is born in the Deva-gati. If it dies in the part of the Avali that is suitable for human birth, then it is born in the Manushya-gati.

Page #57:
---------------------------
24/Go. Ma. Jivakaraast
Gatha 21-22 is the time. Similarly, there is a time for the birth of the following types of beings: sentient five-sense beings, non-sentient five-sense beings, four-sense beings, three-sense beings, two-sense beings, and one-sense beings.
The nature of the third Gunasthan is Sammamicchudayena ya jattarasanddhavikjjerana. Ranaya samm micch pi ya sammisso hodi parinaamo ||21|| Bahigudimiva bamissan puhbhavam pey karid sakkam.
Evam misssayabhavo sammamicchotti ranadayo2 ||22||
Maatharth-Samyagmithyatvaroop mishnparinaam jaatyantar sarvaghatiya samyagmithyatva prakriti ke uday ka karya hai. Yah mishraparinaam na samyaktvaroop hai aur na mithyatvaroop hai ||21 Just as the mixture of curd and jaggery produces a separate taste (jaatyantar) which cannot be separated, so should the mixed state of samyagmithyatvaroop be understood. ||22.
Vishesharth-The name of the third Gunasthan is Samyagmithyaashti. Drishti, Shraddha, Ruchi, and Pratyay (Pratiti) are synonymous names. A being with a mixed vision of both appropriate and inappropriate is a Samyagmithyadrishti being.
Shankha-It is not possible for a being to have both Samyak and Mithya vision simultaneously, as there is a contradiction in these two visions coexisting in a single being. If it is said that these two visions reside in a being sequentially, then they should be considered to be included in the independent Gunasthans named Samyagdristi and Mithyadristi. Therefore, a third Gunasthan called Samyagmithyadristi does not form.
Samadhan-A being with both appropriate and inappropriate Shraddha simultaneously is considered to be Samyagmithyadristi. There is no contradiction in believing this, because the soul is multi-faceted, therefore the coexistence of multiple facets in it is not impossible. If it is said that the soul is multi-faceted, this is a well-known fact, so it is not right to say that, because without Anekanta, Arthakriyakaaripana cannot be formed.
Alternatively, there are two types of contradictions. Parasparyaparharalaksana virodh and Sahaamavasthalaksana virodh. Of these, the contradiction of mutual exclusion in the infinite qualities of a substance is desirable. If the qualities are not considered to exist by excluding each other, then there is a possibility of losing their nature. However, this alone does not make the contradiction of coexistence possible in qualities. If the simultaneous existence of multiple qualities is considered to be the nature of contradiction, then the existence of the object itself cannot be formed, because the existence of the object is only caused by Anekanta. That which is capable of performing Arthakriya is an object; but this Arthakriya cannot be formed in a single aspect, because if Arthakriya is considered to be one, then again:
1. Dh. Pu. 5 p. 35.
2. P. Pu. 1 p. 170, Pra. Pan. San. M. 1 Ga. 10.
3. Dh. Pu. 1 p. 167.

Page #58:
---------------------------
##  Gatha 23-24
##  Gunasthan /25

The attainment of the same process again, and if it is considered to be of many forms, then there is a contradiction in the action of meaning in the one-sided aspect due to the Anekant defect. From this statement, the Anekant defect does not arise even with the conscious and unconscious, because both conscious and unconscious are not qualities. Those who are harmonious are called qualities, but these two are not always harmonious, because in the absence of the state of bondage, both conscious and unconscious are not found together. The second point is that if the cause of the origin of two opposite dharmas is considered to be the same, i.e., one, then there is a contradiction. All these statements are not hypothetical, because along with the non-abandonment of other deities accepted earlier, there is also a being with faith in the form of Samyagmithya who is also a deva.

Here, the example of curd and jaggery is given, which means that the taste of curd is sour and the taste of jaggery is sweet, and when both curd and jaggery are mixed, the mixed taste of sour-sweet becomes a separate kind (Jatyantar) of taste. Just as it is not possible to separate the sourness or sweetness from the mixed substance of curd and jaggery, similarly, Samyagmithyatva is also Jatyantar, which is neither Samyattva nor Mithyatva, but a mixed form of both, from which it is not possible to separate Samyaktva or Mithyatva.

##  Characteristics of this Gunasthan

So, Sanjam is not grasped, nor is Besanjam, nor is the bondage of raga. Samma or Miccha, whichever is abandoned, dies according to the rule. ||23||

When the Sammat-Miccha is bound in the past, in the results, then death occurs according to the rule, having attained that Samyaktva or Mithyatva result, because it has not died in the mixed (Samyagmithyatva) and the Marananta-Samudghta is also not in the mixed state. ||24||

##  Explanation

That Samyagmithyadristi Sanjam, or Desasanjam, is not grasped, nor does it blind the lifespan. In the results of Samyaktva or Mithyatva, whichever result has been bound in the past, according to the rule, it dies having attained that Samyaktva or Mithyatva result, because it has not died in the mixed (Samyagmithyatva) and the Marananta-Samudghta is also not in the mixed state. ||23-24||

##  Special Explanation

Samyagmithyadristi beings do not have such purity in their results that they can grasp Sanjam, i.e., Mahavrata or Desasanjam, i.e., Anuvrata. It is also said:

"Nay marai, ney sanjammuved, tah besasanjam va vi.
Samm-amicchavitthi na u marantam samudghashri." [Dhaval Pu. 4 p. 346]

Samyagmithyadristi beings neither die, nor attain Sanjam, nor attain Desasanjam, and they also do not have Marananta-Samudghta.

1. Pra. Pu. 1 p. 174 | 2. Gh. Pu. 1 p. 167 and Upasakaadhyayan 4/143-44.

Page #59:
---------------------------
## Chapter 26: The Soul
## Verse 25

**Doubt:** Why is a soul with mixed right and wrong faith not granted liberation after its lifespan is complete?

**Solution:** Because such a soul, with its mixed right and wrong faith, cannot transition to other states of being, neither to the state of wrong faith with wrong vision, nor to the state of right faith with un-controlled right vision. (Gom. Ka. Ga. 556-556)

**Doubt:** What is the reason for not being able to transition to other states of being?

**Solution:** It is simply its nature, and nature is not subject to questioning, as it is inherently contradictory. (Dhaval Pu. 4, p. 343)

A soul that attains mixed right and wrong faith after having right vision and killing its lifespan, departs from that state with right faith. Conversely, a soul that attains mixed right and wrong faith after having wrong vision and binding its lifespan, departs from that state with wrong faith. (Dha. Pu. 5, p. 31) In other words, if a soul with right vision attains mixed right and wrong faith by binding its lifespan, it dies with un-controlled right vision. If a soul with wrong vision attains mixed right and wrong faith by binding its lifespan, it dies with wrong vision. This is the rule.

**Verse Meaning:** The characteristic of the weakening right faith is that it is born from the rise of the destructive nature of right faith, and it is characterized by being unsteady, impure, and shallow. It is also permanent, meaning it persists for 66 oceans, and it is the cause of the destruction of the knowledge-obscuring karma.

**Detailed Explanation:** There are three natures of the knowledge-obscuring karma: the nature of right faith, the nature of mixed right and wrong faith, and the nature of wrong faith. The nature of right faith includes the destructive elements of the creeper stage and the infinite parts of the tree stage. This means that all the destructive elements, from the first destructive element of the creeper stage to the last destructive element (the infinite parts of the tree stage), belong to the nature of right faith. The nature of right faith lacks the all-destructive elements, so it is unable to completely destroy right vision. However, it does destroy a part of right faith, namely the stability and unwavering nature of right vision. This means that the rise of the nature of right faith does not destroy the impurities of right vision, but it does make right vision unsteady and impure. The karma that causes a weakening of faith in scriptures and substances is the nature of right faith. (Dhaval Pustak 6, p. 36) Or, the karma that causes a weakening of the newly arisen right faith and makes it unstable is the nature of right faith.

1. J.B.Pu. 5, p. 126.
2. J.Gh.Pu. 5, p. 130.
3. Dha.Pu. 13, p. 158.

Page #60:
---------------------------
## Gatha 25

**Doubt:** From the arising of which karma does doubt arise in the acquired, the scriptures, and the substances?

**Solution:** Doubt that does not destroy right faith arises from the arising of the Samyaktvaprakriti. But all doubt, that is, doubt that completely destroys Samyaktv, and delusion, arise from the arising of Mithyatva karma.

**Doubt:** How is that nature called 'Samyaktv'?

**Solution:** Due to the accompanying arising of right faith, it is called 'Samyaktv' by convention.  Weakening of faith in the acquired, scriptures, and substances, and the loss of faith, are the functions of Samyaktvaprakriti.

The arising of Samyaktvaprakriti is experienced as the knowledge of right faith. The knowing right faith being is a person of weakened faith. Just as an old man holds a piece of wood loosely in his hand, similarly, the knowing right faith being is also loosely attached to the truth. Therefore, due to wrong reasons and wrong interpretations, the knowing right faith being is not slow in contradicting right faith.

"In the various specialities of the soul, there is the defect of wavering. Even though water is one, it appears to be many waves. Similarly, the faithful person, due to delusion, wavers in the belief that 'this god is mine' and 'this god is of another'.

**Note:** The above quote is from the text, "Naanaatmiyayavisesheshuu chalatosi chalam smrutam. Lasatkallolamaala jalamekam avasthitam. || Swakaaritetyadou devo'yam me'anyakaarite. Anyasyamiti bhramyan mohaachchradho'pi cheshtete."

**The defect of wavering** is to differentiate gods in the form of idols, believing 'this god is mine' and 'this god is of another'. Just as a person who wavers, similarly, the arising of Samyaktvaprakriti...

"The greatness obtained from the ripening of Samyaktv karma is like pure gold becoming impure due to dirt. Similarly, right faith also becomes impure due to doubts and other defects due to the arising of Samyaktvaprakriti."

**Note:** The above quote is from the text, "Tavayalabdha mahatmyam paakaatsamyaktvakarmaanah. Malinam malasangen shuddham swarnam iyodbhavet ||"

"The one who is established in the place is said to be trembling. Like a stick held in the hand of an old man, it is unsteady.  Even though all beings are infinitely powerful, the belief that 'this god is mine' and 'this god is not mine' arises in the minds of even the wise."

**Note:** The above quote is from the text, "Sthanam eva sthitam kampamagadamiti kirtyate. Vriddayashtirivaatsyaanaa - karatale sthitaa || Samedhanantashaktittve sarveshaam atamayam. Devo'samai prabhure sho'sma iti aastha sudrishaam api ||"

Page #61:
---------------------------
28/Go. Sa. Jivakanda
Verse 26 - Just as the wood in the hand of a Buddha remains firm, but does not fall from the hand, in the same way, the bud of auspiciousness is present, but remains firmly established in the true faith (place), and does not deviate from there. All Arhant Bhagavans are equal in infinite power, yet "Sri Maantinaath Bhagavan is the doer of peace and Sri Parshvanath Bhagavan is the destroyer of obstacles." Thus, the faith of the Vedak Samyagdrishti is weak due to deep-rooted faults.

Vedak Samyagdrishti is eternal, meaning that out of the three Samyagdarshanas, the longest duration in the state of Samsara is that of Vedak Samyagdarshan. This duration is 66 Sagara, which is as follows: A being, having attained Vedak Samyaktva from Upsham Samyaktva, is born in the Devas with an age of less than twenty Sagaropama, which is the remaining lifespan. Then, from there, he is born in humans, and again from human lifespan, he is born in the Devas with an age of less than twenty-two (22) Sagaropama. From there, he is again born in humans, and then, from the remaining human lifespan and until the destruction of Darshanmoha, he is born in the Devas with an age of less than twenty-four (24) Sagaropama. From there, he is again born in the human realm, and then, when only a moment remains in the duration of Vedak Samyaktva, he begins the destruction of Darshanmoha and becomes Kritakareeya. In the final moments of such a Kritakareeya, the duration of Vedak Samyaktva is found to be 66 Sagaropama.

Vedak Samyaktva is the cause for the destruction of karma, meaning it is the cause for the destruction of Darshanmohaniya karma, because no other being (Mithyashti, Sasadan Samyagdrishti, Samyagmithyashti, or Upsham Samyagdrishti) can destroy Darshanmohaniya karma except Vedak Samyagdrishti. Vedak Samyagdrishti is not the cause for the destruction of other karma types, except for the three types of Darshanmohaniya and the four types of Anantanu bandhi, because Vedak Samyagdrishti can only be from the fourth (Asayantasamyagdrishti) Gunasthan to the seventh (Aparammatasanyata) Gunasthan.

Sha - Why does Vedak Samyagdarshan not occur in the eighth and subsequent Gunasthanas?

Solution - Vedak Samyaktva does not occur in the eighth and subsequent Gunasthanas because the movement of the Kshapaka and Upsham श्रेणी ( श्रेणी ) with deep-rooted impurities, including Shraddha, does not become possible.

The nature of Aupashbhik and Kshayik Samyagdarshan.
Sattanha Uvasamdo Ubasamasammo Khayaad Khayiyo Ya.
Bidiyakasayudayado Prasanjado Hovi Sammo 5 ||26||

Meaning - Upsham Samyaktva arises from the Upsham of the seven types of karma, and Kshayik Samyaktva arises from the complete destruction of karma. And due to the presence of the second type of karma, Apratyakhyanavaran Kshaya, this Samyaktva is Asanyata (Therefore, the being residing in this Gunasthan is called Asanyata Samyagdrishti) ||26||

1. Go. Ji. Gapa 25's structured commentary.
2. Dh. Pu. 7 p. 180-181.
3. P. Pu. 1. 357.

Page #62:
---------------------------
##  Verse 27
##  Grunasthan/26

**Special Meaning:**  The infinite karmas that destroy the qualities of vision and character are of four types:  the four natures and the three natures of false vision, partially false vision, and right vision, which are the karmas that obstruct right vision.  The complete destruction of these seven natures results in the destruction of right vision, while their suppression results in the suppression of right vision.  Both the destruction and suppression of right vision are free from the defilement of the nature of right vision, as it does not arise in either of these states.

There are four types of passions:  infinite karmas, non-rejection covering, rejection covering, and agitation.  Of these four, the non-rejection covering passion is called the second passion because it is the second in order.  Rejection means abandonment.  The 'a' in 'apratyakhyana' does not mean 'not' but rather 'slightly'.  The passion that covers 'slightly abandoning' is the non-rejection covering passion.  Due to the arising of this second passion, known as non-rejection covering, the being cannot hold any restraint, and therefore remains unrestrained.  In other words, due to the arising of the second passion, non-rejection covering, even if right vision is attained through the suppression, destruction, or destruction-suppression of the aforementioned seven natures, restraint cannot be held.  Therefore, this being in the fourth stage of the soul is called the unrestrained right vision.

**Special Features Related to the Fourth Stage of the Soul:**  The right vision being, following the rules, has faith in the teachings.  Even without knowing, the right vision being, through the command of the guru, has faith in the extraordinary meaning.

**Meaning of the Verse:**  The right vision being has faith in the teachings that are given.  'Pavayan' means excellent speech, teachings, meaning the teachings of the omniscient, the supreme scripture, and the principles.  These are all synonymous terms, as there is no other excellent speech available.  Therefore, the right vision being has faith in these teachings.  This is the summary of the meaning of the sutra.  By saying 'saddhadi prasambhavan', it means that the right vision being, taking the guru's words as proof, even without knowing, has faith in the extraordinary meaning.  This is the meaning of the statement.  This verse describes the characteristics of the wise right vision.

**Question:**  How can a being who accepts the extraordinary meaning be a right vision being?

**Answer:**  Because it is the teaching of the supreme scripture, the being who accepts it in this way, even without knowing the ultimate truth, does not deviate from being a right vision being.

[Janapit] A. 1 Ga. 12 and Labdhimara Gaatha 105. 3. J. P. Pu. 12 p. 321.

Page #63:
---------------------------
30/Go. Ma. Jotrkaand
Gatha 28-29
When a being does not have faith in the meaning revealed by the sutras, from that time onwards, that being becomes a Mithyadristi. ||28||
Gathaarth: The sutras clearly show that when a being does not have faith in the meaning revealed by the sutras, from that time onwards, that being becomes a Mithyadristi. ||28||
Vishesharth: In Gatha 27, it is stated that a Samyagdristi who has faith in the extraordinary things, if a knower of the supreme path, through another sutra without contradiction, explains that extraordinary meaning in its true form, even then, if that being, due to attachment to falsehood, accepts the extraordinary and not the truth, from that time onwards, that being attains Mithyadristi, because he is a person with intellect contrary to the teachings, as stated in the supreme path. Therefore, it is rightly said that having faith in the meaning taught in the teachings, without contradiction from knowledge and learning, is the characteristic of a Samyagdristi.
The special form of the one who is in the fourth guna sthana is even more special:
3Go: Indriyas Virado Po Jive Thavare Tase Vapi.
Jo Saddhaadi Jinuttum Sammaitti Avirado So. ||26||
Gathaarth: The being who is not detached from the objects of the senses and is also not detached from the violence of stationary beings, but who has faith in the teachings of the Jina, is an Avirad Samyagdristi. ||26||
Vishesharth: Not controlling the five senses and the mind, and not abandoning the violence of the five stationary beings and the three Tras, these are the twelve types of Aviriti. Further, in Gatha 478, the characteristic of Asanayam is stated as follows:
Jiva Choisabheya Indriyavisyaya Tahattvinsa Tu.
Je Tesu Nev Viraaya Asanjada Te Munechaya. ||478|| [Go. Ji.] - There are fourteen types of Jivas, and there are twenty-eight types of objects of the senses and mind. The beings who are not detached from these are Asanyat or Avirad.
Shankha: How are the fourteen types of Jivas?
Samadhan: The fourteen types of Jivas are as follows:
Bavar Suhame Giviya-Vi-Ti-Gharidiya-Prasani-Sashni Ya.
Pajjattappajattha Evam Te Choisa Hoti. ||1/34|| [Pra. Pa. San.]
1. Gh. Pu. 15222 Mootra 36 ki Teeka, Labdhimara Ga. 106.
2. J. Dh. Pu. 12 Pr. 321-22.
3. Gh. Pu. 1 Sutra 12 ki Toka Pr. 173 Ga. 111, but there, instead of 'Vapi', the reading is 'Chadi'.

Page #64:
---------------------------
##  Verse 30

**Mantra:**

**Guṇasthāna / 31**

The seven types of beings, namely, Bādar-ekendriya, Sūkṣma-ekendriya, Dwīndriya, Trīndriya, Chaturindriya, Śraṃsaṃjñipanceṇdriya, and Saṃjñipanceṇdriya, are all both Pāryāpta and Pāryāptak. Thus, there are 14 types of beings.

**Doubt:**

How are there 28 objects of the senses?

**Solution:**

The 28 objects of the senses should be known as follows:

**Go.Ji. 476**

- Five tastes: sweet, sour, astringent, bitter, and salty.
- Five colors: white, yellow, green, red, and black.
- Two smells: pleasant and unpleasant.
- Eight touches: soft-hard, light-heavy, cold-hot, oily-dry.
- Seven musical notes: Ṣaḍja, Ṛṣabha, Gāndhāra, Madhyama, Pañcama, Baiva, Niṣāda.
- One object of the mind.

Thus, in total, there are (5+5+2+8+7+1) 28 objects of the five senses and the mind.

**Doubt:**

From the arising of which karma does a being become un-restrained (asaṃyata)?

**Solution:**

A being becomes un-restrained from the arising of Saṃyamaghāti karma.

**Doubt:**

Isn't the arising of the Apraṭyākhȳānāvaraṇa kṣaya alone the cause of un-restraint, because it is the beginning of all Saṃgha, which obstructs both restraint and un-restraint? How then can it be said that a being becomes un-restrained from the arising of Saṃyamaghāti karma?

**Solution:**

No, because without the arising of other four types of Cāritrāvaraṇa karma, the Apraṭyākhȳānāvaraṇa alone does not have the power to destroy restraint.

In verse 27, the words "Sammāṭṭhī jīvo uvahaṭṭa patrayaṇaṃ tu sahavi" state that a Samyagjīva believes in the teachings prescribed by the Jina. The same is said by the phrase "Jo sadahavi jinuṭṭa sammāiṣṭṭī", because what is said by the "Jinu" (Jina) is the "vaṭṭa pavayaṇaṃ" (prescribed teachings). Believing in the meaning prescribed in the teachings is a characteristic of Samyagdṛṣṭi.

The epithet "asaṃyata" given for Samyagjīva in the verse is an "antyadīpaka" (final illuminator), therefore it signifies the un-restraint of all the lower Guṇasthānas. The word "Samyagdṛṣṭi" in this verse is like the flow of the Ganges river, it extends to all the higher Guṇasthānas, meaning that Samyagdṛṣṭi is found in the fifth and all the higher Guṇasthānas.

**The nature of the five Guṇasthānas:**

**Pañcakkhāṇudayādo saṃjamabhāvo raṃga hodi gavaṛa tu**
**Yo vavado hodi tado desa vavvo hodi pañcamapro ||30||**

From the arising of the five senses, restraint becomes a color, but
When it becomes a vow, then it becomes a country, that is the fifth.

Page #65:
---------------------------
32/Mo. Ma. Jivakanda
Gatha 30-31
One who is not completely restrained due to the arising of the Pratikyanavarana Kshaya, but is restrained in some ways, is called a Deshavrat (Anuvat). Therefore, Deshavrat, meaning Anuvan or Desasanayama, is the fifth Gunasthan. ||30||
A being who has unwavering faith in the Jina Dev, and at the same time is free from harming living beings, but not free from harming stationary beings, is called Viratavirat. ||31||
Special Meaning: There are four types of Kshaya: Anantanubandhi, Apratikyanavarana, Pratikyanavarana, and Sanjwalan. Of these, the third, Pratikyanavarana, destroys complete restraint, but not Desasanayama. It is also said:
"The first, Anantanubandhi Kshaya, destroys Samyagdarshan. The second, Apratikyanavarana Kshaya, destroys Desasanayama, meaning it is harmful to Ekadeshaviriti. The third, Pratikyanavarana Kshaya, is harmful to complete restraint, and the fourth, Sanjwalan Kshaya, is harmful to Charitra, as is known." [Pra. Pan. San. A. 1]
Therefore, when the third, Pratikyanavarana Kshaya, arises, complete restraint cannot be achieved, but there is no obstacle to the practice of Stokavrat, meaning Deshavrat, because the second, Apratikyanavarana Kshaya, which is harmful to Deshavrat, has its influence in the fifth Gunasthan.
One who is restrained but also unrestrained is called Sanayatasanayat or Viratavirat.
Doubt: One who is restrained cannot be unrestrained, and one who is unrestrained cannot be restrained, because restraint and unrestraint (Virat and Avirat) are mutually contradictory. Therefore, Viratavirat cannot be the fifth Gunasthan.
_Solution: There are two types of contradiction: Parashparaparihar Lakshna Vigeta and Sahananvastha Lakshna Virodh. Of these, Parashparaparihar Lakshna Virodh is desirable in the infinite qualities of a substance. If the existence of qualities is not considered to be mutually exclusive, then there is a possibility of the loss of their nature. However, Sahananvastha Lakshna Virodh is not possible in qualities. If it is assumed that the simultaneous existence of qualities is considered to be contradictory, then the existence of the substance itself cannot be established. Because the existence of a substance is dependent on Anekanta. That which is capable of performing an action is a substance, but that action cannot be established in Ekant, because if the action is considered to be one, then it cannot be repeatedly achieved, and if it is considered to be many, then it will have the fault of Anvastha. Therefore, there is a contradiction in the existence of action in Ekant.
1. This Gatha is found at the end of the commentary on Dh. Pu. 1 Sutra 13, on page 175, but the text there is as follows:
"Jo tas-vahau viro aviryo, tah ya bavar-vahayo. Ekk-samayamhi jiva viraya-viro jinekrammai. ||112||"

Page #66:
---------------------------
## Papa 30-31

**Gunasthan/33** If the cause of the origin of two opposing Dharmas is considered to be the same, then opposition is the mother. But even if both restraint (Samyama) and unrestraint (Asamyama) are accepted in one soul, there is no opposition, because the cause of their origin is different. The cause of the origin of restraint is the absence of the desire to harm (As-Hinsa), and the cause of the origin of unrestraint is the desire to harm stationary beings (Sthavar-Hinsa). Therefore, Samyama-Asamyama, meaning Virata-Avirata, becomes the fifth Gunasthan.

**Doubt:** From which of the five states - Praudyika, etc. - does the Samyama-Asamyama state arise?

**Solution:** The Samyama-Asamyama state is Kshayopa-shamic, because the destruction of the present-time, all-destructive competitors of the non-rejectable covering Kshaya (A-pratyakhyana-Avaraniya Kshaya) and the suppression of those same competitors that are likely to arise in the future, and the arising of the non-rejectable covering Kshaya, give rise to Samyama-Asamyama-A-pratyakhyana Charitra (Ekadesha Charitra).

**Doubt:** How many Samyag-darshanas are related to the stream of Samyama-Asamyama Desha Charitra?

**Doubt:** Are there Desha-Samyami without Samyag-darshan?

**Solution:** No, because the soul who is devoid of the desire for liberation (Moksha) and whose thirst for worldly objects has not been quenched, cannot have the birth of A-pratyakhyana-Samyama (Desha Charitra).

The arising of the Desha-Ghati competitors of the four Sanjwalanas and the nine No-Kshayas, which are known as Kshayopa-shamic, gives rise to Samyama-Asamyama.

**Doubt:** The arising of the Desha-Ghati competitors of these thirteen natures - the four Sanjwalanas and the nine No-Kshayas - is the cause of the attainment of Samyama. How is it accepted as the cause of Samyama-Asamyama?

**Solution:** No, because the arising of the Desha-Ghati competitors of the four Sanjwalanas, etc., which is obstructed by the arising of the all-destructive competitors of A-pratyakhyana-Avarana, does not have the ability to produce Samyama, except for Samyama-Asamyama.

**-**

**-**

The A-pratyakhyana-Avarana Kshaya destroys its opposite, Sarva-pratyakhyana (Sakala-Samyama), therefore it is all-destructive, but it does not destroy all A-pratyakhyana, because it does not have any business in that matter. Thus, the all-destructive nature of the transformed A-pratyakhyana Kshaya is proven, but the nature that gives rise to a particular quality does not acquire the all-destructive nature in relation to that quality. If this is not accepted, then the fault of Ati-prasanga will arise.

1. G.P. 1, pp. 173-175. Sak. 2. P.P. 7, p. 64.

Page #67:
---------------------------
## 34/Go. Sa. Jeevakanda
## Gatha 32-31

Why was the statement of the three states of the restrained and unrestrained, namely, the subsidence, destruction, and destruction-subsidence of the karma that obscures the perception of the soul, not made after stating the subsidence, destruction, and destruction-subsidence of the karma that obscures the perception of the soul?

**Solution:** Because the subsidence, etc., of the karma that obscures the perception of the soul does not lead to the origin of the restrained and unrestrained.

**The characteristic of the sixth, the state of the deluded, is:** "The restraint that arises from the burning and the destruction of the passions is the restraint. The delusion that produces the impurities is also from that, therefore, he is free from delusion." ||32||

"He who is deluded by the passions, who is restrained by the passions, is the restrained-deluded. He is full of all virtues, conduct, and purity, and is a great devotee, and dwells in the abode of the mind." ||33||

"The fifteen delusions are: four falsehoods, four passions, five senses, one sleep, and one love (affection)." ||34||

**Meaning of the Gatha:** Restraint arises from the burning and the destruction of the passions. Along with this restraint, there is also delusion that produces impurities. Therefore, he is free from delusion. ||32||

He who is full of all virtues, conduct, and purity, and is therefore a great devotee, dwells in the abode of the mind, both in the manifest and the unmanifest delusions. Therefore, he is the restrained-deluded. ||33||

The fifteen delusions are: four falsehoods, four passions, five senses, one sleep, and one love (affection). ||34||

**Special Meaning:** The extremely intoxicated being is deluded. The being who is completely free or has attained restraint is restrained. He who is restrained even while having delusions is the restrained-deluded.

**Doubt:** If he is deluded, then he cannot be restrained, because the deluded being cannot have the perception of his own nature. He who is restrained cannot be deluded, because the state of restraint is the opposite of delusion.

**Solution:** This is not a fault, because restraint is the state of being free from the five sins: violence, falsehood, stealing, sexual misconduct, and attachment. This restraint is protected by the three refuges and the five observances. This restraint cannot be destroyed by delusion, because delusion only produces impurities in restraint.

**Doubt:** How can it be ascertained that the delusion that produces impurities in restraint is intended here, and not the delusion that destroys restraint? - - - 1. Gh. Pu. 5 p. 203. 2. Gh. Pu. 1 p. 178, Pra. Pan. Sa. Pa. 1 Gatha 14. 3. Pa. Pu. 1 p. 178, Pra. Pan. San. A. 1 Ga. 15. 4. Pa. Pu. 1 p. 175.

Page #68:
---------------------------
Mama 32-34
Gunasthan/35  While Samadhan-Pramad exists, the harmony of restraint cannot be formed otherwise, therefore it is certain that here, Pramad, which produces impurities in restraint, is desirable. Secondly, the short-lived Bhandatam Pramad cannot destroy restraint, because in the absence of Pratyakhyanavaran, which strongly restricts successful restraint, the destruction of restraint is not found.
Here, the word "Pramat" is the final indicator, therefore, Pramat-Samyat Gunasthan indicates the existence of Pramad in all the previous Gunasthanas.
Currently, Pratyakhyanavaran is generated by the rise and fall of its deadly competitors, and in the future, it is generated by the non-emergence of those same competitors who are in a state of existence, and by the emergence of Sanshwalan Kshaya.
Doubt - If restraint is caused by the emergence of Sanjwalan Kshaya, should it be called a "Praudayik" state? Solution - No, because restraint is not generated by the emergence of Sanjwalan Kshaya.
Doubt - Where does Sanjwalan operate?
Solution - Sanjwalan Kshaya operates in generating impurities in restraint, which is generated by the absence of the rise of the deadly competitors of Pratyakhyanavaran Kshaya.
Doubt - Can restraint be achieved even without Samyagdarshan?
Solution - This is not the case, because restraint cannot be generated in a being who has not developed faith in the acquired, the Agam, and the substances, and whose mind is filled with the three types of foolishness.
Doubt - How do we know that Dravyasamya is not being considered here?
Solution - It is not the case, because the one who is restrained, with Yama, is restrained, knowing well and with faith. This is how it is known that Dravyasamya is not being considered here.
Doubt - What is meant by "vyakt" and "avyakta"?
Solution - That which is the object of knowledge of oneself, others, or both, is "vyakt". That which is not the object of knowledge of oneself, others, or both, but is only the object of direct knowledge, is "avyakta".
Doubt - What is Pramad?
Solution - Pramad is the name given to the intense emergence of the four Sanjwalan Kshayas and the nine Nokshayas, a total of thirteen natures. 1. G.P. 1 p. 176. 2. D.P. 1 p. 177. 3. P.P. 7 p. 11.

Page #69:
---------------------------
36/Go. Sa. Jivakanda
Verses 35-37

What is the meaning of "Shankachittalaayaran"?

Solution: Conduct that is mixed with carelessness is called "Chitralaacharan", or "Chittala" (Cheetal) is another name for a deer, so conduct that is similar to a deer, i.e., weak and of many types, or conduct that is likely to cause carelessness, is called "Chitralaacharan".

There are four types of "Vikatha": "Streekatha", "Bhaktakatha", "Rashtrakatha", and "Rajakatha". There are four "Kashaya": "Krodha", "Mana", "Maya", and "Lobha". There are five senses: "Sparshan", "Rasana", "Gharan", "Chakshu", and "Shrotra". The sleep that occurs due to the "Darshanavaran Karma" is called "Nidra". "Pranaya" refers to affection.

There are five types of carelessness: "Sankhya", "Prastar", "Parivartana", "Nasht", and "Samutthiti".

These five types should be known in the context of "Pramadsamutvartan". ||35||

Meaning of the verse: "Sankhya", "Prastar", "Parivartana", "Nasht", and "Samutthiti" are the five types of carelessness that should be known. ||35||

Detailed meaning: "Sankhya" means difference or counting of breaks. "Prastar" means placement. "Parivartana" means movement of the axis. "Nasht" means removing the axis while keeping the count. "Uddishta" means keeping the axis and bringing the count. These five types should be used to explain carelessness.

The order of the origin of "Sankhya": "Savye Vi Pushyabhang Uvarimbhangesu Ekkekkesu".

"Melati Ti Ya Kamaso Gurishdade Uppajjande Sankhya". ||36||

Meaning of the verse: All the previous breaks combine with each other in every break above them, therefore, by multiplying them together, the number of breaks is generated. ||36||

Detailed meaning: The previous break is "Vikatha", which has four types. Above that are four "Kashaya". In each "Kashaya", all four "Vikatha" are possible. Thus, by multiplying the four "Vikatha" and four "Kashaya", sixteen numbers are generated. These sixteen are the lower breaks. Above them are five senses. In each sense, the aforementioned sixteen breaks are possible. Therefore, by multiplying sixteen by five senses, the number of breaks becomes eighty. Above them is "Nidra", which also has one type, therefore, by multiplying eighty by one, we get eighty. Above that is "Pranaya" (affection), which is also one type, so by multiplying eighty by one again, we get eighty breaks.

"Prastar-kram Padham Pamad-pamanam Kamen Riyekvi-vi Uvarimaranam Cha".

"Pidam Padi Ekkekka Gikkhite Hovi Paththaro". ||37|| 1. V. Pu. 7 P. 45. 2. Same. 3. Same.

Page #70:
---------------------------
## Verse 38036
**Guṇasthāna / 37**
**Verse Meaning:**  By sparsely distributing the number (proof) of the first division of *pramada* (distraction), and depositing the *piṇḍa* proof of the *uparama* *pramada* division above each one, a spread is created. ||37||
**Special Meaning:** The proof of the first division of *pramada*, *vikathā*, is four. This four should be sparsely distributed and written as one each in four places (1 1 1 1). Above each of these, the *piṇḍa* proof of the *uparima* *pramada* division, *kaṣāya*, which is four, should be deposited (7). By depositing in this way, 16 divisions of *pramada* are formed. Again, by sparsely distributing these sixteen, the *piṇḍa* proof of the *uparitaṇa* *pramada* division, *indriya*, which is five in number, should be deposited above each one (¥¥¥¥¥). By depositing in this way, there is one division of the *pramada* *kaṣṣī* (). This shows that the former are found together.
This spread is the second order of the spread of all *pramada*, and of each division of *pramada* that follows.

## Verse 38037
**Verse Meaning:**  The number of the second division of *pramada*, *kaṣāya*, should be established by placing the number of the first division of *pramada*, *vikathā*, in each place (4444), and then sparsely distributing the second division of *pramada* above it, depositing one digit on each *piṇḍa* (23). By depositing in this way, 16 divisions of *pramada* are formed. The same method of deposition should be used everywhere above. For example, the number of *indriya* proof should be established in as many places as there are forms (*graka*) (16 16 16 16 16). The number of the *uparima* division of *pramada* should be sparsely distributed, depositing one above each *fre* (). By depositing in this way, all 80 divisions of *pramada* are formed. This is the second order of the spread. ||38||
**Verse Meaning:**  This is the same everywhere, and the *kāyan* is also the same. ||38||

## Verse 38038
**Verse Meaning:**  When the third *praksa* - *indriya* division, etc., changes, reaching the end and then returning to the beginning, there is a change in the second *praksa* - *kaṣāya* division. Similarly, this second *akṣa* also changes, reaching the end, and along with it, the first *akṣa* also reaches the end. That is, when both *akṣa* reach their end, there is a change in the first *akṣa*. ||39||
**Special Meaning:** There are five divisions of *pramada*: 1. *vikathā* 2. *kaṣāya* 3. *indriya* 4. *nidrā* 5. *sneha*.  Leaving one place and going to another is called change.

Page #71:
---------------------------
## 30/Go. Sa. Jeevakanda
##  Verse 40

There are four types of Vikatha: Streekatha, Bhavat (food) Katha, Rashtrakatha, and Rajkatha. There are also four types of Kashaya: Krodha, Mana, Maya, and Lobha. There are five types of Indriya: Sparshan, Rasana, Gharana, Chakshu, and Thotra. There are no types of Nidra and Sneha, therefore there is no Akshasanchar-Parivartan in them. Only in Vikatha, Kashaya, and Indriya is Akshasanchar Parivartan possible, because they have further types.

The first Palap is to say the first type of Vikatha, Streekatha, with the first type of Kashaya, Krodha, along with the first type of Indriya, Sparshan. In the second Palap, the same Krodha Kashaya and Streekatha should be uttered with the second type of Indriya, Rasana. In this way, only changing the third Aks, the utterance should be done till the last type of Indriya, Shrotra. Then, returning to the first type of Indriya, Sparshan, and changing the second Aks, the second type of Kashaya, Mana, and the first type of Vikatha, Streekatha, should be uttered. This sequence should be continued till the last type of Indriya. Again, returning to the first type of Indriya, Sparshan, and changing the second Aks, the third type of Kashaya, Maya, and the first type of Vikatha, Streekatha, should be uttered. This sequence should be continued till the last type of Indriya. Again, returning to the first type of Indriya, Sparshan, and changing the second Aks, the last type of Kashaya, Lobha, and the first type of Vikatha, Streekatha, should be uttered. This sequence should be continued till the last type of Indriya, Shrotra. In this Palap, the last type of Indriya, Shrotra, and the last type of Kashaya, Lobha, are taken, so both the third and second Aks reach their end. Again, returning to the first type of both the third and second Aks, the second type of Vikatha, Bhavatkatha, is uttered. Just as twenty Palaps are said by repeatedly changing the third Aks and changing the second Aks once from the beginning to the end with Streekatha, similarly twenty Palaps should be said with Bhavatkatha, Rashtrakatha, and the last Rajkatha. In this way, all three Aks reach their end in the last Palap.

The sequence of Akshasanchar is as follows:

**"Padham Akkho Antagado Pravigado Sankavi Vidiyaksho.
Doni Vi Gantarantam Pradigado Sankamedi Tadiyaklo."**

**Verse 40 Meaning:** When the first Aks reaches the end and returns to the beginning, the second Aks also transitions. When both of them reach the end and return to the beginning, the third Aks also transitions.

**Special Meaning:** The first Aks (type) of Pramada, Vikatha, should be uttered in reverse order, starting with Streekatha, Bhavatkatha, Rashtrakatha, and Rajkatha. With each of these, the first type of Kashaya and Indriya should be uttered.

**1. Dhaval Pu. 7 Page 45 Matha 11.**

Page #72:
---------------------------
##  **Guṇasthāna/34**

One should accept the four divisions of Vikathā in reverse order, but while accepting the second division of the Kṣaya, Hīvara, one should accept only the first division of the Indriya, Sparśana. Similarly, leaving Māna, one should accept the third division of Kṣaya, 'Māyā', and recite the Vikathā from the beginning to the end, but in all these four, the first division of Indriya, Sparśana, is mentioned. Similarly, leaving the third division of Kṣaya, Māyā, one should accept the last division, Lobha, and recite the four Pālapas and the changes, but with the first division of Indriya, Sparśana. These 16 divisions have been accepted in reverse order, with the first division, Vikathā, being accepted once, the second division, Kṣaya, being accepted four times, and the third division, Indriya, being accepted once.

Again, one should recite these 16 Pālapas with the second division of Indriya, Rasana, by reversing the first division, Vikathā, four times and the second division, Kṣaya, once. Similarly, one should recite the 16 divisions with the third division of Indriya, Ghragna. One should recite the 16 Pālapas by changing the third division, Indriya, up to its last division, Śrotra. Thus, all three divisions (Vikathā-Kṣaya-Indriya) should be brought to their respective last divisions. One should know the statement of the change in the Akṣa-saṃcāra in relation to the second Prastāra.

**Gāthārtha** - (To find the Pramada-bhanga), divide it by the Akṣa-piṇḍa-pramāṇa. The remainder obtained should be noted and the Akṣa-sthāna should be known. Add one to the quotient. If the division is exact and the remainder is zero, then the last division of the Praka should be accepted and one should not add one to the quotient.

**Viśeṣārtha** - This Gāthārtha is explained with an example in relation to the first Prastāra. To find the 15th bhanga, divide 15 by the piṇḍa-pramāṇa of the third Akṣa, Indriya, which is five (15/5). The quotient is three and the remainder is zero. Therefore, the last division of the Indriya Praka, Śrotra, is accepted. Again, divide the quotient, three, by the piṇḍa-pramāṇa of the second Akṣa, Kṣaya, which is four (3/4). The quotient is zero and the remainder is three. Therefore, the third division of Kṣaya, Māyā-kṣaya, is accepted. Adding one to the quotient (0+1), we get one. Dividing this by the piṇḍa-pramāṇa of the first Akṣa, Vikathā, which is four (1/4), the quotient is zero and the remainder is one. Therefore, the first division of Vikathā, Strīkathā, is accepted. Therefore, the 15th bhanga of Pramada is that of a Śnehavān, Nidrālu, Indriya-vaśībhūta, Māyāvī, Strīkathā-lāpī. This statement should be known in relation to the first Pāra.

**Ras. Pu. Pṛ. 46 Gāthā 12**

Page #73:
---------------------------
## 40/Go. Sa, Jivakanda
## Verse 42

Compared to the second expansion, the fifteenth **pramada** is **rastrakathalapi** (national story-speaking), **lobhi** (greedy), **sparshanendriya** (touch sense) dominated, **nidralu** (sleepy), and **snehavan** (affectionate).

To find the number of **palapas** (stages), one should multiply the **al** (unit) by the **pindapraman** (number of categories) of the **aks** (axis) and then subtract the **ananakit** (number of categories beyond the specified one). This should be done for all the **aks** from the last one to the first.

**Explanation:**

**Doubt:** What is **ananakit**?

**Solution:** The number of categories beyond the specified category of an **aks** is called **ananakit**. For example, if the first category of the **viktha** (story) **aks** is **streekatha** (woman story), then the **ananakit** is three, as there are three more categories beyond it: **bhaktakatha** (devotee story), **rastrakatha** (national story), and **rajkatha** (king story).

**Example:**

Let's find the number of **palapas** for a **pramada** that is **snehavan**, **nidralu**, **shrotrendriya** (hearing sense) dominated, **mayavi** (illusory), and **streekathalapi**.

1. We start with the **al** of one and multiply it by the **pindapraman** of the first **aks**, **viktha**, which is four. This gives us four.
2. The **ananakit** for **viktha** is three, as there are three more categories beyond **streekatha**.
3. We subtract the **ananakit** (3) from the product (4), leaving us with one.
4. We multiply this one by the **pindapraman** of the second **aks**, **kashaya** (passion), which is four. This gives us four.
5. The **ananakit** for **kashaya** is one, as there is one more category beyond **maya** (illusion).
6. We subtract the **ananakit** (1) from the product (4), leaving us with three.
7. We multiply this three by the **pindapraman** of the third **aks**, **indriya** (sense), which is five. This gives us fifteen.

Therefore, the **pramada** is the fifteenth **palapas**.

**Note:** There is a variation in the text regarding the **ananakit** and the order of the **aks**.

Page #74:
---------------------------
## Maasha 43

**Gunasthan/41**

The auditory sense is the final distinction, therefore there is no unmarked (anankit) state. Hence, the effect of the number to be subtracted from the product of 15 is also present here, so it is not subtracted. Thus, the number of this palap, "Snehavan, Nidralu Shrotrendriya ke Vashi Bhoot Mayavi Streekathalapi," is 15, meaning this bhang is the 15th. 

**Vidhan** - Other palaps' numbers should be obtained from this method.

**First Expansion** - The statement of the instrument related to the lost and intended, in relation to the first expansion, is: Igi-Bi-Ti-Gha-Parana Kha-Parana Vas-Paparaparasan Kha-Bees-Taal-Satthi Ya. Santhaviya
**Pamdathaane Pachhuddiṭṭa Cha Jaaran Titthaane** ||43||

**Gayaarth** - In the first row, one, two, three, four, and five should be placed (written). Below it, in the second row, zero, five, ten, and fifteen should be placed. Below that, in the third row, zero, twenty, forty, and sixty should be placed. Through these places, the lost and intended related to pramad should be obtained. ||43||

**Vishesharth** -

The instrument for obtaining the lost and intended related to pramad, in relation to the first expansion, is:

| Indriya Pramad | Sparshan | Rasna | Gharana | Vakshu | Shrotra |
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
| Rishaya Pramad | Krodh | Man | Maya | Lobh |  |
| Vikatha Pramad | Stri | Bhojan | Rashtra | Raj |  |
|  | 1 | 2 | 3 | 4 | 5 |
|  | 0 | 5 | 10 | 15 |  |
|  | 0 | 20 | 40 | 60 |  |

- The pramad palap is the one whose distinction of no-jo is on the angas or zero that, when added together, result in the desired number. There is an additional detail that "Nidralu" and "Snehavan" should also be added to it.

**Illustrative Example** -

**First Example** - Let's say we want to find the 36th palap. Adding twenty, fifteen, and one together (20 + 15 + 1 = 36) gives us 36. Twenty is on Bhojan Katha, fifteen is on Lobh Kshaya, and one is on Sparshan Indriya. Therefore, the 36th bhang (palap) is "Bhojan Kathalapi, Lobhi, Sparshan Indriya ke Vashibhoot, Nidralu, Snehavan."

**Second Example** - Let's say we want to find the 41st palap. Adding forty, zero, and one together (40 + 0 + 1 = 41) gives us 41. Forty is on Rashtra Katha, zero is on Krodh Kshaya, and one is on Sparshan Indriya. Therefore, the 41st palap is "Rashtra Kathalapi, Krodhi, Sparshan Indriya ke Vashibhoot, Nidralu, Snehavan."

These two examples are for finding the lost. To find the intended, for example, we need to find the number of the palap that is "Pranendriya ke Vashibhoot, Mani, Rajkathalapi, Nidralu, and Snehavan." Pranendriya has the number three, Man Kshaya has the number five, and Raj Katha has the number sixty.

Page #75:
---------------------------
## Chapter 42 / Go. Sa. Jivakanda

Adding the three numbers (3 + 560) we get 66. Therefore, 'the 68th Alap is 'the one who is under the influence of the olfactory sense, is proud, talks about kings, is sleepy and affectionate'. The second example is as follows:

We need to find the number of the Alap 'the one who is under the influence of the visual sense, is greedy, talks about women, is sleepy and affectionate'. The number for the visual sense is four, the number for the greed kṣaya is fifteen, and the number for talking about women is zero. Adding these three (4 + 15 + 0) we get 16. Therefore, 'the one who is under the influence of the visual sense, is greedy, talks about women, is sleepy and affectionate' is the 16th Alap. Similarly, other lost and intended should be known.

## A Device to Know the Lost and Intended Compared to the Second Chart

**Verse 44**

One, two, three, and four should be established (written) in the first row; zero, four, eight, twelve in the second row; and zero, sixteen, thirty-two, forty-eight, and sixty-four in the third row. Through these three places, one should know the lost and intended related to carelessness.

**Special Meaning**

A device to know the lost and intended related to influence compared to the second chart:

**Influence of Vikatha**

**Women**
**Food** 2 **Nation** 3

**Kṣaya** **Carelessness**
**Anger**
**Pride** 4 **Delusion**

**Sense** **Carelessness** **Touch** **Tongue** 16 **Holding** 32
1
の
J
**Verse 44**
m
**King** 4
**Greed** 12
**Eye** 45
**Ear** 64

Those numbers or zero which, when added together, give the desired number, should be known. The carelessness that corresponds to those numbers or zero is the Alap of carelessness. The special feature is that 'sleepy and affectionate' should also be added to it.

To clarify this device, we give the first example to know the lost: We need to know the 32nd Alap. Adding thirty-two, four, and two together (32 + 4 + 2 = ) we get 38. Two corresponds to food talk, four corresponds to pride kṣaya, and thirty-two corresponds to the olfactory sense. Therefore, the 38th Alap is 'the one who talks about food, is proud, is under the influence of the olfactory sense, is sleepy and affectionate'.

The second example to know the lost is as follows: We need to know the 16th Alap. Adding four, twelve, and zero together (4 + 12 + 0) we get 16. Four corresponds to king talk, twelve corresponds to greed kṣaya, and zero corresponds to the sense of touch. Therefore, the 16th Alap is 'the one who talks about kings, is greedy, is under the influence of the sense of touch, is sleepy and affectionate'.

Page #76:
---------------------------
After giving two examples related to the lost (Nasta), now we give examples to make the intended (Uddishta) net. We need to find the number of the 'Food-story-speaking, illusionary, eye-sense-subdued, sleepy, affectionate' (Bhojanakathalaapi Mayaavi Chakshuindriya ke Vashibhut Nidralu Snehavan) Palapa. The number for Food-story is two, the number for illusionary Kshaya is eight, and the number for eye-sense is forty-eight. Adding these three (2 + 8 + 48 = 58), we get 58. Therefore, the number of the above 'Food-story-speaking, illusionary, eye-sense-subdued, sleepy, affectionate' Palapa is 58. Similarly, the Palapa of other lost (Nasta) and the intended (Uddishta) of other Palapa should be found.

**Doubt:** Why were the brackets not made for sleep-inattentiveness (Nidra Pramad) and affection-inattentiveness (Sneha Pramad) in verses 43 and 44?

**Solution:** There are not two and three initial-answer-differences (Praadi Uttar Bhed) for sleep-inattentiveness (Nidra Pramad) and affection-inattentiveness (Sneha Pramad), therefore, their brackets were not made. Even if the brackets were made, putting zero in place of sleep-inattentiveness (Nidra Pramad) and zero in place of affection-inattentiveness (Sneha Pramad), and adding these two zeros, would not make any difference in the number, therefore, the brackets for sleep-inattentiveness (Nidra Pramad) and affection-inattentiveness (Sneha Pramad) were not made.

**Or:** There are 37,500 divisions (Bhang) of inattentiveness (Pramad), which are as follows: two divisions of affection (Sneha), five types of sleep (Nidra), five senses (Indriya) and mind (Man) making six, Kshaya and non-Kshaya together making twenty-five, and twenty-five Vikatha. Multiplying these together (2 x 5 x 6 x 25 x 25 = 37,500), we get 37,500 divisions (Bhang).

To find the lost (Nasta) and intended (Uddishta), the instrument (Yantra) is made in such a way that there are as many rows (Pancti) in the instrument as there are original divisions (Mula Bhed). There are as many compartments (Kothe) in the row of the original division (Mula Bhed) as there are answer-differences (Uttar Bhed) of that original division (Mula Bhed). The original divisions (Mula Bhed) and answer-differences (Uttar Bhed) are written in order. In the compartments of the first row, the numbers one, two, three, etc. are written in order. Below that, in the first compartment of the second row (Ananta Anubandhi), zero is written. In the second compartment, the number (25) that was written in the last compartment (Sangitavadya Katha) of the first row is written, because there is no row before this first row. In the third and subsequent compartments (Ananta Anubandhi Maya Adi) of the second row, the number of the second compartment (Ananta Anubandhi Man) is doubled (25 x 2 = 50), tripled (25 x 3 = 75), quadrupled (25 x 4 = 100), etc. up to 25 x 24 = 600. Below the second row, in the first compartment (Sparshendriya) of the third row (Indriya), zero is written. The number (25) of the last compartment of the first row and the number (600) of the last compartment of the second row are added together, and the resulting number (625) is written in the second compartment (Ramana) of the third row (Indriya). After this, in the third and subsequent compartments, the number of the second compartment is doubled (625 x 2), tripled (625 x 3), quadrupled (625 x 4), etc. in order. Similarly, in the compartments of the fourth, fifth, etc. rows, zero is written in the first compartment (Styanagaddhi) and in the second compartment (Nidvani Nidra), the sum of the numbers of the last compartments of the previous rows {25 + 600 + 3125 = 3750} is written, and in the Nritoay and subsequent compartments, the number of the second compartment is doubled (3750 x 2), tripled (3750 x 3), etc. Adding the numbers of the last compartments of each row together gives the total number of divisions (Bhang). According to this method, two instruments are made for the two presentations of the 37,500 divisions (Bhang) of inattentiveness (Pramad), which are as follows: -

Page #77:
---------------------------
## Chapter 44, The Living Being

**Verse 43**

In comparison to the first stage, there are 37,500 (37,500) types of negligence in the 5th row of the instrument of destruction.

**Row 5**

**Row 4** | **Row 3** | **Row 2** | **Row 1** | **Vikatha** (25) | **Kashaya** (25) | **Indriya** (6) | **Nidra** (5) | **Sneha** (2) | **Stri** (1) | **Aneka** (Mogh)

**1** | **Sparshan** (1) | **Stpanagrudhi** (1) | **Sneha** (1) | **2** | **Prarthana** (2) | **E** (50144041500) | **2** | **Anuman** (2) | **+** (50-602) | **Mata** | **Nivandidra** (20) | **3** | **Mojan** (3) | **An** (Maya) | **60 x 2 = 120** | **8 + 2 = 10** | **1500 x 2 = 3000**

**3** | **Prachalapravala** (4) | **An** (Lobha) | **60 x 3 = 180** | **3** | **Dharana** (4) | **Raj** (1500 x 3 = 4500) | **2 x 2 = 4** | **Apratya** (Krodha) | **60 x 4 = 240** | **10 x 2 = 20** | **5** | **Chor** (5) | **Nidra** (1500 x 4 = 6000) | **Apratya** (Man) | **60 x 5 = 300** | **Chakshu** (1500 x 5 = 7500) | **Apratya** (Maya) | **6 x 6 = 360** | **10 x 3 = 30** | **...**

**7** | **Parpaakhanda** (15.046 = 10008) | **Apratya** (Lobha) | **60 x 7 = 420** | **5** | **Shrotra** (2 x 4 = 8) | **Desha** (1500 x 3 = 105) | **Pratya** (Krodha) | **6 x 8 = 48** | **10 x 4 = 40**

**1** | **Pratya** (Man) | **6 x 6 = 540** | **6** | **Man** (6) | **Bhasha** (150 x 6 = 12000) | **11** | **Pratya** (Maya) | **6 x 10 = 600** | **1 x 5 = 50** | **10** | **Gunatrandha** (1500 x 6 = 12100) | **12** | **Pratya** (Lobha) | **60 x 11 = 660** | **11** | **Devi** (1500 x 10 = 15000) | **13** | **Sanjva** (Krodha) | **60 x 12 = 720** | **12** | **Nishthara** (150 x 11 = 16500) | **14** | **Sanjva** (Man) | **60 x 13 = 780** | **13** | **Parpaishunma** (1500 x 12 = 18000) | **15** | **Sanjva** (Maya) | **65 x 14 = 840**

**16** | **Sanjva** (Lobha) | **60 x 15 = 900** | **14** | **Kandarpa** (1500 x 13 = 19500) | **17** | **Hasya** | **6 x 16 = 96** | **15** | **Deshakala** (1500 x 14 = 21000) | **20** | **18** | **Rati** | **6 x 17 = 102** | **16** | **Arav** (60 x 18 = 1080) | **16** | **Bhanda** (1500 x 15 = 22500) | **2** | **Shoka** | **6 x 19 = 114** | **17** | **Murkha** (15 x 16 = 24000) | **21** | **Bhaya** | **60 x 20 = 1200** | **18** | **Pratmaprshansa** (1500 x 17 = 25500) | **22** | **Jugupsa** | **60 x 21 = 1260** | **19** | **Parparivada** (150 x 18 = 27000) | **...**

**23** | **Syauveda** | **60 x 22 = 1320** | **20** | **Parjugupsa** (1500 x 19 = 28500) | **24** | **Purushveda** | **60 x 23 = 1380** | **21** | **Parpida** (1500 x 20 = 30000) | **22** | **Kalha** (1520 x 21 = 31500) | **23** | **Parigraha** (15 x 22 = 33000) | **24** | **Krishyaadyarambha** (1500 x 23 =

Page #78:
---------------------------
## Karma 43

**Gunasthan / 45**

This chart shows the 37,500 (37,500) variations of the **Pramava** (the state of delusion) in the **Second Prastar** (stage of spiritual development) compared to the **First Prastar**.

**Yantra Shakti** (Power of the Instrument)

**5th Row** | **4th Row** | **3rd Row** | **2nd Row** | **1st Row** | **Saha** (Association) | **Nidra** (Sleep) | **Indriya** (Sense Organs) | **Kashaya** (Passions)
------- | -------- | -------- | -------- | -------- | -------- | -------- | -------- | --------
**0** | **2** | **5** | **6** | **25** | **2** | **5** | **6** | **25**

**Vidha** (Method)

| **Rasama** (Taste) | **Man** (Mind) | **Leha** (Attachment) | **Styanaddhi** (Laziness) | **Gran** (Knot) | **Kosh** (Sheath) | **Streekatha** (Story of Women) | **Nidranidra** (Deep Sleep) | **Marthakatha** (Story of Death) | **Pratha-Prachala** (First Stage of Delusion) | **An** (Attachment) | **Maya** (Illusion) | **Bhojanakatha** (Story of Food) | **Dharana** (Concentration) | **Gran** (Knot) | **Lobha** (Greed) | **Rajakatha** (Story of Kings) | **Apratya** (Unconscious) | **Krodha** (Anger) | **Nidra Chakshu** (Sleep of Eyes) | **Apratya** (Unconscious) | **R** (Attachment) | **Horakatha** (Story of Horrors) | **Apratya** (Unconscious) | **Mapa** (Measurement) | **Dara-katha** (Story of Fear) | **Shrotra** (Hearing) | **Apratya** (Unconscious) | **Lobha** (Greed) | **Parpa-Khandakatha** (Story of the Other Side) | **Pratya** (Conscious) | **Krodha** (Anger) | **Desha-katha** (Story of the Country) | **Pratya** (Conscious) | **Man** (Mind) | **Man** (Mind) | **Bhapika-katha** (Story of Steam) | **Pratya** (Conscious) | **Maya** (Illusion) | **Pratya** (Conscious) | **Lobha** (Greed) | **Gunavandha-katha** (Story of the Bond of Qualities) | **Sanjva** (Awakened) | **Krodha** (Anger) | **Devi-katha** (Story of Goddesses) | **Sanjva** (Awakened) | **Man** (Mind) | **Nishthura-katha** (Story of Cruelty) | **Sanjva** (Awakened) | **Maya** (Illusion) | **Lot** (Second Stage) | **Sanjva** (Awakened) | **Lobha** (Greed) | **Par-Pashunya-katha** (Story of Backbiting) | **Hasya** (Laughter) | **Kandarpa-katha** (Story of Love) | **Rati** (Desire) | **Desha-Kala-Anuchita-katha** (Story of Improper Time and Place) | **Arati** (Dislike) | **Anda-katha** (Story of Eggs) | **Mookha-katha** (Story of the Dumb) | **Jugupsa** (Disgust) | **Pratma-Prashansa-katha** (Story of Self-Praise) | **Stree-Ved** (Knowledge of Women) | **Purusha-Ved** (Knowledge of Men) | **Par-Jugupsa-ka** (Knowledge of Disgust) | **Nagu-Sak-Ved** (Knowledge of Small Animals) | **Par-Pida-katha** (Story of Oppression) | **Gok** (Cow) | **Kala-katha** (Story of Quarrel) | **Pari-graha-katha** (Story of Possession) | **Kridhya-Adyarambha-katha** (Story of the Beginning of Play) | **Sangit-Vady-katha** (Story of Musical Instruments)

**Note:**

* The main difference between the **First Prastar** and the **Second Prastar** is that the **Second Prastar** has the **Vikatha** (Delusion), **Kashaya** (Passions), **Indriya** (Sense Organs), **Nidra** (Sleep), and **Sneha** (Affection) in the **Yantra** (Instrument) in a reversed order.
* The order of the rows in the **Second Prastar** is 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, which is the reverse of the **First Prastar**.
* The rest of the method for creating the **Yantra** is the same as explained in the **Special Meaning**.

Page #79:
---------------------------
## 46 / Go. Sa. Jeevakand

The nature of the seventh Apramattasangat Gunasthan is described by the venerable Sanjalraparoksaayanaanusri. When the Sanjwalan Kshaya and the Navokshaya are in a mild state of arousal, then it is Apramattasangat Gunasthan, and from this, the Prapramattasanyat is born. || 45 ||

**Verse 45**

**Meaning:** When the Sanjwalan Kshaya and the Navokshaya are in a mild state of arousal, then it is Apramattasangat Gunasthan, and from this, the Prapramattasanyat is born. || 45 ||

**Explanation:** The Sanjwalan Kshaya are: Mana (mind), Maya (illusion), Lobha (greed), and Hasyarati (laughter and pleasure). The Navokshaya are: Prarati (anger), Shoka (sorrow), Bhaya (fear), Jugupsa (disgust), Strivedapurupraved (attraction to women), Purupraved (attraction to men), and Napusakaved (attraction to eunuchs). These 13 Prakritis (natural tendencies) in their intense state of arousal are called Pramad. From this, it is also established that the mild state of arousal of the four Sanjwalan Kshaya and the nine Navokshaya is called Prapramad. Before the ascent of the soul in the Shreni (hierarchy of beings), all the Sanjamis (those who have attained self-control) experience these thirteen Prakritis in both intense and mild states of arousal. When they are in an intense state of arousal, they attain the sixth Gunasthan called Pramattasanyat, and when they are in a mild state of arousal, they remain in the seventh Gunasthan called Apramattasangat. However, the duration of Pramattasanyat is twice that of Apramattasangat. Thus, in the Pramattasangat and Apramattasangat Gunasthan, the one who is confused is in the Apramattasangat Gunasthan.

Those whose Sanjam (self-control) is not accompanied by Pramad are Apramattasangat. Those Jivas (living beings) who are Sanjamis and do not experience the fifteen types of Pramad are Apramattasangat.

**Doubt:** Does this Apramattasangat Gunasthan encompass all the remaining Sanjamis, thus eliminating the need for other Sangat Gunasthanas?

**Resolution:** This is not the case. Only those Sangats who are not endowed with the special qualities like A-purvakaran (absence of previous actions) etc., and who have been affected by Pramad, are included in the Apramattasangat Gunasthan. Therefore, all the subsequent Sanjamis are not included in the Apramattasangat Gunasthan.

**Doubt:** How can we know that the Sanjamis endowed with the special qualities like A-purvakaran etc., are not included here?

**Resolution:** If we do not accept that the subsequent Sanjamis are not included here, then their description cannot be established. This indicates that only the Pramattasanyats who are devoid of the special qualities like A-purvakaran etc., are included here.

In the present time, the emergence and disappearance of the Sarvaghati (all-destructive) competitors of the Pratyakhyanavararagiya Karmas (karmas that lead to the rejection of the world), and the absence of their emergence in the future, as well as the mild state of arousal of the Sanjwalan Kshaya, give rise to Pratyakhyan (rejection). Therefore, this Gunasthan is also Kshayopashamic (pacifying the Kshaya). The causes of Sanjam are:

1. "Ko Pramado Naam? Chadu Sanjwal Ragavanokasayarnam Tibboudayo." Dhaval Pu. 7 p. 11.
2. "Prathamattadhado Pramattadhae Dugunattado - Aval Pu. 3 p. 60."
3. Prakrut Panchasangrah Pra. 1 Ga. 16, and Dhaval Pu. 1 p. 179; this verse is also found in the commentary of Sutra 15.

Page #80:
---------------------------
##  Chapter 46-47

**Gugaasthan 47**

This Gugaasthan is attained by the destruction of the obstacles to Samyaktva, their pacification, and their complete pacification, as well as by the expectation of Samyaktva. Therefore, it is also (this Gunasthan) of the Kshayik, Kshayopaśamik, and Praupaśamik.

**The nature of Svasthan Apramattasanyata and Sātisham Apramattasanyata is Gatthasesapamāvo Vayaguṇasololimāṇḍio Gāṇi. Aṇubasammaro Prakhavāno Bhāraṇiliṇo Hu Apamatto. ||46|| Igavīsamomohakhavāṇuvāsamararaṇimittāriṇ Tikaraṇāriṇ Tahiṁ. Paḍhama Pradhāpavasaṁ Karaṇam Tu Karedi Apamatto. ||47|| Yugmam |**

**Gāthārtha:** The one who is completely free from all kinds of Pramada, both explicit and implicit, and who is adorned with all the Mahāvratas, Bhatthaisas, Mulagunas, and Sheelas, and who is constantly immersed in the knowledge of the distinction between the body and the soul, and in the contemplation of the cause of liberation, is called Svasthan Apramattasanyata or Niratishaya Apramattasanyata, as long as he has not ascended to the Kshapaka or Kshayopaśamik category. ||46|| The three Karanas of the soul, namely Adhaḥkaraṇa, Apūrvakaraṇa, and Anivṛttikaraṇa, are the causes for the pacification or destruction of the twenty-one types of Mohaniya, which are the nine types of Kshaya, namely Krodha, Māyā, Lobha, and Hāsya, etc., related to the Apraatyākhyāna and Pratyākhyāna-sanjvalana. Of these, the Sātishaya Apramat, who is on the verge of ascending the category, performs the first Adhaḥpravṛttikaraṇa. ||47||

**Visheshārtha:** In any Gunasthan from the fourth to the seventh, the Samyagdṛṣṭi who has destroyed the infinite Anubandhi Kshaya by the three Karanas, namely Adhaḥkaraṇa, Apūrvakaraṇa, and Anivṛttikaraṇa, and has pacified the three types of Darshanamohiya (Samyaktva, Samyagmithyatva, and Mithyatva) by the three Karanas, has attained the second pacification, Samyaktva. Or, the Samyagdṛṣṭi who has destroyed these three types and become a Kshayik Samyagdṛṣṭi, is capable of pacifying the twenty-one types of Charitramohiya Karma, namely Apraatyākhyānavaramā, etc. However, only the Kshayik Samyagdṛṣṭi is capable of destroying the twenty-one types of Charitramohiya Karma, because the Dvitiyopaśama Samyagdṛṣṭi cannot ascend to the Kshapaka category. Such a Samyagdṛṣṭi, by repeatedly moving from Pramat to Apramat and from Apramat to Pramat, becomes Sātishaya Apramat through the purification of infinite qualities. The one who is in Nirvikalpa Samadhi is truly a knower, because he has completely eliminated the attachment and aversion of his intellect. The one who knows the attachment and aversion as something to be abandoned but still engages in them intellectually is not a true knower.

**Visheshārtha of the 46th Gāthā:** In the Svasthan Apramat Gunasthan, there is activity like coming and going. Otherwise, in the Apramat Gunasthan, there would be a situation of the absence of Parihāra, Vishuddhi, and Sangama, because the one who...

**Prākrata Pañcasangraha M. 1 Gā. 16 and Dh.Pu. 1 P. 176 Sutra 15's commentary.**

Page #81:
---------------------------
## 48/Mo. Sa. Jivakanda
**Verse 45-46**

Continuous meditation, due to the effect of its action, does not allow for the possibility of Pariharavishuddhi-Samyama. It is said, "The soul immersed in the ocean of nectar, which is meditation, who observes the vow of silence (Bachan-Yama), and has contracted all worldly business, such a being cannot be subject to the Parihar of auspicious and inauspicious actions. Because, one who is inclined towards actions like going and coming can perform Parihar, but one who is not inclined cannot. Therefore, in the above-mentioned states of meditation, Pariharavishuddhi-Samyama cannot be attained."

**Remaining Special Meaning of Verse 47:**

The term "Aupashamak" and "Akshapka" is given to the state of being in the "Sati-Shay Aprammat Gunasthan" due to the absence of "Kandak-Ghat" and "Anubhag-Kandak-Ghat". Due to the disassociation of the four "Ananta-Anubandhi" of the "Dvitiyopasham-Samyagdristi", and the subsidence of the three natures of "Darshan-Moh", or the destruction of these seven natures of "Kshayik Samyagdristi", 21 natures of "Charitra-Mohaniya Karma" remain. To subside or destroy these, there are three "Karana" - "Adha-Karan", "Apurva-Karan", and "Anivritti-Karan". Out of these three, "Apurva-Karan" occurs in the 8th Gunasthan, and "Anivritti-Karan" occurs in the 9th Gunasthan. There is no Gunasthan called "Adha-Karan", therefore, the first "Adha-Karan" occurs in the "Sati-Shay Aprammat Gunasthan". In this "Sati-Shay Aprammat Gunasthan", due to "Adha-Karan", the infinite purity increases every moment, the "Anubhag" of "Aprashast" natures becomes "Ananta-Guna-Ananta-Gunaheen Visthanik", and the "Anubhag" of "Prashast" natures becomes "Ananta-Guna-Ananta-Guna Vriddhigat" and "Chatur-Sthanik". With every "Bandha-Apsaran", the "Sthiti-Bandha" decreases. These four essential actions begin with "Adha-Karan".

**• The reason for the "Ana-Pravritti-Karan" of the first "Karan"**

**• The proof of its time and the results that occur in it**

"Tama Padham Karanam Pradhapavattoti Siddhitham" ||4||

"Antomahattameto Takkalo Hodi Tattha Parinama. Logaranamasanakhamida Uvaruri Sarisavaddhigaaya" ||46||

**Meaning of the Verse:**

During the time of "Adha-Pravritti-Karan", the results of the beings of the higher time are equal to the results of the beings of the lower time, in terms of number and purity. Therefore, the first "Karan" is called "Adha-Pravritti-Karan". ||48|| The time of this "Adha-Pravritti-Karan" is the "Antam-Harti" proof, and the number of its results is "Asankhyat-Lok" proof. These results have attained equal growth, one after the other. ||4||

**Special Meaning:**

The result through which the desired state, like "Upasham", etc., is produced, is called "Karan". The result in the form of "Karan" of the being present in that "Karan", i.e.,

1. P. Pu. 1 Pri. 375.

Page #82:
---------------------------
## Aama 48-49

**Gunasthan / 49**

The results of the future (later) time tend to be similar to the results of the past (earlier) time, this is called Adhapravrittikaran. This means that the results of the upper time are also found in the lower time.

Although the duration of Pravrittikaran, Apurvakaran, and Shrinivrittikaran is all Antarmuhurt, the duration of Shrinivrittikaran is the shortest. The duration of Apurvakaran is a multiple of it, and the duration of Adhapravrittikaran is a multiple of that.

From the first time to the last time of Adhapravrittikaran, there are a countless number of Lok Praman Parinamasthan in each separate time, which are situated in a sequence of six increases and are the cause of Sthitipasarana, etc. In the first time of Adhapravrittikaran, there are countless Lok Praman Ramasthan. Again, in the second time, those same Parinamasthan are more special (selected) than other Apurva Parinamasthan.

**Doubt:** What is the measure of this special (selection)?

**Solution:** The measure is equal to the number of Aama (Sanshyat Lok Prasaran) Parinam that are obtained by dividing the Parinamasthan of the first time by the Antarmuhurt.

Thus, according to this division, each time should be considered to have special and more Parinamasthan, up to the last time of Adhapravrittikaran.

The Parinamasthan that exist in the first time should be divided into as many parts as there are Antarmuhurt in their duration.

**Doubt:** What is the measure of this Antarmuhurt?

**Solution:** The measure of this Antarmuhurt is the countless part of the Adhapravrittikaran time.

There are as many Nirvarmanakandak as there are divisions of the Parinamasthan of the first time, because the similarity of the results of the first time is possible only up to that point. Beyond that, the similarity of the results of the first time is broken. The divisions of the results of the first time or the results of other times are not similar to each other, they are dissimilar, because they are situated in a sequence of special and more order in relation to each other. The quotient obtained by dividing by the Antarmuhurt is the measure of the special. Again, excluding the first division, these Parinamasthan should be established in the second time, violating the tradition. The special feature is that in this second time, there are countless Bank Praman other Apurva Parinamasthan. They are more special than the last division results of the first time by the amount obtained by dividing the Muhurt by the last division results of the first time. These results should be established as the last division of the second time. In this way...

**A.S. Pu. 12 P. 233. 2. J.D. Pu. 12 P. 236-37.**

Page #83:
---------------------------
50/Go. Sa. Jivakanda
Gatha 48-46

When established, Antarmuhurta Praman Khandas are obtained even in the second time. Similarly, in the third and subsequent times, the creation of Parinamasthanas should be reduced until the last time of Adhopravrittikaran is obtained.

Or, the Khand-vidhi of the Parinamasthanas of the first time of Adhopravrittikaran should be known as follows:

For example, in the first time, the first Khand is obtained by taking all the previous Parinamasthanas, different from those Parinamasthanas which are equal to the Parinamasthanas of the first time with the least Parinam of the second time.

Again, in the first time, the second Khand is obtained by taking all the remaining Parinamasthanas, different from those Parinamasthanas which are equal to the Parinamasthanas of the first time with the least Parinam of the third time, from all the previously taken Parinamasthanas (below).

In this way, going in this order, again, in the first time, the Praman of the second extreme Khand is obtained by taking all the remaining Parinamasthanas, different from those Parinamasthanas which are equal to the Parinamasthanas of the first time with the least Parinam of the last time of the first Nirvagana Kandak, from all the previously taken Parinamasthanas (below). And, by taking all the remaining Vishuddhisthanas beyond that, the Praman of the last Khand is obtained. And, by doing so, the number of parts of the Adhopravrittikaran time is divided, and there are as many Khandas as there are times in one part.

Similarly, in the second and subsequent times, until the last time of Adhopravrittikaran is obtained, the Antarmuhurta Praman Khandas should be known separately by the method mentioned above.

The following is the Sandristi of all the Parinamasthanas mentioned above:

100000000000 | 1000000000000 | 1000000000000
100000000000000
10000000000
100000000000
1000000000000 | 10000000000000
1000000000
100000000000
1000000000000
100000000
10000000000
100000000000
100000000
1000000000
10000000000
1000000
10000000
100000000
1000000000
100000
100000000
10000
100000
1000000

In this Sandristi, the time of Adhopravrittikaran is considered as the time Praman, and the Parinams of each time are divided into four parts in the form of Khandas.

In this regard, the Kalpit Prakasandristi is as follows:

- .- .- .  1. J. P. Pu. 12 p. 238 | 2. J. P. Pu. 12 p. 234-238

Page #84:
---------------------------
Vāyā 4-49
Guṇaspān/51
The results of the pradhā-pravṛtta-karaṇa are presented as a hypothetical numerical representation of the creation-composition,
time, and the serial number of the resultant.
Transmission
First Section
Second Section | Third Section | Second Section
Fourth Section
222
218
Kāṇḍaka Final Nirvaganga
214
-
210
-
-
 
164
Kāṇḍaka Vicaram Nivargāṇā | Second Nivargāṇā |
Kāṇḍaka
-
-
-
182
154
-
-
Kāṇḍaka First Nivargāṇā
-
-
1. The Sushīlā Upaṇyāsa (by Sv. Pa. Gopāladāsajī Barayā) Parva 16 pp. 210-11 presents this same representation with the following specific explanation
[See page 52]

Page #85:
---------------------------
## Number of Results and Their Numbers

**52 / Go. Sa. Jivakanda**

**222**
No. 611-612 218
No. 60-855 214 58690 210
535 – 744 465610 202 436620 165
306 - 565 164 341-534 160
265 – 484 186
250 – 435 182 206387 163 – 340 121 – 264 170
80   246 166 2040 205 162 1 162
No. 
**
691-744 53
628-690 52 169-627 51
535-585 5.0 4e5-534 YE
436-484 48
388-435 ૭
241-307 ૬ 265-340 45 250-214 44
206-246 43 163-205 42
121-162 41
80-120 40
40-176 36
1-36
Anukrushti Rachana
55
745-763 ૪
611-744 53
638-690 52
586 - 637 노민
535-585 40
485-534 xe
436-484 48
388-435 47
341-387 46
215-340 45 250 - 264 ** 206-246 43 163 - 205
42 121-162 41 80-120 40
4076 56
80-855 55.
745-766 54
661-744 53
638-660 5.2
505-627 51
535-55 50 485 - 534 46 426-484 48
380-435 47
341-387 ૪૬ 25-340 ૪૧ 250-214 44 206-246 43
163 - 205 42 121-162 41 80-120
Gatha 48-49
57
16-12 북두
800-685 55
745-766 54
661-744 53 638-660 52 506-137 51 535-565
50 465-534 YE
436-484 45 188-435 47
341-307 YE
295-340 45 150-264 44 206-246 43 163 - 205 42 121-162
162 के 26, 40, 41

**Meaning:**

Just as the first time-related results (R) and 42 are divided into four sections in this order, there are 26 results from number 1 to 36 that are not found in any previous time. These results are called the first section. In the second section, there are 40 results from number 1 to 4076 that are found in both the first and second times. In the third section, there are 41 results from number 1 to 80120 that are found in all three times: first, second, and third. In the fourth section, there are 42 results from number 121 to 162 that are found in all four times: first, second, third, and fourth. Similarly, in other times, all these results are known to be multiplied by the previous results and the subsequent results, with infinite and abundant qualities.

Page #86:
---------------------------
This 46.46
Gugasthan/53   In this Asangshti, 16 times of the final period of Adhapravrittakaran have been conceived and an imitation-creation has been made by conceiving the total number of results of the Prasankhyatalokapraman as 3072, so that the actual statement can be easily understood.
Taking the support of Sandrishti, the prototype of imitation-creation is made - in Adhapravrittakaran, the results of the first section related to the first time (36 to 54) are not the same as any of the results related to the upper time. At the same time, the results of the second section (40) are the same as the results of the first section of the last time. Similarly, the results of the third etc. sections of this first time should also be known to have the least repetition with the results of the first section of the third etc. times until the results of the last section related to the first time are repeated with the results related to the first section of the last time of the first Nirvagganakandak and end. Similarly, the result sections of the second etc. times of Adhapravrittakaran should also be separately discussed and the statement of repetition of the results of the second etc. sections here with the results of the first section of the time series of the Nirvagganakandak one time less than the upper time from the next time should be made. For example, the second section of the second time (41) is the same as the second section of the third time (41). This is the special feature that the results of the first section are unrepeated everywhere. That is, the results of the first section of each time are not the same as the results of any section of the next time. Similarly, the result sections of the second Nirvagganakandak are repeated with the result sections of the third Nirvagganakandak, but here too the results of the first section are unrepeated. The results of the sections of the third, fourth, fifth etc. Nirvagganakandaks are repeated with the section-results of the next upper Nirvagganakandaks. Similarly, this sequence ends with the repetition of all the result sections except the first section of the first etc. times of the second extreme Nirvagganakandak with the results of the last Nirvagganakandak. The research of repetition-non-repetition in the results of the last Nirvagganakandak should be done without contradiction of the Parmagam. Which is as follows
The first section of the first time of the last Nirvagganakandak is not the same as any section of the time above. The second section of the first time and the first section of the second time are the same. The third section of the first time and the second section of the second time are both similar. Similarly, going back, the last section of the first time and the last section of the second time are both similar. Similarly, the result sections of the second time of the last Nirvagganakandak and the result sections of the third time should be brought together. Similarly, above also, the previous one should be brought together with the next one. Thus, the imitation-creation in Adhapravrittakaran is completed.
-
The statement of Alpabahutva is made with respect to the purity of the results of the sections of Adhakarana. Alpabahutva is of two types due to the difference between Swasthan and Parasthan.
1. J.D.P. 12 p. 241 last paragraph. 2. J.D.P. 12 p. 240-242.

Page #87:
---------------------------
## 54 / Go. Sa. Jeevakanda
## Verses 48-49

**Swasthana Alpbahutva** - In the first time of Adhopravrttikaran, the purity of the lowest result of the first section is the least. The purity of the lowest result of the second section of the first time is infinite times greater. The purity of the lowest result of the third section is infinite times greater. The purity of the lowest result of the last section of the first time is infinite times greater. One should know this in the same way until this place is attained. In the first time, the highest result of the first section is the least, from there the highest result of the second section is infinite times greater, from there the highest result of the third section is infinite times greater. In the same way, one should know the infinite times greater order until the highest result of the last section. Just as the sections of the first time have been stated, in the same way, from the second time onwards, until the last time of Adhopravrttikaran, the statement of the Alpbahutva of the lowest and highest results obtained for each section should be made. The statement of Swasthana Alpbahutva is finished.

**Parasthana Alpbahutva** - In the first time of Adhopravrttikaran, the lowest purity is the least. From that, in the second time, the lowest purity is infinite times greater, because the lowest purity place of the second section in the second time is seen as the lowest, having crossed countless Vidhyudhi places in the order of Shatsthana from the lowest purity place of the first time. In the same way, the lowest purity goes on increasing infinitely with each time, going upwards within a moment, until the attainment of the last time of the first Nirvanakandak.

The highest purity of the first time of the same Nirvargarakandak is infinite times greater than the lowest purity of the last time of the first Nirvanakandak, because the said lowest purity is similar to the lowest purity of the last section of the first time, and this highest purity is the highest purity of the said last section, which is situated after crossing countless Lok Praman Shatsthana Patit Vriddhi-rupa Parinamasthana.

The lowest purity of the first time of the second Nirvakandak is infinite times greater than the lowest purity of the last time of the first Nirvakandak, or the highest purity of the first time of the first Nirvargayakandak, i.e., the highest purity of the last section (42), is infinite times greater than the lowest purity of the first time of the second Nirvargaranakandak (43), because the highest purity is situated below, and this lowest purity is of the Ashtak form, which is ahead of the said Urvak.

From that, the highest purity of the second time of the first Nirvargenaakandak (the highest purity of 43) is infinite times greater, because the said lowest purity is the form of the lowest result of the last section (43) of the second time, and this is the highest purity of the same last section (43), which is situated after crossing countless Lok Praman Padasthanapatit-Vriddhisthana from the lowest.

In this way, according to this method (Riti), one should state the Alpbahutva of the lowest and highest results above and below, placing one (each) Nirvakandak in the time-measure of an Antarmuhurt. This whole Bahutva should be stated by crossing all the Nirvargarakandak in order, again from the highest purity of the last time of the second Nirvaganga Kandak (the highest purity of 53) to the last time of Adhopravrttikaran.

1. J. V. Pu. 12 p. 244. 2. J. Dh. Pu. 12 p. 245.

Page #88:
---------------------------
Head 48-46
Guganasthan/55
Apayavishuddhi (54's Jghanyavishuddhi) should be done until the end of Jghanyavishuddhi, being infinite-fold.
First, from the excellent Vimutti of the second time of the Nirvargaggaakandak (from the purity of 43)! The inferior Vishuddhi of the second time of the second Nirvarganakaandak (44's Jghanyavishuddhi) is infinite-fold. Above this, the excellent Vishuddhi of the third time of the first Nirvarganakaandak (44's) is infinite-fold. Above this, the inferior Vishuddhi of the third time of the second Nirvarganakaandak (45's Jghanyavishuddhi) is infinite-fold. Above this, the excellent Vishuddhi of the fourth time of the first Nirvarganakaandak (45's excellent Vishuddhi) is infinite-fold. Knowing this, the inferior Vishuddhi of the last time of the second Nirvarganakaandak is infinite-fold, and one should continue to do Alpabahutva until it is attained. In this way, by continuously investigating the inferior results of the upper Nirvarganakaandak in sequence with the excellent results of the lower Nirvarganakaandak, the inferior Vishuddhi of the last time of Adhapravrttikaran becomes infinite-fold compared to the excellent Vishuddhi of the last time of the Dvicharama Nirvarganakaandak, and the end of the inferior Vishuddhis is attained. One should take it to the point of attaining this place.
J. 7. 1
.
. J.
AA
.
The excellent Vishuddhi of the last time of the Dvicharama Nirvarganakaandak. Above this, the inferior Vishuddhi of the last time of Adhapravrttikaran (54's Jghanyavishuddhi) is infinite-fold. In this, the excellent Vishuddhi of the first time of the last Nirvarganakaandak (54's excellent Vishuddhi) is infinite-fold. In this way, looking at the previous times in parallel, the excellent Vishuddhi should be taken as infinite-fold. This sequence of excellent Vishuddhi should be taken to the last time of Adhapravrttikaran. This subject becomes clear from this picture.
163 21 22 25 70thar
N
/I/
J. 0
J. 218140 trait i
J. P.
AAAAAAAAAAAA
J. J. J . 4.ORN nsty १६६१८
J J J
u
A.
- 61-4AMRO
-
Special—In this picture, the numbers from 1 to 16 indicate the times of Adhapravrttikaran. The numbers within the brackets indicate the four times in the Nirvargarganakaandak. 'J' indicates Jghanya and 'U' indicates Utkrishta. The numbers 1, 40, etc. indicate the proof of the inferior result. The numbers 162, 205, etc. indicate the proof of the excellent result. - The Vishuddhi increases infinitely in all these places: from Jghanya to another Jghanya, from Jghanya to Utkrishta, from Utkrishta to Jghanya, and from Utkrishta to another Utkrishta.
# Geet
Sa
::1
1. J.D.P. 12 p. 246 to 246. 2. J.D.P. 12 p. 250.

Page #89:
---------------------------
56/Mo. Sa. Jivakanda
Gatha 50
Two other places of the first place of पुनरुक्त and the last time
Two other places of the last place of पुनरुक्त and the first time
The first section of the first time and the last section of the last time in अधःप्रवृत्तकरण are अपुनरुक्त, and all the remaining sections are पुनरुक्त.
| 40 41
42
Thus, the statement of अधःप्रवृत्तकरण is complete. Now, we state अपूर्वकरण.
मपूर्वकरण गुणस्थान अंतोमुत्तकालं गमिकरण अधापयत्तकरणं तं ।
पडिसमयं सुज्झतो अपुष्धकरणं समल्लियइ ॥५०॥ _ Gathaarth - By the अन्तर्मुहूर्तकाल, अधःप्रवृत्तकरण is passed, and प्रतिसमय, becoming pure, अपूर्वकरण is attained. ॥५०॥
Vishesharth - With great effort and without negligence, by the infinite गुण विशुद्धि of प्रतिसमय, until the appropriate अन्तर्मुहूर्तकाल, those pure results increase, and from them, the four-स्थानीय अनुभाग of सातादि प्रशस्त प्रकृतियों...

Page #90:
---------------------------
51-52
Guṇasthāna / 57
Time, binding with infinite-infinite guṇas, binds the two-positional part of the excellent natures like asāta etc., with infinite-infinite guṇas every time, spreading the number-thousand position-binding, and by these four konkas, it transcends the downward movement and enters the previous of either of the two categories, where from the first time itself, there are previous-previous results, that is the previous-making place.
The meaning of previous-making
'Even in this guṇasthāna, the jīvas with two different times,
When they attain the earth, they become previous-unmeritorious results ||5||
With two different times, the jīvas always become similar,
With one-time-different karmas, they become similar or dissimilar ||52||
Gāthārtha - In the successive times of this guṇasthāna, the results of the jīvas are dissimilar, i.e., not of the same form. The pure results that occur in the upper time, those results are not obtained in the lower previous time, therefore, every time there are previous-previous results ||51|| In the entire time of previous-making, the results of the jīvas situated in different times are not similar, but the results of those situated in the same time are both similar and dissimilar. ||52||
Viśeṣārtha - In the purified and restrained who have entered the previous-making, there are both calming and diminishing types of calming from the general. The word karana means result, and those that did not happen in the previous times are previous results. This guṇasthāna is of countless measure, with results increasing in order from the beginning to every time, in comparison to various jīvas. In this guṇasthāna, the results of the jīvas of the desired time are previous to those of other time-bound jīvas. The results of jīvas of different times are dissimilar, i.e., unique, from the results of jīvas of the desired time. Thus, the previous results that occur in every time are called previous-making. In previous-making, the downward movement is prohibited by the previous specialisation, because where the results of the upper time-bound jīvas are both similar and dissimilar with the results of the lower time-bound jīvas, there is no previousness found in the results that occur in such downward movement.
Śaṅkā - The word pūrva is indicative of the meaning 'never obtained before', not of the meaning dissimilar, therefore, the meaning of the word apūrva here cannot be dissimilar or viṣa.
Samādhana - It is not so, because pūrva and samāna are both synonymous, therefore, the meaning of both pūrva and asaman should also be understood as one.
Śaṅkā - Which jīvas enter the previous-form results?
Samādhana - The jīvas who enter the previous-making results are the sātiśaya-praparamatta-samyata-jīvas 6.pu. 1 p. 103 gā. 117: prā. paṁ saṁ. śra. 1 gā. 18 || 2. bha.pu. 1. 183 gā. 116: prāpaṁ saṁ. 1 17 ||

Page #91:
---------------------------
58) Go. Sa. Jivakanda
There is similarity in the aspect of being unprecedented in the results of all those क्षपक and उपशामकजीत्र who attain unprecedentedness, therefore all of them together constitute an unprecedentedness गुणस्थान.
Padasamayamsankhya lokaparināma. Praṇukattī patthi yime ||53||
Tārisaparīnāmadviyajīyā hū jirohi galiyatimirehiṁ. Svavaṇuvasamaṇujjayā bhariyā. ||54||
Mohassu pukarrā
Tomuhuttamette kamauḍhāpuṇvagune
T:
Gāthārtha - The time of the unprecedentedness गुणस्थान is अन्तर्मुहूर्त and in it the results are countless लोकप्रभाग flowing continuously with each moment. Those results are progressively increasing with each moment. In this unprecedentedness गुणस्थान, by rule, there is no imitation creation. ||53|| The जीवs who possess unprecedented results are eager to क्षपण or उपशमन of the मोहनीय karma (the remaining natures). The Jinenḍradeva, who is completely free from the darkness of ignorance, has said so. ||54||
Viśeṣārtha - (1) The time of the पूर्वकरण गुणस्थान, although generally called अन्तर्मुहूर्त, is less than the अन्तर्मुहूर्त time of the अधःप्रवृत्तकररण by a countable number. (2) The results of the अधःप्रवृत्तकररण are less than the results of the unprecedentedness by countless लोक गुण. (3) The results from the first moment to the last moment of the unprecedentedness have increased progressively with each moment, i.e., both the number and purity have increased with each moment. There is no fragmentation of the results of the unprecedentedness with each moment, because in this गुरगस्थान, the results of the जीवs of the higher time are not the same as the results of the जीवs of the lower time. In the अधःप्रवृत्तकररण, the results of the higher time are similar to the results of the lower times, therefore there is imitation creation of results in the अधःप्रवृत्तकररण.
The जीवs who possess unprecedented results, i.e., the जीवs of the sixtieth गुणस्थान, are eager to क्षय or उपशमन of the remaining 21 natures of the मोहनीय karma.
Śaṅkā - In the eighth गुरगस्थान, neither क्षय of karmas nor उपशमन takes place, then how are the जीवs of this गुणस्थान said to be eager for क्षपण and उपशमन?
Samādāna - Not so, because by treating the future meaning as the same as the past meaning, this designation becomes established in the eighth गुरणस्थान.
Śaṅkā - By accepting this, will there not be a प्रतिप्रसङ्ग दोष?
Samādāna - No, because under the influence of प्रतिबन्धक मरण, i.e., when there is remaining lifespan, by rule, those who उपशमन of चारित्रमोह and those who क्षय of चारित्रमोह, therefore, the designation of being eager for क्षरण and उपशमन becomes established for the जीव who is facing उपशमन and क्षरण.
1. Ba. Pu. 1 p. 150 12. Gha. Pu. 1 p. 151. 3. Dha. Nu. 1 p. 183 Sūtra 16's commentary 1

Page #92:
---------------------------
## Papa 55-56

**Guṇasthāna / 56**

The destruction of karmas is the cause of the results that occur in the Kṣapaka श्रेणी, and the suppression of karma is the cause of the results that occur in the Upaśama श्रेणी. So, can these different results be unified?

**Solution:** No, because the results that occur in Kṣapaka and Upaśama beings are more similar in their impermanence than in their permanence. This makes them unified.

To clarify the increase in results from time to time in the Apūrvakaraṇa, here is a numerical representation:

The number of results of Apūrvakaraṇa is 4016 in the numerical representation. Time = Time. The results of the first time are 456, the results of the second and subsequent times are 7, 8, ..., 5, 20, 13612-565. In this way, the results increase from time to time.

**Bihapayale aspi pau upasamanti upasamaya.**

**_Khavam dukke khava ya niyameṇa khavanti moham tu. ||55||_** - The Upaśama beings, whose bondage of sleep and activity of the mind has been destroyed and who have remaining lifespan, suppress moha (delusion). And the Kṣapaka beings, who ascend the Kṣapaka श्रेणी, destroy moha by the rule of Kṣapaka. ||55||

**Special Meaning:** The Apūrvakaraṇa Guṇasthāna has seven parts. In the first part, the sleep and activity of the mind of the Mīnāvaraṇa karma are unbound. Because the bondage of the Styāna, Gṛddha, and Trika is unbound in the second Guṇasthāna, called Sāsādana. In the sixth part of the Apūrvakaraṇa, the bondage of the thirty natures of the Aramvika (karma that arises in the next life) is unbound. In the seventh part, the bondage of the four No-Kṣaya (non-destructive) karmas - Hāsya (laughter), Rati (attachment), Bhaya (fear), and Jugupsā (disgust) - is unbound. And the arising and cessation of the six No-Kṣaya karmas - Hāsya, Rati, Arati (disattachment), Śoka (sorrow), Bhaya, and Jugupsā - also occur.

The Upaśama श्रेणी ascender does not die until the first part of the Apūrvakaraṇa. But after the first part, death is possible. If death does not occur, then the 21 natures of the Cāritramohaniya karma are suppressed by the rule of Liam. And if death occurs, then by the rule, they become un-restrained Samyagdrṣṭi in the Vāimānika Devas. The beings who ascend the Kṣapaka श्रेणी do not die. They destroy the 21 natures by the rule.

In this Apūrvakaraṇa Guṇasthāna, four new essential beginnings occur: 1. The destruction of the Sthitikāṇḍaka, 2. The destruction of the Anubhāgakāṇḍaka in the form of infinite parts of the Praśubha karma, 3. The destruction of the Guṇasthāna श्रेणी from time to time, and 4. The transition of Guṇasthāna. In the time of one Sthitikāṇḍaka destruction, there are a thousand Anubhāgakāṇḍaka destructions.

The form of the Anivṛttikaraṇa Guṇasthāna is:

**_Ekkamhi kālasamaye saṇṭhāṇādihi jah giyati._**
**_Rae riṇayati tah ciya pariṇāmehi miho je hu. ||56||_**

P. Pu. 1 p. 181-182 Sūtra 16 commentary. 2. J. P. Pu. 13 p. 217-228. 3. G. Pu. 1 p. 186 Sūtra 17 commentary; Prā. Pa. Sa. Pr. 1 Gā. 20.

Page #93:
---------------------------
60/ Go. Sa. Jeevakanda
Gatha 56-57
'Honti Arinayattini Te Padisamayam Jesssimekkaparinama. Vimalyara - Karana - Huyavaha - Sihahi Niddhada Kamma - Varana ||57|| (Jummam)
Gathaarth  Just as there is a difference in the constitution etc. of beings existing in the same time (period), in the same way, those who do not attain mutual cessation (difference) in respect of their Jona results, are called Anivrittikarana. Their Prati-samaya (corresponding time) results are the same, increasing progressively with infinite virtues and purity. They burn away the karma-body with the flames of the pure meditation-fire. || 56-57 ||
Vishesharth - The uninterrupted growth of the results of beings existing in the same time is called Anivritti. Or, the word Nivritti also means Vyavritti (separation), therefore, those results which do not have Nivritti, i.e. Vyavritti, are called Anivritti.
The beings who have the Gunasthan of Anivrittikarana, all of them, even though they exist in the same time, in respect of the past, present and future, are still of the same result, and therefore, the Gunashreni of these beings is also the same. If those who have the Gunasthan of Anivrittikarana, existing in the same time, are said to have different results, then just as the results of those who have the Gunasthan of Purvakarana, existing in the same time, are different, therefore, they cannot be called Anivritti, in the same way, these results also cannot be called Anivrittikarana.
Shankha  There are many results of this type in the A-purvakarana Gunasthan, therefore, these results should also be called Anivritti.
Samadhan - No, because there is no rule for their being without Nivritti.
Shankha - How do we know that the uninterrupted growth of the results of beings in this Gunasthan is intended for beings existing in the same time?
Samadhan - This is proved by the repetition of the word 'A-purvakara', that in this Gunasthan, there is a difference in the results of the beings of the first time etc. with the beings of the second time etc. This means that the word 'A-nivritti' is related only to the results of the same time.
Shankha - Why are there not as many Gunasthan as there are results?
Samadhan - No, because if there are as many Gunasthan as there are results, then there will be no practice, therefore, according to the Prathyarthika Nay, only those Gunasthan which have a fixed number have been called Gunasthan.
1. V. Pu. 1. 186 Sutra 17's commentary; 3. G. Pu. 1 page 218 Sutra 27's commentary.
Pra. Pan. San. 1 Ma 21. 2. D. Pu. 1 page 183-184.

Page #94:
---------------------------
##  Translation:

**Chapter 56-57**

**Guṇasthān / 61**

This Guṇasthān is called **Aupaśamik** because it reduces many **Tṛkṛti** (negative karmas) and will further reduce many in the future. It is also called **Kṣāyik** because it destroys many **Prakṛti** (karmas) and will destroy many more in the future.

**Doubt:** Why are there not two separate Guṇasthāns, one for **Kṣapak** (destroying) and one for **Upaśāmak** (reducing)?

**Solution:** No, because the similarity between the two (Kṣapak and Upaśāmak) arises from the similarity in the **Anivṛtti** (non-manifestation) of the **Pariṇāma** (results) that are the cause of this Guṇasthān. In other words, both Upaśāmak and Kṣapak share the same characteristic of non-manifestation.

Since all beings up to the tenth Guṇasthān have **Kaṣāya** (passions), the **Saṃyata** (self-controlled) are found with **Yata** (effort) in relation to Kaṣāya. Therefore, there is a possibility of doubt arising in the minds of those with **Manda-buddhi** (slow intellect) up to the tenth Guṇasthān. Hence, it is necessary to use the qualifier **Saṃyata** to remove this doubt.

At the time of entering the **Nivṛttikaraṇa Guṇasthān**, all **Karma** (actions) are simultaneously **Prastaupaśāma** (initial reduction), **Nivṛttikaraṇa** (cessation), and **Nikācanakaraṇa** (removal). Among them, the karmas that are capable of **Karṣaṇa** (attraction), **Utkarsaṇa** (elevation), and **Paraprakṛti-saṃkramaṇa** (transition to another nature) and are naturally inclined to **Risa** (relapse) against **Udirana** (stimulation) are capable of being **Apākṛṣṭa** (repelled) in the **Udayasthiti** (state of manifestation). This is called **Apraśasta Upaśāmanā** (unrefined reduction) and its name is **Apraśastaupaśāmanakaraṇa**. Similarly, the karma that is capable of **Ākarṣaṇa** (attraction) and **Utkarsaṇa** (elevation) without **Aviruddha** (opposition) and is not capable of **Udaya** (manifestation) and **Paraprakṛti-saṃkramaṇa** (transition to another nature) is **Nivṛttikaraṇa** (cessation). The karma that is incapable of **Udaya** (manifestation), **Paraprakṛti-saṃkramaṇa** (transition to another nature), **Utkarsaṇa** (elevation), and **Apākṛṣaṇa** (repulsion) and is bound in **Avasthāna** (state) is **Avasthāna-viśeṣa Nikācanakaraṇa** (specific state removal). Before the **Anivṛtti Guṇasthān**, these three **Karaṇa** (processes) were active, but they cease at the time of entering the **Anivṛttikaraṇa Guṇasthān**. When these three **Karaṇa** (processes) cease, all karmas become capable of **Apākṛṣaṇa** (repulsion), **Saṃkarṣaṇa** (attraction), **Udirana** (stimulation), and **Paraprakṛti-saṃkramaṇa** (transition to another nature).

In the **Nivṛttikaraṇa Guṇasthān**, the **Sthitibandha** (duration of a state) decreases gradually, reaching an **Asankhyāta** (innumerable) part of **Patyopam** (a unit of time). After that, when **Saṃkhyāta** (countable) thousands of **Sthitikaṇḍa** (units of duration) have passed, the **Jñānāvaraṇa** (knowledge obscuring), **Darśanāvaraṇa** (perception obscuring), and **Antarāya** (hindering) karmas begin to **Anubhāgabandha** (gradually bind) in **Deśa** (region). After **Saṃkhyāta** (countable) thousands of **Sthitibandha** (duration of a state) have passed after **Deśa** (region), **Antarakaṇa** (internal purification) occurs.

A special feature is that when **Saṃkhyāta** (countable) many parts of the **Anivṛttikaraṇa Guṇasthān** have passed in the **Kṣapak** (destroying) series and a **Saṃkhyāta** (countable) part remains, before **Antarakaṇa** (internal purification), the **Kṣapak** destroys **Darśanāvaraṇa** (perception obscuring) **Dvitrika** (two-fold) and **Nāmakarma** (name karma) **Naraka-gati** (hellish rebirth) etc., a total of **133** **Prakṛti** (karmas). After that, it destroys **Pratyākyānāvaraṇa** (rejection obscuring) and **Apratyaakyānāvaraṇa** (non-rejection obscuring) **Krodha** (anger), **Māna** (pride), **Māyā** (deceit), and **Loba** (greed). However, the **Kaṣāya-prābhṛta** (teaching about passions) states that it first destroys **Kaṣāya** (passions) and then destroys the **16** **Prakṛti** (karmas). To reconcile these two statements, the **Tīkā** (commentary) states...

**References:**

1. **Pu. 1, p. 104, 105, 16, 17**
2. **Dh. Pu. 1, 185**

Page #95:
---------------------------
62/Go. Sa. Jivakanda
Whether the sins of the Vale are destroyed or not, only a Kevali or Shruta Kevali can know. At this time, it cannot be decided.
After introspection, the क्षपक (Kshapaka) gradually destroys the नपुसकवेद (Napusaka Veda), स्त्रीवेद (Stri Veda), six नोकषाय (Nokashaya), पुरुषवेद (Purusha Veda), संज्वलनक्रोध (Sanjwalana Krodha), संज्वलनमान (Sanjwalana Mana), संज्वलनमाया (Sanjwalana Maya), and संज्वलनबादरलोभ (Sanjwalana Badar Lobha) in the मुरास्थान (Mura Sthan), but the उपशामक (Upashamaka) pacifies these natures. The special feature is that it pacifies the प्रत्याख्यानावरण (Pratyakhyana Avarana) and अप्रत्याख्यानावरण (Apratyakhyana Avarana) Kshayas along with the संज्वलन (Sanjwalana).
The work done in the last part of the अनिवृत्तिकररणगुणस्थान (Anivritikaran Gunasthan) is पुन्वापुश्वरफड्डयवादरसुहुमगयकिट्टिअणुभागा (Punva Pushwara Faddaya Vadar Suhum Gaya Kitti Anubhaga).
हीएकमाणंतगुणेरणवरादु वरं च हेतुस्स ॥५८।। गाथार्थ- The अनुभाग (Anubhaga) of the अपूर्वस्पर्धक (Apuurva Spardhaka) from the पूर्वस्पर्धक (Purva Spardhaka), the अनुभाग (Anubhaga) of the बादरकृष्टि (Badar Krisht) from the अपूर्वस्पर्धक (Apuurva Spardhaka), and the अनुभाग (Anubhaga) of the सूक्ष्मकृष्टि (Sookshma Krisht) from the बादरकृष्टि (Badar Krisht) are all infinitely less. The अनुभाग (Anubhaga) of the उत्तर-उत्तर (Uttara-Uttara) from the जघन्य (Jaghanya) of the पूर्व-पूर्व (Purva-Purva) and the अनुभाग (Anubhaga) of the जघन्य (Jaghanya) from the उत्कृष्ट (Utkrisht) are also infinitely less.।५८॥
विशेषार्थ- At the first time of becoming an अवेदी (Avedi), the अनुभाग (Anubhaga) of the four संज्वलन (Sanjwalana) Kshayas is as follows: The अनुभाग (Anubhaga) is the least in मानसंज्वलन (Mana Sanjwalana), it is significantly more in क्रोध-संज्वलन (Krodha-Sanjwalana), it is significantly more in मायासंज्वलन (Maya Sanjwalana), and it is significantly more in लोभ-संज्वलन (Lobha-Sanjwalana). Here, the evidence of significantly more is अनन्तस्पर्धक (Ananta Spardhaka). At that first time, the अनुभागकाण्डक (Anubhaga Kandaka) which is for doing अश्वकर्णकरण (Ashwakarna Karana) has few स्पर्धक (Spardhaka) of क्रोध (Krodha), it has significantly more स्पर्धक (Spardhaka) of मान (Mana), it has significantly more स्पर्धक (Spardhaka) of माया (Maya), and it has significantly more स्पर्धक (Spardhaka) of लोभ (Lobha). The अनुभागस्पर्धक (Anubhaga Spardhaka) remaining from the स्पर्धक (Spardhaka) taken for doing घात (Ghat) are less in लोभसंज्वलन (Lobha Sanjwalana), infinitely more in माया (Maya), infinitely more in मान (Mana), and infinitely more in क्रोध (Krodha). This is the description of the first time of doing अश्वकर्णकरण (Ashwakarna Karana) from क. पा. चूर्तिणसूत्र (Ka. Pa. Churti Nasutra) 4.76 to 486 (page 788). अश्वकर्णकरण (Ashwakarna Karana), आदोलकर (Adolkar), and अपवर्तनोद्वर्तनाकरण (Apavartana Udvartana Karana) are all synonymous names.
अश्वकर्ण (Ashwakarna) means the परिणाम (Parinam) which go away in a sequence like the ear of a horse. The संज्ञा (Sanjna) of those परिणाम (Parinam) is अश्वकर्यकरण (Ashwakarya Karana). The name आदोल (Adol) is of a swing. Just as a triangular shape appears in the gap between the pillar and the rope of a swing, like the ear of a horse, similarly here also the संनिवेश (Sannivesh) of the अनुभाग (Anubhaga) of the क्रोधादि (Krodhadi) संज्वलन (Sanjwalana) Kshaya appears to decrease in sequence, therefore it is also called आदोलकरण (Adolkarana). Because the अनुभाग (Anubhaga) of the क्रोधादि (Krodhadi) संज्वलन (Sanjwalana) Kshayas appears in the form of हानिवृद्धि (Hanivriddhi), it is also called अपवर्तनोद्वर्तनाकरग (Apavartana Udvartana Karaga). (Ka. Pa. Su. page 787)
At that same first time of doing अश्वकर्णकरण (Ashwakarna Karana), it does the अपूर्वस्पर्धक (Apuurva Spardhaka) of the four संज्वलन (Sanjwalana) Kshayas. [Ka. Pa. Chanisutra 460 | The स्पर्धक (Spardhaka) which were never obtained before, but which are in the क्षपकश्श्रेणी (Kshapaka Shreni)
1. Dh. Pu. 1 Sutra 2.7 commentary.

Page #96:
---------------------------
## Gugaasthan 63

These are obtained in the time of Ashvakarnakarana and are called A-purvaspardhakas, which are progressively diminishing in nature due to the loss multiplied by the Mantguna from the Purvaspardhakas obtained in the Samara state.  The Laamaama of these A-purvaspardhakas is equal to the Adivargna of all the Deshghati Spardhakas of all the Karma of all the Prakshapka Jivas.  Even among all the Deshghatis, only the Adivargna of all the Deshghati Karmas except Mithyatva is equal.  These are called Purvaspardhakas.  After that, the same Avedi Jiva of the first time does A-purvaspardhakas of all the four Sanjwalana Kashayas from those Spardhakas. [Ka. Pa. Chanisutra 463-64] Although this Avedi Kshapka of the first time removes all the four A-purvaspardhakas of Kashayas together, the method of doing the A-purvaspardhaka of the first Lobha is said to be - by taking the Asankhyatava part from the Purvaspardhakas of Sanjwalnalobha, the other Spardhakas are removed in the Anantva part below the first Deshghati Spardhaka.  Although they are Ananta in comparison to the Gana, they are A-purvaspardhakas in the same amount as the Asankhyatava part of the Spardhakas of the Pradesh Gana Hanimanaantara.  That is, in the Adivargna of the first (having the least Anubhaga) Deshghati Spardhakas of the Purvaspardhakas, there are as many A-vibhagapratichhedas as there are A-vibhagapratichhedas in the Anantva part of the Adivargna of the last A-purvaspardhaka.  In this way, the amount of A-purvaspardhakas removed is only the Asankhyatava part of the Spardhakas within the Pradesh Guna Hanisthanantara.  The Adivargna of the Purvaspardhakas is progressively diminished by one-one particular Vargana, the place where it is diminished by two is called Ekapradesha Guna Hanisthanantara.

In the first time, the A-purvaspardhakas that are removed, the A-vibhagapratichhedas are less in the Adivargna of the first Spardhaka.  The A-vibhagapratichhedas are more in the Adivargna of the second Spardhaka by Ananta Bahubhaga.  The A-vibhagapratichhedas of the Adivargna of the second Spardhaka are slightly less than the second part and more than the A-vibhagapratichhedas of the Adivargna of the third Spardhaka.  The A-vibhagapratichhedas of the Adivargna of the third Spardhaka are slightly less than the third part and more than the A-vibhagapratichhedas of the Adivargna of the fourth Spardhaka.

In this way, until the Adivargna of the last Spardhaka in the Jghanya Parita Asankhyata Pramana Spardhakas becomes more than the Adivargna of the Adivargna below it by the Utkrishta Sankhyatava part and does not reach the end of the Sankhyatava part increase, then this type of fourth, fifth, etc. part should be taken more in order.  Further (from the beginning), until the Adivargna of the last Spardhaka in the Jghanya Parita Ananta Pramana Spardhakas becomes more than the Adivargna of the Spardhaka below it by the Utkrishta Asankhyata Asankhyatava part and does not reach the end of the Asankhyatava part increase, then the order of Asankhyatava part increase remains.  Further, one should know the order of Anantva part increase until the last Spardhaka.  * The Adivargna of the first Spardhaka is less in the A-purvaspardhakas that are removed in the first time.  From this, the Adivargna of the last A-purvaspardhaka is Anantguna.  From this, the Adivargna of the Purvaspardhaka is Satguna.  In the first time of Ashvakarnakarana, just as the A-purvaspardhakas of Sanjwalna Lobha are

Page #97:
---------------------------
## Chapter 64 / Go. Sa. Ji. Kand

Just as the **praroopanā** (formation) of **aśvakarṇakaraṇa** (ear-horse formation) has been done, in the same way, the **praroopanā** of **sanjvalana māyā**, **māna** (pride), and **śodha** (search) should also be done.

"In the first time, the **apūrvaspardhaka** (previous competitors) that are removed, the **apūrvaspardhaka** of **krodha** (anger) are the least, the **apūrvaspardhaka** of **māna** are more than that, the **apūrvaspardhaka** of **māyā** are more than that, and the **apūrvaspardhaka** of **lobha** (greed) are more than that. Here, the evidence of **viśeṣa** (special) is an **anantava** (infinite) part."

"In the first time, the **apūrvaspardhaka** of **lobha** that are removed, the **avibhāgapratichheda** (indivisible segments) in the **ādivargā** (initial class) are less, the **avibhāgapratichheda** in the **ādivargā** of **māyā** are more than that, the **avibhāgapratichheda** in the **ādivargā** of **māna** are more than that, and the **avibhāgapratichheda** in the **ādivargā** of **krodha** are more than that. In this way, the **apūrvaspardhaka** of the four **kaṣāya** (passions), the **avibhāgapratichheda** in the **ādivargā** of the last **apūrvaspardhaka** are equal to all four **kaṣāya** and are **anantagunita** (infinitely multiplied)."

"To clarify the statement from **K. Pa. Chūṇisūtra 505 to 514**, the **aṅka-sandṛṣṭi** (numerical representation) is as follows: The number of **apūrvaspardhaka** of the four **kaṣāya** (anger, pride, māyā, greed) are 16, 20, 24, 28 respectively, and the **avibhāgapratichheda** in the **ādivargā** are 105, 84, 70, 60 respectively. Multiplying the **ādivargā** by their respective **apūrvaspardhaka** **śalākā** (rods), the **prasāraṇa** (expansion) of the **avibhāgapratichheda** of the **ādivargā** of the last **apūrvaspardhaka** of each **kaṣāya** is obtained, which are equal to each other but are **anantagunita** compared to their own **ādivargā**." For example:

| **Kaṣāya** | **ādivargā** **avibhāgapratichheda** | **apūrvaspardhaka** **śalākā** | **ādivargā** **avibhāgapratichheda** of the last **apūrvaspardhaka** |
|---|---|---|---|
| **Krodha** | 105 | × 16 | 1680 |
| **Māna** | 84 | × 20 | 1680 |
| **Māyā** | 70 | × 24 | 1680 |
| **Lobha** | 60 | × 28 | 1680 |

"In the first time of **aśvakarṇakaraṇa**, from the **anantava** part of **apūrvaspardhaka** bound like a vine, and from the **stan** (breast) **apūrvaspardhaka**, by **udīraṇa** (excitation) after **apkṣaraṇa** (reduction) of an **asanкhyātava** (innumerable) part of the **pradeśāgra** (tip of the region), an **anantava** part of the **anubhāga** (section) is found in the form of **udaya** (arising) and also remains **anudīrna** (unexcited), but the upper **anantabahu bhāga** (infinitely many parts) remains **anudīrna**."

"Compared to **bandha** (bondage), the first **apūrvaspardhaka** is taken as the beginning, and **apūrvaspardhaka** are removed up to the **anantava** part of **apūrvaspardhaka** like a vine. There is such a **viśeṣa** (speciality) that these **bandhaspardhaka** are **anantagunita** (infinitely multiplied) less **anubhāga** (section) powerful compared to **udayaspardhaka** (arising competitors)."

"Now, the **praroopanā** of the second time of **aśvakarṇakaraṇa** is done. For example, in the second time of **aśvakarṇakaraṇa**, the same **sthitikāṇḍaka** (state section), **anubhāgakāṇḍaka** (section section), and the same **sthitibandha** (state bondage) are there, but the **anubhāgavantra** (section container) is **anantagunita** (infinitely multiplied) less, and the **guṇashreṇī** (series of qualities) is **asanкhyātava** (innumerable) times more. It removes the **apūrvaspardhaka** that were removed in the first time, and from them, it becomes **asanкhyātava** (innumerable) times more."

Page #98:
---------------------------
**Māpā 57-58**

**Gṛgāmyān/65** also eliminates the previous competitors. The same sequence is followed in the third time. The only difference is that it eliminates both the previous competitors and the other previous competitors. As described in the second time, the same sequence should be known until the last time of the first section-chapter is engraved. - After this, the special feature of the section-being in the subsequent time is as follows: the section-being is the least in the burning-greed, the section-being is infinite times more in the burning-delusion than this, the section-being is infinite times more in the burning-pride than this, the section-being is infinite times more in the burning-anger than this. The same sequence is followed in the entire time of the horse-ear-making. In the first time of the horse-ear-making, the eliminated previous competitors are many, in the second time, the eliminated previous competitors are infinitely less. In the third time, the eliminated previous competitors are infinitely more than the second time. In this way, the previous-previous competitors eliminated in the subsequent times are infinitely less in the subsequent times. Here, the infinite part of the multiplier-simile is present.

In the last time of the horse-ear-making, the indivisible-intersections are few in the initial-series of the first previous competitor of greed, the indivisible-intersections are double in the initial-series of the second previous competitor, the indivisible-intersections are triple in the initial-series of the third previous competitor. Similarly, the indivisible-intersections should be known as four times, five times, etc. in the initial-series of the fourth, fifth, etc. previous competitors. Similarly, the indivisible-intersections should be known in the previous competitors of delusion, pride, and anger. In the last time of the horse-ear-making, the binding-state of the four burnings is eight years and the binding-state of the remaining karmas is ten thousand years. The binding-state of name, lineage, and feeling is infinite years and the binding-state of the four material karmas is ten thousand years. In this way, the time of the horse-ear-making ends.

From here onwards, the time of the earth-attraction-making is from the subsequent time. The time of anger-knowledge, which is obtained by the six transitions of laughter, etc., has three parts. The first part is the time of the horse-ear-making, the second part is the time of the earth-attraction-making, and the third part is the time of the earth-knowledge. After the end of the horse-ear-making, the binding-state of the four burning passions in the subsequent time is eight years less than the previous binding-state and the binding-state of the remaining karmas is ten times less than the previous binding-state. The first time-related earth-attractor makes the anger-earth-attractions by attracting the region-tip from the previous competitors and the previous competitors of greed. Similarly, it makes the pride-earth-attractions by attracting the region-tip from the competitors of pride, it makes the delusion-earth-attractions by attracting the region-tip from the delusion-competitors, and it makes the greed-earth-attractions by attracting the region-tip from the greed-competitors. All these eight of the four passions are as much as the infinite part of the series of one competitor in terms of calculation.

**K.P. Rīn Mūtra 527 to 530.** 2. **K.P. Cūṇimūtra 537.** 3. **K.P. Cūśisūtra 541.** 4. **K.P. Hariṇasūtra 542-553.** 5. **K.P. Cūṇisūtra 554 to 557.** 6. **K.P. Giāsūtra 57 to 582.**

**K.P. Caṇi Sūtra 583 to 560.**

Page #99:
---------------------------
## Chapter 66 / Go. Sa. Jivakanda
## Verses 57-5868

In the beginning, each of the four kṣayās (passions) that are eradicated, is divided into three groups of kṛṣṭis (degrees of intensity). Of these, the lowest kṛṣṭi of greed is the weakest, the second kṛṣṭi is infinitely stronger. In this way, one should understand the infinite series of kṛṣṭis from the first group to the last kṛṣṭi of the first group. The last kṛṣṭi of the first group is infinitely stronger than the lowest kṛṣṭi of the second group. This multiplication is infinitely greater than the multiplication of the kṛṣṭis in each of the twelve groups. What is less in the first group is also less in the second group. The ratio of the infinite multiplication between the lowest kṛṣṭi of the second group and the first group should be understood as the same ratio between the lowest kṛṣṭi of the third group and the second group. In this way, there are three groups of kṛṣṭis for greed. The last kṛṣṭi of the third group of greed is infinitely stronger than the lowest kṛṣṭi of delusion. Delusion also has three groups of kṛṣṭis in the same order. The last kṛṣṭi of the third group of delusion is infinitely stronger than the lowest kṛṣṭi of pride. Pride also has three groups of kṛṣṭis in the same order. The last kṛṣṭi of the third group of pride is infinitely stronger than the lowest kṛṣṭi of anger. Anger also has three groups of kṛṣṭis in the same order. The last kṛṣṭi of the third group of anger is infinitely stronger than the lowest (initial) degree of the predecessors of greed.

The multiplication of the kṛṣṭis is as follows: each group has infinite kṛṣṭis, and the difference between them is also infinite. The difference between these kṛṣṭis is called "kṛṣṭi-antar" (difference between kṛṣṭis). There are eleven differences between the groups of kṛṣṭis, which are called "sagraha-kṛṣṭi-antar" (difference between groups of kṛṣṭis). In the first group of greed, the difference between the lowest kṛṣṭis, i.e., the multiplier by which the stronger lowest kṛṣṭi obtains its second degree, is the smallest. The difference between the second kṛṣṭi is infinitely greater. In this way, going from one infinite to another, the difference between the last kṛṣṭi is infinitely greater. In the second group of greed, the difference between the first kṛṣṭi is infinitely greater. In this way, going from one infinite to another, one should understand the multiplier of the last kṛṣṭi as infinitely greater. Again, in the third group of greed, the difference between the first kṛṣṭi is infinitely greater. In this way, going from one infinite to another, the difference between the last kṛṣṭi (multiplier) is infinitely greater.

From here onwards, in the first group of delusion, the difference between the first kṛṣṭi is infinitely greater. In this way, going from one infinite to another, the difference between the kṛṣṭis of all three groups of delusion should be understood as an infinite series. From here onwards, in the first group of pride, the difference between the first kṛṣṭi is infinitely greater. In this way, going from one infinite to another, the difference between the kṛṣṭis of all three groups of pride should be understood as an infinite series. From here onwards, in the first group of anger, the difference between the first kṛṣṭi is infinitely greater. In this way, going from one infinite to another, the difference between the kṛṣṭis of all three groups of anger should be understood as an infinite series, until the last difference. The last multiplier of these multipliers is infinitely greater than the difference between the first group of greed. The difference between the second group is infinitely greater than this, and the difference between the third group is infinitely greater than this. The difference between greed and delusion is infinitely greater. The difference between the first group of delusion is infinitely greater. The difference between the second group is infinitely greater than this, and the difference between the third group is infinitely greater than this. 

1. K. Pa. Chūṇisūtra 561 to 307. 
2. K. Pa. Chūṇisūtra 608 to 620.
3. K. Pa. Sūtra 621-626.

Page #100:
---------------------------
## Gatha 57-58
Gugaamthan/67

The difference between Maya and Maan is infinite times greater. The difference between Maan and the first collection-creation is infinite times greater. From this, the difference between the second collection-creation is infinite times greater. From this, the difference between the third collection-creation is infinite times greater. The difference between Maan and Krodh is infinite times greater. The difference between Krodh and the first collection-creation is infinite times greater. From this, the difference between the second collection-creation is infinite times greater. From this, the difference between the third collection-creation is infinite times greater. The difference between the original creation of Krodh and the initial classification of the non-previous competitors of Lobh is infinite times greater.

The duration of the binding of the four Sanjwalans at the end of the Badar creation period is more than a moment but less than four months. The duration of the binding of the rest is thousands of years. The duration of the binding of Mohaniya Karma decreases from thousands of years to more than a moment but less than a year. The duration of the binding of the remaining three types of Karma is thousands of years. The duration of the binding of Naam, Gotra and Vedaniya Karma is countless thousands of years.

The one who performs the Badar creations experiences the pain of the previous and non-previous competitors, but not the pain of the creations. When only the last part of the first stage of Sanjwalan Krodh remains, the creation period ends. After the end of the creation period, the creations are removed from the second stage and entered into the Udayavali within an infinite amount of time. At that time, the duration of the binding of the four Sanjwalans is four months and the duration of their existence is eight years. The duration of the binding and existence of the remaining three types of Karma is thousands of years. The duration of the binding of Vedaniya, Naam and Gotra Karma is thousands of years and the duration of their existence is countless thousands of years. The part of the Sanjwalan Krodh that remains as a residue in the form of Ucchishtavli within a short period of time is Satradhatu. The part that is bound for nine periods of time within two short periods of time is Deshghati. This part of the Sanjwalan Krodh is in the form of a competitor. The rest of the Sanjwalan Krodh is in the form of creation.

At the beginning of the Badar creation period, the first stage is created by removing the Pradeshgra from the first collection-creation. At that time, countless parts of the first collection-creation of Krodh are born, i.e., they attain Uday. Countless parts of the first collection-creation of Krodh are bound, but the remaining two collection-creations are neither bound nor born.

When the last part of the first stage of the one who experiences the pain of the first creation of Krodh remains, the time of the first creation of Krodh is experienced. After that time, the Pradeshgra of the second creation of Krodh is removed and the first stage of Krodh is created. At that time, the parts of the first collection-creation of Krodh that are bound for nine periods of time within two short periods of time and the Pradeshgra that have entered the Udayavali remain in the first creation.

Page #101:
---------------------------
## 68/Go. Sa. Jivakanda
## Verses 57-58

The first time of the second cultivation of anger is the vedaka.

**Doubt:** Just as the vedaka of the first cultivation of anger binds the first cultivations of all four kṣayās, does the vedaka of the second cultivation of anger bind the second cultivations of all four kṣayās or not?

**Solution:** It binds the cultivation of the kṣayā whose cultivation it experiences, and it binds the first cultivations of the remaining kṣayās.

The first state of the kṣapaka who experiences the second cultivation of anger, when the remaining time of āvali and pratyāvali is left, the grāgāla and pratyāgāla are cut off. In that same first state, when more than one āvali time remains, the vedaka of the second cultivation of anger is the charma-samaya-varti. At that time, the sthiti-bandha of the four sanjvalana kṣayās is two months and less than twenty days, the sthiti-bandha of the remaining ghātiyā karmas is one year, and the sthiti-bandha of the remaining karmas is thousands of years. At that time, the sthiti-sattva of the four sanjvalanas is five years and less than four months, the sthiti-sattva of the remaining three ghātiyā karmas is thousands of years, and the sthiti-sattva of the nāma-gotra-vedanīya karma is countless years.

After that time, it causes the first state by causing the apkarṣaṇa of the pradeśāgra from the third cultivation of anger. At that time, countless parts of the anṇara cultivations of the third sangraha-kṛṣṭi of anger are udiṛṇa, and countless parts of them are bound. The peculiarity is that the parimārga of the antar-kṛṣṭis that are bound from the antar-kṛṣṭis that are udiṛṇa is very low.

When more than one āvali time remains in the first state of the one who experiences the third cultivation of anger, the charma-samaya-varti anger vedaka occurs, and at that time, the udiṛaka of the jghanya state of anger-sanjvalana occurs. At that time, the sthiti-bandha of the four sanjvalana kṣayās is two months, and the sthiti-sattva is four years.

After that time, it causes the first state by causing the apkarṣaṇa of the first kṛṣṭi of māna. Here, the first state is only the division of the vedaka time of the sarva-vedaka time of the sanjvalana-māṇa. Then, the one who experiences the first sangraha-kṛṣṭi of māna experiences countless parts of the antar-kṛṣṭis of that first sangraha-kṛṣṭi, and then binds the kṛṣṭis that are very low from those udiṛṇa kṛṣṭis, and binds only the first sangraha-kṛṣṭis of the remaining kṣayās. In the first state of the one who experiences the first sangraha-kṛṣṭi of māna, when more than one āvali time remains, the sthiti-bandha of the three sanjvalana kṣayās is one month and less than twenty days, and the sthiti-sattva is three years and less than four months.

Page #102:
---------------------------
## Gatha 57-58
## Gunarathan/66

**Thereafter, in time, the second collection-accumulation of *mana* (pride) causes the *pradeshagra* (apex of the region) to regress and returns to the first state.** When one who has overcome the second accumulation of *mana* has one *pravali* (period of time) remaining in the first state, the *sthitibandha* (duration of the karmic bond) of the three *sanjvalana* (agitations) is one month and slightly less than ten days, and the *sthitisattva* (duration of the karmic effect) is two years and slightly less than eight months.

**Thereafter, in time, the third accumulation of *mana* causes the *pradeshagra* to regress and returns to the first state.** And in the same way, when one who has overcome the third accumulation of *mana* has one *pravali* remaining in the first state, they become the *charamasamaya* (ultimate time) *vedaka* (overcomer) of *mana*. At that time, the *sthitibandha* of the three *sanjvalana* is one month and the *sthitisattva* is two years.

**Thereafter, in time, the first accumulation of *maya* (delusion) causes the *pradeshagra* to regress and returns to the first state.** And in the same way, when one who has overcome the first accumulation of *maya* has one *pravali* remaining in the first state, the *sthitibandha* of those two *sanjvalana* is slightly less than 25 days and the *sthitisattva* is one year and slightly less than eight months.

**Thereafter, in time, the second accumulation of *maya* causes the *pradeshagra* to regress and returns to the first state.** When one *pravali* remains in the first state, the *sthitibandha* of the two *sanjvalana* is slightly less than 20 days and the *sthitisattva* is slightly less than 16 months.

**Thereafter, in time, the third accumulation of *maya* causes the *pradeshagra* to regress and returns to the first state.** When one *pravali* remains in the first state, they become the *charamasamaya* *vedaka* of *maya*. At that time, the *sthitibandha* of the two *sanjvalana* is half a month and the *sthitisattva* is one year. The *sthitibandha* of the remaining three *ghatiya* (destructive) karmas is one month apart, and the *sthitisattva* is a number of thousands of years. The *sthitibandha* of the three *aghatiya* (non-destructive) karmas is a number of years, and the *sthitisattva* is countless years.

**Thereafter, in time, the first collection-accumulation of *lobha* (greed) causes the *pradeshagra* to regress and returns to the first state.** When one who has overcome the first accumulation of *lobha* has one *pravali* remaining in the first state, the *sthitibandha* of *lobha* is an *antarmuhurta* (moment within a moment), and the *sthitisattva* is also an *antarmuhurta*. The *sthitibandha* of the three *ghatiya* karmas is one day apart, and the *sthitibandha* of the remaining karmas is one year apart. The *sthitisattva* of the *ghatiya* karmas is a number of thousands of years, and the *sthitisattva* of the three *aghatiya* karmas is countless years.

**Thereafter, in time, the second accumulation of *lobha* causes the *pradeshagra* to regress and returns to the first state.** At the same time, the second and third accumulations of *lobha* become *sukshmasamprayika* (subtle) accumulations, whose location is below the third accumulation of *lobha*.

**The *sanjvalana* of *lobha* and *kṣaya* (passion) are also infinitely numerous due to the *badara-samprayika* (coarse) accumulations.**

**Footnotes:**

1. K.P. Chūṇisūtra 1200.
2. K.P. Chūṇisūtra 1202.
3. K.P. Chūṇisūtra 1204 to 1208.
4. K.P. Chūṇisūtra 1206 to 1212, p. 860.
5. K.P. Chūṇisūtra 1213 to 1216.
6. K.P. Chūṇisūtra 1217 to 1224.
7. K.P. Chūṇisūtra 1225 to 1232.
8. K.P. Chūṇisūtra 1233 to 1236.

Page #103:
---------------------------
## 70/Go. Ma. Jivakanda
## Gatha 57-58

**Subtle Samparayik-Krustikaran** is the term used for the state of being situated in a very subtle or faint section, resulting from loss. Even the most excellent Subtle Samparayik Krusti, from the most inferior Vada Krusti, is still inferior to the Anantarina. Therefore, the place of Subtle Samparayik Krustis is below the third Krusti of Greed. The one who overcomes the second Krusti of Greed begins to create Subtle Samparayik Krustis from the very beginning. If the one who ignites Greed does not create Subtle Samparayik Krustis in the second division, then the transition to Subtle Krusti cannot occur in the third division.

The one who overcomes the second Krusti of Greed, in their first state, when there is a long gap of time in one period, is called **Charam Samayavarti Badar Samparayik**. At the same time, that is, at the end of the Anavrittikaran Gunasthan, the **Samkrant Maran Charam Badar Samparayik Krusti** of Greed completely transitions into Subtle Samparayik Krustis. Except for the nine Sampaprabbaddhas with two Pravali less than one period of the second Badar Krusti of Greed, and except for the Udayavali-Pravisht Dravya, all other Krustis attain transition, that is, they become Subtle Krustis.

The **Utkrishta Krusti** that ignites Anger is also a part of the Anantbaag of the **Pradivargna**, that is, the inferior Vargana of the first **Apuurvaspardhak**. In this way, the sections in Krustis are progressively smaller. Therefore, the Krusti by which the Karma of the Anger Kshaya is made thin is meaningful. This is the characteristic of Krusti.

All **Sangrah Krustis** and their component Krustis are in the second state, but the Krusti that is overcome is in the first state.

**Explanation of how many Sangrah Krustis are formed for each:** If the Kshapak Shreni ascends with the rise of the Anger Kshaya, then there are twelve Sangrah Krustis. The one who ascends with the rise of the Mana Kshaya has nine Sangrah Krustis. The one who ascends with the rise of the Maya Kshaya has six Sangrah Krustis. The one who ascends with the rise of the Greed Kshaya has three Sangrah Krustis. Each Sangrah Krusti has infinite components or internal Krustis. There are three Sangrah Krustis in each Kshaya.

The **Bevakkalas** of the Krustis are such that the last twelfth Krusti is overcome (by becoming Subtle Krusti) until the end of the Muhurta, but its overcoming time is the shortest. The overcoming time of the eleventh Krusti is significantly longer. The overcoming time of the tenth Krusti is significantly longer. The overcoming time of the ninth Krusti is significantly longer. The overcoming time of the eighth Krusti is significantly longer. The overcoming time of the seventh Krusti is significantly longer. The overcoming time of the sixth Krusti is significantly longer. The overcoming time of the fifth Krusti is significantly longer. The overcoming time of the fourth Krusti is significantly longer. 

3. K. Pa. Churnimush 731 to 736.
1. Based on Jayadhaval.
2. K. Pa. Churnisutra 1265-67.
4. K. Pa. Gatha 168.
5. K. Pa. Churnisutra 706 to 714.

Page #104:
---------------------------
## Gunasthana/71

The duration of the Vedakakāla for the third Kṛṣṭi is particularly greater. The duration of the Vedakakāla for the second Kṛṣṭi is particularly greater. The duration of the Vedakakāla for the first Kṛṣṭi is particularly greater. Here, the evidence for "viśeṣa" (particular) is the numerical fraction of the Sṛṣṭi-Vedakakāla. The above statement regarding the actions related to the Kṣapaka-śreṇī, such as Aśvakarṇakaraṇa, Apūrvapradhāk, and Bādarkṛṣṭi, is made in comparison to the Kṣapaka-śreṇī. The special feature is that in the Sapna-śreṇī, Aśvakarṇakaraṇa, Apūrvapradhāk, and Bādarkṛṣṭikaraṇa do not occur, but in the second division of the Lobha-Vedakakāla, by repelling the Pradeśapuja from the previous competitors, it creates subtle Kṛṣṭis, which are infinitely inferior to the Anantaguṇī, like the most despicable creeper, in the opposite direction of the Saptasvara.

The name of this second division is Kṛṣṭikaraṇakāla, because here it performs Kṛṣṭis by refracting the competitor-related Anu-bhāga. Therefore, this meaningful name Kṛṣṭikaraṇakāla is given to the second division of the Lobha-Vedakakāla. Just as in the Kṣapaka-śreṇī, by performing (Bādra) Kṛṣṭis, it completely refracts all the previous and ultimate previous competitors and establishes only (Bādra) Kṛṣṭis, such a thing does not happen here, because without abandoning their own nature, all the previous competitors remain in that state, and from among all the competitors, it creates subtle Kṛṣṭis by repelling a fraction of the Dravya, which is numerically insignificant, from the Anu-bhāga, which is numerically insignificant, of a single competitor, in the Upasama-śreṇī.

In comparison to the Alpabahutva-Tīva-Manda Anu-bhāga related to the Tīva-Manda Anu-bhāga, the inferior Kṛṣṭi is insignificant, the second Kṛṣṭi is infinitely greater than that, and the third Kṛṣṭi is infinitely greater than that. In this way, the series continues in a Tantraguṇīta-śreṇī form until the final Kṛṣṭi.

**The Prefiguration of the End of the Kṛṣṭikaraṇakāla:**

When the Prāvalī and Pratyāvalī are absent in the Kṛṣṭikaraṇakāla, the Prāgāla and Pratyāgāla become extinguished. When one moment remains in the Pratyāvalī, the inferior state of the mind's agitation, Udeeranā, arises. At that time, all the Pradeśa related to the competitor-related Lobha becomes pacified, but the Kṛṣṭi-related Pradeśa remains unpacified, because the pacification of the Kṛṣṭis is seen in the time of the Sūkṣma-Samparāya. This is the final time-related Bādra-Samparāyika opinion, because here the end of the Anivṛttikaraṇakāla is seen.

Thus, the statement regarding the previous and non-previous competitors and the Bādra-Sūkṣma-Kṛṣṭi related to the Kṣapa-śreṇī, and the previous competitors and the Sūkṣma-Kṛṣṭi related to the Upasama-śreṇī, is complete.

**Tenth Gunasthāna - The Nature of Sūkṣma-Samparāya:**

"Dhudakkosu bhayavattāṁ hodi jahā suhamārāyasaṁjutaṁ | Evam suhamaka-sānō suhama-sarāgōtti raṇāvadhyō || 56 ||"

**References:**

* J.D.P. 13, p. 315
* K.P. 37-8462, J.V.P. 135.307
* J.G.P. 13, p. 318-316, "Asāsūtra 2583"

Page #105:
---------------------------
72/Go, Sa, Jivakanda
Gatha 56-60

A subtle greed is the knowledge of the soul, it is like a subtle bird or a subtle insect.
It is subtle in its association, like a subtle grain of dust. || 60 ||

Gatha-artha: Just as a subtle redness remains in a washed kusumbi cloth, so too, (even after the effect of badarakshaya has been washed away), the soul is subtle in its kshaya, or subtle in its raga. This is what should be known. || 56 ||

One who is experiencing the subtle greed of a upaśamaka or kshapaka is subtle in his samparaya, and he is slightly less than the yathakyata charitra. || 6 ||

Visheshartha: The kshaya of the anivatti karan parinamas has washed away the kshaya of the rama-dha-rupa kshaya, i.e., it has made it absent. However, like a washed kusumbi cloth, a subtle raga or kshaya in the form of subtle greed remains. Due to this subtle greed, the upaśamaka or kshapaka's subtle samparaya charitra is slightly less than the yathakyata charitra.

Subtle kshaya is called subtle samparaya. Those jinas who have entered into it are subtle samparaya-sanjata, and they are in the tenth gunasthana. Both upaśamaka and kshapaka are present in them. Since there is no difference between them in terms of subtle samparaya, both upaśamaka and kshapaka have the same gunasthana. In this gunasthana, both the apurva and anivritti are present. Therefore, both these visheshanas should be added to subtle samparaya, otherwise, this gunasthana will not have any special characteristic from the previous gunasthanas.

In this gunasthana, the soul destroys many prakritis, will destroy many more in the future, and has destroyed many in the past. Therefore, it has the kshayikabhava. And it pacifies many prakritis, will pacify many more in the future, and has pacified many in the past. Therefore, it has the aupaśamikabhava.

The first time-bound subtle samparaya kshapaka has countless multi-parts of subtle krushtas. After the countless sthitikanḍakas of the sahasra have passed, the last sthitikanḍaka of the mohaniya karma is revealed. After this sthitikanḍaka is revealed, there is no further sthitighata of the mohaniya karma, because the remaining time of the subtle samparaya gunasthana is the same as the satva of the mohaniya karma, and it destroys this sthiti satva through adhasthiti.

The last time-bound subtle samparaya kshapaka has a sthitibandha of eight muhurtas for the name and gotra karma, a sthitibandha of twelve muhurtas for the vedaniya karma, and a sthitibandha of one antarmuhurta for the remaining three ghatiya karmas.

The first time-bound lobha-vedaka badara-samparaya sanjata, who has risen due to the rise of anger, has a first sthiti of two-thirds (3) of the total lobha-vedaka time. The time of the subtle samparaya sanjata is slightly less than half of this sthiti.

1. B.P. 1 p. 187 2. G.P. 1 p. 188. 3. K.P., Burinsutra 1336 to 1346. 4. K.P. Chugimutra 1368 to 1370. 5. J.V.P. 13 p. 320.

Page #106:
---------------------------
## Translation:

**Guṇasthāna**

Except for the countless upper parts of the **kriṣṭis** (spiritual states) that were attained in the first time period, and from the lowest **kriṣṭi** to the countless parts of the **kriṣṭis** that were attained in the last time period, the remaining **kriṣṭis** are **udīrṇa** (emerged). This is a special feature that the **kriṣṭis** within the countless upper parts that were not given away from the **kriṣṭis** attained in the first time period become **madhyama-kriṣṭi** (medium **kriṣṭi**) by **apakarṣaṇa** (reduction) (in proportion to the section), being infinitely inferior, and the **kriṣṭis** within the countless lower parts that were not given away from the lowest **kriṣṭi** to the **kriṣṭis** attained in the last time period become **madhyama-kriṣṭi** by being seven times superior, because their emergence and absence are valued by their own nature, but their emergence is not prohibited by being in the form of a medium size.

The **sūkṣma-sāmprāyika** (subtle **sāmprāyika**) **upaśāmaka** (pacifier) of the first time period pacifies the **pradeśa** (region) of all **kriṣṭis** in the form of a **guṇa-śreṇī** (series of qualities), i.e., it pacifies the **pradeśa-puñja** (collection of regions) of **kriṣṭis** in the form of a countless-times-superior series every time. In the second time period, it pacifies the **pradeśa-puñja** by giving one part out of the countless parts of the **palyopam** (highest **kriṣṭi**) in all **kriṣṭis**. Again, in the third time period, it pacifies the **pradeśa-puñja** by giving one part out of the countless parts of the **palyopam** in all **kriṣṭis**. But it pacifies the **pradeśa-puñja** countless times more than the **pradeśa** pacified in the first time period.

**Doubt:** How is this known?

**Solution:** It is known from the greatness of the results. Thus, the **sūkṣma-sāmprāyika** **guṇasthāna** pacifies everything from the least to the most until the last time period is attained. It also pacifies the **navaka-samaya-prabaddha** (those who have attained the nine time periods) who are two time periods less and two **prāvalī** (stages) less. The **bādar-sāmprāyika-saṃyata** (those who have restrained the **bādar-sāmprāyika**), who had previously abandoned the **ucchiṣṭa-āvalī** (remaining **āvalī**), attain it through **kriṣṭi** in the form of **pariṇāma** (transformation) by **stibu-saṃkrama** (transition).

The **kriṣṭis** that emerged in the second time period are from the **agram** (front) of the **kriṣṭis** that emerged in the first time period, leaving out the countless parts from the seven highest **kriṣṭis** downwards.

**Doubt:** Why is this so?

**Solution:** If this were not the case, the emergence of the second time period would not be infinitely inferior to the emergence of the first time period.

The **kriṣṭis** that emerged in the second time period are specially inferior to the **kriṣṭis** that emerged in the first time period by a countless-part measure, because the abandoned part above is much greater than the lower, previously acquired part. Similarly, it should be stated for the third and subsequent time periods until the last time period of the **sama-sāmprāyika-saṃyata** is attained.

**Knowledge, Obstacles, and Barriers of the **sūkṣma-sāmprāyika** **upaśāmaka** of the Last Time Period**

a. **Pā-cūṇi-mūtra** 276-273. 2. **J. Gh. Yu.** 13 p. 322. 3. **J. P. Pu.** 13 p. 323. 4. **K. Pā. Pariṇasūtra** 276. 5. **J. P. Pu.** 13 p. 324-25.

Page #107:
---------------------------
74/ Go. Sa. Jeevakanda
Verse 61
The duration of the bondage of karma is an antarmuhurta. The duration of the bondage of karma of name and lineage is sixteen muhurtas. The duration of the bondage of vedaniya karma is twenty-four muhurtas. After that time, all mohaniya karma is completely pacified.
Vay-Fay - Shranubhagavi Anantgune Hone. Lahaanuhi Diyo Hand Sum- Samparashri So ||121||
- The one who is situated in subtle greed, which is devoid of infinite qualities from the section of previous competitors and non-previous competitors, should be considered as subtle samparaya gunasthanavarti ||121||
The nature of the Upashantakshaya Gunasthan
'Kadakphalajudajalam va Sarae Sarbariyam va Rinammalayam. Sayalovasant Moho Uvasantaksayano
Hodi || 61 ||
Verse meaning - Like pure water mixed with katak fruit or like the pure water of a lake in the autumn season, the pure results arising from the pacification of all mohaniya karma are called Upashantakshaya. || 61 ||
Special meaning - Those whose passions have been pacified are Upashantakshaya jivas, because the bondage, rise, stimulation, decline and rise of all mohaniya karma are seen to be in a pacified state. Now from here onwards, until the antarmuhurta time, Upashantakshaya-Vitrag remains in a hidden state. Due to the pacification of all passions, Upashantakshaya, due to the destruction of the rise of all raga results, Vitrag, due to the hidden state of knowledge-obscuring and vision-obscuring, that is, due to the hidden state of knowledge-obscuring and vision-obscuring, in this way, Upashantakshaya-Vitrag remains in a hidden state until the antarmuhurta time, with completely pure results.
Doubt - Why does it not remain in the state of Upashantakshaya for more than an antarmuhurta?
Solution - No, because it is impossible for the Upashma Paryaya to remain for more than an antarmuhurta. During the entire pacified time, it is in the state of results, because there is the influence of the rise of passions, which are the cause of the loss and increase of results. Therefore, the Upashantakshaya Vitrag, with the completely pure Vitrag result, which is endowed with the pure conduct, purity and restraint, as described, observes the time of Upashantakshaya Vitrag, inseparably, every moment. It is not possible for the Gunashreni arrangement to be possible from the non-existent dimension form of the living being with the existing result and from the decline form of the non-existent Pradeshpuranj, because it is prohibited. Therefore, in the entire pacified time, the dimension of the Gunashreni deposit that is to be done is expected and declined
1. K. Pa. Trainisutra 282 to 285. 2. Dhaval Pu. 1 p. 188.
3. Sakaygahalam Jalam va Sarae Saravariyam va Rimlae.
Samalovasant Moho Un Sant Kasayano Hoi ||122||
Dhaval Pu. 1 p. 189.

Page #108:
---------------------------
Chapter 61

The category of qualities is present in relation to the province that is known as the muga-sthana/75.

The present vedaka is present within the entire period of quiescence, in relation to the emergence of the sections of only-knowledge-veil and only-vision-veil. Sleep and lethargy are natures that have emergence and non-emergence. Therefore, their vedaka is sometimes present and sometimes not present. If it is present, then as long as it remains present, it is the present vedaka, because it is present in relation to the result.

The present vedaka of the five natures of karma is also present, because when it is present in relation to a single differentiated result, there is no other possibility of its emergence. The remaining labbhi-karma-ash, that is, the antaraya-karma, has four knowledge-veil and three vision-veil natures in addition to the five natures, and their emergence of sections is in the form of increase, decrease, or presence.

Doubt: What are labbhi-karma-ash?

Solution: Those whose result is in the form of destruction and quiescence are labbhi-karma-ash, because there is no obstacle to the attainment of the designation of labbhi-karma-ash when the destruction and quiescence of the karma-ash are complete. The emergence of sections of all these karma-ash is not necessarily present.

Doubt: Why is this so?

Solution: Because even when the result is a perception, there is the possibility of six types of increase, six types of decrease, and a present form of result. For example, the first is the knowledge-veil of perception. If the destruction and quiescence of the knowledge-veil of perception is not present in the quiescent passion, then its emergence is present, because there is no cause for its non-presence. If the destruction and quiescence of the knowledge-veil of perception is present, then there is the emergence of the section in the form of six increases, six decreases, and presence, because the knower of the spatial limit and the ultimate limit. In the living beings, there is no obstacle to the result being in the form of increase, decrease, and presence, in relation to the external and internal causes of the result, even when the destruction and quiescence of the knowledge-veil of perception is present in the form of countless worlds. All the knowers of perception are transformed by the excellent destruction and quiescence, and the emergence of their knowledge-veil of perception is not present. Other than that, its emergence is not present in the form of six increases, six decreases, and presence. Similarly, one should speak in relation to the knowledge-veil of mental perception. Similarly, one should speak in relation to the remaining knowledge-veils and vision-veils, knowing according to the sequence.

The vedaka is present in relation to the emergence of sections of the name-karma and the lineage-karma, which are result-perceptions.

Doubt: What are those natures?

Solution: Human path, five-sense being, noble body, subtle body, karma-body, one of the six institutions, noble body limbs, one of the three excellent institutions.

Page #109:
---------------------------
76/Go. Sa. Jivakanda
Go. 62
Varna, Gantr, Rasa, Sparsha, Agaslaghu, Upghāt, Parghāt, Ucchvās, Do Vihayogati, Bas, Bādar, Paryāpt, Pratiksha Sharira, Sthira, Asthira, Shubha, Ashubha, Susvara and Duhsvara, Subhaga, Prādeya, Yash Kīti and Nirman these are the Prakṛitis. Out of these, Tanjas Sharira, Karmansha Sharira, Varna, Gandha, Rasa, Shīta-Ushya-Snigdha-Rūksha Sparsha, Agurulaghu, Sthira, Asthira, Shubha, Ashubha, Subhaga, Prādeya, Yash Kīti and Nirman these Prakṛitis are Pariṇām Pratyay. Uchchagotra is the Parināma Pratyay. In this way, these name and gotra karmas with Pariṇām Pratyay are the Vedaka of Anubhāgodaya, because their Pariṇām Pratyay being related to their existing Pariṇām, another type is not possible. But here, the Bhava Pratyay which is to be known, the remaining Sātavēdaniya etc. Praghātiya Prakṛitis, by the order of six वृद्धि and six हानि, give this Vedatā to the Anubhāga.
The Upashāntakshaya Gunasthānāvi Jiva, although Kshaya is present in his Satā, is Upashānt, i.e. Anudayasvarūpa. Therefore, in the absence of Rāgodaya, his Chitta is Nirmala. To explain this Nirmalatā, two Dṛṣṭānta have been given in the Gāthā - 1. Just as in muddy water, if Katak Phal or Nirmali is put, the mud settles down and the water becomes clear. 2. In the rainy season, the water of the lake remains muddy, but when the autumn season arrives, the mud etc. which was mixed in the water goes down in the lake and the water of the lake becomes clear. By these two Dṛṣṭānta, it has been made clear that mud etc. is present in Satā, but it is not making the water dirty. In the same way, Mohaniya Karma is present in Satā, but it is not making the Chitta dirty by entering the Udara. Due to the existence of mud etc., it can again make the water dirty, in the same way, due to Bhava Kshaya or Kāla Kshaya, the Mohaniya Karma sitting in Satā again makes the Chitta dirty.
The 14th Gunasthān, called Kshīṇamoha, has its own measure:
*Riṇasse Sakhorana Moho Falīhā Malabhāyanudaya Samchitto.
Khīṇakashāno Bhagati Piganthō Bīyarāyhi. || 62 ||
Gāthārtha - He who has destroyed Moha completely, whose Chitta is as clear as pure water kept in a clear crystal vessel, Vītarāgadeva has called such a Nirgrantha Kshīṇakshaya Gunasthānāvarti.
Visheshārtha - Moha is of two types - Dravya Moha and Bhāva Moha. Dravya Moha is of four types due to the difference in Prakṛiti, Sthiti, Anubhāga and Pradesh. Bhāva Moha is of two types due to the difference in Rāga and Dvesha. He who has completely destroyed Dravya Moha and Bhāva Moha along with their differences and sub-differences, therefore, no part of them remains in any way. Therefore, the word "Nisseṣa-Khīṇa-Moha" has been given in the Gāthā. Due to Mohaniya Karmaudaya or due to Rāga-Dvesha, various types of waves used to rise in the Chitta, due to which there was a lack of Samchitta (Chitta without waves, Nirmala Chitta - Shānta Chitta), but when Moha is destroyed, the rising of waves has stopped, therefore, the Chitta has become 'Samchitta'. This 'Sam
1. J. P. Pu. 13 p. 332-334. 2. Gh. Pu. 1 p. 160; Jayadhayala Mula p. 2264. Prā. Pa. Sa. 1/25.

Page #110:
---------------------------
## Verse 62
## Guṇasthāna / 77

The verse uses the phrase "Kalihāmalabhāyanudaya" to explain the purification of the mind, using the analogy of clear water placed in a crystal vessel. This analogy illustrates that even if mud or dirt comes into contact with the water, it cannot make the water impure again once it has been purified. Similarly, once the taint of delusion is destroyed, the mind cannot be polluted again. Therefore, the mind becomes permanently "Samcitta" (equanimous). Although this concept can also be understood from the phrase "Nisseṣakhi Rag Moho," the analogy of "Kalihāmalabhāyanudaya" makes this concept even clearer.

The word "Nirgrantha" (without attachments) mentioned in the verse is of particular significance. There are five types of ascetics: 1. Pulāka, 2. Vakusha, 3. Kuśīla, 4. Nirgrantha, and 5. Snātaka. All five are free from external attachments, but Pulāka, Vakusha, and Kuśīla still have internal attachments due to the presence of Mohaniya Karma (karma that causes delusion). The Nirgrantha designation is truly applicable to those who are in the Kṣīṇamoha Guṇasthāna (stage of diminishing delusion) because their internal attachments are destroyed due to the destruction of Mohaniya Karma. They are also called Nirgrantha because they are about to attain Kevalajñāna (omniscience) and Kevaladarśana (omniscient vision) in the very next moment. Although those in the Upaśāntamoha Guṇasthāna (stage of subdued delusion) are also free from internal attachments, they are not called Nirgrantha in verse 61 because the Mohaniya Karma that causes these attachments still exists.  Śrī Pūjyapāda Svāmī and Śrī Alakdeva, along with other Ācāryas, have also used the qualifier "about to attain Kevalajñāna and Kevaladarśana in the very next moment" to specifically designate only those in the Kṣīṇamoha Guṇasthāna as Nirgrantha.

Those who bind us to karma are called "Grantha" (attachments). Attachments are of two types: internal and external. Internal attachments are of fourteen types: 1. Mithyātva (false belief), 2. Hāsya (laughter), 3. Rati (attachment), 4. Arati (aversion), 5. Śoka (sorrow), 6. Bhaya (fear), 7. Jugupsā (disgust), 8. Strīveda (attachment to women), 9. Puruṣaved (attachment to men), 10. Napuṃsaka Veda (attachment to eunuchs), 11. Krodha (anger), 12. Māna (pride), 13. Māyā (deceit), 14. Lobha (greed). External attachments are of ten types: 1. Kṣetra (land), 2. Vāstu (house), 3. Suvarna (gold), 4. Cāndī (silver), 5. Dhana (wealth), 6. Dhānya (grain), 7. Dāsī (female servant), 8. Dās (male servant), 9. Vastra (clothes), 10. Bhāṇḍa (utensils). One who is completely free from these 24 types of attachments is called Nirgrantha.

In this Guṇasthāna, there is no acceptance of Kṣīṇakṣaya (diminishing passions) in the form of name, establishment, or material deposit. However, there is acceptance of Kṣīṇakṣaya in the form of emotional deposit.

Those in the Kṣīṇakṣaya Guṇasthāna become the managers of the nature, state, and section of the body of all karmas from the very first moment. Due to the presence of Bhātra Yoga (the yoga of the soul), the path of the seven-sense being is bound for one moment. For one moment, the three types of Ghatish Karma (karma that causes death) are stimulated until only the remaining time of the present life remains. In the two extreme moments of Kṣīṇakṣaya, the second Śukladhyāna (meditation on the white) destroys the arising and existence of both Nidrā (sleep) and Prachalā (restlessness) karmic natures simultaneously.

Page #111:
---------------------------
78/Go. Sa. Jivakanda
Verse 62: How is it possible for the emergence of sleep-inducing tendencies in opposition to the nature of doubt-meditation results?
Solution: Such doubt is not correct because the emergence of sleep-inducing tendencies is possible even for those who are suitable for meditation.
Thereafter, at the ultimate time, the three types of karmas, namely, knowledge-obscuring, vision-obscuring, and obstruction, along with the sattva, are simultaneously destroyed.
"Jao na chhadumaththado tihan dhavin vevago hoi.
Sagar rel khaya sadhyashtra samvadarasi ya." As long as one does not transcend the state of being restrained by the subtle passions, free from attachment, and in a state of forbearance, the three types of karmas, namely, knowledge-obscuring, vision-obscuring, and obstruction, remain as obstacles. After that, in the subsequent time, by destroying the three types of karmas, one becomes omniscient and all-seeing.
Doubt: Why do the non-destructive karmas not also attain complete destruction along with the destructive karmas at the ultimate time of the subtle passions?
Solution: Such doubt should not be entertained because the non-destructive karmas do not have a specific state-destroying effect like the destructive karmas. Even at the final time of the subtle passions, the state-sattva of the three non-destructive karmas remains for an innumerable part of a moment. The specific destruction or effect of the non-destructive karmas is not even known, because there is a lack of such an inappropriate state in the non-destructive karmas compared to the destructive karmas. Even though there is similarity in comparison to the destructive karmas, the mohaniya karma among the non-destructive karmas is more inappropriate, therefore, it is specifically destroyed and is destroyed before the internal transformation. Similarly, even though there is similarity in comparison to the karmic nature, the destructive karmas are more inappropriate than the non-destructive karmas, therefore, they are destroyed by the second white meditation and attain complete destruction at the final time of the subtle passions. This statement has been made according to the production-destruction theory.
"Shantkshinakshayasyapurvajasya triyoginah. Shuklaayam shuklaleshyasya mukhyam sanhananasya tat." (1) "Dvitiyasyaadyavatsarvam visheshtavekyoginah.
Vighnavaranarodhaya kshinamohasya tat smritam." (2) - The first white meditation is for those who have subdued the subtle passions and those who have subtle passions, but they should be knowledgeable about the past. This meditation is for those beings who are endowed with excellent concentration, who are present in the white-bodied state, and who are endowed with all three yogas. The statement of the second white meditation is also similar to the first white meditation. The difference is that the second white meditation is for those who have one yoga in the state of subtle passions, for the destruction of the three karmas, namely, knowledge-obscuring, vision-obscuring, and obstruction.
-
1. J.D. Mula p. 2265; Churin Sutra 1563 to 1566; J.D. 16/120-125. 2. K.P. Sut p. 866. 3. J.D. Mula p. 2266-67 and J.D. 16 p. 125-26. 4. J.D. Mula p. 2266 and J.D. 16 p. 123.

Page #112:
---------------------------
## Gaggarpaan/71

The nature of the thirteenth Kevali Gunasthan is: "The one whose ignorance-darkness is completely destroyed by the group of rays of the sun of Kevalnaan, which are like the indivisible divisions of the fruit. And the one who is called 'Paramatma' due to the manifestation of the Kevalalabdhis. ||63|| The one who is free from the need for senses, support, weapons, and endurance is called Kevali. ||64||"

The one whose ignorance-darkness is completely destroyed by the group of rays of the sun of Kevalnaan, which are like the indivisible divisions of the fruit (excellent, infinite, and radiant), and the one who is called 'Paramatma' due to the manifestation of the Kevalalabdhis, is called Kevali. He is called Jina because he is free from the need for senses, support, weapons, and endurance, and because he is united with Kayayoga, and because he is free from the Patikarma. This is what is said in the Anadinidhan Parsva Agama. ||63-64||

**Special Meaning:** Just as the darkness of the night is destroyed by the group of rays of the sun at dawn, in the same way, when the destructive karmas like Jnaanavaran are destroyed, the ignorance-darkness related to all knowable objects is destroyed by the group of rays of the sun of Kevalnaan, which are like the excellent, infinite, and indivisible divisions. This means that all knowable objects become manifest in that Kevalnaan, and no object remains unmanifest. It is also said:

"How can the knower be ignorant of the knowable when there is no obstacle? Just as fire, being inherently fiery, cannot fail to burn the combustible object when there is no obstacle (like water, mantra, etc.)." ||13||

Kevalnaan only knows the knowable, because Kevalnaan is the proof of the knowable. As Shri Kundakundaacharya has said in Pravachansar, verse 23, with the testimony of Jinendradev: "Naan Geyapamanmudditta." If the Kevali were to know the unknowable, it would contradict the principle that "Naan is the proof of the knowable." Therefore, Shri Swami Kartikeyaacharya has said: "Neyen Vina Kahan Naan?" How can Kevalnaan exist without the knowable? This means that the Kevali does not know what is unknowable. If it is said that there is nothing unknowable, then in the absence of the unknowable, the knowable cannot exist either, because the existence of all objects with their opposites cannot be otherwise. Shri Viraseenaacharya has proved this point based on the Panchaastikaya, saying that all objects have opposites, because Kundakundaacharya has taught this principle with the words: "Sab Payastha Sappadvikha."

2. P. Pu. 1, p. 162 and J. Gh. Mula, p. 2270.
1. Gh. Pu. 1, p. 161; J. Dh. Mula, p. 2270. 3. J. P. Pu. 1, p. 66. 4. Dh. Pu. 14, p. 234.

Page #113:
---------------------------
## 80/Go. Sa.. Jotrakaand
## Gatha 63-64

The destruction of the four ghatiya karmas gives rise to nine kevalalabdhis. The destruction of jnanaavaran karma leads to kshayikgyan, the destruction of darshanavaran karma leads to kshayikdarshan, the destruction of mohaniya karma leads to kshayik samyaktv and kshayikcharitra, and the destruction of antaryakarma leads to kshayikdaan, kshayiklabh, kshayikbhog, kshayik upbhog, kshayikveery. Thus, kshayikgyan, kshayikdarshan, kshayik samyaktv, kshayikcharitra, kshayikdaan, kshayiklabh, kshayikbhog, kshayik upbhog, and kshayikveery are the nine kshayik bhavas, which are called nav kevalalabdhis. The aforementioned jnanaavaran etc. karmas are detrimental to devatva, i.e., the state of parmatma. When these karmas are destroyed, the nine kevalalabdhis arise, and along with them, the state of parmatma is also attained.

Ashayagyān is called kevalgyān because it is devoid of dependence on indriyas, light, and mano-vyāpār. It is also stated in Sarvarthasiddhi etc., "kevalasthāsāhayatvat" (1:30), and Shri Vira Sena Acharya has also said, "kebalamasāhayam". When the ghatiya karmas are destroyed, knowledge and vision become ashay, hence their designation as kevali.

In the thirteenth gunasthan, there is the rise of pudgal dhipāki sharira nāmakarma, and it is endowed with dravyaman, vachan, and kāya. Therefore, in the thirteenth gunasthan, there is the presence of yoga, which is the power to receive karmas. The function of yoga, the curse of satavadenīya kām, is also found in the thirteenth gunasthan. Therefore, they are sayogkevali. Alternatively, yoga is the tendency of mind, speech, and body. Those who are kevali along with yoga are sayogkevali. Alternatively, there is a harmonious state of yoga with the characteristics of parispanda of speech and body, which is the cause of īryāpath bandha. The kevali who resides with such yoga are sayogkevali.

Here, we are stating the nature of kevalgyan etc. For example, in kevalgyan, the word "keval" means that the knowledge is ashay, i.e., it occurs without dependence on indriyas, light, and mind. Thus, the knowledge that is keval is kevalgyan. The kevalgyan that is subtle, uninterrupted, and spread without obstruction in subtle, obstructed, and separated objects, which is devoid of karana, krama, and vyavadhan, and whose manifestation is due to the complete destruction of jnanaavaran karma, is niratishay and anutar jyotiratra-rupa kevalgyan. This is the meaning of the aforementioned statement. However, the anantya vishesharan given to it is for the fame of its indestructibility. Just as the absence of destruction of a pot is sad-anant, similarly, the sad-anant nature of kshayik bhavas makes the rule of avasthan available. Alternatively, the vishesharan "anant" of kevalgyan should be understood as the fame of the supreme anant parinam of that kevalgyan, which makes all dravyas and their anant paryayas its objects. Because the prameyas are anant, therefore, there is no obstruction in proving the knowledge powers that are their delimiters to be anant. This entire statement is not merely a matter of upachaar, but it is from the ultimate truth that such kevalgyan-related avibhagapratichhedasamarthya is available, which comes to be known through the anant gunarupa and pragam pramarga of the entire prameya rashi. Thus, the existence of the aforementioned avibhagapratichhedas is not merely in the form of imagination, but it is actually dravya. Therefore, its anantata...

1. J. Dh. Pu. 1 p. 67. 2. J. Pa. Pu. 1 p. 21, Dh. Pu. 1 p. 161; J. Dh. Mul p. 2266, J. Gh. Pu. 16 p. 131. 3. J. Pa. Pu. 1 p. 23. 4. Go. Ji. Ga. 216. 5. Pa. Pu. 1 p. 161. 6. J. Pa. Mul p. 2266, J. Pr. Pu. 16 p. 230.

Page #114:
---------------------------
-63-64
This should be ascertained. It is also said:
"That which is impermanent, one, infinite in nature, knows all substances of the three times together, is without any excess, is obtained at the end of the knowledge of the destruction of karma, never falls, and is free from the obstruction of subtle, gross, and differentiated substances, is omniscience."
Gunasthan / 81
Similarly, the nature of omniscience should also be explained, because just as omniscience is obtained by the complete destruction of the karma that covers the perception, there is no restriction on the existence of omniscience with infinite attributes, which is obtained by the complete destruction of the karma that covers the perception, and which is of the nature of observing the gross substances.
Here, it should not be assumed that "there is no difference between knowledge and perception, because there is no difference in the object of knowledge and perception, and both are of the nature of directly knowing all substances, so it is useless to assume another use because the same work is done by both." Because the difference in the object of knowledge and perception is shown many times. Therefore, it is proved that just as omniscience is free from all blemishes, so also omniscience is in the state of omniscience. The existence of defects like falsehood, contradiction, etc. is inevitable.
The infinite energy, which is free from the obstacle of karma, is said to be the energy that arises from the destruction of the karma that obstructs the energy, and which is free from the obstacle of karma, and which is powerful and infinite. But it should be known that it is associated with the use that is of the nature of the feeling of joy, even when it is the result of the use that is permanent and the object of which is all substances, because without its power, the use that is of the nature of the feeling of joy cannot arise. Otherwise, we would have to assume that the use of an Arihant is also without power, just like the use of ordinary people. It is also said:
"O Bhagavan! Your infinite energy has manifested due to the destruction of your karma that obstructs the energy. You are established in this state by your powers, such as knowing the entire universe." 1.
From this statement, it should be known that the infinite happiness that is the ultimate result is also explained in this Bhagavan, because the one whose power is increased by infinite knowledge, infinite perception, and infinite energy, who is free from delusion, who is established on the highest peak of knowledge and detachment, has the ultimate happiness of liberation as his garment. But
there is no other thing called happiness than the happiness that arises from detachment, because the happiness that is obtained through the senses is dependent, full of obstacles, and intermittent.
Babu Pu. 1 p. 188. 2. Jayadhwala Mula p. 2266.

Page #115:
---------------------------
## 82nd Go, Sa. Jivakagad
## Gatha 63-64

The cause of bondage is fleeting, it is the cause of bondage, and it is uneven. Indeed, it is always in the form of suffering. ||2||

We are certain that whatever is not born with dispassion as its cause is nothing. If it is a cause, then there is clearly no other than you, from whom you exist only as a cause. ||3||

Therefore, the one who has the predominance of infinite knowledge, infinite vision, infinite power, and infinite restraint, who is of uninterrupted activity, who is without excess, who is realized by taking the self as the substratum, who is transcendental, and who is free from duality, is of infinite faces. From this, the arising of the unperceivable. Because of the good state, the argument of the SaYogakevali Bhagavan, who determines the state of infinite happiness and the accompanying Kavalaharavritti, is refuted, because in him, the arising of that (unperceivable) is like the arising of a blow due to the failure of cooperative causes, which is insignificant. Therefore, it is proven that they do not eat like the Siddhaparameshthi, because they have infinite knowledge, infinite vision, infinite power, infinite restraint, and infinite happiness as their result.

By taking infinite power as a characteristic, infinite giving, infinite gain, infinite enjoyment, and infinite consumption have arisen from the destruction of all obstructing karma, because there is no special characteristic for the arising of those gains like infinite power. But those gains are useful because of the power of giving fearless protection to all beings, because of the accomplishment of the lordship of the three worlds, and because of the accomplishment of all independent objects of enjoyment and consumption while there is a purpose. Therefore, one who has attained the purity of ultimate right faith and right conduct by the destruction of both types of mohaniya karma, whose infinite knowledge and infinite vision of the perishable category have manifested after the destruction of the root and subsequent categories of knowledge-obscuring and vision-obscuring karma, and who has been transformed by the nine infinite gains of infinite power, infinite giving, infinite gain, infinite enjoyment, and infinite consumption due to the destruction of obstructing karma, attains the ultimate peak of fulfillment and is called Ahatparameshthi, Svayambhu, Jin, Kevali, Sarvajña, Sarvadarshi, and SaYogakevali. Here, the explanation of the meaning of the words like Jin is a confluence, so we do not elaborate on them.

"Those Bhagavans, Mahatparameshthi Devas, with countless qualities, sweep away the regions of the earth like a stream." The meaning of this sutra is that these Bhagavans, with countless qualities, sweep away the karmic regions every moment, and they move through the appropriate dharma-kshetra, accompanied by devas and asuras, for the sake of the flow of dharma-tirtha, with great glory, for the sake of a spacious path of movement, or because they are naturally inclined to move.

Doubt - Perhaps it may be thought that the extraordinary activity and teaching of these Mahatparameshthi Bhagavans can only be done intentionally, otherwise they would be subject to the fault of doing something.

Page #116:
---------------------------
## Gunasthana/3

It happens and by believing so, these Bhagavans are attained with desire. But is it acceptable to accept this?

**Solution:** But it is not so, because even without intention, the ability to accomplish the substance of these Bhagavans, like the Kalpavriksha, is formed. Or, like a lamp, the great ability of these Bhagavans is formed, because the lamp does not remove the darkness of its surroundings due to its rule of compassion, but because of its nature, it removes the darkness of its surroundings. As it is said: "O Jagadguru! The beneficial teachings you have given for the sake of the world have been given without the desire to speak, because it is a rule that the Kalpavriksha gives the desired fruit to devotees without desire."

O Muni! Your actions of body, speech, and mind are without desire, but this does not mean that your actions related to mind, speech, and body are without review. O Dheer! Your actions are inconceivable.

The presence of the desire to speak is not seen in the action of speech, because we clearly see that people of dull intellect are not able to become speakers of scriptures even with desire.

Therefore, one should know that the actions of these Bhagavans, like speaking and walking, which are the characteristics of the purity of the restraint that is the form of supreme neglect, are not the cause of the bond of merit, because they are naturally extraordinary. As it is said in the scriptures:

"The movement of the Tirthankara Parameshthi is for the benefit of the world, but this action of theirs is not meritorious, and their speech is the beginning of giving and worship, yet it does not bind them to any deficiency."

Again, one should know that this great being's extraordinary movement takes place on golden lotuses created by the group of gods who are devoted to him, without touching the ground, in the sky, without any special effort, due to his special greatness, because the powers of yogis are inconceivable.

Thus, these Kevalis, who are slightly less than the best, move for a period of time equal to a previous koti kalpa, and then, when the remaining portion of the pratyukarma karma is very large, they begin another action called pravajit-karan to equalize the state of adhatikarma.

**Rajur - What is pravajit-karan?**

**Solution:** Facing the Kevali-samudghat is called pravajit-karan. He follows it for the duration of the antarmukhurta kalpa, because for the duration of the antarmukhurta kalpa, pravajit-karan...

. Jayaghavla Mula p. 2271.

Page #117:
---------------------------
54/Go. Sa. Jivakanda
Gaya 63-64

A Kevali-samudghat cannot occur without the presence of abhimukhibhav. At that very time, the name, gotra, and vedaniya karma's pradesha-pinda are discarded and a small pradesha-ja is given in the uday. In the subsequent time, an asankhyata-guna pradesha-ja is given. In this way, it is deposited in an asankhyata-guna shreni-rupa, and from the time of the sayogi, and especially from the time of the ayogi, it reaches the guna-shreni-shirsha, which is present in a special way. But this guna-shreni-shirsha, while remaining present in the subsequent adhastana time, is located in the guna-shreni-naya deposited by the swayogika-kevali in its own place, going to an asankhyata-guna-heen place. This should be known. But in comparison to the pradesha-ja, it should be said that it is indicated by an asankhyata-guna pradesha-vinyas.

Doubt: How is this known?

Solution: It is known from the gatha sutra that describes the nature of the eleven guna-deshis.

From that guna-shreni-shirsha, in the subsequent anantara position, it also irrigates an asankhyata-guna pradesha-ja. After that, it deposits a pradesha-punja that is devoid of any special characteristics. In this way, it should be known that the guna-shreni-nikshepa is present throughout the ajit-karana-kala. Here, one should know the visible pra-rupa-na.

Doubt: Does the guna-dhreni-nikshepa of the sayogi kevali, who is facing the ajit-kriya, have the same pra-ayama as the swayogika-kevali, or does it have a galita-shesh pra-ayama?

Solution: It should be decided that in the act of doing the nikshepa-rupa, it has the pra-ayama-bala that is present.

From this point onwards, until the final phala of the dwichar-ma-stha-kan-da of the sayogi kevali is obtained, the pra-ayama of this guna-nikshepa is seen as a law of nature in this matter.

And this is not famous, because it is confirmed by the strength of the param-guru-tra's sampradaya, which is not contradictory to the sutra.

Doubt: How has this guna-nikshepa become so dissimilar in this place, while the swayogika-kevali and the kevali facing the ajit-kriya have the same form of parina-ma?

Solution: There should be no such doubt here, because even though there is no difference in the bita-raga parina-mas, they are still different in their antaranga parina-ma-vishesh, and they are related to the antam-hurta-pra-mana-pra-yu. And they are motivated by the sadhana-bhav of the pra-varjit-karana-rupa, which is a different kriya. Therefore, there is no restriction on the guna-dhreni-nikshepa being dissimilar here.

In this way, until the antam-hurta-pra-mana-kala, the pra-ajil-karana-vishayaka dhyapa-ra-vishesh is...

Page #118:
---------------------------
## Gatha 63-64:

**Question:** What is the meaning of "Kevali Samudghat"?

**Answer:** "Udghat" means "expansion". It refers to the expansion of the realms of the Kevalis. The appropriate expansion is called "Samudghat". The expansion of the Kevalis is called "Kevali Samudghat". The meaning of the statement is that the expansion of the realms of the Kevali Jivas, without any obstruction of time, upwards, downwards, and diagonally, is "Kevali Samudghat" to equalize the state of the Pratikrama Karmas.

**Question:** In the term "Kevali Samudghat", the word "Kevali" is a special qualifier. Why should we know this?

**Answer:** We should know this to negate all other special qualifiers of "Samudghat" because those "Samudghats" do not have authority in nature. This "Kevali Samudghat" should be known in four forms: Danda, Kapata, Pratara, and Lokapura.

**Question:** Is the "Samudghat" of the Kevalis caused by something or not?

**Answer:** The second option, that it is not caused by anything, cannot be true. If we accept this, then all Kevalis would attain liberation immediately after "Samudghat". If we say that all Kevalis attain liberation only after "Samudghat", then what is the harm? This is also not correct because according to the rules, there are only twenty Kevalis who perform "Samudghat" in the Lokapura. This cannot be a rule. The first option, that it is caused by something, is also not true because no cause for "Kevali Samudghat" is found. If we say that the difference in the state of the Pratikrama Karmas from the state of the three Aghatiya Karmas is the cause of "Samudghat", then this is also not correct because in the extreme state of the Kshayna Kshaya Gunasthan, all Karmas are not equal. Therefore, all Kevalis would attain liberation.

**Answer:** According to the teachings of Yativrishabhacharya, in the extreme state of the Kshayna Kshaya Gunasthan, all Aghatiya Karmas are not equal. Therefore, all Kevalis attain liberation after performing "Samudghat". However, according to the views of those Acharyas who believe in the rule of twenty Kevalis performing "Lokapura Samudghat", some Kevalis perform "Samudghat" and some do not.

**Question:** Which Kevalis do not perform "Samudghat"?

**Answer:** Those whose time of existence in the world (Samsara-vyakti) is equal to the state of the Vedaniya, etc., Nitya Karmas, do not perform "Samudghat". The rest of the Kevalis perform "Samudghat".

**Question:** Why is there a difference in the state of the Samsara-vyakti and the state of the remaining three Karmas, even though the results of Anivriti, etc., remain the same?

**Answer:** This is because the results of Anivriti, etc., which are the causes of the destruction of the state of the individual, are not equal.

Page #119:
---------------------------
86/Go. Sa. Jivakanda
Verse 63-64: There is a contradiction in considering the world to be the same as its meaning, i.e., the state of the three karmas.
Question: What is the cause of the severance of the world?
Solution: The knowledge of the twelve angas, intense devotion in them, Kevali-samudghat, and the result in the form of non-return, all these are the causes of the severance of the world. But all these causes are not possible in all beings, because even the beings who have ten and nine purvas are seen to ascend the क्षपकश्रेणी. Therefore, there is no karma state similar to the world-person there. In this way, countless parts of the पल्योपम, which are naturally prone to fall in the अन्तर्मुहूर्त, fall down with the number of पावलीप्रमाण स्थितिकाण्डकों, and many beings complete the remaining karmas equal to their lifespan without samudghat. And many beings do the शोष karmas equal to the प्रायुकर्म through samudghat. But this destruction of the world is not possible in the Kevali first, because, all beings get the same result as the destruction of the first स्थितिकाण्डक.
Question: When there is no excess in the results, i.e., the results of all Kevalis are the same, then why should the world not be destroyed even later?
Solution: No, because, even with the same results in the form of वीतराग, the destruction of the world is caused by the specific results other than the आत्मा, which are born from the प्रायुकर्म, in the अन्तर्मुहूर्तप्रमाण.
Question: Why should the Acharya who explains this meaning, which is not accepted by other Acharyas, not be considered to be contradicting the sutra?
Solution: ... No, because, the statement of the Acharyas who are subservient to the sutra, which states the interval of वर्षपृथक्त्व, contradicts the aforementioned statement.
Question: The being who has attained Kevalgyan with six months of प्रमागा आयु remaining, is liberated only by doing samudghat. Other beings do samudghat and also do not do it. As:
धम्मासाउबसेसे उप्पणं जस्स केवलं जाणं ।
स-समुग्यानो सिन्झइ सेसा भज्जा समुग्घाए ॥१६७।। Why is the teaching of this verse not accepted?
Solution: No, because, there is no reason found to accept this alternative, therefore the teaching of the aforementioned verse is not accepted.
The beings whose name, gotra, and वेदनीयकर्म state are the same as the प्रायुकर्म, they attain liberation without doing samudghat. Others, beings are liberated only by doing samudghat. 
...
...
1. Dhaval Pu. 1 p. 303. 2. Dhaval Pu. 1 p. 304.

Page #120:
---------------------------
##  Paba 3-64
## Gunasthan/87

_It cannot be said that the meaning expressed in the aforementioned verse is the cause of the destruction of some beings and not the destruction of others, because, in all beings, the state of karma is found to be the same due to the results of the same non-retraction. Therefore, it contradicts the fact that their lifespan is the same. Secondly, at the extreme time of the Kshina-kapay Gunasthan, the three non-violent karmas go to the beings in the form of the insignificant part of the Palyopam. Therefore, the aforementioned meaning does not seem correct. If there is a doubt, then it is not a subject of logic, so is it not appropriate to refute the meaning of the aforementioned verses by the force of logic?_

**Solution:** No, because the decision of these two verses has not been made from the scriptures. Or, if the decision of these two verses is made from the scriptures, then only they should be accepted. 'The Lord first destroys the beings with the Dand-Samudghāt in the first time.'

**Doubt:** What is the characteristic of that Dand-Samudghāt?

**Solution:** It is said that when the lifespan karma is left, the Kevali destroys the beings with the Dand-Samudghāt, facing forward or backward, by Kayotsarga or by Palyankasan. There, the Dand-Samudghāt done by the Kevali who does it by Kayotsarga is the spread of the living beings' regions in the form of a rod, which is slightly less than fourteen Raj long, from the circumference of the original body. Here, it should be understood that the area blocked by the Vata-valaya is slightly less than the Lok below and above the Lok. Because, by nature, in that state, the living beings' regions of the Kevali do not enter within the Vata-valaya. Similarly, the Dand-Samudghāt of the Kevali who destroys by Palyankasan should be said. The special feature is that in that state, the circumference of the Dand-Samudghāt becomes three times the circumference of the original body. Here, the statement of the Karaga is understandable. This type of special state is called Dand-Samudghāt. Because, due to the knowledge of the meaningful name, the spread of the living beings' regions in the form of a rod according to the prescribed method is Dand-Samudghāt. But in this Dand-Samudghāt, there is only the Audarik-Kay-Yoga of the Kevali who is present, because in that state, there is a lack of other Yogas. Now, to state the differences in the actions to be performed by the Kevali who is present in this Dand-Samudghāt, the next sutra is said:

'In the Dand-Samudghāt of the Kevali (except for the lifespan karma), the Kevali destroys the countless majority of the remaining non-violent karmas.'

In that Dand-Samudghāt, the Kevali who is present, leaving the lifespan karma, destroys the countless majority of the part of the Palyopam of the three non-violent karmas, which is equal to the countless majority of the immediately available state-based karma, and establishes the state of the countless majority of the part of the Palyopam. This is the meaning of the aforementioned verse.

1. Jayadhwala Mal p. 227846. 1 2. This is a sutra from the Kshay-pahu, which is followed by the Jayadhwala commentary. Similarly, the entire commentary of verse 64, the Kshay-pahu and its Jayadhwala commentary, has been written as it is.

Page #121:
---------------------------
## 8 / Go. Sa. Jiwa
## Gatha 63-64

**Question:** How can such a situation arise from just one time period?

**Answer:** There is no need to doubt this, as there is no obstacle to its occurrence due to the predominance of **Kevalisamudghat**.

This Sutra is stated to show the greatness of **Anubhaghat**.

It destroys the infinite multitude of **Anubhagas** related to the remaining **Anubhagas**.

This statement means that the **Anubhag** remaining after the destruction of the **Kshapak Ksheenakashay Gunasthan** in the two extreme time periods destroys the infinite multitude of **Anubhagas** and establishes the **Satkarma** of **Aprashasht Prakritis** in the infinite part.

It should be understood that the **Sthitighāt** of **Prashasht Prakritis** occurs here, not **Anubhaghat**.

Just as the **Gunashreninirjara** is modeled in **Avajitikaran**, it should be modeled here as well, because there is no difference between them.

To determine the specific nature of the one who undergoes **Parinamana** from **Kevali Jin** after **Dandasamudghat** by **Kevali Jin** in this way, the next Sutra is revealed.

**Kapat**

After that, in another time period, **Kevali Jin** performs **Kapatasamudghat**.

That which is like a **Kapat** is a **Kapat**.

**Question:** What is the **Upamārtha** (metaphor)?

**Answer:** Just as a **Kapat** is narrow in thickness but wide and long, so too, this is also a special stage of **Jivapradeshas** that is less than the abundance of the original body or even less than three times its abundance, and it is obtained by increasing the **Vistar** (extension) by a little less than fourteen **Raju** in **Yayam** (length) and seven **Raju** in **Vistar** (extension), and it remains in that state. This is called **Kapatasamudghat**, because the structure of the **Kapat** is clearly available in this **Samudghat**.

In this **Samudghat**, by determining the difference in the diameter of the **Kapat** area of the **Purvabhimukh** and **Uttarabhimukh** **Kevalis**, one can clearly understand the **Purvabhimukh** and **Uttarabhimukh** **Kevalis**.

However, in this special state, there is **Shraddarik Mishrakayayog** of the **Kevali**, because due to their cause and **Shraddarik**, the **Jivapradeshas** obtain the **Paryaya** in the form of **Parispand** due to the dependence of these two bodies.

Now, to show the difference in the work done by the **Jiva** in this special state, the next Sutra begins.

**Kapatasamudghat** destroys the countless multitude of **Sthiti** remaining in its time. It destroys the infinite multitude of **Anubhagas** remaining in the **Prashasht Prakritis**.

1. Jayadhaval Mula p. 2276.

Page #122:
---------------------------
Mama 66.64

**Gunasthan/86**

Due to the ease of understanding, there is no need for further explanation of the two types of urine mentioned here. Here too, it is similar to the **1 Gunashreeni-Praaroopana Praavajitkar**. Thus, to describe the form of the Kevali existing in the third specific state of Valisamudghat, the following Sutra-bandh is stated.

After that, in the third time, he performs the Samudghat named **Manth**.

The one by whom Karma is churned is called **Manth**. This statement means that the specific state of the Jiva-pradeshas of Kevalis for the churning of the position and section of Aghatikarma is the **Manth Samudghat** with the **Pratar Sanjna**. In this specific state, the Jiva-pradeshas of the Kevali, spreading from all four sides in the form of **Pratar**, fill the entire Lokakasha regions except the **Vatavaly**, it should be known, because in that state, the Jiva-pradeshas of the Kevali do not naturally circulate within the **Vatavaly**. This should be known by the strength of the **Pratar Sanjna** and **Ruchka Sanjna** in **Pagam**. But in this state, the Kevali becomes **Karmakayayogi** and **Anaharak**, because in that state, the **Parispand** of the Jiva-pradeshas born from the support of the original body is not possible, and in that state, the **Nokarma Pudgalpind** suitable for the body is not taken. Then, to state that in this state, he performs the **Ghat** of position and section in the same way as before, the following Sutra has been revealed.

"He performs the **Nirjara** of position and section in the same way."

This statement means that he speaks of the countless parts of the position and the infinite parts of the unrefined natures in the same way as before. Here, it should be understood that the **Pradeshaj** also performs **Nirjara** in the same way, because from **Praavajitkaran** to the **Gunaginirjara** of the **Swasthan Kevali**, the state of **Prasankhyataguuni Gunaveshinirjara** is found in the form of **Nishcheparoop Payam**, and there is no obstacle in the attainment of **Pravritti**. Thus, this **Kevalisamudghat** has been described. Now, in the fourth time, he performs the **Lokapuransanjak Samudghat** by filling the entire Lok with his entire **Pradeshas**, to make this known, the following Sutra is begun.

After that, in the fourth time, he fills the Lok.

This statement means that the Kevali attains this state in which the **Lokapuransanjak** fourth **Kevalisamudghat** is performed by the **Jiva**'s **Pradeshas** continuously entering the regions of the **Lokakasha** that are blocked by the **Vatavaly** from all sides. Here too, he is **Anaharak** along with **Karmankayayog**, because in that state, the arrival of the **Praudarik Sharira Nokarma Pradeshas** for the creation of the body is seen to be obstructed. Thus, to state the **Yog** of the Kevali existing in that state with **Karmankayayog** in the fourth state by filling the Lok, the following Sutra is begun. In **Lokapuransamudghat**, there is **Vargana** of **Yog**, therefore, here **Samyog** should be known.

1. Jayadhaval Mooga Poo. 2288.

Page #123:
---------------------------
6/Go. Sa. Jivakanda
Verses 63-64

The liberated Jina, who exists in the Lokapurana Samudghata, has Lokapramans that are similar in all living beings, without any increase or decrease in the division of yoga-related divisions. Therefore, all living beings become similar in terms of wealth and become one class. Therefore, this liberated Jina should know the Samayoga in this state, because there is no difference in the number of yogas in all living beings, except for the similarity. This is the meaning of the above statement. And this Samayoga-like result occurs from the subtle Nigodajiva's (yoga-related) lowest classification to the countless times greater, practically applicable, middle classification. This should be understood. The method of the previous state of the A-purva competitor multiplies the countless and infinite parts of the divisions, because the Samudghata action takes place only for its multiplication. This is the meaning of the above statement. Thus, in this Lokapurana Samudghata, the liberated Jina, by multiplying the countless parts of the state, leaves behind a very small amount of state-karma, which remains in a state of internal moment-like duration. To understand this, the next verse is presented.

The Lokapurana Samudghata establishes the state of karmas as internal moment-like.

This verse is difficult to understand. Now, is this internal moment-like state the same as the state of Ayukarma? Or is it multiplied by the number? Or is it of another type? To remove this doubt, this verse is said:

The remaining non-destructive karmas are multiplied by the number of the state of Ayukarma.

Here, it should be understood that these non-destructive karmas do not have the same state-karma as Ayukarma, but are multiplied by the number. Two teachings are found on this subject, as many Acharyas say.

Doubt - How is that?

Solution - According to the teachings of the great teacher Aryama Thama, when the Lokapurana Samudghata occurs, the state-karma of name, lineage, and Vedaniya karma is established as the same as the state of Ayukarma. According to the teachings of the great teacher Nagahastin Shraman, when the Lokapurana Samudghata occurs, the state-karma of name, lineage, and Vedaniya karma is internal moment-like. Even so, it is established as multiplied by the number of the state of Ayukarma. But this explanation is against the tradition of the Samprdayaring, because the Charinsutra clearly states that the state of the remaining non-destructive karmas is multiplied by the number of the state of Ayukarma. Therefore, the current teaching is the main one to be followed, otherwise there will be an objection to the consistency of the verse. Thus, after describing the specific nature of these Dand, Kapata, Pratar, and Lokapurana Samudghatas and the actions performed there, the next two verses clarify this meaning in a concluding manner.

In these four times of the liberated Jina's Samudghata, the divisions of the unrefined karma-regions undergo simultaneous transformation.

Page #124:
---------------------------
## Gatha 63-64
## Gugaasthan/11

Because at the time of these four *Samudghāt*, the *pratisamaya* of *aprashasht karma* is clearly available due to the *anantar* mentioned *anubhāgghāt*.

And there is a *sthiticāṇḍakghāt* that lasts for one *samaya*.

It has been said that in all four *samaya*, the *pravṛttamana sthiti* is completed by one *samaya*. Therefore, after *āvajitakaraṇa*, by performing this type of *kevalisamudghāt*, it keeps the state of *nāma*, *gotra*, and *vedanīya karma* in the form of *antarmuhūrta prāyāmara*. This is the meaning of the community of all *atikrānta* *mutrapabandh*.

Now, after the completion of the *lokapūraṇa* action, what is the order of the *kevali jin* who concludes the *samudghātapariyāya* and falls into his own place? Or is there any order for the one who descends? To resolve this doubt, we will present a brief outline of the one who descends, derived from the *sūtra*.

For example, the *kevali jin* who concludes the *lokapūraṇa-samudghāt* also performs the *mantha-samudghāt*, because the conclusion of the *kevalisamudghāt* cannot be achieved without the *mantharūpa* result. And it should be understood that after concluding the *lokapūraṇa-samudghāt*, by destroying the *samyoga* result, all the previous competing *samaya* are revealed without obstruction.

Again, the *kevali jin* who concludes the *mantha-samudghāt* attains the *kapāṭa-samudghāt*, because its conclusion cannot be achieved without the *kapāṭa* result. Subsequently, in the next *samaya*, the *kevali jin* concludes the *kapāṭa-samudghāt* by resulting in the form of *daṇḍa-samudghāt*, because the rule of *daṇḍa-samudghāt* is seen to occur only after it. After that, in the next *samaya*, the *kevali jin* concludes the *daṇḍa-samudghāt* with the *kevalipana* in the form of *svasthāna*. At that time, the rule of the location of the *jīvapradeśa* of the *kevali bhagavān* is seen from the evidence of the original body, devoid of deficiency and excess.

Thus, there are three *samaya* for the *kevali jin* who descends from the *kevalisamudghāt*, because in the fourth *samaya*, inclusion in *svasthāna* is seen. Or, according to the order of explanation of some *ācāryas*, the *kevali jin* who descends from the *kevalisamudghāt* takes four *samaya* along with the fourth *samaya*. Their intention is that the *samaya* in which the *kevali jin* stays in *svasthāna kevalipana* (i.e., in the original body) and concludes the *daṇḍa-samudghāt* should also be included in the *samudghāt*.

The *kevali jin* who descends from the *samudghāt* has the same *kārmaraṇakāyayoga* as before. It should be understood that the *kevali jin* who attains the *kapāṭa-samudghāt* has *audārika-mithakāyayoga*, and the *kevali jin* who attains the *daṇḍa-samudghāt* has *audārika kāyayoga*.

Here are the relevant *prāryā gāthā*...

The *kevali jin* has *daṇḍa-samudghāt* in the first *samaya*, *kapāṭa-samudghāt* in the second *samaya*, *manthāna-samudghāt* in the third *samaya*, and *loka-vyāpī-samudghāt* in the fourth *samaya*. ||1||

In the fifth *samaya*, the *kevali jin* concludes the *lokapūraṇa-samudghāt*, in the sixth *samaya* the *kevali jin* concludes the *manthāna-samudghāt*, in the seventh *samaya* the *kevali jin* concludes the *kapāṭa-samudghāt*, and in the eighth...

1. Jayadhavan Mūla p. 1281-82.

Page #125:
---------------------------
92 / Go. Sa. Jivakanda
Concludes the punishment of the Dandasamudghat. ||2||1
Verses 63-646
After this, the description of the Kevalasamudghat ends.
Now, from the first time of the descending Kevali Jin, how is the tendency of Sthitighāt and Anubhāgghāt? To remove such doubts, the following sutra says: It destroys the numerous parts of the remaining Sthiti from the first time of the descending Kevali Jin.
This means that from the first time of the descending Kevali Jin, it destroys the numerous parts of the remaining Antarmūhūrta Prasāraṇa Sthiti in the form of a Kāṇḍaka, because other types are not possible there.
And there, it destroys the infinite numerous parts of the remaining Anubhāga.
The Jiva does this Anubhāgghāt by making the remaining Anubhāga after the first destruction into the form of a Kāṇḍaka of the infinite numerous parts of Satkarma. This is the meaning of the above statement.
Reception
The time of the emergence of the Sthitikāṇḍaka and Anubhāgakāṇḍaka is the measure of Antarmūhūrta.
After the completion of the Lokapurusasamudghat, Sthitighāt and Anubhāgghāt do not occur in every moment. But the time of Sthitikāṇḍakghāt and Anubhāgakāṇḍakghāt is active in the measure of Antarmūhūrta. Thus, this is the collective meaning of the sutra here. In this way, after concluding the Kevalasamudghat in this manner, the Kevali Jin, who is present in his own place, performs the thousand Sthitikāṇḍa and Anubhāgakāṇḍa without any obstruction, and then performs Yoganirodha, and performs these other actions. To make this known, the following sutra arrangement is started.
1. Jayadhaval Mula Pr. 2282. 2. Jayadhaval Mula Pr. 2282-83.
Further, going to Antarmūhūrta, it stops Bādar-Manoyoga by means of Bādar-Kāyayoga.
The impulse of the Jiva, which is in the form of power, for the purpose of taking Karma to make the mind, speech and body act, is called Yoga. But it is of three types - Manoyoga, Vachanayoga and Kāyayoga. Its meaning is easy, each of them is of two types - Bādar and Sūkṣma. Before the completion of the Yoganirodha action, Bādarayoga is present everywhere. Further, it performs Yoganirodha by transforming from Sūkṣmayoga, because it is not possible to stop the Yoga of the descending Kevali Jin by Bādarayoga alone. In that, this Kevali Jin first tries to perform Yoganirodha, and by the support of Bādarkāyayoga, it stops Bādarmanoyoga.

Page #126:
---------------------------
## Gatha 63-64

**Guṇasthān / 63**

Because the Kevali Jin, who is engaged in activity through the Bādar Kāyayoga, establishes it in an innumerable, quality-less form, by suppressing the power of Bādar Manoyoga and decreasing it through the most subtle form of the Sanjñī Pañcendriya, which is insufficient, this is the meaning of the above statement.

Thus, the Kevali Jin, who exists in the form of Bādar Kāyayoga until the time of Antarmūhūrta Pramāṇa, suppresses the power of Bādar Manoyoga and then, by relying on the same Bādar Kāyayoga through the time of Antarmūhūrta Pramāṇa, also suppresses the power of Bādar Vachanayoga. This is stated in the following sūtra.

After that, from the time of Antarmūhūrta, he suppresses Bādar Vachanayoga through Bādar Kāyayoga.

Here, when it is said "Bādar Vachanayoga," one should understand the most subtle Vachanayoga of the Dwīndriya Paryāpta, which is the supreme power of Yoga. By suppressing it, he establishes it in an innumerable, quality-less form, below the most subtle Vachanayoga of the Dwīndriya Paryāpta. This is the meaning of this sūtra.

After that, from the time of Antarmūhūrta, he suppresses Bādar Ucchvāsa-Niḥśvāsa through Bādar Kāyayoga.

Here too, when it is said "Bādar Ucchvāsa-Niḥśvāsa," one should understand the most subtle Ucchvāsa-Niḥśvāsa power, which is sufficient from the Pāna Paryāpti of the Sūkṣma Nigoda Nirvṛtti Paryāpta Jīva. By suppressing it, he establishes it in a subtle form, below the most subtle Ucchvāsa-Niḥśvāsa power of the Sūkṣma Nigoda, in an innumerable, quality-less form. This is the collective meaning of this sūtra.

**Doubt:** How is this particular type of suppression known, as it is not specified in the sūtra?

**Solution:** One should not have this doubt here, because the explanation provides knowledge of that particular type.

After that, from the time of Antarmūhūrta, he suppresses the same Bādar Kāyayoga through Bādar Kāyayoga.

Here too, he suppresses the same Bādar Kāyayoga, which is engaged in activity through Bādar Kāyayoga, by establishing it in a subtle difference through the time of Antarmūhūrta. This is connected to the meaning of the sūtra, because it is seen that the rule of its activity in this place is established in a subtle form, by becoming innumerable times less than the most subtle Yoga of the Sūkṣma Nigoda. Here are two useful verses:

The Kevali Jin suppresses the Manoyoga, which is innumerable times less than the Jīva who is sufficient in the Pañcendriya and is endowed with the most subtle Yoga. || 1 ||

1. Jayaghava Mula p. 2283.

Page #127:
---------------------------
##  64 / Go. Ma. Jeevakand
##  Gatha 63-46

Just as the Indriya Jeeva and the Sadharan (ordinary) beings hold Vachan Yoga and Ucchvas (breathing) in their respective orders, the Kevali Bhagwan conquers even lesser forms of these two Yogas. The Kevali Bhagwan conquers even lesser forms of Kay Yoga than the Jghanya (lowest) Paryaptak holds. ||2||

This is how, in order, the Kevali Bhagwan conquers the powers of Badar Manoyoga, Badar Vachan Yoga, Badar Ucchvas-Nishvas (inhalation-exhalation), and Badar Kay Yoga. By suppressing these powers, the Kevali Bhagwan leaves behind the subtle, pulsating powers of these Yogas in an unmanifest form. Then, through the activity of subtle Kay Yoga, the Kevali Bhagwan suppresses even these subtle powers according to their respective orders. To explain this, the following Sutra-Prabandh is presented:

After that, the Kevali Bhagwan, going within an Antarmuhurt (a very short period of time), suppresses subtle Manoyoga through subtle Kay Yoga.

Here, when it is said "subtle Yoga," it should be understood as the subtle Manoyoga Pariṇama (result) of the Sanjni Panchendriya Paryaptak, which is countless times weaker than the subtle, unmanifest, Dravya-Man-nimittak (matter-mind-created) Jeeva-Pradesh (region of the soul) pulsation. The Kevali Bhagwan suppresses it, meaning destroys it.

After that, within an Antarmuhurt, the Kevali Bhagwan suppresses subtle Vachan Yoga through subtle Kay Yoga. Here too, when it is said "subtle Vachan Yoga," it should be understood as the subtle Vachan Yoga Shakti (power) of the Dwi-Indriya Paryaptak, which is countless times weaker than the subtle, unmanifest, Dravya-Vachan-nimittak (matter-speech-created) Jeeva-Pradesh (region of the soul) pulsation. The rest of the explanation is straightforward.

Further down,

After that, within an Antarmuhurt, the Kevali Bhagwan suppresses subtle Ucchvas (breathing) through subtle Kay Yoga.

Here too, the subtlety of the Ucchvas Shakti (power) is the lowest of the subtle Nigod Paryaptak Jeeva. The Ucchvas Shakti of this Sayogikevali (liberated soul in a body) should be understood as countless times weaker than the subtle, unmanifest, Dravya-Uchchvas-nimittak (matter-breathing-created) Jeeva-Pradesh (region of the soul) pulsation. This is how the Kevali Bhagwan, who suppresses these Yogas, performs pulsating actions through subtle Kay Yoga, suppressing the subtle powers of Man, Vachan, and Ucchvas-Nishvas in their respective orders. Then, the Kevali Bhagwan suppresses even subtle Kay Yoga, performing these actions through the Karana (instruments) that are the cause of Yoga suppression. To explain this, the following Sutra-Prabandh is presented:

After that, going within an Antarmuhurt, the Kevali Bhagwan suppresses subtle Kay Yoga through subtle Kay Yoga, performing these actions through the Karana (instruments).

After that, going within an Antarmuhurt, the Kevali Bhagwan, through the power of subtle Kay Yoga, suppresses the same subtle Kay Yoga. There, the Kevali Bhagwan, with full awareness, first activates the Karana (instruments) that are mentioned next. This is the meaning of the statement. But, if there is a doubt about what these Karana (instruments) are, then it is said:

First, the Kevali Bhagwan activates the A-purva (new) Spardhak (competitor) by suppressing the Purva (old) Spardhak (competitor).

By "suppressing the Purva Spardhak," it is meant that the Kevali Bhagwan activates the A-purva Spardhak by suppressing the pulsating power of subtle Kay Yoga, which is countless times weaker than the subtle Nigod Paryaptak, and which was previously the Purva Spardhak.

1. Jayathbal Moola, page 2284.

Page #128:
---------------------------
## Chapter 63-64
## Gugamyan /65

It results in an unprecedented competition by refracting even better than those at this time. This action is called unprecedented competition. Now, to model this, we must first create an innumerable fraction of the previous competitors' world-series. By doing so, these competitors are inferior to the competitors related to the inferior place of the subtle Nigoda being in terms of innumerable qualities, otherwise, its (the previous competitors of the Syogikevali) subtlety cannot be formed. In this way, by creating unprecedented competitors by degrading these established previous competitors by an innumerable quality reduction, this Syogikevali, who inhibits Yoga, whose modeling management will be explained according to the next sutra, [this Syogikevali being who inhibits Yoga] degrades the innumerable fraction of the establishment of the indivisible intersections of the initial classification of the previous competitors.

By degrading the living regions from the previous competitors and creating unprecedented competitors, it degrades the innumerable fraction of the indivisible intersections of the initial classification of the previous competitors. This is the meaning of this sutra. It means that it creates unprecedented competitors by degrading the living regions in the form of indivisible intersections, which are inferior to the indivisible intersections of the initial classification of the previous competitors by an innumerable quality. This is because an innumerable quality reduction from the initial classification of the previous competitors is seen in the indivisible intersections of the final classification of the unprecedented competitors. Here, the fraction of the innumerable quality reduction is the innumerable fraction of the Palyopam.

And the being who degrades the innumerable fraction of the living regions.

It means that it creates those unprecedented competitors by degrading the innumerable fraction of the living regions from the previous competitors' initial classifications, by the fraction-divisor-like participation, by degrading, and by resulting in the form of the aforementioned indivisible intersection power. And the order of the insemination-arrangement of the degraded living regions in the unprecedented competitors is called. For example, in the first time, it inseminates the majority of the living regions in the initial classification of the unprecedented competitors by degrading the innumerable fraction of the living regions. This is because there is an effect of opposition in the possibility of many living regions resulting in the most inferior power. In the second classification, it inseminates the living regions without special qualities according to the innumerable fraction of the world-series participation. It goes on inseminating in this way until it reaches the final classification of the unprecedented competitors. Again, it inseminates the living regions, which are inferior by an innumerable quality, from the final classification of the unprecedented competitors to the initial classification of the previous competitors. Here, the multiplier of the loss is the innumerable fraction of the Palyopam, but it should be known that it is also the fraction-divisor-like participation of the excessive degradation-elevation. The investigation of its cause is easy. Further, one should know the arrangement order of the living regions in the form of special loss without opposition of time. This modeling happens in the first time of the one who creates the unprecedented competitors. Similarly, in the second, initial times, it creates unprecedented competitors without opposition of time until the internal moment time. In this way, explaining this meaning, the next sutra is said.

Page #129:
---------------------------
## Chapter 16, Life of the Soul, Verse 63-64

This way, until the end of the moment, it creates unprecedented competitors. This sutra is easy to understand. But it creates those competitors in an infinite number of series at every moment. To explain this, this sutra is said:

It creates those unprecedented competitors in an infinite number of series and in an infinite number of series of soul regions.

The meaning of this sutra is that in the first moment, from the unprecedented competitors created, it creates an infinite number of unprecedented competitors below them in the second moment. Again, in the second moment, from the unprecedented competitors created, it creates an infinite number of other unprecedented competitors below them in the third moment. In this way, one should know that it continues in an infinite number of series until the end of the last moment of the moment. But the soul regions are depleted in an infinite number of series, not in the fifth part. In the second moment, the number of soul regions that are depleted from the regions that were previously depleted is seen to be infinite. Similarly, in the third and subsequent moments, one should know that the soul regions are depleted in an infinite number of series.

Now, the series of the soul regions that are depleted in the second and subsequent moments should be understood in this way. For example, in the first moment, from the soul regions that are depleted, it creates an infinite number of soul regions in this moment, and in the second moment, it creates a large number of soul regions in the initial classification of the unprecedented competitors that are created. Beyond that, it creates special and non-special until the final classification of the unprecedented competitors is reached. Again, in the first moment, in the unprecedented competitors that are created, it deposits an infinite number of soul regions in the initial classification of the lowest competitor. Beyond that, it deposits non-special soul regions everywhere. Similarly, in the third and subsequent moments, one should know that the series of the soul regions that are depleted is the same. Now, to state that the number of unprecedented competitors created by all this time is so much, the next sutra is said:

All these unprecedented competitors are as many as an infinite part of the world series. This sutra is easy to understand. All those unprecedented competitors are also as many as an infinite part of the square root of the world series. Doubt: What is the reason for this?

Solution: Because from these, the infinite number of previous competitors are also determined to be as many as an infinite part of the first square root of the world series. Now, the next sutra is said to explain that these unprecedented competitors are also as many as an infinite part of the previous competitors.

1. Jayadhavala Mula, page 2285.

Page #130:
---------------------------
Head 63.64
Gugasthan/7
These are countless parts of the proofs of all the previous competitors, which are not competitors.
This sutra is about the past. It is so special that countless parts of the proofs of the previous competitors are possible in the form of palyopama. In one such place of loss of merit, one should know that these non-competitors are countless times less than the number of competitors. Pari:
Doubt- It is not stated in the sutra. Without it, how is it known?
Solution- This should not be doubted, because there is no contradiction in the meaning of the sutra according to the tradition of the supreme guru, and knowledge of the special is obtained from the explanation, this is the law.
_ In this way, according to this pattern, the non-competitors are to be made until the time of the internal moment proof. The non-competitive action of the living being who follows the time ends at the end of that time. It is so special that even after the action of the non-competitors ends, all the previous competitors remain in the same way, because they have not yet been destroyed. Here, one should know the position of the position section and the section section and the guranshreni nirjara in the order mentioned earlier, because there is an effect of restriction in the tendency of all three until the last time of the sa yogi kevali. After this, the method of non-competitive creation ended. In this way, by following the time of non-competitive creation until the time of the internal moment, and then by repelling the previous competitors and non-competitors until the time of the internal moment, the sa yogi kevali, who creates the yogic practices, will tell us according to the pattern of his future management.
After this, he does the practices until the time of the internal moment.
By concluding the yoga in the form of a row of bricks from the previous and non-previous competitors, he creates subtle and subtle sections, which are called practices. Due to the effect of increasing and decreasing the indivisible sections, one should consider the peculiarity of the practice from the characteristics of the competitor here, because the yogic power is seen to be located in the living areas of the practice only through countless times of increase and decrease. The kevali, who inhibits this yoga, does these practices with such characteristics until the time of the internal moment. In this way, here is the meaning of the sutra in its entirety! Now, to explain this very nature of the practices, the previous sutra has been revealed.
Repelling the countless parts of the indivisible sections of the non-competitors from the pradivargna
He repels the countless parts of the pradivargna, which is the most sluggish power of the aforementioned non-competitors. By repelling the yogic power in the form of countless indivisible sections, he establishes it in its countless parts. This is the meaning of the above statement. Here
is. Jayaghaval Original Page 2287.

Page #131:
---------------------------
Gochari Jivakanda
Gatha 63-64

The extent of the division of the karmic particles (krstis) and competitors (spardhakas) is the asankhyatavena part of a palya. This is the measure of the undivided divisions (avibhagapratichhedas). By reducing the asankhyata gunas of the undivided divisions, in the first moment, how many jiva-pradeśas does the kṛṣṭi-doer (kṛṣṭikara) reduce to the form of kṛṣṭi? To dispel this doubt, the sutra is begun.

The kṛṣṭi-doer reduces the asankhyatavena part of the jiva-pradeśas. 

The meaning of the above statement is that it reduces the pratisamkhyatavena part of the jiva-pradeśas existing in the previous and non-previous competitors (purva and apurva spardhakas) to the form of kṛṣṭi. Here, the pratibhaga is in the form of the apakarsana-utkarsana bhagahara.

Doubt: In what specific structural form does it deposit the jiva-pradeśas or kṛṣṭis that have been reduced?

Answer: The jiva, who performs the first kṛṣṭi and restrains the yoga, reduces the jiva-pradeśas by the pratibhaga of the asankhyatavena part from the previous competitors and non-previous competitors, and deposits a large number of jiva-pradeśas in the first kṛṣṭi. In the second kṛṣṭi, it deposits the jiva-pradeśas that are devoid of specialties.

Doubt: What is the measure of the pratibhaga here?

Answer: Here, the measure of the pratibhaga is the niṣeka bhagahara of the asankhyata part of the loka-śreṇī.

Continuing in this way, it keeps depositing until the final kṛṣṭi is attained. Again, from the final kṛṣṭi of the non-previous competitors, it mixes the asankhyata guna-less jiva-pradeśas in the gradivarga, and then further deposits them in a specially harmful way. 

Again, in the second moment, by reducing the asankhyataguṇa jiva-pradeśas from the ones reduced in the first moment, it deposits a large number of jiva-pradeśas in the first non-previous kṛṣṭi of that time. In the second kṛṣṭi, it deposits the jiva-pradeśas of the pratisamkhyatavena part. Continuing this deposition, it deposits until the final non-previous kṛṣṭi of the second moment.

Again, from the final non-previous kṛṣṭi of the second moment, it deposits the jiva-pradeśas that are less than the asankhyatavena part on the jāghanya kṛṣṭi of the non-previous kṛṣṭis created in the first moment, because there are only the jiva-pradeśas deposited earlier and a single kṛṣṭi specialty less. From here onwards, it deposits only the jiva-pradeśas devoid of specialties until the attainment of the final kṛṣṭi.

The sequence of kṛṣṭi and spardhakas in the union should be as stated above. In this way, it creates the non-previous kṛṣṭis in the form of an asankhyataguṇī-less śreṇī up to the antarmuhurta time. But until the end of the kṛṣṭikāra time, it deposits the jiva-pradeśas in the kṛṣṭis in the form of an asankhyataguṇī-less dhenu.

Page #132:
---------------------------
## Gatha 63-64

**Gatha 63-64**
**Gunasthan /26** Here, the number of **Krishtis** created in the **Antarmuhurtakal** is **Asankhyataguṇī** in series. This sutra is easy. The number of **Jivapradeshas** is also **Asankhyataguṇī** in series. This sutra is also easy. Now, to resolve the doubt about how many times the **Krishtis** created here are multiplied by the **Krishtis** below them, we will point out the proof of the multiplication of **Krishtis** by the next sutra -

**The multiplication of Krishtis is **Asankhyat** times the **Palya**.**

The meaning of the above statement is - **Krishtis** with wealth equal to the lowest **Krishti** are **Asankhyat** times the **Jagapratara**. When the **Avivabhagapratichhedas** related to the **Yoga** of one lowest **Krishti** are multiplied by **Asankhyat** times the **Palya**, there are **Avivabhagapratichhedas** related to the **Yoga** of one **Jivapradesha** in the next higher **Krishti** after the lowest **Krishti**. Similarly, in the **Duri** also, the multiplication should be known until the **Matish** **Krishti** is obtained. Again, when the **Avivabhagapratichhedas** related to the **Yoga** of one final **Krishti** are multiplied by **Asankhyat** times the **Palya**, there are **Avivabhagapratichhedas** of one **Jivapradesha** in the **Adivargana** of the **Apuurvaspardhakas**. It should be known that further on, the **Avivabhagapratichhedas** are more than the **Jivapradesha** according to the previous **Pramana**. Thus, one **Jivapradesha** is said to be the **Ashrayakar**. Or, when the lowest **Krishti** is multiplied by **Asankhyat** times the **Palya**, the second **Krishti** is obtained. This multiplication should be known until the final **Krishti** is obtained. This multiplication is said by looking at the **Krishtis** with equal wealth. Again, the entire group of **Avivabhagapratichhedas** with wealth equal to the final **Krishti** is **Asankhyat** times less than the group of all **Adhibhagapratichhedas** with wealth equal to the **Adivargana** of the **Apuurvaspardhakas**, because the **Jivapradesha** multiplication of the lower **Avivabhagapratichhedas** is seen to be **Asankhyataguṇī** by the multiplication of the higher **Avivabhagapratichhedas**.

**Sha - What is the proof of the multiplication here?**
**Samadhan - The proof of the multiplication here is **Asankhyat** times the **Jagatheni**.

The remaining statement should be known. Thus, by establishing the characteristics of the **Krishtis** by the establishment of the **Krishtigunakar**, we now begin the next sutra to determine the specific **Pramana** or the determination of these **Yoga** related **Krishtis** created by the **Antarmuhurtapramanakal** -

**Yoga related Krishtis are **Asankhyat** times the **Jagashreni**.

Because, the **Pramana** of **Asankhyat** times the **Jagatheni** is easily obtained from the **Pramana** of **Asankhyat** times the first square root of the **Jagashreni**. Now, their **Apuurvaspardhakas** are also -

1. **i.e.** in the final **Krishti**, the multiplication result of "**Jivapradesha** number 4 **Aviv. prati.**" is less than the multiplication result of "one **Vargana** of **Jivapradesha** **Aviv. prati.** for each **Jivapradesha**" in the **Adivargana** of the **Apuurvaspardhaka**.

Page #133:
---------------------------
## 100/Go. Ma. Jivakanda
## Verses 63-64

The following sutra explains that countless inferiorities are not contradictory.

These yoga-related efforts are a fraction of the countless number of previous competitors.

A single loss of merit is a fraction of the countless number of competitor-measuring rods of previous competitors. Again, a fraction of these are the yoga efforts, which should be known as a fraction of the countless number of competitor-related classifications. This is the meaning of this sutra.

Thus, to explain the determination of the specific form of the infinite time that follows the end of the time of effort for this being who follows the internal moment time in performing efforts, the following sutra-group is sung:

_At the end of the time of effort, in the subsequent time, it destroys the previous and the previous competitors._

As long as the final time of the time of effort is there, the previous and the previous competitors are seen undestroyed, because a fraction of their countless number is constantly undergoing transformation in the form of effort in the regions of beings with similar wealth. Again, in the subsequent time, all the previous and the previous competitors abandon their own form and undergo transformation in the form of effort, because from the lowest effort to the attainment of the highest effort, their transformation in that time is seen in the form of similar wealth in those efforts. Thus, the time of effort ended. Now, after this, until the internal moment time, it follows the remaining time in the time of conjunction, being a yoga-possessor in the form of effort, to explain this, the previous sutra has been revealed._

Until the internal moment time, it is a yoga-possessor in the form of effort. This sutra is easy. Now, does this yogi-kevali, who experiences the yoga in the form of effort, experience it with the state of being present until the internal moment time, or does it experience it in some other way? In this way, we will remove this doubt.

For example, in the first time, the effort-experiencer experiences a countless majority of efforts. Again, in the second time, the efforts related to the lowest and highest countless parts of the efforts experienced in the first time are experienced in the form of medium effort, abandoning their own form. Thus, the yoga related to the second time is countless inferior to the yoga related to the first time. In this way, it should be known in the third and subsequent times as well. Therefore, it should be said that in the first time, it experiences many efforts, in the second time, it experiences efforts that are not special, and in this way, until the last time, it experiences efforts of the non-special order.

Or, in the time of effort, it experiences a few efforts [primarily], because in the first time, the efforts related to the lowest and highest countless parts are primarily desired, being destroyed. In the second time, it experiences countless efforts, because in the first time, the destruction

Page #134:
---------------------------
## Gatha 63-64
## Gunasthan/101

This statement implies that the **prasankhyanaguni** **krishtis** related to the **adhastan** and **uparim** countless parts in other times are destroyed by the **krishtis** obtained. Thus, until the **antarmuhurt** time, this being experiences the **krishtigat** **yoga** in the form of a series of **asankhyatmuni**, because at every moment, the tendency of **krishtis** to transform from the **madhyam** **krishti** form is seen in the form of **asankhyatguna**.

**Doubt:** Why don't we consider that the **jivapradesha** of the **krishtis** that were **vedita** in the first and subsequent times remain **ayogi** in the second and subsequent times due to **aparispand**?

**Solution:** No, because there is a contradiction in the tendency of **bhayog** and **ayog** **paryayas** to occur in a being in an **akram** manner.

In this way, it is proven that the **madhyam** **krishtis** destroy the **krishtis** of the **adhastan** and **uparim** countless parts in the form of **asankhyatguna** **thenimp**. One should not doubt that this meaning is not in the **sutra**, because this particular meaning is clearly seen in the **sutra** that will be said later, "In the last time, it destroys the countless majority of **krishtis**." Thus, to remove the doubt about what kind of **dhyan-parinam** occurs in the state of **sayogikevali** existing in **atisukshma** **kayayoga** due to experiencing **krishtigat** **yoga** until the **antarmuhurt** time, the next **sutra** begins.

And the **sukshma** **kriya** form of **apratipati** **dhyan** is **dhyata**.

This statement implies that the **dhyan** in that state is the third **shukladhyan**, which is **sukshma** **kriya** form **yoga** and **apratipati** due to not being **pratiraat** below.

**Doubt:** What is the fruit of this **dhyan**?

**Solution:** Its fruit is the complete restraint of the **prasrava** of **yoga**, because even the **sukshmatara** **kayaparispand** is seen here as restrained without **anvaya**. It is also said:

"The third **shukladhyan** is said to restrain the **yogakriya** of the **kayayogi** and the **adbhut** state **sarvagna**." (1)

**Doubt:** It is desired that the **kevali** transformed by **dhruva** and **upayoga**, who make all substances their objects, have **ekagra** **chintanirodha**, which is impossible, so **dhyan** cannot arise.

**Solution:** It is true to say that **dhyan** in the form of **ekagra** **chintanirodha** cannot be formed for the **sarvagnadeva** who have experienced all substances and who are transformed by **akram** **upayoga**, because it is desired. But, considering the tendency of the **dhyanphala** in the form of **karmaasrava** restraint, which occurs only by the restraint of **yoga**, that type of treatment has been imagined, therefore...

---

1. Jayadhaval Moola p. 2260.

Page #135:
---------------------------
## Chapter 102 / Go. Sa. Jivakanda
## Verses 63-64

There is no harm, or because it is a cause of worry, the name of yoga is worry compared to the past, its concentration is the suppression of concentrated worry. By taking refuge in this kind of explanation, meditation is accepted here, therefore there is no fault. It is also said in that way -

**Meditation is the departure of worry in one object for a moment, but for the Kevalis, the suppression of yoga is meditation.**

Therefore, it is rightly said that the Kevali Bhagwan, who suppresses yoga, meditates on the supreme white meditation, which is characterized by subtle action-oriented knowledge, in order to completely suppress the power of karma-grasping. Thus, the one who meditates, by the fire of supreme white meditation, constantly nourishes the karma-destruction in an infinite-fold series, and the situation-section and the section-section fall in order, the yoga-power of this supreme sage gradually diminishes, and at the end of the sa-yoga-kevali guna-sthana, it is completely destroyed. Thus, with the desire to expound this, the next sutra is said -

**The krsti-vedaka sa-yoga-kevali jiva destroys an infinite multitude of krstis at the end of his life.**

From the first moment of krsti-vedaka, he destroys an infinite multitude of krstis in an infinite-fold series, and at the end of the sa-yoga-kevali guna-sthana, he destroys an infinite multitude of krstis, because after that, the complete cessation of yoga-tendency is seen, thus this is the collective meaning of the sutra here.

The name, gotra, and vedaniya karmas, taking the last situation-section, are as many yogical times as there are, and all are non-yogical times. Therefore, except for the situations, it takes all the situations above with the title of guna-shreni. At that time, it repels the province-cluster and gives a small province in the rise, and in the subsequent time, it gives an infinite-fold province-cluster. Thus, it deposits in an infinite-fold series, going from the lowest situation of the situation-section to the attainment of the next situation.

This becomes the top of the guna. From this guna-shreni, it gives an infinite-fold in the lowest situation of the situation-section. From that, it deposits the province-cluster from the next situation upwards, depositing it up to the old guna-shreni-shirsha. Again, from the old guna-shirsha upwards, it gives an infinite-fold province-cluster in the next situation. From that onwards, it deposits the province-cluster which is completely special-less. From here onwards, it becomes the melted-remaining guna-shreni. Thus, the last situation-section should become two-extreme-falling.

Again, taking the substance of the last falling of the last situation-section, it gives the sloka province-cluster in the rise. In the subsequent time, it gives an infinite-fold province-cluster. Thus, infinite-fold...

1. Jayadhaval Mula . 2261.

Page #136:
---------------------------
##  Verse 65

**Gṛś**

**!**

**.3**

The श्रेणी (series) of karma, in the form of deposits, continues until the final moment of the Aयोगिकेवली (non-perfect Jina). At this very moment, the योगनिरोधक्रिया (cessation of yogic restraint) and the time of the सयोगिकेवली (perfect Jina) come to an end. Beyond this, there is no further गुणश्रेणि (series of qualities), स्थितिधात (state of being), or अनुभागघात (destruction of parts). One should understand that only through अधःस्थिति (lower state) does the श्रेणी (series) of karma, with its countless qualities, continue to be destroyed. It is here that the प्रकृतिबन्ध (bond of nature) of the सातावेदनीय (seven-sense beings) is broken, and one should know that the forty-nine प्रकृति (natures) are also destroyed. At the same time, name, lineage, and वेदनीथ (painful karma) become like आयु (life-span) in their nature, becoming स्थितिसत्कर्म (karma that determines the state of being). To explain this, the सूत्र (aphorism) of ग्रामे (village) begins:

> When yoga is restrained, [karma becomes like life-span in terms of its state].

This means that the name, lineage, and वेदनीय karma that remain after being destroyed by the केवलिसमृद्घातक्रिया (action of destroying the karma of the perfect Jina) and the योगनिरोधरूपकाल (time of cessation of yogic restraint) through स्थितिघात (destruction of the state) and अनुभागघात (destruction of parts), become like आयु (life-span) at this time and their स्थितिसत्कर्म (karma that determines the state of being) becomes equal to the time of the प्रयोगिकेवली (perfect Jina).

Thus, by explaining this प्ररूपणाप्रबन्ध (method of explanation), the सयोगिकेवली गुणस्थान (state of the perfect Jina) is upheld, and upon its completion, the प्रयोगिकेवली गुणस्थान (state of the perfect Jina) is attained as appropriate. The following verse further explains this:

> "प्रयोगकेवली गुणम्यान का कथन सोलेसि संपत्तो विरुद्ध पिस्सेस पासवो जीयो ।
> कम्मरयविप्पमुक्को गयजोगो केवली होदि ॥६५॥"

**Meaning of the Verse:**

He who has attained mastery over शील (conduct), who has restrained all प्रास्रव (influx of karma), and who is free from the dust of newly accruing karma, is called a गतयोगकेवली (perfect Jina) or प्रयोगकेवली (perfect Jina).

**Special Meaning:**

The first adjective is - सोलेसि संपत्तो, meaning those who have attained mastery over all qualities and conduct in their complete (perfect) form are called 'जीलेश' (lords of the worlds). The meaning of शीलेश (master of conduct) is शैलेश्य (mastery).

**Question:**

If the meaning of शैलेश्य is mastery, then this adjective should not begin in the fourteenth गुणस्थान (state of being), because the अरिहन्त परमेष्ठी भगवान (supreme liberated being) has attained mastery over all qualities and conduct in their complete form even in the सयोगकेवली (perfect Jina) state. Otherwise, the सयोगिकेवली (perfect Jina) would not be able to attain परमेष्ठीपना (supreme liberation) due to incomplete qualities and conduct, just as we cannot attain परमेष्ठीपद (supreme liberation) because our qualities and conduct are not complete.

**Solution:**

Your statement is true, the सयोगिकेवली (perfect Jina) has also attained the true nature of the self. They are a treasure trove of all qualities, are flawless, and are known as यथाख्यात विहारशुद्धि संयम (conduct that is pure and restrained as it should be), with the characteristic of परम-उपेक्षा (supreme indifference).

**1. घवल १११६६ also mentions this.**

Page #137:
---------------------------
104/Go. Sa. Aushakanda
Chapter 65

Who resides in the state of perfection. Thus, it is acknowledged that all the virtues and conduct of the Sayogakevali are manifest, but the complete restraint, which is the fruit of the complete destruction of karma, has not arisen in relation to the existence of only the Prastav, which arises due to their yoga, whereas the Ayogakevali has stopped the doors of all Prastavs and has attained the liberation of the soul without any opposition, with this intention, the epithet 'Mauleśya' is used with the Prayogakevali, there is no fault in this.

The Ayogakevali attains ownership-dominion over the 18,000 varieties of conduct. The 18,000 varieties of conduct are described in the Mulachara as follows:

O, by actions, dreams, senses, and the teachings of the monks, etc.
From heat and cold, there are eighteen thousand varieties of conduct.

Three yogas, three karmas, four samjnas, five indriyas, ten Prithivobhayiya, etc., types of jivas, the ten virtues, beginning with Uttamakshama, when multiplied together (3434445410 x 10), result in 18,000 varieties of conduct. Prachsarasar Adhikar 12 also states:

By the protection of dharma, karma, samjna, aksha, and pranasanyama.
Eighteen thousand, sixteen, by mutual multiplication. ||2||

Ten dharmas, three guptis, three karmas, four samjnas, five indriyas, and ten pranasanyamas (1043434445410), when multiplied together, result in 18,000 varieties of conduct. In addition to these, 18,000 varieties of conduct are described in the Jinagam in other ways.

The second epithet is 'Niruddhanisseśa Praśayas', meaning that the complete restraint of all Prastavs has resulted in the ultimate restraint of new karmas. The Prastav of karmas that arose from Mithyadarshan, Aviriti, Pramada, and Kashaya, has been restrained in the lower gunasthans. The Prayogakevali has no yoga, which was the cause of the Prastav, therefore, the restraint of all Prastavs of the Prayogakevali is proven by this epithet.

The third epithet is 'Kammaravippaṁusaṁko', meaning that the Prayogakevali is free from Kammaraj due to the complete restraint of the Prastav, which is the cause of bondage, and due to the destruction of the karma, which is in the form of sattva, by the constant melting and decay of the lower gunasthans. Or, they are free from Kammaraj because they are not stained by new Kammaraj.

Shankara-Puratanakarma, having given their fruit, attain the state of Prakarma, due to the results of which, the Ayogakevali should have been stained by Kammaraj.

There is no solution, because the absence of Mohaniyakarma makes the remaining four Aghatiya karmas powerless, therefore, they are unable to perform their function.

1. J.P. Mula Pri. 2262 and J.P. 16/183.

Page #138:
---------------------------
##  Verse 65
##  Gunasthan/105

Even in the absence of Mohaniya Karma, Pratiya Karma continues to function. Otherwise, the soul's dwelling in the body, the destruction of the soul's non-material nature, and the destruction of its upward-moving nature would not be possible.

**Explanation:** Although these actions occur due to the rise of Pratiya Karma, the soul does not become attached to Karma-raja because the function of attachment to Karma-raja is that of Leshya. The Leshya of a Prayog-kevali is absent. In the absence of the cause, the effect is also impossible. Secondly, Mithyatva, Aviriti, Pramada, Kashaya, and Yoga are the causes of Karma-bandha. Since all these causes are completely destroyed in a Prayog-kevali, Karma-bandha is also absent. If we assume a bandha without a cause, it would lead to the possibility of the effect of Moksha.

A Prayog-kevali contemplates the fourth Shukla-dhyana, which is called "Samuccinna Kriya-nivritti" or "Vyuparat-triya-nivritti." Yoga is called Kriya. This final Shukla-dhyana is called Samuccinna because all the actions of mind, speech, and body are Samuccinna or Vyuparat (destroyed). Due to the nature of this dhyana, a Prayog-kevali does not fall or "Nivartate" (return), hence it is called Samuccinna-kriya-nivritti Shukla-dhyana. With the support of Aleshya, the fruit of this dhyana is seen as liberation from the bondage of Kayatraya (Audarik, Tejas, and Form-body). It is said that "The Bhagwan contemplates." As before, here too, there is contemplation through treatment. Due to the culmination of the Dhyana-upyoga of a Kevali, there is no lack of one-pointed concentration and restraint, which are the characteristics of dhyana. Therefore, a Kevali does not contemplate in the ultimate sense. The fruit of a Kevali's dwelling in his own soul, which restrains all the doors of the scriptures, is the destruction of all Karmas. This should be understood as the perception of dhyana. It is also said:

"Surya syavayogasya sesha karma chhidu samam.
Phalam asya bhutum dham, paratirtha durasavam." ||15||

- The fourth Shukla-dhyana of a Prayog-kevali is for cutting off the remaining Karmas. It is difficult to obtain. Its fruit is the attainment of the wonderful Moksha-dham. This dhyana is difficult to obtain for those who are Mithyatirtha.

The name of the time period of an Ayog-kevali in Gunasthan is "Sleshya-kha." The duration of that time is only the utterance of five short vowels (a, i, u, ri, l). In the two extreme times of an Ayog-kevali in Gunasthan, there is a decay of 72 types of Vedaniya Karma-prakriti, including Devagati, etc., which are of the nature of Anudaya. In the extreme time, there is a decay of 13 types of Vedaniya Karma-prakriti, including Manushya-ayu, Manushya-gati, etc., which are of the nature of Udaya.

Although the state of both types of Karma-prakriti, Udaya and Anudaya, is the same, the Anudaya Karma-prakriti, one time period before, transmigrates through the Stibuka-samkramana of its own type of Udaya-prakriti and comes into Udaya in the form of Paramukha. Due to the Anudaya-prakriti, which is in the state of existence until the extreme time of a Prayog-kevali, transmigrating into the Udaya-prakriti through Stibuka-samkramana in the two extreme times, there are 1. "Simpatini Leshya" P.P. 1, p. 146. 2. "Antarmukhurtamaleshyabhavena Bhagavatyayogikevalini" (J.P. Mula p. 2262). 3. "Karanabinasha tatkaryasambhava." 4. J.D., Mula p. 2263, J.G. 16/185. 5. J.D., Mula p. 2263, J.G. P. 16.155-86.

Page #139:
---------------------------
## Gatha 65

**106/Go. Sa. Jivakanda**

It is said that in the time of the two extremes, the nature of the arising beings ceases to exist due to the absence of their essence. This statement is made in relation to the section on production. The natures that become disconnected from their essence in the time of the two extremes are:

* Devagati (divine path)
* Five bodies
* Five body-bonds
* Five body-aggregates
* Six institutions
* Three agopaangas (non-essential limbs)
* Six sanhananas (contractions)
* Five varna (colors)
* Two gandhas (smells)
* Patra rasa (taste of food)
* Sparsha (touch)
* Devagatyānupūrvi (following the divine path)
* Aguru-laghu (heavy-light)
* Upadhata (secondary substance)
* Paraghata (external impact)
* Ucchvasa (exhalation)
* Prashasta-bihm-yogati (excellent-great-yoga-path)
* Pratyek-sharira (each body)
* Apariapt (insufficient)
* Sthira (stable)
* Asthira (unstable)
* Shubha (auspicious)
* Ashubha (inauspicious)
* Susvara (good sound)
* Dusvara (bad sound)
* Durbhaga (unfortunate)
* Anadeya (unworthy of respect)
* Daya (compassion)
* Kili (parrot)
* Girja (church)
* Nitago (leader)
* Mor (peacock)

These 72 natures are present until the time of the two extremes for the Ayogakevali (non-yogic omniscient). However, in addition to these 72 natures, there is also the Manushya-gatyānupūrvi (following the human path) which is an arising nature. Therefore, Shri Voresenaswami has also mentioned the cessation of the essence of this nature in the time of the two extremes. (Dhaval Pustak 6.417)

The arising nature of a single vedaniya (object of feeling), Manushya-gati (human path), Manushya-ayu (human lifespan), Panchendriya-jati (five-sense being), Sa (yes), Badar (bad), Paryapt (sufficient), Subhaga (auspicious), Pradeya (worthy of respect), Yash-kirti (fame-glory), Tirthankara (liberated being), and Uchcha-gotra (high lineage) - these twelve natures cease to exist in the final time of the Yogakevali (yogic omniscient). However, Shri Jinseanaacharya has mentioned the cessation of thirteen natures, including Manushya-gatyānupūrvi. Along with Manushya-gati, there is also the binding of Manushya-gatyānupūrvi. Therefore, the cessation of the essence of Manushya-gatyānupūrvi is mentioned along with Manushya-gati.

Those who do not have yoga (spiritual practice) and have transcended it are Ayogi (non-yogic). Those who have attained Kevalgyan (omniscience) are Kevali (omniscient). Those who are Kevali without yoga are Ayogakevali (non-yogic omniscient).

**Doubt:** The Yogakevali has a mind, therefore, Kevalgyan is possible for them. But how is Kevalgyan possible for the Ayogakevali who does not have a mind?

**Solution:** This is not correct, because the knowledge that arises from the destruction of the Jnanavarana karma (karma that obscures knowledge) and is Akramvarti (non-sequential) is not considered to originate from the mind.

**Doubt:** Just as Mati (perception) and other knowledge are themselves knowledge and require a cause for their origin, similarly, Kevalgyan is also knowledge, therefore, it should also require a cause for its origin.

**Solution:** No, because there is no similarity between Kshayik (destructive) and Kshayopa-shamic (mitigating) knowledge.

**Doubt:** How does the unchanging Kevalgyan know the changing substances at every moment?

**Solution:** This doubt is not correct, because there is no contradiction in assuming that Kevalgyan undergoes changes to know the substances that undergo changes accordingly.

**Doubt:** Why is the re-origin of Kevalgyan, which changes due to the dependence on the object, not considered?

**Solution:** No, because the re-origin of Kevalgyan does not occur in the case of the general, as opposed to the specific. Even though its origin occurs in the case of the specific, that specific Kevalgyan is not dependent on the senses, mind, or light.

Page #140:
---------------------------
## Gatha 66-67
## Guranasthan/107

It does not arise because there is a contradiction in assuming the help of the senses, etc., in Keval Jnana, for those whose Karma of Avarana of Keval Jnana, etc., have been destroyed.
Sha - If Keval Jnana is helpless, then does it not know the Pramaya?
Solution - This is not so, because knowing the substances is its nature, and the nature of things is not subject to the questions of others. If there were to be questions even in nature, then there would be no order of things. (Dhaval Pu. 1 p. 168-196)

In the fourteen Guranasthanas, the Nirjara of the remaining seven Karmas without the Prayukarma that occurs in them,
Sammattuppattiye Savay-Virade Paratakkammse. Dasanmohakhavage Fasay-Uvasamage Ya Upasante. ||66|| Khavage Ya Khiranmohe, Jine Su Vanya Asankhagunivakama.
Tavi Variya Kala Sankhejjagunashakama Honti. ||67||

Gatha-arth - Samyaktva-utpatti, meaning Saatishaya Mithyashti, Shravak, meaning Deshavati, Virat, meaning Mahadatti, Anantanubandhi Kashaya, the one who disconnects the Kashaya, the one who destroys Darshanmoha, the one who calms Charitramoha, the one who calms Kashaya, the one who destroys Charitramoha, the one who weakens Moha, the one who is a Svasthanajin and the one who performs Yoganirodha, in these places, there is Nirjara that is countless times greater, but the time of Nirjara (Guranashreni Praayam) is the opposite, meaning it increases from the back to the front, which is a series that is not multiplied by numbers. ||66-67||

Vishesharth - These two Gathas speak of the eleven Guranashrenis that are distinguished by the place and time of Nirjiran.
"By the Vishuddhis, there is Anubhagakshaya, and from that, there is Pradesh Nirjara. To make this known, it is said that Anubhag is the reason for the relationship between the Jiva and Karma. The reason for Guranashreni Nirjara is Bhava. 'Sammattappatti', meaning the way to achieve the first Samyaktva by calming Darshanmoha. 'Savay', meaning Deshavirati. 'Viraden', meaning Samyat. 'Pranatakkammse', meaning the one who disconnects the Anantanubandhi Kashaya. 'Dasanmohakhavage', meaning the one who destroys Darshanmoha. 'Kasayauvasamage', meaning the one who calms Charitramoha. 'Uvasante', meaning the one who calms Kashaya. 'Khavage', meaning the one who destroys Charitramoha. 'Khiranmohe', meaning the one who weakens Kashaya. 'Jiges', meaning the one who is a Svasthanajin and the one who is present in Yoganirodha. In this way, these Gathas..."

1. These two Gathas are given in the first Chulikarup in Dha. Pu. 12 p. 78. There, the text is as follows -
"Sammattuppatti Vi Ya Savayavirade Antakkammse. Dasagamohakhavaye Kasayauvasamaye Ya Uvasate. ||7|| Khabaye Ya Sriinamohe Jine Ya Shiyama Bhave Asankhejjja. Tandhikhariido Kalo Sankhejjagunap Ya Sedie. ||8||"

2. Dha. Pu. 12 p. 76.

Page #141:
---------------------------
## 108 / Go. Sa. Jeevakanda

**Eleven types of Pradeshguna श्रेणी (series of qualities) have been described by Nirjanga.**

The 'Tavaavdokaalo' (time of the present) however, has a different order of these qualities, i.e., it increases from the end to the beginning. To prevent the infinite multiplication of the series, as in the previous case, the 'Sankhejjaguranavakama' (numerically multiplied order) is used, as it is said. Its specific explanation is as follows:

**Gatha 66-67**

"The गुणश्रेणिगुणकार (multiplier of the series of qualities) of the one who has overcome Darshanamoha (delusion of perception) is the least. || 175 ||"

The word 'guna' means multiplier and its series, sequence or line is called गुणश्रेणी. The substance obtained by Nirjara (purification) in the first time of the one who has overcome delusion is the least. In the second time, the substance obtained by Nirjara is infinitely multiplied from the previous one. In the third time, the substance obtained by Nirjara is infinitely multiplied from the previous one. This should be continued until the last time of the one who has overcome Darshanamoha. This line of multipliers is गुणश्रेणी. The quality of गुणश्रेणी is called गुणश्रेणिगुणकार. Its meaning is that "the गुणश्रेणिगुणकार which is the best in the origin of Samyaktva (right faith) is also the least compared to the multiplier to be mentioned later."

"The गुणश्रेणिगुणकार of the one who is restrained and unrestrained is infinitely multiplied from the previous one. || 176 ||"

The least multiplier of Nirjara of the one who is restrained and unrestrained is also infinitely multiplied from the previous best multiplier.

"The गुणश्रेणिगुणकार of the one who is restrained and unrestrained is infinitely multiplied from the previous one. || 177 ||"

The least multiplier of the one who is restrained and unrestrained is infinitely multiplied from the best गुणश्रेणिगुणकार of the one who is restrained and unrestrained.

**Doubt:** Since the result of restraint and unrestraint is infinitely multiplied compared to the result of restraint, the Pradesh Nirjara (purification of the region) should also be infinitely multiplied compared to the result of restraint and unrestraint, because the result is always in accordance with the cause.

**Solution:** No, because the multiplier of Pradesh Nirjara follows the multiplier of Yoga (union), therefore, there is a contradiction in its being infinitely multiplied. Secondly, it is not appropriate to accept infinite multiplication in Pradesh Nirjara, because if it is accepted, the possibility of liberation will arise in the second time of गुणश्रेणिनिर्जरा. Thirdly, there is no rule that the effect always follows the cause, because the rule of the external cause of the effect following the internal cause cannot be established.

**Doubt:** How can it be said that the गुणश्रेणिनिर्जरा which occurs due to restraint with Samyaktva and restraint and unrestraint with Samyaktva is different from the one which occurs due to restraint and restraint and unrestraint without Samyaktva?

1. Gh. Pu. 12 p. 79. 2. Gh. Pu. 12 p. 80. 3. Gh. p. 12 p. 80.

Page #142:
---------------------------
## Maya 66-67
## Gunasthan / 106

**Solution - No, because here Samyaktva-parinam is not given priority. Or, restraint is that which is inseparable from Samyaktva, not anything else, because other things do not have the function of the destruction of the Gunashreni. Therefore, by accepting restraint, the attainment of restraint along with Samyaktva is achieved.**

"The Gunashreni-gunakar of the one who detaches from the Anantanubandhi is Asankhyata-guna."
11 295 11

**Compared to the excellent Gunashreni-gunakar of the Svasthan-samyata, the inferior Gunashreni-gunakar of the Asamyata-samyagdristi, the Samyata-samyata, and the Samyata beings who detach from the Anantanubandhi is Asankhyata-guna. Here, everywhere where it is said "Gunashreni-gunakar", one should understand the Gunashreni-gunakar of the Galman (those who are to be destroyed) regions and the Gunashreni-gunakar of the Nisichman (those who are to be deposited) regions.**

**Doubt - How is this known?**

**Solution - This is known from the general instruction "Gunashreni-gunakar".**

**Doubt - Compared to the restraint-like parinams, the parinam (purification) of the Asamyata-samyagdristi who detaches from the Anantanubandhi is devoid of Ananta-guna. In such a state, how can Asankhyata-guna regions be destroyed?**

**Solution - This is not a fault, because compared to the restraint-like parinams, the Samyaktva-like parinam, which is the cause of the detachment from the Anantanubandhi kshayas, is available in Ananta-guna (purified).**

**Doubt - If the detachment from the Anantanubandhi kshayas happens through the Samyaktva-like parinams, then does the detachment happen for all Samyagdrstis?**

**Solution - The detachment from the Anantanubandhi cannot happen for all Samyagdrstis, because the detachment from the Anantanubandhi kshayas is accepted only through specific Samyaktva-like parinams.**

"The Gunashreni-gunakar of the being who destroys Darshan-moha is Asankhyata-guna." 176

**Compared to the two Gunashreni-related excellent gunakars of the being who detaches from the Anantanubandhi, the inferior gunakar of the two types (Galman and Nisichman regions) of Gunashrenis of the being who destroys Darshan-moha is Asankhyata-guna. One should know the Asankhyata-guna part-proportion of the Atit, Anagat, and Vartaman Pradesh-Gunashreni-gunakar as being like a moment.**

"The Gunashreni-gunakar of the Kshaya-upashaak is Asankhyata-guna." 180

1. Dh. Pu. 12 p. 81 2. Pu. 12 p. 823

Page #143:
---------------------------
## 110/Go. Sa. Jivakanda
## Gatha 66-67

The multiplier of the inferior qualities of the one who mitigates the passions is countless times greater than the multiplier of the superior qualities of the one who destroys the obscurations of perception. The multiplier of the qualities of the series of qualities of the destroyer of the obscurations of perception is countless times greater than the multiplier of the qualities of the series of qualities of the one who destroys the obscurations of perception.

**Doubt:** If the multiplier of the qualities of the series of qualities of the destroyers of the obscurations of conduct is also described as being less and more, then wouldn't the series of qualities of the series of qualities become fifteen instead of eleven?

**Solution:** The series of qualities of the series of qualities does not become fifteen, because when relying on the principle of negation, the three mitigators and the three destroyers are considered as one, resulting in eleven types of series of qualities of the series of qualities.

"The multiplier of the qualities of the series of qualities of the one who mitigates the passions, the one who destroys the passions, and the one who destroys the passions is countless times greater." ||181||

Here, the multiplier of the qualities of the series of qualities of the remaining karmas, excluding the karma of obscuration, should be described as being less and more, because the destruction of the karma of obscuration, which has attained the state of mitigation, is not possible.

"The multiplier of the qualities of the series of qualities of the destroyer of the passions is countless times greater." ||182||

Compared to the superior multiplier of the qualities of the series of qualities of the mitigated passions, the inferior multiplier of the qualities of the series of qualities of the three destroyers, who have attained non-duality through the principle of substance, is also countless times greater.

"The multiplier of the qualities of the series of qualities of the one who destroys the passions, the one who destroys the passions, and the one who destroys the passions is countless times greater." ||183||

Due to the influence of the binding, arising, and remaining of the karma of obscuration, the power of the destruction of the karmas becomes infinitely greater.

"The multiplier of the qualities of the series of qualities of the one who is restrained, the one who is restrained, and the one who is restrained is countless times greater." ||184||

Due to the weakening of the karmas of the body, the result of the destruction of the karmas attains an infinite increase.

"The multiplier of the qualities of the series of qualities of the one who is restrained, the one who is restrained, and the one who is restrained is countless times greater." ||185|| Because this is the nature.

Now, the special statement of the phrase "Tashviriya Kala Sankhejjagunakkama Hoti" from the Gatha Sutra is made.

"The multiplier of the qualities of the series of qualities of the one who is restrained, the one who is restrained, and the one who is restrained is the least." ||186||

Except for the one who is restrained, the one who is restrained, and the one who is restrained, the rest of the karmas are destroyed by the one who is restrained, the one who is restrained, and the one who is restrained. 1. Gh. Pu. 12 P. 83. 2. Dh. Pu. 12 P. 4.

Page #144:
---------------------------
## Verse 65

**Guasthan / 111**

It gives a **stoka** at the **udaya** (arising). From that, it gives **asankaayatguna** in the second time. From that, it deposits **sankhyaatguna** in the third state. In this way, it deposits until the **antarmuhurt** time. From that, it deposits two **pradeshas** in the **asankaayatguna** in the time beyond. Further, it deposits **vishesh** (choice) until its own **pratisthapanavali** is not obtained. Here, the **adhwana** of **karmapradeshaniksepa** of the **gunashreni** is **stoka**, because it is the most **jghanya** (inferior) **antarmuhurt** measure.

'From that, the **gunashreni** time of the **adhapravrittakevali** **samyata** is **sankhyaatguna**. || 187 ||'

Here also, the order of the **udayadi** **gunashreni** should be said the same as before. The special thing is that the **adhwana** of **gunashrenipradeshaniksepa** of the **adhapravrittakevali** is **sankhyaatguna** from the **adhwana** of **gunashrenipradeshaniksepa**. The **gunakara** is **sankhyaatsamaya**.

Previously,

'From that, the **gunashreni** time of the **kshinakashaya** **vitaraagachathastha** is **sankhyaatguna**. || 188 ||'

The **gunakara** is **sankhyaatsamaya**.

'From that, the **gunashreni** time of the **kashayakshapak** is **sankhyaatguna**. || 186 ||'

The **gunakara** is **sankhyaatsamaya**.

'From that, the **gunashreni** time of the **upashantakshayavitaraagachathastha** is **sankhyaatguna**. || 160 ||'

'From that, the **gunashreni** time of the **kashayajapashamak** is **sankhyaatguna**. || 11 ||'

'From that, the **gunashreni** time of the **darshanamohak** is **sankhyaatguna**. || 162 ||'

'From that, the **gunashreni** time of the **anantaanubandhi** **visanyojaka** is **sankhyaatguna**. || 163 ||'

'From that, the **gunashreni** time of the **adhapravrittasamyata** is **sankhyaatguna**. || 164 ||'

**Adhapravrittasamyata** and **ekantaanuvridhi** etc. actions free **samyata**, both have the same meaning.

'From that, the **gunashreni** time of the **samyatasamyata** is **sankhyaatguna**. || 165 ||'

'From that, the **gunashreni** time of the **darshanamohopashamak** is **sankhyaatguna**. || 166 ||'

Everywhere, the **gunakara** is **sankhyaatsamaya**. In this way, the statement of the eleven places of **gunashreininirjanga** is complete.

## The nature of **siddhas** who are beyond **gunasthanas**

**Viha kamma viyala sodobhuda khirangaraga rigaccha. Shramurana dikiccha loyyaggarivasiyo siddha. || 66 ||**

1. V. Pu. 12 p. 85.
2. Ghabhal Pu. 12 p. 66-67.
3. V. Pu. 1 p. 200 Pra. Pa. Sa. A. 1 Ma. 31.

Page #145:
---------------------------
112/Go. Sa. Jivakanda
Verse 68
Verse Meaning: Those who are devoid of the karmas of the path, are extremely peaceful, pure, eternal, endowed with eight qualities, accomplished, and reside at the forefront of the world, they are the Siddha Bhagavans. ||68||
Special Meaning: Siddha, Nishthita, Nishpanna, Kritakritya, and Siddha-Sadhya are synonymous terms. 'Muktajiv' become Siddhas. They are Siddha Bhagavans, devoid of the eight types of karmas by destroying the root-nature of the path-makers, namely, Jnana-Avarana, Darsana-Avarana, Vedaniya, Mohaniya, Ayu, Nama, Gotra, and Antaraya. The counter-natures of these path-karmas are 148, and the subsequent natures are countless, infinite in comparison to the indivisible divisions. By completely destroying the bondage, arising, and essence of all these natures, their related states, sections, and regions, they are 'Viyala' past or fallen from these karmas. Alternatively, Siddha Bhagavans are devoid of three types of karmas: Dravyakarma, Bhavakarma, and Nokarma.
The second special characteristic is "Sovimuda". In their previous state of existence, they were tormented by the suffering of birth and death, etc., and the heat of the suffering of attachment, aversion, and delusion. In the state of liberation, they have become 'Sidhibhuda', i.e., extremely peaceful, due to the absence of the suffering of the cycle of birth and death, the heat of attachment and aversion, and the drinking of the nectar of infinite happiness born from the self. The third special characteristic is 'Rinranjana'. 'Ajan', meaning soot or blackness. Just as it stains the nature of a substance, similarly, karmas are 'Ajan' because they cause the impurity of the pure nature of the self, infinite knowledge, etc., due to Jnana-Avarana, etc. By eliminating these karmas, Siddha Bhagavans are pure. Due to the destruction of the causes of bondage, namely, false perception, lack of interest, negligence, and passions, and the cessation of the cause of new karma, namely, yoga, the Jivas are also pure. The fourth special characteristic is 'Niccha', meaning eternal. Although Siddhas experience natural production and destruction through the Agurulughgana due to the cause of time, they are eternal in comparison to infinite knowledge, etc., pure consciousness, and in comparison to the general substance-form. They never deviate from their pure nature and substance-form.
The fifth special characteristic is 'Advaguna'. Due to the destruction of the eight karmas, Siddhas develop the following eight qualities: Kshayik Samyaktva, Kshayik Jnana, Kshayik Darshan, Kshayik Virya, Sukshmatva (Amurtiktva), Avgahanatva, Svabhavik Agurulughu, and Avyabadha. It is also said:
Moho Khaiyasamman Kevalanan Cha Kevalaloyam. Hanavi Pravaranavugam Anantaviriy Nam Vi Gdhantu. Suhaman Cha Namakamm Hadi Prau Hanevi Avgahanam. Agurulughugam Govan Anvahaham Hanai Veyaniyam.
[Go. Ji. Kannada Tika 68] Due to the destruction of Mohaniya karma (1) Kshayik Samyaktva, due to the destruction of Jnana-Avarana and Darsana-Avarana, these two Avaranas, respectively (2) Keval Jnana and (3) Keval Darshan, due to the destruction of Antaraya karma (4) Ananta Virya, due to the destruction of Nama karma (5) Sukshmatva (Amurtiktva), due to the destruction of Ayu karma (6) Avgahanatva, due to the destruction of Gotra karma (7) Agurulughutva, and due to the destruction of Vedaniya karma (8) Avyabadhatva, these eight qualities arise in Siddhas.
1. Gh. Pu. 1 p. 200.

Page #146:
---------------------------
Gacha 68
Gunasthan/113

It is revealed here that the Prathaguna are said to be due to the destruction of Prishta Karmas, however, there are infinite Gunas in Siddhas. For example, the qualities like Kshayik Charitra, Akshay, Aved, Vitrag, etc. are also present in the Shikhas due to the destruction of Charitramoha, but these 'Gunas' are included in these Prathaguna.

The sixth special characteristic is 'Kichakiccha'. Until the ultimate Shukla Dhyana destroys the Charamanishek of the Prayogkevali, they are not considered accomplished, because they had to destroy the Karmas of Udayaswaroop. After the complete destruction of all Karmas, the Siddhabhagwan attains Moksha, i.e., the state of Siddha, and there is nothing left for him to do. The results like Kevalgyan-Darshan, etc. are natural, not actions.

The seventh special characteristic is 'Loyagganivaasino'. Although the infinite and infinite-fold Akashdravya is one, due to Dharmaastikaya, it is divided into Lokakash and Alokakash, because in the absence of Dharmadravya, which is a cooperative cause in movement, the Jiva and Pudgal dravyas cannot go beyond Dharmadravya. It is also said:

"Loyaloyavibheyan gamana thanam cha jana hehi. Ai nahi tanam heu kih loyaloyavavaharo." [Nayachar]

"Jado pralagalogo jeshi sambhavaavo ya gamana-thiki. No di ya marasa vibhata anita loyame na ya." [Panchaastikaya]

Shri Amritchandracharya's commentary: "Dharmaadhamo vidyate lokaaloka-vibhaganyanthanupapata." If Dharmadravya and Adharmadravya do not exist, then there cannot be a division of Lokakash and Alokakash.

The Siddhabhagwan resides in the last part of the upper Tanuvatavalaya, which is the front part of the Lokakash region of the Akashdravya divided by Dharmaastikaya. Although the Atma has the nature of upward movement and infinite strength, it depends on the cooperative cause Dharmaastikaya. The movement of the Atma is possible only in the presence of the cooperative cause. In the absence of Dharmaastikaya, which is the cause of movement, the Siddhabhagwan cannot move beyond the Tanuvatavalaya, therefore, they reside in the Tanupatavalaya above the Lok.

Shri Kundakundacharya has said in Panchaastikaya:

"Praagasan avagasan gamaranadidikaaranai devi jadi. Uddangavippaadhana siddha chittathi kidh tatha." [12]

"Ja uritaanam siddhanam jinavarehi panata. Tahama gamanaavaranam prayase jana gasthitti." [13]

Shri Amritvaacharya's commentary: "Sarvotkrushtaswaabhaavikordhvagatiparinata bhagavanta siddhabahirangantranangasadhanasamagryam satyamaphi futasttraakase tishthanti iti. Yaso gatyabhagavanta siddha lokoparyavasishthante tato gatisthisihetuthvam akase naastiti nischetavya. Lokalokavachchevaako dharmaadharmaaveb gatisthisihetu mantavyaviti."

From these verses and the commentary, it is clear that movement occurs when both the inner and outer causes are present. Shri Siddhabhagwan are transformed by the most excellent natural upward movement, but they stay in the front part above the Lok due to the influence of the external cause Dharmadravya, because they cannot move beyond it.

Page #147:
---------------------------
## 114/Go. Sa. Jivakanda
## Verse 69

These seven characteristics of Siddhas are given to refute the beliefs of other religions.

Those who have eradicated all karmas, who have attained infinite, unparalleled, natural and unopposed happiness, free from external objects, who are detached, have attained an unchangeable nature, are free from all vices, are the repository of all virtues, whose body, i.e., the soul, is slightly smaller than the gross body, who are free from the arrows that have come out of the sheath and reside in the fire-part of the world, are Siddhas.

The Patali earth is located twelve yojanas above the flagstaff of the Sarvartha Siddhi Indraka Vimana. Seven thousand fifty dhanush above the eighth earth is the abode of the Siddhas. Four thousand dhanush is the Ghanodadhivatabalay, two thousand dhanush is the Ghanavatavalay, 525 dhanush out of 1575 dhanush is subtracted from the depth of the Siddhas (1575-525) = 1050 dhanush is the Tanuvatavalay. Thus, going up (4000 + 2000 + 1050) = 7050 dhanush is the abode of the Siddha Bhagwan. The highest depth of the Siddhas is 500, i.e., 525 dhanush, which is the square of five, and the lowest depth is three hands. The size of all Siddhas is slightly less than the size of the gross body. Within the area covered by one Siddha Jiva, there are infinite Siddha Jivas, including the lowest, highest and middle depths. The heads of all Siddhas are like the upper part of the Tanuvatavalay, which is located in the human world (two and a half islands).

The word 'Siddha' is at the end of the verse. These Siddhas are different from the worldly Siddhas like Anjanasiddha, Padukasiddha, Gutikasiddha, Digvijayasiddha, Khadgasiddha, etc., and are characterized by infinite virtues like Nirnama, Nirgotra, Pramurtvatva, etc., which are included in the eight virtues like Samyaktva, etc.

The seven characteristics of the Siddhas given in the verse are given with a view to refuting other religions. Therefore, to clarify this, we will now state it in the next verse.

The purpose of the above seven characteristics of the Siddhas is to refute the Saivas, Sankhyas, Maskaris (ascetics), Buddhists, Naiyayikas, Vaisheshikas, Ishwaras, and Mandalis.

**Special Meaning:**

Those who follow the Saivas believe that the Jiva is eternally free and untouched by karma. To refute this, it is said that 'Siddha Bhagwan is free from Patakas'.

Page #148:
---------------------------
## Verse 66
## Gunasthan / 115
I

The term 'liberated' is used for that which is bound. Just as the term 'liberated' is used for a thief bound by shackles. The term 'liberated' is not used for light, etc., because they are not bound. This proves that liberation occurs only after bondage. The soul has been bound by karmas since time immemorial; liberation occurs when those karmas are destroyed. This is well-known in the scriptures. Bondage occurs due to false perception, etc. Liberation occurs through right perception, etc., i.e., right perception, right knowledge, and right conduct. This is supported by logic.

The Samkhya philosophy believes that nature itself experiences bondage, liberation, happiness, and suffering. The soul does not experience bondage, liberation, happiness, or suffering. To refute this, the term 'Sodomuda', meaning 'peaceful', is used for the Siddhas. The soul itself undergoes transformation into false perception, etc., and due to this, karma-bondage occurs, the fruit of which is suffering in the form of worldly afflictions. The soul transformed by right perception, etc., attains liberation, and its fruit is happiness in the form of peace. This proves that the soul itself experiences bondage, liberation, happiness, and suffering. Nature (Prakriti) is non-conscious; it cannot experience happiness or suffering.

The Reet theory states that even liberated beings, due to their connection with the karmic influence, again become worldly. This is because if all beings were to be liberated, the influence of the world would cease to exist. Therefore, Maskari formulated this theory that liberated beings again become bound by karmas and become worldly, ensuring the continued existence of worldly beings. To refute the Maskari theory, the term 'Mirjan' is used for the Siddhas. Due to the complete liberation from all karmic actions, both mental and physical, the pure nature of the liberated being is influenced by false perception, etc., which are mental karmic actions. Therefore, bondage, which is the result of mental karmic actions, is possible. Otherwise, liberation would be without a cause, and the absence of the world would arise. There are countless beings in the world. Even if they continue to be liberated for an infinite period, there will be no lack of worldly beings. A quantity that does not end, even though it is without beginning and subject to destruction, is infinite.

The intoxicated ones believe that the effect of knowledge-progeny is liberation. To refute this, the term 'freear', meaning eternal, is used. Liberation is something to be attained, and effort is made for it through austerities, yoga, etc. If knowledge-progeny were liberation in the form of destruction, then no one would make any effort for such liberation, because it is impossible to make an effort for an undesirable result. It is well-known in the world that a wise person never acts for his own detriment. All people strive for unprecedented gain, not for the destruction of their roots. All substances, including the soul, are eternal and imperishable. This is also supported by logic. NOTHING IS CREATED NOTHING IS DESTROYED. Therefore, according to the theory of substance, the soul is eternal. The Buddhists' belief that substances are momentary is directly contradictory.

The Nyaya and Vaisheshika philosophers believe that liberation is the complete annihilation of the nine special qualities of the soul: intellect, happiness, suffering, desire, aversion, effort, virtue, and impressions. To refute this, the term 'Attaguna' is used. The Supreme Soul has inherent qualities like pure knowledge, etc. If these qualities are named, then the destruction of the substance, which is inseparable from those qualities, would arise. If the effect of knowledge, etc., is accepted in liberation, then the Supreme Soul would become non-conscious, just as the sky, etc., are non-conscious due to the effect of the knowledge quality. Consciousness is the nature of self-awareness and awareness of others.

Page #149:
---------------------------
## 116/Go. Sa. Jivakanda
##  Verse 16

The effort of a Tattvavedi, such as tapas and yoga, is directed towards a moksha that destroys its own inherent qualities, which is a moksha with undesirable results. In other words, Tattvavedis do not strive for such a moksha with undesirable results. Moksha does not destroy inherent qualities; rather, it allows inherent qualities to manifest.

While theists consider the Supreme Being to be eternally liberated, they also consider it the creator of the universe. To refute this, the term "Kivkiccha" is used, meaning that the Supreme Being is already accomplished. The Supreme Being, knowing and seeing all the lokas and alokas, their infinite substances, qualities, and permutations, experiencing infinite bliss, and possessing infinite power, destroys all impurities and shines brightly on the peak of the lokas like a pure gem reflecting light. Due to the absence of purpose, and because of the destruction of karma and related practices, the Supreme Being does not engage in any external actions. The creation, destruction, and maintenance of the universe happen naturally through the support of the principle of "Nimittakara Palaya." For discerning and intelligent individuals, the statement "The Supreme Being is the creator" appears inappropriate. Even in logic, the creation of the universe by God, or the theory of creationism, has been refuted. These logical arguments also support this view. Therefore, the Supreme Being is not the creator of the universe.

The Mandali-Varshanikas believe that the Supreme Being has an upward-moving nature and, because there is no obstacle, it continues to move upwards. To refute this, the term "Loyaggarigavasiigo," meaning "residing at the forefront of the lokas," is used. The cooperative cause for the movement of jivas and pudgalas is the Dharma-dravya. The jivas and pudgalas move within the area occupied by the Dharma-astikaya, and there is no movement beyond that area. The loka is also limited to that extent. The cause for the cessation of movement, the Adharma-astikaya, also remains within the same area. Therefore, the Supreme Being, devoid of all karma, due to its upward-moving nature, moves upwards to the forefront of the lokas and remains there. This is because the cooperative cause for movement, the Dharma-astikaya, is absent beyond the forefront of the lokas, preventing further movement. Otherwise, if the Dharma-astikaya were to influence the movement, and if the cooperative cause for movement were to be all-pervasive, then all jivas and pudgalas would move throughout the entire space, leading to the absence of a distinction between lokas and alokas. However, this is not the case, as the distinction between lokas and alokas is universally accepted. Thus, the Supreme Being's residence at the forefront of the lokas is established.

**Question:** What is the difference between Siddhas and Arihantas?

**Answer:** Siddhas destroy the eight karmas, while Arihantas destroy the four ghatiya karmas. This is the difference between them.

**Question:** When the four ghatiya karmas are destroyed, all the qualities of the Arihanta's soul manifest. Therefore, is there no difference in qualities between Siddhas and Arihanta Parameshthis?

**Answer:** This specific meaning is based on the commentary of Shrimad Abhaychandra Suri, the Siddhanta Chakravarti.

Page #150:
---------------------------
## Gartha 70

**Solution:** This is not the case, because both the arising and the presence of the non-violent karmas of Arhants are found, therefore there is a difference in these two Supreme Beings.

**Sha:** Are the non-violent karmas, due to being half-burnt by the fire of white meditation, unable to function even though they are present in terms of arising and presence?

**Solution:** This is also not the case, because the absence of the body's decay is not otherwise proven, therefore the arising and presence of the remaining karmas like lifespan etc. of Arhants are established.

**Sha:** The function of karmas is the world filled with eighty-four lakh types of births, old age, and death. This is not found in the Arhant Supreme Being even with the presence of non-violent karmas, and the violent karmas are also unable to destroy the soul's death. Therefore, it is not right to believe in a difference in qualities between the Arhant and the Siddha Supreme Being.

**Solution:** This is not the case, because the arising of the lifespan karma, which is an obstacle to the soul's upward movement, and the arising of the vedaniya karma, which is an obstacle to the quality of happiness, are found in Arhants, therefore there is a difference in qualities between Arhants and Siddhas.

**Sha:** Upward movement is not a quality of the soul, because if it is considered a quality of the soul, then its influence will also have to be considered an influence of the soul. For the same reason, happiness is also not a quality of the soul. Secondly, the arising of vedaniya karma does not produce suffering in Kevalis, otherwise Kevalitva will not remain.

**Solution:** If this is the case, then let it be, because it is just. Still, the difference between the two Supreme Beings is established in terms of the difference in the presence of the subtle body and the absence of the subtle body, and in terms of the difference in location.

Thus, the first chapter called "Gunasthan Pra-rupana" in the Gommatsar Jivakanda is complete.

## 2. Jivasamaas-Pra-rupana

The general characteristic of Jivasamaas, with its etymology, is: "Those by which the souls are known, and their various types are understood, those are called Jivasamaas, which are the collection of those Dharmas." (7)

**Gathary:** Those specific Dharmas by which various souls and their various types of species are known, those Dharmas which collect the species, are called Jivasamaas. (7)

1. Dhaddal Pu. 1 p. 47-48.
2. Pra. Pan. San. Ga. 1/32.

Page #151:
---------------------------
## 118/Go. Sa. Jivakanda

**Verse 71: Special Meaning**

Although there are many beings and they are of many types (like earth, sand, stone, etc., and water, foam, ice, etc.; strong wind, storm, gentle breeze, etc.; wildfire, forest fire, flame, etc., fire; trees, grass, plants, etc., vegetation), all of them have one sense of touch. In relation to this common characteristic, all these countless beings are included in the category of one-sensed beings. All beings that are perceived or known through the intended common characteristic are included in one category. In the classification of beings, these categories are collected. The category in which they are collected is called the "Jivasamaas".

**Explanation of the Verse:**

The characteristic of Jivasamaas is "Tadsadrujugaranamjja, Aviruddhi hi Jubajavikammudaye".

**Meaning of the Verse:**

Jivasamaas is the "Tadbhavasadrushyasamanya" (common characteristic of the derived) that arises from the "Jatinamkarmaudaya" (emergence of the category-specific karma) with non-contradictory karmic natures in the middle of the four pairs (As, Badar, Paryapt, Pratyek).

**Special Meaning:**

The "Namakarma" (karmic action related to name) has eight natures: "S-Sthavar", "Badar-Sukshma", "Paryapt-Aparyapt", and "Pratyek Sadharan". Among these eight natures, "S-Badar-Paryapt-Pratyek" or "Tras-Badar-Aparyapt-Pratyek" are mutually non-contradictory. "Sras" contradicts with "Sthavar-Sukshma-Sadharan" (three). "Sthavar" contradicts with "As". The remaining six natures are non-contradictory, but "Sukshma" and "Badar" contradict each other. Similarly, the natures of the remaining two pairs also contradict each other.

When four non-contradictory natures from these eight natures are found, as much as possible, along with the emergence of one of the five "Jatinamkarmaudaya" (category-specific karmic action) like "Ekendirya" (one-sensed), then the "Tadbhava" (that which exists in them) i.e., the "Sadrushyasamanya" (common characteristic of similarity) is called "Jivasamaas".

For example, when "Prithvi Sthavarakaya-Badar-Paryapt-Pratyeknari" (earth, stationary body, Badar, sufficient, individual body) is combined with "Ekendirya Jatinamkarmaudaya" (emergence of one-sensed category-specific karmic action), and when "Jal Sthavarakaya Badar-Paryapt-Pratyek Sharira" (water, stationary body, Badar, sufficient, individual body) is combined with "Ekendirya Jatinamkarmaudaya", then in both of these, "Ekendirya Jati", "Sthavar", "Badar", "Paryapt", and "Pratyek" are common characteristics of similarity. Therefore, "Badar-Ekendirya-Paryapt" is one "Jivasamaas" for both of these.

"Sadrushyasamanya" is also called "Tiryaksamanya". For example, one black cow and another white cow; both have "Go-pana" (cow-ness) as a common characteristic of similarity.

"Sadrushparinamastiryak Khandamundadishu Gotvavath ||4||" [Parokshamukha: Chaturtha Samuddesha]

Meaning: "Sadrush" (similar) i.e., "Samanya Parinam" (common result) is "Tiryaksamanya". For example, "Khandhi-Mundi" (broken-headed) etc. cows have "Gopana" (cow-ness) in common.

This verse indicates that "Badar" and "Sukshma", and "Paryapt-Aparyapt" "Namakarmaudaya" (emergence of karmic action related to name) cause differences in "Jivasamaas".

1. Based on "Mandaprabodhini Tika".

Page #152:
---------------------------
## Nafā 72-73

**Jīvasamās of 14 types**

"Bādarahmae Indiy-Vitichouriṣiy As Siṇī Ya | Pajjatā Pajjatā Evam Te Chodasā Honti ||72||"

**Gāthārtha:**  Bādar (gross), Sūkṣma (subtle), Dvīndriya (two-sensed), Trīndriya (three-sensed), Chaturindriya (four-sensed), Prasaṁjñī Pañcendriya (conscious five-sensed), and Pañcendriya (five-sensed) - these seven types, with their Pāryāpta (sufficient) and Apāryāpta (insufficient) distinctions, result in (7 x 2 = ) 14 Jīvasamās. ||72||

**Viśeṣārtha:**  Ekaindriya (one-sensed) beings are of two types: Bādar (gross) and Sūkṣma (subtle). All five types of stationary beings (sthāvara) fall under Ekaindriya. Dvīndriya, Trīndriya, and Chaturindriya - these three are all Vikalatrai (three-fold suffering) beings. Pañcendriya beings are also of two types: Saṁjñī (conscious) and Prasaṁjñī (unconscious). These Pañcendriya beings are also Vikalatrai. All beings are Bādar, not Sūkṣma. Therefore, unlike Bādar and Sūkṣma, there are no two distinctions of Sūkṣma and Bādar for Dvīndriya, etc. Thus, there are two distinctions for Ekaindriya due to Bādar and Sūkṣma, two for Pañcendriya due to Saṁjñī and Asamjñī, and three for Vikalatrai. All these (2+2+3) seven distinctions are Pāryāpta and Apāryāpta. Therefore, multiplying seven by two, we get fourteen Jīvasamās. They are as follows:

1. Pāryāpta Bādar Ekaindriya Anantajīva, 2. Apāryāpta Bādar Ekaindriya Anantajīva, 3. Pāryāpta Sūkṣma Ekaindriya Anantajīva, 4. Apāryāpta Sūkṣma Ekaindriya Anantajīva, 5. Bādar Pāryāpta Dvīndriya Saṁsthātajīva, 6. Bādar Apāryāpta Dvīndriya Asaṁkhyātajīva, 7. Bādar Pāryāpta Trīndriya Asaṁkhyātajīva, 8. Bādar Apāryāpta Trīndriya Saṁkhyātajīva, 9. Bādar Pāryāpta Chaturindriya Asaṁkhyātajīva, 10. Bādar Apāryāpta Chaturindriya Asaṁkhyātajīva, 11. Saṁjñī Pāryāpta Pañcendriya Asaṁkhyātajīva, 12. Saṁjñī Apāryāpta Pañcendriya Asaṁkhyātajīva, 13. Asaṁjñī Pāryāpta Pañcendriya Prasaṁkhyātajīva, and 14. Asaṁjñī Apāryāpta Pañcendriya Asaṁkhyātajīva. Thus, in summary, these are the fourteen Jīvasamās.

**Nineteen and 57 Jīvasamās**

Bhū-Prau-U-Bāū Piñchacha Duggavi Gi Godathūlivara |
Patteya Padi Dvivara Tasaparana Puṇṇā Puṇṇavugā ||73||

**Gāthā:**  There are two types of Bhū-kāyika (earth-bodied), Āp (water)-kāyika, Teja-kāyika (fire-bodied), Vāyuṁ-kāyika (air-bodied), and Sādhāraṇa Vanaspati-kāyika (ordinary plant-bodied) - Nitya-nigoda (ever-stationary) and Chaturgati-nigoda (four-fold migratory). Each of these six types has two distinctions: Sthūla (gross) and Itara (subtle). Thus, there are twelve distinctions for each type of plant. Adding the two distinctions of Saṁpratiṣṭhita (established) and Apratiṣṭhita (not established), we get fourteen distinctions for stationary beings. Adding the five distinctions of Vikalatrai to this (14 + 5), we get sixteen distinctions. Multiplying each of these by three distinctions - Pāryāpta (sufficient) and two types of Apāryāpta (insufficient) (2 + 1) - we get (16 x 3) 57 Jīvasamās. ||73||

**Viśeṣārtha:**  Bhū-kāyika means earth-bodied, Āp-kāyika means water-bodied, Teja-kāyika means fire-bodied. 

1. Prā. Paṁ. Saṁ. 1/34 |

Page #153:
---------------------------
## Chapter 120, Section 1, The Living Being (Jiva)

**Verse 73**

The four stationary bodies (sthavara-kaya) are: Teja-kayika (fire-bodied), Agni-kayika (fire-bodied), Vayu-kayika (air-bodied), and Vayu-kayika (air-bodied). Those with ordinary bodies, the plant-bodied (vanaspati-kayika) beings, are Nigoda. Nigoda is of two types: Nitya-nigoda and Chatur-gati-nigoda.

There are twelve categories due to the coarse and subtle distinctions of each of the six types: Prithvi-kayika (earth-bodied), Apa-kayika (water-bodied), Teja-kayika (fire-bodied), Vayu-kayika (air-bodied), Nitya-nigoda, and Chatur-gati-nigoda (6 x 2 = 12). Each plant-bodied being is also of two types: Pratiṣṭhita (established) and Apratiṣṭhita (not established). Each plant is only coarse (not subtle), therefore there are only two categories, as there are no subtle distinctions. Combining these with the twelve categories (12 + 2 = 14), there are fourteen categories related to stationary bodies.

There are five categories of Tras (mobile beings): Dvi-indriya (two-sense), Tri-indriya (three-sense), Chatur-indriya (four-sense), Sanjñi-panchendriya (conscious five-sense), and Asanjñi-panchendriya (unconscious five-sense).

All living beings are also coarse. Adding these five categories of Tras to the fourteen categories related to stationary bodies, there are sixteen categories of Jiva-samasa (living being aggregates). Each of these sixteen Jiva-samasa has three categories: Paryāpta (sufficient), two types of Aparyāpta (insufficient) - Nivṛtti-aparyāpta (cessation-insufficient) and Labdhi-aparyāpta (gain-insufficient) (16 x 3 = 48). Therefore, there are forty-eight categories of Jiva-samasa.

The present result of the Jati-jiva (species-being) is called Jati. If there were no Jati karma (species karma), then bedbugs would not be similar to bedbugs, scorpions to scorpions, ants to ants, grains to grains, and rice to rice. However, there is a similarity between them. Or, the karma that creates the one-sense, two-sense, three-sense, four-sense, and five-sense states is called Jati karma.

**Doubt:** Jati is understood as a similar perception, but there is no similarity between grass (trna) and a tree, because there is no similar state available (although both have the rise of Jati karma of one-sense).

**Solution:** No, because there is similarity between them in terms of taking water and food.

The karma that causes the state of movement is called Tras karma. The karma that causes the state of dreaming is called Sana karma. The karma that causes the birth of the senses and other things is called Bas karma.

The karma that causes the state of being stationary is called Sthavara karma. If there were no Sthavara karma, then the stationary beings would be mobile, but this is not the case, because the stationary beings are found to be stationary. The karma that causes the birth of one-sense beings is Sthavara karma. These stationary beings are of five types: earth, water, fire, air, and plants.

**Doubt:** Water, fire, and air-bodied beings move, so are they mobile?

**Solution:** The movement that occurs in water, fire, and air-bodied beings is a result of the Pariṇāma (transformation) of the Pariṇāmik (transforming) state, therefore they are not mobile.

**Footnotes:**

1. Based on the Man. Pra. Tika.
2. Dh. Pu. 6, p. 51.
3. Dh. Pu. 5.
4. Dh. Pu. 6, p. 61.
5. Dh. Pu. 13, p. 363.
6. Sarvārthasiddhi.
7. Dh. Pu. 13, p. 363.
8. Dh. Pu. 13, p. 365.
9. Dh. Pu. 6, p. 61.
10. Sarvārthasiddhi.

Page #154:
---------------------------
Baba 74
Jivasamaas/121
The karma that destroys the body of the Bādar, which is an obstacle to others, is called Bādar-nāmakarma. If Bādar-nāmakarma does not exist, then the influence of Bādar-jīvas would be present, but this is not the case, because even those beings with a Prati-dhāti body are found.
The karma that destroys the subtle body is called Sūkṣma-nāmakarma. If Sūkṣma-nāmakarma does not exist, then there would be a lack of subtle beings, but this is not the case, because in the absence of their opposite, the influence of Bādar-kāyika beings is also found. Those beings whose body's movement is not hindered by water, land, etc., are Sūkṣma-jīvas.
Paryāpta - The karma that creates the formation of food, etc., is called Paryāpta-nāmakarma. It is of six types: Āhāra-paryāpta-nāmakarma, Śarīra-paryāpta-nāmakarma, Indriya-paryāpta-nāmakarma, Prāṇāpāna-paryāpta-nāmakarma, Bhāṣā-paryāpta-nāmakarma, and Manaḥ-paryāpta-nāmakarma. If Paryāpta-nāmakarma does not exist, then all beings would be Aparyāpta, but this is not the case, because the presence of Paryāpta-jīvas is found.
Aparyāpta - The karma due to which a being is not able to end the Paryāptis is called Aparyāpta-nāmakarma. If Aparyāpta-nāmakarma does not exist, then all beings would be Paryāpta, but this is not the case, because in the absence of the opposite, the influence of the desired is also found.
Prati-ek-śarīra - The body created by Śarīra-nāmakarma, which is the cause of the enjoyment of a soul, is called Prati-ek-śarīra-nāmakarma. The karma due to which only one being lives in one body is called Prati-ek-śarīra-nāmakarma. If Prati-ek-śarīra-nāmakarma does not exist, then only one being would be found in one body, but this is not the case, because their presence is found.
Sādhāraṇa-śarīra - The Sādhāraṇa body, which is the cause of the enjoyment of many souls, is called Sādhāraṇa-śarīra-nāmakarma. If Sādhāraṇa-nāmakarma does not exist, then all beings would be Prati-ek-śarīra, but this is not the case, because in the absence of the opposite, the influence of the desired being is also found.
The names of the four authorities who specifically mention Jivasamaas:
Jivasamaas is explained in detail by the differences in place, birth, body, and lineage.
Gāthā-ary - The description of all Jivasamaas should be done in order by place, birth, body, and lineage.

Page #155:
---------------------------
## 122/Go. Sa. Jodhakanda
## Verses 75-78

**Special Meaning:**

Describing the different types of *Jivasamas* (living beings) based on the number of *Jivasamas* in a single body (e.g., one *Jivasama*, two *Jivasamas*, three *Jivasamas*, etc.) is called *Jivasama* classification by location. The source of origin is called *Yoni*. Describing *Jivasamas* based on the different types of *Yoni* (e.g., *Sachitta*, *Praadi*, etc.) is called *Jivasama* classification by *Yoni*. Describing *Jivasamas* based on the different types of *Avgahana* (incarnation) from the lowest *Avgahana* of a *Sukshmalabhya* (subtle) *Pariaptanigod* (fully developed) *Jiva* to the highest *Avgahana* of a *Mahamatsya* (great fish) of five hundred *dhanush* (bows) is called *Jivasama* classification by *Sharirpravgahana* (body incarnation). There are many types of *Nokarmavargana* (karmic actions) that are the cause of the birth of different bodies. These *Nokarmavargana* lead to different *Kula* (families). Describing *Jivasamas* based on these *Kula* is called *Jivasama* classification by *Kula*. All *Jivasamas* should be described with their respective special differences. The examination done by experts is called *Praruprana* (classification).

**First Classification by Location:**

* *Samanya Jiva* (ordinary living being), *Tras* (mobile living being), and *Sthavar* (immobile living being)
* *Ekendriya* (one-sense), *Vikalendriya* (impaired sense), and *Sakalendriya* (complete sense)
* *Charimduge* (last) *Sakalendriya* (complete sense) with two classifications
* *Indriya* (sense), *Kaya* (body), and *Charim* (last) *Vasakaya* (body) with two, three, four, and five classifications
* Combining these classifications with the five *Sthavar* (immobile living beings) results in 7-8-6-10 locations. ||75||
* Combining *Tras* (mobile living being) with the five *Sthavar* (immobile living beings) and then combining *Tras* with two, three, four, and five classifications results in 11-12-13-14-15 locations. ||76||
* Combining *Tras* with six *Yugala* (pairs) and each *Vanaspati* (plant) with three, four, and five classifications results in 16-17-18 locations. ||76||
* Combining the five classifications of *Vas* (body) with the seven *Yugala* (pairs) of *Sthavar* (immobile living beings) results in the 16th location. ||76||
* Multiplying these 16 locations by one, two, and three results in the total number of locations. ||77||
* These 16 locations should be arranged in three rows. The first row should be based on *Samanya* (ordinary), the second row should be based on *Pariapt* (sufficient) and *Apariapt* (insufficient), and the third row should be based on *Pariapt* (sufficient), *Nitya Pariapt* (permanently sufficient), and *Labhya Pariapt* (obtainable sufficient). ||78||

**Special Meaning:**

(1) *Samanya Jiva* (ordinary living being), (2) *Tras* (mobile living being) and *Sthavar* (immobile living being), (3) *Ekendriya* (one-sense), *Vikalendriya* (impaired sense), and *Sakalendriya* (complete sense), (4) *Ekendriya* (one-sense), *Bikalendriya* (impaired sense), *Sanjipancheindriya* (conscious five senses), and *Ansanjiipancheindriya* (unconscious five senses), (5) *Ekendriya* (one-sense), *Dwiindriya* (two senses),

Page #156:
---------------------------
## Gatha 75-76
## Jivasamaas/123

**1.**  Sri-indriya, Chatur-indriya, Pancha-indriya, (6) Prithvi-kayika, Ap-kayika, Teja-kayika, Vayu-kayika, Vanaspati-kayika and Trasa-kayika, (7) Prithvi-kayika, Ap-kayika, Teja-kayika, Vayu-kayika, Vanaspati-kayika, Vikala-indriya, Sakala-indriya, (8) Prithvi-kayika, Ap-kayika, Teja-kayika, Vayu-kayika, Vanaspati-kayika, Vikala-indriya, Sanjeepa-pancha-indriya and Asanjnoopa-pancha-indriya, (8) Prithvi-kayika, Ap-kayika, Teja-kayika, Vayu-kayika, Vanaspati-kayika, Dwi-indriya, Tri-indriya, Chatur-indriya and Pancha-indriya, (10) Prithvi-kayika, Ap-kayika, Teja-kayika, Vayu-kayika, Vanaspati-kayika, in these five sthavar-kaya, the Dwi-indriya, Tri-indriya, Chatur-indriya, Sanjeepa-pancha-indriya and Asanjnoopa-pancha-indriya, these five divisions, when combined, result in ten locations.

**2.** In Jivasamaas, the first location is with respect to the collective dravya-atmik-naya, and the remaining locations are with respect to the predominance of vyavahar-naya, due to their being in the form of divisions. ||75||

**3.** (11) After the five sthavar-kaya, with respect to the coarse and subtle, there are five pairs, namely, Badar-Prithvi-kayika-Sookshma-Prithvi-kayika, Badar-Ap-kayika-Sookshma-Ap-kayika, Badar-Teja-kayika-Sookshma-Teja-kayika, Badar-Vanaspati-kayika-Sookshma-Vanaspati-kayika. In this way, there are ten divisions of sthavar, and when Trasa-kayika is added to them, there are eleven locations in Jivasamaas. (12) In these same five pairs, namely, Badar and Sookshma Prithvi-Ap-Teja-Vayu-Vanaspati-kayika, when the two divisions of Trasa, Vikala-indriya and Sakala-indriya, are added, there are twelve locations. (13) In those same five sthavar-pairs, namely, the aforementioned ten divisions of sthavar, when the three divisions of Trasa, Vikala-indriya, Sanjneepa-pancha-indriya and Asanjnoopa-pancha-indriya, are added, there are thirteen locations. (14) In those same five sthavar-pairs, when the four divisions of Trasa, Dwi-indriya, Tri-indriya, Chatur-indriya and Pancha-indriya, are added, there are fourteen locations. (15) In those same five sthavar-pairs, when the five divisions of Trasa, Dwi-indriya, Tri-indriya, Chatur-indriya and Asanjnoopa-pancha-indriya, are added, there are fifteen locations. (16) There are six pairs of sthavar, and each Vanaspati-kayika, namely, Badar-Prithvi-kayika-Sookshma-Prithvi-kayika, Badar-Ap-kayika-Sookshma-Ap-kayika, Badar-Teja-kayika-Sookshma-Teja-kayika, Badar-Vayu-kayika-Sookshma-Vayu-kayika, Badar-Nitya-nigoda (ordinary Vanaspati-kayika)-Sookshma-Nitya-nigoda, Badar-Chatur-gati-nigoda-Sookshma-Chatur-gati-nigoda, these six pairs, twelve in total, and each Vanaspati-kayika, thus thirteen divisions of sthavar-kayika, when the three divisions of Trasa, Vikala-indriya, Sanjneepa-pancha-indriya and Asanjnoopa-pancha-indriya, are added, there are sixteen locations. (17) In the aforementioned thirteen divisions of sthavar, when the four divisions of Trasa, Dwi-indriya, Tri-indriya, Chatur-indriya and Pancha-indriya, are added, there are seventeen locations. (18) In the aforementioned thirteen locations of sthavar, when the five divisions of Trasa, Dwi-indriya, Tri-indriya, Chatur-indriya, Sanjeepa-pancha-indriya and Asanjnoopa-pancha-indriya, are added, there are eighteen locations. ||76||

**4.** (16) There are seven pairs of sthavar, namely, Badar-Prithvi-kayika-Sookshma-Prithvi-kayika, Badar-Ap-kayika-Sookshma-Ap-kayika, Badar-Teja-kayika-Sookshma-Teja-kayika, Badar-Vayu-kayika-Sookshma-Vayu-kayika, Badar-Nitya-nigoda-Sookshma-Nitya-nigoda, Badar-Chatur-gati-nigoda-Sookshma-Chatur-gati-nigoda, Saprati-stha-pratyek-Vanaspati-kayika-Aprati-stha-pratyek-Vanaspati-kayika, when the five divisions of Trasa, Dwi-indriya, Tri-indriya, Chatur-indriya, Sanjeepa-pancha-indriya and Asanjnoopa-pancha-indriya, are added, there are nineteen locations in Jivasamaas.

**5.** By multiplying the locations from one to nineteen by one, two and three respectively, the final nineteen locations, thirty-eight locations and fifty-seven locations become the locations of Jivasamaas. ||77||

**6.** There should be three rows of all these locations of Jivasamaas, from one to nineteen, namely, one, two, three, four, and so on, increasing by one, up to sixteen, there are sixteen locations of Jivasamaas. There should be three rows of these nineteen locations. The first row is with respect to the general, because in it, there is no alternative of sufficient or insufficient.

**7

Page #157:
---------------------------
##  Translation:

**124 / Go. Sa. Jayakanda**
**Verse 36**

In the first row, multiplying each of the 13 places by one will result in the same number, i.e., 19 places will be obtained from one to sixteen. In the second row, due to the intention of "incomplete" (apurna) meaning insufficient and "other" (itar) meaning sufficient, multiplying by two will double the number of each place, i.e., two, four, six, eight, etc., increasing by two, 38 places are obtained. Again, in the "first" (prathaman) meaning the third row, due to the intention of "sufficient" (paryapt), "obtainable sufficient" (labdhyaparyapt) and "south-west sufficient" (nirrityaparyapt), multiplying each number by three will result in three, six, nine, twelve, etc., increasing by three, the number of places of jivasamas is obtained up to fifty-seven (57). Although the second and third rows are "first" (prathaman), but due to the separate mention of the second row in the verse, the third row is taken by the "not first" (aprathama). || 78 || 1

**Th. Pu. 2 Page 561** states the places of jivasamas as follows: - Two or three, four or six, six or nine, eight or twelve, ten or fifteen, twelve or eighteen, fourteen or twenty-one, sixteen or twenty-four, eighteen or twenty-seven, twenty or thirty, twenty-two or thirty-three, twenty-four or thirty-six, twenty-six or thirty-nine, twenty-eight or forty-two, thirty or forty-five, thirty-two or forty-eight, thirty-four or fifty-one, thirty-six or fifty-four, thirty-eight or fifty-seven, are jivasamas. Their detailed explanation is from page 561 to 566 of Dh. Pu. 2, one should know from there.

**Dhavalakar Acharya Shri Virsenaswami** has stated the number in relation to "sufficiently liberated" (nirvrittiparayapt) and "liberated sufficient" (nirvrittyaparyapt) or has stated in relation to "liberated sufficient" (nirvrittiparayapt), "liberated sufficient" (nirvrittyaparyapt) and "obtainable sufficient" (labdhyaparyapt), he has not stated the number in relation to "general" (samanya), but in Go. Sa. Jayakanda verse 78, the number has been stated in relation to "general" (samanya) in the first row. Although there is only a difference in the Dhavala commentary and Go. Sa. Jayakanda in stating the number of jivasamas in relation to "general" (samanya) and not stating it, there is no other difference, however, there is a lot of difference in the detailed description of the differences. For example, in Go. Sa. Jayakanda, two jivasamas, "trembling" (tras) and "stationary" (sthavar) are mentioned, but in the Dhavala commentary, two jivasamas, "sufficient" (paryapt) and "insufficient" (aparyapt) are mentioned. To know in detail, one should see Dh. Pu. 2 pages 561 to 566. The description of the number of places of jivasamas is as follows:

**General (samanya)** | **Sufficient (paryapt)** | **Sufficient (paryapt) and Liberated Sufficient (nirvrittyaparyapt)** | **Insufficient (aparyapt)**
------- | -------- | -------- | --------
1 | 2 | 3 | 4
5 | 6 | 9 | 8
10 | 12 | 15 | 12
13 | 16 | 21 | 16
17 | 20 | 27 | 20
19 | 24 | 33 | 24
21 | 28 | 39 | 28
23 | 32 | 45 | 32
25 | 36 | 51 | 36
27 | 40 | 57 | 40

We state the jivasamas:
**sfraणं इगिविगले ससिगियजलथलखगाणं । गन्भभवे सम्मुच्छे दुतिगं भोगयलखेचरे दो दो ॥ 76 ॥**

1. Based on the commentary of Mandaprabodhini.

Page #158:
---------------------------
Sama 71-50
Jivasamaas/125
In the case of the Mleccha-mandala humans, there are two types, and in the case of the Bhoga-bhumij humans, there are also two types.
In the case of the Suranirya, there are two types each, and in the case of the Jivasamaas, there are 68 types. ||50||
Gathaartha: There are 51 types of one-sensory and multi-sensory beings, two types of aquatic, terrestrial, and aerial beings in the case of the five-sensory Tiryanchas, and three types of the born-from-the-womb and the born-from-the-egg in the case of the conscious and unconscious beings. There are two types of terrestrial and aerial beings in the case of the Bhoga-bhumij beings. ||76||
Aryakhanda humans have three types, Mleccha-mandala humans have two types, Bhoga-bhumij humans have two types, Kubhoga-bhumij humans have two types, and Devas and Narakas have two types each. Thus, there are a total of 68 Jivasamaas. ||10||
Visheshartha: There are 14 types of one-sensory stationary beings, and 3 types of multi-sensory beings. Multiplying these 17 types by three (sufficient, attainable, and cessation) gives us 51 special Jivasamaas related to one-sensory and multi-sensory beings. This is because all 17 types have the three types of sufficient, attainable, and cessation due to their birth from the egg. There are two types of aquatic, terrestrial, and aerial beings in the case of the five-sensory Tiryanchas, born-from-the-womb, conscious and unconscious beings, who are sufficient and cessation. This is because the born-from-the-womb beings do not have the attainable type. Thus, there are 12 Jivasamaas in the case of the born-from-the-womb, conscious and unconscious, five-sensory Tiryanchas, who are Karma-bhumij. However, the born-from-the-egg beings have the attainable type. Thus, there are 18 Jivasamaas in the case of the born-from-the-egg beings (conscious-unconscious 2, aquatic-terrestrial-aerial 3, sufficient-cessation-attainable 3). Thus, there are 30 Jivasamaas in the case of the five-sensory Tiryanchas, who are Karma-bhumij. Adding the four Jivasamaas of the Bhoga-bhumij beings to these, we get a total of 34 Jivasamaas for the five-sensory Tiryanchas. Adding the 51 types related to one-sensory and multi-sensory beings to these 34 Jivasamaas, we get a total of 85 Jivasamaas for the Tiryanchas.
In the case of the Aryakhanda humans, who are Karma-bhumij, there are three types: sufficient, eternally sufficient, and attainable. However, there are no attainable humans in the Mleccha-mandala, so there are only two types: sufficient and eternally sufficient. Similarly, there are no attainable humans in the Bhoga-bhumij and Kubhoga-bhumij, so there are also two types of humans in each. Thus, there are a total of 9 Jivasamaas related to humans (3+2+2+2). There are two types of Devas and two types of Narakas. This is because there are only two types of Devas and Narakas: sufficient and eternally sufficient. There is no attainable type in the case of Devas and Narakas. Thus, adding the 6 types related to humans, Devas, and Narakas to the 34 types related to the five-sensory Tiryanchas, we get a total of 47 Jivasamaas related to the five-sensory beings in all four paths. Adding the 51 types related to one-sensory and multi-sensory beings to these, we get a total of 98 Jivasamaas. (From the commentary of the Mandaprabodhini Tika)
In the commentary on verses 131-132-133 of the Swamikartikayamupreksha Gatha, Shri Shubhachandracharya has mentioned 15 places of Jivasamaas. These are as follows: There are 66 types of born-from-the-egg Tiryanchas and 16 types of born-from-the-womb Tiryanchas.
Shankha: What is meant by born-from-the-egg?
Samadhan: The ability of the pudgalaskandha to change its form and shape.

Page #159:
---------------------------
## 126/Go.Ma. Jivakanda
## Gatha 76-80

The name **Sammurchhana** is given to the body formation of a living being arising from the aggregation of matter from all sides, and living beings born from **Sammurchhana** are called **Sammurchhana** beings.

**Question:** What are **Garbhaja** beings?

**Answer:** The process of a living being transforming the **raja** and **virya** (sperm) into its body form is called **Garbha** (womb). Beings born from this **Garbha** are called **Garbhaja**. In other words, beings born from the mother's womb are **Garbhaja**.

**Sammurchhana** beings are of 66 types, divided into 23 categories of **Tiryancha** (non-human beings). These 23 categories are as follows:

* **Sukṣma Dhabada** (minute) **Pṛthvīkāyika** (earth-bodied) - 2 types
* **Sukṣma Bada** (minute) **Jalakāyika** (water-bodied) - 2 types
* **Sukṣma Bada** (minute) **Agnikāyika** (fire-bodied) - 2 types
* **Sukṣma Bada** (minute) **Vāyukāyika** (air-bodied) - 2 types
* **Sukṣma Bada** (minute) **Nitya-Nigoda-Sādhāraṇa-Vanaspatikāyika** (everlasting-cluster-common-plant-bodied) - 2 types
* **Sukṣma Bada** (minute) **Chatur-Gati-Nigoda-Sādhāraṇa-Vanaspatikāyika** (four-motion-cluster-common-plant-bodied) - 2 types
* **Pratiṣṭhita** (established) **Pratyek** (each) **Vanaspati** (plant) **Kāmin** (desiring) **Bada** (cluster) - 1 type
* **Apratiṣṭhita** (not established) **Pratyek** (each) **Vanaspati** (plant) **Bada** (cluster) - 1 type

Thus, there are 14 types of **Ekendriya** (one-sense) **sthāvara** (stationary) beings.

* **Shankha-Sīpa** (conch-shell) etc. are **Dwīndriya** (two-sense) beings.
* **Kandha-Chiṭṭī** (ant) etc. are **Trīndriya** (three-sense) beings.
* **Ḍāṁs-Macchhar** (mosquito) etc. are **Chaturindriya** (four-sense) beings.

These 3 are **Vikalendriya** (imperfect-sense) **Tiryancha**.

* **Karmabhūmija** (earth-born) **Jalachara** (aquatic) **Sañjñī** (conscious) and **Asañjñī** (unconscious) **Panchendriya** (five-sense) **Tiryancha** - 2 types
* **Karmabhūmija** (earth-born) **Nabhachara** (aerial) **Sañjñī** (conscious) and **Asañjñī** (unconscious) **Panchendriya** (five-sense) **Tiryancha** - 2 types
* **Karmabhūmija** (earth-born) **Sthalachara** (terrestrial) **Sañjñī** (conscious) and **Asañjñī** (unconscious) **Panchendriya** (five-sense) **Tiryancha** - 2 types

Thus, there are 6 types of **Karmabhūmija** (earth-born) **Panchendriya** (five-sense) **Tiryancha**.

Adding together the 14 **Ekendriya** (one-sense), 3 **Vikalendriya** (imperfect-sense), and 6 **Panchendriya** (five-sense) types, there are a total of (14+3+6=23) **Sammurchhana** **Tiryancha**.

Each of these 23 categories is further divided into three types: **Paryāpta** (sufficient), **Nitya-Paryāpta** (everlasting-sufficient), and **Labdhya-Paryāpta** (obtainable-sufficient). Therefore, multiplying 23 by 3 (23 x 3 = 66), there are 66 **Jīvasamāsa** (living being aggregates) of **Sammurchhana** **Tiryancha**.

Adding the 16 types of **Garbhaja** **Tiryancha** to this, there are a total of 85 **Jīvasamāsa** (living being aggregates) related to **Tiryancha**.

The 16 types of **Garbhaja** **Tiryancha** are as follows:

* **Machchhī** (fish) etc. **Karmabhūmija** (earth-born) **Garbhaja** (womb-born) **Jalachara** (aquatic) **Sañjñī** (conscious) and **Asañjñī** (unconscious) **Panchendriya** (five-sense) **Tiryancha** - 2 types
* **Hiran** (deer) etc. **Karmabhūmija** (earth-born) **Garbhaja** (womb-born) **Sthalachara** (terrestrial) **Sañjñī** (conscious) and **Asañjñī** (unconscious) **Panchendriya** (five-sense) **Tiryancha** - 2 types
* **Pakṣī** (bird) etc. **Karmabhūmija** (earth-born) **Garbhaja** (womb-born) **Nabhachara** (aerial) **Sañjñī** (conscious) and **Asañjñī** (unconscious) **Panchendriya** (five-sense) **Tiryancha** - 2 types
* **Bhoga-Bhūmija** (pleasure-earth-born) **Sthalachara** (terrestrial) **Garbhaja** (womb-born) are only **Sañjñī** (conscious), therefore there is only 1 type.
* **Bhoga-Bhūmija** (pleasure-earth-born) **Nabhachara** (aerial) **Garbhaja** (womb-born) are also only **Sañjñī** (conscious), therefore there is only 1 type.

Page #160:
---------------------------
Life Matters / 127
Doubt - What is meant by every plant with a body and every plant without a body?
Solution - Those plants which have a gross body, i.e., a nigoda, are called every plant with a body. Those which are gross, i.e., without a nigoda, are called every plant without a body.
Cow 7680
:
A
1
'There are four types of humans: womb-born, karma-land, Arya and Mleccha, and enjoyment-land and non-enjoyment-land. Each of these is sufficient and insufficient. Therefore, there are eight types of womb-born humans and one attainable sufficient fainting human; these total (6+1) 6 living beings related to humans. There are two types of gods, sufficient and insufficient, and similarly, there are two types of hell beings, sufficient and insufficient. Thus, there are 4 living beings related to gods and hell beings. Altogether, there are 85 living beings related to all places, 6 related to humans, 2 related to gods, and 2 related to hell beings (65 + 92 + 2) for a total of 68.
Three verses related to living beings
Suvarakujalaseva freeaagrata - nigov - dhulidara. Padithiwar panchapattiya vilatipunna pushnayugga ||1|| Igivi gale igisivi sharanisari gagayajalathal khaganam. Gabhabhave sampucche itigati bhogathal khage ghare do do ||2|| Prajjabasammu game mlecchabhogathiya kunarapantti sa ye.
Surariye vo do ivi jivasamala hu chhaiyacharis ||3||
Meaning of the verses: Pure earth-bodied, sound earth-bodied, water-bodied, fire-bodied, air-bodied, eternal nigoda, and class nigoda, after these, there are five types of every plant with a body and every plant without a body, both subtle and gross, and in free, there are two types of insufficient (insufficient, insufficient) and one type of sufficient. Thus, there are 1 living being related to one-sensed, 1 related to defective-sensed, 1 related to conscious, and 1 related to occasional, aquatic, terrestrial, and aerial. Among these, there are two types of those who move and three types of those who faint. There are two types of terrestrial and aerial in three types of enjoyment-lands. In the womb-section, there are humans who faint. In the grand, there are three types of enjoyment-lands in the Mleccha section and one type of non-enjoyment-land. Thus, there are six types of womb-born humans, and in each of these, there are two types: sufficient and insufficient. There are also two types (sufficient and insufficient) in 135 types of gods and hell beings. Thus, altogether, there are 406 living beings. ||1-3||
Special meaning - Soil etc. is pure earth-bodied, and stone etc. is sound earth-bodied. Thus, there are two types of earth-bodied, water-bodied, fire-bodied, air-bodied, eternal nigoda ordinary plant, and four-gated nigoda ordinary plant. After these seven, there are fourteen types due to the difference between subtle and gross (7*2), and five (vine, creeper, root, small trees like lemon and orange, large trees like banyan etc.) types of every plant with a body and every plant without a body.
1. Those who have a gross body are called every plant with a body. Those who do not have a body are called every plant without a body. (Swa. Ka. Anu. Ga. 120 Tika) |
I

Page #161:
---------------------------
## 128/Go. Sa. Jivakanda
**Verse 1**

There are three (3) types of Vikal Tray: Dwindriya, Triindriya, and Chaturindriya, totaling (14+10+3) 27 types. These 27 types are related to Ekendriya and Vikalendriya. Each of these types is further divided into three categories: Paryapt, Nityaparyapt, and Sadhyaparyapt. Therefore, multiplying 27 by 3, we get (27*3) 81 types of Ekendriya-Vikalendriya.

Panchendriya, Jalchar, Thalchar, and Nabhchar, which are the five-sense beings, are further divided into six types based on Sanjee and Prasanjee. These have 12 types based on Paryapt and Nityaparyapt in their Garbhaja form. In their Sammuchhana form, they have 18 types based on Paryapt, Nityaparyapt, and Labdhyaparyapt. In the Thalchar and Nabhchar Panchendriya, which belong to the Utkrishta, Madhyam, and Jaghanya Bhogbhumi, there are 12 types based on Paryapt and Nityaparyapt. Thus, there are a total of (12+18+12) 42 types related to Panchendriya Tiryanch.

In Aryakhanda, the Labdhyaparyapt Sammuchhana are humans, hence there is one type of Sammuchhana human. In Bhayakhanda, Mlechchhakhanda, Utkrishta, Madhyam, Jaghanya Bhogbhumi, and Kubhogbhumi humans, there are six types of humans. There are ten types of Bhavanvasi Dev, eight types of Vamadhyantar Dev, five types of Jyotishi Dev, and 63 types of Vaimanik Dev in 63 patals. All these together total (10+8+5+63) 86 types of Dev. There are 46 types of Naraki in 46 patals. Thus, there are (6+86+46) 141 types related to humans, Dev, and Naraki. Based on Paryapt and Nityaparyapt, these become (141*2) 282 types.

Adding the 81 types of Ekendriya-Vikalendriya, 42 types of Panchendriya Tiryanch, 1 type of Sammuchhana human, and 282 types of Garbhaja human, Dev, and Naraki, we get a total of (81+42+1+282) 406 types of Jivasamas.

Thus, the categorization of Jivasamas is complete.

**Yoni Adhikar**

**Description of the types of Prakriti Yoni and the prohibition of Garbha in Shankavatta Yoni**

"Shankavattayajoni Kummunnayasa pattajoni ya | Tatha ya Shankavatte Rinayama Vivjjade Gabbo ||1||"

**Meaning of the verse:**

There are three types of Prakriti Yoni: Shankavatta Yoni, Karmoannat Yoni, and Vanshapatra Yoni. Of these, Shankavatta Yoni is naturally devoid of Garbha. ||1||

**Explanation:**

The Yoni that has a spiral shape like a conch shell is called Shankavatta Yoni. The Yoni that is elevated like the back of a tortoise is called Kummoannat Yoni. The Yoni that resembles the shape of a bamboo leaf is called Vanshapatra Yoni. Of these, Garbha is naturally prohibited in Shankavatta Yoni. Women with Shankavatta Yoni are infertile (bandhya). For example, Devangana and the female gem among the fourteen gems of a Chakravarti are naturally infertile.

**Doubt:**

What is Garbha?

**Solution:**

"Garbha: Shukrashogitgaranam" Garbha is the combination of Shukra (sperm) and Shoonit (blood). Shankavatta Yoni does not exist in Bhogbhumi.

1. Moolachar Paryapti Adhikar Ga. 61. From the base.
2. Shri Yamunandi Pracharya's Moolachar Deeka Ek M. Pr. Teeka.

Page #162:
---------------------------
##  Verse 82
**Jiva Samaas/129**

Those born in the Kūrmoṇṇata and Vaṃśapatra yonis are instructed as follows: "Kummūṇṇapajogīe, Titthayara Duvihachakkavaṭṭī ya | Rāmā vi ya jāyate, Sesāe Sesagajarano ya ||2||"

**Verse Meaning:** In the Kūrmoṇṇata yoni, Tīrthankaras, two types of Cakravartīs, and Balabhadra are born. The rest are born in the Tṛtīyayoni as other humans. ||82||

**Special Meaning:** The Kūrmoṇṇata yoni is a special yoni with a pure and holy region and an abundance of pure pudgalas. In this yoni, Tīrthankaras, Cakravartīs, Vasudeva, Prativāsudeva, and Baldeva are born. The rest, meaning those born in the Bhogbhūmija and other Vaṃśapatra yonis, are born in the other yonis. The verse mentions "Duviha Cakravaṭṭī," which means there are two types of Cakravartīs: Sakalacakravaṭṭī and Ardhacakravaṭṭī. Vasudeva and Prativāsudeva, also known as Nārāyaṇa and Pratiṇārāyaṇa, are both Ardhacakravaṭṭīs. "Rāmā" refers to Baldeva, the brother of Nārāyaṇa.

## Verse 83

**Jiva Samaas/129**

The differences in birth and the related qualities of yonis are as follows: "Jammā khalu sammūccharaṇagabbhuvavaḍā du hodi tajjoṇī | Saccitta-sīdasauṇḍasedara missa patteyaṃ ||83||"

**Verse Meaning:** There are three types of birth: Sammūcchana, Garbha, and Upāpāda. The yonis of birth are Sacitta, Sīta, Sanvṛta, and their opposites: Acitta, Uṣṇa, Vivṛta, and a mixture of each. As much as possible, each yoni should be described along with the type of birth, such as Sammūcchana, etc. ||83||

**Special Meaning:** The birth or origin of a samsārī jīva is the taking on of a new body in the Uttarabhavu after leaving the body of the Pūrvabhavu. Although, in ultimate truth, the first moment of the Uttarabhavu, which is the first paryaya, is called birth because the destruction (vyaya) of the Pūrvaparyaya and the origin (utpāda) of the Uttaraparyaya happen simultaneously. Just as the straightening of a finger is destroyed at the same time as the bending of the finger, there is no difference in time between the two. However, the taking on of the Yugaḷapiṇḍa in the form of Sammūcchana, etc., is called birth by convention. Because the absence of the Pūrvaparyaya and the origin of the Uttaraparyaya at the same time is called birth, the first moment of taking on a body in the nearby time is called birth by convention. Just as the bank of the Ganges is called the Ganges by convention because of the proximity of the Ganges, similarly, the first moment of taking on a body, which is the first moment of the Uttarabhavu, is the same as the time of the destruction of the Pūrvabhavu because the origin and destruction happen simultaneously. Therefore, the first moment of taking on a body is the main characteristic of birth for those born in the Ṛjagati. The birth of samsārī jīvas happens in three ways: Sammūcchana birth, Garbha birth, and Upāpāda birth. The Tattvārthasūtra also states: "Sammūcchana-garbha-upāpāda..."

**Footnotes:**

1. Mūlācāra Paryāpti Adhikāra Gā. 62.
2. Based on Mūlācāra Ṭīkā and M.Pr. Ṭīkā.

Page #163:
---------------------------
## 130/Go. Sa. Jivakanda
## Gatha 82-83
## Birth (2/11)
## Sammurchana - 'Sam' - Samantat, meaning in all three realms, i.e., the upper, lower, and transverse realms, the gathering of the appropriate pudgala atoms for the body from all directions, above, below, and sideways, to form the body is Sammurchana. It is a birth distinct from Garbha and Uppapad birth.
## Garbha - The mutual mingling of Shukra and Shonit, which are the causes of the body's maturation in the womb, i.e., the uterus of a woman, is called Garbha. Or, the assimilation of the food consumed by the mother in her womb, i.e., the process of Garga, is called Garbha. 'Garbha' is a conventional term and refers to the birth of Jarayuja, Andaja, and Potja.
## Uppapad - The birth where the Jiva moves after being obtained is called Uppapad birth. In the case of Devas, obtaining or taking shelter in the Samputa Shayya (a bed shaped like a conch shell), and in the case of Narakas, obtaining or taking shelter in a burrow shaped like the mouth of a camel, etc., and obtaining the pudgala skandhas suitable for the body's transformation is Uppapad. 'Uppapad' is a conventional term referring to the birth of Devas and Narakas.
## The place of origin of Sammurchana, Garbha, and Uppapad birth is called Yoni. Although there are 84 types of Yoni, they are classified into nine types based on the specific qualities of Sachitta, etc. Each of the specific births, Sammurchana, Garbha, and Uppapad, has Yonis with specific qualities of Sachitta, etc. These Yonis are as follows: "Sachitta, Sheet, Samvrita, and others, i.e., their opposites, Achitta, Ushna, and Vivrita, and the mixture of each, i.e., Sachitta-Achitta, Sheet-Ushna, and Samvrita-Vivrita, are the Yonis of birth." The specific transformation of the Atma's consciousness is called Chitta. The pudgala particles that exist with this Chitta are called Sachitta. Sheet is a type of Sparshaguna. It refers to both the substance and the quality, like Shukla, etc. Therefore, the substance with cold touch and weight is also called Sheet, i.e., the pudgala substance with abundant cold touch is called Sheet. That which is of good quality is Samvrita. Here, the innermost hidden component, i.e., the place in the form of a component that is not visible, is called Samvrita. All three have their opposites. 'Itra' also means 'other'. Those that exist with them are called 'Itra-Setra'. These 'Itra' are Achitta, Ushna, and Vivrita. The pudgala particles without consciousness are Achitta. The pudgala substance with abundant Sparshaguna is Ushna. The clearly visible component is Vivrita. The dualistic, i.e., both forms, is called Misra. Here, the mixture of both qualities is called Misra. Sachitta-Achitta mixed, Sheet-Ushna mixed, Samvrita-Vivrita mixed.
## The word 'Patteyam' in the Gatha is used to indicate the order in the mixture, so that it is understood that Sachitta is mixed with Achitta, not with Sheet, etc. Similarly, Sheet-Ushna and Samvrita-Vivrita are mixed.
## Doubt - In this way, there is no difference between Yoni and birth.
## 1. Based on M.P. Tika. 2. T. Sutra No. 2 Sutra 32. 3. Based on S.Si., Rajapathika, and Mandaprabodhini Tika.

Page #164:
---------------------------
## Verse 4
## Jivasamaas/131

**Resolution:** It is not correct to say so, because there is a difference in the womb and birth due to the difference between the base and the object. The wombs like Sachittaadi are the base and the differences in birth are the objects. Because in the base, which is the form of Sachittaadi womb, the soul acquires the pudgals suitable for the body, food and senses through the birth of Sammoorchanaadi.

**Verse:**
The birth of Pot, Jarayuja and Andaja beings is through the womb. The birth of Devas and Narakas is through Uppaad. The birth of the remaining beings is through Sammoorchana, as stated in the Parmagam. ||4||

**Explanation:**
**Pot-Garbhajanma:** The birth of a being without any covering, whose all limbs are complete and who is capable of movement and other activities as soon as it comes out of the womb, is called Pot-Garbhajanma.

**Jarayuja:** The Jarayu is a membrane that is not made of water and is made of blood. The being born in it is called Jarayuja.

**Andaja:** The Andaja is a hard, round egg, whose covering is made of Shukra and Moona. The being born in it is called Andaja.

**Question:** Are there also eggs of birds?

**Resolution:** There is no rule that eggs are born only in the womb. Eggs with the above-mentioned characteristics are born in the womb, but there is no rule for other types of eggs to be born in the womb.

**Further Explanation:**
Only Jarayuja beings are seen to perform activities like language learning, and great beings like Chakradhara and Vasudeva are born only in them. The path of Samyagdarshanaadi (Ratnatraya) leads to the happiness of Moksha, which is connected only with Jarayuja, not with others. Pot is the origin of Andaja, because among Andaja beings, there are parrots, mynas, etc., who are skilled in pronouncing letters.

**Conclusion:**
Pot, Jarayuja and Andaja are the beings born through the womb, or the beings born through the womb are Pot, Jarayuja and Andaja. Devas and Narakas are the beings born through Uppaad, or the beings born through Uppaad are Devas and Narakas. The remaining beings, other than those born through the womb and Uppaad, are humans and Tiryanchas, who are born through Sammoorchana. All beings from Ekendriya to Chaturindriya, and the Panchaindriya humans and Tiryanchas who are Labdhyaparaptak, are born through Sammoorchana. Even among the Sanjee and Asanjee Paraptak Tiryanchas, some are born through Sammoorchana.

**References:**
1. Sarvarthasiddhi
2. Sarvarthasiddhi 2/33
3. Dh. Pu. 1 p. 346
4. Rajavatik 2/33
5. "Jarayujaandapotanaam garbha:" (T. Su. Pr. 2 Su. 33)
6. "Devanarakamaamuppaad." (T. Su. Pr. 2 Su. 34)
7. "Sheshaanam sammoorchhanam" (T. Mu. Pr. 2 Su. 35)

Page #165:
---------------------------
##  132 / Go.Sa. Jivakanda
##  Verses 85-87
##  Kamar
##  The Statement

**Verse 85**
"Uppaad (birth from a womb) has a Prachitta (pure) yoni, Garbha (birth from a womb) has a Misra (mixed) yoni, and Sammucchaana (birth from a womb) has all three types of yonis: Sachitta (pure consciousness), Shrachitta (impure consciousness), and Misra (mixed)."

**Verse 85 Explanation**
The division of Sachitta and other yonis in Sammucchaana, Garbha, and Uppaad births is as follows:

In Uppaad births, the Devas and Narakas have a Samputa (closed) bed, a camel-shaped mouth, etc., as their birth places. The जीव (living being) is born from a place like a burrow. Before the birth, there is only Chitta (consciousness) because these yonis are not dependent on other beings. Or, the Pudgala (matter) in these Uppaad regions is Prachetan (conscious). In Uppaad births, there are no Sachitta or Misra yonis.

In Garbha births, there is only a Misra yoni because the mixture of the male's Galita Chitta (dissolved consciousness) Shukra (semen) with the female's Sachitta Shonita (blood) creates a Misra yoni. It is not possible to have a yoni with only Achitta Shukra (unconscious semen) or only Sachitta Stri Shonita (conscious female blood). Or, the mixture of the unconscious Viry (semen) and Raja (menstrual blood) with the conscious Atma (soul) in the mother's womb creates a Misra yoni.

In Sammucchaana births, all three types of yonis: Sachitta, Shrachitta, and Misra, are present. In Sammucchaana births, from Ekendriya (one sense) to Panchendriya (five senses), some have Sachitta yonis, some have Achitta yonis, and some have a mixture of Sachitta and Prachitta yonis. The Nigod (ordinary) Sammucchaana beings have Sachitta yonis. The rest of the Sammucchaanas have either Achitta or Misra yonis.

The above statement is also mentioned in another verse (in Mulachar).

**Verse 86**
"In Uppaad births, there are two types of yonis: Sheet (cold) and Uparana (warm). In the rest of the births, there are three types of yonis: Sheet, Ushna (hot), and Misra. The yoni of those born from Uppaad and Ekendriya beings is Sanvruta (closed), while the yoni of Vikalendriya (disabled) beings is Vivruta (open)."

**Verse 87**
"The yoni of those born from Garbha is Misra, a mixture of Sanvruta and Vivruta. The yoni of Panchendriya Sammucchaana beings is Vivruta, like that of Vikalendriya beings."

**Verse 86-87 Explanation**
Shri Praklankdev (in Rajavartika 2/33, 24-26) says that Devas, Narakas, etc.

1. Based on Man. Pra. Teeka and Rajavartika.
2. Achitta, indeed, is the yoni of the Neraiyaana (liberated) and Devas. Misra is the yoni of the rest, as well as the Garbha (womb) births. 12/56 (Paryapta Adhikar).

Page #166:
---------------------------
## Verse

There are closed yonis (sanvṛtayoni) for the one-sensed (ekendriya) and the saints, and open yonis (vivṛtayoni) for the multi-sensed (vikaleṇdriya) beings. The womb-born (garbhaja) have mixed yonis (sanvṛta-vivṛta mili hui). It is also stated in the Muladhara:

"The one-sensed, the hell-born, and the gods have closed yonis. The multi-sensed, that is, the two-sensed, three-sensed, and four-sensed beings have open yonis. The womb-born have mixed yonis, that is, closed and open combined." (12/58, Paryā. Pravi.)

The Rajavatik and Mulachara texts do not mention the yoni of the five-sensed beings born from the womb (sammūrchana janmavale pancendriya jiva), but the latter half of verse 87 in the Go. Sa. Jivakanda states that the five-sensed beings born from the womb have open yonis.

In the case of beings born from the womb (upāpadajanama), there are both cold yonis (śītayoni) and hot yonis (uṣṇayoni). For example, in the hell-born beings, from the first earth (ratnaprabhā) to the three-fourths of the fifth earth (ghūmprabhā), there are hot yonis. In the remaining one-fourth of the fifth hell, and in the entire sixth and seventh hells, there are cold yonis. In the remaining womb-born (marbhaja) and the beings born from the womb (sammūrchana jiva), there are three types of yonis: cold, hot, and mixed. However, in the Mulachara (12/60), the hot yoni is mentioned for the beings with a fiery body (tejākāyika jiva), and in the Sanskrit commentary, the Acharya Shri Isunandi, the author of the Siddhantachakravarti, has stated that the beings with a non-fiery body (apākāyika) have only cold yonis.

In the case of beings born from the womb (upāpadajanama), the one-sensed beings born from the womb (ekendriyarūpa sammūrchana sanma) have closed yonis. For example, the womb (samputa śayyā) and the camel's mouth (uṣṭra mukhākāra upāpadasthan) remain closed by rule after the birth of the desired being (vivṛkṣita jiva) and before the birth of another being. In the case of the multi-sensed beings born from the womb (vikaleṇdriyarūpa sammūrchana janma), the yoni is open. In the case of the womb-born (garbhajanma), the yoni is a mixture of closed and open. This is because the semen (galitaśukra) from the male body is open, and the womb (śorīṇata) of the female is closed. The mixture of these two is the womb (garbha). Therefore, the womb-born have a mixed yoni (sanvṛta-vivṛta miśrayoni). The other two types, that is, closed or open yonis, do not exist. In the case of the five-sensed beings born from the womb (pancendriya sammūrchana janma), the yoni is open, similar to the multi-sensed beings. It is also stated:

"The one-sensed, the hell-born, and the gods have closed yonis. The multi-sensed, that is, the two-sensed, three-sensed, and four-sensed beings have open yonis. The hell-born have hot yonis, and the gods have cold yonis. The remaining beings have hot yonis."

"The number of yonis is nine according to the common understanding (sāmaṇṇeṛana), and eighty-four lakh according to the detailed understanding (jogīyo). The number of yonis is eighty-four lakh according to the rules." (88)

1. Based on the M. Pra. Hīkā.
2. Manāchāra 12/58-62 (Paryāpti Adhikāra).

Page #167:
---------------------------
• 134 / Go. Sa. Jivakanda
There are nine types of yonis: Saccitta, Sheet, Samvrit, Shracitta, Ushna, Vivrit, Saccitta-Acitta-Mishra, Sheetoshna-Mishra, Samvrit-Vivrit-Mishra. Those with direct knowledge have seen these nine types of yonis through divine vision, while the rest have learned about them through the scriptures. In general, there are nine types of yonis, but in detail, there are 8.4 million types of yonis. -
Gatha 6-60
8.4 million types of yonis
Ricchidaradhadusatt ya tarudas viyalidiesu chchyeva. Suranirayatiriyacauro chots manuesu sadsahasssa || 86 ||
Gathaarth - There are seven hundred thousand (7 lakh) yonis in each of the following: Nitya-Nigoda, Itar (Chaturgati) Nigoda, Dhatu (earth-bodied, water-bodied, fire-bodied, air-bodied). There are ten lakh yonis in Taru (plant-bodied), six lakh in Vikalendriya (disabled), four lakh each in Deva (gods), Naraka (hell), and Tiryanch (animals), and fourteen lakh yonis in Manusya (humans). ||26|
In detail, there are seven lakh yonis in Nitya-Nigoda, and seven lakh in Itar (Chaturgati) Nigoda. Earth-bodied, water-bodied, fire-bodied, and air-bodied are called the four Dhatus. Each of these four has seven lakh yonis. Thus, there are a total of 42 lakh yonis in these six-bodied beings. There are ten lakh yonis in each plant (Taru). There are six lakh yonis in Vikalendriya, with two lakh for those with two senses, two lakh for those with three senses, and two lakh for those with four senses. There are four lakh yonis for Devas, four lakh for Narakas, four lakh for five-sensed Tiryanch, and fourteen lakh for Manusya. All these together (42 + 10 + 6 + 4 + 4 + 4 + 14 = ) make up 64 lakh yonis. * Thus, there are a total of 84 lakh yonis for Chaturgati beings.
Doubt – Who are the Nitya-Nigoda beings and who are the Anitya-Nigoda beings?
Solution – Those Nigoda beings who are not capable of attaining Saparyaya in all three times are Nitya-Nigoda. Those Nigoda beings who have attained or will attain Trasaparyaya are Anitya-Nigoda, beings who are in the Nigoda state. It is also said:
"Ke punanitya-nigota: ke cha'nitya-nigota: ? Trishvapi kaleshu prasavayogyya yena bhavanti se nitya nigota: | Trasavavam apta shravapsyanti cha ye te shranitya-nigota: |
Thus, the description of yonis is complete in the description of beings.
The relationship between gatis and births; the possibility and impossibility of beings attaining liberation Jayadada Suranirya Gambhajasammuchhima hai Paratiriya. Sammuchhima
Manussapjjatta
Elikkha ||
1. Mulachar 12 / 58.
2. Ra. Va. 2 / 32/201
3. Baras
4. Man. Pra. Teeka and Raj Va. Pra. 2 Su. 32 or 27.
Anuveksha Gatha 35, Mulachar 12 / 63. 5. Ra. Ba. 2 / 32 / 27.

Page #168:
---------------------------
Paasha 11-13
Jeevasamaasa/135 Panchakkhatirikkhayo gabbhajasam-mucchima tirivakharanam. Bhogabhumaa gabbhabhavaa, parapunnaa gabbhajaa cheva.||6|| Uvavaadagambhajesa u, laddhi-appajjataga khaniyamena. Garasammucchimajivaa, laddhi pappajjataga cheva ||12||

The birth of gods and hell beings is by spontaneous generation (upapada). The birth of humans and animals is both by embryonic development (garbhaja) and by spontaneous generation (sammuchcha). The single-sensed, incomplete-sensed, and non-developed humans have only spontaneous generation birth.||60|| The five-sensed animals have both embryonic and spontaneous generation birth. The animals of the sensual realms have only embryonic birth. The developed humans have only embryonic birth.||61|| In the case of spontaneous generation birth and embryonic birth, the attainment of completeness (labdhyaparyaptaka) does not occur by rule. The spontaneously born humans are only attained completeness.||62||

Viseshaartha - The gods and hell beings are only by spontaneous generation. The beings residing in the hells are called narakas. It is also said, "Devanaarakaaranamuppaadah" meaning the birth of gods and hell beings is by spontaneous generation, not by other births. Humans and animals are both embryonic and spontaneous generation. The non-developed [attained completeness] humans are only spontaneous generation. The single-sensed beings and incomplete-sensed (two-sensed, three-sensed, four-sensed) are by rule spontaneous generation. The five-sensed animals have both embryonic and spontaneous generation, but the animals of the sensual realms have only embryonic birth. The "parapunnaa" i.e., the developed humans are also only embryonic birth. In the case of spontaneous generation birth, i.e., the gods-hell beings, and the embryonic humans-animals, and the specific animals-humans, the attainment of completeness does not occur by rule. The spontaneously born humans are by rule attained completeness.

Narakaadi gatisu veda-sambandhi niyamo gariiya khalu sanhaa paratirive tini hoti sammucchaa. Sanda surabhogabhumaa purisitthi-vevaggaa cheva ||13||

Gaaathaarttha - The hell beings are by rule neuter gender. In humans and animals, there are all three vedas (male, female, neuter). The spontaneously born are neuter gender. In the gods and the beings of the sensual realms, there are only two vedas, male and female.||63||

Viseshaartha - The hell beings are by rule neuter in both substance (dravya) and state (bhava). In humans and animals, there are the three vedas - male, female, and neuter - in both substance and state. The spontaneously born animals and humans are only neuter in both substance and state. The spontaneously born humans have the neuter gender in the vulva, armpits, and base of the breasts, and in the impure places of other women, except the chief queen of the universal monarch.

Page #169:
---------------------------
136/Go. Sa. Jivakanda
Verse 63: They are born. 'Devas and Bhogabhumis are only female and male-bodied by substance and by emotion. In this regard, the following sutras of Tattvarth Sutra Chapter 2 are also worth noting:
"Narakasammuccchino napusakanni ||50|| Na devaah ||51|| Seshastrivedaa ||52||"
From the rise of the Napusakavedodaya of the Charitramohanayakarma, there is a Bhavanapumsakaved, and from the rise of the Ashubhanamakarma, there is a Dravyanapusakaved. The Naraki and Sammurchan; these beings have the rise of both the Charitramohanayakarma and the Ashubhanamakarma, therefore the Naraki and Sammurchan beings are only Napusakavedi by emotion and by substance, not female-bodied or male-bodied. Devas and Bhogabhumis are beings with auspicious destinies. They experience the extraordinary happiness related to male and female, therefore they do not have Napusakaved. The remaining humans and animals, that is, the Karmabhumij humans and animals, have all three: female, male, and Napusak. Ved means gender. It is of two types, Dravyaling and Bhavaling. The Yoni, Mehanadi, etc., which arise from the rise of the Namakarma, are called Dravaling. The Bhavaling arises from the rise of the Charitramohanayakarma. 13 It is also said elsewhere:
Eindiya vilidiya naraya sammucchima ya khalu sanche. Lene gaya ne gaya honti niyama du ||7|| Veva ya bhogabhuma asankhavasaauma manuyatiriya. Te honti bosu vedesu natthi tesi tadiya vedo ||8|| Panchidya vu sesa sanni asanni ya tiriya manusa ya.
Te honti isthipurisa nasaga chaavi behi ||6|| -Ekaindriya-earth, water, fire, air, and plant-bodied; Vikalaindriya-two-sensed, three-sensed, four-sensed; Naraka, that is, the Naraki of all seven earths; Sarva Sammurchan-Sammurchan-conscious and Sammurchan-unconscious, the five senses, by rule, only have Napusakaved. That is, compared to the Ved of all Ekaindriya, all Vikalaindriya, all Naraka, and all Sammurchan-conscious-unconscious five senses, by rule, only Napusakaved is present. The residents of Devaloka, Vanavyantara, Jyotishi, Kalpabasi; Bhogabhumij animals and humans, the humans and animals born in the three Bhogabhumikalas of Sushma-Sushmadi, which have an immeasurable number of years of lifespan, related to the Bharat-Airavata regions, and the humans and animals born in all the Mlechchhakhandas, only have the two Veds: female and male, they do not have the third, that is, Napusakaved. The remaining five senses, that is, the Devas-Naraki and Bhogabhumij, those with immeasurable years of lifespan [born in the participation of Bhogabhumi and born in the Mlechchhakhandas], except for these, the remaining five-sensed conscious and unconscious beings (humans and animals) have all three: female, male, and Napusak, both Dravyaved and Bhava Ved. 1. In the Karmabhum, in the armies of great kings like Chakravarti, Drava, etc., where they throw excrement, in such places, semen, nasal mucus, phlegm, earwax, and tooth decay, and extremely impure regions, these are immediately born. Those whose body is only an immeasurable part of a finger, and who are quickly destroyed after birth, and who are Ladhyaparyaptak, are called Sammurchan humans. 2. Based on the M.Pr. Tika. 3. Based on the Tattvarth Rajavatik. 4. Mulachar Paryapti Adhikar. 5. Shri Vasunandipracharyakrit Mulachar Tika.

Page #170:
---------------------------
## Verse 64
## Jivasamaas/137

The Lord of the most inferior and most superior absorption, 'Suhamani-Gov-Appajjattapassa Jaadasa Sadiyasa Mayamhi'. The portion of the Angula, which is the measure of the inferior absorption, is the immeasurable part of the Angula. The superior absorption is that of the fish. ||4||

## Verse Meaning

In the third time of birth, the absorption of the subtle Nigoda-Labdhyaparyaptak is the immeasurable part of the Angula, and the absorption of the superior body is that of the fish. ||14||

## Special Meaning

The subtle Nigoda-Jiva, who is a Labdhyaparyaptak and a Trisamayavarti Aharak, is present in the third time of birth, has inferior Yoga, and is present in the most inferior absorption of the body. The inferior absorption of his body is the immeasurable part of the Angula. To negate the 'Paryaptak', the instruction 'Aparyaptak' is given.

## Doubt

Why is the 'Paryaptak' negated?

## Solution

The inferior absorption of the 'Aparyaptak' is much greater than the inferior absorption of the 'Paryaptak', hence it is negated. In the Vigraha-Gati, the inferior absorption is also similar to the previous absorption, hence to negate it, 'Trisamayavarti Aharak' is said. To indicate that it is born from the Riju-Gati, 'Tritiyasamayavarti Tadbhavastha' is said.

## Doubt

Why is the inferior absorption of the Nigoda-Jiva, who is a Tadbhavastha in the sixth time of birth, after being born by one, two, or three Vigrahas, not accepted?

## Solution

It is not accepted because the said Jiva, who has increased by the Ananta-Gurinat-Shreni in five times, has a very large absorption due to the Ananta-Anuvridhi-Yoga.

## Doubt

Why is the inferior absorption of the Nigoda-Jiva, who is an Aharak in the first time of birth and a Tadbhavastha in the first time of birth, not said to be the Lord?

## Solution

It is not said because the said Jiva, who is situated in the shape of a Prayat-Chaturasra-Kshetra, cannot have a small absorption.

## Doubt

How is it known that the Jiva-Pradesha is situated in the shape of a Prayat-Chaturasra in the first time of birth after being born from the Juga-Gati?

## Solution

This is known from the Acharya-Paramparaga-Upadesha.

## Doubt

Why is the inferior absorption of the Jiva, who is an Aharak in the second time of birth and a Tadbhavastha in the second time of birth, not said to be the Lord?

## Note

1. The first part of Mulaacharya Paryapti A. 12 Ga. 47 is also similar.
2. Dh.Pu. 11 Page 33 Sutra 20.

Page #171:
---------------------------
## 138/Go. Sa. Jivakanda
## Verse 14

**Solution:** This is not a contradiction, because even in the second time, the Jiva-pradeshas remain in the form of a square.

**Question:** How do we know that in the second time, the Jiva-pradeshas become like a sphere, with a diameter?

**Solution:** This is known from the teachings of the Paramguru.

**Question:** Why is the inferior ownership of the Nigoda Jiva, who is a food-taker and exists in the third time, given to the third time?

**Solution:** This is not a fault, because at that time, the Jiva-pradeshas are seen to be situated in a circular, or round, shape, by contracting all four corners of the square region.

**Question:** How do we know that at that time, the Jiva-pradeshas are situated in a circular shape?

**Solution:** This is known from this very Sutra.

From the first time of their origin, the Jiva-pradeshas are engaged in the three times, from the inferior Upadad-yoga to the inferior Ekanta-anuvritti-yoga. To explain this, the Sutra has been directed towards those with inferior yoga. In the third time, there is also inferior Avagahana. Therefore, to prohibit them, it has been said, "Present in the most inferior Avagahana of the body." By these qualifications, the inferior Avagahana of the subtle Nigoda Jiva is obtained.

The fish that has an Avagahana of one thousand yojanas has an excellent Avagahana. From this part of the Sutra, those fish that are situated from the innumerableth part of an angula, up to one pradesh less than one thousand yojanas in extent, are prohibited.

**Question:** Even if we accept the fish that are found similar to the Mahamatsya, in terms of their Utsesha and Vishkambha, there is no fault, so why are they not accepted?

**Solution:** This is not a fault, because until the Ayam, Vishkambha, and Utsesha of the Mahamatsya are known, it is not possible in any way to know the Ayam, Vishkambha, and Utsesha of the obtained fish. The Ayam of the Mahamatsya is not known from any other Sutra, because there is no other statement possible from this Sutra that is older and more authoritative.

The Ayam of the Mahamatsya is one thousand yojanas, the Vishkambha is five hundred yojanas, and the Utsesha is two hundred and fifty yojanas.

**Question:** How is this known without the Sutra?

1. Bh. Pu. 11 p. 34-35. 2. Gh. Pu. 11 Su. 8 p. 15.

Page #172:
---------------------------
## Jivasamas/136

**Solution:** This is known from the teachings that have come down through the lineage of the Acharyas, and it is not only a Sutra that indicates the diameter and height of the Mahamatsya, but it is also not a rule, because it is stated in the Sutra, "Khoyansahasso tti," meaning "one thousand yojanas," that this is the information about it.

These diameter and height are the same for the Mahamatsya everywhere. The measure of the diameter and height at the mouth and tail is only this much, because no Sutra or explanation is found that describes a different diameter and height in these. And without this, the instruction of one thousand yojanas does not even form.

Seeing the fish here, many Acharyas say, "The mouth and tail of the Mahamatsya are extremely subtle," but this does not happen, and in some places, there is seen a deviation in the limbs of the fish, or these diameter and height are proven to be equal, many Acharyas say. Another thing is that the Mahamatsya with an extremely subtle mouth cannot swallow other fish like Timigala, which can dive one hundred yojanas, because it encounters opposition in that. Therefore, in the explanation, the above-mentioned diameter and height of the Mahamatsya should be accepted.

The area of the Mahamatsya, which is one thousand yojanas in length, five hundred yojanas in height, and half of that, i.e., two hundred and fifty yojanas in width, is also the measure of the Sankasa Pramana Jangul of the Banphal.

It is said in Tiloayapannati, Part 2, Chapter 5, page 640, that the most excellent diving depth of a Sammuchchhana Mahamatsya born in the area located in the outer part of the Swayamprabhachal is seen, which is one thousand yojanas in length, five hundred yojanas in width, and half of that, i.e., two hundred and fifty yojanas in height. When its Pramanangul is calculated, it becomes four thousand five hundred twenty-six crore eighty-four lakh thirty-two thousand two hundred crore Pramaghanaangul. That is, 1000-500-250-125000000 yojanas cubic volume x 3623878656 == 4,52,68,48,32,00,00,00,000 Pramaghanaangul.

From the least diving depth to the most excellent diving depth, there are countless varieties of medium diving depth in the order of increase of each region. In this way, all the options of diving depth are countless, because there are countless regions in one ghanaangul.

**Gathaarth:** The excellent diving depth of Ekendriyadi beings is one thousand yojanas, twelve yojanas, one less than one yojana, one yojana, and one thousand yojanas respectively.

**References:**

1. G.P. 11, page 15-16.
2. P.P. 4, page 35-36.
3. Jivaraj Granthamala, published in Solapur.

Page #173:
---------------------------
140/Go, Sa. Jivakanda
Verse 63
Special Meaning: The population of Traskayik Jivas residing in the outer region of the Swayamprabha mountain is predominant, as this population has a longer lifespan and larger Avagahana compared to Jivas residing in other Karmabhoomi. This verse aims to convey the knowledge that the largest Avagahana is located in the outer region of the Swayamprabha mountain.
"Sankho Puran Barah Joyanaani Gomhi Bhav Tiko Sam Tu.
Bhamro Joyanamegam Machho Pun Jovaran Sahassso." ||12|| - A Sankha, a two-sensory Jiva, has an Avagahana of twelve Yojanas in length. A Gomhi, a three-sensory Jiva, has an Avagahana of three Kos in length. A Bhamra, a four-sensory Jiva, has an Avagahana of one Yojana in length. And a Mahamatsya, a five-sensory Jiva, has an Avagahana of one thousand Yojanas in length.
The volume of the excellent Avagahana of Jivas like Padma, a one-sensory Jiva, is as follows: In the outer region of the Swayamprabha mountain, there is a Padma (lotus) with an excellent Avagahana, which is one Kos plus one thousand Yojanas high and one Yojana thick, with a circular shape. To obtain the volume of this, the following verse is mentioned in the Triloksar:
"Baso Tiguno Pariho Vasachautthahdo Ku Khetphalm.
Khetphalm Vehagunm Khatphalm Hoi Sanyath." ||17|| - The diameter of the Padma, a one-sensory Jiva with an excellent Avagahana, is one Yojana, the circumference is three times the diameter, i.e., 143 = 3 Yojanas. One-fourth of the diameter is one Yojana. Multiplying the circumference by one-fourth of the diameter, we get 34 = square Yojanas as the area. Multiplying this area by the height, we get 41000 - 7501 cubic Yojanas as the volume. The measure of its Prabhanagul is 750143623878656 = .2718588466248 Prabhanagul.
In the outer region of the Swayamprabha mountain, there is a Sankha, a two-sensory Jiva with an excellent Avagahana, whose mouth is four Yojanas wide and its length is twelve Yojanas. To obtain its volume, the following verse is mentioned in the Tri. Pa.:
"Vyasam Tavat Krutva, Badandalonam Mukharshavargayutam.
Dvigunam Charshibhakt Sanabhike'smin Ganitmaah." ||5/316|| - According to this verse, the area of the Sankha is seventy-three Yojanas. 73.
"Payame Muh-Sohiy Punaravi Praayam Sahid Muhbhajiyam.
Bahallan Ranayavam Sankhayaraattiye Khette." ||320|| - According to this verse, the Bahalla of the Sankha is five Yojanas in length. Multiplying the area of the Sankha, which is seventy-three Yojanas, by the Bahalla, which is five Yojanas, we get three hundred and sixty-five Yojanas as the volume. ||36|| 1. V. Pu. 4 P. 33. 2. Tri. Pa. Pu. 636 Part 2 (Solapur) 1 3. Praamamakado Muhdalheesa Muhvasaprashavaggagjuda. Viguana Behen Hada Sankhavattassa Khetphalm. ||327|| (Triloksar)! 4. Tri. Pa. A. 5. 5. Tri. Pa. Part 2 P. 638, Solapur.

Page #174:
---------------------------
## Verse
**Jivasamas/141**

Multiplying the extent of twelve yojanas by itself, i.e., squaring the extent of 12 yojanas, the resulting amount (12 x 12 = ) 144 yojanas. Subtracting half of the mouth (4 yo.) which is 2 yo. from it (144 - 2 = ) 142 yo. Adding the square of half the mouth, 2 yo. (2 x 2 = ) 4 yo. to it (142 + 4 = ) 146 yo. Doubling this (146 x 2 = ) 262 yo. Dividing this by four (262 / 4 = ) 73 square yojanas is the area of the conch. 

The extent of 12 yo. minus the mouth of 4 yo. (12 - 4 = ) leaves 8. Adding the extent of 12 yo. to this (8 + 12 = ) 20 yo. Dividing this by the mouth of 4 yo. (20 / 4 = ) 5 yo. is the external diameter of the conch. 

Multiplying the area of the conch, 73 yo. by the external diameter, 5 (73 x 5 = ) 365 yo. is the volume obtained. 365 x 3623878656 = 1322715701440 is the volume of the conch in terms of ghanaangulas.

The volume of the Gomhi, a ShriIndriyaJiva with excellent Avgahana, situated in the outer part of the Swayamprabhachal, is as follows: The Gomhi has an extent of one yojana, a width of one-eighth of a yojana (1/8) yojana, and a diameter of half the width, 3/8 yojana. Multiplying these three together (1 x 1/8 x 3/8 = ) 3/64 cubic yojanas is the volume obtained. Its volume in terms of ghanaangulas is 143623878656 x 3/64 = 11643636 ghanaangulas.

The Bhramara, a ChaturIndriyaJiva with excellent Avgahana, situated in the outer part of the Swayamprabhachal, has an extent of one yojana, a height of half a yojana, and a circumference of half a yojana, i.e., a diameter of half a yojana. The circumference of half a yojana (1/2) is 3/4 yojana. The diameter of 3/4 yojana multiplied by the height of half a yojana (3/4 x 1/2 = ) 3/8 yojana, multiplied by the extent of one yojana (3/8 x 1 = ) 3/8 yojana is the volume of the Bhramara. Its volume in terms of ghanaangulas is (643623878656 x 3/8 = ) 1358654466 ghanaangulas.

The volume of the Mahamatsya, a PanchendriyaJiva with excellent Avgahana, is described in the commentary of verse 64.

**The measure of the least Avgahana of the DviIndriya and other Jivas and their respective owners**

**"Bitichapupunnajannam anudharikuthukaranam acchim.
Sinchaymacche vivangulasankhe sankhagunivakama."** (Verse 6)

**Meaning:** The least Avgahana among the DviIndriya Jivas is of the Anudhari, among the TriIndriya Jivas is of the Kuthu, among the ChaturIndriya Jivas is of the Kanamaskika, and among the Panchendriya Jivas is of the Sikthamatsya. These are measured in fractions of a ghanaangula, but the number of fractions is in a sequence.

**Explanation:** In the verse, 'vi' refers to the DviIndriya Jivas, 'ti' refers to the TriIndriya Jivas, 'ch' refers to the ChaturIndriya Jivas.

Page #175:
---------------------------
142/Go.Sa. Jivakanda
Maya 17.100

And the five-sense being is the knower. The lowest avagahana of the two-sense being is that of the andhari. The lowest avagahana of the three-sense being is that of the kuthu. The lowest avagahana of the four-sense being is that of the karanamaskhika. The lowest avagahana of the five-sense being is that of the siktha (tandul) matsy.

The lowest avagahana of the two-sense being is multiplied by the number of the lowest avagahana of the three-sense being, and from this, the lowest avagahana of the four-sense being is multiplied by the number, and from this, the lowest avagahana of the five-sense being is multiplied by the number. Thus, these lowest avagahanas are in a numerical order. The multiplier is always the number of time. All these lowest avagahanas are in proportion to the number of parts of a dhanangula, because there are many types of numbers. For example, ten is multiplied by the number of twenty, twenty is multiplied by the number of forty, forty is multiplied by the number of eighty. Although these four numbers are in a numerical order, they do not violate the two-digit rule, that is, all four are two-digit numbers. Similarly, all four lowest avagahanas are also in a numerical order, but they do not violate the rule of the number of parts of a dhanangula, and even though they are multiplied by the number, they remain the number of parts of an angula.

The owner of the avagahana from the lowest to the highest, and the inferiority and superiority of these avagahanas, and the proof of the multiplier is:

Suhumarinavatepraabhuyaategra purin padi didam idaram. Bitichapam avillagam eyaraanam. Tisediy. ||7||

Apadidvivapatteyam, bitichapati chabi apaditthidam sayalam. Tichabi apaditthidam cha ya sayalam badalagurinadakama. 98||

Pravaram punnam padham solam puran padhamabidiyata viyoli. Punnidar punnayana jahannamukkasamukkassa. ||6||

Pushagjana tatto varam apunnas sa punnaukkasam. Bopanna jahannoti asankham sankham ganam tatto. ||10||

Gathaarth - Sukshmanigoda apariaptka, sukshma vayukayika apariaptka, sukshma tejakayika apariaptka, sukshma apkayika apariaptka, sukshma prithvikaayika apariaptka, badarvayukayika apariaptka, chadar tejakayika apariaptka, badaram apkayika apariaptka, badar prithvikaayika apariaptka, badar nigoda apariaptka, badar nigoda pratisthita pratyek vanaspatikaayika apariaptka, badar apratisthita pratyek vanaspatikaayika apariaptka, dwiindriya apariaptka, triindriya apariaptka, chaturindriya apariaptka, panchendriya apariaptka, out of these 16, the first 11 should be divided into three categories. ||17||

Three categories of:

- - 1. P.Pu. 11 P. 73.

Page #176:
---------------------------
## Verse 7-100
## Jivasamaas/143

After the lowest Avagaahana of every Vanaspathikayika, which is sufficient, and the lowest Avagaahana of every Dwiindriya, Triindriya, Chaturindriya, and Panchendriya, which is sufficient, then the highest Pravagaahana of every Triindriya, Chaturindriya, Dwiindriya, and Panchendriya, which is insufficient, and then the highest Avagaahana of every Panchendriya, which is sufficient, Triindriya, Chaturindriya, and Dwiindriya, which is insufficient, should all be written in order. There are 42 places in these, which are Gunakaara. |||| Aadi Kes

The sixteen places are of the lowest Avagaahana of the insufficient. In the first category, there are the lowest Avagaahana of the sufficient, in the second category, there are the highest Avagaahana of the insufficient, and in the third category, there are the highest Avagaahana of the sufficient. ||6|| After the third category, there are five places of the lowest Avagaahana of the sufficient, and again, there are four places of the highest Avagaahana of the insufficient. There are countless Gunakaara until the lowest Avagaahana of the sufficient Dwiindriya, and after that, there are countable Gunakaara. ||10||

**Special Note:** The subject matter presented in these verses is taken from the 'Avagaahana Dandaka' in Dh.Pu. 11, therefore, special clarification has been given here according to that Avagaahana Dandaka.

1. The lowest Avagaahana of the insufficient, the subtle Nigoda, is the most meager. That Avagaahana is as much as what is obtained by dividing the countless parts of a Palyopama into one Utsheddha Dhanangula. 2. The lowest Avagaahana of the insufficient, the subtle Vayu Kayika, is countless times greater than that. Here, the Gunakaara is the countless part of the Praavali. When 'Prachapti' is said, the Labdhya Parayaapta should be taken, because the lowest Avagaahana of the Nitya Parayaapta will be mentioned later. 3. The lowest Avagaahana of the insufficient, the subtle Teja Kayika, is countless times greater than that. The Gunakaara is the countless part of the Maavali. Here, only the Labdhya Parayaapta should be taken. 4. The lowest Avagaahana of the insufficient, the subtle Jaala Kayika, is countless times greater than that. The Gunakaara is the countless part of the Praavali. Here too, only the Labdhya Parayaapta should be taken. 5. The lowest Avagaahana of the Labdhya Parayaapta, the subtle Prithvi Kayika, is countless times greater than that. The Gunakaara is the countless part of the Aavali. 6. The lowest Avagaahana of the insufficient, the Baadar Vayu Kayika, is countless times greater than that. Here, the Gunakaara is the countless part of the Palya. 7. The lowest Avagaahana of the insufficient, the Baadar Teja Kayika, is countless times greater than that. The Gunakaara is the countless part of the Palyopama. 8. The lowest Avagaahana of the insufficient, the Baadar Jala Kayika, is countless times greater than that. The Gunakaara is the countless part of the Palyopama. 9. The lowest Avagaahana of the insufficient, the Baadar Prithvi Kayika, is countless times greater than that. The Gunakaara is the countless part of the Palyopama. 10. The lowest Avagaahana of the insufficient, the Baadar Nigoda Jeeva, is countless times greater than that. The Gunakaara is the countless part of the Palyopama. 11. The lowest Avagaahana of the insufficient, the Nigoda PratiShthita Pratyek, is countless times greater than that. The Gunakaara is the countless part of the Palyopama. 12. The lowest Avagaahana of the insufficient, the Baadar Vanaspathi Kayika Pratyek Sharira, is countless times greater than that. The Gunakaara is the countless part of the Palyopama. 13. The lowest Avagaahana of the insufficient, the Dwiindriya, is countless times greater than that. The Gunakaara is the countless part of the Palyopama. 14. The lowest Avagaahana of the insufficient, the Triindriya, is countless times greater than that. The Gunakaara is the countless part of the Palyopama. 15. The lowest Avagaahana of the insufficient, the Chaturindriya, is countless times greater than that. The Gunakaara is the countless part of the Palyopama. 16. The lowest Avagaahana of the insufficient, the Panchendriya, is countless times greater than that. The Gunakaara is the countless part of the Palyopama. These previously mentioned lowest Avagaahana are of the Labdhya Parayaapta. The Nivritti Parayaapta and the Nitya Parayaapta will be mentioned later. 17. From that...
-
-

Page #177:
---------------------------
## Chapter 144/Go. Sa. Jeevakanda, Verses 67-100

The gross **avagahana** (descent) of the **nirvriti-paryapta** (liberated) **sukshma-nigoda-jiva** (subtle nigoda soul) is **asankhyat-gun** (incalculable times) greater. The multiplier is the **asankhyat** (incalculable) part of the **gunakar-pravali** (series of multipliers). 16. The **utkrista-pravgahana** (superior ascent) of its **aparyapta** (non-liberated) (**sukshma-nigoda** **nitya-paryapta** (subtle nigoda eternally liberated)) is even greater than that. Here, **aparyapta** refers to **nitya-paryapta**, as there is no contradiction with any other. The measure of the **vishesh** (difference) is the **asankhyat** part of an **anguli** (finger). The **asankhyat** part of an **avala** (a specific measure) is its **pratibhag** (equivalent), but according to some **acharyas** (teachers), it is the **asankhyat** part of an **elyopam** (a specific measure). 13. The **utkrista-pravgahana** of its **paryapta** (liberated) **ghi** (butter) is even greater than that. The measure of the **vishesh** is the **asankhyat** part of an **anguli**. 20. The gross **avagahana** of the **sukshma-vayukayik** (subtle air-bodied) **paryapta** is **asankhyat-gun** greater. The multiplier is the **asankhyat** part of the **gunakar-pravali**. 21. The **utkrista-avagahana** of its **nitya-paryapta** is even greater than that. The measure of the **vishesh** is the **asankhyat** part of an **anguli**. 22. The **utkrista-avagahana** of its **paryapta** is even greater than that. The measure of the **vishesh** is the **asankhyat** part of an **anguli**. 23. The gross **avagahana** of the **nirvriti-paryapta** **sukshma-tej-kayik** (subtle fire-bodied) is **asankhyat-gun** greater. The multiplier is the **asankhyat** part of the **gunakar-pravali**. 24. The **utkrista-avagahana** of its **aparyapta** (**nitya-paryapta**) is even greater than that. The measure of the **vishesh** is the **asankhyat** part of an **anguli**. 25. The **utkrista-avagahana** of its **nirvriti-paryapta** is even greater than that. The measure of the **vishesh** is the **asankhyat** part of an **anguli**. 26. The gross **avagahana** of the **nirvriti-paryapta** **sukshma-jal-kayik** (subtle water-bodied) is **asankhyat-gun** greater. The multiplier is the **asankhyat** part of the **gunakar-pravali**. 27. The **utkrista-avagahana** of its **nitya-paryapta** is even greater than that. The measure of the **vishesh** is the **asankhyat** part of an **anguli**. 28. The **utkrista-avagahana** of its **nirvriti-paryapta** is even greater than that. The measure of the **vishesh** is the **asankhyat** part of an **anguli**. 29. The gross **avagahana** of the **nirvriti-paryapta** **sukshma-prithvi-kayik** (subtle earth-bodied) is **asankhyat-gun** greater. The multiplier is the **asankhyat** part of the **gunakar-pravali**. 30. The **utkrista-avagahana** of its **nirvriti-paryapta** is even greater than that. The measure of the **vishesh** is the **asankhyat** part of an **anguli**. 31. The **utkrista-avagahana** of its **nirvriti-paryapta** is even greater than that. The measure of the **vishesh** is the **asankhyat** part of an **anguli**. 32. The gross **avagahana** of the **nirvriti-paryapta** **badar-vayukayik** (cloud-air-bodied) is **asankhyat-gun** greater. The multiplier is the **asankhyat** part of the **palyopam** (a specific measure). 33. The **utkrista-avagahana** of its **nitya-paryapta** is even greater than that. The measure of the **vishesh** is the **asankhyat** part of an **anguli**. 34. The **utkrista-avagahana** of its **nirvriti-paryapta** is even greater than that. The measure of the **vishesh** is the **asankhyat** part of an **anguli**. 35. The gross **avagahana** of the **nirvriti-paryapta** **badar-tej-kayik** (cloud-fire-bodied) is **asankhyat-gun** greater. The multiplier is the **asankhyat** part of the **palyopam**. 36. The **utkrista-avagahana** of its **nitya-paryapta** is even greater than that. The measure of the **vishesh** is the **asankhyat** part of an **anguli**. 37. The **utkrista-avagahana** of its **nirvriti-paryapta** is even greater than that. The measure of the **vishesh** is the **asankhyat** part of an **anguli**. 38. The gross **avagahana** of the **nirvriti-paryapta** **badar-jal-kayik** (cloud-water-bodied) is **asankhyat-gun** greater. The multiplier is the **asankhyat** part of the **palyopam

Page #178:
---------------------------
## Gatha 101

**101. The lifespan of a Jiva is an innumerable fraction of an angul (finger width). 43. The superior Avagahana (perception) of its Nivritti Paryapta (liberation) is even greater than that. The measure of this greater amount is an innumerable fraction of an angul. 44. The inferior Avagahana of the Badar Nigod Nivritti Paryapta is innumerable times greater. The multiplier is an innumerable fraction of a Pal (measure of time). 45. The superior Avagahana of its Nitya Paryapta (eternal liberation) is even greater than that. The measure of this greater amount is an innumerable fraction of an angul. 46. The superior Avagahana of its Nitya Paryapta is even greater than that. The measure of this greater amount is an innumerable fraction of an angul. 47. The inferior Avagahana of the Nigod Pratiṣṭhita Paryapta is innumerable times greater. The multiplier is an innumerable fraction of a Pal. 48. The superior Avagahana of its Nirvritti Paryapta is even greater than that. The measure of this greater amount is an innumerable fraction of an angul. 49. The superior Avagahana of its Nitya Paryapta is even greater than that. The measure of this greater amount is an innumerable fraction of an angul. 50. The inferior Avagahana of the Badar Vanaspatikayika (plant-bodied) Pratyekabuddha Nivritti Paryapta is innumerable times greater. The multiplier is an innumerable fraction of a Pal. 51. The inferior Avagahana of the Malavala Jiva Nitya Paryapta is innumerable times greater. The multiplier is an innumerable fraction of a Pal. 52. The inferior Avagahana of the Tri-Indriya (three-sense) Nivritti Paryapta is innumerable times greater. The multiplier is an innumerable amount of time. 53. The inferior Avagahana of the Chatur-Indriya (four-sense) Nivritti Paryapta is innumerable times greater. The multiplier is an innumerable amount of time. 54. The inferior Avagahana of the Pancha-Indriya (five-sense) Nivritti Paryapta is innumerable times greater. The multiplier is an innumerable amount of time. 55. The superior Avagahana of the Tri-Indriya Nitya Paryapta is innumerable times greater. The multiplier is an innumerable amount of time. 56. The superior Avagahana of the Chatur-Indriya Nitya Paryapta is innumerable times greater. The multiplier is an innumerable amount of time. 57. The superior Avagahana of the Dwi-Indriya (two-sense) Nivritti Paryapta is innumerable times greater. The multiplier is an innumerable amount of time. 58. The superior Avagahana of the Badar Vanaspatikayika Pratyekabuddha Nitya Paryapta is innumerable times greater. The multiplier is an innumerable amount of time. 59. The superior Avagahana of the Pancha-Indriya Nivritti Paryapta is innumerable times greater. The multiplier is an innumerable amount of time. 60. The superior Avagahana of the Tri-Indriya Nivritti Paryapta is innumerable times greater. The multiplier is an innumerable amount of time. 61. The superior Avagahana of the Chatur-Indriya Nivritti Paryapta is innumerable times greater. The multiplier is an innumerable amount of time. 62. The superior Avagahana of the Dwi-Indriya Nivritti Paryapta is innumerable times greater. The multiplier is an innumerable amount of time. 63. The superior Avagahana of the Badar Vanaspatikayika Pratyekabuddha Nivritti Paryapta is innumerable times greater. The multiplier is an innumerable amount of time. 64. The superior Avagahana of the Pancha-Indriya Nivritti Paryapta is innumerable times greater. The multiplier is an innumerable amount of time.**

**The multiplier for the innumerable and the greater amount in the 22 stages of the श्रेगिगत (Shreigat) is an innumerable fraction of a Pal. The multiplier for the 64 stages is an innumerable fraction of a Pal. 101.**

**Meaning of the Gatha:** The multiplier for the Sukshma (subtle) and Badar (gross) is an innumerable fraction of a Pal and an innumerable fraction of a Palyopam (measure of time) respectively. However, the amount is greater by one fraction in each successive stage. 101.

**Special Meaning:** The subject matter of this Gatha is explained in Dh.Pu. 11, Sutras 5 to 16. 
1. Dh.Pu. 11, pages 56-66, Sutras 31-44.

Page #179:
---------------------------
## English Translation:

**146 / Go. Sa. Jeevakanda**
**Gatha 102-103**

The subject matter is based on the same sutras as here, but with a specific meaning. The multiplier of the *shravagahana* from one microscopic being to another is the *prasankhyata* part of *avali*. This means that wherever it is stated that "the *avagahana* from one microscopic being to another is *asankhyata* times greater," the *prasankhyata* part of *avali* is the multiplier. The multiplier of the *pravgahana* from a microscopic being to a *vadar* being is the *asankhyata* part of *palmopam*. Wherever the *shravagahana* from a microscopic being with one sense to a *vadar* being is said to be *asankhyata* times greater, the *asankhyata* part of *patyopam* is the multiplier. The multiplier of the *avagahana* from a *vadar* being to a microscopic being is the *prasankhyata* part of *avali*. Wherever the *avagahana* from a *vadar* being is said to be *asankhyata* times greater than the *avagahana* of a microscopic being with one sense, the *asankhyata* part of *avali* is the multiplier. The multiplier of the *avagahana* from a *vadar* being to another *vadar* being is the *asankhyata* part of *palmopam*. The *hindriyadi* beings are also grasped when beings with the *vadar* karma are grasped. Wherever the *avagahana* from one *vadar* being to another *vadar* being is *asankhyata* times greater, the *asankhyata* part of *palmopam* is the multiplier. In some cases, the multiplier of the *avagahana* from one *vadar* being to another *vadar* being is *sankhyata* times. The multiplier of the *avagahana* in *hindriyadi* beings, *nirvriti* beings, and their *paryaptakas* is *sankhyata* times.

The origin of the multiplier of the *jghanya shravagahana* of a microscopic *vayukaamik* being from the *jghanya avagahana* of a microscopic *nigoda* being, which is the *prasankhyata* part of *avali*, and the description of the differences in the *shravagahanas* between the two, is explained in the *avaruvari* section. The *shradi* (series) continues in this way, with each *mad* (stage) being related to the previous one. || 102 || When the *pravara avagahana* is grasped, the *jghanya parimita* is *asankhyata* times greater. The *pravara* is *asankhyata* times greater than the *tuvara*. || 103 ||

**Explanation:**

The *jghanya shravagahana* is the smallest *shravagahana*. When one *pradesh* (region) is added to the measure of the *jghanya shravagahana*, it becomes the starting point for the *asankhyata* part increase. From this point onwards, the *pradesh* increases continuously by one *pradesh* at a time. When the *jghanya parimita* is divided by the *jghanya parita* *asankhyata* part, the resulting *shrave* (number) indicates the number of *pradeshes* that need to be added to reach the highest point of the *asankhyata* part increase. || 102-103 ||

**Specific Meaning:**

The subject matter discussed in these two *gathas* is found in the commentary on *D. Pu. 11 Su. 21*. Therefore, the specific meaning here is based on that. By making the *prasankhyata* part of *patyopam* rare and dividing the *ghanangul* into equal parts, the *jghanya avagahana* of a microscopic *nigoda* being is obtained for each *rupa* (unit). Subsequently, with one *pradesh* more *avagahana*, the *jghanya avagahana* of a being residing in the same *nigoda* *paryaya* (stage) is obtained. This second *shravagahana* alternative has increased due to the *asankhyata* part increase. It is as follows: By making the *jghanya avagahana* rare below and obtaining the amount corresponding to one digit above (the *jghanya avagahana*), one *pradesh* is obtained by dividing the *jghanya avagahana* into equal parts. The second *ajghanya avagahana* of a being residing two *pradeshes* above the *jghanya avagahana* is obtained. Here too, there is an *asankhyata* part increase. Three *pradeshes* more than the *jghanya...*

1. *D. Pu. 11 p. 66-70*

Page #180:
---------------------------
## Translation:

**Chapter 104-105**

**Jivamara/147**

The third *ajghanya avgahana* (non-negligible increase) is for a living being residing in *pragahana* (a state of existence). Thus, one should increase each *prakashapradesh* (region of light) until the increase reaches the *jghanya paritasankhyat* (smallest number of the infinite). When the *prapannya avgahana* (negligible increase) is divided by the *jghanya paritasankhyat*, and one *khand* (part) is added to the result, the increase remains *asankhyatabhagavrudhi* (infinitely divisible increase).

**Verse 10**

*Tassuvari igipadesse, jhui pravattavabhagaparambhi. Gharasankhamavahidavare, ruune pravaraurijude. ||10|| Tanvaddie charimo tassuvari ruv sanjude padhama. Sankhejjabhagauddhi ubarimdo ruvparivaddie. ||10||*

**Meaning of the Verse:**

The *pravattavya bhagahar* (divisible part) begins when the increase reaches the *etapradesh* (this region) beyond the last position of the *prasankhyatabhagavrudhi* (finitely divisible increase) or the best path of the *asankhyatabhagavrudhi* (infinitely divisible increase). The best position of the *pravattavya vrudhi* (divisible increase) is when the *jghanya avgahana* (smallest increase) is divided by the *utkrista sanharat* (best number) and the result is reduced by one. The first position of the *sankhyatabhagavrudhi* (finitely divisible increase) is when one *pradesh* (region) is added. When one more *pradesh* is added, the increase remains *sankhyatabhagavrudhi*.

**Explanation:**

The scriptures mention six types of increase: *anantabhagavrudhi* (infinitely divisible increase), *asankhyatabhagavrudhi* (infinitely divisible increase), *sankhyatabhagavrudhi* (finitely divisible increase), *sankhyatgunavrudhi* (finitely multiplicable increase), *asankhyatgunavrudhi* (infinitely multiplicable increase), and *anantagunavrudhi* (infinitely multiplicable increase). Therefore, Shri Vira Sena Swami did not accept the *utkrista sthana* (best position) of the *asankhyatabhagavrudhi* as the final position when one *khand* is added to the *jghanya paritasankhyat* after dividing the *anyaj pravagahana* (other increase) by it. Instead, he considered the increase of one *pradesh* at a time as *asankhyatabhagavrudhi* because there is a lack of increase in the number of *pradeshes* equal to the result obtained by dividing the *jghanya avgahana* by the *utkrista sankhyat* (best number). Thus, by increasing one *pradesh* at a time, the *jghanya avgahana* is divided by the *utkrista sankhyat*, and when one *khand* is added to the result, the beginning of the *sankhyatabhagavrudhi* and the end of the *prasankhyatabhagavrudhi* are reached.

When one is subtracted from the *jghanya paritasankhyat*, it becomes the *utkrista sankhyat*. When the *jghanya paritasankhyat* is divided, the result obtained is the increase. Although the *asankhyatabhagavrudhi* ends when this increase is reached, the *sankhyatabhagavrudhi* begins when the increase reaches the result obtained by dividing by the *utkrista sankhyat*. For example, when 100 is divided by 5, the result is 20. When it reaches 120, the increase of the fifth part ends. When 100 is divided by 4, the result is 25. The increase of the fourth part occurs at 125. The question is, when the increase is 21, 22, 23, or 24, it cannot be considered as the increase of the fifth part or the fourth part.

**References:**

1. P. Pu. 11, pp. 36-38.
2. Pra. Pa. Sutra 17, p. 5 (Shantivirnagar Publication).
3. Go. Sa. 'Jivakanda Ga. FF 322.
4. Gh. Pu. 11, p. 38.

Page #181:
---------------------------
## 148/Go. Ma. Jivakanda
## Gatha 106-107

**Part Increase:** In the same way, when the increase of the lowest innumerable part is completed and before the increase of the highest countable part begins, the increases are neither innumerable part increases nor countable part increases. Therefore, Gommatasar has given them the name **Pravaktvyavrudhi**, but Dhavalakar has called them innumerable part increases because they are inferior to the highest countable part increase. In this way, there is only a difference in terminology between the two texts. There is no difference in meaning, nor is there any difference in the beginning of the countable part increase.

**Gatha:**
> **106.** When the increase of the lowest **avagahana** (descent) is completed, the countable part increase is completed. Above that, when there is an increase of one **pradesh** (region), it is the first place of **avaktvyavrudhi**.
> **107.** When there is an increase of one **pradesh** less than the lowest **avagahana** above the lowest **avagahana**, it is the highest place of **pravaktvyavrudhi**. When there is an increase of one **pradesh** in that, it is the first place of **sanख्येज्जगुरणवढी** (countable multiplication increase).

**Explanation:**
> When the lowest **avagahana** is made equal to the highest countable by **viralan** (rarefaction), the measure of the **pradesh** (region) in the increase is obtained (in the beginning of the countable part increase). From here onwards, the countable part increase continues until the upper **viralan** (the innumerable part measure of **palyapam**) remains half. Here, the beginning of the countable multiplication increase and the end of the countable part increase occur.

> The lowest number is two because the number begins with two and counting begins with one. When a quantity is divided or multiplied by one, there is no loss or gain, therefore one is not given the name of a number. When the lowest **avagahana** is divided by the lowest number two, half of the lowest **avagahana** is obtained. When there is an increase of **pradesh** equal to half of the lowest **avagahana** above the lowest **avagahana**, the last place of the countable part increase is obtained. When there is an increase of **pradesh** equal to the lowest **avagahana** above the lowest **avagahana**, the countable multiplication increase begins because the measure of the lowest **avagahana** doubles. But the places between these two are neither countable part increases nor countable multiplication increases. Gommatasar has given these places the name **avaktvyasthan** (unspeakable place), but these places are inferior to the lowest countable multiplication increase place. Therefore, these places are included in the countable part increase because the places before the beginning of the countable multiplication increase will be countable part increases.

> From the beginning of the countable multiplication increase, one **pradesh** more, two **pradesh** more, etc.

> 1. **Gh. Pu. 11 p. 36**. 2. **Trilokasar 1**

Page #182:
---------------------------
## English Translation:

**J149**

When the *avagahana* increases by one *pradesa*, the *jghanya avagahana* increases threefold. The *bhagahara* of that *avagahana* is one-third (3) of the *bhagahara* related to the *jghanya avagahana*. Subsequently, when the *jghanya avagahana* increases by one, two, or more *pradesas*, the *avagahana* increases fourfold. There, the *bhagahara* is one-fourth of the *bhagahara* related to the *jghanya avagahana* (the numerical part of the *palyopam*). In this way, the multiplier related to the *jghanya avagahana* should be taken up to the *utkrista sankhyata*.

**Gatha 108-111**

*When the *jghanya avagahana* is multiplied by the *utkrista sankhyata*, the *utkrista sthana* of the *sankhyata guna-vriddi* is reached. When one *pradesa* is added to that *avagahana*, the first *pravaktavya guna-vriddi* occurs. When the *jghanya avagahana* is multiplied by the *jghanya parita sankhyata* and one is subtracted, the end of the *avaktavya guna-vriddi* is reached. When one is added to that final *sthana* of the *avaktavya guna-vriddi*, the first *sthana* of the *prasankhyata guna-vriddi* is reached.*

**Gatha-artha:** When the *jghanya avagahana* is multiplied by the *utkrista sankhyata*, the *avagahana* becomes *utkrista sankhyata guna*. The *bhagahara* of that *avagahana* is equal to one part when the *bhagahara* related to the *jghanya avagahana* (the *asankhyata* part of the *palyopam*) is divided by the *utkrista sankhyata*. When one, two, or more *pradesas* are added to it, the beginning of the *prasankhyata guna-vriddi* and the end of the *sankhyata guna-vriddi* occur. The *bhagahara* of this *avagahana* is equal to one part when the *bhagahara* related to the *jghanya avagahana* (the *prasankhyata* part of the *palyopam*) is divided by the *jghanya parita sankhyata*.

**Visheshartha:** In the *Gommatasar*, the *sthana* after the *utkrista sankhyata guna-vriddi* and before the *jghanya asankhyata guna-vriddi* are called *vaktavya guna-vriddi*. The *Dhavalakar* has called those *sthana* as *sankhyata guna-vriddi*. There is only a difference in the name, nothing else.

**Avaliya sankha bhaga gura gare.**
**Bau soggahara nam kamalo.**

**Gatha 110:** The *bhagahara* of the *asankhyata guna-vriddi* is called *kamalo*.

**Buttarena tatto, tappagge jave, evam uvari vi shro, padesarvaadhakamo jaha joggam.**
**Satyatyek kahi ya, jivasamaasaran vicchalle.**

**Gatha 111:** When one *pradesa* is added to the first *sthana* of the *asankhyata guna-vriddi*, the *avagahana* increases by one *pradesa* and so on. This is the way of the *jivasamaasaran vicchalle*.

**Note:** This translation preserves the Jain terms as requested. However, it is important to note that some of these terms are complex and require further explanation to fully understand their meaning.

Page #183:
---------------------------
## Chapter 150/Mo. Sa. Jiva Kanda
## Verses 110-111

When the multiplier of the subtle, insufficient air-bodied being's inferior Avagahana becomes equal to an innumerable part of the Pravali, it is born. ||110||

Similarly, in the interval of every Jiva-samas, one should know the Avagahana-sthana in accordance with the increase of the region. ||111||

**Special Meaning:**

After this (from the increase of the innumerable multiplier of the inferior Parota), when the multiplier of the Pravali becomes equal to an innumerable part of the subtle, insufficient Nigoda Jiva's Avagahana, due to the increase of one region, two regions, etc., the subtle air-bodied, insufficient Jiva's inferior Avagahana becomes equal to the subtle Nigoda, sufficient Jiva's inferior Avagahana. Now, leaving the Avagahana of the subtle Nigoda Jiva and taking the inferior Avagahana of the sufficient air-bodied, sufficient Jiva, one should increase the Avagahana of the subtle air-bodied, sufficient Jiva by four increases (innumerable part increase, countable part increase, countable multiplier increase, innumerable multiplier increase) in the order of one region more, etc., until it becomes equal to the inferior Avagahana of the subtle Teja-bodied, sufficient Jiva. Then, leaving the air-bodied and taking the inferior Avagahana of the subtle Teja-bodied, sufficient Jiva, one should increase it by four increases in the order of one region more, etc., until it becomes equal to the inferior Avagahana of the subtle Jala-bodied, sufficient Jiva. Again, leaving the Teja-bodied and taking the inferior Avagahana of the subtle Jala-bodied, sufficient Jiva, one should increase it by four increases in the order of one region more, etc., until it becomes equal to the inferior Avagahana of the subtle Prithvi-bodied, sufficient Jiva. Again, leaving the Jala-bodied and taking the inferior Avagahana of the subtle Prithvi-bodied, sufficient Jiva, one should increase it by four increases in the order of one region more, etc., until it becomes equal to the inferior Avagahana of the Badara air-bodied, sufficient Jiva. The special point is that here the multiplier is an innumerable part of the Palyopama, because it is the Parasthan multiplier. Again, leaving the subtle Prithvi-bodied and taking the inferior Avagahana of the Badara air-bodied, sufficient Jiva, one should increase it by four increases in the order of one region more, etc., until it becomes equal to the inferior Avagahana of the Badara Teja-bodied, sufficient Jiva. Here also, the multiplier is an innumerable part of the Palyopama, because the multiplier of the Avagahana of the Badara Jiva from the Badara is an innumerable part of the Palyopama. Leaving the Badara air-bodied and taking the inferior Avagahana of the Badara Teja-bodied, sufficient Jiva, one should increase it by four increases in the order of one region more, etc., until it becomes equal to the inferior Avagahana of the Badara Jala-bodied, sufficient Jiva. Here also, the multiplier is an innumerable part of the Palyopama. After that, leaving the Badara Teja-bodied and taking the inferior Avagahana of the Badara Jala-bodied, sufficient Jiva, one should increase it by four increases in the order of one region more, etc., until it becomes equal to the inferior Avagahana of the Badara Prithvi-bodied, sufficient Jiva. Again, leaving the Badara Jala-bodied and taking the inferior Avagahana of the Badara Prithvi-bodied, sufficient Jiva, one should increase it by four increases in the order of one region more, etc., until it becomes equal to the inferior Avagahana of the Badara Nigoda, sufficient Jiva. After that, leaving the Badara Prithvi-bodied and taking the inferior Avagahana of the Badara Nigoda, sufficient Jiva, one should increase it by four increases in the order of one region more, etc., until it becomes equal to the Nigoda...

1. V. P. 11 P. 40.

Page #184:
---------------------------
##  Gatha 110-111
## Jivammasa/151

Each body established should be increased until it becomes similar to the lowest Avagahana of the Labdhyaparyapta.  Leaving aside the Badar Nigoda, and taking the lowest Avagahana of the Nigoda-established Labdhyaparyapta, it should be increased by fourfold increments, one Pradesh more each time, until it becomes similar to the lowest Avagahana of the Badar Vanaspatikaayik Labdhyaparyapta. Here also, the multiplier is an innumerable part of the Praavali. Leaving aside the Avagahana of the Nigoda-established Labdhyaparyapta, and taking the lowest Avagahana of the Badar Vanaspatikaayik Labdhyaparyapta, it should be increased by fourfold increments, one Pradesh more each time, until it becomes similar to the lowest Avagahana of the Dwindriya Labdhyaparyapta. Here also, the multiplier is an innumerable part of the Praavali. Now, leaving aside each body Labdhyaparyapta, and taking the lowest Avagahana of the Dwindriya Labdhyaparyapta, it should be increased by fourfold increments until it becomes similar to the lowest Avagahana of the Triindriya Labdhyaparyapta. Here also, the multiplier is an innumerable part of the Praavali. Now, leaving aside the Dwindriya Labdhyaparyapta, and taking the lowest Avagahana of the Triindriya Labdhyaparyapta, it should be increased by fourfold increments, one Pradesh more each time, until it becomes similar to the lowest Avagahana of the Chaturindriya Labdhyaparyapta. Here also, the multiplier is an innumerable part of the Praavali. Afterwards, leaving aside the Triindriya, and taking the lowest Avagahana of the Chaturindriya Labdhyaparyapta, it should be increased by fourfold increments, one Pradesh more each time, until it becomes similar to the lowest Avagahana of the Panchendriya Labdhyaparyapta. Here also, the multiplier is an innumerable part of the Praavali. Afterwards, taking the Panchendriya Labdhyaparyapta, it should be increased by fourfold increments, one Pradesh more each time, until it becomes equal to the lowest Avagahana of the Sukshma Nigoda Nivrittiparayapta. Here, the multiplier is an innumerable part of the Praavali. Now, taking the lowest Avagahana of the Sukshma Nigoda Nivrittiparayapta, it should be increased by fourfold increments, one Pradesh more each time, and divided into innumerable parts of the Aavali, and one part should be added to it. In this way, increasing, this Avagahana becomes equal to the highest Pravagahana of the Sukshma Nigoda Nivrittiparayapta. Afterwards, taking this, it should be increased by fourfold increments, one Pradesh more each time, and divided into innumerable parts of the Praavali, and one part should be added to it, until it becomes one part more. In this way, increasing, this Avagahana becomes equal to the highest Avagahana of the Sukshma Nigoda Nivrittiparayapta. Then, this Avagahana should be increased by fourfold increments, one Pradesh more each time, until it reaches the lowest Avagahana of the Sukshma Vaayukaayik Paryapta. Here, the multiplier is an innumerable part of the Praavali. This multiplier should be said to be present everywhere in the Sukshma Jivas. Afterwards, taking this, it should be increased by fourfold increments, one Pradesh more each time, and divided into innumerable parts of the Praavali, and one part should be added to it. In this way, increasing, it becomes the highest Avagahana of the Sukshma Vaayukaayik Nivrittiparayapta. Afterwards, taking this, it should be increased by fourfold increments, one Pradesh more each time, and divided into innumerable parts of the Praavali, and one part should be added to it. In this way, increasing, it becomes the highest Avagahana of the Sukshma Vaayukaayik Paryapta. Afterwards, this should be increased by fourfold increments, one Pradesh more each time, until it reaches the lowest Avagahana of the Sukshma Tejaakaayik Paryapta. Afterwards, this Avagahana should be increased by fourfold increments, one Pradesh more each time, and divided into innumerable parts of the Aavali, and one part should be added to it, until it reaches the highest Avagahana of the Sukshma Tejaakaayik Nivrittiparayapta. Afterwards, this should be increased by fourfold increments, one Pradesh more each time, until it becomes equal to the highest Avagahana of the Sukshma Tejaakaayik Paryapta. Then, this Avagahana should be increased by fourfold increments, one Pradesh more each time, until it becomes equal to the highest Avagahana of the Sukshma Tejaakaayik Paryapta. Then, this Avagahana should be increased by fourfold increments, one Pradesh more each time, until it becomes equal to the highest Avagahana of the Sukshma Tejaakaayik Paryapta. Then, this Avagahana should be increased by fourfold increments, one Pradesh more each time, until it becomes equal to the highest Avagahana of the Sukshma Tejaakaayik Paryapta. Then, this Avagahana should be increased by fourfold increments, one Pradesh more each time, until it becomes equal to the highest Avagahana of the Sukshma Tejaakaayik Paryapta. Then, this Avagahana should be increased by fourfold increments, one Pradesh more each time, until it becomes equal to the highest Avagahana of the Sukshma Tejaakaayik Paryapta. Then, this Avagahana should be increased by fourfold increments, one Pradesh more each time, until it becomes equal to the highest Avagahana of the Sukshma Tejaakaayik Paryapta. Then, this Avagahana should be increased by fourfold increments, one Pradesh more each time, until it becomes equal to the highest Avagahana of the Sukshma Tejaakaayik Paryapta. Then, this Avagahana should be increased by fourfold increments, one Pradesh more each time, until it becomes equal to the highest Avagahana of the Sukshma Tejaakaayik Paryapta. Then, this Avagahana should be increased by fourfold increments, one Pradesh more each time, until it becomes equal to the highest Avagahana of the Sukshma Tejaakaayik Paryapta. Then, this Avagahana should be increased by

Page #185:
---------------------------
152/Go. Sa. Jibakāpada
Gāthā 110-111 Adhika ityadikrama se cāravṛddhiyoḥ dvārā sūkṣmajalakaāyika paryāptaka ki jaghanyāvagāhanā ke sadrśa honā cāhiye. Paścāt iṣa avagāhanā ko deśādhika imādiga: 'Ātaṃkavāsabhāgavṛddhi dvārā bṛḍhānā cāhiye yāvat sūkṣmajalakaāyika nirvṛttyaparyāptaka ki utkarṣṭāvagāhanā ke sadrśa na bhaveta. Punaḥ iṣa avagāhanā ke upari ekapradesa adhika ityadikrama se bṛḍhānā cāhiye yāvat sūkṣmajalakaāyika paryāptaka ki utkarṣṭapragāhanā ke sadrśa na bhaveta. Paścāt iṣa avagāhanā ko ekapradesa adhika ityadikrama se cāravṛddhiyoḥ dvārā sūkṣmapṛthvīkaāyika ki jaghanyāvagāhanā ke sadrśa honā cāhiye. Paścāt iṣa avagāhanā ko ekapradesa adhika ityadikrama se asaṃkhyātabhāgavṛddhi dvārā sūkṣmapṛthvīkaāyika nirvṛttyaparyāptaka ki utkarṣṭapravagānā tak bṛḍhānā cāhiye. Paścāt iṣa avagāhanā ko ekapradesa adhika ityadikrama se asaṃkhyātabhāgavṛddhi dvārā sūkṣmapṛśvīkaāyika paryāpta ki utkarṣṭāvagāhanā tak bṛḍhānā cāhiye. Tatpaścāt iṣa avagāhanā ko ekapradesa adhika ityadijāma se cāravṛddhiyo dvārā bādaravāyukaāyika paryāptaka ki jaghanyāvagāhanā ke prāpta honā tak bṛḍhānā cāhiye. Ihāṃ guṇakāra palyopama ka asaṃkhyātābhāga asti. Paścāt iṣa avagāhanā ko ekapradesa adhika ityadikrama se asaṃkhyātabhāgavṛddhi dvārā bādaravāyukaāyika nityaparyāptaka ki utkarṣṭāvagāhanā tak bṛḍhānā cāhiye. Tatpaścāt iṣa avagāhanā ko ekapradesa adhika ityadikrama se asaṃkhyātavena bhāga vṛddhi ke dvārā bādaravāyukaāyika paryāptaka ki utkarṣṭāvagāhanā tak bṛḍhānā cāhiye. Punaḥ iṣa avagāhanā ko ekapradesa adhika ityadikrama se cāra vṛddhiyoḥ dvārā bādaratejkaāyika paryāptaka ko jaghanyāvagāhanā tak bṛḍhānā cāhiye. Ihāṃ guṇakāra palyopama ka asaṃkhyātavāṃbhāga asti. Paścāt iṣa avagāhanā ko ekapradesa adhika ityadikrama se asaṃkhyātabhāgavṛddhi dvārā bādaratejkaāyika nirvṛttyaparyāpta ki utkarṣṭāvagāhanā tak bṛḍhānā cāhiye. Paścāt iṣa ṣaḍvagāhanā ko ekapradesa adhika ityadikrama se asaṃkhyāta bhāgavṛddhi dvārā bādaratejkaāyika paryāpta ki utkarṣṭāvagāhanā tak bṛḍhānā cāhiye. Tatpaścāt iṣa avagāhanā ko ekapradesa adhika ityadikrama se cāroḥ vṛddhiyoḥ dvārā vādarajalakaāyika paryāptaka ki jaghanyāvagāhanā tak bṛḍhānā cāhiye. Ihāṃ guṇakāra palyopama ka asaṃkhyātavāṃ bhāga asti. Paścāt iṣa avagāhanā ko ekapradesa adhika ityadikrama se asaṃkhyātabhāgavṛddhi dvārā bādarajalakaāyika nirvṛttyaparyātaka ki utkarṣṭāvagāhamā tak bṛḍhānā cāhiye. Punaḥ iṣa avagāhanā ko ekapradesa adhika ityadikrama se asaṃkhyātabhāgavṛddhi dvārā vādarajalakaāyika paryāptaka ki utkarṣṭāvagāhanā tak bṛḍhānā cāhiye. Tatpaścāt iṣa avagāhanā ko ekapradesa adhika ityadikrama se nāroḥ vṛddhiyoḥ dvārā bādara pṛthvīkaāyika paryāptaka ki jaghanyāvagāhanā tak bṛḍhānā cāhiye. Ihāṃ guṇavāra palyopama ka asaṃkhyātayāṃ bhāga asti. Punaḥ ekapradesa adhika ityadikrama me asaṃkhyātabhāga vṛddhi ke dvārā bādarpṛthvīkaāyika nityaparyāptaka ki utkarṣṭāvagāhanā tak bṛḍhānā cāhiye. Punaḥ iṣa avagāhanā ko ekapradesa adhika ityadikrama se asaṃkhyātabhāgavṛddhi dvārā bādarpṛthvīkaāyika paryāptaka ki utkarṣṭāvagāhanā tak bṛḍhānā cāhiye. Punaḥ iṣa avagāhanāki ekapradesa adhika ityadikrama se cāroḥ vṛddhiyoḥ dvārā bādarnigodaparyāptaka ki jaghanyāvagāhanā tak bṛḍhānā cāhiye. Ihāṃ guṇakāra palyopama ka asaṃkhyātavāṃbhāga asti. Punaḥ iṣa avagāhanā ko ekapradesa adhika ityadikrama se asaṃkhyātabhāgavṛddhi ke dvārā bādarnigodanityaparyāptaka ko utkarṣṭāvagāhanā tak bṛḍhānā cāhiye. Punaḥ iṣa avagāhanā ko ekapradesa adhika ityadikrama se asaṃkhyātabhāgavṛddhi dvārā bādara nigodaparyāptaka ki utkarṣṭāvagāhanā tak b

Page #186:
---------------------------
Maya 112
Jitasamas 153

From the four increases, one should increase the **nigoda-pratiṣṭhita-paryāptaka** from its lowest **avagāhana** to its highest **avagāhana**. Here, the multiplier is an **asankhyātavaṁbhāga** of **paly**. Then, one should increase this **avagāhana** from one **pradeśa** more, etc., to the highest **avagāhana** of the **nigoda-pratiṣṭhita-nitya-paryāptaka** by **asankhyātavaṁbhāgavṛddhi**. Then, one should increase this **avagāhana** from one **pradeśa** more, etc., to the highest **avagāhana** of the **nigoda-pratiṣṭhita-paryāptaka** by **asankhyātavaṁbhāgavṛddhi**. Afterwards, one should increase this **avagāhana** from one **pradeśa** more, etc., to the lowest **avagāhana** of the **bādar-vanaspatikāyika-pratyekasara-paryāptaka** by the four increases. Here, the multiplier is an **asankhyātavaṁbhāga** of **patyopama**. Then, one should increase this **avagāhana** from one **pradeśa** more, etc., to the lowest **avagāhana** of the **dvīndriya-paryāptaka** by the four increases. Here, the multiplier is an **asankhyātavaṁbhāga** of **patya**.

Now, the **utsedhanāṅgula** becomes the **saṁkhyātarūpa-pramāṇa**. Further, one should increase this **avagāhana** from one **pradeśa** more, etc., to the lowest **avagāhana** of the **trīndriya-paryāptaka** by the three increases (**asankhyātavaṁbhāgavṛddhi**, **saṁkhyātavaṁbhāgavṛddhi**, **saṁkhyātaguṇavṛddhi**). Here, the multiplier is **saṁkhyāta-samaya**. Then, one should increase this **avagāhana** from one **pradeśa** more, etc., to the lowest **avagāhana** of the **caturindriya-paryāptaka** by the three increases. Then, one should increase this **avagāhana** from one **pradeśa** more, etc., to the lowest **avagāhana** of the **pañcendriya-paryāptaka** by the three increases. Then, one should increase this **avagāhana** from one **pradeśa** more, etc., to the highest **avagāhana** of the **trīndriya-nitya-paryāptaka** by the three increases. Afterwards, one should increase this **avagāhana** from one **pradeśa** more, etc., to the highest **avagāhana** of the **caturindriya-nirvṛttya-paryāptaka** by the three increases. Then, one should increase this **avagāhana** from one **pradeśa** more, etc., to the highest **avagāhana** of the **dvīndriya-nirvṛttya-paryāptaka** by the three increases. Afterwards, one should increase this **avagāhana** from one **pradeśa** more, etc., to the highest **avagāhana** of the **bādar-vanaspatikāyika-śarīra-nirvṛttya-paryāptaka** by the three increases. Then, one should increase this **avagāhana** from one **pradeśa** more, etc., to the highest **avagāhana** of the **pañcendriya-nitya-paryāptaka** by the three increases. Then, one should increase this **avagāhana** from one **pradeśa** more, etc., to the highest **avagāhana** of the **trīndriya-paryāptaka** by the three increases. Afterwards, one should increase this **avagāhana** from one **pradeśa** more, etc., to the highest **avagāhana** of the **caturindriya-paryāptaka** by the three increases. Then, one should increase this **avagāhana** from one **pradeśa** more, etc., to the highest **avagāhana** of the **trīndriya-paryāptaka** by the three increases. Then, one should increase this **avagāhana** from one **pradeśa** more, etc., to the highest **avagāhana** of the **bādar-vanaspatikāyika-pratyekasara-paryāptaka** by the three increases. Afterwards, one should increase this **avagāhana** from one **pradeśa** more, etc., to the highest **avagāhana** of the **pañcendriya-paryāptaka** by the three increases.

In the aforementioned places, the **avagāhana** **medas** are included in the **matsya-racanā** as **hedrā** **jesi** **jahṣaṇam** **vāram** **ukkasasayam** **have** **jattha**. **Tathāntaragā** **savyē** **tesi** **uggahaṛaṇam** **vi** **appā**. ||112||
1. Dhaval Pu. 11 p. 46.
2. Dha, Pu 11 p. 40 to 51.

Page #187:
---------------------------
## Translation:

**Gatha:**

- The middle ground of all the differences between the inferior and superior Avagahana of the beings, which has been stated earlier, and the superior Avagahana, which has been stated wherever it has been stated, is included in the middle ground. ||112||

**Special Meaning:**

- Where is the inferior Avagahana of the intended being and where is the superior Avagahana? And how many other places are there between the inferior and superior Avagahana? This has been explained simply in one glance in Dh. Pu. 11, page 71, by the Matsya Rachana. According to it, the following is being attached here. In this Matsya Rachana, the first 16 Avagahana places are of the inferior Avagahana of the Trisamayavarti Paharak and Trisamayavarti Tadbhavastha Labdhyaparyaptak beings. The superior Avagahana of the Labdhyaparyaptak is found to be innumerable times greater than the superior Avagahana of the Nirvasyaparyaptak without any special increase, therefore the superior Avagahana of the Labdhyaparyaptak was not taken. The superior Avagahana of the Nirvasyaparyaptak is that which is going to become Paryaptak in the future time. The inferior Avagahana of the Paryaptak is that which is present in the first time of becoming Paryaptak and comes from the inferior Upadhyayog and inferior Ekantaanuvridhiyog and stays in the inferior Parinamyog and inferior Avagahana. The superior Avagahana is that of the Paryaptak being with superior Yog, which is present in the superior Avagahana and has the tradition of Paryapti.

- **Note:** The text contains some unclear parts and possible errors. The translation attempts to convey the general meaning, but some details might be inaccurate.

Page #188:
---------------------------
**Verses 113-117**
**Jiva Samaas/155**

**Statement of Jiva Samaas by Kula (Species)**

"Twenty-two lakhs for the Earth-bodied, seventeen lakhs for the Water-bodied, three lakhs for the Fire-bodied, and seven lakhs for the Air-bodied are the Kulakotis." ||113||

"Seven lakhs for the two-sensed, eight lakhs for the three-sensed, six lakhs for the four-sensed, and twenty-eight lakhs for the plant-bodied are the Kulakotis." ||114||

"Twelve and a half lakhs for the aquatic, twelve lakhs for the birds, ten lakhs for the quadrupeds, and one lakh for the reptiles (those who move on their bellies) are the Kulakotis." ||115||

"Twenty-six lakhs for the Devas, twenty-five lakhs for the Narakas, and twelve lakhs for the humans are the Kulakotis to be known." ||116||

"These are the Kulakotis, totaling sixty-nine lakhs fifty thousand kotis for all beings." ||117||

**Explanation of the Verses:**

These five verses are also found in the Panchaachar Adhikar and Paryapti Adhikar of the Mulaachar. In those, the Kulakotis for humans are mentioned as fourteen lakhs, and for all beings as one hundred and ninety-nine and a half lakhs. However, in the Gommatasar and Praacharasar, the Kulakotis for humans are mentioned as twelve lakhs, and for all beings as sixteen hundred and seventy-three lakhs. Currently, there is no Shrutakevali, therefore, it cannot be decided which number should be accepted.

**Doubt:**

What is meant by Kula (Species)?

**Solution:**

Shri Abhaychandra Suri, the Siddhantachkravarti, in his Mandaprabodhini Tika, has stated, "The lineages that arise due to the progressive increase in the special qualities of the higher and lower gotras are called Kula (Species)."

Page #189:
---------------------------
156/Go. Sa, Jivakanda
Verse 118: The lineages that arise from the successive emergence of specific natures are called 'kulas'. According to the Mulachara commentary, "the term 'kula' refers to the position of the mind due to the body."
Doubt: What is the difference between 'kula' and 'yoni'?
Solution: The distinctions of 'jati' are called 'kulas', and the foundational place from which beings originate (the cause of their birth) is called 'yoni'. For example, banyan, peepal, worm, clam, ant, bumblebee, fly, cow, horse, etc., and Kshatriya, etc., are 'kulas'. Tuber, root, egg, womb, sap, sweat, etc., are 'yonis'.
Doubt: What is the benefit of knowing 'kula', 'yoni', 'margana', etc.?
Solution: By understanding the nature of all beings through the support of 'kula', 'yoni', and 'margana', one should make their faith unshakeable, i.e., free from doubt. Shri Kundakunda Acharya has also said in Mulachara:
"The fruits, 'yoni', 'margana', and the battles, are all the same for all beings. By knowing this, doubt will be removed from all beings." ||37||
Thus, the second chapter, called 'Jivasamasaprarupana', in the Gommatasar Jivakanda is complete.
3. Paryapti-Prarupana Adhikar
The characteristics of 'paryapti' and 'aparyapti', and the distinction between 'paryapti' and 'aparyapti' in a being:
"Just as a house, a pot, and a cloth, etc., are inanimate substances that are both full and empty, in the same way, beings are also of two types: full and empty. Full beings are called 'paryaptak', and empty beings are called 'aparyaptak'." ||11||
Special Meaning: The cause of completeness is called 'paryapti'. Food, body, senses, drink, language, 
1. Based on the Mulachara commentary. 2. This verse is found in Gh. Pu. 2, p. 417. It is also found in Pra. Pan. San. p. 2, Pra. 1, Ga. 43, but there, instead of 'Pundira Jiwa Pattidra', the reading is 'Punnapunyano Panjattiyara'. 3. 'Pajjati' - 'Paryapti' - the causes of completeness (Mulachara Paryapti Adhikar 12. Ga. 4. commentary).

Page #190:
---------------------------
Gatha 116
Paryapti/157

And the completeness of the mental and physical powers is called paryapti. The incompleteness of these powers is called aparyapti. Due to this distinction of paryapti and aparyapti, the jivas (living beings) also become of two types - paryaptajiva and aparyaptajiva. The jivas in whom the special state of completely fulfilling their respective paryaptis has manifested due to the rise of the paryapta-namaka-karma, are called paryaptajivas. The jivas in whom the special state of dying without fulfilling the body-paryapti has arisen due to the rise of the aparyapta-namaka-karma, are called aparyaptajivas. All jivas are called paryapta when the body-paryapti is accomplished. Even the jivas whose paryapti is not complete, but the paryapta-namaka-karma has risen, are also called paryapta, because their paryapti will be complete in the future. By figurative usage, their paryapta designation is not contradictory.

The types of paryaptis and their possessors:
"Aharasaririndiyapanabhasa-marana, 
Cattari panca chappiya, eeviya-viyalasaranina" ||116||

Meaning of the gatha: The paryaptis are - aharaparyapti, sarira-paryapti, indriya-paryapti, svasa-ucchvasa-paryapti, bhasa-paryapti, and manas-paryapti. The ekendriyas (one-sensed beings) have the first four paryaptis. The vikaiachatushka (four-sensed beings) have five paryaptis. The sanjni (conscious) jivas have six paryaptis.

Special meaning: Normally, the paryaptis are six in number - aharaparyapti, sarira-paryapti, indriya-paryapti, svasa-ucchvasa-paryapti, bhasa-paryapti, and manas-paryapti. The paryaptis are only six, not more than that.

Page #191:
---------------------------
## English Translation:

**150/Go, Sa. Ovakanda**
**Chapter 116**

**Body Perfection:** The completeness of the power to transform the body into a form like the husk of sesame seeds, with the hard parts like bones, etc., and the liquid parts like juice, blood, fat, semen, etc., like the oil of sesame seeds, is called body perfection.

**Sensory Perfection:** The completeness of the power to receive objects like form, etc., located in a suitable place, is called sensory perfection. However, even after sensory perfection is complete, knowledge of the objects does not arise at that time, because the instruments, the sense organs, are not present at that time.

**Breath Perfection:** The completeness of the power of inhalation and exhalation is called breath perfection.

**Speech Perfection:** The completeness of the power to transform into four types of speech, through the limbs of speech articulation, is called speech perfection.

**Mind Perfection:** The origin of the power of remembering the meaning experienced, through the dependence on the substance-mind, which arises from the mind-articulations, is called mind perfection.

**Beings with mind are called sentient beings.** There are two types of mind: substance-mind and feeling-mind. Substance-mind is the one that depends on the karma of the name-body, which is the result of the pudgala. Feeling-mind is the purity that arises in the soul due to the destruction and cessation of the karma of the obstruction of semen and the nine sense-organ coverings.

**Question:** At the time of taking on a new birth, the feeling-mind, like the feeling-senses, also comes into existence. Therefore, just as the feeling-senses are said to be in harmony during the time of imperfection, why is the feeling-mind not said to be in harmony there?

**Answer:** No, because if we accept the existence of the substance-mind, which is not perceivable by the external senses, during the state of imperfection, then the question of the non-existence of such a substance-mind will arise.

**Question:** The existence of the substance-mind will be proven only by the description of perfection.

**Answer:** No, because if we accept that perfection is the completeness of the power of remembering external objects, then even in the absence of the substance-mind, the description of mind perfection will be established. It is also not correct to say that "the harmony of the substance-mind will be established before the power of remembering external objects," because there is a contradiction in accepting the existence of the substance-mind before the origin of the substance suitable for it. Therefore, it should be understood that not saying that the feeling-mind exists in the state of imperfection is indicative of the existence of the substance-mind.

**References:**
1 to 5: Gh.Pu. 15,255, V. 3 Appendix, pp. 30-31.
6: P.Pu. 15, 256.60.

Page #192:
---------------------------
## Gatha 111

According to the Mulachara Toka by Siddhanta Chakravarti Shri Vasunandi Acharya, the nature of Paryaptis is to be observed. Therefore, it is also being given here.

**Ahar Paryapti:** The completeness of the cause by which a Jiva is able to transform the three bodies - Audarik, Vaikriyik, and Praharak - into their respective forms, by consuming the appropriate Ahar Vargas, is called Ahar Paryapti.

**Sharira Paryapti:** The completeness of the cause by which a Jiva is able to transform the Pudgal Dravya suitable for body formation into the Audarik, Vaikriyik, and Praharak bodies, is called Sharira Paryapti.

**Indriya Paryapti:** The completeness of the cause by which a Jiva is able to know its own Indriya Vishayas (objects of senses) like touch, etc., by consuming the Pudgal Dravya suitable for Ekendriya, Dwiindriya, Triindriya, Chaturindriya, and Panchendriya, is called Indriya Paryapti.

**Pranapan Paryapti:** The completeness of the cause by which a Jiva creates the structure of inhalation and exhalation by taking hold of the Pudgal Dravya suitable for breathing, is called Pranapan Paryapti.

**Bhasha Paryapti:** The completeness of the cause by which a Jiva is able to transform into the Bhasha form by taking hold of the Pudgal Dravya suitable for the four types of language, is called Bhasha Paryapti.

**Manah Paryapti:** The completeness of the cause by which a Jiva is able to create the four types of Manah Paryapti by taking hold of the Pudgal Dravya suitable for the four types of mind, is called Manah Paryapti.

The above six Paryaptis occur from the Sanjni Mithyadristi to the Asanyat Samyagdristi Gunasthanas.

**Doubt:** Do those in the Samyag Mithyadristi Gunasthanas also have six Paryaptis?

**Solution:** No, because in this Gunasthan, Aparayapti Kala is not found.

**Doubt:** Why do those in the Gunasthanas above Shradeshavira, etc., not have six Paryaptis?

**Solution:** No, because the name Paryapti itself is the completion of the six Paryaptis, and this completion occurs only up to the fourth Gunasthan. Therefore, it is not found in the fifth and subsequent Gunasthanas. Because, if we consider the existence of Paryapti in the subsequent Gunasthanas, it would contradict the fact that the final stage of Aparayapti, which is Paryapti, is completed at one time.

There are five Paryaptis and five Aparayaptis.

1. Muladhar Bhag 2, p. 176, Paryapti Adhikar 12, Gatha 4, Tika.
2. G.P. 1, p. 312.

Page #193:
---------------------------
## 160/Go. Sa. Jivakanda
##  Verse 119

**Doubt:** The five requisites are included within the six requisites, so why is it necessary to mention the five requisites separately?

**Solution:** No, some beings possess all six requisites, while others possess only five. The word "Panch" (five) is used in the verse to indicate this.

**Doubt:** Which are these five requisites?

**Solution:** The five requisites are those possessed by the "Vikal" (impaired) beings, namely the two-sensed, three-sensed, four-sensed, and the non-conscious five-sensed beings. The word "Vikal" in the verse indicates the inclusion of the impaired four-sensed beings.

**Doubt:** Even impaired beings have a mind, because the function of the mind, which is knowledge, is also found in impaired beings.

**Solution:** It is not certain, because it is well-known that the knowledge present in impaired beings is a function of the mind.

**Doubt:** It is observed that the special knowledge in humans is a function of the mind.

**Solution:** If the special knowledge in humans is a function of the mind, then so be it, because it is observed in humans.

**Doubt:** There is no difference between the knowledge in humans, which is accepted as a function of the mind, and the knowledge in impaired beings, in terms of the general nature of knowledge. Therefore, it is assumed that the knowledge in impaired beings also arises from the mind.

**Solution:** No, because there cannot be a similarity between knowledge present in different species. The statement "Impaired beings do not have a mind" is not contradicted by direct perception, because there is no scope for direct perception in this case.

**Doubt:** How do we know that impaired beings lack a mind?

**Solution:** We know this from the scriptures (Agama).

**Doubt:** How can scriptures be considered evidence?

**Solution:** Just as direct perception is naturally evidence, so are the scriptures naturally evidence.

1. P. Pu. 1 p. 513. 2. P. Pu. 1 p. 314.

Page #194:
---------------------------
## Gatha 120
## Paryapti/161

There are four Paryaptis and four Aparyaptis. The four Paryaptis are Ahar Paryapti, Sharira Paryapti, Indriya Paryapti, and Panapan Paryapti. Some beings have four Paryaptis, while others have four Aparyaptis. These four Paryaptis are only found in Ekendriya beings, not in others.

**Doubt:**  Are there no Ucchvasas in Ekendriya beings?

**Solution:** No, because it is known from the Agamas that Ekendriya beings have breathing.

**Doubt:**  Is this Agama contradicted by direct perception?

**Solution:** If there is a contradiction from direct perception by someone who has directly perceived all substances, then it can be called a direct contradiction. However, Indriya Pratyaksha does not make all substances its object, so it is not possible to distinguish between substances that are not the object of Indriya Pratyaksha.

**Doubt:**  Those who have attained perfection with six Paryaptis, five Paryaptis, or four Paryaptis are called Paryaptakas. So, is someone who has attained perfection with one Paryapti called a Paryaptak, or is someone who has attained perfection with all Paryaptis called a Paryaptak?

**Solution:** All beings are called Paryaptakas when they have completed Sharira Paryapti.

The time of the beginning and completion of each and all Paryaptis is **Pazzatti Patthavanam Jugavan Tu Kamen Hovi Gitthavanam**.

**Antomutta Kale Pahiyakama Tattiyalaaya.** ||120||

**Gathaarth:** The establishment of Paryaptis happens simultaneously, but their completion happens sequentially. Even though the time of these Paryaptis is increasingly sequential, it is still within a moment. ||120||

**Vishesharth:** The beginning of all six Paryaptis happens simultaneously, because they exist from the time of birth. However, their completion happens sequentially. First, Ahar Paryapti is completed within a moment. Then, Sharira Paryapti is completed after a time that is a multiple of the time taken for Ahar Paryapti. In other words, the time taken for Sharira Paryapti is a multiple of the time taken for Ahar Paryapti from the time of birth. The time taken for Indriya Paryapti is a multiple of the time taken for Sharira Paryapti, and the time taken for Panapan Paryapti is a multiple of the time taken for Indriya Paryapti. The time taken for Bhasha Paryapti is a multiple of the time taken for Panapan Paryapti, and the time taken for Manah Paryapti is a multiple of the time taken for Bhasha Paryapti.

1. P. Pu. 1 p. 314-315 ||2. P. Pu. 1 p. 315-316. 3. Etasan Praarambho'kramane Janmasamayaadaramy Tasan Sasvabhyupagamat. Nishpatti Tu Punah Kramen. Gh. Pu. 1 p. 255-256. 4. Based on the commentary by Shrimad Abhayachandra Suri in Siddhanta Rakavarti.

Page #195:
---------------------------
162/Mo. Sa. Jivakanda
Verse 121: The appropriate statement can be understood by the numerical arrangement as follows: A being is born at 8:00, at 8:02 its Aharaparyapti is complete, at 8:02:12 its Shariraparyapti is complete, at 8:02:25 its Indriyaparyapti is complete, at 8:02:40 its Panapanaparyapti is complete, at 8:02:56 its Bhashaparyapti is complete, and at 8:03:14 its Manahparyapti is complete. To indicate that the Paryaptis are not completed at one or two times, Antarmuhurt has been taken. The time for completing the Paryaptis is both inferior and superior.
Paryapt and Nivanyaparyapt's time is Pajjattass Ya Udaye, Niyanniyapjattarinavido Hodi. Jav Sariram Punnam, Khimvatti Prapunnago Tath. ||121||
Verse Meaning: When the Paryapt Karma arises, i.e., the being whose Paryapt Karma arises, is the one who completes his own appropriate Paryaptis. As long as, i.e., for as long as the Shariraparyapti is not complete, this being remains Nityaparyaplak. ||121||
Special Meaning: The Paryapt Karma of the being who will have all the Paryaptis completed according to the rules arises. When the Paryapt Karma arises, until the Shariraparyapti is complete, i.e., until the time of both Ahar and Sharira Paryapti, or until the time of Antarmuhurt, this being remains Nirvrittyaparyaptik.
Yoga is of three types: Uppaadyoga, Ekantaanuvridhyoga, Parinaamayoga. In the first moment of birth, Uppaadyoga occurs. From the second moment of birth until the last moment of being incomplete in Shariraparyapti, Ekantaanuvridhyoga occurs. From the first moment of being complete until further, Parinaamayoga occurs. Nirvrittyaparyaptikas do not have Parinaamayoga. But there is also one opinion that the being becomes Paryapt when all the Paryaptis are complete. If even one Paryapti remains incomplete, Parinaamayoga does not occur in the Aparyaptikas.
The being who has been greatly afflicted by the sufferings of the Narakas and has been born in the humans from the Narakas, his Audarik Mishrakayayoga's time is short, because at that time the abundance of his Yoga is seen.
1. "Egg-do Samaye Hi Pajjatino E Samaranedi Si Jagabai Tomuttagahanam Kadam. Pajanisamayanakalo Jahanno Ukkassano Vi Asthi." Gh. Pu. 10 p. 236. 2. Uppanavidiyasamayamp Di Jac Sarirapjattiae Apjattay Vacharimsamabho Tad Egtanuvadi Jigo Hodi. Pajjatmasamayapphandi Uri Samvatth Parinaama Jogo Chev. Nivattigrapajattaran Patnim Parinaamajogo. (Gh. Pu. 10 p. 420-21) 3. Savvahim Pajjatthihi Pajjanayado. Ekkaae Vi Paujattiae Asamattae Pajptam Parinaamajogo Na Hodi. (4. Pu. 1. p. 55) 1

Page #196:
---------------------------
## Gatha 122-124
## Payapti 163

The time period of the *Praudarikamisrakayayog* (the state of being born as a human after death) for the *Vimana* dwelling gods, who are nurtured in happiness and devoid of suffering, is long because they are slow in their *yog* (spiritual progress) and thus take a long time to absorb the subtle *pudgalas* (matter particles). Or, even if their *yog* is great and they absorb many *pudgalas*, the time period for such a being is still long because they are unable to quickly complete their *paryaptis* (spiritual attainments) due to their life of luxury and indulgence.

The time period of *aparyapti* (non-attainment) for those born in *Vimana* dwelling gods is short, while it is long for those born in hell. A *dravyalingi* (one who has renounced all possessions) ascetic was born in the highest *granveyaka* (heavenly realm) and attained *paryapti* in the shortest possible time, an *antarmuhurta* (a fraction of a moment). A *samyagdristi* (rightly-seeing) *bhavalingi* (one who has renounced all attachments) ascetic, who had attained *sarvarth-siddhi* (perfection in all aspects), was born in the *Vimana* dwelling gods and attained *paryapti* in the shortest possible time, an *antarmuhurta*. A *tiryanch* (animal) or a human, a *mithyadristi* (wrongly-seeing) being, was born in the hells of the seventh earth and attained *paryapti* in the longest possible time, an *antarmuhurta*. A *baddhanaraka* (bound to hell) human, who attained *samyaktva* (right faith), destroyed the *darshanamohaniya* (veil of perception), and was born in the hells of the first earth, attained *paryapti* in the longest possible time, an *antarmuhurta*. Both these *jghanakalas* (inferior times) are multiplied by the number of *utkrushtkalas* (superior times).

The nature of the *labdhyaparyaptak* (one who has attained *paryapti*) is...

The number of *bhavas* (existences) related to *ekendriya* (one sense), *vikaleendriya* (impaired senses), and *sakaleendriya* (all senses) of the *utkrushtbhavas* (superior existences) of the *sadyaparyaptak* (one who is about to attain *paryapti*) and the clear description of the *bhavas* related to *ekendriya*...

**Gatha 122**
"The *antarmuhurta* (fraction of a moment) is the time of death for the *aparyaptak* (one who has not attained *paryapti*).

**Gatha 123**
"Three hundred and thirty-six, twenty-six thousand *maranarins* (deaths) are the *antarmuhurta* for the *khuddhabhava* (small existence).

**Gatha 124**
"Sixty *talas* (a unit of time), twenty-four *viyala* (a unit of time) for the *panchakhya* (five senses), sixty thousand, and thirty-two *meyavakhya* (a unit of time) for the *sakaleendriya* (all senses)."

**Notes:**

* The text refers to the Jain concept of *karma* (action) and its effects on the soul's journey through different realms of existence.
* *Pudgalas* are the basic building blocks of matter in Jain cosmology.
* *Yog* refers to the spiritual progress of the soul towards liberation.
* *Paryaptis* are the spiritual attainments that lead to liberation.
* *Antarmuhurta* is a very short period of time, while *antarmuhurta* is a very long period of time.
* *Vimana* dwelling gods are a type of heavenly being in Jain cosmology.
* *Granveyaka* is a type of heavenly realm.
* *Samyagdristi* is a state of perfect knowledge and understanding.
* *Bhavalingi* is a state of detachment from all worldly attachments.
* *Sarvarth-siddhi* is the state of perfection in all aspects of life.
* *Tiryach* refers to animals.
* *Mithyadristi* is a state of wrong belief.
* *Baddhanaraka* is a being bound to hell.
* *Darshanamohaniya* is a veil of perception that obscures the true nature of reality.
* *Samyaktva* is the state of right faith.
* *Jghanakalas* are inferior times.
* *Utkrushtkalas* are superior times.
* *Labdhyaparyaptak* is one who has attained *paryapti*.
* *Sadyaparyaptak* is one who is about to attain *paryapti*.
* *Ekendriya* is one sense.
* *Vikaleendriya* is impaired senses.
* *Sakaleendriya* is all senses.
* *Bhava* is an existence.
* *Utkrushtbhavas* are superior existences.
* *Talas*, *viyala*, and *meyavakhya* are units of time.
* *Panchakhya* is five senses.
* *Maranarins* are deaths.
* *Khuddhabhava* is a small existence.

Page #197:
---------------------------
164/Go. Sa. Jeevakanda
Verse 125
Pudhvidgaganimarad - Saharanathal - Suham Patteya.
Evesu Apunnesu Ya Ekkekke Bar Khan Chakkam ||12||
Verse Meaning - Due to the inadequacy of the karma-udaya, they do not complete their respective perfections and attain death in the Antarmuhurta time, they are Labdhyaparaptak. ||122||
In the Antarmuhurta time, the Labdhyaparaptak being attains death after 66336 years, and there are as many Kshudra Bhavas. ||123||
The Vikalendriyas have 80, 60, and 40 Bhavas, the Panchendriyas have 24 Bhavas, and the Ekendriyas have 66132 Bhavas. ||124||
Badar and Sukshmapৃথিবী-Jal-Agni-Bayu and ordinary plants, these ten, and one each plant, these 11 Labdhyaparaptak, each have 6012 Bhavas. ||12||
Special Meaning - In verse 137, in the context of Swamikatikayana, the nature of Labdhyaparaptak is described as follows:
Ussasadwarasame Bhaage Jo Mardi E Ya Samanevi.
Ekko Vi Ya Pajasi Ladhi-Apunno Have So Chha.
Meaning - The being who dies in the eighteenth part of the breath and does not complete even one perfection is a Labdhyaparaptak being. In Go. Ji. Ga. 122, 'Antarmuhurta' refers to the eighteenth part of the pulse, because there are many types of 'Antarmuhurta'. There are approximately 80 pulses in one minute and 60 seconds, so one pulse is 1/80th of a second, i.e. 0.75 seconds. The eighteenth part of 0.75 seconds, i.e. 3/80th of a second, is the lifespan of a Labdhyaparaptak. One Bhava of a Labdhyaparaptak is also called Kshudra Bhava. An Ekendriya Labdhyaparaptak being does not complete even one perfection out of the four perfections. A Dwiendriya, Triendriya, Chaturindriya, and Asanjnī Panchendriya Labdhyaparaptak being does not complete even one perfection out of the five perfections, and a Sanjnī Panchendriya Labdhyaparaptak does not complete even one perfection out of the six perfections. The one whose ability to complete their perfection is incomplete is the etymological meaning of Labdhyaparaptak.
A healthy, well-being human being has 3773 breaths (pulses) in one Muhurta. It is also said:
Padhyanalasanupahatamanujocchvasaistrisaptasaptatrimitaih.
Pahu Muhurtam Antamuhurtam Ashtaashtajitsvibhagayutaih ||
Meaning - A wealthy, healthy human being without laziness has 3773 breaths in one Muhurta (48 minutes). By reducing 88 breaths from these 3773 breaths and adding one-third of the breaths, the measure of Antarmuhurta (3773-88=)3685 breaths; - breaths = 3685 breaths is said.
1. Labdhya Swasya Paryaptinishthapanayogyataya Aparaptaa Anishpana: Lajayaparapsa iti Nirukteih. Swa. Ka. A. Ma. 137's commentary 2. Go. Ji. Ka. Ga. 125's commentary from Ut.

Page #198:
---------------------------
## Verse 126
**Parayapa/165**

The lifespan of a **jighanya** (lowest) being in the **parayapa** (state of perfection) is equal to the duration of a **muhurt** (48 minutes), but the lifespan of a **jighanya** being in the **labdhyaparyapa** (state of attaining perfection) is equal to one-eighteenth of a breath. In this regard, the following verse should be considered:

> **Prayur antamuhurtah syadesho'syastadashamshakah |**
> **Uchchvasastha jighanyam cha nritirischa labhyapurnake ||**

Dividing the duration of a **muhurt** by one-eighteenth of a breath (36851 breaths), we get 1356666336 **kshudrabhava** (minor births) for **labdhyaparyapa** beings. This means that a being can be born a maximum of 66336 times if it continuously takes birth in the **labdhyaparyapa** state. Out of these 66336 **kshudrabhava**, 66132 are related to **ekendriya labdhyaparyapa** (one-sense **labdhyaparyapa**). The number of **kshudrabhava** for **dwiendriya** (two-sense), **triendriya** (three-sense), **chaturindriya** (four-sense), and **panchendriya** (five-sense) **labdhyaparyapa** are 80, 60, 40, and 24 respectively. All these together (66132 + 80 + 60 + 40 + 24 = 66336) make up the total 66336 **kshudrabhava**.

In this regard, **Shri Kundakunda Acharya** has also said in **Bhaavapad**:

> **Chhattisam-tisin-saya-chaav-dvisahas-vaar maranaani |**
> **Anto muttamam jhe pattosi nigoyavasamhi ||2||**
> **Vilivae asiidi satti chaalisameva jaaneh |**
> **Pandiidi shami gudamarato muhattas-sa ||26||**

The explanation of the 66132 **bhavas** related to **ekendriya labdhyaparyapa** is as follows: 6012 for **sukshma prithvikaayik** (subtle earth-bodied), 6012 for **badara prithvikaayik** (gross earth-bodied), 6012 for **sukshma akaayik** (subtle non-bodied), 6012 for **badara akaayik** (gross non-bodied), 6012 for **sukshma tejakaayik** (subtle fire-bodied), 6012 for **badara tejakaayik** (gross fire-bodied), 6012 for **sukshma vaayukaayik** (subtle air-bodied), 6012 for **badara vaayukaayik** (gross air-bodied), 6012 for **sukshma sadharan vanaspatikaayik** (subtle ordinary plant-bodied), 6012 for **badara sadharan vanaspatikaayik** (gross ordinary plant-bodied), and 6012 for each type of **vanaspatikaayik** (plant-bodied). Similarly, the 24 **bhavas** for **panchendriya labdhyaparyapa** are as follows: 8 for **manushya labdhyaparyapa** (human **labdhyaparyapa**), 8 for **asangya panchendriya labdhyaparyapa** (non-conscious five-sense **labdhyaparyapa**), and 8 for **sangya panchendriya labdhyaparyapa** (conscious five-sense **labdhyaparyapa**).

---

**Samudapat** (state of arising)

The reason for the **aparayapa** (imperfection) of **kevali** (omniscient) beings in the **samudapat** state is:

> **Pajjattasarirass, pajjatt-udayass kaayajogass |**
> **Jogiss apunnattam apunnajogoti rinaddilam ||126||**

**Gathaarth**: The **aparayapa** (imperfection) of a **kaayayogi** (body-yoga practitioner) who has a **parayapa** body and **parayapa** **namakarma** (karmic potential) is called **apurnna yog** (incomplete yoga).

**Notes:**

1. Quoted from the commentary of **Go. Sa. Ji. Ma 125**.
2. **Panchendriya labdhyaparyapa** has four types (24), out of which 8 are **manushya labdhyaparyapa**, 8 are **asangya panchendriya labdhyaparyapa**, and 8 are **sangya panchendriya labdhyaparyapa**. Together, they make up 24 **panchendriya labdhyaparyapa**. (Commentary of **Swa. Ka. Pra. Ga. 127**)

Page #199:
---------------------------
## 166/Go. Sa, Jivakanda
## Gatha 126

**Special Meaning:** Although the **Sayaga Kevali** residing in the 13th **Gunasthan** has a complete **Audarik** body and the emergence of sufficient **Namkarma**, during the time of **Samudghat**, **Audarik Mishra** and **Kamanka** yogas are used. These two yogas occur in the insufficient state, not in the sufficient state. Therefore, these two yogas are called **Aपूर्णयोग** (incomplete yogas). Due to these incomplete yogas, the **Sayaga Kevali** is called insufficient in the **Kapat**, **Pratar**, and **Lokapuran** states.

**Question:** What is **Samudghat**?

**Answer:** **Dhat** refers to the **Dharma** that destroys. Its meaning in **Prakriti** is the destruction of the state and **Anubhag** of **Karmas**. The **Dhat** that occurs progressively is **Udghat**, and the appropriate **Udghat** is **Samudghat**.

**Question:** The word **Samudghat** does not mention the destruction of the state and **Anubhag**, nor does it have authority. How do we know that the destruction of the state and **Anubhag** of **Karmas** is intended here in **Samudghat**?

**Answer:** It is understood from the context that the destruction of the state and **Anubhag** of **Karmas** is intended in **Kevali Samudghat**.

**Question:** How is this **Dhat** appropriate?

**Answer:** It is not appropriate because there is no contradiction in the appropriateness of this **Dhat** occurring at one time, compared to the **Dhat** that is completed over a long period of time.

**Question:** Is **Samudghat** for **Kevalis** caused or uncaused? It cannot be uncaused, because if we assume this, then all **Kevalis** would attain **Moksha** only after performing **Samudghat**. If we say that all **Kevalis** attain **Moksha** only after performing **Samudghat**, what is the harm in that? It is not right to say that, because if we assume this, then the number of **Kevalis** who perform **Lokapuran Samudghat** would be twenty after the **Varshaprithaktva**, which cannot be a rule. **Samudghat** for **Kevalis** is caused, this first possibility also does not stand, because there is no cause for **Kevali Samudghat**. If we say that the inequality of the state of **Prayukarma** from the state of the three **Aghatiya Karmas** is the cause of **Samudghat**, that is also not right, because in the extreme state of the **Kshina Kshaya Gunasthan**, all **Karmas** are not equal, therefore, the occurrence of **Samudghat** for all **Kevalis** would be implied.

1. **Poralimissakayajogo Apjattanam Bagh.Pu. 1 P. 315)** It is certain that **Kamanka** yoga is only in the insufficient state. (**V.Pu. 1 P. 316**)
2. "**Dhanam Ghatah Sthityanubhavyovinasha iti Yavat 1 Japarighat Upratah, Samichina Udghatah Samudghatah.**" (**D.Pu. 1 P. 300**)
3. "**Kathamumuktamanadhikritam Pavagamyata iti Chenna, Prakaran Ghaladavagateh. Kayamasya Ghatasya Mamicinatvamiti Chenna, Bhuyahkalinishpadyamanapatebhyo'syakasamayikasya Samichinatvadishechat.**" (**Ch.Pu. 1 P. 300-301**).

Page #200:
---------------------------
## Sufficient / 167
**Solution:** According to the teachings of Shri Yativrishabhacharya, at the culmination of the Kshayika Kshaya guna sthana, the state of all the bad karmas is not the same, therefore all Kevalis attain liberation only by Samudghata. However, according to the views of those Acharyas who have a rule of twenty Kevalis who perform Lokapurana Samudghata, there are many Kevalis who perform Samudghata and many who do not.
**Doubt:** Which Kevalis do not perform Samudghata?
**Solution:** Those whose Samsara Vyakti, i.e., the time spent in the world, is equal to the state of the three karmas, Vedaniya, etc., do not perform Samudghata. The rest of the Kevalis perform Samudghata.
**Verse 126**
**Doubt:** Why is there a difference between the Samsara Vyakti state and the state of the remaining three karmas, even though they remain the same in terms of the results like Anivriti, etc.?
**Solution:** No, because if the Samsara is considered equal to the state of the three karmas due to the results being equal to the Anivriti form, then there is a contradiction.
**Doubt:** What is the cause of the destruction of Samsara?
**Solution:** The knowledge of the twelve angas, intense devotion in them, Kevali Samudghata, and the results in the form of Anivriti, all these are the causes of the destruction of Samsara. But all these causes are not possible in all beings, because the beings who have ten previous births and those who have no previous births are also seen to ascend the ladder of Kshapaka. Therefore, there is no karma state equal to Samsara Vyakti there. Thus, in the Grantharmukhurta, while destroying the countless parts of the Patyopama, which are obtained by the rule of the name, or the countable parts of the Gravali, many beings destroy the remaining karmas equal to the Aayu without Samudghata, and many beings destroy the remaining karmas equal to the Aayu through Samudghata. But this destruction of Samsara is not possible in the Kevali earlier, because earlier, all beings have the same results due to the destruction of the Sthiti Kandaka.
**Doubt:** If there is no excess in the results, i.e., the results of all Kevalis are the same, then why should there not be destruction of Samsara later?
**Solution:** No, because even though the results are the same in the form of Vitaraga, the destruction of Samsara is caused by the specific results of the Granth, which are born from the soul, in comparison to the Aayu karma, which is as long as the Grantharmukhurta.
**Doubt:** Why should it not be considered that you are going against the Sutra by explaining this meaning in this way, which has not been explained by other Acharyas?
1. Dh. Pu. 1 p. 301-302.
1

Page #201:
---------------------------
168/Go. Sa. Jiyakanda
Chapter 126
Solution: No, because the statement of the Acharyas, who are bound by the sutra that establishes the interval of years, contradicts the aforementioned statement.
Sha-If a being who has attained omniscience remains with six months of life remaining in his life-karma, he is liberated only by dying, the Ghosha beings say so and also do not say so. It is also said
Chhammasa-uvase-se utpannam jassa kevalam ganam.
Sa-samugyano sijhabhai sesa bhajja samuggahae ||167|| Why is the meaning of this verse not accepted?
Solution: No, because there is no reason found to accept this kind of alternative, therefore the meaning of the aforementioned verse is not accepted.
Shankha Jesi Aau-Samai Nama Govani Veyaraniyam Cha.
Se Akay Samuggahaya Vadhvantiyare Samugdhae ||168|| That is, those beings whose names, gotras and vedaniya-karma are the same as their life-karma, they attain liberation without dying, other beings are liberated only by dying.
Solution: This kind of meaning expressed in the aforementioned verse (168) cannot be said to be the reason for some Kevalis dying and some not dying, because all Kevalis experience the destruction of their karma-situations through the same uninverted results. Therefore, there is a contradiction in their (vedaniya-name-gotra-karma situation) being equal to their life. Secondly, at the time of the culmination of the subtle-passion-quality-locus, the three non-destructive karmas are found in the infinitesimal part of the countless parts of the moment in all beings. Therefore, the aforementioned statement does not seem correct.
Shankha-Pagam is not the subject of logic, therefore it is not appropriate to refute the meaning of the aforementioned verses by the force of logic.
Solution: No, because the decision of these two verses has not been made in the form of Agam. Or if the decision of these two verses is made in the form of Agam, then their acceptance is the feeling.
Shankha-Kapat, Pratar and Lokapurana-samugdha are sufficient or insufficient for the Kevali who has attained them?
Solution: They are not considered sufficient, because "Odarakamishrakayayoga is of the insufficient." This sutra proves their insufficiency.
Shankha-Samyagmithyashti, Sanyata-sanyata and Sanyata Munasthanas are beings who are sufficient by rule
1. Vasunandi Shravakaachar Ga. 530. 2. P. Pu. 1 p. 301 to 304. 3. "Poraliyamisska Yajogo Apjattanam" Gh. Pu. 1 p. 315 Sutra 76 and Go. Ji. Ka. Ga, 68.

Page #202:
---------------------------
##  Gaya 126
## Paryapti/166

"Thus, as instructed in the sutra, it is proven that beings with Audarikamisrakaayayoga are insufficient, except for those with Sayogavali."

**Solution:** This is not a valid argument, because the sutra "Maharakamisrakaayayoga is of the insufficient" implies that even those who are restrained are insufficient to some extent.

**Objection:** The sutra "Maharakamisrakaayayoga is of the insufficient" is an Anuvakaana (a sutra without a parallel), meaning there is no other place for its application. Therefore, this sutra proves that those who are restrained are sufficient. This sutra contradicts the previous one, but the sutra "Audarikamisrakaayayoga is of the insufficient" does not contradict the sutra "Those who are restrained are sufficient," because the sutra "Maharakamisrakaayayoga is of the insufficient" is weak due to its Savakaana nature (having multiple places for its application, including those other than Sayogi). Therefore, just as the insufficiency of Maharak Samudghat beings can be proven, the insufficiency of Samudghat Kevalis cannot be proven.

**Solution:** This is not a valid argument, because the sutra "Those who are restrained are sufficient" is also considered Savakaana (having multiple places for its application, including those other than Sayogi). Therefore, it is weak and cannot prevent the application of the sutra "Audarikamisrakaayayoga is of the insufficient."

**Objection:** Both of the aforementioned sutras are Savakaana, yet they are simultaneously obtained in the Sayogogunasthan. Still, the sutra "Paro Vidhidhiko Bhavati" ("Those who are restrained are sufficient by rule") contradicts the sutra "Audarikamisrakaayayoga is of the insufficient," because the latter sutra is Par (later).

**Solution:** This is not a valid argument, because the word "Par" signifies "Ista" (desired). Assuming this, the sutra "Those who are restrained are sufficient by rule" contradicts the sutra "Audarikamisrakaayayoga is of the insufficient," just as the previous sutra "Audarikamisrakaayayoga is of the insufficient" contradicts the sutra "Those who are restrained are sufficient by rule." Therefore, the objection's previous statement contains many flaws.

**Objection:** In the sutra "Those who are restrained are sufficient by rule," is the word "Niamam" (rule) with a purpose or without a purpose?

**Solution:** The second option cannot be accepted, because it would be contradictory to the principles stated by Shri Pushpadanta Acharya, as there cannot be meaninglessness in the principles. Also, the revelation of the eternal nature of the sutra cannot be the result of the word "Niamam," because assuming this would lead to the conclusion that the sutras without the word "Niamam" are not eternal. However, this is not the case, because assuming this would lead to the conclusion that the sutra "Audarikamisrakaayayoga is of the sufficient" lacks the word "Niamam," implying the existence of Audarikamisrakaayayoga in the insufficient, which is not desirable. Therefore,

1. "Sammâmicchâidhittha-majadasam jad-samjad-ṭṭhâne niyamâ pajjattâ" (G.P. 1, p. 326).
2. "Mahâramissakâvajogo appajattâṇam" (G.P. 1, p. 78).

Page #203:
---------------------------
## 170 / Go. Sa. Jivakanda
## Verse 127

The word "niyam" found in the sutra is indicative, not regulatory. If it is not considered so, it will lead to absurdity.

**Doubt:** What is indicated by this word "niyam"?

**Solution:** It indicates that "Samyagmithyadristi, Sanyatasanyata and Sanyata jivas are sufficient by rule." This sutra is not eternal. From this, the insufficiency of Samyagmithyadristi, Sanyatasanyata and Sanyata who produce the next body, and the insufficiency of Kevalis who have attained Kapata, Pratar and Lokapurna Samudghat, is proven.

**Question:** The one whose body is initiated is called insufficient, but in the Sayogi state, the body is not initiated, so how can the insufficiency of Mayogi Kevali be established?

**Solution:** No, because in the Kapata etc. Samudghat state, Sayogi Kevali are devoid of the six powers of Paryapti, therefore they are called insufficient.

In the Kevali Samudghat state, due to the absence of Vachanbal (Vachanyog) and Shwasochchwas, only Kayayog remains, therefore in the verse, Kayayogi is mentioned instead of Samudghatgat.

Labdhyaparyapta, Nityaparyapta and Paryaptavasta are possible in the Gugaasthan.

**Verse Meaning:**

Labdhyaparyaptak jivas are Mithyadristi. Nityaparyaptak jivas are in Mithyatva, Sasadan, Asanyatasamyagdristi and Pramattavirata Gunasthans. Paryaptajivas are in the aforementioned Gunasthans and the remaining Gunasthans.

**Special Meaning:**

Labdhyaparyaptak jivas are only in the Mithyadristi Gunasthan, not in other Gunasthans. Labdhyaparyaptak jivas are not present in the Sasadan Gunasthan. Labdhyaparyaptak jivas are not present in Samyagmithyadristi, Asanyatasamyagdristi, Deshasanyata and Sakalasanyata. Nityaparyaptak jivas are present in the Mithyatva (first), Sasadan (second), Asanyatasamyagdristi (fourth) and Pramattasanyata (sixth) Gunasthans. They are not present in the Gunasthans beyond these. Nityaparyaptak jivas are also not present in the Samyagmithyatva (third) and Deshasanyata (fifth) Gunasthans.

**Doubt:** How is Nityaparyapti possible in the Pramattasanyata Gunasthan? Because in the Aparyaptavasta, Sanyam is impossible.

**Solution:** The questioner does not understand the meaning of the Agam. The meaning of the Agam is:

1. Dh. Pu. 2, p. 441-444.
2. Labdhyapteshu Mithyaishtibhyatirikta Sheshgunasambhayat. (P. Pu. 1, p. 208).

Page #204:
---------------------------
Chapter 127
Perfection/11

It is thus that - even though a Sadhu, who is a Pramatta-Samyata-Gunasthanavarti, who generates a Maharak body, may be a Paryaptak with respect to the six Paryaptis of the Audarik body, but he is an Aparyaptak with respect to the Paryapti related to the Aharak body, because the Paryapti related to the Aharak body is not complete.

Doubt - Paryaptak and Aparyaptak cannot exist simultaneously in one Jiva, because there is a contradiction in the existence of both in one Jiva at the same time.

Solution - No, because the Yoga related to Paryaptak and Aparyaptak cannot exist simultaneously in one Jiva. This is desirable.

Doubt - Then why should the previous doubt not be accepted, because there is a contradiction in the statement of the solution?

Solution - No, because the contradiction is known with respect to the previous Nay. That is, even in the Aharak-Mishra state, Paryaptak can be practiced with respect to the Paryapti related to the Audarik body. Or, with respect to the acceptance of the Dravyarthik Nay, even if the six Paryaptis related to the Aharak body are not complete, it is said to be Paryaptak.

Doubt - Why is the Dravyarthik Nay not accepted elsewhere?

Solution - No, because the conditions for accepting the Dravyarthik Nay are not found there.

Doubt - Then why is the Dravyarthik Nay accepted here?

Solution - The reason for accepting the Dravyarthik Nay here is to show the similarity of the Pramatta-Samyata, who has attained the state of Aparyaptak with respect to the Maharak body, with the Paryaptak.

Doubt - How can a Pramatta-Samyata, whose six Paryaptis related to the Audarik body have been destroyed and whose Paryaptis related to the Aharak body have not yet been completed, be a Samyata? And for what reason can there be similarity with other Paryaptakas?

Solution - No, because there is no contradiction in the existence of such Samyata, whose characteristic is to oppose Granav, with the Mandayoga, that is, the Aharak-Mishra Yoga. If there is a contradiction in the existence of Samyata with this Mandayoga, then the Kevali, who has attained Samudghat, will also not be able to be a Samyata, because there also the Yoga related to Aparyaptak is found, there is no specialness in this. There is similarity with other Paryaptakas with respect to the absence of Dukha. Just as those who are born from Uppapad-Janma, Garbha-Janma or Sammuchchhana-Janma experience Dukha, those who are born from Aharak-Sharira do not experience Dukha, therefore in that state the Pramatta-Samyata is Paryaptak. This is how it is treated, or the previous Audarik-Parira is treated without Dukha.

Page #205:
---------------------------
172/Go. Sa. Jivakanda
Verse 128
Abandonment takes place. Therefore, even in the state of distracted restraint and insufficiency, it is sufficient; this kind of treatment is done. Upon performing the atonement of determination, it is insufficient.
The rule of perfectness in the state of eternal sufficiency and the absence of sustenance in the state of attainable sufficiency
"Hetim chappuḍavīṇam, joisivaṛanabhavaraṇasavvaittīṇam.
Pugiṇadare rahi sammo, ṇ sāsaṇo raṇārayāpuṇṇe. ||128||"
Verse meaning: In the state of non-attainable sufficiency of the six lower earths, the celestial beings of the Jyotishi-Vaṇavyantar-Bhavana, and all women, there is no right faith. In the state of insufficiency of the hell beings, there is no sustenance guna-sthana. ||128||
Special points - The meaning of "hanama" is "destruction": In the state of insufficiency of the hell beings, there is no sustenance guna-sthana. By this, it is indicated that the statement is being made about which guna-sthana are present and which are not present in the state of insufficiency of the four paths. Therefore, we are stating the same here. As follows:
Doubt - Even though the hell beings have existence in the mithya-ashti guna-sthana, because the cause of birth in the hell beings is found to be false faith, but the hell beings should not be found in the other guna-sthana, because the cause of birth in the hell beings is not found to be false faith in the other guna-sthana.
Solution - This is not the case, because without the bondage of the hell body, there is no capacity for the birth of hell beings in false faith, non-restraint, and passions. The previously bound lifespan is not destroyed by the right faith that arises later, because if this is assumed, it contradicts the scriptures. It is also not the case that those who have bound the hell body cannot attain restraint, just as they cannot attain right faith, because if this is assumed, it contradicts the sutras. Those beings who have previously bound the hell body and later developed right faith, such bound-lifespan, action-doer, right-sighted, or passion-affected right-sighted, are born in hell. Such right-sighted are found in hell in the state of insufficiency, but those with sustenance guna-sthana do not die and are born in hell, because sustenance right-sighted are not born in hell.
Doubt - Just as sustenance right-sighted are not born in hell, in the same way, right-sighted should not be born in hell after death.
Solution - There is no prohibition in the scriptures that right-sighted are born in the first earth after death.
1. G. Pu. 1 p. 330-31. 2. This verse with some differences is found in D. Pu. 1 p. 206 as follows: "Su heṭṭimāsu puḍachīsu, joisivaṛan mavaṛan sacch itthīsṛ. Gaidesu samuppanna sammāiṭhī du jo jīvo. ||133||" And in Pra. Pa. Sa. Ga. 163 as follows: "Chasu heṭṭimāsu puḍavīsu joisipaṛanabhavaraṇ savva itthīsu. Bāras micchāvāde sammāiṭiss raṇasthi upavādo. ||" (p. 41). 3. P. Pu. 1 p. 205.

Page #206:
---------------------------
Chapter 128
Perfection/173 Doubt- Just as the Samyagdarshi are superior in the first earth, why are there no Samyagdarshi beings born in the second and subsequent earths?
Solution- Unsubdued Samyagdarshi beings are not born in the second and subsequent earths, because the conditions for their birth in the remaining six earths are not found.
It is not correct to say that the state of being Ashobhaleshhya is the cause of birth in hell, because the cause of birth in the lower six earths at the time of death is not found in the Unsubdued Samyagdarshi being. The state of being Marakayu is also not the cause of birth in the lower six earths, because the lower six earth-related lifespan is cut off by the sword of Samyagdarshan. The cutting off of the lower six earth-related lifespan is not known, because it is confirmed by the scriptures, therefore it is proven that Samyagdarshi is not born in the lower six earths.
Doubt- Why is the Narakayu not destroyed by the power of Samyagdarshan?
Solution- The Narakayu is certainly destroyed, but it is not completely destroyed. Doubt- Why is it not completely destroyed?
Solution- The lifespan bound to the future birth is not completely destroyed, this is the nature. Those who were Mithyadarshi at the time of binding the Prāyukarma and who have subsequently attained Samyagdarshan, Samyagdarshan does not have the power to prevent the birth of such beings in Narakadi.
After the statement of Narakagati, now the Gunasthanas related to Tiryanchagati are stated-
Tiryancha Mithyadarshi, Sasadan Samyagdarshi and Unsubdued Samyagdarshi are both sufficient and insufficient in Gunasthanas.
Doubt- How is a Kshayik Samyagdarshi being, who has served the Tirthankara and destroyed the seven natures of Moha, born in the painful Tiryanchas?
Solution- No, because there is no greater suffering than that of the Narakies in the Tiryanchas.
Tiryancha Samyagmithyadarshi and Sanjata-Asanjatagunasthanas are sufficient by rule. Even though born in Tiryanchas, Kshayik Samyagdarshi beings do not take Anuvratas, because if Kshayik Samyagdarshi are born in Tiryanchas, then they are born in the Bhogbhumi Tiryanchas, and it is not possible for beings born in Bhogbhumi to take Anuvratas.
1. V.P. 1 p. 207. 2. D.P. 1 p. 324. 3. D.P. 1 p. 326. 4. G.P. 1 p. 336. 5. Tiritrakha Micchaittthi-Sasanasammaittthi-Asanjadassammaittthiāṇe Siyā Pajjatā Miyā Appajjattā. 4. (P. 1 p. 325). 6. P.P. 1 p. 325. 7. "Sammimiच्छाइटिठ-Sanjadasanjadatthāṇe Niyamā Pajjatā. 85." C.P. 1 p. 326. 8. "Tirikkhā Sanjadasanjadahāṇe Khaīy Sammāittthī Gasthi" D.P. 1 p. 402.

Page #207:
---------------------------
174/Go. Sa. Jiva Kapad
Gatha 128

Doubt: How can those beings who have not given charity be born in the realm of enjoyment?

Solution: No, because the cause of birth in the realm of enjoyment is the perception of wealth, and there is no objection to those who have it being born there. And beings devoid of the approval of worthy charity cannot become क्षायिकसम्यग्दृष्टि, because the effect of worthy charity cannot be formed in them.

The origin of क्षायिकसम्यग्दृष्टि occurs only in the human realm. Therefore, it should be known that the main reason for the birth of such a being in the realm of superior enjoyment is क्षायिकसम्यग्दृष्टि, not worthy charity, even though he is not devoid of the approval of worthy charity.

Five-sense beings are both sufficient and insufficient in the मिथ्यादृष्टि and सासादनगुरणस्थान, but in the सम्यग्मिथ्याष्टि, असंयतसम्यग्दृष्टि, संयतासंयतगुणस्थान, they are sufficient by rule.

Doubt: Just as a bound क्षायिकसम्यग्दृष्टि being is born in the नपुसकवेद related to hell, why is he not born in the स्त्रीवेद of the animal realm?

Solution: No, because there is only the presence of a नपुसकवेद in hell. Any सम्यग्दृष्टि being who is born in a particular realm is born only in the specific वेद, etc., related to that realm. This proves that a सम्यग्दृष्टि being does not die and be reborn in the animal realm.

मनप्य मिथ्याष्टि, सासादनसम्यग्दृष्टि and असंयनसम्यग्दृष्टि are both sufficient and insufficient in the गुणस्थान. 'सम्यग्मिथ्याष्टि, संयतासंयत and संपतगुणस्थान are sufficient by rule. Similarly, just as in the case of human beings, they are sufficient in the human realm.

Doubt: How can one be called sufficient if his body is not fully sufficient?

Solution: No, because in relation to the द्रव्याथिकनय, his sufficiency is formed. Rice is being cooked. Just as rice is called rice here, similarly, even in the state of insufficiency of a being whose all sufficiencies are about to be formed, the use of the term 'sufficient' does not meet with any objection. Or, one should understand his sufficiency in relation to the arising of the पर्याप्ननामकर्म.

In human beings, मिथ्यादृष्टि and सासादनसम्यग्दृष्टि are both sufficient and insufficient in the गुणस्थान, but सम्यग्मिथ्याष्टि, असंयतसम्यग्दृष्टि, संयतासंयत and संयतगुणस्थान are...

1. घ. पु. १ पृ. ३२७ । 2. पंचिदियतिरिक्ख-जोरिणगीसु मिच्छाइटि-सासणसम्माइठिट्टाणे मिया पज्जनियामो सिया अप्पज्जत्तियाग्रो ॥७॥ सम्मामिच्छाइटिठन्यसंजदसम्माइदिठ-संजदासंजद-ठाणे णियमाएज्जत्तिया यो ॥८८||"प.पु. १ पृ. ३२८ । 3. "मणुस्सा मिच्चाइट्ठि-सासरणसम्माइदिव-प्रसंजदसम्माइट्ठि ठाणे सिया पज्जत्ता सिया अपज्जत्ता ।।१६।।"(प.पु. १ पृ. ३२६) 4 सम्मामिलाइटि-संजदासजद-संजदहारणे गियमा पज्जता ||६०1" (व.पु. १ पृ. ३२६) । 5. एवं मणुस्स-पज्जत्ता ||६॥ प.पु १/३३१ । 6. ध.पु. १ पृ. ३३१ ।

Page #208:
---------------------------
##  Verse 128
##  **Paryāpta/175**

"They become *paryāpta* by the rules."

**Doubt:** Why are there no *samyagdṛṣṭi* beings born among women in the *huṇḍāvasarpini* time?

**Solution:** There are no *samyagdṛṣṭi* beings born among them!

**Doubt:** By what evidence is this known?

**Guidance:**

**Solution:** This is known from this *pārṣvasūtra*.

**Doubt:** Then, from this *pāgam*, it will also be proven that *dravya* women attain liberation?

**Solution:** No, because due to being clothed, *dravya* women have the *sanayatasanayattaguṇasthāna*, therefore, the origin of *sanayama* cannot happen for *dravya* women.

**Doubt:** Even though they are clothed, there is no contradiction in *bhāvasanayama* happening for those *dravya* women.

**Solution:** *Dravya* women do not have *bhāvasanayama* either, because if *bhāvasanayama* is accepted, then their *bhāva* cannot be the non-separable taking of clothes, etc., which is *asanayama*.

**Doubt:** Then, how can the statement that there are fourteen *guṇasthāna* in women be true?

**Solution:** No, because there is no contradiction in accepting the harmony of fourteen *guṇasthāna* in *bhāvastṛī*, that is, in *dravya* men with *strīveda*.

**Doubt:** *Bhāva* *veda* is not found above the *bādarakṣāyagurṇasthāna*, therefore, there cannot be harmony of fourteen *guṇasthāna* in *bhāva* *veda*.

**Solution:** Here, *veda* is not the main thing, but *gati* is the main thing, and it is not destroyed first.

**Doubt:** Even though fourteen *guṇasthāna* are possible in the *manuşyagati*, if it is qualified by *veda*, then fourteen *guṇasthāna* are not possible in it?

**Solution:** No, because even after the qualifier is destroyed, there is no contradiction in accepting the harmony of fourteen *guṇasthāna* in the *manuşyagati* which, by treatment, holds the name qualified by that qualifier. Here, *veda* is not the main thing, but *gati* is the main thing. *Gati* is not destroyed first, that is, *manuşyagati* remains until the 14th *guṇasthāna*, and it is called fourteen *guṇasthāna* with prominence.

1. *Maṇuṣiṇīsu micchāitthī-sāṣaṇasammāicchi ṭhāṇe simā pani ja tāyāṁro sivā apjattiyāno 162|| Sammāmicchāitthī asanjadasammāicchi sanjadāsajada sanjadāṇe niyamā pammattiyāyo.||63.|| (C. Pu. 1 p. 332). 2. P. Pu 1 p. 332-33. 3. P. Pu. 1 p. 332-333.

Page #209:
---------------------------
## Chapter 156, Life Cycle, Verse 128

"Bhaveyed" is an adjective for the human state. Up to the ninth stage of qualities, the human state remains in harmony with Bhaveyed. Beyond the ninth stage, in the tenth and subsequent stages, the human state persists even after the adjective Bhaveyed (feminine, etc.) is lost. Therefore, due to the predominance of the human state, even after the loss of Bhaveyed (feminine, etc.), the fourteen stages of qualities are described in relation to the human state, which is the object of the adjective, remaining in harmony.

This should be understood with the example of Leshya. The scholars have described the thirteenth stage of qualities as Lakleshya. But Parantuleshya occurs in the state of Yogapravritti along with the arising of passions. [Yogapravritti stained by passions is Leshya, but since Yoga (Vineedhya) is predominant in Leshya, even after the loss of passion (adjective) in the thirteenth stage of qualities, Leshya is described there simply because of the presence of the object, Yoga (object). Similarly, here too, even after the loss of Ved (adjective), the fourteenth stage of qualities is described because of the presence of the object, the human state, in harmony.

In the stages of qualities of Deva Mithyashti, Sasab Nasamyagdristi, and Asampatsamyagdristi, they are both sufficient and insufficient. In the Samyagmithyavristi stage of qualities, they are sufficient by rule.

**Doubt:** In the state of Vigraha, those with a Kamaganarira do not attain sufficiency, because the six sufficiencies do not arise in the time of Vigraha. Similarly, they cannot be insufficient in the state of Vigraha, because the term "insufficient" is given to the middle state from the beginning to the end of the sufficiencies. But those who have not even begun the sufficiencies, such as one, two, or three time-bound beings related to the state of Vigraha, cannot be called insufficient, because accepting this would lead to the fault of Atiprasanga. Therefore, in the state of Vigraha, there should be a third state, different from sufficient and insufficient.

**Solution:** This is not a fault, because beings who have attained the state of Vigraha are included among the insufficient, and accepting this does not lead to the fault of Atiprasanga, because the beings residing in the Karmaranasharira have a closeness to the insufficient due to the absence of ability, the state of Upadhyayogasthan, the state of Ekantavridhiyogasthan, and the state of motion and lifespan in the first, second, and third times, which is not found in other beings. Therefore, beings residing in the Kamaganakayayoga are included among the insufficient. Therefore, there are only two states of all beings, and there is no third state different from them.

**Doubt:** Why are Samyagmithyashti beings only sufficient?

**Solution:** Because death does not occur with the third stage of qualities, and the Samyagmithyattvagunasthan does not arise even in the time of insufficiency.

1. "Deva Miccha Iti-Sapana Tammaidi-Prasan Jadassamaitthi-Aane Sia Pajjattha Sia Apajjattha ||4||" (D.P. 1 p. 334).
2. "Samm-Amiccha Iti-Tane Niyama Pajjattha ||65||" (P.P. 1 Vr. 335).
3. P.P. 1 p. 334.
4. V.P. 1 p. 334.

Page #210:
---------------------------
Gapa 128
Paryapti/177 Doubt - "Only Paryapti are present in the third Gunasthan" accepting this rule leads to Ekantvad.
Solution - No, because one who believes in Anekantvad does not find any contradiction in accepting Ekantvad.
Bhavanvasi, Vanyantar and Jyotishi Devas and their Devis, and Saudharma and Aishana Kalpvasi Devis, all these are both Paryapti and Aparyapti in Mithyavrushti and Sasadan Samyagdristi Gunasthan. But in Samyagmithyadristi and Asanyat Samyagdristi Gunasthan, they are Paryapti by rule.
Doubt - It is true that Samyagmithyadristi Jeevas are not born in Bhavanvasi etc. Devas and Devis, but it is not possible that Asanyat Samyagdristi are not born in the said Devas and Devis.
Solution - No, because Samyagdristi is not born in the Janay Devas.
Doubt - Why are Samyagdristi Jeevas born in the lower state of Narakas and Tiryanchas, not born in the higher state of Bhavanvasi etc. Devas and Devis, and Kalpvasi Devis?
Solution - No, because those who were Mithyadristi at the time of binding of Prayukarma and who have accepted Sadanantar Samyagdarshan, Samyagdarshan does not have the power to stop their birth in Naraka etc.
Doubt - Just as Samyagdristi Jeevas are born in Naraka etc., why are they not born in Devas?
Solution - It is right to say so, because it is desirable.
Doubt - If this is the case, then will Asanyat Samyagdristi Jeevas be born in Bhavanvasi etc.?
Solution - No, because those who have already bound Prayukarma, their Samyagdarshan does not contradict the Aayusamany related to that state, but there is a contradiction with the birth in that particular state. In such a situation, Bhavanvasi, Vanyantar, Jyotishi,

Page #211:
---------------------------
17/Go.Sa. Jivakanda
Gatha 128

In the Prakirtaka, Abhiyogya, and Kilbishika devas, in the six lower narakas, in all kinds of females, in the napumsaka-veda, in the ekendriya, in the vikalatriyas, in the labdhyaparyaptaka jivas, and in the karmabhumi-tiryancas, the origination of a samyagdristi is refuted. Therefore, samyagdristi jivas are not born in so many places.

From the Saudharma-Aisana svarga up to the uppermost Avreyaka devas, the jivas are both paryapta and aparyapta in the mithyadrsti, sasadana-samyagdrsti, and asanyata-samyagdrsti gunasthanas.

Objection: From the Sanatkumara svarga and above, females are not born, because the origination of devaanganas is stated in the Saudharma and Aisana svarga, but their origination is not stated in the subsequent svarga realms. Therefore, in the absence of females, how can there be devaanganas?

Solution: No, because the origination of Sanatkumara-adikalpika females occurs in the Saudharma and Aisana svarga.

Objection: Then should the existence of females in the Sanatkumara-adikalpas be stated?

Solution: No, because the females who are born elsewhere and whose desha, ayu, and bala are different from the Sanatkumara-adika devas, their existence in the Sanatkumara-adikalpas is contradictory to accept.

The Bhavanavasins, Vyantaras, Jyotishis, and Saudharma-Aisana kalpa devas perceive through the body like humans. They call the perception through touch as prabocchara. Those whose perception is through the body are called kayaprabocchara. The Sanatkumara and Mahabhadra kalpika devas perceive through touch, i.e., they attain supreme delight merely by the touch of the devaanganas. Similarly, the devis there also attain supreme delight merely by the touch of the devas. The devas residing in the Brahma, Brahmottara, and Lantavapishtha kalpas attain supreme bliss merely by the sight of the adornment, ramparts, sports, excellent and charming forms of their devaanganas, and are therefore called rupa-prabocchara. The devas residing in the Shukra, Mahashukra, Shataara, and Sahasraara kalpas attain supreme delight merely by hearing the sweet music, soft laughter, graceful speech, and the sound of the ornaments of their devaanganas, and are therefore called shabda-prabocchara. The devas of the Pranata, Pragata, Aarana, and Acyuta kalpas attain supreme bliss merely by contemplating their devaanganas in their minds, and are therefore called mana-prabocchara.

Page #212:
---------------------------
##  
**Verse 129**
**Life / 176**

The counteraction of pain is called "pravichar".  Since there is no pain, all the gods from the ninth heaven upwards are devoid of "pravichar" and therefore are constantly happy.

In the "Samyagmithyadristi Gunasthan", the gods are "paryaptak" according to the divine rules.  The gods residing in the nine directions and in the five "anuttar vimanas" - Vijay, Vaijayant, Jayant, Aparajit, and Sarvarthasiddhi - are in the "asanyatsamyagdristi gunasthan" and are both "paryaptak" and "aparyaptak".

Thus, the third chapter of the Gommatasar Jivakanda, called "Paryapti Prarupana", is complete.

**4. Pran Prarupana Adhikar**

**Definition of "Pran" with Etymology**

* "Bahar jaha tav prabhandhi panehi, parati jehi jiva, pana te honti rigaddittha." || 129 ||

**Meaning of the Verse:** Just as the living being lives through external transformations, similarly, the living being lives through these internal "pranas".  This is what is said. || 129 ||

**Special Meaning:** This verse defines "pran".  Those through which the soul attains the state of "life" are "pranas".  Those through which the living being lives are "pranas".  Those through which the living being is born and through whose separation it dies are "pranas".  Those through which the living being lives or becomes capable of living are "pranas".

There are two types of "pranas": external "pranas" (i.e., "dravya pranas") and internal "pranas" (i.e., "bhav pranas").

Page #213:
---------------------------
## Chapter 126: The Essence of Life

**180/Go. Sa. Jeevakaanda**

**Chapter 126**

**"Dravyendriya, etc. are Dravyaprana, and Bhaavendriya, etc. are Bhaavaprana."**  The destruction and cessation of the inner life force (Matigyaanaavaran) is due to karma. The function of the outer life force and the inner life force is like the opening and closing of the eyes, sensory activity, bodily movement, speech, inhalation and exhalation, etc.

**Doubt:** What is the difference between "Paryaapti" (sufficiency) and "Prana" (life force)?

**Solution:** There is a difference between them, as vast as the difference between the Himalayas and the Vindhya mountains. The completeness of the elements of food, body, senses, drink, language, and mind is "Paryaapti," and that which enables the soul to experience life is "Prana." This is the difference between the two.

**Doubt:** The five senses, lifespan, and bodily strength can be considered "Prana" because they are present from birth to death and the absence of any one of them leads to death. However, inhalation, mental strength, and speech cannot be considered "Prana" because life can exist even without them.

**Solution:** No, because without inhalation, mental strength, and speech, life cannot be sustained in a state of "Paryaapti" after a state of "Apyaapti" (insufficiency). Therefore, there is no contradiction in considering them as "Prana."

**Doubt:** The difference between "Paryaapti" and "Prana" is merely a matter of name, not substance?

**Solution:** No, because there is a difference between them based on their function and cause. "Paryaapti" does not include lifespan, and "Prana" in the form of mental strength, speech, and inhalation are not present in a state of "Apyaapti." Therefore, it is necessary to understand the difference between "Paryaapti" and "Prana."

**Doubt:** "Paryaapti" is also not present in a state of "Apyaapti," so there will be no harmony between them in that state.

**Solution:** No, because there is a partial harmony between them in a state of "Apyaapti."

**Doubt:** What is the meaning of "Apyaapti" (insufficiency)?

**Solution:** "Apyaapti" is the incompleteness of "Paryaapti." Therefore, the difference between "Paryaapti," "Apyaapti," and "Prana" is established. Alternatively, "Paryaapti" is defined as the completeness of the power of the senses, etc., without considering the cause of life in them. The causes of life are:

1. Dravyendriya, etc. are Dravyaprana, and Bhaavendriya, etc. are Bhaavaprana. (Commentary on Brihad Dravyasangraha, verse 3).
2. "The inner life force functions through the opening and closing of the eyes, sensory activity, bodily movement, speech, inhalation and exhalation, etc. They live because of the life force, and they live because of the destruction and cessation of the inner life force (Matigyaanaavaran)." (Commentary by Shri Abhayachandrasuri).
3. G. Pu. 1, page 256-57.

Page #214:
---------------------------
## Verse 150

"There are 181 *praanas* (life forces), and this is the difference between the two." *Pahar* (body), *sharira* (body), *indriya* (sense organs), *bhaapan* (food), *bhaasha* (language), and *manaroopa* (mental form) are the perfections of the power that are sufficient for the *parinaman* (transformation). The *vyakti* (individual) *praanas* are the *vyapar* (activity) of *vishayagrahan* (object perception). In this way, you should know the difference between the two.

There are ten *praanas*: five *indriya* (sense organ) *praanas*, three *balapraanas* (power *praanas*) of *man* (mind), *vachan* (speech), and *kaya* (body), *paanpraan* (food *praan*), and *ayunaan* (life *praan*).

**Explanation:**

The original four *praanas* are:

1. *Indriyapraanas* (sense organ *praanas*)
2. *Balapraanas* (power *praanas*)
3. *Paanpraan* (food *praan*)
4. *Ayu* (life) *praan*

These have ten sub-categories. The five *indriya* *praanas* are: *sparshan* (touch), *rasana* (taste), *ghraan* (smell), *chakshu* (sight), and *shrotra* (hearing). The three *balapraanas* are: *manobal* (mental power), *vachanabal* (speech power), and *kayabal* (body power). *Ayu* (life) *praan* is *shwasoচ্ছ্বাস* (breathing). In this way, all these together (5+3+1+1) become ten *praanas*.

The five senses are not included in the category of *ekendriya* (one sense) etc., because the senses that arise due to the destruction and pacification of the *karma* (actions) of *chakshurindriyaavaran* (covering of the eye sense) etc., do not have the same qualities as the *ekendriya* etc. categories. Similarly, these five senses are not included in the *indriya* (sense) *paryapti* (perfection), because the *karma* (actions) that cover the *chakshurindriya* (eye sense) etc., and the *pudgal* (matter) that is the cause of the power to perceive external objects due to the destruction and pacification of the *karma* (actions), cannot be considered as one. Similarly, *manobal* (mental power) is not included in *manahparyapti* (mental perfection), because the *pudgal* (matter) that arises from the *skandha* (aggregates) of *manovargna* (mental defilement) and the *manobal* (mental power) that arises from it cannot be considered as one. Similarly, *vachanabal* (speech power) is not included in *bhaasha* (language) *paryapti* (perfection), because the *pudgal* (matter) that arises from the *skandha* (aggregates) of *aaharavargna* (food defilement) and the *bhaasha* (language) that arises from it, do not have the same power to transform into a *paryaya* (category) that can be perceived by the *shrotrendriya* (ear sense). *Kayabal* (body power) is also not included in *bhaari* (heavy) *paryapti* (perfection), because the absence of the rise and pacification of *veeryantaraay* (obstacles to energy)

Page #215:
---------------------------
182, Go. Sa. Jivakanda
Chapter 131-133

Due to the power that causes the cessation of the destruction of karma and the destruction of the taste of the world, there is no unity in the accumulation of pudgala. Similarly, inhalation-exhalation is the function of pranas, which is the cause of the self-existence. Inhalation-exhalation is the sufficient cause and pudgala-upadana is the instrumental cause, therefore, one should understand the difference between the two.
_ The material and the emotional pranas are born from the power arising from the destruction of the karma of viriya, jiva, and upavasama.
The strength of the body is born from the rise of the karma of the body, the strength of the mouth is born from the rise of the karma of the mouth, and the strength of the feet is born from the rise of the karma of the feet. ||131||
Meaning of the verse - The strength of the senses and the strength of the mind are born from the cessation of the destruction of the karma of knowledge-obscuring karma along with the karma of viriya-antaraya. The strength of the body is born from the rise of the karma of the body, the strength of the mouth is born from the rise of the karma of the mouth, and the strength of the feet is born from the rise of the karma of the feet. ||131||
Special meaning - When the karma of viriya-antaraya ceases along with the cessation of the destruction of the karma of knowledge-obscuring karma, the mind and the senses become strong, i.e., the power to perceive their respective objects, the emotional sense called laabdhi, is born. Thus, from the cessation of the destruction of these two karmas, five sense-pranas and one mind-strength-prana, these six pranas are born. From the rise of the karma of the body, the seventh prana called the strength of the body, which is the power to move the body, is born. When the rise of the karma of inhalation-exhalation occurs along with the rise of the karma of the body, the power to perform the function of inhalation-exhalation, the eighth prana called the prana of the mouth, is born. When the rise of the karma of the voice occurs along with the rise of the karma of the body, the power to perform the function of speech, the ninth prana called the strength of the voice, is born. From the rise of the karma of life, the tenth prana called the prana of life, which is the power to sustain the existence of the body in the form of the four states of existence (naraka, tiyanch, manushya, deva), is born. The six sufficient causes are born from the rise of only one karma called the karma of sufficient cause, in the same way, ten pranas are not born from the rise of one karma, because there is no karma called 'prana', but different pranas are born from different karmas, this is the meaning of this verse.
The owners of the pranas are the senses, the body, and the life, these three pranas are present in both sufficient and insufficient beings, but the prana of the mouth is also present in sufficient beings. The beings with two senses and above are sufficient beings.
1. Pr. Pu. 2 p. 412-13 2. Siddhantachakravati Shreenadhabhay Chandrasuri's commentary. 3. Gh. Pu. 2 p. 418 This topic is given on this verse. 4. Mah Gatha Gh. Pu. 2 p. 418 is also there.

Page #216:
---------------------------
## Verse 132-133

**Verse 132:**
In the category of both *naval* and *sanjee* migratory beings, there are also *mano-bala* (mental strength) *praanas* (life forces).

**Verse 133:**
*Sanjee* beings with five senses have ten *praanas*, and for each subsequent category of beings, one *praana* is reduced, until finally two *praanas* are reduced. In the two categories of *aparayaapta* beings, there are seven *praanas* each. In the remaining categories, one *praana* is reduced for each.

**Explanation:**

The ten *praanas* mentioned in verse 120 are those of *sanjee* beings with five senses. The remaining seven *praanas* are those of *sanjee* beings with five senses, excluding *graan-paan* (eating and drinking), *bachan-bala* (power of speech), and *mano-bala*.

Of the ten *praanas*, the nine excluding *mano-bala* are those of *asanjee* beings with five senses. And when these beings attain the *aparayaapta* state, they have only seven *praanas* remaining, excluding *bachan-bala* and *aan-paan* (breathing).

From the *praanas* of *prasanjee* beings with five senses, when the *shrotriya* (hearing) *praana* is removed, the remaining eight *praanas* are those of beings with four senses.

From these *aparayaapta* beings with four senses, when *an-shan* (eating) and *bachan-bala* are removed, the remaining six *praanas* are those of beings with four senses.

From the eight *praanas* of beings with four senses, when the *chakshu-indriya* (eye) is removed, the remaining seven *praanas* are those of beings with three senses.

From these seven *praanas*, when *praan-paan* (breathing) and *bachan-bala* are removed, the remaining five *praanas* are those of *aparayaapta* beings with three senses.

From the seven *praanas* of beings with three senses, when the *ghraana-indriya* (nose) is removed, the remaining six *praanas* are those of beings with two senses.

From those six *praanas*, when *praan-paan* and *bachan-bala* are removed, the remaining four *praanas* are those of *aparayaapta* beings with two senses.

From the *praanas* of beings with two senses, when the *raman-indriya* (taste) and *bachan-bala* are removed, the remaining four *praanas* are those of beings with one sense.

From those four, when the *graan-paan* is removed, the remaining three *praanas* are those of *aparayaapta* beings with one sense.

**Further Explanation:**

The *Praakrut Panchasangrah* (a Jain text) further clarifies this topic in verses 47-50.

**Verse 47:**
*Ussaso* (breathing) is present in beings with a body, *indriya* (sense organs), and *vachi* (speech). *Chitta-bala* (mental strength) is present in *sanjee* beings.

**Verse 48:**
They say that there are ten *praanas* in beings with a body, *indriya*, and *vachi*. In the remaining categories, there are seven, then two.

**Verse 49:**
All beings without *mano-bala* are *du-iyara* (two-bodied). They are *so-da-vighaaran* (with two types of bodies) and *jin-bhaar-hiyaa* (with the burden of karma).

**Verse 50:**
There are five *praanas* in beings with a body, *indriya*, and *vachi*. All beings without *us-saas* (breathing) are *apu-shne* (unnourished). They are without *karan* (action), *vigandha* (smell), and *rasana* (taste).

**Summary:**

The above verses describe the *praanas* of beings from the 12th *gunasthan* (stage of spiritual progress) up to the *kshog-a-va-paay* (state of liberation). Now, we will discuss the *praanas* of *sayogi-jin* (liberated souls) and *a-yogi-jin* (non-liberated souls).

*Sayogi-jin* beings have five *bhaava-indriya* (inner senses) and no *bhaava-man* (inner mind). Therefore, they have four *praanas* without these six. In the *aparayaapta* state of *kebali-samud-ghaat* (a type of liberated soul), there is no *bachan-bala* and *shvaas-ochchvaas* (breathing).

**Note:**

* *Naval* and *sanjee* are terms referring to different categories of migratory beings.
* *Aparayaapta* refers to beings who have not yet attained liberation.
* *Praana* is a life force that sustains the body and mind.
* *Gunasthan* is a stage of spiritual progress.
* *Sayogi-jin* and *a-yogi-jin* are terms referring to liberated and non-liberated souls, respectively.
* *Kebali-samud-ghaat* is a type of liberated soul who has not yet attained complete liberation.

Page #217:
---------------------------
## Chapter 184/Mo. Sa. Jivakanda

**Verse 132-133:**

It is known that there are only two Pranas, namely Kayaval and Ayub, in the time of the third Shukla Dhyana, or during the state of a Sanyogi Kevali. However, some Acharyas say there are ten Pranas, considering the Dravya Indriyas as complete. Their statement is not valid because Sanyogi Jin does not have Bhava Indriyas. The destruction of the five Indriya Avarana Karmas is called Bhava Indriyas, but this destruction does not occur in those whose Adharana Karma is completely destroyed. If only Dravya Indriyas are considered as Pranas, then there would be only two Pranas in the case of Sanjeevi, instead of seven, because their Dravya Indriyas are active. Therefore, it is proven that there are only four or two Pranas in a Sanyogi Jin.

**A Yogi Jin has only one Prana called Ayub.**

**Doubt:** What is the reason for having only one Ayub Prana?

**Solution:** The five Indriya Pranas are not present in an Ayogi Kevali because of the destruction of the Jnanavarna Karma. This destruction leads to the absence of the destruction of the Avarana Karma. Similarly, the Panapan, Bhasha, and Manah Pranas are also absent in them because they lack the power of Sanjna, which is generated by Paryapti. Likewise, they do not have the Prana called Kayaval because they lack the Karma generated by the Sharir Nama Karma and the No Karma. Therefore, an Ayogi Kevali has only one Ayub Prana.

**There are also one, six, or seven Pranas, depending on the context.** This statement is not the main point, but rather a secondary explanation.

**Explanation:** When the main thing is absent, but there is a reason or purpose for mentioning it, then a secondary explanation is given. In the case of an Ayogi Jin, the main Indriyas are absent because they have destroyed the Jnanavarna Karma. However, due to the Pancha Indriya Jati Nama Karma, an Ayogi Kevali has five Indriyas. Therefore, the five Indriya Pranas are considered as a secondary explanation. Although the Sharir Nama Karma is not present, there is still a Sattva and an Audarik Sharir. Therefore, the Kayaval Prana can also be considered as a secondary explanation. In this way, the five Indriya Pranas, along with the Ayub Prana, become six Pranas as a secondary explanation. Adding the Kayaval Prana to these six Pranas makes it seven Pranas as a secondary explanation.

**Thus, the fourth chapter of the Gommatasar Jivakanda, called Prana Prarupana, is complete.**

**References:**

1. "Tamha Sajogikevali'ssa Paripaya Do Pasha Ya." (4. Pu. 2 p. 444-45 & p. 651)
2. "Paoum Panon Epko Cheda" (P. Pu. 2 p. 445)
3. Gh. Pu. 2 p. 445-46
4. "Mukhya Bhaave Sati Prayojane Nimise Ghopcharah Pravartate. ||212|| (Palaprapaddhati)."

Page #218:
---------------------------
## Verse 134-135

**Verse 134**

**Sanjna/185.**

**5. Sanjna-Prarupanaadhikaara**

The characteristics and types of Sanjna are: "Those which cause the Jiva to experience terrible suffering in this world, and those which cause the Jiva to experience terrible suffering in both the worlds, even when they are consumed, are the four Sanjnas."

**Explanation:**

Due to being afflicted by desires for food, etc., the Jiva experiences terrible suffering, i.e., the three types of suffering, in this world. By consuming the desired object, the Jiva experiences intense suffering in this world and the next world, i.e., in both the worlds. These worldly desires (Sanjnas) are four: Aahaara Sanjna, Bhaya Sanjna, Maithuna Sanjna, and Parigraha Sanjna. Here, desire is called Sanjna. Desire is the cause of great suffering in this world and the next.

**Verse 135**

**The characteristics of 'Aahaara Sanjna' are:** "Seeing food, using it, the stomach being empty, and the stimulation of the Asataavedaniya Karma, which is the opposite of the Saataavedaniya Karma, are the causes of Aahaara Sanjna."

**Explanation:**

The craving or desire for food is called Aahaara Sanjna. This Aahaara Sanjna arises due to the combination of internal and external causes. The internal cause is the three-fold rise and stimulation of the Asataavedaniya Karma, which is the opposite of the Saataavedaniya Karma. The external causes are: 1. The emptiness of the stomach, because when the stomach is empty, hunger arises and there is a desire for food. 2. Seeing various types of delicious and beautiful food, drink, etc., creates a desire for them. 3. The memory of having consumed delicious and beautiful food, drink, etc., in the past, also leads to the rise of Aahaara Sanjna.

Page #219:
---------------------------
186/Go. Sa. Jivakanda
Gatha 136-137

Lakshana and Causes of Bhayasanjña (Fear Cognition)
'Atibhimadarsanena tassupayogena promassattiya | Bhayakammudirana bhayasanna jayave cahim ||136||
Meaning of the Gatha: Due to the sight of extremely frightening forms, engagement with them, weakness of power, and the arising of the karma of fear, the cognition of fear arises in four ways.||136||
Visesha-artha: Bhayasanjña (fear cognition) is a state of being. 1. From the observation of three terrifying forms - appearance, activity, and cruel animals like lions, etc. 2. From the memory of terrifying dacoits, tigers, lions, etc. 3. From the weakness of mental power. In this way, from these three external causes and the arising of the inner cause of the non-ghati karma of fear, the bhayasanjña arises. Due to fear, there is a desire to flee or seek refuge. When the powerless jiva sees a more powerful and harmful object, it gets scared and desires to take refuge, and searches for a place of refuge.

Lakshana and Causes of Maithunasanjña (Sexual Cognition)
'Parinatarasabhoyanam ca tassupayogena kusllasevaya | Vedassudiranae maithunasanna havadi evam ||137||
Meaning of the Gatha: From partaking of delicious and nourishing food, engaging with the objects previously enjoyed, practicing unvirtuous conduct, and the arising of the karma of the Vedas, the maithunasanjña (sexual cognition) arises in this way.||137||
Visesha-artha: Maithunasanjña arises due to the general rise of the three Vedas. Without distinguishing the three Vedas, due to the intense arising of the karma of the general Veda, maithunasanjña arises. Maithunasanjña arises from the arising of any one of the three Veda karmas. This is the internal cause. From consuming appetizing and delicious food that arouses passion, remembering the objects previously enjoyed, practicing unvirtuous conduct, associating with unvirtuous (wicked) people, listening to unvirtuous poetry and stories, seeing unvirtuous dramas, cinema, television, and pictures - that is, from these external causes, the desire for sexual play, i.e., maithunasanjña, arises. Listening to stories of women's passion, seeing the attractive limbs of women, remembering the pleasures previously enjoyed, consuming nourishing food, and adorning one's own body - from these causes also, maithunasanjña arises. Therefore, one should renounce these.

Page #220:
---------------------------
Chapter 138-139
The definition and cause of Parigraha-samjna is: "By seeing, using, and having attachment to objects, it is aroused by the stimulation of the lobha-kṣaya karma." || 138 ||
-
Samjna / 187
Specific meaning: The greed that arises due to external objects is Parigraha-samjna. 2 Soft beds, beautiful food, fragrant flowers, beautiful women, gold, etc., are the means of enjoyment for the senses. Seeing these objects, remembering them, and having attachment to them, these external causes, along with the special stimulation of the lobha-kṣaya in the inner being, give rise to Parigraha-samjna.
The existence of Samjna in the Aparamatta-guna-sthana
"There is no cause for the first (Aahara) Samjna in the Aparamatta-guna-sthana, because the effect of the cause has ceased. The remaining three Samjnas are due to treatment, because the karma that is their cause arises here, but they do not manifest as actions." || 136 ||
Specific meaning: - From the Mithyadrsti-guna-sthana to the Pramatta-samyata-guna-sthana, there are four Samjnas: Aahara, Bhaya, Maithuna, and Parigraha. In the Aparamatta-guna-sthana, the first Samjna, i.e., Aahara-samjna, does not exist, because the inner cause of Aahara-samjna, the stimulation of the Asata-vedaniya karma, has ceased. The stimulation of the Sata-vedaniya and Asata-vedaniya karma, as well as the Ayukarma, occurs only up to the Pramatta-guna-sthana. In the Aparamatta-samyata and subsequent guna-sthana, the stimulation of the Vedaniya and Ayukarma ceases. In the Aparamatta-samyata-guna-sthana, there are Bhaya, Maithuna, and Parigraha Samjnas, because their causes, the lobha-kṣaya, bhaya-karma, and vedaniya-karma, are present. In the Aparamatta-guna-sthana, the stimulation of the bhaya-karma ceases, so there is no Bhaya-samjna in the ninth guna-sthana. In the ninth guna-sthana, the stimulation of the vedaniya-karma does not occur, so there is no Maithuna-samjna there either. In the Upsanta-moha and subsequent guna-sthana, the stimulation of the lobha-kṣaya ceases, so there is no Parigraha-samjna either. In the Aparamatta and subsequent guna-sthana, the stimulation of karma is said to be merely a cause for treatment, due to the presence of the cause. However, there is no desire for food, sexual pleasure, or possessions there. Due to the subtle, subtler, and subtlest stages of karma arising, and due to the special restraint, the great sages do not primarily experience Bhaya and other Samjnas. Otherwise,
1. Pra. Pa. Sa. p. 574 Ga. 44 and p. 12 Ga. 55 1 Pu. 413). 3. Shrimadabhichandrasur Siddhantachakravarti's commentary.
2. Alidha-bahiyartha lobhatah Parigraha-samjna (6 Pu. 2

Page #221:
---------------------------
## 188/Go. Sa. Jivakanda
##  Verse 140

The destruction of white meditation and harmful karmas cannot possibly occur. This would lead to the absence of liberated souls (Jivanmukta). The absence of liberated souls (Ahenthi) would also affect the perfectly liberated souls (Siddha). Just as those who follow the Vedic path believe in the influence of liberation for worldly beings, similarly, the Mahant's view also suggests the influence of liberation. Therefore, those who desire liberation (Syadhadi) should accept the influence of all four types of knowledge (Sanjna) in the category of destruction (Kshapaka). How can the liberation of Kevalis (those who have conquered their passions) be possible if the knowledge of food (Pahaar Sanjna) is prohibited? How can the liberation of women (Mahilapon) be possible if the absence of the knowledge of attachment (Parigraha Sanjna) prevents them from ascending the category of destruction (Kshapaka)? The supreme scriptures (Parmagam) prohibit women from practicing restraint by abandoning their clothes. The previous scriptures (Pragmantra) - which describe the rules of wearing white clothes, etc. - are refuted by the logic and evidence of the present scriptures (Yugti-Pagam). This refutation makes those previous scriptures (Pragmantra) appear as false (Pragmabhās). Thus, the liberation of Kevalis and the liberation of women are prohibited.

**Doubt:** If these four types of knowledge are caused by contact with external objects, then shouldn't the knowledge of those who are in the state of non-distraction (Aparamatta Gunasthanavarti) be affected?

**Solution:** No, because the presence of these types of knowledge in those who are non-distracted is accepted through the process of reasoning (Upachaar).

The non-distracted and restrained beings (Aparamatta Sanayata) have three types of knowledge: fear, sexual desire, and attachment. This is because the absence of the stimulation of the non-perceivable karma (Asata Vedaniya Karma) prevents the knowledge of food (Ahaar Sanjna) in the non-distracted and restrained. However, the karmas that are the cause of fear, sexual desire, and attachment can still arise. Therefore, through reasoning (Upachaar), these three types of knowledge are present in them.

Thus, the fifth chapter of the Gommatasar Jivakanda, called "Sanjna Praroopana," is complete.

**"Margna-Mahaadhikār"**

**Mangalacharan:**
We praise the Jina, the destroyer of ignorance, who is the path to the supreme virtues (Dhamma Gun). We will speak of the great path (Maggan Mahahiyar) and its various aspects (Vivihhiyar).

Page #222:
---------------------------
• **Verse 141**
**Margana/186**

I bow to the Jina, who destroys the power of the enemy, delusion, with the bow of Dharma, the string of qualities like knowledge, perception, and restraint, and the arrows of the fourteen Marganas. I call this great authority Margana, which is filled with various Antara Adhikars. ||140||

**Explanation:**

The mind is restless because the unity of right perception, right knowledge, and right conduct is the Ratna Tray (three jewels). The main enemy of the Karmas, delusion, cannot be conquered without the Ratna Tray. The power of delusion can only be weakened by the Ratna Tray. Therefore, the Dharma of the Ratna Tray is compared to a bow, because a bow is used to destroy the power of the enemy in battle. A bow has a string, which is pulled to release the arrow. The meaning of qualities is also a string. The characteristic of the soul is the quality of consciousness. Therefore, the quality of consciousness is compared to a string. The power of the enemy cannot be destroyed with just a bow without an arrow. The knowledge of the fourteen Marganas, which specifically describe the living being, strengthens faith and purifies the Ratna Tray. Therefore, the fourteen Marganas are compared to arrows. Thus, the one who has conquered the enemy of delusion with the bow of the Ratna Tray, the string of the quality of consciousness, and the arrows of the fourteen Marganas, that is, the one who has destroyed delusion with the Ratna Tray, is the true 'Jina'. By bowing to such a Jina, Shri Nemichandra Siddhanta Chakravarti has vowed to describe the Margana Maha Adhikar for the purification of the Ratna Tray and the destruction of Karmas. This Margana Maha Adhikar contains fourteen Antara Adhikars, such as motion, senses, body, etc. Therefore, this Adhikar is called Maha Adhikar.

**Etymology and Number of Marganas:**

"Those by whom or in whom the living beings are searched, are called Marganas. Such fourteen Marganas are mentioned in the Shruta Jnana." ||141||

**Special Meaning:**

What are Marganas? The fourteen Jiva Samasas, which are filled with the Anuyoga Dvaras of truth, number, etc., are called Marganas. The one by whom or in whom the living beings are searched or considered, is Margana, and it has fourteen divisions. As it is said in the Shruta Jnana or the discourse, O Bhavy! You should know it that way. After considering the living being briefly through the Gunasthana, Jiva Samasa, Paryapti, Pran, and Sanjna Pra Rupanam, now the living being will be considered in detail with five aspects through the Marganas of motion, senses, etc. The five aspects of motion, senses, etc.

Page #223:
---------------------------
## 190 / Go. Sa. Jeevakanda

**Meaning:** The soul exists in the form of categories (Paryayas), and the knowledge of these categories is called Shruta Jnana. Here, Shruta Jnana refers to the knowledge of the scriptures (Dravya Shruta) in the form of words, which has been passed down uninterruptedly through the Guru-Shishya-Pradhisya tradition. If a scholar has made a mistake due to a lapse of time or negligence, then one should ignore that mistake and accept the path of the ultimate truth (Parmagam).

**Verse 142**

**Doubt:** When considering worldly matters (Vyavaharik Padarthas), we see four types of investigation: Mrigayita, Mrigaya, Margerana, and Marganopaya. However, these four types are not found when considering the transcendental (Lokottara) matters. Therefore, how can we talk about Margana?

**Solution:** This is not a flaw, because these four types are present even in this context. They are as follows:

* The devotee (Bhavya) who has faith in the soul and other substances is Mrigayita, meaning the one who investigates the transcendental matters.
* The soul with fourteen Gunasthanas (stages of development) is Mrigaya, meaning the one who is worthy of investigation.
* The path (Gati) etc., which are the basis of the soul with fourteen Gunasthanas (Mrigaya) or which are very helpful in the investigation of the devotee (Mrigayita), are Margerana.
* The disciple (Shishya) and the teacher (Upadhyaya) etc., are the means of Margerana.

**Names of the Fourteen Marganas**

"Gai Indiyasu Kaye Jogue Vede Kasayane Ya.
Sanjama Saranalesa Bhaviyassamattasanishrahare." || 142 ||

**Meaning of the Verse:** Gati, Indriya, Kaya, Yoga, Veda, Kasaya, Jnana, Sanjama, Darshan, Leshya, Bhavya, Samyaktva, Sanjee, and Ahar are the fourteen Marganas. || 142 ||

**Special Meaning:** The investigation of the soul's stages of development (Gunasthanas) is done in Gati, Indriya, Kaya, Yoga, Veda, Kasaya, Jnana, Sanjama, Darshan, Leshya, Bhavya, Samyaktva, Sanjee, and Ahar. The word "Ya" in this verse is used to indicate a collection. There are only fourteen Marganas.

**Doubt:** Why is the seventh case ending (Saptami Vibhakti) used in the verse?

**Solution:** The seventh case ending is used to indicate that these Gati etc., Marganas are the basis of the soul. Similarly, the third case ending (Triteeya Vibhakti) can also be used with each word.

**Doubt:** If the seventh case ending is used with each word, then how is the third case ending possible?

**4. Gh.**

**1. Siddhanta Chakravarti Shreemad Amayachandra Suri's Commentary.**
**2. Dh. Pu. 1 Page 133-34.**
**3. Pra. Pan. Sa. Pu. 12 Ga. 57, Page 575 Ga. 46. Moolachar Paryapti Adhikar Page 276 Ga. 156. Dh. Pu. 1 Page 132 Sutra 4. Pu. 1 Page 132.**
**5. A. Pu. 1 Page 133.**

Page #224:
---------------------------
## Verse 142
## Margna/161

**Solution:** It is not correct to say that, because the seventh case ending in this verse is a marker of location, it also implies the third case.

**Question:** Why is only Margna taught in this verse, excluding Mrgyita, Mrgya, and Margnoupaya?

**Solution:** This is not a valid objection. Because the word "Nimami" is a marker of location. Or, the word "Margma" is inseparable from the other three, so by mentioning only Margna, the other three are also implied.

**Gati:** That which is attained is Gati. By defining Gati in this way, it does not fall into the fallacy of over-application with Siddhas, because Siddhas lack the qualities that can be attained. If we were to say that only knowledge and other qualities are attainable, that would not be a valid statement, because the concept of attainment and attainment-maker is contradictory in the nature of pure consciousness. Due to being generated by adhyasa, only passions and other emotions can be considered attainable, but these are not found in Siddhas, so there is no fallacy of over-application with Siddhas.

**Indriya:** Those that function in direct perception are called Indriyas. The eye is called Indriya, and that which exists in relation to the eye is called direct perception, which is the object of the Indriyas or the knowledge generated by the Indriyas. Those that function in direct perception, which is the object of the Indriyas or the knowledge generated by the Indriyas, are called Indriyas. These Indriyas are generated by the destruction and pacification of the knowledge-obscuring karma called touch, taste, form, smell, and sound, and by the material Indriyas. The material Indriyas are generated only when the subtle Indriyas, which are in the form of destruction and pacification, exist. Therefore, the subtle Indriyas are the cause and the material Indriyas are the effect. This is why the material Indriyas are also called Indriyas. Or, the subtle Indriyas are generated by the material Indriyas, so the subtle Indriyas are the effect and the material Indriyas are the cause. This is also why the material Indriyas are called Indriyas. This is not an unfounded assumption, because the effect-based dharma in the cause and the cause-based dharma in the effect are found in the world in a well-known way.

**Kaya:** That which is accumulated is Kaya. If we create a definition that "that which is accumulated is Kaya," then this definition would also apply to the opposite, such as the accumulation of bricks, etc., excluding Kaya. Therefore, it would fall into the fallacy of contradiction. Realizing this doubt, the Acharya says that this fallacy of contradiction does not arise with the accumulation of bricks, etc., because it is explained that "that which is accumulated by the karma-arising from the stationary name like "earth," etc., and the karma-arising from the non-stationary name is Kaya."

**References:**

1. Pra.Pu. 1, p. 133
2. Dha.Pu. 1, p. 134
3. "Gamyata iti Gati" (Mulaachar Paryapti Adhikar, p. 2766, verse 156, commentary; A.Pu. 1, p. 134)
4. Dha.Pu. 1, p. 134
5. "Pratyakshanirataani Indriyani. Prakshagindriyani." (Cha.Pu. 1, p. 135)
6. Pa.Pu. 1, p. 135
7. "Chiyata iti Kayah" (Dha.Pu. 1, p. 138)
8. Pa.Pu. 1, p. 138

Page #225:
---------------------------
## 192/Go. Sa. Jiva Kanda

**Verse 142:** 'Yoga is that which attains to samyoga.' One who attains to samyoga does not acquire the fault of vyabhichar from clothes etc., because they are not the dharma of the soul. He does not acquire the fault of vyabhichar from kshayas either, because kshayas are not the cause of the reception of karmas (asrava). 2 Or, the origin of the viriya, which is the cause of the reception of karmas due to the activity of the soul in the form of pradesha-parispanda, is called yoga. Or, the contraction and expansion of the pradeshas of the soul is called yoga. (Pra. Pa. 1/55)

'Veda is that which is known or experienced.'

**Doubt:** By defining veda in this way, the arising of the eight karmas will also be called veda, because both veda and pathakarma are the same in terms of vedana. Just as veda is in the form of vedana, similarly the arising of jnana-charanadi pathakarma is also in the form of vedana.

**Solution:** This should not be understood, because any general description is found in its specifics. Therefore, the knowledge of the specific is obtained. Or, the etymology of the word 'raudhika' is subject to tradition. Therefore, the word 'veda' is established in purusha-veda etc., and due to the etymology 'vedyate', meaning 'that which is known', only veda is understood, not the arising of jnana-avaran etc. pathakarma. Or, the veda is that which produces the delusion in the form of mithuna in the activity of the soul.

**Kshaya:** That which cultivates the field in the form of karma, which produces various types of grains in the form of sukha-duhkha, i.e., makes it fit to produce fruit, is kshaya.

**Doubt:** Why is the etymology of the word 'kshaya' not given as 'kasantiti kshayaah', meaning 'that which binds is kshaya'?

**Solution:** If the etymology is given as 'that which binds is kshaya', then any substance that binds will be considered kshaya. Therefore, there may be confusion in understanding the nature of kshaya. Therefore, the etymology 'that which binds is kshaya' is not given. Also, due to the fear that understanding kshaya will become difficult with this etymology, the etymology 'that which binds is kshaya' is not given.

**Jnana:** That which illuminates the truth is jnana.

**Doubt:** How can the knowledge of bhibhyasti be the illuminator of the truth?

1. 'Yujyate iti yogah' (Va. Pu. 1 p. 136). 2. Dha. Pu. 1 p. 236-240. 3. 'Vadyate iti vebah' (Pa. Pu. 1 p. 140-41). 4. 'Prathayatma-pravritte mithunasammohotpado vaidah' (Moolachar Paryapti Adhikar Ga. 156 Tika, p. 276; Gha. Pu. 1 p. 141). 5. 'Sukha-duhkharoopa-bahushasya-karma-kshetra kripantiti kshayaah' (Shra. Pu. 1 p. 141). 6. 'Bhootartha-prakashak jnanam' (Moolachar Paryapti Ashvikar 12, Ga. 156 Toka p. 277; Gha. Pu. 1 p. 142).

Page #226:
---------------------------
## Gatha 142
## Margna/163

**Solution:** This is not true, because there is no similarity in the light of Samyagdristi and Mithyadristi.

**Doubt:** If there is similarity in the light of both, then how can Mithyadristi beings be ignorant?

**Solution:** This doubt is not correct, because Mithyadristi beings are called ignorant because they do not have the cessation of doubt, wrong perception, and indecision, even when the object appears to them due to the rise of Mithyatva karma.

**Doubt:** If this is the case, then will the effect of knowledge be obtained in the state of Darshanopयोग?

**Solution:** This is not a fault, because the effect of Gyanopयोग is desirable in the state of Darshanopयोग.

**Doubt:** If this is assumed, then why will this statement not contradict the sutra "Eg-Jeevan Paachch Pranavibho Apjjavsidon" etc., which has come in the Kalānuyog? That is, the time of Mithyājñān and Shrutajnān is Anadi-Anant compared to one life, why will there not be a contradiction with this sutra?

**Solution:** It is not right to have such a doubt, because the predominance of Kshayopaśama is what is stated in Kalānuyog with respect to knowledge.

**Doubt:** How can Mithyājñān be the illuminator of Satyarth?

**Solution:** This doubt is not correct, because the duality found in the moon is found in other substances. Therefore, it becomes Bhutartha in that knowledge.

**Or** The knowledge that determines the truth is the knowledge that determines the truth. This proves that Mithyadristi is not knowledgeable, because the knowledge that perceives the truth in the desire for purification is the knowledge that perceives the truth.

**Doubt:** Knowledge is inseparable from the soul, so how can it be the most effective cause for knowing things?

**Solution:** It is not right to say so, because if knowledge is considered completely different from or inseparable from the soul, then the consequence of the loss of the nature of the soul is found, and there is no contradiction in considering knowledge in the form of difference as the most effective cause for the action of knowing.

Page #227:
---------------------------
194/Go. Sa. Jivakanda
Verse 142
**Samyama** is the act of restraining. When **Samyama** is defined in this way, it cannot be a **dravya**-based restraint without **bhavacarita**, because the word "**san**" negates it.
**Doubt:** Here, the word "**yama**" should be taken to mean **samitis**, because **Samyama** cannot be formed without **samitis**?
**Solution:** Such a doubt is not correct, because the word "**san**" used in **Samyama** encompasses all **samitis**.
**Darshan** is that by which one sees. This does not lead to the **atiprasanga** fallacy with the **chakshu** sense organ and **aloka**, because these are not the **dharma** of the **atma**. (Here, **chakshu** refers to the **dravya** **chakshu**.)
**Doubt:** If **Darshan** is that by which one sees, then what is the difference between **Darshan** and **jnana**?
**Solution:** There is no contradiction, because **antarmuka** **chitprakash** is **Darshan** and **bahirmuka** **chitprakash** is **jnana**.
**Doubt:** What is that **chaitanya**?
**Solution:** **Chaitanya** is the sensation of the **jiva**'s **trikala**-related infinite **paryaya** form, according to its own **kshaya** and **upashama**. Therefore, **jnana** is that which perceives the external object that is **samanya-visheshatmaka**, and **Darshan** is that which perceives the **atmaswarupa** that is **samanya-vidyoshatmaka**.
**Or:** **Palokanavritti** is **Darshan**. This means that the one who observes is **palokan** or **atma**. **Vartan** (activity) is **vritti**. The **vritti** of **palokan** (**atma**) is **palokanavritti**. **Bahuswasanswedan** is **Darshan**.
**Or:** **Prakashavritti** is **Darshan**. This means that **prakash** is **jnana**. The **vritti** of the **atma** for this is **prakashvritti**. That is **Darshan**.
**Or:** **Darshan** is the state prior to the conjunction of the object and the subject.
**Leshya** is that which **limpan**s. This does not lead to the **ativyapti** fallacy with **bhumilepika**, because it is expected that "the **atma** is **limpan**ed by **karmas**". In other words, **Leshya** is that which **limpan**s the **atma** with **karmas**.
**Or:** **Leshya** is the **pravritti** of the **man-vacan-kayarupa** yoga that is **anuranjit** by **kapaya**.

Page #228:
---------------------------
Gatha 143-144
Mangana / 195
Leshya. It should not be concluded that the kevalayoga of the vitarāgīs cannot be called leshya, because in leshya, yoga is predominant, not kashaya. Kashaya is only a special feature of yogapravṛtti, therefore its predominance is not possible. The prostitute is the one who connects the soul and activities (karmas).

Bhavya 1
- One who has attained nirvana is bhavya, and the opposite of this is abhavya. * The characteristics of samyaktva are the manifestation of samyaktva, pratishama, samvega, anukampa and āstikyā. " Doubt - If the characteristics of samyaktva are accepted in this way, will the effect of the asanyatasamyagdṛṣṭi guṇasthāna occur?
Solution - Your statement can be considered true only by taking refuge in the shuddhanayas. Or, tattvartha-shraddhana is samyagdarshana. Or, tattvaruci is samyagdarshana. 7

Sanjni - One who accepts teaching, action, instruction, conversation is sanjni; the opposite of this is asanjni.

Ahara - Accepting the pudgala-pinda suitable for the body is ahara, the opposite of this is anahara.

Shantara - The division of the shantara-marganās, the measure of the highest and lowest period of the shantara-marganās, and the statement of the period of separation 'Uyasama suhūmāhāre, ve gubviya missa - par-prajjate. Sāsaraṇasamma misse, sāntaragā maggagā.' 143. Sattadiraṇā chhamāsā vāsapudhataṃ ca bārasamuhuttā. Pallāsaṃkhaṃ tiha varamavaramu egasamayo du. 144.

1. Or, "kṣayānurañjitā kāyavāṅmanoyogapravṛttirleshyā" (P. Pu. 1 p. Tika; Gh. Pu. 16 p. 485 and 45 S. Si. A. 2 Su. 6. Pravṛttisaṃśleṣakārī leshyā." [Mūlācāra p. 277 and Dh. Pu. 1 p. Sadviparitoabhavyaḥ." [Mūlācāra Śr. 12 Ga. 156 Tika p. 277 146); Pañcāstikāya Ga. 116 2. Dh. Pu. 1 p. 150. 3. "Ātma-" 149 | 1 4. "Nirvāṇapuraskṛto bhavyaḥ V. Pu. 1 p. 150-51] Mūlācāra Śr. 12 p. 277].

5. "Praśamasaṃvegānukampāstikyyābhivyaktilakṣaṇaṃ samyaktvaṃ" | Ch. Pu. 1 p. 151, 6. "Tattvārthashraddhānaṃ samyagdarśanam" [Gh. Pu. 1 p. 151, Su. A. 1 Su. 2]. "Sabhyavatyam" [Tr. Pu. 1 p. 251 Mūlācāra Śr. 12 Ga. 156 Tika p. 277] Grāhaka: sañjñī, tadviparitoasañjñī." [Mūlācāra P. A. 12, Ga. 156 Tika p. 277 6. Śarīrāyogyapudgalapinḍa grahaṇamāhāraḥ tadviparitoanāhārī" [Mūlācāra Paryāpti Tika, p. 277, Pu. 1 p. 152-53]. 10. Manuyā ya appajjattā veubbiyu missahāraya doṣi. Suhūmo sāsaraṇa misso ucasamsammo ya sāntarā maṭha ||55/3

7. "Athavā tattvaruciḥ "Śikṣā kriyopadeśālāpa-" [Dh. Pu. 1 p. 152]. Adhikāra 12 Ga. 156

Page #229:
---------------------------
166/Go. Sa. Jivakanda
Verse 145
'Padhamuvasamasahidaae, Viradaaviradoae Chaudasaa Divasaa.
Viraviae Pannaarasaa, Virahivakalo Du Bodhyo ||145||
Gathaarth - Upasama Samyaktava, Sukshmasampraaya, Aaharakyoga, Paaharakamishrayoga, Kriyikamishrayoga, Manusya Aparyaapta, Saasadan Samyaktava, Samyagmithyatva ye Paath Antarmargnaa hain. ||143|| Inka Utkrishta Virahakal Kramshah Satadin, Chhamaah, Varshaprithaktva, Varshaprithaktva, Barahmuhurt aur antim tinmargnaaon ka Virahakal Palyo ke Asankhyatavembhaag; Prathamopaasama Samyaktavasahit Virataaviratapanchama Gurugasthan ka Chaudas Din aur Sakalasanyam ka Pandrah Din hai. In sabka Jaghanya Antarakal Ekasamaya hai. ||144-145||
Vishesharth Antar, Ucched, Viraha, Parinaamantergaman, Nastitvagaman aur Anyabhaavavyavadhan ye sab Ekarthavachi naam hain. 2 'Ratrindin' yah Divas ka naam hai, kyonki Sammilit Din va Ratri se Divas ka Vyavhaar dekha jaata hai. Prathamopaasamasamyaktva ka Nanaajivon ki Apeksha Utkrishta Antar Saat Divas maatr hota hai. Yadi koi bhi Jiv Prathamopaasama Samyagdristi na ho to uska Utkrishta Virahakal Saatdin maatr hai. Haun Dhan Praant maatr hai.
_ Graaharakakayayogi aur Aaharakamishrakayayogi Jivon ka Antar Jaghanya se Ekasamaya hota hai, kyonki Ekasamaya tak Aaharak aur Paaharakamishrakayayogion ke bina tinon Lokon ke Jiv paaye jaate hain, Utkarash se Antar Varshaprithavattva pramaan hai, kyonki Paaharak Kayayoga aur Aaharakamishrakayayoga ke bina samasat Pramattasampaton ka Varshaprithaktva kal tak Avasthan dekha jaata hai. Aaharakakayayoga aur Paahar kamishra Kayayoga Pramattasanyata-chhathe Gunasthan mein hi hota hai.
Vaikriyikamithakayayogion ka Antar Jaghanya se Ekasamaya hota hai, kyonki sab Kriyikamithakayayogion ke Paryaptiyaan poorn kar lene par Ekasamaya ka Antar ho kar Dvitiyasamaya mein Devon ya Narakiyon ke Utpanna hone par Vaikriyikamishrakayayogion ka Antar Ekasamaya hota hai. Vaikriyikamishrakayayogion ka Antar Utkarash se Barah Muhurt hai, kyonki Dev athava Narakiyon mein na Utpanna hone vale Jov yadi bahut adhik kal tak rahte hain to Barah Muhurt tak hi rahte hain. Arthat Devon athava Narakiyon mein adhik se adhik Barahmuhurt tak koi bhi Jiv Utpanna na ho, aisa sambhav hai.
Manusya Aparyaapta arthat Lanthyaparyapta Manusyon ka Antar Jaghanya se Ekasamaya hai, kyonki Jagatshrini ke Asankhyatavembhaag Manusya Aparyaaptakon ke mar kar anyagati ko praapt hone par Ekasamaya Antar ho kar Dvitiyasamaya mein anya Jivon ke Manusya Aparyaaptakon mein Utpanna hone par Ekasamaya Antar praapt hota hai. Manusya Aparyaaptakon ka Antar Utkarash se Palyopam ka Asankhyatavambhaag maatr hai, kyonki Manusya Aparyaaptakon ke mar kar anyagati ko praapt hone ke paschat Palyopam ke Asankhyatavembhaag
1. Sammatte Sat Dina Viradaavirade Ya Badasa Hoti. Viradesu Ya Pannya Rasam Birahim Kaal Ya Bohubvo ||20|| (Pra. Pa. Sa. Jivammasa Adhikar): 2. "Antarmucchedho Virahi Parinaamantergamanam Sthittayamanam Annabhaavabahaanamidi Eyaro" (Dh. Pu. 5 Pri. 3). 3. Gh. Pu. 7.Pu. 462 Sutra 58-56. 4. Pa. Pu.7 Pri. 485-466 Sutra 27-28-26. 5. Gh. Pu. 7 Pri. 485 Sutra 24.-25-26. ||

Page #230:
---------------------------
Gatha 146
Gati-Margana/17
"After the mere passage of time, the living beings are again found to be born in the aparyaptas (incompletely developed beings) according to the rule."

The minimum difference between the Sasadana-samyagdrsti (the right faith attained through descent) and the Samyag-mithyadrsti (the mixed right and wrong faith) is one samaya (the smallest unit of time), because there is no contradiction to the minimum difference of one samaya between the Sasadana-samyaktva (the right faith attained through descent) and the Samyag-mithyadrsti guna-sthanas (stages of spiritual development).

The maximum difference is up to the asankhyatavein (innumerable) part of a palyopama (an immeasurably long period of time), although the maximum duration of the existence of the Samyag-mithyadrstis is also only the asankhyatavein part of a palyopama, yet their period of absence is prasankhyata (innumerable) times more than that, but still it is the asankhyatavein part of a palyopama, because the asankhyatavein part of a palyopama is of many types.

The maximum difference between the Prathamopasama-samyagdrstis (those with the first stage of subsidence of passions) in the Viratavirati (partially restrained and unrestrained) named fifth gunasthana (stage of spiritual development) is fourteen days, and the maximum difference for the Viratis (the restrained ones), i.e., the Samyatas, is fifteen days. It is also said:

"In the Sammattas (those with right faith), the Virataviratis are of fourteen (days), and the Viratis, the period of absence is to be known as not more than fifteen."

In the Upasama-samyaktva (the right faith with subsidence of passions), it should be known that the minimum difference is one samaya, and the maximum difference is seven days; in the Upasama-samyaktva with Virataviratis, i.e., the Desavratas, it is fourteen days; and in the Viratis, i.e., the Pramatta-apramatta Mahavratas, it is fifteen days.

The minimum difference between the Upasama-samyagdrstis in the Sayatasayyatas (partially restrained and unrestrained) is one samaya, and the maximum difference is fourteen days. The minimum difference between the Upasama-samyagdrstis in the Pramatta-samyatas (restrained with passions) and the Apramatta-samyatas (unrestrained without passions) is one samaya, and the maximum difference is fifteen days.

These gathas also reveal that there is no difference in the rest of the Marganas (spiritual stages), they are continuous. Although "no difference" and "continuous" both indicate the absence of difference, "no difference" is the predominant expression, so this is a Prasajya-pratisedha (absolute negation) relationship. "Continuous" establishes their existence along with the absence of difference, so this is a Paryudasa-pratisedha (exclusive negation) relationship.

6. In the Gati-Margana-adhikara (chapter on the stages of spiritual development), the etymological meaning of the word "Gati" and the types of Gati are: "Gaiuddayaparyaya, Caturgatigamana, and Marana are the causes and effects of Gati. The four types of Gati are Tiryanc (animal), Manusya (human), Deva (divine), and Naraka (infernal)."

Page #231:
---------------------------
168/Mo. Sa. Jivakanda
Verse 147
Verse Meaning- 'Gati' is the state of existence generated by karma, or it is the cause of movement in the four states of existence. Hell, animal, human and god, these four are the different types of 'gati'. ||146||
Special Meaning- The place where one goes is called 'gati'.
Doubt- If 'gati' is defined in this way, then shouldn't places like 'pram', 'nagar', 'khet', 'karvat' etc. also be considered 'gati'?
Solution- This is not possible because the word 'gati' is used for the state of existence that is produced by the karma called 'gati' due to convention. The state of existence of a Siddha is called 'pragati' because the karma called 'gati' does not arise in them.
Or, 'gati' is the transition from one existence to another. And the state of existence of a Siddha is in the form of 'prasankranti'. It is also said:
"Gah-kamma-virinavatta ja chetta sa gai muneyavya.
Jiva hu saurangam gachchanti ti ya gai hoi ||4||"
One should understand 'gati' as the cessation of activity caused by karma, or the cause for going to the four states of existence.
There are four types of 'gati' based on the distinction of hell, animal, human and god.
The nature of hellish 'gati' is:
"Na ramanti jado nicham, davve khette ya kal-bhayey ya.
Annohi ya jahma, tahma te garaya bhari gaya ||147||"
Verse Meaning- Those who are never happy in substance, space, time and feeling, both individually and collectively, are called 'Bharat' (hellish beings). ||14||
Special Meaning- Substance- food and drink. Space- places like burrows. Time- seasons etc. Feeling- feelings in the form of afflictions. Those who are not attached to these and to each other, who are engaged in inappropriate actions like violence, are called 'nirat' and their state of existence is called 'niratgati'. Or, 'narak' is that which torments and grinds the 'nar' (living beings). 'Narak' is a karma. Those who are born from it are called 'narak' and their state of existence is called 'narakgati'. Or, the state of existence whose arising is the contributing cause for the arising of all inauspicious karmas is called 'narakgati'. Those who do not have mutual affection are called 'narat' and their state of existence is called 'naratgati'.
1. "Gamyata iti gatiḥ" (D. Pu. 7 p. 6; Mulaachar A. 12 p. 276). 2. "Prathava bhavad bhavasankranti gatiḥ" (D. Pu. 7 p. 6 Mulaachar Paryapti Adhikar Ma. 156 Tika p. 276). 3. Shra. Pu. 1 p. 135, Pra. Pan. San. Ga. 60 p. 576. 4. “Sa charshina narakgati tiryaag gati manushya gati deva tibhedena." (Mulaadhar M. 12 Ga. 156 ki tika). 5. P. Pu. 1 p. 102; Pra. Pan. San (Gyanapith) A. 1 Ga. 60 p. 13. 6. P. Pu. 1 p. 203.

Page #232:
---------------------------
## Verse 147
## Path of Motion/169

This also states, while describing the hellish beings in comparison to the Nagas and others:

"Seeing a man associating with sinful people, the Naigamana says, 'Oh great man, he is a hell-being.' [When that man contemplates killing a living being and gathers materials, he is a hell-being according to the Sangrahanaya. The Mashaganama says, 'When a man wanders about searching for deer with a bow and arrow in his hand, he is called a hell-being.' The Rijusutra says, 'When he sits in a hidden place and attacks the sinful deer, he is called a hell-being.' The Sambanaya says, 'When the animal is freed from its life, then that man who is engaged in violence is a hell-being due to the karma of violence.' The Samabhirudhanaya says, 'When a man becomes bound by hellish karma (narakayu) and is associated with hellish karma, then he is called a hell-being.' When that man reaches hell and experiences the suffering of hell, he is a hell-being according to the Ayambhutanaya."

There are seven earths below the lower world - Ratnaprabha, Sharkaraprabha, Balukaprabha, Pankaprabha, Dhumaprabha, Tamahprabha, and MahaTamahprabha. In these seven earths, there are seven hells, starting with the first, whose names are respectively Gharma, Bansha, Shaila (Megha), Anjana, Arishta, Maghavi, and Maaghavi. In those hells, there are 84,00,000 burrows which are the dwelling places of the hell-beings. In those hells, there are respectively one, three, seven, ten, seventeen, twenty-two, and thirty-three sagaropama (ocean-like) superior lifespans. The inferior lifespan in the first hell is ten thousand years. In the subsequent hells, starting with the second, one should understand that the superior lifespan of the previous hell is the inferior lifespan of the subsequent hell.

The hell-beings of the first earth eat the foul-smelling, impure, small amount of earth they get, quickly. From this, one should know that there are countless times more bad food and drink in the subsequent earths.

The sphere of knowledge in the first hell is one yojana in measure. Further, with the loss of half a yojana in each subsequent hell, it becomes only one kosa in the seventh hell. In the first four hells and in two-thirds of the fifth hell, called Arishta, that is, in two lakh burrows, there is the pain of heat. In the remaining one lakh burrows of the fifth earth and in the two lakh burrows of the sixth and seventh hells (100000 + 66695 + 5), there is extreme cold pain.

In the first two hells, there is Kapoteleshya, in the third and fourth hells, there is Neel and Krishna leshya, in the sixth hell, there is Duhkrisna leshya, and in the seventh, there is Mahakrishna leshya. The hell-being born in the first Gharma hell, suffering, jumps up from his birthplace 500 dhanushya (bow) in measure, and in the remaining hells, they jump up twice the distance in each subsequent hell. In those hells, the beings experience Por, Teev, Mahakashtabheem, Bheeshma, Bhayanak, Darun, Bipul, Ugra, and Teekshna suffering.

In 'Swami Kartikeyanupreksha', the suffering of the hells is described as follows: "Narakayu is born in the beings due to the rise of sinful karma and there are five types of many sufferings..."

1. Ga. 1 to 6, Gh. Pu. 7 p. 26-26.
2. Lokavibhag ka va vibhag.
3. Gaatha 34 to 31.

Page #233:
---------------------------
## 200/Go. Ma. Jivakanda
**Verse 147**

The suffering of hell is greater than the suffering of other destinies. There are five types of suffering: suffering caused by oneself, physical suffering, mental suffering, suffering caused by the environment, and suffering caused by others. In hell, there is an unfavorable and inseparable reaction. The hell-bound beings react inseparably with weapons like the Barana and others, and with Vajragni and others. They attain the form of fire, wind, stone, trees, alkaline water, and poison, and inflict terrible suffering on each other. They also react as ferocious animals like tigers, vultures, eagles, crows, chakravaka birds, wolves, and dogs, causing suffering to each other. The hell-bound beings are satisfied by tormenting other hell-bound beings through killing, binding, and other obstacles, causing them to be pierced little by little, devoured, and so on. The ground of hell is like heated iron to the touch, covered with sharp hairs like a razor, and filled with sharp thorns like needles. Even a slight touch causes unbearable pain, even more than the bite of thousands of scorpions. In hell, there are iron statues like anklets, filled with flames and sparks, forests of Asipatra trees with sharp leaves like razors and arrows, terrifying Vetalagiri mountains with hundreds of caves and mechanisms, unimaginable Kuta Salmali trees, Vaitarani rivers, and ponds filled with the stench of corpses and swarms of insects, all of which are a torment for the terrified hell-bound beings. Fearing the fire, they run towards the Vaitarani river, mistaking its salty water for cool water and falling into it. The pain of burning caused by the salty water makes them rise up quickly, seeking shade and entering the Asipatra forest. There, they are pierced by falling Asipatra leaves. Their feet, arms, shoulders, ears, lips, noses, and heads are torn apart by the Asipatra leaves. The pain of cold and heat is unbearable in hell. The earth there inflicts unbearable suffering. The suffering of hunger, thirst, and fear is constant in hell. There are many instruments of torture, both naturally occurring and created by reaction, such as cauldrons filled with boiling water, burning, strange-shaped skewers, and many furnaces.

The first three hells are inhabited by Asura Kumaras, who are of bad character and have strayed from the right path. They cause great suffering to the hell-bound beings, enjoying themselves by making them fight each other. The hell-bound beings experience great mental suffering due to the lack of desirable things, the presence of undesirable things, and humiliation and fear. Even when their bodies are reduced to the size of a sesame seed, they do not die. They do not die prematurely. Their bodies are scattered like mercury and then reassembled. The hell-bound beings suffer from various diseases constantly. Even their relatives from previous births, now in hell, become angry and cause them suffering. The suffering of even one moment in hell cannot be described by thousands of tongues.

Those who drink alcohol, eat meat, kill living beings, take pleasure in hunting, speak untruthfully due to attachment, greed, anger, and other vices, are lustful and attached to other women, engage in sexual intercourse day and night, cheat others, steal the wealth of others, and steal, are sinners.

**1. Lokavibhaga Ashtama Vibhaga**

Page #234:
---------------------------
...
**Verse 147**
**Gati Marg Gga/201**

All four types of living beings are born in hell. Beings with excessive beginning and excessive attachment bind hell-life and are born in hells after death. Fainting is attachment.

Hellish beings are countless, which is proven by the countless worlds. There are the most hellish beings in the first hell, and in the second and subsequent hells, there are countless parts of the first hell. The duration of hell-life for a being is at least as long as the final moment, because the hell-life of a being who is born in the animal or human realm after escaping hell and binds hell-life within the shortest lifespan and is born again in hell after death is found to be the final moment. The duration of hell-life for a hellish being is at most countless particle transformations, which is equivalent to infinite time, because after escaping hell, it wanders in the countless parts of the countless particle transformation time of the un-intended paths and the one-sensed beings, and this duration is found when it is born again in hell.

There are hellish beings in these four states of existence: false faith, partially correct faith, partially false faith, and uncontrolled correct faith. There is a contradiction in being born in hell with the state of partially correct faith. Those with correct faith (either destructive or fully realized correct faith) are born in the first earth (hell) after death, but those with correct faith are not born in the second and subsequent earths (hells).

Up to the first hell, beings are born as unconscious, up to the second hell as crawling, up to the third hell as birds, up to the fourth hell as insects, up to the fifth hell as lions, up to the sixth hell as women, up to the seventh hell as fish and humans.

Beings who escape hell are born as womb-born, karma-born, self-born, and fully-realized humans or animals, but those who escape from the seventh hell escape only with false faith and are born as animals. Beings who escape hell do not become Narayana, Prati-Narayana, Balabhadra, or Chakravarti, but they can become Tirthankara after escaping from the first, second, or third hell. Those who escape from the fourth hell become fully-bodied, those who escape from the fifth hell become controlled, those who escape from the sixth hell become country-protectors, and those who escape from the seventh hell rarely attain correct faith. In the first three hells, some attain correct faith through remembering their past lives, some through unbearable pain, and some through the teachings of the gods. In the remaining four hells, hellish beings attain correct faith through remembering their past lives and experiencing pain. In these four hells, there are no teachings of the gods, because the gods only go up to the third hell, not below. In particular, in the statement of the Gati-Pragati Chulika, in the 484th page, 205th sutra, Shri Bhootvali Acharya has written that a human being does not attain correct faith or partially correct faith after escaping from hell.

Hellish beings are self-born, five-sensed, fully-realized, and have a non-physical body.

1. Tiloyapali, Second Chapter. 2. T.M.Pr. 6. 5. Gh.Pu. 7, Page 187-8. 6. P.Gu. 1, Page 204, Sutra 25. 1. Ti.Pa. Second Chapter. 3. T.Mu.Pr. 7. 4. Gh.Pu. 7, Page 245. 7. P.Pu. 1, Page 205. 8. P.Pu. 1, Page 207.

Page #235:
---------------------------
## 202/Go. Sa. Jivakanda
## Chapter 14

**Verse 148**

Those who have attained crookedness in mind, speech, and body, whose food and other things are clearly known, who are inferior and ignorant, and who have an abundance of great sins, are called "tiryanch."

**Commentary:**

The cause of birth in all types of "tiryanch" is "tiryanch-gati." Or, "tiryanch-gati" is the collection of "tiryanch" categories obtained from the arising of the "tiryanch-gati" karma. Or, "tiras," "chakra," and "kutila" are all synonymous, therefore those who have attained crookedness are "tiryanch." The movement of "tiryanch" is "tiryanch-gati."

"Tiryach" experience happiness and sorrow, but they endure it within their minds. They cannot express it to others through words, nor can they call others to share in their happiness or sorrow. The actions that arise in their minds are not performed by their bodies. Although some "tiryanch" like trained parrots, mynas, and other intelligent five-sensed beings may have a straight inclination in mind, speech, and body, yet from one-sensed to non-conscious five-sensed "tiryanch," and even trained intelligent five-sensed "tiryanch," are generally inclined towards crookedness in mind, speech, and body. Humans perform actions like eating and mating in a secluded place and at a specific time, but these actions are not performed in a secluded place by "tiryanch," they are performed openly in a suitable place. "Tiryach" do not have the same discrimination of virtues and vices, constant practice, and knowledge of truth as humans, therefore they are called ignorant. Due to the absence of great vows, virtues, and good conduct in "tiryanch," and the absence of good use of right faith, etc., in one-sensed beings, etc., there is an abundance of intense afflictions, therefore it is appropriate to call "tiryanch" as having an abundance of great sins.

The suffering of "tiryanch-gati" is described in verses 40 to 43 in the "Swamikartikeyanupreksha" as follows:

"Taking birth in many types of "tiryanch," they experience suffering like piercing, etc., even in the womb. Born as one-sensed, three-fold-disabled, conscious, non-conscious, five-sensed, etc., various types of "tiryanch," they experience suffering like piercing, cold, heat, hunger, thirst, etc., in the womb and at birth. The physical suffering of "tiryanch" is very severe. Powerful tigers, lions, bears, cats, dogs, crocodiles, etc., kill and devour weaker "tiryanch." They are killed by sinful wicked humans like barbarians, tribals, and fishermen. They are constantly afraid and run around being killed. "Tiryach" eat each other, therefore they endure terrible suffering. Hunger, thirst, torment, killing, slaughter, bondage, etc., are the suffering of "tiryanch."

1. This verse is also found in "D. Pu. 1, p. 202" with some differences. There, "suviyal" is replaced by "suviyard" and "bhagaya" is replaced by "nam" in the text. In "Pra. Pa. Sa., p. 576, verse 62," "suviyard" is also found. "Gig miti" is replaced by "gigatt" in the text.
2. "D. Pu. 1, p. 202."
3. Commentary by Shrimad Abhayachandrasuri.

Page #236:
---------------------------
##  Verse 148

**"They endure many kinds of suffering, such as carrying burdens, on the path of transmigration."** The suffering of the *tiryanch* path is clearly visible. Due to the influence of *maya*, the living being, after killing a *tiryanch* life, is born in the *tiryanch* realm and endures various kinds of suffering.

The *tiryanch* beings in the *tiryanch* path are infinite in number according to the *dravya* measure, and they are not removed from the infinite *avsarpinis* and *utsarpinis* in terms of time.

**Doubt:** Why are the *tiryanch* beings not removed from the infinite *avsarpinis* and *utsarpinis*?

**Solution:** Because here only the *utsarpini* and *avsarpinis* related to the past time are considered.

There are five types of *tiryanch*: *samanya tiryanch*, *panchendriya tiryanch*, *panchendriya tiryanch paryapta*, *panchendriya tiryanch yonini*, and *panchendriya tiryanch aparyapta* (labdhyaparyapta). We have already mentioned the number of *samanya tiryanch* above.

The *panchendriya tiryanch*, *panchendriya tiryanch paryapta*, *panchendriya tiryanch yonini*, and *panchendriya tiryanch aparyapta* are countless.

The difference between the *tiryanch* being and the *tiryanch* path is at least the time of *kshudrabhavgrahan* because the *tiryanch* being, after leaving the *tiryanch* path and being born in the *labdhyaparyapta* realm, stays for the time of *kshudrabhavgrahan* with *kadalidhat* and then is reborn in the *tiryanch* realm, the difference in the time of *kshudrabhavgrahan* is found. The maximum difference from the *tiryanch* path is found up to the time of *sagaropama shataprithaktva*, because there is no possibility for the *tiryanch* being to stay in the other paths for more than the time of *sagaropama shataprithaktva* after leaving the *tiryanch* realm. But the excellent difference of the four types of *panchendriya tiryanch* is the infinite time of *asankhyata pudgal parivartan* because after leaving the desired path and wandering in the undesired paths like *ekendriya* and *vikaleendriya* for the time of *asankhyata pudgal parivartan*, this difference in time is considered when born in the desired path.

There are five *gunasthanas* in the *tiryanch* realm: *mithyashti*, *sasadan samyagdristi*, *samyagmithyashti*, *asanyata samyagdristi*, and *sanyatasangrat*. Just as it is possible for the *bound ayushk* *asanyata samyagdristi* and *masadan samyagdristi* *gunasthan* beings to have *sadbhav* in the *aparyapta* time of the *tiryanch* path, it is not possible for the *samyagmithyashti* and *sanyatasangrat* to have *sadbhav* in the *aparyapta* time of the *tiryanch* path because there is a conflict between *samyagmithyashti* and *sanyatasangrat* with the *aparyapta* time. There are also five *gunasthanas* in the four types of *panchendriya tiryanch*, but in the *labdhyaparyapta* beings, except for one *mithyashti* *gunasthan*, other *gunasthanas* are impossible.

1. "Maya taiyangyonasy" (T. Su. Pr. 6 Sutra 16). 2. For details, see P. Pu. 3 p. 30-31. 3. Dh. Pu. 7 p. 252. 4. Gh. Pu. 7 p. 186. 5. Dh. Pu. 7 p. 16. 6. Gh. Pu. 1 p. 207. 7. Gh. Pu. 1 p. 208.

Page #237:
---------------------------
204/Go. Sa. Jivakanda
Verse 149
• Doubt - How can the effect of the Asanyata Samyagdristi Gunasthan be considered in the case of Tiryanchas who have an insufficient lifespan?
Solution - Not possible, because Asanyata Samyagdristi does not arise in Tiryanchas. Doubt - How is this known? Solution - This is known from the following verse sutra:
"Chasu Hetthimasu Pudhadhosu Jois-Charan-Bhavaran-Sav-Itthisu.
Rane Desu Samuppannai Sammaitti Du Jo Jiyo." ||133||
Meaning - "In the first hell, and the six hells below the earth, in the Jyotish-Baan-Vyantar and Bhavan-Vasi Devas, and in women of the Garva-prakar, a Samyagdristi Jiva is not born."
There are fourteen Jiva-samas in Tiryanchas.
The four types of consciousness, all the senses, the six bodies, the eleven yogas (excluding Vaikriyik, Vaikriyik-Mishra, Aharak and Aharak-Mishra), the three Vedas, the four kshayas (anger, etc.), the six jnanas (3 jnanas, 3 ajnanas), the two samyamas (Asamyam, Desha-Samyam), the three darshanas except Keval Darshan, the six leshyas in terms of dravya and bhava, bhavya-abhavya and graha-samyaktva. All these are present in Tiryanchas, both in terms of sanjni and prasanji, aharak and anaharak, and jnana and darshan.
Many Tiryancha Jivas attain Prathamopasham and Vedak Samyaktva through pratibodh, and some through their nature. In addition, many Tiryanchas attain Prathamopasham and Vedak Samyaktva by seeing the suffering of the mouth, by remembering their past lives, by seeing the glory of the Jineendras, and by seeing the Jin-Bimb.
The nature of the human state is described as follows:
"Mannati Jado Piccham, Manena Ni Uranna Manukkara Jamha.
Mannubhava Ya Samthe, Tamha Te Manusa Bharinda." ||146||
Meaning - "Those who always know the heya-upadeya, are proficient in many arts like silpa, etc., have strong uses like dharana, etc., and are the descendants of Manu (Kulkaras), are called humans." ||146||
Special Meaning - Those Jivas who continuously know the heya-upadeya, tattva-pratattva, prapt-anapt, and dharma-adharma,
1. Gh. Pu. 6 p. 201. 2. Ti. Pa. Adhikar 5, Verse 307-306. 3. Ti. Pa. A. 5 Verse 310-311. 4. Pra. Pan. San. (Janapith) p. 13 Ga. 62. Ba p. 576 Ga. 63 - "Mannati Jado Nicham Bhagaye Giun. Jado Du Je Jiva. Mashatakkara Ya Jamha Samha Te Manusa Bhania."

Page #238:
---------------------------
##  Verse 146
##  Gatimagna/205

Those who contemplate, decide, act, know subtle secrets, are farsighted, have enduring convictions, and are distinguished by their extraordinary use, are humans. Or, when the time of the Bhoga-bhoomi ended and the time of the Karma-bhoomi began, from the first Manu (Kulkar) who was promised, up to Bharat Chakravarti, the 16 Manus (Kulkar) in the beginning of the Yuga (Chaturthakal), they all showed the people the way to overcome the difficulties of that time and gave teachings for a happy life, therefore they became like fathers. All humans in the Karma-bhoomi are their descendants. Because they are descendants of Manu, they are also called humans.

Humans are found only up to the Manushottara mountain. Beyond the Manushottara mountain, humans are not found. The place of humans is Jambudvipa, Dhaatki-khand, and half of Pushkar Vardvipa, these two and a half islands, and the Lavana-samudra and Kalodadhi, these oceans, whose diameter is 4,500,000 yojanas, that is their extent. That is, compared to the other three gatis, the place of humans is the smallest, that is, it is a fraction of the countless.

**Doubt:** What is the reason for the area of humans being 4,500,000 yojanas?

**Solution:** Only through the human gati can a jiva become liberated and attain the Siddha state. Liberation cannot be attained through the other three gatis. The measure of the Siddha-kshetra is 4,500,000 yojanas, therefore the measure of the human-kshetra is also 4,500,000 yojanas.

**Doubt:** Why shouldn't it be assumed that a jiva can be liberated from any place and go to the Siddha-kshetra?

**Solution:** The movement of liberated jivas is without any bend at any time. From the place where the jiva is liberated, it goes straight up and resides in the Siddha-kshetra directly above that place. If liberation happens from a place other than the place below the Siddha-kshetra, then the jiva would have to bend to go to the Siddha-kshetra, and that would contradict the scriptures.

**Doubt:** Why don't the narakas attain liberation?

**Solution:** Narakas always have inauspicious leshya. Krishna, Neel, Kapoot are inauspicious leshyas. One with inauspicious leshya cannot hold restraint, and without restraint, liberation is not possible.

**Doubt:** Devas have only auspicious leshya, then why don't they attain liberation?

**Solution:** Even though Devas have auspicious leshya, their food and other things are fixed. Those whose things are fixed cannot hold restraint, because they cannot choose their food and other things.

1. Commentary by Shrimad Abhaychandrasuri.
2. "Praang Manushottaraanmanushya." S. Su. Pra. 3 Su. 35.
3. "Avigraha Jivasya" Pra. 2 Su. 27 (T. Su.).
4. "Narakanitmaashubhataraleshya......." [Pra. 3. Su. 3 T. Su.].

Page #239:
---------------------------
206/Go. Sa. Jiva Kanda
Verse 146
One cannot abandon and adopt fasting, etc. The main cause of Nirjara is Tapas.
Doubt - Why do Tiryanch not attain Moksha?
Solution - Tiryanch are born from the lower gotra, and those who are born from the lower gotra cannot adopt Samyama.
Doubt - Can all humans attain Moksha?
Solution - Only Karmabhoomi humans attain Moksha. Bhogbhoomi humans do not attain Moksha.
Doubt - Bhogbhoomi humans also have Vajrarṣabhanārātrasaṁhanana and three auspicious leṇyā, then why do they not attain Moksha?
Solution - Bhogbhoomi humans have a fixed Praharaparyaya. The best Bhogbhoomi humans eat after three days, the middle Bhogbhoomi humans eat after two days, and the lowest Bhogbhoomi humans eat after one day. They cannot eat before their fixed time, and they cannot violate the fixed time. That is, Bhogbhoomi humans must eat at the fixed time, so they cannot adopt Samyama. Without Samyama, one cannot attain liberation with only Samyagdarshan and knowledge. Shri Kundakundaacharya has said in the Pravachansara - "Sahaharaṇo astha asanjado vā ṇ ṇivyādi ||237||" Even one who has faith in substances, if he is unrestrained, does not attain Nirvana. This is also with faith and knowledge, but if one does not remove oneself from the unrestrained state of Vikalpa, such as raga, dvesha, etc., with the strength of character, like the strength of a man, then what good can knowledge and faith do? That is, knowledge and faith cannot do any good to this being. Therefore, without Samyama, one cannot attain the Siddha state with knowledge and faith.
Doubt - Can all Karmabhoomi humans attain Moksha?
Solution - Dravyastriyas cannot attain Moksha, because they cannot abandon their clothes.
Doubt - Can all men attain Moksha?
Solution - There are six khandas in the Karmabhoomi region. Of these, one is Aryakhanda and five are Mlechchhakhanda. Men born in the Mlechchhakhanda do not attain Moksha. In all the Mlechchhakhandas, there is one Mithya
1. "Tapasa Nirjara" [T. Su. A. E Mu. 3]. 2. "Ayan Jivah Shraddhanjnanamhitopi Pourupasthaniy Charitravlena Ragadhibikalpadasanayamadyadi Na Nivartate Tada Tasyashraddhanam Jnan Va Ki Kuryan Kimpi" [Pra. Sa. Ga. 237 Ta. Va.]. "Asanvatasya Cha Yathoditatmatattvapratilrirūpa Shraddhan Yathoditatmatattvanatirupa Shanan Va Ki Kuryat." [Pra. Sa. Ga. 237 Ki Amritachandraacharya Krit Teeka]. 3. Tatah Samyamasunyata Shranat Jnanadva Nasti Siddhi [Wahi]. 4. "Bhavasamyamivina Bhavivswadidupanadanananyathanupaparoh." [Dh. Pu. 1 Pri. 333].

Page #240:
---------------------------
## Chapter 143
## Path of Liberation/207
## The state of virtues remains.

**Doubt:** Can all men born in the Bharitya Khand (India) attain liberation by taking initiation?

**Solution:** Shri Kundakunda Acharya has said in Pravachansara Gatha 224/10 and Shri Jayasenacharya has said in his commentary on it, "Yannesu Tisu Ekko" - who is one of the three varnas (Brahmana, Kshatriya, Vaishya), "Kallago" - who has a healthy body, "Tayosho Vayas" - who is of a suitable age for penance, not too old or too young, "Sumuho" - whose mouth is free from defects and who is able to express the pure, unchanging, supreme consciousness within, "Kuchh Rahido" - who has no blemishes in the world due to bad conduct, "Laggaghane Havavi Jogi" - such a virtuous man is eligible to take Jain initiation.

This proves that not all men born in the Bharitya Khand can attain liberation by taking initiation.

**The sorrows of human existence:** Based on the concept of Samsara (cycle of birth and death) in "Swamikartikeyanupreksha", when this soul is in the mother's womb, it suffers great pain due to the constriction of its limbs and organs. At the time of birth, it experiences intense pain while exiting the womb. If the parents die in childhood, the soul suffers and is raised on the leftovers of others, leading a life of begging. By committing bad deeds, it accumulates negative karma and suffers from its consequences. It is surprising that humans still commit sins like violence, etc., and do not perform virtuous acts like charity, worship, penance, and meditation. Only a few become "Vevaak" or "Kshayik Samyagdristi" (liberated souls) and by following the 12 vows of a Shravak or the five great vows, they earn merit with pure results, engaging in "Ninda" and "Garda" (self-criticism and confession). [Self-criticism is "Ninda" and confessing one's faults to the Guru is "Garda".] Even virtuous humans, those with merit, experience the loss of desired things like wealth, grain, children, wife, friends, etc., and the association of undesirable things like snakes, thorns, enemies, etc. Shri Shradinath Tirthankara's son, the first Chakravarti Bharat, despite being powerful, was defeated by his younger brother Shri Bahubali and suffered humiliation. Even those with great merit do not get all the material possessions, wealth, and grain, etc., that they desire. Those with little merit or no merit do not get them at all. No one has enough merit to get everything they desire. Some are unhappy because they do not have a wife, others are unhappy because they do not have children even if they have a wife, and others are unhappy because their children have many physical ailments. Even if the body is healthy, they are unhappy due to the influence of wealth and possessions. Even if they have wealth, they are unhappy if they die in childhood or youth. Some are unhappy because of a wicked wife, some because of a gambler, meat-eater, drunkard, or other addicted son. Some are unhappy because their brother or family member is an enemy, some because their daughter is immoral. They are unhappy for these reasons. Some are unhappy because their good son died, some because their beloved wife died. 
1. "Sambamilichch Swayam Prakasnanam Nindanam Garhanam Gurusaakshikatmado shaprakasnanam" [Swa. Ka. Ga. 48]
Miti. Pa. Sa. Pra. Ga. 2637]. 2. Ga. 45 to 57 | 3. Gratmakritadushkarmnah

Page #241:
---------------------------
## 2) Go. Ma. Jeevakanda

Someone is grieving over the death of a loved one, or the burning of their home and family in a fire. In the human realm, this being endures various sorrows like hunger, thirst, etc., yet does not apply their intellect to Dharma and does not abandon their attachments to home and business. Today, someone is wealthy, but tomorrow they are seen as poor, and vice versa. A king becomes a servant, and a servant becomes a king. An enemy becomes a friend, like how Vibhishana became a friend of Ramachandraji. A friend becomes an enemy, like how Vibhishana became an enemy of Ravana. All this variability arises due to the ripening of karmas, both virtuous and non-virtuous. Even witnessing and experiencing all this, this being does not become detached from the world, the body, and enjoyments. This is truly astonishing.

Although there are countless humans, the number of "Labdhyaparyapt" humans is immeasurable. Therefore, the number of ordinary humans can be calculated by multiplying the square root of a fingertip by its cube root. The result obtained is then used to divide the "Jagshreni" by the "Rupaadik" humans and the "Rupaadik" humans who are not "Labdhyaparyapt". This means that the quotient obtained by dividing the "Jagshreni" by the product of the square root and cube root of a fingertip is one more than the number of ordinary humans. Subtracting the number of "Paryapt" humans and women from this gives the number of "Labdhyaparyapt" humans.

**Doubt:**

- Why is "Rupa" projected?

**Solution:**

- Since the "Jagani" is a quantity of "Kritayugma", and humans are "Tejojarupa", "Rupa" is projected into it.

**Gatha 143:**

The maximum duration of a being's continuous stay in the human realm is 47 "Purvakoti" plus three "Payog" units. A being born in the human realm from the "Pravivaksit" Paryaya, who has wandered through the three Vedas of the "Karmabhoomij" humans for 47 "Purvakoti" and has given donations or approved of donations, is born among the "Bhogabhoomij" humans who have three "Patyopam" units of "Prayusthiti". This being attains this maximum duration.

The minimum duration of a human's stay in the human realm is until the "Kshudrabhavgrahan" time. This is because a human leaving the human realm and being born in the "Tiryachgati" realm, staying there until the "Kshudrabhav" time, and then being reborn in the human realm, experiences this minimum duration.

The maximum duration of a human's stay in the human realm is until the "Prasankhyat" "Pudgalparivartan" units of time. This is because a human leaving the human realm and being born in the "Tiryachgati" realm with one sense organ, etc., and wandering for a time equal to the "Prasankhyat"th part of the "Pravali" units of "Pudgalparivartan", experiences this maximum duration.

1. V. Pu. 7 p. 256 Sutra 27 || 2. Dh. Pu. 7 p. 256. p. 166-160.
3. V. Pu. 7 p. 126.
4. Dh. Pu. 7

Page #242:
---------------------------
##  Gati Ma Ganga / 206

A human being cannot be born without the bond of human lifespan (shrayu-bandha). A being who is content with little beginning (alparambha) and little possession (alparigrah) makes the bond of human lifespan.

##  Gaya 150

Human existence (manushya-gati) is the only existence where fourteen stages of qualities (guna-sthana) are possible. In the other three existences, fourteen stages of qualities are not possible.

Human existence is the best existence because even gods desire to become human and attain the state of liberation (siddh) by practicing self-control (san-yam). But it is unfortunate that humans, even after attaining this invaluable existence, desire the existence of gods (dev-gati) for the sake of worldly pleasures (vishay-bhog), where self-control is not possible.

##  Meeting of Tiryachas and Humans

**Sāmagā pañcidī, pajjatā joṇikhī apjjaṭṭā |**
**Tiriyā garā tahā vi ya, pañcidiyabhanga do holā || 150 ||**

**Meaning:** There are five types of Tiryachas: ordinary Tiryachas, five-sense Tiryachas, five-sense Tiryachas with sufficient senses, five-sense Tiryachas with sufficient senses and birth, and five-sense Tiryachas with sufficient senses and attainment. Similarly, there are different types of humans, but the five senses are not broken. || 150 ||

**Special Meaning:** In the existence of Tiryachas, there are beings with one sense to five senses. Ordinary Tiryachas include all these beings. One-sense and incomplete-sense Tiryachas cannot make the bond of hellish existence (narak-ayu), godly existence (dev-ayu), godly existence (dev-gati), hellish existence (narak-gati), godly existence in sequence (dev-gati-anupurvi), hellish existence in sequence (narak-gati-anupurvi), body with changing qualities (vaikriyik-sharira), and body with unchanging qualities (vairiyik-gopang). But five-sense Tiryachas can make the bond of these karmic natures. From one-sense to four-sense Tiryachas, there is one stage of false belief (mithyatva-guna-sthana), but in five-sense Tiryachas, five stages of qualities are possible. Due to these special characteristics, five-sense Tiryachas are classified separately. Five-sense Tiryachas are of two types: sufficient and attainable. There are three types of births in sufficient five-sense Tiryachas: womb-born, born from a lump, and born from a combination of both. But attainable five-sense Tiryachas are only born from a combination of both and are eunuchs. Therefore, there are two types of five-sense Tiryachas: sufficient and attainable. In sufficient five-sense Tiryachas, a being with right faith (samyak-drishti) can be born, but in five-sense Tiryachas with birth, a being with right faith cannot be born. Due to these reasons, five-sense Tiryachas with birth are classified separately.

Humans have all five senses and do not have beings with one sense, etc. Therefore, there is no separate classification based on five senses in humans. There are only four types of humans: human, sufficient human, human with birth, and attainable human. The reasons for these classifications in Tiryachas should also be understood in the classifications of humans. The purpose of human with birth is human with attainment. There is a difference in births in the field of karma (karma-bhoomi). Those who are male in form (purusha-devi) but female in nature (bhav-stri) are included in human with birth. Human with birth has six types of bodies (sanhanan) and fourteen...

1. "Parambha-parigrah-tvam manushyasya" (T. Su. Pr. 6).

Page #243:
---------------------------
210/Go, Sa. Jivakanda
Verse 151: Gunasthanas are possible, but women can only have three inferior sahnanas and five gunasthanas, therefore their restraint cannot be born.
Doubt: How is it possible that there are fourteen gunasthanas in human women?
Solution: No, because there is no contradiction in accepting the harmony of fourteen gunasthanas in the human path, which is endowed with bhavasthri.
Doubt: The bhaaved is not found above the gunasthana called badar kshaya, therefore the harmony of fourteen gunasthanas is not found in the bhaaved. [In the anivrittiguranasthana, the extinction of vedodaya itself becomes the state of being without ved on the soul. From the sukshmasampray gunasthana to the prayogakevali gunasthana, there are five gunasthanas that are pravedi.]
Solution: No, because here the ved is not the main thing, but the motion is the main thing, and that motion is not destroyed first.
Doubt: Although fourteen gunasthanas are possible in the human path, they cannot be possible in it when it is endowed with the ved qualification?
Solution: No, because even after the qualification is destroyed, there is no contradiction in accepting the harmony of fourteen gunasthanas in the human path, which is endowed with the qualification, by means of treatment.
The nature of the gods is two-fold, even though they are playful, with eight divine qualities.
They shine with the world-body, therefore they are called gods. ||15||
Meaning of the verse: Those who are endowed with divine qualities and who constantly play with the eight qualities are called gods. ||151||
Special meaning: Those who play by virtue of obtaining the eight powers of anima, etc., are gods. The path of the gods is the devagati. Or, the word 'dev', which is endowed with the powers of anima, etc., is the producer of the causal paryaya in knowledge and behavior, the paryaya born from the rise of the devagati name karma is called devagati. Here, this characteristic has been done by means of treatment of the cause in the effect.
Those who play with the eight qualities (powers) of anima, etc., due to the devaparyaya, wander without hindrance in all three worlds (urvaloka, madhyaloka, adholoka) with their families,
1. Go. K. Verse 32. 2. "Savasaratvadapratyarupanagunasthanitanam samyamanupapatteh." (P. Pu. 1 p. 333). 3. P. Pu. 1 p. 333. 4. Shra. Pu. 1 p. 203. Pra. Pan. Sa(sanapiith) p. 13 Ga. 63; p. 576 Ga. 64 but instead of 'divanti' there is the reading 'kidanti'. 5. Dh. Pu. 1 p. 203.

Page #244:
---------------------------
##  Verse 151
##  Gati Margna/211

Those who praise the five supreme beings, who are always happy with the objects of the five senses, whose bodies are radiant and luminous with beauty, grace, splendor, and youth, are the Deva (divine beings).

**Suffering among Devas:**  The four types of Devas experience great suffering in different ways.  They experience mental anguish when they see the powers and wealth (Vibhuti) of the Devas like Indra, Samanika, Trayastrishat, and other great Siddhi-holders.  These Devas, who possess great Siddhis, suffer from the thirst for the pleasures of the five senses and from the separation from their beloved celestial wives and other objects of affection.  How can the happiness of those beings who are dependent on the touch and other objects of the five senses be fulfilled?  It cannot be.  Due to the lack of fulfillment, the thirst for enjoyment remains constant, causing them to be perpetually unhappy.  Although Devas rarely experience physical suffering because they have subtle bodies, they do experience mental suffering.  Mental suffering is far more intense than physical suffering.  Those who experience mental suffering or anxiety find even pleasurable objects and enjoyable things to be painful.  The happiness of the Devas is dependent on the beautiful objects like the celestial wives, their powers, and other attractive things.  Even this object-based happiness becomes a cause of suffering in the future due to the connection with the change in substance (Dravyantara), because the celestial wives have different levels of Leshya, lifespan, and strength compared to the Devas.  Therefore, these celestial wives become a source of suffering in the future.  Similarly, the desired objects that were previously pleasurable also become a cause of suffering when they do not turn out as desired.

"Even in this vast and expansive world, suffering is the only reality.  Who can find happiness in this ocean of suffering?  If one truly examines this reality, how can anyone find happiness in this meaningless world where even the Devas are unhappy?"  This means that all beings are subject to suffering.

**Types of Devas:**  There are four categories of Devas: Bhavanavasi, Vyantara, Jyotishi, and Vaimanika.  Those who reside in palaces are called Bhavanavasi.  There are ten types of Bhavanavasi Devas: Asura Kumar, Naga Kumar, Vidyut Kumar, Suparna Kumar, Agni Kumar, Bata Kumar, Stanit Kumar, Udhadhik Kumar, Dvip Kumar, and Div Kumar.  They are all called Kumar because their dress, weapons, places, vehicles, and games are similar to those of Kumaras.  The palaces of the Asuras are located in the earth's region rich in mud (Panka Bahul), while the palaces of the other nine types of Bhavanavasi Devas are located in the earth's region rich in sand (Khar Bhaga).  Those who reside in various countries are called Vyantara Devas.  There are eight types of Vyantara Devas: Kinnara, Kimpurusha, Mahoraga, Gandharva, Yaksha, Rakshasa, Bhut, and Pishacha.  The residences of seven types of Vyantara Devas are located in the earth's region rich in sand (Khar Bhaga), while the residences of the Rakshasas are located in the earth's region rich in mud (Panka Bahul).  Those who are associated with the celestial sphere are called Jyotishi Devas.  There are five types of Jyotishi Devas: Surya (Sun), Chandra (Moon), Graha (Planets), Nakshatra (Stars), and Prakik (Comets).

1. Commentary by Siddhanta Chakravarti Shrimati Abhaychandra Suri.
2. Swamitekeyanuprekshantaargat Me 69.
3. Pra. Pu. 1, Page 336.
4. Swamikartikeyanupreksha Sansar Bhavana (T. Su. Pra. 4, Su. 1).
5. "Devaschatursikaayah"
6. Sarvarth Siddhi 4/10.
7. Sarvarth Siddhi 4/11.

##  Sansar Bhavana Gatha 58

Page #245:
---------------------------
212/Mo. Sa. Jeevakaant
Gatha 152
"The region of the sky, extending from 790 yojanas above the earth to 900 yojanas, is 110 yojanas thick and extends to countless islands and oceans, up to the wind-circle of the dense ocean. It is inhabited by Jyotishidevas, who are especially known as 'Pushmatma' (those who consider the beings residing in them as souls) and are called 'Vaimanika' (celestial beings) because they reside in two Vimanas (celestial abodes). They are of two types, 'Kalpopapann' (those who are born in the current Kalpa) and 'Kalpaatit' (those who are beyond the current Kalpa). There are 16 heavens in the 'Kalpopapann' category: Saudharma, Aishana, Sanatkumar, Mahendra, Brahma, Brahmottara, Lantava, Kapishtha, Shukra, Mahashukra, Pratar, Sahasrar, Granat, Pranat, Parana, and Achyut. There are 12 Indras (kings) in these 16 heavens, as there are four Indras in the middle four heavens. Above these are nine 'Greveyaka', 'Navanudish', and 'Vijay', 'Vaijayant', 'Jayant', 'Aparajit', and 'Sattarthasiddhi', which are the five 'Anuttara Vimanas' (highest celestial abodes). All these are called 'Kalpaatit' because they have no 'Ahmindra' (chief Indra).

The duration of a being's stay in the 'Devagati' (heavenly realm) ranges from a minimum of 10,000 years to a maximum of 33 'Sagaropam' (ocean-like) years. This is because a being who is born in the 'Devagati' after being born in the 'Tiryanch' (animal) or 'Manushya' (human) realm, and then dies and is reborn in the 'Devagati', stays there for only 10,000 years. On the other hand, a being who is born in the 'Sattarthasiddhi Vimana' after being born in the 'Devagati' for 33 'Sagaropam' years, stays there for that duration.

Doubt: Can a being stay in the 'Devagati' for even longer by experiencing the seven 'Bhava' (states of existence) in the long-lived 'Devas' (gods)?

Solution: No, it is not possible. When a 'Deva', 'Naraki' (hell being), 'Bhogabhumij Tiryanch' (animal of the earth), or 'Bhogabhumij Manushya' (human of the earth) dies, they are not reborn in the same 'Paryaya' (state) immediately after death. This is because there is a complete absence of...

The minimum duration of a being's stay in the 'Devagati' is 'Antarmuhurt' (a fraction of a moment). This is because a being who is born in the 'Tiryanch' or 'Manushya' realm after being born in the 'Devagati', and then dies and is reborn in the 'Devagati' after completing their 'Paryaya' and accumulating 'Devayau' (heavenly lifespan), stays there for only 'Antarmuhurt'. The maximum duration of a being's stay in the 'Devagati' is 'Asankhyat Pudgal Paribartan' (countless particle transformations), which is equivalent to infinite time. This is because there is no obstacle for a being to die in the 'Devagati' and be reborn in the other three 'Gati' (states of existence) after only a fraction of an 'Angul' (finger) of 'Pudgal Paribartan' (particle transformations).

The nature of 'Siddhgati' (state of liberation):

* 'Jaizaramaranabhaya, Sanjogavijogadukkhassannabho |
* Rogadidiga ya jisse, na santi sa hodi Siddhgai ||152||

Meaning: The state of liberation is where there is no birth, old age, death, fear, association, separation, sorrow, perception, or disease. ||152||

Special Note: This Gatha describes the nature of 'Siddh' (liberated beings) within the context of 'Gatimarg' (path of liberation).

1. Sarvarthasiddhi 4/12.
2. Sarvarthasiddhi 4/16.
3. V. Pu. 127 Sutra 26-27 commentary.
4. Pu. 7 p. 186-60.
5. P. Pu. 1 p. 204 and Pra. Pan. San. (Manapith) p. 14 Gatha 64, p. 576 Gatha 65.

Page #246:
---------------------------
## Verse 152
##  Gati Marg Gana/213

The term 'Gati' is used in a metaphorical sense in relation to Siddhas in both Gatha 152 and Dhaval Purana 1, Sutra 24. However, the definition of 'Gati' provided in Gatha 146 and Dhaval Purana 1, pages 134-135, negates the concept of Siddhas having 'Gati', as Siddhas do not experience the emergence of 'Gati' karma. Dhaval Purana 1, page 134, clarifies this by stating that such a definition of 'Gati' does not lead to the contradiction of Siddhas having 'Gati', as they lack the qualities attainable through 'Sikhas' (spiritual practices). Due to the absence of 'Gati' karma emergence, the 'Gati' of Siddhas is called 'Pragati' (progress), or it can be defined as the transition from one existence to another, while the 'Gati' of Siddhas is characterized by non-transition.

Birth is the emergence of one's body-equivalent in different existences due to the influence of karma. The destruction of this body-equivalent through decay is called 'Buddhata' (wisdom). The abandonment of this body-equivalent and life force due to the exhaustion of one's lifespan is called 'Maran' (death). The desire to escape harmful substances due to the fear of suffering is called 'Bhay' (fear). The association with undesirable substances that cause distress is called 'Sanyog' (association). The loss of desirable substances that cause happiness is called 'Vयोग' (separation). The confinement of the soul caused by these experiences is called 'Dukha' (suffering). The desire for the remaining three 'Mahaar' (material possessions), 'Methun' (sexual pleasure), and 'Parigraha' (attachment) is called 'Sanjna' (perception). The 'Gati' of Siddhas is devoid of pain caused by illness, humiliation, death, imprisonment, etc., as these experiences do not arise in their state. This is because the karmas that cause these experiences have been eradicated. The Siddha state is characterized by the attainment of one's inherent qualities, such as knowledge, vision, speech, and strength, which are manifested in the form of the Siddha-equivalent. This Siddha-Gati is attained by the soul that has achieved liberation by eliminating all karmas through the 'Sanvar Nirjara' (purification process) arising from the 'Shukla Dhyan' (white meditation) after being associated with the supreme 'Ratnatraya' (three jewels). This Siddha-Gati is the state of the Siddha-Parameshthi (supreme Siddha) equivalent, achieved through the natural upward movement and attainment of the forefront of the universe.

The attainment of one's true nature, meaning being established in one's true nature with all its qualities, is called 'Siddhi' (perfection). The 'Gati' of such a perfected state is called 'Siddha Gati'. Siddha, Nishthit, Nishpann, Kritkritya, and Siddhasadhya are synonymous terms. Those who have eradicated all karmas, are free from dependence on external objects, possess infinite and unparalleled inherent happiness, are free from opposition, are free from attachments, have attained an unshakeable state, are devoid of all negative qualities, are repositories of all positive qualities, whose physical form (Atma) is slightly less than the 'Charam Sharira' (ultimate body), and reside in the forefront of the universe are called Siddhas.

The Mandalik school believes that the upward movement of the soul is its natural tendency, and therefore, they are constantly moving upwards in space without stopping anywhere. Due to the absence of karmas, there is no obstacle to this natural upward movement. The Acharyas (teachers) state that the accomplishment of a task is due to both internal and external causes. 'Dharmadravya' (spiritual substance) is the external (instrumental) cause, and the natural upward movement is the internal (material) cause. 'Dharmadravya' exists until the end of the universe. Beyond that, 'Dharmadravya' is absent. Therefore, due to the influence of the instrumental cause ('Dharmadravya'), the Siddha Bhagwan (divine Siddha) experiences upward movement.

1. "Siddha Gati is 'Agati' (non-movement) due to the absence of 'Gati' karma emergence. Alternatively, 'Gati' is the transition from one existence to another, while 'Siddha Gati' is 'Pragati' (progress). (Dhaval Purana 7, page 6).
2. "This becomes the Siddha-Parameshthi equivalent." Commentary by Shrimad Abhay Chandrasari on Siddhanta Chakravarti.
3. Dhaval Purana 1, page 203.
4. Dhaval Purana 1, page 200.
5. "Due to the absence of 'Dharmadravya'." (Tattvartha Sutra Prakarana 10, Sutra).

Page #247:
---------------------------
## Chapter 214 / Go. Sa. Jivakanda
**Verses 153-154**

Even though they have power, they are situated in the front part of the world. They do not consider the cause in the occurrence of the Maandalik work, hence this epithet is given for their refutation.

**Number of beings in hell**

The spread of ordinary beings from the lowest to the highest is equal to the second square root of a ghanaangula. The number of beings in the six lower hells, starting from the second, is respectively equal to the jagatchreni divided by the twelfth root, tenth root, eighth root, square root, third root, and second root. The number of beings in the six lower earths is subtracted from the total number of beings in hell, and the remaining number is the number of beings in the first earth.

**Explanation:**

In the Dhavala Granth, the number of beings in hell is described in three ways: in relation to females, in relation to time, and in relation to space. Here, only the number of beings in hell in relation to space is mentioned. In terms of calculation, the number of beings in hell is countless. In terms of time, the number of beings in hell is countable, and they are reduced during the descending and ascending periods. In terms of space, the number of beings in hell is countless, equal to the countless parts of the jagatchreni. The diameter of those jagatchrenis is equal to the square root of the second square root of a sucyangula.

**Doubt:**

In verse 153, it is said that the second square root of a ghanaangula is used, while in the Dhavala Granth, it is said that the square root of the second square root of a sucyangula is used. Why is there a discrepancy between these two texts?

**Solution:**

There is no discrepancy between these two texts, only a difference in words. The number of beings in both cases is the same, there is no difference.

**Doubt:**

How is it the same?

**Solution:**

Multiplying the second square root of a sucyangula by the second square root of a sucyangula gives the first square root of a sucyangula. The first square root of a sucyangula is equal to the second square root multiplied by the second square root, which is again multiplied by the second square root (second square root x second square root x second square root). Multiplying them together gives the cube of the second square root of a sucyangula (second square root of a sucyangula), which is equal to the second square root of a ghanaangula.

1. Dh. Pu. 7 p. 244 Sutra 2-3.
2. Pu. 7. 245 Sutra 4-5.
3. Gh. Pu. 7 p. 246 Sutra 6.

Page #248:
---------------------------
## Verse 153-154
**Gati Marg Rag/215**

**Doubt:** How is this possible?

**Solution:** The square root of the *suchyangula* multiplied by the square root of the *suchyangula* is equal to the square root of the *suchyangula* multiplied by the *suchyangula*. In other words, the square root of " *suchyangula* - *muchyangula* x *suchyangula*". Thus, multiplying the *suchyangula* by itself three times gives the *dhanangula*. The *dhanangula* is the cube of the *suchyangula*. Therefore, it is called the square root of the *dhanangula*. Thus, the value in both the *parshagranthas* is the same, there is no difference.

**Doubt:** In the commentary of *D.Pu.* 7, page 246, sutra 13, it is stated that "by multiplying the first square root of the *jagachhreni* with its twelfth, tenth, eighth, sixth, third, and second square roots, the number of hell beings in the second, third, fourth, fifth, sixth, and seventh earths respectively is obtained." But in the above verse, it is stated that by dividing the *jagachhreni* by its twelfth, tenth, eighth, sixth, third, and second square roots, the number of hell beings in the second and subsequent six hells is obtained. Why is there a contradiction between these two *agamas*?

**Solution:** There is no contradiction between these two *agamas* because the number of hell beings in both *agamas* is the same.

**Doubt:** In the *Dhavala* text, the number is obtained by multiplying the square roots, and in the above verse, the number is obtained by dividing. Multiplication increases the number, and division decreases the number. Therefore, there must be a difference in the number of hell beings in the second and subsequent earths in these two *agamas*?

**Solution:** No, because the value obtained by dividing a large number can also be obtained by multiplying smaller numbers. For example, the number of hell beings in the seventh earth, which is obtained by multiplying the first square root of the *jagachhreni* by its second square root, is the same as the number obtained by dividing the *jagachhreni* by its second square root.

**Doubt:** How is this possible?

**Solution:** It is possible because dividing the *jagachhreni* by its second square root gives the product of its first square root and its second square root. Multiplying the first square root of the *jagachhreni* by its second square root gives the product of its first square root and its second square root. Let's assume that the *jagachhreni* is 'j'. According to algebra, the first square root of 'j' is √j and the second square root is j. Multiplying these together gives j, because the power is added during multiplication (2+1=3). If 'j' is divided by the second square root j, then j is obtained, because the power is subtracted during division (1-2=-1). In numerical terms, the *jagachhreni* is 256. The first square root of 256 is 16 and the second square root is 4. Multiplying these together (16x4) gives 64. Dividing the *jagachhreni* '256' by its second square root 4 (256/4) gives 64. Similarly, the number of hell beings in other earths should be known.

Page #249:
---------------------------
##  Chapter 216,  Jiva Kanda,  Verse 155-156

The Naraki (J.the.) of the second earth are the Naraki (J.shre.) of the third earth. The Naraki (J.the.) of the fourth earth are the Naraki (J.shre.) of the fifth earth. The Naraki (J.shre.) of the sixth earth and the Naraki (J.shre.) of the seventh earth are the same. (All these are J.dhaat). The number of all Naraki is obtained by subtracting all these from the number of Naraki (J.shre.) multiplied by the square root of the second square of Ghanaangul. This number is slightly less than the number of all Naraki. In this way, the number of all Naraki and the number of Naraki on each of the seven earths has been stated.

The number of Tiryanch (non-human) beings is obtained by subtracting the number of beings in the three paths from the total number of beings in the world. The number of Panchendriya (five-sense) Tiryanch beings is obtained by subtracting the number of beings in the three paths from the total number of Panchendriya beings. The number of Panchendriya Tiryanch beings with sufficient karma is obtained by subtracting the number of beings in the three paths from the total number of Panchendriya Tiryanch beings with sufficient karma. The number of Tiryanch beings in the world is divided by the square of six hundred yojanas. The number of Panchendriya Tiryanch beings with sufficient karma is obtained by subtracting the number of Panchendriya Tiryanch beings with sufficient karma from the total number of Panchendriya Tiryanch beings.

**Explanation:** To understand the above statement correctly, it is necessary to know the number of beings in the world, the number of Panchendriya beings, and the number of Panchendriya beings with sufficient karma. The total number of beings is infinite and infinite in many ways.

**"Naam Thavana Dadhiyam Sassava Ganana Paadesiyam Avantum. Ego Ubhaayaadeso Vistharo Samva Bhavo Ya."** (Verse 8)

Name is infinite, establishment is infinite, substance is infinite, eternal is infinite, calculation is infinite, non-local is infinite, one is infinite, both are infinite, expansion is infinite, all is infinite, and existence is infinite. Thus, there are eleven types of infinity.

**Shankara:** Which of these eleven types of infinity is the total number of beings considered infinite?

**Solution:** The total number of beings is considered infinite in terms of calculation infinity. Calculation infinity is of three types: Paritaanant, Yuktaanant, and Anantaanant. 

**1. P. Pu. 3 Pri. 11**

Page #250:
---------------------------
## Verse 156
**Gatimarggana / 217**

Even among infinite numbers, the total number of living beings is infinitely infinite, because in relation to time, the total number of living beings is not diminished by infinite eons of the ascending and descending cycles. This infinitely infinite is of three types: inferior infinitely infinite, superior infinitely infinite, and medium infinitely infinite.

**Doubt:** Which of these three infinitely infinites is the total number of living beings?

**Solution:** The total number of living beings is the medium infinitely infinite, because wherever "infinitely infinite" is mentioned, it refers to the medium infinitely infinite, which is the most excellent in terms of reproduction.

**Doubt:** This medium infinitely infinite is also infinitely infinite in its variations. Which variation is relevant here?

**Solution:** The quantity that arises by going up from the inferior infinitely infinite by an infinite number of square places and down from the superior infinitely infinite by an infinite number of square places is the quantity that is understood by the term "infinitely infinite" here. Alternatively, the quantity that arises by cubing and multiplying the inferior infinitely infinite three times, and then multiplying that quantity by infinity and adding the six substances, is the quantity that is relevant here.

**Doubt:** How do we know that this great quantity, which arises from cubing and multiplying three times, is infinitely less than the total number of living beings?

**Solution:** When we repeatedly square the inferior infinitely infinite, the square place of the total number of living beings arises above the square places below the inferior infinitely infinite, while the square place of the quantity that arises from cubing and multiplying three times arises before that (i.e., it arises above some square places below the inferior infinitely infinite). This shows that the square places of the quantity that arises from cubing and multiplying three times are infinitely less than the square place of the total number of living beings. Therefore, the quantity itself is also infinitely less.

The point is that there is a contradiction in considering a quantity that is finite and can be exhausted as infinite. Such a statement does not lead to the fault of contradiction with the half-pudgala transformation, because the infinite nature of the pudgala transformation is considered as a remedy.

**Doubt:** What is the quantity in which the six substances are added?

**Solution:** The quantity that arises from cubing and multiplying three times should be added to the six infinite quantities: Siddhas, Nigoda-jiva, Vanaspatikayika, Pudgala, Time, and Aloka-akasha.

**[Verse 312 from the Tattvartha Prajnapti]**

"Siddhas, Nigoda-jiva, Vanaspatikayika, Pudgala, Time, and Aloka-akasha, these six are the infinite quantities."

**[Footnotes]**

1. "The number of living beings is infinite, because they are not diminished by time, even with the ascending and descending cycles." [Tattvartha Rahasya, 3.28]
2. "Wherever infinite is mentioned..." [Pravacana Purva, 3, p. 27]
3. [Pravacana Purva, 3, p. 16]

Page #251:
---------------------------
## English Translation:

**218 /Mo. Sar. Jiva Kanda**
**Verse 156**

When these six quantities are combined, they become the six dravya prakshipta rashi. Thus, the number of jivas is equal to the infinite multiple of the three-times-classified and categorized rashi, minus the infinite multiple of the six dravya prakshipta rashi. This is the medium anantanant.

**Doubt:** It is not appropriate to say that "jivas are not taken away by the infinite number of avasarpinis and utsarpinis," because the number of jivas is infinitely greater than the number of kalas? It is also said:

**Dhammya maagas nini vi tulaa honti thovaani. Astig jiva-poggal-kalaagasaa pranatgunaa ||16||**

**Meaning:** "Even though the dharmadravya, adharmadravya, and lokaakasha have equal regions, they are still small. The number of jivas is infinitely greater than them. The number of pudgalas is infinitely greater than that, the number of kalas is infinitely greater than that, and the region of akasha is infinitely greater than that." From this, it is known that even if the number of jivas ends, the number of kalas cannot end, because the number of kalas is infinitely greater than the number of jivas.

**Solution:** This is not a fault, because in calculating the number of jivas, the entire seed is measured by the past kala, which is like the measure of a piece of wood used to measure grain. There are three types of prastahs: anagat, vartaman, and atit. The one that has not yet been produced is the anagat prastah, the one that is being produced is the vartaman prastah, and the one that has been produced and is fit for use is the atit prastah. There is a verse that says:

**Patyo tiha vihato aragaagado vattamaraativo ya. Evesu avoshena tu mijjie sab bijam tu ||20||**

**Meaning:** "There are three types of prastahs: anagat, vartaman, and atit. The entire seed is measured by the atit prastah." Similarly, there are three types of kalas: anagat, vartaman, and atit. The entire number of jivas is known by the past kala. It is also said:

**"Kalo tiha vihato pranagayo battamaashatido ya. Edesu pradideena du mijjide jivaraasi vu ||21||**

**Meaning:** "There are three types of kalas: anagat, vartaman, and atit. The entire number of jivas is known by the past kala." Therefore, the number of jivas does not end, but the entire time of the past kala ends. This is known from the alpabahutva of the sixteen rashi. This alpabahutva of the sixteen rashi is as follows: the vartaman kala is the smallest. The number of abhavya jivas is infinitely greater than the vartaman kala. The number of abhavya jivas is infinitely greater than the number of...

**1. Dh. Pu. 3 p. 24-25-26. 2. Dh. Pu. 3 p. 26. 3. Gh. Pu. 3 p. 26. 4. Dh. Pu. 3 p. 21.**

Page #252:
---------------------------
## Gatha 156
**Gatimarganga/216**

The Siddhakal is infinite times greater than the Siddha number. The Siddha number is infinite times greater than the Siddha beings. The Asiddhakal is infinitely greater than the past time. Or, multiplying the Siddha number by the number of Siddhas gives the measure of the past time. The Bhanvamithyashti beings are infinitely greater than the past time. The Bhavya Mithyashti beings are infinitely greater than the Bhavya beings. The Bhavya beings are infinitely greater than the common Mithyashti beings. The common Mithyashti beings are infinitely greater than the Samsari beings. The Samsari beings are infinitely greater than the total beings, which are infinitely greater than the Siddha beings. The Pudgala dravya is infinitely greater than the total beings. Here, the multiplier is infinite times greater than the total beings. The Anagatakal is infinitely greater than the Pudgala dravya. Here, the multiplier is infinite times greater than the total Pudgala dravya. The total time is infinitely greater than the Anagatakal. The Alokaakash is infinitely greater than the total time. Here, the multiplier is infinite times greater than the total time. The total Akash is infinitely greater than the Alokaakash. Thus, it is evident from this small amount that the total beings are infinitely greater than the perceived time. Therefore, the entire time of the perceived time is exhausted, but the total beings are not exhausted. Even if the Samsari beings are exhausted, the Mithyashti beings are not completely destroyed. If the total beings are exhausted by infinite infinite Avasarpini and Utsarpini, then the destruction of all Bhavya beings comes into question.

**Doubt:** How is the past time exhausted?

**Solution:** By establishing the times of infinite infinite Avasarpini and Utsarpini on one hand, and the Mithyashti beings on the other, one should reduce one time from the times of the Kal and one being from the number of Mithyashti beings in the same way. In this way, by continuously reducing the time of the Kal and the number of beings, all the times of infinite infinite Avasarpini and Utsarpini are exhausted, but the number of Mithyashti beings is not exhausted.

The number of Samsari beings is obtained by subtracting the number of Siddha beings (perceived time multiplied by the number of Siddhas) from the total beings (which is medium infinite infinite). By subtracting the number of Naraki, the number of humans, and the number of Devas from the number of Samsari beings, the number of common Tiryanch beings is obtained, which is infinite and slightly less than the number of Samsari beings. The number of Tiryanch beings is also not exhausted by infinite infinite Avasarpini and Utsarpini.

The Panchendriya beings are Asankhyata Asankhyata. They are not even the lowest Asankhyata Asankhyata, nor the highest Asankhyata Asankhyata, but they are the medium Asankhyata Asankhyata. That is, the number of Panchendriya beings is equal to the quotient obtained by dividing the Jagatpratar by the square of the number of parts of a Sucyangula. Or, the number of Panchendriya beings is equal to the square of the quotient obtained by dividing the Sucyangula by the Asankhyata part of a Pavali.

Page #253:
---------------------------
## Chapter 220/Go. Sa. Jivakanda
## Verse 156

The number of five-sensed beings is obtained by dividing the total number of beings by the square of the known part of the "Suchyangal" (a unit of measurement). From this, subtracting the countless number of hell beings, countless gods, and countless humans, the number of five-sensed animals is obtained.

Dividing the "Jagatpratar" (the total lifespan of the universe) by the square of the known part of the "Suchyangal", the number of five-sensed beings is obtained, which is "Madhyam Prasankhyata-sankhyat" (a very large number). From this, subtracting the number of hell beings, humans, and gods, the number of five-sensed beings is obtained.

Multiplying the lifespan of the gods by the number of "Sankhyatarupas" (a unit of time), the lifespan of five-sensed animals is obtained. Alternatively, squaring the number of "Angulas" (finger widths) in six hundred "Yojanas" (a unit of distance), the lifespan of five-sensed animals is 2123 "Koda-kodi", 36 "Kodi-lakh", and 64 "Kodi-hazar" (2123,36,64,0000000000) "Pratarangulas".

This lifespan of five-sensed animals is not consistent with the teachings of many Acharyas (teachers), as the lifespan of "Vyantar" (a type of god) is only the square of the number of "Angulas" in three hundred "Yojanas".

**Doubt:** How do we know that the lifespan of five-sensed animals mentioned earlier is incorrect and the lifespan of "Vyantar" gods is correct?

**Solution:** There is no definitive answer to this question. It is possible that one of the two lifespans is incorrect, or both are incorrect.

The original sutras (aphorisms) of the "Patkhandagam" state that the "Jagatpratar" is reduced by the number of five-sensed animals multiplied by the lifespan of the gods, in relation to the "Kshetra" (space). The lifespan of the gods is the square of 256 "Angulas". The number of gods is obtained by dividing the "Jagatpratar" by the square of 256 "Angulas" in relation to the "Kshetra".

According to Shri Nemichandra Siddhantachkravarti, the number of five-sensed beings is obtained by dividing the "Jagatpratar" by the square of 600 "Yojanas". The number of five-sensed animals is countless in relation to the "Dravyapraman" (substance), and countless-countless in relation to the "Kal" (time). In relation to the "Kshetra", the number of five-sensed animals is countless times less than the lifespan of the gods.

1. "Khettena Panchitiemu Padaram Avahiradi Prasangulam Samsa Ujjad Bhag Bagga Padimasha ||22|| [3, p. 3 p. 314; Dh. Pu. 7 p. 27. Sutra 64]
2. Dh. Pu. 7 p. 253
3. Pa. Pu. 3 p. 230
4. Pa. Pu. 3 p. 231
5. Dh. Pu. 3 p. 230 Sutra 35, Dh. Pu. 7 p. 253 Sutra 21
6. Dh. Pu. 7 p. 260 Sutra 33, Dh. Pu. 3 p. 268 Sutra 55

Page #254:
---------------------------
## Gatha 157-159

**Gati Margna / 221**

The world is destroyed by the door.  Dividing the countless parts of the Avali by 65,536 (256 squared), the number of Pratarangul Devas, gives the time of destruction for the insufficient five-sense beings.  Subtracting the sufficient five-sense beings from the total number of five-sense Tiryanchas, we get the number of five-sense beings who are capable of attaining liberation.

**Doubt:** Why are only the sufficient five-sense beings subtracted from the total number of five-sense Tiryanchas? The number of five-sense Tiryancha births should also be reduced, as the five-sense Tiryancha births are also sufficient.

**Solution:** No, the sufficient five-sense Tiryanchas include all three types of beings who have attained the Vedas. Therefore, the number of five-sense Tiryancha births is also included in the number of sufficient five-sense Tiryanchas.

Thus, the numerical representation of the Tiryancha Gati is complete.

The number of humans, sufficient humans, human females, and insufficient humans is as follows:

**Gatha 157:** Dividing the Jagatchreni by the square root of the first and third parts of the Sucyangula, and subtracting one from the result, gives the number of ordinary humans. The number of sufficient humans is equal to the fifth power of the square root.

**Gatha 158:** The number of sufficient humans is as follows: six, three, three, zero, five, nine, three, four, five, three, nine, five, one, three, three, four, six, two, four, one, five, two, six, one, eight, two, two, nine, and seven.

**Gatha 159:** The number of human females is three-fourths (3/4) of the number of sufficient humans. Subtracting the number of sufficient humans from the total number of humans gives the number of insufficient humans.

**Special Note:** In the human Gati, the number of human beings is countless in terms of their material form. In terms of time, humans:

1. Are countless in terms of their material form.
2. Are countless in terms of their births and deaths.
3. Are countless in terms of their births and deaths, and their time of destruction.
4. Are countless in terms of their births and deaths, their time of destruction, and their time of liberation.
5. Are countless in terms of their births and deaths, their time of destruction, their time of liberation, and their time of attaining the Vedas.

Page #255:
---------------------------
222/Go. Sa. Jivakanda
Verses 157-156: Countless numbers of Avasarpini-Utsarpini are abducted. The measure of the human population is obtained by multiplying the square root of the first class of the angula by the square root of its third class and dividing the Jagachchreni by it, and adding one. Subtracting one from this gives the number of humans.
Question: Why is one subtracted?
Answer: Since the Jagachchreni is a Kritayugma quantity and the human population is a Tejoja quantity, dividing the Jagachchreni by the human population with one added to it gives the square root of the first class of the angula multiplied by the square root of the third class.
Question: What are the quantities 'Kritayugma' and 'Tejoja'?
Answer: A quantity that is divisible by four is a Kritayugma quantity. A quantity that leaves a remainder of three when divided by four is a Tejoja quantity. It is also said:
_ Chaudas badaramma solas kadajumme ratha kaliyojo.
Teras sejojo khalu pannerasevam va visneya. ||3|| Meaning: Fourteen should be known as Badaryugma, sixteen as Kritayugma, thirteen as Kaliloja, and fifteen as Tejoja.
Adding one to the Tejoja quantity makes it a Kritayugma quantity. For example, adding one to the Tejoja quantity of 15 (15 + 1) makes it 16, a Kritayugma quantity, by which the Kritayugma Jagachchreni is divisible.
_ Dividing the Jagachchreni by the square root of the first class of the angula and the square root of the third class leaves the measure of the Jagachchreni as countless yojana koti. Thus, the measure of the general human population is proven to be medium countless countless.
The number of humans sufficient is between the sixth class and the seventh class in the Dvirupavargadhara, that is, above countless countless countless and below countless countless countless. Although this is a general statement, according to the traditional teachings of the Acharya, the human population sufficient is the cube of the fifth class (fifth class x fifth class x fifth class - sixth class x fifth class).
To know which number is represented by which letter from the alphabet starting with 'ta', know the following verse:
1. "Asankhejjasaankhejjahhi osappini-ussappinihi ahirnti kalena" P.Pu. 7 p. 255 Sutra 24. 2. "Manusamanu apjjataehi rucam ruvapaklittaehi sedi abahridi angulabamgamule tadiyasvammamulegurinde rana" D.Pu. 7 p. 256 Sutra 27. 3. "Jo rasi chaduhi pahirijjadi so kadajummo. Jo tigammo so tejojo." G. Pu. 10 p. 22-23. 4. P. Pu. 10 p. 23. 5. "Tisse mediye prayamo asanvejjayo jovarakodhimro" G. Pu. 7 p. 256 Sutra 27. 6. "Manusapjjatta dabdapamane na kodakodakoddie uri kodakodakolakodie hetado chanhvargaaragamuvari sattanhvamgaae helado" D. Pu. 7 p. 257; D. Pu. 3 p. 253.

Page #256:
---------------------------
## Verse 157-156

**Description of the Katpa:**

The Katpa is described in the forest, with eight divisions, arranged in order. The vowels, the letter "N" and the number "zero" are to be discarded, as they do not convey any meaning.

**Gati Ma Ganga/223**

**Meaning:**

From the letters (K, Kh, G, Gh, Ng, Ch, Chh, J, Jh) in order, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, T, Th, D, Dh, N, T, Th, D, Dh in order, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 6, P, Ph, B, Bh, M in order, 1, 2, 3, 4, 1, Y, R, L, V, S, H, one should take the number of syllables. The vowels, "T" and "N" are indicators of zero. They should be discarded, as they do not convey any meaning.

1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8 are the measures and the letters above them.

The statement that the human population is equal to the cube of the fifth category (clouds) is not justified, because it contradicts the sutra of the Shatkhandagama, "There are countless human beings above and below countless countless countless." The cube of the fifth category (clouds) is 26 digits, but by placing 21 zeros after one, we get countless countless, which is 22 digits, and by placing 28 zeros after one, we get countless countless countless, which is 29 digits. However, the cube of the fifth category, even though it is 26 digits, exceeds this number called countless countless countless. Secondly, if the human population is equal to the cube of the fifth category (clouds), then this population should fit in the human region (616708466666416200000000 pratirangal). If we multiply the number of human beings, 76228162514264337563543650336, by the pratirangal, then we will have to multiply the human region by the same number.

**Doubt:**

The area of the human region is obtained from the pratirangal, how can the human population, which is only a fraction of the pratirangal, fit in it?

**Solution:**

This doubt is not valid, because the human population, which is the most dense (3 kos), has a mouth expansion in the form of a multiplier of the pratirangal. Similarly, the human population cannot fit in the Jambudvipa-sized aircraft of the Sarvarthasiddhi gods, because it contradicts the assumption that the gods, with their dense population, can reside there. Therefore, one should accept that the human population is greater than one countless countless.

Three-fourths of the human population are women, and one-fourth are men and eunuchs. The word "manushini" should not be taken to mean dravyastri, i.e., women, because dravyastri cannot give up clothes, and clothes are inseparable from non-restraint. Therefore, dravyastri can only have the fifth guna sthana, which is restraint and non-restraint, but not restraint. However, manushini can have restraint.

1. Go. Ji. Ka. Ga. 158, Samyaggyanachandrika commentary. 2. Dh. Pu. 3, p. 25.5. 3. Shra. Pu. 3, p. 158. 4. Va. Pu. 7, p. 256.

Page #257:
---------------------------
224/Go.Sa. Jivakanda
Gatha 157-116

Even after subtracting the number of humans who are sufficient in terms of the number of humans from the J. श्रे. (J. श्रे. is a Jain term referring to a specific category of beings) divided by the first and third square roots of the index finger, the number of insufficient humans is still countless. Therefore, the number of insufficient humans is countless in comparison to the number of sufficient humans. Here, we should consider the humans who are potentially sufficient, not the eternally sufficient ones. In terms of time, the number of potentially sufficient humans is countless, being taken away by countless numbers of Avapinis and Utsapinis (Avapinis and Utsapinis are Jain terms referring to specific types of beings). In terms of space, the number of potentially sufficient humans is equal to the countless parts of the J. श्रे. The diameter of the countless parts of the J. श्रे. is countless crores of yojanas (yojana is a unit of distance).

The first square root of the index finger is placed in a garland-like form with the third square root, and the Jagachchreni (Jagachchreni is a Jain term referring to a specific category of beings) is taken away by the potentially sufficient humans who are more than the form.

Shaha - The diameter of the countless parts of the J. श्रे. is countless crores of yojanas. Why is the countless part of the श्रेणी ( श्रेणी is a Jain term referring to a specific category of beings) called श्रेणी here?

Solution - The countless part of the J. श्रे. is also called श्रेणी because the tendency of the name of the component is seen in the component. For example, if a part of a village is burnt, it is said that the village has burnt down. Or, we should make this kind of connection that the diameter of the countless part of the श्रेणी is countless crores of yojanas. In all three places, "Apjattaehi Rubpakkhittaehi Ruva Pakkhittaehi Ruvam Pakkhittaehi", we should project the number of humans who are potentially sufficient in any mind. Again, after subtracting the number of potentially sufficient humans from the obtained number, we get the number of potentially insufficient humans. By multiplying the first square root of the index finger by the third square root and dividing the J. श्रे. by the obtained quotient, we get the number of ordinary humans by subtracting one from the quotient. And by subtracting the number of sufficient humans from this, we get the number of potentially sufficient humans.

Alpabahutva (Alpabahutva is a Jain term referring to the relative scarcity of beings)

Ayogakevali (Ayogakevali is a Jain term referring to a specific type of being) humans are the most scarce. They are outnumbered by the four (4-6-10-11) Gunasthanavarti (Gunasthanavarti is a Jain term referring to a specific category of beings) Upshamaka (Upshamaka is a Jain term referring to a specific type of being). The four (8-6-10-12) Gunasthanavarti Kshapaka (Kshapaka is a Jain term referring to a specific type of being) are outnumbered by the Upshamaka. Sayogakevali (Sayogakevali is a Jain term referring to a specific type of being) are outnumbered by the four Kshapaka. Apramattasanyata (Apramattasanyata is a Jain term referring to a specific type of being) humans are outnumbered by the Sayogakevali. Pramattasanyata (Pramattasanyata is a Jain term referring to a specific type of being) humans are outnumbered by the Apramattasanyata. Sanyatasanyata (Sanyatasanyata is a Jain term referring to a specific type of being) humans are outnumbered by the Pramattasanyata. Sasadan Samyagdristi (Sasadan Samyagdristi is a Jain term referring to a specific type of being) humans are outnumbered by the Sanyatasanyata. Samyagmithyashti (Samyagmithyashti is a Jain term referring to a specific type of being) humans are outnumbered by the Sasadan Samyagdristi. Asanyata 
1. "Manusa Apjatta Danvapamaneṇa Kevaḍiga? Asankhejjā ॥५॥" Gh. Pu. 3 P. 262. 2. P. Pu. 3 P. 262. 3. "Asanvejjaasakshetraahi Prosappisa-Umssappinihi Avahiramti Kalena" Dh, Pu. 3 P. 262 Sutra 51. 4. "Khetena Seṭiae Asankhejjadhibhago. Tissa Seḍiae Ayamo Asankhejjamro Joyaga-Koḍimo. Manusa-Apjattaehi Ruya Pashyitehi Seṭimbahuradi Angula Baggamulaṁ Tadayavangamulagurina Deṇa ॥५२॥" P.pu. 3 P. 262. 5. Dh.pu. 3 P. 263-264.

Page #258:
---------------------------
**Gatha 160-163**

The number of Samyakdrishti humans is multiplied by the number of Asamyakt Samyakdrishti humans. The number of Asamyakt Samyakdrishti humans is multiplied by the number of Mithyadrishti humans. The number of Mithyadrishti humans is multiplied by the number of Mithyadrishti women. The lifespan of the Asamyakt humans is multiplied by an uncountable number. The number of Asamyakt humans is uncountable. The number of Samyakdrishti, etc., beings in the human realm is multiplied by the number of Samyakdrishti, etc., beings in the women's realm. This is because, due to the lack of proper Vedic knowledge, many beings do not attain Samyaktva.

**Doubt:** How is this known?

**Solution:** The Sutra states that "The number of Asamyakt Samyakdrishti beings in the neuter gender is the least, the number of Asamyakt Samyakdrishti beings in the female gender is uncountably more, and the number of Asamyakt Samyakdrishti beings in the male gender is uncountably more." This Sutra indicates that the number of beings in the female gender is less, and therefore, the number of Samyakdrishti, etc., beings in the female gender is also less. However, the exact number of Samyakdrishti, etc., beings in the female gender is not known because there is no such teaching available in this time.

The number of beings in the Devati realm is obtained by dividing the square of three hundred yojanas for the Vyantar Devas and the square of two hundred and fifty-six angulas for the Jyotishi Devas. ||160|| The number of Bhavanavasi Devas is obtained by multiplying the square root of the first cube of the ghana angula by the J.Shre. and the number of Saudharma-Ishana Devas is obtained by multiplying the J.Shre. by the cube root of the third cube of the ghana angula. ||161|| The number of Devas in the five Kalpa Yugas from the third (Sanatkumar) Kalpa to the twelfth (Sahasrar) Kalpa is obtained by dividing the J.The. by the eleventh, ninth, seventh, fifth, and fourth square roots of their respective J.Ve. The number of Devas in the Anatadi (26 Vimanas) is an uncountable fraction of the Paly. ||162|| The number of Sarvarthasiddhi Devas is three or seven times the number of women, and the number of general Devas is slightly more than the number of Jyotishi Devas. ||163||

Page #259:
---------------------------
## Chapter 226/Go. Ma. Jivakanda
## Verses 160-163

**Question:** How many Devas are there in the Deva-Gati, based on the amount of Dravya?

**Answer:** There are countless Devas in the Deva-Gati, based on the amount of Dravya. Here, by "countless" we should understand that it is neither countable nor infinite.

**Question:** How many Devas are there in relation to the Kshetra?

**Answer:** The number of Devas in relation to the Kshetra is obtained by dividing the Jagat-Pratara by the square of two hundred and fifty-six Angulas.

"Angula" is a general term, but here it refers to the "Suchy-Angula". The square of 256 Suchy-Angulas is 65,536 Pratara-Angulas. Dividing the Jagat-Pratara by this gives the measure of the number of Devas. Thus, the number of Devas is proven to be of the "A-Jghanya-Anutkrista" (medium) "Asankhyata-Sankhyata" measure.

**Question:** How many Devas are there in relation to time (Kala)?

**Answer:** In relation to time, the number of Devas is "Asankhyata-Sankhyata", and they are removed by the "Avasapini-Utsapinis".

Thus, the measure of the number of Devas has been explained in relation to Dravya, Kshetra, and Kala in general. Subsequently, the separate measures of the Bhavan-Vasi, Van-Vyantara, Jyotishi, and Vaimanika Devas will be explained.

**Question:** How many Bhavan-Vasi Devas are there, based on the amount of Dravya?

**Answer:** There are countless Bhavan-Vasi Devas, based on the amount of Dravya.

**Question:** How many Bhavan-Vasi Devas are there in relation to the Kshetra?

**Answer:** The number of Bhavan-Vasi Devas in relation to the Kshetra is "Asankhyata-Jagat-Chheeni", which is equal to the "Asankhyana"th part of the Jagat-Pratara. This can be obtained by multiplying the Suchy-Angula by the square root of the Suchy-Angula. In other words, multiplying the Suchy-Angula by its first square root (Suchy-Angula first square root x Suchy-Angula first square root x Suchy-Angula first square root) gives the first square root of the "Ghan-Angula". This is the "Vishkambha-Suchi" of the J.Shre. Multiplying the Jagat-Chheeni by this "Vishkambha-Suchi" gives the measure of the Bhavan-Vasi Devas.

**Question:** How many Bhavan-Vasi Devas are there in relation to time (Kala)?

**Answer:** In relation to time, the number of Bhavan-Vasi Devas is "Asankhyata-Sankhyata", and they are removed by the "Avasapini-Utsapinis".

**References:**

1. Dh. Pu. 7, p. 252, Sutra 30-31
2. Shra. Pu. 7, p. 260, Sutra 33
3. "Magul-Midi Kuttae Eltha Suchin Gul-am Bettava" - P. Pu. 3, p. 268, Sutra 55, Commentary
4. Va. Pu. 7, p. 260-61
5. 3. Pu. 7, p. 260, Sutra 32
6. P. Pu. 7, p. 261-262, Sutra 37-38
7. Gh. Pu. 3, p. 271, Sutra 55, Commentary
8. Gh. Pu. 7

Page #260:
---------------------------
**Gaya 160.163**
**Gatimayana/227**

**Question:** How many Vaanavyantaradevas are there in terms of Dravya Pramaan?

**Answer:** The number of Vaanavyantaradevas is countless in terms of Dravya Pramaan.

**Question:** What is the number of Vaanavyantaradevas in relation to the Kshetra?

**Answer:** The number of Vaanavyantaradevas in relation to the Kshetra is obtained by dividing the Jagatpratar by the square of one hundred yojanas.

**Note:** "One hundred yojanas" refers to the number obtained by squaring the angulas of three hundred yojanas, which is (53084160000000000).

**Question:** How many Vaanavyantaradevas are there in relation to time?

**Answer:** The number of Vaanavyantaradevas in relation to time is countless, as they are destroyed by the countless number of Avasarpini and Utsarpini cycles.

**Note:** If the lifespan of a Tiryanchi is the square of six hundred yojanas multiplied by the appropriate number, then the lifespan of a Vaanavyantaradeva could be the square of three hundred yojanas multiplied by the appropriate number. If the lifespan of a Panchendriya Tiryanchi is the square of six hundred yojanas (Ma. 156), then the lifespan of a Vaanavyantaradeva should be the number of squares of three hundred yojanas, otherwise it would contradict the principle of "Alpबहुत्व". The number of Vaanavyantaradevas is obtained by dividing the Jagatpratar by the lifespan mentioned above.

**Question:** What is the number of Jyotishis in relation to the Dravyathikanaya?

**Answer:** The number of Jyotishis in relation to the Dravyathikanaya is the same as the number of general Devas, which is the Jagatpratar divided by the square of 256 Suchi Angulas. However, there is a difference in relation to the Paryayathikanaya. The Vaanavyantaradevas and other Devas are a fraction of the Jyotishis. When the number of general Devas is divided by this fraction, a number is obtained. This number is then thinned out, and the general Devas are divided into equal parts. For each part of the thinned-out number, there is a number of Vaanavyantaradevas and other Devas. When this number is subtracted from the general Devas, the number of Jyotishis is obtained.

**Note:** By dividing the lifespan of a Deva by one less than the lower thinning, a fraction of the number of Pratarangalas is obtained. This fraction is added to the lifespan of the Deva to obtain the lifespan of a Jyotishi.

**As mentioned earlier, the number of Jyotishis is the Jagatpratar divided by the square of 256 Suchi Angulas.**

**References:**

1. P.P. 7, p. 262-63, Sutra 40-41.
2. P.P. 7, p. 263, Sutra 43.
3. "संवेज्जोयगणेत्ति वुत्ते तिपिणजोयणसय मंगुलं काऊरण पग्गिदे जो उप्पज्जदि ससी सो घेत्तम्वो" (P.P. 3, p. 273, Sutra 63 commentary).
4. D.P. 7, p. 263, Sutra 42.
5. "बाररावेंतरदेवा संखेजगुरा" (D.P. 7, p. 585, Sutra 40).
6. C.P. 3, p. 273-74.
7. "जोइसियदेवा देवगईणं मंगो" [D.P. 3, p. 275, Sutra 65].
8. D.P. 3, p. 275-76, Sutra 65 commentary.
9. P.P. 3, p. 276, Sutra 65 commentary.

Page #261:
---------------------------
##  220 / Go. Sa. Jivakanda
##  Gaya 160-163

The **Jagatpratar** is a measure, but if this division belongs to the **Samanyadevas**, then by dividing the **Pratarangul** by the number of **Prataranguls** in the **Avaharkal** of the **Samanyadevas**, which is 256 **Suchyangul** squared, we get the **Avaharkal** of the **Jyotishis** (astronomers). Dividing the **Jagatpratar** by this **Avaharkal** gives us the measure of the **Jyotishis**.

**Doubt:** How many **Saudharma** and **Aishana** **Kalpavasis** are there in terms of **Dravyapraman**?

**Solution:** The **Saudharma** and **Aishana** **Kalpavasis** are **asankhyat** (innumerable) in terms of **Dravyapraman**.

**Doubt:** How many **Saudharma** and **Aishana** **Kalpavasis** are there in terms of **Kshetra** (space)?

**Solution:** In terms of **Kshetra**, the **Saudharma** and **Aishana** **Kalpavasis** are **asankhyat** **Jagatchrenis** (innumerable **Jagatchrenis**) or are equal to the **asankhyat** part of the **Jagatpratar**. The **Vishkambhasuchi** (diameter) of these **asankhyat** **Jagatchrenis** is equal to the **Suchyangul** squared multiplied by the cube root of the **Suchyangul**.

Multiplying the **Suchyangul** squared (cube root of **Suchyangul** x cube root of **Suchyangul**) by the cube root of **Suchyangul** - (cube root of **Suchyangul** x **Suchyangul** squared x cube root of **Suchyangul**) - we get the cube root of **Nagul**. Therefore, the **Saudharma** and **Aishana** **Kalpas** have **Devas** equal to the cube root of **Ghanangul**.

**Doubt:** How many **Saudharma** and **Aishana** **Kalpavasis** are there in terms of **Kal** (time)?

**Solution:** In terms of **Kal**, the **Saudharma** and **Aishana** **Kalpavasis** are **asankhyatasankhyat** (innumerably innumerable) and are **Apahrita** (taken away) by the **Avasarpini** and **Utsarpini** (descending and ascending cycles).

**Doubt:** What is the measure of the **Devas** from **Sanatkumar** to the **Sahasrar Kalpa**?

**Solution:** The measure of the **Devas** from **Sanatkumar** to the **Sahasrar Kalpa** is equal to the **asankhyat** part of the **J. Shre.** (**Jagatchreni**). In terms of **Samany** (general), there is no difference between the **asankhyat** part of the **J. Shre.** and the **Narakas** (hells) of the seventh **Prithvi** (earth). In terms of **Vishesh** (specific), there is a difference, because here we have the **J. Shre.** divided by the square roots of the eleventh, ninth, seventh, fifth, and fourth **J. Shre.** respectively.

This means that in the **Sanatkumar** and **Mahendra Kalpas**, the **J. Shre.** is divided by the eleventh square root; in the **Brahma** and **Brahmottar Kalpas**, it is divided by the ninth square root; in the **Lantav** and **Apishta Kalpas**, it is divided by the seventh square root; in the **Shukra** and **MahaShukra Kalpas**, it is divided by the fifth square root; and in the **Shatar** and **Sahasrar Kalpas**, it is divided by the fourth square root. This is the measure of the **Devarashi** (number of **Devas**).

**Doubt:** How many **Vimana** (flying vehicles) **Devas** are there from **Pranta** (border) to **Aparajit Vimana** (unconquerable **Vimana**) in terms of **Dravyapraman**?

**Solution:** The **Vimana** **Devas** from **Pranta** to **Aparajit Vimana** are equal to the **asankhyat** part of the **Patyopam** in terms of **Dravyapraman**. Here, the **Antarmuhurta** (inner moment) is **Apahrita** (taken away) by the **Patyopam**.

**Notes:**

1. Dh. Pu. 7, p. 264, Sutra 45-46.
2. Dh. Pu. 7, p. 265, Sutra 40-50.
3. Va. Pu. 7, p. 265, Sutra 50.
4. Dh. Pu. 7, p. 264, Sutra 47.
5. Gh. Pu. 7, p. 266.
6. Pa. Pu. 7, p. 266, Sutra 52-54.

Page #262:
---------------------------
Maya 164
Indriyamargna/26
Here, the proof of Antarmuhurt of Asankhyatva Bhaga or Sannyat Pravalias is not there. Although there is Antarmuhurt of Sannyat Pravalias, but there is no contradiction in the Antarmuhurt of Asankhyat Pravalias by treating the cause in the work.
Sarvarth Siddhi Vimanavasi Dev are Sannyat in terms of Dravyapraman. Here, the proof of Sannyat is to know three times more than Manushinis.
Thus, Gommatsar Jivakand in Hatha Gatimargna Adhikar is complete.
7. Indriya-Margna Adhikar
The meaning of Indriya is "Ahmida Jah Deva, Pravisensam Ahmham Ti Mannata.
Isanti Ekkaek, Inva Iv Indie Jana ||164|| Gatharth Just as Ahmindradeva, without any special quality, believe "I am Indra, I am Indra", in this way, each one considers himself as the master, in the same way, Indriyas should be known. ||1641||
Vishesharth-Indra, there is no difference in Samanik etc., therefore, there is no special quality in Kalpatit Grambayak etc. Vimanavasi Ahmindradeva, therefore, each one, independently, in his own business, believes himself to be "I am", and each one, separately, acts without the priority of master-servant. In the same way, without the difference of inferiority and superiority, the Indriyas like touch etc., also, in taking their own touch etc. objects, believe themselves to be "I am", and act independently, without the expectation of others, each Indriya acts with its own mastery. The touch Indriya does not have the expectation of the taste Indriya in knowing its own touch object. In the same way, the taste etc. Indriyas also, without the expectation of other Indriyas, know their own objects by nature.
Indan means being powerful, therefore, here the meaning of the word Indra is Atma, and the Ling (sign) of Indra (Atma) is called Indriya. That which is made from Indra (Namakarma), is Indriya."
Indriyas are engaged only in their own fixed objects, i.e., they work only in their fixed objects, therefore, they are free from Sankara and Vyatikar doshas. Their own object is called their own object, in which they are engaged only in their own object, without any inclination towards the objects of other Indriyas, with certainty, i.e., they are Indriyas.
Or, those who are engaged in their own Vritti, are Indriyas. The explanation of this is that
1. P. Pu. 7 P. 267. 2. P. Pu. 3 P. 286. 3. Gh. Pu. 1 P. 137. Pra. Pan. San. (Gyanapith) P. 14 Tha. 65, P. 576 Ga. 66. 4. Siddhanta Chakravarti Shrimdbhayachandramuri Krit Tika. 5. Dh. Pu. 1 P. 233.

Page #263:
---------------------------
230/Go. Sa. Jivakanda
Verse 165: The tendency to make decisions about doubt and wrong knowledge is called vritti. They are engrossed in their own vritti, therefore they are indriyas.
Doubt: When the indriyas do not engage in their objects, then in the state of non-engagement, will they not be able to obtain the designation of indriya?
Solution: It is not correct to say so, because due to the force of rudhi, even in such a state of non-engagement, there is indriya behavior in them. . . .
Or, those who are engrossed in their own objects are indriyas. "Aryate" means the object that is determined. Those who engage in their own object-like object are indriyas. Or, they are called indriyas because they have independent dominion over their own independent objects.
The distinction of indriyas and their nature was explained in detail by Madin Yadanorupa.
Bhavidiyam tu Davam, Dehudayajayehachinha tu ||16|| Verse Meaning: The purity arising from the destruction and pacification of the Matijnanaavaran karma is the Bhavaindriya, and the marks arising in the body from the body-karma-udaya are the Dravyendriyas. ||165||
Special Meaning: There are two types of indriyas - Bhavaindriya and Dravyendriya. From the destruction and pacification of Matijnanaavaran and Viryantaarayakarma, purity arises in the soul, which is the ability to grasp the object. This ability to grasp the object is called labdhi. Labdhi is also called yogyata. The use of this purity is the activity of grasping the object, which is the knowledge-like object. Labdhi and use are both Bhavaindriyas. The synonym of Chaitanya is Bhava, and the characteristic or mark of that Chaitanya is Bhavaindriya. Due to the body-karma-udaya along with the jati-karma-udaya, there are Dravyendriyas in the body, which are the marks of the Bhavaindriyas like touch, etc. The Dravyendriya is the synonym of the pudgaladravya.
Doubt: The word pudgal is not used in Dravyendriya, so why is Dravyendriya called the synonym of pudgaladravya?
Solution: From one part of the name, the whole name is taken, therefore, by saying only "dravya" as one part of the pudgaladravya, the pudgaladravya is taken.
There are two types of Bhavaindriya - labdhi and use. Obtaining is called labdhi. The special destruction and pacification of the jnanaavaran karma, which is the cause of the cessation of the indriya, is called labdhi. Or, the one whose
1. Gh.Pu. 1 p. 237. 2. "Vishuddhi: Arthagrahanashakti: Labdhi:" [Mi.Ch. Thi A. Suri Krit Tika]. 3. "Davyam. Pudgaladravya Paryaya: Tatupamindriyam Dravyendriya" [Bihi]. 4. "Namaikadeshasya Namni Vartanaat" [Same]. 5. N.Mu., 2 Su. 18. 6. "Lambhan Labdhi:" Sarvarthasiddhi Pra.2 Sutra-ki Tika.

Page #264:
---------------------------
## English Translation:

**Chapter 231**

The soul engages in the creation of the sense organs through the substance of the sense organs. The destruction and pacification of the knowledge-obscuring karma that results in this creation is called **labdhi** (gain). The **upayoga** (use) is the result of the soul that arises from the object, which is the cause of the **labdhi** in the form of destruction and pacification.

**Verse 195**

**Nivritti** (cessation) and **upakarana** (instrument) are the two divisions of the sense organs. Creation is called **nivriti**. This creation performs karma. **Nivritti** is of two types: **bahya-nivriti** (external cessation) and **abhyantara-nivriti** (internal cessation).

**Question:** What is **bahya-nivriti**?

**Answer:** **Bahya-nivriti** is the accumulation of **pudgala** (matter) that attains a specific state due to the arising of **nama-karma** (name karma) and **akara-rupa-karma** (form-shape karma) in the soul-regions that have received the sense perception.

**Question:** What is **abhyantara-nivriti**?

**Answer:** **Abhyantara-nivriti** is the creation of countless parts of the soul-regions, which are equal to the measure of the world or the measure of the **utsedha-agula** (a unit of measurement), due to the form-shape of the **chakshu** (eye) and other sense organs.

The **upakarana** is that which performs the action or assists in **nivriti**. **Upakarana** is also of two types, based on the division of external and internal. The two eyelids and the eyelashes of the eye are the external **upakarana** of the eye sense organ. The **krishna-mandala** (black circle) and **shukla-mandala** (white circle) are the internal **upakarana** of the eye sense organ.

**Question:** Just as the destruction and pacification of the touch sense organ arises in all soul-regions, does the destruction and pacification of the eye and other sense organs also arise in all soul-regions or only in specific soul-regions? It cannot be accepted that the destruction and pacification of the eye and other sense organs arises in all soul-regions, because if we accept this, then it would lead to the conclusion that all parts of the soul would perceive form, etc. If it is said that all parts of the soul perceive form, etc., then this is also not correct, because it is not observed that all parts of the soul perceive form, etc. Therefore, destruction and pacification cannot be accepted in all parts of the soul. If we accept that the destruction and pacification of the eye and other sense organs arises in specific parts of the soul, then this also does not work, because if we accept this, then it would lead to the conclusion that the soul-regions are mobile, immobile, and both mobile and immobile. This would lead to the confusion of the soul-regions due to the **vebhana-prabhuta** (a principle of Jain philosophy) and the entire living beings would become blind in their state of wandering.

**Answer:** This is not a fault, because the arising of destruction and pacification in all soul-regions of the living beings has been accepted. However, even if we accept this, it does not lead to the conclusion that all soul-regions of the living being perceive form, etc., because the external cause that is cooperative in the perception of form, etc., is not found in all soul-regions of the living being.

**Footnotes:**

1. **V. Pu. 1** (**Vyakhyaprabandha**), page 1, commentary.
2. **T. Su. Sh. 2** (**Tattvartha Sutra**), **Shloka** (verse) 17.
3. **S. Si. Pr. 2** (**Sarvarthasiddhi Prabandha**), **Shloka** 17, commentary.
4. **S. Si. 2/17** (**Sarvarthasiddhi**), **Shloka** 17.
5. **D. Pu. 12.367-68** (**Dravyaprabandha**), **Sutras** (aphorisms) 5-7 and **Dhavala** (commentary) 13/266. **Go. Sh. G. 562** (**Gommatasar**), **Shloka** 562. **T. Ra. Ba. Gh. 5** (**Tattvartha Rahasyabhasya**), **Shloka** 8, **Vachana** (explanation) 14.
6. **Sh. Pu. 1** (**Shashthi Prabandha**), page 232-233.

Page #265:
---------------------------
## 232 / Go. Sa. Jivakanda
## Gatha 166-167

Should the body, which has a samvaya relationship with the Jiva-pradeshas, also travel through the Jiva-pradeshas when the Jiva travels through the Shank-karma skandhas and all the Jiva-pradeshas?

**Namedev says:** No, because the body does not have a samvaya relationship with the Jiva-pradeshas when the Jiva is in the state of traveling through the Jiva-pradeshas.

**Doubt:** If the body does not have a samvaya relationship with the Jiva-pradeshas during travel, will it experience death?

**Solution:** No, the destruction of the Ayu-karma is considered the cause of death.

**Doubt:** Then how does the samvaya relationship between the Jiva-pradeshas and the body re-establish?

**Solution:** There is no obstacle in this, because it is seen that the Jiva-pradeshas, which have concluded their various states, re-establish a samvaya relationship with the body. And there is no contradiction in the relationship of two material substances. Or, this all happens due to the peculiarity of the function of the karma that is the cause of the Jiva-pradeshas and the body's formation. The karma, which has many types of functions experienced, is found to be powerful.

**Doubt:** Why is it not accepted that the Jiva-pradeshas do not travel according to the Dravya-indriya evidence?

**Solution:** No, if the Dravya-indriya evidence is not accepted for the travel of the Jiva-pradeshas, then the Jivas, traveling at extremely fast speeds, would not be able to know about the rotating earth, etc. Therefore, while traveling through the Atma-pradeshas, the Dravya-indriya evidence should also be accepted for the travel of the Atma-pradeshas.

**Doubt:** Use is the fruit of the senses, because it originates from the senses. Therefore, it is not appropriate to give the name "indriya" to use?

**Solution:** No, because the dharma that resides in the cause has its continuation in the effect. In the world, the effect is seen to imitate the cause. Just as the knowledge that arises from the shape of the pot is called the pot, similarly, the use that arises from the senses is also called "indriya."

**Indriya-based Differences in Jivas**

**|| 166 ||**

Those who have the senses of taste, smell, touch, sound, and sight are called "Indriya-upachaya Jivas." These Jivas are different in their senses, but the enjoyment of the senses is the same for all Jivas.

**|| 167 ||**

There are also Jivas who have only the senses of touch, taste, and smell. These Jivas are called "Kam-uddiya Jivas."

Page #266:
---------------------------
## Gatha 166-167
Indriyamana / 233

**Gatha-artha:** There are one-sense, two-sense, three-sense, four-sense, and five-sense beings, whose characteristic is the knowledge of touch, taste, smell, form, and sound, and they exist with their respective differences. || 166 || The one-sense being has only one sense of touch, and the other beings have tongue, nose, eyes, and ears in order. || 167 ||

**Special Meaning:** Those who have only one sense are called one-sense beings.

**Doubt:** Which is that one sense?

**Solution:** That one sense is touch.

**Doubt:** What is meant by the sense of touch?

**Solution:** The sense of touch is that by which the soul, through the destruction and cessation of the karma of the internal obstacle of semen and the covering karma of the sense of touch, and through the arising of the karma of the support called "Adgopanga," knows the touch quality of objects, i.e., the main characteristic of the touch quality in objects.

This characteristic of the sense of touch is from the perspective of the cause. In the independent desire of the sense, there is also a means. For example, the sense of touch is called the sense of touch when it touches due to the aforementioned causes like the destruction and cessation of the karma of the internal obstacle of semen.

**Doubt:** What is the object of the sense of touch?

**Solution:** The object of the sense of touch is touch.

**Doubt:** What is the meaning of touch?

**Solution:** When the object is desired primarily from the perspective of the substance-realist view, then the object is grasped by the sense, because touch and other qualities cannot be found without the object. Therefore, in this desire, what is touched is called touch, and that touch is in the form of the object. And when the quality is desired primarily from the perspective of the quality-realist view, then, due to the difference of the quality from the substance, the state of being indifferent is stated. Therefore, touch also becomes a means of the quality. For example, touch is touch itself.

**Doubt:** If this is the case, then touch cannot be applied to subtle atoms, etc., because there is a quality of touch-like action in them?

**Solution:** This is not a fault, because there is touch in subtle atoms, etc., otherwise, the attainment of touch in gross objects, which are the actions of atoms, would not be possible. But touch is found in gross objects, therefore, touch is also established in subtle atoms, because it is a principle of logic that what is completely non-existent does not arise. If the arising of what is completely non-existent is accepted, then there will be an absurd consequence. Therefore, it should be understood that touch, etc., are definitely found in atoms, but they are not capable of being grasped by the senses.

Page #267:
---------------------------
## 234/Go. Sa. Jirkaand
## Gatha 165-167

**Doubt:** How can touch residing in atoms be called touch, when it cannot be perceived by the sense organs?

**Solution:** No, because the ability to be perceived by the sense organs is not always present in atomic touch.

**Doubt:** Touch residing in atoms is never perceivable by the sense organs.

**Solution:** No, because when atoms become gross and quantifiable, the qualities residing in them become perceivable by the sense organs.

**Doubt:** Which are the one-sense beings?

**Solution:** Earth, water, fire, air, and plants are the five one-sense beings.

**Doubt:** How do we know that these five have only one sense of touch and no other senses?

**Solution:** No, because there is a statement in the ancient scriptures that says that earth and other one-sense beings have only one sense of touch.

**Doubt:** What is that ancient statement?

**Solution:** That statement is:

"Jagadi passavi bhujavi sevdi pasivien ekken.
Kunedi ya tassamittam thayaru einvito ten." ||135||

**Meaning:** Because stationary beings perceive, eat, drink, and enjoy only through one sense of touch, they are one-sense beings.

**Or,** it is known from the statement "Vanaspatiyantanaamekam" in the Tattvartha Sutra that they have only one sense of touch. The meaning of this Sutra is as follows: The word "ant" has multiple meanings. Sometimes it means a part, like "Vastrant" meaning a part of a cloth. Sometimes it means proximity, like "Udakant gamta" meaning going near water. Sometimes it means the end, like "Sansarant gamta" meaning reaching the end of the world. Here, the intended meaning of the word "ant" is the end. This means that beings up to plants have only one sense of touch.

**Doubt:** Beings from earth to plants have one of the five senses, because "ek" does not indicate only one sense of touch, it is a general number, so one of the five senses can be perceived?

1. Gh.Pu. 1 Pr. 236, Pra.Pan.Sa. 1/66.
2. T.Su.Pr. 2 Sutra 22.

Page #268:
---------------------------
## Gatha 166-167

**Solution:** This is not a fault, because the word 'one' here is used to indicate priority, therefore it refers to the first sense organ, 'touch', mentioned in the sutra "sparshan-rasan-pran-chakshu-shrotra".

**Explanation:** When the 'Veeryantaraya' and 'Sparshanendriyaavaran' karmas are destroyed or subdued, and the 'Rasnaadi' remaining sense organ coverings are overcome by their antagonists, and the 'Ekendiryajati' karma arises, then one sense organ of touch is born.

**Explanation:** A being with one sense organ has one sense organ of touch. A being with two sense organs has two sense organs, touch and taste. A being with three sense organs has three sense organs, touch, taste, and smell. A being with four sense organs has four sense organs, touch, taste, breath, and sight. And a being with five sense organs has five sense organs, touch, taste, smell, sight, and hearing.

**Explanation:** The increasing order of each sense organ, the five sense organs are in the increasing order of each sense organ that is found.

**Explanation:** Those who have two sense organs are two-sense organ beings. These two-sense organ beings are conch, oyster, and worm, etc. It is also said:

"Kukkhi-kimi-sippi-sanka-gandol-arit-ayash-khulla ya.
Tah ya baraday jeeva ya biindiya ede." ||136||

**Meaning:** Abdominal worms, oysters, conch, gandola (large worm born in the abdomen), arishta, aksha (a special aquatic creature named Chandanaka), kshullaka (small conch), and baudi, etc. are two-sense organ beings.

**Doubt:** Which are those two sense organs?

**Solution:** Touch and taste. The characteristic of touch has already been explained. The nature of the taste sense organ is that it is born from the destruction or suppression of the 'Veeryantaraya' and 'Rasnaendriyaavaran' (Matijnanavaran) karmas, and from the arising of the 'Angopaang' karma, which enables the perception of taste.

**Doubt:** What is the object of the taste sense organ?

**Solution:** The object of the taste sense organ is taste.

**Doubt:** What is the meaning of the word 'taste'?

**Solution:** When the object is primarily intended, then the synonym is not found except the object, therefore the object itself is taste. In this intention, the karma-sadhanapana of taste...

Page #269:
---------------------------
## 236 / Go. Sa. Jivakanda
**Verse 166-167**

It is like, that which is tasted, is rasa. And when the paryaya is primarily intended, then the difference between dravya and paryaya becomes apparent. Therefore, the state of being indifferent is stated. In this way, the rasa also becomes a means of feeling. For example, in tasting, the action of the ear is called rasa.

**Doubt:** From what cause do the two senses of touch and taste arise?

**Solution:** When the karma of viriyantaraya and the karma of touch and taste sense-covering (matijnana-avaran) are destroyed or subdued, then the remaining sense-covering karma, due to the arising of the all-destroying competition, arises in dependence on the arising of the angopaang-namakarma. And when the karma of the two-sense-type arises, then the two senses of touch and taste are produced.

Those who have three senses are tri-indriya jivas.

**Doubt:** Which are those tri-indriya jivas?

**Solution:** Kuniyu, Khatmal, etc. are tri-indriya jivas. It is also said:

**Verse 137:**

"Kuthu, pipilika, khatmal, bichchu, ju, indragop, kanakhjura, uttirang, nattiya, etc. are all tri-indriya jivas."

**Doubt:** Which are those three senses?

**Solution:** Touch, taste, and smell are the three senses. The nature of touch and taste has already been explained.

**Doubt:** What is meant by the pranendriya?

**Solution:** The word "ghrana" is a means of action, because in the intention of dependence, the senses are means of action. Therefore, when the karma of viriyantaraya and the karma of smell sense-covering (matijnana-avaran) are destroyed or subdued, and the angopaang-namakarma arises, then that by which one smells is the pranendriya. Or, in the intention of the independence of the senses, the word "dharan" is also a means of action, because in the world, the independence of the senses is also seen. For example, "My eye sees well, my ear hears." Therefore, when the previously mentioned causes of viriyantaraya, etc., are destroyed or subdued, then that which smells is the ghrana indriya.

The object of the ghrana indriya is smell. That which is smelled is smell, or the action of smelling is smell. When the karma of viriyantaraya and the karma of touch, taste, and smell sense-covering are destroyed or subdued, and the angopaang-namakarma arises...

**Footnotes:**

1. Gh. Pu. 1, p. 242
2. Gh. Pu. 1, p. 245
3. Dh. Pu. 1, p. 245

Page #270:
---------------------------
## Verse 166-167
Indriyamargna/237

When the Ablambana and the SriIndriyaJati Karma arise, the three senses of touch, taste, and smell are produced.

Those who have four senses are called ChaturIndriya Jivas. Mosquitoes, flies, etc. are ChaturIndriya Jivas. It is also said:

"Bhakkaḍaya-bhamar-mahuvar-masay-padanga ya salah-gomacchi.
Manchho sadans kida ya paridiya jiva." ||138||

That is, spiders, bumblebees, honeybees, mosquitoes, moths, butterflies, cowflies, flies, etc. are ChaturIndriya Jivas.

With the destruction and pacification of the ViryaAntaray and ChaIndriyaAvarana, and the arising of the AngoPang Karma, "that by which an object is seen is the ChaIndriya." Although the root "Chakshi" has many meanings, here the meaning of "seeing" is intended. In the sense of independence, the Chakshu Indriya is also the agent and instrument. For example, "My eye sees well," therefore, when the aforementioned ChakshuIndriyaAvarana, etc. causes are present, that which sees is the ChakshuIndriya.

Doubt: What is the object of the ChakshuIndriya?

Solution: The object of the ChakshuIndriya is "varna" (color). That which is seen is "varna."

Doubt: What are the causes of the production of the four senses of touch, taste, smell, and sight?

Solution: The destruction and pacification of the ViryaAntaray and the touch, taste, smell, and ChaIndriyaAvarana Karmas, the arising of the remaining ThotraIndriyaAvarana Karma's all-destroying competitors, the arising of the AngoPang Karma as the Ablambana, and the arising of the ChaturIndriyaJati Karma as the Vashvatita cause, lead to the production of these four senses.

Doubt: Who are called Panchendriya Jivas?

Solution: Those who have all five senses of touch, taste, smell, sight, and hearing are called Panchendriya Jivas.

Doubt: Who are the Panchendriya Jivas?

Solution: Jaryuj, Andaj, etc. are Panchendriya Jivas. It is also said:

"Sansevim-samuchchim-umbhedim-provavaviya cheva. Rasa-potantarajajarajapanchidia jiva." ||136||

[1. Dh, Pu. 1 P. 246. 2. Gh, Pu. 1 P. 247. 3. Ibid. 4. P, Pu. 1 P. 248]
[5. Ibid. 6. Ibid.]

Page #271:
---------------------------
238/Go. Sa. Jivakanda
Gatha 16:  That is, Swetaj, Samucchima, Udbhijj, Praupapadik, Rasaj, Pot, Andaj and Jarayuj are all Panchendriya Jivas.  In relation to the senses of touch, taste, smell and sight, it has been said before.
Doubt: What is the Shrotrendriya?
Solution:  By the destruction and pacification of the Veerayantray and Shrotrendriavaran Karma, and the support of the Agopang Karma, that by which one hears, or that which hears, is the Shrotrendriya.
Doubt: What is the object of the Shrotrendriya?
Solution: The object of the Shrotrendriya is sound. That which is heard is sound. Or, the action in the form of sound is called sound.
Doubt: What are the causes of the origin of the five senses?
Solution: The destruction and pacification of the Veerayantray and the touch, taste, breath, sight and hearing sense covering Karma, and the support of the Angopang Karma, along with the rise of the Panchendriya jati Karma, are the causes of the origin of the five senses.
Although the senses are born from the destruction and pacification of the Veerayantray and the sense covering Karma, the rise of the jati Karma is the main cause here. Humans, Gods and Hell beings are all Panchendriya.  Among the animals, lions, deer, parrots, fish, etc. are also Panchendriya.
The opposite field of the five senses is Dhanuvisadavasayakdi, Joyanchadal-hipatisahassa.
Pratusahassa Dhanuran, Visaya Duguna Asagitti ||168||
Gatha meaning: The object field of the senses of touch, etc. is respectively (touch) 400 Dhanus, the square of 20 (taste) 64 Dhanus, the square of 8 (smell) 100 Dhanus, the square of 10 (sight) 2904 Yojan, and (hearing) 8000 Dhanus.  Further, the object field up to the Asanji Panchendriya is doubled.
Special meaning: The excellent object field of the sense of touch of a Ekendriya Jiva is 400 Dhanus, the square of 20.  The excellent field of the sense of touch of a Dwindriya Jiva is 800 Dhanus, of a Triendriya Jiva is 1600 Dhanus, of a Chaturindriya Jiva is 3200 Dhanus, and of an Asanji Panchendriya Jiva is 6400 Dhanus.  In this way, one should know that the excellent object field related to the sense of touch from Ekendriya to Asanji Panchendriya is doubled.
The excellent object field of the sense of taste of a Dwindriya Jiva is 64 Dhanus.  The excellent object field of the sense of smell of a Triendriya Jiva is 100 Dhanus.
1. Gh. Pu. 1 p. 246.
2. Pa. Pu. 1 p. 250.
3. Dh. Pu. 1 p. 24.

Page #272:
---------------------------
##  Verse 168
**Idriyamargarpa/236**

The range of a **Chaturindriya** (four-sensed) being is 256 **dhanush** (bows), and that of an **Asanji Panchendriya** (non-conscious five-sensed) being is 512 **dhanush**. The range of the **pranendriya** (life sense) of a **Shrindriya** (one-sensed) being is 100 **dhanush**, that of a **Chaturindriya** being is 200 **dhanush**, and that of an **Asanji Panchendriya** being is 400 **dhanush**. The range of the **chakshuindriya** (eye sense) of a **Chaturindriya** being is 2654 **yojan** (leagues), and that of an **Asanji Panchendriya** being is 5608 **yojan**. The range of the **shrotrendriya** (ear sense) of an **Asanji Panchendriya** being is 8000 **dhanush**. These ranges should be understood through the **pudgalparinam yog** (karma theory). 

**One-sensed** and other beings, with their respective superior powers, perceive objects located at a distance through their **sparshanadi indriyas** (sense organs of touch, etc.) according to the above mentioned ranges.

**Objection:** These sense organs cannot perceive objects located at such distances, because they only perceive objects that are present.

**Solution:** This objection is not valid, because it is established that sense organs can perceive objects without them being present. This is not contradictory to logic and scriptures.

**Objection:** What is the logic?

**Solution:** **One-sensed** beings, through their roots, can perceive objects located at a distance. For example, they extend their roots in the direction where gold or other objects are buried, and spread their veins and arteries in the area containing the object. The scriptures also consider **sparshanadi indriyas** (sense organs of touch, etc.) as **apraptagrahi** (non-present perceivers), because there are 336 types of **matijnana** (knowledge of mind) related to touch, etc.

**Chaturindriya** beings can see objects located 2654 **yojan** away with their eyes, there is no doubt about it. **Sparshanadi indriyas** (sense organs of touch, etc.) are **praptagrahi** (present perceivers), but **chakshuindriya** (eye sense) is not. Otherwise, it would be able to perceive **anjan** (collyrium) and other things present within itself. **Chakshuindriya** (eye sense) does not perceive objects by going near them, otherwise, the area of the eye would become blind. It is also not logical to assume that **jnana** (knowledge) in the form of the eye goes near the object, because this would make the soul ignorant. It is also not possible for the eye to go near the object sequentially, because this would lead to the perception of all objects in between. Therefore, **chakshuindriya** (eye sense) is **apraptagrahi** (non-present perceiver), not **praptagrahi** (present perceiver) like **sparshanadi indriyas** (sense organs of touch, etc.).

**Asanji Panchendriya** (non-conscious five-sensed) beings, devoid of knowledge of **palap** (foliage) etc., perceive objects located 5608 **yojan** away through their **chakshuindriya** (eye sense). Therefore, the range of the **chakshuindriya** (eye sense) of an **Asanji Panchendriya** (non-conscious five-sensed) being is 5608 **yojan**. (Commentary on **Moola. Paryapti Adhikar** verse 53).

The range of the **shrotrendriya** (ear sense) of an **Asanji Panchendriya** (non-conscious five-sensed) being is 8000 **dhanush**.

**Note:** There are relevant verses in **P. Pu. 6, p. 158** and **Mooladhar Paryapti Adhikar** regarding this topic.

Page #273:
---------------------------
##  240 Go, Sa. Jivakanda

**Verse 166-170**

A sentient five-sense being, through the auditory sense, knows the word that arises in the context. The specific arrangement or significance of the pudgala dravya, i.e., the material dravya, the manifestation of color, etc., is the transformation of the pudgala dravya. The sun, etc., are transformations of the pudgala dravya and are perceived by specific senses.

The sensory field of the auditory sense of a sentient five-sense being is twelve yojanas. The sensory field of the three senses is nine yojanas each. The sensory field of the visual sense is slightly more than forty-three thousand two hundred sixty-three yojanas.

**Verse 166**

**Meaning:** The sensory field of the auditory sense of a sentient five-sense being is twelve yojanas. The sensory field of the three senses is nine yojanas each. The sensory field of the visual sense is slightly more than forty-three thousand two hundred sixty-three yojanas.

**Special Note:** In this regard, there are these verses in Thaval Pu. 6, p. 158 and Mulachar Paryaptyadhikaran 12, p. 212-213:

**Verse 52:** The sensory field of touch, taste, and smell for a sentient five-sense being is nine yojanas, and for the auditory sense, it is twelve yojanas.

**Verse 53:** Forty-three thousand two hundred yojanas, these are the excellent sensory fields of the visual sense.

Sentient five-sense beings, whose senses have a very intense decay and cessation, such as chakravartis, etc., can perceive touch through the tactile sense, taste through the gustatory sense, and smell through the olfactory sense up to nine yojanas away. Through the auditory sense, they can perceive sound up to twelve yojanas away. Sentient five-sense beings, whose visual sense has a second decay and cessation, such as chakravartis, etc., can perceive objects through the visual sense up to slightly more than forty-three thousand two hundred sixty-three yojanas away (slightly more than one kos, twelve hundred fifteen dandas, one hand, two angulas, and a quarter of a yava).

**Verse 170:** The attainment of the excellent sensory field of the visual sense is rooted in the absence of the three types of ignorance, the absence of the root of attachment, and the absence of the root of anger. It is the attainment of the excellent sensory field of the visual sense.

**Notes:**

1. Mulachar Paryaptyadhikaran 12, verse 54, Sanskrit commentary, p. 212.
2. Thaval Pu. 6, p. 158. Mulachar Paryaptyadhikaran 12, p. 212, verse 55.
3. Thaval Pu. 6, p. 158. Mulachar Paryaptyadhikaran 12, p. 213, verse 56.
4. Mulachar, commentary by Shri Vasunandi Acharya on the above verses.
5. Mulachar (Phalatan), p. 565, verse 106.

Page #274:
---------------------------
## Indriyamanā / 241

**Verse Meaning:** Multiply the difference between one lakh (100,000) and three hundred sixty (360) and six thousand six hundred forty (6,640) yojanas by the square root of ten. Then multiply the resulting amount by nine and divide by sixty to obtain the extent of the object of the sense of sight. || 170 ||

**Verse 170**

**Explanation:** The Sun has 184 lanes. When the Sun is in the first inner lane, it is 180 yojanas inside Jambudvipa. The diameter of Jambudvipa is one lakh yojanas. Subtracting 180 yojanas from both sides (180 x 2), i.e., 360 yojanas, we get the diameter of the inner lane (100,000 - 360 = 99,640) yojanas. Multiplying this diameter by the square root of ten gives the circumference of the inner lane, which is approximately 315,086 yojanas. It takes one Sun two nights and days, or 48 hours or 60 muhurtas, to traverse this circumference. When the Sun is in the first inner lane, the day is 18 muhurtas long, hence it is Ayodhya. Therefore, nine muhurtas after sunrise, the Sun is over the city of Ayodhya. To find the distance from the city to sunrise, we divide the circumference of the first inner lane by sixty to get the Sun's travel distance in one muhurta. Multiplying this by nine gives the distance traveled in nine muhurtas, i.e., the distance from Ayodhya to sunrise. The circumference of the first inner lane is 315,086 yojanas. Dividing this by 60 and multiplying by 2, or dividing by 20 and multiplying by 3, we get (315,086 / 20) x 3 = 472,630 yojanas. One yojana is equal to twelve hundred fifteen dhanus, one hand, two angulas, and a little more than a fourth part of a yava. The following verses are also useful in this context:

* **Verse 57:** "Eighty times the square of the difference of the faults, multiplied by many, is the eye, well-directed and knowing."

**Root:** When the Sun is in the first inner lane, it is 150 yojanas inside Jambudvipa. Subtracting 150 yojanas from both sides, we get 360 yojanas (150 x 2). Subtracting this from the diameter of Jambudvipa, which is one lakh yojanas, we are left with (100,000 - 360) = 99,640 yojanas. Squaring this, multiplying by ten, and then taking the square root, we get the circumference of the inner lane, which is 315,086 yojanas. Dividing this by sixty and multiplying by two, we get the extent of the sense of sight.

**Verse 430:** "The circumference of the first lane, multiplied by three and divided by twenty, is forty-seven thousand two hundred."

**Verse 431:** "The second is seven hundred thousand, and the third is twenty thousand."

**First Half:**
* The circumference of the first lane, multiplied by three and divided by twenty, is forty-seven thousand two hundred.
* The second is seven hundred thousand, and the third is twenty thousand.

**Notes:**
* This translation uses the Jain terms "yojana," "muhurta," "dhanus," "angula," and "yava."
* The text refers to the Sun's movement through the lanes of the universe, a concept found in Jain cosmology.
* The calculations are based on the Jain understanding of the size and structure of the universe.
* The translation attempts to preserve the meaning and context of the original text while being accessible to a modern English reader.

Page #275:
---------------------------
242/Go. Ma. Jivakagad
Gatha 171-173
A distance of 57 yojanas and seven parts out of twenty parts of a yojana; this much is the extent of perception. 4.72633 yojanas, this is the excellent object of the eye sense.
The form and extent of the senses are as follows: the eye is like a lentil, the ear is like a barley stalk, the nose is like a Kadamba flower, the tongue is like a hoof, and the touch sense is of many forms. ||171|| The extent of perception of the eye sense is an infinitesimal part of an angula. The extent of perception of the ear sense is countless times greater than that. The extent of perception of the nose sense is even greater than that. The extent of perception of the tongue sense is countless times greater than that, yet it is still an infinitesimal part of an angula. ||172|| At the third time of the arising of the subtle Nigodaya Labdhyaparyaptak, the extent of perception of the touch sense is an infinitesimal part of an angula, and the extent of perception of the fish is excellent. ||173||
Special Meaning: The external extent of the eye sense, which is lentil-shaped, is an infinitesimal part of a ghana-angula. The external extent of the ear sense, which is barley stalk-shaped, is an infinitesimal part of an angula. The external extent of the nose sense, which is Kadamba flower-shaped, is an infinitesimal part of a ghana-angula. The external extent of the tongue sense, which is crescent-shaped or hoof-shaped, is an infinitesimal part of a ghana-angula. The external extent of the touch sense is of indefinite form. It is an infinitesimal part of a ghana-angula in the body of a subtle Nigodaya Labdhyaparyaptak at the third time of its arising, and it is countless ghana-angulas in the body of a great fish, etc.
The extent of perception of the eye sense is the smallest. The extent of perception of the ear sense is countless times greater than that. That is, the ear sense encompasses countless times more space than the eye sense encompasses with its perception. The extent of perception of the nose sense is even greater than that.
1. This Gatha is in Dhaval Pu. 1, Pra. 236: Pra. Pa. San. p. 14, Ma. 66; Mulachar Paryaptyadhikār 12, Gatha 50, but there is a difference in the words. 2. This Gatha is in Mulachar Paryaptyavikār 12, Gatha 47, but there is a difference in the words in the latter half. 3. Pra. Pa. San. 1/66. 4. Dhaval Pu. 15. 234-265.

Page #276:
---------------------------
## Gatha 174
**Indriyamana / 243**

The olfactory sense pervades the Pradesh (regions) of smell. From that, in countless multiples, the taste sense resides in the Pradesh of space. And from that, in countless multiples, the touch sense is in the Pradesh of light.

**Statement of the Non-Sensory Beings**

They, the non-sensory beings, do not perceive the objects of sense. Their sensory pleasures are non-sensory.

**Explanation of the Gatha**

They are not endowed with sense organs and are not even perceived through the means of perception like Shravagrah (hearing), etc. Because their knowledge is infinite and their special attributes are infinite.

**Special Note**

Those who do not have senses are called non-sensory beings.

**Question**

Who are they?

**Answer**

The liberated Siddhas (perfect beings) without bodies are non-sensory.

**Question**

In those Siddhas, there is the presence of mental senses and their use, so they are sensory.

**Answer**

No, because the sensory nature is due to the use arising from the destruction of passions. But in Siddhas, whose all karmas are destroyed, there is no destruction of passions, because it is removed by the nature of the karmas.

**Question**

What is meant by 'Artha' (object)?

**Answer**

'That which is known' is 'Artha'. According to this etymology, 'Artha' is found in the present sense.

**Question**

Is this etymological meaning the same in the future and past senses?

**Answer**

No, because the perception of the future and past senses is through the perception of the present sense. That is, the past and future senses exist in the present sense in the form of past power and future power. Since their perception can only be through the perception of the present sense, they cannot be called 'Artha'.

The soul with pure knowledge is free from the need of any auxiliary like sense organs, etc., besides itself and the object.

1. Dhaval Pu. 1 Pu. 235. Page 577 has Gatha 72.
2. This Gatha has some word differences in Dhaval Pu. 1 Page 246 and Prakrit Pantr Sangrah (Jnanapeeth) Pra. Pan. San. Pu. 15 on Gatha 74.
3. Dhaval Pu. 1 Page 248. Page 1 Page 246.
4. 'Aparisciddyate iti nyayatastatraarthamopa lambhat. [Jayadhaval Pu. 1 Page 22]; 'Aryant iti arthah nischiyate iti arthah.' [Sarvarth Siddhi 1/2].
5. Jayadhaval Pu. 1 Page 23.

Page #277:
---------------------------
244/Go. Sa. Jivakanda
Verse 175

Question: By what quality does the term 'artha' (meaning) arise?
Answer: The term 'artha' arises due to the quality of 'prameyata' (being an object of knowledge), because that which is knowable by pramana (means of knowledge) and is the self and other nature, is 'prameya'.

Question: On what basis does this quality reside?
Answer: This quality resides on the basis of 'dravya' (substance), because all qualities reside with the support of 'dravya'.

Question: How can the present 'paryaya' (state) be given the term 'artha', since it does not have the quality of 'prameyata' as its support?
Answer: The present 'paryaya' is given the term 'artha' because it has a 'tadātma-sambandha' (identity relationship) with 'dravya'. It is also said:
"Parinamadhi jeraṇ dabvam tatkālam tammay tti eṇṇatt." (When a 'dravya' undergoes a change in state, at that time it becomes identical with that state.)
The 'dravya' is not identical with the past or future 'paryayas' in the present, therefore they are not given the term 'artha'. They are in the form of 'pradhvamsābhāva' (non-existence of destruction) and 'prāgābhāva' (non-existence of prior state), not in the form of 'sadbhāva' (existence).

Question: From the infinite variety of 'nāmananta' (nameless) etc., which infinite is relevant here?
Answer: Here, the infinite without destruction is relevant. 'Anta' means destruction, that which does not have 'anta' (destruction) is 'ananta' (infinite).

Question: Are 'ananta jnana' (infinite knowledge) i.e. 'kevalajnana' (perfect knowledge) and 'ananta mukha' (infinite mouths) the only two qualities in Siddhas?
Answer: No, because 'kevaladarshan' (perfect perception), 'samyaktva' (right faith), 'virya' (energy) etc. qualities are companions of 'ananta jnana' and 'ananta mukha', therefore even without mentioning them, all other qualities are included. These qualities are also natural.

In brief, the opinion of beings like 'ekendrima' (one-sensed) etc. is:
"Thavarasanka pipiliyabhramara manussādi ga sameda je.
Jugavaramasanka jejjāṇatarāṇta ṇigodhabhava." ||175||

Meaning of the verse: Stationary bodies (except for ordinary plants), conch (two-sensed), ant, bee, human etc. beings,
Countless in number, born from the 'nigoda' (egg).

1. 'Pramanena strapararupaṁ parikṣheyaṁ prameyam.' [Palāpapaddhati, Sutra 68].
2. 'Dravyānāyā nigunā guṇanataḥ.' [Tattvārtha Sutra 541].
3. Pravachanasara, Verse 8.
4. 'Granto vināṇaḥ, na vidyate anto yamy tadanantam.' [Dhavala, Part 3, Page 15].
5. Siddhantachakravarti, commentary by Dhimadabhayachandra Muni.

Page #278:
---------------------------
## Verse 175
## Indriyamargna/245

(SriIndriya), Bhramara (ChaturIndriya), and Manushadya (Panchendriya) are all individually, along with their respective sub-categories, countless in number, meaning they are AsankhyataAsankhyat. Nigodaya, meaning ordinary plants, are infinite. ||175||

**Special Meaning:**  Apart from the stationary beings, meaning Nigodaya, all the Ekendriya beings, along with their variations and sub-variations, meaning those with Earth-like bodies, Water-like bodies, Fire-like bodies, Air-like bodies, and each type of plant-like body, are AsankhyataAsankhyat. Nigod beings are mentioned separately, therefore they are not included in the stationary beings. Among the DwIndriya beings, the conch shell has the most excellent perception, therefore mentioning conch shell encompasses all DwIndriya beings. The most well-known SriIndriya being is the ant (Pipilika). Therefore, mentioning Pipilika encompasses all TriIndriya beings. Among the ChaturIndriya beings, the bee has the most excellent perception, therefore mentioning Bhramara encompasses all ChaturIndriya beings. Among the Panchendriya beings, humans are the most prominent, because only through human conduct can a being attain liberation by cutting the karmic bonds through restraint. Therefore, mentioning Manushadya encompasses all Panchendriya beings of the four paths (mentioning Dwik Var Asankhyat encompasses AsankhyataAsankhyat, because the word Asankhyat is used twice in 'AsankhyataAsankhyat').

Ekendriya beings, Ekendriya Sukshma beings, Ekendriya Badar beings, Ekendriya Paryapt beings, Ekendriya Sukshma Paryapt beings, Ekendriya Badar Paryapt beings, Ekendriya Aparyapt beings, Ekendriya Sukshma Aparyapt beings, Ekendriya Badar Aparyapt beings, these nine categories of Ekendriya beings are infinite in number compared to the measure of substance, because Nigodaya beings are also Ekendriya. They are not exhausted by infinite numbers of Avaspirani-Utspirani, compared to the measure of time. They are infinite in number compared to the measure of space, meaning they are infinite in number of Lokas.

**Doubt:**  Among the aforementioned nine categories of Ekendriya beings, beings are born in the Trasas from a countless number of parts of the universe, and the same number of beings are born in the Trasas from the Ekendriya beings. Due to the equal rate of birth and death, these nine categories of Ekendriya beings will never end. Therefore, this statement is not proven, and this sutra is not worthy of being started.

**Solution:**  If the birth and death of these aforementioned nine categories were equal, then this sutra would not be worthy of being started, but the death of these categories is greater than their birth, because those who are born in the Trasas from the aforementioned nine categories, and who attain Samyaktva, destroy their worldly existence, and they do not re-enter those existences. Therefore, these nine categories are subject to death. Therefore, these nine categories are subject to death. Even though these nine categories are subject to death, they never cease to exist, because they have existed in their own form since the beginning of time. If the entire population of beings were exhausted by an infinite number of past times, then the entire population of beings would have been exhausted since the beginning of time, but this is not the case. Because such an achievement does not occur.

**Doubt:**  Why is the entire population of beings not destroyed by the passage of time?

1. Ghabhal Pu. 7 P. 267-268 Sutra 57-60.

Page #279:
---------------------------
246/Go. Sa. Beevakaanda
Verse 175: There is no solution, because if the desired amount is considered to be the destruction of the opposing entity, the vast amount, then the existence of the non-vast would be destroyed. The non-vast do not lack, because if they lacked, then worldly beings would be affected. If worldly beings lacked, then the non-worldly (liberated) beings would also lack.
. Doubt- How is it possible for non-worldly (liberated) beings to be affected if worldly beings lack?
Solution- If worldly beings lack, then non-worldly (liberated) beings cannot exist either, because the attainment of all substances is with an opposing entity. It is also said:
"Satta sampyattha savistaruuva pranansapjjayaa.
Bhangushpayaadhukta sappadivakha hava ekka." All substances are in the form of existence, are in the form of the universe, have infinite categories, are associated with destruction, production, and permanence, are in the form of having an opposing entity, and are one. Thus, in this verse, with the words "savva payatya sappadivakha", Shri Kundakunda Acharya has mentioned the principle that "all substances have an opposing entity". This principle has been used by Shri Vira Sena Acharya in many places. Not only that, but if worldly and non-worldly (liberated) beings lack, then all beings will lack. If beings are affected, then the lack of the opposing entity of beings, non-beings, will also be encountered. Thus, if vast beings are affected, then the effect of all substances will be encountered, therefore, even if liberation continues, the Nigoda one-sense amount will never end. Because, even if expenditure continues without income, the amount that does not end is infinite. Except for the Nigoda amount, the remaining one-sense amounts are innumerable.
Two-sense, three-sense, and four-sense beings, and the beings with sufficient and insufficient karma, are innumerable in terms of the amount of substance. They are destroyed by innumerable expirations and inspirations in terms of time.
The word "insufficient" refers to beings with insufficient name karma, otherwise, the word "sufficient" would also refer to beings with sufficient name karma, who are liberated from insufficiency. Similarly, the word "sufficient" refers to beings with sufficient name karma, otherwise, it would not refer to beings with sufficient name karma, who are eternally sufficient. Two-sense, three-sense, and four-sense beings are those with the name karma of two-sense, three-sense, and four-sense, respectively.
_ Doubt- Is there any fault in saying that beings with two senses are two-sense beings?
_ Solution- No, because if this meaning is understood, then the beings existing in insufficient time:
1. Dhavala Ghu. 3 p. 306-307. 2. Dhavala Pu. 14 p. 234. 3. Dhavala Pu. 14 p. 234, Panchastikaya Ga. 8 | 4. "Jasi samvaaranam prayavirahiyarana sankhejjja sankhejjhehi baijjamananam pi vonchhedo rana hodi tasi manalamidi saga." .Pu. 14 p. 235. 5. Dhavala Pu. 3 p. 210 and 212 Sutra 77-78. 6. Dhavala Pu. 3 p. 211.

Page #280:
---------------------------
## Gatha 176-177

**Gatha 176**

The context of non-perception due to the absence of sense organs is obtained.

**Doubt:**  Shankha-kshayopasham is called an indriya, but dravya-indriya is not called an indriya. Therefore, even if dravya-indriyas are not present in the insufficient time, does perception still occur through dwi-indriya etc. categories?

**Solution:** If the meaning of indriya is taken as kshayopasham, then the context of the absence of indriya for those who have lost their ayopa-sham (non-destruction) arises.

**Doubt:**  This is a contradiction. There is no solution, because the sutra states that the sa-yoga-kevali is described as having five indriyas.

**Gatha 177**

**Doubt:**  All living beings, from dwi-indriya onwards, are constantly subject to expenditure in accordance with their karma. Therefore, how can it be said that they are destroyed by countless avasapirina-utsapirina?

**Solution:** It is true that living beings from dwi-indriya onwards are not destroyed. However, if their expenditure were to occur without karma, then they would certainly be destroyed. If this is not accepted, then the statement "hindriya pravima irasamsa hai" cannot be established.

Similarly, there are countless panchendriya, anendriya-paryapt, and panchendriya-aparyapt beings.

Among the ekendriya beings, the proportion of paryapt and aparyapt is stated as follows: "Tasahigo sansari ayakkha taran sankhaga bhaga. Punnaan pariman sankhejjadhim. Apunnaan."

**Gatha 177**

**Gatha-arth:**  The living beings who are in the world without the absence of indriyas are ekendriya beings. Their number is a large proportion, and a small proportion are aparyapt.

**Gatha 177**

**Gatha-arth:**  Ekendriya beings are of two types, based on the subtle pain of badar. Even among them, there are paryapt and aparyapt. The order of the number of these six categories of ekendriya beings will be mentioned in the Kayamarganga. This is what we should know.

**Special Meaning:**  By subtracting the number of pranindriya beings (liberated beings) from the total number of living beings, we obtain the number of worldly beings. By subtracting the number of dwi-indriya, tri-indriya, chatur-indriya, and panchendriya beings, or the number of shrama beings, we obtain the number of ekendriya beings. Among these ekendriya beings, the badar-ekendriya-paryapt beings are the most numerous. The badar-ekendriya-aparyapt beings are less numerous than them.

**References:**

1. Dhavan Pu. 3, p. 611
2. Dhaval Pu. 3, p. 312

Page #281:
---------------------------
## 248/Go. Sa. Jivakanda
## Gatha 178-180

There are countless **Gurge** (types of beings). Countless beings are **Gunakar** (multipliers). **Badar-Ekendriya** (two-sensed) beings are **Vishesh-Adhik** (significantly more) than the number of **Badar-Ekendriya-Apariapt** (two-sensed insufficient) beings. The number of **Badar-Ekendriya-Paryapt** (two-sensed sufficient) beings is **Nish-Adhik** (infinitely more) than the number of **Badar-Ekendriya-Apariapt** beings. **Sanniya-Gapat** (three-sensed) beings are **Asankhyat Gunan** (countless times) more than the number of **Badar-Ekendriya** beings. Countless beings are **Gunakar**. **Ekendriya Apariapt** (one-sensed insufficient) beings are **Vishesh-Adhik** than the number of **Sookshm Ekendriya Apariapt** (subtle one-sensed insufficient) beings. The number of **Badar Ekendriya Apariapt** beings is **Tanmatra Vishesh-Adhik** (only significantly more) than the number of **Sookshm Ekendriya Apariapt** beings. **Sookshm-Ekendriya-Paryapt** (subtle one-sensed sufficient) beings are **Sankhyat Guran** (countless times) more than the number of **Ekendriya-Apariapt** beings. The **Gunakar** is **Sankhyat Samay** (countless times). **Ekendriya-Apariapt** beings are **Vishesh Adhik** than the number of **Sookshm-Ekendriya Paryapt** beings. The number of **Badar-Ekendriya-Paryapt** beings is **Vishesh Adhik** than the number of **Sookshm-Ekendriya Paryapt** beings. **Sookshm-Ekendriya** (subtle one-sensed) beings are **Vishesh Adhik** than the number of **Ekendriya Paryapt** (one-sensed sufficient) beings. The number of **Sookshm-Ekendriya-Paryapt** beings without the number of **Badar-Ekendriya-Paryapt** beings is **Tanmatra Vishesh Adhik**. **Ekendriya** (one-sensed) beings are **Vishesh Adhik** than the number of **Sookshm Ekendriya** beings. The number of **Badar-Ekendriya** beings is **Vishesh Adhik** than the number of **Sookshm Ekendriya** beings.

**Ank Sandrishti** (Numerical Observation):
* **Ekendriya Jiv Rashai** (Number of one-sensed beings): 256
* **Sookshm-Ekendriya-Jiv Rashai** (Number of subtle one-sensed beings): 240
* **Badar Ekendriya-Jiv Rashai** (Number of two-sensed beings): 16
* **Sookshm-Ekendriya-Paryapt-Jiv Rashai** (Number of subtle one-sensed sufficient beings): 180
* **Sookshm-Ekendriya-Apariapt Jiv Rashai** (Number of subtle one-sensed insufficient beings): 60
* **Badar-Ekendriya-Apariapt-Jiv Rashai** (Number of two-sensed insufficient beings): 12
* **Badar-Ekendriya-Paryapt-Jiv Rashai** (Number of two-sensed sufficient beings): 4
* **Ekendriya Apariapt Jiv** (Number of one-sensed insufficient beings): 72
* **Ekendriya-Paryapt** (Number of one-sensed sufficient beings): 14

The number of beings is **Vitichpamaanam Asankhen Vahidpadarangaleran Hivpadaran** (infinitely more than the number of beings with one sense). **Hogakam Padibhago Pravaliya Sankhabhago Du** (The proportion is the countless part of the series). **Bahubhago Samabhago Chaunnamede Sime Shakhabhagalshi** (The majority is divided into four equal parts, and each part is given to each category in the order mentioned). **Uttakamo Tatthabi Bahubhago Bahugas De Pro Du** (The majority of the remaining part is given to the category with the highest number, and this process continues until the end). **Trivipachpunnapaman Padarangal Sankhabhaghihidpadaran** (The number of beings with three senses, four senses, and five senses is obtained by dividing the number of beings with one sense into countless parts). **Hogakam Punnurga Vitichpajeech Aparajjata** (The number of beings with two senses, three senses, four senses, and five senses is less than the number of beings with one sense).

**Mathaarth** (Meaning):
When the universe is divided into countless parts, the number of beings with two senses, three senses, four senses, and five senses is obtained. However, the number of beings with one sense, two senses, three senses, and four senses is progressively less than the number of beings with five senses. The proportion is the countless part of the series. **178**
The majority should be divided into four equal parts, and each part should be given to each category in the order mentioned. The majority of the remaining part should be given to the category with the highest number, and this process should continue until the end. **179**
When the universe is divided into countless parts, the number of beings with two senses, three senses, four senses, and five senses who are sufficient is obtained, which is less than the number of beings with one sense. The number of beings with two senses, three senses, four senses, and five senses who are insufficient is obtained by subtracting the number of beings who are sufficient from the total number of beings with two senses, three senses, four senses, and five senses. **180**

1. Dhaval Pu. 3 p. 324-325. 2. Pavan Pu. 3 p. 320-21.

Page #282:
---------------------------
## Gatha 178-10

**Dividing the Jagatpratar by an innumerable part of the Pratarangul, the number of Dwindriya, Trindriya, Chaturindriya, and Panchendriya beings is obtained. However, the number of Trindriya beings is less than the number of Dwindriya beings, and the number of Chaturindriya beings is less than the number of Trindriya beings. The number of Panchendriya beings is less than the number of Chaturindriya beings. Thus, they are progressively less in number.**

**Explanation:**

* Dividing the Pratarangul by an innumerable part of the Pavali, the resulting quotient is obtained. Dividing the Jagatpratar by this quotient gives the number of beings.
* This number is then divided by an innumerable part of the Pavali, and one part is set aside. The remaining part is divided into four equal sections, and one section is given to each of the Dwindriya, Trindriya, Chaturindriya, and Panchendriya beings, ensuring that each receives an equal share without any excess or deficiency.
* The set aside part is again divided by an innumerable part of the Pavali, and the majority of the resulting parts are given to the Dwindriya beings, as they are the most numerous among the four.
* The remaining part is again divided by an innumerable part of the Pavali, and the majority of the resulting parts are given to the Trindriya beings, as they are the most numerous among the remaining three categories (Trindriya, Chaturindriya, and Panchendriya).
* The remaining part is again divided by an innumerable part of the Pavali, and the majority of the resulting parts are given to the Chaturindriya beings. The remaining part is then given to the Panchendriya beings, as they are the least numerous.
* When these parts are combined with their respective equal sections, the number of Dwindriya and other beings is obtained.

**To obtain the number of Trindriya, Dwindriya, Panchendriya, and Chaturindriya beings, the Jagatpratar should be divided by an innumerable part of the Pratarangul. The resulting quotient is then divided by an innumerable part of the Pavali, and the resulting parts are divided into four equal sections. One section is given to each of the Trindriya, Dwindriya, Panchendriya, and Chaturindriya beings. The remaining part is then divided by an innumerable part of the Pavali, and the majority of the resulting parts are added to the equal section of the Trindriya beings. The remaining part is again divided by an innumerable part of the Pavali, and the majority of the resulting parts are added to the equal section of the Dwindriya beings. The remaining part is again divided by an innumerable part of the Pavali, and the majority of the resulting parts are added to the equal section of the Panchendriya beings. The remaining part is then added to the equal section of the Chaturindriya beings. The resulting number represents the number of Trindriya, Dwindriya, Panchendriya, and Chaturindriya beings, which progressively decreases.**

**Subtracting the number of Paryapt beings from their respective general categories gives the number of Aparyapt beings.**

**The Dhavalagranth states:**

* "Prathibhag and Bhagahar are synonymous terms."
* "The square of an innumerable part of the Angul (an innumerable part of the Angul multiplied by an innumerable part of the Angul) is the Pratarangul."
* "An innumerable part of the Angul is the divisor (Prathibhag) for obtaining the number of Panchendriya beings from the Jagatpratar."

**Note:**

* This translation preserves the Jain terms as requested.
* The text refers to the number of beings with different senses (Dwindriya, Trindriya, Chaturindriya, and Panchendriya).
* The text also mentions Paryapt (sufficient) and Aparyapt (insufficient) beings, which are categories within the different sense groups.
* The text uses the terms Pavali and Pratarangul, which are units of measurement used in Jain cosmology.
* The text refers to the Dhavalagranth, a major Jain scripture.

Page #283:
---------------------------
## 250 / Mo. Sa. Jivakanda
## Chapter 101

**(Pratarangul)** ... The portion of the **Sūcyangula** (a unit of measurement) is divided into **Sūcyangula** parts. This is used to determine the number of **Panchendriya** (five-sensed) **Paryāpta** (perfect) beings.

**(Sanyātavaṅga)** This is a part of the **Jagatpratar** (the universe). When **Sūcyangula** is divided by an **asankhyāta** (innumerable) part of **Prāvali** (a unit of time), the resulting quotient is **Pratarangul**. When this **Pratarangul** is squared, it gives the number of **Jīvas** (living beings).

1. **Pratarangul** is the **avahārakāla** (duration of existence) of **Triendriya** (three-sensed) **Paryāpta** beings.

To calculate the **avahārakāla** of different types of beings:

* **Dwīndriya** (two-sensed) **aparyāpta** (imperfect) beings: Divide the **avahārakāla** of **Dwīndriya** beings by an **asankhyāta** part of **Prāvali** and add the quotient to the **avahārakāla** of **Dwīndriya** beings.
* **Triendriya** (three-sensed) beings: Divide the **avahārakāla** of **Dwīndriya** **aparyāpta** beings by an **asankhyāta** part of **Prāvali** and add the quotient to the **avahārakāla** of **Dwīndriya** **aparyāpta** beings.
* **Caturindriya** (four-sensed) **aparyāpta** beings: Divide the **avahārakāla** of **Triendriya** beings by an **asankhyāta** part of **Prāvali** and add the quotient to the **avahārakāla** of **Triendriya** beings.
* **Panchendriya** (five-sensed) **aparyāpta** beings: Divide the **avahārakāla** of **Caturindriya** **aparyāpta** beings by an **asankhyāta** part of **Prāvali** and add the quotient to the **avahārakāla** of **Caturindriya** **aparyāpta** beings.
* **Panchendriya** (five-sensed) **Paryāpta** beings: Multiply the **avahārakāla** of **Panchendriya** **aparyāpta** beings by an **asankhyāta** part of **Prāvali**. This gives the **avahārakāla** of **Panchendriya** **Paryāpta** beings.
* **Caturindriya** (four-sensed) **Paryāpta** beings: Divide the **avahārakāla** of **Panchendriya** **Paryāpta** beings by an **asankhyāta** part of **Prāvali** and add the quotient to the **avahārakāla** of **Panchendriya** **Paryāpta** beings.
* **Triendriya** (three-sensed) **Paryāpta** beings: Divide the **avahārakāla** of **Caturindriya** **Paryāpta** beings by an **asankhyāta** part of **Prāvali** and add the quotient to the **avahārakāla** of **Caturindriya** **Paryāpta** beings.
* **Dwīndriya** (two-sensed) **Paryāpta** beings: Divide the **avahārakāla** of **Triendriya** **Paryāpta** beings by an **asankhyāta** part of **Prāvali** and add the quotient to the **avahārakāla** of **Triendriya** **Paryāpta** beings.

By dividing the **Jagatpratar** by these **avahārakālas**, we can determine the number of **Jīvas** (living beings) in each category.

The above method is explained in both the **Tīkā** (commentary) by **Śrīmad Abhayacandrasuri** and the **Dhavala** (commentary) by **Ācārya Jinabhadragani**. While the methods differ slightly, the final number of **Jīvas** remains the same.

Thus, the **Indriyamārgaṇā** (chapter on senses) in the **Gommatasāra Jīvakanda** is complete.

8. **Kāyamārgaṇā** (chapter on bodies) is the chapter that explains the origin of **sthāvara** (immobile) beings. It is like a **Jīmadagi** (a type of tree) that bears fruit in the form of **Pṛthvīkāyādi** (earth, etc.) and **Chhadma** (false bodies). ||181||

1. **Dhavala** 3, p. 315-316.

Page #284:
---------------------------
## Gatha 151
## Karma/251

**Gatha Meaning:** The **Jati** (birth) **Karma** is said to be inseparable from the **Bas** (fixed) and **Sthavar** (immovable) **Karma**. This is how the **Kay** (body) arises. According to the **Jina** (Jain) teachings, it is described as six types based on the differences in **Prithvi Kay** (earth body) etc. ||151||

**Detailed Meaning:** The **Bas** and **Sthavar** **Karma** are inseparable from the **Jati** **Karma**. The **Kay** of the soul, which arises from the manifestation of these **Karma**, is described as **Trasarup** (mobile form) and **Sthavarup** (immovable form) by the **Sarvagya** (omniscient) **Vitrag** (liberated). The **Kay** is the form of the **Tras** (mobile) or **Sthavar** (immovable) being. This is how it is understood. The **Tras** is characterized by **Udvagjanit Kriya** (action arising from agitation) and the **Sthavar** by **Sthiti Kriya** (action of stillness). This can be understood from the **Nirukti** (etymology). The **Kay** is that which is accumulated through **Pudgal Skandhas** (aggregates of matter), like the **Audarik** (physical) body etc. The soul residing in the body is also considered **Kay** by implication. The **Jiva** (soul) **Vipaki** (resultant) **Jati** **Karma** is the cause of the **Bas** and **Sthavar** **Karma**, and therefore the **Kay** is the **Paryaya** (transformation) of the **Jiva**. This is how it is understood. The **Pudgal** **Vipaki** **Sharira** (body) **Karma** is also considered **Kay**. This **Kay** is of six types based on the differences in **Prithvi** (earth), **Ap** (water), **Tej** (fire), **Vayu** (air), **Vanaspati** (plant), and **Tras** (mobile).

**Note:** The **Kay** is that which is accumulated. The accumulation of bricks etc. does not involve **Vyabhicharadosh** (transgression), because the **Prithvi** (earth) etc. **Karma** should be considered as a qualifier.

**Doubt:** Why is it not explained that the **Kay** is that which is accumulated through the manifestation of the **Pudgal** **Vipaki** **Audarik** (physical) body etc. **Karma**?

**Solution:** This is not the case, because the **Sahkari Rup** (cooperative form) of **Prithvi** (earth) etc. **Karma** cannot accumulate **Nokarma Vargana** (non-karmic categories) solely through the manifestation of the **Audarik** (physical) body etc. **Karma**.

**Doubt:** Will the **Nokarma** (non-karmic) **Pudgal** accumulated through **Prithvi** (earth) etc. by the **Jiva** residing in **Karman Kay Yog** (state of karmic body) acquire the characteristic of **Kay** due to its influence?

**Solution:** This should not be understood in this way, because the cause of the accumulation of **Nokarma** (non-karmic) **Pudgal** is the **Prithvi** (earth) etc. **Karma** which is **Sahkrit** (co-operative) with the **Audarik** (physical) body etc. **Karma**. This **Sattva** (essence) is also found in the **Karman Kay Yog** (state of karmic body), therefore the characteristic of **Kay** is also applicable in that state.

**Or:** The **Audarik** (physical) body etc. **Pudgal Pind** (aggregate of matter) accumulated through the **Yogarup** (state of yoga) **Atma** (soul) is **Kay**.

**Doubt:** Even with this explanation of **Kay**, the previous objection is not resolved. That is, even in this way, the **Jiva** in the **Karman Kay Yog** (state of karmic body) acquires the characteristic of **A Kay** (non-body).

**Solution:** This is not the case, because the **Karma** **Pudgal Pind** (aggregate of matter) accumulated through the **Yogarup** (state of yoga) **Atma** (soul) is found in the **Kay Yog** (state of body) in a state of **Sadbhav** (harmony). That is, when the **Atma** (soul) is in the **Karman Kay Yog** (state of karmic body), its **Jnana Avarana** (veil of knowledge) etc. eight **Karma** are in a state of **Sadbhav** (harmony), therefore the characteristic of **Kay** is applicable.

**References:**

1. **Siddhant Chakravarti** by **Srimad Bhav Chandra Suri**
2. **Dhaval** **Purva** **1**, page 1327-138.

Page #285:
---------------------------
## 252/Go. Sa. Jivakanda
##  Verse 181

**Doubt:** In the state of Karma-yoga, due to the non-existence of the non-karmic pudgala-pinda, which is obtained through the accumulation of karma by the self-directed yogic activity, can the term 'body' not be applied to the living being in the state of Karma-yoga?

**Solution:** Due to the existence of karma, which is the cause of the accumulation of the non-karmic pudgala-pinda, in the state of Karma-yoga, the term 'body' becomes applicable to the living being in the state of Karma-yoga. It is also said:

"The pudgala-pinda accumulated through the self-directed activity is the body."

This body is said to be of six types in Jainism, based on the distinction of earth-body, etc., and these six bodies are of two types: Sakaya and Sthavara-kaya.

The body resembling earth is called the earth-body, and the living beings who possess it are called earth-bodied.

**Doubt:** If the earth-bodied is defined in this way, then how can the living beings in the state of Karma-yoga be considered earth-bodied?

**Solution:** This is not the case. Just as the term 'this has happened' is used for an action that has not yet happened, similarly, the term 'earth-bodied' becomes applicable to the living beings in the state of Karma-yoga. Or, the living beings who are the inheritors of the earth-bodied name-karma are called earth-bodied. Similarly, the water-bodied, etc., should also be understood.

**Doubt:** Are the earth, etc., karmas well-known?

**Solution:** Yes, because the existence of the earth-bodied, etc., karmas cannot be otherwise, therefore, the existence of the earth, etc., name-karmas is established.

**Doubt:** According to the explanation that those whose nature is to stay in one place are stationary, why is the nature of stationary beings not described?

**Solution:** No, because if such a definition is accepted, then the air-bodied, fire-bodied, and water-bodied living beings would have to be considered non-stationary due to their movement from one place to another.

**Doubt:** Let the air-bodied and fire-bodied be considered non-stationary, because they are said to be non-stationary in the scriptures.

**Counter-doubt:** Which scripture is that?

**Answer to the counter-doubt:** That scripture is as follows:

"Those who are stationary due to their subtle body, and those who are mobile due to their subtle body, are of that type. The living beings who are devoid of death and transformation are like this." (1. Dhavala Pu. 1, p. 138-136; 2. Panchastikaya Ga. 111)

Page #286:
---------------------------
##  Verse 182
##  Kay Margga/253

- Of the five, Earth Kay, Water Kay, and Plant Kay are three that are stationary, while Fire Kay and Air Kay are two that are mobile. Earth, Water, Plant, Fire, and Air, all five are devoid of mind-results and are also one-sensed.

**Solution:** No, because such a decision has not been made in the aforementioned Pragama Sutra. Secondly, this Agam contradicts the Sutra of the Dvadasanga.

**Doubt:** Which Sutra is that?

**Solution:** "Tarukayiya Voindhiya- Pahudi Jav Jogikevaliti. 9 Hindriya se Adi lekar Prayogkevali tak us Jiva hote hain." From one-sensed to the stage of the Perfect Knower, there are such beings. By the Pariseṣa Nyaya, it is known through this Sutra that one-sensed beings are stationary. In the aforementioned Agam, Fire Kay and Air Kay are also called one-sensed, therefore they cannot be mobile, but they are stationary, as proven by the Pariseṣa Nyaya.

"Stationary beings are stationary, this is not the primary meaning like in etymology, they are stationary due to the name-karma-udaya of stationary." They have attained the meaning of "Tras" (stationary).

**Doubt:** "Trasī Udvege" - the word "Tras" originates from this root, which means those who are agitated, fearful, and run away, are they stationary?

**Solution:** No, because the aforementioned characteristic does not occur in beings who are enclosed in an egg in the womb, unconscious, or asleep, therefore the context of their being stationary will arise. Therefore, one should not consider "Tras" and "Stationary" in relation to walking and staying.

Earth, Water, Fire, and Air, in the bodies of these four, the four qualities of color, taste, smell, and touch are present in their respective proportions.

**Verse 182:** The body of Earth, Water, Fire, and Air, due to name-karma-udaya, becomes endowed with its own appropriate class, taste, smell, and touch.

**Special Note:** According to the Vaisheshika school of thought, Earth, Water, Fire, and Air are the four elements. Of these, Earth has all four qualities - color, taste, smell, and touch, but Water does not have smell. Fire lacks smell and taste. 

1. Patukhandagam Sant Prarupana Sutra 44.
2. "Ke Punah Stavarah iti Vedekendiya: | Pariseṣat |" Dhaval Pu. 1, p. 275-276.
3. Dhaval Pu. 1, p. 265-266.
4. "Ete Panchapi [Dhaval Pu. 1, p. 265].
5. Dhaval Pu. 1, p. 266.
6. Dhaval Pu. 1, p. 266.

Page #287:
---------------------------
## Chapter 254 of the Jiva Kanda

Verse 12 is missing, and the air lacks smell, taste, and form. However, the Vaisheshika's claim is not justified, because the four elements are formed from the same type of atoms. But due to specific transformations, some qualities are manifest, while others remain latent. In some, the smell quality is latent, in some smell and taste, and in some smell, taste, and color are all latent. This is why they are not perceived by the senses. However, no atom or element can be devoid of any of the four qualities: touch, taste, smell, and color. Because the absence of a quality would lead to the destruction of the atom.

This verse is composed keeping the Vaisheshika view in mind, as it only mentions the four qualities of touch, taste, smell, and color in the bodies of the four stationary elements: earth, water, fire, and air. Among them, touch is of eight types: soft, rough, heavy, light, cold, hot, smooth, and rough. Taste is of five types: bitter, sour, pungent, sweet, and astringent. Smell is of two types: fragrant and foul. Color is of five types: black, blue, yellow, white, and red. Depending on the combination of atoms, there are countless variations of these qualities. The salty taste is included within the sweet taste. Even though smell, etc., are latent in water, etc., their presence is still perceived due to the manifest nature of the touch quality, which is in harmony with them. This is because the other qualities are inseparably connected with the touch quality, making it the dominant one.

There are 36 types of earth, including earth, sand, sugar, etc., which are as follows:

* Earth, sand, sugar, boiled stone, salt, iron, copper, zinc, 
* Spadic stone, hingul, death stone, sasganjan, pavala, 
* Ambapadlagbhavallu, vadar kaya, mani vidhiya, 
* Gomjhage, rujage, phalihe, lohidake, 
* Chandapbhe, velie, jalakate, surakate, 
* Geru, chandan, vavag, kyamoe, tah masaragallo.

Know these types of earth and avoid them.

Page #288:
---------------------------
## Verse 182
## Kashramargna / 255

Lead, silver, gold, vajra (diamond), orpiment, realgar, manasila, green-colored vegetation, anjana, coral, bhodal, smooth and shining sand, karketanamariṇ, rajavartaka maṇi, pulakavargamariṇ, sphatikamariṇ, paragamani, chandrakantmariṇ, beduryamani, jalakantmani, suryakantmariṇ, geru, rudhirakshamani, chandan gandhamani, maraktama ring, pukhraj, nilamariṇ and vidrumamani are all the different forms of earth. Due to these different forms, the earth-bodied beings are also of thirty-six types.

## Prose 133
## 2

Prose, snow, mist, thick water droplets, subtle water droplets, water produced from chandrakantmani, water produced from the beginning, ocean, pond, and water produced from dhanavat, etc., dense water or haradanu, i.e., water produced from ponds, oceans, etc., and dense water, i.e., water produced from clouds, etc., all these are called water-bodied beings in Jainism.

## 3

Embers, flames, achi (agnikaran, spark), sura (fire from embers), pure fire (fire produced from lightning or suryakant, etc.), common fire with smoke, etc. All these are called fire-bodied beings.

## 4

Common air, udhram (cyclone), utkali (air agitated with water waves), mandali (air rotating touching the earth), gunja (resonating air), mahavat (storm), dhanavat and tanuvat, all these are air-bodied beings.

## 5

Earth, water, fire, and air, each of these is of four types. Earth, earth-body, earth-bodied, earth-being; water, water-body, water-bodied, water-being; fire, fire-body, fire-bodied, fire-being; air, air-body, air-bodied, air-being.

## 6

In the earth path, the dust that is a sub-product is earth. It holds the qualities of consciousness and hardness.

Page #289:
---------------------------
## 256 / Go. Sa. Jivakanda
**Verse 1=2**

There is no *karma* called *sthavar* (stationary) arising in the earth because it is not sentient. However, it is called earth due to the action of *prathan* (first).

**Prithvikay** - The word *kay* means body. The body that the earth being has left to be reborn elsewhere, such a body of the earth being is *prithvikay*. For example, the body of a dead human. Similarly, bricks, etc. These are also insentient. There is no *karma* called *sthavar* *prithvikay* arising in them. There is no sin of violence in their destruction.

**Prithvikayik** - That which contains the earth being is *prithvikayik*. There is sin in its destruction.

**Prithvijeev** - The being in which the *karma* called *sthavar* *prithvikay* has arisen, but who has not yet taken the earth as their body, such a being in *vigrah* (disintegration) state is called *prithvijeev*. It has a *karman* *kay* (body) *yoga* (union).

**Jal** - The water that has been sprinkled, thrown here and there, or has dripped from a cloth, is *jal*.

**Jalkaay** - The *jalkaayik* from which the beings have perished, or hot water, is *jalkaay*.

**Jalkaayik** - The water that the *jaljeev* has taken as its body is *jalkaayik*.

**Jaljeev** - The being in *vigrah* state who will take water as their body in one, two, or three periods, is *jaljeev*.

**Agni** - The fire that has been thrown here and there, the fire that has been in contact with water, etc., the fire that is covered with abundant ashes, the fire that has a little heat, is *agni*.

**Agnikaay** - Ashes, etc., or the *agnikaayik* that the *agnijeev* has left, is *agnikaay*.

**Agnikaayik** - The fire-like body that the *agnijeev* has taken is *agnikaayik*.

**Pragnijeev** - The being who is going to take the fire-like body, such a being in *vigrah* state is *pragnijeev*.

**Vayu** - The moving air that contains a collection of dust is *vayu*.

**Vayukaay** - The *pudgal* (matter) of such air from which the being has departed is *vayukaay*.

**Vayukaayik** - The air that is combined with the *vayujeev* is *vayukaayik*.

**Vayujeev** - The being in *vigrah* state who is going to take the air-like body, such a...

Page #290:
---------------------------
Chapter 182
Kayamargarana/257
A jiva is a living being. One should also refer to chapter 11 of Siddhanta Sara Deepika on this topic.
Question: Which of these four categories are sentient and which are insentient?
Answer: The first two categories are insentient, non-living. The remaining two, 'Kayik' (having a body) and 'Vigraha-Gati' (having a body and movement) are sentient.
Question: What is the difference between the two sentient categories?
Answer: The third category, Kayik jiva, has a body, while the fourth category, jiva, is without a body. This is the difference between these two sentient categories.
Question: What is the difference between the two insentient categories?
Answer: The first insentient category is currently devoid of life and therefore insentient, but it is a potential birthplace for earth-based jivas. Jivas can be born in it, and it will become sentient when a jiva is born. For example, the dust on a road is insentient as long as people are walking on it, but when movement stops at night, earth-based jivas are born, and the insentient dust becomes sentient. However, bricks and other earth-based objects cannot give birth to earth-based jivas. Similarly, the first category, 'Viloditha Jal' (water that has been stirred), 'Dohare Vastra Roopi Yantra Dwara Galit Jal' (water that has been filtered through a double-layered cloth), or water made from hydrogen and oxygen, or water produced from Chandrakanta Mani (a type of gemstone), is currently insentient, but it will become sentient when water-based jivas are born in it over time. However, the second category, 'Jal-Kay' (water-based body), is hot water. Since the birthplace of water-based jivas has been destroyed, water-based jivas cannot be born again in hot water. The first category, 'Agni' (fire) covered with ash, or fire in the form of electricity, or fire produced from Surya Kanta Mani (a type of gemstone), is currently insentient, but when the ash is removed, fire-based jivas will be born in this first category of fire over time, making it sentient. However, the second category, 'Agni-Kay' (fire-based body), where the heat has dissipated, cannot give birth to fire-based jivas in such ash. Thus, the first category becomes sentient, while the second category does not. This is the difference between the two. Because it becomes sentient over time, the first category is also called 'Kinchit Praranshit' (slightly sentient).
1. Tattvarthavritti 2/13 p. 14; Mulachar (Phalatan) p. 121. 2. "Chaturgamaphi Prithivishbadvachyatve'pi Shuddha Pudgal Prithivya, Jiyaparitayakadhivikaayasya cha neha grahan tayor netantvatvena tatkarmaudayasambhavataskritadhivivyapadeshasiddha. Lamjivaadhikaraatprithivikaayatvatvenagrihittvatah prithivikaayikaray vigrahagatyapanasya prithivijiivasya grahan tamoreba prithivishravagnama karmaudayam adravaatprithivinyapadesha ghatanat." (Moovanavot ka Tattvarth Sutra 2/13). 3. "Evam Vilohitham Yatrata Viksiptan Vastradigalitam Jalamapa Uchyate." (Tattvachati 2/13); "Math Jalamy Prasukavavam Kiyakalamiti Vargaayanti Muhurta Galitam Tayam Prasurf Praharavayam. Ugodakam Mahaaranam Tatah Mammucchim Bhadat." (Shrishivakotiyacharyapranita Ratnamala).

Page #291:
---------------------------
##  25/Go. Sa, Jivakanda
##  Verse 153

**Due to the arising of the Badar karma, the bodies of the Prithvikayika and other Jivas become Badar and Sukshma. The body with the Ghat (gross) characteristics is Badar (gross) and the body with the Aghat (subtle) characteristics is Sukshma.**

**Special Meaning:** Stationary Jivas are of two types - Badar and Sukshma. Those whose Jiva-vipaki Badar-namakarma arises are Badar Jivas. Those whose Sukshma Jiva-vipaki-namakarma arises are Sukshma Jivas. The body of Badar Jivas is also Badar and the body of Sukshma Jivas is also Sukshma.

**Doubt:** The word Badar is a synonym for gross, and the nature of grossness is not fixed. Therefore, it is not known which Jivas are gross. If it is said that those who are perceivable by the senses are gross, then it does not work, because according to this, those gross Jivas who are not perceivable by the eye at the time of perception would become invisible. Those who are not perceivable by the eye would be considered Badar, and there would be no difference between Sukshma and Badar.

**Solution:** This doubt arises from ignorance of the nature of the Paga. The word Badar is not a synonym for gross, but it refers to the Badar-namakarma. Therefore, the Jiva also becomes Badar due to the arising of the Badar-namakarma.

**Doubt:** The karma that produces grossness in the body is called Badar, and the karma that produces subtlety is called Sukshma. However, that which is not perceivable by the moving sense is a Sukshma body, and that which is perceivable by it is a Badar body. Therefore, the Jivas with the arising of Sukshma and Badar karma, and with Sukshma and Badar bodies, are called Sukshma and Badar respectively. This proves that those who are perceivable by the eye are Badar, and those who are not perceivable by the eye are Sukshma. If this characteristic is not accepted, then there will be no difference between Sukshma and Badar.

**Solution:** This is not the case, because there is no contradiction in the statement that something can be gross but not perceivable by the eye.

**Doubt:** The body that is countless times larger than the Sukshma body is called Badar, and the Jivas with that body are called Badar by convention. Or, the body that is countless times smaller than the Badar body is called Sukshma, and the Jivas with that Sukshma body are called Sukshma by convention.

**1. Srimad Abhayachandra Suri Krit Dika.**
**2. "Yadudayad Jivanam Chakshu-pisharira-tvalakshanam Badar-tvam Bhavati Tad Badar Nam, Prithviyaderekaikasariramp Chakshu Jhava-abhave'pi Badar-parinam-visheshad Bahunam Samudaya-chakshusha Grahanam Bhavati. Tadvipritam Mukshma-nam, Yadudayad Vadanam Samuditana-ag Pi Jantu Shari-ganam Chakshur-mahyata Na Bhavati." Shwetaambar Karma Prakriti.

Page #292:
---------------------------
## Karma-Marg 256

**Solution:** This idea is also not correct, because the subtle body, which is created by the subtle karma, is infinitely more subtle than the gross body. Therefore, the statement above contains the fault of anekanta. Hence, it is proven that those beings who experience the rise of gross karma are gross, and those who experience the rise of subtle karma are subtle.

**Doubt:** What is the difference between the rise of subtle karma and the rise of gross karma?

**Solution:** The rise of gross karma leads to the formation of a body that is capable of being affected by other material objects, while the rise of subtle karma leads to the formation of a body that is not capable of being affected by other material objects. This is the difference between the two.

**Verse 183**

**Doubt:** Since the body of subtle beings is subtle, it is not affected by other material objects. Therefore, there should be no acceptance of the karma of liberation, which involves interaction with material objects.

**Solution:** No, because if we accept this, then there would be no difference between the subtle body, which is infinitely less subtle than the gross body and experiences the rise of subtle karma, and the gross body, which experiences the rise of gross karma. Therefore, there would be no special characteristic of the subtle body, and it would also not be affected by material objects. This would lead to a contradiction.

**Doubt:** Should we accept this?

**Solution:** No, because if we accept this, there would be no difference between the rise of subtle karma and the rise of gross karma.

**Doubt:** The rise of subtle karma leads to the formation of a subtle body. Therefore, there is a difference between the rise of the two.

**Solution:** No, because the subtle body is also capable of experiencing the rise of gross karma, which leads to the formation of a gross body that is infinitely less subtle than the subtle body.

From the above statement, it is proven that subtle karma determines the formation of a body that is not affected by material objects, and gross karma determines the formation of a body that is affected by material objects.

**Beings are of two types:** Gross and subtle.

* **Gross beings:** Gross earth-bodied, subtle earth-bodied.
* **Water-bodied beings:** Gross water-bodied, subtle water-bodied.
* **Fire-bodied beings:** Gross fire-bodied, subtle fire-bodied.
* **Air-bodied beings:** Gross air-bodied, subtle air-bodied.

**References:**

1. "Badasyand jiva apjjannttayass jahaniya mogana asankhejjaguga ||40|| Panjantrastra jahaniya shrogahana shrasankhejjaguna ||47||" [P.P. 11, p. 58-56].
2. P.P. 1, p. 249.
3. Dhaval P.P. 1, p. 251.
4. V.P. 1, p. 253.
5. G.P. 1, p. 267.

**Suhumarigodajiva Rivvati**

Page #293:
---------------------------
260/Mo. Sa. Jivakanda

Knowing the four divisions,
Of the gross and subtle bodies,
Is like one part in an innumerable number of dhanangulas.
The gross beings depend on a base,
But the subtle beings are everywhere without obstruction. || 184 ||

**Verse 164**

**Meaning of the Verse:** O worthy ones! The comprehension of the four types of stationary beings, both gross and subtle, is like one part in an innumerable number of dhanangulas. Gross, meaning gross beings, depend on a base, but subtle beings are filled everywhere without obstruction. || 1864 ||

**Special Meaning:** A dhanangula is obtained by multiplying a barley grain by three. The number of spaces in that dhanangula, when divided into innumerable parts, one part is an innumerable part of an angula. The bodies of the gross and subtle beings of earth, water, fire, and air, have that much comprehension, meaning that the bodies of those beings occupy an innumerable part of a dhanangula of space.

**Doubt:** What is the division of a dhanangula of space?

**Solution:** An innumerable part of a palya.

**Doubt:** Is this a measure of the least comprehension or the greatest comprehension?

**Solution:** From the least comprehension of the body of a subtle, insufficient, air-bodied being to the greatest comprehension of the body of a gross, sufficient, earth-bodied being, all the comprehensions of the body, meaning the comprehensions of the bodies of all the subtle and gross, earth-bodied, water-bodied, fire-bodied, and air-bodied beings, are an innumerable part of an angula.

**Doubt:** The comprehension of all bodies is different, how can they all have the same measure?

**Solution:** There are innumerable divisions of an innumerable part of an angula, because the number innumerable is also of innumerable types. From a general perspective, they are all an innumerable part of an angula, but from a specific perspective, there is a difference in their magnitude.

**Doubt:** Is the difference in magnitude in terms of specific form or in terms of multiplication?

**Solution:** There is a difference in magnitude in terms of specific form as well as in terms of multiplication. This is clear from the previous statement about the comprehension of the body.

**Doubt:** How is it possible that even with an increase in multiplication in an innumerable part of an angula, it remains an innumerable part of an angula?

1. "Angula sambhagam badarahuma" [Moolachar Paryatyadhikār 12 Ga. 46]; "Desehi badara khalu sumehi girantaro loshro." [Moolachar Paryapyadhikār 12 Ga. 161]. 2. Go. Ji. Ga. 64-112.

Page #294:
---------------------------
##  Gaba 165
## Kayamaganga/261

**Solution:** When an innumerable part of an angul is multiplied by an innumerable number, there is an increase in proportion compared to the previous one. However, the product obtained by multiplying by an innumerable number is also an innumerable part of an angul. For example, 4 is an innumerable part of the number 100. Even when four is multiplied by an innumerable number (5), the number obtained (445 - 20) is also an innumerable part of the number 100.

The bodies of the Vādaras (animals) depend on others, such as the Vādaras living on the Vātavalaya (air-ring), the Pāṭha (earth) and the Vimāna (planes) due to their wonder, so that they do not fall down. And the subtle bodies are found everywhere in water, land, etc., i.e., in the Lokākāśa (world-space), because they are free from obstruction. Vādaras live in one part of the Lokākāśa, but even one part of the Lokākāśa is not devoid of subtle beings.

**Doubt:** If the bodies of subtle beings are free from obstruction, why are they not found outside the Lokākāśa?

**Solution:** As long as there is Dharma-āstikāya (body of Dharma), there is the movement of Jīva-pudgalas (living particles). The absence of the external cooperating cause, Dharma-āstikāya, makes the movement of Jīva-pudgalas outside the Lokākāśa impossible.

The statement of the Vana-spati (plant) sthāvara-kāya (stationary body) is made through thirteen Gāthās.

**Gāthā 18:**

**Gāthārtha:** The Jīva becomes a Vana-spati due to the karma-udaya (karma-arising) of the Vana-spati. That Vana-spati is of two types, due to the difference between the general (common) and the particular. Each Vana-spati is also of two types... the established each Vana-spati and the unestablished each Vana-spati.

**Viśeṣārtha:** There are five sub-divisions of the karma-udaya called sthāvara-nāma-karma (stationary name karma). Earth, Ay (water), Teja (fire), Vāyu (air) and Vana-spati. Out of these five, the Jīva becomes Vana-spati-kāyika (plant-bodied) due to the karma-udaya of the Vana-spati sthāvara-nāma-karma. Those whose each body is each body due to nāma-karma-udaya, etc., are each Vana-spati. Those whose each, i.e., separate bodies are separate, are each body Jīvas, such as the Khaira, etc., plants. One Jīva has one body.

**Doubt:** When the characteristic of each body is described in this way, the bodies of the five sthāvaras, such as the earth-bodied, etc., also get the designation of each body.

1. Mūlācāra Paryāptyadhikāra 12 Gā. 161's commentary p. 282.
2. Lokālokāvacchedako Dhamādhiciv Gatistithi Hetū Mantavyāviti. || Pañcāstikāya Gāthā 63's commentary.
3. Tahmā Ghāmmādhāmmāgamaraṇa Dvidikāraṇāriṇa Gāsāṁ. Idi Jigaṇavarehi Bhāgadāṁ Logasahāvaṁ Sāṁgatāṇaṁ. || Paṁ.Kā.Gāthā ||
4. "Pratyekam Pṛthakśarīram Yeṣāṁ Te Pratyek Śarīgaḥ." [Ghavan Pu. 1 p. 268]
5. "Ekamy Jīvasya Eka Śarīramityarthaḥ." [Śrī Abhayacandrācāryakṛta Ṭīkā].

Page #295:
---------------------------
## Translation:

**262 / Mo. Sa. Jivakanda**
**Verse 185**

**Doubt:** This objection is not valid, because it is desirable to consider earth-body etc. as every body.
**Solution:** Then why not apply every adjective to earth-body etc. as well?
**Doubt:** No, because just as in plants, there is a common plant that can be negated from every plant, in the same way, no such distinction is found in earth etc. that is different from every body, i.e., a common body. Therefore, there is no need to give this adjective to earth etc.
**Doubt:** In every plant, the two adjectives "coarse" and "subtle" are not found, therefore every plant attains the state of being an object of experience. But apart from "coarse" and "subtle", no third alternative in the form of an object of experience is found, therefore, in the absence of an alternative in the form of an object of experience, every body will also attain the effect of plants?
**Solution:** This is not the case, because every plant exists in the form of "coarse", therefore it cannot have an effect.
**Doubt:** Every plant is not called "coarse", then how can it be known that every plant is "coarse"?
**Solution:** No, because the existence of every plant cannot be proved by any other form, therefore its existence is proved by the form of "coarse".
**Doubt:** Although subtlety - the existence of a specific being - is possible in every plant, because its proof is obtained through the principle of "sattvanyathanupapatti" (non-existence of the opposite). Therefore, this "sattvanyathanupapatti" form is non-categorical.
**Solution:** No, because "coarse" is a characteristic that is universal (extensive), therefore it is found in all beings. Therefore, every plant being is "coarse", not subtle, because just as in the common body, there is an exception method that obstructs the universal method, i.e., in common bodies, besides the "coarse" distinction, the "subtle" distinction is also found, in the same way, the exception method is not found in every plant. There is a complete absence of the "subtle" distinction in them.
**Doubt:** How is it known that "coarse" is a universal characteristic in every plant?
**Solution:** No, because in every plant and in beings, both "coarse" and "subtle" adjectives are not found, therefore subtlety cannot be universal, because without the scriptures, knowledge of subtlety cannot be obtained through direct perception etc. Therefore, there is a contradiction in considering the subtlety known through direct perception etc. as universal like "coarse".

**1. Vayal Gu. 1 p. 26**
**2. Dhaval Pu. 1 p. 269**
**3. Dhaval Pu. 1 p. 269**

Page #296:
---------------------------
## Verse 186-187

**Verse 186**

**Kay Margana / 263**

Plants established from the Badar Nigoda are all established plants.

**Doubt:** Which plants are established from the Badar Nigoda?

**Solution:** Plants like Thuhur, Predarkh, and Mooli are established from the Badar Nigoda. 

The distinction of plants and their established and non-established stages, in relation to seeds, is as follows: Mulabija, Agrabija, Parvabij, Kandabij, Skandhabij, Bijarooh, and Sammuchchhim.

**Verse Meaning:** Mulabija, Agrabija, Parvabij, Kandabij, Skandhabij, Bijarooh, and Sammuchchhim are all said to be of two types, established and non-established, due to the distinction of each and every established plant.

**Explanation:** Plants whose seed is the root are Mulabija plants, like ginger, turmeric, etc. Plants whose seed is their own front part are Agrabija, like Graiyank (Netravala), etc. Plants whose seed is their joint are Parvabij plants, like Santha, etc. Plants whose seed is the tuber are Kandabij plants, like Pidalu, Ratallu, Suran, etc. Plants whose seed is the stem are Skandhabij plants, like Salar (Salai), Palas, etc. Plants that are attached to their own seed are Bijarooh, like wheat, Shali, etc. Plants whose root, etc., do not have a fixed seed, and are born by taking in the Pudgal Skandhas from all sides, are Sammuchchhim plants, like Dub, etc.

Although the birth of all plants is Sammuchchhim, not Garbhaja, yet those that do not have a fixed seed, and are born spontaneously anywhere when favorable conditions are met, are said to be a different type of Sammuchchhim plant. All these plants are called Anantakaaya in the Parmagam because they are established from the bodies of countless Nigoda Jivas, even though they are each a body. And because the word 'cha' removes the non-established, these plants are both established and non-established. The excellent understanding of the established is the measure of the countless parts of the Ghanangul.

**Verse 187**

**Verse Meaning:** The same Jiva or another Jiva is born in the Yoni-bhoot seed, and these Muladi are each, i.e., established, in the first stage.

**Notes:**

1. Dhaval Pu. 1 p. 271.
2. Swami Kartikeyanupreksha Pu. 66. This is verse no. 160.
3. Shrimad Prabhayachandra Siddhanta Chakravarti's commentary.
4. Jivatatvapradip commentary.

Page #297:
---------------------------
##  264 / Go. Ma. Jivakanda
##  Verses 188-190

**Special Meaning:**  Mulabija, Agrabija, Parvabija, Kandabija, Skandhabija, Bijarūha, i.e., the main parts of a living being, whose power to sprout has not been destroyed. When water, earth, air, and seasons, etc., become the cause, then the same living being that was previously in that seed, or another living being, by virtue of its change in motion, arises in that seed. Mulaadik, which are established in the Agamas, are also unestablished in every way at the time of taking a body or until the time of Antarmūhūrta. After Antarmūhūrta, they become the shelter of Nigodajiva, then they become established in every way.

**Sri Matrachandra Vidyādeva** has written in three verses the special characteristics of established and unestablished:

**Verse 188:**  Samābhanga, Mahīruha, and Chhinna-ruha, which have visible veins, lines, and knots, and which break evenly, and in both breaks, there is no connecting thread or fiber, and which sprout even after being cut, are called ordinary plants. The opposite of this is called a "pratiṣṭhita-pratyek" plant.

**Verse 189:**  Those plants whose roots, tubers, skin, new shoots or sprouts, small branches (twigs), leaves, flowers, fruits, and seeds, when broken, break evenly, i.e., into two equal pieces, without any stopping, are called "su-pratiṣṭhita-pratyek" plants. On the other hand, those whose break is not even are called "pratiṣṭhita-pratyek" plants.

**Verse 190:**  The plant whose tuber, root, small branch, or stem (trunk) has a thick bark is called "anantājīya-sampratiṣṭhita-pratyek." The one with thin bark is called "apratiṣṭhita-pratyek" plant.

**Special Meaning:**  In the commentary of verse 128 of the Kotika, on page 66, Pandit Kailashchandraji has written that the "pratiṣṭhita-pratyek" plant, whose layers, branches, and knots are not visible, which breaks evenly into two pieces when broken, and has no connecting thread or fiber in the middle, and which sprouts again even after being cut, is called ordinary, i.e., "sampratiṣṭhita-pratyek." Here, the "sampratiṣṭhita-pratyek" plant body is called ordinary because it is the shelter of ordinary living beings. The plant in which the above things are not present, i.e., in which stripes, etc., are clearly visible, which does not break into equal pieces when broken, and which has a connecting thread when broken, is called "pratiṣṭhita-pratyek" body. In Mulaachar, the verse 216 of Panchaacharaadhikār is similar to the above verse 190 of Jivakanda. There also, Vasunandi Siddhantavarti has described it in the same way.

1. According to the commentary of Srimadandrasiddhantachakravarti.
2. This verse is the 216th verse in the Bhulaachar Adhikār 5.
3. All three verses are mentioned on page 66 of the commentary of verse 120 of Swa Ka. Anu. (Rayachandra Granthamala)

Page #298:
---------------------------
## Verse 161
## Kayamarg/265

**Special Meaning:** This verse explains the characteristics of **ordinary plants** (**sādhāraṇa vanaspati**), which are considered **ordinary beings** (**sādhāraṇa jīva**) in Jainism. The verse uses the term **"jahirūk"** as an example, which refers to plants like **"manjiṭh"** (madder) and others.

**Explanation:**

* **Gūḍhasira:** Plants with **hidden veins** (**gūḍhasira**), meaning the veins are not visible on the surface. Examples include cucumber, gourd, and pumpkin, where the veins are not visible in the early stages of growth.
* **Gūḍhasandhi:** Plants with **hidden joints** (**gūḍhasandhi**), meaning the joints are not visible or are not clearly defined. Examples include oranges, pomegranates, and other fruits where the joints are not visible in the early stages of growth.
* **Gūḍhaparva:** Plants with **hidden nodes** (**gūḍhaparva**), meaning the nodes are not visible or are not clearly defined. Examples include sugarcane and bamboo, where the nodes are not visible in the early stages of growth.

**Ordinary Plants:** Plants that exhibit all three characteristics (**gūḍhasira**, **gūḍhasandhi**, and **gūḍhaparva**) in their early stages of growth are considered **ordinary plants**.

**Ordinary Beings:** Ordinary plants are considered **ordinary beings** because they have a **single body** (**nigoda śarīra**) and are **dependent** (**āśraya**) on other beings for their existence.

**Other Characteristics of Ordinary Plants:**

* **Samabhanga:** Plants that break into **similar pieces** (**samabhanga**) when cut, like chalk.
* **Chinnarūha:** Plants that **regrow** (**chinnarūha**) after being cut, like creepers.

**Non-Ordinary Plants:** Plants that do not exhibit the characteristics of **gūḍhasira**, **gūḍhasandhi**, **gūḍhaparva**, **samabhanga**, or **chinnarūha** are considered **non-ordinary plants**. Examples include coconut, tamarind, palm fruit, and mango.

**Verse Meaning:**

**Ordinary beings** (**sādhāraṇa jīva**) are those who have a **single body** (**nigoda śarīra**) and are born from the **ordinary karma** (**sādhāraṇa karma**). These beings are of two types: **bādar** (gross) and **sūkṣma** (subtle).

**Special Meaning:**

**Ordinary plants** are born from the **ordinary karma** (**sādhāraṇa karma**) which arises from the **stationary karma** (**sthāvara karma**). These plants have a **single body** (**nigoda śarīra**).

**Question:** What is a **single body** (**nigoda śarīra**)?

**Answer:** A **single body** (**nigoda śarīra**) is a body that is **shared by many souls** (**jīva**) and is not **differentiated** (**bhinna**) into individual bodies.

**Reference:** Dhvala Purva, 1, page 266.

Page #299:
---------------------------
## 266/Go. Sa. Jivakanda
**Verse 162**

How can numerous beings be born from a single body, when the pudgala, bound to different beings, becomes vipāki, and the skandhas of the pāhara-vargaṇāmas, by means of the graudārita nokarma-skandhas, which are the cause of the body's form and give different fruits to different beings, cause the body to be relieved of its form?

**Solution:** There is no contradiction, because the pudgala, which is situated in one place and is connected with all the beings situated there, produces a single body for all the beings. This is because the effect produced by a common cause is also common. Since the effect is in accordance with the cause, it cannot be denied.

**Doubt:** What is meant by "nigoda"?

**Solution:** "Ni" means "connected with", "go" means "earth, region, dwelling", "da" means "gives", therefore "nigoda" means "a body that gives dwelling to countless beings in a limited space".

**Verse 192**

**Sāhāragamāhāro sāhāranaṁ māe pāraṇagahaṇaṁ ca |
Sāhāranaṁ jīvāṇaṁ sāhāranaṁ lakkharaṇaṁ bhariṇayaṁ ||19||**

**Meaning:** Ordinary food and ordinary inhalation and exhalation are said to be the characteristics of ordinary beings.

**Special Meaning:** This sūtra-gāthā describes the characteristics of both the embodied being and the body, because knowing the characteristics of one leads to knowing the characteristics of the other.

The taking in of pudgala-skandhas suitable for the body is called food. It is ordinary, meaning common.

**Doubt:** How can the food taken by one being be the food of countless beings at that time?

**Solution:** There is no contradiction, because the power generated by that food is taken in by the newly born beings at the time of their birth.

**Doubt:** If this is the case, then instead of saying "food is ordinary", shouldn't it be said "the power generated by food is ordinary"?

**Solution:** There is no fault in this, because by treating the cause as the effect, the power generated by food is also established as food.

**References:**

1. Dhavala Pu. 1 p. 270.
2. Svāmikātikēyānuprekṣā Sanskrit Tīkā p. 66.
3. Dhavala Pu. 1 p. 270 and Gu. 3 p. 332; Prā. Pa. Sa. p. 17 Gā. 82; Dhavala Pu. 14 p. 222, but this is the original verse 122.
4. Dhavala Pu. 14 p. 226.
5. Jayadhavala Pu. 14 p. 227.

Page #300:
---------------------------
## Gatha 162
## Kayamargna/267

The word 'Paaran' means exhalation and the word 'Apaan' means inhalation. The intake of 'Anapan' i.e. the intake of food and breath is common to all living beings.

**Doubt:** To which living beings is it common?

**Resolution:** It is common to ordinary living beings. This is stated in the Gatha Sutra by the phrase 'Saahaaran Jivaanam'.

**Doubt:** Who are ordinary living beings?

**Resolution:** Living beings residing in one body are ordinary.

Living beings residing in different bodies do not have commonality with living beings residing in different bodies, because they lack the commonality arising from the dwelling of one body. This means that if the first-born Nigoda living beings become sufficient through body sufficiency, sensory sufficiency, food sufficiency, and exhalation-inhalation sufficiency by the most inferior sufficient time, then the Nigoda living beings with weak yoga born in the same body also fulfill these sufficiencies by the same time, otherwise the commonality of food intake etc. cannot be formed. If the first-born living beings obtain all four sufficiencies by a long time, then the living beings born later in the same body fulfill those sufficiencies by the same time. This is the meaning of the above statement.

**Doubt:** Why is it not said that body sufficiency and sensory sufficiency are common to all?

**Resolution:** No, because the use of the words 'Pahaar' and 'Paanapaan' in the Gatha Sutra is all-encompassing, therefore their inclusion in these is also implied.

**Saahaaranagi Jesin Paahahassas-Kay-Paani.**
**Te Saahaaran-Jiva Taanant-Ppamaaraaganam ||126||** - Those countless living beings whose food, breath, body, and lifespan are common are ordinary-bodied living beings. The lifespan of countless ordinary living beings born in one time is the same, i.e. it is not less or more.

**Eyass Anuggahanam Baharan Saahaaranaanameyass.**
**Eyass Jam Baharavam Samaasado Tam Pi Hovi Eyass ||123||** - The benefit of one living being is of many ordinary living beings and also of this one. And the benefit of many living beings together is also of this desired living being.

1. Dhaval Pu. 14 p. 226.
2. Dhaval Pu. 14 p. 227.
3. Dhaval Pu. 14 p. 228.
4. Swaamikaartikeyaamupreksha.
5. Dhaval Pu. 14 p. 228.

Page #301:
---------------------------
## Gatha 162
268 /Go. Ma. Jivakanda

The **anugrahana** (grace) of a single **nigoda** (aggregate) being, i.e., the acquisition of **pudgala** (matter) atoms for the generation of **paryapti** (sufficient conditions), or the acquisition of matter atoms by the body that has been shed, is very beneficial for both those who remain in that body during that time and those who do not. The power generated from that **pahar** (moment) is simultaneously available to all beings here. Or, the fruit of the body's components generated from those atoms is available to all beings.

**Sha** - If the **pudgala** atoms acquired through **yoga** (effort) in one being belong to other beings residing in that body, then that **anugrahana** cannot be of that being who has performed **yoga**, because its connection is found with other beings.

**Samadhan** - This **anugrahana** also belongs to the single being who has performed **yoga**, because its fruit is also available in that being.

**Shankha** - How do other beings enjoy the fruit of the **pudgala** given by one being?

**Samadhan** - This is not a fault, because even in the case of wealth, grain, etc., given by one person, it is seen that brothers, sisters, father, son, and grandson, who share the wealth, enjoy it.

**Sha** - Are the **pudgala** atoms acquired through **yoga** by beings residing in the same body, belonging to a specific being or not?

**Samadhan** - The **anugrahana** of many beings collectively becomes the **anugrahana** of one, i.e., the specific **nigoda** being, because the power generated from the collection of **pudgala** atoms acquired through **yoga** by countless beings residing in one body is found in that being.

**Shankha** - If this is the case, then that **anugrahana** (grace) or benefit of those many beings does not occur, because its fruit is available in another being?

**Samadhan** - The word "one" is used here with the meaning of "all-inclusive" (**antbhit**), therefore, it is concluded that this **anugrahana** belongs to each individual being, because the generation of power in other beings from those **pudgala** occurs simultaneously with its generation in itself.

**Samagam Bakkantaagam Samagam Teshi Shariranipatti.
Samagam Cha Anuggahana Samagam Ussasanissaso.** ||124|| - The birth of those who are born in one body occurs simultaneously, their **anugrahana** occurs simultaneously, and their inhalation and exhalation occur simultaneously.

The countless beings who are born first in one body and the countless beings who are born later are all said to be born simultaneously.

1. Dhaval Pu. 14 p. 228.
2. Dhaval Pu. 14 p. 226.
3. Dhaval Pu. 14 p. 226.

Page #302:
---------------------------
## Verse 163
## Kay Marg/26

**Doubt:** How can there be a simultaneous birth of beings born at different times?

**Solution:** There is no contradiction in the simultaneous birth of beings in relation to one body.

**Doubt:** If there are beings born later in one body, how can their birth be in the first time?

**Solution:** The fruit of the grace of beings born in the first time is also available to beings born later. Therefore, the birth of the seventeen beings born in one body in the first time is established according to this principle.

Thus, in both ways, the beings born simultaneously have their origin from the same body, i.e., from the "M" (matter), and their grace is simultaneous because their grace is the same. Therefore, the absorption of the atoms of the pudgalas of all beings is simultaneous, i.e., in a process. Therefore, the origin of food, body, senses, and inhalation-exhalation is simultaneous, i.e., in a process. Otherwise, there is a contradiction in the commonality of grace. The four perfections of infinite beings born in one body end simultaneously in their respective places because grace is common. This is the meaning of the above statement.

**Verse:**

"Where one being dies, there infinite beings die, and where one being is born, there infinite beings are born."

**Explanation:**

Where one being dies, there is a filling of infinite Nigoda beings according to the rule.

**Doubt:** Where is the basis for this statement?

**Solution:** The word "Du" in the verse has a basis in the meaning of the word "Gr" (absorption).

It is not one, two, or countless beings that die, but certainly infinite beings of the Nigoda class die in one body. This is the meaning of the above statement. And in the Nigoda body where one being is born, there is a birth of infinite Nigoda beings according to the rule. One countable and countless being is not born in one Nigoda body at one time.

Page #303:
---------------------------
270/Go. Sa. Jivakanda
Gatha 133

The Japa festival is when infinite jivas are born, but not finite jivas. They are born only by being attached to a body, otherwise each bodily aggregate and the subtle and gross nigoda aggregates would have infinite arising, but this is not the case, because they are not found in that way.

It is said:
"The gross nigoda and subtle nigoda jivas are mutually bound and manifest. They are indeed infinite jivas that arise due to the causes of mula, yuhara, and ardra, etc."

The gross nigoda jivas residing in one body are bound and manifest with the other gross nigoda jivas residing there, and the subtle nigoda jivas residing in one body are bound and manifest with the other subtle nigoda jivas residing there. This bondage is of two types: desa-samavaya and sarva-samavaya. They do not remain bound by desa-samavaya, but they remain manifestly bound by all their parts; they do not remain unbound and unattached.

Objection: How many jivas reside in this state?
Answer: In this state, they are not finite or infinite, but the jivas are endless.

Objection: What is the cause of their arising?
Answer: They arise due to the causes of mula, tuhara, and ardra, etc. Here, the word 'etc.' should include other types of vegetation as well. This indicates the womb of the gross nigoda, not the subtle nigoda, because their womb is seen everywhere in water, land, and sky. The meaning is that the bodies of mula, tuhara, and ardra, etc. vegetation are the womb of the gross nigoda.

Therefore, in the bodies of mula, tuhara, and ardra, etc., as well as human bodies, etc., there are innumerable lokalpramana nigoda bodies. In each one of those nigoda bodies, in the first moment, endless gross nigoda jivas and subtle nigoda jivas are born. Then, in the second moment, innumerable inferior jivas are born. In this way, until the completion of the innumerable part of the prapti, innumerable jivas in the form of a series are continuously born. Again, from one, two, and three moments, up to the completion of the innumerable part of the prapti, with intervals, jivas are continuously born in an excellent manner.

In this way, with intermittent and continuous decrease, jivas are born until birth is possible. The gross nigoda jivas and subtle nigoda jivas born in this manner remain bound and manifest in one body, this is the meaning of the aforementioned statement.

1. Dhavala Vol. 14, p. 231. 2. Dhavala Vol. 14, p. 231.

Page #304:
---------------------------
## Gatha 114-166
Kayamargga /271

Those who are mostly devoid of **Jiva** and have **Dhyeya** are **Kayamargga**. Because in them, **Moksha**-bound beings are available. But the influence of worldly beings is not obtained. For its accomplishment, the following Gatha is said.

**Skandha, Andar, Pravas, Pulvi and Nigoda** bodies, their nature and number:

**Skandha** are countless **Loka** in number. **Andar**, **Pravas**, **Pulvi** and **Nigoda** bodies are situated in a progressively countless-multiplied order. ||164||

**Gatha-artha**: Just as there are houses in **Saketa** city, **Saketa** city in **Kosala** country, **Kosala** country in **Bharat** region, and **Bharat** region in **Jambu** island, similarly, there are **Skandha**, **Andar** in **Skandha**, **Pravas** in **Andar**, **Pulvi** in **Pravas**, and **Nigoda** bodies in **Pulvi**. ||165||

**Vishesh-artha**: **Skandha**, **Andar**, **Pravas**, **Pulvi** and **Nigoda** bodies are five. Among them, the one that is the abode of **Badar-Nigoda**, is full of **Vakkharas** and is similar to **Valajanta-Varinaya-Kachchaud**, is called **Skandha**, which bears the name **Mooli**, **Thar** and **Lata**, etc. These **Skandha** are countless **Loka** in number, because **Badar-Nigoda** established **Jiva** are found in countless **Loka**. Those who are the components of these **Skandha** and are similar to the anterior and posterior parts of **Balajanta-Prakkachchaud**, are called **Andar**. Those who are situated within **Andar** and are similar to the **Kachchaud-Andar** situated **Vakravar**, are called **Pravas**. There are countless **Loka** in number of **Andar** in each **Skandha**. There are countless **Loka** in number of **Pravas** in each **Andar**. Those who are situated within **Pravas** and are similar to the **Kachchaud-Apahar-Vakkhar** situated **Pishvi**, are called **Pulvi**. There are countless **Loka** in number of **Pulvi** in each **Pravas**. And in each **Pravas**, there are countless **Loka** in number of **Nigoda** bodies in each **Pulvi**, which are the material cause of **Audarik**, **Tanjas** and **Karman** **Pudgalas** and are similar to the substances situated within **Kachchaud-Andar-Vavswara-Pulvi**, filled with countless **Nigoda** beings. Or, just as there are **Jambu** island, **Bharat**, **Janapad**, **Gram** and **Pur**, similarly, there are **Skandha**, **Andar**, **Pravas**, **Pulvi** and **Nigoda** bodies.

The number of **Jiva** in one **Nigoda** body is more than the number of substances:

In one **Nigoda** body, the number of **Jiva** is more than the number of substances. This is because the **Jiva** are countless in number and are multiplied by the **Siddha** in the second time. ||166||

1. **Paval** **Pu.** 14 **P.** 86. 2. **Dhaval** **Pu.** 14 **P.** 234 **Moola** **Ga.** 128; **Dhaval** **Pu.** 1 **P.** 270 and 364, **Pu.** 4 **P.** 478; **Pra.Pan.San.** **P.** 17 **Ga.** 84, **Moolachar** **Paryapti** **Adhikar** 12 **Ga.** 163.

Page #305:
---------------------------
## 272/Go. Sa. Jivakanda
**Verse 164-166**
**Verse Meaning:** In a single Nigoda body, the number of living beings is infinitely greater than the amount of matter, even compared to the number of Jivas who have attained liberation in all past times. ||166||

**Special Meaning:** The disintegration of worldly beings never occurs. One reason for this is stated in this verse. In a single Nigoda body, there are an infinite number of living beings.

**Doubt:** How many are there? **Solution:** In a single Nigoda body, there are infinitely more living beings than those who have attained liberation in the past.

**Doubt:** What is the logic behind the existence of an infinite number of living beings in a single Nigoda body? **Solution:** The logic is that the total number of living beings is infinite.

**Doubt:** Those numbers which, upon their depletion, lead to the disintegration of the soul, are called countable and uncountable. Those numbers which do not lead to disintegration even upon their depletion in countable and uncountable forms are called infinite. Since the total number of living beings is infinite, it does not experience disintegration. Otherwise, there would be a contradiction in its being infinite.

**Doubt:** With the change of half-pudgala, there is a deviation, because even though the time of half-pudgala change is infinite, it still experiences disintegration.

**Solution:** This is not correct, because the infinite designation applies only to the object of pure knowledge, and its infinite form is known through inference. It is also not correct to say that the designation of quantity is known in the object, because the designation of quantity is obtained in the measured barley grains.

**Doubt:** How do we know that the number of living beings in a single Nigoda body is infinitely greater than the number of Jivas who have attained liberation in all past times?

**Solution:** We know this through logic. For example, if the total number of living beings is present in the Nigoda bodies, then how many living beings would be present in a single Nigoda body? In this way, by dividing the amount of matter by the desired amount multiplied by the amount of fruit, the amount of living beings in a single Nigoda body is equal to the uncountable fraction of the total number of living beings. However, if the liberated Jivas were to attain liberation in an uncountable number of lokas in every moment of the past, then they would still be uncountably greater than the past time. But this is not the case, because the liberated Jivas are only available in an uncountable fraction of the past time.

**Doubt:** How do we know that the total number of living beings is infinitely greater than the past time? **Solution:** We know this through the principle of "Shodashapadika Alp Bahutva" (the principle of sixteen-fold smallness and greatness).

**Doubt:** What is the principle of "Shodashapadika Alp Bahutva"?

Page #306:
---------------------------
Maya 164-196
Kayamargana/273
Samadhan:
1. The present time is the smallest. The number of inauspicious (abhavya) beings is infinitely greater than it.
2. The least upper limit (jaghanya yukta-ananta) is desired here in the form of a multiplication.
3. The duration of the liberated state (siddha-kala) is infinitely greater than the inauspicious mass.
4. If one is added to the eighth part of six months, the resulting time-unit (samaya-sankhya) is infinitely smaller than the past time of the devotee.
5. The liberated state (siddha-kala) has infinitely more beings than the siddha (liberated) beings.
6. Here, the distinction (prthaktva) is tenfold in the form of a multiplication.
7. The known (prasiddha) time is infinitely greater than the siddha beings.
8. Here, the countable (sankhyata) pavalikās are in the form of a multiplication.
9. The past time (atita-kala) is specially much greater than the known (prasiddha) time.
10. The measure of the liberated state (siddha-kala) is specially much greater.
11. The inauspicious (mithyadrsti) auspicious (bhavya) beings are infinitely greater than the past time.
12. The infinitesimal part of the auspicious (bhavya) inauspicious (mithyadrsti) beings is in the form of a multiplication.
13. The auspicious (bhavya) beings are specially much greater than the auspicious (bhavya) inauspicious (mithyadrsti) beings.
14. The beings from the stage of partial enlightenment (sāsādana-gunasthāna) to the non-yogic omniscient (ayogi-kevali) are specially much greater in number.
15. The common (sāmānya) inauspicious (mithyadrsti) beings are specially much greater than the auspicious (bhavya) beings.
16. The number remaining after subtracting the beings in the first fourteen stages is specially much greater.
17. The worldly (samsāri) beings are specially much greater than the common (sāmānya) inauspicious (mithyadrsti) beings.
18. The beings in the first thirteen stages are specially much greater in number.
19. The total beings are specially much greater than the worldly (samsāri) beings.
20. The number of siddha beings is specially much greater.
21. The mass of pudgala (matter) is infinitely greater than the total mass of beings.
22. Here, the total mass of beings is in the form of an infinite multiplication.
23. The future time (anāgata-kāla) is infinitely greater than the pudgala (matter).
24. Here, the entire mass of pudgala (matter) is in the form of an infinite multiplication.
25. The total time (samasta-kāla) is specially much greater than the future time (anāgata-kāla).
26. The present and past time together are specially much greater.
27. The entire time is infinitely greater than the non-cosmic space (alokākāśa).
28. The entire time is in the form of an infinite multiplication.
29. The entire illumination (prākāśa) is specially much greater than the non-cosmic space (alokākāśa).
30. The measure of the regions of the cosmic space (lokākāśa) is specially much greater.
31. Thus, from this smallness and greatness, it is evident that the inauspicious (mithyadrsti) beings are infinitely greater than the past time.
32. Therefore, it is established that the beings in a single nigoda body are infinitely greater than the siddhas.
33. Hence, the beings in all past time do not establish even a single nigoda body.
34. The nigoda beings are of two types: chaturgati (four-gati) and nityaṇigoda (eternal nigoda).
35. The chaturgati nigoda beings are those who are born among the gods, hell-beings, animals, and humans, and then re-enter the nigoda.
36. If the beings who have attained the dream state in the present time are very many, then they are infinitely greater than the past time.
37. If even the infinitesimal part of the beings born among the trasas (mobile beings) in an antarmuhurta (48 minutes) is, then how many will be there in the past time?
38. Thus, dividing the mass of results by this mass, the mass becomes infinitely greater than the past time.
39. From this, it is known that there is the existence of beings who have not attained that state in the past time, and even after the liberation of beings, the separation of worldly beings does not occur.

Page #307:
---------------------------
##  Chapter 274,  Verse 165: Characteristics of Nigoda-dwelling Souls

There are infinite souls who have never attained the state of liberation (Tsarana-parinama). They are abundant in the defilement of attachment (Bhavakalank) and therefore do not abandon the Nigoda-dwelling state.

**Explanation:**

Those who have never attained the state of liberation, even in the distant past, are infinite in number. Otherwise, the influence of the liberated souls (Bhavya) would be present in the cycle of existence (Samara). However, their influence is not present because the absence of liberated souls (Bhavya) would also lead to the absence of non-liberated souls (Abhavya). And even that is not present because the absence of both liberated and non-liberated souls would lead to the absence of all souls in the cycle of existence (Samsari). 

**Question:** How is it possible for the liberated souls (Asansari) to have an influence if there are no souls in the cycle of existence (Samsari)?

**Answer:** If there are no souls in the cycle of existence (Samsari), then there cannot be liberated souls (Asansari) either. This is because all things with opposites cannot exist without their opposites.

Therefore, it is proven that there are infinite souls who have never attained the state of liberation in the past. The following verse supports this:

"Existence is present in all, it is all-pervading, infinite in its forms, it is characterized by destruction, creation, and permanence, it has opposites, and it is one."

Why have these souls not attained the state of liberation? The latter part of the verse explains this: "Abundant in the defilement of attachment (Bhavakalank)." This means that the defilement of attachment is abundant in them. This is the reason for their birth in the one-sense (Ekendirya) category. The abundance of this defilement is the reason why these souls have not abandoned the Nigoda-dwelling state. This is the meaning of the verse.

Thus, the characteristics of the eternally Nigoda-dwelling souls have been explained.

Page #308:
---------------------------
## Gatha 166
##  Karma/275
## The Nature of Sentient Beings

Those beings who are endowed with two senses, three senses, four senses, and five senses, should be known as *Trasakaya* according to the teachings of the Lord Vira.

**Explanation:**

Beings who are endowed with the senses of touch and taste are called *Dwīndriya* (two-sensed) beings, such as conch shells, cowries, oysters, leeches, and lizards.

Beings who are endowed with the senses of touch, taste, and smell are called *Trīndriya* (three-sensed) beings, such as ants, scorpions, beetles, lice, and bedbugs.

Beings who are endowed with the senses of touch, taste, smell, and sight are called *Chaturindriya* (four-sensed) beings, such as flies, butterflies, bees, honeybees, and spiders.

Beings who are endowed with the senses of touch, taste, smell, sight, and hearing are called *Panchendriya* (five-sensed) beings, such as birds, elephants, horses, snakes, humans, gods, and hell beings.

The birth of *Panchendriya* beings is of many types:

* **Andaja** (born from eggs), such as birds.
* **Jarayuja** (born from a womb), such as humans, cows, and buffaloes.
* **Potayika** (born from a womb without a covering), such as some *Panchendriya* beings.
* **Rasayika** (born from chemical processes), such as beings born from a leather container.
* **Sansvedima** (born from sweat).
* **Sammurchana** (born from the aggregation of matter).
* **Udbhedhima** (born from breaking through earth, wood, or stone), such as frogs that emerge from stones.
* **Uppaadima** (born in the realms of gods and hell beings), such as gods and hell beings.

Those beings who have the *Tras* karma, which is the result of their actions, are called *Sajīva* (living beings).

**Doubt:**

Why are beings who move out of fear not called *Sajīva*?

**Resolution:**

This is not a correct interpretation, because beings in the womb, in an egg, in a state of unconsciousness, or in deep sleep do not move even when they are exposed to external fear. Therefore, the concept of *sattva* (consciousness) would apply to them. The scriptures also state that beings from the *hindriya* (two-sensed) to the *prayogakevali* (those who have attained omniscience through their own efforts) are called *Sajīva*.

**Doubt:**

Are *Sajīva* beings subtle or gross?

**Resolution:**

*Trasakaya* beings are gross, not subtle.

1. Dhavala, Part 1, Page 274, Pra. Pa. Sa. Pu. 18. 86.
2. "Dhokiyadayastrah ||14|| [Tattvartha Sutra, Chapter 2]"
3. Tattvavritti, 2/14.
4. Rajavartika, 2/12/1-2.
5. "Trasakaya ni i diya-pphudi java jogikevali. ||44|| Chatra, Part 1, Page 275."

Page #309:
---------------------------
##  248 Go. Ma Jivakag
##  Gatha 125

**Doubt:** How is this known?

**Solution:** Because the subtle beings are very minute, no Agamic evidence is found to support this statement.

**Gatha:**  Except for the Uppapadagata and Maranantak Samudghatas, the remaining As Jivas are not found outside the Asanali, as stated by the Jinas.

**Explanation:** Uppapad is of one type and occurs only at the time of birth. The attainment of Paryaya at the time of the first birth of a Vitrakshitabhava is Uppapad. Pranatyag is death, 'Antah' means end. The time of the end is 'Maranantakakal', i.e., the final moment of the present existence. The Samudghatas that occur during the Maranantakakal are Maranantak Samudghatas. The Jiva-pradesh extends to the place of birth of the next existence. This is the characteristic of Maranantak Samudghat. Without leaving the present body, through Rijugati or Vigrahagati, the Jiva travels to the region where it is to be born, and stays there until the final moment, either with a threefold expansion of the body or in some other way. This is called Maranantak Samudghat. Maranantak Samudghat is definitely directed towards the direction where the Jiva is to be born. But other Samudghatas do not have this rule of moving in one direction, as they are found to move in all ten directions. (However, in Ra.Ba. 1/20112, it is written that Aharak and Maranantak Samudghatas occur in one direction. The remaining five Samudghatas occur in all six directions.) The length of Maranantak Samudghat is, at its best, up to the end of the region where it is to be born, but this is not the rule for other Samudghatas. The word 'Cha' should be understood as excluding even the Kevali Samudghat. Except for these three states of Uppapad, Maranantak Samudghat, and Kevali Samudghat, all the remaining As Jivas are found only in the Asanali, not in the external realms of the Asanali. The Asanali is located in the middle of a Lok that is one Raju in diameter and fourteen Raju in length. This is the literal meaning of Asanali, because it is like a canal. It is also said:

"Loy Bahumjhade Se Rukhe Sarav Rajjupavarajuva. Choisaraajjutta Ga Tasanali Hovi Gurganaama." (143)

1. Dhaval Pu. 1 p. 272.
2. "Uvvado Eyaviho. So Vi Uppanna Padhamasamaye Chev Hodi." [Dhaval Pu. 4 p. 26].
3. "Vitrakshitabhava Prathamasamaya Paryayaprapti: Uppapadah." [Shrimad Amayachandra Siddhanta Chakravarti Krit Teeka]
4. "Maran Pragatyag: ............Jiva Pradeshamasarpana Lakshana." [Shrimad Amayachandra Siddhanta Chakravarti Krit Teeka p. 444].
5. Dhaval Pu. 4 p. 27.
6. Shrimad Abhayachandra Siddhanta Chakravarti Krit Teeka.
7. Trilokasar.

Page #310:
---------------------------
## Gatha 200
## Kayamamnga/277

In the vast majority of the Lokas, the As-Nali exists just as the core wood exists within a tree. This As-Nali is one Raju long, one Raju wide, and fourteen Raju high, with an area of (1x14x14) 14 Dhanraju. The Lokas are 343 Dhanraju. Within them, only 14 Dhanraju are the As-Nali, meaning that only Asajiva are found within it. The remaining (343-14) 326 Dhanraju contain only Sthavar Jeeva, not Tras. The Atma-Pradesha of Jeevas who have experienced Uppapad-Maran-Shantika-Samudghat and Kevali-Samudghat are definitely found within these 326 Dhanraju.

**Doubt:** During Uppapad, how do Tras Jeevas remain outside the As-Nali?

**Solution:** Some Vayu-Kayika Jeevas reside in the Vatavala outside the Shram-Nali. They have completed the lifespan of their Dwi-Indriya and other As-Paryaya. At the end of their lifespan, they die and the Tras-Karma arises, making them Tras. However, it takes time to reach the Vas-Nali. This is the first moment of Vigrah-Gati. Thus, a Shram Jeeva remains outside the As-Nali during the Uppapad stage of the first moment of their lifespan, having left the As-Nali and been born in the Vas-Nali.

**Doubt:** Why do Tras Jeevas go to the outer part of the As-Nali during Maran-Antik-Samudghat?

**Solution:** Some As Jeevas residing in the As-Nali bind the Vayu-Sthavar-Kaya to be born in the Tanu-Vatavala. They perform Maran-Antik-Samudghat at the end of their As-Paryaya lifespan to touch the Tanu-Vatavala, their birthplace in the next life. This causes the Atma-Pradesha of that Vas Jeeva to extend from the As-Nali to the Tanu-Vatavala. Thus, the Atma-Pradesha of Tras Jeevas are located outside the As-Nali.

**Doubt:** In which stages of Kevali-Samudghat does the Atma-Pradesha remain outside the As-Nali?

**Solution:** During the five moments of the Kapata, Pratar, Lok-Purn, Sankuchit, and again Pratar and Kapata stages, the Atma-Pradesha of Kevali Bhagwan remain outside the As-Nali. The nature of Kevali-Samudghat has been explained earlier.

Just like plants, other Jeevas also have the distinction of being Prati-Sthit and A-Prati-Sthit. The bodies of the four Sthavar-Kayikas, namely Prithvi, etc., the bodies of Kevalis, the bodies of Aharak, the bodies of Devas and Narakas are A-Prati-Sthit. The bodies of the remaining Jeevas are Prati-Sthit due to Nigoda.

## Gatha-Arth:

The bodies of the four Sthavar-Kayikas, namely Prithvi, etc., the bodies of Kevalis, the bodies of Aharak, the bodies of Devas and Narakas are A-Prati-Sthit. The bodies of the remaining Jeevas are Prati-Sthit due to Nigoda.

## References:

1. Trilok-Sar, page 154
2. Siddhanta-Vakra-Varti, commentary by Shrimad Abhaychandra, page 444.

Page #311:
---------------------------
278/Go. Sa. Jeevanagar
Gatha 201-202

**Special Meaning:** The bodies of the four stationary beings - Prithivicayik, Apkayik, Agnicayik, and Vayukayik - the bodies of Kevalis, the bodies of Maharak, the bodies of Devas, and the bodies of Narakas, these eight types of bodies do not have Badar Nigod Jivas residing in them. Therefore, these eight types of bodies are considered A-pratisthit (not established). The remaining bodies of Vanaspatikayik, the bodies of Dvi-indriya, Tri-indriya, Chatur-indriya, and Pancha-indriya beings, and the bodies of humans, all these bodies are considered Prati-sthi-t (established) because Badar Nigod Jivas reside in them.

The shape of the stationary beings and the Sakayik beings is like a cluster of Masur (lentils), water droplets, needles, and flags.

**Gatha Meaning:** The shape of the four stationary beings, starting with Prithvi, is like a cluster of Masur (lentils), water droplets, needles, and flags. The bodies of Vanaspatikayik and Asakayik beings are of many types.

**Special Meaning:** The shape (structure) of the body of a Prithivicayik being is like a round Masur grain. The shape (structure) of the body of an Apkayik being is like a round water droplet with a pointed tip. The shape (structure) of the body of an Agnicayik being is like needles and has many facets. The shape (structure) of the body of a Vayukayik being is like a flag (banner) and is almost rectangular. The perception of these four stationary beings' bodies is like an innumerable fraction of a Dhanangula (a unit of measurement), which is not visible to the naked eye. What is visible to the senses is the collection of the bodies of many beings, starting with Prithvi. 'Tarunam' means Vanaspatikayik, which includes all plants and trees, including ordinary plants and microscopic plants. The shape (structure) of their bodies and the shape (structure) of the bodies of Dvi-indriya, Tri-indriya, Chatur-indriya, and Pancha-indriya beings are of many types, meaning they have an indefinite shape (structure). The perception of these bodies is like an innumerable fraction of a Dhanangula, a countable fraction of a Dhanangula, and a countable Dhanangula.

The Sampatari Jiva carries the burden of karma through its body. An example of this is:

**Gatha Meaning:** Just as a man carrying a load carries the load by carrying a Kavar (a basket), similarly, this Jiva carries the burden of karma by carrying the body as a Kavar.

Page #312:
---------------------------
## Gatha 203-204
**Kayamaganga/276**

**Special Meaning:** Just as a man carrying a load on his shoulder takes it to the desired place, in the same way, a worldly being carries the burden of karma, such as knowledge-obscuring karma, in his body-shaped kavada, which is made of the body of merit, etc., and wanders through various births. That man, freed from the burden of the kavada, is free from the suffering caused by that burden and rests comfortably in a desired place. Similarly, a near-liberated soul, having attained the five attainments of destruction of karma, purification, knowledge, practice, and instrument, becomes endowed with right faith, right knowledge, and right conduct. He abandons the carrying of the burden of karma through his body-shaped kavada, and being free from the various kinds of suffering caused by the ripening of karma, he dwells happily in the desired place of the world. This is the intention of the Acharya for the benefit of the liberated souls.

**Kayamargna**

**Gatha 203:** Just as gold, when it reaches fire, leaves behind its impurities and blackness, in the same way, a soul, when it attains meditation, becomes free from the bondage of the body and becomes bodiless.

**Special Meaning:** Just as in the world, when impure gold is heated in a blazing fire and refined by the feeling of taste, etc., it leaves behind its external impurities and blackness, and its internal impurities, as a result of which pure gold, shining with sixteen qualities, is obtained, and all people praise it. Similarly, by the use of the fire of austerity, through the contemplation of Dharma-meditation and Shakla-meditation, especially the near-liberated soul, being freed from the bondage of the body of merit and the body of energy, and from the bondage of the connection of the body of karma, becomes a bodiless, non-physical, liberated, supreme being. He attains the attainment of infinite knowledge, etc., and resides in the world. He becomes worthy of praise, salutation, worship, and appreciation by all beings in the world. Those who have a body are worldly, and those who are without a body are bodiless and liberated.

**Shri Madhavchandra Vidyadeva** states the number of beings with earth bodies, etc., in Kayamargna through eleven gathas:

**Gatha 204:** By multiplying the number of worlds in the method of three and a half times, the number of energy-bodied beings is obtained. The number of earth-bodied beings is much greater than the number of energy-bodied beings.

**Notes:**

1. According to the commentary by Shrimadabhayachandra on the Siddhanta Chakravati.
2. In Shrautapurana, page 266, Gatha 144 is mentioned, but instead of "Jogaiga", it is "Joena". And in Pra. Pan. San., page 18, Gatha 17 is mentioned.

Page #313:
---------------------------
## Chapter 280, Section 204, The Living Beings Chapter

**Water-bodied living beings are special and more numerous than air-bodied living beings. The number of beings in this special category is countless.**

**Explanation:**

According to the teachings of the Acharya Parampara, which are consistent with the Sutras, the method for calculating the number of fiery-bodied living beings is as follows:

1. **Establish a dense realm as the base.**
2. **Rarefy another dense realm.**
3. **For each unit in the rarefied realm, give a dense realm.**
4. **Multiply the two realms together and subtract one from the base realm.** This gives the first **mutual multiplier**.
5. **Square the result of the multiplication.** These squares are only a fraction of the countless parts of the **Palyopam**.
6. **The number of **half-moon shaped** units in the result is countless.**
7. **The total number of units in the result is also countless.**
8. **Rarefy this large number.**
9. **For each unit in the rarefied realm, give the same large number.**
10. **Multiply the two realms together and subtract one from the base realm.** This gives the second **mutual multiplier**, which is **two**.
11. **The squares, half-moon shaped units, and the total number of units in the result are all countless.**
12. **Continue this process until the number of realms in the base is exhausted.**
13. **The number of **mutual multipliers** will then be equal to the number of realms.**
14. **The remaining three quantities (the total number of units in the result, the squares, and the half-moon shaped units) will all be countless.**
15. **Rarefy the total number of units in the result.**
16. **Establish this rarefied realm as the base.**
17. **For each unit in the rarefied realm, give the same number of units as the total number in the result.**
18. **Multiply the two realms together and subtract one from the base realm.** This gives the **mutual multiplier**, which is **one more than the number of realms.**
19. **The remaining three quantities (the total number of units in the result, the squares, and the half-moon shaped units) will all be countless.**
20. **Rarefy the total number of units in the result.**
21. **For each unit in the rarefied realm, give the same number of units as the total number in the result.**
22. **Multiply the two realms together and subtract one from the base realm.** This gives the **mutual multiplier**, which is **two more than the number of realms.**
23. **The remaining three quantities (the total number of units in the result, the squares, and the half-moon shaped units) will all be equal to the number of realms.**
24. **Continue this process until the number of **mutual multipliers** is two more than the number of realms.**
25. **All four quantities will then be countless.**
26. **Continue this process until the base realm is exhausted.**
27. **All four quantities will then be countless.**
28. **Finally, establish the total number of units in the result as the base.**
29. **Rarefy another realm with the same number of units as the total number in the result.**
30. **For each unit in the rarefied realm, give the same number of units as the total number in the result.**
31. **Multiply the two realms together and subtract one from the base realm.**
32. **All four quantities will then be countless.**
33. **Continue this process until the base realm is exhausted.**
34. **All four quantities will then be countless.**
35. **Finally, divide the total number of units in the result into three parts.**
36. **Establish one part as the base.**
37. **Rarefy another part.**
38. **For each unit in the rarefied realm, give the remaining part.**
39. **Multiply the two realms together and subtract one from the base realm.**

**This process demonstrates that the number of fiery-bodied living beings is countless.**

**Note:** This explanation uses the terms "realm" and "unit" to represent the Jain concepts of "lok" and "shalaka" respectively. The specific details of the calculation are not essential for understanding the general principle that the number of fiery-bodied living beings is vast and immeasurable.

Page #314:
---------------------------
##  Verse 205
##  Kayamargaga/281

The **pramana** should be given in its due form and mutually reconciled, and one should be subtracted from the **shalaka** amount. In this way, it should be carried on again and again until the **shalaka** amount of the fourth time established mutual multiplier, which is less than the **shalaka** amounts of the first, second, and third times established mutual multipliers, is exhausted. Then the **tejaskayika** amount is produced. The **shalaka** amounts of the mutual multiplier of that **tejaskayika** amount are the **pramana** of the fourth time established mutual multiplier **shalaka** amount.

By dividing the **tejaskayika** amount by the **pramana** of innumerable worlds, the quotient obtained should be added to the **pramana** of the same **tejaskayika** amount, then the **pramana** of the **prithvikaayika** amount is obtained. By dividing this **prithvikaayika** amount by the **pramana** of innumerable worlds, the quotient obtained should be added to the same **prithvikaayika** amount, then the **pramana** of the **apkaayika** amount is obtained. By dividing this **apkaayika** amount by the **pramana** of innumerable worlds, the quotient obtained should be added to the same **apkaayika** amount, then the **pramana** of the **vaayukaayika** amount is obtained.

**Apdiddivapatteya asankhalogashpamaranaya hoti.**
**Tatto padhihada purana asankhalogen sangurinava.** ||205||

**Gayaarth:** Each **banaspatikaayika** being without **pratiṣṭhita** is the **pramana** of innumerable worlds, and each **banaspatikaayika** being with **pratiṣṭhita** is the **guna** of innumerable worlds. ||205||

**Vishesharth:** By taking one **palyopama** from one **sagaropama** and dividing that **palyopama** by the innumerable part of the **shraavali**, the one part obtained there should be established separately, and the remaining many parts should be added to the **palya** less **sagar**, then the **ardhachched** **shalaka** of the **badar tejaskayika** amount is obtained. The one part that was established separately should be again divided by the innumerable part of the **shraavali**, and the one part obtained there should be subtracted, and the remaining many parts should be added to the **ardhachched** of the **badar tejaskayika** amount, then the **ardhachched** **shalaka** of each **prarira** being without **pratiṣṭhita** of the **badar** **vanaspati** is obtained. In the same way, the **ardhachched** **shalaka** of the **badar** **nigod** **pratiṣṭhita** is obtained. That is, by dividing the remaining one part again by the innumerable part of the **shraavali**, and establishing the one part obtained separately, and adding the remaining many parts to the **ardhachched** **shalaka** of each being without **pratiṣṭhita** of the **badar** **vanaspati**, the **ardhachched** **shalaka** of each **banaspati** of the **nigod** **pratiṣṭhita** is obtained.

By making the **ardhachched** **shalaka** of each rare, and by multiplying each one of that rare amount by two, the amount of each is produced. The **ardhachched** of the amount of each being without **pratiṣṭhita** of the **badar** **vanaspati** is less, therefore this amount is less. And the **ardhachched** of the amount of the **nigod** **pratiṣṭhita** is more, therefore the amount of the **nigod** **pratiṣṭhita** is more. By dividing the more **ardhachched** by the **ardhachched** of the **dhanaloka**, the quotient obtained should be made rare, and that...

1. Dhaval Pu. 3 p. 341.
2. Dhaval Pu. 3 p. 344.
3. Trilokamara Ga. 75.

Page #315:
---------------------------
## Translation:

**282 / Go. Sa. Jeevakanda**

**Gatha 206208**

By multiplying the number of each individual in the dense realm (Ghanaloka) by the number of each individual in the rare realm (Viralita Rashi) and then multiplying the resulting number by the number of each individual in the Badar vegetation, we obtain the total number of Badar-Nigoda established living beings.

**Tasarasi-pudhavi-shraadi - chakka patteya ho ran-sansari.**
**Sahara jeevanam parimar hodi jiradi-ttha.** || 206 ||

**Gatha-artha:** The Jina has said that after subtracting the number of stationary beings (Sthavarakaya) like earth, water, fire, and air, and the number of each individual plant from the total number of beings in the world, we obtain the number of ordinary living beings. || 206 ||

**Vishesh-artha:** The number of stationary beings (Sarani) is equal to the number of worlds divided by an uncountable number of parts (Gatha 211). The number of earth, water, fire, and air beings, and the number of each individual plant (Gatha 204, 205) are all subtracted from the total number of beings in the world. The remaining number represents the number of ordinary plant-bodied beings, i.e., Nigoda beings. This number is infinite, and it is infinitely greater than the number of Siddha beings (Gatha 126).

**Sagasaga-prasankhabhago badar-kayaran hodi parimanam.**
**Padibhago puvvari-gaddi-ttha.** || 207 ||

**Sesa**
**Suhum-pamanam**

**Gatha-artha:** The uncountable part of the number of Shramni and Shrapni beings represents the number of Badar-kaya beings, and the remaining large part represents the number of subtle-bodied beings (Sukshma-kaya). The number of parts has been mentioned earlier (Gatha 204). || 207 ||

**Vishesh-artha:** In Gatha 204, the words "Padibhago'sankhalogo" indicate that the number of parts is equal to the number of countable realms. When we divide the number of each individual being by the number of countable realms, the quotient obtained represents the number of Badar-kaya beings, and the remainder represents the number of subtle-bodied beings, which is uncountably greater than the number of Badar beings. When we divide the number of earth-bodied beings by the number of countable realms, the quotient obtained represents the number of Badar earth-bodied beings. When we subtract the number of Badar beings from the total number of earth-bodied beings, the remaining large part represents the number of subtle earth-bodied beings. Similarly, we should calculate the number of Badar and subtle beings in the water, fire, and air realms. Badar earth-bodied beings are countable, and the number of subtle earth-bodied beings is uncountably greater than them. The multiplier is the number of countable realms.

**Sumesu sankhabhagam sankha bhaga apunna-na idara.**
**Jasti punna-dwado pushpadha sankha-gurinabakama.** || 208 ||

1. Bhabal Pu. 3 Pu. 346-347
2. Dhaval Pu.. 3 Pri. 366 2

Page #316:
---------------------------
##  Bāthā 206
## Kāyamārga/283

**Gāthārtha:**  The number of subtle, insufficient beings is insignificant compared to the number of subtle, sufficient beings. This is because the lifespan of subtle, sufficient beings is a countless number of times greater than the lifespan of subtle, insufficient beings. ||20||

**Viśeṣārtha:** The number of subtle, sufficient beings is countless times greater than the number of subtle, insufficient beings. For example, the number of insufficient beings is like a single grain of sand compared to the countless grains of sand on the beach. The number of subtle, earth-bodied sufficient beings is countless times greater than the number of subtle, earth-bodied insufficient beings. This is because time is a multiplier. Similarly, one should understand this principle for water-bodied, fire-bodied, and air-bodied beings.

The lifespan of subtle, earth-bodied, water-bodied, fire-bodied, air-bodied, plant-bodied, and subtle, nigoda beings, as well as their corresponding sufficient and insufficient beings, is the same as the lifespan of subtle, one-sensed, sufficient and insufficient beings. How long does a subtle, one-sensed, sufficient being live? The shortest lifespan of such a being is an antamuhuurta, and the longest lifespan is also an antamuhuurta. How long does a subtle, one-sensed, sufficient being live? The shortest lifespan of such a being is a small fraction of a grahana (eclipse). The shortest lifespan of a sufficient being is countless times shorter than the shortest lifespan of a sufficient being. In a short period of time, a small number of beings accumulate, and in a long period of time, a large number of beings accumulate. The ratio of time is the same as the ratio of the number of accumulated beings. For example, the time of the seventh guṇasthāna, called "Aparammatasamyata," is twice as long as the time of the sixth guṇasthāna, called "Pramattasamyata." Therefore, the number of beings in the "Aparammatasamyata" guṇasthāna is twice as large as the number of beings in the "Pramattasamyata" guṇasthāna. The lifespan of subtle, sufficient beings is countless times greater than the lifespan of subtle, insufficient beings. In the same proportion, the number of subtle, sufficient beings is countless times greater than the number of subtle, insufficient beings. The multiplier is the measure of time.

**Pallasakhejjavahidapadarangulabhājidē jagappadare |
Jalabhūriṇapāvādaryā puṣṇā prāvaliprasankhabhājidakama ||2063**

**Gāthārtha:** The number of water-bodied beings is equal to the number of jagatprataras (a measure of distance) divided by an immeasurable number of pratarangulas (a measure of distance). This number, divided by an immeasurable number of pāvalis (a measure of distance), gives the number of earth-bodied, sufficient beings. This number, divided by an immeasurable number of pāvalis, gives the number of plant-bodied, sufficient beings that are established in nigoda (a type of hell). This number, divided by an immeasurable number of pāvalis, gives the number of plant-bodied, sufficient beings that are not established in nigoda. ||206||

**Footnotes:**

1. "Suhamāputābhikāiyapājjattā sankhejjagurugā. Ko guṇagāro? Sangvejjasa mayā." [Śraval, p. 3, p. 367]
2. "Evam cau-teu-vāuṇam jāṇi ūraṇ pattanvam." [Dhaval, p. 3, p. 366]
3. Dhaval, p. 4, p. 405, sūtra 151
4. Dhaval, p. 4, p. 364-365, sūtra 122, 123, 124
5. Dhaval, p. 4, p. 396, sūtra 125-126
6. Dhaval, p. 4, p. 366, sūtra 126, commentary
7. Dhaval, p. 3, p. 601

Page #317:
---------------------------
## Translation:

**284 / Mo. Sa. Jivakanda**

Here, the term 'angula' refers to 'pramanaangula'. The countless part of that pramanaangula, which is the square of the countless part of the prataraangula, obtained by dividing the prataraangula by the countless part of the palya, is the 'pratibhaga' (part) or 'avaharakala' (time of destruction). Due to this avaharakala, the world is destroyed by the countless water-bodied beings.

**Verse 210**

Dividing the countless part of the 'malya' by the 'suchyangula' and squaring the result gives the countless part of the 'prataraangula'. This is the avaharakala of the countless 'badar' (inferior) 'apkayika' (non-earth-bodied) beings. Multiplying this avaharakala of the countless badar apkayika beings by the countless part of the 'pravali' (a unit of time) gives the avaharakala of the countless badar 'prithvikayika' (earth-bodied) beings. Multiplying this avaharakala of the countless badar prithvikayika beings by the countless part of the pravali gives the avaharakala of the countless beings residing in the 'nigoda' (a type of hell). Multiplying this avaharakala of the countless badar nigoda-residing beings by the countless part of the pravali gives the avaharakala of the countless badar 'apratiṣṭhita' (non-established) plant beings. The reason for the increasing avaharakala is that the previous ones are multiplied by their own quantity. Dividing the world by these avaharakalas gives the measure of their respective substances.

The greater the 'bhagaahar' (divisor, avaharakala), the smaller the 'labdha' (quotient). According to this 'karanasutra' (principle), the avaharakala of the badar jalakaya beings is the 'rupa' (form), therefore, the measure of the badar jalakaya beings is greater. The avaharakala of the badar prithvikayika beings is multiplied by the countless part of the pravali, therefore, the measure of the badar prithvikayika beings is the measure of the badar jalakaya beings divided by the countless part of the pravali. In other words, the measure of the badar prithvikayika beings is obtained by dividing the measure of the badar jalakaya beings by the countless part of the pravali. The avaharakala of the badar pratiṣṭhita plant beings is multiplied by the countless part of the pravali from the avaharakala of the badar prithvikayika beings, therefore, the measure of the badar pratiṣṭhita plant beings is one part of the measure of the badar prithvikayika beings divided by the countless part of the pravali. Again, dividing this by the countless part of the pravali gives the measure of the badar apratiṣṭhita plant beings, because its avaharakala is multiplied by the countless part of the pravali from the previous avaharakala. In this way, the avaharakala progressively increases by the countless part of the pravali, multiplied countless times. Compared to the previous badar beings, the subsequent badar beings are progressively reduced by the countless part of the pravali, multiplied countless times.

**Verse 210**

"The measure of the world is countless, and the measure of the beings is also countless. The measure of liberation is obtained by dividing the world by the measure of the beings."

**Footnotes:**

1. "Here, the term 'angula' refers to 'pramanaangula'." [Dhavala Pur. 3, p. 346].
2. Dhavala Pur. 3, p. 346.
3. Dhavala Pur. 3, p. 350.

Page #318:
---------------------------
## Gatha 211
## Kayamargna: 285

**Gatha-artha:**  An innumerable portion of the **Dhanavali** is the measure of **Agnikaayik** sufficient beings, and an innumerable portion of the **Lok** is the measure of **Vaayukaayik** sufficient beings. By subtracting the measure of **Baadar** sufficient beings from their total **Baadar** sufficient quantity, the measure of **Baadar** insufficient beings is obtained. ||210||

**Visheshartha:** **Baadar** **Tejaskayik** sufficient beings are innumerable in comparison to the measure of **dravya**, which is in the form of innumerable **Pravali** squares, but within the **Pravali** wealth, i.e., less than the **Dhanavali**. By dividing the **Pratravali** by the innumerable portion of the **Pravali**, the quotient obtained is then used to divide the upper square of the **Pratravali**, resulting in the quantity of **Baadar** **Tejaskayik** sufficient beings. This is the measure of innumerable **Pratravali**. Its explanation: Dividing the **Pratravali** by its upper square gives the measure of the **Pratravali**. Dividing the second portion of the **Pranavali** by the upper square of the **Pranavali** gives two **Pratravali** as the quotient. Dividing the third portion of the **Pratravali** by the upper square of the **Pratravali** gives three **Pratravali** as the quotient. Similarly, going down, dividing the **Pratravali** by the innumerable portion of the **Pravali**, the quotient obtained (the innumerable portion of the **Pratravali**) is then used to divide the upper square of the **Pratravali**, resulting in the **Pratravali** obtained. This is the measure of **Baadar** **Tejaskayik** sufficient beings.

**Pravaliyae Baggo Pravaliya-sanka-bhag-gurin-do Du.**
**Tahma Ghanass Anto Baadar-pajjattate-oonam.** ||77|| - This means that multiplying the square of the **Pravali** by the innumerable portion of the **Pravali** gives the measure of **Baadar** **Tejaskayik** sufficient beings, therefore that measure is within the **Dhanavali**.

**Baadar** **Vaayukaayik** sufficient beings are innumerable in comparison to the area of the world, which is the measure of innumerable **Jagat-Pratra**. Dividing the **Ghanalok** by the innumerable gives the measure of **Baadar** **Vaayukaayik** sufficient beings.

**Jagase-dhie-e Vammo Jagaseti-sanka-bhag-gunido Du.**
**Tahma Ghanalok-anto Baavar-pajjattva-oonam.** ||7|| - Multiplying the square of the **Jagachhreni** by the innumerable portion of the **Jagachhreni** gives the quantity of **Baadar** **Vaayukaayik** sufficient beings. Therefore, the said measure is within the **Ghanalok**.

**Saaharan-baadare-su Asankham Bhagham Asankga Bhaga.**
**Punnaanam-apunnaanam Parimaanam Hodi Anukamaso.** ||211|| **Gatha-artha:** Among ordinary **Baadar** beings, an innumerable portion are sufficient beings, and an innumerable majority are the measure of insufficient beings. ||211||

**Visheshartha:** **Baadar-nigod** sufficient beings are the most subtle. **Baadar-nigod** insufficient beings are innumerable.

1. **Dhaval Pu. 3 Pri. 250 Sutra 61 V. 251.**
2. **Dhaval Pu. 3 Pri. 355.**
3. **Baval Pu. 3. 355 Mutr 94.**
4. **Shraval Pu. 3 Pri. 356.**
5. **Dhaval Pu. 3 Pri. 356.**

Page #319:
---------------------------
## Translation:

**286/Go, Sa. Jivakanda**
**Chapter 212**

These are the qualities. There are countless beings with qualities. Those countless infinite beings who have one body in common are called Nigodajivas. Thus, common and Nigod are synonymous terms. In the entire amount of Badar Nigod, when divided by countless beings, one part is the amount of sufficient Badar Nigod beings, and the remaining majority part is the amount of insufficient Badar Nigod beings. This is proven by the appropriate small-large difference.

**Question:** What is the reason for the scarcity of sufficient beings among Badars?

**Answer:** Badar is a virtuous nature, and sufficiency is also a virtuous nature. Among the aforementioned Nigod beings, those who have both Badar and sufficient virtuous natures are scarce. Here, the time of accumulation is not the subject of discussion, but the virtuous nature is.

**Verse 212:**

**Gathaarth:** When the world-span is divided by the countless part of a Pavali, the amount of Tris beings is obtained, and when the world-span is divided by the countable part of a Pavali, the amount of sufficient Tris beings is obtained. By subtracting the amount of sufficient Tris from the general amount of Tris, the remaining amount is the amount of insufficient Tris.

**Special Meaning:** The amount of Sakayik Labdhyaparyaptak beings is equal to the amount of Panchendriya Labdhyaparyaptak beings.

**Doubt:** When the Dwindriya, Trindriya, Chaturindriya, and Panchendriya Labdhyaparyaptak beings are combined, the amount of Sakayik Labdhyaparyaptak beings is obtained. Then how can the description of Asakayik Labdhyaparyaptak beings be similar to the description of Panchendriya Labdhyaparyaptak beings?

**Answer:** This is not a fault, because in both cases, i.e., Panchendriya Labdhyaparyaptak and Asakayik Labdhyaparyaptak, the instruction is given to consider the division in the form of the countless part of a Pratarangul to obtain the amount. The Ganadhar cannot refute the special aspect of their description in terms of meaning. Therefore, the amount of Tris beings will be stated based on the foundation of Panchendriya, because both have the same division; for example,

With respect to the field, the Panchendriya and Panchendriya sufficient beings, the world-span is taken away by the square-shaped portion of the countless part of a Sucyangula and the square-shaped portion of the countable part of a Sucyangula.

**References:**

1. Dhaval Pu. 3 p. 3723
2. "Jesimvantaanantjivaanamekk cheva sariram bhavadhi sadharanasyaena te rinagodajiva bhaanti." Dhaval p. 3 p. 357.
3. Dhaval Pu. 3 p. 362 Sutra 102.
4. Dhaval Pu. 3 p. 363.
5. Dhaval Pu. 3 p. 314 Sutra 2.

Page #320:
---------------------------
## Gatha 213-215
## Kayagarna/287

The world is divided into countless parts by the **Trasakayikas** (those with three bodies) and into a finite number of parts by the **Isakayikas** (those with one body), in proportion to the **Kshetra** (field of activity).

To clarify the meaning of this sutra, we will now discuss the **Abahar Kalas** (division of time) for **Vikalendriya** (those with impaired senses) and **Panchendriya** (those with five senses) beings, as well as their **Paryapt** (sufficient) and **Aparyapt** (insufficient) counterparts.

**Dividing the **Suchyangula** (a unit of measurement) by an **Asankhyat** (infinite) part of **Pavali** (a unit of time), the quotient obtained when squared represents the **Abahar Kala** of **Dwindriya** (two-sensed) beings. Dividing the **Abahar Kala** of **Dwindriya** by an **Asankhyat** part of **Pavali**, and adding the quotient to the original **Abahar Kala** of **Dwindriya**, gives the **Abahar Kala** of **Dwindriya Aparyapt** beings. Dividing this **Abahar Kala** of **Dwindriya Aparyapt** by an **Asankhyat** part of **Pavali**, and adding the quotient to the original **Abahar Kala** of **Dwindriya Aparyapt**, gives the **Abahar Kala** of **Trindriya** (three-sensed) beings.

Similarly, the **Abahar Kala** of **Trindriya**, **Trindriya Aparyapt**, **Chaturindriya** (four-sensed), **Chaturindriya Aparyapt**, **Panchendriya**, and **Panchendriya Aparyapt** beings should be divided by an **Asankhyat** part of **Pavali** in succession, increasing the quotient by one part each time.

After this, dividing the **Abahar Kala** of **Panchendriya Aparyapt** beings by an **Asankhyat** part of **Pavali**, the quotient obtained represents the **Abahar Kala** of **Trindriya Paryapt** beings, which is equal to a finite part of **Pratarangula** (another unit of time). Dividing this by an **Asankhyat** part of **Pavali**, and adding the quotient to the original **Abahar Kala** of **Trindriya Paryapt**, gives the **Abahar Kala** of **Dwindriya Paryapt** beings. Dividing this **Abahar Kala** of **Dwindriya Paryapt** by an **Asankhyat** part of **Pavali**, and adding the quotient to the original **Abahar Kala** of **Dwindriya Paryapt**, gives the **Abahar Kala** of **Panchendriya Paryapt** beings. Dividing this **Abahar Kala** of **Panchendriya Paryapt** by an **Asankhyat** part of **Pavali**, and adding the quotient to the original **Abahar Kala** of **Panchendriya Paryapt**, gives the **Abahar Kala** of **Chaturindriya Paryapt** beings.

In all these cases, the quotient obtained by dividing a specific quantity by another quantity should be reduced by one, and the result should be multiplied by an **Asankhyat** part of **Pavali** to obtain the **Abahar Kala**.

By dividing the **Jagatpratar** (world duration) by these individual **Abahar Kalas**, we can determine the amount of **Dravya** (substance) corresponding to each.

**Gatha 213:**
**Pravali Prasankha Bhaga Gavahid Pallu Payarchchhida. Badarate Pari Nabhu Jalavadaanam Charimasayaram Punnam.**

**Gatha 214:**
**Tevi Visese Ranahya Pallasan Khajejjabhagamette Na. Tamha Te Rasimo Asankhalogena Gurinavakama.**

**Gatha 215:**
**Dinnachhedena Va Hindattchhedhehi Payadaviralanam Bhajiye. Laddham Idattarasir Amaranophaddie Hodi Payadadhanam.**

**Notes:**

* **Dhavla Purana** (a Jain text) mentions these sutras in its 3rd volume, pages 315-316.
* The text uses the term **Asankhyat** to denote an infinite number, which is a key concept in Jain cosmology.
* The **Abahar Kalas** are used to calculate the lifespan of different types of beings in the Jain universe.
* The **Jagatpratar** is the duration of the current cosmic cycle, which is also a key concept in Jain cosmology.
* The **Dravya** is the fundamental substance of the universe, which is believed to be eternal and unchanging.

Page #321:
---------------------------
##  Translation:

**288/Go. Sa. Jivakanda**

**Verse 213-215**

The number of half-sections of the Badar Tejaskaayik beings is obtained by subtracting the number of Patyas (a unit of measurement) from a Sagar (another unit of measurement) after dividing the Sagar by an innumerable number of times by the Praavali (a unit of measurement). The number of half-sections of the Badar Aapratiṣṭhita Pratyek, Badar Pratiṣṭhita Pratyek, Badar Prithvi Kaayik, and Badar Jal Kaayik beings is obtained by dividing the Praavali by an innumerable number of times, twice, thrice, four times, and five times respectively, and then subtracting the result from a Sagar. The number of half-sections of the Badar Vayu Kaayik beings is equal to the number of a complete Sagar. ||213||

Each of these half-sections is greater than the previous one by an innumerable number of times the Praavali. Therefore, the number of beings in each category is an innumerable number of Lokas (worlds) times greater than the number of beings in the previous category. ||214||

To obtain the original amount, divide the number of half-sections of the desired amount by the number of half-sections of the given amount, and then multiply the desired amount by the result obtained. ||215||

**Explanation:**

Imagine a Sagar. Take one Patya from it and divide it into an innumerable number of parts by the Praavali. Keep one part separate and add the remaining parts back to the Sagar (minus the Patya). This gives you the number of half-sections of the Badar Tejaskaayik beings. Now, take the one part that was kept separate and divide it again by an innumerable number of times by the Praavali. Add the remaining parts to the half-sections of the Badar Tejaskaayik beings. This gives you the number of half-sections of the Badar Aapratiṣṭhita Pratyek Vanaspati beings. Repeat this process with the remaining part for the Badar Pratiṣṭhita Pratyek Vanaspati beings, Badar Prithvi Kaayik beings, and Badar Jal Kaayik beings. The remaining part after the last division represents the number of half-sections of the Badar Vayu Kaayik beings.

To obtain the number of Badar Tejaskaayik beings, take the number of half-sections of the Badar Tejaskaayik beings, divide it by two, and then multiply the result by itself. Alternatively, divide the number of half-sections of the Badar Tejaskaayik beings by the number of half-sections of a Ghana Lok (a unit of measurement), divide the result by two, and then multiply it by the number of Ghana Lokas. Alternatively, subtract the number of half-sections of the Badar Aapratiṣṭhita Pratyek Vanaspati beings from the number of half-sections of the Badar Tejaskaayik beings, divide the result by two, and then multiply it by itself. Finally, divide the result by the number of Badar Aapratiṣṭhita Pratyek Vanaspati beings to obtain the number of Badar Tejaskaayik beings.

**Note:**

This text is a complex explanation of the vastness of the Jain cosmology and the different categories of beings within it. The terms used are specific to Jain philosophy and require a deeper understanding of the concepts to fully grasp their meaning.

Page #322:
---------------------------
## Verse 216
**Yoga Margana/281**

Even after halving the number of **Badar** **Vanaspathikayika** **A-pratisthita** **Each-body** **Jiva-rashi**, **Badar** **Tejaskayika** **Rashi** is generated. Alternatively, dividing the number of **Badar** **Vanaspathikayika** **A-pratisthita** **Each-body** **Jiva-rashi** by the number of **Dhana-loka** halves, the quotient obtained is thinned out. Then, multiplying this thinned-out **Rashi** with each **Dhana-loka** in a due manner, the **Rashi** obtained is multiplied with the number of **Badar** **Vanaspathikayika** **A-pratisthita** **Each-body** **Jiva-rashi** to obtain the **Badar** **Tejaskayika** **Rashi**. Similarly, **Badar** **Nigoda** **Prati-stha** **Each-body** **Vanaspathi**, **Badar** **Prithvi-kayika**, **Badar** **Pra-kayika**, and **Badar** **Vayu-kayika** **Jivas** should generate **Badar** **Tejaskayika** **Rashi** from their respective halves.

By thinning out the number of **Badar** **Vanaspathikayika** **Each-body** **Jiva-rashi** and multiplying each of the thinned-out **Rashi** by two, the **Badar** **Vanaspathikayika** **Each-body** **Jiva-rashi** is generated. Alternatively, dividing the number of **Badar** **Vanaspathikayika** **A-pratisthita** **Each-body** **Jiva-rashi** by the number of **Dhana-loka** halves, the quotient obtained is thinned out. Then, multiplying this thinned-out **Rashi** with each **Dhana-loka** in a due manner, the **Rashi** obtained is multiplied with the number of **Badar** **Vanaspathikayika** **A-pratisthita** **Each-body** **Jiva-rashi** to obtain the **Badar** **Vanaspathikayika** **A-pratisthita** **Each-body** **Jiva-rashi**. When **Badar** **Vanaspathikayika** **A-pratisthita** **Each-body** **Jiva-rashi** is generated from **Badar** **Tejaskayika** **Rashi**, doubling the **Badar** **Tejaskayika** **Rashi** twice generates the **Badar** **Vanaspathikayika** **A-pratisthita** **Each-body** **Jiva-rashi**. Alternatively, thinning out the number of halves and multiplying each of the thinned-out **Rashi** by two, the **Rashi** obtained is multiplied with the **Badar** **Tejaskayika** **Rashi** to obtain the **Badar** **Vanaspathikayika** **A-pratisthita** **Each-body** **Jiva-rashi**. Alternatively, dividing the number of halves by the number of **Dhana-loka** halves, the quotient obtained is thinned out. Then, multiplying this thinned-out **Rashi** with each **Dhana-loka** in a due manner, the **Rashi** obtained is multiplied with the **Badar** **Tejaskayika** **Jiva-rashi** to obtain the **Badar** **Vanaspathikayika** **A-pratisthita** **Each-body** **Jiva-rashi**. Based on the number of **Badar** **Nigoda** **Prati-stha** **Each-body** **Vanaspathi**, **Badar** **Prithvi-kayika**, **Badar** **Pra-kayika**, and **Badar** **Vayu-kayika** **Jiva-rashi**, the **Badar** **Vanaspathikayika** **A-pratisthita** **Each-body** **Jiva-rashi** should be generated. Just as **Tejaskayika** **Jiva-rashi** is generated from these **Rashi**, it should be generated in the same way. **Badar** **Nigoda** **Prati-stha** **Each-body** **Vanaspathikayika**, **Badar** **Prithvi-kayika**, **Badar** **Pra-kayika**, and **Badar** **Vayu-kayika** should be calculated in the same way.

Thus, the chapter named **Kaya-margana** in the **Gommatamar Jivakanda** is complete.

**9. Yoga Margana Adhikara**

The general characteristic of **Yoga** is the **Jiva** who is endowed with the body arising from the **Puggala** **Vi-vaideha** and who is **Mara-vayan** **Kaya-yutta**. This **Jiva** is the **Yogi** due to the **Karma** **Agama** **Karana**. ||216||

Page #323:
---------------------------
260/Go. Sa. Jivakanda
Gatha 216
_ Gatharth-The power that is the cause of the reception of karmas by the living being, who is endowed with mind, speech, and body, due to the rise of the pudgala-vipaki-sharira-karma, is called yoga. ||216||
Vishesharth-In this Gatha, the meaning of yoga is explained. The power of the mind to receive karmas in the atma-pradeshas is called yoga. This power is not inherent in the atma, but arises in the samsari jiva, who is endowed with mind, speech, and body, due to the rise of the pudgala-vipaki-sharira-karma. Those who do not have the rise of the pudgala-vipaki-sharira-karma, such as the Jinadeva, who is in the fourteenth gunasthana, lack yoga and are called ayogakebali.
That which attains samyoga is yoga. That which attains samyoga does not have the fault of vyabhichar with clothes, etc., because they are not atmadharma. Although kshaya is atmadharma, it does not have the fault of vyabhichar, because kshaya is not the cause of the reception of karmas. It is the cause of sthitibandha and anubhagabandh. * Or, the production of the power that is the cause of the reception of karmas due to the activity of the atma in the form of pradesha-parispand is yoga. Or, the contraction and expansion of the atma-pradeshas is yoga.
Manasa vacasa karana chavi juttas sa viriya-parinama. Jovas sa parinayo bho jogo ti jinehi gittho. ||||
The particular viriya that arises in the atma due to the action that occurs due to mind, speech, and body is yoga. Or, the praniyoga (action in the form of parispand) of the jiva is yoga. This is the teaching of the Jinas. The parispand-rupa-prayatna that occurs for the production of the mind is manoyoga. The parispand-rupa-prayatna that occurs for the production of speech is vacanayoga. The parispand-rupa-prayatna that occurs for the action of the body is kayayoga.
Shankha-Prayatna is done with buddhi, and buddhi is done with manoyoga. In this situation, it should be established that manoyoga is inseparable from the other yogas. It should be established that many prayatnas occur simultaneously.
Samadhan-Many yogas cannot occur simultaneously, because the cause and effect cannot be produced at the same time.
The parispand in the jiva-pradeshas due to the support of mind, speech, and body is yoga. The contraction, expansion, and rotation of the jiva-pradeshas is called yoga.
1. "Vujyata iti yoga." [Dhaval Pu. 1 p. 136]. 2. "Thidi-anumaga kshayado hoti." [Go. Ka. Ga. 257]. 3. "Mathava atma-pravritteh kadina nibandhanaviryotpado yoga: 1 Ayava atma-pradeshanam sankocha-vikoca yoga." [Dhaval Pu. 1 p. 140] 'Atma-pravritteh sankocha-vikoco yoga.' [Dhaval Pu. 7 p. 6]. 4. Dhaval Pu. 1 p. 140. 5. Dhaval Pu. 1 p. 276. 6. "Mano-vak-kaya avasthambhabalena jiva-pradesha-parispando yoga iti." [Dhaval Pu. 7 p. 6]. 7. Dhaval Pu. 10 p. 437.

Page #324:
---------------------------
##  Yatha 216
## Yogamargana/261

**Question:** Is the action of a jiva's movement also a type of yoga?

**Solution:** The movement of a jiva cannot be called yoga, because it would imply the presence of a **satyogatva** (state of being in union with the liberated soul) for a **prayogakevali** (a soul who has attained liberation through its own efforts) who is moving upwards due to the destruction of **aghatiya karmas** (karmas that cause suffering).

The yoga that arises from the **parispanda** (pulsation) of **virya** (energy) originating from the mind is **manoyoga** (yoga of the mind). The yoga that arises from the **parispanda** of **virya** originating from speech is **vachanayoga** (yoga of speech). The yoga that arises from the **parispanda** of **virya** originating from the body is **kayayoga** (yoga of the body).

The contraction and expansion of a jiva due to the **dravya-mana** (material mind) arising from **manovargna** (mental activity) is **manoyoga**. The contraction and expansion of jiva-pradeshas (parts of the soul) due to the **pudgalaskandha** (matter-particles) related to speech is **vachanayoga**. The contraction and expansion of jiva-pradeshas due to the four types of bodies is **kayayoga**.

**Question:** If jiva-pradeshas are **asthita** (existing, moving), then they can have **karma-bandha** (binding of karma), because they are **asthita** (moving) and have **yoga**. But if jiva-pradeshas are **sthita** (non-moving), then they cannot have **karma-bandha**, because they are devoid of **yoga**.

**Answer:** It is known that jiva-pradeshas are devoid of **yoga** because they do not **parispanda** (pulsate). There is no possibility of **yoga** in **parispanda-rahita** (non-pulsating) jiva-pradeshas, because if it were so, then even **siddha jivas** (liberated souls) would have **satyogatva** (union with the liberated soul), which is a contradiction.

**Solution:** The use (**prayoga**) of a jiva in the creation of actions related to the mind, speech, and body is **yoga** and is the cause of **karma-bandha**. However, this **prayoga** cannot occur in a small number of jiva-pradeshas, because it would contradict the idea that the **yoga** that is active in one jiva is also active in a small number of **ashyavas** (parts of the soul) or that it is active in a fragmented way within one jiva. Therefore, **karma-bandha** occurs in **sthita** (non-moving) jiva-pradeshas.

On the other hand, it is not true that all jiva-pradeshas **parispanda** (pulsate) regularly due to **yoga**. It is also not true that **yoga** occurs only in a specific way, because it is observed that the **parispanda** that occurs in jiva-pradeshas is caused by **yoga**. Therefore, **karma-bandha** should be accepted as occurring even in **sthita** (non-moving) jiva-pradeshas due to the presence of **yoga**.

**Question:** What is the nature of **yoga**?

**Solution:** **Yoga** is an **anadi parinamik bhava** (an eternal, uncreated state). This is because **yoga** is not an **aupashamik bhava** (a state of pacification), because it is found even when **mohaniya karma** (karma that causes delusion) is not pacified. It is also not...

**Footnotes:**

1. "Not the movement of the jiva is yoga, but the union with the liberated soul due to the destruction of karmas that cause suffering, such as **aghatiya karmas**, is the meaning of **satyogatva**." [Dhavala, p. 10, p. 437]
2. Dhavala, p. 1, p. 308
3. Dhavala, p. 7, p. 76
4. Dhavala, p. 12, p. 366
5. Dhavala, p. 12, p. 367

Page #325:
---------------------------
262/Go, Sa, Jiyakanda
Gatha 216

The state of yoga is a result of karma, because it is found to be contradictory to the assumption that yoga arises from karma in the absence of the true nature of the self. Yoga is not caused by the rise of destructive karma, because even after the destruction of the rise of destructive karma, the state of yoga is found in the A-yoga-kevali. Yoga is not caused by the rise of non-destructive karma, because even in the absence of the rise of non-destructive karma, yoga is not found in the A-yoga-kevali. Yoga is not caused by the rise of body-making karma, because it is contradictory to the fact that the pulsation of the living being is caused by the nature of the subtle matter.

Doubt: The karmic body is not subtle matter, because it does not give rise to the color, taste, smell, touch, and form of the subtle matter. Therefore, should yoga be considered to arise from the karmic body?

Solution: No, because the karmic body is also a result of subtle matter, as it is the support or foundation of all karma.

Doubt: Yoga is seen to be destroyed at the time of the destruction of the rise of the karmic body. Therefore, should yoga be considered to be caused by the karmic body?

Solution: No, because if this is assumed, then the consequence of the rise of the auspicious state of being, which is destroyed after the destruction of the rise of non-destructive karma, would also be a consequence of karma.

Thus, from the above discussion, it is proven that yoga is a result of karma. Or, yoga is a result of karma, because yoga is seen to be destroyed after the destruction of the rise of body-making karma. This assumption does not contradict the auspicious state of being, because it is contradictory to assume that the auspicious state of being, which is opposite to the state of yoga, arises from karma.

What is yoga? In the Shatkhandagama, another alternative is stated as follows: "By the destruction of the obscurations and the attainment of liberation, the living being becomes mentally, verbally, and physically yogic."

Doubt: The contraction and expansion of the living being's regions, i.e., the pulsation, is yoga. This pulsation arises from the rise of karma, because it is not found in the Siddhas who are free from the rise of karma. It is not appropriate to say that yoga is not a consequence of karma because of the absence of yoga in the A-yoga-kevali, because if the A-yoga-kevali does not have yoga, then the rise of body-making karma would not occur either. Yoga, which arises from the rise of body-making karma, cannot occur without the rise of that karma, because assuming so would lead to the fallacy of excessive consequence. Thus, if yoga is a consequence of karma, why is it called the destruction of obscurations?

Solution: This is not the case, because when the rise of body-making karma causes the accumulation of many subtle matter particles that are suitable for the formation of the body, and the absence of the rise of the all-destructive competitors of the life-ending karma, and the destruction of the obscurations of those competitors, and the rise of the country-destroying competitors, yoga is called the destruction of obscurations.

1. Th. Pu. 5 p. 225-226. 2. Dh. Pu. 7 p. 75.

Page #326:
---------------------------
##  Gatha 217-216
**Yoga Margana / 263**

"When the contraction and expansion of the living being's regions increases, then by obtaining that potency, yoga is considered to be a destroyer of obstacles."

**Doubt:** If the increase and decrease of the pulsation of the living being's regions is due to the increase and decrease of the strength arising from the destruction of the obstacle karma, then in a liberated being whose obstacle karma has been destroyed, does the multiplicity of yoga arise?

**Solution:** No, because the strength that destroys obstacles is seen as different from the strength that destroys. The pulsation of the living being's regions, which is obtained by the increase and decrease of the strength that destroys obstacles, is not obtained by the increase and decrease of the strength that destroys, because assuming so would lead to an absurdity.

**Doubt:** If yoga arises from the destruction of the obstacle karma of potency, then does the influence of yoga arise in a liberated being?

**Solution:** No, because the aspect of destroying obstacles in yoga is considered to be a remedy. In reality, yoga is a manifestation of the inherent nature. Accepting the influence of inherent yoga in a liberated being leads to contradiction.

Yoga is superior to the path, because it arises from the stimulation and manifestation of name karma. The origin of yoga is from the manifestation of the karma that is conducive to its practice and not harmful. Therefore, yoga is a manifestation of the inherent nature.

**Doubt:** Isn't yoga also said to be a destroyer of obstacles?

**Solution:** It is called a destroyer of obstacles because the increase of yoga is seen from the destruction of the obstacle of potency. That also happens.

**Characteristics of Specific Yoga**

"The leaf of the Maravar tree, the true, the false, the fear, the trembling, in these.
The name of the yoga is then, those are the yogas, those are the yogas.
The nature is the true, the death, the yoga that is yours, that is the true, the death, the yoga.
The fear of the poison, the poison, know it, the true poison, that.
The color is the true poison, the one that is joined, the death, that is the true poison, the death, the yoga.
The yoga that is yours, that is the true poison, the death, the yoga." || 217 || 218 || 216 ||

*1. Dh. Pu. 7 p. 75. 2. Dh. Pu. 7 p. 76. 3. Dh. Pu. 9 p. 316. 4. Dh. Pu. 10 p. 436. 5. In the printed book, the text is "Sambhashamane Saccho", which seems to be correct, but in Dh. Pu. 1 p. 281, the text is "Sanbhavasacchamarana", which is adopted here. 6. Dh. Pu. 1 p. 262. Pra. Pan. San. 0 Pu. 18*

Page #327:
---------------------------
## 264 / Go. Sa. Jivakanda
**Verse 217-219**

**Verse Meaning:** The nature of the mind and speech in relation to true, false, both, and experiential objects is the same as the name of the mind and speech at that time, and in relation to that, the name of that tendency (yoga) is also the same. ||217||  The mind related to truth is the true mind. The yoga arising from the true mind is true mind-yoga. The opposite yoga is false mind-yoga. The yoga that is both true and false is true-false mind-yoga. ||218|| The mind that is not associated with truth and falsehood is false-false mind. The yoga arising from it is false-false mind-yoga. ||219||

**Special Meaning:** Mind-yoga has been said to be of four types. In this regard, the following sutra is:
"Bhanajogo chamviho, sacchamanajogo mosamanajogo sachamosamarajogo asandhamosamaranajogo chedi. ||46||" [Shatkhandagama Sant-Paruvana Dhaval Pu. 1 p. 280] Mind-yoga is of four types: true mind-yoga, false mind-yoga, true-false mind-yoga, and false-false mind-yoga. ||46||

Truth, non-falsehood, and infallible are synonymous words. The mind related to truth is the true mind, and the yoga that arises from it is true mind-yoga. The opposite yoga is false mind-yoga. The yoga that arises from the combination of truth and falsehood is true-false mind-yoga. The yoga that is different from true mind-yoga and false mind-yoga is false-false mind-yoga.

**Shankara:** What is false-false mind-yoga, i.e., experiential mind-yoga?

**Solution:** In equanimous beings, the tendency of speech occurs with mental knowledge, because without mental knowledge, the tendency of speech is not found in them. Therefore, out of the four, the yoga arising from the mind that is the cause of true speech is called true mind-yoga. The yoga arising from the mind that is the cause of false speech is called false mind-yoga. The yoga arising from the mind that is the cause of both true and false speech is called both mind-yoga. The yoga arising from the mind that is the cause of experiential speech, such as invitation, etc., which is different from these three types of speech, is called experiential mind-yoga. However, this statement is not the main meaning, because it does not have complete pervasiveness with the whole mind. That is, the above statement is metaphorical because the truth, etc., of speech has been metaphorically applied to the mind.

**Doubt:** What is the correct meaning to be taken here?

**Solution:** The true tendency of the mind is the true mind. ||2|| The mind that tends to act in accordance with the object is the true mind. The opposite of this is the false mind. The mind that is both true and false is the both mind. And the mind that is the cause of knowledge that is doubtful and uncertain is the experiential mind. Or, the mind has the ability to produce true, false, etc., speech. In relation to this, the statement that was previously called metaphorical is also the main one, because it arises from the cause of true speech, etc.

**General Mind-yoga, True Mind-yoga, and False-False Mind-yoga**

From the wrong view of the false-false mind-yoga to the yoga...

1. Dhaval Pu. 1 p. 281.
2. Yathavastu pravruksha manah satyapanah. [Dhaval Pu. 1 p. 281].

Page #328:
---------------------------
## Verse 216-217
**Yoga Marganga/265**

**Question:** Where does the fifth type of Manoyoga, called "common Manoyoga", come from, besides the four types of Manoyoga?

**Answer:** This is not a flaw, because the common Yoga, which resides within the four types of Manoyoga, becomes the fifth number.

**Question:** What is this "common" that is found in the four types of Manoyoga?

**Answer:** Here, "common" should be understood as the similarity of the mind. The effort that is made for the origin of the mind is Manoyoga.

**Question:** Is there a tendency of the mind seen even without effort from previous actions?

**Answer:** If there is a tendency of the mind even without effort, let it be, because the Yoga that arises from such a mind is not the meaning intended here. But the specific effort in the form of "parispanda" (vibration) that occurs due to the mind is intended here as Yoga.

**Question:** The Kevali's Satya Manoyoga should have Sadbhava (harmonious existence), because there is Sadbhava of the true knowledge of the "Varta" (reality). But the Sadbhava of their Asatya Mrish Manoyoga is not possible, because there is the influence of doubt and "Anadhyavasaya" (indecision) in their knowledge?

**Answer:** No, because the mind being the cause of speech due to the form of doubt and "Anadhyavasaya", there can still be "Anubhaya" (experience) Dharma (principle) in it. Therefore, there is no contradiction in accepting the Sadbhava of "Anubhaya" Manoyoga in the "Sayogi" (those who have attained liberation).

**Question:** What is the meaning of the Kevali's speech giving rise to doubt and "Anadhyavasaya"?

**Answer:** Because the objects of the Kevali's knowledge are infinite, and the listener's "Kshayopa-sham" (reduction of karmic impurities) is not excessive, doubt and "Anadhyavasaya" can arise due to the Kevali's words.

**Question:** The words of the Tirthankaras are "An-akshara" (non-lettered) in form, and therefore they are "Sva-nirupa" (self-evident), and because they are self-evident, they cannot be of two types: Satya (true) and "Anubhaya" (experiential)?

**Answer:** No, because in the Kevali's words, there is Sadbhava of "Anubhaya" speech through forms like "Syat" (perhaps). Therefore, it is well-known that the Kevali's sound is "An-akshara" (non-lettered).

**Question:** The Kevali's "Dravya-mana" (substance-mind) should have Sadbhava, but its function is not found there.

**1. "Maga Joga Mumnama Joga Asacchamosaman Joga Mani Micchaiti-ppadidi Javi Sajogine Bali Ti." [Dhaval Pu. 1 Page 982]**. **2. Dhaval. Pu. 1 Page 28**.

Page #329:
---------------------------
296 / Go. Sa. Jivakanda
Natha 220-221
Solution - Even though there may be a lack of karmic obscurations and karmic pacifications in the form of the function of dravyaman, effort is found in the production of dravyaman, because there is no obstructive cause found in the effort that takes place to bring about the varmanas of dravyaman. Therefore, it is proven that the effort which is the parispanda form of the soul, for the sake of that mind, is manoyoga.
Doubt - When there is no (भाव) mind of the Kevali, how can the production of these two types of words, truth and experience, occur from it?
Solution - No, because the production of those two types of words by the mind has been ordained by the treatment.
Satyamanoyoga and Ubhayanoyoga are found from the Mithyadristi Gunasthan with the designation of Sanjni to the Kshinakashaya Vitraga Chhadmastha Gunasthan.
Doubt - The satyamanoyoga and anubhavamanoayoga of the kshapaka and upshamka jivas may be present, but the remaining two, namely grasatyamanoyoga and ubhayanoyoga, cannot be present, because the shraprmad that resides in these two is the opposite of the asaty and ubhayaman that are the causes of pramad. That is, the kshapaka and upshamka are free from pramad, therefore their asatyamanoyoga and ubhayanoyoga cannot be found?
Solution - No, because there is no contradiction in accepting the presence of the mind that is the cause of viparyaya and anadhyavasaya of jivas who are associated with avaranakarma. But in relation to this, the kshapaka or upshamka jivas cannot be considered to be pramatta, because pramad is a synonym of moha.
The yoga that is in the ten types of true words is satyavachanayoga. The yoga that is opposite to this is mrishavachanayoga. Saty-mrishavachanayoga is ubhayavachanayoga. The word that is neither true nor false is asatyamrishavachanayoga. The language of the prasanjna jivas and the mantra etc. language in the sanjna jivas is anubhava language. 220-221
1. Babal Pu. 1 p. 284. 2. Dhaval Pu. 1 p. 265 3. "Mommaran Joga Sacchamo Samanajogi Sae Miichaitti - Phudi Jav Khisa Kasaya - Biyaray - Dumtya Tti ||51||" [Tr. Pu. 1 p. 265] 4. Shradal Pu. 1 p. 2066 Pra. Pan. San. p. 11 Ma 61 v p. 578 Ga. 85 5. Jal Pu. 1 p. 286 Pra. Pan. Sa. Pu. 19 Ga. 92 v p. 578 Ma. 86.

Page #330:
---------------------------
## Verse 220-221
**Yoga Marga/267**

**Special Meaning:** "Dhachiogo Chaudivaho Sacchachijogo Mosavachijogo Sacchamosavachijogo Asacchamosavachijogo Chedi" [Dhaval Pu. 1 p. 286].

**Vachan Yoga** is of four types: **Satya Vachan Yoga**, **Asatya Vachan Yoga**, **Ubhaya Vachan Yoga**, and **Anubhaya Vachan Yoga**. **Samanya Vachan Yoga** and **Anubhaya Vachan Yoga** occur from the two-sense being to the thirteenth **Gunasthan** of **Sayogakevali**.

**Question:**  Anubhaya Vachan is generated from the mind, as stated earlier. How can Anubhaya Vachan Yoga occur in two-sense beings and other non-conscious beings?

**Solution:** It is not a rule that all Vachans are generated from the mind. If we assume that all Vachans originate from the mind, then the Kevalis (liberated souls) who are without a mind would not have any Vachans.

**Doubt:**  Without a mind, knowledge cannot be generated in beings with impaired senses, and without knowledge, Vachans cannot be expressed.

**Solution:** This is not true, because it is not a rule that knowledge is generated only from the mind. If we assume that knowledge is generated only from the mind, then knowledge cannot be generated from other senses, because we are assuming that all knowledge originates from the mind. Or, the Dharma (quality) of being generated from the mind cannot reside in the senses, because it contradicts the concept of mental knowledge being the object of sight, hearing, and experience. If we consider the mind as a contributing factor to the senses like sight, etc., it still doesn't work, because the knowledge of the senses is generated from the senses themselves, which require the effort and cooperation of the soul.

**Doubt:** In **Samansva** beings, knowledge is generated only through **Manoyoga**.

**Solution:** No, because this contradicts **Kevalgyan** (omniscience).

**Doubt:** Then, let's assume that the **Joxayopashmik** knowledge of **Samansva** beings is generated through **Manoyoga**.

**Solution:** This is not a fault, it is desirable.

**Doubt:** How can the earlier statement that Vachans are generated through **Manoyoga** be true?

**Solution:** This doubt is not a fault, because the term "mind" in the statement "Vachans are generated through Manoyoga" is used metaphorically to refer to mental knowledge.

1. "Vachijogo Pramoccamosavachijogo Bee Diyah Ppdi Javasa Yogikevali Ti ||53||" [Dhaval Pu. 1 3.257]. 2. Dhaval Pu. 1 p. 287.

Page #331:
---------------------------
268/Mo. Sa. Jivakanda
Gaya 222-224

How is experiential knowledge possible in the words of the Vikalendriya?
Solution- The words of the Vikalendriya are due to knowledge in the form of non-determination, therefore they are called experiential.
Doubt- In the words of the Vikalendriya, there is sound-object determination, i.e. certainty, then why are they called the cause of non-determination?
Solution- No, because here, by non-determination, the absence of determination regarding the subject matter of the speaker is intended.

The true word-yoga, known as Mithyadristi, extends from the Mithyadristi to the Sayoga-kevali Gunasthan. There is no contradiction in the ten types of true words being found in the thirteen Gunasthanas, therefore they have ten types of true words.

The false word-yoga and the true-false word-yoga, known as Mithyadristi, are found from the Mithyadristi to the Kshina-kashaya-Bitaraga-Chhap-sthana Gunasthan.
Doubt- How can the words of a being whose kashayas have become weak be false?
Solution- Such a doubt is futile, because the cause of false words, ignorance, is found up to the twelfth Gunasthan, in this regard, the existence of false words has been established there, and therefore, the true-false word-yoga, which is a combination of both, also exists up to the twelfth Gunasthan, there is no contradiction in this statement.
Doubt- How is word-yoga possible for beings who are free from kashayas and who completely follow the vow of word-secrecy?
Solution- No, because there is no contradiction in the existence of internal speech in beings who are free from kashayas.

Illustrative examples of the ten types of true words are found in the Jagvad-Samm-ditha-Varga-Ganam. In the same way, the ten types of truth are found in the Samavara-ge.
1. Bhattan, Vevi, Chandappa-ha-padima, and also Jiran-datto.
2. Sedho, Digdho, Rajjadi, Kurotti, and also Je have Vayana.
3. Sakko, Jambudvipa, Pallavi, Payav-ajja-vayana, and also Pallovama.
4. Kamaso Jag-pada-sachadi Ditthata.

1. Dhaval Pu. 1 P. 287.
2. "Saccha-vachi-joga Sanim-ichchai-dvi-ppati Java Sajogi-kevali ti." [Dhaval Pu. 1 P. 288].
3. "Mosava-chi-joga Saccha-mosa-vachi-joga Sanina-michchai-tti-ppatu-di Java Khina-kamay-viy-ray-chha-du-mattha ti." [Dhaval Pu. 1 P. 286].
4. Dhaval Pu. 1 P. 286.

Page #332:
---------------------------
## Verse 222-224
Yoga Margga / 266

**Verse Meaning:** There are ten types of truth: (1) Janapada Satya, (2) Sammati Satya, (3) Sthapana Satya, (4) Nama Satya, (5) Rupa Satya, (6) Pratiitya Satya, (7) Vyavahara Satya, (8) Sambhavna Satya, (9) Bhava Satya, (10) Upamā Satya.

Examples: (1) Bhakt, (2) Devi, (3) Shri Chandra Prabhu Pratima, (4) Jinadatt, (5) Shwet, (6) Lambā, Baḍā, (7) Bhat pakta hai, (8) Indra Jambudvipa ko ulata sakta hai, (9) Pav Vachan, (10) Palyopama; these are examples of Janapada Satya, etc. respectively. ||222-224 ||

**Special Meaning:**

(1) **Janapada Satya:** The word that is commonly used or prevalent in a particular region is called Janapada Satya. For example, in Maharashtra, "Shrodan" is called "Bhatu," in Andhra Pradesh it is called "Vantak" or "Mukooḍu," in Karnataka it is called "Kulu," and in Dravidian country it is called "Chor." Thus, "Shrodan" is called by different names in different regions. The word used for "Shrodan" in a particular region is called Janapada Satya in that region.

(2) **Sammati Satya:** The name that is established by convention or common belief, or is universally accepted, is called Sammati Satya. This is also called Samvriti Satya. For example, calling women other than the queen as "Devi."

(3) **Sthapana Satya:** Establishing another object in an object and calling it by the name of the main object is called Sthapana Satya. For example, calling the statue of Shri Chandra Prabhu Tirthankara as Shri Chandra Prabhu.

(4) **Nama Satya:** Giving a name to someone for the sake of convenience, without any other expectation. For example, giving someone the name "Jinadatt" for the sake of convenience. Even though he is not given by the Jinas, he is called Jinadatt for the sake of convenience.

(5) **Rupa Satya:** Calling something by its main characteristic, even though it has many other qualities. For example, a person has many qualities like touch, taste, smell, etc., but he is called a fair person because of his fair complexion. This is Rupa Satya.

(6) **Pratiitya Satya:** Calling an object as inferior or superior in comparison to another object is called Pratiitya Satya. This is also called relative truth. For example, this is long, it is called long in comparison to short. Even though it is also short in comparison to long, but that is not the intention.

(7) **Vyavahara Satya:** Calling an object by its main characteristic according to the Nayas like Naigamadi, etc. is called Vyavahara Satya. For example, according to the Naigama Naya, "Bhat is cooking." Even though after the rice is cooked, it will be Bhat, but Bhat is a synonym for the transformation that is about to happen. Therefore, there is no fault in calling it Bhat according to the Naigama Naya. This is Vyavahara Satya. Or, according to the Sangraha Naya, all objects are real because calling them real includes all objects. This is also Vyavahara Satya.

(8) **Sambhavna Satya:** Establishing the nature of an object based on its possibility, while avoiding the impossible. For example, Indra has the power to overturn Jambudvipa. Even though Indra has never overturned Jambudvipa and will never overturn it, this is true based on the establishment of Indra's power. This is Sambhavna Satya. This does not involve action, because action arises from the meeting of many external causes.

(9) **Bhava Satya:** The result of the concept of law and prohibition according to the principles of the scriptures, in relation to the transcendental object, is called Bhava. The words that describe that Bhava are called Bhava Satya. For example, what has dried up or has been cooked in fire or has been cut into pieces by a machine or has been mixed with sourness or salt is called Prasook. Eating it does not cause sin. This kind of statement that is free from sin is called Bhava Satya. Even though there may be the possibility of microscopic beings that are not perceptible to the senses, but the transcendental knower has called it Prasook in the scriptures, therefore calling it Prasook is Bhava Satya.

(10) **Upamā Satya:** Calling another object similar to a well-known object is called Upamā Satya. Or, another object that is similar to a well-known object is called Upamā. The words spoken based on Upamā are called Upamā Satya.

Page #333:
---------------------------
300/Go. Sa. Jivakanda
Gatha 225-227
• The similes are true; the first simile is the name of a pit. As many as the number of hairs on the tip of the hairs of countless beings come into that pit, so many countless times the time measure is called the time measure of the simile.
The statement of the types of Anumayavachan is Aamantari, Parana Varani, Yachari, Yapuchchharani, Panna Varani, Pacchakkhani, Sansayayani, Ichchhanuloma. ॥22॥ The ninth Anaskharagada is the language of Asachchmosa.
The brothers have a common thread, they are all connected. ॥226॥ Gathaarth-Aamantrani, Agyapani, Yachani, Aapruchchhani, Pragyapani, Pratyakhyani, Sanshayavachani, Ichchhanuloomni, Anaragata are the nine types of Anubhayatmak language, because the listener gets knowledge of both the expressed and the unexpressed parts. ॥225-226॥
Vishesharth- "Hey Devadatta, come here" this type of calling statement is Aamantrani language. "Do this work" etc. the statement in the form of a command is Agyapani language. "Give me this" etc. the statement in the form of a request is Yachani language. "What is this" etc. the statement in the form of a question is Aapruchchhani language. "What should I do" etc. the statement in the form of information is Pragyapani language. "I renounce this" such a statement in the form of renunciation or avoidance is Pratyakhyani language. "Is this a line of words or a line of flags" this type of statement in the form of doubt is Sanshayavachani language. "I should also have the same" this type of statement expressing desire is Ichchhanuloomni language. From the two-sense beings to the non-conscious five-sense beings, there is a language without letters, which expresses its own problem-like sign. This is the ninth Anaskharagata language. This type of language is in the form of Anubhayavachan, because by listening to them, both the expressed and the unexpressed parts are understood. The general part is expressed, so these languages are not false, and the special part is not expressed, so they are not true either.
Sha-How is it possible for Anaskhari language to be Anubhayavachan, when the general part is not expressed in it?
Samadhan-The speaker's intention of happiness etc. is known by the expression of pain etc. through the Anaskhari language. Therefore, the general part is also expressed in Anaskhari language. The beings who speak Anaskhari language have statements in the form of signs, by those statements, their happiness, sorrow, etc. are known by relying on their circumstances etc. through them.
The root of the four types of Manoyog and Vachanayog is the root of the Manavayargans, the root of the Punnadehuudo.
The root of the two fears is the root of the Avaran. ॥227॥ 1. According to the commentary of Siddhanta Chakravarti Shrimadbhayachandra Moori. 2. According to the commentary of Siddhanta Chakravarti Shrimadbhayachandra.

Page #334:
---------------------------
## Gatha 228-226
**Yoga Marg Gan/301**

**Gatha Arth - (Truth and Experience)** The root cause of Manoyog and Vachan yog is the arising of Paryapti Namkarma and Sharira Namkarma. The root cause of Mrusha and Ubhay Manoyog and Vachan yog is the arising of three sections of Avaran. ||227||

**Vishesh Arth** - Although the first part of the Gatha mentions general Man and Vachan, it implies Satya and Anubhay Manoyog and Vachan yog because without the specific, the general is "Swaravisharan Bat". The mention of Mrusha and Ubhay is in the latter part of the Gatha, therefore, the first part implies Satya and Anubhay from the general. The main cause of Mrusha and Ubhay Manoyog and Vachan yog is the arising of the section of Avaran Karma, otherwise, Mrusha and Ubhay Manoyog and Vachan yog would not be mentioned in the 12th Ganasthan of Ksheen Moh. Only Mohaniya Karma is not the cause of Mrusha and Ubhay Manoyog and Vachan yog, although Satya Vachan yog is possible due to the true knowledge of Kevali Bhagwan, however, due to the words of Kevali, the listener may experience doubt and uncertainty because the listener has Kshayopa Shamik knowledge and is devoid of Atishay, therefore, Anubhay Vachan yog of Kevali is also proven.

**Sayog Kevali's Manoyog is possible due to the Manasahiyan Vayan Dittha Tappuyami, this is Sayoga. Uto Manodhayare Ringadiyana Hogammi. ||228|| Ango Vangudaya do Davmaran? Jirinadachandaham. Maragvagaran Khandhanam Agamaranado Du Bhanajogo. ||226||**

**Gatha Arth** - The use of words by beings with Manas is done with Manojnan, therefore, Manoyog is said to be Upchar for Sayog Kevali who is devoid of Indriyanan. Due to the arising of Ango Upang Namkarma, there is Dravya Manas, for that Dravya Manas, the Manovarganas of Kevali Bhagwan arrive, therefore, it is called Manoyog. ||228-226||

**Vishesh Arth** - Kevali has Atishay knowledge, therefore, their Manas is not found?

**Solution** - No, because their Dravya Manas's Sadbhav is found.

**Doubt** - Even if Kevali's Dravya Manas's Sadbhav is there, but its function is not found?

**Solution** - Even if the function of Dravya Manas, Kshayopa Shamik knowledge is absent, but the effort to produce Dravya Manas is found, because there is no obstacle in the effort to bring the Dravya Manas's Varganas. Therefore, it is proven that the effort in the form of Atma-Parispand, which happens due to that Manas, is Manoyog.

1. "Nivishesha hi Samanyam Bhavet Khar Vishanavat." [Alap Padhati Ga.6]
2. Dhaval Pu. 1 Page 283.

Page #335:
---------------------------
302/Go. Sa. Jivakapad
Verse 230-231
Doubt-Why does the Kevali not perform his work even though effort exists in producing the object of the mind?
Solution-No, because the Kevali lacks the cooperative cause of mental knowledge, the form of destruction of obscurations, therefore they do not have mind-created knowledge.
Doubt-While the Kevali does not actually have a mind that is free from obscurations, how can the two types of speech, truth and experience, arise from it?
Solution-No, because the production of both types of speech by the mind is ordained by treatment.
Soudarik Kayayoga and Audarik Mishrayoga Purumahadurarural Ayatto Sanvijan Tahmi Bhavan. Auraliyan Tamuccai Pouraliyakayajogo So. ||230|| Pouraliy Uttattham Vijan Missant Aparipunnham Tam.
Jo Teran Sampujogo Pouraliyamissogo So. ||231||
Verse Meaning-Pur, Mahan, Udar and Ural are words with the same meaning. What is in Udar is Audarik and the yoga that happens due to it is Audarik Kayayoga. ||230||
O Blessed One! Know that the body whose form has been described earlier, is mixed until it is complete, i.e., until the body is complete, and the yoga that happens through it is called Audarik Mishrayoga. ||231||
Special Meaning-The effort that is the cause of pulsation in the regions of the living being due to the power generated by the Audarik body is Audarik Kayayoga. The effort that is for the pulsation in the regions of the living being due to the semen produced by the Karmaran and Audarik classifications is Audarik Mishrayoga. Udar, Pur and Mahan are words with the same meaning. The body that is produced in it is the Audarik body.
Doubt-The Audarik body is great, this does not become a fact, because it is said in the classification section *The regions of the Audarik body are the smallest of the classifications related to the substance. From it, countless times the Vikriyik body is 1. Dhaval Pu. 1 p. 284 and 285. 2. These two verses are verse 160 and 161 on Dhaval Pu. 1 p. 261 and verse 63 and 14 on Pra. Pan. San. 520, but there are differences in some letters. 3. Yaval p. 1 p. 281 and 26. 4. "Padesappabahue Ti Savayovamo Sriraliyasariradavvayaganapro Pades Tta Dae. ||785|| Ve Uvi Yasariradavvabammaranamo Padesadae Prasasnejjagunagro. ||786|| Praharasariradattvavamahasi Padesavae Kasankhejjagunayo. ||787|| Tejasasariradavvyvamgaragayo Padesatthadae Prapantagunabho. ||788|| Bhasa-Mama-Kamm Yasaradavavaganamro Padesatthadae Prapantamuranamo ||786| Dhaval Pu. 14 p. 560-562]

Page #336:
---------------------------
## Verse 230-231
**Yoga Margarn:/303**

The regions of the **dravya** (substance) classification related to the **aahar** (food) body are countless. The regions of the **dravya** classification related to the **tejas** (light) body are countless times more than that. The regions of the **dravya** classification related to the **bhaasha** (speech) body are countless times more than that. The regions of the **dravya** classification related to the **mano** (mind) body are countless times more than that. And the regions of the **dravya** classification related to the **karma** (action) body are countless times more than that.

**Solution:** This is not the case in reality, because the **audarik** (subtle) body becomes the **sthala** (region) in comparison to **avagahana** (perception). As stated in the **vargana** (classification) section:

1. The **avagahana** of the **dravya** classification related to the **karma** body is the most subtle.
2. The **avagahana** of the **dravya** classification related to the **mano** body is countless times more than that.
3. The **avagahana** of the **dravya** classification related to the **bhaasha** body is countless times more than that.
4. The **avagahana** of the **dravya** classification related to the **tejas** body is countless times more than that.
5. The **avagahana** of the **dravya** classification related to the **aahar** body is countless times more than that.
6. The **avagahana** of the **dravya** classification related to the **vaikriya** (transformation) body is countless times more than that.
7. The **avagahana** of the **dravya** classification related to the **audarik** body is countless times more than that.

**Or:** The **audarik** body is **ural** (vast) in comparison to **avagahana**. The **avagahana** of the **para** (higher) body is very vast in comparison to the **avagahana** of the **pop** (lower) body, therefore the **audarik** body is **ural**.

**Doubt:** How is the vastness of its **avagahana** known?

**Solution:** Because the **audarik** body of the **mahamatsya** (great fish) is five hundred **yojan** (a unit of distance) in width and one thousand **yojan** in length. This shows the vastness of its **avagahana**.

**Doubt:** The **sukshma** (subtle) **prithvi** (earth), **jala** (water), **agni** (fire), **vayu** (air) and ordinary bodies lack **sthula** (grossness). How is the **audarik** body possible in those **sukshma** bodies?

**Solution:** No, because the **sukshma** body becomes **sthula** in comparison to the even more subtle **vaikriya** body, etc. In other words, the **sukshma** body of the **sukshma** **prithvi** (earth) bodied beings, etc., becomes **sthula**. Or, in **paramagam** (ultimate path), the body of the **sukshma** **prithvi** (earth) bodied beings, etc., is called **audarik**.

**Doubt:** How does the **audarik** body become important when the word **ural** is derived from the word **udara** (generous)?

**Solution:** Because the **audarik** body is the cause of **nivrittigaman** (liberation) and the cause of the origin of eighteen thousand **sheelas** (characteristics), therefore it becomes important.

The **audarik** **mishrakayayoga** (combination of bodies) occurs until the **antarmuhurta** (last moment) before the **shariraparyapti** (completion of the body) is complete. Because at that time, the **atma** (soul) region does not **parispand** (vibrate) only due to the **audarik** classifications, but:

1. "**Progyaharayappabahue ni sabvathoudamro kammaiyasariradasvavagganagro progahagaae.||760|| Maranadanavagganamo progaanaae prasankhejj guanaso 61|| Maasadayavagganapro progaharanaae asanvejjagunayao.||762|| Tejasasariradabvavaragaramio progahanaae asankhejjagugayao ||763|| Mahaarasariradabvabaggarayo yogahanaae asankhejjaguranpo ||764|| Veviyagariir davya varagaranamo ghogahgaae asakhejjaguraayo.||765|| Yoralijasarirapvvadagaranayo progahanaae asankhejjaguhapro ||766||" **Badal Gu. 14 p. 562-564**.
2. **Dhaval Pu. 14 p. 322**.
3. **Siddhantanavati** by **Themadamoyachandra** with commentary.
4. **Dhaval Pu. 14 p. 323**.

Page #337:
---------------------------
## 304 / Go. Sa. Jivakanda
## Gatha 232-233

**Yoga occurs only when connected with the karma-body.** Yoga occurs due to both **Shraddarik Vargana** and **Karman Vargana**, therefore it is **Praddarik Mishra Kayayoga**. **Audarik Kayayoga** and **Shraddarik Mishra Kayayoga** occur in both **Tiryachas** and **Humans**.

**Question:** Why does **Audarik Sharira** **Namakarma** not arise in **Devas** and **Narakas**?

**Answer:** It does not arise because by nature, their **Shraddarik Sharira** **Namakarma** does not arise. Or, the **Audarik Sharira** **Namakarma** is in conflict with the **Devagati** and **Narakagati** **Namakarma**, therefore it does not arise in them.

However, it is not a rule that only **Tiryachas** and **Humans** have **Praddarik** and **Audarik Mishra Kayayoga**, because such a rule would lead to objections regarding the influence of **Karman Kayayoga** etc. in **Tiryachas** and **Humans**. Therefore, one should know that **Praddarik** and **Audarik Mishra Kayayoga** occurs only in **Humans** and **Tiryachas**.

## Vaikriyik Kayayoga and Vaikriyik Mishra Kayayoga

**Gatha 232:** A body with various qualities and abilities, or a body with specific actions, is **Vaikriyik** or **Vimurva**. The yoga that arises in it should be known as **Vaigurik Vaikriyik Kayayoga**.

**Gatha 233:** O **Bhavyas**, as long as the **Vaikriyik Sharira** with the aforementioned characteristics remains incomplete, it should be known as **Vaikriyik Mishra Kayayoga**. And the **Sampayoga** that occurs through it is **Vaikriyik Mishra Kayayoga**.

**Special Meaning:** It is **Vaikriyik** because it is endowed with various qualities and abilities. *Ringgama, Mahima, Laghima, Prapti, Prakamya, Ishtava, Vashitva, and Kamaropa* are some of the many abilities. It is said to be **Vaikriyik** because it is endowed with these abilities.

**Various** means various types of auspicious and inauspicious forms, **Anima**, **Mahima**, etc. qualities, their **Riddhi** (greatness) combined with the body of **Devas** and **Narakas** is **Vaigurik**, **Vaigurik** or **Vaikriyik**. In which:

1. "**Oraliyakay Joga Shroaliy Misss Kayayoga Tirishda Manura Saranam** || 57 ||" 
3. **Ghadal Pu. 1 Pr. 261 Gatha 192** and **Pra. Pan. Sa. Pu. 21**
2. **Sha. Pu. 1 Pr. 295-266**. There is some difference in words, the Gatha is 60, but the word difference is written on No. 233. 
6. **Dhaval Pu. 14 Pr. 325**.
[**Dhaval Pu. Gatha 65**
**1 Pr. 265**] | **Pr. 578 Gaya**
4. **Dhaval Pu. 1 Pr. 262 Gatha 163** and **Pra. Pan. San. Pu. 21 Gatha 66** and **Pr. 578**. This is Gatha No. 234, but according to the Gathas of **Dhaval** and **Panchasangrah**, it is 
5. "**Vivihaingkiguṇ Juttamidi Vejavishaya** || 238 || **Shraval Pu. 14. 325**] /

Page #338:
---------------------------
## Gatha 234

There are various types of **vigurva** (actions). That which has **vigurva** as its purpose is **vaigursik**. Or, **vikriya** is the name for various types of actions and many **anima** (subtle matter) etc. **vikara** (modifications). That which has **vikriya** as its purpose is **vaikriyik**. For that **vaikriyik** body, the effort that arises from the power generated by the intake of **vairiyik** food categories, which are capable of transforming into that body form, and which is the cause of **parispand** (pulsation) in the **jivapradesha** (living regions), is **vaikriyik kayayog** (yoga of the **vaikriyik** body). As long as the **vaikriyik** body is not fully attained, the effort that arises from the **karma** and **vaikriyik** categories, which is the cause of **parispand** in the **jivapradesha**, is **vaikriyik mishra kayayog** (mixed yoga of the **vaikriyik** body). In the very short time of **antmuhurt** (the last moment), **parispand** does not occur in the **atmapradesha** (soul regions) merely due to the **vaikriyik** categories, but only in conjunction with the **karman** body, and due to the **vaikriyik** body-related layers. Therefore, this is **mishrayog** (mixed yoga).

Where is the possibility of **vaikriyik kayayog**? **Badar**, **tejokayik**, **vayukayik**, and **panchendriya** (five senses) **paryapt** (sufficient) **jiv** (living beings) with **praudarik** (substantial) bodies perform **vikriya**. Among them, those whose bodies possess this ability perform **vikriya**.

**Special Meaning:** **Dev** (gods) and **narak** (hell beings) have **vaikriyik kayayog** and **vaikriyik mishra kayayog**.

**Doubt:** Why do **tiryanch** (animals) and **manushya** (humans) not have these two yogas?

**Solution:** No, because **tiryanch** and **manushya** paths are opposed to the arising of **vaikriyik** body **namakarma** (karma of the name) along with the arising of **karma**. That is, **tiryanch** and **manushya** paths do not have the arising of **vaikriyik** body **namakarma**. This is their nature. Therefore, **tiryanch** and **manushya** do not have **vaikriyik kayayog** and **vaikriyik mishra kayayog**.

**Doubt:** **Tiryach** and **manushya** are also heard to have **vaikriyik** bodies. How is that possible?

**Solution:** No, because **praudarik** bodies are of two types: **vikriyatmak** (active) and **pratikriyatmak** (reactive). The **vikriyatmak** **praudarik** body is said to be **vairiyik** in **manushya** and **tiryanch**, but it is not considered a **vaikriyik** body because it lacks various qualities and **ridhi** (powers).

Those who have four bodies are **char sharira** (four-bodied) living beings.

**Doubt:** What are those four bodies?

1. **Shrimadbhavchandra Siddhantchakravarti**'s commentary.
2. Although this **gatha** is numbered 233, it is numbered 234 according to the **Dhaval** text.
3. "**Veubviyakayajogo Veubviya Misskayajogo Devaneriyanam**" [**Dhaval** Vol. 1, p. 296].

Page #339:
---------------------------
306/Go. Sa, Jeevanagad
Gatha 235-230
There are beings with four bodies: Audarik, Graharak, Taijas, and Karman; or, Graudarik, Vairiyik, Taijas, and Karman; or, Audarik, Graharak, Taijas, and Karman.
According to Yogamargarana, the five Manoyogi, five Vachanayogi, and Audarik Kayayogi beings are either three-bodied or four-bodied.
Doubt: How is Audarik Kayayogi possible for beings who react to the body? Solution: It is not possible, because the reacting body is also Audarik.
Doubt: Does the Audarik body lose its Audarik nature due to the arising of the Karma called Audarik?
Solution: This is not correct, because it would lead to a contradiction.
However, it has been said elsewhere that the reacting body is also Audarik. This is not correct, because the reacting body is prohibited from being Audarik. The Vairiyik body is only for a short time, from the time of the arising of the Karma called Mamkarma. This is because in animals or humans, the reacting body is found for a short time, and the being dies after a second time.
There are beings who react in the Agnicayik, Vayukayik, Badar Agnicayik, Badar Vayukayik, their equivalents, Sakayik, and Sakayik equivalents. Therefore, the Vairiyik body is possible in them.
Graharak Kayayogi and Aharak Mishrayogi:
"Aharasudayena ya pamattaviradasa hovi ahar. Asanjamparihara ratta sandehaviranasanntu cha." ||235||
"Rinayasese kevalivugavirahe ripakk maranpahudhikalane. Parakhet sanvite jijiranadharavandaragatta cha." ||236||
"Uttamaangamhi have dhabubihiinam suham asanhananam. Suhansthanam dhavalam hatthapamanam pasaththudayam." ||237||
"Pravaghadi antomuhurtakalatthididi jahappinadare. Pajjattisampunne maranampi kadachi sabavai." ||238||
1. Dhaval Pu. 14 p. 238. 2. "Joganavaadena panchamaran jogi panchavachi jogi progalia kayajogi athi jeeva tisarira chadu sarira." ||144|| [Dhaval Pu. 14 p. 242]. 3. Dhaval Pu. 14 p. 242-243. 4. Dhaval p. 14 p. 402. 5. Shraval Pu. 15 p. 64. 6. Dhaval p. 14 p. 242.

Page #340:
---------------------------
**Gaya. 296-240**
**Yogamarga/307**

"The *paharak* body arises from the *aaharaka* body karma-udaya of the *pramattasanyata* muni, to remove *asanyama* and dispel doubts. ||236||"

"Know that this *aaharaka* body is born from the *uttamaanga*, is devoid of the seven *dhatus*, is auspicious, free from *sanhanana*, has an auspicious structure, is white, has a span of one hand, and is the work of the *prashasta* karma-udaya. ||237||"

"It is free from *vyaghata*, its inferior and superior states are of the duration of an *antarmuhurta*. Upon completion of *paryapti*, death is possible. ||238||"

"When there is doubt about a dream, the muni, through this body, goes to the *kevali* and takes in subtle matter. Therefore, the yoga that occurs through this body is *aaharaka-kaya-yoga*. ||239||"

"This *paharak* body, with the aforementioned characteristics, is *aaharaka-mith* as long as it remains incomplete. The *samprayoga* that occurs through it is *paharaka-misra-kaya-yoga*. ||240||"

**Special Meaning:** The *aaharaka* body is that through which the soul takes in, i.e., assimilates, subtle matter. The yoga that occurs through that *paharak* body is *paharaka-kaya-yoga*.

**Doubt:** How can the *jiva-pradeshas* associated with the *darik* skandhas, which are one hand in span, white like a conch shell, and have an auspicious, i.e., square, structure, be connected with another body?

**Resolution:** This is not a fault, because the *jiva-pradeshas* are bound by *anadicalina* bonds, and are therefore concrete. Therefore, there is no contradiction in their being connected with the concrete *aaharaka* body. And for the same reason, their re-combination with the *praudarik* body is also not contradictory.

**Doubt:** The *ayu-karma* is what connects the *jiva* with the body. The separation of the *jiva* and body is death. Therefore, a *jiva* whose *ayu* has been destroyed cannot be reborn in the same body, because this would be contradictory. Therefore, the *jiva* cannot be re-combined with the *praudarik* body. In other words, once the *jiva-pradeshas* are connected with the *paharak* body, they cannot be re-connected with the former *praudarik* body?

**Footnotes:**

1. & 2. Dhavala 1, p. 264; Pra. Pan. San. p. 21, verse 17-6%.
3. Dhavala 1, p. 292.

Page #341:
---------------------------
308/Go. Sa. Jeevakanee
Chapter 235-240: The solution is not satisfactory, because in the Pagaam, the separation of the Jiva and the body is not called death. Otherwise, their union would have to be considered birth.
Doubt: What harm is there in considering the union of the Jiva and the body as birth?
Solution: This is not the case, because when the Payukarma taken in the previous birth arises, those who have bound the Ayukarma related to the future birth and have lost connection with the Bhujyaman Prayu, even though they have not obtained either of these two bodies in the past or future, such Jivas are found to be born. Therefore, the union of the Jiva and the body cannot be called birth.
Doubt: If birth is of this kind, then still, death must be considered as the separation of the Jiva and the body?
Solution: This is correct, but only the complete separation of the Jiva and the body can be called death. Their separation from one part cannot be called death, because even those Jivas whose Jiva-pradesh has become contracted up to the neck do not experience death. If separation from one part is also considered death, then the person whose hand has been severed from the living body will also be considered to have committed adultery. Similarly, assuming the Paharaka body does not mean abandoning the Audarik body completely, which would lead to the death of the one assuming the Aharaka body.
This Paharaka body, being subtle, does not collide with mountains, get pierced by weapons, or burn in fire while moving, like the Vaikriyika body. The union that occurs through the semen produced by the Praharaka and Karman categories is the Aharaka Misra Kayayog.
_ Excess of Asanyam, inferiority of Aajna, and separation from one's own field, [absence of Kevali, Shruta Kevali] - these three reasons cause the Sadhu to obtain the Paharaka body. When there is an abundance of subtle Jivas that are unavoidable in water, land, and sky, there is an excess of Asanyam. To avoid this, they obtain an Aharaka body that is white like a swan and cloth, uninterrupted, made of the shoulders of the Ahar category, and one hand in length. Therefore, obtaining the Paharaka body is said to be caused by excess of Asanyam. Aajna, Siddhanta, and Aagam are synonymous words. Its inferiority, i.e., its smallness in its own field, is Prajnakanishthata. This is the second reason. When there is no subject matter of other proofs of Dravya and Paryaya except Praagam, and there is doubt in them, to remove this doubt, one goes to the feet of Shruta Kevali and Kevali in the other field, thinking, "I will go to the feet of Shruta Kevali and Kevali in the other field," and by taking the form of the Aharaka body, one goes to Giri, Nidi, Sagar, Meru Parvat, Kulachal, and Patala, and by asking Kevali and Shruta Kevali with humility, one returns without doubt. The origin of the Kevalgyan of the great Munis in the other field, and
1. Dhaval Pu. 1 p. 565-563. 2. Dhaval Pu. 1 p. 563.
3. Dhaval Tu. 14 p. 326.

Page #342:
---------------------------
## Verse 235-240

This is the third reason for the attainment of liberation and the initiation of Tirthankaras. A sadhu, devoid of the power of reaction and possessing the power of acquiring food, knowing the origin of omniscience through clairvoyance, scriptural knowledge, or the thought of the arrival of gods, goes with the thought, "I will go with devotional reverence," and transforms into an Aharaka body, goes to that place, and after paying homage to those omniscients, other Jinas, and Jinālayas, returns.

The etymology of the Aharaka body, which is taken by relying on these three reasons, is as follows: "Nipuran" means fine and sweet. "Snigdha" means white, fragrant, beautiful, and lovely. "Apratihata" is called subtle. The Aharaka body is called so because it extracts, i.e., takes, the finer and smoother particles from the food substances to produce the Aharaka body.

**Objection:** How can the Aharaka body be fine, smooth, and subtle?

**Solution:** There is no contradiction in the finer nature of the substances that are the objects of the categories of "tara" and "tama" when considering the first stage.

**Or:** The Aharaka substance is the proof. It knows the most fine among the fine, the most skilled among the skilled, and the most subtle among the subtle, hence it is called Aharaka.

**Objection:** If the Aharaka body has five types of colors, then how is it said that the Maharak body is white?

**Solution:** This teaching is given considering the whiteness of the body due to the accumulation of the essence.

**Objection:** The Aharaka body has five types of tastes. How can the Aharaka body be sweet when there is a possibility of an inauspicious taste?

**Solution:** The teaching of the sweet taste is given there because the inauspicious taste of the categories is latent.

The Aharaka body has categories with fragrant smells. Here too, the fragrance should be said to be the same as before.

The Aharaka body has categories with pleasant touch. Here too, the pleasant touch of the Aharaka body should be said to be the same as before. Or, it is said here that the categories with inauspicious taste, inauspicious smell, and inauspicious touch transform into the Aharaka body and become pleasant taste, pleasant smell, and pleasant touch.

The Aharaka body yoga and the Aharaka mixed body yoga are attained by the sixth guga-sthana-dwelling, restrained, and intoxicated.

1. Babal Pu. 14 Pu. 326-327.
2. Dhabal Pu. 14 Pri. 557-556.
3. Dhabal Pu. 14 Pri. 558.

Page #343:
---------------------------
## 31st Chapter, The Soul, Verses 295-240

**This is it.** ||5||

**Shankara:** Here, are the possessions called "possessing Ṛiddhis" because they have attained the Ṛiddhi of consuming, or because they have attained the Ṛiddhi of being bankrupted first? Of these two possibilities, the first is not acceptable because it leads to the fallacy of mutual dependence. This is explained... Until the Ṛiddhi of consuming is attained, they cannot be considered as possessing Ṛiddhis, and until they possess Ṛiddhis, the Ṛiddhi of consuming cannot arise. The second option is also not possible because when one Ṛiddhi is used, there is a lack of the generation of other Ṛiddhis. If the existence of other Ṛiddhis is assumed, then the generation of the knowledge of the mind's perception of the Ṛiddhi of consuming should also be assumed. Because there is no special characteristic in its existence similar to other Ṛiddhis, but the knowledge of the mind's perception of the one possessing the Ṛiddhi of consuming cannot be assumed, because assuming so would contradict the scriptures.

**Solution:** The fallacy of mutual dependence mentioned in the first possibility does not arise, because the Ṛiddhi of consuming does not arise in dependence on itself, because the action of self-generation from itself leads to a contradiction. The Ṛiddhi of consuming arises in dependence on restraint and its excess, therefore, the epithet "possessing Ṛiddhis, those who are restrained" also becomes valid. Here, even if other Ṛiddhis are not generated, the Ṛiddhi is considered as the cause of restraint, which is the cause of the Ṛiddhi, by treating the effect as the cause. Therefore, the restrained ones who have attained the restraint which is the cause of the Ṛiddhi are called "possessing Ṛiddhis, those who are restrained," and they possess the Ṛiddhi of consuming, this is proven. Or, the power in the form of the production of the consuming body, which is generated from a specific restraint, is called the Ṛiddhi of consuming, therefore, the fallacy of mutual dependence does not arise. The fault mentioned in the second option also does not arise, because it is not assumed that other Ṛiddhis do not exist along with one Ṛiddhi. There is no rule that multiple Ṛiddhis cannot be generated simultaneously in one soul, because the seven Ṛiddhis are present simultaneously in the Ganadharas.

**Doubt:** Has the contradiction of the knowledge of the mind's perception with the Ṛiddhi of consuming been refuted?

**Solution:** If there is a contradiction of the knowledge of the mind's perception with the Ṛiddhi of consuming, then let it be so, but it is not said that the Ṛiddhi of consuming has a contradiction with all other Ṛiddhis.

The time of the lowest and highest duration of the one who has the body of consuming mixture is the last moment. **Doubt:** Why is there not a single time here? **Solution:** It is not possible because there is no possibility of sustenance and the turning away from the yoga here.

1. "The yoga of the consuming body is the mixing of the consuming body with the yoga of the body of the mind, the Ṛiddhis are born from the mixing." ||56|| {Dhavala Pu. 1 p. 267]
2. Dhavala Pu. 1 p. 267-265.
3. Pravala Pu. 1 p. 298.
4. "How long does the yoga of the consuming mixture body last? ||18|| The lowest duration is the last moment. ||10|| The highest duration is the last moment. ||11|| (Dhavala p. 7 p. 155).
5. Dhavala Pu. 7. 155.

Page #344:
---------------------------
##  Verses 235-240
##  Yoga Marga, 311

The duration of the lifespan of an Aharak-kamithakaya-yogi varies from the shortest to the longest. A careless, restrained being who has previously produced many Aharak bodies and attained perfection in the shortest possible time, experiences the shortest lifespan. This is how the shortest lifespan is attained. A careless, restrained being who has never produced an Aharak body before and attains perfection in the longest possible time, experiences the longest lifespan. This is how the longest lifespan is attained.

The shortest lifespan for an Aharak-kayayogi is one moment. A careless, restrained being who is engaged in Manoyoga or Vachanayoga and attains Aharak-kayayoga, dies or enters the original body within the second moment. This is how a lifespan of one moment is attained.

The longest lifespan for an Aharak-kayayogi is an Antarmuhurt. A careless, restrained being who is engaged in Manoyoga or Vachanayoga and attains Aharak-kayayoga, remains in the state of the most excellent Antarmuhurt and attains other yogas. This is how the longest lifespan is attained.

A being who experiences the emergence of an Aharak body has four types of Udayasthan named Karma: twenty-five, twenty-seven, twenty-eight, and twenty-nine. The twenty-five natural Udayasthan are: Manushya-Gati, Tejas-Sharira, Karma-ran-Sharira, Aharak-Sharira, Praharak-Mangopanga, Varna-Chatushk, Upghāt, Aguru-laghu, Panchendriya-Jati, Sthira, Asthira, Shubha, Ashubha, Pradey, As-Chatushk, Sama-Chaturasra-Sansthan, Subhaga, Yashaskorti, and Nirman. When the body is fully perfected, the combination of Parghāt and Prashasta-Vihayogati results in twenty-seven natural Udayasthan. When the Anapan-paryapti is fully perfected, the combination of Ujjhav and Vas-Prakriti results in twenty-eight natural Udayasthan. When the Bhasha-paryapti is fully perfected, the emergence of the Susvara-Prakriti results in twenty-nine natural Udayasthan. These four Udayasthan clearly indicate that the absence of the Sanhanan-karma in the Aharak-Sharira results in the absence of the seven dhatus, including Asthi (bone).

The Aharak-putala emerges from the tenth door, the Shirachhidra, which is located at the eighth part of the front of the hair. Therefore, it is said to be born from the Uttaanga.

Page #345:
---------------------------
312/Go. Sa. Joyakand
Verse 241: The group of karmas, or the karma body called the Kāmaṇaśarīra, is the cause of the Kāyakaṁmala. The yoga that arises from it is called Kāmaṇakāyayo. This yoga lasts for one, two, or three time periods. ||241||
Special Meaning: The Kāmaṇakāyayo occurs for those beings who have attained the Vigrahagati, as well as for the Kevalī who has attained the Samudghāta of the Lokapūraṇa. ||60||
Explanation: Vigraha refers to the body. The movement that occurs for it is called Vigrahagati. This being, due to the arising of the Audārika and other Pārīranāmakarma, is able to create its own body by taking in various types of Pudgalas. Therefore, the body is taken in by the worldly beings. Hence, the body is called Vigraha. The movement that occurs for such a Vigraha, or body, is called Vigrahagati. Alternatively, the meaning of 'Vi' is 'opposite' and the meaning of 'Graha' is 'destruction', so the word Vigraha also means 'destruction', which means the prevention of taking in Pudgalas. Therefore, the movement that occurs with the prevention of taking in Pudgalas, which is Vigraha, is called Vigrahagati. The being who has attained this well is called Vigrahagati-samāpanna. The Kāmaṇakāyayo occurs for those beings who have attained the Vigrahagati. The entire body, which is the seed-like Kāmaṇaśarīra, is called the Kāmaṇakāya. The pulsation of the Ātmapradeśas that occurs due to the Vacaṇavargāṇa, Manovargāṇa, and Kāyavargāṇa is called yoga. The yoga that arises from the Kāmaṇakāya is called Kāmaṇakāyayo. It occurs for those beings who are in the Vigrahagati, or the crooked movement. There are four types of movements for those beings who move from one movement to another: Iṣugati, Pāṇimuktāgati, Lāṅgalikāgati, and Gomūtrikāgati. The first, Iṣugati, is without Vigraha. The remaining three movements are with Vigraha. The simple movement, without any bends, like an arrow released from a bow, is called Iṣugati. This movement takes one time period. Just as there is a single bend in the water thrown from the hand, similarly, the single bend movement of worldly beings is called Pāṇimuktāgati. This movement takes two time periods. Just as there are two bends in a plow, similarly, the movement with two bends is called Lāṅgalikāgati. This movement takes three time periods. Just as the urination of a cow while walking has many bends, similarly, the movement with three bends is called Gomūtrikāgati. This takes four time periods. Except for Iṣugati, the remaining three Vigrahagatīs have Kāmaṇakāyayo.
The Kāmaṇaśarīra is the sprout, or the base producer, of all karmas, and the seed of happiness and sorrow. ||241||5 Karmas sprout in it, therefore, the Kāmaṇaśarīra is the sprout. Like the circle of the Kuṣmāṇḍa fruit, the Kāmaṇaśarīra is the base of all karmas. It is also the producer of all karmas, because the Kāmaṇaśarīra...
...
-
-
1. Dhavala Pu. 1 p. 265, Prā. Pa. Sa. Pa. 21 Gā. 6 and p. 578 Gā. 63. 2. "Kammaiya Kāyajogo Vigmahagatisamāvaṇṇāgaṇam Kevalīyam vā Samudghāda Gaṇam ||60||" [Dhavala Pu. 1 p. 268]. 3. V. Pu. 1 p. 266300. 4. Dhavala Pu. 1 p. 300. 5. Sikha Kammaṇam Pāhaṇuppādāyam Sudukkhāṇam Vijamidi Kammaiya. ||241||" [Dhavala Pu. 1. p. 328].

Page #346:
---------------------------
##  Verse 242
**Yoga Margna/313**

No karma arises without a body. Therefore, it is the cause of both happiness and sorrow. Because without it, their existence is not possible. By this, the karma body, which is the constituent of name karma, is shaped. It is the germinator, producer, and seed of all happiness and sorrow in the three times. Therefore, the collection of karmas is the karma body.

The karma yoga is the cause of the destruction of the other bodies. Through karma yoga, which is the pulsation of the karma-created self-region, both the acquisition and the change of location of karmas occur.

The type of yoga practice is the restraint of the excretory, digestive, and bodily activities. All beings have only one yoga at a time.

**Verse Meaning:**

In the sixth stage of restraint, the activities of the excretory body and the digestive body do not occur simultaneously. All beings have only one yoga at a time.

**Special Meaning:**

This verse indicates that the power of excretion and the power of digestion are possible simultaneously for a restrained muni, but the origin of the excretory body and the origin of the digestive body are not possible simultaneously. The special meaning is as follows:

"A being who attains human existence from a divine state, takes initiation, becomes restrained, and creates a digestive body. Five bodies are possible in relation to the restraint of that former deity, like a pot of ghee. Even though both the digestive and excretory bodies arise in a restrained being, due to the absence of their simultaneous activity, four bodies are possible simultaneously by the abandonment of one. The five bodies exist because the excretory body is based on existence. This sutra should be applied here."

The opinion of the author of the Naswartha Sutra is different. There, only the existence of up to four bodies in a being is accepted. In the commentary on this sutra, Shri Akalankdev has clearly denied the five bodies. Because the digestive body belongs to a restrained human being, he does not have an excretory body. Deities and hell beings have excretory bodies, but they do not have digestive bodies. The simultaneous existence of the digestive body and the excretory body is not possible. The reason for this is that the reactive body of humans and animals is not considered excretory, but rather, it is considered to be the result of the power of the digestive body.

Page #347:
---------------------------
## Chapter 243 of the Jiva Kanda

This chapter discusses the existence of four bodies, as stated in the text. If we consider the two sutras from the Graga, then the existence of five bodies is established.

**Doubt:** Do the three yogas (karmas) occur simultaneously?

**Solution:** No, they do not occur simultaneously. If we assume that the three yogas of a single soul occur simultaneously, then the concept of yoga-nirodha (cessation of karma) would be contradicted.

**Doubt:** Are there instances where we see the simultaneous occurrence of mental, verbal, and physical actions?

**Solution:** If such instances are observed, then it would imply simultaneous activity. However, even in those cases, there is a distinct effort involved in the mind, speech, and body. Their simultaneous activity cannot be proven, as there is no such teaching in the scriptures.

**Doubt:** Why can't two or three yogas occur together?

**Solution:** They cannot occur together because their simultaneous occurrence is prohibited.

**Doubt:** Can we find instances of multiple yogas occurring simultaneously?

**Solution:** No, we cannot find such instances. The perception of the pulsation of the jiva-pradesha (soul-regions) beyond the senses is contradictory to the knowledge obtained through the senses. There is no fixed rule regarding the contraction and expansion of the jiva-pradesha during the movement of the soul. When a soul, in its initial state of liberation, moves from the middle world (Madhyaloka) to the front part of the universe (Lokagra), there is no contraction or expansion of its jiva-pradesha.

Therefore, it is established that only one yoga can occur at a time. A single soul cannot have two or three yogas occurring simultaneously.

Due to its inherent upward movement, a pure soul travels from the middle world to the tanu-avat-valaya (the outermost boundary of the universe), but due to the absence of karma-udaya (fruition of karma), there is no yoga, meaning no pulsation of the soul-regions.

Those who are devoid of yoga, like warriors, are like those who have attained the state of liberation, full of joy and happiness. They are free from the cycle of birth and death, and they are not bound by the karmic forces.

**Verse 243:**

"Those who are devoid of yoga, like warriors, are like those who have attained the state of liberation, full of joy and happiness. They are free from the cycle of birth and death, and they are not bound by the karmic forces."

**Footnotes:**

1. "Sripapadhika Vaikriyikam ||46|| Labdhipratyayam cha ||47||" [Tattvartha Sutra Chapter].
2. Dhaval Pu. 1 p. 276.
3. Dhaval Pu. 5 p. 77, Dhaval 10/437.
4. Yali Gatha Pra. P. San. p. 578 Gatha 14 and p. 22 Gatha 100, but instead of "grajogi" it is "ajoha" and instead of "bal" it is "guna", and also in Dhaval Pu. 1 p. 280, but instead of "prajogi" it is "prajoi".

Page #348:
---------------------------
/315
**Verse Meaning:** Those beings who do not have auspicious and inauspicious yogas, which are the producers of merit and demerit, are the liberated Jinas, who are unparalleled and possess infinite power. || 243 ||

**Specific Meaning:**

**Doubt:** What are inauspicious yogas?
**Solution:** Violence, stealing, and sexual misconduct, etc., are inauspicious bodily yogas. And uncultured speech, etc., are inauspicious verbal yogas. The thought of killing is an inauspicious mental yoga.

**Verse 243:**
False speech, harsh speech, jealousy, envy, etc., are inauspicious.

**Doubt:** What are auspicious yogas?
**Solution:** Non-violence, non-stealing, celibacy, etc., are auspicious bodily yogas. Auspicious verbal yogas are speaking truthfully, beneficially, and moderately. Auspicious mental yogas are devotion to the Arhats, a liking for austerity, humility towards the scriptures, etc.

**Doubt:** What is the reason for the distinction between auspicious and inauspicious yogas?
**Solution:** The yoga that leads to auspicious results is an auspicious yoga, and the yoga that leads to inauspicious results is an inauspicious yoga.

**Doubt:** Why is it not said that the yoga that is the cause of auspicious karma is an auspicious yoga, and the yoga that is the cause of inauspicious karma is an inauspicious yoga?
**Solution:** No, if it were defined in this way, then there could be no auspicious yoga, because even auspicious yoga leads to the obscuration of knowledge, etc., which are inauspicious karmas. The definition of auspicious and inauspicious yoga that has been given is correct.

**Doubt:** If this is the case, i.e., auspicious yoga also leads to inauspicious karmas, then how is it said that auspicious yoga is the producer of merit?
**Solution:** The reference is to the merit and demerit in relation to the destructive karmas. Or, it is not asserted that "auspicious is the cause of only merit," but it is asserted that "auspicious is the cause of merit."

**Doubt:** What is merit?
**Solution:** That which purifies the soul or by which the soul is purified is merit, such as the seven types of knowledge, etc.

**Doubt:** How can the seven types of knowledge, etc., which are of the nature of bondage, be like iron shackles, purify the soul?
1. Tattvarth Rajavani and Sarvarthasiddhi 6/3 |

Page #349:
---------------------------
316/Go, Sa, Jivakanda
Gatha 244
Solution: There are forty-two auspicious natures, such as the seven-sense-endowed, Tirthankara, high-lineage, human lifespan, etc. These auspicious natures are the ones that give the happiness of the Tirthankara, etc., positions, i.e., the Arhant position. Therefore, the characteristic of merit, which purifies the soul, is true.
From the karma of the body name, the power to grasp the objects of the senses arises in the soul. Those who have no arising of the karma of the body name, their karma-based yoga also ceases to have an effect, because the origin of an effect is impossible without a cause. Therefore, the A-yogi Kevali, who is in the fourteenth gunasthana, and the Siddha Bhagavan, who is beyond the gunasthana, do not have the arising of the karma of the body name, so they lack yoga. From the seventh gunasthana to the thirteenth gunasthana, there is auspicious yoga. From the first gunasthana to the sixth gunasthana, there is both auspicious and inauspicious yoga.
Doubt: If there is no yoga, then the Siddha Bhagavan is said to lack strength, because we see strength as a result of our yoga?
Solution: The strength of the Siddha Bhagavan is not like our strength. The strength of the Siddha Bhagavan is infinite. They have no fatigue or weariness in knowing all the knowable things in the world and beyond. Therefore, the word "anupam-ananta-bala-kalita" is used in the Gatha.
The division of karma and non-karma in the body is:
"Poraliyavegunviyamahaarayatejaranamakkammudaye |
Chauranokammasarira kammey ya hodi kammiyam ||244||"
Gatha meaning: These four bodies, which arise from the arising of the Audarik, Vaikriyik, Aharak, and Tejas karmas, are non-karmic. Karma itself is the karmic body. ||244||
Special meaning: The four bodies (Audarik, Vaikriyik, Aharak, Tejas) that arise from the arising of karma are non-karmic.
Doubt: Why are the four bodies, Audarik, etc., called "non-karmic"?
Solution: The word "no" is used for both negation and slightness. Just as the word "no" is used for slightness in "no-kashya", similarly, the word "no" is used for slightness in "no-karma". These four bodies, Audarik, etc., do not harm the qualities of the soul, like karma. Just as the karmic body harms the qualities of the soul and causes it to wander in the four paths, these four bodies neither harm the qualities of the soul nor cause it to wander in the four paths. Therefore, these four bodies are called non-karmic. These four bodies are karmic
-
.
1. "Punyaprakritipastirthapadadhimukhakhanyah." (Moolachar Pradeep Panchva Adhikar Klok 158 p. 200); "Punag Phala Parahanta" [Pravachansar Gatha 23], "Pahanta: Malu Sakalasamyakparipkava-purvalpapadapa-p.la Ev Bhavanti." [Acharya Amritachandra Krit Teeka]. 2. Go.Ji Ga, 216.

Page #350:
---------------------------
## Gatha 245-240

**Yoga Marg Sha/317**

The cooperative causes of the body are also called *naokarma*.

**Doubt:** What is meant by *tejas* body?

**Solution:** Due to the presence of *tej* (radiance) and *prabha* (effulgence) qualities, it is called *naijas* body. ||240|| The color of the *padmaragamani* (ruby) in the *sharira skandha* (body aggregate) is called *tej*, and the rays emanating from the body are called *prabha*. The *haya* (subtle body) within this is the *tejas* body.

The *karman* body is formed due to the arising of *namakarma* (name-karma). The *karma skandha* groups like *jnanaabaran* (knowledge-obscuring) etc. are the *karman* body. Without these *karma skandha* groups, the *karman* body of others is not mentioned in the *paramagam* (ultimate scriptures).

The *audarik* (generous) etc. bodies have an infinite number of *vargana* (categories) due to their *samayaprabaddha* (time-bound) nature. ||245|| The *samayaprabaddha* of these *vargana* is an immeasurable number of times greater than the *gadakama* (a unit of measurement). The *tej* body is infinitely greater than the previous one, and it is very subtle. ||246|| The *samayaprabaddha* and *vargana* of these bodies are immeasurable times smaller than the *angul* (finger). The *samayaprabaddha* and *vargana* of the *audarik* etc. bodies are immeasurable times smaller than the *suchyangul* (needle-finger). ||247|| The *samayaprabaddha* and *vargana* of the *audarik* etc. bodies are immeasurable times smaller than the *suchyangul* (needle-finger). ||248||

**Gatha Meaning:** The *vargana* (category) of infinite *paramanu* (atoms) is called *anantaanant* (infinitely infinite). There is one *samayaprabaddha* (time-bound) for these infinite *vargana*. ||245|| The *samayaprabaddha* of the *audarik*, *vanriyak* (materialistic), and *graharak* (receiving) bodies are immeasurable times greater than each other. The *tejas* and *karman* bodies have infinite *samayaprabaddha*. However, all five bodies are progressively subtle. ||246|| The *samayaprabaddha* and *vargana* of these bodies are immeasurable times smaller than the *angul* (finger). The *samayaprabaddha* and *vargana* of the *audarik* etc. bodies are immeasurable times smaller than the *suchyangul* (needle-finger). ||247|| The *samayaprabaddha* and *vargana* of the *audarik* etc. bodies are immeasurable times smaller than the *suchyangul* (needle-finger). ||248||

**Special Meaning:** When atoms of equal qualities are arranged in a row, it forms a *varga* (category). By doing this, we get *varga* (atoms) of infinite qualities from the *abhavya* (non-liberated) and infinite times smaller than the *siddha* (liberated).

1. *Leyapaha* . *Juttamidit* *Jadayam*. ||240|| *Dhaval* 14, p. 327.
2. *Dhaval* 14, p. 325-328.
3. *Par Par Mujhammam* ||37|| *Pradesato'sankhyeyagunam Prak T Jasat*. ||38|| *Anantgune Pare*. ||36|| [ *Tasvarth Sutra* Chapter 2].
4. " *Raaegugnna Pachutikrtaah Varga Varga Ga*. " [ *Ra. Va* 2/5/4].

Page #351:
---------------------------
##  318 Go. Sa. Jivakanda
**Verse 245.24**

When the principle of dravya is applied, the term 'vargana' is used for all of these. The group of vargas is called vargana. There is only one vargana, but there are infinite vargas. From the abhavyas, an infinite number of times, i.e., an infinite part of the siddhas, a vargana is established at one time. This much dravya is bound together, therefore it is called 'samayaprrabaddha'. There are infinite varieties of the infinite part of the siddha-rashi. Therefore, from the abhavya-rani, an infinite number of times, such a medium infinite-infinite should be taken from the infinite part of the siddhas.

The pudgala skandhas suitable for the praudarik, vaikriyik and aharak bodies are called 'aharadratryavargana'. Above the vargana of the infinite-infinite-pradeshi paramanu pudgala dravya and below the first agrahan dravya vargana, this aharavargana is situated.

When the varganagra (group of varganas) of the aharavargana is divided into countless parts, there is a multi-part aharak body-suitable varganagra. When the remaining part is divided into countless parts, there is a multi-part vaikriyik body-suitable varganagra. And the remaining one-part is the grohani-suitable varganagra.

Since only stokas come in stoka varganas, therefore the audarik body vargana is stoka, so say many acharyas. But this meaning is not correct, because this tendency is not seen in the tejas body vargana etc.

The audarik body dravya varganas are the smallest in terms of pradesharthata (counting of pradeshas). ||785|| This alpabahutva is being said of the varganas established at one time due to yoga, not of all varganas. The audarik body dravya varganas obtained from one yoga are smaller than the pradeshagra and the vargana. ||786|| The vaikriyik body dravya varganas are countless times larger than the pradesharthata. ||787|| The varganas that are suitable for pragama at one time for the audarik body from the ahar varganas, from those same varganas, at the same time, for another jiva, due to the same yoga, the varganas suitable for pragama for the vaikriyik body are countless times larger, because such is the nature. The multiplier is countless times the part of the jagachhani. The aharak body dravya varganas are countless times larger than the pradesharthata. ||788|| At the same time, due to the same yoga, the aharak body dravya varganas that come from the ahar varganas are countless times larger, because such is the nature. The multiplier is countless times the part of the j.shre. The tejas body dravya varganas are infinite times larger than the pradesharthata. ||788|| At the same time, due to the same yoga, the varganas that are suitable for pragama for the tejas body from the tejas body dravya varganas are

Page #352:
---------------------------
## Papa 245-240
## Yogamargag/31

The Pradeshāgras are infinitely superior to the Pradeshā, because that is their nature. They are infinitely superior to the Abhavya and infinitely inferior to the Siddhas. The Bhāshā-vargaṇās, Manovārgaṇās, and Kārmāṇa-śarīra-vargaṇās are infinitely superior to the Pradeshārtathā. ||786||

At the same time, with the same Yoga, the Bhāshā-vargaṇās, which are capable of transforming into Bhāshā-rūpa-paryāya, are infinitely superior to the Pradeshāgras. At the same time, with the same Yoga, the Manodravya-vargaṇās, which are capable of becoming Dravyamāna, are infinitely superior to the Pradeshāgras. At the same time, with the same Yoga, the Kārmāṇa-dravya-vargaṇās, which are capable of becoming Pāṭha, are infinitely superior to the Pradeshāgras. Everywhere, the superiority is infinitely greater than the Abhavya and infinitely less than the Siddhas.

The Avagāhanā of the Alpābahutva-Kārmāṇa-śarīra-dravya-vargaṇās is the least compared to the Avagāhanā. Because, when a single Dhanāṅgula is divided into an infinite number of parts, the Avagāhanā of a single Kārmāṇa-vargaṇā is produced. The Manodravya-vargaṇās are infinitely superior to the Avagāhanā. They are infinitely greater than the part of an Angula. The Bhāshā-vargaṇās are infinitely superior to the Avagāhanā. ||762|| They are infinitely greater than the part of an Angula. The Taijasa-śarīra-dravya-vargaṇās are infinitely superior to the Avagāhanā. ||793|| They are infinitely greater than the part of an Angula. The Grāhārak-śarīra-dravya-vargaṇās are infinitely superior to the Avagāhanā. ||764|| They are infinitely greater than the part of an Angula. The Vaikriyika-śarīra-dravya-vargaṇās are infinitely superior to the Avagāhanā. ||765|| They are infinitely greater than the part of an Angula. The Audārika-śarīra-dravya-vargaṇās are infinitely superior to the Avagāhanā. ||766|| They are infinitely greater than the part of an Angula.

The meaning of all this is that the Audārika-śarīra is gross, the Vaikriyika-śarīra is subtle, the Vaikriyika-śarīra is subtle compared to the Audārika-śarīra, the Grāhārak-śarīra is subtle compared to the Vaikriyika-śarīra, the Taijasa-śarīra is subtle compared to the Grāhārak-śarīra, and the Kārmāṇa-śarīra is subtle compared to the Taijasa-śarīra. This statement is made in comparison to the Avagāhanā, but in comparison to the Pradeshā, there are infinitely more Pradeshā in the Vaikriyika-śarīra than in the Audārika-śarīra, infinitely more Pradeshā in the Grāhārak-śarīra than in the Vaikriyika-śarīra, infinitely more Pradeshā in the Taijasa-śarīra than in the Grāhārak-śarīra, and infinitely more Pradeshā in the Kārmāṇa-śarīra than in the Taijasa-śarīra.

**Question:** If this is the case, then the later body is larger than the earlier body.

**Answer:** This is not a fault, because there is no difference in size due to the specific type of bondage. For example, a pile of cotton and a ball of iron.

The number of atoms in the time-bound state of these five bodies increases progressively, but the Avagāhanā becomes increasingly subtle. The time-bound state and the Avagāhanā of the Audārika-śarīra is obtained by dividing a Dhanāṅgula by an infinite number of parts of a Sūcyaṅgula. By dividing this again by an infinite number of parts of a Sūcyaṅgula, the time-bound state and the Avagāhanā of the Vaikriyika-śarīra is obtained. By dividing this again by an infinite number of parts of a Sūcyaṅgula, the time-bound state and the Avagāhanā of the Grāhārak-śarīra is obtained. By dividing this again by an infinite number of parts of a Sūcyaṅgula, the time-bound state and the Avagāhanā of the Taijasa-śarīra is obtained.

1. Dhavala Pu. 14 p. 562. 2. Dhavala Pu. 14 p. 562-564. 3. Sarvārthasiddhi 2135-36.

Page #353:
---------------------------
320/Go, Sa, Jivakanda: Evidence is obtained for the understanding of the time-bound and class-based nature of the Tanjas body. Dividing it by countless parts of the index finger, we obtain the understanding of the time-bound and class-based nature of the Karman body.

The nature of Binasopacaya is that it is infinitely multiplied by the Jiva-dosha, the Ganta-guna, and the Padiparamanu.

The Jiva is united with each and every one of them. ||246||

Gatharya: (Karma and Nokarma) Each atom has an infinite multiplication of Binasopacaya by the Jiva-dosha, they are united with the Jiva, they are equal to each other. ||246||

Special Meaning:

Doubt: What is the meaning of Visrasopacaya?

Solution: The Pudgal that is attached to the five bodies due to the qualities of Snigdha, etc., is called Visrasopacaya. Due to the relationship of these Visrasopacayas, the five bodies have the qualities of Pud, Pan, Gan, and Nimna, etc., and they are also called Visrasopacaya, because here the cause is treated as the effect.

In each and every Praudarik Pradesh (atom), there are infinite divisions and intersections by all Jivas.

Doubt: What is called A विभागप्रतिच्छेद?

Solution: The subtle increase in an atom is called A विभागप्रतिच्छेद.

From this evidence, by piercing the subtle or excellent qualities of the atoms, there are infinite A विभागप्रतिच्छेद by all Jivas. In each and every atom, there are as many A विभागप्रतिच्छेद as there are Bंधनबद्ध Visrasopacaya atoms, because the effect is seen according to the cause. Here, the equality is with respect to the infinite multiplication by all Jivas, not with respect to the number, because the subtle body class-based nature produced by the subtle Visrasopacayas attached due to the subtle division is infinitely multiplied by the subtle division, and the excellent body class-based nature produced by the Visrasopacayas that have come due to the infinite multiplication of the division is infinitely multiplied.

Doubt: How is the A विभागप्रतिच्छेद called Visrasopacaya?

Solution: By treating the cause as the effect, the name Visrasopacaya is established for the A विभागप्रतिच्छेद, which is the effect.

The Pudgal atom and the Jiva Pradesh are mutually connected. Or, there is no contradiction in the Jiva Pradesh being called an atom. Therefore, it is said, "Jivaen saha samvetaaḥ". 1. Dhaval Pu. 14 p. 430. 2. "Y विभागपडिच्छेदपरूवरणदाय एक्के कम्पि पोरालियपदेसे केवटिया अविभागपडिच्छेदा ॥५०३॥ अयंता अविभागपडिच्छेदा सम्वजीवेहि अणंत गुणा ॥५०४||"[Shwal Pu. 14 p. 431. 3. Dhaval Pu. 14 p. 431. 4. Dhaval Pu. 14 p. 432. 5. "Jiva-pomgalaanam anagaayaaṇagayatte paramāṇams vi jīvapadasavadaa sāvirohaado vā." [Dhaval Pu. 14 p. 436].

Page #354:
---------------------------
## Verse 246

The indivisible parts of the Audārika body are the least numerous. The indivisible parts of the Kriyāka body are infinitely more numerous than them. They are infinitely more numerous than all living beings. The indivisible parts of the Āhāraka body are infinitely more numerous than them. They are infinitely more numerous than all living beings. The indivisible parts of the Taijasa body are infinitely more numerous than them. They are infinitely more numerous than all living beings. The indivisible parts of the Kārmaṇa body are infinitely more numerous than them. They are infinitely more numerous than all living beings.

In another way, the accumulation of Visrasa is described as follows: Those who have not abandoned the Audayika state and who are present throughout the entire space of the universe, the five bodies abandoned by such beings are described as having the form of Visrasa accumulation. Each atom of the five bodies, even when freed from a living being, is accumulated with Visrasa, which is infinitely more numerous than all living beings. Therefore, these become included in the categories of Dhruva, Skandha, Sāntara, and Nirantara, having equal wealth. They are bound from all the universes.

**Doubt:** Why is this statement made?

**Solution:** According to their respective stated reasons, karma-worthy, etc., beginningless and endless, and all living beings, along with the space they occupy, become bound to the Pudgala. According to this statement, the Pudgala located in the space where a living being is located, how does it become bound to Visrasa accumulation in the same way that it undergoes five transformations due to the causes of Mithyātva, etc. (Mithyātva, Aviрата, Pramāda, Kaṣāya, and Yoga)? This statement is made to determine this.

The five bodies are bound by the Visrasa accumulated from all the universes. The Pudgala located in the space of all the universes, due to the influence of Samīrana, etc., or due to the transformation of motion, becomes connected with them. Or, the Pudgala of the five bodies is present throughout the entire space at the time of their liberation from the living being.

The substances of the Audārika body, which are of one quality-endowed category, are numerous and are accumulated by infinite Visrasa. ||536|| The substances of one quality-endowed category, accumulated by infinite Visrasa, are numerous compared to the sticks.

**Doubt:** What is taken by one quality?

**Solution:** The lowest quality is taken. That lowest quality is produced by infinite indivisible parts.

**Doubt:** How is this known?

1. Dhvala Pu. 14 p. 437-438 Sutra 515-516. 2. "Te ca sabbalogāgadehi baddhā ||522||" [Dhvala Pu. 14 p. 436]. 3. 6. Pu. 14 p. 439-440. 4. Dh. Pu. 14 p. 440. 5. "Orāliyasarīrasma je ema guṇajuttadambapāe davā te bahuprā praṇatehi vissāsubacāehi uvacidā ||536||" [Dh. Pu. 14 p. 450].

Page #355:
---------------------------
322 / Go. Sa. Jivakast
Solution - 'They are accumulated by infinite Vitasopacayas', this sutra cannot be formed otherwise. It is known from this sutra that it arises from infinite Vibhagapratichhedas.
Verse 249
Doubt - While one Vibhagapratichheda exists, infinite Vitasopacayas are possible, not one Vitasopacaya.
Solution - This is not correct; because in such a situation, their relationship would be without cause, such a situation would be obtained. If it is said that its bond with Vitasopacayas will also happen, then it is not right to say so, because there is a contradiction with the sutra 'Bond does not happen with the one having inferior qualities'.
Those who are the substances of two-quality-possessed Vargana are special and they are accumulated by infinite Vitasopacayas. || 540 || *
Doubt - If the word 'one quality' remains in the inferior quality which is combined with infinite Vibhagapratichhedas, then the word 'two qualities' should be present in two inferior qualities, otherwise the presence of the word 'two' is not available?
Solution - This is not a defect, because when one Vibhagapratichheda increases above the inferior quality, two-quality-ness is seen.
Doubt - How is the second quality designation of the same Vibhagapratichheda?
Solution - Because only that much increase in the difference of qualities is seen in the difference of substances. The second quality designation is of the special second state of the quality and the third quality designation is of the special third state, therefore, the two-quality-ness and three-quality-ness become here with the inferior quality. Otherwise, a sutra like 'Substances of two-quality-possessed Vargana' will be obtained. But it is not so, because such a sutra is not available. The substances of quality-possessed Vargana are devoid of the previous rods from the point of view of the rods.
In this way
Doubt - Just as the Vargana quality, which is the cause of the relationship of one atom, is possible in the atomic form of Pudgalas, which are situated in the form of Parinamika, why is it not possible in these Pradarika-body Pudgalas from the Jiva?
Solution - No, because at the time of bondage due to Mithyatva etc. reasons, in which all the Jivas have obtained infinite-quality-bondage-quality-increase, and even after being separated from the Jivas, those who have not abandoned the Pradayika only, in such Praharaka-atoms, infinite bondage-quality is available. Similarly
1. "Na Jghanyagunanam ||34||" [ Tattvarth Sutra . 5 ]. 2. "Je Vismasu Ehi Uvchida. || 540 || [ Dhaval Pu. 14 p. 450 ]
Dugarat Vagaye Davya Te Visheshina Manateh 3. Dhaval Pu. 14 p. 450 - 451.

Page #356:
---------------------------
##  Verse 25-251
##  Yoga Marg, 323

Those substances which have three, four, five, countless, infinite and infinitely infinite qualities are inferior and are accumulated by infinite vinasopachayas. ||541|| In the same way, know about the four bodies.

The nature and location of the excellent accumulation of karma and non-karma is **upkassatidi charime sagasagaukkassasanchayo hodi**. It is **pandehanam varajogavissasamgagisahyarana**. ||250|| **Shravasaya hu bhayapraddausansam jogasanphile so ya**. **Prokatukkatta nya chchcheve gurinvakammamse**. ||251||

**Meaning of the Verse:** At the end of the excellent state of those who have five bodies, each one has their own excellent accumulation, along with their own materials. There are six essential causes for a being with excellent accumulation of karma to achieve excellent accumulation: **bhavadha**, **ayushya**, **yoga**, **sanvalesha**, **apkarshana**, **utkarshana**. ||250-251||

**Special Meaning:** The owner of the excellent region of the **praudarik** body is a human being of **Uttarakuru** and **Devakuru** with a lifespan of three **palyas**.

The term **anyatar** (any) is used to indicate that the substance is not special due to the **strived** and **purushaved** and the qualities like **samyaktva** and **mithyatva**.

**Doubt:** Why is the excellent ownership of others besides the humans of **Devakuru** and **Uttarakuru** prohibited?

**Solution:** Because there is a lack of **sata** (goodness) elsewhere, as the **asata** (badness) causes the decay of a lot of **pudgala** in the **praudarik** body.

**Doubt:** All the humans of **Uttarakuru** and **Devakuru** have a lifespan of three **palyas**, so why is the qualifier "those with a lifespan of three **palyas**" used?

**Solution:** This is not a fault, because the humans of **Uttarakuru** and **Devakuru** have a lifespan of three **palyas**. The purpose of saying this is to prohibit the alternatives of the remaining lifespan there.

That same human, in the first time, having become **tad-bhav** (transformed), took food through excellent **yoga**. Taking the **pudgala** mass suitable for the body is food. In the second or third time of being **tad-bhav**,

Page #357:
---------------------------
## Translation:

**324 / Go. Sa. Jivakanda**
**Verses 250-251**

The term "food was taken in the first time, having become Tadbhavastha" is given to prohibit the time which is the receiver of food.

**Doubt:** What is the fault in being born from the movement of the Vigraha?

**Solution:** There is no fault, because the context of the effect of the substance accumulated in two times arises. The growth was obtained from the excellent growth. ||420|| 1. The sum of the second time is innumerable times the sum of the first time. The sum of the third time is innumerable times the sum of the second time. In this way, the sum of the continuous increase should be taken to the last time. To prohibit the inferior growth, it is said, "The growth was obtained from the excellent growth." 3.

The whole was obtained from all the sufficientcies by the smallest Muhurta time. ||421|| 3. The times of the completion of all six sufficientcies are both inferior and excellent. In that, the Antarmuhurta measure was obtained from all the sufficientcies by the smallest time.

**Doubt:** Why is the small sufficient time taken?

**Solution:** Because the continuous increase sum of the insufficient time is innumerable times less than the sum of the sufficient time. Therefore, they do not take many Pudgalas. Therefore, the insufficient time is taken as small.

The times of his speaking are small. ||422|| * The labor that occurs from the business of language, and the destruction of the language-shaped Pudgalas, leads to the context of the destruction of many Shraddarik body Pudgalas, therefore the language time should be small.

The times of mental application are small. ||423|| * Due to the worry, the labor that occurs, to prohibit the melting Pudgalas, it is said, "The times of mental application are small."

There is a breaking of the image. ||424|| The image is called the body. To break its nails, etc., by special action is breaking. Here, the breaking is small, i.e., small. Those which cause body pain are there.

Perhaps there was no reaction in the middle of the lifespan. ||425|| While following the lifespan of three Patyas, perhaps there was no reaction, because only the destruction of the Audarik body of the one who takes the form of reaction, leaving the Shraddarik body, arises. It is not right to say that this reaction form body is also Shraddarik, because the prohibition of the Shraddarik nature of the reaction form body.

1. Kasmiaye Baddi Baddo ||420|| [Dhaval Pu. 14 p. 400]
3. Namune Mala Sambahhi Pajjatihi Pajjataydi ||421|| [Dhaval Pu. 14 p. 400]
5. Appamo Mara Jogadan ||423|| [Dhaval Pu. 14 p. 401]
7. Antareṇ Kadai Vidhido ||425|| [Dhaval Pu. 14 p. 401]

2. Dhaval Pu. 14 p. 400
4. "Taham ||420|| [Dhaval Pu. 14 p. 400]
6. "Appa Chhavi Chhed ||424|| [Dhaval Pu. 14 p. 401]
8. Dhaval Pu. 14 p. 402

**Note:** The translation uses the Jain terms as requested, but some terms may not have direct English equivalents. The translation aims to convey the meaning as accurately as possible while preserving the original text's structure and terminology.

Page #358:
---------------------------
## Gatha 250-251
## Yogamarga 325

**"When the remaining lifespan is very short, the yogic state remains above the Yavamdhya until the Antarmuhurta time."**  It remains there until the Antarmuhurta time to collect a lot of Pudgalas, because it is not possible to stay there for a longer time. Within the time period of three Palya, it transmigrates to the yogic states above the Yavamdhya whenever possible.

**"In the final Jivagunahani-sthanaantara, it remains for a time period equal to an innumerable part of the Pravali."** ||427|| Because in the final Jivagunahani, it takes refuge in the final yogic state for a time period equal to an innumerable part of the Pravali, and the yogic states there are innumerable times greater. However, it is not possible to stay there for a time period longer than an innumerable part of the Pravali. While remaining above the Yavamdhya, it remains in the final Jivagunahani-sthanaantara whenever possible.

**"It attained the excellent yogic state in the extreme and double-extreme times."** ||428||  Because with the increase in yogic power, the increase in Pradeshbandha is very high, and with the excellent yogic state, there is the power to transmigrate within the Bhavasthiti for a very long time, except for the two, three, and four times. In this Bhava, when there is wealth, it has attained the Taya-Tat Kadamoga.

**Doubt:** Why is there no mention of Sanklesha here?

**Solution:** Because after attaining the righteous path after death, there is no purpose in the increase or decrease of Kashaya. By taking refuge in the presence of Sanklesha, the opportunity arises for the melting of many Nokarma Pudgalas, therefore, the presence of Sanklesha is not considered.

**"The excellent Pradesh-agra (group of Pradesh) of the Praudarik body of that Jiva who became Tadbhavastha in the final time."** ||426||

**Conclusion:** A human or a Tithanca, by giving a donation or approving a donation, bound the lifespan of a human in Devakuru or Uttarakuru with the merit of three Palya. In this way, after death, the human is born in Devakuru or Uttarakuru through the righteous path. Again, in the first time, becoming Praharaka and Tadbhavastha in the first time, by taking food with the excellent Uppapadayoga, it deposited the Nokarma Pradesh that were taken from the first time to the final time of three Palya in the form of a Gopuccha. Then, from the second time onwards, it attained growth with the excellent Ekanta-Anuvridhi Yoga, and until the Antarmuhurta time, it took the Nokarma Pradesh in the form of an innumerable series and deposited them in the time period of three Palya. Again, by ending the very fast attainments and attaining the Parinamyoga, it attained the excellent Dravya by following the above-mentioned method and being situated in the final time.

**"The owner of the excellent Pradesh-agra of the Vaikriyika body is the Aran who is situated in the state of twenty-two Sagaras."**

Page #359:
---------------------------
326/Go. Sa. Jivakanda
Gatha 250.251 Achyut Kalpawasi is an Anyatar Dev. || 431-432 ||. There is no specific substance due to the cause of Samyaktva and Mithyatva, etc.
Doubt- Why is there no excellent Swami in the Devas of Sarvarthasiddhi who have a long lifespan?
Solution- No, because the nine graveyak, etc., are not available in abundance for the reflection of excellent yoga in the above Devas.
It is not correct to say that the above Avagahana is short, therefore there is no ownership there, because the karma and na karma pudgals that come from yoga do not produce a specific number due to the special Avagahana.
Doubt- Why is there no excellent ownership in the lower Devas? Solution- No, because there is a lack of long lifespan there.
Doubt- The Narakas of the seventh earth have a long lifespan and excellent yoga, why is there no excellent ownership there?
Solution- No, because there is an abundance of Sankleshas there, therefore there is a lot of destruction of Nokarmas in them.
The same Dev, in the first time, took food with excellent yoga, being an Aharak and being Tadbhavastha in the first time. || 433 ||. He attained growth from excellent growth. All the sufficientties are sufficient by the short time of Antarmuhurta measure, by all the short times. || 435 ||. His speaking times are short. || 436 ||. His Manoyog times are short. || 437 ||. He does not have Chhavi Chhed. || 438 ||. Because holes, differences, etc., are not found in the Vairyik body. He did a lesser reaction. || 439 ||. Because doing a lot of reaction leads to the melting of a lot of Parmanu Pudgals. He remained in the yoga above Yavamdhya, till the time of Antarmuhurta, when there was a lack of Jivitavya. || 440 ||. He remained till the time of the countless part of Pravali, in the last Jiv Guna Hanisthana Antar. || 441 ||. He attained excellent yoga in the last and second last time. || 442 ||. The Vairyik body of that Jiv, who became Tadbhavastha in the last time, has excellent Pradesh Agn. || 443 ||.
The Swami of the excellent Pradesh Agn of the Aharak body is the Anyatar Pramattasanyat Jiv, who reacts to the Uttar body. || 445-446 ||. There is no difference in substance in relation to Avagahana, etc. The Aharak body of the Sanyat arises when there is Pramad. The same Jiv, in the first time, took food with excellent yoga, being an Aharak and being Tadbhavastha in the first time. 1. Beundhiyasarirasas un massayam padesaggham kassa || 431 ||. Apnadarasm maran macchud kappavasidevasas vavissagaronamachhidiprasam. || 432 ||. [Paval Pu. 14 p. 411]. 2. Dhaval Pu. 14 p. 411. 3. Dhaval Pu. 14 p. 412-413. 4. “Ukkasapaderan maharasari rassas ukkassayam padesamgam kassa. Annadarsam pamattasanjadasas uttarsaram viutriyam. || 446 ||. [Dhaval Pu. 14 p. 414].

Page #360:
---------------------------
## Gatha 250-251
## Yogamargna/327

**Question:** How can the 'Aharak' body be considered 'Prathamasamayatadbhav' (first time derived) in a special way?

**Answer:** This is not a fault, because it is the 'Avantaregaman' (transition) of the 'Jyotir' (soul) that has transformed from the 'Aharak' body form, excluding the 'Audarik' body. Therefore, it becomes the 'Prathamasamayatadbhav' (first time derived) special characteristic.

**Gatha 448-456:**

* It has attained growth through excellent growth.
* It has become sufficient through all sufficiencies by the smallest 'Antarmuhurta' (shortest time) period.
* Its speaking times are short.
* Its times of 'Manoyog' (concentration) are short.
* There are no 'Chhavi Chhed' (breaks in the image).
* It has remained for a limited time on the 'Yogayayamadhyasthan' (middle ground of yoga) after a little remaining time of 'Nivritti' (withdrawal).
* It has remained for a time equal to an innumerable part of the 'Pravali' (a unit of time) in the final 'Jivagunahan' (loss of soul qualities) 'Sthanantar' (transfer).
* It has attained excellent yoga in the extreme and double-extreme times.
* The 'Nivritti' (withdrawing) soul is the master of the excellent 'Pradeshagra' (region) of the 'Aharak' body in the final time.

**Explanation:**

The statement regarding the 'Audarik' body has been specifically stated. However, the special characteristic is as follows: It produces the 'Pramattasanyat' (distracted and controlled) 'Aharak' body and is of 'Aparayapt' (insufficient) yoga in 'Aparayapt' (insufficient) time. Otherwise, the 'Aharak' body cannot become 'Vridhi' (growth) through excellent growth in a short time. Secondly, 'Nisek-Rachna' (creation of the body) occurs only when it is in the 'Avasthit' (existing) form. It does not occur through 'Galitavasesha' (melted remains).

**Question:** Why is this known?

**Answer:** Because the time of 'Nirjara' (depletion) of the 'Aharak' body is said to be 'Antarmuhurta' (shortest time) in measure.

If it is said that it is possible for the 'Pradesha' (regions) deposited at the same time without a difference in time to melt in 'Antarmuhurta' (shortest time) without a time, it is not correct, because it creates a contradiction. Similarly, in 'Tithanch' (lunar days) and humans, the 'Vaifayik' (physical) body should be created through 'Nisek-Rachna' (creation), otherwise, there is a contradiction in the time of depletion being 'Antarmuhurta' (shortest time) in measure.

**Gatha 460:**

The soul who is the master of the excellent 'Pradeshagra' (region) of the 'Tejas' (fire) body, is a 'Purvakoti' (previous category) soul with a long lifespan, who binds the 'Ayukarma' (karma of lifespan) of the 'Naraki' (hell beings) of the seventh earth.

The 'Purvakoti' (previous category) soul with a long lifespan, who binds the 'Ayukarma' (karma of lifespan) of the 'Naraki' (hell beings) of the seventh earth, creates 'Nisek-Rachna' (creation) in a 'Gopuchchhakar' (tail-like) form from the 'Prathamasamaya' (first time) to the 'Antmasamaya' (final time) of the 'Tejas' body, which is 'Chhayasath Sagar' (sixty-four oceans) in measure.

It should not be assumed that the soul who binds the lifespan of the 'Naraki' (hell beings) of the seventh earth is the same soul who binds the excellent state of the 'Tejas' body 'Nokarma' (karma of the body). Instead, it should be understood that the 'Purvakoti' (previous category) soul with a long lifespan and excellent 'Yogabala' (power of yoga), who is capable of binding the lifespan of the 'Naraki' (hell beings) of the seventh earth while still having a portion of the 'Purvakoti' (previous category) division remaining, binds the excellent state of the 'Tejas' body 'Nokarma' (karma of the body). Otherwise, there is no benefit in making rules like this, which bind the lifespan of the 'Purvakoti' (previous category).

**Footnotes:**

1. P.P. 14, p. 336
2. Ghavla P. 14, p. 415

Page #361:
---------------------------
328/Go. Sa. Jivakanda
Gatha 250-251 Why did the Prāyuvāla of the Pūrva-koti bind the excellent state of the Tejas body of the Jiva?
Solution Because there are abundant reflections of excellent yoga available there.
Doubt - If this is the case, why is the Pūrva-koti not made to wander among the Prāyuvālas and obtain the excellent accumulation of Tejas-body karma?
Solution No, because very often the Jiva born after death obtains the occasion for the accumulation of Stoka-dravya through insufficient yogas.
At the time of the binding of the lifespan of the Naraki, the lifespan of the thirty-three Sagara, which is slightly less than two Pūrva-kotis, should be bound, otherwise there is a contradiction in the completion of sixty-six Sagara at the end of the Naraki.
The Prāyuvāla of the Pūrva-koti, who binds the Prāyu-karma of the Narakis of the seventh earth, died in sequence and was born in the seventh earth below. ||461||
He died while sustaining life without Kadali-ghāt. Doubt - Why was he born in the seventh earth?
Solution - No, because there is a lot of excellence of dravya available due to the affliction there. And such affliction is not found elsewhere.
Doubt - Why is the statement of the Prāyu not made?
Solution - His Prāyu is slightly less, therefore the statement of the Prāyu is not made. From there he was born again in the Prāyuvālas of the Pūrva-koti. ||462||
Doubt - Why was he born again in the Prāyuvālas of the Pūrva-koti? Solution - Because there are abundant reflections of excellent yoga available there.
He died in sequence while sustaining the Prāyu and was born again in the Narakis of the seventh earth below. ||463|| That is, he died while sustaining life without Kadali-ghāt and Apavartana-ghāt. At the end of the second Pūrva-koti, he was born in the Narakis of the thirty-three Sagara Prāyuvāla after completing the first thirty-three Sagara. In the first time of the two Naraka and one Tiryancha insufficient kalas, he became Āhāraka and in the first time he became Tadbhavastha. The same Jiva, with excellent yoga, grasped the Āhāraka.
1. G. P. 14 P. 416-417. 2. "Kamga Kalagadasmaranagho Sattamae Pudhavie, Unnyango. ||461|| [Dhannal Pu. 14 P. 417] 3. "Tado Uchthidasamaso Puranraave Puratra Kodauve Sutranno" ||462|| [Pra. Pu. 14 P. 410]. 4. Sutras from 563 to 474 are in P. Bu. 14 from P. 418-421.

Page #362:
---------------------------
## Gatha 250-251
## Yogamarga/326

**464.** It is forbidden to be born from the movement of the **vigraha** for the purpose of increasing the **paryapta** time.

**465.** Having attained the **utkrista** **dine** **baji**.

**466.** Become **paryapta** from all **paryaptis** by the smallest **antarmuhurt** time.

**467, 468, 469.** There, the **tritees** **sagar** **ayupraman** **bhavasthiti** follows, having attained **utkrista** **yogasthanas** many, many times. It becomes **vipul** **sanklesh** **parinam** many, many times.

**470.** It is rotated among the **utkrista** **yogavalas** for the purpose of collecting many **pudgalas**. The statement of **sanklesh** is found for the purpose of **utkarsha** of the accumulated **tejas** **pudgalas**. The **pudgalas** of the **praudarik** body, **vaikriyik** body, and **paharak** body do not **utkarsha**, because the statement of **sanklesh** is not found in the statement of those bodies. Thus, by rotating, when the **jivitavya** remains in the **stoka** **shesh**, the **yoga** remains on the **yavamdhya** for the **antarmuhurt** time.

**471.** In the **antam** **jivagunahani** **sthanaantar**, it remains for the time equal to an **asankhyata** part of the **pravali**.

**472.** In the **dvicharam** and **tricharam** time, it attains the **utkrista** **sanklesh**.

**473.** In the **charam** and **dvicharam** time, it attains the **utkrista** **yoga**.

**474.** The **jiv** who is **tadabhava** in the **charamsamayavartee** **bhavasthiti** is the owner of the **utkrista** **pradesagra** of the **tejas** body.

**475.** In the first time of the **chhayasath** **sagar** **sthiti**, the **tejas** body **pudgal** **skandha** that was bound, in the last time of ownership, it remains only as the last **gopuccha**. The one that was bound in the second time of the **karma** **sthiti**, in the last time of ownership, it remains only as the **charam** and **dvicharam** **gopuccha**. [Similarly, proceeding, the one that was bound in the last time of the **karma** **sthiti** remains fully (completely) as the **samayaprrabaddha**. ] Thus, in the last time, there is only **dehadh** **gunahani** as the **samayaprrabaddha** **praman** **tejas** body **dravya**. The owner of the **karman** body **pradesagra** is the **niv** **jiv**.

**476.** The **jiv** who remains in the **badar** **prithvikayik** **jivs** for a time less than two thousand **sagaropam** but more than the **kamasthiti** **praman** time.

**477.** Why is it not born in the **shankha** **apkaayik**, **vayukayik**, and **vanaspatikayik** **jivs**?

**Solution:** No, because the **paryapta** and **aparyapta** **yoga** of the **prithvikayik** **jivs** is **asankhyat** times greater than the **paryapta** and **aparyapta** **yoga** of those.

**478.** Why is it not rotated in the **badar** **prithvikayiks** for the entire **karma** **sthiti** **praman** time?

**Solution:** No, because the **yoga** and **ayu** of the **ekendriyas** is **asankhyat** times greater, and they are **sanklesh**-abundant. Therefore, after being rotated in the **prithvikayiks**, it is rotated in the **ekendriyas**. If it were kept only in the **ekendriyas**, then the accumulation of **dravya** that is **asankhyat** times greater in the **ekendriyas** compared to the **ekendriyas** would not be obtained. This is the reason why it is not rotated in the **ekendriyas** for the entire **karma** **sthiti** **praman** time.

**479.** Why is it not rotated in the **sakamika** for the entire **karma** **sthiti** **praman** time, after accumulating **utkrista** **dravya** within its own **sthiti** **praman** time, being born again in the **badar** **prithvikayiks**, remaining there for the **antarmuhurt** time, and then rotating in the **soms** for the **vasasthiti** time, and being born in the **ekendriyas**?

**1. P.P. 17 p. 32. 2. G.P. 10 p. 33.**

Page #363:
---------------------------
330 / Go. Sa. Jiva Kanda
Verses 250 - 251
Solution - No, because the being who is born in the one-sense state after completing the state of suffering, does not have the accumulated substance in the bodies to be released without being melted.
There are many and sufficient births in (the Badar Prithvi Kayikas). || 8 || The name of the births is Bhava.
Doubt - Why are there many births in the sufficient ones?
Solution - The yogas of the sufficient ones are found in countless times the yogas of the insufficient ones. Doubt - Why is the multiplicity of yogas desirable?
Solution - The multiplicity of regions is proved by the yogas.
The sufficient time is long and the insufficient time is short. || 6 || That is, the one who is born in the sufficient ones is born in the long-lived ones, and the one who is born in the insufficient ones is born in the short-lived ones. * The long-lived ones, even though born in the sufficient ones, complete the sufficient ones in the shortest time. *
Whenever he binds the lifespan, he binds it with the inferior yoga suitable for him. The lifespan is bound by the inferior yoga in order to make the superior region-accumulation of karma, otherwise the superior accumulation cannot be done. When the lifespan is bound in the time of the superior yoga, the destruction of the karma of the one who binds the lifespan by the inferior yoga is seen as the destruction of the substance in countless times. 7
The superior positions have the superior position of fertilization and the inferior positions have the inferior position of fertilization. || 11 || Although the superior position-bond in the one-sense beings is one ocean, even after the passage of one ocean time, all the karma-skandhas of the time-bound ones do not melt, because their position-being is increased by the exaltation.
Doubt - If this is the case, why is the accumulation not taken by exalting it for an infinite time?
Solution - No, because the power of exaltation of the karma-skandhas has an effect for that much time. "The karma-state that has attained the manifest state is followed by the karma-state in the form of power."
The multiplied karma-ashic being specially throws more
Or the bound and exalted regions are thrown by the inner cause, first in the first state, a little is thrown, in the second state, it is thrown, in the third state, it is thrown specially more. Thus, the attainment of the superior state
Gh Pu 10 p. 37 ||
p. 43 ||
3. V. Pu. 10 p. 36 ||
4.
1. Dh. Pu. 10 p. 34. 2. V. Pu. 10 p. 35. 5. V. Pu. 10 38. 6. Sh Pu. 10 p. 38. 7. Dh. Pu. 10 p. 36 8. Dh. Pu. 1 6. "Vattikammatthaditthi Anusarinini Sattikammatthaditti Vaynaddo." [Sh. Pu. 10 p. 42.] .

Page #364:
---------------------------
## Gatha 250-251
## Yoga Magamra/331

"It projects in the order of special and more, until it becomes." The reason for this reverse arrangement is the multiplicity of karma-ashiktava, and the reason for the forward arrangement is the depletion of karma-ashiktava, not the defilement and purity.

**12** It attains excellent yoga-sthana very, very often. **11** It becomes very, very often, very much the result of defilement. **12** It is made to attain very, very often, the results of defilement, for the sake of attracting the dravya and for binding the excellent state.

Thus, by revolving, it was born in the Nadar Trasa Paryaptakas. The meaning is that, being devoid of the state of existence, the karma-sthiti revolved in the Ekendriya for the duration of the Pramaraṇa Kala, and then later, it was born in the Badar Sa Paryaptakas.

**Doubt:** Why is the word Badar used?

**Solution:** To negate subtlety.

**Doubt:** Doesn't saying "As" itself negate subtlety, because subtle beings are not found in the nerves?

**Solution:** No, because here, the subtlety that arises from the emergence of the subtle karma-nama is accepted, without which the subtlety of the "As" present in the Vigraha-Gati is accepted. Because their bodies are devoid of the karma-skandha, which is accumulated from the continuous Vitropachya.

**15** The said being, revolving in the "As", has many Paryapta Bhavas and few Aparyapta Bhavas. **16** The Paryapta Kala is long and the Aparyapta Kala is short. **17** Whenever it binds the Ayus, it binds it with the appropriate, inferior yoga. **18** The superior state has an excellent position for the removal of defilement, and the inferior state has an inferior position for the removal of defilement. **19** It attains excellent yoga-sthana very, very often. **20** It becomes very, very often, very much the result of defilement.

Thus, by revolving, it was born in the Narakas of the seventh earth, below, in the final Bhava-grahana. **21** It was born in the seventh Naraka, for the sake of binding the excellent state with excellent defilement, and for the sake of excellent upliftment. The name for increasing the karma-sthiti is "Utkarshana". The name for the refraction of the states of the karma-pradesha is "Apkarshana". In other Naraka-prithvis, there is the influence of intense defilement and long Ayus-sthiti.

**22** It received the karma-mugala by the excellent yoga, being an Aharaka in the first time and being a Tadbhavastha in the first time. **23** It attained growth from excellent growth. **24** It became Paryapta from all Paryaptis, very quickly, by the Antar-muhurta. **24** If even one Paryapti remains incomplete, then in the Paryaptakas...

1. G. Pu. 10 p. 43 || 5. G. Pu. 10 p. 47-48.
2. S. Pu. 10 p. 44. || 6. G. Pu. 10 p. 50-51.
3. D. Pu. 10 p. 45. || 4. G. Pu. 10 p. 46. || 7. D. Pu. 10 p. 52-53.

Page #365:
---------------------------
## 332/No. Sa. Jivakanda

**Verse 252**

It is said that "The result of yoga does not occur, but from the first time of the body's attainment, the result of yoga occurs." (Dhaval Pu. 10, p. 422, 427, and 431).  The sufficient yoga is countless times greater than the insufficient yoga, therefore it has been said that "All became sufficient in a very short time." There, the state of existence is a measure of thirty-three oceans. ||25||

While consuming the lifespan, one attains excellent yogasthana many, many times. ||26||

Many, many times, one experiences a state of great affliction. ||27||

Thus, after wandering around, when a little life remains, one stays in the state of yoga for the time of the inner moment, above the middle of yoga. ||28||

The last jiva remains in the Gurgahani place for a time that is an immeasurable fraction of the Pravali. ||29||

In the time of the second and third extremes, one attains excellent affliction. ||30||

In the time of the extreme and the second extreme, one attains excellent yoga. ||31||

In that extreme time, the karmic body of the tadbhava jiva is excellent. ||32||

The five bodies have the following measures of their excellent state: three palyas, thirty-three oceans, the inner moment, sixty-six oceans, and the state of karmic bondage. ||252||

**Explanation of the Verse:**

The excellent state of the audarik body is measured by three palyas, because the audarik body is that of humans and animals. The excellent lifespan of humans and animals is measured by three palyas. Therefore, the excellent state of the audarik body is said to be three palyas.

The excellent state of the vaikriyik body is measured by thirty-three oceans, because the vaikriyik body is that of gods and hell beings. Their excellent lifespan is thirty-three oceans. Therefore, the excellent state of the vaikriyik body is said to be thirty-three oceans.

The graharak body is owned by the pramattasanyata. The time of the pramattasanyata in the Gurgahani place is the inner moment. Therefore, the state of the graharak body is said to be the inner moment.

The tejasas body and the karmic body are both connected to all jivas from the beginningless time. Therefore, their state is said in relation to the desired time-bound state.

**Footnotes:**

1. Dha. Pu. 10, p. 54-55 "Even in one, when there is no ability to attain, the result of yoga occurs." [3. Pu. 1, p. 55] "Where does that result of yoga occur? It occurs for me from the first time of the body's attainment, from the attainment of the mother's milk." [Dha. Pu. 1, p. 422, 421, 431] This is the second opinion.
2. Dha. Pu. 1, p. 55.
3. Dha. Pu. 10, p. 55-57.
4. Dha. Pu. 10, p. 68.
5. Dha. Pu. 10, p. 10-106. And p. 224, Sutra 34.
6. "The state of existence is not in the other, it is a burden of the past." ||3|| "And of those born in the animal realm." ||36|| (Tattvarth Sutra No. 3).
7. "The birth of gods and hell beings." ||2.34|| "The birth of the vaikriyik body." ||2/46|| (Tattvarth Sutra).
8. "The great one, in the light, the state of existence is measured by thirty-three oceans." ||3/43|| "In the state of victory, etc., the excellent state is measured by thirty-three oceans." ||4/32/3|| (Rajavatik).
9. "The pramattasanyata, who has the good, pure, and maya-free food." ||46|| (Tattvarth Sutra No. 2).
10. Dhaval Pustak 4.
11. "And the connection from the beginningless time." ||4|| "All." ||4|| (Tattvarth Sutra No. 2).

Page #366:
---------------------------
## Gatha 253
## Yogamargna/333

Those who are bound by the Tejas body in the form of Pradesh, some stay for one time, some for two times, some for three times. In this way, the most excellent ones stay for sixty-six Sagara Kalas. ||247|| 

Meaning: From the beginningless time, wherever the Tejas body is established in the world, the जीव gets the Pradesh structure.

Those who are bound by the Karman body in the form of Pradesh, some stay for one time more than the Pavali Pramanakal, some for two times more than the Pavali Pramanakal, and some for three times more than the Pavali Pramanakal. In this way, the most excellent ones stay for the Karmasthiti Pramanakal. ||248||

Here, while saying Karmasthiti, one should accept seventy Kotakoti Sagara, because in the texts, the community of Karmas is accepted as the Karman body.

Those who are bound by the Pradesh for the first time, some stay for one time more than the Pavali Kal, because after the Bandhavali, the substance is reduced and deposited in the Uday, and the time of the Uday of the developed one time more than the Pavali form Uday time is one time more than the Pavali, and in such a Karmapradesha, the substance brought in is seen as Akarma in the last time of two times more than the Pavali.

**Conclusion:** Except for the mixed time, i.e., the insufficient time, the time of the five bodies is as follows:

The time of the Audarik body of the Tiryanch and humans is three Palyopama Praman, less than the Antarmuhurt from the lowest and less than the Antarmuhurt from the highest. Here, the Antarmuhurt Praman is reduced by the mixed time.

The time of the Mula Vaikriyik body is ten thousand years less than the Antarmuhurt related to the insufficient time from the lowest and thirty-three Sagara less than the Antarmuhurt from the highest.

The time of the Uttar Vaikriyik body is the Antarmuhurt of the lowest and highest of the Devas.

**Question:** In the birth celebrations of the Tirthankaras and the worship of the Jinchantyalas in the Nandishwar Dwip, more time than the Antarmuhurt is taken. How does the Uttar Vaikriyik body of the Devas stay for that long?

**Solution:** Due to repeated Vikriya, the lineage of the Uttar Kriyik body does not break.

The time of the Graharak body is the Antarmuhurt from the lowest and the highest.

In terms of lineage, the Tejas and Karman bodies are Abhavya, beginningless and endless. They do not end even after an infinite time for any Bhavy. They are beginningless and endless for any Bhavy.

The state of the Tejas body, which is independent of the Sant, is sixty-six Sagara, and the state of the Karman body is Karmasthiti Praman, i.e., seventy Kotakoti Sagara Praman.

The proof of the destruction of the qualities of the five bodies is Antomuhuttametan Gunahani Hodi Adimatigaranam. Palla Sankhejjadiman Gunahani Tejakamanam. ||253||

1. Dhavan Pu. 14 p. 335. Batik 2/1/8.
2. Dhaval Pu. 14 p. 235.
3. Dhaval Pu. 14 p. 235-236.
4. Raj.

Page #367:
---------------------------
## 334/Go. Sa, Jivakanda
**Verse 253**
**Verse Meaning:** The measure of the decay of the three initial bodies is an antarmuhurta. The measure of the decay of the Tejas body and the Karman body is an infinitesimal fraction of a palya. ||253||

**Special Meaning:** By dividing the substance of the first insemination by the insemination divisor (two decay measures), the measure of the selection is obtained. Each inseminator becomes devoid of one selection. From the substance of the first insemination, as it decreases, until it becomes half of the substance of the first insemination, there is one decay measure. When it becomes twice as deficient, i.e., half, the second decay measure begins. Because in each decay measure, the substance becomes twice as deficient (half), therefore, its name, decay measure, is meaningful. The number of inseminations in one decay measure is called the decay measure mayaam or the decay measure adhwaan.

The Audarik body, the Vaikriyika body, and the Aharak body have a measure of one decay measure's length as an antarmuhurta, and the three decay measures are equal in their transfer. But the measure of the decay of the Tejas body and the Karman body is only an infinitesimal fraction of a palya; which is obtained by dividing their respective excellent states by their respective numerous decay measures.

In the first time of the existence of the Audarik and Vaikriyika bodies, the region that is inseminated, above that, after an antarmuhurta time (one decay measure), the inseminated (irrigated) region there becomes twice as deficient. Again, above the twice-deficient insemination, after the same situated adhwaan, the other insemination is twice as deficient. In this way, it becomes twice as deficient until there are three palyas and thirty-three sagaras. Successively, above the desired twice-deficient insemination, the situated antarmuhurta adhwaan goes and the situated insemination becomes twice as deficient. In this order, one should take it to the final state of three palyas and thirty-three sagaras.

One-region decay measure transfer is an antarmuhurta measure, and many-region decay measure transfer is an infinitesimal fraction of a palya measure. ||274|| The fact that the decay measure transfer is an antarmuhurta measure is known from the sutra itself, because it is situated in violation of the subject matter of the reasoning. But the measure of the many decay measure scales is known from both the sutra and the reasoning. If an antarmuhurta receives one decay measure scale, then how many decay measure scales will three palyas and thirty-three sagaras receive? In this way, by dividing the desired quantity by the measure quantity multiplied by the fruit quantity, the many decay measure transfer is obtained as an infinitesimal fraction of a palya measure. One-region decay measure transfer is small, because it is an antarmuhurta measure. From that, many-region decay measure transfer is countless times greater, the multiplier is an infinitesimal fraction of a palya.

Here, the description of the arrangement of regions of the Aharak body is done. In the first time, the Aharak became, and in the first time, the जीव who became in that state, in the first time, the region that was deposited by him,

Page #368:
---------------------------
## Yoga Maya / 335
## Verses 254-255

Why is the **Aharak** body not described in the same way as the **Shraddarik** and **Vaikriya** bodies, along with their **Shankas**?

**Solution:** Because the number of **Gunahani** marks differs.

**Gunahani** exists as a **Antarmuhurt** measure, and **Nana Pradesh Gunahani** is a measure of time in terms of number. When one **Gunahani** mark is obtained in **Antarmuhurt**, how many will be obtained within the time period of the **Aharak** body's existence? This is calculated by dividing the desired quantity by the measured quantity, multiplied by the result. This results in a number of **Nana Gunahani** marks. **Nana Pradesh Gunahani** is a **Stoka** (small quantity) because it is a number, and from it, one **Pradesh Gunahani** is an **Asankhyat** (innumerable) times greater. The multiplier is **Antarmuhurt**.

The **Taijas** and **Karman** bodies, through the **Taijas** and **Karman** bodies, respectively, deposit **Pradeshagra** at the first moment. This **Pradeshagra** becomes half its size after traveling a distance equal to an **Asankhyat**th part of a **Paly**. It becomes half its size again after traveling a distance equal to an **Asankhyat**th part of a **Paly**. || 282 ||

In this way, it continues to become half its size, reaching the **Chyasath Sagar** and the **Karma Sthiti** **Shranti**. || 283 ||

One **Pradesh Gunahani** is equal to the square root of an **Asankhyat**th part of a **Paly**, and **Nana Pradesh Gunahani** is equal to an **Asankhyat**th part of the square root of a **Paly**. || 284 ||

**Nana Pradesh Gunahani** is a **Stoka** (small quantity). || 285 ||

From it, one **Pradesh Gunahani** is **Asankhyat** times greater. || 286 ||

**Shraddarik** and other bodies, in their states of **Bandha** (bondage), **Udaya** (arising), and **Sattva** (being), have a **Dravya** measure of one. The **Bandha** and **Udaya** are also one, measured in time. The **Sattva** is one and a half **Gunahani** in time. || 254 ||

However, the **Praudarik** and **Vaikriya** bodies are different. The **Bandha** of these bodies is measured by the remaining lifespan, compared to the lifespan already lived. At the end of lifespan, only one and a half **Gunahani** of **Sankaya** (accumulation) and **Udaya** (arising) occur. || 255 ||

**Footnotes:**

1. "**Aharasar** **Terav** **Paham** **Samay** **Aharayena** **Padamasamayatavbhavtyeo** **Graharasarinae** **Jan** **Patramasamae** **Do** **To** **Hattan** **Ganga** **Dugu** **Honan** || 277 || [ **Dhaval** **Pu.** 14 **P.** 248 ]
2. **Dhaval** **Pu.** 14 . 246
3. **Dhaval** **Pu.** 14 **P.** 350-351.

Page #369:
---------------------------
## Translation:

**336 / Go. Sa. Jivakanda**
**Gatha 254-255.**

**Special Meaning:** In the first moment of the three moments, the bound nokarma is deposited in a go-pucchha-akar (tail-like) form from the first moment of those three moments until the last moment. The bound nokarma-pradesha in the second moment is deposited in a go-pucchha-akar form from the second moment until the second extreme moment of the three moments. Again, in the last moment of the nokarma-sthiti, the extreme and second extreme go-pucchha of the desired time-bound is deposited, because the effect of the pra-yu-sthiti is above. The bound nokarma-pradesha-agra in the third moment is deposited from the third moment until the second extreme moment is attained. Afterwards, in the last moment, the extreme, second extreme, and third extreme go-pucchha of the desired time-bound is deposited. Again, going in this way, the first go-pucchha of the bound nokarma-pradesha-agra in the second extreme moment of the three moments is deposited in the second extreme moment and then again deposited in the kosha. The complete bunch of the bound nokarma in the last moment of the three moments is deposited in the last moment itself.

Thus, if the pradesha-agra accumulated in the last moment of the three moments is added, then the load of the total dravya accumulated in the last moment is one and a half times the desired time-bound amount.

Similarly, one should know about the remaining four, namely the aharaka-sharira, tejas-sharira, and karma-sharira. The special feature is that the niseka-rachana happens only in the existing form in the aharaka-sharira, tejas-sharira, and karma-sharira. There is no niseka-rachana of the melted residue. That is, the niseka-rachana of each time-bound of the praharaka-sharira will be as many as the moments in the antar-muhurta (the time between two moments). (There is no time-bound amount of the melted residue). The niseka-rachana of the tejas-sharira is as many as the moments in the sixty-four oceans. The niseka-rachana of the karma-sharira at the time of binding is as many as the moments in the seventy ko-da-kodi oceans minus seven thousand years. Only one time-bound dravya binds in each moment, because the karma and nokarma dravya that bind in one moment are called time-bound. The first niseka of one time-bound, the second niseka of another, the third, fourth, etc. niseka of some, the extreme niseka of some, the second extreme niseka of some, the third extreme niseka of some, etc. all arise simultaneously in one moment, and thus all together, one time-bound dravya arises. It is said:

**Samaya-prabaddha-pama hodi tiricchhen chattamami. Padisamayam bandhude ekko samaya-baddho sattam samaya-prabaddha divasa-guna-hani tadiyam unam. Triko savadidambhe milide have niyama.** || 643 ||

**1642.**

One time-bound binds in the desired present moment, and only one time-bound dravya arises. This is known from the nir-ya-rupa-rachana. The sattva dravya is slightly less than one and a half times the time-bound amount. This is obtained by adding all the dravya of the trikona-rachana yantra according to the rule. 642-643.

**1. Lapu 14 p. 406-407. 2. Dhavala Pu. 14 p. 415. 3. Gommatasar Karmakanda.**

Page #370:
---------------------------
## Chapter 256-258
## Pogamargga/337

The Gommatasara Karmakanda commentary provides a triangular diagram. This diagram proves that the 'day of the great annihilation' (**De Dagurbahani**) is always present, but the **Audarik** body, **Vaikriyik** body, and **Paharaka** body all experience the 'day of the great annihilation' at the end of their respective lifetimes.

**For further details, refer to the Gommatasara Karmakanda commentary on verses 642 and 143.**

**Verse 256:**
> Those born in Devakuru or Uttar Kuru, with a lifespan of three **palyopamas**, experience the accumulation of the **Audarik** body at the end of their life, whether it be their first or second life.

**Verse 257:**
> Those who have crossed the twenty-two oceans and are born in the **Parana-Achyuta** heaven experience the accumulation of the **Vaikriyik** body. This is because the **utkrista** (excellent) yoga is rarely found elsewhere.

**Verse 258:**
> Those born in the seventh earth as a **naraki** (hell being) experience the accumulation of the **Tejas** body in their second life. Those who are born in the seventh earth as a **naraki** after many lifetimes in hell experience the accumulation of the **Karma** body at the end of their life.

**Explanation:**

* **Verse 256** states that both humans and **tiryanch** (non-human beings) born in Devakuru and Uttar Kuru with a lifespan of three **palyopamas** are masters of the **Audarik** body. However, the **Dhavala** commentary (14, p. 368, Sutra 418) states that only humans are masters of this body. The relevant Sutra is:
> "**Annadara** (human) born in Uttar Kuru or Devakuru, with a lifespan of three **palyopamas**."

* The verse mentions mastery at both the end of the first and second life, but the **Dhavala** commentary (14, Sutra 426) only mentions mastery at the end of the first life. The relevant Sutra is:
> "At the end of his life, he becomes the master of the **Poraliy** body."

* **Verse 257** mentions the mastery of the **Vaikriyik** body but does not specify the time. The **Dhavala** commentary (14, p. 413, Sutra 443) states that the mastery occurs at the end of the life. The relevant Sutra is:
> "At the end of his life, he becomes the master of the **Beuns** (**Vaikriyik**) body."

Page #371:
---------------------------
## Translation:

**338 / Go. Sa. Jivakanda**
**Gatha 256-260**

These Gathas do not mention the owner of the excellent Pradesh Agra of the Aharak body, but Dhaval 5. 165. 414-4956 mentions the owner of the excellent Pradesh Agra of the Aharak body.

The commentary on Gatha 250-251 has already elaborated on these five bodies based on Dhaval Pu. 14 and Dhaval Pu. 10. However, it is not mentioned. It should be seen from the special meaning of Gatha 250-251.

Sri Madhavchandra, through eleven Gathas, mentions the owner of the Pradesh Agra. Due to the repetition fault, it is mentioned here.

**NA**

Vidyadeva Yogamargana mentions the number of Jivas.

The number of Jivas in Yogamaya.

**Badar Punna Teu Samrasiya Prasankhabhagimida. Vishikariyas Tijutta Palla Sankhejjaya Palla Sankhejjaya - Bidangulgurigad Se Dhimetta Vegubviyapanchshakha Bhogbhuma Puhu**
**Bau ||25||**
**Hu.**
**Vigudhvanti. ||260||**

**Gatharth:** An innumerable part of the Badar sufficient Agnicayik Jivas are endowed with the power of reaction. In the Badar sufficient Vayukayik Jivas, an innumerable part of the Patya are endowed with the power of reaction. ||25|| Multiplying the Jagachheni by the Ghanangul multiplied by an innumerable part of the Palya, we get the number of Jivas with five-sense Vairyik power. Bhogbhumia also react separately.
**1125011**

**Special Meaning:** Compared to the Grodh, the Jivas with four bodies are innumerable, i.e., they are innumerable parts of the Jagatpratar or innumerable J.Shre. The diameter list of those Jagachheni is only an innumerable part of the Palya, measured in Ghanangul. The majority of these are Tiryanch, because even though the number of Jivas with reactive power in humans is countable, it is very small. Therefore, the amount of reaction in Tiryanch is only an innumerable part of the Patyopama, measured in Ghanangul, multiplied by J.Shre. The number of five-sense, five-sense sufficient, Tras, and insufficient Jivas is said to be the same as the five-sense Tiryanch. This also shows that the five-sense Tiryanch are the majority. Because even in the Agnicayik and Vayukayik, the amount of reaction combined is an innumerable part of the Patyopama. However, the five-sense Tiryanch,

1. "Dusarog Davvapamane Kevadiya? Asankhejjara, Padarast Asate. Mago, Shrasankhejjarao Dhimero, Tasi Seti Vikmasutri Palido Asale. Magametaghanam Gulaghi." [Dhaval Pu. 14 p. 249].
2. "Tirivase Vinchmararatri Patridomadam Asankhejjadhimagameta Ghangulahi Gunisevito." [Dhaval Gu. 3. 66-67].
3. "Panchdigra-Panchidimajjatta Tas-Taspajjatta Panchdiy Tiriks Mango." [Dhaval Pu. 14 p. 251].
4. "Ed Diya Badarai Divpajjatta Chadusarira Davyamaakhen Vadiya? Shrasankhejjara, Palido Ase Bhavo." [Dhaval Pu. 14 p. 210].

Page #372:
---------------------------
##  Verse 261
##  Yoga Margna/361

There are countless four-bodied beings among the five-sense-endowed transmigratory beings and the five-sense-endowed transmigratory-womb beings, which are equal to an innumerable part of the Jagatpratar. Or, multiplying the J.Shre. by the countless parts of the Palya-upam, the result obtained is the number of four-bodied beings, i.e., those who perform actions.

The number of Badar Agni-kayik Paryaya beings is equal to an innumerable part of the Dhanavali. An innumerable part of this is endowed with Vikriya Shakti. An innumerable part of the Palya is Badar Vayu-kayik Paryaya beings endowed with Vikriya Shakti. Both the Badar Vayu-kayik and Badar Agni-kayik beings endowed with Vikriya Shakti together are equal to an innumerable part of the Palya. The number of humans and transmigratory beings endowed with Vikriya Shakti is equal to the result obtained by multiplying the J.Shre. by the countless parts of the Palya. Humans and transmigratory beings of the Bhogabhumib and Karmabhumij also perform actions in the form of Uttar-sharira, separate from the Chakravarti Mula-sharira.

**Devehi Sadireya Tijogino Tehi Heen Taspunna.**
**Bijogino Tadurga Sansari Ekkajoga Hu.** ||26||

**Meaning of the Verse:** Beings with three Yogas are slightly more than the Devas. Subtracting the number of beings with three Yogas from the total number of beings, we get the number of beings with two Yogas. Subtracting the number of beings with three Yogas and two Yogas from the total number of beings in the world, we get the number of beings with one Yoga. ||261||

**Special Meaning:** The number of all Devas is slightly more than the number of Jyotishi Devas, because the remaining Devas, like Vanavyantar, etc., are equal to an innumerable part of the Jyotishi Devas. Adding the number of Narakas, Sanjee five-sense-endowed transmigratory beings, and five-sense-endowed humans to this number of Devas, we get the number of beings with three Yogas. The first square root of the Sucyangula is the number of Narakas, which is equal to the second square root of the Jagatshre. The number of humans is equal to the volume of a cloud. The number of Sanjee five-sense-endowed transmigratory beings is equal to the Jagatpratar divided by the square of 256 angulas multiplied by 6. Adding these three numbers to the number of Devas, we get the number of slightly more Devas.

**Doubt:** Why doesn't the number of Devas double, triple, etc., when these three numbers are added?

**Solution:** Because the number of the remaining three types of Sanjee five-sense-endowed transmigratory beings is equal to an innumerable part of the number of Devas.

1. Dhaval Pu. 14 p. 246.
2. Ghadal Pu. 14 p. 303.
3. Shrimadabhapchandra Moorikrit Teeka.
4. "Warparvataradi Ses Sabvedeva Joisiyadevara Sankhejdi Bhagmeetta Havanti." [Dhaval Pu. 3 p. 275].
5. "Tasi Sankit Vikvambasuchi Angulbaggamula Vidiyavaggamulagurinde." ||17|| [Dhaval Pu. 3 p. 131].
6. "Manumapajjatta Dhayalayaggas Ghargameta." [Chaval Pu. 3 p. 255].
7. "Samve Deva Saninano Cheya. Tes Sankejdi Bhagmecha Tigdi Sanino Hoti." [Dhaval Pu. 3 p. 482].

Page #373:
---------------------------
40/Go, Sa. Jivakanda
Gatha 262-263

Only those beings with five senses who are *sanjee* (conscious) have these three *yogas* (actions): mind, speech, and body. The number of *sanjee* beings is said to be slightly more than the number of gods. There are also a significant number of *triindriya* (three-sensed), *triindriya* (three-sensed), *chaturindriya* (four-sensed), and *asanjee* (unconscious) *panchendriya* (five-sensed) beings. These beings have only two *yogas*: speech and body. Therefore, subtracting the number of *sanjee* *panchendriya* beings from the total number of beings (which is calculated by dividing the *jagatpratar* by the ninth part of a *pratarangula*) leaves the number of *dwiindriya* (two-sensed) and other *asanjee* *panchendriya* beings, who are only capable of speech and body *yogas*. Subtracting the number of beings with three *yogas* and two *yogas* from the total number of beings in the world leaves only the number of beings with one *yoga* (body), which is infinite.

Thus, this *gatha* describes the number of beings with no *yogas*, two *yogas*, and one *yoga*. Beings with three *yogas* and two *yogas* are countless, and beings with one *yoga* are infinite.

*Antomuhuttamela chaumurgajoga kaman sanka guna. Tajjoga samangan chauvacijoga tado du sanka gurga. ||262|| Tajjoga samannanam kano sankahado tijogamida. Sagaramasanima magashgangune du sagarasi. ||263||*

**Gatha Meaning:**

The time for each of the four mind *yogas* and collectively is *antarmuhurta* (a very short time), but they are in a numerical ratio. The time for the four *vakan yogas* is in a numerical ratio to the time for the collective mind *yoga*. The time for the body *yoga* is in a numerical ratio to the time for the collective speech *yoga*. By dividing the total number of beings with three *yogas* by the time for the collective three *yogas* and multiplying by the time for each individual *yoga*, we can obtain the number of beings for each *yoga*.

**Special Meaning:**

The number of beings in each *yoga* is determined by the time for that *yoga*, because it is during the time for that *yoga* that the beings associated with that *yoga* accumulate. The time for the four mind *yogas* and the collective mind *yoga*, as well as the time for the four speech *yogas* and the collective speech *yoga*, are in a numerical ratio, as follows:

* The time for *satyamanoyoga* (truthful mind *yoga*) is the shortest.
* The time for *bhrishamanoyoga* (deceitful mind *yoga*) is numerically greater than that.
* The time for *ubhaymanoyoga* (mixed mind *yoga*) is numerically greater than that.
* The time for *anubhavmanoyoga* (experiential mind *yoga*) is numerically greater than that.
* The time for the collective mind *yoga* is significantly greater than that.
* The time for *satyavachanyoga* (truthful speech *yoga*) is numerically greater than that.
* The time for *mrishvachanyoga* (deceitful speech *yoga*) is numerically greater than that.
* The time for *ubhayvachanyoga* (mixed speech *yoga*) is numerically greater than that.
* The time for *anubhavvachanyoga* (experiential speech *yoga*) is numerically greater than that.
* The time for the collective speech *yoga* is significantly greater than that.
* The time for *kayayoga* (body *yoga*) is numerically greater than that.

Adding the time for the mind *yoga*, speech *yoga*, and body *yoga* gives us the total number of beings with three *yogas*.

1. "Manipayanuavadagan mag miklaitti dabpamanen kevadiya devehi sadireyan. ||1:5||" Cha.Pu. 3 p. 482 || 2. "Diindrivadayasvamaah. ||14||" [Tattvarth Sutra no. 2]. 3. "Padaggulassa sanghajjaad bhagere jagapara bhage hinde tamakaiyapaata bhavathi thi vuttam bharvad." [Dhaval Pu. 3 p. 362]. 4. "Ede do vi rasi pro anata." {Dhaval Pu. 3 p. 365]. 5. Dhaval Pu. 3 p. 388.

Page #374:
---------------------------
##  Verse 264-2:5
**Yoga Margaga/341**

The number of Devas is known. By dividing it into three parts and multiplying each part by its respective time, we get the number of Manoyogi, Vachanayogi, and Kayayogi beings. Again, by adding the times of the four Manoyogis and dividing the number of Manoyogi beings by this sum, we get the number of beings in each of the four Manoyogis, namely Satyamanoayogi, etc.

Similarly, by adding the times of the four Vachanayogis and dividing the number of Vachanayogi beings (obtained above) by this sum, we get the number of beings in each of the four Vachanayogis, namely Satya Vachanayogi, etc.

It is noteworthy that by adding the number of beings in the Dwindriya, Trindriya, Chaturindriya, and Asanjnī Panchendriya Vachanayogi beings to the number of beings in the Anubhay Vachanayogi beings, we get the total number of Anubhay Vachanayogi beings.

**Verse 264**
**Karmaṇakāyayoga** time, **Praudārikamiśrakaṇakāyayoga** time, and **Audārikakāyayoga** time are all infinite.

**Verse 265**
The time of **Karmaṇakāyayoga** is three moments, the time of **Praudārikamiśrakaṇakāyayoga** is a countable number of **Prāvalī**, and the time of **Audārikakāyayoga** is a countable number of **Prāvalī** multiplied by another countable number. By dividing the total number of beings in a **Yoga** by the sum of these three times and multiplying by their respective times, we get the number of beings in each **Yoga**. The number of **Karmaṇakāyayogi** beings is the least, the number of **Praudārikamiśrakaṇakāyayogi** beings is countless times greater, and the number of **Audārikakāyayogi** beings is countable times greater than that.

**Special Note:** Here, the **Nigoda** beings are the most numerous because all other types of beings are countless. Even among the **Nigoda** beings, the **Sūkṣma** beings are the most numerous. The **Sūkṣma** **Nigoda** beings are countless times more numerous than the **Bādar** **Nigoda** beings. Among the **Sūkṣma** **Nigoda** beings, the **Paryāptak** beings are countable times more numerous than the **Aparyāptak** beings. The lifespan of the **Sūkṣma** **Paryāptak** **Nigoda** beings is only a fraction of a moment. However, even though this lifespan is only a fraction of a moment, it is countable times greater than the **Aparyāptak** time. The **Karmaṇakāyayoga** time is three moments because **Karmaṇakāyayoga** occurs only in the **Anāhārak** state, and the **Anāhārak** state lasts for three moments. The **Aparyāptak** time is a countable number of **Prāvalī**. And one **Prāvalī** contains a countless number of moments.

Page #375:
---------------------------
342/Mo. Sa. Jivakanda
Gatha 266-269

The duration of Karma, body, and time is countless times greater than the insufficient time. The sufficient time is countless times greater than the insufficient time. The sum of these three times is also an antarmuhurta, because there are countless varieties of antarmuhurta.

The sufficient time is countless times greater than the insufficient time for both the Tithandhas and the humans, because of the predominance of the Karmabhumija. By dividing the Tiryanch rashi by the sum of those times, the obtained Abe is multiplied by the insufficient time, which gives the measure of the insufficient rashi. There are two yogas in the insufficient time. In the state of Vigraha Gati, i.e., in the state of Anaharaka, there is Karman Kayayoga, and in the state of Aharaka, there is Audarik Mishrakayayoga. If the entire insufficient Jivarasthi is accumulated in the Antarmuhurta time, then how much accumulation will be obtained in three times? In this way, by multiplying the desired rashi by the fruit rashi, and dividing the obtained Prave by the measure, the entire Jivarasthi divided by the Antarmuhurta, i.e., so many Jivas are the associates of Karman. Multiplying this by countless gives the measure of the Audarik Mishrakayayogis.

Sovakkamannu Vakkamkalo Sankhejjavasathi Diwane. Pravali Prasankhabhago Sankhejjavalipama Kamaso. ||266||
Tahin Sadhye Suddhasala Sovakkamkalo Do Sankhaguna. Tattho Sankhagunooraga Apunyakalamhi Sukhasala. ||267||
Tam Suddhasalagaahi Darinyarasim Punyakalalahin. Suddhasalagaahi Guna Betaravegumvami Issa Hu. ||268||
Tahin Sesadevanaray-Missajude Samvamissavegudhwam. Suranaray-Kayajoga Begumviyakayajoga Hu. ||269||

Gathaarth - In the Vanvyantar Devas who have the state of countless years, the Sopakramkal and Anupakramkal are respectively the countless parts of the Pavali, i.e., the measure of countless Pavali. ||266||
In that state of countless years, the measure of the Sarvasuddha Shalaka is countless times greater than the Sopakramkal. The measure of the Suddhashalaka related to the insufficient time is countless times less than the Sarvasuddhashalakas. ||267||
By dividing the measure of the Vyantar Devas by the Suddhashalaka or part, and multiplying the obtained by the Suddhashalaka related to the insufficient time, the measure of the Vaikriyik Mishrakayayogi Vyantar Devarashi is obtained. ||268||
In the measure of the Vaikriyik Mishrakayayogi Vyantar Devarashi, by adding the measure of the remaining Devas and Naraki Vaikriyik Mitrayogis, the total number of Vaikriyik Mishrakayayogis is obtained. There are as many Vaikriyik Kayayogi Jivas as the measure of the sufficient Devas and Naraki Kayayogis. ||269||

Vishesharth - The name of the birth is Upakraman. The time in which there is continuous birth is Sopakramkal. This Sopakramkal is the measure of the countless parts of the Pavali, in an excellent way.

Page #376:
---------------------------
##  Verse 270
##  Yoga Margna/343

The difference in the time of origin arises. That interval is a measure of the number of Shravakas, from the lowest to the highest. Among the Devas, those with a lifespan of countless years are born in greater numbers, hence the statement is made with respect to them. If all the Devas are gathered together in the time of origin (in the twelve periods of origin), how many beings will be accumulated in the time of destruction, according to the Shalaakas? Thus, by calculating the three-term rule, dividing the measure by the desired quantity, and then dividing the result by the number of Devas, the number of Vaikriya Mishrakaya Yogis among the Devas is obtained, which is only a fraction of the number of Devas.

The time of destruction will be greater for those with a lifespan of countless years, hence the number of Vaikriya Mithkaya Yogis among them will be less, therefore they are not considered. By adding the number of Naraka Mithkaya Yogis to the number of Devas, the total number of Vaikriya Mishrakaya Yogis is obtained.

The number of Vaikriya Kayayogi Devas is less than the number of Devas. The number of Devas that is less than their respective number is the measure of the Vaikriya Kayayogis. By adding the number of Devas and Narakas, and dividing the sum by the combined duration of Manoyoga, Vachanayoga, and Kayayoga, the resulting Shravaka is multiplied by three, and then multiplied by their respective durations, to obtain the measure of their respective numbers. Since the number of Manoyogi beings and Vachanayogi beings is a fraction of the number of Devas, the measure of the Vaikriya Kayayogi number is less than the total number by a fraction.

The number of Aharaka Kayayogi and Graharaka Mishvakaya Yogis is as follows:

Aharaka Kayayogi are at most forty-four at a time.

Graharaka Mishvakaya Yogis are twenty-seven. ||270||

**Special Meaning:**

Graharaka Kayayogi are only found in the Pramattasanyata Gunasthan, not elsewhere. Although the above verse mentions twenty-seven Graharaka Mishvakaya Yogis, this statement is based on the teachings passed down from the Acharya tradition. However, in Dhaval Pu. 3 Sutra 120, the number is not mentioned as twenty-seven, but as countless. This means that there are as many Graharaka Mithkaya Yogis as Jindev has seen, not twenty-seven. Because the word "countless" in the Sutra cannot be interpreted otherwise. And the fact that Aharaka Kayayogi beings are countless times more numerous than Graharaka Mishra Yogis also suggests that Graharaka Mishra Kayayogi beings are countless, not twenty-seven. It might be argued that two is also countless, but that is not considered here, because only the number from the lowest to the highest is considered.

Page #377:
---------------------------
344/Go. Sa. Jivakanda
Gatha 271.272
It is. Or, even though the number of inferior sufficient times is multiplied by the number of all insufficient times, it still appears that the Aharaka Misra Kayayogi should not take twenty-seven.
Thus, the tenth chapter, Yogamarganarna, in the Mommatsar Jivakanda, is complete.
10. Vedamarganadhikari
Vedamargana is the state of being a Purushavedi, a Strivedi, or a Napunsakavedi due to the arising of karma in the Purusha, Stri, and Napunsaka, respectively. Due to the arising of Angopanga karma, one becomes a Dravyapurushavedi, a Dravyastrivedi, or a Dravyanapunsakavedi. Both Dravya and Bhava Vedas are generally similar (alike), but sometimes they become dissimilar. ||271|| Due to the arising and stimulation of Vedanokshaya, there is delusion in the results. Due to delusion, the Jiva does not know the merits or demerits. ||272||
Gathaarth - Purushaveda, Striveda, and Napunsakaved are the states of being a Purushavedi, a Strivedi, or a Napunsakavedi, respectively, due to the arising of karma. Due to the arising of Angopanga karma, one becomes a Dravyapurushavedi, a Dravyastrivedi, or a Dravyanapunsakavedi. Both Dravya and Bhava Vedas are generally similar (alike), but sometimes they become dissimilar. ||271|| Due to the arising and stimulation of Vedanokshaya, there is delusion in the results. Due to delusion, the Jiva does not know the merits or demerits. ||272||
Vishesharth - Veda is of two types: Dravya Veda and Bhava Veda. Due to the arising of Angopanga karma, the creation of the Yoni, Linga (Mehan), etc. in the body is Dravya Veda. Due to Vedanokshaya, Mohaniya karma arising and stimulation, feelings of attraction to a man, a woman, or both arise in the Jiva, and the Jiva becomes deluded and loses his discernment, and the discernment of merits and demerits is lost. For example, a Jiva who drinks alcohol becomes intoxicated and does not think about duty, non-duty, work, non-work, etc. Such a state occurs when Vedakarma arises intensely. The following Gathas are useful in this regard:
Grevasudiranae Balattan Pun Rinayakchhuve Bahuso. Ityo-Purisa-Paunsay Veyanti Tado Havavi Vedo ||101|| Timvev Ev Savve Vijiva Vittha Hu Damva-Bhayado. Te Chev Hu Vivariya Sambhavanti Jahakam Samve ||102|| Udayadu Nokasayana Bhavavedo Ya Hoi Jantunam. Jogi Ya Lingamayi Gamoday Davvavedo Du ||103|| Itthi Purisa Raunsay Veyya Khalu Vashva-Bhavadohoti. Te Chev Ya Vivaroiya Havanti Samve Jahakamaso ||104||
1. Dhaval Pu. 3, 409. 2. Prakrit Panchasamah (Published by Gyanapith) p. 22.

Page #378:
---------------------------
##  Gāghā 973

When the karmic force of vedakarma arises, the jīva exhibits various childish (unman) emotions. It experiences female, male, and neuter feelings. The emotion arising from the emergence of vedakarma is called bhāva-veda. In terms of both dravya and bhāva, all jīvas appear to have all three vedas. It is possible for all of them to have opposite vedas (viṣama vedas) in due course. 

The jīva experiences bhāva-veda due to the emergence of nokṣāya, and dravya-veda, such as yoni, linga, etc., due to the emergence of nāma-karma. The three vedas, namely strī-veda, puruṣa-veda, and napuṁsaka-veda, are undoubtedly of two types in terms of dravya and bhāva, and they all become opposite and unequal in due course.

The emergence of sexual desire in the form of citta-vikṣepa in ātma-pravṛtti (the conscious aspect of the soul) is called veda. The presence of mustache, beard, linga, etc., in the body due to the emergence of nāma-karma is dravya-puruṣa. The presence of a beardless face, breasts, yoni, etc., in the body due to the emergence of nāma-karma is dravya-strī. The presence of a body devoid of both types of signs, such as mustache, beard, linga, etc., and breasts, yoni, etc., due to the emergence of nāma-karma is dravya-napuṁsaka. 

While dravya and bhāva vedas are usually similar, they sometimes become dissimilar (viṣama) in humans and animals due to karmic influence. For example, a jīva may have dravya-puruṣa-veda but bhāva-strī or bhāva-napuṁsaka-veda. Similarly, a jīva may have dravya-strī-veda but bhāva-puruṣa or bhāva-napuṁsaka-veda. Or, a jīva may have dravya-napuṁsaka-veda but bhāva-strī or bhāva-puruṣa-veda. Thus, the possibility of viṣama vedas exists.

The ownership of these three vedas is described as follows:

* **Gāghā 7:**  "Indriyas, vilivīyas, nārāyaṇas, and those who are completely unconscious are all, by rule, napuṁsaka-vedī. They are napuṁsaka-vedī in both dravya and bhāva."
* **Gāghā 8:** "Devas, those who dwell in the realm of enjoyment (bhoga-bhūmi), those who have an immeasurable lifespan, those who are born in the bhoga-bhūmi of the Bharata and Airavata regions, and those who are born in all the mleccha regions, both humans and animals, have only two vedas, puruṣa and strī. They do not have napuṁsaka-veda. There is no disparity in their vedas."
* **Gāghā 16:** "Those who have five senses, those who are born with disabilities, those who are happy, and those who are unhappy, both humans and animals, have all three vedas, strī, puruṣa, and napuṁsaka. There is also disparity in their vedas."

The characteristics of these three vedas are as follows:

* **Gāghā 273:** "Those who perform actions that lead to the enjoyment of the world, those who perform actions that lead to the enjoyment of the world, those who are the best of the best, are puruṣa-vedī."

**Note:** The text refers to various Jain scriptures and commentaries, including the Dhvala, the Abhaya Chandra Siddhanta Chakravarti commentary, the Mulacara Paryapti, and the Pravacana Pancasati.

Page #379:
---------------------------
##  Pāpa 273
## Vedamārgaṇā/345

When the karmic force of *vedakarma* arises, the soul experiences various kinds of *bāla bhāva* (delusional states) and feels the sensations of *strībhāva* (feminine state), *puruṣabhāva* (masculine state), and *napusakabhāva* (neuter state). The feeling that arises from the emergence of *vedakarma* is called *bhāva-veda*. 

In terms of both *dravya* (substance) and *bhāva* (state), all souls appear to have all three *vedas*. It is possible for all of them to have opposite *vedas* (heterogeneous *vedas*) in due course. 

*Nokaṣāya* (the karmic force of *nokaṣāya*) gives rise to *bhāva-veda* in the soul, while *dravya-veda*, such as *yoni* (womb) and *linga* (gender), arises from the emergence of *nāmakarma* (the karmic force of *nāmakarma*). 

*Strīveda* (feminine *veda*), *puruṣaved* (masculine *veda*), and *napusakaved* (neuter *veda*) are all two types of *vedas* in terms of *dravya* and *bhāva*, and they all become opposite and heterogeneous in due course.

"The emergence of *mithunarūpa* (sexual) mental distraction in the *ātma-pravṛtti* (the soul's conscious state) is called *veda*."

The presence of a mustache, beard, and *linga* in the body due to the emergence of *nāmakarma* is *dravya-puruṣa* (masculine substance). The presence of a hairless face, breasts, and *yoni* in the body due to *nāmakarma* and other karmic forces is *dravya-strī* (feminine substance). The presence of a body without any signs of a mustache, beard, *linga*, breasts, or *yoni* due to the emergence of *nāmakarma* is *dravya-napusaka* (neuter substance).

*Dravya-veda* and *bhāva-veda* are usually similar, but sometimes they become heterogeneous in human and animal beings due to the karmic force of *karmabhūmi*. For example, a being may have *puruṣaved* in terms of *dravya* but *strīveda* or *napusakaved* in terms of *bhāva*. Similarly, a being may have *strīveda* in terms of *dravya* but *puruṣaved* or *napusakaved* in terms of *bhāva*, or *napusakaved* in terms of *dravya* but *strīveda* or *puruṣaved* in terms of *bhāva*. Thus, there are 18 possible combinations of *vedas*.

The ownership of these three *vedas* is described as follows:

"The *ekaindriya* (one-sensed) beings, *hindriya* (two-sensed), *trīndriya* (three-sensed), *caturindriya* (four-sensed), *vikalendriya* (disabled-sensed) beings, *nārki* (hell beings), and *sarva-sammūrchana* (totally unconscious) beings, or *sanjī-sammūrchana* (consciously unconscious) and *asanjī-pancendriya-sammūrchana* (unconsciously unconscious five-sensed beings), are all *napusakavedī* (neuter *veda*) by rule, meaning they have *napusakaved* in terms of both *dravya* and *bhāva*.

Devas (gods), *bhogabhūmi* (enjoyment realm) beings, those with an immeasurable lifespan, meaning those born in the *bhogabhūmi* (enjoyment realm) period (the time of the *bhogabhūmi* of the *Bharata* and *Airavata* realms), and those born in all *mleccha* (non-Jain) regions, have only two *vedas*: *puruṣaved* and *strīved*. They do not have *napusakaved*. There is no heterogeneity of *vedas* in them.

The remaining *sanjī* (conscious) and *prasanji* (partially conscious) five-sensed human and animal beings have all three *vedas*: *strīved*, *puruṣaved*, and *napusakaved*. There is also heterogeneity of *vedas* in them."

"The characteristics of the three *vedas* in due course are as follows:

"One who serves the *puruṣaguṇa* (masculine qualities) in the world, performs *puruṣaguṇa* (masculine qualities) karma, and is the best of the *puruṣa* (masculine) beings, is a *Brahmā* (a celestial being)."

**Footnotes:**

1. *Dhavala* P. 1 P. 141
2. *Śrīmadabhaya Chandra Siddhānta Chakravarti*’s commentary.
3. *Mūlādhāra Paryāpti* chapter 12 P. 340-341.
4. *Mūlāchāra Paryāpti* chapter 12 verse 88 P. 241.
5. This verse is also found in *Dhavala* P. 1 P. 341, P. 6 P. 47, and *Prā. Pa. Sa.* verse 106 P. 23.

Page #380:
---------------------------
346/Go, Ma. Jivakanda
Gatha 274-275

Gatha-artha: The person who experiences mastery in excellent qualities and excellent enjoyments, who performs excellent virtuous deeds in the world, and who is excellent, is a Purusha (superior being).

Vishesha-artha: The one who rests in the most excellent qualities and most excellent enjoyments is a Purusha. Or, the one by whose karmic fruition the soul becomes unaware of the qualities of a sleeping Purusha and does not attain enjoyments, is a Purusha. The one in whom the desire for a woman is found, is a Purusha. The one who performs the best karma is a Purusha.

Shanka: How can the one in whom the desire for a woman is found, perform the best karma?

Samadhan: Yes, because the most excellent one, even though endowed with some capacity, has the desire for a woman, therefore, he performs the best karma. This statement is made by way of Upachara (figurative expression).

Chhadayadi sayam doseshu, ranayado chhadavi param vi dosena.
Chhadanashila jahma, tahma sa vaniya itthi. ||274||
Gatha-artha: The one who covers her own faults and also covers the faults of others, is called a woman due to her nature of covering.

Vishesha-artha: The one who covers her own as well as others' faults is a woman. The Veda that is in the form of a woman is called Striveda. Or, the one who desires a man, is a woman, meaning she is the one who craves for a man. The one who experiences himself as a woman is a Striveda. The Veda in the form of a woman is called Striveda. The one who, through soft speech, sidelong glances, and favorable conduct, brings the man under her control and corrupts him with sinful activities, is a woman. Although some women, such as the mothers of the Tirthankaras, do not possess this characteristic, yet this characteristic is stated considering the majority.

Nevitthi ranesa pumam, raumsho uhalingavidirittha.
Itthavaggisamaranagavedaranagaru procalusachitto. ||275||
Gatha-artha: The one who is neither a woman nor a man, but is devoid of both types of gender, who is afflicted with intense pain like the fire of Avaki, and whose mind is polluted by the constant desire for the sexual union of women and men, is called a Napumsaka (neuter).

Vishesha-artha: The one who is neither a woman nor a man is a Napumsaka. The one whose desire for women and men is...

Page #381:
---------------------------
## Verse 271

Both types of desires are found, it is called impotent. Or, the impotent Veda is the result of the rise of the Veda Nokasha. One who does not have the signs of a man, such as beard, mustache, and penis, and the signs of a woman, such as breasts and vagina, is impotent.

## Verse 276

A being devoid of the three Vedas, like the fire of grass, the fire of Kariesh, and the fire of Ishtapaka (the fire of the house), is devoid of the Veda. Such beings enjoy infinite and supreme happiness born from the soul.

## Explanation

A being who has overcome the suffering (inner burning) caused by the three types of Vedas is devoid of the Veda. A being becomes devoid of the Veda through the attainment of the Praupashmik and Kshayik.

With the rise of the desired Veda, the being ascends the Upshama category, overcomes the Mohaniya karma, and then, in the appropriate places, the desired Veda arises, is stimulated, repelled, enhanced, transferred to the other nature, and remains in the Sthitikandika and Anubhagakandika without the Pudgala Skandhas in the being. This is Upshama. At that time, the being's attainment of the absence of the Veda makes it devoid of the Veda.

With the rise of the desired Veda, the being ascends the Kshapaka category, overcomes the Antarkaran, and then, in the appropriate places, the Pudgala Skandhas related to the desired Veda are completely removed from the being's regions, along with the Sthiti and Anubhag. This is Kshaya. The being's state at that time is the Kshayik state. The being becomes devoid of the Veda through this Kshayik attainment.

## Doubt

How can the effect of the Veda and the attainment related to the effect both arise at the same time, and how can there be a relationship of base and dependent or cause and effect between them?

## Solution

It is possible because the relationship of cause and effect is seen in the shadow and sprout that arise at the same time, and the effect of the Kushul is seen at the time of the pot's creation.

## Objection

Even though the absence of the Bhava Veda may occur due to the destruction of the Dravya Karmas of the three Vedas, because it is logical to assume the absence of the effect due to the cause, how can the effect of the Bhava Veda not occur while the Pudgala Dravya Skandhas related to the three Vedas remain in the Upshama category? This is because there is a contradiction in assuming the effect of the cause in the presence of the cause.

## Solution

There is no contradiction because when medicines whose power has been seen are given to a patient suffering from a primary disease, such as indigestion, the power of those medicines is obstructed by the disease of indigestion, and they are found to be unable to perform their function.

Page #382:
---------------------------
## 348 / Go. Sa. Jivakanda

Although the living being becomes a Shrapagatvedi from the beginning of the Avedbhaga of Nivrittikaran, there is no Trivksha here, but only the Vivksha of the Kevali. Because the infinite, excellent, self-generated happiness is only possible for the Kevali. In the Chhadmastha state, the destruction of the nature of knowledge and perception makes infinite and excellent happiness naturally impossible, but the suffering in the form of the destruction of nature exists.

**Gava 277-278**

**Number of living beings in Vedamata**

**Gathaarth:** The Vyantaras are less in number than the Jyotish Devas. The Tiryanchas are less in number than them. The Purushavedi Tiryanchas are less in number than them. The Sanjee Panchaindriya Tiryanchas are less in number than them. The Sanjee Panchaindriya Tejoleshya living beings are less in number than them. The Sanshi Panchaindriya Padmaleshma living beings are less in number than them. || 277 ||

**Kamearde || 277 ||**

**Vishesharth:** The Panchaindriya Tiryancha Yonin living beings are numerous than the Bhavanvasi Devis. The Vanvyantar Devas are numerous than the Panchaindriya Tiryancha Yonin. The Devis are numerous than the Devas. The Jyotish Devas are numerous than the Vanvyantar Devis. And the Devis are numerous than the Devas. This is known from the Sutra of Khudda Bandha. The Devis are numerous in the number of Devas, and the Tiryancha Yonin living beings are a fraction of the number of Devis.

**3**

**Igipurise Basisan Devi Tajjogbhajidevodhe. Saggalugarene Gunne Purusha Mahila Ya Devesu || 278 ||**

**Gathaarth:** There are thirty-two Devis for one Deva. By dividing the Devaghosh amount by their sum and multiplying by their own multiplier, the number of Devas and Devis is obtained. || 278 ||

**Vishesharth:** If there is one Deva, then there are thirty-two Devis. In this way, by adding one and thirty-two (1 + 32), and dividing the Deva amount by thirty-three, one Khandam is the number of Devas. By subtracting this one Khandam from the Deva Progh amount, the number of Devis is obtained.

"It is also seen that the Devis are thirty-two times more than the Devas."

"The Devis are thirty-two times more than the Devas," this is known from the teachings received from the Acharya Parampara.

1. Shrimandbhayachandra Suri Siddhantachkravarti Krit Tika. 2. Pravachansar Ga. 60 Shri Shramutchandracharya Krit Tika "Khedasyayatnani Ghatikarmani." And Ga. 55 Shri Jayasen Shraacharya Krit Tika - "Yavatansehen Sukshmartham Na Janati Tavatansehen Chitkhedakaranam Bhavati. Khedashcha Duhkham.” 2. V. Pu. 3 P. 493-414. 4. "Devaras Teettimkhandarin Kanegakhandamavadi Devi Pamanam Hodi." [Sha. Pu. 7 P. 281]. 5. "Devahito Devi Batao Ti Vastrasarakhadodos." [Dha. Pu. 3 P. 232].

Page #383:
---------------------------
Vedamargana / 346
There are some more female-sexed beings than the deities. By adding the female-sexed ratio related to tiryañca and human beings to the female-sexed deities, the total female-sexed ratio is obtained.

Gatha 276
The number of male-sexed beings is slightly more than the deities, and the number of female-sexed beings is slightly more than the female deities. By subtracting the male-sexed and female-sexed ratios from the total sexed ratio, the remaining ratio is of the neuter-sexed.

Viseshartha - The number of male-sexed beings is slightly more than the deities.
This is because one part out of the thirty-three parts of the deity category contains the ratio of male-sexed beings among the deities. By adding the male-sexed ratio of the tiryañca and human beings to it, the total ratio of male-sexed beings is obtained. This is why the number of male-sexed beings is said to be slightly more than the deities. Similarly, the number of female-sexed beings is said to be slightly more than the female deities.

The total white night is. By subtracting the innumerable ratio of female-sexed beings from it, the ratio of neuter-sexed beings still remains infinite and endless. This infinite neuter-sexed ratio is greater than the spatial region.

The nigoda category is only of the neuter-sexed, and the nigoda category is infinite and endless. Therefore, the neuter-sexed are also said to be infinite and endless. Or, from the single-sensed to the four-sensed beings, all are pure neuter-sexed.

Shanka - Anthills are seen.
Samadhan - There is no rule that the anthills are formed only in the womb. 

Shanka - The single-sensed beings do not have dravyaveda, then how is the existence of their neuter-sexed veda claimed?
Samadhan - Although the single-sensed beings do not have dravyaveda, as its predominance is not stated in the description of veda, or its attainment is not found in the single-sensed, its absence is not proven. But its proof is established by the omnipresent upalamdha-pramana (omniscience).

Page #384:
---------------------------
## 350/Go. Sa. Jivakanda

**Verse 280-281**

**Doubt:** How can a one-sensed being, who is completely ignorant of the female and male states, have desires related to women and men?

**Solution:** No, because this statement is contradictory to the case of a young man who is completely ignorant of the female state and has grown up within the womb.

The three states of being (male, female, and neuter) occur sequentially, not simultaneously, because "state" is a synonym for "ved". Just as the intended passion (kṣaya) only lasts for a moment, so too, all states do not last for a single moment, because from birth to death, one state is experienced at a time.

The number of beings who have lost their state (apgatavedi) is infinite, according to the principle of substance (dravya).

**Verse 280-281**

**Explanation:** The above statement is made to explain the relative abundance and scarcity of states in the path of liberation (vedamarg). This statement is made in comparison to the five-sensed beings (tiryanch).

1. The neuter beings with a state (sanji napusakavedi) are the least numerous among all beings born in the womb (garbhaj).
2. The male beings with a state (sanji puruṣavedi) are numerous, according to the principle of countable multiplication (sankhyatgurane).
3. The female beings with a state (sanji strivedi) are numerous, according to the principle of countable multiplication (sankhyatgurane).
4. The neuter beings with a state (sanji napusakavedi) who have attained the state of complete liberation (sammuchchhim) are numerous, according to the principle of countable multiplication (sankhyatgurane).
5. The neuter beings with a state (sanji napusakavedi) who have not attained the state of complete liberation (sammuchchhim) are numerous, according to the principle of uncountable multiplication (asankhyatgurane).
6. The female beings with a state (sanji strivedi) and the male beings with a state (sanji puruṣavedi) who are born in the womb (garbhaj) are both equally numerous, according to the principle of uncountable multiplication (asankhyatgurane).

**Special Note:** The above statement is made to explain the relative abundance and scarcity of states in the path of liberation (vedamarg). This statement is made in comparison to the five-sensed beings (tiryanch).

1. Dhavla Purana 1, page 344.
2. Ghanla Purana 1, page 346.
3. Dhavla Purana 7, page 283.
4. Dhavla Purana 7, page 555, "Pachidiyatiriksh jogi esu payadi."

Page #385:
---------------------------
## Translation:

**Page 252**

**Question:** How are the two Vedas similar?

**Answer:**  In the realms of enjoyment (bhogabhumi), only male-female couples are born.  Neither eunuchs (napuṃsaka) nor those in a state of unconsciousness (sammūcchima) or dreamless sleep (asaṃjñī) are possible there, as they are ruled out by the absence of the necessary conditions. Here, the multiplier is an immeasurable (asaṃkhyāta) part of a palya (a unit of time). This is known from the teachings of the Acharya tradition.  For the sake of the counter-rotating (pratikranta) quantities, the division of the universe (jagat) is only a finger-breadth (pratarangula) in proportion to the immeasurable part of a palya. However, here, the division is a countable (saṃkhyāta) finger-breadth.

**Page 351**

**13.** From the realms of enjoyment, eunuchs (napuṃsaka) with consciousness (pra-saṃjñī) are born in a countable (saṃkhyāta) proportion. ||140||  Because the destruction and pacification (kṣayopaśama) of the karma of the nine sense organs (navin-driyāvaraṇa) does not occur in many of the five-sense beings. 

**8.**  Men (puruṣa) without consciousness (asaṃjñī) are born in a countable (saṃkhyāta) proportion. ||141||

**C.** From these, women (strī) with consciousness (saṃjñī) are born in a countable (saṃkhyāta) proportion. ||142||

From the realms of enjoyment to the quantity of women (strī) without consciousness (asaṃjñī), the division of the universe (jagat) is a countable (saṃkhyāta) finger-breadth (pratarangula).

**2**

**10.** From the five-sense beings (tiryanc) (i.e., women (strī) without consciousness (asaṃjñī)), the gods of the first interval (vānavyantara) are born in a countable (saṃkhyāta) proportion. ||40|| The multiplier is a countable (saṃkhyāta) time.

**11.** From the gods of the first interval (vānavyantara), the luminous gods (jyotiṣī) are born in a countable (saṃkhyāta) proportion. ||42|| The multiplier is a countable (saṃkhyāta) time.

According to Makhanu, Vedamārgaṇā (Dhavala 7, pp. 555-558), the first nine categories are as described above. However, the tenth and eleventh categories are as follows:

**(10)** From women (strī) without consciousness (asaṃjñī), eunuchs (napuṃsaka) with consciousness (pra-saṃjñī) in a state of unconsciousness (sammūcchima) are born in a countable (saṃkhyāta) proportion.

**(11)** From eunuchs (napuṃsaka) with consciousness (pra-saṃjñī) in a state of unconsciousness (sammūcchima), eunuchs (napuṃsaka) with consciousness (pra-saṃjñī) in a state of unconsciousness (sammūcchima) with insufficient (aparyāpta) life are born in an immeasurable (asaṃkhyāta) proportion. The multiplier is an immeasurable (asaṃkhyāta) part of the series (āvalī).

...

**ATM**

Thus, the tenth chapter of the Gommatasāra Jīnakāṇḍa, called Vedamārgaṇā, is complete.

**11. Kaṣāyamārgaṇā Chapter**

**The definition of kaṣāya (passion) as established by etymology (nirukti)**

**suhadukkha subahasassan kammavakhettam kasedi jīvassa |
saṃsāradūrame ram te kasā śrotti naṃ benti || 262 || 3**

**Meaning:** Kaṣāya is that which makes the field of karma (kammavakhettam) fertile, producing many fruits like happiness (sukha), suffering (dukkha), etc., and whose boundary in the form of the cycle of existence (saṃsāra) is very far away.

**Special Meaning:** **Question:** Why is the etymology not "kaṣantiti kaṣāyāḥ," meaning "those who bind are kaṣāyas"?

**1.** Dhavala 7, pp. 555-558, sūtras 134-142.

**2.** Dhavala 7, p. 565, sūtras 40 and 42.

**3.** Prā.Paṃ.Saṃ. 23gā. 108 and Pū. 579 mā 100 Dhavala 1, p. 142 gā. 60.

Page #386:
---------------------------
352/Go. Sa. Jivakanda
Verse 283
Solution - Those who bind, are called kshaya. When the word kshaya is derived in this way, any substance that binds will be considered kshaya. Therefore, there may be doubt in understanding the nature of kshaya, therefore, the derivation 'that which binds is kshaya' is not done.
The definition of kshaya as established by etymology (in relation to the root ksh) is - Sammat-Des-Sayal-Charit-Jahkhaadacharanparinaame. Ghaadanti ya kshaya chausoal asankhalogamida ||283||
Verse Meaning - That which destroys the results of right faith, right conduct, complete conduct and conduct as declared, is kshaya, which is of four types, sixteen types or countless types as per the number of beings. ||283||
Special Meaning - Kshaya is in the form of mohaniya karma. Mohaniya karma deludes or reverses the virtues of faith and conduct of the soul. It is of four types in relation to destroying the aforementioned virtues of the soul. The kshaya that binds to the body due to the desire for enjoyment is anantaanubandhi kshaya. The kshaya that destroys one-sided conduct, which is a little renunciation, is apratyakhyanavaran kshaya. The kshaya that destroys complete conduct (mahaavrataroop charitra) is pratyakhyanavaran kshaya. The kshaya that destroys conduct as declared is sanjwalan kshaya. In relation to destroying the four virtues, there are four corresponding types of kshaya.
Padamo san ghai vivio sah ghai aspirasi. Taino sanjamghai chautho jahkhaay ghaiya ||11||
- The first anantaanubandhi kshaya destroys right faith, the second apratyakhyanavaran kshaya destroys desavirat (deshcharitra, desasanayam). The third pratyakhyanavaran kshaya destroys complete restraint (mahaavrat, sakalcharitra) and the fourth sanjwalan kshaya destroys conduct as declared.
Samyaktva hananty anstaanubandhinaste kshayakaa. Apratyakhyanaroopaasch desavatvighatinaah ||25|| Pratyakhyanasvabhaavaah syuh sanayamasya vinaashakaa. Charitre tu yathaakhyate kuyuh sanjwalanaah kshatim ||26||
- The kshayas that destroy right faith are those anantaanubandhi kshayas. The apratyakhyanavaran kshaya is the destroyer of desavat (deshcharitra). The nature of pratyakhyanavaran kshaya is to destroy restraint (mahaavrataroop sakalcharitra). Sanjwalan kshaya destroys conduct as declared.
1. Dhaval Pu. 1 Page 141. 2. Pra. Pa. San. Page 25. 3. Upasakaadhyayan, Kalp 46, Page 331-332.

Page #387:
---------------------------
## Verse 283
The four kṣayās, namely anantānubandhi, pratyākhyāna, pratyākhyāna, and sanjvalana, destroy samyaktva, deśachāritra, sakalachāritra, and yathāsyāt chāritra respectively. Therefore, the names of these kṣayās are also meaningful according to their destructive nature.

## Commentary
**Doubt:** How can the anantānubandhi kṣayā be destructive of samyagdṛṣṭi? It is the nature of chāritramohaniya karma, so it can be destructive of chāritraguṇa. Mithyātva-prakriti is destructive of samyagdṛṣṭi.

**Solution:** Vipṛta-grahiniveśa is mithyātva, and it arises from both mithyātva-prakriti and anantānubandhi kṣayā-prakriti. The rise of sāśādana guṇasthāna is found. Therefore, both types of ignorance (mithyājñāna) are possible there.

**Doubt:** What is sāśādana?

**Solution:** Sāśādana is the negation of samyaktva. One who is endowed with this negation is called sāśādana. One whose samyagdṛṣṭi has been destroyed by the rise of anantānubandhi kṣayā, but who has not attained the results of mithyātva in the form of mithyātva karma, but is still facing mithyātva karma, is called sāśādana.

**Doubt:** Sāśādana is neither samyaktva, nor mithyātva, nor a mixture of both. Therefore, sāśādana guṇasthāna is not possible.

**Solution:** This is not the case, because vipṛta-abhiniveśa, i.e., vipṛta-abhiprāya, remains in sāśādana guṇasthāna, therefore it is considered as asaddṛṣṭi.

**Doubt:** If this is the case, then it should be called mithyādṛṣṭi. It is not appropriate to give it the name sāśādana.

**Solution:** No, because the vipṛta-abhiniveśa arising from the rise of anantānubandhi kṣayā, which restricts samyagdṛṣṭi and chāritra, is found in the second guṇasthāna. Therefore, the mithyādṛṣṭi belonging to the second guṇasthāna is mithyādṛṣṭi. But the vipṛta-abhiniveśa arising from the rise of mithyātva karma is not found, therefore it is not called mithyādṛṣṭi. Only sāśādana is called samyagdṛṣṭi.

**Doubt:** According to this statement, when it is sāśādana guṇasthānavarti praśasti, then why is it not given the name mithyādṛṣṭi?

1. "Mithyātvaṁ nāma vipṛta-abhiniveśaḥ. Sa cha mithyātva-adanantānubandhinścha utpadyate." [Ghaval Pu. 1 p. 361]. 2. Ghaval Pu. 1 p. 163-164.

Page #388:
---------------------------
## 254/Go, Sa, Jivakanda
**Verse 283**

The solution is not that, because the statement of the dual nature of the infinite-bound (anantaanubandhi) natures is proven by the independent manifestation of the Saasadan Gunasthan.

**Doubt:** Is it justifiable to give the name of both (dual) to the infinite-bound right faith (samyaktv) and conduct (charitra) because they are both restrictive?

**Solution:** This accusation is not correct, because it is desirable for us, yet such teaching is not given in the supreme scripture (paramagam) in comparison to the main Nay.

**Question:** What is the reasoning regarding the two types of power of the infinite-bound passions (kashay)?

**Solution:** The manifestation of the Saasadan feeling cannot happen otherwise than by the arising of the infinite-bound passion. From this impossibility of otherwise, the obscuring nature of the infinite-bound is proven. The activity of the infinite-bound in conduct is not fruitless either, because it is opposed by the fruitlessness of the infinite-bound passion, which is the cause of the infinite arising flow of the destructive passions like non-rejection-covering (apratyakhyanavaran) etc.

**Rejection (pratyakhyan) and restraint (samyam) are names with the same meaning. Non-rejection (apratyakhyan) means slight (alpa) rejection (tyag). Slight rejection or restraint-non-restraint or country-conduct (deshacharitra) is called non-rejection. The passion that covers it is the non-rejection-covering passion.**

**Rejection (pratyakhyan) means restraint (samyam), and the passion that covers it is the rejection-covering passion. The passion that burns in the right way is the burning passion (sanjvalan).**

**Doubt:** What is the right understanding (samyakpana) of the burning passion (sanjvalan)?

**Solution:** Burning along with conduct is its right understanding. It is said that this passion arises without destroying conduct.

**Doubt:** How can the burning passion (sanjvalan) that does not destroy conduct become a covering of conduct (charitraavaran)?

**Solution:** No, because the burning passion (sanjvalan) restricts conduct as known by producing impurities in restraint (samyam). Therefore, there is no contradiction in accepting the burning passion (sanjvalan) as a covering of conduct (charitraavaran).

**The passion is of four types due to the difference between the infinite-bound (anantaanubandhi), non-rejection-covering (apratyakhyanavaran), rejection-covering (pratyakhyanavaran), and burning (sanjvalan). From these four, the passion is of 16 types by differentiating anger, pride, deceit, and greed in each. For example, infinite-bound anger-pride-deceit-greed, non-rejection-covering anger-pride-deceit-greed, rejection-covering anger-pride-deceit-greed, burning anger, burning pride, burning deceit, burning greed. All four burning passions are the same as the non-rejection-covering and rejection-covering passions.**

**1. Gaval Pu. 1. Pg. 165 2. Atral Pu. 6 Pg. 42.43 3. Dhavan Pu. 6 Pg. 43.44 4. Dhaval Pu. 6 Pg. 44 5. Dhaval Pu. 6 Pg. 44**

Page #389:
---------------------------
## Verse 283
## Kashayamargna/355

The word "sanjwalan" (inflamed) is used with each of the passions (kṣayās) to indicate that there is no simultaneous absence of their binding and arising.

**Doubt:** How are there countless lokpramanas?

**Solution:** There are countless lokpramanas due to the variations in the characteristics of the places of arising (udayasthanas). Because there are many variations in arising, such as intense, more intense, mild, less mild, etc., there are countless lokpramanas of the karmaprakritis that are conducive to the defilement of conduct (charitramohaniya).

**Doubt:** What is anger (krodha)?

**Solution:** Anger, wrath (kopa), rage (rosha), etc., are all forms of anger. It is also said:

"Koho ya kova roso ya akkhama sanjwalana kalah badhi ya.
Jhanjha bosa vivavo basa koheyadhiya hoti." ||1||

- Anger, wrath, rage, intolerance (akṣamā), inflamed, strife (kalha), increase (vṛddhi), agitation (jhanjha), hatred (dvesha), and dispute (vivāda) - these ten are synonyms for anger. Anger, wrath, and rage are easily understood because they are derived from the roots ṛdh, kup, bhir, and ruṣ. The absence of the form of forgiveness (kṣamā) is intolerance. Its other name is resentment (amarṣa). That which burns well is inflamed (sanjwalan), because:

"Anger is fire due to the burning of black bile."

The meaning of strife is known (pratiita). Due to anger, sin (pāpa), disgrace (ayaśa), strife, and enmity (vair) all increase, therefore anger is called increase, because anger is the root of all evil. The name agitation (jhanjha) is given to the intense agitation (sanvlesha) form. Because it is the cause, anger-passion (krodha-kṣayā) is also called agitation. The meaning of hatred is dislike (apriti). Its implication is internal pollution (āntarik kalushta). The name dispute (vivāda) is given to opposing speech (viruddhavāda). Competition (spardhā) and conflict (sangharsha) are its other names. Thus, these ten are synonyms for anger.

**Doubt:** What is pride (māna)?

**Solution:** "Māna, arrogance (mada), conceit (darpa), stiffness (stambha), excellence (utkarṣa), preeminence (prakarṣa), eminence (samutkarṣa), self-excellence (ātmokarṣa), contempt (paribhava), and scorn (usikta) - these ten characteristics are of pride. To consider oneself superior (big) due to caste, etc., is pride. To become intoxicated like a person who has consumed alcohol due to the same caste, etc., is arrogance. To have conceit due to the arrogance that has grown is conceit. Just as a person becomes unsteady in a state of collapse,

Page #390:
---------------------------
3.56/Mo. Sa. Jivakanda
Verse 283

"Stambha" is when one speaks in a way that is different from what they actually mean, due to pride arising from delusion. Similarly, "utkarsh," "prakarash," and "samutkarsh" are all synonyms for "maan" (pride), as they all indicate arrogance. "Pratmoskarsh" is the name for one's own sense of superiority. It is the belief that "I am superior in terms of caste, etc., and no one else is superior to me." "Paribhava" is to belittle or disrespect another. "Urisakta" is the feeling of arrogance that arises from one's own sense of superiority and the belittling of others. These are the ten synonyms for "maan."

"Maya, satiyog, nikriti, vanchana, anujuta, grahan, manojnamargna, kakk, kuhak, grihan, and chhanna" are the eleven synonyms for "maya" (deceit). "Maya" is the use of deception. "Satiyog" is deceitful behavior. "Nikriti" is the intention to cheat. "Vanshchana" is a confused mind. "Anujuta" is the deceitfulness of yoga. "Grahan" is to take advantage of another's good intentions and then betray them. It is the act of secretly whispering a hidden mantra with the intention of inner deceit. "Manojnamargna" is the intention to gain something desirable from another through false humility and other means. "Kalk" is hypocrisy. "Kuhak" is to deceive people through false mantras, tantras, and teachings. "Grihan" is to hide one's inner evil intentions. "Chhanna" is to use deception. "Prati-sanhdan" and "vishrambha-dhat" are also synonyms for "chhanna."

"Kama, raga, nidana, chanda, sut, prey, dosha, sneha, anurag, pasha, ichchha, mul, griddhi, sashta, prarthana, lalasa, aviriti, trushna, vidya, and jihva" are the twenty synonyms for "lobha" (greed). "Kama" is the desire for a beloved woman, husband, or children, etc. "Raga" is the attachment to a desirable object. "Nidana" is the intention to achieve something in future lives. It is the belief that "How will I achieve such wealth and enjoyment in future lives?" and the intention to achieve it. "Chanda" is the determination of the mind to repeatedly enjoy a desirable object. "Sut" is the polluted water of desire for various objects.

Page #391:
---------------------------
##  Verse 253
## Kayamargna/357

**To covet is called greed, like the thread of a loom.**  **The feeling of "mine" is called "self-love."**  **That is, the attachment to "mine" is called self-love.**  **What is like a beloved is called "preya."**  **The fault called "preya" is "preya-dosha."**

**Shankha:** How can it be a fault if it is "preya" (beloved), since there is a prohibition against the two being one?

**Solution:** No, even if it is "preya" (beloved) only in terms of the desire to acquire, it becomes a fault because it is the cause of the increase of the world:

**— Affection is the attachment of the mind to a desired object.**  **Similarly, one should explain "anuraga" (attachment).**  **The desire for something that does not exist is called "praasha" (greed).**  **Or, that which makes the soul thin is called "praasha" (greed).**  **The desire for external and internal possessions is called "ichchha" (desire).**  **An intense craving for possessions is called "muchchha" (fainting).**  **Extreme thirst for acquired and unacquired possessions is called "guddi" (greed).**  **That which remains with "praasha" (greed) is called "maas" (greed), and the feeling of "maas" is called "shaasta" (greed).**  **Or, that which is eternal is called "shaashvata" (eternal).**  **This is also a name for greed.**  **Because it remains forever before and after the acquisition of possessions, greed is called "shaashvata" (eternal).**  **"Prashta" means to desire, to request.**  **That is, to desire wealth is called "prashta."**  **"Lalsa" and "guddi" are synonyms.**  **"Viraman" is "virati" (non-attachment).**  **That which does not have "virati" is called "avirati" (attachment).**  **"Avirati" is the result of non-restraint, because all forms of "avirati" (attachment) related to violence are caused by the "kashya" (passion) of greed.**  **The thirst for objects is called "trishna" (thirst).**  **"Vidya" (knowledge) is derived from "loba" (greed), because its origin is dependent on "vedana" (feeling).**  **Therefore, greed is also called "vidya" (knowledge).**  **Greed increases through greed.**  **Thus, greed is called "vidya" (knowledge) because it is like "vidya" (knowledge).**  **Just as the pursuit of "vidya" (knowledge) is difficult, so too is the sustenance of greed difficult, because it is achieved through the enjoyment of pleasures.**  **Therefore, greed is called "vidya" (knowledge) in nature.**  **"Jihva" (tongue) is a synonym for greed, because it takes refuge in the similarity of "asantosh" (dissatisfaction).**

**Anger is a fault, because anger causes suffering in the body.**  **The body trembles, the complexion deteriorates, darkness descends before the eyes, the ears become deaf, words cannot be uttered, memory is lost, etc.**  **In anger, a person kills his father, mother, and other beings.**  **Anger is the cause of all evil.**

**Pride is a fault, because it arises after anger and is the cause of all the faults mentioned in relation to anger.**  **Maya is "pajj" (attachment), because its sustenance is a beloved object.**  **Maya is practiced for the sake of obtaining a beloved object for oneself.**  **It produces satisfaction in the mind after its manifestation.**  **That is, a person feels happy when Maya is successful.**  **Greed is "pajj" (attachment), because it is the cause of happiness.**

**1. Janyabal Pu. 12 p. 186-160. 2. J.D. Pu. 12 p. 160-162. "Kamo raganidane par suta preyadopanamanah. Snehanuraga mama, mujananaguddisamjnaasch. ||4|| Saashta praarthana trishna. Nalsa virati tatha. Vidya jinchha cha lobasya paryayah vishati smritaah ||5||" (Jayadhabal p. 162). 3. Jayaghaval Pu. 1 p. 365.366.**

Page #392:
---------------------------
358/Go. Sa. Jivakanda
Verse 284
Doubt-Are anger, pride, delusion and greed these four vices because they are themselves the cause of the object or because they are the cause of the inflow?
Solution-It is right to say so, but here only the question is raised as to which of these is the cause of happiness and which is not the cause of happiness, therefore it is not a vice. Or, vice is found in love. Therefore, delusion and greed are preya (pejj).
In terms of conduct, anger is a vice, pride is a vice, delusion is a vice and greed is preya.
Doubt-It is right to say that anger and pride are vices, but it is not right to call delusion a vice, because vice is not seen in delusion?
Solution-No, because in delusion also the cause of disbelief and the cause of being condemned by the world is seen. That which is condemned by the world cannot be pleasant, because condemnation always gives rise to sorrow. Greed is preya, because by the milk saved by greed, life is spent happily.
In terms of words, anger is a vice, pride is a vice, delusion is a vice, greed is a vice, but greed is somehow preya.
"From the treasury, destruction of the enemy, from pride, humility is obtained. From deceit, betrayal of trust, greed is the destroyer of all virtues." ||146||' Anger destroys joy, pride destroys humility, deceit destroys trust. Greed destroys all virtues.
Anger, pride and delusion do not give the living being satisfaction and supreme bliss. Greed is somehow preya, because from greed for the means of obtaining the object of the treasure, heaven and liberation are seen, and greed for other objects is not preya, because from it sin is seen to arise.
Doubt-Is dharma also not preya?
Solution-It is not right to say so, because if dharma and adharma, which are the causes of happiness and sorrow, are not considered to be preya and vice, then the effect of dharma and adharma is also obtained.
In terms of power, the four passions of anger, etc. are like dust, water, fire and wind. They are the causes of the destruction of the body. ||284||
1. Jayaghat Pu. 1 p. 366. 2. Jayadhaval Pu. 1 p. 367-368. 3. Jayadhaval Gu. 1 p. 366. 4. Jayadhaval p. 1 p. 366-670.

Page #393:
---------------------------
Gacha 264-287
Kayamargaraga/356
The person who is attached to the worldly things is a ṇiyabheegṇu. He is the cause of the birth in the ṇārayatiriyan, rāmaragai, and other realms. ||28||
The one who is attached to the worldly things is like the root of the bamboo, the horn of the ram, the cow's urine, and the sickle. He is the cause of the birth in the ṇārayatiriyan, rāmaragai, and other realms. ||286||
The one who is attached to the worldly things is like the iron, the worm, the dust, and the turmeric. He is the cause of the birth in the ṇārayatiriyan, rāmaragai, and other realms. ||287||
Gāthārtha-Anger is of four types: like the line of a stone, like the line of the earth, like the line of the hair, and like the line of water. These four types of anger are the cause of birth in hell, animal realm, human realm, and heaven respectively. ||284||
Pride is also of four types: like a stone, like a bone, like a wood, and like a bamboo. These are also the cause of birth in hell, animal realm, human realm, and heaven respectively. ||285||
Deception is also of four types: like the root of the bamboo, like the horn of the ram, like the cow's urine, and like the sickle. This deception is also the cause of birth in hell, animal realm, human realm, and heaven respectively. ||286||
Greed is also of four types: like the worm, like the dust, like the turmeric, and like the iron. This is also the cause of birth in hell, animal realm, human realm, and heaven respectively. ||287||
Viśeṣārtha-Śrī Bhagavān Gurugadhar Bhaṭṭārak has mentioned this topic in the chapter called Chatusthān of the Kaṣāyapāhuḍ. The verses are as follows:
Gaga-puḍhavi-dhālu godayaraīsariso caugyihō kōhō. Selaghaṇ-aṭṭhi-dārum-ladāsamāṇō hadi māraṇō ||2|| Vasajiṇhagasarīsī mēh bisāṇasarīsī ya gomutti. Avalehaṇī samāraṇā māyā ci caunviha bhariṇavā ||3|| Kimirāgarattasamogo akkhamalasamo ye paṃsulekasamo.
Hāliddawatthasamogo lōbhovi cavihō bhariṇavō ||4||
Anger is of four types: like the mountain, like the earth, like the sand, and like the water. Pride is also of four types: like the stone, like the bone, like the wood, and like the creeper. Deception is also of four types: like the root of the bamboo, like the horn of the ram, like the cow's urine, and like the writing instrument. Greed is also of four types: like the worm, like the dust, like the turmeric, and like the iron. ||2.4||
These four verses mention the four types of each of the four passions, including anger, with examples. Among them, the word 'ṇagarāīsariso' refers to the anger that is like the stone of the mountain.
1. Dhaval Pu. 1 P. 350 Gā. 174.177, Prā.Paṃ.Sa.Pū. 24 Gā. 111-114; Varmaprakṛti Granth (Jñānapīṭh) P. 121 B 122 Gā. 57-60. 2. Jayśraval Pu. 12 P. 152 V 155.

Page #394:
---------------------------
## 360 / Go. Ma. Jeevakanda
## Gatha 284-287

This example is given to illustrate the unchanging nature of *sadharmya* (similarity) throughout time. Just as a mountain, once split by a rock, does not reunite through any other means, remaining in its state, similarly, the *krodha parinam* (result of anger) arising in any being, in any particular man, does not subside through any other means, remaining without resistance in that very existence and carrying the resulting *sanskar* (impression) into future births. This intense *krodha parinam* is likened to a line etched in stone.

Similarly, *krodha* is like a line in the earth, but it is milder than the previous one, because even after existing for a long time, it can be reunited through other means. For example, in the summer, the earth splits due to the loss of its moisture, becoming fragmented. But during the rainy season, the flow of water fills the cracks, restoring it to its original state. Similarly, the *krodha parinam* that exists for a long time but subsides through other causes, like the teachings of a guru, is like the intense fragmentation of the earth, resembling a line. Here, in both instances, the word "rai" signifies the separation of the constituent elements, a synonym for fragmentation.

When it is said "like a pile of dust," one should understand *krodha* as a line formed in the middle of a pile of sand on the bank of a river. It lasts for a shorter period, as seen in this example. Just as a line formed in the middle of a pile of sand on the bank of a river, due to human activity or any other cause, is quickly restored to its original state by other causes like the impact of wind, similarly, the *krodha parinam*, arising mildly, is quickly pacified by the wind of the guru's teachings.

Similarly, one should understand *krodha* as resembling a line in water. However, it is milder and lasts for a shorter period. Because a line formed in water is seen to disappear without any other means at that very moment. Here, in both instances, the word "rai" is a synonym for a line.

Similarly, one should understand the four states of *mana* (mind). This particularity is explained by understanding "sel" as a rock. This example is given in relation to the state of extreme rigidity. Similarly, one should understand the meaning of *mana* and *vshaya* (object of sense) as being like bone, wood, and creeper.

The four states of *maya* (illusion) are explained through examples. The first *maya* is like the twisted root of a bamboo, with its knots. This example is given based on the impossibility of straightening it. Just as the knots of a bamboo root cannot be straightened even after being destroyed and worn out, similarly, the *maya parinam* resulting from extreme crookedness is irreversible. The second state of *maya* is like the horn of a ram. It is milder than the previous *maya*, because even though it is formed by extreme curvature, the horn of a ram can be straightened by other means like fire.

Page #395:
---------------------------
## Verse 288-287
**Kapayama Ganga/361**

It is possible to do so. However, one should speak in relation to the intensity of the loss of merit, in the order of Maya, similar to cow urine and a file or a hoe. Here, the word "file" should be taken to mean a piece of wood used to clean teeth (datun or jibi).

The first stage of greed is **Krimiraag Lobhastan**. Krimiraag is a specific type of insect. It regularly excretes a very sticky thread of the same color as the food it consumes, from its waste disposal opening. With that thread, weavers create many valuable multi-colored fabrics. Even though that color is washed with the continuous flow of a thousand pots, washed with various types of alkaline water, it is not possible to remove that color even slightly, because it is a reflected form. Even when burned by fire, the color of that fabric, which is attached to the Krimiraag, never fades, and remains the same. Similarly, the **Atitiiv Lobha Parinam** located in the heart of a being, which cannot be diminished, is said to be similar to the color of Krimiraag.

The second greed is **Nikrishta Veeryavala** and **Teeravasta Parinat**. It is similar to **Akshamal**. The wood that holds the wheel of a chariot or the axle of a cart is called **Praksh**, and its waste is **Akshamal**. That is, the sticky waste of the axle grease. Due to its extreme stickiness, it is not possible to easily remove the Akshamal. Similarly, this greed, being of a dense nature, is deeply rooted in the heart of a being. Therefore, it is not possible to remove it.

The third stage of greed is similar to **Dhuli Lep**. Just as the dust coating on a surface is easily removed by washing with water, and does not stay for long, similarly, this type of greed, which is of a gradually diminishing nature, does not stay for long. It is infinitely weaker than the previous greed, and can be removed with a little effort in a short time.

The fourth, weaker stage of greed is said to be like **Haridravastra**. A cloth dyed with turmeric is called **Haridra**. Just as the color of a cloth dyed with turmeric does not last long, and fades away due to air, sunlight, etc., similarly, this type of greed, being of the weakest nature, does not stay in the soul for long. It disappears in a moment. Thus, greed is said to be of four types, divided by the intensity and weakness of its stages, which are **Prakarsh** and **Aprakarsh**.

**Alpabadhatva** is like this: the **Avivhaagpratiched** of the **Jghanya Vargana** are infinitely more numerous than the **Avivhaagpratiched** of the **Jghanya Vargana** like a tree. The **Avivhaagpratiched** of the second **Vargana** like a vine are infinitely more numerous than the **Avivhaagpratiched** of the second **Vargana** like a tree. Thus, the **Avivhaagpratiched** of the **Utkrisht Vargana** like a vine are infinitely more numerous than the **Avivhaagpratiched** of the **Utkrisht Vargana** like a tree.

3. Jayashwal Pu. 12 p. 156.
1. Jayadhaval Pu. 12 p. 155. 2. Jayadhaval Pu. 12 p. 156. 4. Jayashraval Pu. 12 p. 156-157. 5. Jayadhaval Pu. 12 p. 157.

Page #396:
---------------------------
362/Go. Sa. Jivakanda
Verses 204-287
Section: Anantgane. This place should be taken until it is obtained. In this way, according to the arrangement of the successive sections, this order is determined that all the sections like a vine are Anantgune from the undivided sections of all the sections like wood. Similarly, the sections like wood are Anantgune from the sections like Arith. From that, the sections like rock are Anantgune.
_ The last state of a being who binds the forty whips of passions like the ocean, has all kinds of atoms, both country-destroying and all-destroying, taking the characteristics of one-place, two-place, three-place, and four-place. And they are also possible without distinction in the parallel inferior state after the obstacle. The one-place section is also obtained in the excellent state, and the four-place section is also obtained in the inferior state, because in all the special states, their four places are found without distinction.
The beginning one-part section, except for the section like wood, is Sarvaavaran (all-destroying) and the rest are all Anantbahubhag and excellent sections. The section like vine before that and the first Anantva part section of wood are Deshaavaran. The section like bone and rock from the section like wood onwards is Sarvaavaran (all-destroying). This order should be known in the four places of Maya, Lobh, and Krodh, without any difference.
A being who is Asaji, feeling the two-place section, binds the two-place section according to the rule, because there is no possibility of change in them. A being who is Sanjni Panchendriya (in the category), feeling the one-place section, binds only the one-place section according to the rule, not the other sections. Feeling the two-place section, he binds the two-place, three-place, and four-place sections. Feeling the three-place section, he binds the two-place and four-place sections. And feeling the four-place section, he binds the four-place section according to the rule. He is the manager of the remaining places.
The meaning of the four places of Krodhkashya, like Nag, Prithvi, etc., which has been done with an example, has been done by taking the support of the similarity of the subject. The meaning of the twelve places of the remaining passions has been done with an example from the main point of view of the feeling. The feeling of Mana is stillness. The feeling of Maya is crookedness without a partner. The feeling of Lobh is the feeling of unrest caused by dissatisfaction.
A being who is in the category of Jitra, who bears the feeling that happens until the end of the moment and feels Krodh, feels Krodh like the Udakraji, because like the Udakraji, his
1. Jayaghaval Pu. 12 p. 162-163. 2. Jayaghaval Pu. 12 p. 158. 3. Jayadhaval Pu. 12 p. 164. 4. Jayadhaval Pu. 12 p. 165. 5. Jayadhaval Pu. 12 p. 171. 6. Jayadhaval Pu. 12 p. 179-180.

Page #397:
---------------------------
##  Verse 28

**Kapaayamaanana/363**

**Merging is seen at the same time without abiding for a long time. This does not destroy restraint, because it is of a dull section, but it is an obstacle to the extreme purity (extreme purity) of restraint, because its form of negligence, etc., is engaged in generating impurities.**

The one who experiences the pain of anger within half a month, violating the ultimate moment of the great time, experiences anger like a line of sand, according to the rule, because anger like a line of sand is seen to abide within half a month, violating the ultimate moment of the result. This has been said by observing the state of the polluted result, which has passed through the form of a wound arising from the rise of passion, for that much time. Otherwise, it contradicts the sutra that states the ultimate moment of the time of the state of anger usage. This anger result, experienced in the form of a distinction, destroys restraint and establishes the being in the assembly of non-restraint.

The being who experiences the pain of anger within six months, after spending half a month according to the rule, is like a line of earth, because the subtle impression arising from it is seen to abide within six months, like a line of earth. This is the third type of anger. Here too, the passion result remains in the form of a wound for only six months. Otherwise, it contradicts the sutra. This anger result, experienced in the form of a distinction, destroys restraint and establishes the being in right conduct.

Anger arising towards someone, becoming intense, residing in the heart, and again being established, counted, and seen through countless kalpas, attains the highest intensity, because there is no contradiction in the form of the impression arising from it abiding for that much time. This type of anger result is like a line of mountains. Because, like a mountain breaking through a rock, it does not become established again through countless kalpas. This anger result, experienced in the form of pain, destroys right conduct (right faith) and establishes it in the state of wrong conduct. This is the fourth type of anger, the most intense section.

Although the characteristics of water-like, dust-like, earth-like, and mountain-like anger, and the characteristics of burning, rejection-covering, non-rejection-covering, and endless-following anger, are similar to each other, there is a difference between water-like, etc., anger and burning, etc., anger. The earth-like, like a rock, of the non-conscious, does not have bondage and arising, but the endless-following and non-rejection-covering have bondage and arising. In the absence of the arising of non-rejection-covering, there is no bondage of non-rejection-covering, but in the absence of the arising of earth-like (three-located), there is bondage of earth-like (three-located). In the first time of birth in the hells, etc., the rule of the arising of anger, etc., is more than the abundance.

**Gariyatirikhgarasuragaiisu uppannapadhamkalanhhi. Koho maya marano lohabano arinayamo vaapi. ||28||**

1. Jayadhaval Pu. 12 p. 10.
2. Jayadhaval Pu. 12 p. 122.
3. Jayadhaval Pu. 12 p. 181.
4. Jayadhaval Pu. 1 p. 181-12.

Page #398:
---------------------------
364) Go. Sa. Jivakanda
Gatha meaning - In the first time of being born in hell, animal, human and divine realms, Maya, pride and greed arise. Or there is no such rule. || 268 ||
Gatha 286
From effort, anger,
Special meaning - In the first time of being born in hell, the anger kshaya arises. In the first time of being born as a human, the rule of the pride kshaya arising is seen. In the first time of being born as an animal, the rule of the Maya kshaya arising is seen. In the first time of being born as a god, the greed kshaya arises. This is the traditional teaching of the acharyas. 'In the first time of being born in hell, human, animal and divine realms, anger, pride, Maya and greed arise respectively.
Doubt - In the first time of being born as a god, do the other kshayas not arise except greed?
Solution - This would be correct if the same meaning was intended here. But in the context, the author of the Churnisutra means that there is no such rule in the first time of being born as a god. In general, all kshayas do not arise there. In the first time of being born as a god, all kshayas are possible.
Doubt - In the Jivasthan or other texts, it is said that the time of death is less than the time of the kshayas arising in the beings who have experienced the kshayas. Why is this not accepted here?
Solution - No, because according to the meaning of the Churnisutra, it is not possible to accept that kind of time.
According to Shri Bhootbali Acharya, the rule of greed etc. kshayas arising is seen in the first time of being born in the divine realm etc. But according to Shri Yativrishabhacharya's Churnisutra, there is no such rule. As is clear from the above statements of Ghavla and Jayadhavla.
This gatha has been created according to Shri Bhootbali's statement, but in the gatha, the words 'Ashiyamowa' also indicate the opinion of Shri Yativrishabhacharya. Thus, there are two different opinions of two great acharyas. It cannot be said which of these two is correct, because the influence of Shrutakeli is present at present.
Kshayarahit Jiva
Shrapyaparo bhayabadharbandhasanjamarin mil - kohadi. Jaisi gatthi kshaya amala akasharano jiva ||26||*
1. Shraval Pu. 1 p. 445.
4. Jayadhavla
2. Traval Pu. 7. 161. 2. Jayadhavla Pu. 7 p. 225 Shu. 13 Sh. 15. 5. This gatha is also in Ghavla Pu. 1 p. 351, and Pra. Pan. Sangrah Pu. 25 Ga. 116.

Page #399:
---------------------------
## Verse 260-264

**Verse 260**
Those beings who are free from the **kṣayās** (passions) like anger, which cause hindrance, bondage, and non-restraint to oneself, others, and both, and who are free from external and internal impurities, are **akṣayī** (non-passionate). ||26||

**Explanation:**
The **kṣayās** like anger are the cause of karmic bondage for oneself, and they also cause bondage to others by generating **kṣayās** in them. Or, the **kṣayās** like anger, arising in oneself, and causing the generation of **kṣayās** in others, bind both oneself and others. Similarly, the one who is passionate is himself unhappy, causes unhappiness to others, or is a **kṣayā** that causes hindrance to both oneself and others. In the grip of **kṣayās**, both sensory restraint and restraint of the body are lost. Those beings who are free from these **kṣayās** like anger are **akṣayī** (non-passionate). These beings are free from the three karmic impurities: **dravya-karma** (matter-karma), **bhāva-karma** (mental-karma), and **noka-karma** (verbal-karma), according to the Siddhas. Or, those who are free from **bhāva-karma** (mental-karma) are **amala** (pure), according to the eleventh and subsequent **guṇasthāna** (stages of spiritual development).

**Doubt:**
Which beings residing in which **guṇasthāna** (stages of spiritual development) are passionate?

**Resolution:**
Beings in the four **guṇasthāna** (stages of spiritual development) of **upaśānta-kṣayavītarāga** (calm-passionless), **chhadma-sthā** (hidden), **kṣīṇa-kṣayavītarāga** (diminished-passionless), **sthā** (stable), **sayoga-kevalī** (liberated by knowledge), and **prayoga-kevalī** (liberated by practice) are free from **kṣayās**.

**Doubt:**
How can the **upaśānta-kṣayā** (calm-passionless) **guṇasthāna** (stage of spiritual development) be considered free from **kṣayās**? Because the presence of **dravya-kṣayā** (matter-passion) in the form of infinite atoms makes it impossible for it to be free from **kṣayās**.

**Resolution:**
No, because the absence of the arising of **kṣayās** makes it free from **kṣayās**.

**Verse 261**
There are thirty-four types of **kṣayās** according to their location, such as **sthāna-kṣayā** (location-passion), **koha-kṣayā** (anger-passion), etc., in relation to **śakti** (power) or **āyu-bandha** (life-bondage). There are four types of **kṣayās** according to the **sattīla** (life-span) and **sāmrājya-bandha** (kingdom-bondage) and **bandha-gati-bheda** (bondage-path-difference).

**Verse 262**
They are **śilā-śela** (stone-rock), **veṇu-mūṣika** (bamboo-rat), **mirāyā** (illusion), and **ādī** (beginning) in order. There are four types of **kṣayās** according to **koha** (anger) etc.

**Verse 263**
**Koha** (anger) etc. are six in number in the earth. **Sukkottiya** (dry-heat) is in dust, water, and dry things.

**Verse 264**
**Śela** (rock) is in **kiṇha** (black), **suśāṁ** (white), **khira** (milk), and **ya** (which) is in **bhūga-ega-biṭṭhāla** (earth-fire-air). **Riya** (desire) is in **igibiti-nāū** (fire-water-air) and **tiṭṭhāna** (place) is in four. **Dhūli-gachcha-ṭṭhāra** (dust-going-support) is in four, **ura-ūti-gada-uga** (chest-breath-going-coming) is above. **Paśca-duṭṭhāna** (back-place) is in **deva** (god), **deva** (god), **suṣṇa** (dry), and **tiḍvāṇa** (lightning).

Page #400:
---------------------------
366/Go. Ma. Jeevakanda
Verses 260-265: Empty in the dust-like state, empty in the water-like state, countless are the divisions of the beings!
Fourteen, twenty, and countless are the people in these states. ||265|| Verse Meaning - There are four divisions in terms of the power of the four kṣayās (passions), fourteen divisions in terms of the leśyās (shades), and twenty divisions in terms of the ādhubandha (bondage). ||260|| The four divisions in terms of the power of the kṣayās are: śilā-bheda (stone-like division), paulastambha (pillar-like division), bānsa-mūla (bamboo-root division), and kṛmi-rāga (worm-like attachment). ||261|| In the śilā-bheda, there is only one leśyā, the kṛṣṇa leśyā. In the pṛthivī-bheda (earth-like division), there are six leśyās, from kṛṣṇa to śukla. In the dhūli-bheda (dust-like division), there are six leśyās, from kṛṣṇa to śukla. In the jala-bheda (water-like division), there is only one leśyā, the śukla leśyā. ||262|| In the paulastambha, there is no bondage in the kṛṣṇa leśyā, and only narakāyu (hell-bound) bondage in the pṛthivī-bheda. In the next three divisions, there is one prāyu (life-span), two prāyus, and three prāyus, respectively. In the remaining four, five, and six leśyā divisions, there is bondage for all four prāyus. ||263|| In the dhūli-bheda, there is bondage for four prāyus in the six leśyā divisions, three prāyus in the five leśyā divisions, two prāyus in the four leśyā divisions, one deva-prāyu (heavenly life-span) in the five leśyā and four leśyā divisions, deva-prāyu in the three leśyā divisions, and none in the two leśyā and one leśyā divisions. ||264|| In the two leśyā and one leśyā divisions, there is no bondage. In the jala-bheda, there is no bondage in the one leśyā division. Thus, there are four, fourteen, and twenty divisions, each with countless divisions of beings. ||265||
Special Meaning - First, one should divide the kṣayās into four divisions based on their power. For example, the four divisions of krodha (anger) are: śilā-bheda, pṛthivī-bheda, dhūli-bheda, and jala-bheda. The four divisions of māna (pride) are: śailasthambha (mountain-like pillar), asthisthambha (bone-like pillar), kāṣṭha-sthambha (wood-like pillar), and bēnta-sthambha (bamboo-like pillar). The four divisions of māyā (deceit) are: bāsa-mūla-vṛtta (bamboo-root-like curve), meḍha-śṛnga-vṛtta (ram's horn-like curve), gomūtra-vṛtta (cow's urine-like curve), and khurpa-vṛtta (hoe-like curve). The four divisions of lobha (greed) are: kṛmi-rāga, cakra-mala (wheel-like dirt), śarīra-mala (body-dirt), and haridra-raṅga (turmeric-like color). Then, one should divide these four divisions based on the leśyās. In the śilā-bheda, there is only one leśyā, the kṛṣṇa leśyā, so there is only one division. In the pṛthivī-bheda, there are six leśyās, so there are six divisions: 1. kṛṣṇa leśyā, 2. kṛṣṇa and nīla leśyā, 3. kṛṣṇa, nīla, and kāpota leśyā, 4. kṛṣṇa, nīla, kāpota, and pīta leśyā, 5. kṛṣṇa, nīla, kāpota, pīta, and padma leśyā, 6. kṛṣṇa, nīla, kāpota, pīta, padma, and śukla leśyā. These six divisions are based on the leśyās in the pṛthivī-bheda. Similarly, one should know the divisions based on the leśyās in the dhūli-bheda: six leśyās, five leśyās, four leśyās, three leśyās, two leśyās, and one leśyā. In the jala-bheda, there is only one leśyā, the śukla leśyā. Thus, the total number of divisions based on the leśyās is: 1 for śilā-bheda, 6 for pṛthivī-bheda, 6 for dhūli-bheda, and 1 for jala-bheda (1+6+6+1 = 14).
In terms of ādhubandha, there are two divisions in the śilā-bheda: one for prāyu and one for narakāyu. In the pṛthivī-bheda, there are a total of eight divisions: 1. kṛṣṇa leśyā narakāyu, 2. kṛṣṇa and nīla leśyā narakāyu, 3. kṛṣṇa, nīla, and kāpota leśyā (one narakāyu, two narakāyus, and three narakāyus), 4. kṛṣṇa, nīla, kāpota, and pīta leśyā (four prāyus), 5. kṛṣṇa, nīla, kāpota, pīta, and padma leśyā (four prāyus), 6. kṛṣṇa, nīla, kāpota, pīta, padma, and śukla leśyā (four prāyus). Thus, there are eight divisions of āyu-bandha in the six leśyā divisions of the pṛthivī-bheda.

Page #401:
---------------------------
## Gatha 260-265
## Kayamaganga/ 367

There are six places of *prayubandha* in *dhuni-bhed* as follows:

1. In the six mixed *leshya* places, there is one place of *bandha* for all four *ayu* (lifetimes), two places of *bandha* for the three *ayu* of hell, human and god, and one place of *bandha* for the two *ayu* of human and god. This makes a total of three places of *prayubandha*.
2. In the place of five mixed *leshya* without *krishna*, there is one place of *bandha* for *vayu*.
3. In the place of four mixed *leshya* without *krishna* and *nila*, there is one place of *bandha* for *devayu*.
4. In the place of three mixed *leshya* of *pita* etc., there is one place of *bandha* for *devayu* and another place of *bandha*. This makes a total of two places.
5. In the mixed *leshya* of *padma* and *shukla*, there is one place of *bandha*.
6. In the *shukla* *leshya*, there is one place of *bandha*.

Thus, in the six *leshya* places of *dhuni-bhed*, there are six places of *prayubandha* (3-1-1+2+1+1). In the one *leshya* place of *jala-bhed*, there is one place of *prayubandha*. In the fourteen *leshya* places of four *shakti-bhed*, there are twenty places of *ayu-bandha* (2+8+1+1). This matter becomes clear by simply looking at the table given later.

From these *gatha* and the statements of *Dhaval* *purva* 16, pages 466-467, it appears that there are some parts in the six *leshya* that are common to all six *leshya*. Otherwise, it would not be possible to have one place of six *leshya* in *prithvi* and *dhuni-bhed*, and that place would also be suitable for all four *prayubandha*.

The following is the comparison of the *jghanya* (inferior) and *utkrista* (superior) *san-kram* (transition) and *prati-graha* (reception) of the three *mandata* (dullness):

* The *jghanya* *leshya-sthana* of *nila-leshya* is *stoka* (small). The place of *nila-leshya* where *prati-graharan* (reception) takes place from *krishna-leshya* is *anant-guna* (infinitely greater) than the *jghanya* *prati-graha* place of *nila-leshya*.
* The *jghanya* *san-kram* place of *krishna* and the *jghanya* *prati-graha* place of *krishna* are both *shurusha* (small) and *pas* (near). The *jghanya* *san-kram* place of *nila* is *anant-guna* (infinitely greater). The *jghanya* *prati-graha* place of *krishna* is *anant-guna* (infinitely greater). The *utkrista* *prati-graha* place of *nila* is *anant-guna* (infinitely greater). The *utkrista* *san-kram* place of *krishna* is *anant-guna* (infinitely greater). The *utkrista* *san-kram* place of *nila* and the *utkrista* *nila-sthana* are both *tuly* (equal) and *anant-guna* (infinitely greater). The *utkrista* *prati-graha* place of *krishna* is *anant-guna* (infinitely greater). The *utkrista* *krishna-leshya-sthana* is *anant-guna* (infinitely greater).

From this *alpa-bahutva* (smallness), it becomes clear that some middle parts of *krishna-leshya* and *nila-leshya* are mutually similar. Similarly, the statements of *alpa-bahutva* of the *san-kram* and *prati-graha* places of *nila-leshya* and *kapota-leshya* prove that some middle parts of *nila* and *kapota-leshya* are one. Similarly, the statements of *alpa-bahutva* of the *san-kram* and *prati-graha* places of *kapota* and *tejo-leshya*, *tejo-leshya* and *pala-leshya*, *pala-leshya* and *shukla-leshya* prove that some middle parts of the *leshya* above and below are mutually similar. Therefore, the following *alpa-bahutva* has been said:

* The *jghanya* place of *kapota* is combined with the most *manda* (dull) section. The *jghanya* place of *nila-leshya* is *anant-guna* (infinitely greater) than that. The *jghanya* place of *krishna-leshya* is *anant-guna* (infinitely greater) than that. The *jghanya* place of *tejo-leshya* is *anant-guna* (infinitely greater) than that. The *jghanya* place of *padma-leshya* is *anant-guna* (infinitely greater) than that. The *jghanya* place of *shukla-leshya* is *anant-guna* (infinitely greater) than that.
* The *utkrista* place of *kapota* is *anant-guna* (infinitely greater). The *utkrista* place of *nila* is *anant-guna* (infinitely greater). The *utkrista* place of *krishna* is *anant-guna* (infinitely greater). The *utkrista* place of *tejo* is *anant-guna* (infinitely greater). The *utkrista* place of *padma* is *anant-guna* (infinitely greater). The *utkrista* place of *shukla* is *anant-guna* (infinitely greater).

1. *Prabal* *purva* 16, page 498.
2. *Dhaval* *

Page #402:
---------------------------
Table regarding the power-place (Shakti Sthan), color-place (Leshya Sthan) and life-bond-place (Prayubandhabandha Sthan)
[Verse 260-265]
Power Place
Color Place 14
Life-bond-place 20
0 Prabandha
Shilabheda Samaan
1 Krishna Leshya
1 Narakayu
1 Krishna
2 Krishna, Neel
3 Krishnaadi Teen Leshya
Prithvibheda Samaan
4 Krishnaadi Char Leshya 5 Krishnaadi Panch Leshya 6 Krishnaadi Chhah Leshya
1 Narakayu 1 Narakayu 1 Narakayu 2 Narak Tiryanch Ayu 3 Narak Tiryanch Manusya Ayu 4 Sarva Prayu 4 Sarva Prayu 4 Sarva Prayu 4 Mee Ayu 3 Manusya Dev Tiryanch Ayu 2 Manusya Deva Ayu 1 Deva Ayu 1 Deva Ayu 1 Deva Ayu
6 Krishnaadi Chhah Leshya
Dhulirekha Samaan
5 Krishna Bina Panch Leshya 4 Krishna, Neel Bina Char Leshya
3 Peetaadi Teen Leshya
0 Prabandha
2 Padma aur Shukla Do Leshya
0 Abandha
1 Shukla Leshya
0 Prabandha
Jalarekha Samaan
1. Shukla Leshya
0 Prabandha

Page #403:
---------------------------
## Gatha 269-297
## Kashayamargna/366

How can a living being in the Shanka, Shukla, and Leshya states, surpassing the Padma, Teja, Kapota, and Neel Leshyas, simultaneously become Krishna Leshya?

**Solution:** When the Dev-Prathu with a medium Shukla Leshya becomes weak, it does not transform into a Jghanya Shukla Leshya, but merges into the three auspicious Leshyas.

Although this is not explicitly stated in these transmissions, it can be concluded from these cases that some medium aspects of the Draha Leshyas are mutually similar.

No Acharya has mentioned this topic, therefore it is not acceptable, but it is worth considering. This topic is written here for consideration only.

In Kashayamargna, the number of living beings is **Puhu Puhu Kashayakalo Rinraye Antomuhuttaparimaryo. Lohadi Sankhuguno Devesu Ya Kohapuhuvido.** ||26|| **Samvasamasega Vahivasagagasagaraasi Pugosavi Sangurinide. Sagasagaguranagarehi Ya Sagasagarasiranparimanam.** ||26||

**Meaning:** In Narakas, the time of each Kashaya is Antarmuhurta, but the time of Lobha and other Kashayas is progressively multiplied in number compared to the previous ones. Similarly, in Devas, the time of Krodha and other Kashayas is progressively multiplied in number compared to the previous ones. By dividing the sum of the time of the rise of all Kashayas by the respective speed of the living beings, the result obtained is multiplied by the time of the rise of the desired Kashaya related to its own speed, which gives the measure of the living beings related to that particular Kashaya. ||296.267||

**Visheshary:** The time of Krodha Kashaya, the time of Mana Kashaya, the time of Maya Kashaya, and the time of Lobha Kashaya are both Jghanya and Utkrishta Antarmuhurta. In Naraka Gati, the time of Lobha is the least, the time of Maya is multiplied in number from that, the time of Mana is multiplied in number from that, and the time of Krodha is multiplied in number from that. Similarly, it should be known in Deva Gati, with the special feature that the time of Lobha is multiplied in number. This should be known in reverse order until this place is reached. This is explained as follows:

In Naraka Gati, the order is Shodha, Mana, and then Krodha. From this order,

- -.. 1. Dhaval Pu. 8 Pr. 322. 2. See also the commentary on Gatha 469-526. 3. Go. Ji. (Calcutta Edition) Shastrakar Pr. 632 and 634 mentions in the commentaries that these Gathas are by Maghavchandra Vidyadhev. 4. Koshadha Manadgha Mayadha Loiya Jahaniyaamro Vi Unkassiano Vi Tomuhutan. J.D. Pu. 12 Pr. 15]. 5. J.D. Pu. 12 Pr. 16.

Page #404:
---------------------------
## 370/ Go. Ma. Jeevakanda
## Gatha 266-297

After thousands of transformations, there is one transformation of Maya. Since the beings in hell are full of vices, they have an abundance of anger and pride. Thus, with repeated transformations, the number of Maya transformations also becomes thousands. Then, according to the Visarsh Paripati, there is one transformation related to greed. Each transformation of Maya is inseparable from thousands of transformations of anger and pride. Thus, after thousands of transformations of Maya, there is one transformation of greed.

**Doubt:** Why does this happen?

**Solution:** In the hellish realm, which is full of extreme sins, the transformation of greed, which is the object of desire, is extremely rare. This sequence continues until the final moment of their destined state. Its illustration is as follows: In a hellish realm, in a life span of a countable number of years or in a life span of an uncountable number of years, after thousands of transformations of anger and pride like 1100, 2200, etc., there is one transformation of Maya, with anger overcoming pride in the final instance. Its illustration is 3210. Even then, following the same method, after thousands of transformations of anger and pride, there is one transformation of Maya, with anger overcoming pride in the final instance. Its illustration is 3210. Even then, following the same method, after thousands of transformations of Maya, the subsequent Paripati is that there is one transformation of greed, with anger overcoming pride and Maya. Its illustration is 3201. Even then, following the same method, after thousands of transformations of Maya, there is one transformation of greed, with anger overcoming pride and Maya. Its illustration is 3201. Even then, following the same method, after thousands of transformations of Maya, there is one transformation of greed. Its illustration is 3201. Thus, one should know this until the final moment of the lifespan obtained. Here, the total number of transformations of anger, pride, Maya, and greed are: anger 27, pride 18, Maya 6, greed 3.

The scarcity of these transformations is as follows:

According to this explanation, in a hellish realm, in a life span of a countable number of years or in a life span of an uncountable number of years, the transformations of greed are the rarest. Because transformations of greed are extremely rare in hell. The transformations of Maya are thousands of times more than the transformations of greed, because for every transformation of greed, there are thousands of transformations of Maya. The transformations of pride are thousands of times more than the transformations of Maya, because for every transformation of Maya, there are thousands of transformations of pride. The transformations of anger are even more numerous than the transformations of pride. The proof of this is their countable number. The transformations of pride are significantly more than the transformations of greed and Maya.

1. "Girima gaiye koho marano kohi mano ti var-sahasarin pariyattidugna sai maya parivasadi!" [J.V. Pu. 12. p. 64]. 2. [J.D. Pu. 12 p. 35]. 3. [J.D. Pu. 12 p. 36].

Page #405:
---------------------------
## Gatha 226
## Kayamargaga/371

**Meaning:** The changes in the *mana* *kṣaya* are obtained by adding the changes in *lobha* and *māyā* to the changes in *krodha*. According to the numerical calculation, the changes in *lobha* are 3, the changes in *māyā* are 6, and the changes in *mana* are 18. Adding these three (18 + 3 + 6) gives 27 changes in *krodha*.

In the *devagati*, *lobha* and *māyā* are repeated a thousand times, and then there is a transformation into *mana*. Because *lobha* and *māyā* are seen to be abundant in the *preya* state, after obtaining a thousand changes in *lobha* and *māyā*, it transforms into *lobha* and then transcends *māyā* in the *māyā* state, becoming *mana* once. This process is repeated, and the changes in *mana* also become a thousand. Then, another type of change occurs. When there are a thousand changes in *mana*, there is one change in *krodha*. Each change in *mana* *kṣaya* is the result of a thousand changes in *lobha* and *māyā*. In this way, when there are a thousand changes in *mana* *kṣaya*, there is one change in *krodha*. Because in the *devagati*, the *krodha* result is not usually produced. This cycle of change continues until the end of the lifespan obtained.

In the numerical calculation, the changes in *lobha* *kṣaya* are 27, the changes in *māyā* are 18, the changes in *mana* are 6, and the changes in *krodha* are 33.

In the *devagati*, the changes in *krodha* *kṣaya* are few. The changes in *mana* *kṣaya* are a multiple of them. The changes in *māyā* *kṣaya* are a multiple of those. The changes in *lobha* *kṣaya* are significantly more. The proof of this is the numerical proportion, which is equal to the changes in *krodha* and *mana*. By adding the time related to *kṣaya* in the *devagati*, dividing the *deva* population by it, and then dividing the resulting quotient into four parts, and multiplying them by the time of *krodha* etc. in the order of the *paripati*, their respective amounts are obtained. The same should be understood for the *nārakas*.

In humans and animals, the number of beings with *kṣaya* is obtained by the method of *raṇaratiriya* *loha* *māyā* *koho* *mārano* *vidyādiviya*.

**Gatha 18:**
**Meaning:** Just as the number of beings with two senses etc. has been obtained, in the same way, the number of humans and animals with *lobha*, *māyā*, *krodha*, and *mana* should be obtained in the order of the countless parts of the *pāvali*. Alternatively, the number of beings with the aforementioned *kṣaya* should be calculated by taking into account their respective time.

**Special Meaning:** The time of *mana* is the least. The time of *krodha* is significantly more than that. The time of *māyā* is significantly more than that. The time of *lobha* is significantly more than that. The flowing...

Page #406:
---------------------------
372/Go. Sa. Jivakanda
Verse 266
(Shree Nag Hasti) According to the teachings, there is a specific inter-moment of time for the karmas. The inter-moment is of many types - counted by the number of Avali, counted by the fraction of Avali, and counted by the fraction of Avali. Here, the inter-moment of time for the karmas is counted by the fraction of Avali, because the tradition of the ancient teachers is found in that way. In this way, it has been said that there is a difference in the predominance of the Tiryanch and human paths due to the Ogh, because the time of the karma is not the least in other paths besides humans and Tiryanchs.
From the Ogh, due to greed, delusion, anger, and pride, there are countless changes. Once, the change of greed karma is more. In this way, after countless changes related to greed, the change related to delusion is more than the change related to greed. In this way, after countless changes related to delusion, the change related to anger is more than the change related to pride. This is the explanation from the Ogh. Even in that, there is no difference between the Tiryanch path and the human path in the explanation from the Ogh and the explanation from the region. Therefore, it has been said that it should be understood in the same way in the Tiryanch path and the human path.
The time of the karma is not the same for humans and Tiryanchs who have all four karmas, because the time of the four karmas is not the same. The time of pride is the least in Tiryanchs and humans. The time of anger is significantly more than the time of pride. It is significantly more than the fraction of Avali. The time of greed is significantly more than the time of delusion. It is significantly more than the fraction of Avali. In this way, when the time of the karmas is forgotten, those who have the same exit and entry and are situated like the flow of the Ganges River in relation to their offspring, cannot be similar to those quantities situated there. By adding the time of the four karmas and dividing it by the quantity of each of the four karmas, the obtained result is multiplied by four, and then multiplied by the time of the karmas of pride, etc., in order, to obtain the quantities of each.
In this way, the eleventh chapter named "Kshaya Margarnana" in the Gommatanaar Jivakanda is complete.
12. Gyan Margarnana Adhikar
The general characteristic of knowledge, as established by etymology
Jagae Tikalvisae Bavvagune Pajjae Ya Bahubhede |
Pacchavakham Cha Parovavam Shranena Ganeeti Nam Benti ||266||
Meaning of the verse - That by which the object of liberation, its qualities, and its many differences, along with the qualities of the object of liberation, are known, is called knowledge.
1. J. Gh. Pu. 12 Pr. 17-18. 2. Kshaya Pahutt p. 566-570 Sutra 107 110 13. Dhaval Pu. 3 p. 425. 4. This verse is in Dhaval Pu. 1, verse no. 61, p. 144, and Pra. Pan. San. Pu. 25 Ma. 117 and Pr. 571. 106.

Page #407:
---------------------------
##  Gāghā 296
## Jñānamārga-raṇā/373

Many types of knowledge are known directly and indirectly, that is called knowledge. ||266!!

**Special Meaning:** Knowledge that illuminates the essence (true form and meaning).

**Doubt:** How can knowledge of doubt and false vision illuminate the essence?

**Solution:** This is not the case, because there is similarity in the knowledge of right vision and false vision.

**Doubt:** If there is similarity in the knowledge of both, then how can the false vision being ignorant?

**Solution:** Knowledge with false vision is called ignorance because it does not perform the function of knowledge. Just as a son who does not perform the duties of a son is called a non-son.

**Doubt:** What is the function of knowledge?

**Solution:** The function of knowledge is to have interest in the truth, certainty, faith, and to uphold conduct. This function is not found in the false vision being, therefore their knowledge is called ignorance.

**Explanation:** To express desire is interest. To decide the nature is certainty. Not to deviate from the decision is faith. Or, the fruit is of two types - direct fruit and traditional fruit. The cessation of knowledge related to the object is the direct fruit of knowledge. Abandonment of undesirable or harmful objects after knowing is called abandonment. Acceptance of desirable or beneficial objects after knowing is called acceptance. In the state of being free from attachment, after knowing the object, the intellect of desirable and undesirable does not arise, but a neutral feeling of indifference arises, this is called indifference.

**Explanation:** He who knows is knowledge, i.e. concretely used knowledge, or the knowledge-obscuring karma from which the soul knows, knew, or will know, the result of the soul arising from the partial destruction of the knowledge-obscuring karma or the complete destruction of the knowledge-obscuring karma is called knowledge. The name of karma-doer is form, the use that remains with that type is called concrete. Karma separate from evidence is called form. That is, the object that appears different from oneself in evidence is called form.

**Explanation:** Substance is beginningless and infinite. From the perspective of substance, there is neither destruction of substance nor any new substance.

Page #408:
---------------------------
374/Go. Sa. Jyotirkanda
Gatha 266

Because it is produced, therefore, the substance is called trikala-varti in the Gatha. There are many types of substances, their qualities and their synonyms by which they are known, that is knowledge. There are two types of substances: jiva and ajeeva. Ajiva substance is of five types: pudgala, dharma-dravya, adharma-dravya, akash dravya, and kal dravya. Knowledge, darshan, sukha, and veerya, etc. are the qualities of jiva dravya. Sparsha, rasa, gandha, varna, etc. are the qualities of pudgala dravya. Samsari, mukt, or sthavar, etc. are the synonyms of jiva dravya. Mana and skandha, etc. are the synonyms of pudgala dravya.

That knowledge is of two types: direct and indirect. Direct - which is called akshya, which is dependent on the soul, that is the main direct knowledge. 'Akshya' means soul, from it 'para' (other) which is the knowledge obtained by the senses, that is indirect.

The knowledge which is infinite, pure, and has an eternal relationship with the universal consciousness, which is called akshya, which is dependent on the soul, which does not require the help of senses, light, etc., which is infinite because of its infinite power, such direct knowledge knows all the knowables, no knowable is outside that knowledge. Thus, five characteristics of direct knowledge have been given. That is, the characteristics of direct knowledge have been explained.

"Jan paravo vishnanam tan tu parokham ti bhanivamatthesu.
Javi kevalena ranavam hadi hi jivena panchavam." ||5|| - The knowledge which is related to the knowable object, which is due to the help of others, that knowledge is indirect, and the knowledge which knows only (without the help of senses, etc.) by the soul, that is direct knowledge.

Or, the detailed knowledge is called direct. The appearance which is free from the obstruction of other knowledge and which is special is called vaishdy. The knowledge which is not detailed is indirect.

The knowledge which is without help is called kevalgyan. Or, kevalgyan is without the need of any helper like senses, etc., besides the soul and the object, therefore, it is also called keval, that is, without help. "The destruction of karma, etc., the senses of touch, taste, smell, sight, hearing, and mind, and the help of light, etc., without the need of kevalgyan knows the knowables, therefore, it is without help, but it depends on the knowables because kevalgyan is the proof of knowables (Pravachansar Gatha 23) and without knowables, knowledge cannot be produced. Therefore, it depends on the help of the object (knowables).

1. "Prakshyamatmanam pratyashrit pratyakshamiti mukhya pratyaksha." [Pramayaratnamala p. 43] 2. "Akshya pratma tasmat paravrittam paroksham. Athava pararindriyadibhikshyate sinchyate abhivait iti paroksham." [Pramayaratnamala p. 43]. 3. Pravachansar Matha 54 Shri Amrit Chandraavaryakrit Teeka. Pravachansar. 5. Vishdam pratyaksha ||1|| Pratotyant rabyavghanean visheshvattaya va pratibhasan vaishyam. ||2/4 p. mu. || Parokshamitarat. ||3/1. || Parikshamukha). 6. "Kevalamashay" [Jayadhaval pu. 1 p. 21] | "Pratmarthavyatirikt sahayanirapekshatvadva keval mashayam." Jayabaval 1423]". 8. "Sanam ayashpamaasa muththi." [Pravachansar Gatha 21]. 6. "Neyen vina kahm ganam." (Swamikartikayanrupreksha Gatha 247]

Page #409:
---------------------------
## Gatha 300-301
**Jnanamaargna/375**

_There are five types of knowledge: Matijnana, Shrutajnana, Avadhijnana, Manahparyayajnana, and Kevalajnana. Of these, the first four are Kshayopaśamik and Kevalajnana is Kshayik. ||30|| The first three, which are appropriate knowledge, become ignorance when Mithyatva and Anantanubandhi arise. However, there is a special feature that Vibhangajnana occurs only with the five senses and their objects. ||301||_

**Gathaarth:** Knowledge is of five types: Matijnana, Shrutajnana, Avadhijnana, Manahparyayajnana, and Kevalajnana. Of these, the first four are Kshayopaśamik and Kevalajnana is Kshayik. ||300|| The first three, which are appropriate knowledge, become ignorance when Mithyatva and Anantanubandhi arise. However, there is a special feature that Vibhangajnana occurs only with the five senses and their objects. ||301||

**Vishesharth:** Knowledge is of eight types: Matijnana, Shrutajnana, Avadhijnana, Manahparyayajnana, Kevalajnana, Matijnana, Shrutakujan, and Vibhangajnana. Of these, the first five are Samyagjnana and the last three are Mithyagjnana.

**Shankha:** When we say ignorance, does it mean the absence of knowledge? If there is no knowledge, then it implies the absence of the Jiva, because knowledge is the characteristic of the Jiva. If we don't consider the absence of knowledge when we say ignorance, then it leads to the absence of the result of negation.

**Samadhan:** The first objection is not applicable in the present context, because the purpose here is not just the negation of absence. The second objection also doesn't hold, because the negation of knowledge by the word "ignorance" here is achieved by the effect of self-other discrimination in all substances located in the immediate vicinity of the soul, excluding the soul itself. The knowledge of substances that is devoid of self-other discrimination is called ignorance here.

**Shankha:** Then why shouldn't we negate the knowledge of Samyagdristi, because there is no difference between Mithyashtijnana and Samyagdristijnana in terms of the nature of affirmation and negation?

**Samadhan:** Here, the negation is not of the nature of the substance in general, but of the feeling of otherness in other substances, which would negate Samyagdristijnana. However, the knowledge that arises due to the power of Mithyatva and Anantanubandhi, which creates opposite faith in the known object, is ignorance where the Jiva does not develop faith in the known object, because it does not yield the fruit of knowledge.

1. "Mati, Shruta, Avadhi, Manahparyaya, these are the powers of knowledge." [Tattvarthsutra 1/6].
2. "Mati, Shruta, Avadhi, these are the causes of Viparyaya." [T.M. 1/31].
3. Brihad Dravyasangraha Gatha 5.
4. Ghavan Pu. 7, page 84-85.

Page #410:
---------------------------
## 376 / Go. Sa. Jiva Kanda
**Verse 300-301**

**Doubt:** Is there true knowledge and faith in things like doubt-pots, cloths, pillars, etc., for those with false views?

**Solution:** No, because even in their knowledge, there is indecision, meaning lack of conviction. This is not well-known, because there is an absence of certainty like "this is how it is." Alternatively, a deluded being, in relation to the true direction, even while having faith based on the knowledge of the four sense objects - color, smell, taste, and touch - is still considered ignorant, because their faith is influenced by their true knowledge. Similarly, even while having faith in true knowledge in things like pillars, etc., a being is considered ignorant because their faith is influenced by the words of the Jina.

**Verse 45**

**Doubt:** How can the attainment of knowledge-destruction be considered the attainment of knowledge-destruction for a knowledge-possessor?

**Solution:** Because, due to the rise of the country-betraying competitors of the knowledge-obscuring karma, the being attains the state of knowledge-possessor.

**Doubt:** If ignorance arises from the rise of country-betraying competitors, then wouldn't it be appropriate to consider knowledge-possession as a rising state?

**Solution:** No, because there is the influence of the rise of all-betraying competitors.

**Doubt:** Then what is knowledge-destruction in ignorance?

**Solution:** Where, even with the presence of obscuration, a part of the obscured knowledge is found to be rising, that state is called knowledge-destruction. This does not contradict considering ignorance as a knowledge-destruction state. Alternatively, the destruction of knowledge is called destruction. The cessation of that destruction is partial destruction. Thus, the term knowledge-destruction can be considered for partial destruction. The knowledge or ignorance that arises due to such knowledge-destruction is the attainment of knowledge-destruction.

Similarly, knowledge of perception, knowledge of differentiation, knowledge of perception, knowledge of scripture, knowledge of clairvoyance, and knowledge of mind-perception should also be called knowledge-destruction states. The only difference is that in all these knowledges, the attainment of knowledge-destruction occurs due to the rise of country-betraying competitors of their respective obscurations.

**Doubt:** Why are there not seven obscurations for these seven knowledges?

**Solution:** There are not, because apart from the five knowledges, no other knowledge is found. But this does not negate the influence of knowledge of perception, knowledge of scripture, and knowledge of differentiation, because they are included in knowledge of perception, knowledge of scripture, and knowledge of clairvoyance respectively.

**1. Ghawala Pu. 7 p. 86. 2. Grovas Miya LBA. [Bachala Pu. 7 p. 56]. 3. Dhavala Pu. 7 p. 87**

Page #411:
---------------------------
-
-
Head 301
Knowledge Path/377
Doubt  First, the rise and fall of all-destroying competitors in the sensory path and the yoga path, the pacification of those same competitors, and the rise of country-destroying competitors were used to describe the state of pacification of the karmas. But here, the rise and fall of all-destroying competitors and their pacification are both denied, and only the rise of country-destroying competitors is said to be the cause of the pacification of karmas. Why is there no contradiction in this?
Solution - There is no contradiction, because if it is desirable to believe that the pacification of karmas is caused by the rise of country-destroying competitors along with the rise and fall of all-destroying competitors, then the pacification of karmas of the sense of touch, body yoga, and intellectual knowledge and scriptural knowledge will not be obtained; because the all-destroying competitors of the coverings of the sense of touch, the obstacle of semen, intellectual knowledge, and scriptural knowledge have an effect at all times. That is, the rise of the all-destroying competitors of the said coverings never happens. There is no contradiction in this either, because in the sensory path and the yoga path, that description was given to explain the order of explanation of other teachers. What is regularly produced by something is its function, and that other thing is the cause that produces it. But the rise and fall of all-destroying competitors, like the rise of country-destroying competitors, are not the producers of their respective knowledge according to the rule, because at the time of the final destruction of the subtle karmas, the destruction of the all-destroying competitors of the knowledge coverings of clairvoyance and mental perception is not found to produce clairvoyance and mental perception.
How does a being with perfect knowledge become a being with perfect knowledge? Perfect knowledge is not karmic either, because karma refers to an effect, and it is contradictory to consider an effect as a cause.
Solution - A being becomes a being with perfect knowledge through the acquisition of perfect knowledge. The destruction of the covering of perfect knowledge is insignificant, meaning it is merely the absence of something, so it should not be understood that it is incapable of performing any action, because it is contradictory to consider the living being's substance, which is devoid of the bondage, pacification, and rise of the covering of perfect knowledge, and which is endowed with infinite power, detachment, right conduct, and vision, etc., as insignificant. Considering something as the absence of something is not contradictory, because the essence and the effect are found to embrace each other completely through their own essence. There is no contradiction in what is found, because the subject of contradiction is non-attainment, and therefore, where there is attainment of something, it is contradictory to believe that contradiction exists. 5
Doubt - Why is it said that false knowledge also arises from the rise of the infinite attachments? The mere external appearance of falsehood was sufficient, because the rise of falsehood itself leads to opposite attachment.
Solution - In the seventh stage of the qualities, false knowledge (cognition) occurs even though falsehood does not arise. To explain this, the rise of infinite attachments is also a cause of ignorance. Opposite attachment is called falsehood, and it is caused by both falsehood and infinite attachments.
1. Dhavala Pu. 7 86-7. 2. Dhavala Pu. 7 p. 88. 3. "Kevalaraganiinam katham bhavadhi ||46|| Na khaiyam pi, khano ranam prabhavo tamas karanattavihado." [Dhavala Pu. 7 p. 88 480]. 4. "Khadyaae lagieae ||47||" and commentary [Dhavala Pu. 7 p. 60-61].

Page #412:
---------------------------
## 375/Go, Sa. Jivakanda
**Verse 302**

It is born. In the Sasadan Gunasthan, the world of infinite power is found, therefore both prajnan are present here.

**Question:** In the one-sensed beings, due to the absence of the auditory sense, knowledge of sound cannot be obtained, therefore Shrutaprajnan cannot be present?

**Answer:** This is not a singular case, that only the knowledge of objects arising from sound is called Shrutaprajnan. The knowledge of the gendered being from the form, etc., gender is also Shrutaprajnan; for example, the tendency towards benefit and avoidance of harm is seen in the plant-bodied beings.

The cause of mixed knowledge and the master of manas-paryaya knowledge is mixed with the mixed, in the other way, it is only in the state of being.

With special restraint, the mind-protection armor is strong. ||302||

**Verse Meaning:** Due to the rise of the mixed nature of Samyagmithyatva, there are three mixed knowledge, which are a mixture of three ignorance and three knowledge. Those who have special restraint, they have manas-paryaya knowledge. ||302||

**Special Meaning:** Due to the rise of the mixed (Samyagmithyatva) nature of the darshanamohaniya karma, Samyagmithyatva-drishti becomes the third Gunasthan. In that Samyagmithyatva-drishti Gunasthan, the three knowledge (mati, shruta, avadhi) are mixed with the three prajnan (matya-jnan, shruta-jnan, vibhang-jnan). Matya-jnan is mixed with matya-jnan, shruta-jnan is mixed with shruta-jnan, avadhi-jnan is mixed with vibhang-jnan. In other words, all three knowledge are mixed with ignorance. 3

**Question:** The knowledge obtained through the understanding connected with true faith is called knowledge, and the understanding connected with false faith is ignorance. In such a situation, the mixture of knowledge and ignorance residing on the basis of different beings cannot be formed?

**Answer:** It is true to say this, because it is desirable, but this meaning should not be taken here in the Samyagmithyatva Gunasthan, because the Samyagmithyatva nature cannot be mithyatva, because it does not have the power to produce opposite attachment in Samyagmithyatva, which has the power to become infinite-gunee, and it is not the form of Samyaktva nature, because the true faith association of Samyagmithyatva, which is more powerful than the infinite-gunee Samyaktva nature, is in contradiction. Therefore, due to being of different types, Samyagmithyatva is only the producer of different types of results. Therefore, the knowledge mixed with the results produced by the rise of Samyagmithyatva cannot obtain the name 'Samyag-jnan', because true faith is not found in that knowledge. It cannot be called ignorance either, because it does not have contact with false faith. Therefore, that knowledge 1. Dhwala Pu. 1 Sutra 116's commentary. 2. Dhwala Pu. 1 Sutra 116's commentary. 3. "Mammamichchaittthi-hane tinni vinapani annanana missani. Minibhohiya madiprapanena missayam, suvanara sud-pranagoga missayam sohimagnam vibhangnanane missayam. Tinni vi garaparige prananeea missaran va idi ||11|| [Shravala Pu. 1 p. 363]".

Page #413:
---------------------------
## Gatha 303-304
**Knowledge Path/376**

Just like the transformation of right and wrong knowledge, the state of being of a different species is attained. Therefore, even though it is one, it is called mixed.

Knowledge is the understanding that arises from the object that is perceived as it is. Ignorance is the understanding that arises from the object that is perceived as it is, but is tainted by defects. Knowledge of a different species is the knowledge that arises from the cause of a different species. This is called mixed knowledge.

Mind-perception knowledge ranges from being deluded and associated with the senses to being subtle, free from passions, and devoid of attachment. This is because the masters of mind-perception knowledge are restrained.

**Doubt:** Why don't the beings in the lower stages of the qualities, such as those who wander the land, have mind-perception knowledge?

**Solution:** They don't, because it is contradictory to believe that mind-perception knowledge arises with restraint, without restraint, and with unrestraint.

**Doubt:** If restraint is the cause of the arising of mind-perception knowledge, then why don't all restrained beings have mind-perception knowledge?

**Solution:** If only restraint were the cause of the arising of mind-perception knowledge, then this would be the case. But there are other causes for the arising of mind-perception knowledge, and because those other causes are not present, mind-perception knowledge does not arise in all restrained beings. Therefore, the Gatha says, "It is accompanied by a specific restraint."

**Doubt:** What are those other specific causes?

**Solution:** Other causes are specific types of substance, specific regions, and specific times, without which mind-perception knowledge does not arise in all restrained beings.

The author himself will specifically discuss the distinctions of mind-perception knowledge, etc., in Gatha 435 to 459.

**Characteristics of the Three Types of Knowledge**

"Just as you describe the body, the cage, the fetters, and the bonds, so too is the knowledge that arises from the other, the knowledge that arises from the other, the knowledge that arises from the other." (303)

"Just as the Bharata Ramayana is, so too is the knowledge that arises from the other, the knowledge that arises from the other, the knowledge that arises from the other." (304)

1. Dhavla Pu. 1 Sutra 116 Commentary p. 363-364.
2. Dhavla Pu. 1 Sutra 116 Commentary p. 364.
3. "Mranapjjavashani Pamattamanjan-pahudhi Jan Khilkasay-bidarag Chudumtya Ti. || 121 ||" [Dhavla Pu. 1 p. 366]
4. Dhavla Pu. 1 Sutra 121 Commentary p. 366-367.
5. Babal Pu. 1 p. 358 Ma. 176; Pra. Pan. Sangrah Pu. 25 Ga. 118 and p. 576 Ga. 107.
6. Dhavla Pu. 1 p. 358 Ga. 180 Pra. Pan. San. Pu. 26 Ga. 116 and p. 576 Ma. 105.

Page #414:
---------------------------
##  Chapter 380,  Jiva Kanda,  Verses 305-306

**Verse 305:**  "The seed of karma, which is the knowledge of poison, traps, deceit, cages, and bonds, without any moral instruction, is called *Matyajnan* by the wise."

**Verse 306:** "The knowledge of objects, both with and without the senses, which is direct and regular, is called *Abhinibodhik Jnan*. It has four aspects: *Avagraha*, *Iha*, *Avaya*, and *Dharana*."

**Explanation of Verse 305:**  *Matyajnan* is the knowledge of things that cause harm to living beings, such as poison, traps, deceit, cages, and bonds, without any moral instruction.  For example, if someone creates a trap to catch animals without any concern for their well-being, that is *Matyajnan*.

**Explanation of Verse 306:** *Abhinibodhik Jnan* is the knowledge of objects that is direct and regular. It is gained through the senses and the mind.  The four aspects of *Abhinibodhik Jnan* are:

* **Avagraha:**  The initial perception of an object.
* **Iha:**  The desire for the object.
* **Avaya:**  The attachment to the object.
* **Dharana:**  The holding onto the object.

Page #415:
---------------------------
##  Verse 306
##  Jnanamanganga/381

Knowledge is that which is *abhinibodhik*. The existence of matter in the field that is perceivable by the senses is called *abhimukh*. The sense of touch is regular in touch; it is not regular in taste, smell, color, and sound. That is, the object of the sense of touch is *sparshaniya*. Similarly, the object of the sense of taste is *rasaniya*. The object of the sense of smell is *gandha* which is fixed. The object of the sense of sight is *varna* and *prakar* etc. which are fixed. The object of the sense of hearing is *shabda* which is fixed. Each sense knows only its fixed object which is situated (abhimukh) in its own field.

*Abhimukh* and *niyamit* are understood as *abhinibodha*. Gross, present, and uninterrupted, i.e., without obstruction, meaning is *abhimukh*. Or, the name *abhimukh* is given to the meaning that is perceivable by the senses and the mind. In the sense of sight, form is regular, in the sense of hearing, sound, in the sense of smell, smell, in the sense of taste, taste, in the sense of touch, touch, and in the mind (mind), seen, held, and experienced objects are regular. Or, because their tendency is not elsewhere, it is their rule.

Knowledge of form arises only through meaning, sense, light, and use. Knowledge of taste, smell, sound, and touch arises only through meaning, sense, and use. Knowledge of the mind arises through seen, heard, and experienced meaning and the mind. This is the rule here. The knowledge that arises in such *abhimukh* and *niyamit* objects is *abhinibodha*. *Prabhinibodha* is called *graabhinibodhik* knowledge. The knowledge that arises from *abhimukh* meanings according to the rule is *paabhinivodhik* knowledge. This knowledge is indirect.

The meaning of *aksha* is the soul. That which is other than *aksha* is *para*. The knowledge that arises from causes other than the soul is indirect knowledge. The knowledge that arises from the predominance of *upat* and *anupat* other causes is indirect. Here, the word *upat* refers to the senses and mind, and the word *anupat* refers to light, instruction, etc. The knowledge that arises from their predominance is indirect. Just as a person who is capable of walking but is unable to walk on his own walks with the help of a stick, etc., similarly, after the destruction and cessation of the *matijnanaavaran* and *shrutajnanaavaran*, the soul, which is naturally capable but unable to perceive the object itself, the knowledge that arises from the predominance of the aforementioned perceptions is indirect because it is dependent.

*Mati* (Prabhinibodhik) knowledge is of four types: *avagraha*, *iha*, *avaya*, and *dharana*. All four types of knowledge do not arise everywhere, because such an arrangement is not found. Therefore, sometimes there is only *avagraha* knowledge, sometimes *avagraha* and *iha* these two, or *avagraha* and *dharana* these two; sometimes *avagraha*, *iha*, and *avaya* these three, and sometimes *avagraha*, *iha*, *avaya*, and *dharana* all four. The nature of *avagraha* etc. is itself...

Page #416:
---------------------------
382/Go. Sa. Jivakanda
Chapter 307-300
The author will speak about it later, so its form is not written here.
The characteristics of Avagraha and the distinctions of Pravagraha are explained after explaining Visparana and Viseerana. Avagraha is the special inquiry into the object of perception. ||307||
There are two types of Avagraha, Vyanjanavagraha and Avigraha, due to the difference between the obtained meaning and the unobtained meaning. Vyanjanavagraha comes first and then Arthaavagraha, in terms of the order of their origin. Vyanjanavagraha does not occur through the eye and mind. ||308||
Special Meaning: The first perception that occurs after the connection between the object and the perceiver is Avagraha knowledge. The knowledge that arises as a desire to know the specifics of the object perceived through Avagraha is called Iha. The first perception that occurs after the connection between the object and the perceiver is Avagraha. For example, in the word "purusha" (man), the desire for food, clothing, and other specifics arising from the meaning perceived through Avagraha is called Iha. The first perception that occurs after the object and the perceiver come together is Avagraha. The object of meaning is taste, etc., and the six senses are the perceivers. The state before the origin of knowledge is the coming together of the object and the perceiver, which is perception. This perception is marked by the origin of the lineage of specific results that are the cause of the origin of knowledge, and it lasts for a very short time. The first perception of the object after this is Avagraha. For example, seeing a pot and a cloth with the eye and knowing "this is a pot, this is a cloth" is Avagraha. Even when the form, direction, and shape, etc., of an object are known without the object itself, through specific object-knowledge, in an unconscious way, it is still Avagraha, because Iha and other types of knowledge cannot arise without an object being perceived. Similarly, Avagraha should be understood for the other senses as well. The first perception after the object and the perceiver come together in a suitable place is Avagraha. The external object is the object, and the senses are the perceivers. The state of these two being capable of producing knowledge is called coming together. The knowledge that arises after the object and the perceiver come together is called Avagraha. This Avagraha is of two types: Arthaavagraha and Vyanjanavagraha. The perception of the unobtained meaning is Arthaavagraha, such as perceiving form through the eye sense. The perception of the obtained meaning is Vyanjanavagraha, such as perceiving touch through the touch sense.  ....-.- .- -.. 1. In printed texts, verse 308 is numbered as verse 305 and verse 307 is numbered as verse 308. But here, the verse that describes the characteristics of Pravagraha knowledge is written first, and then the verse about the distinctions of Avagraha knowledge is written after it. 2. Dhaval 111. 354. 3. Dhaval Pu. 6. 144. 4. Dhaval Pu. 13 p. 216-217. 5. Dhaval Pu. 6 p. 16 p. 17.

Page #417:
---------------------------
## Gatha 307-308
## Shanmargaga/383

It is not correct to say that the name of **spasht grahan** (clear perception) is **arthaavgraha** (perception of meaning), because if we accept this, then the question arises of **vyanjanavgraha** (perception of implication) in **aspasht grahan** (unclear perception).

**Doubt:** Can this happen?

**Solution:** No, because even **aspasht grahan** is seen by the eye, so it becomes a case of **vyanjanavgraha**. But this is not true, because **vyanjanavgraha** does not occur through the eye and mind; it is prohibited in the sutra.

It is also not correct to say that the name of **ashugrahan** (quick perception) is **arthaavgraha**, because if we accept this, then the question arises of **vyanjanavgraha** in **dhire dhire grahan** (slow perception). But this is not true, because if we accept this, then **chakshus avgraha** (visual perception) which is slow, will also become **vyanjanavgraha**. And if the adjectives **kshipra** (quick) and **akshipra** (slow) are not given to both types of **avgraha** (perception), then the 336 types of **matijnana** (knowledge of mind) cannot be formed.

**Doubt:** Does perception of an object not attained by the other four senses except mind and eye, not occur? It is also said:

"Puṭhaṁ suṇehi sadda appuṭṭa veya passade ruvaṁ |
Gaṇḍhaṁ rasaṁ ca phāsaṁ balu puṭhaṁ ca jāṇādi ||54||" - The ear hears the sound that is not touched, but the eye sees the form that is not touched. The other senses know the smell, taste, and touch that are bound and touched. Does this sutra prove that the senses only perceive the objects they are meant to perceive?

**Solution:** The meaning of this gatha is as follows: The eye perceives the form that is not touched. The word "cha" also indicates that the mind perceives the object that is not touched. The other senses perceive smell, taste, and touch that are bound, i.e., regulated in their respective senses, and touched. The word "cha" also indicates that they perceive the object that is not touched. The word "sprusht" (touched) in "sprusht shabd ko sunta hai" (hears the touched sound) should also be accompanied by the words "bound" and "cha", because if we do not do so, we will face the objection of a corrupted explanation. Because the **dhav vrksha** (white tree) is seen to perceive the unattained treasure, and the **tu badi ki lata** (creeper of the big tree) etc. are seen to perceive the unattained garden and tree etc. This proves that the other four senses can also perceive unattained objects.

The complete absence of an object and its non-expression are not called unattained, so the reason for their **avgraha** (perception) etc. is the **indriya** (sense organ)'s inability to perceive them.

**Doubt:** Then what is the purpose of the inability to perceive? If the complete absence and 
 
1. "Na chakshurganandriyabhyam." [Tattvarth Sutra 1/16]. 2. D.P. 13 p. 220. 3. D.P. 6. 156 S.S. 1/16, R.V. 1/16-3: V.B. 336 (Ni, 5) etc. 4. Dhaval P. 6. p. 160. 5. Dhaval P. 13 p. 230, Dhaval P. 11 Sutra 115 commentary. 6. Dhaval P. 1 p. 356.

Page #418:
---------------------------
384/Go. Sa. Jivakanda
Gatha 307-308

If something is not said to be attained, then how can there be perception, etc., of the non-emitted and non-spoken by the eye and mind? If the aforementioned non-emitted and non-spoken are considered to be perceived by the eye and mind, then wouldn't they also be subject to the concept of attainability?

Solution - No, because the attainment of objects lies in their presence in the field that is capable of being perceived by the senses. It is clear that in the state of being chewed, the smell and touch reside in their respective fields along with the senses that perceive them. It is also clear that the taste resides in its field along with the tongue. Similarly, it is clear that form resides in its field in front of the eye, because the form does not become attainable with the eye that perceives it. In this way, the perception, etc., of non-emitted and non-spoken objects is established.

Doubt - Is perception in the form of determination or non-determination? In the first case, i.e., if it is accepted as being in the form of determination, then it would be included in the category of 'avaaya' (a state of being aware), but this cannot be, because if it were so, then there would be a possibility of the influence of doubt arising behind it, and it would also contradict the opposite of determination and non-decision. If it is considered to be in the form of non-determination, then perception cannot be evidence, because if it is established, then it would be included in doubt, opposite, and non-decision?

Solution - No, because perception is of two types, based on the distinction between clear perception and unclear perception. Among them, clear perception is in the form of determination, and it is the cause of the origin of knowledge in the form of assumption, 'avaaya', and perception, due to non-regularity. Even though it is in the form of determination, it cannot be considered as 'avaaya', because the 'avaaya' of determination is after the assumption perception.

In this, unclear perception is the one that does not perceive the specific qualities of age, form, etc., but perceives the qualities of importance, etc., of all human beings, which are the cause of action, and which is the cause of the origin of assumption, etc., due to non-regularity. This unclear perception is not included in perception, because it occurs in the time of the relationship between the dissimilar and the subject.

Doubt - Unclear perception is not evidence, because it is in the form of non-decision?

Solution - This is not so, because it is accompanied by the decision of some specific qualities. The said knowledge cannot be called evidence because it is in the form of opposite knowledge, because it does not contain opposition. If it is said that it is the producer of opposite knowledge, and therefore not evidence, then this is also not correct, because there is no rule for the production of opposite knowledge from it. It is not evidence because it is the cause of doubt, because there is no rule for the occurrence of action according to the qualities of the cause, and the said cause is also a 'vyabhichari' (a quality that is not always present) because the evidence-based determination perception arises from the non-evidence-based doubt. It is not evidence because it is in the form of doubt, because there is a contradiction in the unity of the unclear perception, which is present in two subjects like a stationary object and a human being, etc., and which is of a moving nature, with the doubt that is fixed and has one object. For this reason, unclear perception should be accepted as evidence with respect to the object that is perceived, because it is suitable for action.

   - - 1. Dhaval Pu. 1 p. 357. 2. Pabal Pu. 6.144-146.

Page #419:
---------------------------
##  Verses 307-308
##  Knowledge Seeking/185

**Iha knowledge** is the knowledge that arises from the desire to know the specific characteristics of an object that has been grasped through **avagraha**.  **Avagraha** is the grasping of an object, and **Iha** is the desire to know its specific characteristics. In other words, **Iha** is the specific curiosity about an object that has been grasped through **avagraha**. For example, seeing a man, one might wonder, "Is he handsome?" or "Is he ugly?" This kind of specific examination is called **Iha knowledge**.

**Iha knowledge** is not doubt, because doubt is destroyed by the **Iha**-like thought-intellect. **Iha** is the thought-intellect that arises in the space between doubt and **avaya** knowledge, being superior to doubt and inferior to **avaya** knowledge.

**Doubt:**  Is **Iha** **shruta** knowledge because it involves reasoning in a specific way?

**Solution:** This is not a fault, because **Iha** is the reasoning that relies on the object grasped through **avagraha**, while **shruta** knowledge is the reasoning that relies on a different object.

**Doubt:**  When a person is grasped through **avagraha**, the effort that arises later to specifically inquire about whether he is from the south or the north, etc., without having specific knowledge, is called **Iha**. Therefore, because it involves grasping the object grasped through **avagraha** and being doubtful, is **Iha** knowledge not a valid means of knowledge?

**Solution:**  Grasping the object grasped through **avagraha** is not the reason for its invalidity, because the reason for its invalidity is doubt, error, and indecision. Secondly, **Iha** knowledge is not entirely dependent on the object grasped through **avagraha**, because **Iha** knowledge, which grasps the sign that is the cause of the determination of that part of the object grasped through **avagraha** which was not grasped through **avagraha**, cannot be dependent on the object grasped through **avagraha**. It is also not the case that it only grasps the ungrasped, because if that were the case, it would contradict the grasping of the real object, as it would be unreal like a mirage. **Iha** knowledge is not doubt, because there is a contradiction in saying that the **vimarsha** knowledge, which removes doubt by grasping the sign that is the cause of the determination, is doubt. Because it is present in the living being that is the basis of doubt, **Iha** knowledge cannot be invalid. Because there is a contradiction in saying that the said knowledge, which is opposed to doubt and inherently different from doubt, is invalid. **Iha** knowledge cannot be invalid because it is indecisive, because there is a contradiction in saying that the said knowledge, which removes doubt by determining some specifics, is indecisive. Therefore, it is proven that **Iha** knowledge (examination knowledge) is valid. It is also said:

> "The examination that destroys the components of doubt and produces the components of **avaya**, and which leads to proper determination, is called **Iha** knowledge." (47)

1. Dhavla, Vol. 1, p. 354.
2. "Vitarakaḥ śrutam." (Tattvārthasūtra 6/33).
3. Dhavla, Vol. 6, p. 17.
4. Chanchal.

Page #420:
---------------------------
## 386/Go. Sa. Jivakanda
**Verse 307-30**

**Doubt:**  Iha and other such प्रत्यय (impressions) cannot be considered as matijnana (knowledge of perception), because they are not produced by the senses like श्रुतज्ञान (knowledge of scripture).

**Solution:** This is not true, because Iha and other such प्रत्यय, which are produced from the अवग्रह ज्ञान (knowledge of perception), are accepted as being produced by the senses through उपचार (conventional usage).

**Doubt:** Should this conventional sense-produced nature be accepted in श्रुतज्ञान as well?

**Solution:** No, because just as there is a tendency towards the object grasped by अवग्रह, there is no such tendency in श्रुतज्ञान. Therefore, due to the absence of this tendency, there is no possibility of श्रुतज्ञान being contradicted. For this reason, श्रुतज्ञान cannot be considered as conventionally sense-produced. Therefore, matijnana (knowledge of perception) is not possible in श्रुतज्ञान.

**Explanation:**  Iha is the desire to know the specific characteristics of an object grasped by अवग्रह. This arises from the doubt that arises from the अवग्रह, which is the nature of प्राणध्यावसाय (the state of being alive). For example, a being who has doubt about whether a white object is a बलाका (a type of bird) or a पताका (a flag) will experience Iha. It is not a fixed rule that Iha only arises from an unclear अवग्रह. Even when an object is clearly grasped, like "this man," a person can still experience Iha if they have doubt about whether the man is a दाक्षिणात्य (from the south) or an उदीच्य (from the north).

**Doubt:** In which type of knowledge does the संशय प्रत्यय (doubtful impression) belong?

**Solution:** In Iha, because it is the cause of Iha.

**Doubt:** Why is this so?

**Solution:** Because the effect is conventionally present in the cause. In reality, the संशय प्रत्यय is the अवग्रह.

**Doubt:** What is the nature of Iha?

**Solution:** Iha is the type of impression that exists between संशय (doubt) and अवाय (certainty), and is produced by the reliance on a हेतु (reason).

**Iha is not अनुमानज्ञान (inferential knowledge) because अनुमानज्ञान deals with an object that is not grasped by अवग्रह. It is not correct to consider Iha, which deals with a grasped object, and अनुमानज्ञान, which deals with an ungrasped object, as the same. This is because they have different अधिकरण (spheres of application), and considering them as the same would lead to contradiction. Another reason why they are not the same is that Iha is produced from a रूपलिंग (sign) that is inseparable from its object, while अनुमानज्ञान is produced from a रूपलिंग that is different from its object. Therefore, considering them as the same would lead to contradiction. Iha is not a परिच्छेदक (determiner) of the object like संशयज्ञान (doubtful knowledge).**

**1. Ghavla Pu. 6, p. 146-148.**

Page #421:
---------------------------
## Knowledge Path / 387

It is not correct to say that *Iha* knowledge is unreliable; because *Iha* knowledge arises by grasping the object and it has knowledge of the linga (sign) related to the Dakshinatya and Udicya (south and north) regions. Therefore, since unreliability is not possible in it, there is a contradiction in considering it unreliable.

It is also not correct to say that *Iha* knowledge, which occurs after the initial grasping, is unreliable; because it is the cause of the definition of a particular object, and it has knowledge of one aspect of the object. It is also different from doubt and wrong knowledge. Therefore, there is a contradiction in considering it unreliable.

It is also not correct to say that it is unreliable because it is in the form of non-conclusive knowledge; because its nature is to eliminate doubt. It knows the specific object like white, etc., in a general way, and it is eager to grasp whiteness from the objects in the three worlds and establish it in one object. Therefore, there is a contradiction in considering it unreliable.

**Verse 306**

The desire to know the object grasped by the grasping knowledge through specific characteristics like knowledge, age, proof, region, and language, etc., is *Iha* knowledge. The thoughtful knowledge that occurs after grasping knowledge and before *Pravaya* knowledge, whose nature is to remove the doubt that arises in grasping knowledge, is *Iha* knowledge.

**Pravaya and Dharana Knowledge**

When certainty is achieved through *Iha* knowledge, that certainty about the object is *Pravaya* knowledge. The fourth, *Dharana* knowledge, is the cause of remembering the decided object in the future.

**Explanation:**

The certain knowledge of the object known through *Iha* is *Pravaya* knowledge. The knowledge that produces the impression of not forgetting in the future is *Dharana* knowledge.

After *Iha*, the knowledge that arises as a result of *Iha*-like thought is *Pravaya* knowledge. That is, the knowledge that arises from the decision of the thought that is in the form of a desire to know specifically in *Iha* knowledge is called *Pravaya*. The decisive knowledge that arises from the elimination of doubt due to the proper knowledge of the inherent linga (sign) is *Pravaya*. For example, knowing through signs like flying above, flapping wings, calling, etc., that this is a flock of birds and not a flag, or knowing from hearing words that this man is from the south and not the north, is *Pravaya* knowledge.

**Question:**

Since there is no difference in the decisiveness of both grasping and *Pravaya* knowledge, why is there no unity?

**Solution:**

Even though there may be unity due to no difference in decisiveness, 

1. Jayadhaval Pu. 1, p. 336
2. Ghadal Pu. 1, Sutra 115, Commentary
3. Jayadhaval Pu. 1, p. 563
4. Dhaval Pu. 13, p. 218

Page #422:
---------------------------
## 388/Go. Ma. Jivakar
##  Verse 36

The first knowledge that arises after the coincidence of the object and the knower is **avagraha** (perception), and the knowledge that arises after **iha** (desire) and is influenced by doubt is **avayajnan** (doubtful knowledge). Therefore, there is no unity between these two types of knowledge, **avagraha** and **avayajnan**.

**Doubt:** Is **avayajnan** **shrutagyan** (scriptural knowledge) because it arises from the **shanka-ling** (doubtful sign)?

**Solution:** Such a doubt should not be entertained, because the meaning that is distinct from the object grasped by **avagraha** is considered **shrutagyan** due to the **lamban haraleshali** (long-lasting) and **mislinganit buddhi** (confused intellect). However, **avayajnan** is concerned with the object grasped by **avagraha** and arises after **ihagyan** (desiring knowledge), therefore it cannot be **shrutagyan**.

**Doubt:** **Pravayajnan** (doubtful knowledge) cannot be **matijnan** (intellectual knowledge) because it arises from the **palamban ghal** (mistake) of the **ling** (sign) determined by **iha** (desire). For example, **anumana** (inference)?

**Solution:** This is not the case, because there is a contradiction in saying that **avayajnan** which is concerned with the object grasped by **avagraha** and arises from the **ling** (sign) determined by **iha** (desire) is not **matijnan**, and **anumana** (inference) is not concerned with the object grasped by **avagraha**, because it arises in another object, i.e., another object, due to the strength of the **ling** (sign) determined by **avagraha**.

**Dharana** (retention) is that which does not forget the object of knowledge. **Dharana** is the non-forgetting of the object determined by **avayajnan** in the future. The knowledge that produces **sanskaras** (impressions) in the soul due to non-forgetting in the future, i.e., in the coming time, is called **dharana**. The knowledge that is the cause of non-forgetting of the object known by **avayajnan** in the future is **dharana**. For example, the knowledge that "This is the same **balaka** (child) that we saw this morning" is **dharana**.

**Doubt:** Are **iha** (desire), **avayajnan** (doubtful knowledge), and **dharana** (retention) unreliable because they are **phalajnan** (fruitful knowledge)?

**Solution:** It is not right to say so, because if we accept this, then **avagraha** (perception) also becomes unreliable because it is the fruit of seeing. Secondly, all knowledge is available in the form of action, therefore **iha** (desire), **avayajnan** (doubtful knowledge), and **dharana** (retention) are unreliable?

**Doubt:** Are **iha** (desire), **avayajnan** (doubtful knowledge), and **dharana** (retention) unreliable because they are **grihitgrahi** (grasping the grasped)?

**Solution:** It is not right to say so, because no knowledge is available that grasps the meaning that is completely ungrasped. Secondly, grasping the grasped meaning is not the cause of unreliability, because unreliability is seen only in knowledge that is **sanshaya** (doubt), **viparaya** (error), and **anadhyavasaya** (indecision).

:
1. Dhaval Pu. 6 p. 18. 2. Dhaval Pu. 6 p. 148. 3. Dhaval Pu. 6 p. 144. 5. Dhaval Pu. 13 p. 218-216.
4. Dhaval p. 6 p. 18.

Page #423:
---------------------------
## Gatha 310-311
## Jnanmarg/381

There is no rule for the sequential origin of all four, *avagraha* etc., because the origin of *samshaya* (doubt) is not seen after *avagraha* according to any rule. Without *samshaya*, there is no desire for the specific, so *iha* (desire) does not arise after *pravagraha* according to any rule, and *nirnaya* (decision) does not arise from *iha* according to any rule, because *iha* perception is seen somewhere that does not produce *nirnaya*. *Dharana* knowledge does not arise from *avaya* according to any rule, because there is also *vyabhichar* (deviation) in it. Therefore, all four knowledges from *avagraha* to *dharana* are *matijnana* (knowledge of the mind). That is, the origin of all four knowledges is always *amasha* (non-sequential), and due to the influence of this rule, the four are proven to be *mita* (limited). If all four were *matijnana* in nature, then all four would have to occur sequentially according to a rule. Because all four of these knowledges arise from the senses, and secondly, these knowledges are the objects of the object that is made the object by the knowledge arising from the senses, therefore these four knowledges (*avagraha*, *iha*, *avaya*, *dharana*) are called *matijnana*.

Now, the short duration of *iha* etc. is stated.

The duration of *avagraha* arising from the senses is particularly longer than the duration of *darshanopयोग* (use of perception). From this, the duration of *avagraha* knowledge arising from the auditory sense is particularly longer. From this, the duration of *pravagraha* knowledge arising from the olfactory sense is particularly longer. From this, the duration of *avagraha* knowledge arising from the gustatory sense is particularly longer. From this, the duration of *manoyoga* (mental application) is particularly longer. From this, the duration of *bachanayoga* (verbal application) is particularly longer. From this, the duration of *kayayoga* (physical application) is particularly longer. From this, the duration of *avagraha* knowledge arising from the tactile sense is particularly longer. In all cases, the proof of the specific should be taken as numerical.

**Doubt:** Why is the short duration of *avagraha* knowledge arising from the mind not stated?

**Solution:** The duration of *avagraha* knowledge arising from the mind is included in the duration of *manoyoga*, therefore it is not stated separately.

The duration of *avaya* knowledge is particularly longer than the duration of *avagraha* knowledge arising from the tactile sense. This duration of *avaya* knowledge is the same for all senses. The duration of *iha* is particularly longer than the said duration of *avaya*.

The rest is easy.

**Statement of the divisions of *matijnana* into one, four, etc., up to three hundred and thirty-six**

*Ekka caukka chaubisadaavisaa cha tipadi kiccha. Igicchaa chaarasagurigade madirgaane hoti thaaranariṇ.* ||310|| (314)
*Bahuu bahuuviham cha khipppaani ssivaṇuttaṁ dhuvaṁcha idaraṁ cha. Tatthekkēṣake jāde chhattisaṁ tisayamevaṁ tu.* ||311|| (310)

1. Dhavala Pu. 6 p. 148.
2. J.D.Pu. 1 p. 337.
3. J.D.Pu. 1 p. 334-336.

Page #424:
---------------------------
## 360/Go. Sa. Jivakanda

**Gatha 310.311 Gatha-artha** - One, four, twenty-four, and twenty-eight, each of these should be multiplied by three. By multiplying these three rows of numbers by one, six, and twelve, the number of distinctions of Matijnana is obtained. Bahu, Bahuvidha, Kshiti, Animrit, Anukta, and Dhruva, and their opposites, each of these is the subject of Matijnana, thus there are three hundred and thirty-six distinctions of Matijnana. ||310|| 311|| (314, 310)

**Special Meaning** - Matijnana is of one type compared to the general. It is of four types compared to Vyajanavagraha - 1. Shrotrendriya Vyajanavagraha, 2. Ghrānendriya Vyajanavagraha, 3. Jihvendriya Vyajanavagraha, 4. Sparshanendriya Vyajanavagraha. Vyajanavagraha does not occur through the eye or mind. Four distinctions are mentioned in relation to the four senses. After Vyajanavagraha, there is no Iha-Abaya-Dharana-jnana, only Vyajanavagraha occurs, therefore, Vyajan-Iha etc. are not mentioned. Artha, meaning the object, is grasped through the five senses and mind, these six, therefore, there are six Avagraha, six Iha, six Abaya, and six Dharana, making twenty-four distinctions in relation to Artha. Adding the four Vyajanavagraha to these twenty-four (24+4) makes twenty-eight distinctions.

Bahu, Bahuvidha, Kshipra, Anissrita, Anukta, and Dhruva, and their opposite objects, are known through Abhinibodhik Jnana. Meaning, Matijnana occurs through the support of these twelve types of objects - Alp, Bahuvidha, Ekavidha, Kshipra, Akshipra, Nissata, Anissrita, Ukta, Anukta, Dhruva, Adhruva. Multiplying these twelve by twenty-eight (28 x 12) results in three hundred and thirty-six distinctions of Matijnana.

**Specific Explanation** - Matijnana is of twenty-four types. Its explanation is as follows, Matijnana arising from the eye sense is of four types - Avagraha, Iha, Prabaya, and Dharana. Similarly, knowledge arising from the remaining senses and mind is of four types each, distinguished by Avagraha, Iha, Abaya, and Dharana. All these together make twenty-four distinctions. Alternatively, Matijnana is of twenty-eight types. Its explanation is as follows, Avagraha is of two types - Arthaavagraha and Vyajanavagraha. Only Arthaavagraha occurs through the eye and mind, because the meaning obtained through these two is not grasped. Both Arthaavagraha and Vyajanavagraha are found in the remaining four senses. Adding the four types of Vyajanavagraha to the twenty-four types of Artha Matijnana (24 + 4) makes it twenty-eight types. Bahu, Bahuvidha, Kshipra, Anissrita, Anukta, and Dhruva, and their opposites - Alp, Ekavidha, Akshipra, Nissata, Ukta, and Adhruva; these twelve types of objects are the subject of Matijnana. Therefore, adding these to the previously mentioned twenty-eight types of Matijnana separately, each [meaning multiplying], Matijnana becomes (28 x 12) three hundred and thirty-six types.

1. In the Mudit books, the number of Gatha 310 is 314, and in Madha, the number of Gatha 312 is 310, but without Gatha 314, the meaning of Gatha 311 is not clear, therefore, the number of the Gatha has been changed. 2. Shra. Pu. 13 p. 221 Sutra 266 3. "Vyajanasyavagraha ||18|| Na Chakshurani Dibhyam ||16|| Tattvartha Sutra Pra. 1] 4. Gh. Pu. 13 Sutra 28, 30, 32, 34 p. 227, 230-31, 232, 233. 5. "Bahu-Bahuvidha-Kshipraanissritanuktadhruvaagaam Metaraanam. 16. [Tattvartha Sutra A. 1]. 6. Gh. Pu. 1 p. 354. 7. J. Dh. Pu. 1 p. 14.

Page #425:
---------------------------
## Gatha 310-311
## Jnanamarga/361

**The chest performs many actions, the eye grasps one, and so on. In this way, there are twelve types of sensory grasps.  Eha, Avaya, and Dharana, each of these are twelve types for each eye. Thus, there are forty-eight types of Matijnana (knowledge of the mind) due to the eye sense. There are the same number of types due to the mind, because there is no Vyajanavgraha (grasp of expression) in these two. For each of the remaining four senses, there are sixty types, because they also have twelve types of Vyajanavgraha. All these together (48 + 48 + 60 + 60 + 60 + 60) are three hundred and thirty-six.**

**Or, it can be explained this way:  Due to the differences in Avgraha, Eha, Avaya, and Dharana, there are four types of Prabhinivodhik Jnana (knowledge of the state of being bound). If one sense has four types of knowledge like Avgraha, etc., then how many types of knowledge will there be for six senses? In this way, by multiplying the desired quantity by the fruit quantity and dividing it by the evidence quantity using the Rasik process, twenty-four Prabhinivodhik Jnana are obtained.  By adding four Vyajanavgraha related to the tongue, touch, smell, and hearing senses to these twenty-four types, there are twenty-eight types of Prabhinivodhik Jnana.  There is Prabhinivodhik Jnana of Bahu (many), Bahuvidha (multifaceted), Kshipra (swift), Anishrita (uncertain), Anukta (unsaid), and Dhruva (fixed), and their opposite substances.  There is Avgrahajnana (knowledge of grasping) of many through the eye, Avgrahajnana of one through the eye, and so on. There are twelve types of eye-Avgrahajnana. Similarly, there are twelve types each of eye, Eha, Avaya, and Dharana. By placing the previously generated 4, 24, and 28 types in two places and multiplying them by six and twelve, and then reducing the repeated types, the evidence of these types is: 4412 = 48 * 24 - 12 - 288, 28412 - 336.  By adding 48 types for Pravgraha, etc., 288 types for the meaning of the sense and mind, etc., and 48 types for Vyajanavgraha (258 + 48), the total number of types is 336.**

**The point is that there are four basic types: Avgraha, Eha, Avaya, and Dharana.  By multiplying these by five senses and one mind (6), there are 24 types.  By adding four types of Vyajanavgraha to this, there are 28 types. These twenty-eight are the subsequent types, so by adding the four basic types of Avgraha, etc., there are 32 types. [Dhaval 13/234] These types are due to the separate intentions of the sense and Avgraha, etc.**

**Now, six types of substances have been mentioned: Bahu, Bahuvidha, Kshipra, Anishrita, Anukta, and Dhruva.  By adding their opposite substances [i.e., one, one-faceted, etc.], twelve types of substances have been mentioned.  If the aforementioned [4, 28, 28, and 32] options are multiplied by these separately, the following options of Matijnana arise:**

**First place 4-6-24 24 * 6 = 144**
**Second place 4-12-48 24 * 12 = 288**
**32 * 6 = 162**
**32 * 12 = 304**

**1. B.P. 6 p. 155-156 and D.P. 6 p. 16-21**
**2. V.P. 13 p. 233-240.**

Page #426:
---------------------------
362/Go, Sa. Jivakanda
Gatha 312-314

Thus, a total of 8 options were formed. When the original options 4, 24, 28, 32 are added to these, a total of 12 options (differences) are formed. For example: 4, 24, 28, 32, 24, 144, 168, 162, 48, 288, 336, 384. But the number 24 appeared twice. Therefore, considering the same number appearing twice as a repetition, one 24 is removed, and writing 24 only once, such difference groups are formed:
4, 24, 28, 32, 144, 168, 192, 48, 285, 336, 384. Arranging these numbers from least to greatest, this form is formed:
4, 24, 28, 32, 48, 144, 168, 162, 288, 336, 384. It is to be remembered that the two 24s that were found twice, although they were formed in different ways. For example, the first 24 is in the form of the number: U6 Indriya 44 Avgrahaadi Bhed-24. The second 24 is in the form of the number: Avgrahaadi 446/Bah, Bahuvidha, Kshipraadi Padarth-24. Nevertheless, these are two broken forms of the 24 form difference. The original place is still one 24 form; therefore, 24 is written only once. [Dh.13/241]

Now, out of these 11 options that have been proven, the original 4, 24, 28, 48, 288, 336 have been opened above. The remaining options have been opened in the commentary.

**Statement of the form**

Bahupattijaavigahane Bahubahuvimeeramiergahar, Mhi. Sagaranaamaado Siddha Khippaadi Sevara Ya Taha. ||312||
Vaththussa Padesaado Vaththuggaharanam Tu Vaththudesam Va. Sakalam Va Avalambiya Arigastidam Annavaththugai. ||313||
Pukkharagahane Kale Hathissa Ya Badaragagavayagaharanewa. Vaththantar-Chandassa Ya Ghenussa Ya Bohanam Cha Have. ||314||

**Meaning of the Gatha**

Many individuals of one species are 'Bah'. In contrast to this, i.e., many individuals of many species are 'Bahuvidha'. Their opposites and Kshipraadi, and their opposites, their meaning is understood from their names. ||312||
Knowing the whole object by seeing a part of the object, or knowing another object by relying on the grasping of a part or the whole object, all this is not a mistake. ||313||
Knowing the elephant by seeing its trunk while it is submerged in water, knowing the moon, which is different from it but similar to it, by seeing it at the same time, or knowing the cow by seeing the gavaya, all this is not a mistake. ||314||

**Special Meaning**

The word 'Bah' has been taken as a number-indicating and abundance-indicating word, because there is no special feature in making both meanings. The word Bah is a number-indicating word and also an abundance-indicating word. Both of them are taken here, because it is used equally in both these meanings. In the number...

Page #427:
---------------------------
##  Gatha 312-314
##  Jnanmargaga/393

"Just as one, two, many. In abundance, just as much rice, much lentil."

**Doubt:** The effect of many **avagraha** (grasping) and other types of knowledge is there, because knowledge is different for each object.

**Solution:** No, because if we accept this, then the question of the origin of knowledge of one object always arises.

**Doubt:** Is this the case?

**Solution:** No, because if we accept this, then the question of the origin of knowledge of one object will arise in the city, forest, and camp as well.

**Doubt:** Since there is one city, one forest, and one camp in the city, forest, and camp, respectively, and the use of the singular form cannot be otherwise, it is evident that these are not many?

**Solution:** No, because without **bahutva** (plurality), there is a contradiction in the origin of those three **pratyaya** (perceptions). Secondly, the singular form is a proof of oneness. There is no such thing. Because oneness is not seen in the **dhavādi** (trees, etc.) situated in the forest. To say that analogy is the cause of oneness is also not correct, because there is a contradiction there.

Secondly, in the opinion of one who believes that knowledge grasps only one meaning, does the origin of subsequent knowledge occur after the cessation of previous knowledge, or does the origin of subsequent knowledge occur without the cessation of previous knowledge? Without the cessation of previous knowledge, the origin of subsequent knowledge cannot occur, because there is a contradiction with the statement "Knowledge, being one-minded, knows one meaning," and if this happens, then the behavior of "this is different from that" is lost. Thirdly, in the opinion of one who believes that one knowledge does not have many objects as its subject, then the simultaneous grasping of the middle and index fingers will not lead to the relative behavior of long and short in relation to them. Fourthly, if we consider each knowledge to be fixed towards one meaning, then there will be the effect of doubt-knowledge arising from the fact that 'that' knowledge cannot be both-touching in the case of a pillar and a man. Fifthly, the origin of the knowledge of the action and the pot of the painter who paints a full pot and is skilled in painting cannot occur, because the origin of two, three knowledges simultaneously is not possible, because there is a contradiction in accepting this. Sixthly, the knowledge of the five fingers located in the **yogya-pradesh** (suitable place) cannot occur because the knowledge of many cannot occur simultaneously. To say that there is a difference in knowledge because there is a difference in the meaning that is known is also not correct, because one **trikoti** (three-cornered) **parinat** (transformed) knowledge with diverse nature is available. To say that the difference in power is the cause of the difference in objects is also not correct. Because they cannot be considered as objects because they do not have different meaning-actions.

Thus, grasping many objects simultaneously is **bahu-avagraha**. This **bahu-avagraha**...

**3. Dhavala**
**1. G.P. 13 p. 235; V.D.P. 6 p. 344.**
**2. G.P. 13 p. 235-236; B.C.P. 6 p. 346.**
**3. G.P. 13 p. 236; V. Dhavala P. p. 146, 150, 151.**

Page #428:
---------------------------
## 364/Go. Ma. Jivakanda
## Gatha 312-314

It is not unknown, because in a suitable country, the five fingers are found together.

The science that makes one meaning the subject is **ekapratyay**.

**Doubt:**  Is it not **ekapratyay** because there is unity found in the multiplicity that resides in the parts like the upper part, lower part, and middle part, etc.?

**Solution:** No, because here, the unity of the same kind is taken. 'The **pratyay** that is the cause of the use of one word is **ekapratyay**.'

**Doubt:** Does not one **avagraha** occur from the existence of things with many qualities? If it does, then the attainment of a thing with one quality is achieved, because the evidence that takes a thing with one quality is found?

**Solution:** This is not a fault, because the knowledge that takes one thing is called **ek-avagraha**. And there is no objectivity of the qualities of **vidhi** and **pratisedha**, so that there can be many parts in them? But there is one thing that is the collective nature of **vidhi** and **pratisedha** qualities, and the attainment of that kind of thing is called **ek-avagraha**. Knowledge about many things is called **anek-avagraha**. But **pratibhaas** is always the subject of many qualities, because in both **vidhi** and **pratisedha**, there is non-attainment of one quality, that is, one is not found without the other, both are found together as principal and non-principal.

The acceptance of **vidhi** is for revealing the difference, therefore, the meaning of **bahuvidha** is many kinds. The **pratyay** that makes many kinds, that is, many kinds, residing in the category, is called **bahuvidha**. The **pratyay** that resides in the categories like cow, human, horse, and elephant, etc., is the **chakshurjanaya bahuvidha pratyay**. The **pratyay** that resides in the categories of words like **tat**, **bitat**, **ghan**, and **sushir**, etc., is the **shrotraja bahuvidha pratyay**. The **pratyay** that resides in fragrant substances like camphor, agarwood, **turushk** (a special fragrant substance), and sandalwood, etc., is the **ghranaja bahuvidha pratyay**. The **pratyay** that resides in the tastes like bitter, astringent, sour, sweet, and salty, etc., is the **rasanaja bahuvidha pratyay**. The **pratyay** that resides in the touches like oily, soft, hard, warm, heavy, light, and cold, etc., is the **sparshaja bahuvidha pratyay**. This **pratyay** is not unknown, because it is found, and what is found cannot be denied, because doing so will lead to the objection of disorder, along with the objection of the effect of the use of the plural due to the cause of the **bahu-pratyay** related to the category.

The **pratyay** that is opposite to this **bahuvidha pratyay** due to making one category the subject is called **ekavida**.

1. Dhaval p. 6 p. 16.
2. Dhaval p. 13 p. 236.
3. Dhaval p. 6 p. 151.
4. Dhaval p. 6 p. 16.
5. Dhaval p. 6 p. 151-152 and Dhaval p. 13 p. 237.

Page #429:
---------------------------
## Gatha 312.314

**Doubt:** What is the difference between *ek* and *ekavidha*?

**Solution:**  The perception of a single individual form of substance is *ek* (one), and the perception of a substance located in a single category or many substances is *ekavidha* (one kind). Alternatively, *ekavidha* is not included in *ekapratyay* (one perception), because it is associated with a single swallowing act, while *ekavidha* is associated with a single category in many individuals. Since category and individual are not the same, the perceptions that make them their objects cannot be the same.

The perception that grasps the meaning of *shina* (subtle) is *kshiprpratyay* (swift perception). *Kshipravrutti* (swift activity) means the swift perception that grasps a swift object. *Prashugrahana* (swift grasping) is *kshipra-avgraha* (swift perception).  Grasping slowly (*shanaih*) is *akshipra-avgraha* (non-swift perception). Just as water received by a new earthen pot slowly makes it wet, similarly, the perception that slowly knows a substance is *akshipra-pratyay*.

The perception that grasps a whole object by relying on a part of it, and the perception that relies on a part or the whole of an object and makes another object that is not present there its object, is also *pranisruta* (emitted). This perception is not well-known, because sometimes the perception of a pot arises by relying on the mouth of the pot, sometimes it arises by relying on a part of the mouth, sometimes it is like a cow (i.e., it is a *gavaya*). In this way, or in other ways, the perception arises by relying on one object and making another object that is not present there its object. Sometimes, the perception of the other part is found at the time of grasping the mouth part, and this is also not well-known, because otherwise the perception of the object cannot be formed. And the mouth part alone cannot be the object, because it does not have the capacity to perform the action of the meaning.

**Doubt:** Why would the knowledge of the un-relied upon other part, etc., arising from relying on the mouth part, not be inferential knowledge?

**Solution:** No, because inferential knowledge makes a different meaning its object than the *linga* (sign). The knowledge of the other part that occurs at the same time as the knowledge of the mouth part cannot be inferential knowledge, because it is a perception-like knowledge. The knowledge that occurs at a different time also cannot be inferential knowledge, because it is included in the knowledge of the *iha* (this) due to its arising later.

Sometimes, the knowledge of the letters to be spoken later arises at the time of hearing one year, sometimes the knowledge of the object with two, three, etc., touches arises at the time of grasping one touch in an object that is extremely accustomed to many touches, and sometimes the knowledge of the object with another taste that is not contiguous in that region arises at the time of grasping one taste. Therefore, *pranisruta* perception is not *asinda* (uncertain). Other teachers read the word *nisruta* (emitted) in place of *pranisruta*, but that is...

**Note:** The text continues with further discussion and arguments related to the terms and concepts mentioned above.

Page #430:
---------------------------
## 366 / Go. Sa. Jivakanda
## Gatha 312-314

It does not occur, because believing so, only the *upamā* (simile) *pratyaya* (cognition) is available there. Its opposite is the *nihsrita* (emanated) *pratyaya*, because somewhere at some time, the origin of knowledge of only a part of the object is seen.

To grasp the direct meaning is *nihsrita avagraha* (emanated apprehension) and to grasp the indirect meaning is *anihsrita avagraha* (non-emanated apprehension). Or, to grasp through the *upamāna-upamēya* (simile-similize) relation is *nihsrita pravagraha* (emanated apprehension), like *kamaladalanayana* (lotus-petal-eyed), meaning this woman's eyes are like lotus petals. To grasp without the *upamāna-upamēya* relation is *granihsrita avagraha* (non-emanated apprehension).

*Niyamita guna* (regular quality) - To grasp the specific meaning is the said *pravagraha*. For example, to grasp a white object through the eye and to grasp a fragrant substance through the nose, etc. *Aniyamita guna* (irregular quality) - To grasp a specific substance is *sranukta sravagrha* (said apprehension). For example, to grasp the taste of jaggery etc. through the eye and to grasp the taste of curd etc. through the nose.

In *Kriti-sranuyoga-dvāra* (the gate of action-emanation-association) it is also said that at the time of grasping an object with a specific quality that is constant, the grasping of an object with a quality that is not the object of that sense organ is *sranukta pratyaya*. This *pratyaya* is not proven, because at the time of grasping salt, sugar, and candy through the eye, perhaps the knowledge of its taste arises, at the time of grasping the smell of curd, perhaps the knowledge of its taste arises, at the time of grasping the form of a lamp, perhaps the knowledge of its heat arises, and at the time of hearing the words of someone with *samskāra* (impressions), perhaps the knowledge of the taste etc. of that object is also seen. Its opposite is the said *pratyaya*.

**Doubt:** What is the object of the mind being free?

**Solution:** The eight, the unheard, and the unexperienced objects. The mind's inclination towards these objects is not even known, because if it is not believed so, then the knowledge of the twelve-limbed scripture cannot be formed without instruction.

**Doubt:** What is the difference between *nihsrita* and *ukta* (said)?

**Solution:** There is none, because the *ukta pratyaya* is both *nihsrita* and *anihsrita*, therefore, there is a contradiction in considering it non-different from *nihsrita*.

The previously mentioned *anukta avagraha* is not included in *granihsrita avagraha*, because at the time of grasping one object, to grasp an object separate from it, at the time of grasping the upper part, to grasp the lower part, and at the time of grasping a finger, to grasp Devadatta is *sranihsrita sravagrha*.

The knowledge of a pillar etc. with a specific quality of permanence is *sthira* (stable) *pratyaya*. It is not appropriate to decide that stable knowledge is absolute, because here too, the subject matter of *anekānta* (non-absolutism) is seen through injunction and prohibition. The knowledge of an object with production and destruction, like lightning and the flame of a lamp etc., is *avapratyaya* (false cognition). The knowledge of an object with production, destruction, and change is also *avapratyaya*, because first...

1. *Sra. Pu.* 13 p. 235 | *Dha. Pu.* 16 p. 153-154 |
2. *A. Pu.* 6 p. 20 || 5. *Savala Pu.* 6 p. 231,
3. *Dha. Pu.* 6 p. 201 | 4. *Va. Pu.* 6 p. 238-231, *Ghavala Pu.* 13 p. 154-155 | 6. *Babala Pu.* 6 p. 20 ||

Page #431:
---------------------------
##  Gaya 312-314
##  Jnanmargaga 317

"Knowledge is different from the knowledge of the self." This type of conviction, "I am that, I am that," is called Dhruva. Its opposite is Prabhrava.

##  Avgraha, Iha, Avaya, Dharana

These four are synonyms for Prabhinibodhika.

1. **Avgraha:** Avadana, Sana, Avalambana, and Medha are synonyms for Avgraha. Avgraha is that by which objects like pots are "avagrihyate" (known).  "Avdiyate Khandyate" (separated from other objects and the intended meaning is known) is another name for Avgraha, called Pravachana.  "Syati, Chhinatti, Hanti, Vinashyati" (pierces, destroys) is the third name for Avgraha, called Sana.  That which takes the support of the senses, etc., for its origin is the fourth name for Avgraha, called Avalambana.  That by which the meaning is "Medhyapti" (known) is the fifth name for Avgraha, called Medha.

2. **Iha:** Uha, Apoha, Margana, Gaveshana, and Meemamsa are synonyms for Iha.  Iha is that by which one "Ihte" (strives) to destroy the doubt that arises in the mind.  That by which one "Uhyate" (reasons) about the specific meaning not known from the grasped meaning is called Uha.  That by which one "Apohyate" (negates) the alternatives that are the cause of doubt is called Apoha.  That by which one investigates the specific meaning of the grasped meaning is called Gaveshana.  That by which one specifically examines (considers) the grasped meaning is called Meemamsa.

3. **Avaya:** Vyavsaya, Buddhi, Vignpti, Pramunda, and Pratyamunda are synonyms for Avaya.  Avaya is that by which the examined meaning is "Aveyate" (determined).  That by which the investigated meaning is "Vyavasiyate" (determined) is called Vyavsaya.  That by which the inferred meaning is "Buddhyate" (known) is called Buddhi.  That by which the logically reasoned specific meaning is known is called Vignpti.  That by which the inferred meaning is "Pramudhyate" (contracted) is called Pramunda.  That by which the examined meaning is "Pramundhyate" (contracted) separately is called Pratyamunda.

4. **Dharani:** Dharana, Sthapana, Kostha, and Pratiṣṭhā are synonyms.  Dharani is the name for the mind similar to the earth.  Just as the earth (Dharani) holds mountains, rivers, oceans, trees, rocks, etc., similarly, the mind that holds the meaning is called Dharani.  That by which the meaning is held is called Dharana.  That by which the meaning is established in a determined way is called Sthapana.  Kostha is the name for the mind similar to a container.  Kostha refers to a container.  The mind that holds the determined meaning similar to that is called Kostha.

Page #432:
---------------------------
368/Go. Sa. Jivakanda
Verse 315
That intellect is called 'kostha' (receptacle). The intellect in which substances remain without destruction is called 'pratiṣṭhā' (establishment).
Saṁjñā, smṛti, mati and cintā are synonymous terms. ||41||
That by which one knows appropriately is 'saṁjñā' (cognition). To remember is smṛti (memory). To contemplate is mati (intellect). To think is cintā (thought). Although these words are derived from different roots, they are synonymous by convention.
From the knowledge of letters obtained by a one-sensed being to the countless lokapramāṇa mati-jñāna (knowledge of the universe) situated with six increases, all those knowledges are included in these categories.
|| Thus ends Mati-jñāna ||
The general characteristic of śruta-jñāna (scriptural knowledge) is that it is based on the object known by mati-jñāna (intellectual knowledge) and leads to the knowledge of other related objects. This knowledge is always preceded by mati-jñāna. Here, śruta-jñāna arising from words is the main one. ||315||
Śruta-jñāna is the knowledge of a related object from another object through words and signs like smoke, etc. Among them, śruta-jñāna arising from words is the main one. It is of two types: anga (limb) and angabāhya (external to the limb). Anga-śruta is of twelve types and angabāhya is of fourteen types. Śruta-jñāna is preceded by mati-jñāna, because śruta-jñāna cannot arise without mati-jñāna.
The word 'śruta' (heard) is like the word 'kuśala' (skillful), which has a secondary meaning. Just as the word 'kuśala' is established by the action of cutting with a sharp blade and is used everywhere in the sense of 'paryavādāt' (pure or pleasing), similarly, the word 'śruta' is also established by the action of washing and is used in a particular sense by convention, not just in the sense of knowledge arising from hearing! It is also śruta-jñāna preceded by mati, i.e., arising from mati-jñāna, because the word 'pūrva' (previous) is established as 'that which sustains or completes the action'.
Doubt: Is there no difference in śruta-jñāna because of the similarity in being preceded by mati?
Solution: No, because even though they are similar in being preceded by mati, śruta-jñāna in each person is different. 1. Dhavala Pu. 13 p. 243. 2. Ghayala Pu. 13 p. 244. 3. Sarvārthasiddhi. ||13|| 4. Dhavala Pu. 13 p. 244. 5. This verse is verse 153 on page 356 in Dhanala Pu. 1, and also verse 122 on page 26 in Prā. Pa. Sa. Ya. 1. 6. Dhavala Pu. 1 Sutra 115 commentary p. 357. "Śrutaṁ matipūrva dvaynek-dvādaśabhedam ||1520:||" [T. M.]. 7. Jaya Dhavala Pu. 1 p. 24.

Page #433:
---------------------------
##  Verse 316
**Knowledge Path/366**

The destruction and pacification of the varna (categories) are often different, therefore, their distinctions and the distinctions of external causes are related to the knowledge of the scriptures.

**Doubt:** When one who has attained the subject matter of the original scriptures, knows the word-bound pudgala skandha, which holds the distinctions of varna, pada (words), vakya (sentences), etc., and the other related things, such as the water-holding function of the purusha ghata, which is indicated by the object of the eye, etc., or the ashes, etc., from fire, etc., then there is benefit from the scriptures. Therefore, the characteristic of the scriptures being prior to the mind is flawed because it includes the flaw of being applicable to everything heard.

**Solution:** This is not the case, because even when there is an obstacle, the previous word still has its effect. For example, Pataliputra is east of Mathura. Therefore, in the acceptance of the mind being prior, both direct and traditional acceptance of the mind being prior are included.

The knowledge that arises from the cause of scriptural knowledge is also scriptural knowledge. Still, there is no contradiction with the sutra "Scriptural knowledge happens with the mind being prior," because the said sutra is said with respect to the initial occurrence of scriptural knowledge.

Previous cause and reason are synonymous.

**Distinction of Scriptural Knowledge**

There are countless distinctions of scriptural knowledge that are not based on letters, in relation to the increase of the position of the word. The proof of scriptural knowledge based on letters is one out of the six positions of the sixth category in the two-category class.

**Verse:** The distinctions of scriptural knowledge that are not based on letters are countless in relation to the increase of the position of the word. The proof of scriptural knowledge based on letters is one out of the six positions of the sixth category in the two-category class.

**Special Meaning:** The subtle knowledge that is sufficient for the attainment of the subtle nigoda is called the letter of attainment.

**Doubt:** Why is this called a letter?

**Solution:** Because it remains in one form without destruction, the knowledge of only one is a letter. Because there is no increase or decrease in it. In relation to the principle of the abundance of substance, the subtle knowledge that is sufficient for the attainment of the subtle nigoda is the same. Therefore, this knowledge is called a letter.

**Doubt:** What is its proof?

**Solution:** Its proof is the infinite part of the knowledge of only one.

This knowledge is without covering, because the infinite part of the letter is always revealed, or

Page #434:
---------------------------
400/Go, Sa, Jivakanda
Verse 316

This is the context of the effect of the Jiva when it is inclined. In this Labdhyakshar knowledge, when the share of all living beings is given, then from all living beings, infinite-fold knowledge-division-intersection is obtained.

Sha - Labdhyakshar knowledge is infinite-fold from all living beings, how is this known?

Solution - It is known from the Parikarma. Just as - "By squaring all living beings successively, infinite Lokapraman square-places are obtained ahead, and all Pudgal Dravyas are seen. Again, by squaring all Pudgal Dravyas successively, infinite Lokamatra square-places are obtained ahead, and all Kalas are obtained. Again, by squaring all Kalas successively, infinite Lokamatra square-places are obtained ahead, and all Akash श्रेणी are obtained. Again, by squaring all Akash श्रेणी successively, infinite Lokamatra square-places are obtained ahead, and the Agurulghu Guna of Dharmaastikaya and Adharmaastikaya are obtained. Again, by squaring it successively, infinite Lokamatra square-places are obtained ahead, and the Agurulghu Guna of one Jiva is obtained. Again, by squaring it successively, infinite Lokamatra square-places are obtained ahead, and the subtle Nigod Labdhyaparyaptak Kaaksharasavayas is obtained. This is said in the family. In this Labdhyakshar knowledge, when the share of all living beings is given, then in comparison to the knowledge-division-intersections, infinite-fold Labdha is obtained from all living beings. By adding this projection to the Labdhyakshar knowledge which is the basis of the counter-quantity, the proof of Paryayajnan is produced. Again, when the share of all living beings is given in Paryayajnan, then what is obtained is added to the same Paryayajnan, and Paryay Samaasajnan is produced. Again, ahead of this, infinite-part increase, innumerable-part increase, countable-part increase, countable-guna increase, innumerable-guna increase, and infinite-guna increase, successively, innumerable Lokamatra Paryay... Samaasajnan places are obtained continuously until the two extreme places of the innumerable Lokamatra Paryay... Samaasajnan places are obtained. Again, when there is an increase in one projection, then there is the final Paryay Samaasajnan place. In this way, Paryay Samaasajnan places are obtained in six places, which are innumerable Lokamatra.

Again, when the share of all living beings is given in the final Paryay Samaasajnan, then what is obtained is added to the final Paryay Samaasajnan, and Aksharajnan is produced. This Aksharajnan is equal to the infinite-infinite Labdhyakshars of the subtle Nigod Labdhyaparyaptak. All the knowledge before this Aksharajnan is Anaskharatmak Shrutajnan, which is in six places, which are innumerable Lokapraman.

There are three types of Akshar - Labdhyakshar, Nivrityakshar, and Sansthan Akshar. From the subtle Nigod Labdhyaparyaptak to Shrutakebalo, all the Kshayopaśamas of the Jiva are called Labdhyakshar. The word that comes out of the mouth of the Jivas is called Nityakshar. There are two types of that Nityakshar - Vyakt and Avyakt. Vyakt Nirvrittyakshar is called the five-sense-equipped Paryaptak. Avyakt Nityakshar is from the two-sense-equipped to the five-sense-equipped Paryaptak. The other name of Sansthanaakshar is Sthapana-Akshar.

Shankha - What is Sthapana?

1. Dhaval Pu 13 p. 262-264. 2. Dhaval Pu. 13 p. 264.

Page #435:
---------------------------
##  Janamaganna / 401

**Solution:** The establishment that occurs in the intellect, or that is written, in the form of a variety of 'this is that letter', is the established letter.

**Doubt:** Which letter among these three letters is the object of purpose in its nature?

**Solution:** The purpose is from the acquired letter, not from the other letters; because they are inert in nature. The inferior acquired letter is of the subtle Nigoda acquired sufficient, and the superior is of the fourteen previous holders. The inferior southwest letter is of the sensory sufficient, etc., and the superior is of the fourteen previous holders. Similarly, the established letter should also be stated. The knowledge of the scriptures that arises from one letter is the inferior letter knowledge of the scriptures. When another letter is added to this letter knowledge, there is knowledge of the scriptures called letter combination. By combining letters, there is knowledge of the scriptures called a word. "Thus, with the increase of each letter, the number

**Verse 317**

There are as many varieties of letter-based knowledge of the scriptures as there are letters. Because, from each letter, one knowledge of the scriptures arises. The proof of the letters is as follows:

Twenty-five square letters, four interstitial letters, and four heat letters, thus there are thirty-three consonants. A, I, U, R, L, E, AI, O, AU, thus these nine vowels are separately twenty-seven with the varieties of short, long, and pluta.

**Doubt:** Do E, AI, O, AU not have short varieties?

**Solution:** No, because there is no contradiction in accepting their harmony in Prakrit. In the use of language, there are only A and these four. "Thus, all the letters are sixty-four (64)

**One-syllable is short, two-syllable is called long. Three-syllable is to be known as pluta, and consonant is one-syllable.**

From these sixty-four letters, there are sixty-four options for letter-based knowledge of the scriptures. The amount of the number of these letters, by making the rare of the proof 2' and multiplying it together, is collected, i.e., 16446744073706551616. By subtracting one from this number, the proof of all the letters of the complete scripture is obtained. There are as many options for letter-based knowledge of the scriptures, and that is the proof of the superior knowledge of the scriptures.

**The statement of twenty types of knowledge of the scriptures is: Pajjayakkhar, Pad, Sangha, Ard, Dugvara, Pai, Cha, Ya, Pahudayam, Padivattiyarin, Jogam, Cha, Vaty, Upudvam, Cha.**

1. Dhaval Pu. 13 p. 264-265.
2. Dhaval Pu. 13 p. 247. 13 p. 246.
3. Dhaval Pu. 13 p. 248.
4. Dhaval Pu.

Page #436:
---------------------------
4.02/Go. Sa. Jivakanda
Gatha 318
Tesiccha Samasehi Ya Vīsaviham Va Hu Hodi Sudaragaṇam | Prāvaraṇassa Vi Bhedā Tattiyamettā Havanti Ti ||31||
Gāpārtha-Paryāya, Akshara, Pada, Sanghata, Pratipattik, Anuyoga, Prābhrita Prābhrita, Prābhrita Vastu and Pūrva these ten and ten their samāsa like Paryāyasamāsa etc., in this way there are twenty types of Śruta-jñāna. There are also the same number of types of Śruta-jñāna-āvaraṇa. ||317-318||
Viśeṣārtha—Paryāya, Paryāyasamāsa, Akshara, Aksharasamāsa, Pada, Padasamāsa, Sanghata, Sanghatasamāsa, Pratipatti, Pratipattisamāsa, Anuyogadvāra, Anuyogadvārasamāsa, Prābhrita Prābhrita, Prābhrita Prābhritasamāsa, Prābhrita, Prābhritasamāsa, Vastu, Vastusamāsa, Pūrva and Pūrvasamāsa, these twenty types of Śruta-jñāna should be known.
"Samāsa" should be related to each one, otherwise there cannot be twenty types of Śruta-jñāna.
Akshara (Avināśī) known as Kevala-jñāna, its infinite parts are the measure of Lakṣyakṣara-jñāna, when the part of all beings is given in this knowledge, then the infinite multiplication of all beings is obtained by the division of knowledge, the obtained is mixed with the Labdhyakṣara-jñāna, then Paryāya-jñāna is produced.
Śaṅkā - What is the name of Paryāya? Samādhāna - The name of Paryāya is the projection (mixing) of the divisions of knowledge.
When the part of all beings (infinite) is given in Paryāya-jñāna, then the obtained is mixed with the same Paryāya-jñāna, then Paryāyasamāsa-jñāna is produced. (When there is an infinite increase in Paryāya-jñāna) Paryāyasamāsa-jñāna is produced. Again, due to the increase of Ṣaṭsthāna-patita, countless Lokamātra Paryāyasamāsa-jñāna is produced. In this way, countless Lokapramāṇa Paryāyasamāsa-jñāna is obtained, but Paryāya-jñāna is only of one type. The samāsa of projections is in the knowledge-places, those knowledge-places are called Paryāya-samāsa, but where there is only one projection, that knowledge is called Paryāya. Paryāyasamāsa-jñāna should be taken up to the completion of Akshara-jñāna. The knowledge that goes on increasing one by one Akshara from Akshara-jñāna onwards is called Aksharasamāsa. Here, there are no six dhyānas beyond Akshara-jñāna, but some Ācāryas say that there is only an increase in Akshara in the order of double, triple, etc., but some Ācāryas say that there is an increase of six types of Kṣayopasama-jñāna from Akshara-jñāna onwards. But their statement does not happen, because it is not possible to have six types of increase above Akshara-jñāna, which is the countable part of all Śruta-jñāna.
1. Dhavala Pu.13 p. 260 has the following Gāthā no. 1 - "Pajjaya-masvara-pada-saṅghāday paḍibatti-jogadārāi | Pāhue pāhuḍ-vatthū gulbasamāsā ya bokhamvā ||1||” 2. Ghabhala Pu. 13 p. 262. 3. P.Pu. 13 p. 263-264. 4. D.Pu. 12 p. 4.76-480 and Pu. 6 p. 22-23.

Page #437:
---------------------------
Head 316-322
Why does knowledge not increase through six types of growth on top of the knowledge of the letters?
Solution: No, because the knowledge of the letters is a part of the total knowledge. Therefore, when it arises, there is only an increase in the number of parts and an increase in the number of qualities. There are no six types of growth, because the knowledge of the letters, which has gained strength through one form of knowledge, contradicts the belief in six types of growth.
Further, the author himself will state the meaning of the word "paryaya" through the verses of "pavaramara", "kapisani", "saya", "pasthan", "nati", and "sadhi"; therefore, it is not mentioned here.
The nature of the knowledge of "paryaya" is as follows:
"In the first moment of the birth of the knowledge of "suhamani" and "govapajjatta", it is revealed to all beings, free from any covering." (31)
"In the case of "suhamani" and "govapajjatta", the knowledge of the "sagasanbhava" is the cause of their birth. The last "punnattivakkana" is the cause of the first "vakkattiye" (320)
"In the first moment of the birth of the knowledge of "suhamani" and "govapajjatta", it is revealed to all beings, free from any covering." (31)
"In the case of "suhamani" and "govapajjatta", the knowledge of the "sagasanbhava" is the cause of their birth. The last "punnattivakkana" is the cause of the first "vakkattiye" (320)
"In the first moment of the birth of the knowledge of "suhamani" and "govapajjatta", it is revealed to all beings, free from any covering." (31)
"In the case of "suhamani" and "govapajjatta", the knowledge of the "sagasanbhava" is the cause of their birth. The last "punnattivakkana" is the cause of the first "vakkattiye" (320)
"In the first moment of the birth of the knowledge of "suhamani" and "govapajjatta", it is revealed to all beings, free from any covering." (31)
"In the case of "suhamani" and "govapajjatta", the knowledge of the "sagasanbhava" is the cause of their birth. The last "punnattivakkana" is the cause of the first "vakkattiye" (320)
"In the first moment of the birth of the knowledge of "suhamani" and "govapajjatta", it is revealed to all beings, free from any covering." (31)
"In the case of "suhamani" and "govapajjatta", the knowledge of the "sagasanbhava" is the cause of their birth. The last "punnattivakkana" is the cause of the first "vakkattiye" (320)
"In the first moment of the birth of the knowledge of "suhamani" and "govapajjatta", it is revealed to all beings, free from any covering." (31)
"In the case of "suhamani" and "govapajjatta", the knowledge of the "sagasanbhava" is the cause of their birth. The last "punnattivakkana" is the cause of the first "vakkattiye" (320)
"In the first moment of the birth of the knowledge of "suhamani" and "govapajjatta", it is revealed to all beings, free from any covering." (31)
"In the case of "suhamani" and "govapajjatta", the knowledge of the "sagasanbhava" is the cause of their birth. The last "punnattivakkana" is the cause of the first "vakkattiye" (320)
"In the first moment of the birth of the knowledge of "suhamani" and "govapajjatta", it is revealed to all beings, free from any covering." (31)
"In the case of "suhamani" and "govapajjatta", the knowledge of the "sagasanbhava" is the cause of their birth. The last "punnattivakkana" is the cause of the first "vakkattiye" (320)
"In the first moment of the birth of the knowledge of "suhamani" and "govapajjatta", it is revealed to all beings, free from any covering." (31)
"In the case of "suhamani" and "govapajjatta", the knowledge of the "sagasanbhava" is the cause of their birth. The last "punnattivakkana" is the cause of the first "vakkattiye" (320)
"In the first moment of the birth of the knowledge of "suhamani" and "govapajjatta", it is revealed to all beings, free from any covering." (31)
"In the case of "suhamani" and "govapajjatta", the knowledge of the "sagasanbhava" is the cause of their birth. The last "punnattivakkana" is the cause of the first "vakkattiye" (320)
"In the first moment of the birth of the knowledge of "suhamani" and "govapajjatta", it is revealed to all beings, free from any covering." (31)
"In the case of "suhamani" and "govapajjatta", the knowledge of the "sagasanbhava" is the cause of their birth. The last "punnattivakkana" is the cause of the first "vakkattiye" (320)
"In the first moment of the birth of the knowledge of "suhamani" and "govapajjatta", it is revealed to all beings, free from any covering." (31)
"In the case of "suhamani" and "govapajjatta", the knowledge of the "sagasanbhava" is the cause of their birth. The last "punnattivakkana" is the cause of the first "vakkattiye" (320)
"In the first moment of the birth of the knowledge of "suhamani" and "govapajjatta", it is revealed to all beings, free from any covering." (31)
"In the case of "suhamani" and "govapajjatta", the knowledge of the "sagasanbhava" is the

Page #438:
---------------------------
404/Go. Sa. Jivakanda
Verses 316-322

Infinite multiples of the knowledge-division-intersections are obtained from the living beings. When this projection is added to the knowledge of the acquired letter, the evidence of the knowledge of the synonym arises (when the infinite part increases in the knowledge of the acquired letter, the knowledge of the synonym arises). When the part of all living beings is given in this knowledge of the synonym, and the obtained is added to the knowledge of the synonym (infinite part increase), the knowledge of the synonym-combination arises. Again, before this, infinite part increase, innumerable part increase, countable part increase, countable quality increase, innumerable quality increase, and infinite quality increase, in this order, innumerable-world-only synonym-combination knowledge is continuously obtained. Here, only the knowledge of the acquired letter is called the eternally revealed uncovered, the knowledge of the synonym is not called the eternally revealed uncovered.

What is the name of the synonym? The name of the knowledge-division-intersections is synonym. The synonym-combination name of those knowledge-places where their combination happens, but where there is only one projection, that knowledge is called the synonym.

The second opinion is like this - the absence of destruction, i.e., destruction, is the letter of only-knowledge. Its infinite part is the knowledge of the mind called synonym. That knowledge of the mind called synonym and only-knowledge are uncovered and indestructible. The knowledge of the scripture that arises from this subtle-nigoda acquired-letter is called synonym due to the treatment of the cause in the effect. The infinite part more knowledge of the scripture that arises from this synonym knowledge of the scripture is called synonym-combination knowledge. Infinite part increase, innumerable part increase, countable part increase, countable quality increase, innumerable quality increase, and infinite quality increase, these six increases are the collective place increase.

In this second opinion, the most inferior knowledge of the mind is called synonym. That knowledge of the mind is the cause of the most inferior acquired-letter knowledge of the scripture, therefore, by treating the cause in the effect, that knowledge of the scripture (acquired-letter knowledge of the scripture) is also called synonym knowledge. That is, the synonym knowledge of the scripture is also eternally revealed uncovered, like the knowledge of the mind called synonym. But in the previous opinion, the knowledge of the synonym arises when the infinite part increase happens above the acquired-letter knowledge of the scripture. There, the acquired-letter knowledge of the scripture is called eternally revealed uncovered, the knowledge of the synonym is not called eternally revealed uncovered because of the increase of one projection in it.

Perhaps the verses were composed keeping both these opinions in mind. Which opinion is correct out of these two, it cannot be said anywhere, because there is no scripture-knower at present. Therefore, both opinions have been collected.

The knowledge that is called eternally revealed and uncovered in the subtle-nigoda living being that is acquired-sufficient, is also uncovered in the subtle-nigoda in relation to the most inferior destruction-pacification of the knowledge-covering karma, but it is not completely uncovered. If even that inferior knowledge is covered, then it will be the effect of the living being. In reality, that knowledge is also covered in relation to the knowledge of the destruction-pacifying that is changing with the time, and in relation to the only-knowledge; because the worldly living beings lack the knowledge of the destruction, therefore,
1. Dh. Pu. 13 p. 262-264. 2. Gh. Pu. 13 p. 264. 21-22.
3. Dhaval Pu. 13 p. 264.
4. Dhaval Pu. 6 p.

Page #439:
---------------------------
## Gatha 323-331
## Janamarga/105

The knowledge of Nigodaya is the same as Kshayopaśama. If even a small part of the soul has the knowledge of Nirāvaraṇa, then from that one part, the entire universe can be seen. However, this Nigodaya, being the most inferior knowledge, knows the least. This is the meaning.

The nature of Shatsyanavṛddhi is: infinite part increase, innumerable part increase, numbered part increase, numbered quality increase, innumerable quality increase, and infinite quality increase.

The total number of souls, the innumerable number of worlds, and the excellent numbered quantity, these three quantities, the aforementioned infinite part increase, etc., six...

...1. वृहद दव्यसंग्रह Gatha 3 Sanskrit commentary: "Even if the Nigoda Jina, who has attained the subtle knowledge of Nirāvaraṇa, has a small amount of knowledge, it is still considered inferior to the subtle Nigoda, but not completely. ... It is like a small light shining through a dense eyelid, like the sun." वृहदतव्यसंग्रह, Shri Ganesh Varni Di. Jain Granthamala, pp. 66-67.

Page #440:
---------------------------
## Chapter 406/Go. Sa. Jivakanda
## Verses 323-331

**324.** In the realms, the quantity present due to the accumulation of Bhamahar or Gunakar is called **Klama**.

**325.** For the sake of understanding, these are the names of the six increments in order: **Urvat, Chaturank, Panchaku, Shadank, Saptaank, Ashtaank**.

**326.** When the number of parts of an Angul reaches an uncountable number, it increases by one. This process continues until the final increment.

**327.** In the first realm, there are five increments. In all the remaining realms, there are six increments. The number of steps is the same everywhere.

**328.** In the six realms, the first realm is **Ashtaank** and the last realm is **Urvank**. Because even the lowest knowledge is **Ashtaank**, as the Jina has said.

**329.** In one realm, there is only one **Ashtaank** and **Saptaank** Kandak Praman. Below that, up to **Urvank**, the Kandak Praman should be multiplied by one more in order.

**330.** The sum of all the increments is obtained by multiplying the square of one more than the Kandak by the wealth, as the Jina has said.

**331.** When the number of parts of the highest number reaches the uncountable number of increments, or when it reaches three-fourths of the highest number, or when it reaches forty-one divided by fifty-six times the highest number, or when it reaches seven-tenths of the highest number, the knowledge obtained doubles.

**Special Note:** This one **Shadvridhi Sthan** is the collective of these six increments: **Anantbhaag Buddhi, Asankhyatbhaag Vridhi, Sankhyatbhaag Vridhi, Sankhyat Gunavridhi, Asankhyat Gunavridhi, and Anant Gunavridhi**.

When the Kandak Praman reaches the **Anantbhaag Vridhi Sthan**, it increases by one **Asankhyatbhaag Vridhi**. Even then, when the Kandak Praman reaches the **Anantbhaag Vridhi Sthan**, it increases by a second **Asankhyatbhaag Vridhi**. In this way, when the Kandak Praman reaches the **Asankhyatbhaag Vridhi**, it increases by one **Sankhyatbhaag Vridhi**. Afterwards, when it reaches all the lower paths, it increases by a second **Sankhyatbhaag Vridhi**. Again, when it reaches that same amount of path, it increases by a third **Sankhyatbhaag Vridhi**. In this way, when the Kandak Praman reaches the **Sankhyatbhaag Vridhi**, it increases by one **Sankhyatgun Vridhi** when it reaches another path suitable for the creation of **Sankhyatbhaag Vridhi**. Afterwards, when it reaches all the lower paths, it increases by a second **Sankhyatgun Vridhi**. In this way, when the Kandak Praman reaches the **Sankhyatgun Vridhi**, it increases by one **Asankhyat Gunavridhi** when it reaches another path related to **Sankhyatgun Vridhi**. Then, when it reaches all the lower paths, it increases by a second **Asankhyat Gunavridhi**. In this way, when the Kandak Praman reaches the **Asankhyat Gunavridhi**, it increases by one **Anantgun Vridhi** when it reaches another path related to **Asankhyat Gunavridhi**. This is one **Shadsthan**. There are countless **Lokamaatra Shadsthan**.

**2.** In the Kandak Praman, there are **Anantbhaag Vridhi Kandak, Asankhyatbhaag Vridhi Kandak, Sankhyatbhaag Vridhi Kandak, Sankhyatgun Vridhi Kandak, Asankhyatgun Vridhi Kandak, and Anantgun Vridhi Kandak**.

**202.** In the **Shadsthan Praman**, by which increment has **Anantbhaag Vridhi** increased? **Anantbhaag Vridhi** has increased by all beings. This is the only increment.

**204.** Here, the purpose is the number of all beings. When the number of all beings is divided by the lowest realm, the quotient is the measure of the increment. By making the lowest realm the base and adding the increment obtained, the first realm of **Anantbhaag Vridhi** is obtained.

**1. P.Pu. 6 p. 22**
**2. Gh.Su. 12 p. 120-121**
**3. Gh.Pu. 12 p. 128**
**4. Dh.Pu. 12 p. 135**

Page #441:
---------------------------
## Gatha 323-331
## Jnanamargapa/107
## K

"It is born."
It is born by the increase of *Asankhyata Bhaga* and the increase of *Prasankhyata Lokas*. This much increase happens. ||206|| "Asankhyata Lokas" - when this is said, one should understand the *Asankhyata Lokas* whose nature has been known by the Jina (by the *Dhutkevali*), because there is no specific instruction in this regard. In the last *Ananta Bhaga* of the *Ananta Bhaga Vridhi Kandaka*, when the *Prasankhyata Lokas* are added to the *Ananta Bhaga*, the first *Asankhyata Bhaga* is born. This transition is *Ananta* times greater than the lower transition. The multiplier is one more than the *Asankhyata Lokas* divided by the total number of living beings.

**Explanation:**

Let's say that the number of divisions of the desired place is "k", where the place with the *Vada* is the last *Ananta Bhaga* place; and immediately after that, the *Asankhyata Bhaga* place is born. So,

* The number of divisions of the desired place = 'k'
* Therefore, the *Ananta Bhaga* increase happening above it = 
* Number of living beings
* Therefore, when the said *Ananta Bhaga* is added to the "k" divisions,
* (Number of living beings x k) + k number of living beings
* This number of living beings is the last *Ananta Bhaga* place. Now, immediately after this is the *Asankhyata Bhaga* place. It will be this much: = Last *Ananta Bhaga* place + *Asankhyata Bhaga* of the last *Ananta Bhaga* place (Number of living beings - k) + k (Number of living beings x k) + k number of living beings
* Number of living beings x *Asankhyata Lokas* k (Number of living beings + 1 k (Number of living beings + 1) Number of living beings + Number of living beings - *Asankhyata Lokas*
* k (Number of living beings + 1)

**Note:** In this *Asankhyata Bhaga* place, the increase is only = 
* Number of living beings x *Asankhyata Lokas*
* Now, the increase in the lower place was = 
* Number of living beings

* -
* -
* -
* -
* -
* -
* -
* +
* - This much.

1. *D.P.* 12 p. 135. 2. *G.P.* 12 p. 151. 3. *Dhavala P.* 12 p. 151.

Page #442:
---------------------------
## 408/Go. Sa. Jivakanda
## Gatha 323-31
... (B)
-
-
X
-

**(A) How many times greater is the innumerable-part-increase (B) from the increase of the lower place (A) than the product of the number of living beings and the innumerable worlds? To overcome this, we need to divide the innumerable-part-increase (B) by the increase of the time-marker (B) which is the infinite-part-increase (A).**

**(B) Upon dividing by (A), we get:**

(Number of living beings x innumerable worlds) / (Number of living beings x (Number of living beings - 1))

**(C) By canceling out the similar terms in the numerator and denominator, we get:**

(Number of living beings - 1) / innumerable worlds = 1 + (Number of living beings / innumerable worlds)

**(D) Thus, it is proven that the multiplier is the number of living beings plus one, divided by the innumerable worlds.**

**(E) The innumerable-part-increase is obtained by increasing it by one less than the inferior innumerable-part-increase.**

**(F) The term "one less than the inferior innumerable" refers to the superior number. When this superior number is multiplied by one more than the section-marker, and then divided by the last infinite-part-increase in the section-marker-measured increases, the result is the first place of the innumerable-part-increase. When one indivisible-intersection is removed from this, there is a shift in place. This is an infinite calculation from the lower infinite-part-increase shifts. It is innumerable times greater than the innumerable-part-increase shifts. It is innumerable times greater than the lower infinite-part-increase shifts of the upper infinite-multiplication-increase. It is innumerable times greater than the lower innumerable-part-increase shifts of the innumerable-multiplication-increase. It is number-times greater, number-times less, or innumerable-times less than the lower number-part-increase shifts of the infinite-multiplication-increase.**

**(G) The number-multiplication-increase is increased by one less than the inferior innumerable-multiplication-increase. When the section-marker-measured number-part-increases reach the infinite-part-increase place located in the subject of the number-part-increase, and then multiplied by the superior number, the number-multiplication-increase occurs. In the lower place, this...**

1. Dh.Pu. 12 p. 154.
2. Gh.Pu. 12 p. 154-155.
3. Pa.Pu. 12 p. 155.

Page #443:
---------------------------
## Gatha 326-331
## Knowledge Treasure/406

When adding to the increase, the first place is the *sanchataguṇavṛddhi*. This place is *anantaguna* increase from the increase of *urvak* places of the lower *sthānāntara*, *asankahyataguṇavṛddhi* from the increase of *caturank* *sthānāntara*, and *prasankhyataguṇavṛddhi* from the increase of *pancank* *sthānāntara*.

From the lower *urvak* *sthānāntara* of the upper *bhraṣṭa*, there is *anantaguna*, from the first seven *ank* of the first six places of the upper, there is *asankahyataguṇa* from the *caturank* *sthānāntara*, and from the second *asankahyataguṇavṛddhi*, there is *sanchataguṇa* from the lower *sanchatabhāgavṛddhi* *sthānāntara*, *sanchatabhāga* less, *sanchataguṇa* less, or *prasankhyataguṇa* less.

*Asankhyataguṇavṛddhi* is increased by the multiplication of *prasankhyat* *loka*. || 212 ||

When the *kaṇḍakapramāṇa* becomes six *ank*, the last *urvak* situated in the subject (place) of the upper six *ank* is multiplied by *asankahyat* *loka* to obtain the increase as per the rules, and *asankahyataguṇavṛddhi* is produced. By reciprocating the *urvak* and adding the increase to it, the *asankahyataguṇavṛddhi* place is obtained. By reducing one division from *asankahyataguṇavṛddhi*, there is a *sthānāntara*. This is *anantaguna* from the lower *anantabhāgavṛddhi* *sthānāntara*, *asankahyataguṇa* from the *asankahyatabhāgavṛddhi*, *sanchatabhāgavṛddhi*, and *sanchataguṇavṛddhi* *sthānāntara*, *anantaguna* from the lower *anantabhāgavṛddhi* *sthānāntara* situated below the upper *guṇavṛddhi* place, *asankahyataguṇa* from the *asankahyatabhāgavṛddhi* *sthānāntara*, *sanchataguṇa* from the *sanchatabhāgavṛddhi* *sthānāntara*, *sanchatabhāga* less, *sanchataguṇa* less, or *prasankhyataguṇa* less, and *asankahyataguṇa* less from the *sanchataguṇavṛddhi* and *asankahyataguṇavṛddhi* *sthānāntara*. One should know further.

*Anantaguna* increase is increased by the multiplication of all beings. || 214 ||

By multiplying the lower *urvak* by the total number of beings, *anantaguna* increase is obtained. By reciprocating it and adding it to the *anantaguna* increase, the *anantaguna* increase place is obtained. Here also, comparison should be made with the *sthānāntara*. In this way, the representation of increases situated in the *pad* places of *asankahyat* *loka* should be done.

Here, the *urvak* is the name of *anantabhāgavṛddhi*, *caturank* is the name of *asankahyatabhāgavṛddhi*, *pancank* is the name of *sanchatabhāgavṛddhi*, *ṣaḍank* is the name of *sanchataguṇavṛddhi*, *saptank* is the name of *prasankhyataguṇavṛddhi*, and *aṣṭak* is the name of *anantaguna* increase. The *ank* (3) of *u* and *3* is similar, therefore, instead of keeping the name *tryank* for *anantabhāgavṛddhi*, *urvak* is kept, the purpose is only from the *ank* of three. Because three, four, five, six, seven, eight, these become six places. The names of the remaining places, *caturank* etc., are given in order of numbers.

**Doubt:** What is called *aṣṭank*?

**Solution:** What is obtained by multiplying the lower *urvak* by the total number of beings, the place which is more than that *urvak* from the lower, is *aṣṭank*.

**Doubt:** The lowest place is *aṣṭank*, how is this known?

**Solution:** From the lowest place, the *kaṇḍak* of *anantabhāgavṛddhi* places goes to *prasankhyatabhāgavṛddhi*

Page #444:
---------------------------
## 410 / Go. Sa. Jivakanda
## Gatha 323-331

"The lowest place is the *Rishyanka*." This is known from the description given. The lowest place is not *Urvak* because if it were, the entire *Kandaka* proof would not be possible. It cannot be *Chaturank* either, because the *Kandaka* expansion goes from countless divisions to the first countable increase. This is what has been said! It cannot be *Panchank* either, because the *Kandaka* goes from countable divisions to countable multiplications, as it has been said. It cannot be *Shashthank* either, because the *Kandaka* goes from only countable multiplications to countless multiplications, as it has been said. It cannot be *Sapthank* either, because the *Kandaka* goes from countless multiplications to infinite multiplications, as the sutra says. Therefore, by the nature of the remainder, the lowest place is *Rishyanka*.

Because the lowest place is *Grushtanka*, therefore, infinite multiplication is not possible in the first six places. In the remaining places, the first place has infinite multiplication, therefore, all six increases are possible in the remaining six places, but in the first six places, there are only five increases.

**Doubt:** What is the measure of the *Kandaka*?

**Solution:** The measure of the *Kandaka* is a countless part of an *angula*. What is the divisor of that (angula)? Due to the lack of specific instruction, its knowledge is not available.

The *Kandaka* measure of infinite divisions goes to the place of countless divisions. || 215 || 3 The square of the *Kandaka* of infinite divisions and one *Kandaka* go to the place of countable divisions. || 220 || * If the *Kandaka* measure is infinite divisions below one countless division, then how many (infinite divisions) will there be below one more *Kandaka* measure of countless divisions? In this way, by multiplying the desired result by the measure [(*Kandaka*) x (*Kandaka* + 1)], there are *Kandaka* square measure infinite divisions including the *Kandaka*. In terms of numbers, *Kandaka* - 4 x (4+1) - [(4 x 4) + 4] - so many infinite divisions cannot be produced without countable divisions.

**Doubt:** Below countable divisions, there are *Kandaka* measure countless divisions. How is it appropriate to produce one more *Kandaka* infinite division place by using the rule of three?

**Solution:** This is not a fault, because below countable divisions, there are *Kandaka* measure countless divisions, but by reaching the subject (place) of another countless division, countable division is produced in the *Grdhvana* suitable for countable division, not countless division. Therefore, the above statement does not have a fault.

The square of the *Kandaka* of countless divisions and one *Kandaka* go to the place of (16+4) countable multiplications. || 221 || If the *Kandaka* measure is countless divisions below one countable division, 

1. Gaval Pu. 12 p. 130-131. 2. Gaval Pu. 12 p. 163. 3. Gaval Pu. 12 p. 163. 4. Gaval Pu. 12 p. 126. 5. Gaval Pu. 12 p. 166-167. 6. Gaval Pu. 12 p. 167.

Page #445:
---------------------------
## Gatha 323-331
## Shanbhaag/411

If there are a certain number of **sankaatbhaag** (countable parts) **vridhis** (multiplications) below one **kaandak** (section) **pramaan** (measure), how many will there be below one more **kaandak** **pramaan**? In this way, by applying the **pramaan** (measure) to the **falagurinat** (fruit-multiplied) **ichcha** (desire) without changing it, there are countless **sankaatbhaag** **vridhis** with the **kaandak** and the square of the **kaandak**.

The square of the **kaandak** of the **sankaatbhaag** **vridhis** and one **kaandak** together (16+4) is the place of infinite multiplication. ||222||

If there are a certain number of **sankaatbhaag** **vridhis** below one **sankaat** (countable) **gurug** (heavy) **vridhi** (multiplication), how many will there be below one more **kaandak** **pramaan** **sankaat** **vridhis**? In this way, by applying the **pramaan** (measure) to the **falagurinat** (fruit-multiplied) **ichcha** (desire) without changing it, there are countless **sankaatbhaag** **vridhis** with the **kaandak** and the square of the **kaandak** **pramaan**.

The square of the **kaandak** of the **sankaatgun** (countable-multiplied) **vridhis** and one **kaandak** together (16+4) is the place of infinite multiplication. ||223||

If there are a certain number of **sankaatgun** **vridhis** below one **asankaatgun** (uncountable-multiplied) **vridhi**, how many will there be below one more **kaandak** **pramaan** **asankaatgun** **vridhis**? In this way, by applying the **pramaan** (measure) to the **falagun** (fruit-multiplied) **ichcha** (desire) without changing it, there are countless **sankaatgun** **vridhis** with the **kaandak** and the square of the **kaandak** **pramaan** below the **ashtaank** (eight-fold).

Thus, within one **shat-sthan-patit** (six-place-fallen), there are infinite **bhaag** (part) **vridhis** with the amount of five **kaandaks** multiplied together (444444444, i.e., 44421024), four squares of the square of the **kaandak**, six cubes of the **kaandak**, four squares of the **kaandak**, and one **kaandak** **pramaan**. The number of **sankaatbhaag** **vridhis** is 1024 + (256 + 256 + 256 + 256) + (64 + 64 + 64 + 64 + 64 + 64) + (16 + 16 + 16 + 16 + 4) so many times. The number of **asankaatbhaag** **vridhis** is one square of the **kaandak**, three cubes of the **kaandak**, three squares of the **kaandak**, and one **kaandak** **pramaan** - 256 + (64 + 64 + 64) + (16 + 16 + 16) + 4. The number of **sankaatbhaag** **vridhis** is one cube of the **kaandak**, two squares of the **kaandak**, and one **kaandak** **pramaan** - 64 + (16 + 16) + 4. The number of **sankaatgun** **vridhis** is one square of the **kaandak** and one **kaandak** **pramaan** - 16 + 4. The number of **asankaatgun** **vridhis** is one **kaandak** **pramaan** - 4. The **ashtaank** is one, which is the lowest place. In this regard, the following **sutra** (formula) also exists: "Below infinite multiplication, there are infinite **bhaag** **vridhis** - five times the **gurinat** (multiplied) **kaandak**, four squares of the square of the **kaandak**, six cubes of the **kaandak**, four squares of the **kaandak**, and one **kaandak** **pramaan**. (444444444 - 1024) + (4 squares of the square of the **kaandak** = 44256) + (4346) + (4244) + 4 or 1024 + 256 + 256 + 256 + 256 + 64 + 64 + 64 + 64 + 64 + 64 + 16 + 16 + 16 + 16 + 4 ||224||

Below infinite multiplication, there are countless **bhaag** **vridhis** with one square of the square of the **kaandak**, three cubes of the **kaandak**, three squares of the **kaandak**, and one **kaandak**. ||228|| [(4445) + (4343) + (4243) + 4] or [256 + 64 + 64 + 64 + 16 + 16 + 16 + 4]

Below the place of infinite **bhaag** **vridhis**, the measure of **sankaatbhaag** **vridhis** is one cube of the **kaandak**, two squares of the **kaandak**, and one **kaandak**. [43(4242) + 4] ||226|| or [64 + 16 + 16 + 4]

1. Dhaval Pu. 12 p. 167. 2. Pakshal Pu. 12 p. 167-168. 3. Dhaval Pu. 12 p. 16. 4. Dhaval Pu. 12 p. 1

Page #446:
---------------------------
412/ Go. Sa. Jokkand
Gatha 323-331
The Kandakavarg of Sankhyatgunavriddhis and the Kandak (16+4) go and become the place of Anantgunavriddhi. ||223|| Here, everywhere, the measure of the countless parts of an angul is the number four (4) for the Anksandristi.
The Kandak measure of Asankhyat gunavriddhi goes and the place of Anant gunavriddhi is produced. ||116||
Doubt - How much distance does the Jghanya place increase by, going in order of Sankhyat Bhagavriddhi, to become double?
Solution - To produce understanding in ignorant people, the form of doubling has been described in three ways. It is of three types, by the difference of Sthul, Sukshma and Madhyama. The Sthul form is like this - before the Jghanya place, the Sankhyat Bhagavriddhi places of the excellent Sankhyat measure are doubled, because from the production of one Jghanya place from the excellent Sankhyat measure Sankhyat Praksheps, the Jghanya place produced by the increase, along with the Ogh Jghanya place, becomes double.
Doubt - How is this form Sthul?
Solution - Because in this, leaving out Pishul etc., the doubling form has been described from the Jghanya place produced only by Praksheps.
The Madhyama form is like this - in the Sankhyat Bhagavriddhi places of the measure of the countless parts of an angul, the construction should be done from the first place of the excellent Sankhyat measure Sankhyat Bhagavriddhi places. In them, three-fourths (1) of the excellent Sankhyat measure, going forward, becomes double. Sixteen (16) Anks are taken for the Sandristi for the excellent Sankhyat. Dividing the excellent Sankhyat into the Jghanya place, Sankhyat Bhagavriddhi happens. Adding it to the Jghanya place, the first Sankhyat Bhagavriddhi place happens. Adding two Praksheps and one Pishul to the Jghanya place, the second Sankhyat Bhagavriddhi place is produced. Adding three Praksheps, three Pishuls and one Pishulapishul to the Jghanya place, the third Sankhyat Bhagavriddhi place happens. Adding four Praksheps, six Pishuls, four Pishulapishuls and one Pishulapishul pishul to the Jghanya place, the fourth Sankhyat Bhagavriddhi place happens. In this way, one should know and go forward. The special thing is that the Praksheps increase in order from one to one more. The Pishuls increase in the form of the collection of the past distance, one less. The Pishulapishuls increase in the form of the second collection of the past distance, two less. The Pishulapishul pishuls increase in the form of the third collection of the past distance, three less. In this way, one should say further. Their Sandristi is this
1. Shraval Pu. 12 p. 168.
2. Dhaval Pu. 12 p. 165.
3. Dhaval Pu. 12 p. 174-174.

Page #447:
---------------------------
Guide :- Acharya Shri Suvihasagar Ji Maharaj
Verses 323-331
Janmarg/413

Here in the context, there are only twelve (12) projections, sixty-six (66) Pishuls and two hundred twenty (220) Pishulapishuls. By establishing this, we demonstrate the doubling growth.

Doubt - There are only 000000000000 (1641-12) projections in the three-fourths of the Utkrishta Sankhyat. Separating these 000000000000, if there are only 0000000000 projections in the one-fourth of the Utkrishta Sankhyat, then there would be a doubling growth of 00000000, but it is not so. Therefore, doubling growth does not occur here?

Solution - No, because only one-fourth of the Utkrishta Sankhyat are projections compared to the Pishuls. For example, the three-fourths of the Utkrishta Sankhyat are Pishuls in the form of the sum of one less than three-fourths of the Utkrishta Sankhyat in the Sankhyatbhaga Vriddhi Sthan. By equating them sequentially, starting from one and increasing by one, taking one Pishul from the first position and merging it with the last Pishuls, there are only three-fourths of the Utkrishta Sankhyat Pishuls. In the second position, taking two Pishuls and merging them with two less than the extreme Pishuls, there are also only three-fourths of the Utkrishta Sankhyat Pishuls. In the third position, taking 000000000000 Pishuls and merging them with three less than the extreme Pishuls, there are only three-fourths of the Utkrishta Sankhyat Pishuls. In this way, by equating all, there are three-fourths of the Utkrishta Sankhyat - 000000000000, and the half of one less than three-fourths of the Utkrishta Sankhyat, which is the extended area. It is this:
000000000000

Then, from this, one should separate the one-fourth of the Utkrishta Sankhyat as the diameter and its three-fourths as the dimension.
000000000000

The remaining area is the three-fourths of the Utkrishta Sankhyat as the length and one-eighth less than the half of the Utkrishta Sankhyat as the extended area.

Then, dividing it into three parts, taking the one-eighth of the Utkrishta Sankhyat Pishuls from the third part and merging them with the deficient row of the second part, the first and second parts are situated with the one-fourth of the Utkrishta Sankhyat as the dimension and its one-eighth as the diameter. Then, from them,

Page #448:
---------------------------
## Chapter 414 / Go. Sa. Jivakanda

**Second Part**

When the second part is placed on top of the first part, a square area with a diameter of the fourth part of the **utkrista** number and a **praayam** equal to the diameter is formed. When this is combined with the previous area, which has a diameter of the fourth part of the **utkrista** number and a **praayam** of three-fourths of the diameter, an area with a **pramaan** of the **utkrista** number and a diameter of one-fourth of the **pramaan** is formed. Its **pramaan** is:

```
00
0
0000000000000000
?
20 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 400
00
```

**Verses 323-331**

```
0000
16
0000ooooooo
```

Here, taking the **utkrista** number as the **pishul**, there is a **sankaatbhaagavrudhi** projection. Therefore, all the projections are one-fourth of the **utkrista** number. When these (4) projections are combined with the previous three-fourths of the **utkrista** number (12) projections, there are **utkrista** number (16) **sankaatbhaagavrudhi** projections. All these together form a **jghanya** space. When this is combined with a **jghanya** space, there is a double increase. The remaining **pishul** and **pishula pishul** remain in the same position. This is also the gross meaning.

Now, we will describe the subtle meaning in relation to this. By dividing the **utkrista** number into fifty-six parts, forty-one parts go forward from the first **sankaatbhaagavrudhi** space or descend fifteen parts from the last space of the **utkrista** number **sankaatbhaagavrudhi** spaces, creating a space of double increase there. For example, when forty-one parts are situated by climbing up, there are forty-one parts of total projections in that space.

Now, when there are fifteen parts of total projections, a **jghanya** space is created. We will explain the method of their creation. The number of **pishul** related to that space is only the sum of forty-one parts (41).

**Doubt:** Why don't we say that it is less than one digit?

**Solution:** No, because due to its **stoka** nature, it does not have prominence here.

Then, when they are equated, an area is formed with a **praayam** of forty-one parts and a **trishkambh** of half of forty-one parts - 2034. To take an area of fifteen parts wide and forty-one parts long within this area, one should separate and establish a separate area of five parts wide and forty-one parts long, leaving a diameter equal to fifteen parts of **pishul** from the first **praayam** and exceeding by half a part. Then, one should separate and establish a separate area with a diameter of half a part and a **praayam** of forty-one parts. Then, one should cut and separate an area with a diameter of one part and a **praayam** of one part. The remaining area from this taken area is 34. This area...

Page #449:
---------------------------
## Verse 332
**Janamaarga/415**

If you divide the base into four parts and join them above the diameter, you get a region with four parts of diameter and five parts of base (4, 5). If you place this on top of a region with five parts of diameter and forty-one parts of base, you get a region with five parts of diameter and forty-five parts of base (5, 45). If you divide this into three parts and join two parts of diameter above one part of diameter, you get a rhombus region with fifteen parts of diameter and fifteen parts of base (15, 15). If you place this on top of a region with fifteen parts of diameter and forty-one parts of base, you get a region with fifteen parts of diameter and fifty-six parts of base (15, 56). There should be a number of *pishula* equal to the number of parts of the base, which is fifty-six. 

There is also a question about the *pishula* because when you divide a *sakala prakshepa* by the number of *pishula*, you get a *vishala*. Therefore, there are fifteen *sakala prakshepa* in this region. When you combine these *sakala prakshepa* with the forty-one *sakala prakshepa* of the previous region, you get fifty-six *sakala prakshepa*. All of these together form a *jghanya sthana* because the fifty-six *sakala prakshepa* produce a number of *sakala prakshepa* equal to the number of *pishula*.

**Doubt:** How do we know that the *jghanya sthana* is formed by the number of *sakala prakshepa* equal to the number of *pishula*?

**Solution:** The reason is that when you divide the *jghanya sthana* by the number of *pishula*, the resulting quotient is considered a *sakala prakshepa*.

If you combine this *jghanya sthana* with itself, it doubles in size. Then, if you take half the diameter of one part and one part of the base from the previously established region and place them on top of the fifty-six parts, dividing one part into twelve parts, you get one *sakala prakshepa* in each of these parts. These *sakala prakshepa* and the remaining *pishula* are more numerous. This explanation is also gross.

**The statement of the scriptural knowledge in letters:**

**The vow to speak the scriptural knowledge in letters and the countless people who are unlettered:**

**They are the *paryayasamaasa* of the unlettered scriptural knowledge. I will now speak the scriptural knowledge in letters.** (332)

**Explanation:**

There are three types of letters: *ladbhyakshara*, *nirvratyakshara*, and *sansthanaakshara*. The *ladbhyakshara* refers to all the *kshayopashama* of beings from the subtle *nigoda* to the *shruta kevali*. The *nirvratyakshara* refers to the words that come out of the mouths of beings. There are two types of *nirvratyakshara*: *vyakta* and *avyakta*. The *vyakta* *nirvratyakshara* is that of the *sanjee panchendriya paryaptaka*. The *avyakta* *nirvratyakshara* is that of beings from the *dondriya* to the *sanjee panchendriya paryaptaka*. The *sansthanaakshara*...

Page #450:
---------------------------
## 416/ Go. Sa. Jiva Kanda
## Gatha 133-334

The second name of the **sthapana akshara** is **sthapana akshara**, one should accept this. The **sthapana akshara** is that which is established in the intellect or written in an inseparable form as "this is this akshara".

## Akshara Shrutagyan

"The **artha akshara** is obtained by dividing the **urvak** of the last **paryaya samas** by the **urvak** of the last **paryaya samas**. Multiplying the last **urvak** by this **artha akshara** results in **akshara shrutagyan**, as said by the **Jinas** (Shruta Kevali)."

## Explanation

The **urvak** of the **paryaya samas shrutagyan** is the last **vikalapa** which is obtained by going up through the six **vriddhis** of the **pra sankhyat** **loka praman**. Multiplying this last **vikalapa**, i.e., the **udak**, by infinite forms results in **akshara shrutagyan**.

## Question

Why is this **shrutagyan** called **akshara**?

## Answer

This **shrutagyan** is called **akshara** because it is derived from a single **akshara** which is bound by the **dravya shruta**.

## Explanation

When the **akshara shrutagyan** is divided by the total number of living beings in the last **paryaya samas** **gyan** **sthana**, the quotient obtained is added to the same **paryaya samas** **gyan**, resulting in the **akshara shrutagyan**.

## Two Opinions

There are two opinions in the **Dhavala Grantha** regarding **akshara gyana**. According to one opinion, **akshara gyana** is produced when there is an infinite increase in the last **paryaya samas gyana**. According to the other opinion, **akshara gyana** is produced when there is an infinite increase in the division of the last **paryaya samas gyana**. It cannot be said which of these two is correct due to the influence of the **Shruta Kevali**. Therefore, both opinions have been compiled.

## Gatha 333

Keeping both these opinions in mind, **Gatha 333** does not say infinite increase or infinite division, but says that **akshara gyana** is produced by multiplying the last **paryaya samas gyana** by the quotient obtained by dividing **akshara gyana** by the last **paryaya samas gyana**. This statement does not favor any of the above two opinions.

## Evidence of the Subject Matter Written in the Shruta

"The **bhavas** of the **vanijja** are infinite divisions, and the **shran** is the **bhilappa** of the **shran**. The **purana** of the **patharigajja** is infinite divisions, and it is **suvarinabaddha**."

## Notes

1. Dhavala Pu. 13 p. 264-265.
2. Dhavala Pu. 6 p. 22.
3. Dhavala Pu. 135. 264.
4. Jayadhavala Pu. 1 p. 42, Dhavala Pu. 6 p. 57 and Pu. 12 p. 171.
5. This Gatha...

Page #451:
---------------------------
## Gatha 335
## Gnanamargana/417

**Gatha-artha:** The infinite part of the **anabhilapya** (unspeakable) substances is the **praman prajnapaneya** (knowable) substance. The infinite part of the **prajnapaneya** substances is the **shruta-nibaddha** (scriptural) substance. || 334 ||

**Visheshartha:** In this Gatha, **kalma** (time), **namar** (name), and **anatbhaga** (infinite part) substances are **anabhilapya**, which are known without instruction. **Shruta-gyan** (scriptural knowledge) is obtained only through instruction, this is not an absolute rule.

**Shankha:** **Shruta-gyan** and **keval-gyan** (omniscience) are similar. This is not correct because this Gatha states that the subject of **shruta-gyan** is not all substances, but the infinite part of **prajnapaneya** substances.

**Samadhan:** The infinite part of all substances may be the subject of **dravya-shruta-gyan** (knowledge of substance), but the subject of **bhava-shruta-gyan** (knowledge of emotions) is all substances. Because without accepting this, there will be a contradiction with the influence of the **Tirthankaras'** (Jain prophets) words.

**Shankha:** How can **purna-shruta** (complete scriptural knowledge) be generated?

**Samadhan:** This is not a flaw, because it can be generated through **anukta-avgraha** (understanding the unsaid), **iha** (desire), **avaya** (belief), and **dharana** (concentration).

This Gatha explains the evidence of **dravya-shruta**. This Gatha is not composed with respect to **bhava-shruta**. With respect to **bhava-shruta**, **shruta-gyan** and **keval-gyan** are similar.

The nature of **akshara-samas-gyan** (knowledge of letter combinations) and **pada-gyan** (knowledge of words) is that it increases by one letter at a time.

**Sankeje khalu uddhe padanam hodi sudarganam || 335 ||**

**Gatha-artha:** When the number of letters increases one by one, starting from the knowledge of one letter, then **pada** (word) named **shruta-gyan** is obtained. || 335 ||

**Visheshartha:** The knowledge of letters increases only by one letter at a time, there are no other increases, this is the traditional teaching of the **Acharyas** (Jain teachers). Many **Acharyas** say that **akshara-shruta-gyan** also increases through six types of increases, but their statement is not correct, because it is not possible for six types of increases to occur above **akshara-gyan**, which is the numerical part of all **shruta-gyan**.

There are numerical alternatives for **shruta-gyan** above **akshara-shruta-gyan** and below **pada-shruta-gyan**.

1. "Sudakevale cha ganam donavi sarisagi hoti" Go. Ji. Ga. 366]
2. Badal Pu. 6 p. 57
3. Dhaval Pu. 12 p. 171
4. Dhaval Pu. 6 p. 22-23

Page #452:
---------------------------
418 / Go. Sa. Jivakanda
This is the name of the compound. The last letter compound is called the name-based Shrutagyan when one letter of the Akshargyan is added to the Shrutagyan.
The meaning word, the proof word and the middle word are the three types of words. The meaning word is the one that is known by the number of letters. The meaning word is unstable because the meaning is known by the indefinite number of letters and this is not known because the meaning of 'A' is Vishnu, the meaning of 'I' is Kama and the meaning of 'K' is Brahma, in this way the meaning is achieved by one letter in each place. The proof word is produced by eight letters. It is stable because its number eight is fixed.
Verse 336
First word - like "Tie the white cow with a rope" or "Bring fire" or "Teach the student knowledge" or "Feed the child milk" etc.
Proof word - There are four quarters in a verse. Each quarter has eight letters. Each quarter is called 'proof word' because the number of letters in the proof word is fixed.
Here, neither the meaning word nor the proof word is useful, but the middle word is useful.
Tithihan Patti Pamanapadamatyamajzhimapadam va Makrimapdu Butta Puthabanganam Padavibhaga || 16 || 3
Tivishan Tu Pavam Bhanidam Shrathapad - Paman - Majzhimapadam ti. Mipadean Bhanida Punyanganam Padavibhaga || 66 || *
Word, proof word and middle word, this way the word is said to be of three types. The middle word divides the previous parts.
Proof of the letters of the middle word
Solasasamchatisasa Kodi Tiyasidilakkhayam Cheva.
Sattasahaasasahaya Atthasiido Ya Padavana. || 336 ||
Verse meaning - Sixteen hundred thirty-four crore eighty-three lakh seven thousand eight hundred eighty (16348308) letters are in one middle word || 336 ||
Special meaning - Sixteen hundred thirty-four crore eighty-three lakh seventy-eight thousand eight hundred eighty-eight (16348307888) letters make one word of Dravyashruta. The Bhavashrut produced from these letters is also called 'word' by courtesy.
1. Dachal . 6 . 23 . 2. Chaval Pu. 13 P. 265-266 . 3. Babal Pu. 13 P. 266 4. Dhaval Pu. 6 P. 196, Jayadhaval Pu. 1 P. 62 . 5. Ghaval Pu. 6 Pu. 23

Page #453:
---------------------------
## Gatha 337
## Jnanamarga/416

"Sixteen hundred and thirty-four crore, eighty-three lakhs, eighty-eight thousand, seventy-two hundred, and eighty-eight are the number of letters in a **madhyama pada** (intermediate stage). Sixteen hundred and thirty-four crore, eighty-three lakhs, eighty-eight thousand, seventy-two hundred, and eighty-eight are the number of letters in a **madhyama pada** (intermediate stage). Sixteen hundred and thirty-four crore, eighty-three lakhs, eighty-eight thousand, seventy-two hundred, and eighty-eight are the number of letters in a **madhyama pada** (intermediate stage). Sixteen hundred and thirty-four crore, eighty-three lakhs, eighty-eight thousand, seventy-two hundred, and eighty-eight are the number of letters in a **madhyama pada** (intermediate stage). Sixteen hundred and thirty-four crore, eighty-three lakhs, eighty-eight thousand, seventy-two hundred, and eighty-eight are the number of letters in a **madhyama pada** (intermediate stage). Sixteen hundred and thirty-four crore, eighty-three lakhs, eighty-eight thousand, seventy-two hundred, and eighty-eight are the number of letters in a **madhyama pada** (intermediate stage). Sixteen hundred and thirty-four crore, eighty-three lakhs, eighty-eight thousand, seventy-two hundred, and eighty-eight are the number of letters in a **madhyama pada** (intermediate stage). Sixteen hundred and thirty-four crore, eighty-three lakhs, eighty-eight thousand, seventy-two hundred, and eighty-eight are the number of letters in a **madhyama pada** (intermediate stage). Sixteen hundred and thirty-four crore, eighty-three lakhs, eighty-eight thousand, seventy-two hundred, and eighty-eight are the number of letters in a **madhyama pada** (intermediate stage). Sixteen hundred and thirty-four crore, eighty-three lakhs, eighty-eight thousand, seventy-two hundred, and eighty-eight are the number of letters in a **madhyama pada** (intermediate stage). Sixteen hundred and thirty-four crore, eighty-three lakhs, eighty-eight thousand, seventy-two hundred, and eighty-eight are the number of letters in a **madhyama pada** (intermediate stage). Sixteen hundred and thirty-four crore, eighty-three lakhs, eighty-eight thousand, seventy-two hundred, and eighty-eight are the number of letters in a **madhyama pada** (intermediate stage). Sixteen hundred and thirty-four crore, eighty-three lakhs, eighty-eight thousand, seventy-two hundred, and eighty-eight are the number of letters in a **madhyama pada** (intermediate stage). Sixteen hundred and thirty-four crore, eighty-three lakhs, eighty-eight thousand, seventy-two hundred, and eighty-eight are the number of letters in a **madhyama pada** (intermediate stage). Sixteen hundred and thirty-four crore, eighty-three lakhs, eighty-eight thousand, seventy-two hundred, and eighty-eight are the number of letters in a **madhyama pada** (intermediate stage). Sixteen hundred and thirty-four crore, eighty-three lakhs, eighty-eight thousand, seventy-two hundred, and eighty-eight are the number of letters in a **madhyama pada** (intermediate stage). Sixteen hundred and thirty-four crore, eighty-three lakhs, eighty-eight thousand, seventy-two hundred, and eighty-eight are the number of letters in a **madhyama pada** (intermediate stage). Sixteen hundred and thirty-four crore, eighty-three lakhs, eighty-eight thousand, seventy-two hundred, and eighty-eight are the number of letters in a **madhyama pada** (intermediate stage). Sixteen hundred and thirty-four crore, eighty-three lakhs, eighty-eight thousand, seventy-two hundred, and eighty-eight are the number of letters in a **madhyama pada** (intermediate stage). Sixteen hundred and thirty-four crore, eighty-three lakhs, eighty-eight thousand, seventy-two hundred, and eighty-eight are the number of letters in a **madhyama pada** (intermediate stage). Sixteen hundred and thirty-four crore, eighty-three lakhs, eighty-eight thousand, seventy-two hundred, and eighty-eight are the number of letters in a **madhyama pada** (intermediate stage). Sixteen hundred and thirty-four crore, eighty-three lakhs, eighty-eight thousand, seventy-two hundred, and eighty-eight are the number of letters in a **madhyama pada** (intermediate stage). Sixteen hundred and thirty-four crore, eighty-three lakhs, eighty-eight thousand, seventy-two hundred, and eighty-eight are the number of letters in a **madhyama pada** (intermediate stage). Sixteen hundred and thirty-four crore, eighty-three lakhs, eighty-eight thousand, seventy-two hundred, and eighty-eight are the number of letters in a **madhyama pada** (intermediate stage). Sixteen hundred and thirty-four crore, eighty-three lakhs, eighty-eight thousand, seventy-two hundred, and eighty-eight are the number of letters in a **madhyama pada** (intermediate stage). Sixteen hundred and thirty-four crore, eighty-three lakhs, eighty-eight thousand, seventy-two hundred, and eighty-eight are the number of letters in a **madhyama pada** (intermediate stage). Sixteen hundred and thirty-four crore, eighty-three lakhs, eighty-eight thousand, seventy-two hundred, and eighty-eight are the number of letters in a **madhyama pada** (intermediate stage). Sixteen hundred and thirty-four crore, eighty-three lakhs, eighty-eight thousand, seventy-two hundred, and eighty-eight are the number of letters in a **madhyama pada** (intermediate stage). Sixteen hundred and thirty-four crore, eighty-three lakhs, eighty-eight thousand, seventy-two hundred, and eighty-eight are the number of letters in a **madhyama pada** (intermediate stage). Sixteen hundred and thirty-four crore, eighty-three lakhs, eighty-eight thousand, seventy-two hundred, and eighty-eight are the number of letters in a **madhyama pada** (intermediate stage). Sixteen hundred and thirty-four crore, eighty-three lakhs, eighty-eight thousand, seventy-two hundred, and eighty-eight are the number of letters in a **madhyama pada** (intermediate stage). Sixteen hundred and thirty-four crore, eighty-three lakhs, eighty-eight thousand, seventy-two hundred, and eighty-eight are the number of letters in a **madhyama pada** (intermediate stage). Sixteen hundred and thirty-four crore, eighty-three lakhs, eighty-eight thousand, seventy-two hundred, and eighty-eight are the number of letters in a **madhyama pada** (intermediate stage). Sixteen hundred and thirty-four crore, eighty-three lakhs, eighty-eight thousand, seventy-two hundred, and eighty-eight are

Page #454:
---------------------------
420/Go. Sa. Jivakanda
Gatha 338-336
Solution - It does not happen, because Akshargyan is the numerical part of Sakalathvagyan. When it arises, there is only increase in the numerical part and numerical multiplication. There are no six types of increases, because there is a contradiction in believing that there are six types of increases for the one who has gained strength through Akshar-rupa Gyana.
The Shrutagnyan called Sanghata is produced by the numerical terms. Margna is done by the four gatis. The number of terms by which one Prithvi of Narakgati is represented, that many terms and the Shrutagnyan produced from them is called 'Sanghata'. Similarly, one should say by taking refuge in all gatis and all Margnas. Among the rights of Prathipatti, each right is called Sanghata. 3
Prathipatti Shrutagnyan Ekadargavirinaruvyasanghadasudadu Upari Puvva Va.
Vane Sankheje Sanghade Uddhamhi Padivatti. ||338||
The Sanghata Shrutagnyan, which describes the Tharthaparaka Shiksha, when it increases one by one in the order of each Akshar, and when the numerical thousand Sanghata increases, then there is a Shrutagnyan called Prathipatti. ||338||
Special Meaning - When an Akshar-Amit Shrutagnyan increases above the Sanghata Shrutagnyan, there is a Shrutagnyan called Sanghata-Samas. In this way, the Shrutagnyan called Sanghata-Samas keeps increasing until a Prathipatti Shrutagnyan is obtained which is less than an Akshar Shrutagnyan. Here also, when Sanghata is perceived, it is also Sanghata, understanding this, Sanghata-Samas is formed. The number of terms by which one Gati, Indriya, Kaya and Yogadi Margna is represented, that many terms is the Prathipatti. 6 The number of rights of Anuyogadwar, each right is called Prathipatti. One Prathipatti Shrutagnyan is obtained by taking refuge in the numerical Sanghata Shrutagnyans.
Anuyog Dhrutishan Chaugaisaruvaruvayparivattido Du Ubari Puvya Va.
Vanne Sankheje Padiyattiudhamhi Parinuyogam. ||336|| Gathaarth - When the Prathipatti Gyana, which describes the nature of the four gatis, increases one by one in the order of each Akshar, and when the numerical Prathipatti increases, then there is an Anuyog Shrutagnyan. ||336||
.
1. Dhaval Pu. 13 p. 265. 2. Dhaval Pu. 6 p. 23. 3. Dhaval Pu. 13. 216. 4. Dhaval Pu. 6 p. 23-24. 5. Dhaval Pu. 13 p. 266. 6. Dhaval Pu. 6 p. 24. 7. Dhaval Pu. 13 p. 269.

Page #455:
---------------------------
## Gatha 340-341
## Jnanamargana/421

**Special Meaning:** When one letter of Shruta Jnana called **Pratipatti** increases, **Pratipatti Samas** named Dhatu Jnana is born. In this way, **Pratipatti Samas** Shruta Jnana keeps increasing until **Anuyogadwar** named Shruta Jnana is attained, which is one letter less. Again, when one letter increases in it, **Anuyogadwar** Shruta Jnana is attained.

**Doubt:** What is the meaning of **Anuyogadwar**?

**Solution:** Each authority of **Prabhut** is called **Prabhut Prabhut**, and each authority of **Prabhut Prabhut** is called **Anuyogadwar**.

The meaning known through the words of the fourteen **Marganas** and the Shruta Jnana born from them is called **Anuyog**.

**Gatha Meaning:** When the **Anuyog** which narrates the fourteen **Marganas** increases by one letter each time, according to the aforementioned order, and the increase of **Chaturadi Anuyog** happens, then **Prabhut Prabhut** Shruta Jnana is attained. ||340|| **Prabhut** and **Adhikar** both refer to the same meaning. Therefore, the authority of **Prabhut** is called **Prabhut Prabhut**, as said by the Jinas (Shruta Kevali). ||341||

**Special Meaning:** When one letter of Shruta Jnana called **Anuyog** increases, **Anuyog Samas** Shruta Jnana is attained. In this way, **Anuyog Samas** named Shruta Jnana is formed by the increase of one letter each time, until **Prabhut Prabhut** named Shruta Jnana is attained, which is one letter less. When one letter of Shruta Jnana increases above it, **Prabhut Prabhut** named Shruta Jnana is born. By the Shruta Jnanas in the form of **Anuyogadwar** in number, one **Prabhut Prabhut** named Shruta Jnana is born.

**Doubt:** What is **Prabhut Prabhut**?

**Solution:** By grasping the **Anuyogadwar** in number, one **Prabhut Prabhut** Shruta Jnana is attained.

The authority of **Vastu** named Shruta Jnana is called **Prabhut**, and the authority of **Adhikar** is called **Prabhut Prabhut**.

1. Dhaval Pu. 6 Pg. 24
2. Dhaval Pu. 13 Pg. 266-270
3. Babal Pu. 6 Pg. 24
4. Dhaval Pu. 6 Pg. 24
5. Dhaval Pu. 13 Pg. 270

Page #456:
---------------------------
English Translation (preserving Jain terms):

422/Go. Sa. Jivakanda
Gatha 342-343

Pramata ka svarupa dugavara-parasar uri rahane kamera sara nile.
Dugavara-pahude sanuddhe khalu hodi pahuyam ||342||
Gatha-artha - Gradually, one by one, the increase in Prabhuta-prabhrita Jnana occurs, and when the increase of twenty-four Prabhuta-prabhrita takes place, then one Prabhrita Shrutajnana is attained. ||342||

Vishesha-artha - In one substance, there are twenty Prabhuta, and in one Prabhrita, there are twenty-four Prabhrita-prabhrita. That is, in one substance, there are twenty Adhikara, and in each Adhikara, there are twenty-four sub-Adhikara.
When the Prabhuta-prabhrita Shrutajnana increases by one letter, the Prabhuta-prabhrita Samasa Shrutajnana is produced. With the further increase of one letter and so on, the Prabhuta-prabhrita Samasa keeps increasing until the Prabhrita Shrutajnana, which is one letter less, is attained. When the Shrutajnana increases by one letter further, the Prabhrita Shrutajnana is produced.
The statement that the twenty-four Prabhrita-prabhrita are grasped, and one Prabhrita Shrutajnana is attained, is the meaning of the above.

Vastu Shrutajnana vimsa-vimsa pahupahiyare ekkavatthuahiyaro.
Eshakaeshakavaranuddi kamenam samvattaga yaya ||343||

Gatha-artha - In each substance, there are twenty-twenty Prabhrita Adhikaras. Everywhere, the increase of one letter occurs in succession. ||343||

Vishesha-artha - When the Prabhrita Shrutajnana increases by one letter, the Prabhrita Samasa Shrutajnana is produced. In this way, the Prabhrita Samasa Shrutajnana keeps increasing by one letter at a time until the twentieth Prabhrita is attained. With the further increase of one letter, the twentieth Prabhuta, i.e., the Vastu Shrutajnana, is produced.

Ekkekkamhi ya vatthu vimsa vimsa ca pahuda bhaniva.
Visama-sama hi ya vatthu savve puna pahudehim sama ||86||
In each and every substance, twenty-twenty Prabhuta are said. The substances are both uneven and even, but all of them are even with respect to the Prabhrita.

Page #457:
---------------------------
## Gatha 344-345
**Janamaganaga/423**

**Gatha 344**
The number of Yantus in each of the fourteen Purvas is as follows: Ten, fourteen, eight, eighteen, twelve, twelve, sixteen, twenty, thirty, fifteen, ten, ten, ten, ten.

**Gatha 344 Explanation**
In each of the fourteen Purvas, there are respectively ten, fourteen, eight, eighteen, twelve, twelve, sixteen, twenty, thirty, fifteen, ten, ten, ten, ten Vastu (objects) as their authority.

**Special Explanation**
The Gathas that explain the number of authorities (Vastus) in the fourteen Purvas are as follows:

**Gatha 14**
Ten, fourteen, eight, eighteen, twelve in two Purvas, sixteen, twenty, thirty, and fifteen in the tenth, thus the number of Vastus in these ten Purvas is stated in this order.

**Gatha 85**
I bow to the remaining four Purvas, which have ten Vastus each.

**Arrangement of the numbers:**
| 10 | 14 | 8 | 18 | 12 | 12 | 16 | 20 | 30 | 15 | 10 | 10 | 10 | 10 |

**Gatha 72**
The number of Vastus in each Purva should be known in order: ten, fourteen, eight, eighteen, twelve in two places (two Purvas), sixteen, twenty, thirty, fifteen.

**Gatha 73**
This is the number of the ten Purvas. After this, one should know that there are ten in each of the four Purvas.

**Gatha 74**
The number of Vastus in the four Purvas after the ten is ten each.

**Gatha 345**
The names of the fourteen Purvas are: Upayapushvagarinaya, Viriyapabad, Sthiranatthiya, Pavada, Ranaranasacchappavada, Padakammappavada.

Page #458:
---------------------------
424/Go. Sa. Jivakanda
Verse 346
Pacchakkhane vijjanuvaadakallaanaparanavaade ya.
Kiriyavisalpubve kamasoth tiloyabindusare ya ||346|| Gathary- Utpadapurva, Agrayaniyapurva, Viryapravadapurva, Astinaastipravadapurva, Gyanapravadapurva, Satyapravadapurva, Pratmapravadapurva, Karmapracharapurva, Pramanavarapurga, Jinudan, Kalyanapravadapurva, Pranavapradapurva, Kriyavisalapurva, Trilokabindusarapurva are the fourteen types of purvajnana in order. ||345-346||
Vishesharth- The twelfth Istibada anga is of five types - Parikarma, Sutra, Prathamanuyoga, Purvagata and Chulicka. Out of these, Purvagata is of fourteen types. These are - Utpadapurva, Agrayaniya, Viryanupravad, Astinaastipravad, Gyanapravad, Satyapravad, Pratmapravad, Karmapravad, Pratyakhyanapravad, Vidyanupravad, Kalyanapravad, Pranabaya, Kriyavisal and Lokabindusar. In these fourteen purvas, there are ten, fourteen, eight, eighteen, twelve, twelve, sixteen, twenty, fifteen, ten, ten, ten and ten things, i.e. Maha-Adhikar, respectively. In each thing, there are twenty Prabhrut, i.e. Avantaar Adhikar. In each Prabhrut, there are twenty-four Prabhrut Prabhut.
When the knowledge of one letter increases on top of the knowledge of the thing, then the knowledge of Pad, Sanghat, Pratipatti, Anuyoga, Pramrit Prabhrut etc. increases. When the knowledge of ten things increases, then the knowledge of the first Utpadapurva is attained. Further, with the effort of increasing one letter etc., when the knowledge of fourteen things increases, one letter remains less, then the knowledge of Utpadapurva Samas is attained. When one letter increases in it, then the knowledge of Pragrayaniyapurva is attained. When one letter of knowledge increases further, then the knowledge of Agrayaniya Samas is attained. Further, when one letter increases in order, then the knowledge of Pragrayaniya Samas is attained until the knowledge of eight things less than one letter. When one letter of knowledge increases on it, then the knowledge of the third Viryanupravadpurva is attained. When one letter of knowledge increases further, then the knowledge of Viryanupravad Samas is attained. The knowledge of Viryanupravad Samas is attained until the knowledge of eighteen things less than one letter. When one letter increases in it, then the knowledge of Astinaastipravadpurva is attained. When one letter increases on it, then the knowledge of Astinaastipravad Samas is attained. When one letter increases in order, then the knowledge of Astinaastipravad Samas is attained until the knowledge of twelve things less than one letter. When one letter increases in it, then the knowledge of Gyanapravadpurva is attained. When one letter increases further, then the knowledge of Gyanapravad Samas is attained. When one letter increases in order, then the knowledge of Gyanapravad Samas is attained until the knowledge of twelve things less than one letter. Again, when one letter increases in it, then the knowledge of Satyapravadpurva is attained. Further, in the same order, Satyapravad Samas, Atmapravad, Pratmapravad Samas, Karmapravad, Karmapravad Samas, Pratyakhyanapravad, Pratyakhyanapravad Samas, Vidyanupravad, Vidyanupravad Samas, Kalyanapravad, Kalyanapravad Samas, Pranavaprad, Pranavaprad Samas, Priyavisal, Kriyavisal Samas and Lokabindusar should be stated.
...
-
-
1. Jayaghaval p. 1 p. 26-27.
2. Based on the commentary by Shrimadacharya Prabhayanandi Sivantachakravarti.

Page #459:
---------------------------
## Gatha 347-346
## Sanmargaga 1425

In the fourteen Purvas, the total number of all objects and Prabhutas is 195 and 3600 respectively.
In these 14 Purvas, there are 195 objects and 3600 Prabhutas. ||347||

**Explanation:** In these fourteen Purvas, the number of objects is 10, 14, 8, 18, 12, 12, 16, 20, 30, 15, 10, 10, 10, 10 respectively. The sum of all these objects is 195.

Each object has 20 Prabhutas. The objects in the Purvas are even and odd, but the Prabhutas are even. The sum of the Prabhutas in each Purva is 200, 280, 160, 360, 240, 240, 320, 400, 600, 300, 200, 200, 200, 200. The sum of all the objects is 195. The sum of all the Prabhutas is 3600.

The twenty types of Shrutagyan mentioned earlier are:
-  Arthaprakshar, Pad, Sanghat, Pratipattik, Anuyog, Prabhruta Prabhruta, Prabhruta, Vastu, Purva, and their respective one-letter increments.
-  These are 18 types.
-  With the addition of Paryaya and Paryaya Samaas, there are 20 types of Shrutagyan.

In terms of structure, there are 12 types of Angapravisht and 14 types of Angabahya Samayik, etc.

**Explanation:** The 18 types of Shruta, including Akshar, Akshar Samaas, etc., are mentioned in Gatha 333-347. The Paryaya and Paryaya Samaas Thulgyan are mentioned in Gatha 31-332. The 20 types of Shruta are mentioned in Gatha 317-318. Therefore, these 20 types of Shruta are not mentioned here due to the fault of repetition. Further, Gatha 356-365 will discuss the 12 Angas, and Gatha 366-367 will discuss the 14 types of Akayahya. Therefore, the 12 and 14 types mentioned here are...

1. Dh.Pu. 6 p. 226.

Page #460:
---------------------------
## Chapter 426/Go. Sa. Jivakanda
## Verses 350-351

**Only the names are given.** The twelve categories of Anga-Praveshta are: Praacharaanga, Sutra-Kritaanga, Staanaanga, Samavaayaanga, Vyakhya-Prajnaapti, Dharmakathaanga, Upasakaadhyaayanaanga, Antahkrid-Dashaanga, Anuttaroppaadadika-Dashaanga, Prasnavyaakarna, Vipaakasutra, Ishtivaadaad.

The fourteen categories of Anga-Baahya Shruta are: Samaayik, Chaturvishas-Tava, Vandana, Pratikramana, Vainaayak, Kritikaarma, Dashavakaalik, Uttaraadhyaayana, Kalpavyavhaar, Kalpaakalpa, Mahakalpa, Puundarika, Mahapuundarika, Nishiddhika.

The description of these twelve Angas and fourteen Prakirnakas will be given in the following verses 356-368.

**The total number of words in the twelve Angas is one hundred and twelve crore eighty-three lakh fifty-eight thousand five (1128358005).**

**The average word has sixteen crore thirty-four lakh eighty-three thousand seven hundred eighty-eight (16348307888) letters.** This average word is used to divide the words of the Angas and the Purvas. The number of these average words in the twelve Angas is mentioned above.

**The total number of words in the Shruta-Jnaana is one hundred and twelve crore (double of fifty-six crore) eighty-three lakh fifty-eight thousand five (1128358005).**

The total number of letters in the Shruta-Jnaana is one less than the same number (184467,4407370,6551615). Dividing this number by the number of letters in the average word (16348307888), we get the number of words as one hundred and twelve crore eighty-three lakh fifty-eight thousand five, and 80108175 letters remain. These remaining letters form the fourteen Prakirnakas, which are Anga-Baahya. This is stated in the verse.

**The number of letters in the Anga-Baahya is two crore eighty-three lakh eight thousand seven hundred fifty-nine (28308759).**

**Note:**

* The numbers in the text are written in the traditional Indian numbering system.
* The translation uses the Jain terms as requested.
* The text refers to the Jain scriptures and their contents.

Page #461:
---------------------------
## Gatha 352-354

**Gatha 352-354**
**Gatha 352**
**General Meaning:** Thirty-three consonants, twenty-seven vowels, and four yogavāha (auxiliary letters) are all (33+27+4) sixty-four मूल वर्ण (root letters).
**Specific Meaning:** Twenty-five वर्ग अक्षर (class letters), four अन्तस्थ (intermediate letters), and four उमाक्षर (letters with umlaut) make up thirty-three (33) consonants. A, I, U, ऋ, ऌ, E, ऐ, O, औ are the nine vowels. Each of these has a short, long, and pluta form, making twenty-seven (27) vowels. The four yogavāha are अं, अः, क, and पये. Thus, all the letters (27+33+4) are sixty-four.

**Gatha 353**
**General Meaning:** By thinning out these sixty-four letters and multiplying each by two, then subtracting one, the number of letters in श्रुतज्ञान (scriptural knowledge) is obtained.
**Specific Meaning:** The method of obtaining the total number of letters is described in the thirty-third वेंजरगाइं (chapter), twenty-seventh सरा (section), and भरिगया (sub-section).

**Gatha 354**
**General Meaning:** Those letters are one, four, four, six, seven, four, four, zero, seven, three, seven, zero, nine, five, five, one, six, one.
**Specific Meaning:** The number of letters in the श्रुतज्ञान is 18446744073706551615. Dividing this number by the number of letters in a पद (word), 16348307888, gives a quotient of 1128358005 and a remainder of 80108175 letters. This remainder is less than the number of letters in a word. These letters form the fourteen अङ्गबाह्य प्रकीर्णक (external chapters of the Angas). Their description will be given in Gatha 367-368.

Page #462:
---------------------------
## Chapter 428, Life Chapter
## Verses 352-354

To bring about the mathematical combinations of letters, establish two quantities (two digits) for the sixty-four letters. Then multiply them together, and subtract one from the resulting product to get the total number of combinations. 

The sixty-four letters are: a, ā, ā, 3, i, ī, ī, 3, u, ū, ū, 3, ṛ, ṛ, ṛ, 3, l, l, l, 3, e, e, 2, e, 3, ai, ai, 2, ai, 3, o, o, 2, o, 3, au, au, 2, au, 3, k, kh, g, gh, ṅ, c, ch, j, jh, ṅ, ṭ, ṭh, ḍ, ḍh, ṇ, t, th, d, dh, n, p, ph, b, bh, m, y, r, l, v, ś, ṣ, s, h, k, p, aṁ, aḥ.

**Question:** Why are the five sounds k, kh, g, gh, ṅ not included in these letters?

**Answer:** Because the combinations arising from the sounds following the k-series without vowels are included in the combinations of letters.

The number of these letters (64) is multiplied by two, and then multiplied by itself. This results in the number 18446744073706551616. Subtracting one from this number gives the number of combinations of letters.

**Question:** How are the single and double combinations, etc., of the Shruta Jnana (knowledge of the scriptures) generated by multiplying the number of letters (64) by two and then squaring it? And why is one subtracted from the resulting number?

**Answer:** The first letter has only one combination, because it does not combine with the remaining letters. When considering the second letter, there are two combinations: one combination with respect to its own position, and another combination with the first and second letters. Thus, there are only two combinations.

**Question:** What is a combination? Is it the unity of two letters? Is it the simultaneous pronunciation of two letters? Is it the name for their having the same meaning (one meaning)?

**Answer:** The unity of two letters cannot be a combination, because if we assume unity, then the duality is destroyed, and there is a contradiction in their being a combination. Simultaneous pronunciation is also not the name for a combination, because it is not possible to pronounce all sixty-four letters simultaneously. Therefore, we should accept that the name for a combination is the same meaning.

**Question:** How can many letters existing in one meaning be called one letter?

**Answer:** This is not a fault, because their unity is found through the meaning.

**References:**

1. Dhavala, Vol. 13, Page 246
2. Chavala, Vol. 13, Page 246
3. Dhavala, Vol. 13, Page 250

Page #463:
---------------------------
## Gatha 352-354
## Jnanamarga / 426

It is not appropriate to conclude that in the present time, there is no availability of a single letter for many forceful sounds, because even in the present time, there is availability of a single letter for many sounds like 'tvakmya' etc., in one sense. It is not that only consonants, not differentiated by vowels, have a single letter form, but even many consonants, differentiated by vowels, have a single letter form, because there is no difference between them, as opposed to the existence of many different letters in one sense.

To bring together the combinations of the first and second letters, the number of the first and second letters is thinned out, doubled, and multiplied together, resulting in four (,, ) = 4. Then, subtracting one from this [(4-1) three;], there are three letters in the form of a single combination and a double combination of the first and second letters, and there are the same number of alternatives of Shrutagyan. Because the difference in the cause is inseparable from the difference in the effect. For this reason, the amount is thinned out, and the thinned out amount is established as two digits, multiplied together, and one is subtracted.

When the third letter is desired, there is one letter from a single combination, 1. The second combination of the first and third letters is the second combination, 2. The second combination of the second and third letters is the third combination, 3. The third combination of the first, second, and third letters is the fourth combination, 4. Thus, four combinations are obtained from the one, two, and three combinations of the third letter, 4. Now, it is desirable to bring the combinations of the third letter along with the combinations of the first and second letters. Therefore, by thinning out the three letters and establishing two as their measure, and multiplying them together, eight combinations are produced (, 8). Subtracting one from these, there are seven combinations of the first, second, and third letters together (81). There are as many alternatives of Shrutagyan as there are letters, because there are effects that follow the cause everywhere. Therefore, one is subtracted from the mutually multiplied amount.

Now, the order of their pronunciation is stated - one letter is available from the single combination of the type, 1. One letter alternative is available from the single combination of the shape, 1. One letter alternative is available from the single combination of the shape, 1. Thus, there are three single combination letters, 3. Again, the fourth letter alternative is from the double combination of the A-shape and the La-shape, 4. Again, the fifth letter alternative is from the double combination of the type and the A-shape, 5. Again, the sixth letter alternative is from the double combination of the A-shape and the A-shape, 6. Again, the seventh letter alternative is from the triple combination of the type, the A-shape, and the A-shape, 7. There are as many alternatives of Shrutagyan as there are letters, because there are effects that follow the cause everywhere. Therefore, one is subtracted from the mutually multiplied amount.

Now, when the fourth letter is desired, there is one combination from a single combination, 1. The second letter is double combination in the combination of the first and fourth, 2. The third letter is from the double combination of the second and fourth letters, 3. The fourth letter is from the double combination of the third and fourth letters, 4. The fifth letter is from the triple combination of the first, second, and fourth letters, 5. The first, third, and fourth letters

Page #464:
---------------------------
430/Go, Sa. Jivakanda
Chapter 352-354
The sixth letter is formed by the Trisanyoga of the four letters. Again, the seventh letter is formed by the Visanyoga of the second, third, and fourth letters. Again, the eighth letter is formed by the Chatursanyoga of the first, second, third, and fourth letters. In this way, the fourth letter has eight bhangas. Now, by bringing the bhangas of the fourth letter along with the previously mentioned bhangas, there are sixteen (16) bhangas when the four digits are thinned out and each one of the thinned out amount is doubled and multiplied together (1,2,1). By subtracting one, the bhangas of the letters in the form of Ekasanyoga, Dwisanyoga, Trisanyoga, and Chatursanyoga of four letters are fifteen (15). Here, the order of their pronunciation is stated. As per the type, one letter is formed by Ekasanyoga 1. The second letter is also formed by the Ekasanyoga of Akar. The third letter is also formed by the Ekasanyoga of Prakar 3. The fourth letter is formed by the Ekasanyoga of Ikar 4. Again, the fifth letter is formed by the Dwisanyoga of Akar and Prakar 5. Again, the sixth letter is formed by the Dwisanyoga of Prakar and Pra3kar. Again, the seventh letter is formed by the Dwisanyoga of Prakar and Ikar 7. Again, the eighth letter is formed by the Hisanyoga of Akar and Akar. Again, the ninth letter is formed by the Dwisanyoga of Shrakar and Hkar. Again, the tenth letter is formed by the Dwisanyoga of Pra3kar and Ikar. Again, the eleventh letter is formed by the Trisanyoga of Prakar, Prakar, and Pa3kar 11. Again, the twelfth letter is formed by the Trisanyoga of Prakar, Akar, and Ikar 12. Again, the thirteenth letter is formed by the Trisanyoga of Prakar, Pra3kar, and Ikar 13. Again, the fourteenth letter is formed by the Trisanyoga of Prakar, Akar, and Ikar 14. Again, the fifteenth letter is formed by the Chatursanyoga of Prakar, Prakar, Akar, and Ikar 15! In this way, fifteen letters are formed from the four sides by one, two, three, and four combinations. Here, there are fifteen alternatives of Shrutagyan and the same number of alternatives of Tadavaran. Therefore, the letters are formed in this way, so the mutually multiplied amount should be reduced by one digit everywhere. The statement of the remaining letters should be understood by this method. By this method, 18446744073706551615 such combinations of letters are formed from sixty-four letters and the same number of Shrutagyan are formed from them. Or
Ekoottarapadavrudho rupayar bhajitashcha pavaddhah.
Gachchah sampaatphalm samahatah sannipaatphalm ||' Establish the number of पद प्रमाण by increasing one by one from one. Again, divide it by the number increased from one to the पद प्रमाण established at the end. By doing this action, the Sampaatphal Gachchpraman is obtained. By multiplying that Sampaatphal, i.e., the Ekasanyogi bhang, by sixty-three divided by two (63) etc., the Sannipaatphal (= Dwisanyogi, Trisanyogi, etc. bhang) is obtained.
By this Karanagatha, all the alternatives of Sanjogakshar and Shrutagyan are formed. Such as -
  -
- - - - - - - - - - - - - 64 63 62 61 6. 56 58 57 56 55 54 53 52 51 50 46
1. Gh. Pu. 13 P. 252-253. 2. Dh. Pu. 13 P. 254. Pu. 12.162, Jayaghaval Pu.2 P. 300.
3. Dh, Pu. 13 Ga. 14 V Pu. 5 P. 163 V

Page #465:
---------------------------
## Gatha 352-354
Janamaargana/431
17 18
31 32 46 45
036 35 34 33 26 35 26 27 26 16 4. 1 42 43 4 45 46 47 48
|| 1 42 32 31 30 26 28 27 26 25 24 23 22 21 20 18 18 17 46 5. 51 52 53 54 55 56 57 58 51 60 61 62 63 64
16 15 14 13 12 11 10 1 8 5 6 5 4 3 2 1 

"When one is divided by the established number of sixty-four (64), the result is sixty-four **sambapatphala** (i.e., one-combination break)."

**Doubt:** What is **sambapatphala**?

**Solution:** The name for the break of one combination is **sambapat**, and its result is called **sambapatphala**. Again, by multiplying the **sambapatphala** by sixty-four divided by two (6), we get two thousand sixteen **dvisamyoga bhang** (23464)2016 of sixty-four letters. For example, when the **prakar** is desired, sixty-three (63) **bhang** are obtained as long as the **aksha** circulates sequentially on the remaining sixty-three (63) letters. Again, when the **prakar** is desired, sixty-two (62) **bhang** are obtained as long as the **aksha** circulates sequentially on the sixty-two (62) letters starting from **pra3kar**. Again, when **pra3kar** is desired, sixty-one (61) **dvisamyoga bhang** are obtained as long as the **aksha** circulates sequentially on the sixty-one (61) letters starting from **ikar**. Again, when **ikar** is desired, sixty (60) **bhang** are obtained from the **dvisamyoga** of **ikar** as long as the **aksha** circulates sequentially on the sixty (60) letters starting from **ikar**. Again, **dvisamyoga bhang** of fifty-nine (59) letters starting from **ikar** should be generated sequentially. When these **dvisamyoga bhang** generated in this way are combined together, two thousand sixteen **bhang** are generated. Or

**Sankalanarasimicche borasi thavayahi ruvahiyam.**
**Tatto egadarddha egadarguna hawe marinanvam.** ||15||

If it is desired to obtain the sum of the series, then establish two quantities, one being the quantity whose sum is desired and the other being one more than that quantity. Then, by multiplying the half of one quantity by the other quantity, the mathematical value, i.e., the measure of the sum of the desired quantity, is obtained. ||15||

By this **gatha**, by taking one as the first term and adding one successively to it, the sum of the series of sixty-three terms is two thousand sixteen, which is the number of **dvisamyoga bhang** of sixty-four letters (6x64 = ... .......

1. Dhaval Pu.13 p. 254.255. 3. Shraval p. 13 p. 255-256. 4. Dhaval Pu.16 p. 256. 2. See the reason in Go K. Gatha 769 commentary, Pu. 061 Editor-Ratanchand Mukhtar.

Page #466:
---------------------------
432/Go. Sa. Jivakanda
Gatha 352-254
2016) Now, after stating the breaking of the three-fold combinations of sixty-four letters, the 2016 two-fold combinations of Bhugas born earlier are multiplied by sixty-two divided by three (32), resulting in 41664 three-fold combinations (2016x62). And the total number of breakings of the one-fold, two-fold, three-fold, etc., up to sixty-four combinations of Tyan, is one less than the Ekattri-pramana, the details of which are as follows:
- Breakings of one-fold, two-fold, etc., of the 64 letters of Shrutamana -
One-fold combination of Shak
:-=64
Two-fold combination of Bhanga
64.63.62
Three-fold combination of Bhanga
Four-fold combination of Bhanga
Five-fold combination of Bhanga
  =7624512
64.63.62.61.60.56
 -=74674368
Six-fold combination of Bhanga
Seven-fold combination of Bhanga
64,63,62.61.60.56.55
  621216192 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7
Eight-fold combination of Bhanga
64.63.62.61-60.56.58,57
-=4426165368
64.63.62.66.67.56.58.57.56
 - =27540184512
Nine-fold combination of Bhanga
Ten-fold combination of Mantra
-
64.6.3.62.61.60.56.58.57.56.51   - - - -
  1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. E......
151473214816

Page #467:
---------------------------
##  Gaya 352-354

Eleven **Sangyogee** Bhang
Twelve **Sangyogee** Mang
Thirteen **Sangyogee** Bhang
Fourteen **Sangyogee** Bhang
Engagement
**Sangyogee** P
Sixteen **Sangyogee** Mang
Seventeen **Sangyogee** Mang
Eighteen **Sangyogee** Bhang
Nineteen **Sangyogee** Mang
Twenty **Sangyogee** Manch
Twenty-one **Sangyogee** Bhang
Twenty-two **Sangyogee** Mang

##  
64.63.62.91.60.53.50.57.56.55.54
1.2.1.4.5.6. 7. 8. 6.10.11
=
64.63.62.61.60.56.58.57.56.55. 54.53
1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9.10.11.12
64.63.62.56.5.5.54.53.52
1. 2. 3..... 10.11.12.13
64.63.62.... 45.54.53.52.51
11.12.13.14
64.63.62.... 54.53.52.51.50
1.2.3 . 12.11.14.15
64.63.62. 51.52.51.50.46
13. 14.15.16
64.63.62.... 52.51.40.49.48
1.2.3
14.15.16.17
1.2.3
1.2.3
BEPL
64.63.62....51.50.49.45.40
1.2.3
15.11.17.10
64.63.62....50.49.48.47.46
www.
1. 2. 3 16.17.18.19
64.63.62... 49.48, 47.46.45
1.2.3 17.10.19.20
64.63.62.... 48.47.46.45.44
1.2.3 18.19.20.21
64.61.62.... 46.45,44,43
1. 2. 3.11.20.21.22
ज्ञानमार्गगाव / 431
743565781824
2284214703056
- 13136850012224
4755666650816
= 159516666662720
=450526637071580
1379370175203520
= 3601680781016050
=716578125622720
= 16616725782651120
41107616277135680
=034744443237120

Page #468:
---------------------------
## Gosasi Bharat
## Gatha 352-354

**Teis Sangyogee Mang**
64.63.52 ....45.44,43.42 -
-146721427591699680 1. 2..3 ...20.21.22.23

**Robom Sangyogee Bhang**
64.63.62 ....4.43.42.41 =
- =250646105466666120 1. 2. 3 .. 21.22.23.24

**Pacchis Sangyogee Bhang**
-
14.63.62 .. 43.42.41.40 -
-401038568751465762 1. 2.3 ..22.23.24.25

**Chhabbis Sangyogee Mang**
-6.1257823127198688
     .-.. ... 
1. 2. 3....23.24.25.26

**Sattais Sangyogee Bhang** =          =84663667871316672
1.2.3 .... 24.25.26.27

**.. ...54.63.62....40.36.38,37 Pradais Sangyogee Mang** =        =1118770262685231888
1.2.3....25.26.25.28

**64.63.62....36.38.37.36 Unatis Sangyogee Bhang** -  -
  93818264740217712 1. 2. 3 .. 26.27.28.22
=

**Tis Sangyogee Bhang**
. ..
64.63.12....38.27.36.35 .
         =1620258010130347424 1.2.3.... 27.28.26.3.

**Ikatis Sangyogee Bhang**
=
    -=1777010076065342336 1.2.3 ....28.26.30.31

**64.63.62....36.35.34.33 Ghasis Sangyogee Mang** -  
   =1-32624140442560534 1. 2. 3.... 26.30.31.32

Page #469:
---------------------------
Gaya 352-354
Santas Sangyogee Mang
To Sangyogee Bhang
Paintyas Sangyogee Mang
Sattee Yogie Band
Santias Sangyogee Bhang
Pradatis Sangyogee Mang =
Unpalit Sangyogee Mang =
Leen Mang
64.63.62.37.25.35.34
=
Ektalis Sangyogee Bhang
Bayalos Sangyogee Mang =
1.2.3.28.29.30.31
64.63.62 38.30.06.35 1. 2. 3.. 27.28.26.30
64.63.62... 36.28.37.36
1. 2. 3 26.27.28.26
64.62.62....40.36.30.37
1. 2. 3 25.11.20
64.63.62.... 41.40.36.36 24.25.26.27
1.2.3
  =1388818264740267762
64.63.62. 42.41.40.36 1. 2. 3....23.24.24.26
64.63.62.43.42.41.40
1. 2. 322.23.24.25
64.63.62... 44.43.42.41
1.2. 3 21.22.23.24
...
64.63.62....46, 45,44,43
Gyanmargaga / 435
1777010076065542336
64.63.62 .... 45.44,45.49 1. 2. 3 20.21.22.23
1. 2. 316.20.21.22
= 1620206010230347424
1118770212185236888
= 846636678475316672
-601557853127160608
401038568051465712
==250646105466666120
- 146021427561666680
= 80347448443237620

Page #470:
---------------------------
436/Go. Sa. Jivakanda
Gatha 352-354.
64.63.62....48.47.46.45.44 Forty-three **Samyogi** Bhang = -
  -41107666877635680 1.2.3 .... 18.16.20.21
64.63.12...46,48.47.46.45 Forty-four **Samyogi** Bhang =       -19616725782151120
1.2.3 .... 17.15.11.20
64.63.62....57.46.48,47,46 Forty-five **Samyogi** Bhang -   -
 .  =719878125622727 1.2.3 .... 16.17.1 8.16
64.63.62....51.50.46.48.47 Forty-six **Samyogi** Bhang =  
  =3601688761018080 1.2.3 .... 15.16.17.18
Forty-seven **Samyogi** Bhang -
64.63.62....52.51.50.46.48
  - -1376370175283520 1.2.3 .... 14.15.16.17
64.63.62 ..53.52.51.57 Forty-eight **Samyogi** Bhang =  
 ...-488526637079580 1.2.3 .... 13.14.15.16
64.63.62....54.53.52.5.1.50 Forty-nine **Samyogi** Bhang =  
 -156518666862720 1.2.3 .... 12.13.14.15
Fifty **Samyogi** Bhang
64.63.62....55.54.53.52.51 .   
  -=47855666658816 1.2.3 .... 11.12.13.14
Fifty-one **Samyogi** Bhang =
64.63.62.... 56.55.54.53.52
  13136.58812224 1. 2. 3 .... 10.11.12.13
64.63.62.61.67.56.58.57.56.55. 54. 53 - -
  =3284214703056
Fifty-two **Samyogi** Bhang
Fifty-three **Samyogi** Bhang
-
64.63.62.61.67.56.58.57.56.55.54    
 - =743565781824 1. 2. 3, 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 1. 10. 11

Page #471:
---------------------------
Matha 352-354
Jnanamaarga/437
64.63.62.61.60.56.58.57.56.55 = 
Chaupan Sangyogee Mang
=151473214816
64.62.62.61.60.59.58.57.56       027540584512
Pachpan Sangyogee Mang
-
64.63.62.61.60.56.58.57 =   
 -442616536
Chhappan Sangyogee Bhang
Mana
Sangyogee Bhang
-
64.23.52.61.50.21.15       -621216192 1, 2. 3. 4, 5, 6-5
Adaban Sangyogee Bhang
=
64.63.62.61.60.56 -
   -74174368
64.62.62.61.60
 -=7624512
Unasath Sangyogee Ang
=
Saath Sangyogee Mang
Ekasath Sangyogee Bhang
 
 
-=41664
Basath Sangyogee Mang
-
   =2016 1.2
Press Sangyogee Bhang
=-=64
Chaumath Sangyogee Mang
= 1
- Kul Yog 1846744073706551615= Ek Kam Ekaththi

Page #472:
---------------------------
438/Go. Sa. Jiyakanda
Gatha 352-354
Square the Gachchha and add the Mula to it. Then multiply the result by the Gachchha including the Praadi and Uttara. Divide the final product by six. The quotient obtained is the calculation of Sankalana. ||16||
- By this Gatha, the previously mentioned Trisanyogi Bhang should be calculated. Here, the Gachchha is 62. Its square is 62462-3844. Adding the Mula 62 to it, we get 3844+62 = 3906. Multiplying this by the Gachchha including the Praadi and Uttara, we get 39064 (1+1+62) = 246684. Dividing this by six, we get the previously obtained Trisanyogi Bhang as 246684:6 = 41664.
The reason for this is that when the 64 aksharas are arranged in order and a particular akshara is desired, the first and second aksharas are fixed, and the third akshara, starting with Aakara, is moved through the 62 aksharas, 62 Visanyogi Bhang are obtained. Then, keeping the first akshara fixed on the Prakara, the remaining two aksharas are placed on Praakara and Ikara, and then, fixing the first two aksharas, the third akshara is moved through them, 61 Trisanyogi Bhang are obtained.
Then, fixing the Prakara akshara, the remaining two aksharas are placed on Ikara and Ikara, and the third akshara is moved through them, 60 Trisanyogi Bhang are obtained. In this way, fixing the Prakara akshara and moving the remaining two aksharas in order, until the end of all the aksharas is reached, the total number of Trisanyogi Bhang obtained is equal to the Sankalana of 62 numbers (1.463 1653).
Then, when Aakara is desired, the remaining two aksharas are moved in order, until the end of all the aksharas is reached, the total number of Trisanyogi Bhang obtained is equal to the Sankalana of 61 numbers (3.462 = 1861).
Then, when Praakara is desired, the total number of Trisanyogi Bhang obtained is equal to the Sankalana of 60 numbers (x.3 = 1953).
Then, when Ikara is desired, the total number of Trisanyogi Bhang obtained is equal to the Sankalana of 59 numbers (5.460 = 1770). In the same way, for each of the aksharas starting with Ikara, the total number of Bhang obtained is equal to the Sankalana of 58, 57, 56, etc. numbers. Adding all these Sankalanas, the total number of Trisanyogi Bhang for all 64 aksharas is obtained. Their number is 41664.
1. Dhaval p. 13 p. 256.

Page #473:
---------------------------
## Gatha 352-354

**Verse 352-354**
**Janamagan/43**

Now, to generate the proof of four-combination bhangs of sixty-four letters, multiplying 41664, which is sixty-one divided by four, with these three-combination bhangs, all four-combination bhangs of sixty-four letters are generated. Their proof is 635376.

Similarly, by generating five-combination, six-combination, and so on, bhangs, and collecting all the bhangs, the number of atgyan generated is equal to the number of one less than the total number of combination letters generated earlier and the number of atgyan generated due to them.

**Doubt:** In one sense, the combination of two initial letters may exist, but the combination of one letter cannot be formed; because combination is dualistic, therefore, considering it as one leads to contradiction?

**Solution:** This is not a fault, because in one sense, the transformation of two types into one letter is seen in form.

'Ya Sri: Sa Gau:' is not an example of a single letter without combination, because it is derived from many combined letters. And it is not an example of a single combination letter either, because there is a contradiction in considering the combination of letters of different types as a single letter combination. And it should also be shown to be inconsistent with 'Veeram Devam Nityam Vande, Vrupham Varadam Satatam Praname, Veerajin Vitabhayam Lokagurum Naumi Sada, Kanakanibham Sasivadanam Ajitajinam Saranamye' and so on.

Then, when asked how a single-combination bhang is obtained, the answer is given that:

When only the letters are intended separately, without intending the combination of letters, then the proof of the letters of Shrutagyan is sixty-four, because from these, letters in the form of combinations of separate letters are not found. Shrutagyan is also sixty-four in proof, because the letters that are the cause of Shrutagyan, which are situated in combined and uncombined forms, are seen to be sixty-four.

**Doubt:** How does Shrutagyan, which is generated from the collection of letters, arise from a single letter?

**Solution:** Because there is a contradiction in the generation of Shrutagyan from their collection when each letter lacks the power to produce Shrutagyan.

The collection of letters that are capable of generating knowledge that makes each external meaning its object is called a combination letter. For example, 'Ya Sri: Sa Gau:' and so on. These combination letters and the Shrutagyan generated from them are one less than the total number.

Page #474:
---------------------------
## 440/Go. Sa. Jivakanda
**Verse 355-356**

**Verse 355:**
A single middle-word (madhyama-pada) is used to divide the total number of letters. The quotient obtained from this division represents the number of letters belonging to the Angas and the preceding (purva) related texts. The remaining letters are those belonging to the Anga-bahya (external to the Angas).

**Verse 356:**
**Explanation:**
The number of letters in the Dravya Shruta, considering the combination of letters, is one lakh eighty-four thousand four hundred sixty-seven crore forty-four lakh seventy-three thousand seven hundred six (18446744073706551615). This is because the combination of sixty-four letters, in various forms like one, two, etc., results in this number of combined letters. 

Considering the number of words, the number of words in the Anga Shruta (twelve Angas) is one hundred twelve crore eighty-three lakh fifty-eight thousand five (1128358005).

**Question:**
How is this number of words obtained?

**Answer:**
One middle-word (madhyama-pada) consists of sixteen hundred thirty-four crore eighty-three lakh seventy-eight thousand eight hundred eight (16348307888) combined letters. Dividing the number of combined letters in one middle-word by the total number of letters mentioned earlier, we obtain the number of Anga words mentioned above.

**Verse 356:**
**Explanation:**
The number of words in the Shruta-gyan (knowledge of the scriptures) is one hundred twelve crore eighty-three lakh fifty-eight thousand five (1128358005). The remaining 80108175 letters are divided by 32, resulting in 250338033 words, which is the number of words in the fourteen Anga-bahya (external to the Angas) texts. This means the number of letters in the Anga-bahya is 80108175, and the number of words is 250338033.

The number of words in the Anga Shruta can be calculated from the number of words in the text.

The names of the twelve Angas and their number of words are:

**1. Go. Ji. Ga. 350**
**2. Go. Ji. Ga. 336**
**3. Pa. Pu. 1 Pri. 165**
**4. Go. Ji. Ga. 351**
**5. Pa. Pu. 6 Pri. 196 and Ja. Dha. Pu. 1 Pri. 63**
**6. Gha. Pu. 1 Pri. 166**

**Note:** The numbers in bold refer to the specific verses in the respective texts.

Page #475:
---------------------------
Jnanarnava/441
The end of the Toba-sayaprajnapana. The number of padas in the Anuttarovavadisesa, Prajnapana, Vayarana, Vivahisutta, etc. \\357\\ Eighteen, thirty-six, forty-one, forty-five, fifty-two. Seventy-seven, twenty-eight, fourteen thousand \\35\\ One, two, five, three, twenty-two, twenty-one, three, sixty-four, and a crore in the Vivagasutta \\356\\ The separate numbers of the Angabahya are indeed in the Bada. 
The colors of the Kanakatajamatanam, Janakanajayas, are outside \\360\\

Gatha-artha - The number of padas in the eleven Angas - Acaranga, Sutrakrtanga, Sthānānga, Samavāyānga, Vyākhyāprajñapti, Dharmakathānga, Upāsakādhyayana, Antahśāstra, Anuttarōpapātikadaśānga, Praśnavyākaraṇa, and Vipākasūtra - is less than eighteen thousand, thirty-six thousand, forty-two thousand, one lakh sixty-four thousand, two lakh twenty-eight thousand, five lakh fifty-six thousand, eleven lakh seventy thousand, twenty-three lakh twenty-eight thousand, ninety-two lakh forty-four thousand, ninety-three lakh sixteen thousand padas. The Vipākasūtra has one crore eighty-four lakh padas. The total of these padas is four crore fifteen lakh two thousand. In the twelfth Anga, the Drstivada, the total padas are one billion eight crore sixty-eight lakh fifty-six thousand five. The measure of the Angabahya-related aksaras is four crore, one lakh, eight thousand one hundred and seventy-five.\\356-360\\

Visesartha - The twelve types of artha-adhikaras (subject-matters) in the Angapravista (the canonical texts) are: Acarya, Sutrakrta, Sthana, Samavaya, Vyakhyaprapti, Natha or Jnata Dharmakatha, Upāsakādhyayana, Antahkrtdaśā, Anuttarōpapātikadaśā, Praśnavyākaraṇa, Vipākasūtra, and Drstivada.

Prācarānga - It is stated through eighteen thousand padas how one should walk, how one should stand, how one should sit, how one should sleep, how one should eat, and how one should speak, so that the bondage of sin does not occur.
'How should one walk, how should one stand, how should one sit, how should one sleep, how should one eat, how should one speak, so that the bondage of sin does not occur.'—One should walk, stand, sit, sleep, eat, and speak carefully, so that the bondage of sin does not occur.

Page #476:
---------------------------
##  442/Go. Sa. Jivakanda
## Chapter 356-360

This Pracharanga describes the methods of conduct, scriptural purity, the five committees, and the distinctions of the three secrets. It describes the conduct of the monks in this way.

The Sutra Kritanga, with its thirty-six thousand (26,000) verses, describes the purification of knowledge and conduct, understanding, what is and what is not possible, the removal and establishment of doubts, and the actions of behavioral dharma, from all directions. It also describes the present and the past time. This Anga describes the characteristics of women, such as their consequences, their tendency to be fickle, their lack of clarity, their passion for desire, their indulgence, their enjoyment of pleasure, and their desire for men.

The **Sthananga** describes the locations of the soul and matter, starting with one and going up to one hundred and one, in forty-two thousand verses. For example:

> "One is the great soul, two is the perception, it is said. Four is the combination of migrations, five is the destruction of the five senses. Six is the combination of six directions, seven is the combination of seven, eight is the possibility of seven categories. Nine is the wandering soul, ten is the filling of the ten substances."

This soul is one because of its great, imperishable, conscious nature, or because of its common characteristic of being used by all souls. It is of two types because of its knowledge and perception, its worldly and liberated nature, or its potential and actual nature. It is of three types because of its knowledge consciousness, karma consciousness, and karma-fruit consciousness, or because of its creation, destruction, and permanence, or because of its substance, qualities, and modifications. It is of four types because of its four migrations in hell, etc. It is of five types because of its five states, such as the ascetic, etc. It is of six types because of its six movements in the six directions of east, west, south, north, up, and down at the time of death. It is of seven types because its good nature is proven by the seven categories. It is of eight types because of its eight karmas, such as the veil of knowledge, etc., or because of its eight karmas or the eight qualities of right faith, etc. It is of nine types because of its nine forms of transformation. It is of ten types because of its ten locations, such as earth, water, fire, air, each and every plant, two-sensed, three-sensed, four-sensed, and five-sensed.

The **Samavayanga** considers the sameness of all substances in one hundred and sixty-four thousand (164,000) verses. This sameness is of four types, according to substance, space, time, and state. The first, substance sameness, is described as follows: "The substance of dharma, the substance of adharma, the space of the universe, and the space of one soul are all the same."

**Doubt:** How can space be considered substance?

1. Dhavala, 6, p. 167.
2. Jayadhavala, 1, p. 122.
3. Dhavala, 1, p. 66, 6, p. 168-169.
4. Dhavala, 1, p. 16.
5. Jayadhavala, 1, p. 122.
6. Dhavala, 1, p. 100, 1, p. 198, Jayadhavala, 1, p. 123.
7. Dhavala, 6, p. 168-169.
8. Dhavala, 1, p. 166.
9. Jayadhavala, 1, p. 124.

Page #477:
---------------------------
##  Chapter 356-36.
##  Knowledge Path/43

**Solution:**  It is not a solution, because by adopting the *Paryayaathikanaya*, the substantiality of the regions is also established. The concept of regions is primarily based on the *Paryayaathikanaya*, therefore, by adopting the *Paryayaathikanaya*, the substantiality of the substance in the region has been established. 'Jambudvipa, Sarvarth Siddhi, Apratisthan Naraka and Nandishwar Dwipastha Ek Vapi, these are all equally one lakh yojana in extent, and are therefore *Kshetra Samavaya* (aggregate of space). Or, the first Indraka of the first Naraka, the Simantaka Bila, the Manushya Kshetra, the first Indraka of the Saudharma Kalpa, the Ritu Vimana, and the Siddhaloka, these four are *Kshetra Samavaya* (aggregate of space) because they are *Sana* (smaller) in relation to the *Kshetra* (space). Time, *Pravali*, *Kshan*, *Lab*, *Muhurta*, *Divas*, *Paksha*, *Masa*, *Ritu*, *Ayan*, *Yuga*, *Purva*, *Parva*, *Pay*, *Sagar*, *Abaspini*, and *Utsaspini* are all equal to each other. That is, one time is equal to another time. One *Pravali* is equal to another *Pravali*. Similarly, one should understand the rest. This is *Kala Samavaya* (aggregate of time).  *Kevalgyan* is equal to *Kevaldarshan*, this is *Bhava Samavaya* (aggregate of perception).

**Explanation Prajnapti:** This text, with two lakh twenty-eight thousand verses, answers sixty thousand questions about what is a living being, what is not a living being, where a living being is born and from where it comes, etc., and describes the auspicious and inauspicious through sixty-nine thousand *Chinnacheda* (divisions).

**Nath Dharma Katha** or **Jat Dharma Katha**, with five lakh fifty-six thousand verses, describes the method of *Swadhyay* (self-study) through *Sutrapourushi* (scriptural authority), i.e., the method of delivering Dharmadeshana (religious discourse) by the divine sound of all languages in the present form without the movement of the tongue and lips of the Bhagwan Tirthankar, the method of destroying the doubts of the doubtful Ganadhardeva, and the nature of various stories and sub-stories.

**Doubt:** What is divine sound?

**Solution:** It is omni-lingual, it is both with and without letters, it contains infinite substances (it describes infinite substances), its body is made of seed-verses, it continuously flows for six hours each in the three periods of morning, noon, and evening, and it is the nature of this sound to remove the doubts, contradictions, and indecision of the Ganadhardeva, which they experience outside of these times, and it is clear in nature due to being free from the defects of *Sankara* (mixture) and *Vyatikar* (interference), and it is the nature of this sound to propagate Dharmakatha (religious stories) through nineteen (studies). This is how one should understand the divine sound.

**Upasakaadhyayan**, with eleven lakh seventy thousand verses, describes eleven types of Shravak Dharma (layman's religion). Here, the useful *Matha* is as follows:

"**Dasan-Yab-Samaiy-Posah-Sacchitt Raadibhatte Ya. Bamharambh-Pariggah-Anumanmuddiṭṭ Desaviradi Ya.**"

**Footnotes:**

1. Jayadhaval Pu 1, Page 124.
2. Chaval Pu. 6, Page 166.
3. Jayadhaval Pu. 1, Page 124-125.
4. Dhaval Pu. 6, Page 200.
5. Dhaval Pu. 6, Page 200 and Jayadhaval Pu. 1, Page 125.
6. Dhaval Pu. 1, Page 102 and Dhaval Pu. 6, Page 201.
7. Jayadhaval Pu. 1, Page 126.

Page #478:
---------------------------
The **Jivakanda** (Chapter on the Soul) of the **Gommatasara** (Essence of the Bull) text, in verses 356-360, classifies the characteristics, methods of attaining, and conduct of eleven types of **Shravakas** (lay followers): **Darshanik** (philosophical), **Atik** (excessive), **Samayiki** (practitioner of Samayika), **Proshadhopavasin** (one who observes partial fasts), **Sachittavirat** (one who has renounced mental attachments), **Ratribhuktivirat** (one who has renounced nighttime meals), **Brahmachari** (celibate), **Prarambhavist** (one who has renounced the beginning of worldly activities), **Parigrahavirat** (one who has renounced possessions), **Anumativirat** (one who has renounced permissions), and **Uddishtavirat** (one who has renounced intentions).

The **Antakrishang** (Chapter on the Final Liberation) describes, in twenty-two lakh twenty-eight thousand verses, the ten **Antakritakevalis** (those who have attained final liberation) in each **Tirthankara's** (liberated soul's) **Tirtha** (spiritual dispensation), who endured various severe **Upsargas** (obstacles) and attained **Pratiharayas** (miracles) before achieving **Nirvana** (liberation). The **Tattvarthabhashya** (Commentary on the Essence of Reality) also states, "Those who have ended the cycle of birth and death are **Antakritakevalis**." In the **Tirtha** of **Shree Vardhamana** (Mahavira), the ten **Antakritakevalis** were **Nami**, **Matanga**, **Somil**, **Ramputra**, **Sudarshan**, **Yamalik**, **Balik**, **Kishkibil**, **Palamb**, and **Ashtaputra**. Similarly, in the **Tirthas** of the twenty-two **Tirthankaras** starting with **Shree Rishabhdev**, ten other **Antakritakevalis** emerged, conquering countless severe **Upsargas** and attaining complete **Karma** (karmic actions) annihilation. This **Anga** (chapter) describes these ten **Antakritakevalis** in each **Tirtha**, hence it is called **Antakrishang**.

The **Anuttaroupapadakavashang** (Chapter on the Non-Returning Ones) describes, in one lakh three thousand verses, the ten **Anuttaroupapadakas** (those who will not return to the cycle of birth and death) in each **Tirtha**, who endured various severe **Upsargas** and attained **Pratiharayas** before entering the five **Anuttar Vimanas** (non-returning heavens). The **Tattvarthabhashya** also states, "Those whose purpose is to attain liberation are called **Upapadakas** (those who are born). **Vijay**, **Vaijayant**, **Jayant**, **Aparajit**, and **Sarvarth Siddhi** are the five **Anuttar Vimanas**. Those who are born in the **Anuttars** from **Upapad** birth are **Anuttaroupapadakas**. **Rishidas**, **Dhanya**, **Sunakshatra**, **Kartikeya**, **Pranand**, **Nandan**, **Shalibhadra**, **Abhay**, **Barisherag**, and **Chilatputra** were the ten **Anuttaroupapadakas** in the **Tirtha** of **Shree Vardhamana**. Similarly, in the **Tirthas** of the twenty-two **Tirthankaras** starting with **Shree Rishabhnath**, ten other **Anuttaroupapadakas** emerged, conquering countless severe **Upsargas** and attaining birth in the five **Anuttars** starting with **Vijay**. This **Anga** describes the ten **Anuttaroupapadakas** who are born in the **Anuttars**, hence it is called **Anuttaroupapadakavashang**.

The **Prashnavyakaran** (Chapter on Grammar of Questions) describes, in thirteen lakh sixteen thousand verses, the four **Kathas** (stories) of **Akshapanee** (accusatory), **Vikshepanee** (dismissive), **Sanvedanee** (sensory), and **Nivedanee** (informative) (as well as the methods of addressing questions related to wealth, gain and loss, life and death, victory and defeat, in the past, present, and future).

The **Akshapanee Katha** is the one that refutes various **Ekant Drishtis** (one-sided views) and other times, purifying them, and establishes the **Prarup** (form) of the six **Dravyas** (substances) and nine **Padarthas** (categories). The **Vikshepanee Katha** is the one that first points out the faults of the present time through the past time, then refutes various **Ekant Drishtis** of the past time, establishing the present time, and establishes the **Prarup** of the six **Dravyas** and nine **Padarthas**. The **Sanvedanee Katha** is the one that describes the fruits of **Punya** (merit).

**Question:** What are the fruits of **Punya**?

**Answer:** 
1. **Ghaval** (Commentary on the **Tattvarthabhashya**), Vol. 1, p. 102; **Tattvarthabhashya**, Vol. 1, p. 201; **Jayadhaval** (Commentary on the **Tattvarthabhashya**), Vol. 1, p. 126-130.
2. **Shraval** (Commentary on the **Tattvarthabhashya**), Vol. 1, p. 102-173; **Ghaval**, Vol. 6, p. 201.
3. **Pavan** (Commentary on the **Tattvarthabhashya**), Vol. 1, p. 123-104; Vol. 6, p. 202; **Jayadhaval**, Vol. 1, p. 131.

Page #479:
---------------------------
Gapa 356-360
Jnanamargana/445

**Solution:** The riches of Tirthankaras, Ganadharas, Rishis, Chakravartis, Baladevas, Vasudevas, Devas and Vidyadharas are the fruits of punya (merit).
What is the story that describes the fruits of papa (demerit) called?
**Solution:** The story that describes the fruits of papa (demerit) is called Nirvedani Katha.
What are the fruits of papa (demerit)?
**Solution:** Birth in the realms of hell, animal, and human, old age, death, disease, pain, and poverty, etc. are the fruits of papa (demerit).
Or, the story that generates vairagya (dispassion) towards the world, body, and enjoyments is called Nirvedani Katha.
**Also, there is:**
"Aakshepani tattva vidhan bhutaam vikshepni tattva diganta shuddhim.
Shanveni gi dharma jaaga nidi vaar maan viragaam."
- The Aakshepani Katha is the story that describes the tattvas (principles). The Vikshepni Katha is the story that purifies the visions obtained from the tattvas, i.e., it purifies the one-sided visions of the other religions and establishes the truth of one's own religion. The Sanvegini Katha is the story that describes the fruits of dharma (righteousness) in detail. The Nirvedani Katha is the story that generates vairagya (dispassion).
While expounding these stories, one should not preach the Vikshepni Katha to a person who does not know the Jinavachan (Jain scriptures), i.e., who has not entered the Jinavachan. This is because a person who does not know the secrets of his own religion and hears the stories that expound the other religions may become confused and accept falsehood. Therefore, one should not preach the Vikshepni Katha to a person who does not know the secrets of his own religion, but should preach the other three stories.
One who has understood his own religion well through the above three stories, who knows the nature of punya (merit) and papa (demerit), who is attached to the Jinshasan (Jain religion) like the marrow is attached to the bone, who has no doubts about the Jinavachan, who is detached from enjoyment and pleasure, and who is endowed with tapas (austerity), sheel (conduct), and niyam (rules), only such a person should be preached the Vikshepni Katha later.
For one who imparts knowledge in a perfect manner, even this story becomes a story. Therefore, one should preach the story of the sadhu (saint) only after finding a worthy person.
This Anga (part) called Prashnavyakaran also describes the nature of st, nasht, musht, chinta, labh, alabh, sukha, dukha, jivit, maran, jay, parajay, naam, dravya, aayu, and sankhya according to the question.
The Anga (part) called Vipaksutra describes the fruits of punya (merit) and papa (demerit) karma (actions) through one crore eighty-four lakh verses.
The total number of verses in the eleven Angas is four crore fifteen lakh two thousand verses. 1. P. Pu. 1 Pri. 106 Ga. 65.

Page #480:
---------------------------
##  446/Go. Sa. Jivakanda
##  Gatha 361-366

**Twelve. The distinctions of the Anga Drishtivada and the proof of their positions, from Chandraprajapati to the Vyākhyāprajñapti, are to be read in the five Sutras.** ||361||

**The five distinctions are: Jalagata, Sthalagata, Mayagata, Akashagata, and Rupagata. There are four Chulika in each of these.** ||362||

**The number of positions in each Chulika is as follows: Jalagata has 20,998,200, Sthalagata has 20,998,200, Mayagata has 20,998,200, Akashagata has 20,998,200, and Rupagata has 20,998,200.** ||363||

**The total number of positions in the five Chulika is 10,499,100.** ||364||

**The number of positions in the five Parikarmas are as follows: Chandraprajapati has 36,05,000, Suryaprajapati has 5,03,000, Jambudvipaprajapati has 3,25,000, Dvipa-Samudra-Prajapati has 52,36,000, and Vyākhyāprajñapti has 84,36,000.** ||365||

**The total number of positions in the five Parikarmas is 1,81,05,000.** ||366||

**Gatha-artha:** The twelfth Anga Drishtivada has five distinctions: Parikarmas, Sutras, Prathamanuyoga, Purvagata, and Chalika. The five Parikarmas are: Chandraprajapati, Suryaprajapati, Jambudvipaprajapati, Dvipa-Samudra-Prajapati, and Vyākhyāprajñapti. The five Chulika are: Jalagata, Sthalagata, Mayagata, Akashagata, and Rupagata. The number of positions in each of these is as follows: Chandraprajapati has 36,05,000, Suryaprajapati has 5,03,000, Jambudvipaprajapati has 3,25,000, Dvipa-Samudra-Prajapati has 52,36,000, and Vyākhyāprajñapti has 84,36,000. The total number of positions in the five Parikarmas is 1,81,05,000. The total number of positions in the five Chulika is 10,499,100. The total number of positions in the fourteen Purvas is 95,50,00,000.

**Special Meaning:** 'Drishtivada Anga' is a Gony name because it describes many perspectives. It is a Sandhyat form in relation to letters, words, groups, understanding, and Anuyoga, and it is a meaning in relation to...

Page #481:
---------------------------
##  Gatha 361-366
##  Jnana Marga/447

"It has infinite forms." Because the propositions of this Drishtivada are infinite. It has both Tadubhayavaktvyata (both self-time and other-time statements).

This Drishtivada Anga has five authorities: Parikarma, Sutra, Prathamanuyoga, Purvagata, and Chulika. Among them, Parikarma has five divisions: Chandraprajnapti, Suryaprajnapti, Jambudvipaprajnapti, Dvipasagaraprajnapti, and Vyakhyaprajnapti.

The Parikarma called Channaprapti describes the age, family, prosperity, speed, and height of the moon's disc, etc., through thirty-six lakh five thousand verses. The Parikarma called Suryaprajnapti describes the age, enjoyment, consumption, family, prosperity, speed, height of the sun's disc, increase and decrease of the day, the measure of rays, and light, etc., through five lakh three thousand verses. The Parikarma called Jambudvipaprajnapti describes the various types of humans and other beings like Tiryanch, as well as mountains, rivers, platforms, years, seasons, natural temples, etc., in the Jambudvipa, through three lakh twenty-five thousand verses. The Parikarma called Dvipasagaraprajnapti describes the measure of islands and oceans from the Uddharapalya, and the various other substances contained within the islands and oceans, through fifty-two lakh thirty-six thousand verses. The Parikarma called Vyakhyaprajnapti describes the material substance called Pudgala, the immaterial substance called Dharma, Adharma, Akasha, and Kala, the liberated and non-liberated souls, through eighty-four lakh thirty-six thousand verses.

The Sutra, which is the authority of the Drishtivada Anga, describes the soul as the manager, the non-stainer, the non-doer, the non-enjoyer, the attributeless, the atomic, the non-existent, the existent, the soul arising from the combination of the five elements, the non-conscious, the conscious without knowledge, the eternal, the non-eternal, etc., through eighty-four lakh verses. It also describes the three hundred wrong views of the Kriyavadis, Atriavadis, Agnanavadis, and Vinayavadis, as well as the Rasikavada, Niyativada, Vigyanavada, Shabdavada, Pradhanavada, Dravyavada, and Purushavada. It is also said:

"Aṭṭhāsi-pahiyāresu 'ghaūṇhamahiyāraṇamattharinaḍḍeso. Paḍhamo prabandhayāṇaṁ vidio terāsiyāṇa boddhanvo." ||36||

"In the eighty-four authorities of this Sutra, the meaning of four authorities is found. The first authority should be understood as the managers, the second as the Trairasikavadis, the third as the Niyativadis, and the fourth as the representative of self-time."

The Prathamanuyoga, which is the authority of the Drishtivada Anga, describes the Puranas through five thousand verses. It is also said:

1. P.P. 1 p. 106.
2. "Asthado pranata, pameyaranaṁtiyaado" [Dhavan P. 6 p. 212].
3. Paval P. 1 p. 101.
4. Dhaval P. 1.112.

Page #482:
---------------------------
448/Go. Sa. Jivakanda
Gaya 361-366
Jineendradev has preached twelve types of Puranas in the world. All the Puranas describe the lineages and royal dynasties. The first is of the Arihantas, meaning the Tirthankaras, the second is of the Chakravartis, the third is of the Vidyadharas, the fourth is of the Narayana-Pratinarayanas, the fifth is of the Charanas, the sixth is of the Prajnadharanas. The seventh is the Kuru dynasty, the eighth is the Hari dynasty, the ninth is the Ikshvaku dynasty, the tenth is the Kashyapa dynasty, the eleventh is the Vaidi dynasty and the twelfth is the Nath dynasty. 77-
The Dristivad Anga's Purvagata Namaka Arthaadhikarya describes production, expenditure and profit etc. through 590 million 50 lakh and five words.
There are five types of Chulikas based on the difference between Jalagata, Sthalagata, Mayagata, Rupagata and Akashagata. Among them, Jalagata Chulikas describe the movement in water and the stoppage of water through 20,998,200 words due to the mantras, tantras and tapascharya-shaped atishya etc. which are the causes of the movement in water. Sthalagata Chulikas describe the mantras, tantras and tapascharya-shaped wonders etc. which are the causes of the movement inside the earth through the same 20,998,200 words, as well as the Vastuvidya and other auspicious and inauspicious causes related to the earth. Mayagata Chulikas describe the mantras, tantras and tapascharya which are the causes of (Maya-shaped) Indrajala etc. through the same 20,998,200 words. Rupagata Chulikas describe the mantras, tantras and tapascharya which are the causes of transformation into the form of lion, horse and deer etc. through the same 20,998,200 words, as well as the characteristics of Chitrakarma, Kasthakarma, Lepyakarma and Lenakarma etc. Akashagata Chulikas describe the mantras, tantras and tapascharya which are the causes of movement in the sky through the same 20,998,200 words.
The total number of words in these five Chulikas is 10 crore 79 lakh 46 thousand words.
One who has attained the Purva or who has attained the form of the Purva is called Purvagata. Thus, 'Purvagata' is a Ginyanama. It is numerical in relation to Akshara, Pada, Sanghata, Pratipatti and Anuyogadvara and infinite in relation to meaning. Out of the three Vaktavyatas, one should understand the Swasamaya Vaktavyata here. There are fourteen types of Arthaadhikarya. They are - Utpadapurva, Agrayaniyapurva, Viryanupravadapurva, Astinaastipravadapurva, Gyanapravadapurva, Satyapravadapurva, Pratmapravadapurva, Karmapravadapurva,
1. Dh. Pu. 1 P. 112.

Page #483:
---------------------------
##  Knowledge Path / 446

**Verses 361-366**

Among them, the **Utpada-purva** (Production-prior) describes the production, consumption, and motion of the substances of Jiva, Kala, and Pudgala, through one crore (ten million) verses of two hundred **Prabhutas** (extensive treatises) on ten objects. [**Pragra** means the acceptance of knowledge as the primary object in the twelve **Angas** (canonical texts), and **Praani-purva** refers to the statement whose purpose is to explain the **Pragra**.] This **Purva** (prior) describes the **Agra** (magnitude) of the **Angas** (limbs) through ninety-nine lakh (nine hundred and ninety thousand) verses of two hundred and eighty **Prabhutas** on fourteen objects. The **Veerya-anupravaad-purva** (Vigor-explanation-prior) describes **Aatma-veerya** (self-vigor), **Para-veerya** (other-vigor), **Ubhaya-veerya** (both-vigor), **Kshetra-deerya** (field-vigor), **Bhaava-veerya** (emotion-vigor), and **Lap-veerya** (absorption-vigor) through seventy lakh (seven million) verses of one hundred and sixty **Prabhutas** on eight objects. The **Grasti-naasti-pravaad-purva** (Existence-non-existence-explanation-prior) describes the existence and non-existence of Jiva and all beings through sixty lakh (six million) verses of three hundred and sixty **Prabhutas** on eighteen objects. For example, Jiva is **kathinchit** (in some ways) **asti** (existent) in relation to its own substance, field, time, and nature. It is **kathinchit** (in some ways) **naasti** (non-existent) in relation to other substance, field, time, and nature. When it is simultaneously perceived through its own four substances and the four substances of others, without any order, it is **syad-vaktavya** (perhaps expressible). When it is perceived in order, first through its own substance and so on, and then through other substance and so on, it is **kathinchit** (in some ways) **asti** (existent) and **naasti** (non-existent). When it is perceived through **syad-asti** (perhaps existent) as the first principle and **syad-vaktavya** (perhaps expressible) as the third principle, it is **kathinchit** (in some ways) **asti** (existent) and **vaktavya** (expressible). When it is perceived through **syad-naasti** (perhaps non-existent) as the second principle and **syad-vaktavya** (perhaps expressible) as the third principle, it is **kathinchit** (in some ways) **naasti** (non-existent) and **vaktavya** (expressible). When it is perceived through **syad-asti** (perhaps existent) as the first principle, **syad-naasti** (perhaps non-existent) as the second principle, and **syad-vaktavya** (perhaps expressible) as the third principle, it is **kathinchit** (in some ways) **grasthi** (existent) and **naasti** (non-existent) and **pravaktavya** (expressible) Jiva. Similarly, one should explain the non-Jiva and so on.

The **Jnana-pravaad-purva** (Knowledge-explanation-prior) describes the five **Jnanas** (knowledge) and three **Prajnan** (wisdom) through one crore minus one (nine million nine hundred and ninety-nine thousand) verses of two hundred and forty **Prabhutas** on twelve objects. It also describes the **Jnana** (knowledge) and its nature, in relation to **dravya-athikanaya** (substance-based logic) and **paryaya-athikanaya** (category-based logic), as **anaadi-ananta** (beginningless and endless), **anaadi-santa** (beginningless and finite), **saadi-ananta** (beginningful and endless), and **saadi-santa** (beginningful and finite). The **Satya-pravaad-purva** (Truth-explanation-prior) describes **vachan-gupta** (speech-guarding), the causes of **vachan-samskaara** (speech-impressions), **vachan-prayoga** (speech-usage), twelve types of language, various types of speakers, various types of false speech, and ten types of true speech, through one crore and six verses of two hundred and forty **Prabhutas** on twelve objects. **Vachan-gupta** (speech-guarding) refers to not speaking falsely or to maintaining **vachan-samyama** (speech-restraint), which is silence. The eight causes of **vachan-samskaara** (speech-impressions) are the head, throat, heart, root of the tongue, teeth, nose, palate, and lips. The nature of **vachan-prayoga** (speech-usage) in the form of auspicious and inauspicious characteristics is simple. Language is of twelve types, based on the distinction between **abhyakhyana-vachan** (accusatory speech), **kalah-vachan** (quarrelsome speech), **paishunya-vachan** (backbiting speech), **avaddha-pralapa-vachan** (meaningless rambling speech), **rati-vachan** (speech that excites desire), **arati-vachan** (speech that repels desire), **upadhi-vachan** (speech that creates attachment), **nikruti-vachan** (speech that degrades), **prati-vachan** (counter-speech), **mosha-vachan** (speech that leads to delusion), **samyag-darshan-vachan** (speech that leads to right faith), and **mithya-darshan-vachan** (speech that leads to wrong faith). **Abhyakhyana-bhasha** (accusatory language) refers to speaking ill of someone, saying "This is the doer." **Kalh-vachan** (quarrelsome speech) refers to words that increase conflict. **Paishunya-vachan** (backbiting speech) refers to revealing faults behind someone's back. **Pralapa-vachan** (meaningless rambling speech) refers to words that are devoid of any connection to Dharma (righteousness), Artha (wealth), Kama (desire), and Moksha (liberation). **Rati-vachan** (speech that excites desire) refers to words that arouse passion in the senses, such as sound. **Arati-va

Page #484:
---------------------------
450/Go. Sa. Jivakanda
Verses 361-366

A word that is capable of causing degradation is called **nikriti-vacana**. A word that, even when heard by men of great penance and knowledge, does not cause the soul to become humble is called **apranati-vacana**. A word that, when heard, leads to the act of theft is called **mosha-vacana**. A word that teaches the right path is called **samyag-darshan-vacana**. A word that teaches the wrong path is called **mithya-darshan-vacana**. All beings, from those with two senses to those with many, are speakers, as they have the **vaktra-paryaya** (the faculty of speech) manifested in them.

There are many types of births depending on the substance, field, time, and **bhaama** (a specific type of time).

A name given to a substance or being that does not possess the qualities associated with that name is called **nama-satya**. For example, calling someone "Indra" even though they do not possess the qualities of Indra is **nama-satya**.

A word that is spoken based on the form of a substance, even though the substance itself does not exist, is called **rupa-satya**. For example, calling a painted image of a man "man" even though it does not have consciousness or the ability to act is **rupa-satya**.

A word that is used to establish a connection between a substance and its function, even though the substance itself does not exist, is called **sthapana-satya**. For example, calling a die "a die" even though it is not made of the original substance is **sthapana-satya**.

A word that is spoken based on the existence of something from the beginning or from the end is called **pratiti-satya**.

Words that are spoken in the world based on **samvriti** (convention or imagination) are called **samvriti-satya**. For example, calling a lotus that grows in mud "pankaj" even though it is born from many causes is **samvriti-satya**.

Words that describe the specific arrangement of conscious or unconscious substances, according to the rules of creation, during the application of fragrant powder from incense, or during the formation of a **vyuha** (a specific arrangement) in the form of a **pam**, **makar**, **hamsa**, **sarvatobhadra**, or **krauncha**, are called **samyojana-satya**.

Words that teach **dharma**, **artha**, **kama**, and **moksha** (righteousness, wealth, desire, and liberation) in the thirty-two countries, based on the distinction between **arya** (noble) and **anarya** (ignoble), are called **janapada-satya**.

Words that teach the **dharma** (righteousness) of villages, cities, kings, **gana** (a group of people), **pakhanda** (hypocrisy), **jati** (caste), and **kula** (family) are called **desa-satya**.

Words spoken by **samyata** (a person who has controlled their senses) and **shravaka** (a follower of Jainism) that describe the qualities of a **chhadmastha** (a person who pretends to be something they are not), even though they cannot determine the true nature of the substance, are called **bhavasatya**.

Words that reveal the true nature of the six types of substances and their **paryayas** (modifications), which are accessible to the **praag-bhagamyata** (the ability to perceive the past), are called **samaya-satya**.

The soul, through its **atma-prayada** (the power of the soul), knows the sixteen **vastugata** (objects of knowledge), the three hundred and twenty **praabhuta** (fundamental principles), and the twenty-six crore **pada** (words). It describes the soul as the knower, the doer, the enjoyer, the wise, etc. It is also said:

"The soul is the doer, the speaker, the being, the enjoyer, the **pudgala** (matter), the **veda** (knowledge), the **vishnu** (the supreme being), the **svayambhu** (self-existent), the **gariri** (the body), the **manava** (human), the **sakta** (the one who is attached), the **jantu** (animal), the **bhani** (the one who shines), the **mayaavi** (the illusionist), the one with **yoga** (spiritual practice), the **sankuta** (the one who is bound), the **asankuta** (the one who is unbound), the **ksetrajna** (the knower of the field), and the **antaratma** (the inner soul)." (81-82)

1. Gh. 1, p. 118-116.

Page #485:
---------------------------
## Knowledge River/ 451

It lives, it will live, and it has lived before, therefore it is a living being. It performs auspicious and inauspicious actions, therefore it is an agent. It speaks truth and falsehood, and appropriate and inappropriate words, therefore it is a speaker. Its life force is found, therefore it is a creature. It experiences merit and demerit in the four types of realms - gods, humans, animals, and hell beings, therefore it is an experiencer. It fulfills and dissolves through six types of substances and various types of bodies, therefore it is a pudgala. It experiences pleasure and pain, therefore it is a knower. Or, it knows, therefore it is a knower. It pervades the acquired body, therefore it is Vishnu. It is self-born, therefore it is self-existent. Its body is found in the worldly state, therefore it is a body-possessor. It is born in knowledge, which is called "man," therefore it is a human. It is attached to its relatives and friends, therefore it is a lover. It is born in the four realms of existence and gives birth to others, therefore it is an animal. It possesses the karma of attachment, therefore it is a possessor of attachment. It possesses the karma of delusion, therefore it is a deluded one. It has three yogas, therefore it is a yogi. It becomes contracted due to the presence of a very subtle body, therefore it is contracted. It pervades the entire space of the universe, therefore it is uncontracted. It knows its own nature, which is the field, therefore it is the knower of the field. It resides within the eight karmas, therefore it is the inner self.

**Verse 267**

It describes the eight types of karmas through one crore eighty lakh verses, using twenty objects and four hundred prabhritas, preceded by karma-flow. It describes the limited and unlimited time-based renunciation, the method of fasting, the five samitis, and the three secrets, through eighty-four lakh verses, using thirty objects and six hundred prabhritas, preceded by renunciation. It describes seven hundred minor knowledges like thumb-pressure, etc., five major knowledges like Rohini, etc., and the eight great causes - space, mighty, limb, sound, dream, sign, consonant, and mark, through one crore ten lakh verses, using fifteen objects and three hundred prabhritas, preceded by knowledge-translation. It describes the four realms of the sun, moon, stars, and constellations, the place of origin, motion, retrograde motion, and their fruits, the sounds of birds, and the great auspicious events like the womb-birth of Arhant (Tirthankara), Baldev, Vasudev, and Chakravarti, etc., through twenty-six crore verses, using ten objects and two hundred prabhritas, preceded by auspiciousness. It describes the eight branches of Ayurveda like body-treatment, etc., the physical actions like applying ashes, tying threads, etc., for the protection of the body, etc., the science of poisons, and the various types of pranayama, through thirteen crore verses, using ten objects and two hundred prabhritas, preceded by the knowledge of the body. It describes the seventy-two arts like writing, etc., the sixty-four secrets related to women, the art of sculpture, the method of identifying the faults of a teacher related to poetry, and the art of creating meters, through nine crore verses, using ten objects and two hundred prabhritas, preceded by the vastness of actions. It describes the eight types of conduct, the four types of seeds, the action that leads to liberation, and the bliss of liberation, through twelve crore fifty lakh verses, using ten objects and two hundred prabhritas, preceded by the essence of the world.

The total number of objects in these fourteen prefaces is one hundred forty-nine, and the total number of prabhritas is three thousand nine hundred.

**Types of external scriptures**

Samaiya-chavisatthayam tado bandaragaa pakkim | Veṇaiyam kidiyamman dasaveyaalam ca uttarayanam ||367||

Page #486:
---------------------------
## 452/Go. Sa. Jivakanda
## Gatha 367-368

**Kappyavaharakappa, Kalpakalpya, Mahakalpa, Pundarika, Mahapu'darika, Nipiddhika.**

**Gathaarth:** There are fourteen types of Anga-bahya Shruta: Samayik, Chaturvishasatav, Bandana, Pratikramana, Vainayik, Kritikarma, Dashavaikalik, Uttaradhyayana, Kalpavyavahar, Kalpakalpya, Mahakalpa, Pundarika, Mahapu'darika, Nipiddhika.

**Vishesharth:** Anga-bahya Shruta, meaning Anangadyuta, is of fourteen types: Samayik, Chaturvishasatav, Bandana, Pratikramana, Vainayik, Kritikarma, Dashavaikalik, Uttaradhyayana, Kalpavyavahar, Kalpakalpya, Mahakalpa, Pundarika, Mahapu'darika, and Nipiddhika.

Samayik is of four types based on Dravya, Kshetra, Kala, and Bhava.

**Dravya Samayik:** Restraining raga and dvesha in both Satta and Achitta dravyas.

**Kshetra Samayik:** Restraining raga and dvesha in places like villages, towns, fields, gardens, pavilions, cities, valleys, and regions, or restraining sampray (kashaya) in one's own dwelling place.

**Kala Samayik:** Restraining kashaya related to the six seasons like spring, etc.

**Bhava Samayik:** The six types of knowledge related to dravyas, free from obstacles and smooth, possessed by a person who has restrained all kashayas, vomited out mithyatva, and is proficient in naya.

**Alternatively:** Restraining kashaya in all external and internal objects during all three sandhyas, or during the junction days of paksha and masa, or at one's desired time.

Samayik, as a prakirnak, relies on time and encompasses limited and unlimited areas like Bharata, etc., as well as sanhanan and gunasthanas.

**Nama Samayik:** Restraining raga and dvesha in the names of humans, animals, etc., like Shabha and Prashabha.

**Sthapana Samayik:** Restraining raga and dvesha in beautiful or ugly installations. For example, some idols are well-established, well-proportioned, complete with all limbs, well-shaped, and pleasing to the mind, while others are poorly established, disproportionate, incomplete, and misshapen. Restraining raga and dvesha in these is Sthapana Samayik.

**Chaturvishasatav:** The act of paying homage to the twenty-four Tirthankaras, each related to their respective time.

**References:**

1. Dhaval Pu. 6 8. 17-188
2. Jayadhaval Pu. 1 p. 65
3. Dhaval Pu. 1 p. 66
4. Jayadhaval Pu. 1 p. 81-88 and new edition p. 66-60
5. Mulachar 7/17 Sanskrit commentary and Gyanapith publication Mulachar Mag 1 p. 363 to 365.

Page #487:
---------------------------
## Gatha 367-368
## Knowledge 453

This section describes the nature of the path (vidhi), the names of the Tirthankaras, their institutions, their festivals, the five great auspicious events (mahakalyaanak), the thirty-four extraordinary qualities (atishya), and the success of worshipping the Tirthankaras.

**Doubt:**  The twenty-four Tirthankaras are considered to be "savady" (imperfect) because they preach the path of the Shravakas (lay followers) which leads to the harm of the six categories of living beings (chaykaaya).  The four virtues of the Shravakas are: giving (daan), worship (pooja), conduct (sheel), and fasting (upavaas). These four types of Shravaka dharma cause harm to the six categories of living beings because:

* Giving cannot happen without causing harm to living beings through activities like cooking food, getting food cooked, lighting fire, extinguishing fire, etc.
* Building a Jain temple cannot happen without causing harm to living beings through activities like cutting trees, getting trees cut, making bricks, getting bricks made, baking bricks, etc.
* Worship cannot happen without causing harm to living beings through activities like performing abhisheka (ceremonial bath), applying unguents, cleaning, applying sandalwood paste, offering flowers, and lighting incense.
* Maintaining good conduct cannot happen without causing pain to one's wife. Therefore, even good conduct is considered imperfect.
* Fasting cannot happen without causing pain to the living beings in one's stomach. Therefore, even fasting is considered imperfect.

Alternatively, the Tirthankaras cannot be considered perfect because they preach to the Shravakas: "Do not kill the three categories of mobile beings, but you can kill the stationary beings."

Alternatively, the Tirthankaras are not perfect because they cause harm to living beings through practices like:

* Fasting (anashan)
* Avoiding food (avmodarya)
* Counting breaths (vritti parisankhyan)
* Giving up taste (ras parityaag)
* Sitting in a secluded place (vivikta shayyaasan)
* Living at the root of a tree, in the sun, or in open spaces
* Performing difficult postures like utkutasan, patyankasan, ardha patyankasan, khadgasan, gavasan, virasan
* Practicing humility (vinaya), self-control (vaivaavrittya), and meditation (dhyaan)

**Solution:** Even though the Tirthankaras preach the above-mentioned practices, their actions do not bind them to karma. This is because the Tirthankaras have attained the 13th stage of spiritual development (gunasthan) where they are free from the three causes of karma-binding: wrong belief (mithyatva), non-restraint (asanyam), and passions (kashaya). Therefore, they do not bind any karma except for the karmas that cause pain (vedaniya karma). Even within the vedaniya karma, they do not bind the karmas that cause existence (sthiitibandh) and the karmas that cause experience (granubhaagbandh) because they are free from passions. The existence of the karmas that cause nature (prakritibandh) and the karmas that cause location (pradeshabandh) cannot be argued because the existence of the karmas that cause existence is necessary for the karmas that cause experience to manifest. Furthermore, the Tirthankaras are constantly shedding their accumulated karmas through their infinite spiritual qualities (ashankhyaat gunee shrenee). Therefore, they cannot accumulate new karmas. The actions of the Tirthankaras' mind, speech, and body are not intentional, and therefore they do not bind new karmas. Just as the sun and the Kalpavriksha (wish-fulfilling tree) act naturally, so too should the actions of the Tirthankaras' mind, speech, and body be understood as natural.

**Verse 54:**

"The Tirthankaras are like the sun and the Kalpavriksha, their actions are natural, and they do not bear the fruits of their actions."

**References:**

1. Dhaval, Vol. 1, Page 66
2. Jayadhaval, Vol. 1, Page 100-101
3. Jayadhaval, Vol. 1, Page 101-102
4. Jayadhaval, Vol. 1, Page 105
5. New Edition, Page 66
6. Jayabal, Vol. 1, Page 101-102

Page #488:
---------------------------
454/Go. Sa. Shrivakanda
Gatha 367-368
The Tirthankara's conduct is beneficial for the world, but it does not bring him any merit. Similarly, the words spoken by those who initiate charity, worship, etc., do not bind them with karma.
"Sanjad-dhammakahā vi ya uvasayāṇam savārasantoso.
Tasavahvirai sikkhāmāvarghādo ti sāmumado ||55||" - The Dharmakatha of the restrained and the unrestrained teaches self-contentment and cessation of birth and death, but it does not permit the destruction of the stationary. The aim is liberation through the teachings of restraint, not the fruition of actions.
"Pāvāgamadārāi praṇāirūvattiāi jīvammi.
Taththa suhāsavādāraṁ ugghaīte kau sadoso ||17||" - The doors of sin are present in beings from time immemorial. Those who open the door of good conduct while these doors remain, how can they be without sin? ||27||
Therefore, the twenty-four Tirthankaras are flawless, and therefore they are worthy of worship by the wise.
If someone doubts that the Tirthankaras are present amidst the paraphernalia of the Murddundubhi, flag, fly whisk, throne, white and pure umbrella, drum, conch, and Kahala (drum), etc., and that they are the support of the three worlds, therefore they are not flawless; such a doubt is not correct because they are adorned with the nine Kevala-labdhis obtained through the influence of the four ghati karmas. Therefore, they cannot be associated with sin.
Thus, by refuting the doubts regarding the twenty-four Tirthankaras, the Chaturvishatistava describes the method of praising the twenty-four Tirthankaras, who are different in name, establishment, substance, and essence, and the fruits thereof.
"The Namastava is the acceptance, i.e., recitation, of the 1008 names of the twenty-four Tirthankaras by following their virtues. The Sthapanastava is the following or chanting of the form of the artificial and natural Jinapratimanas, which are established in the establishment of good and bad, and which, through intellect, have attained oneness, i.e., non-duality, with the Tirthankaras, and therefore possess all the infinite virtues of the Tirthankara.
"The praise of the Jinabhavan is included in the Jinastapanastava, i.e., the praise of the Jinabhagavan established in the image, therefore its separate description is not given here. The one who is free from all pains arising from poison, weapons, fire, bile, wind, and phlegm, who, with the brilliance of his halo, has illuminated the ten directions, 
1. J.D.P. 1 p. 105. 2. J.P.P. 1 p. 106. 3. J.P.P. 1 p. 108. 4. Jayadhaval P. 1 p. 108/84.

Page #489:
---------------------------
##  Gatha 360-368
##  Janma Manga/455

I have dispelled the darkness up to twelve yojanas, which are filled with sixty-four auspicious marks like the swastika, ankusha, etc., whose auspicious formation is the square formation and auspicious consolidation is the vajra-vrshabha-naraacha consolidation. They have filled the universe with fragrant smells, are free from defects like red eyes, shooting arrows with a glance, sweat, dust, etc., and their nails and hair are properly situated. They are as white as the waves of the ocean of milk, adorned with sixty-four chowris made of gold, and their color is auspicious. Following the form of the bodies of these twenty-four Tirthankaras, their praise is dravya-stava. Following the qualities of these twenty-four Jinas, like infinite knowledge, infinite vision, infinite power, infinite happiness, kshayika samyak-tva, anyabaddha, and viraagata, is bhava-stava.

"Salutation to one Tirthankara is vandana."

**Doubt:** Salutation to one Jina and one Jinalaya cannot destroy karma, because it leads to the neglect of other Jinas and Jinalayas. Therefore, it is the cause of the bondage of the inauspicious karma arising from that neglect. And one who salutes one Jina or Jinalaya cannot attain moksha or Jainism, because he is tainted by partiality. Therefore, he cannot have samyak-darshan in his knowledge and character. So, is it not right to salute one Jina or Jinalaya?

**Solution:** Saluting one Jina or Jinalaya does not lead to partiality, because there is no rule found in the form of a vow for the one saluting that "I will only salute one Jina or Jinalaya, not others." And it cannot be said that the one saluting has not saluted other Jinas and Jinalayas according to the rules, because all the infinite Jinas have attained oneness through infinite knowledge, infinite vision, infinite power, and infinite happiness, i.e., all of them have the same infinite knowledge, etc., qualities. Therefore, there is no difference between them in terms of these qualities. So, saluting one Jina or Jinalaya means saluting all Jinas and Jinalayas. Although this is the case, vandana is not included in the Chavimshati-stava, because there is a contradiction in accepting the oneness of dravya-athicanaya and paryayathicanaya, i.e., non-duality. And there is no rule that all partiality is the cause of inauspicious karma bondage, because partiality towards Jina Bhagwan, whose delusion has been destroyed, does not lead to the bondage of inauspicious karma, i.e., accepting the side of Jina Bhagwan does not lead to the bondage of inauspicious karma. If someone insists that the fruit of saluting one Jina is the same as the fruit of saluting other Jinas, then saluting other Jinas is not successful. Therefore, one should only salute one Jina because there is no greater fruit in saluting other Jinas. Or, one cannot have a special inclination towards the use of one Jina out of infinite Jinas at the same time, therefore, one should salute one Jina. One should not make such a one-sided insistence. Because, deciding on complete one-sidedness is wrong. In this way, one should resolve the dispute in the way described here and salute one Jina in the vandana-stava.

1. Jayaghaval. 1 p. 110/85. 2. Jayaghaval. 1 p. 111/86-87.

Page #490:
---------------------------
## 456/Go. Sa. Jivakanda
## Gatha 367-368

This section explains the knowledge of **Nidoshata** (absence of faults), the different types of **Vandana** (worship) and their fruits.

There are seven types of **Pratikraman** (atonement): **Devasik** (daily), **Ratrik** (nightly), **Paakshik** (fortnightly), **Chaturmasik** (quarterly), **Saavatsarik** (annual), **Eipithik** (occasional), and **Prauttamस्थानिक** (at the highest place). **Sarvaaticharik** (all transgressions) and **Nividahaaratyagik** (abandonment of all food) are included in the **Prauttamस्थानik** Pratikraman. All **Pratikraman** related to the transgression of the 28 **Moolgunas** (fundamental qualities) are included in the **Eipithik** Pratikraman, as **Eipithik** Pratikraman deals with known transgressions. This is why they are called **Pratikraman**.

**Question:** What is the difference between **Shankha-Pratyakhyan** (doubt-rejection) and **Pratitramण** (re-atonement)?

**Answer:** **Pratyakhyan** is the abandonment of faults that have accumulated in one's body due to **Dravya** (substance), **Kshetra** (field), **Kaal** (time), and **Bhaav** (emotion). **Pratitramण** is the process of attaining **Apratyakhyan** (non-rejection) from **Pratyakhyan** and then again attaining **Pratyakhyan**.

[**Meaning:** For a **Brati** (aspirant) seeking **Moksha** (liberation), **Pratyakhyan** is the conscious abandonment of **Namaadhik** (name-like things) that are against the **Ratnatray** (three jewels) through mind, speech, and body. **Pratitramण** is the deep and critical purification of the faults that remain after the abandonment (**Pratyakhyan**). This is the difference between the two.]

**Question:** If the above is the definition of **Pratikraman**, then how can there be a **Prauttamस्थानik** Pratikraman, as it does not fit this definition?

**Answer:** No, because something that is not itself **Pratikraman** but is similar to **Pratikraman** is also called **Pratikraman**. This is how **Pratikraman** is accepted in **Prauttamस्थानik** as well.

**Question:** What is the reason for the acceptance of **Pratikraman** in **Prauttamस्थानik**?

**Answer:** In this case, **Pratyakhyan** itself is the reason for the acceptance of **Pratikraman**.

**Question:** What is the purpose of **Pratyakhyan** done for the sake of **Prauttamस्थान** (highest place)?

**Answer:** When I accepted the five **Mahavratas** (great vows), I abandoned food along with the body and **Kashaya** (passions). Otherwise, the acceptance of the five **Mahavratas** would not be possible for the sake of **Shuddanaya** (purification). Even though this happened, I broke the five **Mahavratas** due to weakness and consumed that food for so long. In this way, the tendency of **Pratikraman** is found in the time of **Prauttamस्थान**. To make this known, **Pratitramण** is done in **Prauttamस्थानik** **Pratyakhyan**.

The **Dasha Prakar Pratikraman Prakirnak** (Ten Types of Pratikraman) describes the characteristics and differences of these **Pratikraman**.

1-2. Jayaghabal Pustak 15.113 Prakaran 88-86 |

Page #491:
---------------------------
##  Knowledge Path/457

There are five types of **Vinaaya** (discipline) - **Jnaana Vinaaya** (knowledge discipline), **Darshan Vinaaya** (perception discipline), **Chaaritra Vinaaya** (conduct discipline), **Tapashniya Vinaaya** (austerity discipline) and **Oupaachaarik Vinaaya** (formal discipline).  To possess humility in one's virtues is **Vinaaya**.  Bharat, Airawat and Videh, by taking refuge in the field, time and emotion, which are the objects of practice, have described the characteristics, differences and fruits of these five **Vinaayas** - **Jnaana Vinaaya**, **Darshan Vinaaya**, **Vaari Vinaaya**, **Tap Vinaaya**, and **Upaachaar Vinaaya** in **Vinaaya Prakirnak**.

## Verse 367-368

**Kritikaarm Prakirnak** - The action performed while paying homage to the **Jindev**, **Siddh**, **Praachaarya** and **Upaadhyaaya** is called **Kritikaarm**.  **Kritikaarm Prakirnak** describes the characteristics, differences and fruits of **Kritikaarm** in the form of three **Pradakshina** (circumambulations), three **Avanati** (bowing), four **Namaskar** (prostrations) and twelve **Praavart** (revolving) performed with the soul as the object.  Here is the relevant verse:

* **Dushronadam jahaajavam vaarasavattameva va. Usi tisuddha cha kiviyamman paujaae || 64 ||**

## Explanation

**Kaaya** - Just as a newborn child is free from anger and other defilements, one should perform **Kritikaarm** with two **Avanati**, twelve **Praavart**, four **Shironati** (bowing the head) and three **Shuddhi** (purifications).

**Avanati** -  The act of joining both hands and touching the ground with the head is called **Avanati**.  This **Avanati** is performed once at the beginning of **Panchanamaskar** and once at the beginning of **Chaturvishti**.

**Praavart** - The act of revolving with the body, mind and speech in a controlled manner, is called **Praavart**.  Three **Praavart** are performed at the beginning and end of **Panchanamaskar** and three **Praavart** are performed at the beginning and end of **Chaturvishti**, making a total of twelve **Praavart**.  Alternatively, one **Praavart** is performed in each direction while circumambulating, making a total of twelve **Praavart** in three rounds.

**Shironati** - The act of joining both hands and bowing the head is called **Shironati**.  This action is performed once at the beginning and end of **Panchanamaskar** and **Chaturvishti**, making a total of four **Shironati**.

This **Kritikaarm** should be performed with a mind, speech and body free from defilements, like a newborn child.

## Dashakalik Prakirnak

**Dashakalik Prakirnak** -  There are ten specific times (**Vaikalik**).  The special characteristics of these times are called **Vaikalik**.  This **Prakirnak** (collection) is called **Dashakalik** (ten times).  It describes the rules of conduct and the method of begging, taking refuge in the field, time, and emotion.

## Uttaraadhyaayan Prakirnak

**Uttaraadhyaayan Prakirnak** - This **Prakirnak** contains answers to many questions.  It describes four types of **Upsarg** (afflictions) - **Devakrit** (caused by gods), **Manushyakrit** (caused by humans), **Tiryanchkrut** (caused by animals), and **Achetankrut** (caused by inanimate objects) - and twenty-two **Parishha** (troubles) - **Kshudha** (hunger), **Trisha** (thirst), **Sheet** (cold), **Ushna** (heat), **Danshamashka** (insect bites), **Nagnata** (nakedness), **Shraati** (fatigue), **Stree** (women), **Charya** (walking), **Nishadyaa** (sitting), **Shayyaa** (sleeping), **Shraakrosh** (crying), **Vadh** (killing), **Yaachana** (begging), **Alaabh** (loss), **Rog** (disease), **Trinasparsh** (touching grass), **Mal** (excrement), **Satkaar Puraskar** (honour and reward), **Prajna** (wisdom), **Ajnana** (ignorance) and **Shradarshan** (wrong perception).

## References

1. "**Gunaavishu Neeti Vinaayah**." [Jayadhaval Pu. 1. 117].
2. Dhaval Pu. 1. 189.
3. Pu. 1 P. 118.
4. Dhaval Pu. 6 P. 156.
5. Moolaachaar 7/104 commentary.
6. Dhaval Pu. 1 P. 67.
7. Dhaval Pu. 6. Pa. 1608.
8. Dhavan Pu. 1 P. 160.

Page #492:
---------------------------
458/Go, Sa. Jivakanda
Path 367-36
This describes the ordinance of endurance and the fruit of endurance, and according to this question, this is the answer.
Kalyavyavahar Prakirnak - Kalpya is the name of the eligible and Vyavahar is the name of the practice. The name of the eligible practice is Kalpya Vyavahar. It describes the form of the Sadhus' pichhi, kamandalu, kavali (special knowledge instrument) and books, etc., which are eligible in that time, and it describes the atonement for ineligible consumption and non-consumption of eligible things.
Kalpya-Akalpya Prakirnak - It states all this, regarding the matter, field, time and feeling, which is eligible and ineligible for the monks. It describes the form of both eligible and ineligible things for the Sadhus, taking refuge in matter, field and time. It states the Kalpya-Akalpya Prakirnak, taking refuge in matter, field, time and feeling, of all the things that are eligible and ineligible for the Sadhus and Asadhous to practice.
Mahakalypa Prakirnak - It describes the form of the eligible things for the Sadhus who have attained initiation, education, self-purification, Sallekhana and the highest form of worship, taking refuge in matter, field, time and feeling. It describes the eligible matter, field, etc., for the Sadhus, taking refuge in time and endurance. It is a special description of the Trikala Yoga, etc., rituals, which are eligible for the Jinakalp Sadhus, and the initiation, education, Ganapoushan, self-purification, Sallekhana, etc., of the Sthavirakalp Sadhus, taking refuge in specific matter, field, time and feeling. It describes the form of Bharat, Airawat and Videh, and the Tiryanch, humans, Devas and other matters residing there, taking refuge in six times.
Pundarik Prakirnak - It describes the cause of birth, Bhut Dana, Puja, Sheel, Tap, Upvas, Samyaktva, Samyam and Akamanirjara, and their place of origin and abodes, in the Bhavanvasi, Vanvyant, Jyotishya, Kalpvasi and Bamanik related Indra and Samanik, etc. Or, it describes the form of the birth of Tiryanch and humans in the Devas, Asuras and Narakas, which are characterized by six. It describes the form of the Tiryanch and humans being born in these Kalpas and these Earths in this time. This is the intention.
Maha Pundarik Prakirnak - It describes the birth in the Devendra, Chakravarti, Baldev and Vasudevas, taking refuge in time. Or, it describes the special Tap, etc., practice, which is the cause of birth in all the Indras and Pratindras. Or, this Prakirnak describes the Tap, Upvas, etc., which are the cause of birth in the Devis of the Devas.
1. Jayaghaval Pu. 1 p. 120-121. 2. Dhaval Pu. 1 p. 681. 3. Dhaval p. 6 p. 120. 4. Dhaval Pu. 1 68. Dhaval Pu 6 p. 160. 5. Jayadhaval Pu. 1 p. 121. 6. Jagpraval Pu. 1 p. 121. 7. Dhaval Pu. 1 p. 18. Dhaval Pu. 6 Pu. 161. 6. Jayaghaval Pu.1 p. 121 and Dhaval Pu. 1 p. 68. 10. Dhaval Pu.1.161. 11. Dhavan' Pu. 6 p. 161. 12. Dhaval Pu.1 p. 6. 13. J.D. 1/121, New Edition p. 111.

Page #493:
---------------------------
##  Gatha 367-368
##  Jnanamaargana/456

**Nishiddhika Prakirnak** - "Nishiddhika" refers to the "prohibition" that aims to eliminate faults arising from carelessness. It also refers to the "prakirnak" (collection) that expounds on this prohibition, which includes various types of "prāyaścitta" (atonement). Alternatively, it refers to the one who, relying on time, formulates the rules of "prāyaścitta" and other conduct.

## Forty-one Synonyms for Shrutagyan

Pravachan, Pravachaniya, Pravachanartha, Gatiyon mein Maargnata, Atma, Paramparalabdhi, Anuttar, Pravachan, Prabachani, Pravachanadha, Pravachansannikarṣa, Nayavidhi, Nayantaravidhi, Bhangavidhi, Bhangavidhivishesh, Tattva, Bhoot, Bhavy, Bhavishyat, Avitath, Avihat, Ved, Nyayya, Shuddha, Samyagdristi, Hetuvaad, Nayavaad, Pravaravaad, Maargavaad, Shrutavaad, Paravaad, Laukikavaad, Lokottariyavaad, Agnany, Maarg, Yathānumārg, Purva, Yathānupoorva, and Poorvatipoorva; these are the synonyms for Shrutagyan. ||50||

## The Word "Vachan"

The word "Vachan" is derived from the root "bach" (to speak). According to the etymology "Uchyate Bhanayate Kathayate iti Vachanam", "Vachan" refers to what is spoken. The term "Vachan" is used to denote a collection of words. "Pravachan" refers to the excellent "Vachan".

## Question: How is "Pravachan" Excellent?

## Answer: 

"Pravachan" is excellent because it is free from faults like contradictions, it conveys a flawless meaning, and it is free from inconsistencies.

## Pravachan and Dravyashruta

"Pravachan" refers to the knowledge or "Dravyashruta" (knowledge of substance) that arises from the excellent collection of words. 

## Question: If "Dravyashruta" is based on "Vachan", how can it be the source of "Thachan" (doubt)?

## Answer: 

This is not a fault because the "Vachan" that has attained the status of "Shruta" (scripture) is different from ordinary "Vachan". Therefore, there is no contradiction in considering it as the source of "Thachan". Alternatively, this fault can be avoided by accepting the etymology "Pravachanameva Prabachanam".

## Pravachaniya

"Pravachaniya" refers to what is to be explained or expounded upon, which is done after careful consideration.

## Question: Why is "Pravachaniya" explained at all times?

## Answer: 

Because it is the cause of the destruction of karma for both the explainer and the listener, who are countless times more virtuous. As it is said:

"Sajjhayam Kuvanto Panchidisamvudo Tigutto Ya. Hodi Ya Eyagamanu Viranayena Samahido Bhikkhu." ||21||

1. Dhaval Pu. 1 p. 6. 
2. Dhaval Pu. 6 p. 191. 
3. Dhaval Pu. 13 p. 280.

Page #494:
---------------------------
## Chapter 460/Go. Sa. Jivakanda
## Verses 367-368

**Verse 22:** As the monk who practices self-study, free from the activities of the five senses and endowed with the three secrets, becomes focused and united with discipline, so too, as one delves deeper into the scriptures, which are filled with extraordinary essence and are unprecedented, one becomes united with extraordinary, new faith and experiences supreme bliss.

**Verse 23:** The ignorant being destroys the karma accumulated over millions of billions of lifetimes, while the enlightened being destroys it in a moment, concealed by the three secrets.

**Explanation:**

The collection of twelve categories (Dwadashanga) is a statement, and its meaning is "that which is known and understood." Here, nine substances are taken from the term "meaning."  Statement and meaning together are called "Vachanarth."  When both statement and meaning are excellent, i.e., flawless, that statement is called "Pravachanarth."

**Doubt:**  The statement, in the form of the seven-fold classification, is flawless because it is confirmed by direct perception and inference, and is free from contradiction. Therefore, if the flawlessness of the meaning is known from the flawlessness of the statement, then what is the purpose of understanding the meaning?

**Solution:** This is not a flaw, because the term "meaning" is used to benefit those who follow the words.

**Alternatively:**  The "Pravachanarth," i.e., the twelve categories, is that which is known and understood through excellent statements.  The twelve categories are produced from all the combined letters, which are characterized by unique composition, have many meanings, are endowed with unique causal factors, and require the assistance of specific teachers for understanding. This is the meaning of the above statement.

**Doubt:**  Since the word "Gati" refers to the meaning of "Desha," understanding the word "Gati" leads to the understanding of all fourteen "Marganga-sthana."  The scripture called "Marganga" is the one through which the beings, who are characterized by the fourteen "Gunasthanas," are discovered in the "Gati," i.e., "Marganga-sthana."

**Solution:** The twelve categories are called "Atma" because they are the result of the soul.  And the result is not different from the cause, because the earthen pot, etc., are not found to be separate from the clay.

**Doubt:**  Both "Dravyachatta" and "Bhavaschatta" are similar in relation to the general principles of the scriptures.  Therefore, just as the twelve categories are considered "Atma" in their essence, the same applies to "Dravyachatta."

Page #495:
---------------------------
## Gatha 367.368
## Jnanamarga Prapa/461

**Solution not found, because it is not the Dharma of the Dravyashraatma. The Pragama designation it has received is obtained through treatment. In reality, it is not Pragama.**

**Muktiparayant, the actions like Aṇimā etc. that cause the attainment of the desired object are called Labdhi. The Pragama from which the tradition of these Labdhis is obtained or in which their attainment is said to occur is called Paramparalagdhi, i.e., Pragama. Uttara Prativacana is another name for it. The Shruta which does not have an answer is called Shruta Anuttara. Or, the meaning of the word Uttara is more, since no other principle is found beyond it, therefore, this Shruta is called Anuttara.**

**It describes the nature of Jivadi substances as not being touched by the Kutiyas, i.e., by the senses, therefore, the twelve-limbed, Varna-Pantayatmak is called Pravacana. Or, because of this knowledge being the cause, the Jivadi meanings are said without contradiction to the Pramana etc., therefore, the twelve-limbed Bhavatha Shruta is called Pravacana.**

**Doubt - How does knowledge obtain the quality of being a Karan (cause)?**

**Solution - Not found, because without knowledge, there cannot be a tendency towards a non-contradictory statement in the meaning. It is also not right to say that this cause will have an adulteration with the statements of the Supta and Matta, because there is no rule for them being non-contradictory.**

**That which has excellent statements is Pravacani, according to this etymology, the name of Bhavagama is Pravacani. Or, that which is said is Pravacana, according to this etymology, Pravacana is said to be the object of the statement. It is in it, therefore, the twelve-limbed Grantha, which is the Upaadana Karanaka, is called Pravacani. Adha is called time, the time of excellent, i.e., beautiful statements, in which the Shruta exists, is called Pravacanaakha, i.e., Shruta-Jnana.**

**Doubt - Why is there a tendency towards beautiful statements only in the state transformed by Shruta-Jnana?**

**Solution - This is not a fault, because there is an absence of Ragaaditrika [Raga, Dvesha, Moha] which are the causes of unbeautiful statements.**

**"Those which are said." According to this etymology, the meaning of the word Vachana is Jivadi substances. That in which the statements are excellent, is Pravacana, the twelve-limbed Shruta-Jnana, which is famous for its closeness.**

**Doubt - What is Sannikarsha?**

**Solution - When one Dharma is intended in one object, the consideration of the truthfulness of the remaining Dharmas in it, and when one Dharma out of the said Dharmas residing in it attains excellence, the consideration of the excellence and non-excellence of the remaining Dharmas is called Sannikarsha.**

Page #496:
---------------------------
##  462 Go. Sa. Jiva-kaana
##  Gatha 367-268

**Or, the forceful speech, that is, the Jiva and other substances, which are described in the form of Anekanta, is the Pravacham-Sannyasa, that is, the aforementioned Dvadasanga Shruta-jnana.**

**Naya, Nangamadi, etc. are the principles. They are described in the form of Sat and Asat, etc. This is the Naya-vidhi-Pagam.**

**Or, the Naya-vidhi-Yagam is the one in which the Jiva and other substances are described by the Naya, Nangamadi, etc.**

**Nayantara, that is, the seven hundred divisions of the Naya, Nangamadi, etc., are described by the elimination of the Sankarya of the subject. This is the Nayantara-vidhi, that is, Shruta-shana.**

**Ahimsa, Satya, Asteya, Shila, Guna, Naya, Vachan, and Dravya, etc., are called Bhangas. The one by which they are described is the Bhang-vidhi, that is, Shruta-jnana.**

**Or, the meaning of Bhang is the destruction of the substance, which is inseparable from the state and origin. The one by which it is described is the Bhang-vidhi, that is, Shruta.**

**The meaning of Vidhi is description. The Vidhi of Bhangas, that is, the Bhang-vidhi-vishesh, is the one by which the differences are described separately, that is, Shruta-jnana.**

**The question about the Vidhi-nishedha of Dravya, Guruga, and Paryaya is called Prichcha. The one by which the order and disorder of it, and the Prayashchitta, are described is the Prichcha-vidhi, that is, Shruta.**

**Or, the meaning of the question is Prichcha. The one by which it is described, that is, spoken, is the Prichcha-vidhi-Shruta.**

**To describe is Vidhi. The Vidhi of Prichcha is Prichcha-vidhi. The one by which it is specified is the Prichcha-vidhi-vishesh.**

**Arihant, Acharya, Upadhyaya, and Sadhu are the ones who are eligible to be asked questions. These are the only types of questions. All of these are described in the Chakra-siddhant. Therefore, this is the name of the Prichcha-vidhi-vishesh. This is the meaning of the aforementioned statement.**

**'Tat' refers to Vidhi. The meaning of 'Tat' is Tattva.**

**Doubt: How is Shruta the name of Vidhi?**

**Solution: Since it describes the existence of the subject of all Naya, therefore, Shruta is the appropriate name for Vidhi.**

**Tattva is Shruta-jnana. Agam was in the past, therefore, its name is Bhut. It is in the present, therefore, its name is Bhavy. It will be in the future, therefore, its name is Bhavishyat. Agam is in the past, future, and present. This is the meaning of the aforementioned statement. Thus, Agam is eternal.**

**Doubt: If this is the case, then how does Pagam get the context of Apaurusheya?**

**Solution: No, because Agam is accepted as Apaurusheya due to the relationship between the speaker and the spoken, and due to the flow of the words, sentences, and verses.**

**From this statement, one should understand that the speech composed by Hari, Hara, and Hiranyagarbha, etc., is not Agam. Vithath and Asatya are synonymous words. The Shruta-jnana in which Vithathpana is not found is Astith, that is, Tathya. The speech of Mithyashtis, which is not true in the present, is not Agam.**

Page #497:
---------------------------
##  Gatha 367-368
##  Jnanamaarga / 463

It is not to be destroyed in the future, nor has it been destroyed in the past. It is the unhindered, well-heard knowledge. It is the Veda, the principle, which knows, will know, and has known the promotive substances. By this, the mythical scriptures of the Sutrakanthas, i.e., the Brahmanas, have been refuted. It is called righteous knowledge because it is just. Or, the principle is called righteous because it follows the knowable or because it is in the form of justice.

The principle is called pure because it is free from verbal and semantic defects. It is called Samyagdristishruti because by it, the Jiva and other substances are seen, i.e., known, in the right way. It is called Samyagdristi because by it, the Jiva and other substances are seen, i.e., believed, in the right way. Or, it is called Samyagdristi because of the inseparable connection of Shruti with Samyagdristi. The reason is called Hethu, which is inseparable from the object to be proved, being recognized by a single characteristic in the form of other than non-existence. That Hethu is of two types - Sadhanahethu and Dushanhethu. Among them, the Hethu used for the establishment of one's own side is Sadhanahethu, and the Hethu used for refuting the opposing side is Dushanhethu. Or, the fivefold evidence, which 'hinoti' i.e., makes known, the meaning and the self, is called Hethu. The Shrutijnan Hetuvad is called that by which the said Hethu is 'uchyate' i.e., spoken. Nay is the means of attaining worldly and otherworldly fruits. Its statement, i.e., explanation, is done by this principle, therefore, it is called Nayavad.

The Ratna-tray is called Pravara because it is the path to heaven and liberation. Its argument, i.e., statement, is done by it, therefore, this Agama is called Pravaravad. The path, i.e., the way, is called that by which one is guided. It is of five types - Narakagatimarg, Tiryanagatimarg, Manushya-gati-marg, Devagati-marg, and Mokshagati-marg. Among them, each path is of many types due to the difference of worms, insects, etc. The principle is called Margavad, by which these paths and the appearances of paths are spoken. Shruti is of two types - Angapravisht and Angabahya. The statement of which is done by the collection of words, it is called Dravyashruti Shrutivad. The principle is called Radhanta (principle) Paravad, by which Maskari, Kanabhakṣa, Akshapada, Kapila, Shuddhodani, Charvaka, and Jaimini, etc., and their philosophies are 'parodyante' i.e., refuted. The meaning of the word Laukik is Lok itself.

**Doubt:** What is Lok?

**Solution:** Lok is that in which the Jiva and other substances are given, i.e., available.

That Lok is of three types - Avlok, Madhyam Lok, and Adholk. The principle is called Laukikavad, by which the statement of this Lok is done. The meaning of the word Lokottar is Alok, by which its statement is done, it is called Shruti Lokottaravad. Shruti is the main one from Charitra, therefore, its name is Agra.

**Doubt:** Why is Shruti the main one from Charitra?

**Solution:** Because without Shrutijnan, Charitra is not born, therefore, Shruti is the main one compared to Charitra. Or, the meaning of the word Agra is Moksha. Shruti is also...

Page #498:
---------------------------
464/Go. Sa. Jivakanda
Verse 366
"Agraya" is called the path, the way, and the scripture, these are synonymous. Whose path? The path of liberation. Accepting this, "Right faith, right knowledge, and right conduct, these three together are the path of liberation." There is no possibility of opposition to this statement because the twelvefold path, which is inseparable from right faith, right knowledge, and right conduct, is accepted as the path of liberation.
The scriptural knowledge, which is the means by which the substances like the soul are investigated, is called the "Yathānumārga". Because it is eternal like the world, it is called the "Shruta Purva". "Yathānupoorvi" and "Yathānuparipāti" are synonymous. The scriptural knowledge or "Dravyashruta" that occurs in this is called "Pathānupoorva". The scriptural knowledge and "Dravyashruta" that reside in all human beings are present at all times due to "Yathānuparipāti", this is the meaning of the statement. This scriptural knowledge is very ancient in very ancient objects, therefore it is called "Shruta Purva Atipurva".
Doubt - Why does it have this "Atipurvata"?
Solution - Because knowledge of the past objects cannot be obtained without evidence, therefore it is called "Atipurva".
The greatness of scriptural knowledge is like the sound of a drum, it is very clear.
The essence of knowledge is directly perceived, only by the omniscient. ||366||
Meaning of the verse - In terms of knowledge, both scriptural knowledge and omniscient knowledge are similar. Scriptural knowledge is indirect and omniscient knowledge is direct. ||366||
Special meaning - "Akshya" means the knowledge that arises from the senses and light, etc., which are different from the soul, is indirect. The knowledge that arises from the soul about the objects without the help of the senses, mind, and light, etc., is direct. This has been explained in detail earlier.
"Syādvāda and omniscient knowledge illuminate all truths.
The difference between direct and indirect knowledge is the most important. ||105||" - There is a difference between direct and indirect knowledge in Syādvāda and omniscient knowledge. The object that is not the subject of either of these two types of knowledge is "Pravstu". Here, Syādvāda is synonymous with scriptural knowledge. Both scriptural knowledge and omniscient knowledge know all truths. The difference between them is that scriptural knowledge knows the truths indirectly and omniscient knowledge knows them directly. The one who knows the entire scripture is "Shruta Kevali". "Shruta Kevali" knows all substances through scriptural knowledge. There is no difference in knowledge between "Shruta Kevali" and "Kevali".
1. Ashta Sahali Phlok 105 p. 288 (Narayan Sagar Press, Bombay).

Page #499:
---------------------------
## Chapter 370

**Knowledge-Ocean/465**

The difference between **Shruta** and **Kevalajnan** is that of knowing directly and indirectly. In the verse, the word **Shruta** is used first and then the word **Kevalajnan**. This suggests that neither is superior to the other. The reason is that they are mutually dependent. **Kevalajnan** gives rise to **Shruta** and **Shruta** gives rise to **Kevalajnan**, like a seed and a tree.

**Doubt:** How can **Kevalajnan** be the illuminator of all principles, since it does not know all the modifications?

**Solution:** **Kevalajnan** is called the illuminator of all principles in relation to the substance, not in relation to the modifications.

**Shruta** knowledge, like **Kevalajnan**, also illuminates the seven primary principles. Just as a **Kevali** expounds the principles of soul, etc., for others, so does the **Agam**. The difference is that the **Kevali** knows the meanings directly, while **Shruta** knowledge knows them indirectly. The **Kevali** knows the infinite modifications of a substance at one time, while the **Shruta** knower knows only some of them. Even the **Kevali** cannot expound all the modifications through divine sound, because all modifications are beyond the reach of words. Similarly, the **Agam** also mentions only some modifications. What is not the subject of these two types of knowledge is non-existent.

**Thus ends the section on Shruta knowledge.**

**Avadhi knowledge** is called so because it is limited, as stated in the **Agam**. It is born from the **Bhava** and **Guna** causes, say the wise.

**Explanation:** **Avadhi** is the knowledge that grasps the downward-going **Pudgala** in excess. Alternatively, **Avadhi**, **Maryada**, and **Seema** are synonymous. Knowledge that is accompanied by **Abadhi** is also called **Avadhi**.

**Doubt:** If **Avadhi** knowledge is defined in this way, then this definition applies to **Mati** knowledge, etc., which are not **Avadhi**, leading to the fallacy of **Prativyaapti**.

**Solution:** This is not correct, because the word **Avadhi** is used primarily for a specific type of knowledge. **Mati** and **Nayanajnan** are indirect, while **Avadhi** knowledge is direct, hence the difference.

**Footnotes:**

1. "**Mati** is dependent on the excessive **Ayonibandhi** in substances, not in all modifications." [**Tattvartha Sutra Prakarana 1 Sutra 26**]
2. **Pravachan Paddhati Sangraha**, page 26, verse 123; **Dharma Paddhati**, volume 1, page 356, verse 184.
3. **Vyakhyaprakarana**, volume 1, page 13.
4. **Jayadhaval**, volume 1, page 16; **Tattvartha**, volume 6, page 25.

Page #500:
---------------------------
466/Go. Sa. Jivakanda
Verse 370

**Question:** Why is the word "avadhi" used in avadhijnana?

**Answer:** All the knowledge below it is "savadhi" (limited) and the knowledge above it is "niravadhi" (unlimited). The word "avadhi" is used in avadhijnana to indicate this.

**Question:** Does this statement contradict manahparyayajnana?

**Answer:** No, because manahparyayajnana is also limited in scope compared to avadhijnana. Therefore, in terms of scope, it is considered below avadhijnana. However, due to the special qualities that arise in manahparyayajnana due to restraint, it is placed above avadhijnana to highlight these qualities. Therefore, there is no contradiction.

**Question:** How can the word "avadhi," which is used in the sense of limitation, be used in the sense of knowledge?

**Answer:** Just as there is no contradiction in calling a man who is armed with a sword "asi" (sword) for the purpose of treatment, similarly, there is no contradiction in calling knowledge that is associated with "avadhi" as "avadhi." Mati and shruti jnana are indirect, therefore, they cannot be included in the term "avadhi" because avadhijnana is direct.

**Question:** Doesn't matijnana also see directly?

**Answer:** No, because matijnana does not directly perceive the object. Matijnana only knows a part of the object directly. A part cannot be the whole object. Even the object itself is not known directly through matijnana, because it is the subject of both direct and indirect matijnana. Therefore, it is proven that matijnana is not direct.

**Question:** If this is the case, then avadhijnana also becomes direct-indirect, because the object is composed of countless periods that are present in all three times. However, avadhijnana lacks the ability to know such an object through direct perception?

**Answer:** No, because in avadhijnana, the knowledge of the specific object is obtained directly from all the present periods, and the knowledge of the specific object from countless past and future periods is seen.

**Question:** Even if we accept this, avadhijnana does not know the complete object, therefore, avadhijnana becomes direct-indirect.

**Answer:** No, because in every object, the directness of avadhijnana is found in both the "vyavahar" (practical) and "dravyaathmik" (substance-based) and "paryayaathmik" (period-based) naya (perspectives).

1. Jayadhaval Pu. 1 p. 17 and Pa. 6 p. 13. 2. Dhaval Pu. p. 12-13. 3. Gh. Pu. 6 p. 26.

Page #501:
---------------------------
## Knowledge Path/467

**Doubt:** Avadhijnana does not grasp infinite vyajanaparyayas, therefore it is a knower of one aspect of a thing.

**Verse 379**

**Solution:** No, because here, the reality of the thing is considered, not the vyajanaparyayas that are suitable for practical conduct.

**Doubt:** Why should this not be considered in Matijnana as well?

**Solution:** No, because the effect of Matijnana is to know a specific thing through its present, complete paryaya, and the effect of the rule of Matijnana is to directly grasp the meaning.

There are two types of Ajnana - Bhavapratyay Avadhijnana and Gunapratyay Avadhijnana. Bhav (existence) and Pradurbhav (manifestation) are synonymous terms. The Avadhijnana whose cause (pratyaya) is Bhav is called Bhavapratyay Avadhijnana.

**Doubt:** If Bhav alone is the cause of Avadhijnana, then why does Avadhijnana not arise at the very first time of the birth of Devas and Narakas?

**Solution:** This is not a fault, because here, Bhav, which is sufficient due to six sufficient conditions, is considered the cause of the origin of Avadhijnana.

The Avadhijnana which is caused by the Gunas (qualities) of Anuvrata and Mahavratas, which are established by Samyaktva, is called Gunapratyay Avadhijnana.

**Doubt:** If Avadhijnana arises due to Samyaktva, Anuvrata and Mahavratas, then why do all Asanyata (non-controlled) Samyagdrsti, Sanyata-Asanyata (controlled-non-controlled) and Sanyata (controlled) not attain Avadhijnana?

**Solution:** This is not a fault, because Samyaktva, Sanyata-Asanyata and Sanyata forms of results are innumerable Lokapramanas (worldly proofs). Among them, the results that are the cause of the destruction and pacification of Avadhijnana-Avarana (veil of Avadhijnana) are extremely rare, and they are not possible for everyone, because the results that are opposite to them are many. Therefore, their attainment is rare.

**Owners of both types of Avadhijnana**

**Verse 371:**

"Bhavapratyay Avadhijnana is possessed by Devas and Narakas, and also by Tirthankaras. Gunapratyay Avadhijnana is possessed by Tiryanchas (animals) and others like Sankha (conch) etc."

**Verse Explanation:**

1. "Bhavapratyay Avadhijnana is possessed by Devas and Narakas, and also by Tirthankaras. Gunapratyay Avadhijnana is possessed by Tiryanchas (animals) and others like Sankha (conch) etc."

**References:**

1. Dhaval Pustak (Dhaval Text), Page 6, 27-28.
2. Dhaval Pustak (Dhaval Text), Page 13, 260.
3. Dhaval Pustak (Dhaval Text), Page 13, 260.
4. Dhaval Pustak (Dhaval Text), Page 13, 211-262.

Page #502:
---------------------------
468/Go. Sa. Jivakanda
Verse 371 and it arises from the entire Anga. The quality-suffix-abhijnan is of humans and animals and it arises from the Sankhadhi Trilokas. ||371||
Special Meaning - The bhav-pratyaya abhijnan is of Devas and Narakas. ||
Doubt - Why is it said that the abhijnan which is bhav-pratyaya is only of Devas and Narakas?
Solution - Because, except for the bhava of Devas and Narakas, other bhavas are not caused by it.
In the 'Ghaval' text and the 'Tattvarth Sutra', the bhav-pratyaya abhijnan is said to be only of Devas and Narakas, but in the verse, it is said to be of Tirthankaras also. Although there is no bhava of Tirthankaras, still Tirthankaras are born only after coming from Naraka or Svarga. In Naraka and Svarga, there is bhav-pratyaya avavijnan and that bhav-pratyaya-abhijnan comes with them, from this perspective, the abhijnan of Panch Kalyanak Tirthankaras is called bhav-pratyaya abhijnan.
It is not said that Mithyashtis do not have abhijnan, it is said that the name Vibhangajnan is only for the Hicharit abhijnan.
Doubt - The abhijnan born in Devas and Narakas who are Samyagdrstis is not bhav-pratyaya, because without Samyaktva, the birth of abhijnan only due to one bhava is not available.
Solution - This is not a fault, because even without Samyaktva, the birth of abhijnan of sufficient Mithyadrstis happens, therefore the abhijnan born there is bhav-pratyaya.
Doubt - When it is a general instruction that the abhijnan of Devas and Narakas is bhav-pratyaya, how is it known that the abhijnan of Samyagdrstis and Mithyashtis is only due to sufficient bhava?
Solution - Because, otherwise, the prohibition of Vibhangajnan of insufficient Devas and Narakas cannot be formed. From this, it is known that their abhijnan is only due to sufficient bhava.
Doubt - Why don't you prohibit abhijnan in insufficient time, like Vibhangajnan?
Solution - Because, with respect to birth, its prohibition is also to be seen there, like Vibhangajnan. It is not that abhijnan happens at the first time of birth of Samyagdrstis, because if this is assumed, then the same kind of birth of Vibhangajnan also comes into the picture. It is also not right to say that there is so much speciality from Samyaktva, because if this is assumed, then the bhav-pratyayapana is destroyed. 1. "Jant bhav-iyam tam dev-rayanam 1154ay. P.13 P. 19]"Mayapratyayoyadhidevnarakanam ||2||" [T. Su. 1]. 2. Dh. P. 13 P. 262. 3. Dh. Pu. 13 P. 260. 4, Dh, Pu. 13 P. 260-261.

Page #503:
---------------------------
## Gatha 371

This passage discusses the presence of *avadhijnana* (clairvoyance) in different beings, particularly in relation to the *guna-pratyaya* (quality-perception) of the *jnanamarga* (path of knowledge). It argues that while *avadhijnana* is prevalent in *tiryanch* (animals) and humans due to their *samyaktva* (right conduct), it is not necessarily present in *dev* (gods) and *narak* (hell beings) in their *aparapya* (imperfect) state.

The passage then addresses a doubt: if *avadhijnana* is present in *asanyata samyagdristi* (non-restrained right-seeing) beings like *dev* and *narak*, why not in *tiryanch* and humans? The answer is that *asanyata samyagdristi* in *tiryanch* and humans is merely a *maya* (illusion) and not a true *samyagdarshan* (right-seeing).

Another doubt arises: if *samyagdarshan* is not the cause of *avadhijnana*, then why not consider *samyama* (restraint) as the cause, since it is present in all *samyata* (restrained) beings? The response is that only *vishist samyama* (specific restraint) is the cause of *avadhijnana*, not all *samyama*.

The passage concludes by stating that *avadhijnana* is not necessarily present in all *samyagdristi* *tiryanch* and humans, but only in those with *vishist samyaktva* (specific right conduct). It also points out that *avadhijnana* is not consistently present in all three types of *vishist samyagdarshan* (specific right-seeing), namely *praupathmika* (primary), *kshathika* (secondary), and *kshayopashmika* (tertiary). Therefore, *samyagdarshan* cannot be considered the sole cause of *avadhijnana*.

Page #504:
---------------------------
## 470/Go. Sa. Jivakanda
**Verse 371**

**Doubt:** If this is the case, then even in restraint, along with the five types of special restraints - Samaavik, Chhedopasthapana, Pariharavishuddhi, Sukshmasamparam, and Yathakyat - and with Desh Biraati, the occurrence of Avadhijnana is seen to be influenced. Therefore, can it not be said that the origin of Avadhijnana is due to special restraint, because the objections and refutations are the same when considering both Samyagdarshan and restraint as causes for the origin of Avadhijnana?

**Answer to the Doubt:** In countless Lokapramanas, there are many special types of results in the form of restraint that are the cause of the origin of Avadhijnana. Therefore, the aforementioned flaw is not found.

**Resolution of the Doubt:** If this is the case, then it is certain that in countless Lokapramanas, there are many special types of results in the form of Samyaktva, which are associated with other cooperative factors, that become the cause of the origin of Avadhijnana.

The Avadhijnana whose cause is... The signs by which Avadhijnana arises. The Avadhijnana that is a part of the Jiva's body is called Ekakshetra Avadhijnana. The Avadhijnana that arises from all parts of the body without a specific area is called Anekakshetra Avadhijnana. Tirthankaras, Devas, and Narakis have Anekakshetra Avadhijnana. Because they perceive their object of knowledge through all parts of their body. It is also said:

**Poraiya-Det-Tiojimjassashaatiram De.**
**Jaayenti Samvado Khalu Sesha Deshen Jaananti.** ||24||

Narakis, Devas, and Tirthankaras know through all parts of their body within their Avadhikshetra, and the remaining Jivas know through a part of their body. The remaining Jivas know only through a part of their body. This should not be done, because the Paramavadhijnani and Sarvavadhijnani Ganadharas etc. perceive their object of knowledge through all parts of their body. Therefore, it should be understood here that the remaining Jivas know through a part of their body and through all parts.

**Doubt:** Avadhijnana is only Anekakshetra, because when the simultaneous destruction and cessation of all Jivapradeshas is achieved, knowledge of external objects cannot arise from a part of the body?

**Resolution:** No, because there is no causal nature in other areas. Therefore, there is no contradiction in accepting knowledge arising from a part of the body that has been transformed by its causal nature. It is not correct to say that one knows without the destruction and cessation of the causal factors, because this belief is contradictory. It is also not correct to conclude that Ekakshetra Avadhijnana arises when the destruction and cessation of the Avadhijnaanavaran occurs in a part of the Jivapradeshas, because the Gopuccha, which has attained its rise, is the object of all Jivapradeshas. Therefore, there is a contradiction in accepting its destruction and cessation in a part of the Jiva while it is the permanent cause. It is also not correct to say that the directness of Avadhijnana is destroyed because it is dependent on the causes (signs) of its origin, because it is not dependent on them in Anekakshetra, and therefore directness exists in it.

1. P.Pu. 1 p. 365-366
2. Dh.Pu. 13 p. 265.
3. P.Pu. 13 p. 265-266.

Page #505:
---------------------------
## Gatha 372
## Jnanamargana/471

**Characteristics are found.**

**57.** Compared to the one-field Avadhijnana, the body-regions are constituted by many institutions. Just as the bodies and the senses have a definite form, so also the body-regions, which are the causes of Avadhijnana, i.e., the signs of origin, do not have a definite form, but are constituted by many institutions of the body-regions of the living beings who have attained the destruction and cessation of the Avadhijnana-avarana karma. That is, they are of many forms. In Gatha 201, the forms of the bodies of the earth-bodied etc. have been mentioned, and in Gatha 171, the definite forms of the senses have been mentioned. The forms of the body-regions, which are the causes of Avadhijnana, i.e., the place of origin, are Srivatsa, Kalasa, Shekha, Sathiya, and Nandavarta etc.

**58.** Here, the word "etc." should be understood to include other auspicious institutions. There is no rule that a living being has the cause of Avadhijnana in only one place, because it is possible for any living being to have one, two, three, four, five, and six etc. fields, such as conch etc. auspicious institutions. These institutions are located in the upper part of the navel of the animals and humans, not in the lower part, because the auspicious institutions are opposed to the lower part. And in the case of the animals and humans, there are inauspicious institutions like chameleon etc. below the navel, as per the Guru's teachings. There is no sutra-vacana on this subject. In the case of the Vibhangajnanis, when they attain Samyaktva etc. in due course of time, as a result of their birth, the inauspicious forms like chameleon etc. disappear and auspicious forms like weapons etc. appear above the navel. This should be understood here.

**Many Acharyas say that there is no distinction between the field institutions of Avadhijnana and Vibhangajnan, and no rule about the lower and upper parts of the navel, because there is no difference between the two in comparison to Avadhijnana in general. Even though there is a difference in name due to the association of Samyaktva and Mithyatva, there cannot be any difference between them in comparison to Avadhijnana, because if we assume so, it will lead to the fault of Atiprasanga. This meaning should be emphasized here.**

**Avadhijnana is of six types according to the qualities and perceptions, and three according to the followers, the established, and the growing, and three according to the other, i.e., the opposite, Desavadhi, Paravadhi, and Sarvavadhi.**

**Special Meaning:**

**1.** In the present context, the Rajavatikara has said that even though Avadhijnana is used under the control of the causes, it cannot be called Parashrin or Paroksha. Because the word "Par" is seen only in the senses. That is, only the senses are called Par. Not the causes (signs). Ra.Va. 1/22/4/3.

**2.** "Khesado tav pravebasandaran sauvida." [D.Pu. 13 p. 266]

**3.** "Siribanch-kalap-sanj-sosthiya-gandavatadirin santhagani ranadambarin bhavati." [D.Pu. 13 p. 265]

**4.** D.Pu. 13 p. 267-68.

Page #506:
---------------------------
472/Go. Sa. Jivakanda
Gana 372: Hiyaman, Vardhaman, Avashthit, Anavasthit, Anugaami, Ananugaami, Sapratipaati, Apratipaati, Ekakshetra and Anekakshetra. ||56|| Out of these, the explanation of Ekakshetra and Anekakshetra has been given in the commentary of Gana 371, therefore, these two will not be explained here. The explanation of Deshavadhi, Parmavadhi and Mavidhi will be given later.
Although the Gatha states that there are six types of Gunapratyay Avadhijnana, the term Gunapratyay should be understood here as general Avadhijnana.
Doubt: Why should we not understand that Gunapratyay Avadhijnana is of many types?
Solution: No, because even in Bhavapratyay Abadhijnana, Avashthit, Anavasthit, Anugaami and Ananugaami distinctions are available.
The Avadhijnana which arises like the moon in the dark fortnight, decreases without any growth and permanence until it is completely destroyed, is Hiyaman Avadhijnana. It is included in Deshavadhi, but not in Parmavadhi and Sarvavadhi, because there is no loss in Parmavadhi and Sarvavadhi. The Avadhijnana which arises like the moon in the bright fortnight, increases until it attains its highest potential and produces Kevalajnana in the next moment and is destroyed, without any permanence in each moment, is Vardhaman Avadhijnana. It is included in Deshavadhi, Parmavadhi and Sarvavadhi, because it is supported by all three types of knowledge. The Avadhijnana which arises and sometimes increases, sometimes decreases and sometimes remains stable is Anavasthit Avadhijnana. The Avadhijnana which arises and remains stable like the sun, without any growth or loss, until the birth of Kevalajnana, is Avashthit Avadhijnana. The Avadhijnana which arises and goes with the Jiva is Anugaami Avadhijnana. It is of three types: Kshetranugaami, Bhavanugaami and Kshetra-Bhavanugaami. Out of these, the Avadhijnana which arises in one Kshetra and does not get destroyed when the Jiva moves to its own Kshetra or another Kshetra due to its own effort or the effort of others, is Kshetranugaami Avadhijnana. The Avadhijnana which arises and goes with the Jiva to another Bhav is Bhavanugaami Avadhijnana. The Avadhijnana which goes with the Jiva in Kshetras like Bharat, Airawat and Videha, and also in the Bhavas of Dev, Narak, Manusya and Tiyach, is Kshetra-Bhavanugaami Avadhijnana. The Ananugaami Avadhijnana is Kshetrananugaami, Bhavananugaami and Kshetrabhavananugaami. The Avadhijnana which does not go with the Jiva to another Kshetra, but goes with the Jiva to another Bhav, is Kshetrananugaami Avadhijnana. The Avadhijnana which does not go with the Jiva to another Bhav, but goes with the Jiva to another Kshetra, is Bhavananugaami Avadhijnana. The Avadhijnana which does not go with the Jiva to another Kshetra or Bhav, but remains connected with the same Kshetra and Bhav, is Kshetra-Bhavananugaami Avadhijnana. The Avadhijnana which arises and attains complete destruction is Sapratipaati Avadhijnana. It is not included in the aforementioned Avadhijnana, because Hiyaman, Vardhaman, Anavasthit, Avashthit, Anugaami and Ananugaami, all six
1. "Tam cha graageyaviham desohi paramohi samvohi hayamanayam vadḍamanayam avattidam anugaami praganugaami sappaḍidaadi appaḍiyaadi eyarakhettam aroyakkhet. || 56. ||" [Dhaval Pu. 13 p. 262] 1. Dhaval Pu 13 p. 263-264. 3. Like the brightness of a lightning, the Avadhi which is without any attachment is Pratipaati. Ra. Va. 1/22/4/p. 82.

Page #507:
---------------------------
##  Verse 373
##  Shanmargala/73

Because of its distinct nature from Avadhijnana, it is contradictory to consider its entry into any of them. Avadhijnana, which is produced and destroyed upon the production of Kevalajnana, and is not destroyed otherwise, is called Apratipaati Avadhijnana. This also does not fall under the previous Avadhijnanas of specific nature. Because it is of a general nature.

Although the two distinctions of Pratipaati and Apratipaati are not mentioned in the original verse and Tattvarthasutra, these two distinctions are also worth mentioning, apart from the six distinctions. Therefore, their mention is found in the Dhavala text. Hence, their nature is explained here, considering them as worthy of explanation. Their mention is in the original sutra 56 of Shatkhandagama.

**Bhavacchaigo prohi desohi hodi paramasavyohi.
Mugapacchaigo niyama desohi vi ya gurane hodi. ||373||**

**Verse Meaning:** Bhava-pratyaya is Desavadhi only. Paramavadhi and Sarvavadhi are by rule Guna-pratyaya only. Desavadhi is also Guna-pratyaya. ||373||

**Specific Meaning:** In Paramavadhijnana, the word 'Parama' means the greatest. The Avadhi which is the greatest is Paramavadhi.

**Doubt:** How is this Paramavadhijnana the greatest?

**Solution:** Because this Paramavadhijnana is related to a greater subject than Desavadhi, it is produced only in restrained humans like Manahparyayajnana, it is the cause of the production of Kevalajnana in the same birth in which it is produced, and it is Apratipaati, therefore it is the greatest. Upon the production of Paramavadhijnana, the being never attains Mithyatva or Asanyama. Therefore, its death is not possible, hence it is not produced in Devas.

**Sarvavadhijnana:** 'Vishva' and 'Kritsma' are synonyms of the word 'Sarva'. The Avadhi which has 'Sarva' as its limit is Sarvavadhi. Here, the word 'Sarva' does not refer to all substances, because the Avadhi of that which has no other substance beyond it cannot be formed. But the word 'Sarva' should be understood as present in the substance which is a part of all. Therefore, the Avadhi which is present in all forms should be related in this way. Or, the substance which attains digestion, excretion, etc., is the 'Sarva' substance. The Avadhi which has that as its limit is Sarvavadhi. This Sarvavadhijnana also belongs to the restrained beings with the ultimate body. Or, the meaning of 'Sarva' is only knowledge, and the subject of that knowledge is also called 'Sarva' by convention. Sarvavadhi means the knowledge which has a limit (the limit is known by Kevalajnana), that is Sarvavadhijnana. This also belongs to Nirgranthas only.

1. Dhavala Pu. 13 p. 264-265. 2. Dhavala Pu. p. 41. 3. Ghattal Pu. 13 p. 323. 4. Dhavala Pu. 6 p. 47. 5. Dhavala Pu. 13 p. 323.

Page #508:
---------------------------
474/Go. Sa. Jivakanda
Verse 3:14-375 Desavadhi - 'Des' means samyaktva, because it is a component of restraint. The knowledge that is the extent (limit) of restraint is Desavadhi knowledge. When it exists, the jiva also attains mithyarava and also attains asanayama, because there is no contradiction in this happening.'
Parmavadhi knowledge and Sarvavadhi knowledge are only of the ultimate-bodied restrained ones; restraint is not possible for gods and hell-beings, therefore gods and hell-beings do not have Parmavadhi and Sarvavadhi knowledge. By the principle of residual inference, they only have Desavadhi knowledge. Therefore, the knowledge of the state of existence of gods and hell-beings is called Desavadhi. Sarvavadhi and Parmavadhi knowledge are only of the restrained ones, therefore they are only guna-pratyaya. The Desavadhi knowledge that humans and animals have is also guna-pratyaya, because humans and animals do not have knowledge of the state of existence, it is only of gods and hell-beings.
Desohi'ssa ya pravaram paratiriye hodi sanjadamhi varam. Paramohi samvohi charamasarirass'sa viradass'sa. ||374||
Verse meaning - Inferior Desavadhi knowledge is of humans and animals. Superior Desavadhi knowledge is only of the restrained one. Parmavadhi and Sarvavadhi knowledge are of the ultimate-bodied restrained one. ||374||
Special meaning - "Ukkassam manusesu ya manusa-teri'cchae ja'nnohi."3 Superior knowledge of the state of existence is not of animals, gods and hell-beings, because they cannot be restrained, it is only of humans, and among them, it is only of the restrained human, not of others. That is, superior knowledge of the state of existence is only of the great sages. Inferior knowledge of the state of existence is not of gods and hell-beings, but only of the right-seeing human and animal. Further in verse 378, the scope of inferior knowledge of the state of existence will be said to be the inferior penetration of the subtle Nigodaya Labdhyaparyaptak, the measure and the time-series, the countless part (in verse 383). But in hell, the inferior scope is one kos (verse 424) and in the gods, the inferior scope is twenty-five yojan (verse 426); from this it is known that inferior knowledge of the state of existence is not of gods and hell-beings. The statement of Parmavadhi and Sarvavadhi has been made in the special meaning of 373.
Padi'va'vi desohi' appadi'va'di' havanti sesa pro.
Micchatam aviramanam ga ya padiv'vajati charim'duge. ||375|| Verse meaning - Desavadhi is attainable and the remaining two are unattainable. The last two knowledge of the state of existence do not attain falsehood and unrestraint. ||375||
Special meaning - When Desavadhi knowledge exists, the jiva falls and also attains falsehood and also attains unrestraint. This proves that Desavadhi is attainable. Parmavadhi knowledge
1. Dhaval Pu. 13 p. 323. 2, Dhaval Pu. 13 p. 262 Sutra 54 and 55. 3. Dhaval Pu. 13 p. 327 Verse 17 first half. 4. Dhaval Pu. 13 p. 327. 5. "Taththa micchatam pi gacchejj'a asan'jam'am pi gacchejj'a, praviro'ha'do." [Dhaval Pu. 13 p. 323]

Page #509:
---------------------------
## Gatha 376
## Jnanamarga/475

**Only the arising of Kevalgyan is the cause of its own arising and is imperishable. Paramovadigyan arises only in the restrained. Upon the arising of Paramovadigyan, the being never attains Mithyatva or Asangram.**

**Doubt:** How does a Paramovadigyani not attain Asangram upon being reborn as a Deva after death?

**Solution:** No, because Paramovadigyanis do not undergo Pratipat, so their rebirth as Devas is not possible.

**Sarva** refers to Kevalgyan. **Sarvavadhi** means the knowledge of all boundaries, which is the knowledge of all limitations. **Sarvavadhi** does not include **Paramovadi** and **Savidhi**, because **Paramovadi** and **Sarvavadhi** are not subject to loss. The **Avadhigyan** that arises and grows like the full moon in the bright fortnight, until it attains its highest potential and gives rise to Kevalgyan and is destroyed, is **Vardhaman Avadhigyan**. It is included in **Paramovadi** and **Sarvavadhi**. This proves that **Paramovadi** and **Sarvavadhi** are imperishable and do not attain Mithyatva or Asangram.

**Paramovadigyan** and **Sarvavadhigyan** are imperishable, indestructible, and remain until the arising of Kevalgyan.

**With respect to the fourfold category of substance, etc., the object of Avadhigyan is the substance, field, time, and state, which are perceived as a form of substance.**

**The best of the best, which is free from the duality of the world, is the friend.** ||376||

**Meaning of the Gatha:** All Avadhigyan, from the lowest to the highest, knows the substance, field, time, and state as a form of substance. There is no duality of the lowest and highest in Sarvavadhigyan. ||376||

**From the Mahaaskandha to the atom, all Pudgala substances, the countless Lokapramanas, fields, times, and states, and the beings who have attained the Pudgala state (form) due to the connection with Karma, are known directly by Avadhigyan.** The epithet "form" is used to negate the formless (amurta) substance.

**Doubt:** If only the form of substance is grasped by this (Avadhigyan), then...

1. "Only in the state of being restrained is the arising of Kevalgyan possible, and it is not subject to debate." [Dhavala Pu. 9 p. 41]
2. "If a Paramovadigyani were to die, he would attain Mithyatva or Asangram." [Dhavala Pu. 13 p. 323]
3. "All Kevalgyanis are restrained. The one who has attained the state of being restrained is the one who has attained the state of being restrained." [Dhavala Pu. 13 p. 323]
4. Dhavala Pu. 13 p. 263
5. P. Pu. 13 p. 3281
6. J.D. Pu. 1 p. 43.

Page #510:
---------------------------
476/Go. Sa. Jivakanda
Gatha 377-383

Past, future, and present Paryayas cannot be grasped because they are not rupa (form). The effect of rupa-upane (form-acquisition) is also absent in them due to the lack of dravyatva (substance).

Solution: This is not a fault, because the rupa dravyatva of those pudgala Paryayas is established. The sutra "Rupishvavadhe"2 also states that rupa substance is the object of avadhijnana (clairvoyance). And the sutra "Rupinah pudgalah"5 states that pudgala dravya is rupa. Due to the bondage of karma from the beginning of time, the jiva has attained murta (form). Therefore, the samsari jiva also becomes the object of avadhijnana.

Sarvavadhi (all-encompassing clairvoyance) is ekavikalpa (single-minded). It does not have jghanya (inferior), utkrisht (superior), or tadvyatirikt (other) alternatives.

The jghanya (inferior) evidence that is the object of avadhijnana is:

Pokammuralasancham majjhimajogajjiyam savissachayam.
Loyavibhattam jararadi avarohido daddhyado rinayam. ||377||

Suhamaringodapraprajjatayast jadass tadhiyasammi.
Avarogaharanamaaranam jahanyam prohikhettam tu. ||378||

Avarohhikhettadoham vittharusseha ran janamo.
Annam pun samakarane avarogaharanamaanam tu. ||379||

Avarogaharanamaanam ussehangul-asankhabhagasss.
Suiss y ghanapadaram hodi hu takkhetasamakarane. ||380||

Avaram tu prohikhettam usseham angulam have jamha.
Suhamogahanamaraanam uri pamaanam tu angulyam. ||381||

Avarohhikhettamjhe avarohido avaravandhamavagamadi.
Tahavasvagaaho ussehasankhaghanapadarah. ||382||

Pravaliprasankhabhagam tidavisam cha kalayo pravaram.
Prohi janadadi bhaave kalapasankajja bhagam tu. ||383||

Gathaarth:

Through madhyama yoga (intermediate meditation), the jghanya avadhijnana (inferior clairvoyance) knows, according to the rules, the dravya (substance) obtained by dividing the loka (world) into the ajit (unconquerable), binasopacaya (decay-accompanying), nokarma (karma-less), audarik (generous), and vagangana (category) categories. ||377||

The jghanya pravagahana (inferior influx) that occurs in the third time from the birth of the subtle, attainable, and sufficient nigodaya (nigoda) is as much as its...

1. P.Pu. 6 p. 44.
2. Tattvarth Sutra A. 1 Sutra 27.
3. Tattvarth Sutra A. 5.
4. "Aranadi vandharanavaddhatado." [J.D.Pu. 15. 285].
5. T. Ra. Va. 6. "Elth jahanatakass tavyatiriittaviyappa ratyi, samvohie eyaviyappattado." [D.Pu. 6 p. 48].

Page #511:
---------------------------
## Chapter 377-383
## Knowledge Path/477

**378.** The realm of the most subtle knowledge is the most subtle realm of non-knowledge.

**379.** The height, length, and breadth of the realm of the most subtle knowledge are not known at this time, but the realm of the most subtle knowledge is as large as the measure of the most subtle perception.

**380.** The measure of the realm of the most subtle knowledge is an immeasurable part of an Utsēdhāngula, that is, an immeasurable part of a Sūchvāngula, a cube with a side equal to a Pāyāma.

**381.** The measure (size) of the most subtle realm is in Utsēdhāngula because the perceptions above the most subtle perception are in Prāmāṇāngula.

**382.** The measure of the perception of the substances that fit into the most subtle realm of the most subtle knowledge is an immeasurable part of an Utsēdhāngula.

**383.** The most subtle knowledge knows the past and future time as an immeasurable part of the most subtle knowledge. It knows an immeasurable part of time in relation to the state of being.

**Special Note:** There are three types of space-knowledge: most subtle, most excellent, and neither most subtle nor most excellent. There is no way to measure the most subtle space-knowledge without measuring the object of the most subtle knowledge. Therefore, the measure of the most subtle knowledge is measured by the measure of the most subtle object.

There are four types of objects based on the difference in substance, space, time, and state of being.

**Measure of the most subtle substance:** When the part of the dense world is given to the most subtle substance, which is the noble body with its subtle accumulation, without karma, the measure of the most subtle substance is one part.

**Doubt:** The noble body with its subtle accumulation is of three types: most subtle, most excellent, and other than these. Which of these is divided by the dense world?

**Solution:** Neither the most subtle substance nor the most excellent substance is divided by the dense world, but the substance other than these, whose form has been seen by the Bhagavans, is divided by the dense world. This is because there is no indication of the substance that is specific to the destroyed and multiplied qualities. It is not appropriate to establish this rule only in numbers, because there is also the authority of numbers here.

**Doubt:** Does the most subtle knowledge know only this substance or others as well? If it knows only this, then there will be an effect of the perception of the clusters located one atom, two atoms, etc., more than the cluster of the most subtle substance located within its realm. But this is not the case, because there is a contradiction in the non-perception of the clusters located within its realm, which are different from the infinite differences. And if it knows the clusters located one atom, two atoms, etc., more than the most subtle substance located within its realm, then it will not be the most subtle substance, because other most subtle substances are also seen?

**Solution:** It is not said that the most subtle substance is of one type, but it is of infinite alternative forms. Among these infinite alternative forms of the most subtle knowledge, the cluster mentioned in the verse is called the most subtle. The clusters that are one, two, three, etc., atoms less than this cluster are more subtle.

1. Dh.Pu. 6 p. 14-15.

Page #512:
---------------------------
## 478 / Go. Sa. Jeevakand
## Gatha 377-383

**Desavadhi** is not a subject, as it is situated outside the **Dravyaskandha** which is the subject of **Jghanya**.

**Doubt:** What is the evidence for the **Utkrishta Skandha** being the subject of **Jghanya**?

**Solution:** The **Pudgal Skandha** that resides within the **Jghanya Pravadhi Kshetra** is its **Utkrishta Dravya**. Even though one, two, three, and so on, up to infinite atoms are connected to their **Utkrishta Dravya**, they are not knowable by **Jghanya Jnana**. This is because they are situated in the **Bahya Kshetra** due to the **Udyot** of **Jghanya Avadhi Jnana**.

The **Jghanya Kshetra** of **Jghanya Desavadhi** is one part of the **Praman Desavadhi** obtained by dividing the **Palyopama** into an **Asankhyata** number of parts within the **Utsedha Dhanangula**.

**Doubt:** How do we know this?

**Solution:**  "**Shrogahana Niyama Du Suham-Gioda-Jovast. Addehi Taddehi Jahaniya Khettdo Prohi.**" (4)

- The **Jghanya Avadhi** is in proportion to the **Jghanya Shravagahana** of a **Vid Ji**. In other words, if we establish an **Utsedha Dhanangula** and divide it into an **Asankhyata** number of parts, the **Jghanya Shravagahana** of a **Sukhsma Nigoda Labdhyaparyaptak Jeeva** who consumes food in the third moment and becomes **Tadbhavastha** in the third moment is equal to one part of the **Praman** obtained. The **Jghanya Avadhi Jnana** is in proportion to this **Shravagahana**.

**Doubt:** The **Shravagahana** of a **Sukhsma Nigoda Labdhyaparyaptak Jeeva** is also the **Sanjna** of one **Prakash Pankti**. Why don't we accept **Jghanya Avadhi Jnana** in proportion to that **Praman**?

**Solution:** No, because the **Jghanya** adjective is used to describe the **Shravagahana**. It is not correct to say that one **Prakash Pankti** is **Jghanya Shravagahana**, because the completion of the sentence in the sense of **Samudaya** is preferred. Therefore, all the **Akasha Pradeshas** within the **Shravagahana** of the **Sukhsma Nigoda Labdhyaparyaptak Jeeva** are included.

**Doubt:** How do we know that the completion of the sentence in the sense of **Shravayavara** is not accepted here?

**Solution:** We know this from the **Aviruddha Upadesha** received from the **Pracharya Parampara**.

Therefore, the **Jghanya Avadhi Jnana** is in proportion to the **Jghanya Shravagahana**. This is proven.

1. V. Pu. 6 p. 15-16. 2. Gh. Pu. 6 p. 16. Dh. Pu. 13 p. 301. Mahabanda Pu. 1 p. 21. 3. Dh. Pu. 13 p. 301-302.

Page #513:
---------------------------
## Gatha 3.77-383
## Jnanamarga/479

**Doubt:** Do you not accept that the field of this gross Avadhijnana is established as an Akashapradesha, and within it, the gross dravya is known?

**Solution:** No, because if we accept this, then the field of gross Avadhijnana becomes countless times greater than the gross Avagaha. The field that is obstructed by gross Avadhijnana is called the field of gross Avadhijnana. But here, it appears countless times greater than the gross Avagaha. For example, the extent of the field of gross Avagaha is equal to the diameter and height of the gross dravya. When we multiply the gross Avagaha by the diameter and height of the gross dravya, we get a field that is countless times greater than the gross Avagaha. But it is not appropriate to say that this field is like this. Because, it contradicts the sutra that states, "The field of gross Avadhijnana is equal to the gross Avagaha." And in this way, it is not right to say that the gross dravya fits into the final Akashapradesha of the established gross field. Because, even a single part of the gross dravya obtained by dividing the dense world into parts, which is related to a single jiva, and has a pinḍarūpa with no upacaya, and a nok, is equal to countless parts of an angula of a single bargaraga. It is also not appropriate to say that the Avadhijnani knows in the form of an Akashapradesha, because if we accept this, then something even grosser than gross matijnana is obtained, and there is no other way to know the gross dravya. Therefore, we should accept here that by lifting all the fields obstructed by gross Avadhijnana and establishing them in the form of a ghanapratara, the gross Avagaha of a subtle nigoda jiva is obtained.

When asked what is the diameter, height, and extent of the field related to gross Avadhijnana, it is said that no instruction is available in this regard. But the instruction is definitely available that the extent of the field related to Avadhijnana, established in the form of a ghanapratara, is countless parts of an angula.

When we divide countless parts of this palyopama into angulas, we get a field with an extent, diameter, and height of countless parts of a ghana angula, countless parts of a sūcyangula. This is the gross Avadhikshetra, i.e., the entire field that is the object of gross Avadhijnana, and it is not a rule that all Avadhikshetras are situated in the form of a ghanapratara. But without equating the Avadhikshetras of irregular shapes, like the Avagahakshetra of a subtle nigoda jiva, and establishing them in the form of a ghanapratara, there is no other way to make a pramanaprarūpaṇa.

Many acharyas say that the gross Avagaha of a subtle nigoda jiva is the field of gross Avadhijnana, which is the difference between the Avadhijnani jiva and the dravya that is perceived by it. But this does not happen, because if we accept this, then the field of gross Avadhijnana will become countless times greater than the gross Avagaha of a subtle nigoda jiva.

**Doubt:** How will it become countless times greater?

**Solution:** Because, when we multiply the extent, height, and diameter of the field that is the object of gross Avadhijnana, it proves to be countless times greater, and it is not possible for it to be countless times greater, because...

Page #514:
---------------------------
480/Go. Sa. Jivakanda
Chapter 377-383 'There will be a contradiction with the Gatha Sutra which says that the area of the avadhi is as small as the subtle nigoda jiva's subtle perception. Since the avadhi jnana knows only in one category, there will be no contradiction with the sutra, so say many acharyas. But this does not happen, because, if we assume this, then the same argument will apply to the knowledge obtained through the eye-sense. Because, it is seen that the knowledge obtained through the eye-sense perceives an object within a field of the size of a countable finger-span, elevation and depth. And if we assume that, then the size of this subtle avadhi jnana's field will be countless yojanas.
Doubt: If the size of the said avadhi field is countless times, then let it be, because, it is desirable?
Solution: This cannot be said, because, even in the Bharat-shaped avadhi field, which is inferred from the countless times the half-month period, countless yojanas of size are not found. Secondly, does the excellent deshabhadhi jnana, who is restrained, knowing his excellent substance, know all the pudgalaskandhas residing within the ghanaloka, starting from one paramanu and going up to the higher rungs, simultaneously or not? If he does not know, then his avadhi field cannot be the loka, because, he perceives the pudgalaskandhas residing in one akasha category, and this cannot be one akasha row ghanaloka size, because, the countless parts of the ghanaloka in it contradict the ghanaloka size. In addition, he will not be able to know the Kulachal, Meru mountain, Bhavanbiman, Path earth, Devas, Vidyadharas, Chameleons and lizards, because, they do not have a single akasha location. And he will not know their components either, because, if the components are not known, then there cannot be the power to know 'this is its component'. If he knows all the ghanaloka simultaneously, then our side is proven, because, it is free from opposition.
Some acharyas say that when the subtle perception of the subtle nigoda jiva is established by the dhanapratarakar, he knows only one akasha expanse, which is many categories. But this does not happen either, because, if this happens, then there will be a contradiction with the Gatha Sutra which says 'the area of the avadhi is as small as the subtle nigoda jiva's subtle perception', and the perception of many categories of chhadmasthas is not contradictory, because, the knowledge obtained through the eye-sense perceives the pudgalaskandhas residing in many categories.
The proof of the subtle field of avadhi jnana is similar to the subtle perception of the subtle, obtainable, sufficient nigoda jiva, therefore, its field is said to be the size of an elevation angul. Before that, the proof of the field is from the dhana angul, because, except for the statement of the elevation of Devas, Narakas, Tiryanchas and humans, the statement is made in relation to the pramana angul.
The area of the avadhi jnana, which is only one part out of countless parts of the subtle time angul.
1. Dh. Pu. 13 p. 304.

Page #515:
---------------------------
## Gacha 384-387
## Shanmarma/41

He who knows an innumerable part of time, in comparison to the **pavali**, knows it because that is his nature. He knows the past and future substances within an innumerable part of the **pavali** as a measure of time. This is the meaning. When an innumerable part of the **pavali** is divided by the **pavali**, the time of the **jghanya** duration is only an innumerable part of the **pavali**. In such a short time, the **jghanya** duration knower knows what has happened and what is going to happen.

**Doubt:** Is this the only time, as it is known?

**Solution:** The **jghanya** space and time are respectively equal to an innumerable part of the **ghanangul** and **pavali** (Gacha 404). This is known from the statement of this Gatha Sutra.

**Jghanya** meaning: It is said that the **jghanya** duration knower knows all the **paryayas** of form, taste, smell, and touch, etc., which are located on the **jghanya** substance, from the innumerable part of the **paryayas** that are objectified by the **jghanya** duration knower, out of the infinite present **paryayas** of the substance that he knows. But this does not happen, because they are infinite. And even the **utkrista** duration knower is not capable of knowing an infinite number. Because there is an influence of such teachings in the Agamas.

**Doubt:** How will the **avadhi** knower know the substance directly, if he does not know the infinite **paryayas** located in the substance directly?

**Solution:** No, because the said **avadhi** knower is the recipient of the specific substance from the innumerable **paryaya** elements, leaving aside the infinite number that reside in the elements of the **paryaya**.

**Doubt:** Why is the term '**bhaava**' not used for the past and future **paryayas**?

**Solution:** It is not used because they are accepted as time.

The alternatives of space and time knowledge are **avaroddhādya** to **uvarimattavva** **viyappa** in relation to the fourfold category of substance, etc. The final part of the **dhūvahara** is the **abhavasi** **siddhādara** **pantu** **guna**. ||384|| The **dhūvahara** is the **karma** **vagga** **rana** **gana** **gara** **karma** **vagana** **gani** **de**. The **samaya** **pabaddha** **pamanam** is to be known in the **prohi** **visayamhi**. ||385|| The **manadava** **vaggana** **viyappana** **antima** **samam** **kha** **dhūvahara**. The **avarukka** **sasa** **visesa** **ruvahiya** **tabiya** **ppa** **hu**. ||386|| The **pravara** is **aranama** **pratha** **bhage** **rana** **ahiya** **mukkasam**. ||387|| 1. V. Pu. 13 p. 375. 2. D. p. 6 p. 26-27. 3. G. Pu. 6 p. 27-28.

Page #516:
---------------------------
## 402/Go. Sa. Jivakanda
**Gatha 384-386**

The measure of Dhruvahar is the infinite part of the Siddhas and the infinite multiplication of the Abhavyas. This Dhruvahar is the multiplier for obtaining the number of Karmavargana. Multiplying the Jhamvargi by this Dhruvahar, we get the time-bound measure, which is the object of Avadhijnana, and Avadhijnana knows this time-bound measure.

The measure of the alternatives (bhedas) of Manovargana is obtained by adding one to the number of superior Manovargana, which are more than the inferior Manovargana. Its infinite part is Dhruvahar.

The inferior Manovargana is infinite in measure, and its infinite part is the more superior Manovargana. Thus, the infinite part of the bhedas of Manovargana is Dhruvahar for the Dravya.

The measure of Dhruvahar is only the infinite part of the Siddhas. Or, it is the infinite part of the multiplier of Karmavargana for the time-bound. This multiplier is also obtained by multiplying the Dhruvahar of two different Desavadhi Dravya alternatives with each other.

**Special Meaning:**

Furthermore, when the Praudarik body, including Vinasopachya, is divided by the Ghn लोक, the one part obtained is the Dravya of inferior Avadhijnana. By making the rare quantity (Dhruvahar) which is the infinite part of Manodravya vargana, rare and dividing the Dravya of inferior Avadhijnana into equal parts (i.e., dividing by Dhruvahar), the Dravya obtained for one rare (the quotient obtained) is the Dravya of another Desavadhijnana. Because, in comparison to the aforementioned inferior Dravya, there is the effect of the destruction and pacification of Avadhishana Avarana, which is the cause of knowledge capable of grasping the Pudgalaskandha, which is less than one or two atoms.

**Doubt:**

How is this known?

**Solution:**

There are countless Lokapramāna types of Avadhijnana Avarana. This is known from the Vargana Sutra.

One should multiply by the countless, i.e., the second alternative of Desavadhi is countless times more than the first alternative in comparison to the Bhava. The Kshetra and Kala remain inferior, because there is a lack of their increase.

1. Dhaval Pu. 13 p. 322 Dhaval Pu. 6 p. 28.
2. "Mohinaana Varaniyarasa Kammas Prajijjasro Pamadiyo." [Pra. Pu. 13 p. 286].
3. Gh. Pu. p. 18.

Page #517:
---------------------------
##  Chapter 360-361

In the above verses, what is referred to as "Dhr Bahar" is called "Avasthit-Viralana Rashi" in the Dhaval Granth. The proof of "Dhr Bahar" in the above verses is explained in two ways: the infinite part of Manovargna and the infinite part of Siddhas. Although, to obtain "Samay Prabaddh", it is necessary to multiply the Karman Vargna with the infinite part of Siddhas, and in one Karman Vargna, the infinite part of Siddhas is the proof of Karma Vargna, yet the infinite part of Siddhas related to the proof of "Dhr Bahar" is different from this infinite part. In the above six verses, the proof of "Dhr Bahar" (Avasthit Viralana Rashi) has been proven in various ways, but the conclusion of those proofs is that it is the infinite part of Manovargna or the infinite part of Siddhas.

The statement of the second and other alternatives of Desavdhi Gyan will be made in verse 364 onwards. To obtain these alternatives, division by this "Dhr Bahar" is done. The infinite part of the Siddha Rashi, which is for Samay Prabaddh, is also the infinite part of "Dhr Bahar". The meaning is that Samay Prabaddh Karman Vargna x the infinite part of Siddhas is the proof of infinity. Now, in this equation, the "infinite part of Siddhas" itself is "Dhr Bahar" in its form. 

As many distinctions there are in the subject matter of Desavdhi Gyan, with respect to the substance, two are reduced, and the remaining number of times the Navahar is multiplied with each other, the infinite part of Siddhas is obtained. The subject of the two extreme distinctions of Desavdhi's substance is Kamra Vargna. Therefore, by reducing the extreme distinctions, the two extreme distinctions are obtained, and the least distinction is not obtained by multiplication. Therefore, the least distinction and the extreme distinction of Desavdhi are reduced from the alternatives related to the substance.

The multiplier of Karman Vargna and the proof of the field alternatives of Desavdhi are "Angul Asankh Gurinda Khetviyappa Ya Dabhaveva Chha". "Khetviyappa Avarushakassavisesam Have Esth" ||360|| "Angul Prasankh Bhagham Adharam Ukkastayam Have Logo". "Idi Baggaran Gunagaro Asankh Dhuvhar Samvaggo" ||361||

**Meaning of the verses:** The infinite part of Angul is the least field of Desavdhi, and Lokakash is the best field. The difference between the least field and the best field is the number of field alternatives here. By multiplying these field alternatives with the infinite part of Angul, the proof of the substance alternatives of Desavdhi is obtained. In this way, by multiplying infinite "Dhr Bahar", the multiplier of Karman Vargna is obtained. ||360-361||

**Special Meaning:** Here, the proof of the substance alternatives of Desavdhi is explained based on the field alternatives of Desavdhi. The least field of Desavdhi has been mentioned in verse 378. The following useful verse is related to it:

"Yogaharanna Jahanna Niyama Du Suhamani Godajivasss". "Jaddehi Saddehi Jahaniya Khettado Prohi" ||3|| 1. Dhaval Pu. 13 Page 3.1 and Pu. 1 Page 16, Mahabhand Pu. 1 Page 21.

Page #518:
---------------------------
## Translation:

**484/Go. Ma. Jivakanda**
**Gatha 312-263**

The minimal penetration of a subtle Nigoda Labdhyaparyastak, which receives food in the third time and becomes Tadbhavastha in the third time, is equal to the area of one Khand Praman Kshetra obtained by dividing the part of the Balopke Prasankhyatavena Bhaga in one Upas. The minimal area of Desavadhijnana is equal to the amount of this penetration. The excellent area of Desavadhi is Lokapraman. By subtracting the minimal area from this excellent Utsheghghanaangul Kshetra, a specific Lokakshetra is obtained.

The number of Palya is Asankhyat, which is Asankhyat Praman, because the regions of the entire Lokakasha are Asankhyat.

By dividing the previous Dravyavikalpa by Pravahar, the Uttaradravyavikalpa is produced. After the Dravyavikalpa becomes only the Asankhyatava part of an Angul, there is an increase of one Akashapradesh in the Kshetra-related Vikalpa of Desavadhi. For one Vikalpa of Kshetra, there are only Asankhyatava parts of an Angul as Dravyavikalpa, so for all Kshetravikalpa, there are Dravyavikalpa equal to the Kshetravikalpa Praman multiplied by the Asankhyatava part of an Angul. Thus, there are Dravyavikalpa equal to the Asankhyatava part of an Angul multiplied by Kshetravikalpa.

Thus, according to Gatha 386, by multiplying two consecutive Asankhyat Praman Dravyavikalpa, the Karmavargana Gunakar is obtained.

**Karmavargana Gunakar's Pramaran is Yaggaranrasiparamaragam Siwanantimaparamaran Mettam Pi. Dugasahiyaparamabhedapamarana vaharaana Samvaggo. ||392|| Paramavahissa Bheda Sagogahanaviyappahavateu. Idi Dhuvaharam Vaggaranaguranagaram Vagnanam Jane. ||363||**

The Karmavargana Rashi is only the Asankhyatava part of the Praman Siddhas, yet by combining two more Paramavadhi Bheda Praman Dhuvahar, the Pramaran of Karmavargana is obtained. ||363||

The number of Dravyavikalpa of Paramavadhi is equal to the Praman obtained by multiplying the Tejaskaayik Jivarasthi by the number of Vikalpa of penetration of Tejaskaayik Jivas. Thus, the Praman of Dhuvahar Vargama Gunaakar and Varga is known. ||362-363||

**Special Note:** The minimal penetration of a subtle Tejaskaayik Apariaptka is the Asankhyatava part of an Angul.

1. "Jaddehi Jatraddha Esa Progaharana Tahetti Tatradha Cheva Jannima Prohi Khesado Hodi." [Dhaval Pu. 13 p. 302]
2. "Desohi Ukkamsakhettam Logametam" Dhaval Pu. 13 p. 28] "Asankhyemaha Pradeshha Dharmaadharmakajivaanaam. ||8|| Lokakashae Pravagaaha. ||12|| Dharmaavarmayoha Kritsne. ||13||" [Tassarth Sutra Pra. 5]
3. "Gullamma Nasankhejjadai Bhagametta Daya-Viyappa Upaeyabwa. Tado Jahapan Khelarasuyariego Pragaarapadeesi Vataayedavo. Evam Vavadide Khetassasa Kidiviyappho Hodi." [Dhaval Pu. 6 p. 26]

Page #519:
---------------------------
## Gatha 364-397
## Jnanamargana/485

This is an excellent understanding of the infinite-fold Badratejaskaayika Paryapta. From the excellent understanding, the inferior understanding is reduced, and a single form of the inferior understanding is projected into the remaining, multiplying the general Tejaskaayika amount, resulting in the Shalaaka amount of the substance, space, time, and emotion of the Paravaadhi. This should be established separately. When the excellent substance of the Desavaadhi is divided equally (by Dhruvahaar) from the existing rare, it contains the inferior substance of the Paravaadhi in a single form. One form should be reduced from the Shalaakas. Again, when the inferior substance of the Paravaadhi is divided equally (by Dhruvahaar) from the existing rare, it contains the second substance alternative of the Paravaadhi in one division. One form should be reduced from the Shalaakas. Again, when the inferior substance of the second alternative is divided equally (by Dhruvahaar) from the existing rare, it contains the third alternative form substance in one division. One more form should be reduced from the Shalaakas. The fourth, fifth, sixth, and seventh alternatives should be taken in the same way, as there is no particularity here. When the two extreme substances of the Paravaadhi are divided equally (by Dhruvahaar) from the existing rare, the final substance alternative is obtained. When the excellent (final) substance of the Paravaadhi is divided equally (by Dhruvahaar) from the existing rare, one atom is obtained, which is the subject of the Sarvaavaadhi. The Sarvaavaadhi is a single-alternative form.

As many Shalaaka amounts of the Paravaadhi are there, so many alternatives of the Paravaadhi are there, and so many times the substance has been divided by Dhruvahaar. In addition to the alternatives of the Paravaadhi, the substance was divided by Dhruvahaar once to obtain the atom. The two extreme alternatives of the Desavaadhi are Karman Vargana. Therefore, to obtain the soft, i.e., excellent alternative of the Desavaadhi, Karman Vargana is divided by Dhruvahaar. The extreme Dhruvahaar of the Desavaadhi and the Dhruvahaar of the Sarvaavaadhi, these two Dhruvahaars, when combined with the alternatives of the Paravaadhi, become two more alternatives of the Paravaadhi, proving Dhruvahaar. When these Dhruvahaars are multiplied with each other, the amount (number) obtained is multiplied by the atom, i.e., the square, to obtain Karman Vargana. When Karman Vargana is divided by this number, the atom, i.e., the square, is obtained. Thus, the amount of square multiplication, Vargana, and square is said.

The substance alternatives of the Devaavaadhi are divided equally by Dhruvahaar, becoming two. In the same way, in the remaining alternatives, there are infinite amounts. ||364|| In the middle of the Desavaadhi, the Tejaskaayika Karma increases with the increase in the number of alternatives. The Vargana of Tejaskaayika Karma is only where there is the Tejaskaayika Karma of the Tejaskaayika. ||365|| The one who sees this, knows that there are infinite amounts of Tejaskaayika Karma. There are infinite amounts of Tejaskaayika Karma, and there are infinite amounts of Tejaskaayika Karma. ||366|| From that, the increase in the number of alternatives, bound by the time of Karma, Karma, and Karma, is divided by Dhruvahaar, and it continues until it becomes equal. ||367|| 1. Dhvala Pu. 1 Pr. 44.48.

Page #520:
---------------------------
## Translation:

**486 / Go. Ma. Jivakanda**

**Verse 368:**

When a portion of the Dhruvbahar is given to the lowest category of the Deshavadhi, the second category of the Deshavadhi is obtained. When a portion of the Dhruvbahar is given to the second category, the third category is obtained. In this way, by giving portions of the Dhruvbahar, countless categories should be generated.

**Verse 364-368:**

**Explanation:**

The subject of the Deshavadhi's middle categories is where there is a Tejas body with Visrosopachya, a Karman body with Visrosopachya, a Tejas Vargana without Visrosopachya, a Bhasa Vargana without Visrosopachya, and a Mano Vargana without Visrosopachya. In this case, the area of the Deshavadhi is countless islands, oceans, and time is countless years. However, compared to the previous ones, the area and time are countless times countless times greater.

Further, the subject of the Avadhi knowledge is a Karman with no Visrosopachya, which is time-bound. In this way, the portion of the Dhruvbahar should be given until the substance of the Sarvavadhi (one atom) is obtained.

When this time-bound substance is divided by the Dhruvbahar, the Karman Vargana of the Dviram Deshavadhi is obtained. When a portion of the Bahar is given to this, the substance of the ultimate category of the Deshavadhi is obtained.

**Verse 364-368:**

**Specific Meaning:**

In the formation of the substance of the Deshavadhi and Parmavadhi, the Mano-dravya Vargana, situated like Mount Meru, is thinned out by an infinite portion (Bahar). Then, the lowest category of the Deshavadhi substance is placed on top of it in equal portions. This results in a second category of substance with a uniform structure. This is because, compared to the aforementioned lowest category of substance, there is a lack of destruction and pacification of the Avadhi-jnana Avarana, which is the cause of the Deshavadhi knowledge, which is capable of grasping the Pudgala Skandha formed from one, two, or more atoms. This is because the "Avadhi-jnana Avarana Karma has countless Lokapramanas as its nature" (Dhaval Pu. 13 p. 286).

After that, leaving aside the multi-structured portions, the second category of substance with a uniform structure is placed on top of each form of the existing portion (Dhruvbahar) in equal portions. This results in a third category of substance with one portion. The area and time remain the same.

Again, leaving aside the remaining portions, the third category of substance with a uniform structure is placed on top of the existing thinning (Dhruvbahar) in equal portions. The substance obtained from one of these portions is the fourth category of substance.

In this way, without error, when there are categories of substance only as large as the countless parts of five, six, seven, or more angulas, the second category of area is obtained. However, the time remains the same.

Further, in the middle categories, that is, the middle categories of the Deshavadhi, the subject of Avadhi knowledge is as follows:

**Verse 365-366:**

**Seya Kammaiya Sariram Teyaa Davvam Cha Agemsankhejjaa Diiv-Samuddaa**

**Y**

**Bhasadhavvam Cha.**

**Vasa**

**Y.**

**3**

It knows the Tejas body, the Karman body, the Tejas substance (Tejas Vargana without Visrosopachya), the Bhasa substance (Bhasa Vargana without Visrosopachya), and the Mano Vargana. There, the area is countless islands, oceans, and time is countless years.

1. Dha. Pu. 6 p. 28-56. 2. Mahabanda Pu. 1 p. 22. Pa. Pu. 13 p. 310.

Page #521:
---------------------------
## Gatha 364-368

The **Tejas** body is said to be the accumulation of **Anokarma** (non-karmic) **Pradesha** (regions). One who knows this body knows countless islands and oceans in terms of space and countless years in terms of time, compared to the **Kshetra** (field) of the **Tejas** body. The **Karman** body is said to be the accumulation of **Karma** (karmic) **Sthiti** (state). Even knowing this body, an **Avadhijnani** (one with **Avadhi** knowledge) knows countless islands and oceans in terms of space and countless **Karmas** in terms of time. The special feature is that the space and time of the **Tejas** body are countless times greater than the space and time of the **Karman** body.

**Doubt:** The accumulation of the **Karman** body is countless times greater than the accumulation of **Anokarma** in the **Tejas** body. Therefore, shouldn't the space and time be countless times greater?

**Solution:** This is not a flaw, because even though the **Tejas** body is countless times greater than the **Pradeshas**, the **Karman** body is extremely subtle compared to the **Tejas** body. Therefore, there is no contradiction in the space and time of the **Karman** body being countless times greater. Secondly, **Grahyata** (receptivity) does not depend on the extent of **Paramanu** (atoms). For example, **Grahyata** is not found in the wind, which is made up of countless **Paramanus**, compared to a **Bhindi** (okra) or a **Rajgira** (amaranth) seed, which are perceptible by the eye. Similarly, the **Avadhijnani**'s perception of the **Tejas** body and the **Karman** body is similar because both are related to **Jiva** (living being). Therefore, it is not appropriate to say that the **Grahyata** of both is the same because of the **Avadhijnani**'s perception, as this would lead to contradictions with the **Audarik** body and the **Karman** body, and with milk and water.

**Tejas** is a **Vargana** (category) of **Tejas** substance without **Vistara** (expansion). The **Avadhijnani** who perceives this **Tejas** has a **Kshetra** (field) of countless islands and oceans and a time of countless years. The special feature is that the space and time of the **Tejas** body are countless times greater than the space and time of the **Karman** body, because the **Pradeshas** of the **Tejas** body are countless times smaller than the **Pradeshas** of the **Karman** body due to the **Karma** (karmic) **Puja** (accumulation).

**Doubt:** Why is the **Tejas** substance not perceived as having a specific time?

**Solution:** This is not a flaw, because in the **Anuyogadwar** (chapter) called **Dravyarthata** (substance meaning), the word **Dravy** (substance) is used in the sense of **Vargana** (category) due to convention.

**Bhasha** (language) is a **Skandha** (accumulation) of the **Bhasha** **Vargana** (category). The **Avadhijnani** who knows this **Bhasha** has a **Kshetra** (field) of countless islands and oceans and a time of countless years. However, the space and time of the **Bhasha** **Vargana** are countless times greater than the space and time of the **Tejas** **Vargana**.

**Doubt:** The **Bhasha** **Vargana** is made up of countless **Pradeshas** compared to the **Pradeshas** of a single **Vargana** of **Tejas**. How can the **Avadhijnani** perceive such a massive **Skandha** (accumulation)?

**Solution:** This is not a flaw, because even though the **Bhasha** **Vargana** is countless times greater than the **Pradeshas** of a single **Vargana** of **Tejas**, there is no contradiction in the **Avadhijnani** being able to perceive it, as the **Avadhijnani**'s perception is not limited by the size of the **Pradeshas**.

Page #522:
---------------------------
480/Go. Sa. Jivakanda
Verse 366: How is it known that the understanding of the Bhaṣāvargaṇa is infinitely inferior to the understanding of the Tejasvargaṇa?
Solution: It is known from the fact that "the understanding of the Kārmaṇasariradravya Vargaṇa is the most insignificant. The understanding of the Manodravya Vargaṇa is infinitely greater than that. The understanding of the Bhaṣādravya Vargaṇa is infinitely greater than that. The understanding of the Tejasasariradravya Vargaṇa is infinitely greater than that. The understanding of the Pāhārakasariradravya Vargaṇa is infinitely greater than that. The understanding of the Vaifiyika Sariradravya Vargaṇa is infinitely greater than that. The understanding of the Audārika Sariradravya Vargaṇa is infinitely greater than that." This is known from this smallness.
But, this is not the main point, because the smallness of the understanding is not the reason for the greatness of knowledge, as has been said before. Therefore, it should be understood here that subtlety is the reason for the greatness of knowledge of language.
Doubt: What is subtle?
Solution: That which is difficult to grasp is called subtle. This meaning should also be said elsewhere.
Why is the word 'ca' found in the Śā-Gāthā Sūtra?
Solution: It is sung to collect the meaning of many unsaid things.
Therefore, the meaning here is that one who knows one Vargaṇa related to Manodravya knows infinitely many islands and oceans in terms of space and infinitely many years in terms of time. This is the special feature that it knows infinitely many spaces and times in comparison to the space and time related to the Bhaṣāvargaṇa. Although one Manodravya Vargaṇa is produced by infinitely many regions from the regions of one Vargaṇa of language, still the understanding of the Manodravya Vargaṇa is infinitely inferior to the understanding of the Bhaṣāvargaṇa, therefore it is said that the knowledge of perception that makes the Manodravya Vargaṇa its object is great. One who knows the Kārmaṇadravya Vargaṇa knows infinitely many islands and oceans in terms of space and infinitely many years in terms of time. This is the special feature that the space and time of the knowledge of perception that makes one Kārmaṇadravya Vargaṇa its object is infinitely greater than the space and time of the knowledge of perception that makes one Manodravya Vargaṇa its object.
'When the Kārmaṇavargaṇa dravya is given in a rare state (dhra bahār) by spreading it out, it becomes the excellent dravya of the country's knowledge.'
The number of alternatives like sound etc. is proved by the fact that in the Anguliprasankhabhāge Vyṣiyappe Gave Dukhettamhi. Egāgāsapadeśo Vaḍḍhadi Sampūrṇalogoti. ||36||
1. Kammaday Vaggagādabbamath Divaviralāe Samāha Kariydigo Desohi Ukkassa Davam Hodi. Gh. (p. 35 line 10).

Page #523:
---------------------------
Gaya 666-403
Janamargama / 486
The Pravali Prasankha Bhaga is the spread of the Jghana Kala, which increases by one time unit at a time. This should continue until the excellent time of the Desavadhi is reduced by one Palya. ||400|| The Mangala Prasankha Bhaga increases by an uncountable number of times, and the uncountable number of parts of the Prasankha Bhaga increases by an uncountable number of times. ||401|| In the Jghana Kshetra, the Kshetra increases by Dhruva and Adhruva, and the Jghana Kala increases by one time unit at a time. ||402|| The number of time units in the first Parva (Dhruva and Adhruva) increases by an uncountable number of times. The first and subsequent Kandakas will be described based on the Kshetra and Kala. ||403||

**Explanation:** When the substance and the state of being change by an uncountable number of parts of an Angula, one Akashapradesha increases above the Jghana Kshetra. When this happens, the second change in the Kshetra occurs, but the Kala remains Jghana. After that, when the previous substance change is divided into equal parts and given to the existing Bhagahara, one part above the previous substance change occurs. When the previous state of being change is multiplied by an uncountable number of times, the state of being change above the Avadhi occurs. In this way, by repeatedly changing the substance and the state of being by an uncountable number of parts of an Angula, one should create the changes. When these changes are created, one should increase one Akashapradesha above the second Kshetra change. This results in the third change in the Kshetra. The Kala remains Jghana. Gradually, the Vyachyanacharya, who is free from delusion, free from anxiety, and has a calm mind, should address the listeners by creating changes in the substance and the state of being by an uncountable number of parts of an Angula, and then create changes in the Kshetra by an uncountable number of parts of an Angula, up to the fourth, fifth, sixth, and seventh changes in the Kshetra, and then increase the Jghana Kala by one time unit. When this happens, the second change in the Kala occurs. Again, when the substance and the state of being change by an uncountable number of parts of an Angula, one should increase one Akashapradesha in the Kshetra. In this way, when the Kshetra changes by an uncountable number of parts of an Angula, one should increase the Kala by one time unit to create the third change in the Kala.

1. Dhavala Pu. 6 p. 26.

Page #524:
---------------------------
## 460 Go. Sa. Jiyakanda
## Gatha 269-403

**Shankara:** Here, the doubter says that when an immeasurable number of parts of an angul (finger) pass by, time increases by one moment. This does not happen because, by increasing in this way, the excellent region of the deshavadhi (spatial dimension) cannot be produced, and an immeasurable number of times the excellent time will be produced. In this way, the excellent region of the deshavadhi is the lok (world). The excellent time is one moment less than a palya (a unit of time). In this situation, if an immeasurable number of parts of an angul are obtained in one moment, how many parts of a palya will be obtained in a time less than an immeasurable number of parts of a palya? In this way, when the desired quantity is multiplied by the result quantity and divided by the proof quantity, only an immeasurable number of ghanangul (cubic angul) are produced, not the excellent region of the deshavadhi, the lok. If time increases by one moment when an immeasurable number of parts of an angul pass by, how much time will increase in a lok that is less than a part of a ghangal (a unit of space)? In this way, if the desired quantity multiplied by the result quantity is divided by the proof quantity, an immeasurable part of the lok is obtained, not the excellent time of the deshavadhi, which is one moment less than a palya. Therefore, when a time less than an immeasurable number of parts of a palya is divided by a lok that is devoid of the inferior avadhikshetra (spatial dimension), an immeasurable part of the lok is obtained. Time should increase by one moment when this many parts pass by, because otherwise, the aforementioned faults will arise.

**Solution:** This does not happen because, if it is accepted as such, the non-production of the regions mentioned in the Rasatra of the Vargana will arise. It is like this: the region that knows an immeasurable number of parts of a palya in relation to time knows an immeasurable number of parts of an angul. This is what is said in the sutra (aphorism). The region that knows a time slightly less than a palya knows a ghanangul. The region that knows a palya in relation to time knows the angul separation. The region that knows half a month in relation to time knows the Bharat region. The region that knows a month plus a little in relation to time knows the Jambudvipa. The region that knows a year in relation to time knows the manushyalok (human world). In this way, the remaining regions will not be produced because, if it is accepted that time increases by one moment when the region increases by an immeasurable part of the lok, it will be against the sutra, because it will be a deceptive argument.

**Doubt:** If this does not happen, then it does not happen. But then, how is the production of the excellent region and time possible?

**Solution:** Their production happens due to the absence of the rule of increase. First, time increases by one moment when an immeasurable number of parts of an angul pass by. It is like this: when the inferior time is subtracted from an immeasurable number of parts of a palya, the remaining time increases by an immeasurable number of parts of a palya. By making it rare and subtracting the inferior avadhikshetra, the increase in the region by an immeasurable number of parts of an angul, which is less than the inferior avadhikshetra, is given in equal parts. In this way, an immeasurable number of parts of an angul are obtained in each moment. Here, if there is a settled increase in the region, then when the regions increase one by one, the underlying time of that same region should also increase one by one. Or, if there is an unsettled increase, then one should take an immeasurable number of options of increase from the first option to an immeasurable number of parts of an angul, because the guru (teacher) has taught that time increases by one moment when an immeasurable number of parts of an angul pass by. Again, an immeasurable number of parts of an angul or an immeasurable number of parts of that same angul...

Page #525:
---------------------------
## Gatha 396-403
· · Jnanamarga-ranaa/461

It should be said that time increases as the field-alternatives pass, because there is no contradiction in both types of growth.
• The inferior time should be reduced by a small amount from the lesser of the two pravalis, and the remaining should be thinned out. The inferior dhana-amul should be divided into equal parts and given to each time. The alternatives of growth, which are both existent and non-existent, should be considered as a fraction of an angula, or a fraction of a number, only in the passing of the field-alternatives. Time increases, and this should be considered as a similar pattern as before. In this way, the gods residing in the Uttara Vimana know the entire Lokanali in relation to the Palpa, which is an infinitesimal fraction of the time, and in relation to the Dhotra. Therefore, by thinning out the infinitesimal fraction of the Palpa, which is devoid of inferior time, and by dividing the inferior praadi pradhvana, which is less than the inferior field, into equal parts and giving it to each form, an infinitesimal fraction of the entire Lokanali is obtained for each form. Here, it should not be said that time increases as the field-alternatives pass, because this would lead to the implication of the absence of the lower field and time. Therefore, it should be said that time increases as an infinitesimal fraction of a ghana-angula, or a fraction of a ghana-angula, or a ghana-angula, or a square of a ghana-angula, or a jagani, or a jagat-pratar, or an infinite number of jagat-pratars pass. Therefore, it is proven that there is no contradiction in the origin of the superior field and time.
Now, this should be taken up until the two extremes of dravya, field, time, and bhava achieve equal growth.
Doubt- What is meant by equal growth of the two extremes?
Solution- The equal growth is the name given to the place where all four grow simultaneously. The growth below the extreme equal growth, excluding the extreme equal growth, is the equal growth of the two extremes.
Going that far, whatever difference there is, it is said- How many time alternatives are there above the equal growth of the two extremes? One time form is one alternative. But the field alternatives are only an infinite series, or only a finite series, or only a jag-series, or only the first square root of a ghana, or only the second square root of a ghana, or only a ghana-angula, or only an infinitesimal fraction of a ghana-angula, or only an infinitesimal fraction of a ghana-angula. When asked whether these are or are not, the answer is that they are only an infinitesimal fraction of an angula. Because this is the traditional teaching of the teachers. Or, there is no knowledge about the said dhotra alternatives, because the effect of the sutra related to that is the reason. The alternatives of dravya and bhava are infinite in number due to the field alternatives. The multiplier is an infinitesimal fraction of an angula, because when an infinitesimal fraction of an angula passes, the mind perceives a space in the field. In this way, the equal growth of the two extremes has been explained.
Again, when the audaric dravya of the equal growth of the two extremes is divided into equal parts by the existent biranna, then there is a dravya alternative beyond that. When the bhava of the equal growth of the two extremes is multiplied by its corresponding infinite forms, then there is a bhava alternative after that. In this way, when an infinitesimal fraction of an angula passes, a space increases in the field. In this way, the dravya and

Page #526:
---------------------------
462/Mo. Sa. Jivakanda
Gatha 316-403

The two-limbed (dvicaram) options of the bhava should be taken to the ultimate. Then, while producing the ultimate (utkrista) substance of the desavadhi, by separating the two-limbed (dvicaram) sraddhartika substance and making the karmic vargana substance, which is fit for a single moment of bondage, discrete through rarification, the ultimate substance of desavadhi is obtained. By multiplying the two-limbed (dvicaram) bhava of desavadhi by innumerable similar forms, the ultimate bhava of desavadhi is obtained. When an akasapradesa (space-point) is added above the kshetra (spatial dimension), the ultimate kshetra of desavadhi becomes the loka (universe), because the statement "as long as the loka exists, it is the pratipati (occupier), above it is the apratipati (non-occupier)" means that desavadhi, which makes the loka its object due to the utkarsha (excellence) with respect to the kshetra, is the pratipati, and from this the paramavadhi (highest limit) and sarvavadhi (universal limit) are the apratipati. When a single moment is projected above the two-limbed (dvicaram) time, the ultimate time of desavadhi becomes one moment less than a palya.

The exposition of other acaryas' explanations is not justified by logic, because if that is accepted, it would lead to the implication of the infinite multiplicity of the ultimate substance of desavadhi from the ultimate substance of the avadhi of the Sarvartha-siddhi Vimana-vasi devas. This is because the Sarvartha-siddhi Vimana-vasi deva knows a minute part of the innumerable part of the manodhravya-vargana according to its avadhi-jnanavarana-karma, but the ultimate desavadhi-jnani attains a single moment-bound (ekakshana-prabaddha). And there is no distinction between a single moment-bound and many moment-bound, because here the absence of the predominance of the multiplier in the pratisamkhyana (enumeration) of the palya is only. This method of production of the ultimate substance of the devas is not well-known, because it is established by the sutra "it (the ultimate substance) is the anantavam (infinite) part of its own avadhi-jnanavarana-karma, decreasing one pradesa (spatial unit) after another from its own kshetra". Therefore, after the lapse of the suitable options starting from the inferior substance, one should give the sraddhartika substance with visrasa-upacaya (accretion) by separating it from the visrasa-upacaya-less karmic single moment-bound, because the visrasa-upacayas of the audarikas are infinite times more than the karmic visrasa-upacayas, and this fact is also not well-known, because "the visrasa-upacaya of the audarikas is the least, from that the visrasa-upacaya of the vaikriyikas is infinite times more, from that the visrasa-upacaya of the aharaka is infinite times more, from that the visrasa-upacaya of the tejas is infinite times more, from that the visrasa-upacaya of the karmic is infinite times more" - this way the infinite multiplicity is established by the vargana-sutra.

Doubt: Why don't they give the sraddhartika paramanus (atoms) themselves by rarification, leaving aside the visrasa-upacayas?
Answer: They don't give, because they are infinitely less than the rarification mass, such is the instruction of the guru.
Doubt: How is it known that the karmic substance is infinite times more than the rarification mass?
Answer: "The substances of the ahara-vargana are the least, those of the tejas-vargana are infinite times more, those of the bhasa-vargana are infinite times more, those of the mano-vargana are infinite times more, those of the karmic-vargana are infinite times more" - this vargana-sutra establishes this.
As before, when the innumerable substance and bhava options have lapsed, when the inferior avadhi-kshetra...

Page #527:
---------------------------
Knowledge Path/463.
When the area is multiplied by the countable part of the pravali, then the second alternative of the area is obtained. Similarly, when the infinitesimal time is multiplied by the countless part of the avali after the countless area alternatives have passed, then the second alternative of time is obtained. In this way, one should proceed to the excellent alternative of the deshavadhi. In this way, many acharyas describe the form of the deshavadhi. But it does not happen, because, here we ask whether the adhwana of this explanation is similar to the adhwana mentioned in the previous explanation or dissimilar? In the above two sides, the similar side is not present, because if it were so, then there would be a context of countless lokas for the area and time. It is like this - the countless part of the pravali should be given to each form as a multiplier by thinning out the amount obtained by dividing the half-sections of the lokas by the countable parts of the pravali. Only by thinning out, the area of the avadhi becomes countless lokas in measure, because, only by multiplying the countless parts of the avali with each other, the lokas are generated. Here, in the adhwana itself, the countless part of the patyopama has become countless lokas in measure. Going above this, the context of countless lokas for the area will automatically arise and this is not desirable, because, it has been accepted that the area of the excellent deshavadhi is only lokas in measure. Similarly, one should describe the context of countless lokas for time and it is not desirable that the excellent time of the deshavadhi is countless lokas in measure, because, according to the traditional teachings of the acharyas, the excellent time of the deshavadhi is proved to be one moment less than a palya in measure.
Or 409
The second (dissimilar) side also does not form, because, accepting an adhwana greater than the previously mentioned adhwana will lead to the context of the previously mentioned fault. If one accepts only the countless part of the patyopama as the area alternatives, then that also does not form, because, accepting this will lead to the context of the absence of countless lokas in measure of the deshavadhi's kshayopa-shama alternatives, and also the context of the countless part of the avali for time. The other thing is that the area and time are not present in the deshavadhi in the order of countless multiplication of kshayopa-shama.
11 Chapters of Deshavadhi
Angulma-avali-ae bhagam-asankhejjad-ovi sankhejj-o. Gulavalito pravali-yam cha-angul-pudhattam. || 404 ||
Meaning of the verse - Where the area of the avadhi-jnana is countless parts of an angul in measure, there the time is only countable parts of the avali. Where the area is countable parts of an angul, there the time is countable parts of the pravali. Where the area is an angul in measure, there the time is antaravali (deshon gravali). Where the time is avali in measure, there the area is angul - prithvastra. || 404 ||
Special meaning - 'Angul' should be taken as the measure-dana-angul, because deva, naraki, tiryanch and
1. Dhaval Pu. 13 p. 304, Pu. Pu. 24, M. Ban. Pu. 1 p. 21.

Page #528:
---------------------------
## Translation:

**464 / Go. Sa. Jeevakanda**
**Verse 405**

The Guru's teaching is that one should accept the Angula (unit of measurement) and other such proofs, except in the case of the statement of the expulsion of humans. This Angula should be divided into countless parts. The one who possesses the knowledge of the Avadhi (clairvoyance) that is established in the form of a cube, with one part of this Angula as the proof, knows the countless parts of the Avali (unit of time) in relation to time, because such is the nature. Within the countless parts of the Avali, one knows the past and future substances.

**Doubt:** Is there only one option for the field of Avadhi knowledge and time, or are there other options?

**Solution:** The verse states "two countless" (do vi sankhejjā), meaning that both the field and time are proofs of countless parts.

**Doubt:** What are the countless parts of the proofs?

**Solution:** The Angula and the Avali.

The one who knows the countless parts of the Angula in relation to the field, knows the countless parts of the Avali in relation to time. The one who knows the proof field of one Angula in relation to the field, knows within the Avali in relation to time. Here, "Angula" refers to the proof-cube-Angula, and "Avaliyanthi" refers to a slightly lesser Avali. The Avadhi knowledge that is established in the form of a cube, with the Angula as the separate proof, knows a complete Avali in relation to time.

**"Shravaliyadhattam ghanahattho tah gaunam muhasanto.
Jodharan bhisnamuhattam vivasanto pannavi sam tu." || 405 ||**

**Meaning of the Verse:** Where time is the separate proof of the Avali, there the field is the cube-hand. Where there is a field, there time is the inner-muhurt. Where there is a cube-yojana field, there time is a different muhurt. Where time is slightly less than one day as proof, there the field is twenty-five cube-yojanas. || 405 ||

**Special Meaning:** The Avadhi knowledge that is established in the form of a cube, with the hand as the proof, has the Avali as the separate proof in relation to time. The Avadhi knowledge that is established in the form of a cube, with the cube-kos as the proof, has the inner-muhurt as the proof in relation to time. The Avadhi knowledge that is established in the form of a cube, with the cube-yojana as the proof, has a different muhurt, meaning one muhurt less, as the proof in relation to time.

**Doubt:** Why is it instructed to establish the field bound by Avadhi knowledge in the form of a cube?

**Solution:** No, because otherwise, there would be no other way to state the field separate from the proofs of time.

**E**

**1. Dhaval Pu. 13. 304-305. 2. Dhaval Pu. 13 p. 306 Pu. 6 p. 25, M.B. Pu. 1 p. 21. The text in the printed books is incorrect.**

Page #529:
---------------------------
## Verse 406
**Manamarg/465**

There is no other way. Therefore, the Avadhi knowledge has been established in a cubic form and designated.

**Doubt:** Why is the Suciyोजन and Prataryोजन area not considered here?

**Solution:** It is not considered because if it were, it would be an innumerable times less than the Jghana area. But this is not the case, because the different moments of time cannot be proven otherwise. The meaning is that the Avadhi time is an innumerable part of the Jghana time, and it has become "different moments" in this context. And in this way, the time here has become innumerable times greater than the Jghana time. So, the area here (Ghanayोजन) should also be innumerable times greater than the Jghana area [an innumerable part of Ghanangul]. This is how we know that this is indeed Dhanayोजन. Otherwise, if we consider Suciyोजन and Prataryोजन as the area here, then the area here would be innumerable times less than the Jghana Avadhi area, which is an innumerable part of Ghanangul.

The Avadhi knowledge, whose area is established in a cubic form as twenty-five Ghanayोजन, is only a few days in terms of time.

**"Bharahhammi praddhamaasam sahiya maasam cha jambudīvammi |
Yasaṃ cha manu'aloe pasapudhatam cha ruchagammi ||406||"**

**Meaning of the verse:** Where the Bharatavarsha area is in cubic form, the time is half a month. Where the Jambudvipa area is in cubic form, the time is a little more than a month. Where the Manushyaloka area is, the time is one year. Where the Ruchakavar Dvipa area is, the time is a separate year. ||406||

**Special Meaning:** The Bharatkshetra is 526 1/19 yojanas in size, because it is a principle that words used in a community also remain in its parts. Here, we should take the cubic form of the Bharatkshetra, because the cause is being treated in the action here.

The time here is half a month. The meaning is that the Avadhi knowledge, whose area is established in a cubic form as the cubic size of the Bharatkshetra, knows about half a month in terms of time. Here, the word Jambudvipa refers to the Jambudvipa with a cubic size of one lakh yojanas. When the area is this much, the time is a little more than a month. The Manushyaloka is 47 lakh yojanas in cubic size. When the area is this much, the time is one year. The Ruchakavar Dvipa, from its outer two feet to the middle yojanas, is called Ruchakavar, because it is a principle that words used in a community also remain in its parts. Its cubic form is also called Ruchakavar, because the cause is being treated in the action here. When the area is this much, the time is a separate year.

1. Dh. Pu. 13 p. 306.
2. Gh. p. 13 p. 307, Pu. 1 p. 2.5, M. Ban. Pu. 1 p. 21.
3. P. Pu. 13.

Page #530:
---------------------------
466/Go. Sa. Jivakanda
Verse 407
Why are Bharat, Jambudvipa, Manushyaloka, and Ruchakavar Dvipa, etc., not accepted as having the shape and form of a crescent moon and a full moon?
_ Solution: No, because if we accept this, then we would also find the occurrence of such eclipses in fingers, etc. But this is not the case, because if we accept this, then there would be a situation of disorder. (Therefore, only their positive areas are taken.)
Sankejjapame kale div-samudda havanti sankejjja.
Kallammi asankejjje dob-samudda asankejjja. ||40||
Meaning of the verse: Where time is measured in a countable number of years, there the area is measured in a countable number of islands and seas, and where time is measured in an uncountable number of years, there the area is measured in an uncountable number of islands and seas. ||407||
Special meaning: This verse is found to state the measure of the area related to the knowledge of the limits, in relation to the measure of time. 'Sankejjadme kale' means when time is countable. Here, the word 'kal' is a verbal exception, otherwise, the area of the inferior knowledge of the limits would also be obtained as a measure of the dense combination of uncountable islands and seas.
Doubt: How do we know that the word 'kal' refers to years?
Solution: Because it is possible to accept a particular time in the general time, and the area related to the knowledge of the limits related to time, avali, muhurta, divas, ardhamas, and mas has already been described.
_ By the knowledge of the limits, one knows the past and future substances related to countable years, and one knows the countable islands and seas in relation to that area. When that area of the knowledge of the limits is established in a cubic form, then its dimension becomes the positive measure of the countable islands and seas. When time is measured in an uncountable number of years, then when the area related to the knowledge of the limits is established in a cubic form, then the dimension of the uncountable islands and seas becomes the positive measure.
In verse 404, the first three kandakas are mentioned, in verse 405, the four kandakas from the fourth kandaka to the seventh kandaka are mentioned, in verse 406, the four kandakas from the eighth kandaka to the eleventh kandaka are mentioned, and in verse 407, the twelfth kandaka and the remaining seven kandakas are mentioned.
[See page 467 of Nalika
3. P. Pu. 13 p. 308.
1. . p. 13 p. 307-308. 2. Dh Pu. 13 p. 308, M. Ban Pu. 1 p. 21. 4. Dhaval Pu. 13 p. 308-306. ]

Page #531:
---------------------------
## Gatha 408-406

**Chapter**
* First
* Second
* Third
* Fourth
* Fifth
* Sixth
* Seventh
* Eighth
* Ninth
* Tenth
* Eleventh
* Twelfth
* 13th to 16th

**Area**
* **Inferior** -  *Pra-samsakhyat* part of an *angula*
* **Superior** - *Samsakhyat* part of an *angula*
* *Ghanangula*
* *Pruthaktva Ghanangula*
* *Hastapraman*
* One *Kos*
* One *Yojan*
* Twenty-five *Yojan*
* *Bharat Kshetra*
* *Jambu Dweep*
* *Manushya Lok*
* *Ruchka Dweep*
* *Samsakhyat Dweep Samudra*
* *Pra-samsakhyat Dweep Samudra*

**Time**
* *Pra-samsakhyat* part of an *Aavali*
* *Samsakhyat* part of an *Aavali*
* Slightly less than one *Mavali*
* *Aavali*
* *Pruthaktva*
* *Antarmuhurt*
* *Bhinna Muhurt*
* Slightly less than one day
* Half a month
* Slightly more than one month
* One year
* *Varsh* *Pruthaktva*
* *Samsakhyat* years
* *Pra-samsakhyat* years

**Growth in Chapters (Kandakas) - Dhruva and Adhruva**

> From specific time, specific area is divided, the measure of growth comes. In *Ishta Kandaka*, there is no opposition to *Anuva* growth. || 406 ||

> *Pra-samsakhyat* part of *Ghanangula* or *Samsakhyat* part of *Ghanangula* or *Angula* alone, or *Samsakhyat* *Ghanangula* alone or *Pra-samsakhyat* *Ghanangula* measure area, when there is growth, there is growth in time. Similarly, from *Rani* and *Jagat Pratar*, one should state *Ava* growth. || 408-406 ||

**Explanation:**

Inferior time (*Pra-samsakhyat* part of *Aavali*) is subtracted from slightly less than one *Aavali*, the remainder is thinned out. From inferior area (*Pra-samsakhyat* part of *angula*), *Ghanangula* is made equal and given to each time. In the alternatives of *Avasthit* and *Anuva sthit* growth, when *Pra-samsakhyat* part of *angula* and *Samsakhyat* part of *angula* area alternatives increase (pass), time increases by one time. Similar to the previous (Gatha 401), such a pattern should be made. In this way, the *Anuttara Vimana Vasi* Devas know the *Pra-samsakhyat* part of *Palya Upam* in relation to time and the entire *Lokanali* in relation to area. Therefore, by thinning out the *Pra-samsakhyat* part of *Palya Upam* without inferior time, and giving *Ghanangula* from inferior area to inferior etc. *Adhvan*, *Pra-samsakhyat* part of *Samsakhyat* *Jagat Pratar* alone *Lok* is obtained for each form. Here, when the area alternatives of one form pass, time increases by one time.

Page #532:
---------------------------
468 / Go. Sa. Jivakanda
Gatha 410-411
Sometimes there will be a mention of Ghanangul, sometimes of Prabhav.
One should not say that, because in this way the Yadhstan region and time, therefore, Ghanangul's fraction, sometimes Ghanangul's fraction, sometimes Ghanangul's square (fraction and infinite Ghanangul), in this way going, sometimes Jagchhu Rangi, sometimes Jagatpratar, and sometimes after the passage of infinite Jagatpratars, time increases, one should say that, therefore, there is no contradiction in the origin of the excellent region and time.
The meaning of Avasthit Viralan and Anvasthit Viralan is not from Bahar and Anbahara, in 'Gommatasar' what is called Bahar and Bahar is called Avasthit Viralan and Anvasthit Viralan in the Dhaval Granth.
The proof of the substance, region, time, and feeling that are the subject of the excellent Deshavadhi is Karmaivagganam Dhubaharepi Givivar Bhajide Dayam. Ukkassam Khettam Puran Logo Sampurnashro Hodi. || 410 || Pallasamkaran Kale Bhavena Shrasankhalogametta Hu. Davyassaya Pajjaya Varedesohi Iss Visaya Hu. || 411 ||
Gathaarth - In Karmavargaran, by dividing Dhruvbahar once, the measure of the excellent substance of Deshavadhi comes. And the entire Lok is the measure of the excellent region. One time less than one Palyopam is the excellent time. The measure of the substance of the Sankhyat Lok is the present Paryaya of the excellent feeling. || 410-411 ||
Vishesharth - By dividing the substance with Avasthit Viralan (Bahar) in Karmavargaran, the excellent substance of Deshavadhi is obtained. By multiplying the two extreme feelings of Deshavadhi with the corresponding infinite forms, the excellent feeling of Deshavadhi is obtained. By increasing one Akashpradesh above the region, the excellent region Lok of Deshavadhi is obtained. By projecting one time above the two extreme times, the excellent time of Deshavadhi is one time less than Paly.
The excellent region of Deshavadhi knowledge is the Lok measure and the excellent time is one time less than Paly measure.
The inferior region of Vibhanggyan is the fraction of an Angul in Tiryanch and Manusya, and the excellent region is the seven Prayadvipa Samudra. (Dhaval Pu. 13 p. 328).
1. Dh. Pu. 6 p. 33-34 2. "Kampyatragna Davyam Avaditrirat Samayam Kariya Digo Sohivakastadvam Hodi." [Cha.. Pu. 35] 3. "Mohi Durimbhavam Nayayogasanjjaruvehi Gunide Desohi Ukkasmbhavo Hodi." [Ba. Pu. Pu. 35]. 4. "Khettsvari Egagasa Padeshe Vaddhi Logo Desohiye Ukkass Khettam Hodi." [ .Pu. Pu. 35]. 5. "Durikajas Suvari Egasamaye Pakkhite Dekohiye Jakkassakalo Hodi." [Dh. Pu. 6 Pu. 36]. 6. "Mohi Ukkatsavettam Logamettan, Kalo Samaun Pallan." [Dh. Pu. 13 p. 328]

Page #533:
---------------------------
## Gatha 412-414

**Gatha 412**
"Time is for the increase of the four (dravya, kshetra, kala, bhava). [When time increases, all four increase. When kshetra increases, time may or may not increase. And when dravya and paryaya (bhava) increase, kshetra and time may or may not increase.]"

**Explanation:** "Kalo chaduṇṇa vuḍḍhī" means time is for the increase of the four. Which four? Kala, kshetra, dravya, and bhava. When time increases, dravya, kshetra, and bhava also regularly attain increase. "Kalo bhajidabbo khettavaḍḍhī" means when kshetra increases, time may or may not attain increase. But dravya and bhava regularly attain increase, because kshetra cannot increase without the increase of dravya and bhava. "Vaḍḍhīe dadhvapjayya" means when dravya and paryaya increase, kshetra and time may or may not increase, because that is their nature. But when dravya increases, paryaya (bhava) increases regularly, because dravya cannot be found without paryaya (bhava). Similarly, when paryaya increases, dravya also increases regularly, because paryaya cannot exist without dravya. The meaning of this gatha should be planned in desavadhi jnana, not in parmavadhi jnana.

**Shankara:** How is this known?

**Solution:** This is known from the explanation contrary to the sutra that has come down from the acharya tradition. In parmavadhi jnana, dravya, kshetra, kala, and bhava increase simultaneously, this should be explained here, because this is the teaching of the acharyas who explain contrary to the sutra.

**Gatha 413**
"The measure of the inferior dravya in parmavadhi is obtained by giving a share of the dhr bahar (the state of being sparse) to the superior dravya in desavadhi. Thus said the Jina (Shrutakevali)."

**Gatha 414**
"In the tejaskaayika jiva-rashi, by multiplying the alternatives of that very avagaha, the measure obtained is the superior dravya, which is obtained by giving a share of the dhr bahar to the inferior dravya through the final division."

**Notes:**
1. Pr.Pu. 6 p. 26 and Pu. 13 p. 306, M.B.Pu. 1 p. 22.
3. Dhaval Pu. 13 p. 306-310.

Page #534:
---------------------------
## 500/Go. Sa. Jivakanda
##  Verse 415

**Special Meaning:** The gross immersion of the subtle Tejaskaayik Aparyaaptak is an infinitesimal part of a finger. The excellent immersion of the innumerable times greater Badar Tejaskaayik Paryaptak is innumerable times greater. By subtracting the gross immersion from the excellent immersion and adding one, the proof of the alternatives of immersion for Tejaskaayik beings is obtained. By multiplying the Tejaskaayik population by this, the number of sticks of the ultimate substance, space, time, and emotion is produced. One form should be reduced from the sticks. Again, by dividing the gross substance of the ultimate into equal parts by the existing rarefaction, there is a second substance alternative in one part of the ultimate. Again, by dividing the second alternative substance into equal parts by the existing rarefaction (Dhr Bahar), there is a third alternative form of substance in one part. One form should be reduced from the stick. The fourth, fifth, sixth, and seventh, etc., alternatives should be taken in the same way, as there is no special feature here. In this way, it should be taken up to the ultimate bicentral alternative or until the number of sticks is reduced by one. By dividing the ultimate bicentral substance into equal parts by the existing rarefaction (Dhr Bahar), the last substance alternative is its form-based name. It is the excellent subject of the ultimate. One by one, the forms are reduced from the sticks, and all the sticks are exhausted. The stick form provides the ultimate knowledge of the form-based substances initiated by the Unt Paramanas perceived by those Agnikaayik beings (it knows) (this is the meaning). By this, the excellent substance of ultimate knowledge is stated.

**Verse:**

> All the ultimate is just one atom, that is the unchangeable form. The divisor is like the flow of the Ganges, it is Dhr Vah. ||415||

**Verse Meaning:** The subject of the ultimate is only one atom, it is the unchangeable form. There is no gross, excellent, or other alternative here, because the ultimate is one alternative form, i.e., it is unchangeable because there is no other alternative.

**Special Meaning:** When the excellent substance of the ultimate is divided into equal parts by the existing rarefaction (Dhr Bahar), the one atom that is obtained for each form is the subject of the ultimate.

**Explanation:** By dividing the gross substance of Deshavadi by Dhr Bahar, the second substance alternative of Deshavadi is obtained (Verse 364). In this way, the divisor in the form of Dhr Bahar or existing rarefaction flows like the flow of the Ganges from the gross substance of Deshavadi to the ultimate or until only the atom, the excellent substance of Avadi knowledge, is obtained. Therefore, the verse uses the example of "the flow of the Ganges".

**References:**

1. Dhaval Pu. 9 p. 44-45, Dhaval Pu. 13 p. 325.
2. Dhaval Pu. 6 p. 44 and 45, Dhaval Pu. 13 p. 324 and 325.
3. Dhaval Pu. 13 p. 324.
4. Val Pu. 6.48.

Page #535:
---------------------------
## Gatha 416-418
## Jnanamarga/501

**Gatha 416:**
As many distinctions are there in the Paramoksha with respect to dravya, so many are there with respect to kshetra and kala, but their subject matter is in an infinite number of times.

**Gatha 417:**
The multiplication of the infinite parts of the avli (a unit of measurement) by the number of the desired gachchha (a unit of time) gives the multiplication factor of the kshetra and kala of the desavadhi (a unit of space).

**Gatha 418:**
The multiplication of the infinite parts of the avli by the number of the desired gachchha, which is obtained by adding the number of the desired gachchha to the sum of the numbers of the previous gachchhas, gives the multiplication factor of the desired gachchha.

**Explanation:**
The Paramoksha is characterized by a simultaneous increase in dravya, kshetra, kala, and bhava. Therefore, there is only one shalakarasthi (a unit of measurement) for the alternatives related to dravya, kshetra, kala, and bhava, not different shalakarasthis. The shalakarasthi is obtained by multiplying the number of jovarashi (a unit of time) by the number of avagahana alternatives (a unit of knowledge) of the tejaskaayik (a type of being). The kshetra-upam agni jivas (a type of being) know the excellent dravya, kshetra, kala, and bhava of the desavadhi through the khandan (a process of analysis) and gunan (a process of multiplication) of the shalakas (a unit of measurement) of the dravya, kshetra, kala, and bhava. This proves that the number of distinctions in the Paramoksha with respect to dravya is the same as the number of distinctions with respect to kshetra, kala, and bhava. There is no difference between them.

The sum of the numbers from 1 to the desired number of distinctions gives the sum of the desired gachchha. For example, the sum of the first gachchha is 1, the sum of the second gachchha is 1+2=3, the sum of the third gachchha is 1+2+3=6, and so on. The multiplication of the infinite parts of the avli by the sum of the desired gachchha gives the multiplication factor of the desired gachchha.

Page #536:
---------------------------
502 / Go. Sa. Jivakanda
Verse 416

The multiplier of that particular difference is the product of the infinite parts of the Avali, multiplied by itself, as many times as the sum of the sixth place is. For example, if the sum of the sixth place is 21, then the multiplier of the sixth place is the product of 21 infinite parts of the Avali multiplied by themselves. Similarly, the multipliers of other places should be calculated. Then, multiplying the excellent field of the Desavadhi by the respective multipliers, the result obtained will be the field extension of that number of differences in the Parmavadhi. And multiplying the excellent time (one less than a Paly) of the Desavadhi by the same multiplier, the measure of time of that particular difference in the Parmavadhi is obtained. For example, the sum of the sixth place is 21. Therefore, multiplying the field by the product of 21 infinite parts of the Avali multiplied by themselves, the field measure of the sixth difference in the Parmavadhi will be obtained. And if the same particular product is multiplied by one less than a Paly, then the time measure of the sixth difference in the Parmavadhi will be obtained.

In the Dhavala, the multiplier of the excellent field of the Parmavadhi is produced and explained as follows: "From the places of perception of the Tejaskaayik beings, by going through the number of secret Tejaskaayik beings, because there are as many differences in the Parmavadhi, taking one by one, and adding one by one [for example, the first place is 1, the second is 1+2=3, the third is 1+2+3=6, the fourth place is 1+2+3+4=10 or 455 = 10 or one less than four, that is, 3, the sum is 6+4=10, etc.], the number is produced below the upper square, exceeding the square of the number of Tejaskaayik beings. By thinning out this sum of the Shalaaka, giving the infinite part of the Avali to each form, and multiplying them together, and then multiplying the excellent field of the Desavadhi by this, the excellent field of the Parmavadhi is obtained."

Another way to produce these multipliers is as follows: For example, if we want to find the sum of the sixth difference, then we put 6. Then, one place before 6, that is, 5, the sum of the 5th place is 15. Therefore, adding 6 to 15, we get 21. This will be the sum of the desired place. Multiplying the infinite parts of the Avali by themselves, as many times as this sum, the multiplier of the desired place is obtained.

Parmavadhivar hotey hidaukkass prohinetam tu. Savvavahuguṇagāro kāle vi śraṁkhalogo du. ||416||

Meaning of the verse - In the field of knowledge of the excellent Avadhi, dividing the excellent field of the Parmavadhi by the field obtained, the quotient obtained is the multiplier for the field of all Avadhis. And for obtaining the measure of time of all Avadhis, the multiplier is the infinite number of Lokas. ||416||

Special Note - The field of the Parmavadhi, the state of the body of the Tejaskaayikas, and the Avadhi-bound field are mutually multiplied, and the infinite number of Lokas is placed in the square place above the half-cut Shalaakas of the square of the multiplier.

1. Dhavala Pu. 9 p. 48-46.

Page #537:
---------------------------
## Verse 420-421

**Verse 420:** When the desired quantity is divided by the half-sections of the given quantity, the quotient obtained is the multiplier for the given quantity.

**Verse 421:** When the half-sections of the world are divided by the half-sections of the given quantity, and the quotient is divided by the sum of the numbers of the desired position, the quotient obtained is the multiplier for the world. This multiplier is also used for the final position of the Parāvādī.

**Explanation:**

* **Verse 420:** If the given quantity is 4, its half-sections are 2. If the desired quantity is 256, its half-sections are 8. Dividing 8 by 2, we get 4. Multiplying the given quantity (4) by itself 4 times (4 x 4 x 4 x 4), we get the desired quantity (256). This verse explains the first Karana Sutra.

* **Verse 421:** If the given quantity is 4, its half-sections are 2. The world (256) has 8 half-sections. The sum of the numbers of the final position of the Parāvādī (64) is 2080. Dividing the half-sections of the world (8) by the half-sections of the given quantity (2), we get 4. Dividing the sum of the numbers of the final position (2080) by 4, we get 520. Multiplying the world (256) by itself 520 times, we get the multiplier for the final position of the Parāvādī.

**Note:** The given quantity here is actually an infinitesimal part of the infinite Pravāli. Dividing its half-sections by the half-sections of the world, we get...

**References:**

* Dhavla Purana, Vol. 1, Page 5
* Dhavla Purana, Vol. 1, Page 50-51

Page #538:
---------------------------
## 504/Go. Sa. Jivakanda
## Gatha 422-423

**The amount of *pramana* (evidence) obtained by dividing the *paramavadhi* (ultimate) *vivkshit bhed* (intended difference) by the *sankalit dhan* (accumulated wealth) is the *pramana* required. By establishing the *loka* (world) in that space and multiplying it by itself, the *pramana* obtained is the multiplier in that *vivkshit bhed*. By multiplying the *deshavadhi* (spatial limit) *utkrsht kshetra loka* (excellent field world) by that multiplier, the *pramana* obtained is the *kshetra* (field) *pramana* in that *vivkshit bhed* of the *paramavadhi*. And by multiplying the *deshavadhi* *utkrsht kay* (excellent body, short lifespan) by the same multiplier, the *pramana* of the *jigati bhed* (related body) is obtained. According to this *karan sutra* (causality formula), the multiplier of any term can be obtained.**

**In this regard, Pravalakar has stated as follows:**

**"The half-sections of the *viralan rashi* (rare quantity) are the square-marks of the *utpann rashi* (produced quantity) which are composed of the half-sections of the *dey rashi* (given quantity). The half-sections of the *viralan rashi* are slightly more than twice the half-sections of the *tej kayik jivas* (fast-moving beings) because they are produced by dividing the quantity below the square of the *tej kayik rashi*. Their projection leads to an ascending path from the square of the *pradi* (beginning) to the *paramavadhi*. The slightly more than twice the half-sections of the *tej kayik rashi* only divide this ascending path by the square-marks of the *tej kayik rashi* and reduce it to half. By multiplying the square-marks of the *tej kayik rashi*, an ascending path above the *tej kayik rashi* is obtained. This is the *utkrsht kshetra* (excellent field) of the *paramavadhi*."**

**Gatha 422:**

**"The *pravali* (series) of *asankhyat* (innumerable) parts are the *pajjaya* (permutations) of the *jghanny dravya* (lowest substance). They are *asankhyat guna* (innumerable times) less than the *pravali* due to the *jghanny kal* (lowest time).**

**Gatha 423:**

**"From the *jghanny deshavadhi* (lowest spatial limit) to the *sarvavadhi* (all limits), the *dravya* is divided in order and the *bhava* (state) is multiplied by the *asankhyat* part of the *pravali*. Therefore, the number of terms of *dravya* and *bhava* are similar."**

**Special Meaning:**

**Dividing the *asankhyat* part of the *pravali* by the *pravali* results in the time of the *jghanny avadhi* (lowest limit) being only the *asankhyat* part of the *pravali*. Out of the infinite present permutations of the *jghanny dravya* (lowest substance) which is the subject of this, only the *asankhyat* part of the *pravali* permutations are the *jghanny bhava* (lowest state) due to the *jghanny avadhi jnana* (knowledge of the lowest limit). But the *pramana* (amount) of these present permutations is *asankhyat guna* (innumerable times) less than the *kal* (time). In other words, the number of *bhava* (present permutations) is the *asankhyat* part of the *kal*.**

**In the second alternative of *deshavadhi jnana* (knowledge of spatial limit), the *dravya* (substance) becomes less and the *bhava* (state) becomes more, but the *kshetra* (field) and *kal* (time) remain the same because there is no increase in them. Similarly, the third, fourth...**

**1. Dhaval Pu. 6 p. 461**
**2. Dha. Pu. 6 p. 26-27**

Page #539:
---------------------------
## Gatha 424-425
## Bhanamargna/505

Only an innumerable part of the original angul (smallest unit of measurement) is required for the generation of both dravya (substance) and bhava (state). After this, an expanse of space increases above the lowest dhotra (lowest level of hell), but time remains at the lowest level. This indicates that the number of steps in avadhijnana (clairvoyance) is similar to that of dravya and bhava, but less than that of kshetra (field). Thus, the number of steps in kshetra is less than that of time.

**Gatha 424:**
**Gatha-artha:** In the seventh earth (seventh hell), the field of avadhijnana is one kos (a unit of distance). Above this, the field increases by half a kos at a time until it reaches a full yojana (4 kos) in the first hell.

**Vishesharya:** In the narakas (hells), the lowest field of avadhijnana is one kos, and the highest field is one yojana. In the seventh earth, the highest field of avadhijnana for the narakas is one kos, and the highest time duration for pravadhijnana (clairvoyance) is antarmuhurta (a very short time). In the sixth earth, the highest field of avadhijnana is one and a half kos, and the time duration is antarmuhurta. In the fifth earth, the highest field of avadhijnana is two kos, and the time duration is antarmuhurta. In the fourth earth, the highest field of avadhijnana for the narakas is two and a half kos, and the highest time duration is antarmuhurta. In the third earth, the highest field of avadhijnana is three kos, and the highest time duration is antarmuhurta. In the second earth, the highest field of avadhijnana for the narakas is three and a half kos, and the highest time duration is antarmuhurta. In the first earth, the highest field of avadhijnana for the narakas is four kos (one yojana), and the highest time duration is one muhurta less than a full muhurta.

**Shankha:** Time is not mentioned in the head (of the text), so how is it known?
**Samadhan:** It is known from Gatha 405, which states "Gaugran muhuttanto, yojanabhinnam muhutta" (The time duration is one muhurta less than a full muhurta).

**Gatha 425:**
**Gatha-artha:** In the tiryanchas (animals), avadhijnana ranges from the lowest deshavadhi (knowledge of the field) to the knowledge of the tejas (luminous) body.

**Manue proghang deve jahakam suraha vocchami:**
**Translation:** In humans, the highest avadhijnana is the same as that of the devas (gods), as I have explained.

Page #540:
---------------------------
506/Go. Sa. Jivakanda
Gatha 426-428

The distinction extends to humans (from the lowest to the highest). The knowledge of the gods will be described in the following verses in order, so listen. 425.

Special Meaning: 'Tiryach' means five-sense beings, five-sense beings, and five-sense beings. The lowest knowledge is possessed by humans and five-sense beings, not by gods and hell beings. The reward obtained by giving a share of a Dhanaloka's generous body is the subject of the lowest knowledge, which is the material substance. The area is an immeasurable part of an angul, and even then, the lowest perception is the most subtle. The time of medium knowledge is an immeasurable part of a Prabhali. This is only for humans and five-sense beings. The highest substance for five-sense beings is the luminous body, the highest area is immeasurable yojanas, and the highest time is immeasurable years. The highest substance for humans is one atom, the highest area and time are immeasurable lokas. Or, the highest substance for five-sense beings is the measure of the accumulated regions of the luminous body. The highest area is immeasurable islands and seas, and the time is immeasurable years.

In the Bhavanatrik, the knowledge of the Kumaras is 25 yojanas and the time is one day less. The area of the Jyotishis is multiplied by a number, and the time is very long. 426. The highest area of the Asura Kumaras is immeasurable crores of yojanas, and the highest area of the remaining gods up to the Jyotishis is immeasurable thousands of yojanas. 427. The highest time of the Asura Kumaras is immeasurable years. The highest time of the remaining gods up to the Jyotishis is an immeasurable part by rule. 428. The area of knowledge in the Bhavanatrik decreases downwards, but it is more in the horizontal direction. The Bhavanavasis see (know) up to the peak of the Suragiri (Meru). 429.

1. P.P. 11 p. 3257-328. 2. P.P. 13 p. 325-326. 3. Pr.P. 6 p. 25, P. 13 p. 314: M.B.P. 1 p. 22; Mulachar Paryarit Adhikar 12 Ma 101. 4, Dh.P. 6 p. 25, P. 13 p. 315: Mulachar Paryapti Adhikar 12 Ga. 110. M.B.P. 1 p. 22.

Page #541:
---------------------------
## Gatha 830-434
## Jnanamarga/507

**Special Meaning:** 'Kumar' refers to the ten types of Bhavanavasi (heavenly beings residing in mansions), 'Bhom' refers to the eight types of Vanavyantara (heavenly beings residing in forests). The lowest level of Avadhijnana (clairvoyance) of the Vanavyantara Devas is 25 yojanas (a unit of distance) in terms of area. This is because when their area of Avadhijnana is established in a cubic form, it results in a 25 yojana area. In terms of time, they can only know events for a short period, less than a day. The lowest level of Avadhijnana of the Jyotishi Devas (astronomers) is a countable number of cubic yojanas in terms of area. This is a significant difference, as the area of the lowest level of Avadhijnana of the Vanavyantara Devas is a countable number of times greater than that of the Jyotishi Devas. Although their time span is greater than that of the Bhavanavasi Devas, it is not known whether it is significantly greater or a countable number of times greater, as no such teachings are found at present.

The term 'Asur' here refers to the Bhavanavasi Devas named 'Prasur'. When their highest level of Avadhijnana is established in a cubic form, it extends to an immeasurable number of crores of yojanas. This is a significant difference, as the area of Avadhijnana of the remaining Bhavanavasi, Vanavyantara, and Jyotishi Devas is an immeasurable number of thousands of yojanas. The highest level of Avadhijnana of the nine types of Bhavanavasi, eight types of Vanavyantara, and five types of Jyotishi Devas is not a countable number of times greater than that of the Asur Kumaras. This is because a crore is a countable number of times greater than a thousand. The highest time span of the Asur Kumaras is an immeasurable number of years, and the highest time span of the remaining Devas (including the nine types of Bhavanavasi, eight types of Vanavyantara, and five types of Jyotishi Devas) is also an immeasurable number of years. However, it is not a countable number of times greater than the highest time span of the Asur Kumaras.

The area of Avadhijnana of the Bhavanavasi, Vanavyantara, and Jyotishi Devas is less in the lower direction but greater in the diagonal direction. Additionally, the Bhavanavasi Devas can see up to the end of the Meru mountain's peak in the highest direction.

The statement about the Avadhijnana of the Kampvasi Devas is concisely explained in the first chapter of the Sarpasukumaram. It is said that they can see up to the end of the Brahma Loka, which is a thousand times greater than the Suska (dry) Loka.

The Paragad Paragad Vasi (heavenly beings residing in the Paragad Loka) can see up to the Aachuda (a specific region). The Panchamakhi Devas (heavenly beings with five faces) can see up to the sixth Gaveshjaga (a specific region).

The Devas residing in the Anuttara (highest) Loka can see the entire universe. They can also see the Roobagadamatbhagam (a specific region) with their own eyes.

The Kappsuranam (heavenly beings residing in the Kappsuraloka) can see the entire universe with their own eyes. The statement about their Avadhijnana is explained in detail by the Dhruvaharena Hare (a specific deity).

The statement about the area of Avadhijnana of the Kappsuranam is explained in detail in the Sammappade (a specific text). It is said that they can see up to the end of the Tathataranchara (a specific region).

Page #542:
---------------------------
508/Go. Sa. Jivakanda
Gatha 430-436
The Saudharma and Aishana heaven gods see (know) up to the earth (hell) by their Avadhi knowledge. The Sanatkumara and Mahendra heaven gods know up to the second earth. The Brahma-Brahmottara-Lantaya-Fapishta heaven gods know up to the third earth. The Shukra-Mahashukra-Shatara-Sahasrar heaven gods know up to the fourth earth (hell). 430. The Pranat-Pranatbasi and Praran-Achyutniwasi heaven gods know up to the fifth earth (hell) and the Webakwasi heaven gods know up to the sixth earth (hell). 431. The Anuttara heaven gods know all the Lokanali by their Avadhi knowledge. All the Kalpawasi heaven gods know as many regions as there are in their respective fields, and they know the last part of the Avadhi knowledge-Avaraga karma dravya, which is obtained after giving away the part of the dravya in their respective Vinasopachya. 432-433-434. The time period of the Avadhi of the Saudharma and Aishana heaven gods is countless koti years. Above this, in four kalpas, the Avadhi time period is an immeasurable part of the Paly. After that, from the Lantab heaven to the Sarvarth Siddhi, the Avadhi time period is only a few Paly as per the situation. 435-436.
Special Meaning- The Saudharma and Eishana Kalpawasi heaven gods see from the upper surface of their Vimanas to the lower surface of the first earth (hell), a region that is one and a half Raju long and one Raju wide. The Sanatkumara and Mahendra Kalpawasi heaven gods know from the flagstaff of their Vimanas to the lower surface of the second earth, a region that is four Raju long and one Raju wide. The Brahma-Brahmottara Kalpawasi heaven gods know from the peak of their Vimanas to the lower surface of the third earth, a region that is five and a half Raju long and one Raju wide. The Lantab and Kapishta Vimanas heaven gods know from the peak of their Vimanas to the lower surface of the third earth, a region that is six Raju long and one Raju wide.
Doubt- How is it known that these regions are one Raju wide?
Solution- By the application of the 'Savvam cha Loyarpali' words used in the previous Gatha Sutra (432), it is clear from the Sihavalokan Nyaya that 'six Raju see all the Lokanali'. This is the meaning of the Sutra. From this, it is known that the width of the said regions is one Raju.
The Shukra and Mahashukra Kalpawasi heaven gods see from the peak of their Vimanas to the lower surface of the fourth earth, a Lokanali that is seven and a half Raju long and one Raju wide. The Shatara and Sahasrar Kalpawasi heaven gods see from the peak of their Vimanas to the lower surface of the fourth earth, a region that is eight Raju long and one Raju wide.
1. Dhavale Pu. 11 P. 316-317.

Page #543:
---------------------------
## Translation:

**Shan Maga, 576**

They see a Lokanali that is one Raju wide and 576 Rajus long. The Panat and Pranat Kalpavasis see a Lokanali that is one Raju wide and 9.5 Rajus long from the peak of their Vimana down to the bottom of the fifth earth. The Parana and Achyut Kalpavasis see a Lokanali that is one Raju wide and 10 Rajus long from the peak of their Vimana down to the bottom of the fifth earth. The nine Graveyak Vimana-vasis see a Lokanali that is one Raju wide and 11.5 Rajus long from the peak of their Vimana down to the bottom of the sixth earth. The nine Anudish and five Antar Vimana-vasis see a Lokanali that is one Raju wide and slightly less than 14 Rajus long from the peak of their Vimana down to the outer Vatavaly beyond the Nigodasthan.

**Doubt:** Why are the nine Anudish not mentioned in the Gatha?

**Solution:** The word "Savva" is used in the Gatha. The "Cha" in this word is used to indicate the inclusion of the unsaid. This implies the inclusion of the nine Anudish Vimana-vasis who are not explicitly mentioned in the Gatha Sutra. One should understand the Lokanali as the "Antadipak" and plan accordingly. For example, the Saudharma Kalpavasis see the entire Lokanali from the peak of their Vimana to the first earth. The Sanatkumar and Mahendra Kalpavasis see the entire Lokanali up to the second earth. Similarly, one should continue this explanation for all. Without this, the nine Anudish and five Antar Vimana-vasis would be understood to have knowledge of the entire Lokanali, which is not the case. Firstly, no one has knowledge of the area above the peak of their Vimana. Secondly, the nine Anudish and four Antar Vimana-vasis do not have knowledge of the area below the bottom of the seventh earth. Thirdly, the Sarvarth Siddhi Vimana-vasis do not see the entire Lokanali. They have knowledge of the Lokanali area except for a one Raju wide area that is slightly less than 21 Yojanas [12+8+(1425)] above the peak of their Vimana.

**Doubt:** How do we know that the nine Anudish and four Antar Vimana-vasis do not see below the bottom of the seventh earth?

**Solution:** This is known from the teachings of the Acharya, which contradicts the Sutra.

Many Acharyas explain the Gatha Sutra (432) by saying that the nine Anudish and four Antar Vimana-vasis, as well as the Sarvarth Siddhi Vimana-vasis, see the entire Lokanali from the peak of their Vimana to the final Vatavaly, which is one Raju wide. One should understand this.

By establishing their respective areas in the form of a "Shala" (pillar), they engage in their respective Karmas with the Manodravya-Vanganga.

1. Dhaval P. 13 P. 31.
2. Dhaval P. 13 P. 316.
3. Dhaval P. 13 P. 320.
4. Dhaval P. 13.

Page #544:
---------------------------
510/Go. Sa. Jiva Kanda
Gaya 430-436

The final form-based pudgala obtained after dividing the infinite parts as many times as the number of established shalaakas, is the object of the avadhi-jnana of those respective gods. Here, the word 'cha' is used to denote the collection of the implied meaning. From this, it is proven that the infinite parts form of the manodravya-vargana remains in its state.

The dravya that is the object of the avadhi-jnana of the gods of the Saudharma-Aishana heavens, is established in its field in the form of shalaakas, according to the number of parts of the loka, and by removing the infinite parts of the manodravya-vargana, each one of the rare amount should be divided equally among all the dravyas and one shalaaka should be removed from the shalaaka amount. Again, the amount obtained for one digit of the rare amount should be established by dividing it equally above the said rare amount and another shalaaka should be reduced from the shalaaka amount. This process should be done until all the shalaakas are exhausted. Here, the pudgala dravya obtained for one digit after performing the final action is called form-based. The gods of the Saudharma and Aishana kalpas see it through their avadhi-jnana. Similarly, the statement of the proof of the dravya that is the object of avadhi-jnana in all the gods should be made. The special feature is that this action should be performed by establishing their respective fields in the form of shalaakas.

Doubt - Is this dravya superior or inferior in the gods?

Solution - No. Because the gods attain equal feeling towards knowledge due to the special nature of their caste, therefore, there is no distinction of superior and inferior dravya of avadhi-jnana in them.

Doubt - This sutra is only in relation to the kalpa-dwelling gods, not in relation to the other beings. How is this known?

Solution - This is known from the sutra (Gatha Sutra 378) which states the field of the lowest avadhi-jnana of the tiryanch and humans, which is equal to the innumerable parts of an angula. And it is also not correct to say that the beings who know the varmrana body have a field of lowest avadhi-jnana equal to the innumerable parts of an angula, because this statement contradicts the 'asankhyejja div-samudda' of this Gatha Sutra (407).

In relation to the time of the Saudharma and Aishana kalpa-dwelling gods, the object of avadhi-jnana is innumerable crores of years. In relation to the time of the Sanat-Kumar-Mahendra, the object of avadhi-jnana is the innumerable parts of a palya-upam. In relation to the time of the Mahm-Brahmottara, the object of avadhi-jnana is the innumerable parts of a palya-upam, from the Lantva to the Uparim-Veyaka. The time-object of the gods from the Lantva to the Uparim-Veyaka is slightly less than the palya-upam amount.

In the Raja-Brahma and Brahmottara kalpas, the time is said to be the innumerable parts of a palya. Then, how can the time be slightly less than the palya amount for the Lantva and Kapishta gods, who see a slightly larger field?

1. Dhaval Pu. 13 p. 321. 2. Dhaval Pu. 13 p. 322. 3. Dhaval Pu. 13 p. 317.

Page #545:
---------------------------
English Translation (Preserving Jain Terms):

Gyanamarga/511
Solution - This is not a defect, because there is no contradiction in the difference of the duration of the Kshayopashama (subsidence-cum-destruction) of the Avadhi Jnanavaranaiya (obscuring knowledge) karma due to the difference of the Kalpa (cosmic time cycle) of diverse natures. However, with respect to the region, when the time is brought in, the Kala (time) of the Saudharma Kalpa up to the Sarvartha-siddhi Vimana-vasi (celestial beings) should be the Sankhyatama (countable) part of the said Kalaparyapta (duration), because if one Palya (measureless time) is obtained for one Dhanaloka (celestial region), then what will be obtained for the Sankhyatama part of the Dhanaloka? In this way, by multiplying the Shashi (moon) and dividing the Prabhanmandala (sphere of light) by the Icchha-rashi (desired quantity), the Sankhyatama part of the Kalaparyapta is obtained. But this is not possible, because such a teaching of the Guru is not found. Therefore, one should accept the Kala as stated, without considering the region.
Gatha 437-440
Or, all these devas know the future substance that appears within one Palya, with respect to time. This is also the teaching of the Guru. There is no current Sutra (canonical text) that expounds on this subject.
Joisidarohi kshetta utta paho nti ghanappadara.
Kalpasuranan cha puriso visarittham prayadan hodi.||437||
Meaning - The region of the Bhavana-vasi (celestial beings) and Jyotishi (luminous) devas is not dense and broad, because the spherical and transverse form of the region is more, and the upward and downward is less. The region of the Kalpa-vasi (celestial beings) is more transverse compared to the Prayata (extended), and the region of all the Vimana-vasi (celestial beings) is Rajju-pratara (rope-like). That is, the transverse form is less, and the upward and downward is more. As the region of Saudharma to Ishana is one and a half Rajju upward and downward, and that of Sanatakumara to Mahendra is four Rajju upward and downward, and so on. That is, the Prayata is Visa (extensive). But the transverse form is similar, because the transverse region of all is one Rajju-pratara extension.||437||
|| Thus ends the Avadhi-jnana (knowledge of the duration) ||
The nature of Manaḥparyaya-jnana (telepathic knowledge)
Chitiyamachitiyam ya saddham chitiya maraneyabheyagayam. Mapajjavam ti uccai jam jagati tam khu garalogo.||438||
Maranapajjavam cha duviham ujjuviulam aditti ujjumadi tivihā. Ujjumaratrayan e kaye gadatthavisa yatti riyamer.||439||
Vilamadosiya chaddha ujjuganu juvayaranakayacittamayam. Pattham jaragai jam ha saddattaga ya hu taranattham.||440||
1. Dhavala Vol. 13, p. 318. 2. Dhavala Vol. 13, p. 320. 3. Dhavala Vol. 1, p. 360, Prabhrita Panchika Samgraha Adhyaya 1, Maha. 125.

Page #546:
---------------------------
512/Go. Sa. Jivakanda
Verses 338-440
Verse Meaning - The person who knows the substance with many distinctions like contemplated, contemplated, and half-contemplated, etc. in the human world, he has gone to the knowledge of Manahparyaya. ||3|| There are two types of fame - Rijumati and Vipulmati. Among them, Rijumati Manahparyaya knowledge is of three types - Rijumanagat, Rijuvacanamat, Rijukayagat knowledge (meaning) is the subject of the rule. ||436|| Vipulmati Manahparyaya knowledge is of six types. Rijumanagat, Rijuvacanagat and Rijukayagat contemplation are the subjects of the meaning (knowledge) being contemplated, and there are six distinctions of Vipulmati in relation to the knowledge of contemplation being done by crooked mind, speech and body. The subject of Manahparyaya knowledge is both verbal and meaningful. ||440||
Special Meaning - The meaning of the mind of another is called mind. 'Paryaya' means all around, and the word 'ay' means special. The Paryaya of the mind is Manahparyaya. That mind is called Manahparyaya to the Paryayas, i.e. the specials. The Paryaya of the mind is called Manahparyaya. And by its association, knowledge is also called Manahparyaya. Thus, the knowledge which is in the form of Manahparyaya is Manahparyayajnan. The knowledge that knows the Paryayas, i.e. the specials of the mind, is Manahparyayajnan. The knowledge of Manahparyaya is Manahparyayajnan. Thus, here is the sixth Tatpurusha compound.
It is not possible to take only the special, leaving the general. Because the subject of knowledge is not only special, therefore, it should be said that Manahparyaya knowledge is the one that takes the general-special object?
Solution - This is no fault, because it is desirable to us. Doubt - Then the general should also be taken from the subject of Manahparyayajnan. Solution - No, because it is taken by ability.
Or Manahparyaya is a name derived from usage, therefore, this name is the one that takes the knowledge existing in both contemplated and uncontemplated meanings (in knowledge), it should be taken here. This knowledge is also direct, like Avadhijnan. Because it is not born from the senses.
Manahparyayajnan is less than Avadhijnan by rule, but this Manahparyaya because it is born due to restraint, therefore, Manahparyayajnan is greater than Avadhijnan, it is directed after Avadhijnan to tell this.
Doubt - If restraint alone is the cause of the birth of Manahparyayajnan, then why is there no Manahparyayajnan in all the restrained? - - - - 1.Sa. Mi.1/4 Dhaval Pu.6 p. 28, Pu.13 p. 212 and 328. 2. Dhaval Pu.13 p. 328. 3. Dhaval Pu. 6 p. 28. 4. Jayadhaval Pu. 1 p. 19-20. 5. Dhaval Pu.9 p. 28. 6. Dhaval Pu. 13 p. 328. 7. Dhaval Pu. 13 p. 212. 8. Dhaval Pu. 13 p. 212. 6. Dhaval Pu. 13 p. 213.

Page #547:
---------------------------
## Gatha 438-40
## Janamarga/513

**Solution:** If only restraint were the cause of the origin of Manahparyaya Jnana, then it would be the case that all restrained beings would have Manahparyaya Jnana. However, there are other causes for the origin of Manahparyaya Jnana, and therefore, in the absence of those other causes, Manahparyaya Jnana does not arise in all restrained beings.

**Doubt:** What are those other causes?

**Solution:** Specific types of dravya, kshetra, kala, and other causes are present, without which Manahparyaya Jnana does not arise in all restrained beings.

**Doubt:** Why does Manahparyaya Jnana not arise in beings who are below the level of Deshaviriti, etc., in the lower Gunasthanas?

**Solution:** No, because there is a contradiction in accepting the origin of Manahparyaya Jnana with both restraint and unrestraint.

**Manahparyaya Jnana is of two types:**  Rjumanati and Vipulmati. There is a lack of unity in Manahparyaya Jnana obtained by those who are Rjumanati and Vipulmati due to their specific characteristics.

**Rjumanati Manahparyaya Jnana is of three types:** It knows what is Rjumanogat, what is Rjuvchanagat, and what is Rjukaayagat.

**Doubt:** How does the mind become Rju?

**Solution:** The mind that contemplates an object in the way it is situated is Rju, and the mind that contemplates it in a way contrary to its situation is Anrju.

**Doubt:** How does speech become Rju?

**Solution:** Speech that conveys an object in the way it is situated is Rju, and speech that conveys it in a way contrary to its situation is Anrju.

**Doubt:** How does the body become Rju?

**Solution:** The body that shows an object in the way it is situated through its actions is Rju, and the body that shows it in a way contrary to its situation is Anrju.

**Rjumanati Manahparyaya Jnana is that which knows the object of the mind through its own nature.** It knows only the object that has been contemplated in the mind. It does not know the object that has not been contemplated, the object that has been partially contemplated, or the object that has been contemplated in a contrary way.

**References:**

1. Dhaval Pu. 1, p. 367
2. Dhaval Pu. 1, p. 366
3. Jamghaval Pu. 13, p. 20; Dhaval Pu. 6, p. 28
4. "Uju-Viul Madi Bisesaranehi Jisesidaman-Pajjavanaragarasa Eyalaabhadeeran" [Dhaval Pu. 13, p. 326]
5. Dhaval Pu. 13, p. 326, Sutra 62
6. Dhaval Pu. 13, p. 330

Page #548:
---------------------------
## 514 / Go. Sa. Jivakanda
## Verses 438-440

**"One who knows the meaning that is directly intended, is well-explained, and expressed simply, is also known as *Riju-mati-manas-paryaya-gyan*. This is because one who does not know the meaning that is not spoken, half-spoken, or spoken in a contradictory way, is not *Riju-mati-manas-paryaya-gyan*. This is because *Riju-mati* is the root of *Riju-mati-manas-paryaya-gyan*."**

**Doubt:** Does *manas-paryaya-gyan* based on direct speech not qualify as *Riju-mati-manas-paryaya-gyan*?

**Resolution:** No, because even in this case, direct speech cannot occur without *Riju-mati*.

**Doubt:** If one knows the meaning of a thought when it is spoken, does *manas-paryaya-gyan* become *Shruta-gyan*?

**Resolution:** No, because this knowledge is based on knowing the limits of the dynasty and the lifespan of the king through direct perception, not through mere contemplation. Therefore, it contradicts the definition of *Tana*.

**"One who knows the meaning that is directly intended, directly acted upon, and directly demonstrated is also *Riju-mati-manas-paryaya-gyan*. This is because without *Riju-mati*, the actions of the body cannot be direct."**

**Doubt:** If *manas-paryaya-gyan* arises without dependence on the senses, non-senses, or yoga, why does it not arise without dependence on the actions of others' minds, speech, and bodies?

**Resolution:** No, because *Vipula-mati-manas-paryaya-gyan* is seen to arise in this way.

**Doubt:** Why does *Riju-mati-manas-paryaya-gyan* not arise without dependence on others' minds, speech, and bodies?

**Resolution:** No, because this is the peculiarity of the destruction and pacification of the *manas-paryaya-gyan-avaran* karma.

**Doubt:** Why does *Riju-mati-manas-paryaya-gyan* not know the meaning that is contemplated by the mind, spoken by the mouth, and not acted upon, i.e., not related to bodily actions?

**Resolution:** It does not know because of the effect of its specific destruction and pacification.

**"The substance that exists in another's mind is called *mati*. The meaning of *Vipula* is vast. One whose *mati* is vast is called *Vipula-mati*.**

**"There are six types of *Vipula-mati-manas-paryaya-gyan*: one who knows what is directly intended by the mind, one who knows what is indirectly intended by the mind, one who knows what is directly spoken, one who knows what is indirectly spoken, one who knows what is directly acted upon by the body, and one who knows what is indirectly acted upon by the body."**

**www.**

**9. Dhaval Pu. 13 p. 330**

**2. Chaval Pu. 13 p. 231**

**3. G. Pu. 6 p. 66**

Page #549:
---------------------------
## Knowledge Path/515

The right conduct of mind, speech, and body is called **righteous**. And the conduct of mind, speech, and body that is characterized by doubt, error, and non-application is called **unrighteous**. Half-thinking or non-thinking is called **non-application**. Fluctuating knowledge is called **doubt**. Unrealistic thinking is called **error**. This knowledge also knows what has been forgotten after thinking. It knows what will be thought about in the future, because it is possible for the past and future states to be known by the soul in its own nature.

**Verse 441-444**

Only those who have **mind-perception knowledge** and are restrained are **controlled**. Therefore, those who have **mind-perception knowledge** are only in the human realm. Humans are only in the human realm, not outside, because even in the perceived time, there is no movement of humans beyond the **Manushottara mountain** due to the connection with the former enemy gods. The subject matter of **mind-perception knowledge** will be discussed in verses 455-456.

**Mind-perception knowledge** is only through **intellectual knowledge**, but **clairvoyance** is through **clairvoyant vision**.

**Verse 441**

**Meaning of the Verse:** The **righteous mind-perception knowledge** knows the substance that is the object of thought in the three times by the present soul, but the **extensive mind-perception knowledge** also knows the past and future substances.

**Special Meaning:** The **righteous mind-perception knowledge** only knows the substance that has been thought about in the mind, not the unthought substance. But the **extensive mind-perception knowledge** knows the time-bound substances (**pudgala** and **samsaric soul**) that have been thought about or will be thought about (which have been thought about in the past or will be thought about in the future). This will be discussed in detail in verses 448, 446, and 450.

**Verse 442-444**

From which regions does **mind-perception knowledge** arise? The statement about the new substance, the shape of the mind, etc. is as follows: It arises from the **sanvanga-anga-sam-bhava-chinha** (sign of the arising of the body from the body), it is difficult to produce. It arises from the **death-birth** (death and rebirth) due to the **death-birth** (death and rebirth). It is like a **bad dream**, it is like a **broken mirror**. It arises from the **body-limb-arising** (arising of the body and limbs), it is like a **broken pot**. It arises from the **sense of touch**, and the other senses are also present there. It arises from the **absence of the body**, it is like a **dead body**. 

**Footnotes:**

1. Dh. Pu. 13 p. 240
2. "In those times, due to the connection with the former enemy gods, there is no movement of humans beyond the Manushottara mountain." [Dh. Pu. 7 p. 380]
3. "The earth is not for those who are born from a curse, nor is the human realm for those who are born from a curse." [Sh. Pu. 6 p. 29]
4. "The samsaric soul is a body." [Dh. Pu. 13 p. 333]
5. Dh. Pu. 6 p. 28

Page #550:
---------------------------
## English Translation:

**Chapter 516, Jiva Kanda**
**Verses 442-444**

**Verse Meaning:** Just as Avadhijnana arises from all the regions endowed with auspicious signs like conch shells, etc., in the same way, Manoparyayajnana arises from those regions where Dravyaman exists. ||442|| Due to the rise of Angopaang Karma, Dravyaman arises in the heart region, in the form of an eight-petaled lotus, developed systematically by the skandhas of Manovargna. ||443||  Because Dravyaman is not manifest like the other senses, Manoparyayajnana arises. ||444||

**Special Meaning:**

**Doubt:** Just as the establishment of the regions of the Jiva, where Avadhijnana Avarana has been destroyed or subsided, has been described (with signs like conch shells, etc.), why is the establishment of the regions of the Jiva, where Manoparyayajnana Avarana has been destroyed or subsided, not described?

**Solution:** No, because the destruction or subsidence of Manoparyayajnana Avarana arises in the regions of Dravyaman, which are developed and shaped like a lotus with eight petals. It does not have a separate establishment.

**Explanation:**

The mind, i.e., Matijnana, perceives the Manas, i.e., the nine senses, which have emerged from the skandhas of Manovargna, and then knows it through Manoparyayajnana.

**Doubt:** The nine senses are transcendental. How can they be perceived by Matijnana?

**Solution:** No, because the tendency of Matijnana is seen even in transcendental objects, due to the support of the linga, which is like a signpost. Or, the mind, i.e., Matijnana, perceives the Bhanas, i.e., the object of Matijnana, and then Manoparyayajnana arises.

**Explanation:**

Avadhijnana and Manoparyayajnana are only found in sentient beings. Sentient beings have a mind. There are two types of mind: Dravyaman and Bhavamana. Dravyaman is the one that expects the rise of Angopaang Karma, which is a Pudgalavipaki karma. Bhavamana is the purity that arises in the soul, which is free from the Viriyantaraya and the nine sense Avarana (Matijnana Avarana) karma.

**Doubt:** Just as the Bhavaindriyas are said to exist at the time of the Jiva's new birth, in the same way, why is Bhavamana not said to exist there?

**Solution:** No, because if we accept the existence of Bhavamana in the state of inadequacy, where Dravyaman is not perceived by the external senses, then the context of the existence of Dravyaman, which is already established, will arise.

**Conclusion:**

It is understood that Bhavamana arises only when Dravyaman exists, and Manoparyayajnana can arise. But in the absence of Dravyaman, neither Bhavamana exists nor can Manoparyayajnana arise.

**References:**

1. B.P. 12, p. 331-332
2. B.P. 13, p. 341
3. P. 1, p. 256

Page #551:
---------------------------
## Gatha 445-47
## Gnanamargaprana, 517

**Question:** Why is the term "indriya" (sense organ) not applied to the mind?

**Answer:** Because the mind does not receive its "vay" (subtle energy) from the other indriyas (sense organs) in the same way that the other indriyas do. Therefore, the mind cannot be called an "indra" (soul, the mark of the soul).

**Gatha 445:**  "Mranapjjavan cha paranan satsu viradesu sattidhdonam. Egavijudesu have baddatavisittcharanesu."  The mind-perception knowledge (manahparyayajnan) arises in the seven-guna-sthana (stages of spiritual progress) practitioner who possesses one or more of the eight riddhis (psychic powers) and who has attained the state of a Vardhaman (a being on the path to liberation) or a Visishta Charitra (a being with a special character).

**Gatha 446:** "Indiyanoidiyajogad pekkhittu ujumdi hodi. Riparavekkhiya viulamadi prohi cha hodi khiyamerag."  The mind-perception knowledge (manahparyayajnan) arises in relation to the indriyas (sense organs), the mind, and their interaction. The vast-minded (vipulamati) mind-perception knowledge arises naturally without any such relation.

**Gatha 447:** "Padiwadi puran padhama appadidiwadi hu hodi biviya hu. Suddho padhamo boho suddhataro bidiyaboho du."  The first (rijumati) mind-perception knowledge is a pratipati (a state of being a recipient). The second (vipulamati) mind-perception knowledge is an apratipati (a state of not being a recipient). The first knowledge (rijumati) is pure. The second knowledge (vipulamati) is even purer.

**Explanation:**  "Manapjjavanaani pamattasanjad-ppahadijakhiskasayavidarag-chdamattha ti."  The mind-perception knowledge (manahparyayajnan) arises from the state of being a pramattasanyata (a being who is controlled by the senses) to the state of being a kshiranakashaya (a being who has destroyed the karmas that cause suffering) and a vitrarag-dyastha (a being who has destroyed the karmas that cause attachment) in the guna-sthana (stages of spiritual progress).

**Note:** The term "manahparyayajnan" is used to refer to the mind-perception knowledge itself, as well as the being who possesses this knowledge.

**Question:** Why does the rijumati mind-perception knowledge not arise without the involvement of the indriyas (sense organs), the mind, and the actions of speech and body? The vipulamati mind-perception knowledge arises without any such involvement.

**Answer:** This is due to the unique nature of the destruction of the manahparyayajnanavaraniya karma (the karma that obscures the mind-perception knowledge). Therefore, the rijumati mind-perception knowledge arises only in relation to the indriyas (sense organs) and other factors.

Page #552:
---------------------------
518 / Go. Sa. Jivakanda
Verses 445-447
Doubt - Why does a *Rjhumati Man:paryaygyani* not know the unthought, unspoken, and unacted meaning, even though they are aware of the mind?
Solution - They do not know because they are affected by the specific *kshayopasham*.

A *Rjhumati Man:paryaygyani* cannot know the unthought, unspoken, and unacted meaning, therefore they need to rely on the actions of the mind, speech, and body. However, a *Vipulmati Man:paryaygyani* knows even the thought meaning (Go. Ji. Ga. 438), therefore they do not need to rely on the senses, nine senses, or yoga.

Doubt - This knowledge arises from the mind, so does it become *matijnana*?
Solution - No, because in *Man:paryaygyana*, there is only reliance on the mind. Although it functions only through the power of *kshayopasham*, its behavior is only based on the mind of oneself and others. For example, "Look at the moon in the sky," here, the behavior is based only on the reliance on the sky. That is, there is only reliance on the mind here. This knowledge knows the meaning that exists in the minds of others, this is the only reliance on the mind here.

"The difference between *Rjhumati* and *Vipulmati* *Man:paryaygyana* is due to purity and non-falling. ||24||" *Vipulmati* *Man:paryaygyana* is purer and non-falling, while *Rjhumati* *Man:paryaygyana* is less pure and falling.

The purity that comes to the soul when the *Man:paryaygyana* covering karma is *kshayopasham* is called purity. Falling is called *pratipat* and not falling is called *apratipat*. Due to the rise of *charitramohaneya* in a *kapay* being, they lose their restraint-peak, which leads to *pratipat*. And due to the lack of a cause for the fall of a *kshinakshay* being, there is no *pratipat*. There is a difference between *Rjhumati* and *Vipulmati* based on these two. *Vipulmati* is purer than *Rjhumati* in terms of substance, field, time, and *bhaatra*. One should know that purity is due to the ability to make increasingly subtle substances as objects, because they have increasingly excellent *kshayopasham*, therefore *Vipulmati* has more purity than *Rjhumati*.

*Vipulmati* is also unique in terms of *pratipat*, because its owners have *pravaddhaman* *charitra*. But *Rjhumati* is *pratipati*, because its owners have *charitra* that decreases (diminishes) due to the rise of *kashay*.

It is a rule that *Vipulmati* *Man:paryaygyana* belongs to those who, while being *tadhva* *mokshagami*, ascend to the *kshapkakshani*. But there is no such rule for *Rjhumati* *Man:paryaygyana*. It can belong to a *tadhva* *mokshagami* or to someone else. Similarly, the *kshapka* category...

1. P. Pu. Pri. 63. 2. Sarvarthasiddhi A. 1 Su. 6. 3. T. Su. A. 1. 4. V 5, Sarvarthasiddhi . 1 Lu. 24.

Page #553:
---------------------------
## Verse 44-443
## Knowledge Path / 516

It can be for one who ascends the Kshapaka category, and it can also be for one who does not ascend the Kshapaka category but ascends the Upshama category or does not ascend at all. Thus, the mutual purification and exposition of Ṛjūmati Manahparyaya Jnana and Vipulamati Manahparyaya Jnana has been stated.

**Verse 448:**
He grasps the Ṛjū-situated meaning in the mind of another through Īhāmati Jnana, and then knows it directly through Ṛjūmati Manahparyaya Jnana in a regulated manner.

**Verse 446:**
He grasps the object, which is of many types like Chintita, Achintita, and Ardhachintita, and then knows it directly through Vipulamati Manahparyaya Jnana, like Avadhi Jnana.

**Explanation:**
The meaning of the above statement is that one knows the meaning situated in the mind through Manahparyaya Jnana only after grasping the Manas (mental impressions) of others through Mati Jnana. In other words, one grasps the Manas, i.e., the nine senses arising from the Skandhas of Manovargna, through Mati Jnana, and then knows it through Manahparyaya Jnana.

**Doubt:**
The nine senses are beyond the senses, how can they be grasped through Mati Jnana?

**Resolution:**
It is not impossible, because the tendency of Mati Jnana is seen even in objects beyond the senses due to the support of the Īhā-like sign. Or, one should say that one grasps the Manas, i.e., the object of Mati Jnana, through Manas, i.e., Mati Jnana, and then Manahparyaya Jnana is activated.

**Note:**
Ṛjūmati Manahparyaya Jnana knows even the Chintita meaning, but Vipulamati Jnana knows Chintita, Achintita, and Ardhachintita meanings. It knows directly the Chintita, Ardhachintita, and Achintita meanings existing within forty-five lakh yojanas.

**Special Note:**
This has been specifically stated in the special meaning of verse 438.

**References:**
1. "Madīraṇāgeṇa pati maṇaṁ ghelūgā cetra bhāgapjjavaṇāṇaṇa maraṇammiṭṭidapratye jāgadi ti magidam hodi." [D.P. 13 p. 33.2]
2. "Maṇeśa madīraṇāṇega, māgāsaṁ goīdiyamaṇovaggaṇaskhaṁghariṇattidam. Paḍibidaittā ghetṭaṇa pacchā maraṇa pajjavaṇārōṇa jāgādi. Goīdiyamadiḍiyam kādha madīraṇāṇega ghenḍpade? ṇa, Īhāligāva bhabalēga adiḍiyesu ni pratyesu bulidamsagādo. Athavā maṇeṛaṇa madīmāṇega māg.saṁ madināgaviṇyaṁ paḍibidaittā tavalambhiya pacchā maṇapajjavaṇāṇaṁ payadi tti vattabbaṁ." [V.P. 13 p. 341]
3. "Kit bittiya chittiya yammadchittiya cha jāṇadi" [D.P. 13 p. 326]
4. "Ghitiṁ-prachīniya-achīntiya vasthāṇaṁ paga dālīṁ jōyaśāsakkhaḍhamanare baṭṭamaraṇārā japacchalēgā paricchiti krīrāī" [J.P.P. 1.43]

Page #554:
---------------------------
## 520 / Go. Sa. Jivakanda
Gaya 450-451

**450**
The **Riju-mati** and **Tri-pula-mati** **Manas-paryaya** knowledge, perceived by the **Jiva**, knows the inferior, medium, and superior forms (of the worldly **Jiva** **Pudgala**) according to the limits of **Dravya**, **Kshetra**, **Kala**, and **Bhaava**.

**Explanation:** This knowledge arises from the destruction and pacification of the **Manas-paryaya** **Jnana-avarana** karma. In the state of destruction and pacification, there is the rise of **Desha-ghati** competitors. Due to the section of **Desha-ghati** competitors, the **Riju-mati** **Manas-paryaya** knowledge knows the **Pudgala** in the form of **Riju-mati** **Manas-paryaya** and **Vilapati-naji** **Chintita** with the limits of **Dravya**, **Kshetra**, **Kala**, and **Bhaava**. As much as there is destruction and pacification, accordingly, it knows the gross or subtle **Dravya**, the nearby or distant meaning, the **Dravya** within the limits of **Kala**, and the less and more **Bhaava**.

**Manas-paryaya** knowledge, or **Shruta** knowledge, knows the differences of **Manas**, **Vachan**, and **Kaya**, and then knows the meaning situated there by direct perception. The subject of **Manas-paryaya** knowledge is of four types due to the difference of **Dravya**, **Kshetra**, **Kala**, and **Bhaava**.

**Doubt:** Since the **Jiva** is material, how can it be known by **Manas-paryaya** knowledge, which is below **Avadhi** knowledge, which knows material meaning?

**Solution:** No, because the worldly **Jiva** is bound by the eight karmas from the beginning of time, therefore it cannot be immaterial.

"**Rupi-nah Pudgalah**" - This sutra proves that **Pudgala** **Dravya** is material. Therefore, **Manas-paryaya** knowledge knows both the worldly **Jiva** and **Pudgala**, both of which are material **Dravya**. The subject of **Manas-paryaya** knowledge is of four types due to the difference of **Dravya**, **Kshetra**, **Kala**, and **Bhaava**. Among them, each is inferior, superior, and non-inferior, non-superior (medium or other) in terms of **Pramana**.

The phrase "**Jiva Lakkhi-ya**" in the gatha states that the subject of **Manas-paryaya** knowledge can only be the material **Dravya** that is thought by the **Jiva**.

**451**
The inferior and superior **Dravya** of **Riju-mati** **Manas-paryaya** knowledge:

The superior **Dravya** is the **Dravya** that is situated in the body, is old, and is bound by time. The inferior **Dravya** is the **Dravya** that is new, is young, and is not bound by time.

1. "**Madi-gane va Mudana-ne va Maga Vachi Kaya Bhedam Gaye Pachchhat-tat-thiti-dam-atya-m Pachchhat-trena Jana-m Tasla Maha-yajja-varana-ganassa Dava-vetta-kala-bhaava-bhe-vi-sa Chaub-viho.**" [Dhavala Pu. 6 p. 63]
2. Dhavala Pu. 13 p. 333.
3. T. Su. A. 5.

Page #555:
---------------------------
Verse 451
Knowledge Path/521 Verse Meaning- The evidence of the depletion of the audaric body in one time is the javan dravya of the righteous, and the depletion of the excellent eye sense is the dravya of the evidence. ||451||
Special Meaning- He knows the dravya that is obtained by the depletion of the audaric body in one time, which is related to the infinite and infinite visrasopachya from the inferior dravya, and he knows the dravya that is obtained by the depletion of the sense in one time, which is excellent. The knower of the righteous mind-perception knows all the dravya alternatives of the middle of the excellent and the inferior.
The righteous mind-perception knowledge knows the depletion of the audaric body in one time from the inferior.
Doubt- The depletion of the audaric body is of three types, inferior, excellent and other than that. Which depletion does he know?
Solution- He knows the depletion of the audaric body other than that, because there is a general instruction here.
Doubt- He knows the depletion of the eye sense from the knowledge path.
Doubt- There is no difference between the depletion of the audaric body and the depletion of the sense. Because, there is no audaric body other than the senses?
Solution- This is not a fault, because all the senses are not taken here.
Doubt- Then which sense is taken?
Solution- The eye sense is taken, because it is the least evidence form compared to the other senses and is also associated with the smoothness, i.e. subtlety, of its initial pudgals.
Doubt- The eye sense is seen to be larger than the nose and ear senses?
Solution- This is not so, because the eye sense has accepted the star in the form of a lentil in the middle of the eyeball.
Doubt- The depletion of the eye sense is also of three types, inferior, excellent and other than that. Which depletion is taken?
Solution- The depletion other than that is taken, because there is a general instruction for it.
The righteous mind-perception knower knows the dravya alternatives of the middle of the inferior and excellent dravya. 1. P. Pu. 13 p. 337. 2. .Pu. 6 p. 63. 3. Gh. Pu. 6 p. 64.

Page #556:
---------------------------
522/Go. Sa. Jivakanda
Gatha 452-455

The evidence of the inferior substance of Vipulamati Manoparyaya Jnana is obtained by dividing the superior substance of Riju-mati Jnana into an infinite number of parts. This inferior substance is then further divided into eight parts.  ||452||

When the eight karmas, which are free from decay and increase, are divided into parts according to the time-bound, the second substance is obtained. ||453||

When the second substance of Vipulamati is divided into an infinite number of parts according to the time-bound, the superior substance is obtained. ||454||

**Gatha-artha:** The evidence of the inferior substance of Manodravya is obtained by dividing the superior substance of Riju-mati Jnana into an infinite number of parts. ||452||

When the eight karmas, which are free from decay and increase, are divided into parts according to the time-bound, the second substance is obtained. ||453||

When the second substance of Vipulamati is divided into an infinite number of parts according to the time-bound, the superior substance is obtained. ||454||

**Vishesh-artha:** Vipulamati Manoparyaya Jnana knows the inferior substance as a single time-bound sensory decay.

**Shankha:** How can the superior substance of Riju-mati Jnana be the object of Vipulamati, which is much superior?

**Samadhan:** No, because the substance of Vipulamati is considered to be the inferior or first object, which is a single time-bound sensory decay, which is obtained by dividing the superior substance of Riju-mati Jnana into an infinite number of parts. This is because the inferior substance of Vipulamati is the evidence of the superior substance of Vipulamati.

To know the superior substance of Vipulamati, the infinite number of parts of Manodravya are divided into parts according to the time-bound, which are free from decay and increase, and are related to the readers. This is done by establishing an infinite number of time-bound markers. When these parts are divided into eight parts, the second substance is obtained. One marker should be removed from the marker-set. This process should be continued until the marker-set is exhausted. The last substance obtained is known as the superior substance of Vipulamati. The intermediate substances between the inferior and superior substances are known as the other substances of Vipulamati. Here, "the infinite number of parts of Manodravya" is the Dhruvahar.

Just as the Vipulamati knows the object of its knowledge, the superior substance is obtained by dividing the object of its knowledge into an infinite number of parts. The Vipulamati knows the superior substance as the object of its knowledge, and the superior substance is the object of its knowledge in the next world. ||455||

1. Gh.Pu. 6
66-67. 2. Pra.Pu. 6 p. 67.

Page #557:
---------------------------
## Verse 456
## Shanmarganga/523

This statement, "Nara-loka," is not a measure of the circumference (paridhi) of the Nara-loka, but rather a measure of the expansion (vikkhambha) or the pointer (suchi-thyaasa). This is because the dense (taggara) and subtle (pavara) regions of the knowledge of the mind (mana-paryaya-gyana) have been described as a cube (ghana-pratar). 

## Explanation of the Verse

The knowledge of the mind (mana-paryaya-gyana) knows the region of the subtle (pavara) from the gross (jaghanya) up to the measure of a gavyuti (kos), and from the subtle (pavara) up to the measure of a yojana. It does not know beyond that. The knowledge of the mind (mana-paryaya-gyana) knows the middle alternatives of the gross (jaghanya) and subtle (pavara) regions, which are different from those.

A gavyuti (kos) is two thousand dhanus (bows). Multiplying that by eight gives the measure of the gavyuti. The knowledge of the mind (mana-paryaya-gyana) knows the region of this cube (ghana-pratar) from the gross (jaghanya).

## Doubt

The gross (jaghanya) region of the knowledge of the perception of the subtle (pravadhi-gyana) is said to be the measure of countless parts of an angula (finger), and its time is the measure of countless parts of a pavali (moment). But the gross (jaghanya) region of this knowledge, which is less than the knowledge of the perception of the subtle (avadhi-gyana), is said to be the measure of a gavyuti (kos), and its time is said to be the measure of two or three bhava-grahana (lifetimes). How can this be?

## Solution

No, because both knowledges are of different types. The knowledge of the perception of the subtle (avadhi-gyana) is related to both the restrained (samyata) and unrestrained (asam-yata), but the knowledge of the mind (mana-paryaya-gyana) is related only to the restrained (samyata). This shows that they are of different types. Therefore, there is no similarity in the subject matter of both knowledges. Secondly, just as the eye sense organ knows only form, leaving aside taste, etc., similarly, the knowledge of the mind (mana-paryaya-gyana) knows only two or three vyanjana-paryaya (expressions) related to bhava (existence), leaving aside all other artha-paryaya (meanings) related to bhava (existence). Therefore, it is not the same as the knowledge of the perception of the subtle (avadhi-gyana). It is also not correct to say that this is the measure of seven or eight bhava-grahana (lifetimes) that have passed over a long period of time, because there is no contradiction in assuming that this knowledge, which does not have all artha-paryaya (meanings) as its object and has bhava-sanjnak vyanjana-paryaya (expressions related to existence) as its object, has its activity in bhavas (lifetimes) that have passed over a long period of time.

A yojana is eight thousand dhanus (bows). Multiplying that by eight gives the measure of the dhanus (bows) within the yojana. The cube (ghana) of these is the subtle (pavara) region of the knowledge of the mind (mana-paryaya-gyana).

The knowledge of the mind (mana-paryaya-gyana) of the vipula-mati (one with vast knowledge) knows the region from the gross (jaghanya) up to the measure of a yojana. The subtle (pavara) region of the riju-mati (one with straight knowledge) and the gross (jaghanya) region of the vipula-mati (one with vast knowledge) are not the same, because there are many differences in the yojana. From the subtle (pavara), it knows up to the measure of the manushottara-shala (the region beyond human beings), but not beyond that.

Page #558:
---------------------------
## 524 Mo. Sa. Jivakanda
## Gatha 455-456

The Manushottara mountain mentioned here is a symbolic representation, not the actual one. Therefore, the statement implies that the Manahparyaya Jnana knows the trikala-gochar (past, present, and future) substance that is the subject of concern for the beings residing within the forty-five lakh yojana region. This also means that the Manahparyaya Jnana knows the subject of concern for the Devas and Tiryanchas who are situated outside the Manushottara mountain but within their own subject area.

Some Acharyas say that the Manahparyaya Jnana only knows what is within the Manushottara mountain. According to them, it does not have knowledge of things outside the Manushottara mountain. Some other Acharyas say that the Manahparyaya Jnana knows the subject of concern while being situated within the Manushottara mountain. According to them, it directly knows the substance situated at the end of the Lok (universe). However, both interpretations are incorrect because, according to them, the substance that has entered the flower petal of its knowledge cannot become unavailable. It is not possible for the Manahparyaya Jnana to be obstructed by the Manushottara mountain because, being independent, it cannot be hindered by any obstacle. Secondly, it is also not possible for this knowledge, which knows the substance situated at the end of the Lok, to not know the mind situated there because it cannot become unavailable to its own subject matter situated within its own area. However, this is not possible because, if we accept this, the establishment of the proof of the area becomes futile. Therefore, if the substance that is the subject of contemplation by the beings residing within the forty-five lakh yojana region is within the area obstructed by the influence of the Manahparyaya Jnana, then it knows it, otherwise, it does not know it.

The Manahparyaya Jnana, due to its excellence, knows what is within the Manushottara mountain, not what is outside. This means that it knows the forty-five lakh yojana region.

Some Acharyas say that the Manahparyaya Jnana knows one category of the Akash श्रेणी (heavenly realm) in a sequential manner. However, this does not happen because, if we accept this, it will lead to the situation where the Manahparyaya Jnana cannot manifest in Devas, Manusha (humans), and Vidyadharas, etc. Some Acharyas say that the Manahparyaya Jnana knows all the tangible substances situated within the Manushkshetra (human realm) but not the external area. However, this also does not happen because, if we accept this, it will lead to the situation where the knowledge of the one who is situated near the Manushottara mountain and uses it in the external direction cannot be generated. If it is said that the said situation arises, then let it be, but even that cannot be said because there is no reason for it not to be generated. The absence of क्षयोपशम (cessation of decay) is not the reason because, without it, the generation of knowledge related to the internal direction of the Manushottara mountain also does not happen. Therefore, the existence of क्षयोपशम is established. It is also not possible for the knowledge of the substance situated in the external part to not be generated due to the obstruction by the Manushottara mountain because the non-sensory perception of the Manahparyaya Jnana, which operates in countless past and future periods and also knows the substances obstructed by mountains, etc., in the internal direction, cannot be obstructed by the Manushottara mountain.

Page #559:
---------------------------
## Gatha 457-458
## Jnanamargana/525

This statement is not a regulator of the field within, but it is a regulator of forty-five *saakh* yojanas within the *Manushottar* mountain, because, when the field is established with a cube, along with the brilliance of *Vipulmati* *Manahparyayajnan*, it becomes forty-five lakh yojanas.

**Gatha 457**
The *kalpa* of *Rjhumati* and *Vipulmati* is *dugatigabha* for the inferior and *satbha* for the superior.
The *kalpa* of *Adanavabha* is inferior and *asankhejj* *viulukkassam* for the superior.

**Gatha 457 Meaning:** The inferior *kalpa* for *Rjhumati* is two to three *bhavas* and the superior is seven *paath* *bhavas*. The inferior *kalpa* for *Vipulmati* is nine *bhavas* and the superior *kalpa* is *asankhyat* *bhavas*.

**Special Meaning:** *Rjhumati* *Manahparyayajnan* knows two to three *bhavas* compared to the inferior *kalpa*.

**Doubt:** If one knows only two *bhavas*, then one cannot know three *bhavas*, and if one knows three, then one cannot know two, because there is a contradiction in considering three as two forms.

**Solution:** This is not a fault, because one knows two *bhavas* without the present *bhavas* and three *bhavas* with the present *bhavas*, therefore two and three *bhavas* are said.

**Explanation:** In *Anuyogadwar*, it is said that one knows seven and *paath* *bhavas* from the superior. Here also, one knows the past *bhavas* without the present *bhavas*, otherwise one knows the *paar* *bhavas*. Since there is an indication of *bhavagrahma* in the form of *aniyatkal*, there is no rule of *kalpa* here. One should know that *Rjhumati* *Manahparyayajnan* knows the middle options of inferior and superior *kalpa* besides that.

**Creation and Nature:** In *Anuyogadwar*, it is also said that *Vipulmati* *Manahparyayajnan* knows the *bhavagrahana* of seven *paath* *bhavas* compared to the inferior *kalpa* and the *bhavagrahana* of *asankhyat* *bhavas* from the superior. One directly knows the movement, progress, liberation, *krit* and *pratisevit* meaning of the beings of such *kalpa*. This is the meaning of the above statement. But in this *gatha*, a different statement is made about the inferior *kalpa* of *Vipulmati* from these two (*krit* and *prakriti*) *Anuyogadwar*.

**Gatha 458**
The inferior and superior subjects of *Rjhumati* *Manahparyayajnan* are in proportion to the parts of *pravali*.
-
-
1. Dh. Pri 1 Pri. 67-68. 2. Dh, Pri. 13 Gri. 338: P. Pu. . 651 3. Gh. Pu. 6 Pri. 65. 4. Dh. Pu 6 Pri. 65-66, Pu. 13 Pri. 342 Sutra 74. 5. 4. Pu. 13 Pri. 342 Sutra 75.

Page #560:
---------------------------
## 526 / Go. Sa. Jivakanda
## Gatha 456-460

The number of emotions is multiplied by an uncountable number, from the lowest to the highest. The generative emotion of Vipulamati is uncountably multiplied by the highest of the Rijumati. And there is an uncountable number of Lokas in the highest. || 458 ||

**Special Meaning:** The Rijumati, with their lowest and highest Manahparyaya Jnana, know the uncountable present Paryayas in their respective appropriate substances. The Tripulamati, with their Jnana Bhava, know the uncountable present substances of all those who are Dravyajnatas.

**Gatha 456:**

The Madhyama Dravya, Kshetra, and Kala are known by the Madhyama Manahparyaya Jnana. Thus, the Manahparyaya Jnana is stated concisely. || 456 ||

**Special Meaning:** That which is greater than the lowest and less than the highest is called Madhyama, also known as Prajghanya, Anutkrista, or something other than that. The lowest and highest are of only one type, but the Madhyama has many divisions. While stating the Rijumati and Vipulamati Manahparyaya Jnana, in relation to Dravya, Kshetra, and Kala, the Madhyama Dravya, Kshetra, and Kala have also been stated. One should look at that.

**Keval Jnana**

**Gatha 460:**

The knowledge that is complete, comprehensive, pure, without rivals, pervades all substances, is free from darkness in the Lokas and Alok, should be known as Keval Jnana. || 460 ||

**Special Meaning:** "That Keval Jnana is complete, comprehensive, and without rivals." || 1 ||

**Meaning:** Because it is undivided, it is complete.

**Shankara:** How is it undivided?

**Solution:** When there is no inclination towards all external objects, there is division in knowledge. That is not possible in this knowledge, because the objects of this knowledge are all external objects that are present in all three times.

**Or:** Because the knowledge of the distinction between Dravya, Guna, and Paryayas cannot be otherwise, and their existence is certain, the components of such knowledge are called Kala. It exists with these Kalas, therefore it is complete. The meaning of "Mam" is Samyak, Samyak means the opposite of mutual exclusion, which is the characteristic of opposition.

Page #561:
---------------------------
##  Gaya 461-462
##  Jnanamangala / 527

Since this infinite vision, infinite energy, restraint (character) and transient right faith, etc. are complete with infinite qualities, it is called complete. It is the repository of all qualities, this is the meaning of the above statement. The meaning of 'sapatna' is enemy, the enemies of Kevala Jnana are destructive karmas. They are not there, therefore Kevala Jnana is asapatna. It has completely destroyed its opponent, the fourfold destructive karmas, this is the meaning of the above statement.

Kevala Jnana is helpless, because it is devoid of the need for senses, light and mind.

**Doubt:** Kevala Jnana happens with the help of the soul, so can it not be called Kevala (helpless)?

**Solution:** No, because the soul other than knowledge is not found, therefore there is no one to call Kevala Jnana as Kevala (helpless).

**Doubt:** Kevala Jnana is activated with the help of meaning, so can it not be called Kevala (helpless)?

**Solution:** No, because the activity of Kevala Jnana is found even in the destroyed apparent meanings and in the unborn future meanings, therefore it cannot be said that Kevala Jnana happens with the help of meaning.

**Doubt:** If Kevala Jnana is active in destroyed and unborn forms, then should it also be active in a donkey's horn?

**Solution:** No, because just as the truth of a donkey's horn is not found in the present, in the same way its existence is not found in the present in the form of its past power and future power. That is, just as in the present object, its past states, which have already happened, exist in the form of past power, and the future states, which are going to happen, exist in the form of future power, in the same way, if a donkey's horn had ever existed before, its existence would have been present in some object in the form of past power, and if it were going to happen in the future, its existence would have been present in some object in the form of future power, but a donkey's horn has neither happened nor will happen. Therefore, Kevala Jnana is not active in it.

##  Jnanamangala: Enumeration of the Number of Jivas

Difficult to count, like the grains of sand, the number of births and deaths. Only the Siddhas are counted separately. || 461 ||

The number of Tiryanchas is like the number of grains of sand in the ocean. The number of humans is like the number of grains of sand in a handful. || 462 ||

1. Dh. Pu. 13. 345-346.

Page #562:
---------------------------
5.28/Gee. Sa. Jeevakanda
1
The measure of the four (Naraki, Tiryanch, Manushya and Dev) gatis, for those with Matijnana and Shrutajnana, is an infinitesimal part of a Pallya. Those with Manahparyaya Jnana are countable, and are slightly more than the Kevali (Kevalajnani) Siddhas. || 463 ||
The measure of those without Avadhijnana, including Tiryanch and those with Matijnana, is an infinitesimal part of the countable number of those without Avadhijnana, and the countable number of Manushyas. Subtracting these two quantities from the number of those with Matijnana, the remainder is the measure of those with Avadhijnana. || 464 ||
1
Gathaarth - The measure of those with Matijnana and Shrutajnana, for the four (Naraki, Tiryanch, Manushya and Dev) gatis, is an infinitesimal part of a Pallya. Those with Manahparyaya Jnana are countable, and are slightly more than the Kevali (Kevalajnani) Siddhas. || 461 || The measure of those without Avadhijnana, including Tiryanch and those with Matijnana, is an infinitesimal part of the countable number of those without Avadhijnana, and the countable number of Manushyas. Subtracting these two quantities from the number of those with Matijnana, the remainder is the measure of those with Avadhijnana. || 462 || The measure of Vibhangajnani Tiryanch is equal to the number of Jagshrenis, which is an infinitesimal part of a Pallya multiplied by the measure of a Ghanangula. The number of Vibhangajnani Manushyas and Devas, along with all the Devas and Narakis excluding the Samyagrashtas, is the total number of Vibhangajnani in the four gatis. || 463 || Subtracting the number of five Samyagjnani from the total number of Jeevas, the remainder is the measure of those with Kumati and Kushruta Jnana. || 464 ||
Gatha 463-464
Vishesharth - Dividing an infinitesimal part of an Avali by a Shravali, the quotient obtained is the measure of the Avali, which is an infinitesimal part of the measure of the Asanyata Samyagdristi Jeevas. This time is also the measure of an Antarmuhurta. This time, which is the measure of the Asanyata Samyagdristi, is also the time for those with Matijnana and Shrutajnana. Dividing a Pallya by this time (an Antarmuhurta, which is an infinitesimal part of a Shravali), we get the spread of those with Matijnana and Shrutajnana. Dividing this time by an infinitesimal part of a Pravali, the quotient obtained is added to the same time, and this is the time for those with Avadhijnana. Dividing a Pallyopam by this time, we get the measure of those with Avadhijnana and Asanyata Samyaktvi. The measure of those with Avadhijnana, both Sanayata and Asanayata, is an infinitesimal part of the measure of those with Asanyata Samyaktvi. [Because the time for those with Avadhijnana, Sanayata and Asanayata, is said to be an infinite number of times greater than the time for those with Avadhijnana and Asanyata Samyaktvi. (D. 3/336-40)] The measure of those with Avadhijnana, both Pramatta and Apramatta, is a countable part of their respective quantities, but it is not known exactly how many there are, because there is no Guru who teaches this in the present time. It is only known that there are fourteen Upashamka and twenty-eight Ghora Kshapaka.
Those with Manahparyaya Jnana are countable. Those with Manahparyaya Jnana, both Pramatta and Apramatta, are only a countable part of the Jeevas with two types of Jnana in their respective Gunasthanas, because there cannot be many Rishis who have attained Labdhi. However, it is not known exactly how many there are, because there is no Guru who teaches this in the present time.
1
1. D. Pu. 3 p. 65 1 5. D. Pu. 3 p. 441.
2. D. Pu. 3 p. 436.
3. D. Pu. 3 p. 4361
4. D. Pu. 3 p. 441.

Page #563:
---------------------------
## Gatha 461-464
**Knowledge Path/ 526**

No type of instruction is found. It is so special that there are ten *Man:paryaya* knowers, ten *Upashamak* and twenty *Kshapak*.

There is *Sayogi* *Jin* *Laksha* *Pruthaktva* in *Keval* knowers. The number of *Keval* knowers is greater than this. The number of *Keval* knowers is the main *Siddh* *Rashi* because they are infinite. *Sayog* *Kevali* and *Prayog* *Kevali* are countable. The number of *Keval* knowers is greater than *Sayog* *Kevali* and *Prayog* *Kevali*.

*Matyagyani* and *Shrutagyani* beings are infinite because all the *Mithyadristi* and *Sasadan* *Samyagdristi* beings are *Matyagyani* and *Shrutagyani*. Because no *Mithyadristi* and *Sasadan* *Samyagdristi* beings are found who are free from both types of ignorance. *Mithyadristi* beings are infinite. Even though they are infinite, they are of medium infinite quantity. *Sasadan* *Samyagdristi* beings are a fraction of the *Paly*.

**Doubt:** *Vibhang* knowers are *Mithyadristi* and *Sasadan* *Samyagdristi* beings, therefore the number of *Shrotamithyadristi* and *Sasadan* *Samyagdristi* beings is less than the number of *Matyagyani* and *Shrutagyani* beings.

**Solution:** No, because *Vibhang* knowers are not found separately except for *Matyagyani* and *Shrutagyani* beings, therefore their number is equal to the number of *Mithyadristi* and *Sasadan* *Samyagdristi* beings.

When the entire *Jiva* *Rashi* is divided into infinite parts, the majority of them are *Matyagyani* and *Shrutagyani* *Mithyadristi* beings. When the remaining one part is divided into infinite parts, the majority of them are *Kevalgyani* beings. When the remaining one part is divided into countless parts, the majority of them are *Vibhanggyani* *Mithyadristi* beings. When the remaining one part is divided into countless parts, the majority of them are *Matyagyani* *Shrutagyani* *Asanyat* *Samyagdristi* beings. By multiplying the number of these *Matyagyani* and *Shrutagyani* *Asanyat* *Samyagdristi* beings and dividing it by the countless parts of *Gravali*, the quotient obtained is subtracted from the same number, and the remaining number is the *Avadhigyani* *Asanyat* *Samyagdristi* *Jiva* *Rashi*.

According to the *Ank* *Sandristi*, the number of different knowers in *Gyanamaargana* is as follows:

* **Pratyashani:** Countless
* **Bhrutagyani:** Countless
* **Vibhanggyani:** Countless
* **Mati:** Countless
* **Shrutagyani:** Countless
* **Avadhigyani:** Countable
* **Man:paryaya:** Countable
* **Kevalgyani:** Infinite

Thus, the twelfth chapter of *Gommatasar* *Jivakanda* named *Gyanamaargana* is complete.

* **Jiva Rashi:** Infinite
* **Kevalgyani:** Infinite
* **Sayog Kevali:** Countable
* **Prayog Kevali:** Countable
* **Matyagyani:** Infinite
* **Shrutagyani:** Infinite
* **Vibhanggyani:** Countless
* **Avadhigyani:** Countable
* **Man:paryaya:** Countable
* **Upashamak:** 10
* **Kshapak:** 20

**References:**

1. *Dhaval* Vol. 3, Page 442-443
2. *Dhaval* Vol. 3, Page 65, Sutra 14
3. *Dhaval* Vol. 3, Page 436
4. *Dhaval* Vol. 3, Page 10, Sutra 2
5. *Dhaval* Vol. 3, Page 63, Sutra 6
6. *Dhaval* Vol. 3, Page 437
7. *Dhaval* Vol. 3, Page 442. This *Sandristi* is mentioned in the introduction of the third volume on page 700. There are four *Sandristi* mentioned here.

Page #564:
---------------------------
530/Go. Sa. Jivakanda
Gatha 865-466
13. Samyammarganaadhikara
The definition of samyama is: "Dharanaapalaka-rinaggraha-chaaga-jo samjamo bhavigo" ॥465॥
The meaning is: Preserving the scriptures, observing the samitis, subduing the kashayas, renouncing the three types of danda, and conquering the five senses - this is called samyama.

Visheshaartha: Samyama means self-restraint. Merely observing the vows (dravya-yama) without the corresponding conduct (bhava-charitra) cannot be called samyama, because the prefix 'sam' in the word 'samyama' negates that.

Shanka: Should all the samitis be included in yama, since without the samitis, samyama cannot be established?

Samadhaana: This doubt is not correct, because the prefix 'sam' in 'samyama' implies the inclusion of all the samitis.

Observing the five great vows of ahimsa, satya, asteya, brahmacharya and aparigraha, practicing the five samitis of irya-bhasha-eshana-adaana-nikshepana-utsarga, subduing the four kashaya of krodha, mana, maya and lobha, renouncing the three danda of mana, vachan and kaya, and conquering the five senses - this is called samyama.

Shanka: But we see many mithyadrashti (those with wrong belief) who appear to be samyata (restrained).

Samadhaana: No, because without samyagdarshana (right faith), the arising of samyama is not possible. The prefix 'sam' in 'samyama' indicates samyak (right) meaning. Therefore, those who are abstinent from both external and internal passions, and whose mind is free from the three delusions, are called samyata. One whose faith in the Apta (omniscient), Agama (scriptures) and the objects of knowledge is not established, and whose mind is engrossed in the three kinds of moha (delusion), cannot attain samyama.

The cause of the arising of samyama is: "Badarasanjalanadaye suhume udaye samkhaye ya mohassa. Samjamabhavo piyamaa hoditi jinehi rinnahi" ॥466॥

Page #565:
---------------------------
**Verse 467**
**Sanayamaargna/531**
**Verse Meaning:** Even when the subtle *saampraaya* or *baadar* *sanjwalan* arises due to the subsidence, destruction, or subsidence-destruction of the *chaaritramohaniya* karma, *sanayama* arises according to the rules, as stated by the Jina. ||466||
**Special Meaning:**  *Sanayama* arises due to the destruction (absence of *rad* form of destruction) of the *pratyakhyanaavaran* *chaarishramohaniya* karma, which are the most destructive competitors, in the present, and due to the subsidence of the same *karma* in the future, which are present in the state of existence, and due to the arising of the *baadar* *sanjwalan* *kapaya* or the subtle *kapaya* competitors. Therefore, *sanayama* is *kshayopashaamik*.
**Question:** *Sanayama* arises due to the arising of the *sanjwalan* *kashaya*, why is it not called *praudaayik*?
**Answer:**  Just as the *sanstu* *kapaal* does not always give rise to the Ganga, similarly, *sanayama* is not always *praudaayik*.
**Question:** Where does the *sanjwalan* operate?
**Answer:** The *sanjwalan* operates in the *sanayama* that arises due to the destruction of the most destructive competitors of the *pratyakhyanaavaran* *kashaya* and due to the subsidence in the form of *sadabastaara*.
**Conclusion:** The living being becomes *sanayat* due to the *aupashamik*, *kshayik*, and *kshayopashaamik* gains.
**Explanation:** The living being whose *karma* has subsided due to the *marvopashaam* of the *chaaritravran* karma becomes *sanayat*. Thus, *sanayama* arises due to the *aupashamik* gain.
*Sanayama* also arises due to the destruction of the *chaaritravran* karma. Thus, the living being becomes *sanayat* due to the *kshayik* gain.
*Sanayama* arises due to the arising of the *sanjwalan* *kashaya* and the *nee* *nokashaya* competitors. Thus, the *sanayat* also obtains the *kshayopashaamik* gain.
**Question:** Why is the arising of the *deshghani* competitors called *kshayopashaam*?
**Answer:** The most destructive competitors become *anantguneehin* and arise in the form of *deshghani* competitors. The *anantguneehinta* of those most destructive competitors is the destruction, and their existence in the form of *deshghani* competitors is the subsidence. The combined arising of that destruction and subsidence is called *kshayopashaam*. The *sanayama* that arises from that *kshayopashaam* is also *kshayopashaamik* due to the same reason.
**Verse:**
*Baadar* *sanjwalan* *udaye* *baadar* *sanjamatiyam* *khu* *parihaaro*. *Padidare* *suhumudaye* *suhamo* *sanjamguno* *hovi*. ||467||
**References:**
1. *Dhaval* *Pu.* 1, p. 156-3:47.
2. *Dhaval* *Pu.* 7, p. 62, *mootra* 46.
3. *Dhaval* *Pu.* 7, p. 62.

Page #566:
---------------------------
532/Go. Sa. Jivakanda
Verse 468
When the mohaniya karma subsides and is destroyed, then the restraint, as described, occurs due to the rule. This is what the Jinas (Shrutakevalis) have said. ||468||
Verse Meaning: Even when the three badars (Samayik, Chhedopasthapana, Pariharavishuddhi) are present, the three badar restraints occur due to the mohaniya karma arising. But the Pariharavishuddhi restraint occurs in the two gunasthanas of the distracted and the undistracted. Even when subtle greed arises, the subtle sampraaya restraint occurs. ||467|| When the mohaniya karma subsides and is destroyed, then the restraint, as described, occurs due to the rule. This is what the Jinas (Shrutakevalis) have said. ||468||
Special Meaning: 'I am free from all kinds of savadyayoga.' Thus, the complete abandonment of all savadyayoga, in relation to the dravyathik nay, is called Samayik shuddhi-sanayat.
Doubt: Why wouldn't a person who follows the rules of one vow become a mithyastri?
Solution: No, because the one who has the collection of all the distinctions of the complete character, such a general perceiver does not find any contradiction in accepting the dravyathik nay as the appropriate view.
Doubt: How do we know that this general restraint is the collection of all its own distinctions?
Solution: The use of the word 'sarvasavadyayoga' itself implies that it is the collection of all its own distinctions. If there was only one distinction of restraint that was important here, then the word 'sarva' could not be used, because there would be a contradiction in using the word 'sarva' in such a place.
From this statement, it is proven that the being who has all the distinctions of restraint within himself, such a being who holds one yama in an undifferentiated form is called Samayik shuddhi sanayat.
The cutting off of that one vow, i.e., the establishment of it with two, three, etc., distinctions, i.e., the imposition of vows, is called Chhedopasthapana shuddhi sanayat. The Samayik shuddhi sanayat is of the dravyathik nay form because it is the acceptance of one yama, considering all the vows as one in general. And the Chhedopasthapana shuddhi sanayat is of the paryayaathik nay form because it is the acceptance of that one vow with five or many distinctions. There, the dravyathik nay is taught for the benefit of sharp-minded people, and the paryayaathik nay is taught for the benefit of dull-minded people. Therefore, there is no difference in the practice of these two restraints.
Doubt: Even though the restraint is of two types in relation to the teaching, in reality, it is only one? Solution: This is not a fault, because this statement is desirable to us.
Doubt: While there cannot be two distinctions of the practiced restraint in relation to these two, then the restraint
1. Dhaval Pu. 1 p. 366. 2. Dhaval Pu. 1 p. 330.

Page #567:
---------------------------
## Chapter 466
## Path of Restraint / 533

**Question:** How can these five divisions (Samayik, Chhedopasthapana, Parihar Vishuddhi, Sukshma Samparaya and Yathakyat) become teachings?

**Answer:** If the five types of accumulation do not occur, then it is not possible.

**Doubt:** How many types of restraint are there?

**Answer:** Restraint is of four types, because the fifth restraint is not found.

Those who have attained purity and whose restraint is primarily characterized by the avoidance of violence are called Parihar Vishuddhi Sanayats. After enjoying pleasures for thirty years according to their own desires, they adopt Samayik restraint in a general way and Chhedopasthapana restraint in a special way. They enter the great ocean of renunciation, which is characterized by renunciation in the form of limited or unlimited rejection according to substance, field, time and feeling. Their entire doubt is removed and they have attained the perfection of avoidance through special austerities. Such a being receives Parihar Vishuddhi restraint at the feet of the Tirthankara.

Parihar Vishuddhi restraint occurs in the two Gunasthanas of Pramat and Prapramat.

**Doubt:** Why does Parihar Vishuddhi restraint not occur in the eighth and subsequent Gunasthanas mentioned above?

**Answer:** It does not, because the souls of those who are immersed in the ocean of nectar in the form of meditation, who follow the vow of silence (Bachanyam), and who have contracted all bodily activities related to the body in the form of coming and going, cannot avoid auspicious and inauspicious actions. Only those who are inclined to act, such as going and coming, can avoid them. Those who are not inclined cannot. Therefore, Parihar Vishuddhi restraint cannot occur in the eighth and subsequent Gunasthanas that have attained the state of meditation.

**Doubt:** The perfection of avoidance is also found in the eighth and subsequent Gunasthanas. Therefore, one should assume that this restraint is also present there.

**Answer:** No, because although the perfection of avoidance is found in the eighth and subsequent Gunasthanas, the function of avoiding is not found there. Therefore, the influence of Parihar Vishuddhi restraint is said to be present in the eighth and subsequent Gunasthanas.

A being becomes Samayik-Chhedopasthapana Vishuddhi Sanayat through the attainment of Mik Kshayik and Kshayopa-shamic.

**Doubt:** Although Samayik and Chhedopasthapana restraint may occur in the attainment of Kshayopagam, they cannot occur in the attainment of Shanik and Kshayik, because these restraints are not found above the Gunasthanas of Anivrittikaran.

Page #568:
---------------------------
534/Go. Sa. Jivakanda

Is it not the case that the four *charitramohaniya* (obstacles to conduct) are not destroyed or subdued in the two *kshapika* (destructive) and *upashamaka* (subduing) *gunasthanas* (states of being) of *apuurvakaran* (non-manifestation) and *anivrittikaran* (non-return), which would make it possible for the said *sanjatas* (practitioners) to attain *ayika* (worldly) and *praupashmika* (spiritual) gains?

Solution - This is not the case, because even in the *anivritti* *gunasthan* related to *kshapika* and *upashamaka*, except for *lobha* (greed), the destruction and subduing of the remaining *charitramohaniya* is found, and therefore the possibility of *kshayika* and *aupashamika* gains is found there. Or, from the very beginning of *apuurvakaran* related to *kshapika* and *upashamaka*, there are *kshayika* and *aupashamika* *sanjama* (restraint) gains, because from the very beginning of the said *gunasthanas*, the accomplishment of the work in the form of gradual destruction and subduing is seen. If the work is not accomplished at every moment, then it is not possible for the work to be completed at the end.

Doubt - How can there be three states of *praupashmika* etc. of the same *charitra*?

Solution - Just as many colors are seen in a single *chitra patanga* (multicolored bird), so too a single *charitra* can be endowed with many states.

Through *kshayopashmika* gain, the being becomes *parihara-shuddhi-sanjata* (restrained in purification of conduct).

The birth of *parihara-shuddhi-sanjama* occurs in the harmony of the rise of the *deshghati* (destructive) competitors, who have attained *kshaya* (destruction) through the infinite harm of the *sarvaghati* (all-destructive) competitors of the four *sanjwalana* (inflammations) and nine *nokashaya* (subtle passions), and have been subdued in a *deshghati* manner. Therefore, it is said that *parihara-shuddhi-sanjama* occurs through *kshayopashmika* gain.

Doubt - If the rise of these thirteen natures, the four *sanjwalana* and nine *nokashaya*, is the cause of the birth of *sanjama*, then how is it accepted as the cause of *sanjama-asanjama* (restraint-non-restraint)?

Solution - No, because the rise of the four *sanjwalana* etc., *deshghati* competitors, which has been obstructed by the rise of the *sarvaghati* competitors of *pratyakhyana-avaran* (rejection-covering), does not have the power to produce *sangrama* (struggle) except for *sanjama-asanjama*. That is, the absence of the rise of the *sarvaghati* competitors of *pratyakhyana-avaran* is the cause of the birth of *sanjama*.

*Samparaya* is called *kashaya* (passion). Those *sanjatas* whose *paya* (subtlety) has become subtle are *sukshma-samparaya-sanjata* (restrained in subtle *samparaya*).

When the *sadhus* (holy ones) who have adopted *samayika* (meditation) and *chaidopasthapana* (sixteen postures) *sanjama* become very subtle in *kashaya*, then they are called *sukshma-samparaya-shuddhi-sanjata* (restrained in the purification of subtle *samparaya*).

Through *aupashamika* and *kshayika* gain, one becomes *sukshma-samparaya-sanjata*.

In both *upashamaka* and *kshapika* types of *sukshma-samparaya* *gunasthanas*, the attainment of *sukshma-samparaya-sanjama* occurs. Therefore, *sukshma-samparaya-sanjama* occurs through *aupashamika* and *kshayika* gain.

3. Dhaval Pu. 7
64.

4. Dhaval Pu. 1
1. Dhaval Pu. 7 p. 63. 2. Praval Pu. 3 p. 64 Sutra 51. p. 371. 5. Dhaval p. 7 p. 65. 6. Praval Pu. 7 p. 65.

Page #569:
---------------------------
##  San̄yama Mārga 535

The state of Gurūsthāna is attained by the cessation of the four types of Kāryāmohaniya Karma, and the states of Kshīnamoha, etc., are attained by their destruction. The attainment of Vihārāshuddhi San̄yama, as described, in the states of Upshāntakapāya, Kshīnakshaya, etc., leads to the attainment of Yāta San̄yama through the efforts of the Shramika and the destruction of the Kshāyika. This is what has been said.

## Gāthā 469

The state of Viratāvirata is attained by the arising of the third Kshāya. The state of San̄yama is attained by the arising of the second Kshāya, through the practice of Niyama. ||466||

## Gāthārtha

The state of Viratāvirata is attained by the arising of the third Kshāya. The state of San̄yama is attained by the arising of the second Kshāya, through the practice of Niyama. ||466||

## Visheshartha

There are four types of Kshāya. The first Kshāya is Anantānubandhi, the second is Apratyakhyātāvarana, the third is Pratyakhyānāvarana, and the fourth is San̄jvalana. Of these, the first, Anantānubandhi Kshāya, destroys Samyaktva, meaning that in the absence of the arising of Anantānubandhi Kshāya, Samyagdarshan arises. The second Kshāya, Pratyakhyānāvarana, destroys Desha San̄yama. Desha San̄yama is also called Viratāvirata, San̄yamāsan̄yama, Deshavrat, and Anuvrat. In the absence of its arising, Desha San̄yama arises. The arising of the third Kshāya, Pratyakhyānāvarana, can lead to Desha San̄yama, but not to San̄yama, because the third Kshāya is destructive of all San̄yama. In the arising of the fourth Kshāya, all San̄yama can be attained, but not Yathākhyāta Shuddhi San̄yama, because San̄jvalana is destructive of Yathākhyāta San̄yama.

The phrase "the arising of the third Kshāya" means that the first two Kshāya have not arisen, but the third Kshāya has arisen, because the effect of the arising of Kshāya is in the order of the first, etc. The arising of the third Kshāya destroys all San̄yama, but not Viratāvirata (San̄yamāsan̄yama or Desha San̄yama). The state of Viratāvirata has arisen due to the absence of the arising of the first two Kshāya, but due to the arising of the third Kshāya, all San̄yama has not arisen, but Viratāvirata has also not been destroyed. In this regard, the arising of the third Kshāya is said to be the cause of the fifth Gunasthāna, Viratāvirata. The "arising of the third Kshāya" implies the effect of the arising of the first and second Kshāya. In reality, the absence of the arising of the first and second Kshāya is the cause of the Viratāvirata Gunasthāna. When Kshāya arises, even one-sided San̄yama cannot be attained. Therefore, in the arising of Pratyakhyānāvarana, the Jiva remains without San̄yama. The Jiva who has the arising of Pratyakhyānāvarana, will definitely have the arising of the Kshāya above it, Pratyakhyānāvarana and San̄jvalana.

The Jiva becomes San̄yamāsan̄yama through the destruction of the Kshāyika. The arising of the four San̄jvalana and the nine Nōkapāya, which are destroyers of the Desha, leads to the arising of San̄yamāsan̄yama. The arising of the four San̄jvalana, etc., which are destroyers of the Desha, is prevented by the arising of the Pratyakhyānāvarana, which is destructive of all. This arising does not have the ability to produce San̄yama, except for San̄yamāsan̄yama.

Page #570:
---------------------------
536/Go. Sa. Jivakanda
Gatha 46-473
The rise of Novarana Kasaya is the destroyer of Samyama, but it is not the destroyer of Samyamasamyama. In the rise of Pratyakhyanavarana Kasaya, there is no obstacle in the attainment of the state of Samyamasamyama.
The water of Samyama gets dried up due to the rise of Karmas.
Doubt - It is considered that the rise of only one Apratyakhyanavarana is the cause of Asamyama, because it begins with the prohibition of Samyamasamyama and becomes the destroyer of all Samyama. Then, how can it be said that 'the rise of Karmas of Samyamapati makes one Asamyata'?
Solution - No, because without the rise of other Charitra Karmas, the power of destroying only the regional Samyama of Apratyakhyanavarana is not possible.
Doubt - Samyama is the inherent nature of the soul, therefore, it cannot be destroyed by others, because if its destruction occurs, then the destruction of the substance of the soul will also occur.
Solution - It will not be solved, because just as usage is considered the characteristic of the soul, in the same way, Samyama is not the characteristic of the soul.
Doubt - What is called a characteristic?
Solution - That on which the effect of the substance also occurs, that is the characteristic of that substance, such as - the characteristic of the pudgala is form-taste-smell-touch, and the characteristic of the soul is usage. Therefore, in the absence of Samyama, the effect of the soul substance does not occur.
Samayika, Chedopasthapana and Pariharavishuddhi are the Samyama Sangraha, the highest and most difficult to understand. The soul, by adopting Samayika Samyama, becomes Samayika. The one who establishes the ancient Chedopasthapana and Apariharana, he is the soul who observes the five Dharmas. The one who is endowed with the five Samitis and three Guptis, he is indeed the one who observes Pariharasamyama. The one who is endowed with the five Eshanas, he is the one who observes Pariharasamyama.
Thirty years of age, the disciple of the Tirthankara, the one who has taken the vow of Pratyakhyana, the one who observes the two Ayu Vihara.

Page #571:
---------------------------
## Gatha 470-473
## Sanayamagamaa / 537

**Gathaarth:** A being who possesses a single, transcendental and difficult-to-attain, indivisible Yama, encompassing all restraints, and who, by piercing through the old, worldly, commercial-like state, establishes himself in the five Yama-form Dharma, is a **Chhedopasthapika** (piercing and establishing) **Sanayami**. ||471||

One who, being endowed with five Samitis and three Guptis, always avoids Savadyayoga (conduct that leads to worldly attachments) and possesses the five Yama-form Chhedopasthapana Sanayama and the single Yama-form Samayika Sanghma, is a **Pariharashuddhi** (purified by avoidance) **Sanayata**. ||472||

The Pariharashuddhi Sanayama of one who, after thirty years of birth, studies the teachings of the Tirthankara at his feet until the year of separation, is characterized by two-koom (two-fold) movement, except during the Sandhya (twilight) periods. ||473||

**Vishesharth:** The root word is 'Samaya'. From it, the word 'Samayika' is derived. The word 'Samaya' has two components: 'Sam' and 'Aya'. The prefix 'Sam' means 'one form' or 'unified'. 'Aya' means 'movement'. To become one in the sense of unity is Samaya. And Samaya is Samayika. The unity of a being through right faith, right knowledge, restraint, and austerity is Samaya. This Samaya is Samayika.

There are two types of Samayika: **Niyatakala** (fixed time) and **Aniniyatakala** (unfixed time). Swadhyaya (self-study) etc. are Niyatakala Samayika, and Iryapatha (walking) etc. are Aniniyatakala Samayika. Samayika cannot be called Gupti, because Gupti involves the restraint of mental activities, whereas Samayika involves mental tendencies. It cannot be called Samiti either, because Samayika Sanayama involves the instruction of tendencies in the Samitis for a capable person. Samayika is the cause, and Samiti is the effect.

The result of Samayika is equality in life and death, gain and loss, union and separation, enemy and friend, happiness and sorrow. I hold equality and freedom from attachment and aversion in all beings. I have no attachment to anyone. I renounce all desires and accept non-attachment. This is the nature of Samayika.

There are six types of Samayika:

**Namavarana, Dache, Khette, Kale, Taheva, Bhaave Ya.**
**Samaiyaihi Eso Rikvesro Chhavviho Yo** ||17|| [Mulachar Shradhi. 7]

Samayika is of six types: **Nama Samayika**, **Sthapana Samayika**, **Dravya Samayika**, **Kshetra Samayika**, **Kala Samayika**, and **Bhaava Samayika**. Or, there are six types of deposits in Samayika.

**Nama Samayika:** To renounce attachment and aversion upon hearing the auspicious and inauspicious names of things is Nama Samayika.

**Sthapana Samayika:** There is a Sthapana (establishment) that is auspicious in form, supported by evidence, complete in all its parts, concrete, and pleasing to the mind. And there is a Sthapana that is inauspicious in form, unsupported by evidence, incomplete in all its parts, and illusory. To not have attachment and aversion towards them is Sthapana Samayika.

**3. S. Si. 6. 1. Ra. Va. 6. 18. 3 4 3**
**1. Sarvarthasiddhi 7 / 21**
**2. Mulachar 7 / 18 p. 404**
**5. Mulachar Ga. 23 p. 26**
**6. Mulachar Ga. 42 p. 52**

Page #572:
---------------------------
## 538/Go. Sa. Jivakanda
## Gatha 477-473

**Dravyasamayik:**  To have equanimity (samdarshan) towards gold, silver, pearls, gems, clay, wood, a clod of earth, thorns, etc., meaning to be free from attachment and aversion, is Dravyasamayik.

**Kshetrasamayik:**  A pleasant area, such as a garden, city, river, well, lake, etc., and an unpleasant area, such as a barren land, a place full of thorns, uneven, unattractive, dry, devoid of bones and stones, a dilapidated garden, a dry river, a sandy [waterless] region, a sandy area - to renounce attachment and aversion towards these is Kshetrasamayik.

**Kalsamayik:**  To be free from attachment and aversion towards the six seasons (spring, summer, etc.), night, day, the bright fortnight (Shukla Paksha) and the dark fortnight (Krishna Paksha), etc., is Kalsamayik.

**Bhavasamayik:**  To have a feeling of friendship towards all beings and to renounce inauspicious consequences is Bhavasamayik.

**Sarvasavdha Yoga:**  The renunciation of all careful actions is a form of Ekasanayama or Abhedasanayama, which is also known as Samayik Sanayama. A detailed explanation of this is given in Gatha 467-466 in the Dika, based on the teachings of Dhavala and others. This Samayik Sanayama is unparalleled (anuttar) and rare. Those who have taken the vows (pichchi) and have folded their hands (anjali) in reverence, and who are mindful (savdhaan) and wise, perform Samayik with a focused mind (ekagra man), standing upright, and following the ancient method (pragamoct vidhi). Alternatively, they perform Samayik by reciting the vows (pichchi) and purifying themselves, by purifying their thoughts regarding matter (dravy), space (kshetra), time (kal), and emotions (bhav), and by making their folded hands resemble a blooming lotus (mukulit kamalakar).

**Chhedopasthapana Sanayama:**  After accepting Samayik Sanayama, if one inadvertently commits a careless act, then to rectify the fault through the process of atonement (prayaschitta) and establish oneself in the five types of Sanayama, which are the essence of Dharma, is Chhedopasthapana Sanayama. Chhed means atonement, and Upasthapana means establishing oneself in Dharma. Therefore, Chhedopasthapana Sanayama is the establishment of oneself in Dharma through atonement. Alternatively, it is the establishment of oneself in a faultless Sanayama by rectifying the fault through penance (tap) or the period of initiation (deekshakal).

**Chhedopasthapana:**  Due to the indirect nature of the origin and violence of stationary (sthavar) and other beings, and the hidden nature of the place of their existence (chhadmasth), if one inadvertently commits a harmful act, then to make amends for it in a proper manner is Chhedopasthapana. Alternatively, it is the existence of various options, such as the five types of careless actions (savadha karma) like violence (hinsa), etc., that constitute Chhedopasthapana.

From Lord Ajitanatha to Lord Pashvanatha, the twenty-three Tirthankaras preached Samayik Sanayama. Lord Rishabhanatha and Lord Mahavira preached Chhedopasthapana. The five great treasures (pancha maha dhana) are described separately for ease of understanding, contemplation, and comprehension.

1. Mulachar, page 402-403, Adhikar 7, Matha 17, Dika.
2. Mulachar, Adhikar 7, Matha 36, page 415.
3. Based on the Sanskrit commentary.
4. Ravana - 18.6-7.

Page #573:
---------------------------
## Gatha 474
## Manuyammarg 539

In the Tirthankara's realm of the first Lord, the disciples were simple and dull-witted. Therefore, the practice of Samayik restraint was explained to them in various ways, such as Vrat, Samiti, and Gupti. In the Tirthankara's realm of Mahavira, the disciples were dull-witted and crooked. It was difficult to stabilize them in the vows. Therefore, the vows were explained to them in various ways, such as Vrat, Samiti, and Gupti. From Ajitanatha to Parshvanatha, the disciples were intelligent and free from crookedness. Therefore, the Samayik restraint was explained to them in an undifferentiated form.

The restraint of Pariharavishuddhi is that which involves the elimination of Prariravadha along with specific purification. One who has enjoyed pleasures according to their desires for thirty years, and has then adopted the Samayik restraint, which is uniform with the ordinary, and specifically the Chedopastapana restraint, which includes five Samitis and three Guptis, and has served at the feet of the Tirthankara for a year of separation, and who has mastered the ninth Purva called Pratyakhyana, and who knows the nature of the origin and destruction of beings, the time and place, the substance, etc., and who is diligent, powerful, excellent in destroying the impurities, and practices the extremely difficult conduct, is the one who adopts the Pariharavishuddhi restraint. They travel two Kos daily, except for the three Sandhya times, but do not travel at night.

"**Pariharadhisametah sadjiivanikaayasankule biharam | Papseva panapatram na lipyate papanivahen ||**"

Even while dwelling in a place filled with the six groups of living beings, a Muni with Pariharavishuddhi and its associated powers does not become stained by sin, just as a lotus leaf, even while dwelling in water, does not become wet. The lowest time period for Pariharavishuddhi is Antarmuhurta, because after attaining Pariharavishuddhi restraint, one remains in it for a short time and then attains another Gunasthan, which is called Antarmuhurta. The time period for the slightly lower than the highest category is Purva Koti. After spending thirty years in complete happiness, one spends a year of separation at the feet of the Tirthankara, then studies the Pratyakhyana Purva, and then attains Pariharavishuddhi restraint. After remaining in it for a slightly lower than the highest category of years, they are born as a Deva. This is the time period for that being. Thus, the time period for Pariharavishuddhi restraint is less than thirty-eight years of Purva Koti. Some Acharyas say it is less than sixteen years of Purva Koti, while others say it is less than twenty-two years of Purva Koti.

The nature of Samayik restraint, Chedopastapana restraint, and Pariharavishuddhi restraint is explained in detail in the commentary on the Dhavala Grantha, Bhasya 464-468. One should also refer to that.

"**Sookshma-samparaya-sanayama swaroopam anuloham vevanto jivo uvasamgo va khavagao va | So suhamasamparashro jahkhadenago kinchi ||474||**"

1. Mulachar Adhikar 7 Ga, 36.38 p. 414-415.
2. Sanskrit Tika me udha.
3. B.P. 7 p. 165 Sutra 148.
4. J.D. 2 p. 120, D.P. 165 Sutra 146.
5. D.P. 1 p. 373, Pra.P. San. Pra. 1 Ga, 132.

Page #574:
---------------------------
## 540 / Go. Sa. Jivakanda
**Verse 4.35**
**Verse Meaning - Upshama श्रेणी**
A being who experiences subtle greed at this moment is associated with subtle Saṃpārāya. However, this restraint is slightly less than the well-known restraint. ||474||

**Special Meaning -** A Sadhu who practices Saṃyāyika and Chhedopasthāpana restraint, when they become extremely subtle in their Kṣayās, meaning they experience the arising of subtle greed, they have subtle Saṃpārāya. This restraint is slightly less than the well-known restraint because there is still the arising of extremely subtle greed, they are not completely free from Kṣayās. The well-known restraint belongs to beings who are free from Kṣayās.

Those who are completely vigilant in avoiding the killing of subtle and gross beings, who are extremely enthusiastic without any obstacles, who have unblemished character, who are cleansed by the great banners of Right Faith and Right Knowledge, who have burned the fuel of delusion karma with the flames of the vast fire of Shrāddha-Vāsaya, who have carefully uprooted the poisonous sprouts of Kṣayās, who have pushed the seeds of subtle delusion karma into the mouth of destruction, those Sadhus who have subtle greed Kṣayās have subtle Saṃpārāya character. This restraint (character), even when it is in the form of restraint of tendencies or Right tendencies, is beyond secret and confidential. This happens in the tenth Gunasthāna, where only subtle greed flickers. Therefore, it is separately specified.

The mention of this subtle Saṃpārāya is also found in the special meaning of verses 667-668.

**The nature of the well-known restraint**
When the harmful delusion karma is pacified or destroyed, the restraint of the well-known purity belongs to the Chhadmastha and Arhant Jinas. ||475||

**Special Meaning -** Those who practice in accordance with the teachings of the Paramāgama, meaning they practice in accordance with the influence of Kṣayās, are called well-known restraint practitioners. Those who have pacified Kṣayās and those who have weakened Kṣayās, meaning those who are in the eleventh and twelfth Gunasthānas, are Chhamastha, Vītarāga, or Chhadmastha. The Sayogakevalī, who is in the thirteenth Gunasthāna, and the Prayogakevalī, who is in the fourteenth Gunasthāna, are Jinas. In all these four Gunasthānas, due to the influence of Kṣayās, the well-known restraint, which is characterized by the natural state of the self, occurs.

The well-known restraint is the ultimate indifference that results from the complete pacification or destruction of character-delusion, which is the state of the self-nature. The Sadhus who practiced the previous restraint have spoken and understood it, but...

1. Dh. Pu. 1 p. 371. 2. Ra. Va. 6018.6-10. 3. Dhaval Pu. 1 p. 373 verse 191: Pra. Pan. San. Tha. 1 verse 133. 4. Dhaval Pu. 1. 271. 5. Based on the Sanskrit commentary.

Page #575:
---------------------------
##  Verse 476-4.17
**Sanayamagana/541**

That restraint which is not attained without the subsidence or destruction of delusion is called "Athaakhyaata Sanayama". The word "Athaakhyaata" means "that which is revealed after the subsidence or destruction of delusion". Or, this restraint is called "Yathaakhyaata" because it is revealed as the pure self-nature is.

**Doubt:** Why is the "Mohaniya Karma" (delusion-producing karma) called "Ashubha" (unfortunate)?

**Solution:** "Mohaniya Karma" is the root of the world. Due to the arising of "Mohaniya Karma", there are attachment and aversion, which lead to the bondage of karma. Therefore, "Mohaniya Karma" is called "Ashubha".

"Ratto bandhadi kamma mucchadi jiyo viraga sampatto" ||150 Purvaardha|| [Samayasara] The attached being binds karma and the detached being is liberated from karma.

"Ratto bandhadi kammam mucchavi kammehi ragarahidappa purvaardha 2.7." [Pravachana Sara] The attached being binds karma and the detached being is liberated from karma.

**Doubt:** Is "Yoga" (effort) also a cause of bondage?

**Solution:** The effort of the "Kapayi" (deluded) being only leads to "Ipitha Asrava" (subtle inflow).

"Sakapadaakashaya yo saha sampraayikaaryaapath yo" ||4|| [Tattvartha Sutra Adhyaya 6]

There is "Sampraayika Asrava" (gross inflow) with "Kashaya" (passion) and "Ipitha Asrava" (subtle inflow) without "Kashaya". This means that the being attains the state of "Akarma Bhava" (non-action) in the future. Therefore, "Yoga" is not the cause of bondage. The "Kashaya" associated with "Yoga" is the cause of bondage.

"Sakashayatyaajjiva karmno yogyaan pudgalanaavatte sa bandha" ||2|| [Tattvartha Sutra Adhyaya 8]

The being, due to having "Kashaya", takes in the "Pudgala" (matter) that is suitable for karma, and that is bondage. This sutra also clearly states that "Kashaya" is the cause of bondage.

"Deshaviraata ka swaroop panchatihichu vihehi ya anugunasikkhaavaehi sanjutta. Ucchanti deshaviraya sammaiatti jhaliyakamma" ||476||

"Vansaranavayasamaaiya posahasachittraraya bhatte ya. Bahmaaram pariggaha anumana mudditha deshaviradede" ||477||

1. Ra. Va. 6.18.11-12.
2. Gh. 1 p. 373 Gatha 112, Pra. Pa. Sa. Bha. 1 Gatha 135 Charitra Pramat Gatha 22.
3. Dh. 11 p. 673 Gatha 113, Pu. 6 Pra. 201 Gatha 74; Pra. Pa. Ma. Pradhyaya 1 Gatha 136, Charitra Pahuu Gatha 21, Baras Anubekwa Gatha 66 Vasunandi Thavakachar Gatha 4.

Page #576:
---------------------------
542 / Go. Sa. Jatrakaanda
Gathaartha - Five Pranata, three Gunavata, four Shikshavrata, together with Samyaggrasta, Deshaviрата are said to be. They are. Due to Samyama and Asamyama, they are constantly Karma Nirjara. ||476|| Darshanik, Vratik, Samayiki, Proshdhopavaasi, Sachittavirata, Ratribhukta Virata, Brahmachari Prarambhavirala, Parigrahaviрата, Anumativiрата and Uddishtavirata, these are the eleven types of Deshaviрата. ||477||
Visheshartha - Violence, Truth, Theft, Brahmacharya and Parigraha, these five sins are the five Anuvrata of Ekadeshaviрата. Shri Tattvarthsutra also says - "Hinsanritaste ya Brahmapigrahebhyo virati tam || 1 || Desasarvatonumhati || 2 ||"
Thule Tasakaya Pariharo
Thale Mose Titivakhayale Ya.
Gaya 479-45.9
Pariharambhaparimanam || 23 || [ Charitrapahuḍ ]
Sthula Asambandha, Sthula Asatyakathan, Sthula Chori, Parastri ka Parihar, and Parigraha and Aarambha ka Pariman, these five are Anuvrata.
Shankha - What is violence?
Samadhan - "Pramattayogatpranavyaparopanam hinsaa" || 7|13|| [Tattvarthsutra]. The result of the soul which is associated with Kshaya is called Pramat. And Pramat Pramada, meaning, the yoga of Pramat is Pramattayoga. In relation to this, the destruction of the ten Pranas, including the Indriyas, as much as possible, is violence. This causes suffering to beings, therefore it is Adharma. Only the destruction of Pranas does not constitute Adharma, to explain this, the word "Pramattayogat", meaning "from Pramattayoga", is given in the Sutra. Even without the destruction of Pranas, violence occurs only from Pramattayoga. It is also said -
"Maravu va Jiyadu va Jivo Prayadaacharass Shichchida Hinsa.
Payadass Natthi Bandho Hisamite Samivass || 3|17|| [Pravachansara]
1. Sarvarthasiddhi 7113.
Whether the being dies or lives, even then, violence occurs according to the rule of a man devoid of Yatanachar. Even if the destruction of Pranas occurs due to Yatanachar with Samiti, the Sankalpi violence does not cause bondage. In reality, emotions like Raga etc. are violence, it is also said -
"Pradurabhava Khulu Ragadinaam Bhavatyahanseti.
Teshamevotpattihiseti Jilagamasy Sanksepah || 44 || [Purusharthsiddhi Pay]
- To be certain and not to generate emotions like Raga etc. (Raga-Dvesha) is Ahimsa, and the generation of emotions like Raga etc. is violence. This has been stated with certainty in the Jain Agamas.
"Swayamevatmanatmanam Hinatyatma
Pramadavan. Purva Pranyantaranam Tu Paschat Syadva Na Va Vadhah ||"

Page #577:
---------------------------
## Gatha 476-477
## Sanghammarana: 543

- A soul, filled with carelessness, first destroys itself, whether or not it then destroys other beings.
"Thule taskaayavhe" - the meaning of this is: to abstain from gross violence towards living beings. [Charitra Pahud Ga. 23 Tika] - *
- To abstain from gross violence towards living beings is the vow of non-violence.

**Doubt:** What is untruth?
**Solution:** "Asadabhidhanamanritam" || 7 || 14 || To speak untruth is to speak what is not.
The word 'sat' means praiseworthy. What is not 'sat' is 'asat'. 'Asat' means not praiseworthy. The meaning is that to speak of something that does not exist is untruth. 'Rit' means truth, and what is not 'rit' (truth) is untruth.

**Doubt:** What is not praiseworthy?
**Solution:** That which causes pain to living beings is not praiseworthy. Whether it misrepresents an existing thing or speaks of something that does not exist, such speech is untruth. 2. To abstain from speaking untruth is the vow of truthfulness.
"Thule mose" - to abstain from gross untruthfulness. [Charitra Pahud Ga. 23 Tika] - To abstain from gross untruthfulness is the vow of truthfulness.

**Doubt:** What is theft?
**Solution:** "Pradattadanam steyam." To take what is not given is theft. The word 'padan' means to take. To take what is not given is 'adanaadan' and this is theft.

**Doubt:** If the above meaning of theft is accepted, then is the taking of wages and gifts also theft?
**Solution:** This is not a fault, because theft is only applicable where giving and taking is possible.

**Doubt:** If the above meaning of theft is accepted, then does a monk, while traveling from village to village, commit theft by entering streets, lanes, and doorways without permission?
**Solution:** This is not a fault, because these streets, lanes, and doorways are open for everyone. Monks do not enter houses with doors, because they are...

-
-
-
6. Marthisiddhi 7.13. 2, Mamiddhi 7.14. 3. Sarvarth Siddhi 7.15.

Page #578:
---------------------------
English Translation (preserving Jain terms):

540/Go. Sa. Jiva Kanda
Gatha 476-477

The objects are not open for all. Or the repetition of the term 'pramattayogat' occurs, from which the meaning is that taking an object without being given is Steya (theft). Those who enter the lanes and alleys, do not have it, therefore, the Bhikkhu (monk) who does such an act does not incur the fault of Steya.

The partial renunciation of Steya is Pracharyanuvrta.
"Tittivakadhule ya-1 - Titiksha rathale chauryasthale pariharah." [Charitrapahuda Ga. 23 Tika] The renunciation of theft in a gross form is the Vrta (vow) here.

Query - What is called Abrahma?
-
Answer - "Maithuna-abrahma" || 16 || When the rise of Charitra-mohaniya (deluding karma) occurs, the desire of touch between the woman and man who are associated with the passion-induced state is called Maithuna, and its activity is Maithuna. The repetition of the term 'pramattayogat' occurs. Therefore, the endeavor of the woman and man for the sake of the pleasure arising from passion, that is accepted as Maithuna. The qualities like Ahimsa (non-violence) etc., whose observance leads to growth, that is Brahma, and that which is devoid of it is Abrahma. In Maithuna, the defects like Himsa (violence) etc. get strengthened, because the one who is skilled in the indulgence of Maithuna, commits violence to all the living beings.

"Maithunachara ne mudha! Triyante jantukotayah.
Yonirandra-utpanna lingasanghatapidita." || 21 || [Jnanaarnava Maithuna Adhikara 13]
- O fool! By indulging in Maithuna with women, the countless millions of living beings born in the orifice of the womb are tormented and killed by the impact of the male organ.
"Ghae ghae prasankhejja" - In each and every impact of the male organ, countless millions of living beings die.

"Hisyante tilanatayana taptayati vinihite tila yadvat.
Bahavo jiva yonau hinsyante maithune tadvat." || 108 || [Purusharthasiddhyupaya]
- Just as the sesame seeds are destroyed when the hot iron rod is inserted into the sesame pod, similarly, in the act of Maithuna, many living beings are killed in the womb.

"Pariharoh para pimme pariharah kriyate parapremnipara dare." [Charitrapahuda Ga. 23 Tika]
The renunciation of other women, i.e., the renunciation of all women except one's own wife, is Brahmacharyanuvrata.

Query - What is called Parigraha (possession)?
Answer - "Murchha parigrahaḥ" || 17 || Murchha (infatuation) is Parigraha (possession).

1. Masi ddhi 7315. 2. Sarvartha siddhi 7.16.

Page #579:
---------------------------
## Gatha 476-471
**Sanayamagaranā 545**

**Doubt:** What is Mūrcchā?

**Solution:** The protection, acquisition, and cultivation of external objects like cows, buffaloes, gems, and pearls, which are both animate and inanimate, and the internal objects like attachment, etc., is Mūrcchā. The root meaning of the word Mūrdā is delusion. And general words remain in their specific meanings. Assuming this, the specific meaning of the root is taken here, because the topic here is of possession.

**Doubt:** Even after accepting this meaning of Mūrcchā, external objects do not become possessions, because the root of this word signifies the collection of internal possessions?

**Solution:** This is true, because the internal is collected due to its being the primary. It is clear that even without external possessions, a person who has the resolve of "this is mine" is a possessor.

**Doubt:** If external objects are not possessions, and the resolve of "this is mine" due to being the cause of Mūrcchā is possession, then knowledge, etc., also become possessions, because like attachment, etc., there is also the resolve of "this is mine" in knowledge, etc.?

**Solution:** This is not a fault, because the word "Pramattayogāt" has this tendency. Therefore, the knowledge, perception, and conduct that are free from negligence, do not have delusion due to the absence of attachment, hence the absence of possession is proven. Secondly, knowledge, etc., are not discardable and are the nature of the soul, therefore they do not become possessions. But attachment, etc., arise from karma, therefore they are discardable as they are not the nature of the soul, hence the resolve arising in them is possession. All faults are rooted in possession. The resolve of "this is mine" leads to the feeling of protection, etc. And violence is inherent in it. For this, one speaks untruth, steals, and all the sufferings in hell, etc., are born from possession. Thus, one who reduces the thirst for possession and limits the extent of possession, is the holder of the Aparigraha Anuvrata.

"Parigrahārambhaparimāṇam - parigrahāṇām suvarṇādīnām ārambharagāṁ sevākriṣivāṇijyāādīnām parimāṇam kriyate." [Chāritrapahuḍ Gā. 23 Tīkā]. Limiting the possessions like gold, etc., and the beginnings of agriculture, trade, etc., is the Anuvrata of limiting possession.

The word "Aṇu" signifies small, and the vows that are small are called Anuvrata.

**Doubt:** How are the vows of a householder small?

**Solution:** It is not possible for a householder to completely abandon the faults of violence, etc., therefore his vows are small. He is only a renunciant of violence towards living beings, therefore his first Anuvrata is Ahimsa.

1. Sarvārth Siddhi 7.17.
2. Sarvārth Siddhi 7:17.

Page #580:
---------------------------
546/27. Ta. Jivaka
Gatha 476-477 A householder, due to the influence of worldly attachments and infatuation, refrains from uttering falsehood because of the destruction of his home and village. Therefore, his second Anuvrata is Satyanuvrata. Due to fear of the king, etc., and knowing the other to be suffering, he gives up taking what is not given. Also, because his affection diminishes by taking what is not given, his third Anuvrata is Achauryanavrata. He who gives up his desire for the company of another's wife, whether accepted or not, has the fourth Anuvrata called ParastriTyaga. A householder takes possession of wealth, grain, land, etc., at will, therefore his fifth Anuvrata is Parigraha Parimaran.
Three Gunavrata - Digvrata, Deshavrata, Anarthadandavrata or Digvrata, Anarthadandavrata, Bhogopabhoga Pariman Vrata.
Doubt - Why are these called Gunavrata?
Solution - Because they enhance the original virtues or the aforementioned five Anuvratas, bringing about excellence in them.
Digvrata - To regulate by setting boundaries through well-known signs in the directions, etc., is Digvrata. By abandoning the killing of living beings outside that boundary, there is a great reduction in sins. Due to the absence of results even though there is benefit outside the boundary, greed is abandoned.
"Pravidhay Suprasiddha Maryada Sarvatopyabhijnanaaih. Prachavyabhyo Digbhyah Karthadhya Viratiravichalita." [Purushartha Siddhi Pay] -~- To make a vow not to go in any direction from the east, etc., by setting boundaries with well-known villages, rivers, mountains, etc., is Digvrata.
"Disivi Disimana Padham" meaning to set boundaries for the directions and sub-directions is the first Gunavrata. That is, east, south, west, and north are the four directions, and northeast, southeast, southwest, northwest, above, and below are the six sub-directions. To set limits for coming and going in these is the first Gunavrata called Digvrata.
"Digvalayam Pariganitam Kritvaatoham Bahin Na Yasyami. Iti Sankalpo Diyatmamrityanupapa-Vinivrityai." [Ratnakarandadharakaachar Avadharvahiranapapa-Prativirare Digvatanni Dharayatam. 70. [Ratnakarand Shravakaachar] He who, having set boundaries for the ten directions, makes this vow for the sake of eliminating subtle sins until death, "I will not go beyond this boundary of directions," is called "Digvrata," which is the form of restraint from directions. The Anuvrata of those who observe the directions, the subtle sins outside the boundary 
1. Sarvarthasiddhi 7.2. 2. T.S. 7.21: Purushartha Siddhi Pay Ga. 135-145. 3. Charitrapahuud Ga. 24; Ratnakarand Shravakaachar Palo. 67 Tika. 4. S. Si 21. 5. Charitrapahuud Ga. 24.

Page #581:
---------------------------
## Gatha 476-477
## Samyamamarganga/547

Due to the cessation of the causes of the five great vows, one attains the culmination of the five great vows (a state like that of the Mahavirs).

**138** [Purushartha Siddhi Pay]
Thus, one who engages in the practice of the limited directional divisions, due to the abandonment of all non-restraint outside that area, the vow of non-violence becomes complete or is a state of complete non-violence.

**74** [Ratnakaranda Shravakaachar]
The cessation from useless, sinful actions (sinful thoughts, words, and bodily actions) within the boundaries of the directions is called Anarthadanda by the foremost among the vow-holders, Manigharadeva.

**2** [Ratnakaranda Shravakaachar]
Thoughts of killing, binding, mutilating, harming, and stealing from others, as well as thoughts of victory and defeat, killing, binding, mutilating limbs, and stealing wealth, are all considered Anarthadanda called Apadhyana.

**7** [Ratnakaranda Shravakaachar]
Continuous thinking about harming, binding, mutilating, or hating someone, or about their defeat, and thinking about others' wives, victory, sons, wealth, and grain due to attachment, is called Apadhyana, a type of Anarthadanda, by Ganadhardeva in the Jina teachings. Cessation from this is called Apadhyanavrata.

**141** [Purushartha Siddhi Pay]
One should not think about hunting, victory, defeat, war, adultery, or theft at any time, because the result of these Apadhyanas is only sin. This is called Anarthadanda called Apadhyana. Cessation from this is called Apadhyanavrata.

Speaking words that cause suffering to animals, spread gossip, and are the cause of violence against living beings, is called Anarthadanda called Papopadeśa.

  - 1. Garsi Pa7i /21. 2. Sasidi7/21. 3. Sasij 7/21.

Page #582:
---------------------------
548/Go. Sa. Jivakanda
Gatha 476-477
The story of the exploitation of animals, the business of suffering, the initiation of violence, and the deception of others, is called "Pापोपदेश" (Pāpopadeśa), which is a type of "अनर्थदण्ड" (Anarthadanda). It should be avoided. [Ratnakaranda Sraavakaachaar]
—The business of animals, the business of suffering, or the business of animals suffering and buying and selling, or the business of animals being exploited, the killing of living beings, the initiation of harmful activities like agriculture, and the stories of deception are all called "Pापोपदेश" (Pāpopadeśa), which is a type of "अनर्थदण्ड" (Anarthadanda). It should be avoided.
A man who earns his living through education, business, writing (muni, clerk), agriculture, service, or craftsmanship should never be given advice on sin. [Purushaartha Siddhi]
—A man who earns his living through education, business, writing (muni, clerk), agriculture, service, or craftsmanship should never be given advice on sin.
Cutting trees, digging the ground, watering, etc., without a purpose is called "प्रमावचरित" (Pramāvacarita), which is a type of "अनर्थदण्ड" (Anarthadanda). It is also called "प्रमादचर्या" (Pramādacaryā).
The initiation of earth, water, fire, and wind, the useless cutting of trees, and the useless wandering are called "प्रमादचर्या" (Pramādacaryā), which is a type of "अनर्थदण्ड" (Anarthadanda). It should be avoided. [Ratnakaranda Sraavakaachaar]
—The initiation of earth, water, fire, and wind, the useless cutting of trees, and the useless wandering are called "प्रमादचर्या" (Pramādacaryā), which is a type of "अनर्थदण्ड" (Anarthadanda). It should be avoided.
Digging the earth, uprooting trees or grass, trampling on excessive grass, watering, etc., and picking leaves, fruits, and flowers without a purpose should not be done. This is the third "प्रमाश्चर्या" (Pramāścaryā) "अनर्थदण्ड" (Anarthadanda) vow.
Giving poison, glass, weapons, fire, rope, whip, and wood, etc., as instruments of violence is called "हिंसाप्रदान" (Hiṃsāprādāna), which is a type of "अनर्थदण्ड" (Anarthadanda).
Giving axes, swords, shovels, fire weapons, horns, chains, etc., as causes of killing, i.e., giving instruments of violence, is called "हिंसादान" (Hiṃsādāna) by the wise, which is a type of "अनर्थदण्ड" (Anarthadanda). It should be avoided. [Ratnakaranda Sraavakaachaar]
—Giving axes, swords, shovels, fire weapons, horns, chains, etc., as causes of killing, i.e., giving instruments of violence, is called "हिंसादान" (Hiṃsādāna) by the wise, which is a type of "अनर्थदण्ड" (Anarthadanda). It should be avoided.
1. Sarvartha Siddhi Pa21.

Page #583:
---------------------------
## Verse 476-477
**Sanayamaargna / 546**

One should diligently avoid distributing instruments of violence such as knives, poison, fire, plough, sword, bow, etc. This is called the **Hinsadaan Pranarthadand Vrat**.

Listening to and teaching evil deeds that increase violence and Ramadi is called the **Ashubh Shruti** (unfortunate hearing) **Anarthadand**.

**Beginning -**  
The scriptures that pollute the mind with useless beginnings (agricultural and other sinful acts), attachment (desire for wealth, grain, etc.), courage (doing heavy evil deeds without considering strength and policy), falsehood, hatred, passion, pride, and lust (desire for pleasure) are called **Dushshruti** (unfortunate hearing) **Anarthadand**. Abandoning this is the **Anarthadand Vrat**.

**Ragaadivardhanaanaam Kushtkatha-naambodhabhulaanaam**
**Na harat kurveet shravanarjan shikshanadini** || 145 || [Purusharthsiddhiupaay]

- Do not listen to, collect, or teach evil stories that increase passion and hatred and are full of ignorance. This is the fifth **Anarthadand** called **Bushruti**. Not doing this is the **Anarthadand Vrat**.

Now, according to the **Tavarthasutra**, the third **Gurunvrat** called **Deshvrat** is being discussed. The **Bhogopbhog Parimaan Vrat** will be discussed in the **Shikshavratas**.

**Graamaadi** (village, etc.) is called a **Desh** (region) with a definite boundary. Abandoning going outside this boundary is the **Desh Birati Vrat**. Here too, like the **Digvirati Vrat**, there is a **Mahavrata** outside the boundary.

**Tatrapich Parimaanam Graamaparnabhavanapaatakaadinaam**
**Pravidhaay Niyatakaalam Karaneeyam Viramanam Deshaat** || 136 ||

**Iti Virato Bahuveshaat Tasyahinsa Vishesh Parihaaratt**
**Tatkaalam Vimalamati: Yaha Visheshena** || 140 || [Purusharthsiddhiupaay]

- Even in that **Digvrat**, one should abandon going outside the boundary created by the size of the village, market, temple, neighborhood, etc., for a fixed period of time. Thus, the one who abandons many areas,

Page #584:
---------------------------
550/Go. Sa. Jivakanda
Gatha 476-477
The pure-minded runner, in that regular time, takes refuge in the Ahimsa Vrata, characterized by the abandonment of violence, outside the area defined by the rules.
Vesaavakaasikaṁ syāt kāla-paricchedanena desasya.
Pratyaham aṇuvratānā prati saṁhāraḥ viśālasya. ||62|| [Ratnakaranda Shravakaachar]
The Anuvrata-observing Shravakas' Deshanivritti-oriented Vrata is the daily reduction of the vast country taken in Digbat, with the time limit.
In Vasunandi Shravakaachar, the Deshavrat is described as a multiplier, but its nature is described differently.
Vaya-bhanga-kāraṇaṁ hoi jammi desammi tastha riṇayameṛā.
Koraī gamgariyeyatti taṁ jāraṇa guṇavadhaṁ viviyaṁ. ||215|| [Vasunandi Shravakaachar]
- One should know that the Deshavrat, which is the regular avoidance of going to the country where the cause of Vratabhanga arises, is a Gunavrat with a different name.
Yatra vratasya bhangah syād dese tatra prayatnatah.
Gamanasya nivrittiḥ yā sā desaviratirmātā. ||141|| [Gunabhushan Shravakaachar] - Deshavrat is the deliberate abandonment of going to the country where there is a possibility of Vratabhanga.
Shikshavat Shikshavat-Jina Vratas, whose observance leads to the education of taking Muni Vratas or becoming a Muni, are Shikshaashrat. Although their number is four, there are many differences of opinion among the Acharyas regarding their names. These differences of opinion are as follows -
Acharya or Text First Shikshavat Second Shikshaprat Name
Third Shikshavat Fourth Shikshavat
Proshadhopavas
Sallekhana
1 Shravaka Pratikramana Samayik
Sutra Saṁ. 1 2 Pra. Kundakunda 3 Pra. Swamikartikeya, 4 A. Umaswami
Bhogopbhogparimaana Proshadhopavas
Deshavrat Atithisanvibhaag
5 Pra. Samantabhadra
Deshavrat
Samayik
Vaiyaavrutya

Page #585:
---------------------------
##  Verse 476-473
##  Sanayamaargaana/551
##  Bhoga-Upbhoga-Parimana, Daan, Atithi-Samvibhaag, Sallekhana
##  6 Pra. Somadev, Samayik, Proshdhopavaas, 7 Pra. Devsen, Devstavan, 8 Shravak Pratikraman, Maahhi Atiseema
##  Sutra San. 2, 6, Shri Vasunandi, Bhoga-Virati, Paribhoga-Virati
##  Praacharya 10, Shri Amritchandraacharya, Samayik, Proshdhopavaas

**Bhoga-Upbhoga-Parimana**
**Vyaavrutya**

Maamayik is the third pratima and Proshdhopavaas is the fourth pratima. Therefore, Shri Vasunandi Acharya, in the Babak Pratikraman Sutra San. 2, did not include Samayik and Proshdhopavaas in the Shikshavrata. Shikshavrata are the stepping stones to the higher pratima. From this perspective, some Acharyas have included Samayik and Proshdhopavaas in the Shikshavrata. The nature of the four Shikshavrata mentioned in the Tattvarth Sutra is as follows:

**Samayik:** The detailed explanation of its nature has been given in the Samayik Sanayama. From the perspective of Shikshavrata, it can be said that the duration of time and space for Samayik, for the Shravak who is in Samayik, is the same duration of time and space for Mahavrata outside that space. In the commentary of the Charitrapaind, verse 25, it is said: "Samayik is the first Shikshavrata. It is characterized by Chaitya-bhakti, Pancha-Parameshthi-bhakti, and Samadhi-bhakti. The Samayik that occurs during the Vrata-pratima can be done once, twice, or thrice a day. However, the Samayik that is mentioned in the Samayik-pratima should be done thrice a day as a rule."

**Samayik** is the first Shikshavrata. It involves devotion to the Chaitya, devotion to the five Supreme Beings, and meditation. The Samayik that occurs during the Vrata-pratima can be done once, twice, or thrice a day. However, the Samayik that is mentioned in the Samayik-pratima should be done thrice a day as a rule.

**Ragadveshtyaaga-anikhildravyeshhu saamyam-avalambhya | Tattvopa-labdhimoolam bahush: samayik kaaryam ||148||**
**Rajanidina-yorante tadabashyam bhavaniyam-vishvalitam | Itaratra punah samaye na kritam doshaya tadgunaaya kritam ||146||**
**Samayik shritanaam samastasavadh-yog-parihaarat | Bhavathi mahavratameshaam upayepi charitramohasya ||150||** [Purushartha-siddhi 7.21]

By abandoning attachment and aversion, and embracing equality in all desirable and undesirable things, Samayik becomes the root cause of attaining the knowledge of the Self. This Samayik should be performed with concentration at the end of the night and day. If it is done at other times, it is not for the sake of fault, but for the sake of virtue. For those who have attained this state of Samayik, even if the delusion of conduct arises, they attain Mahavrata by abandoning all the causes of sin.

Page #586:
---------------------------
552/Go. Sa. Jeevaka
Gatha 456-477
The complete abandonment of all five sins, including violence, etc., until liberation (from the cycle of birth and death), is called Samayika by those who know the Agamas. 
Those who know the principles of Samayika, or those who are knowledgeable about Samayika, consider the following to be the practice of Samayika: hair-tying, fist-tying, cloth-tying, Paryakubandhana (lotus posture), and standing Kayotsarga, as well as sitting Kayotsarga. 
One should practice Samayika in a secluded place, free from disturbance and anxiety, in forests, houses, or in Chaityalayas, or in other caves and mountains, with a joyful mind. 
On the day of fasting and Ekaman, one should practice Samayika by abstaining from business and discord, and by abandoning all thoughts and doubts, including internal chatter. 
Every day, without laziness, householders should practice Samayika according to the rules, as it is the cause of the perfection of the five vows, including non-violence. 
In Samayika, all external and internal attachments, including the beginning of agriculture, etc., are abandoned. Therefore, the state of a householder during Samayika is like that of a monk who is adorned with clothes (Chelopasrusht Muni). Hence, this is a teaching. 
Proshdhopachasa - Proshdha means a festival, and residing in it by abandoning the objects of the five senses, including sound, etc., is fasting. That is, abandoning four types of food is fasting. And the fast observed on the days of Proshdha is Proshdhopavasa. 
A householder who observes Proshdhopavasa should abandon bathing, fragrance, garlands, and ornaments, etc., due to the karmas of his body, and should observe the fast in a holy place, in the abode of the virtuous, in a Chaityalaya, or in his own house designated for Proshdha, by engaging his mind in listening to and reciting religious stories and in contemplation. And he should abandon all kinds of beginnings. This vow is observed on every eighth and fourteenth day. 
Proshdhopachasa is of three types, according to the distinction of excellent, medium, and inferior, according to the teachings. 
1. Sarvarthasiddhi 7.21.

Page #587:
---------------------------
##  Verse 476-4.17
**Samyamamarganga/553**

The abandonment of all four types of food - food, drink, edibles, and lehyas - is the **utkrista proshdhopavas** (highest type of fast). The fast where only water is consumed on the day of the fast is the **madhyama proshdhopavas** (medium type of fast). And the fast where **achaamlaahar** (a specific type of diet) is consumed is the **jghanya proshdhopavas** (lowest type of fast).

**Samayik** (a daily vow) is to be established daily. A fast should be observed on both the **ardhabhag** (half) days, i.e., the **Ashtami** (eighth lunar day) and **Chaturdashi** (fourteenth lunar day).

**Verse 151**
One should observe a fast on the day before the **proshdha** (fast) day, being free from all beginnings, abandoning self-attachment and **veha** (attachment to the body).

**Verse 152** [Purushartha Siddhi Pay]

**Verse 10** [Ratnakaranda Shravakaachar]
The abandonment of the four types of food is called **upavas** (fast). Eating once is called **proshdha** or **ekashan** (eating once). The fast with **proshdha** is called **proshdhopavas**. The one who observes the fast and eats once on the day of **dharana** (observance) and **parana** (breaking the fast) is called **proshdhopavas** according to the **shikshabat** (scriptural teachings).

**The characteristics of bhog (enjoyment) and upbhog (use)**

**Verse 83**
That which is to be abandoned after being enjoyed once is **bhog**. For example, food, drink, **vilepana** (application of unguents), etc. And that which is fit to be enjoyed again after being enjoyed once is **upbhog**. For example, clothes, ornaments, etc.

**Verse 161** [Purushartha Siddhi Pay]
**Himsa** (violence) arises from the **bhog** and **upbhog** of the **samyata** (controlled) and **samyatta** (controlled) **shravaka** (lay follower), not from any other source. Therefore, **bhog** and **upbhog** are also to be abandoned or limited, knowing their true nature and according to one's own capacity.

Food, drink, fragrance, and garlands, etc., are called **bhog**. And wearing clothes, bedding, ornaments, etc., are called **upbhog**.

**Footnotes:**
1. Commentary on **Charitrapahuḍ** verse 25.
2. **Ratnakaranda Shravakaachar**.

Page #588:
---------------------------
554 / Gos. Jivakanda
Gatha 476-477
(Bhushan), Shayan, Asan, Ghar, Yaan and Vahan etc. are called Upbhog. To limit these is called Bhogopabhog Parimaran or Upbhog Paribhog Pariman Vrat.
"The quantity of Mandan, Tambool, Gandh and Pushpa that is used is called the first Shiksha Vrat, Bhoga Virati, in the Upasaka Adhyayan Sutra." || 217 ||
"The quantity of Mahila Vastra Aabhushan that is used according to one's capacity is called the second Shiksha Vrat, Paribhoganivritti." || 218 || [ Vasunandi Shravaka Achar ]
- Mandan means Ubtan etc. bodily adornment, Tambool, Gandh and Pushpa.
The five types of Abhakshya are: Trasghat, Madak, Bahughat, Anishta and Anupsekya. These should be abandoned for life. The related Lok is as follows:
"Those who take refuge in the feet of Jin should abandon Madhu and Mans for the sake of avoiding Sahisa, and abandon Madak substances (Bhang, Tobacco etc.) for the sake of removing Pramad, i.e. the lack of awareness and lack of discernment." || 64 ||
"Alpaphal and Bahu Vighat causing Mulak etc. (Gajar - Shaljam etc.) and Masuk Adrak etc. (Aloo, Saral, Shakarkand, Arabi, Haldi, Jamikand etc., Makkhan, Neem ke Phool, Kelki ke Phool, all these and other similar infinite-bodied things are also to be abandoned." || 85 ||
"Whatever is Anishta, i.e. against nature and harmful to the body, should also be abandoned, and whatever is Anupsekya (like Gomutra, Joothan etc.) should also be abandoned. The Vrat that arises from the deliberate detachment from even the appropriate objects is the Bhogopabhog Pariman Vrat." || 66 || [ Ratnakaranda Shravaka Achar ]
Doubt - The body is a foreign substance, from this point of view, consuming infinite-bodied substances (Saunth, Haldi etc.) after drying them is the cause of violence?
Solution - Although the body is a foreign substance, it is helpful in the path of liberation, because until there is a powerful body that can withstand the Vajarshbhanaraachasanahanan, liberation cannot be attained. This is
1. Sarvarthasiddhi 7.21.

Page #589:
---------------------------
Gacha 476-477
Mayammarganga! 555 The reason is that because of the three types of karmic accumulations of women, their liberation is prohibited.
Doubt- There are twenty-two abhakshya (non-edible). Why are only five abhakshya mentioned here?
Solution- Five abhakshya are not mentioned. But in the Ratnakaranda Shravakachar, five types of abhakshya are mentioned. There are many abhakshya substances, but they are all contained within these five types of abhakshya. In the Jinavani Sangrah and other books, there are twenty-two abhakshya mentioned, but there are also other abhakshya. These include the names of anishta (undesirable) and anupsevy (unworthy of service) abhakshya. These twenty-two abhakshya are not mentioned in any Digambar Jain Arsha text. It is possible that these twenty-two abhakshya are mentioned in another sect.
Atithisambhibhag Shikshanat- The destruction of samyama (self-control) should not happen, by this method whoever is found is a guest. Or whoever's arrival is not fixed, is a guest. Whoever arrives at an indefinite time is a guest. To divide for this guest is Atithi-sambhibhag. It is of four types- bhikhya (alms), upakaran (tools), aushadh (medicine) and pratisray (place to stay). For that guest who is bound for liberation, is eager to follow samyama and is pure, one should give pure alms with a pure mind. One should give dharmopakaran (religious tools) that increase samyagdarshan (right faith) etc. One should plan for suitable medicine and with faith in the supreme dharma, one should also give the guest a place to stay.
Sallekhana- Shri Kundakunda and other acharyas have also called sallekhana shikshawat (instructive) and in the Tattvarth Sutra, sallekhana is also taught by 'Sallekhanam Joshitha'. Therefore, sallekhana is said to be- to write (make thin) the body and kshaya (passions) well is sallekhana. That is, to write (make thin) the external body and the internal passions is sallekhana. To write (make thin) the external body and the internal passions, by reducing the causes that nourish the body and passions, is sallekhana. The householder who enjoys this sallekhana at the end of death is the one who enjoys it with pleasure.
Doubt- In sallekhana, the deliberate abandonment of life etc. is done, so is sallekhana atmahatya (suicide)?
Solution- This is not a fault, because there is no carelessness in sallekhana. Whoever kills himself by using poison, weapons etc. tools under the influence of carelessness filled with raga (attachment), dvesha (hatred) and moha (delusion), is an atmahatya (suicide). But the being who has attained sallekhana does not have raga etc., so he does not get the fault of atmahatya. Secondly, death is not desirable for anyone. Just as a merchant engaged in the giving, taking and accumulation of various types of saleable goods does not want his house to be destroyed. But if, due to circumstances, he is faced with its destruction, he tries to remove it as much as possible. Even if they cannot be removed, he protects the saleable goods from destruction.
1. Go. K. Ga. 32. 2. Pravachansar (Shantivirnagar) p. 534.35-36. 3. Sarvamiddi 721.

Page #590:
---------------------------
556 / Go. Ma. Jivakanda
In the same way, a householder who is engaged in accumulating local vows and conduct, does not want the decline of his basic Shrayu, etc. If they arise due to their destruction, he tries to remove them in such a way that they do not hinder his virtues. Even if they do not go away, he tries in such a way that his virtues are not destroyed. Therefore, he cannot be blamed for suicide."
"Having taken only clothes as possessions, and leaving all other possessions, living in his own house or in a Jinalaya, the Shravak who, near the Guru, criticizes himself with mind, speech, and body, and renounces the three types of harm except for drinking, is called the fourth educational vow, Sallekhana, in the Upasakaadhyayana Sutra. 'This Sallekhana is capable of taking my Dharma with me,' such a feeling should be constantly felt [Pu. Si. U. Shlok 175]
The nature of the eleven types of Deshavira
The characteristic of Darshanik Deshavira is briefly as follows:
Samyagdarshan Shuddha
Sansara Sharira Bhoga Nirvinna
Panchaguru Charan-Sharan Darshanik Tattvapath Grihya || 137 || [Ratnakaranda Shravakachar]
- He who is pure by Samyagdarshan, and is detached from the world, body, and pleasures, has taken refuge in the feet of the Pancha-Gurus, i.e., is absorbed in the devotion of the five Supreme Beings, and is attracted to the right path, is a Darshanik Shravak. This is the nature of the first image, as said in relation to Dravyanuyoga. From the point of view of Charananuyoga, the nature of the first image is as follows: Generally, a Shravak who has Darshanpratima is a holder of eight basic virtues, a renouncer of seven vices, and a protector of Samyagdarshan.
Doubt - What are the eight basic virtues?
Solution - According to one opinion, the renunciation of the five fruits of Bada, Peepal, Pakar (Pilkhan), Umar (Gular), and Anjir (and other fruits like them), and the three Makars of Madya, Mans, and Madhu, is the eight basic virtues. According to another opinion, Madyatyaag 1, Mansatyaag 2, Mashrutyaag 3, Ratribhojan Tyaag 4, Panchphali Tyaag 5, Panchaparameshti's praise (Dev-Darshan) 6, Jivadaya 7)
1. Sarvarthasiddhi 7.22.

Page #591:
---------------------------
##  Verse 476.4.47
**The Path of Restraint**

**Filtering Water:** 8; According to other beliefs, abstinence from alcohol (1), meat (2), honey (3), and five anuvratas are the basic virtues.

**Doubt:** What are the seven vices?

**Solution:**  Jana (gambling), alcohol, meat, prostitution, hunting, theft, and adultery are the seven vices, which are forms of great sin. One should abstain from them. Their detailed explanation should be learned from Basunandi Shravakachar and other texts.

To protect one's Samyaktva, one should not listen to the scriptures of other beliefs and keep one's intellect pure and clear.

In addition to this general practice, the Darshan Pratima Ghari should also pay attention to the following: ... One should also abstain from radish, nani (a type of vegetable), marnal (a type of water lily), garlic, eggplant, safflower greens, watermelon, and suran (a type of yam). One should abstain from the following five types of flowers: arani, varan, sohjana, karira, and kanchanara. One should abstain from salt, oil, or ghee-soaked fruits after two muhurtas, from achar (pickles), murabbas (jams), and from the utensils of those who consume butter and meat. One should abstain from water kept in leather vessels, from tal (a type of palm), and from hing (asafoetida). While eating, one should abstain from seeing bones (asthi), alcohol, leather, meat, blood, pus, feces, urine, and dead animals. One should abstain from eating discarded food, from seeing Chandala (outcast) people, and from hearing their words. One should abstain from food that is stale, has a foul smell, and has a changing taste. One should abstain from buttermilk and yogurt after sixteen praharas (a unit of time). One should also abstain from pan (betel leaf), medicine, and water at night. This is the practice of the Darshan Pratima.

The second Pratima is called the Vrat Pratima. It involves the observance of twelve vows.

**"He who is free from the three impurities (maya, mithya, and nidana) and observes the five anuvratas and the seven shila vrata (nine virtues and four shiksha vrata) is considered a holder of the Drattik position (second Shravak) by the Ganadhar Devas."** [Ratnakaranda Shravakachar]

The nature of the twelve vows has been explained earlier. They are not mentioned here due to the repetition of the same information.

**Doubt:** What are the three Gunavrata and four Shikshavrata called Shilavrata?

1. Charitrapahuḍ Ga. 21 Tika 1
2. Ratnakaranda Shravakachar Shlok 65
3. Charitrapahuḍe Gatha 21 Tika
4. Charitrapahuḍ Gatha 21 Tika

Page #592:
---------------------------
558 / Go. Sa. Jivakanda
Gatha 476-477
The protection of Samadhana Vratas is called 'Sheel'. The characteristic of Sheel is as follows:
—
"The protection of all the Vratas taken with the Guru as witness, by one who is afraid of Samsara, is called Sheel." [Shrami Shravaka Pari. 12]
"The Muni-ishwaras say that Sheel is the non-violation of the Vratas taken earlier with the Jinas and Gurus as witnesses." [Poojyapad Shravakaachar]
It is called Sheel to not violate or to protect the Vratas taken earlier with the Guru as witness.
Doubt - What is Shalya?
Solution - 'Shrenaati Hinasti iti Shalya' is the etymology of the word Shalya. Shalya means a painful thing. When a thorn etc. pricks the body, it is called Shalya. Here, the painful feeling similar to it is taken from the word Shalya. Just as cotton etc. Shalya is obstructive to living beings, similarly, due to being the cause of obstruction related to the body and mind, the Karma-udaya-janit Vikar is also treated as Shalya, i.e. it is also called Shalya. This Shalya is of three types: Maya Shalya, Nidana Shalya and Mithyadarshan Shalya. Maya, Nikriti and Vachana, i.e. the attitude of cheating, is Maya Shalya. The desire for enjoyments is Nidana Shalya and the lack of faith in the principles is Mithyadarshan Shalya. He who is free from these three Shalyas is called Nishalya Vrati.
Doubt - One who is free from Shalya is Nishalya and one who observes Vratas is Vrati. One who is free from Shalya cannot be Vrati. Just as Devadatta cannot be a Chatri just because he has a stick in his hand?
Solution - It is necessary to have both the qualities to be a Vrati. If someone has not renounced Shalyas and has only abandoned the faults of violence etc., then he cannot be a Vrati. Here, such a Vrati is desired who has renounced Shalyas and accepted Vratas. Just as one who has a lot of ghee and milk is called a Gaayavala. If he does not have ghee and milk and has cows, then he is not called a Gaayavala. Similarly, one who is truthful, even if he has Vratas, cannot be a Vrati, but one who is Nishalya is a Vrati.
"The pain caused to the body and mind by the rise of Karma etc., is considered to be of three types: Maya, Mithya and Nidana." [Siddhantasarasangrah Pra. 4]
1. Sarvarthmidi 7.18.

Page #593:
---------------------------
## Gatha 476-477

**Gatha 476**
A deceitful person, with a wicked mind, acts in one way with his body and speech, but thinks differently in his mind. What purity can such a deceitful person attain? A deceitful person is greatly impure. A deceitful person is constantly tormented by the poison of deceit. Therefore, he cannot follow the principles of non-violence, etc.

**Gatha 477**
Those who desire to embrace Dharma should completely abandon falsehood. There is a great and eternal conflict between Dharma and falsehood, known as "Saha-anavasthiti".  Just as cold and heat, or the sun and the moon, cannot coexist in the same place, Dharma and falsehood cannot coexist. Falsehood is like a thorn that has not been removed from the body. A person afflicted by the suffering caused by falsehood will never attain liberation.

**Commentary**
Even a "Bhidan" thorn, which causes suffering to living beings, should be abandoned. It is not suitable for a righteous person to bear this thorn, as it destroys all vows. There are two types of "Nidana" (causes): auspicious and inauspicious. Auspicious "Nidana" is further divided into two types: one that leads to worldly existence and the other that leads to liberation. For those who desire to destroy karma, attain enlightenment (the three jewels), achieve Samadhi (meditation on Dharma, meditation on purity), and eliminate worldly suffering, this auspicious "Nidana" is the cause of liberation. For those who desire a suitable land (Aarya Khand), a suitable time (a time of suffering and happiness), a suitable birth (a high Jain family), a suitable environment (a city of Jain followers), and auspicious feelings and wealth, this auspicious "Nidana" is the cause of worldly existence. The first auspicious "Nidana" leads to a pure, unique, and infinite abode of happiness, i.e., liberation. The second auspicious "Nidana" causes some suffering, as it leads to worldly existence in order to attain a suitable land, time, environment, birth, feelings, and wealth for the attainment of Jain Dharma.  Inauspicious "Nidana" is also the cause of worldly existence, as it is motivated by enjoyment and pride. It is blameworthy and hinders entry into the abode of the liberated.

Therefore, only a person free from the thorns of deceit, falsehood, and inauspicious "Nidana" can become a vow-taker. Auspicious "Nidana" is not to be abandoned, as it is the direct and indirect cause of liberation. A person with right vision constantly desires to be reborn as a human being, to take vows, and to attain the happiness of liberation. The desire for a suitable land, time, environment, birth, and feelings for the practice of self-restraint is also inherent in the desire for self-restraint.

**Note:** The commentary refers to the "Siddhantasara Sangraha" (4.245-252) for further details.

Page #594:
---------------------------
## 560 Go. Sa. Jivakanda

**Verse 476-477**

_In the third Samayika pratima, one should perform Samayika for one muhurta each morning, midday, and evening._

**"One who is established with the arrangement of four times three vessels, four prostrations, Arva Kayotsarga, and two Nishadhyanas, and who is situated in the natural form, purifies the three yogas of mind, speech, and body, and performs the act of veneration at the three sandhyas (morning, midday, afternoon), is the third pratima-bearing Shravaka called Samayika."**

_In the fourth Proshadha pratima, one should fast according to one's capacity on every Ashtami and Chaturdashi._

**"One who, on all four festival days of each month, that is, on every Ashtami and Chaturdashi, without hiding one's capacity, engages in auspicious feelings (meditation, self-study, worship, etc.) and establishes the rule of Proshadha with concentration, or who observes the Proshadha fast according to the rule, is the fourth Shravaka, the holder of the Proshadha fast."**

_In the fifth Sachitta-Tyaga pratima, one abandons the consumption of Sachitta substances._

**"One who does not eat raw roots, fruits, vegetables, branches (shoots), karir (knots), tubers, flowers, and seeds, is the holder of the fifth pratima, the 'Sachittavirata' form."**

_In the sixth Ratribhukti-Virati pratima, one abandons the eating and feeding at night, or one protects oneself from sexual activity during the day._

**"One who, being compassionate, does not eat food, drink, edibles, or lickables at night, is the holder of the sixth form, the Ratribhuktivirata, with a mind that is compassionate towards beings."**

_If his young son cries from hunger, even then the sixth pratima-bearer does not eat at night._

**Footnotes:**

1. Charitrapahad Gatha 21 Tika.
2. Ratnakaranḍa Shravakaachar Shlok 136. Tika.
3. Charitrapahad Gatha 21 Tika.
4. Charitrapahad Gatha 21 Tika.
5. Charitrapahad Gatha 21 Tika.

Page #595:
---------------------------
Gatha 476-415
Samyammarganā/561
He will not make anyone else eat, nor will he urge or tell them to do so.

Jo cau-vihạ̣ pi bhojja rāyaṇīe ṇeva bhujjae ṇāṇī | ṇa bhujjāvadi aṇṇạ̣ gisiviramo so have bhogo ||32||
The wise one who does not eat the four types of food at night, nor makes others eat at night, is the renouncer of night-food.

Jo riṇasi-bhuttị̣ vadi so upavāsa kaređi dhammāse | saṃvacchharassa māhe pārambhaṃ cayadi rāyaṇīe ||383||
The one who abandons night-food, performs upavāsa for six months in a year and renounces the beginning of the night.

Maṇa-vacaṇa-kāya-kaya-kāriyāṇumoehị̣ mehuṇạ̣ ṇavahā | vivassami jo vivarajjai guṇammi so sāvo ghaṭṭho ||266||
The one who renounces sexual activity in nine ways - through mind, speech, body, deed, instigation, and approval - in the day, is the steadfast sixth-pratimā lay follower.

Mala-bīja mala-yoṇi galạ̣-malạ̣ pūti-gandhi bībhatsam | paśyann aṅgam anaṅgād viramati yo brahmacārī saḥ ||143||
The celibate who, seeing the body as the source of impurity, foul-smelling discharge, and repulsive, refrains from sensual pleasures, is the observer of brahmacarya vow.

Sevā-kṛṣi-vāṇijya-pramukhā-ārambhato byuparamati | prāṇātipāta-hetor yo 'sāv ārambha-vinivṛttaḥ ||144||
The lay follower who refrains from occupations like service, agriculture, and trade, because the beginning (of these) is the cause of injury to life, is the renouncer of beginning.

Page #596:
---------------------------
562/Go, Sa, Jivakanda
Verse 478-476: Renouncing attachment to the ten material possessions, he remains steadfast in non-attachment. He is self-contained, content, and detached from the desire for possessions. ||145|| [Ratnakaranda Shravakaachar]
-The ninth pratima-dhari Shravak, who is free from attachment to the ten material possessions (such as land, buildings, wealth, grain, etc.), remains steadfast in non-attachment, is self-contained, and is content with what he has, is detached from the desire for possessions. The tenth pratima, Anumati-tyaga, involves the renunciation of permission for activities such as marriage.
He who has no permission for possessions, for worldly activities, or for anything else, is considered to be a holder of the tenth pratima, Anumati-virat, with a mind free from attachment, anger, etc. ||146|| [Ratnakaranda Shravakaachar]
-The eleventh pratima, Uddishta-tyaga, involves the renunciation of food prepared for one's own purpose.
Leaving home for the Muni-vana, he accepts the vows from the Guru's mouth, practices austerities, eats alms food, and wears a piece of cloth. ||147|| [Ratnakaranda Shravakaachar]
-The Shravak who leaves home for the Muni-vana, accepts the vows from the Guru's mouth, practices austerities, eats alms food, and wears a piece of cloth, is a holder of the eleventh pratima, Uddishta-tyaga.
The nature of the un-restrained is fourteen types of Jivas, and the objects of the senses are twenty-eight. Those who are not detached from them should be known as un-restrained. ||478|| Five tastes, five colors, two smells, eight touches, seven sounds, and one mind; thus, the objects of the senses should be known as twenty-eight. ||476||
Explanation of the verse: There are fourteen types of Jivas, and the objects of the senses are twenty-eight. Those who are not detached from them should be known as un-restrained. ||478|| Five tastes, five colors, two smells, eight touches, seven sounds, and one mind; thus, the objects of the senses should be known as twenty-eight. ||476||
Special explanation: There are fourteen types of Jivas, which are classified as follows: Sukshma-ekendriya, Badar-ekendriya, Dwi-indriya, Tri-indriya, Chatur-indriya, Sanji Pancha-indriya, Asanji Pancha-indriya. These are further divided into sufficient and insufficient, making a total of fourteen Jiva-samas. A detailed explanation of these has already been given in the Jiva-samas Adhikar. You should refer to it there. Restraint is the protection of these fourteen Jiva-samas. Sweet, sour, salty, bitter, and pungent are the five tastes; white,
1. Commentary on Charitra Paahu, verse 21. 2. Dhaval Pu. 1, verse 164, page 373; Pra. Pan. Man. A. 1, verse 137.

Page #597:
---------------------------
##  Verse 480-481

**Verse 480-481**

There are five types of colors: yellow, green, red, and black. There are two types of smells: fragrant and foul. There are seven types of musical notes: Sa, Re, Ga, Ma, Pa, Dha, and Ni. There are eight types of touch: soft-hard, light-heavy, cold-hot, rough-smooth. There is one type of mental object. Thus, there are 25 sensory objects (5+5+2+7-8+1=25).

The number of living beings in the path of restraint is as follows:

* The number of beings in the four stages of virtue (Pramatta, etc.) is equal to the number of beings who have attained Samayika.
* The number of beings who have attained Pariharana is three less than seven thousand (6667).
* The number of beings who have attained Pallaya is three less than nine hundred (867).
* The number of beings who have attained Virada is three less than nine lakh (899,997).

**Verse 480**

The number of beings in the four stages of virtue (Pramatta, etc.) is equal to the number of beings who have attained Samayika. The number of beings who have attained Pariharana is three less than seven thousand (6667). The number of beings who have attained Pallaya is three less than nine hundred (867). The number of beings who have attained Virada is three less than nine lakh (899,997).

**Verse 481**

The number of beings who have attained Virada is an innumerable fraction of a Pallaya. The number of beings who have attained Samsara is obtained by subtracting the aforementioned numbers from the total number of beings.

**Special Note:**

The number of beings who have attained Samayika with a break (Chhedopasthapana) is a separate category. The exact number of beings in this category is not mentioned here because according to the Southern tradition, the total number of beings who have attained restraint is 199,999,999. However, according to the Northern tradition, the total number of beings who have attained restraint is 699,999,996. Both these numbers are within the category of separate categories.

The number of beings who have attained Samayika with a break (Chhedopasthapana) is obtained by subtracting the number of beings who have attained subtle Samayika (Sukshma Samprayika) and the number of beings who have attained Samayika with a clear understanding (Yathakyata) from the total number of beings who have attained restraint.

The number of beings who have attained Pariharashuddhi restraint must also have attained Samayika with a break (Chhedopasthapana). Therefore, the number of beings who have attained Pariharashuddhi restraint is not reduced. The number of beings who have attained Pariharashuddhi restraint is three less than seven thousand (6667). The number of beings who have attained subtle Samayika (Sukshma Samprayika) is three less than nine hundred (867). The number of beings who have attained Samayika with a clear understanding (Yathakyata) is 899,997. The total number of beings who have attained subtle Samayika (Sukshma Samprayika) and Samayika with a clear understanding (Yathakyata) is 900,894 (867 + 899,997). Subtracting this number from the total number of beings who have attained restraint (199,999,999) leaves 89,999,103 (199,999,999 - 900,894) beings who have attained Samayika with a break (Chhedopasthapana).

The number of beings who have attained restraint and the number of beings who have not attained restraint are an innumerable fraction of a Pallaya.

**Verse 137**

The number of beings who have attained restraint and the number of beings who have not attained restraint are an innumerable fraction of a Pallaya.

**Verse 138**

The term "Antarmukhurta" refers to the absorption of innumerable Pallayas.

**References:**

1. "Sanjamanaachadena Sanjada Samayichhedocha Chatravan Suddhi Sanjada Davapamarnana Kevatiya?" [D.P. 7 p. 188]. Kotiputhan. [D.P. 7 p. 188].
2. P.P. 3 p. 68.
3. P.P. 3 p. 101.
4. Y.P. 3 p. 446.
5. D.P. 3 p. 67.

Page #598:
---------------------------
564 / Gommatasara Jivakanda
Chapter 482-483
It happens. Because there is an acceptance of the internal moment, which is synonymous with abundance. The statement is as follows, in comparison to the previous statement:
Thirty-two, sixteen, four, know, with the six, the two, and the one. These are the transactions that happen in the two-fold division. ||37|| Two hundred and fifty-six thousand, five hundred and thirty-six. This is considered the Pali-upam. ||38|| Five hundred and twelve, the number of the restrained and unrestrained, should be known.
The duration of the transaction period related to the restrained and unrestrained should be known as 128. Sixty-five thousand five hundred and thirty-six (65536) is considered the Pali-upam. The number of restrained and unrestrained living beings should be known as (65536 ÷ 128) = 512.
The total number of restrained is 81666667, and the number of restrained and unrestrained is a part of the Pali-upam. Combining these two, we get 81666667 plus a part of the Pali-upam. Subtracting this number from the infinite number of worldly living beings, we get the number of unrestrained, which is infinite.
Thus, the thirteenth chapter of the Gommatasara Jivakanda, named "Sanayamaargna", is complete.
14. Darshanamargana Chapter
The characteristic of general perception
That which is the general perception of things, not by their form, nor by their particularity, is called perception in the scriptures. ||482|| The perception of things, which is not described by the living being, but by their general and particular nature, is called perception. ||483||
Special meaning - In the sutra "Jam maamagam gaharanam", the word "samaan" is used for the self-substance.
1. "Sanjadaamanjada dakshyamanee kevadiya? 136|| Pali-upamasma shrasankhejjadai bhaago. ||137|| Ehi pali-doshamama vahiradi shrato. ||138|| Ettha to muhuttamidi butte "asojjavaliya tti ghettavva." [G. 7 p. 259] 4. Dhaval Pu. 1 p. 146, Jayadhaval Pu. 1 p. 360 Pra. Pan. Vrihad Dravya Sangraha Ga. 43; Dhaval Pu. 7 p. 100.
3. G. Pu. 3 p.
2. D. Pu. 3 p. 87. San. Gra. 1 Ga. 135

Page #599:
---------------------------
## Verse 482-403
**Darshan Marga/ 565**

This has been done. Here, the living being is the general form, therefore its perception is Darshan. Here, the general characteristic soul has been taken in the sense of the general word.

**Doubt:** That by which one sees, knows, is Darshan. If Darshan is characterized in this way, then there is no distinction between knowledge and Darshan, both become one?

**Solution:** No, because inward Chitprakash (conscious awareness of self) is considered Darshan and outward Chitprakash is considered knowledge. Therefore, there is a contradiction in their being one.

**Doubt:** Knowledge of external objects different from oneself is called light, therefore, in the presence of inward Chitprakash and outward Chitprakash, that by which one knows these external objects is knowledge. If this explanation is proven, then unity arises between knowledge and Darshan, therefore, their difference cannot be proven?

**Solution:** This is not so, because just as there is a system of karma specifically related to knowledge, in the same way, there is a difference between these two.

By this, it is a pot, it is a cloth, etc., does not happen through Darshan, therefore,

**Or:** The use of the inner is called Darshanopयोग. The reason is that the meaning of form is karma (object) activity, the meaning-understanding that happens without it is called formless use.

**Doubt:** Is there karma-activity in wave use too?

**Solution:** Such a doubt should not be raised, because in it, there is a clear effect of karma of substance and field different from the doer.

**Doubt:** What is called form?

**Solution:** Karma that is separate from evidence is called form. That is, the object that appears different from itself in evidence is form. That form which is not found in use is called formless use, i.e., Darshanopयोग. *The karma-doer form that is obtained as the object of the intellect, separate from the community of all substances, is called form.*

**Doubt:** Is the state that is oriented towards the perception of external meaning, the same as Darshan?

**Solution:** This is not the case, but from the first moment of the conclusion of the perception of external meaning,

Page #600:
---------------------------
566/Go. Sa. Jivakanda
Gatha 482-483
One should accept that Darshanopयोग (the use of Darshan) is present until the final moment of non-acceptance of the truth, because without it, the existence of the Jiva (soul) becomes different from Darshan and Gyanopयोग (the use of knowledge).
'Darshan' is the use related to the self. This Darshan is not in the form of knowledge, because knowledge takes external meaning as its object. And there is no unity of knowledge and Darshan, which have external and internal objects, because believing so leads to contradiction. And knowledge cannot be considered to have two powers, because the effect of one पर्याय (category) on another पर्याय is considered.
Doubt - Why don't we accept that the general perception of external objects is Darshan and the specific perception is called knowledge, because many Acharyas have said so?
Solution - This statement is not appropriate, because without general perception, the absence of specific perception leads to the implication of the simultaneous occurrence of knowledge and Darshan, even in the state of the world, i.e., even for the छयस्थ (those who are on the path of liberation), like the Kevali (omniscient). And if we accept the definition of 'Darshan as the one who perceives the general', then the gradual occurrence of knowledge and Darshan in the छद्मस्थ (intermediate) state also does not happen, because there is no object that is special without the general, and there is a contradiction in the occurrence of knowledge in a non-object. If knowledge is considered to occur in a non-object, then knowledge cannot be considered as proof, because it is not a differentiator of the object. There is also no object that is only special, because it lacks the agency of its अर्थक्रिया (meaningful action). Therefore, "the general name is of the Atma (soul)," because it is generally present in all objects (through knowledge). The use that takes this general form of the Atma as its object is Darshan.
Many people say that only Kevalgyan (omniscient knowledge) knows its own sins and other objects, thus attributing the effect to Kevaldarshan (omniscient perception). But their statement is not logical, because Kevalgyan itself is a पर्याय. There is no other पर्याय of a पर्याय, therefore there is no lack of two powers in Kevalgyan, one that knows itself and the other that knows others. If the harmony of one पर्याय with another पर्याय is accepted, then the अनवस्था दोष (defect of non-existence) cannot be prevented by anyone, therefore the Atma itself is the knower of itself and others. Among them, self-reflection is called Kevaldarshan and reflection on others is called Kevalgyan.
There is no such thing as only general, because apart from its own special, only the general of the same nature and the general of analogy are not found. If it is said that without the general, the same perception and the generation of one perception cannot happen everywhere, therefore the general is a separate substance, then saying so is not logical, because the perception of one is multi-faceted and the perception of the same is not multi-faceted. Therefore, the generation of knowledge that is different in nature, which takes the object of general and special, is seen. This shows that there is no separate substance called general. And there is also no substance called special, which is completely different from the general, because the general is related to

Page #601:
---------------------------
## Gatha 482-483
Darshan Margaga / 567

The attainment of the special is possible only through the general. If the general and the special are considered to be completely independent, then all knowledge will either become mixed or will be without support. But this is not the case, because if it were, it would not be possible to grasp it.

Therefore, while there is a general-special object, considering only Darshan as the subject of the general and only Gyan as the subject of the special, both obtain the effect of use. Only general and only special forms of substance are not found. It is also said:

"Only those who perceive are called 'Sya' (knower). In this time, there is no possibility of a special distinction in words." (140)

"Seeing the other, entering the state of 'Sya' (knower), being a seed. What can be said about the one who sees everything directly?" (141)

If the subject of Darshan is considered to be only the general and the subject of Gyan is considered to be only the special, then the objection arises that the Kevali Jins, who are unseen, are always called known objects, and the desired objects, which are known, are always called known objects. Therefore, the statement that the Kevali Jins are known and seen at the same time cannot be a special distinction. What do the Grahanta Devas know and see while seeing the unknown objects and knowing the known objects? And how can their omniscience be established?

To avoid the above-mentioned defects, it should be accepted that the inner light is only Darshan and the outer light that illuminates external objects is only Gyan. There is no contradiction in accepting the simultaneous occurrence of both uses, because the sequential order of uses is the work of karma, and the absence of karma leads to the effect of the sequential order of uses. Therefore, there is no contradiction in accepting the sequential order of Nirvaran, only Gyan, and only Darshan.

**Doubt:** If the use that makes the soul its object is accepted as Darshan, then since there is no special quality in the soul, there will be no difference between the four Darshanas (Chakshu, Prachakshu, Avadhi, and Kevala).

**Solution:** This is not a defect, because the Darshan that is the perception of the nature of the knowledge that it produces is called by that name. As many objects as are obtained by the subject-consciousness of the knowledge produced by the destruction of the Chakshu Indriya Avaran karma, so many are the destructions of the soul, which are located in the soul, and they obtain those names. And because of them, the soul also becomes of that many types. Therefore, the perception of the soul endowed with such powers is called Darshan. The perception of the soul, which is related to the effort of producing knowledge, i.e., the use that makes the soul its object, is called Darshan. In this Darshan, knowledge...

1. Jayadhaval Pu. 1 p. 353, page 321-22 of the second edition.
2. Jayadhaval Pu. 1 p. 356, Ma 140-41.
3. Jayadhaval Pu. 1 p. 256-257.
4. Dhaval Pu. 1 p. 361-382.

Page #602:
---------------------------
568 / Go, Sa, Jiva Kanda
Verse 482-4-3: The productive effort is not dependent on the external. If this is not accepted, then the context of the performance of the Kevali, who has a weak covering and internal use, without effort, is found.
The effort that is made for the origin of knowledge that is going to happen, that section or observation of that form or one's own soul, is Darshan. The reception of the substance in the form of an alternative in its infinite external object is knowledge. Just as a man is first situated, making an alternative about the pot, then his mind is for knowing the cloth. Then that man, moving away from the alternative of the pot, the effort that he makes in the form of observation-section in the form, is Darshan. After that, the certainty that 'this is cloth' or the alternative that is in the form of reception of the substance in the form of an external object, is knowledge.
The disciple asks, if Darshan is the one who receives himself and knowledge is the one who receives other objects, then, as in the opinion of the Naiyayikas, knowledge does not know itself, in the same way, in Jainism, knowledge does not know the soul, such a defect arises?
Solution - In the opinion of the Naiyayikas, knowledge and Darshan are not two separate qualities. For this reason, in the opinion of those Naiyayikas, the defect of 'the form of knowing the soul' is considered, but in Jain theory, the soul knows the other object through the knowledge quality and knows itself through the Darshan quality, for this reason, the defect of 'not knowing the soul' is not found in Jainism.
Doubt - Why does this defect not arise?
Solution - Just as one fire burns, therefore it is a burner and cooks, for this reason it is a digester, the fire is of two types, burner and digester, due to the difference in the object. In the same way, from the point of view of non-difference, the consciousness is one, in the desire of the point of view of difference, when the soul is inclined to receive itself, then its name is 'Darshan'; and then when it is inclined to receive other objects, then the name of that consciousness is 'knowledge'. Thus, due to the difference in the object, consciousness is of two types.
From the point of view of argument (from the point of view of explaining the other opinions, i.e., those who hold other opinions), Darshan is in the form of observation of existence, such is the explanation. From the point of view of the principle, Darshan is in the form of observation of the soul.
If anyone, knowing the meaning of argument and principle, abandoning the one-sided prejudice, holding the middle ground from the division of Nayas, explains, then both the meaning of argument and the meaning of principle are proved. In argument, the main thing is the explanation of other opinions. Those who hold other opinions do not understand that 'Darshan is the one who receives the soul'. Then, to make them realize, the Acharyas established the name Darshan for the reception of the general in the external object from the gross explanation. The name knowledge was established for knowing the particular in the external object. Therefore, there is no fault, in the principle, the main thing is the explanation of one's own time, therefore, in the principle, while explaining subtly, the Acharyas have said that 'the one who is the receiver of the soul is called Darshan'. Therefore, there is no fault in this either.
1. Dhaval Pu. 6. 32-33. 2. Nanayasangraha Ga. 44's commentary. 3. Brihaddravyasangraha Ga. 44's commentary. 4. Brihaddravyasangraha Ma. 44's commentary. 5. Brihaddravyasangraha Ga. 44's commentary.

Page #603:
---------------------------
Gādha. 484-485
Darśanamārgaṇā/566
In the fourth section of the Samvāya named 'Doubt', it is said that "Kevalajñāna and Kevaladarśana are similar in terms of their nature, and the object of knowledge is the proof." But can Kevalajñāna, which is directed towards infinite external objects that are within the scope of time, and Kevaladarśana, which is directed towards one's own soul that is within the scope of all three times, be similar?
Solution: The soul is the proof of knowledge, and knowledge is the proof of infinite substances and their modifications that are within the scope of all three times. Therefore, there is similarity between knowledge and vision. The special thing is that when the soul is perceived through vision, the knowledge that is present in the soul is also perceived through vision. When knowledge is perceived, the external object that is the subject of knowledge is also perceived. Thus, both knowledge and vision are similar because their subject is the same.
Doubt: Then is vision greater than knowledge in terms of its own modifications that reside in the living being? Solution: This is not a fault, because this is desirable. Doubt: Then how can there be similarity between knowledge and vision?
Solution: It is not that there cannot be similarity, because there is no contradiction in accepting similarity between the two that are dependent on each other. It is also said:
"Pāyā gāṇapamāraṇam gāṇam ṇeyappamāraṇamuddiddv'.
ṇeyam lopālonaṁ tamhā pāṇam tu savya-gayam." ||168||
The soul is the proof of knowledge, knowledge is the proof of the object of knowledge. The object of knowledge is the proof of the world and the non-world, therefore knowledge is all-pervasive. The soul is equal to knowledge. Since the object of vision is the soul, vision is the proof of the soul. Thus, knowledge and vision are proven to be equal. Just as there are as many indivisible perceptions of Kevalajñāna, there are as many indivisible perceptions of Kevaladarśana. In this respect also, Kevalajñāna and Kevaladarśana are equal. Knowledge is all-pervasive and the soul is the proof of knowledge, therefore the soul is also all-pervasive. What is all-pervasive is common. Thus, the soul is perceived through the word 'common'.
The nature of Cakṣu-Pracakṣu-Avadhi vision is: "Cakṣuṇ jaṁ pāyasai dissai taṁ cakṣudarsaṇam veti. Sesiviappayāso raṇāyanvo so pracakṣūtti." ||484|| "Paramāṇuprāviyāiṁ antimkhaṇḍatti muṭṭidavvāi. Taṁ prohidasaṇam puraṇa jaṁ passai tāi paccavakhaṁ." ||485||
1. P. Pu. 1 p. 101. 2. B. Pu. 1 p. 185. 3. Vṛhaddravyasaṁgraha Gā. 44 commentary. 4. Ghapal Pu. 1 p. 385. 5. Dhaval Pu. 1 p. 386, Pravacanasāra 1/23. 6. Dhaval Pu. 1 p. 382, Pu. 7 p. 100, Prā. Paṁ. Saṁ. A. 1 Gā. 126. 7. Dhaval' p. 1 p. 182, p. 7 p. 100 Jayadhaval Pu. 1 p. 357, Prā. Paṁ. Saṁ. M. 1 Gā. 14.

Page #604:
---------------------------
## 570 / Go. Sa. Ji. Kand

**Verse Meaning:**  What is illuminated or seen by the eye sense is called *chakshudarshan*. What is perceived by the remaining senses is called *pradeshna*. ||484||  The *avdhi darshan* is the one who directly sees the material substances from the atom to the final skandha. ||485||

**Verses 484-485**

**Special Meaning:**

**Doubt:** In these sutra verses, the description of *darshan* is done in terms of external objects. Therefore, the subject of *darshan* is the internal substance (soul), which is contradicted by these sutra verses?

**Solution:** This is not the case, because you have not understood the ultimate meaning of these verses.

**Doubt:** What is that ultimate meaning?

**Solution:**  "What is illuminated by the eyes, i.e., seen or perceived by the eye, is *chakshudarshan*." This should be understood as the general experience of one's own power that occurs before the knowledge generated by the eye sense, and which is the cause for the generation of eye knowledge, is *chakshudarshan*.

**Doubt:** How can the eye sense be involved in the internal power that is bound to the object of that eye sense?

**Solution:** No, to teach children, the external objects are used to explain the internal, and what is seen by the eyes is *chakshudarshan*. This is how it is described.

**Doubt:** Why not directly explain the meaning of the verse without twisting it?

**Solution:** We do not do that, because doing so would lead to all the previously mentioned faults.

**The meaning of the latter part of verse 484 is as follows:** The knowledge that arises from what has been seen, i.e., the substance that has been known through the remaining senses, should be understood as *chakshudarshan*. Its ultimate meaning is that the general perception or experience of one's own power, which is bound to its object and is the cause for the generation of *chakshudarshan*, occurring before the generation of knowledge from the remaining senses other than the eye sense, is called *chakshudarshan*.

**The meaning of the second verse (485) is as follows:** "The one who directly sees or knows all the material substances from the atom to the final skandha is *avdhi darshan*." Its ultimate meaning is that the experience of one's own power, which is the cause for the generation of *avdhi jnana* and is related to the substance of pudgala, which exists from the atom to the final skandha, occurring before the direct knowledge of these substances, is *avdhi darshan*. Otherwise, there would be no difference between knowledge and *darshan*.

1. Dhaval Pu. 7 p. 100. 2. Dhaval Pu. Pu. 100-101. 3. Dhaval Pu. 7 p. 101. 4. Dhaval Pu. 7 p. 102.

Page #605:
---------------------------
Head 406
Darganama Ganga/571
"Paramanapadiya" etc. in 485 verses, the subject is directed by the direction of the subject, because the inner subject cannot be described in any other way. That is, the subject of Avadhijnana is the material of the form, therefore, there is no other way to tell the subject of Avadhidarshan, the past inner material, so the material of the form is taken as the support and directed.
The self-awareness that gives rise to Chakshusha knowledge is Chakshudarshan. The self-awareness that is the cause of the knowledge arising from the senses of hearing, breath, tongue, touch and mind is called Prachakshudarshan. The self-awareness that is the cause of Avadhijnana, which takes the Pudgala dravya from the atom to the Maha-skandha as its subject, is called Avadhidarshan.
The nature of Kevaladarshan is multi-faceted, multi-faceted, bright, in the limited field. People are blind to the world and the world, but the light of Kevaladarshan removes the darkness. ||486||
Special meaning - Kevaladarshan is the inner light and Kovaljnana is the light that takes external objects as its subject.
Doubt - Some Acharyas say that since Kevaljnana is the illuminator of both self and other, it is not Kevaladarshan. There is also a verse on this subject
Manapamjavanaanato Ganassa Ya Dasanasya Ya Viseso.
Kevaliyan Nana Pun Nana Ti Ya Daruna Ti Ya Samana ||143|| - There is a difference between knowledge up to mind and knowledge up to vision. But Kevaljnana is equal to both knowledge and vision.
Solution - It is not right for those Acharyas to say so, because Kevaljnana itself is a synonym, so it cannot have another synonym. That is, if Kevaljnana is considered to be self-other-illuminator, then in one time, it will have to be considered as two synonyms, self-illuminator and other-illuminator. But Kevaljnana itself is one synonym, the form of other-illuminator. Therefore, it cannot have another synonym, the form of self-illuminator. It is also not right to say that there is a synonym of a synonym. Because, if this is assumed, then there will be a second synonym of the first synonym, a third synonym of that, and so on, and thus a lineage of synonyms will be obtained, therefore
1. Jayadhaval Pu. 1 p. 357. 2. Dhaval Pu. 13 p. 355. 3. Gh.Pu. 1 p. 382; Pra. Pan. San. Pra. 1 Ga. 141. 4. Jayashaval p. 1 p. 357.358 |

Page #606:
---------------------------
572/Go, Sa. Jiyakanda
Gatha 487-488
The fault of non-existence arises. Secondly, by considering the Paryaya as the Paryaya, the Paryaya becomes a substance. In this way, even by considering the Paryaya as the Paryaya, 'Keval Darshan' cannot be in the form of Keval Jnana.
If it is said that Keval Darshan is unmanifest, then it is not right to say so, because Keval Darshan, which is devoid of the covering and is engaged in the observation of the general specific inner substance, finds opposition in accepting the unmanifest form. If it is said that accepting Keval Darshan as manifest will destroy the similarity (unity) of both Keval Jnana and Keval Darshan, then it is not true, because there is a difference between the two due to the difference between each other. Secondly, if the harmony of Darshan is not accepted, then there will be only seven Karmas without Darshan Avarana, because accepting the influence of Darshan, which is capable of covering, leads to opposition in accepting the harmony of its covering Karma.
The number of Chakshu Darshani etc. beings is the sum of the Chaturindriya and Panchendriya beings. The number of Avadhi Jnani is equal to the number of Avadhi Darshani beings, and the number of Keval Jnani is equal to the number of Keval Darshani beings. ||487||
The sum of all beings from Ekendriya to Kshina Kshaya is the number of Achakhu Darshani beings. ||488||
Special Meaning- Chakshu Darshani beings are innumerable in terms of substance, they are removed by innumerable numbers of Pravrshipini-Utsarpini cycles in terms of time, and in terms of area, by squaring the number of parts of a Suchi Angul and dividing it by the Jagat Pratar, the number of Chakshu Darshani beings is obtained.
If the Chakshu Darshan Avarana is taken as the insufficient amount indicated by the Kshayopa-shama, then the Jagat Pratar is removed by the innumerable parts of the Pratarangul, but it is not taken here. Because in the absence of the counter-effect of the Chakshu-Indriya, the beings with the Kshayopa-shama of the Chakshu Darshan Avarana, which is suitable for the use of Chakshu Darshan, are called Chakshu Darshani, therefore the beings obtained here are not taken. The beings obtained are devoid of the origin of the Indriya, therefore they do not have the Kshayopa-shama in the form of Chakshu Darshan, which is associated with the use of Chakshu Darshan. And the statement that the number of beings with Chakshu Darshan is only like the ocean is not opposed, because the predominance of Kshayopa-shama is accepted there. Therefore, the statement that the Prabahar Kal (division) of Chakshu Darshani beings is only the number of parts of the Pratarangul is proved. Because here the Chakshu Darshani beings
1. Jayadhwala Pu. 1 p. 350-356. 2. Dh. Pu. 7 p. 260-261 Sutra 140-143.
3. Dh. Pu. 7 p. 261.

Page #607:
---------------------------
## Verse 486, 460

The text acknowledges the predominance of four-sensory and five-sensory beings in the statement of evidence. 

Beings are found from the state of false perception (one-sensory) to the state of subtle-passion, passionless, and disguised-state, because beings in the disguised-state without the destruction and pacification of the non-seeing perception are not found. 

The number of beings in these twelve states is the same as the evidence of those who have the seeing perception, which is infinite.

The evidence of those who have the seeing perception is the same as those who have the knowledge perception, because beings who have the knowledge perception without the seeing perception are not found, therefore the evidence of both is the same.

## Shyamagam / 573

The being who has the only seeing perception is the same as the being who has the only knowledge, because a being who has the only seeing perception without the only knowledge is not found.

Thus, the fourteenth chapter of the Gommatasara Jivakanda, called Darshanmarganga, is complete.

## 15. Leshyamarganga Chapter

## The Characteristic of Leshya

The text states that Leshya is what makes a being attached to and controlled by merit and demerit. This is the nature of Leshya, as stated by the Ganadharas and others who know the nature of Leshya.

Yoga-pravritti is Leshya. When Yoga-pravritti is influenced by the arising of passions, then the work of both Yoga-pravritti and the arising of passions is described in the supreme scripture as the fourfold bondage.

## Special Meaning

Leshya is that which makes the soul attached to karmas. Leshya is that which establishes the connection between the soul and pravritti (karma). Thus, by defining Leshya in this way, there is no fault of excessive inclusion, because here the word pravritti is taken as a synonym for karma.

If Leshya is considered to arise only from the arising of passions, then there would be a problem of the influence of Leshya in beings with subtle passions. But Yoga, which is the arising of karma, is also Leshya, because it is also a cause of karma-bondage. Even when passions are destroyed, Yoga remains, therefore there is no contradiction in considering Leshya in beings with subtle passions. Or, the body-yoga, speech-yoga, and mind-yoga influenced by passions,

Page #608:
---------------------------
5.74/Go. Sa. Jivakanda
'Gatha 481-460
'Leshya' is said to be the taking of 'pravritti'. Thus, when defining the characteristics of 'leshya', only 'kṣaya' and only 'yoga' cannot be called 'leshya', but 'yoga-pravritti' influenced by 'kṣaya' is called 'leshya'. From this, one should not conclude that the 'yoga' of the 'vītarāgi' is not 'leshya', because 'yoga' is the primary element in 'leshya', not 'kṣaya', because it is a qualifier of 'yoga-pravritti'.
Doubt-In the translation of the 'śaṅkā-śaya' section, what is meant by the word 'leshya'?
Solution-That which stains the soul from the 'karma-skandha' is 'leshya'. Here, one should not interpret 'leshya' as 'yoga-pravritti' influenced by 'kṣaya', because accepting this interpretation would lead to the objection that 'sayogakevali' is devoid of 'leshya'.
Doubt-If 'sayogakevali' is considered devoid of 'leshya', what is the harm?
Solution-No, because accepting this would contradict the statement that 'sayogakevali' has 'śukla leshya'.
Doubt... 'Leshya' refers to 'yoga', or 'kṣaya', or both 'yoga' and 'kṣaya'? Of these, the first two options, i.e., 'yoga' or 'kṣaya' form, cannot be considered 'leshya', because accepting that would include it in 'yogamārgaṇā' and 'kṣayamārgaṇā'. The third option cannot be accepted either, because it is similar to the first two options.
Solution-Of the three options raised by the doubter, the defects mentioned in the first and second options do not arise, because 'leshya' is not considered only as 'yoga' form or only as 'kṣaya' form. Similarly, the defect mentioned in the third option does not arise, because accepting the inclusion of both 'yoga' and 'kṣaya' in one of them leads to a contradiction (two cannot be included in one). If it is said that 'leshya' should be considered in two forms so that it is included in both 'yoga' and 'kṣaya' paths, that is also not correct, because 'leshya' is considered to be the 'yoga' and 'kṣaya' obtained by oneself, rather than being the one who performs the act of 'karma-lepa'. If it is said that 'leshya' being in the form of 'yoga' and 'kṣaya' obtained by unity will include 'leshya' in both, that is also not correct, because 'leshya', which has attained a third state due to the combination of two 'dharmas' and is therefore dualistic, encounters contradiction in accepting equality with only one.
Doubt-The function of 'leshya' is not found to be different from the function of 'yoga' and 'kṣaya', therefore 'leshya' cannot be considered different from both?
Solution-No, because 'leshya' attains 'mithyātva', 'avīrati', etc., which are obtained by 'viparītatā', and 'yoga' and 'kṣaya' attain 'leshya-bhāva' due to contact with external objects like 'ācārya', etc., which are in the form of 'pālambana'. Therefore, only... - . . - . - 1. Bhrabala p. 1 p. 146, p. 16 p. 485, S. Si. 2/6, Ra. Va. 268; Pañcāvastikāya Gā. 116 Tīkā. 2, Dhavala Pū. 1 p. 146-150. 3. Dhavala Pū. 1 p. 386.

Page #609:
---------------------------
## Gatha 461-462
## Leshya Margana 575

The attainment of the function of the growth of the world, which is different from the function of Yoga and only Kshaya, cannot be said to be the function of only Yoga and only Kshaya. Therefore, Leshya is different from both of them, this is proven.

**Doubt:** If Leshya is the cause of the growth of the world, then what about the statement that "Leshya is that which binds"? This creates a contradiction.

**Solution:** No, because there is no contradiction in giving the name Leshya to the growth of the world, which is inseparable from Karma-lepa. Therefore, it is certain that Leshya is distinct from both of them.

**Doubt:** If the causes of bondage are called Leshya, then why not consider Pramada as Leshya?

**Solution:** No, because Pramada is included in Kshaya.

**Doubt:** Why not consider Asanaya as Leshya?

**Solution:** No, because Asanaya is also included in Leshya Karma.

**Doubt:** Why not consider Mithyatva as Leshya?

**Solution:** Mithyatva can be called Leshya, because there is no contradiction in that. But here, Kshaya is the primary cause. Because Kshaya is the cause of Leshya Karma, which is in the form of violence, etc., and other causes have an effect on them.

**Or:** Mithyatva, Sangama, Kshaya and Yoga are Leshya. Or, Mithyatva, Sanaya, Kshaya and Yoga are the causes of the birth of the soul, which are called Leshya.

**Or:** Mithyatva, Asanaya and Kshaya, which are the causes of the acceptance of Karma-pudgala, and the Yoga tendency, which is influenced by them, is called Noshragamabhava Leshya. The meaning is that the impression born from Mithyatva, Kshaya and Asanaya is called Noshragamabhava Leshya.

## Leshya Margesh's Authority

**Siva parinaamasankamo kammalakkharagagadee ya |
Saami saaharanasanka khettam phasam tado kaalo ||461||**

**Antarbhavatpabahu prahiyarara solasa havanti tti |
Lessaran saaharan jahaakaman tehi yochchaami ||462||**

**Notes:**

1. G. Pu. 1 p. 37-388
2. G. Pu. 7 p. 105
3. G. Pu. 7 p. 105
4. D. Pu. p. 356
5. P. Pu. 16 p. 488
6. G. Pu. 16 p. 485

Page #610:
---------------------------
## Chapter 576, Jovakanda, Gatha 463

**Gatha 463**

**Gatha Explanation:** These sixteen rights are for: Instruction, Color, Result, Transition, Karma, Characteristic, Motion, Owner, Means, Number, Field, Touch, Hair, Interval, Feeling, Less-More, and Means of Leshya. They will be explained in order. ||461-462||

**Special Explanation:** The deposition of Leshya should be considered, because without it, the understanding of natural Leshya is not possible. Its deposition is as follows: Matter Leshya, Establishment Leshya, Substance Leshya, and Feeling Leshya. In this way, Leshya is of four types. In them, the word 'Leshya' is the name Leshya. The establishment of Leshya that is done through good establishment (like a picture of six people eating the fruit of a tree) and bad establishment is called Establishment Leshya. Substance Leshya and Feeling Leshya will be explained later. The author himself has explained the Instruction etc. through the Gathas. Therefore, it is not explained here. Some things are also mentioned here.

To state the nature of something is Instruction. 2 What is seen is Color. The feelings of a being that arise from the rise of passions are called Results. The change from one Leshya to another is Transition, etc.

**Nitesh Yo:** By whom is the description of the six Leshyas done? Black, Blue, Dove, Radiant (Yellow), Red, and White Leshyas. ||463||

**Gatha Explanation:** These six instructions are from the rule of Leshya: Black Leshya, Blue Leshya, Dove Leshya, Radiant Leshya (Yellow Leshya), Red Leshya, and White Leshya. ||463||

**Special Explanation:** By establishing the competitors of the experienced passion-parts in the rise, from the lowest competitor to the highest competitor, and dividing them into six parts, the first part is the most subtle passion-part, and the passion that arises from its rise is called White Leshya. The second part is the less subtle passion-part, and the passion that arises from its rise is called Red Leshya. The third part is the subtle passion-part, and the passion that arises from its rise is called Radiant Leshya. The fourth part is the intense passion-part, and the passion that arises from its rise is called Dove Leshya. The fifth part is the more intense passion-part, and the passion that arises from its rise is called Blue Leshya. The sixth part is the most intense passion-part, and the passion that arises from its rise is called Black Leshya.

There is no single rule that Leshya is only six, because from the perspective of the 'Paryayaathik Nay', Leshyas are countless, as many as the worlds. But from the perspective of the 'Dravyathik Nay', those Leshyas are only six.

From these six Leshyas, each is fallen in six places, in the order of infinite part increase, countless part increase, countable part increase, countable quality increase, countless quality increase, and infinite quality increase.

Page #611:
---------------------------
## Verse 494-465

**Leshyamargna/5507**

Due to the increase and decrease of the six types of *leshya* (color), there are countless variations in the number of beings.

_In the context of the *dravyaathik* (substance-based) perspective, it is stated that there are six *leshyas* in the rule. However, in the context of the *paryaayarthik* (synonymous) perspective, there is no rule of six *leshyas*.

**Verse 464**

The color of the body, which is generated by the *karma* (action), is the *dravya leshya*. It is of six types, starting with black (Krishna) and ending with white (Shukla). Each of these has countless variations.

**Verse 465**

The six *leshyas* are like the colors of a bumblebee, a blue sapphire, a pigeon, gold, a lotus, and a conch shell. Each of these has a countable, uncountable, and infinite number of variations.

**Explanation**

The *leshya* is the color of the *pudgala* (matter) that is perceived by the eye sense. It is of six types: black, blue, pigeon, radiant, lotus, and white.

* Black *leshya* is like a bumblebee, coal, and kohl.
* Blue *leshya* is like the leaves of neem, banana, and date palm.
* Pigeon *leshya* is like ash, straw, and a pigeon.
* Radiant *leshya* is like gold, *japa* (a type of flower), and *kusuma* (a type of flower).
* Lotus *leshya* is like a lotus flower.
* White *leshya* is like a swan and a *balaka* (a type of bird).

It is also said:

* Black *leshya* is like a bumblebee, blue *leshya* is like something with a blue quality, pigeon *leshya* is like a pigeon, radiant *leshya* is like gold, lotus *leshya* is like a lotus, and white *leshya* is like a *kas* (a type of flower).

These *leshyas* should be understood as having the specific colors mentioned above.

**From the *dravyaarthik* perspective, there are six types of *leshya*. From the *paryaayarthik* perspective, there are countable and uncountable types, depending on the *tartamna* (subtlety). From the perspective of *avibhagapratichheda* (indivisible parts), there are infinite types. For example, each *leshya* has three variations: excellent, inferior, and medium.**

**References:**

* 1. Dh.Pu.161.484
* 2. Dh.Pu.16.405, Pra.Pa.Sa.Ma.1Ga.183-184.38

Page #612:
---------------------------
578/Mo. Sa. Jivakanda
Verse 466-468: In the same way, one should establish the distinction between countable and uncountable in each dravya-leshya. Even in the jghanya, there are infinite avibhaga-pratichhedas, therefore there are infinite possibilities in comparison to avibhaga-pratichhedas.
In terms of motion, the statement of leshya in comparison to the body is Nirya Kinha Kappa Bhavanugaya Hu Tisuranaratiriye. Uttaradhe Chakkam Bhoge-Ravichandaharidanga. ||466|| Badar-Paute Sukkateuy Vaukayaanam. Gomuttamuggavanna Kamaso Avattvanno Ya. ||467|| Sanvesi Suhamana Kavoada Say Viggahe Sukka. Savyo Misso Deho Kayodavano Have Rinayama. ||468||
Meaning: All naraki are Krishnavarna. In Kalpavasis Devas, there is dravya-leshya according to bhava-leshya. In Bhavanatrik, Manushya and Tiryancha, there are all six dravya-leshyas, and there are even more dravya-leshyas in comparison to Uttarasharira. The body of Manogamaka, Madhyamabhogabhumika and Jghanya bhogabhumika is respectively Surya, Chandrama and Haritvarna. ||466|| Badar Jalakayika and Badar Taijasakayika have dravya-leshya of Shukla and Tejas (Peet) respectively. In Vayukayika, Ghanodadhivat, Dhanavat and Tanuvat have the color of Gomutra, Mug-like color and the third Tanuvat has an unmanifest color. ||467|| The dravya-leshya of all Sushmas is Kapota, and in Vigrahagati, the dravya-leshya of all is Shukla. In the state of Aparayapta, the color of all jivas with a mixed body is Kapota. ||468||
Special Meaning: The manifestation of all six leshyas based on the body is as follows: The body of Tiryanchayonis are of all six leshyas. Some bodies are Krishna-leshya, some are Neel-leshya, some are Kapota-leshya, some are Tejas (Peet) leshya, some are Pala-leshya and some are Shukla-leshya. Tiryanchayonis, Manushyas and Manushyanis also have all six leshyas. The body of Devas (Vaimanika Devas) is composed of Tejas, Padma and Shukla leshyas in comparison to the original nirvartana. But in comparison to Uttar nirvartana, their body is composed of all six leshyas. The body of Devis is composed of Tejas-leshya in comparison to the original nirvartana, but in comparison to Uttar nirvartana, they are composed of any one of the six leshyas. The body of Narakis is composed of Krishna-leshya. The body of Prithvikayikas is composed of any one of the six leshyas. The body of Apakayika jivas is Shukla-leshya. The body of Agnigayika jivas is composed of Tejas-leshya. The body of Vayukayikas is Kapota-leshya and the body of Vanaspatikayikas is composed of all six leshyas. The body of all Sukshma jivas is composed of Kapota-leshya. The statement of Badar Aparayaptas is the same as Badar Paryaptas. (But Shukla and Kapota are two dravya-leshyas, Dhaval Pu. 2 Page 422). Audarik body is composed of six leshyas. The body of Vakriyika is composed of Krishna-leshya, Tejas-leshya, Padma-leshya and Shukla-leshya in comparison to the original nirvartana (or in comparison to Bhavanatrik, all six leshyas).

Page #613:
---------------------------
Patha 466-498
There are 576 types of Lesya (psychic color). The Taijasa (fiery) body has Tejalesya, and the Karmana (karmic) body has Sukhlalesya.
Doubt: Since all the pudgala (karmic matter) that make up the body have different colors, how can this body have a single Lesya?
Solution: This is not a flaw, as the description is made with reference to the predominant color. For example, a body with predominant dark color is called Krishnalesya. A body with predominant blue color is called Neelalesya, one with predominant red color is called Tejalesya, one with predominant yellow color is called Padmalesya, and one with predominant white color is called Sukhlalesya. Bodies that do not fall into these categories should be understood as Kapotalesya.
The specific details are as follows:
For Krishnalesya, the Shukla (white) quality is minimal, Haridra (yellow) quality is infinitely more, Lohita (red) quality is infinitely more, Neel (blue) quality is infinitely more, and Shyama (dark) quality is infinitely more.
For Neelalesya, the Shukla quality is minimal, Haridra quality is infinitely more, Lohita quality is infinitely more, Shyama quality is infinitely more, and Neel quality is infinitely more.
For Kapotalesya, there are three options:
1) Shukla quality is minimal, Haridra quality is infinitely more, Shyama quality is infinitely more, Lohita quality is infinitely more, and Neel quality is infinitely more.
2) Shukla quality is minimal, Shyama quality is infinitely more, Haridra quality is infinitely more, Neel quality is infinitely more, and Lohita quality is infinitely more.
3) Shyama quality is minimal, Shukla quality is infinitely more, Neel quality is infinitely more, Haridra quality is infinitely more, and Lohita quality is infinitely more.
For Tejalesya, the Shyama quality is minimal, Neel quality is infinitely more, Shukla quality is infinitely more, Haridra quality is infinitely more, and Lohita quality is infinitely more.
For Padmalesya, there are three options:
1) Shyama quality is minimal, Neel quality is infinitely more, Shukla quality is infinitely more, Lohita quality is infinitely more, and Haridra quality is infinitely more.
2) Shyama quality is minimal, Neel quality is infinitely more, Lohita quality is infinitely more, Shukla quality is infinitely more, and Haridra quality is infinitely more.
3) Shyama quality is minimal, Neel quality is infinitely more, Lohita quality is infinitely more, Haridra quality is infinitely more, and Shukla quality is infinitely more.
For Sukhlalesya, the Shyama quality is minimal, Neel quality is infinitely more, Lohita quality is infinitely more, Haridra quality is infinitely more, and the Shukla quality is infinitely intense.

Kapotalesya follows the rule of Ekasthana (single location), while the other Lesyas follow the rules of Dwisthana (two locations), Tristhana (three locations), and Chaturasthana (four locations).

Doubt: The scripture states that Bhavanatrika (celestial) beings have all six Lesyas during their lifespan, but this does not occur, as they lack the presence of all six Lesyas during their lifespan. If it is said that the Lesyas do not arise from their mental state (Bhava) but from the matter (Dravya), since there is a unity between Bhava and Dravya, this argument also does not hold, as the Lesyas that arise from the mental state (Bhavalesya) are the ones that acquire the corresponding Audarika (physical), Vaikriyika (transformable), and Aharaka (food-derived) karmic particles.

Page #614:
---------------------------
580/Mo. Sa. Jivakanda
Maya 466-498

The question is, how do we know that the six *leshyas* of *dravya* are manifested in accordance with the *bhavaleshys* of the *Soudharma* and other gods? The answer is that in the *paryapt* time of the gods, there are only three *leshyas*: *tej*, *padma*, and *shukla*. Therefore, in the *paryapt* time of the gods, the *dravya* should have only *tej*, *padma*, and *shukla* *leshyas*.

**Solution:** The argument presented by the doubter is not valid. Here's why:

* **In the *aparyapt* time:** The *bhavaleshys* do not mimic the *dravya leshyas* in the *aparyapt* time. If they did, then we would see the contradiction of *uttama bhogabhumia* humans, who have three *ashubh* *leshyas*, lacking a white complexion. Similarly, *karmabhumia* *mithyadashti* beings, who also have three *ashubh* *leshyas*, would have a white complexion in the *aparyapt* time.
* **In the *paryapt* time:** The *dravya leshyas* do not consistently mimic the *bhavaleshys* in the *paryapt* time either. If they did, then we would see the contradiction of *paryapt* *tiryanch* and humans, who constantly change between six *bhavaleshys*, having inconsistent *dravya leshyas*.
* **Example of the heron:** If the *bhavaleshys* were determined by the *dravya leshyas*, then a white heron would have a *shukla leshya* due to its white color. This would lead to the conclusion that all beings with white bodies, including those with *graharak* bodies and those existing in *vigraha gati*, would have a *shukla leshya*.
* **The role of *karma*:** The *leshya* of color is determined by the *varna nama karma*, not the *bhavaleshys*. Therefore, we cannot equate the two *leshyas*. The *varna nama karma* is responsible for both the *aghatiya* and *pudgalavipaki* color, while the *charitra mohaniya karma* is responsible for both the *ghatiya* and *jivavipaki* aspects. These two types of *karma* are contradictory, so we cannot say that the *bhavaleshys* are the cause of the *dravya leshyas*.

**Conclusion:** Based on this analysis, we can conclude that the *bhavanvasi*, *vanabhyantara*, and *jyotishi* gods have all six *leshyas* in their *dravya*, while the gods above the *bhavanatrika* have only *tej*, *padma*, and *shukla* *leshyas*.

**Example of the crow:** Just as a crow, which has five different colored *rasas*, is seen as black, similarly, there is no contradiction in a body having all six *leshyas* in its *dravya* while exhibiting only one color.

**The *shukla leshya*:** The *visrshopachya* of all *karmas* is *shukla*. Therefore, all beings existing in *vigraha gati* have a *shukla leshya* in their *dravya*.

**The *kapota leshya*:** When a body is formed, it is made up of six colored atoms. This body then acquires the *kapota leshya* until it fulfills its *paryapti*.

**Further discussion:** The next eight *gathas* will discuss the *parinama adhikar* and the *sankraman adhikar* in relation to the *varna adhikar*.

1. *Dhaval Purana* 2, pp. 532-535.
2. *Dhaval Purana* 2, p. 535.
3. *Dhaval Purana* 2, p. 422.

Page #615:
---------------------------
## Gatha 466-506
## Shyamarya / 581

The number of places where the *kṣayās* arise is innumerable. In them, the *saṃkleśa* transformation is *aśubhaleśyā*, and the *viśuddha* transformation is *śubhaleśyā*. This should be said. ||466||

The most intense, more intense, and intense *kṣayās* are *aśubhaleśyā* transformations, while the mild, milder, and mildest *kṣayās* are *śubhaleśyā* transformations. In each, there is a loss and increase of the six *sthānas*. ||500||

From the excellent part of the three *aśubhaleśyās* - *kṛṣṇa*, *nīla*, and *kāpota* - the *jīva* transmigrates in sequence, due to the loss of *saṃkleśa* transformation, to the middle part, and from the middle part to the inferior part. ||501||

As the *saṃkleśa* transformations increase, this *ātman* transmigrates in sequence to the inferior, middle, and excellent parts of the *kāpota*, *nīla*, and *kṛṣṇa* *leśyās*. Thus, due to the loss and increase of *saṃkleśa*, there is transmigration in the three *aśubhaleśyās*. ||502||

As the *viśuddha* transformations increase, this *ātman* transmigrates in sequence to the inferior, middle, and excellent parts of the three *śubhaleśyās* - *pīta*, *padma*, and *śukla*. As the *viśuddha* transformations decrease, this *ātman* transmigrates in sequence to the excellent, middle, and inferior parts of the *śukla*, *padma*, and *pīta*. ||503||

There are two types of transmigration: *svāsthāna* transmigration and *parasthāna* transmigration. When there is an increase in the *kṛṣṇa* and *śukla* *leśyās*, there is *svāsthāna* transmigration. But when there is a decrease, both *svāsthāna* and *parasthāna* transmigration are possible. In the remaining four *leśyās*, both *svāsthāna* and *parasthāna* transmigration are possible when there is a decrease. ||504||

From the excellent...

Page #616:
---------------------------
582 / Go. Sa. Jivakanda
Verses 461-506
When there is a decrease in the lowest place of the *leshyas* and an increase in the lowest place of the *leshyas* above the lowest place, there is a *svasthana* transition. When there is a decrease in the lowest place of the *leshyas*, according to the rule, there is a *parasthana* transition. || 505 || Transition is in the form of an increase in the six places. The names and quantities of those six places have been mentioned earlier in the *Shrutagyan*. || 506 ||
Special Meaning - The places of origin of the *kasyas* are countless, meaning that there are as many places of origin as there are regions in countless worlds. Of these, the *asam leshyas* are the results of *samklesha*, and a countless fraction are the pure results of the auspicious *leshyas*. But generally, both *samklesha* and pure results are countless. In these *leshyas*, from the best to the worst and from the worst to the best, there is a decrease and increase in the six places. In the inauspicious *leshyas*, there is a decrease and increase in *samklesha*, and in the three auspicious *leshyas*, there is a decrease and increase in purity. That is, when there is a gradual increase in *samklesha*, there is a transformation from the lowest part of the *kapota leshya* to the middle part, and from the middle part to the highest part, then again from the lowest, middle, and highest parts of the *nila leshya*, and then again from the lowest, middle, and highest parts of the *krishna leshya*. Similarly, when there is a gradual increase in purity, there is a transformation from the lowest part of the *pita leshya* to the middle part, and then from the middle part to the highest part, then again from the lowest, middle, and highest parts of the *padma leshya*, and then again from the lowest, middle, and highest parts of the *shukla leshya*. When there is a gradual decrease in purity, there is a transition from the highest part of the *shukla leshya* to the lowest part of the *pita leshya*.
This statement of transformation and transition is not with respect to death, because a *mithyadrishti* deva with a middle *shukla leshya*, when his lifespan is waning, does not transform from the lowest *shukla leshya* etc., but falls into the three inauspicious *leshyas*. (Dhaval Pu. 8 p. 322)
The *leshya parinam* authority has been obtained for the purpose of informing about which *leshya* transforms from which form and by which increase or decrease. The transformation of the *parinam* is transition. In them, the method of transformation of the *krishna leshya* is first mentioned. A being with a *krishna leshya*, having obtained *samklesha*, does not transform into another *leshya*, but obtains an increase in the same place through *shatsthana patit sthana samkran*.
Doubt - What is the form of *shatsthana patit* increase?
-
Solution - Having more *leshyas* than the place from which *samklesha* was obtained, more than countless, more than countable, more than countable times, more than countless times, and more than infinite times, this is called *shatsthana patit* increase.
The aforementioned being with a *krishna leshya*, having obtained purity (decrease in *samklesha*), is without infinite parts, without countless parts, without countable parts, without countable times, without countless times, without infinite times.
1. Dh. Pu. 16 p. 483.

Page #617:
---------------------------
## Gatha 461-506
**Leshyamargna/583**

A Leshya is a being. In this way, a Shatsthana Patit (fallen state) receives a loss in its Svasthana (natural state) due to the Leshya. Due to infinite qualities of loss, it is transformed into a Neel Leshya. In this way, the cause of receiving Sanklesha (affliction) is a choice due to the increase of Leshya by the Leshya Yuni. There are two choices when receiving Vishuddhi (purification, loss of Sanklesha). One choice is due to the loss of Krishna Leshya, and the other is due to the transition into Neel Leshya. This is the law of transformation of Krishna Leshya.

The law of transformation of Neel Leshya is that a Neel Leshya receives Sanklesha from the Neel Leshya, and due to the increase of Shatsthana Patit, it transitions into a Bhol Leshya, or it is transformed into a Krishna Leshya due to the infinite qualities of increase. In this way, there are two choices when receiving Sanklesha. The one who receives Vishuddhi from Neel Leshya receives a loss of Neel Leshya due to the loss of Shatsthana Patit. On the other hand, it is also transformed into a Kapoth Leshya due to the loss of infinite qualities. In this way, there are two choices for the one who receives Vishuddhi from Neel Leshya (the one who receives the loss of Sanklesha). This is the law of transformation of Neel Leshya.

The law of transformation of Kapoth Leshya is that a Kapoth Leshya receives Sanklesha due to irregularity, and due to the increase of Shatsthana Patit, it increases in its Svasthana. On the other hand, it is transformed into a Neel Leshya due to the increase of infinite qualities. In this way, there are two choices for Kapoth Leshya due to the increase of Sanklesha. Due to Vishuddhi (loss of Sanklesha), it receives a loss in its Svasthana due to the loss of Shatsthana Patit. On the other hand, it is transformed into a Tej Leshya due to the loss of infinite qualities. In this way, there are two choices for Kapoth Leshya due to the loss of Sanklesha. This is the law of transformation of Kapoth Leshya.

The law of transformation of Peet Leshya is that Peet Leshya is auspicious. In this, there is a decrease in Svasthana due to the increase of Shatsthana Patit Sanklesha. Due to the decrease of infinite qualities, Peet Leshya is transformed into Kapoth Leshya. In this way, there are two choices for Peet Leshya due to the increase of Sanklesha. In Vishuddhi, it receives an increase in Svasthana due to the increase of Shatsthana Patit. Due to the increase of infinite qualities, it is also transformed into a Pal Leshya. In this way, there are two choices for Peet (Tej) Leshya due to Vishuddhi.

The law of transformation of Padm Leshya is that in Padm Shubh Leshya, there is an increase in Svasthana due to the increase of Shatsthana Patit Vishuddhi. In Vishuddhi, it is transformed into a Shukla Leshya due to the increase of infinite qualities. In Vishuddhi, there is a decrease in Svasthana due to the loss of Shatsthana Patit, or due to Sanklesha, and it receives a transition into Tej Leshya due to the loss of infinite qualities. This is the law of transformation of Padm Leshya.

The law of transformation of Shukla Leshya is that a Shukla Leshya receives the loss of Vishuddhi (Sanklesha), and due to the loss of Shatsthana Patit, it receives a loss in its Svasthana. On the other hand, due to the loss of infinite qualities, it is transformed into a Dhwala Leshya.

Page #618:
---------------------------
584/Go. Sa. Jivakanda
Gatha 466-506

It is transformed by the Padma Leshya. Thus, there are two options in the Shukla Leshya due to the loss of purity (Sanklesha). In the Shukla Leshya, there is an increase in purity in the Svasthana due to the degeneration of the six places, there is no transition to other Leshyas. There is only one option in the Shukla Leshya due to the increase in purity.

The being who has attained an increase in Sanklesha in the Krishna Leshya does not transition to another Leshya. The being who has attained the loss of Sanklesha (Vishuddhi) falls into six places in the Svasthana, or falls into the infinite-quality-less Neel Leshya. That is, it transitions. Having attained an increase in Sanklesha in the Neel Leshya, it transmigrates to the Svasthana or transitions to the infinite-quality-other-place-form Krishna Leshya. The Neel Leshya, having attained the loss of Sanklesha (Vishuddhi), transmigrates to the Svasthana in six places, or transitions to the infinite-quality-less other-place-form Kapoth Leshya. Having attained an increase in Sanklesha in the Kapoth Leshya, it transmigrates to the Svasthana in six places, or transitions to the infinite-quality-other-place Neel Leshya. The Kapoth Leshya, having attained the loss of Sanklesha (Vishuddhi), transmigrates to the Svasthana in six places, or transitions to the infinite-quality-less other-place-form Teja Leshya.

The Teja (Poth) Leshya, having attained the loss of purity (Sanklesha), transmigrates to the Svasthana in six places. It transitions to the infinite-quality-other-place-form Kapoth Leshya. Having attained an increase in purity, it transmigrates to the Svasthana, or transitions to the infinite-quality-other-place Padma Leshya. The Padma Leshya, having attained the loss of purity (Sanklesha), falls down to the Svasthana in six places or transitions to the infinite-quality-less other-place-form Teja Leshya. The Padma Leshya, having attained an increase in purity, goes up to the Svasthana in six places, or transitions to the infinite-quality-purity, other-place-form Shukla Leshya. The Shukla Leshya, having attained the loss of purity (Sanklesha), falls down to the Svasthana in six places or transitions to the infinite-quality-less other-place-form Pala Leshya. Having attained an increase in purity, it transmigrates to the Svasthana, it does not transition to the other place.

The inferiority and superiority of intensity-weakness and the fewness of the Pratigraha-Sthana are as follows:

From the shelter of the Krishna and Neel Leshyas, the statement is as follows: The inferior place of the Neel Leshya is Stoka. The place of the Neel Leshya where there is Pratigraha from the Krishna Leshya, that is the inferior Pratigraha Sthana of the Neel Leshya, it is infinite-quality. The inferior Sankrama Sthana of the Krishna and the inferior Krishna Sthana are both equal and infinite-quality. The inferior Sankrama Sthana of the Neel is infinite-quality. The inferior Pratigraha Sthana of the Krishna is infinite-quality. The superior Pratigraha Sthana of the Neel is infinite-quality. The superior Sankrama Sthana of the Krishna is infinite-quality. The superior Sankrama Sthana of the Neel and the superior Neel Sthana are both equal and infinite-quality. The superior Pratigraha Sthana of the Krishna is infinite-quality. The superior Krishna Leshya Sthana is infinite-quality.

From the shelter of the Neel and Kapoth Leshyas, the fewness of the Sankrama and Pratigraha Sthana - as Krishna

1. Dhaval Pu. 16 p. 465.
2. Dhaval Pu. 16 p. 572-573. 3. Dhaval Pu. 16 p. 466.

Page #619:
---------------------------
## Gatha 466-506
## Leshyamargna/585

And in relation to the Neel Leshyas, one should know the same in relation to Kapoot and Neel Leshyas. The special feature is that this statement should be made starting with Kapootleshya.

From the shelter of Kapoot and Tejo Leshyas, the statement of the smallness of the number of Sankrama and Pratigraha Sthanas is as follows:

* The inferior Sankrama and inferior Sthana of Kapootleshya are both equal in quantity.
* The inferior Sthana and inferior Sankrama of Tejo Leshya are both equal in quantity and are infinitely greater than them.
* The inferior Pratigraha Sthana of Kapoot is infinitely greater.
* The inferior Pratigraha Sthana of Tejo is infinitely greater.
* The superior Sankrama Sthana of Kapoot is infinitely greater.
* The superior Sankrama Sthana of Tejo is infinitely greater.
* The superior Pratigraha Sthana of Kapoot is infinitely greater.
* The superior Pratigraha Sthana of Tejo is infinitely greater.
* The superior Sthana of Kapoot is infinitely greater.
* The superior Sthana of Tejo is infinitely greater.

From the shelter of Tejo, Padam, and Leshyas, the statement of the smallness of the number of Sankrama and Pratigraha Sthanas is as follows:

* The inferior Sthana of Tejo is negligible.
* The inferior Pratigraha Sthana of Tejo is infinitely greater.
* The inferior Sthana and Sankrama of Padam are both equal in quantity and are infinitely greater.
* The inferior Sankrama Sthana of Tejo is infinitely greater.
* The inferior Pratigraha Sthana of Padam is infinitely greater.
* The superior Pratigraha Sthana of Tejo is infinitely greater.
* The superior Sankrama Sthana of Padam is infinitely greater.
* The superior Sankrama and superior Sthana of Tejo are infinitely greater.
* The superior Pratigraha Sthana of Padam is infinitely greater.
* The superior Sthana of Padam is infinitely greater.

From the shelter of Padam, Shukla, and Leshyas, the statement of the smallness of the number of Sankrama and Pratigraha Sthanas is as follows:

* The inferior Sthana of Padam is negligible.
* The inferior Pratigraha Sthana of Padam is infinitely greater.
* The inferior Sankrama and inferior Sthana of Shukla are both equal in quantity and are infinitely greater.
* The inferior Sankrama Sthana of Padam is infinitely greater.
* The inferior Pratigraha Sthana of Shukla is infinitely greater.
* The superior Pratigraha Sthana of Padam is infinitely greater.
* The superior Sankrama Sthana of Shukla is infinitely greater.
* The superior Sthana and Sankrama of Padam are infinitely greater.
* The superior Pratigraha Sthana of Shukla is infinitely greater.
* The superior Sthana of Shukla is infinitely greater.

In this way, one should also state the smallness of the number of three, four, five, and six combinations. From this and the commentary on Gatha 518, it is known that there are some middle parts that are found in all six Leshyas.

The proof of the Sathsthana Patit Leshya Sthanas is the countless Lokas. Among them, the Sthanas of Kapootleshya are negligible. The Sthanas of Neel Leshya are countless times greater. The Sthanas of Krishna Leshya are countless times greater. The Sthanas of Tejo Leshya are countless times greater. The Sthanas of Padam Leshya are countless times greater. The Sthanas of Shukla Leshya are countless times greater.

- The names and definitions of these six Sthanas. Although they have been stated in detail in the Shrutagyan, they are also stated briefly here:

* Anant Bhagavrudhi
* Asankhyat Bhagavrudhi
* Sankhyat Bhagavrudhi
* Sankhyat Gunavrudhi
* Asankhyat Gunavrudhi
* Anant Gunavrudhi

These are the six वृद्धि (Vrudhi). Similarly, there are six हानि (Hani).

* The quantity of Anant is the entire Jeevarashi.
* The quantity of Asankhyat is countless Lokas.
* The quantity of Sankhyat is...

1. Dhaval Pu. 16 p. 466.
2. Dhaval Pu. 16 p. 466-467.
3. Dhaval Pu. 16 p. 467.
4. Dhaval Pu. 16 p. 467.
5. See the commentary on Gatha 288 and 292-65 of this same text.
6. Dhaval Pu. 16 p. 573.

Page #620:
---------------------------
586/Go. Sa. Jivakanda
Gatha 507-506
Parimana utkrisht sankhyaat rashi hai. Anantbhaag vruddhi aur anantgunavrudhhi mein bhaagahaar aur gunaakar samasht jivaraashi pramaan hai. Asankhyaatbhaagavrudhhi aur asankhyaat gunavrudhhi mein bhaagahaar va gunaakar asankhyaat lokpramaag hai. Sankhyaatbhaagavrudhhi aur sankhyaatgunavrudhhi inka bhaagahaar va gunaakar utkrisht sankhyaat avasthit hai. Sandrishti karne ke liye in chhah ki yeh chhah sanjnaa hain—anant bhaagavrudhhi ki urvang (3), asankhyaatbhaagavrudhhi ki chaturang (4), prakhaat bhaag vruddhi ki panchaank (5), sankhyaatgunavrudhhi ki shadank (6), asankhyaatmushavrudhhi ko saptaank (7), anant gunavrudhhi ki ashtaank (8) sanjnaa hai. Suchyanguli ke asankhyaatven bhaag pramaan anantbhaagavaddhiyon ke hone par ek baar asankhyaat bhaagavrudhhi hoti hai. Punah suchyanguli ke asankhyaatven bhaag pramaan baar anant bhaagavrudhhiyon ke hone par ek baar asankhyaatvenbhaagavrudhhi hoti hai. Is kram se asankhyaatbhaagavrudhhi bhi suchyanguli ke asankhyaatven bhaag pramaan ho jaay tab purvokt pramaan anantbhaagavrudhhi ho jaane par sankhyaat bhaag vruddhi hoti hai. Isi kram se anantgunavrudhhi tak le jaana chahiye.'
Drishtaant dwara chhohon lenyaanon ke karm ka kathn pahiya je chhappurisaa paribhattararanamjhadesamhi. Falbhariyaruvakh megam pevikhattaa te vichitanti ||10|| Rinammulkhandhsahakssahm chitt chirinatt padivain.
Khaun phalai idi je maraneg bayanam have kamman ||50|| Gaatharth   Chhah pathik van ke madhya mein marg se bhrashth hokar phalono se bhare hue vrikhsh ko dekhkar vichar karte hain aur kahte hain-jadamul se vrikhsh ko kato, skandh se kato, shakhaon se kato, upshakhaon se kato, phalono ko tod kar khaao, gire hue phalono ko khaamo, is prakar ke vichar ba vachan leshya karm ko prakaat karte hain.।507-508।।
Vishesharth phalono se lade hue vrikhsh ko dekhkar krishnalenya wala vichar karta hai ki is baksh ko jadamul se ukhadkar phal khane chahiye. Neel leshya wala vichar karta hai ki is vrikhsh ke skandh (tane) ko kaatkar phal khane chahiye. Kapoot leshya bala vichar karta hai ki is vrikhsh ki shakhaamon ko kaatkar phal khane chahiye, tejo leshya wala vichar karta hai ki is vrikhsh ki upshastraanon ko kaatkar phal khane chahiye. Padm lenyaavala vichar karta hai ki phal todkar khane chahiye. Shukla leshyaavala vichar karta hai ki pak kar niche gire hue phal khane chahiye. In bhaavon ke anusar ve vachan bhi kahte hain. Unke mansik vicharon tatha vachano se leshya ke tartamya ka gyaan ho jaata hai.
Krishnaleshya ke karm va lakshan ka kathn chando rag muchai veram bhandaragasilo ya dhammavayarihio. Buttho ga ya edi vasan lavkharanmeyam tu kinhass ||50||'
1. Go. Ji. Gatha 323 se 126 tak. San. A. 1ga. 192.40 gar bhi hain.
2. Yah matha kuchh paabdbhed ke saath dhaval pu.2 pri.533, pra. pan. 3. Dhaval pu.1 pri. 388, pu. 16 pri. 460% pra. pan. san. 3,1 ga.

Page #621:
---------------------------
Gatha 5.10 594
Shyamagana / 587

Gatha-artha - The jiva associated with Krishna-shya is extremely wrathful, does not give up enmity, has a nature of abusing, devoid of compassion, wicked and not submissive. This is the characteristic of Krishna-leshya. ||508||

Visheshaartha - The jiva with Krishna-leshya, transformed by the karma of Krishna-leshya, is merciless, quarrelsome, fierce, associated with the tradition of violence, thief, speaker of false speech, desirous of others' wives, attached to honey, meat and liquor, does not listen to the Jain doctrine, and is as firm in his indiscipline as the Meru mountain. "Neel leshya: Karma and its characteristics."

||50|| 2
The one with dull intellect, devoid of discrimination, greedy for sensual pleasures, arrogant, fearful, lazy, impenetrable, abundant in sleep and deception, and extremely desirous of wealth and grains, these are the characteristics of Neel-leshya. ||510 511||

Visheshaartha - 'Neel-leshya' makes the jiva devoid of discrimination, dull-witted, with excess of pride and deceit, sleepy, greedy, and with medium resolve in acts of violence, etc. or in karmas. * The one who is slow or carefree in doing work, unaware of work and its details, lacking in skills and cleverness, addicted to sense pleasures, with intense anger-pride-deceit-greed, lazy, lacking in effort in work, whose intentions cannot be easily known by others, excessively sleepy, and very skilled in deceiving others, is known to have Neel-leshya.

Kapot leshya: Karma and characteristics
He abuses, reviles others, is often fearful of blame.
He despises and insults others, often praises himself.
He believes in others' departure, even thinking of them as such.
He spits, blames, and does not at all cherish. ||512-514||

Page #622:
---------------------------
## English Translation:

**588 / Go. Sa. Joshikanda**

**Verse Meaning:** Being angry, criticizing, blaming others in many ways, being filled with excessive sorrow and fear, being envious, despising others, praising oneself in many ways, never trusting others even if they are like oneself, being satisfied with those who praise oneself, not knowing loss and gain, praying for death in battle, giving a lot of rewards to those who praise, being devoid of the understanding of duty and non-duty - these are all the characteristics of Kapota Leshya. || 512-514 ||

**Special Meaning:** Being angry at others, criticizing them, causing them pain in many ways or holding a grudge, being sorrowful, being fearful, not being able to tolerate the wealth and other things of others, despising them, praising oneself in various ways, not trusting others, considering others to be deceitful like oneself, being satisfied with those who praise and giving them a lot of wealth, not understanding one's own loss and gain, desiring death in battle, lack of understanding in action and inaction, etc. - these are all the actions of Kapota Leshya. Or, 'Kapota Leshya' makes the being engaged in the most despicable actions related to Krishna Leshya.

**Verse Meaning:** 'Tejo Leshya' makes the being aware of duty and non-duty, and the worthy and unworthy to be served, makes it understand all beings as equal, and makes it loving and simple in compassion and charity.

**Verse 515-516**

**Special Meaning:** A being with Tejo Leshya is non-violent, does not consume honey, meat, or alcohol, is truthful, and renounces stealing and adultery. Or, being aware of one's actions, the worthy and unworthy to be served, being impartial towards all, being eager in compassion and charity, being gentle in results - these are the actions or signs of Pita Leshya.

**Pita Leshya Actions**

**Sevam aseyam ca savva samapaasi. Mitta lakkharana meyam tu tejasssa. || 515 || 2**

**...**

**Characteristics of Padma Leshya**

**Chagi bhaddo cokllo ujjavakkammo ya khamadi bahugan pi. Sahu gurupuja gar do lakkhanameyatu pammassa. || 516 || *

**Verse Meaning:** A being transformed by Padma Leshya is renunciant, virtuous, pure, righteous in action, forgiving even of great offenses, and eager in the worship of the virtuous and the guru.

**Special Meaning:** Being charitable, virtuous in results, having a nature of doing good deeds, tolerating both pleasant and unpleasant disturbances, being delighted in the worship of the Muni, Guru, etc. - these are all the signs or actions of one with Padma Leshya.

**1. Dhaval Pu. 16 p. 491. 3. Dhaval Pu. 16 p. 461. 2. Dhaval Pu. 1. 389: 4. Dhaval Pu. 1 p. 360 Pu. Pu. 16 p. 461; Pra. Pan. San. G. 1 Ba. 150. 16 p. 432 Pra. Pan. San. A. 1. 151.**

Page #623:
---------------------------
## Gatha 517-518

**Gatha 517**

When a being has the Sukla Leshya, it does not discriminate or judge. It remains equal to all beings, free from attachment, aversion, and affection. || 517 ||

**Special Meaning:** Not discriminating, not binding to a cause, not having aversion towards all beings due to attachment and dislike, being free from affection towards wife, children, and relatives, these are the characteristics of the Sukla Leshya.

**Gatha 518**

There are twenty-six parts of the Shyama Leshya. Among them, the eight middle parts, which are in the Pratha Apkarhsa Kala, are eligible for Ayubandha. || 518 ||

**Special Meaning:** This is written based on the Dhavala.

**Doubt:** What is the nature of Apkarhsa?

**Meaning of the Gatha:** There are twenty-six parts of the Shyama Leshya. Among them, the eight middle parts, which are in the Pratha Apkarhsa Kala, are eligible for Ayubandha. || 518 ||

**Solution:** Apkarhsa is the reduction of the current lifespan, making it eligible for binding in the next lifespan. If someone has a lifespan of 1 year, after two-thirds of that lifespan (54 years) has passed, the first Apkarhsa occurs, making the being eligible for Ayubandha in the next lifespan. After another two-thirds of the remaining lifespan (18 years) has passed, the second Apkarhsa occurs. This continues until the eighth Apkarhsa. If Ayubandha occurs during these eight Apkarhsa periods, the being will be reborn in a lower realm.

**References:**

* Dhavala Gu. 1, Page 360, Pu. 16, Page 462, Pra. Pan. San. Ma. 1, Ma. 152.

Page #624:
---------------------------
## 560/Go. Sa. Jivakanda
## Gatha 518

If the remaining lifespan is not completely exhausted, then there is definitely a binding of the lifespan of the next birth. Because death does not occur without the binding of the lifespan of the next birth.

The term "Asanksepadha" refers to the binding of the lifespan with the shortest period of rest. It occurs from the end of the Yavamdhya period to the end of the shortest lifespan binding period. This Asanksepadha occurs only in the third division, because there is still a possibility of taking a minor birth. The shortest period of rest above the lifespan binding is called the "Ksullak Bhavagrahana". It occurs above the lifespan binding period. (Dhaval Pu. 14 p. 503-504. Dhaval Pu. 11 p. 266, 273 etc.)

There are twenty-six parts of the six Leshyas. Due to the distinction of the excellent, medium, and inferior parts of each Leshya (643), there are eighteen parts. In addition to these, there are eight medium parts in the Kshayodayasthan, which are before the excellent part of the Teja (Peet) Leshya and after the excellent part of the Kapootaleshya, which are barriers to lifespan binding. Thus, there are twenty-six parts of the Leshyas.

_Shilalekha, Prithvirekha, Dhulirekha, Jalarekha_
_Janarekha U. 0 0 0 0 0 0 J. | 3. 0 0 0 0 0 0 J. 'U... 0 0 0 0 J. | U. 0 0 0 0. 0 J._
_Leshya_
_Kr._
_1_
_1444_
_Payu Bandh_
_Path Madhyam Ansh_
_Go, Jo. Gatha 518 ka Naksha [Apne Shudh Roop mein] Prithvirekha_
_Dhulirekha_
_Shilalekha_
_Jalarekha_
_U. 0 0 0_
_0 0_
_J ,U 0 0_
_0 0 0_
_0_
_J_
_0_
_0_
_0 0_
_0_
_0_
_J | U 0_
_0_
_0 0 0_
_0_
_J_
_Keu_
_Kr. 1_
_+-Madhyamansha:_

Page #625:
---------------------------
## Explanation of the Map

**Water**
**Trulli**
4
**Earth**
!
**Stone**
0 J to U. from 00
0
0 J to
D
HA
0
5
Du
Our
Ow
~
**Medium Sukla and Excellent Sukla**
******..
14-RARE
**Medium Sukla Leshya**
*44*+
**Excellent Padma Jamany Sukla**
Krishna 1
******** **.**.
WAT
Weed... Well
» **Inferior Kapota and Medium Three Shubh**
********
J. Neel and Krishna-free remaining 4 Medium
HE FINE ALL
*********
w J. Krishna and remaining 5 Leshya Medium
*****....
...AREE
  -
Krishnaadi 5 Medium and Jayamy Sukla
********
*******
Ku. Ni. Ka. Vi Medium Inferior Pach
..... •
Medium Krishna
10
* Kr.Ni. Ka. Medium Inferior Peet
********th H...
Medium Krishna
4*14 day
P.LINK
   
Excellent Krishna
Krishna, Neel, Medium Excellent Kapota
.... CNN DUTE NAR
Medium Krishna Excellent Neel
***Ver
....
PERTINENAD....
0 - Prabhandh
0
Prabhandh
0 = Prabhandh
E
J
Ar
"
de
Devapu
Devayu
Devayu
> All four Ayu N. Dina Pra. La.M.De.Pra. 0 x
M
* All four Prayu
All four Bhavu
• All four Ayu
Larka " N ti Shrayu Nati M.Prayu
효리님으로 보
0 Prabhandh
==
=
• = R+K
Fla
" | "
0
0
C
C
G
M
ሱ
Eight Madhyamanta

Page #626:
---------------------------
592/Go, Sa, Jivakanda
Gatha 518
(A) Note-According to the said intoxication, the names of the Maam parts are as follows: 1. Utkrishta Kapota, Krishna Neel Madhyam. 2. Kushshan Neel Kapota Madhyam, Jaghanya Peet. 3. Krishga Neel Kapota Peet Madhyam Jaghanya Pan. 4. Krishnadi Panch Madhyam; Jaghanya Shukun. 5, Jaghanya Krishna and the remaining 5 Leshya Madhyam. 6. Jaghanya Neel and 4 Leshya (without Krishna) Madhyam. 7. Jaghanya Kapota and three Shubh Leshya Madhyam. 6. Madhyam Pam Shukla and Utkrishta Peet. Special-In these said 8 Apakarshas suitable for Ghayuvanda, the first name starts with Utkrishta Kapota and the last name ends with Utkrishta Peet. Therefore, it is said that there are only 2 Apakarshas between Utkrishta Kapota and Utkrishta Peet (Tejo). (See-Go. Ji. Ga. 518)
(B) By giving the order of Leshyas [such as-Krishna, Neel, Kapota, Tejo, Pan, Shukla (Go. Jo. 463)]
There is often confusion among all scholars that in the period from the Utkrishta of Kapota to the Utkrishta part of Tejo, only two (Kapota and Tejo) Leshyas will come. But in reality, this is not the case. Because the map of Go. Ji. Ga. 518 is a big commentary; Maha Dhaval 2 | Page 278 to 281, Dhaval 8 Page 320 to 358 and Go, Ji. Gatha 260 to 265, in all these places, all the Shyams have unanimously said that there is Prayu Bandha.
(C) This statement related to Go. Ji. is also found in the Karthakanda (Big Commentary) Gyanpeeth publication on page 861 (Ga. 546). Here, the representation of 8 Madhyamoshas is presented with a different opinion. According to him, out of 14 Leshyasthanas, only 4 Leshyasthanas in the middle are taken by 8 Madhyamanshas. Out of the 8 Madhyamanshas written in point A above, only 4 Madhyamoshas from the third to the sixth are taken. They are counted here in 8 forms due to difference in opinion. Thus-Pan Shukla Krishna and Neel, these 4 Leshyas, 4 places in the form of Jaghanya part and 4 places related to motion due to Prayubandha, 3 Prayubandha without Naraka, due to Manushya-Devayu-bandha, due to Devayu-bandha; these 4 places. In this way, there are a total of 8 Madhyamanshas. This statement is worth thinking about.
(D) It is also clear from the names of the Apakarshas listed in section (A) that not only two, but all six Leshyas come in the Apakarshas.
(E) In Shlokawatik Bhag 5 page 634, 8 Apakarshas are described as follows- Krishna and Kapota are in the middle and Peet and Shukla are in the middle = 8 Madhyam Ashas. It is said to be in the middle because Prayu does not bind in some three parts of Krishna Leshya and in some Jaghanya parts of Kapota Leshya. Similarly, in some Jaghanya parts of Shubh Leshyas Peet and some Utkrishta parts of Shukla Leshya, there is no ability to bind the karma of longevity. Therefore, four parts lying in the middle of the Prashubh Leshyas and four parts lying between the three Shubh Leprayas; in this way, 8 Madhyam Granshas are called. [Masha Toka]
(F) Three [ " marked with this symbol, see map] Ayubandha places are still left out of the 8 Madhyam Anshas. So "*" related to all three Narakayu are the binding places which are bound by Madhyam Krishna Leshya and this Madhyam Krishna Leshya form Anshatraya is understood by the implication of the word "Madhyam Krishna Leshya" which is transformed into "8 Madhyam Leshyansh". This is what we think.
-Jawaharlal Jain

Page #627:
---------------------------
## Gatha 516-523
## Yamaga/563

The remaining eighteen parts, excluding the middle parts, are the cause of the four gati (movements). The beings who are connected with the Sukkula (white) leshya (color) are born in the Sarvarthasiddhi (perfect attainment) vimāna (heaven). ||516||

**Gatha-artha:**  Except for the middle parts, the remaining eighteen parts are the cause of the four gati (movements). A person who dies with the excellent part of the Sukkula leshya is born in the Sarvarthasiddhi vimāna according to the rule.

**Visheshartha:** If at the time of death, a Digambar Jain sadhu has the appropriate excellent Sukkula leshya as his parinaama (transformation), then that sadhu, according to the rule, goes to Sarvarthasiddhi and becomes a Grahma-Indra (heavenly king). This is a special feature because that sadhu has bound the devaayu (life span) of 33 sagara (oceans). Because in Sarvarthasiddhi, there is no life span less than or more than 33 sagara.

The beings who are connected with the Pravara (excellent) Sukkula leshya are born in the Sadaraduge (heaven) and the beings who are connected with the Madhyama (middle) Sukkula leshya are born in the Madhyama (middle) heaven. The beings who are connected with the Parana (lowest) Sukkula leshya are born in the Sabdha (sound) heaven. ||520||

The beings who are connected with the Utttama (excellent) Padma (lotus) leshya are born in the Sahasrar (thousand) heaven and the beings who are connected with the Avara (lowest) Padma leshya are born in the Saranakumaar and Maheendra (heaven). ||521||

The beings who are connected with the Madhyama (middle) Padma leshya are born in the middle vimāna (heaven) between the Saranakumaar, Maheendra, and Sahasrar heaven. The beings who are connected with the Avara (lowest) Peeta (yellow) leshya are born in the Sohammo (heaven) and the beings who are connected with the Madhyama (middle) Peeta leshya are born in the Vimala (pure) vimāna (heaven). ||523||

**Gatha-artha:** A person who dies with the lowest part of the Sukkula leshya is born in the Shataradvik (heaven) (Pratar, Sahasrar, Anata, Pranan). A person who dies with the middle part of the Sukkula leshya is born in the vimāna (heaven) above the Granata, Pranata, and before the Sarvarthasiddhi. ||520|| A person who dies with the excellent part of the Padma leshya is born in the Sahasrar heaven according to the rule and a person who dies with the lowest part of the Padma leshya is born in the Sanatkumar and Maheendra heaven. ||521|| A person who dies with the middle part of the Padma leshya is born in the middle vimāna (heaven) between the Sanatkumar, Maheendra, and Sahasrar heaven. A person who dies with the lowest part of the Peeta leshya is born in the Sohammo heaven and a person who dies with the middle part of the Peeta leshya is born in the Vimala vimāna (heaven). ||523||

Page #628:
---------------------------
564/Go. Sa. Jivakanda
Gatha 524-526

Dying with the best parts, Sanatkumar Mahendra is born in the last layer of heaven, in the Chakra-named Indraka Vimana, among the bound Vimanas. ||522|| Dying with the worst parts of Pitaleśya, Saudharma Iśāna is born in the first Indraka Vimana called Ritu, or in the bound Vimanas related to it. Dying with the middle parts of Pitaleśya, they are born from the second Indraka Vimana called Vimala, up to the Valabhadra Indraka Vimana in the second last layer of Sanatkumar Mahendra heaven. ||5.33||

Special Meaning- How is it known that the middle eight parts of the 26 types of Leśya, i.e. 26 parts, are the cause of the lifespan bond?
Solution- "Aṣṭābhiḥ prapakaḥ madhyamena parināmena āyubandhnāti" i.e. the text says that the middle results, by means of the eight parts, bind the lifespan. This is the teaching of Pārṣva. The remaining 18 parts are for special movement or for special increase of merit and demerit. It is also known from this that the middle results are due to their own appropriate lifespan bond. Lifespan is obtained from the rise of karma. Therefore, Leśya is the cause of obtaining movement.

Dying from the best parts of the white Leśya, the soul goes to Sarvarthasiddhi. Dying from the worst parts of the white Leśya, it goes to the Shukra, Mahashukra, Shatara, Sahasrar heavens. Dying from the middle parts of the white Leśya, it is born in the Manvatadi heavens before Sarvarthasiddhi. Dying from the best parts of the Padma Leśya, the being is born in the Sahasrar heaven. Dying from the worst parts of the Padma Leśya, it is born in Sanatkumar Mahendra. Dying from the middle parts of the Padma Leśya, they are born from the Brahmaloka heaven up to the Tara heaven. Dying from the best parts of the Tejo Leśya, it is born in the last Chakra-Indraka Vimana of the Sanatkumar Mahendra Kalpa, and in the bound Vimanas related to it. Dying from the worst parts of the Tejo Leśya, it is born in the first Vimana of the Saudharmaśāna Kalpa, and in the bound Vimanas related to it. Dying from the middle parts of the Tejo Leśya, it is born from the Chandradi Indraka Vimana, and from the bound Vimanas related to it, up to the Balabhadra Indraka Vimana and the bound Vimanas related to it. ||

Kinhavranseṛaṇ mudā avaḍhicchāraṇ mmi pravaraṁsamudā. Pañcamacarimati misse majjhe majhega jāyate. ||524|| Nīlukkassamsa mudā pañcama andhiyammi avara mudā. Vālukasampajjali de majjhe majheṛaṇ jāyate. ||525|| Varakāmosamudā sañjalidam jāṁti tadieriṇarayaśśa. Somant avara mudā majjhe majheṛaṇ jāyate. ||526||

1. Ra. Va. 4/22/10
240.

Page #629:
---------------------------
## Gatha 527-528

**Gatha 527-528**
**Shyam Ganga / 515**
**K) Adhisthan**

**Gatha Meaning:**

* **524:** One who dies with the excellent portion of Krishna Leshya is born in the Indrak Bila called Pratiṣṭhita (the seventh hell). One who dies with the inferior portion of Krishna Leshya is born in the Indrak Bila called Timisra (the last Indrak Bila of the fifth hell). One who dies with the medium portion of Krishna Leshya is born in between these two.
* **525:** One who dies with the excellent portion of Neel Leshya is born in the Indrak Bila called Andhendra (the last Indrak Bila of the fifth hell). One who dies with the inferior portion of Neel Leshya is born in the Indrak Bila called Samprajvalita (the last Indrak Bila of the third hell) of Baluka Prithvi. One who dies with the medium portion of Neel Leshya is born in between these two.
* **526:** One who dies with the excellent portion of Kapota Leshya is born in the Indrak Bila called Samprajvalita (the last Indrak Bila of the third hell). One who dies with the inferior portion of Kapota Leshya is born in the Indrak Bila called Simanta (the first Indrak Bila of the first hell). One who dies with the medium portion of Kapota Leshya is born in between these two.

**Special Meaning:**

* The Indrak Bila of the seventh earth has two names: Avadhiṣṭhāna and Apratiṣṭhitaṣṭhāna.
* One who dies with the excellent portion of Krishna Leshya is born in the Indrak Bila called Pratiṣṭhita (the seventh hell). This means they are born in the seventh hell.
* One who dies with the inferior portion of Krishna Leshya is born in the Indrak Bila called Timisra (the last Indrak Bila of the fifth hell).
* One who dies with the medium portion of Krishna Leshya is born from the Himendraka Bila to the Mahārūrava hell.
* One who dies with the excellent portion of Neel Leshya is born in the Indrak Bila called Andhendra (the last Indrak Bila of the fifth hell).
* One who dies with the inferior portion of Neel Leshya is born in the Indrak Bila called Tapta (the last Indrak Bila of the third hell) of Baluka Prithvi.
* One who dies with the medium portion of Neel Leshya is born from the Trasa Indrak Vimana to the Bhapka Indrak Vimana of Baluka Prithvi.
* One who dies with the excellent portion of Kapota Leshya is born in the Indrak Bila called Samprajvalita (the last Indrak Bila of the third hell) of Baluka Prabha Prithvi.
* One who dies with the inferior portion of Kapota Leshya is born in the Indrak Bila called Simanta (the first Indrak Bila of the first hell) of Ratna Prabha Prithvi.
* One who dies with the medium portion of Kapota Leshya is born from the Roka Indrak Bila to the Samprajvalita Indrak Bila.

**Gatha 527:**

**Gatha Meaning:**

* A being filled with the medium portion of the four Leshyas (Krishna, Neel, Kapota, and Peet) is born in the Bhavanaki, Prithvi, Jala, and Vanaspati beings.

**Special Meaning:**

* This refers to the four Leshyas and their influence on the birth of beings in different realms.

**Gatha 528:**

**Gatha Meaning:**

* Those who die with the medium portion of the three Krishna Leshyas are born as Agnicayika, Vayukayika, and Vikalendriya.
* Devas and Narakas are born as humans and Tiyachas according to their respective Leshyas.

**Special Meaning:**

* This refers to the influence of Leshyas on the rebirth of beings in different realms, including Devas, Narakas, and humans.

**Footnotes:**

* 1. "Avadhiṣṭhānaṁ Pratiṣṭhitaṣṭhānaṁ vā" [Trilokasāra Gā. 156's commentary]
* 2. Rā. Dā. 4/22/10/

Page #630:
---------------------------
566/Go.Sa. Jivakanda
Gatha 527-528

Born in the Bhavanatrik (Bhavanavasi, Vanavyantara, Jyotishi) Devas, in the Vyantara and Jyotishi Devas, in the Earth, Water, and Plant beings. They are born in the Agnicayik and Vayukayik with the medium portion of Krishna, Neel, and Kapota Leshya. Devas and Naraki die with their own Leshyas and are born in their respective Manushya and Tiryanch.

The Bhavanatrik (Bhavanavasi, Vanavyantara, Jyotishi) Devas have only three inauspicious (Krishna, Neel, Kapota) Leshyas in their insufficient time. And the Earth, Water, and Plant beings have only three inauspicious Leshyas in both their sufficient and insufficient states. How is a being born after death with the Peet Leshya?

Solution- If a Manushya or Tiryanch in the Karmabhoomi is born in the Bhavanatrik or Earth, Water, and Plant beings, then they die with the three inauspicious Leshyas. But those beings who do not have a Leshyantar Sankraman in their sufficient time, i.e., do not have a transition to another Leshya form, die with their fixed Leshya. After death, a transition to another Leshya form takes place in time. The Mithyadristi Bhogbhoomi has only three auspicious Leshyas and goes to the Devagati by rule. Such a being is born in the Bhavanatrik after death, then it cannot have an inauspicious Leshya at the time of death, therefore it dies in the Peet Leshya (i.e., stays with the Peet Leshya until the end) and is born in the Bhavanatrik. And there, according to the rule of the Bhavanatrik of the first time, the inauspicious trik Leshya becomes.

The Bhavanatrik Devas and the Devas of the Saudharma Ishana heaven have the Peet Leshya by rule in their sufficient state. Such Mithyadristi Devas can be born in the Ekendriya, i.e., the Badar Jalakayik sufficient, the Badar Prithvikaayik sufficient, and the Badar Vanaspatikayik sufficient beings. It is also said...

Bhajyai Ekendriyatvena Deva Aishanatcha Chuta: ||Purvardha 166|| Bhumyapah Sthulparayapta: Pratyekangavanaspati:
Tiryagmanushdevaanam Janmayam Parikortitum ||156|| Tattvarthasar Adhikar 2] The Mithyadristi and Sasadan Bhavanavasi, Vanavyantara, Jyotishi, and Saudharma and Ishana Devas, having come to the Ekendriya, come to the Badar Prithvikaayik, Badar Jalakayik, and Badar Vanaspatikayik, each of these bodies being their sufficient beings.

Thus, beings who die in the Peet Leshya can be born in the Bhavanatrik and the Badar sufficient Jalakayik, Badar sufficient Prithvikaayik, and Badar sufficient Vanaspatikayik beings.

Doubt- Badar Prithvikaayik insufficient, Badar Jalakayik insufficient, each Vanaspati insufficient
1. Ra Ba. 4 22110. 2. Babal Pu. 2 P. 544. 3. Dh. 21546. 4. Gh. Pu. 6 P. 481 Mootra 110 K P. 478 Gootra 176.

Page #631:
---------------------------
##  Verse 526-5.35
##  Shyamargagra / 517

**Question:** Which types of Leshya are born in the subtle earth-bodied and subtle water-bodied beings? Why is this not stated?

**Answer:** This is implicitly stated in verse 528.  The seven one-sensed beings, mentioned in verse 527, are included in the seven one-sensed beings mentioned in verse 526. Therefore, humans and animals who die with the middle portion of the three inauspicious Leshyas are reborn as these one-sensed beings.

**Doubt:** Which Leshya do beings die with to be reborn as sufficient, insufficient, non-cognizant five-sensed beings, and insufficient cognizant five-sensed beings? Why is this not stated?

**Answer:** This is also stated in verse 528. It is understood from the word "Viyalesu".  Besides the sufficient cognizant five-sensed beings, the remaining seven are deficient. The non-cognizant five-sensed beings are deficient because they lack a mind. The insufficient cognizant five-sensed beings are deficient because they lack a mind and the ability to see with their eyes.

**Explanation:**

**Verse 526:** What Leshya does a being have?  Kapol, Kapot, Kapot, Yellow, Golkipaha, or Black.  Which Leshya is the most black?  The Leshya of the beginning of the cycle.

**Verse 530:** The rebirth of the beings is based on their actions, whether good or bad.

**Verse 531:**  The three good Leshyas are obtained by good actions.

**Verse 532:**  There are six Leshyas, the good Leshya, the Leshya of the land, and the Leshya of the sky.  The white Leshya is the Leshya of the yogis.

**Verse 533:**  The Leshya of the passions is the highest, and it is the Leshya of the gods.

**Verse 534:**  There are six, twelve, thirteen, and one hundred Leshyas.  These are the Leshyas of the gods.

**Verse 535:**  There are three, three, three, and three.  There are also white and most white Leshyas.  These are the Leshyas of the cycle of rebirth.  The most white Leshya is the Leshya of the virtuous.

**Verse Meaning:**

* The first earth has the Kapol Leshya.
* The second earth has the Kapot Leshya.
* The third earth has the Kapot and Neel Leshya.
* The fourth earth has the Neel Leshya.
* The fifth earth has the Neel and Krishna Leshya.

Page #632:
---------------------------
## Chapter 568: The Chapter of Living Beings

**Verses 526-535**

In the sixth earth, there is the Krshna Leshya, and in the seventh earth, there is the Param Krshna Leshya. || 5.26 ||

Among humans and animals, there are six Leshyas. There are three (inauspicious) Leshyas for the one-sensed and the disabled-sensed. There are four Leshyas for the non-sentient (five-sensed) and three inauspicious Leshyas for the sentient, namely Mithyashti, Sasadan, Samyagdrishti, and Sambadrishti. || 5.30 ||

For the Bhogabhumia, the Apyptik Samyagdrishti has three inauspicious Leshyas, namely Kapot, Neel, and Krshna, according to the rule. But in the Paryapt state, there are three auspicious Leshyas for both Samyagdrishti and Mithyashti. || 5.31 ||

The non-restrained have all six Leshyas. The three (Deshavirat, Pramattasanyat, and Apramattasanyat) have three auspicious Leshyas. Beyond that, there is only the Shukla Leshya. The fourteenth Gunasthan, Prayogkevali, is Aleshya, meaning without Leshya. || 5.32 ||

For those who have destroyed their Kshayas (Kshina Kshaya or Prakkshayee), the Leshya is said to be based on their previous Prajnapananaya. Or, due to the predominance of Yogapravritti, there is Leshya there. || 5.33 ||

Among the Bhavan and other Devas, the three (Bhavantrik) have Tejo (Peet) Leshya, the two (Soudharm and Aishan) have Peet Leshya, the two (Sanatkumar-Mahendra) have Peet and Padma Leshya, the six (Brahm, Brahmottar, Lantav, Kapishth, Shukra, Mahashukra) have Padma Leshya, the two (Shatar, Sahasrar) have Padma and Shukla Leshya, the thirteen (Manat, Pranat, Parana, Achyut, and nine Praiveyak) have Shukla Leshya, and the fourteen (nine Adisha and five Anuttar) have Param Shukla Leshya. || 5.30-535 ||

**Special Note:**

The Naraki beings have the most inauspicious Leshya. The inauspicious Kapot Leshya of the animals is even more inauspicious than the Kapot Leshya in the first Naraka. The Kapot Leshya in the second Naraka is even more inauspicious than that. In the upper part of the third Naraka, there is Kapot Leshya, and in the lower part, there is Neel Leshya. In the fourth Naraka, there is Neel Leshya. In the upper part of the fifth Naraka, there is Neel Leshya, and in the lower part, there is Krshna Leshya. In the sixth Naraka, there is Krshna Leshya, and in the seventh Naraka, there is Param Krshna Leshya. These Leshyas become progressively more and more inauspicious.

The Bhavanbasi-Vyantarjyotishi Devas have three inauspicious Leshyas, namely Krshna, Neel, and Kapot, in their Apypta state, and four Leshyas, namely Tejo (Peet), in their Paryapt state.

The one-sensed, two-sensed, three-sensed, and four-sensed beings have three inauspicious Leshyas (Krshna, Neel, Kapot) due to the results of their Sambha Leshya.

The non-sentient five-sensed animals have Krshna, Neel, Kapot, and Peet Leshya, because the bondage of Devaayu is possible for the non-sentient five-sensed animals in their Paryapt state.

The sentient five-sensed animals and humans have only three Leshyas, namely Mithyashti, Sasadan, Samyagdrishti, and Samyagmithyashti, for the Asanyat Samyagdrishti beings.

The three, namely Sanyata, Pramattasanyat, and Apramattasanyat, have three auspicious Leshyas, namely Peet, Padma, and Shukla.

As soon as one takes a Vrat, the inauspicious Leshyas disappear, because the sins are gradually abandoned, both partially and completely.

From the fourth Gunasthan, A-purvakaran, to the thirteenth Gunasthan, Sayogkevali, there is only Shukla Leshya, but due to the progressive increase in purity, there is also a progressive increase in Shukla Leshya.

Due to the influence of the A-yogkevali's Yoga, the influence of Leshya also disappears, which is why the Prayogkevali is Aleshya, meaning without Leshya.

**Doubt:**

Why are there only three Leshyas (Krshna, Neel, Kapot) for the Pradi up to the fourth Gunasthan?

1. "Naraka Nitya Ashubhatar Leshya..." [T. Su. Amu 3] || 3/3/2 || 3. T. Ra. 3/3/4 || 4. Ra. Va. 4/12/10 ||
2. "Tiyangyapeno Ati-shaya Nirdesha." || Ra. Va. ||

Page #633:
---------------------------
## Gatha 536
##  Leniyamagrana/566

**Solution:** The intense, more intense, and the harmony of the arising of the three kṣayās is found only up to the fourth guṇasthāna, therefore there are only three ashubha leśyās up to the fourth guṇasthāna.

**Doubt:** How is it possible for the śukla leśyā to exist in beings whose kṣayās have become weak (destroyed) or subsided?

**Solution:** No, because in beings whose kṣayās have become weak or subsided, the cause of karma-lepa, i.e., yoga, is found. Therefore, there is no contradiction in considering their śukla leśyā from this perspective. One should not conclude that the yoga of akṣayā vītarāgis is not leśyā, because leśyā is primarily yoga, not kṣayā; because it is a qualifier of the tendency of yoga. Therefore, it cannot be primary. Indeed, the absence of leśyā in beings with weak kṣayās is found if leśyā is considered to arise only from the arising of kṣayās. However, the yoga arising from the arising of the nāma karma, which is called the body, is also considered leśyā, because it is also instrumental in karma-bandha. Therefore, even when kṣayās are destroyed, yoga remains. Therefore, there is no contradiction in considering beings with weak kṣayās to have leśyā.

The Saudharma śān devās have a medium pīta leśyā. The Sanatkumāra Mahendra devās have a superior pīta leśyā and an inferior padma leśyā. The Brahma, Brahmottara, Lāntava, Kāpiṣṭa heavens have a medium padma leśyā. The devās of the Śukra, Mahāśukra, Śatāra, Sahasrāra heavens have a superior padma leśyā and an inferior śukla leśyā. The Ānata etc. (Ānata, Prāṇata, Āraṇa, Acyuta heavens and the nine Aveyaka) should be known to have a medium śukla leśyā. The Navānudiśa and Pañcānuttara vimānas have a supreme śukla leśyā.

In this way, by stating which leśyā exists in which being, or who is the master of which leśyā, the method is stated in one gāthā:

**Vāṇṇodayasampāditasarīravaṇo du vado leśśā. Mohacayakhagrōvasamōyasamakhajajīvafadaraṇam bhāvo. ||536||**

**Meaning of the Gāthā:** The color (varna) of the body, which is produced by the arising of the karma called varṇa, is the dravya leśyā. The vibration or pulsation or contraction-expansion (yoga) of the jīva-pradeśa, which is associated with the arising, decay, subsidence, or decay with subsidence of the mohaniya karma, is the bhāva leśyā. ||536||

**Special Meaning:** The dravya leśyā arises due to the arising of the nāma karma (varga nāma karma). The yoga, which is in the form of the pulsation of the ātmā-pradeśa, that arises due to the arising, decay, subsidence, or decay of the kṣayās, is the bhāva leśyā. The dravya leśyā has been discussed in detail in the special meaning of gāthās 466-468. 

**References:**

1. Dhavala Pu. 1 p. 361.
2. Dhavala Pu. 1 p. 191.
3. Dhavala Pu. 1 p. 150.
4. Dhavala Pu. 7 p. 105.
5. Rā. Vā. 4.22.12-6 with commentary.
6. Rā. Vā. 4.22.10.

Page #634:
---------------------------
## 600 / Go. Sa. Jeev Kand

The meaning of the remaining verses of the Leshya Marg has already been explained in the context of the Leshya, therefore, it is not mentioned here due to the fault of repetition.

**Verses 537-531**

**The number of beings in the three inauspicious Leshyas**

The number of beings with the Leshyas of Krishna, Neel, and Kapoot should be divided by an innumerable part of the Shraavali, and then divided again. Or, by taking refuge in time, one should obtain the separate substance of Krishna, Neel, and Kapoot, which are of inferior order. ||537||

Compared to the measure of the field, the beings with the three inauspicious Leshyas are innumerable in number, but they are progressively inferior. Compared to time, the beings with the three inauspicious Leshyas are innumerable times greater than the perceived time, and they are progressively inferior. ||538||

The beings with the three Leshyas of Krishna, Neel, and Kapoot are only a fraction of the infinite knowledge, compared to the essence. ||536 First Half||

**Special Meaning:**

When the entire population of beings is divided into infinite parts, the majority of them are beings with the three inauspicious Leshyas. Or, when the number of beings with the three auspicious Leshyas, which is innumerable, is subtracted from the total number of beings in the world, the remaining number of beings in the world, or slightly more than the number of beings with one sense, is the number of beings with the three inauspicious Leshyas. This number should be divided by an innumerable part of the Shraavali, and one part should be kept separate. The remaining majority should be divided into three equal parts. The remaining one part, which was kept separate, should be divided by an innumerable part of the Shraavali, and then added to one of the three equal parts. This will give the number of beings with the Krishna Leshya. The remaining part of the one part that was kept separate should be divided again by an innumerable part of the Shraavali, and the majority should be added to the second equal part. This will give the number of beings with the Neel Leshya. The remaining part should be added to the third equal part. This will give the number of beings with the Kapoot Leshya. The number of beings with the Kapoot Leshya is less than the number of beings with the Neel Leshya. The number of beings with the Neel Leshya is less than the number of beings with the Krishna Leshya. Thus, these numbers of beings are progressively inferior.

The collective time of these three inauspicious Leshyas of Krishna, Neel, and Kapoot, in the beings of the realm of karma, is only a fraction of a moment. In that fraction of a moment, one should divide by an innumerable part of the Shraavali, and keep one part separate. The majority should be divided into three equal parts. The one part that was kept separate should be divided by an innumerable part of the Shraavali, and then added to one of the three equal parts. This will give the measure of time for the Krishna Leshya. The remaining part of the one part that was kept separate should be divided again by an innumerable part of the Shraavali, and the majority should be added to the second equal part. This will give the measure of time for the Neel Leshya.

Page #635:
---------------------------
## Gatha 538-536
**Leniya Magarpa/601**

The time-mark of Leshya is obtained. When the tail is joined to the third Bhamstund, the time-mark of Kapotoleśya is obtained. By dividing the total time-limit of the beings with inauspicious Leshya by the collective time-limit of the end of the moment and multiplying it by their respective time-marks, the amount of living substance of their respective Leshya is obtained, which is in the appropriate inferior order. That is, the amount of living substance of Neel Leshya is inferior to that of Krishna Leshya, and the amount of living substance of Kapotoleśya is inferior to that of Neel Leshya.

**Doubt:** How are beings with inauspicious Leshya more than the one-sensed beings?

**Solution:** In the worldly beings, one-sensed beings are infinite. Two-sensed and other beings are innumerable. Thus, the inauspicious Leshya is found in one-sensed beings. Therefore, it is proven that the number of beings with inauspicious Leshya is slightly more than the one-sensed beings.

One-sensed beings are infinite-infinite times the number of realms. Therefore, beings with inauspicious Leshya are also infinite-infinite times the number of realms. There are as many beings with inauspicious Leshya as there are regions in infinite-infinite realms. Or, the regions of one realm are innumerable, and when multiplied by infinite-infinite, the product obtained is the number of beings with inauspicious Leshya. They are neither superior nor inferior.

One-sensed beings are not taken away by infinite-infinite Avasapirini-Utsapirini in relation to time. It is also said:

**"Eganigodasarira Dabapamanado Vittha. Siddahin Anantguna Samvena Vitivkalena." [Go. Ji.] 166**

Beings with one-bodied body are infinite times the number of Siddhas and the time of the entire perceived time.

**"Asthi Ananta Jiwa Jehi Na Patto Sasaran Parinamo. Bhasakalanka Supoura Nigodavasan Na Mukhati." [Mo. Ji.] 197**

There are also infinite beings who have not yet obtained the As-paryaya due to the inauspicious Leshya form transformations.

From these scriptural evidences, it is proven that one-sensed beings, i.e., beings with inauspicious Leshya, are infinite times the number of past times or infinite-infinite Avasapirini-Utsapirini.

The most excellent number is that of the indivisible sections of Kevalgyan, which are excellent infinite-infinite. All the substances, qualities, Paryayas, and powers in the world, all together, are only a fraction of the infinite part of Kevalgyan.

1. Shraval Pu. 3 p. 466. 2. "Khettega Anantatloga." [Dhaval Pu. 7 p. 238]. 3. "Prantagantahi Prasappini-Ussappinihi Ran Prabahiranthi Kalena." [Dhaval Pu. 7 p. 268].

Page #636:
---------------------------
602/Go. Sa. Jivakanda
Chapter 536.5.42
 
Even though all living beings are an infinite part of Kevalgyan, those with inauspicious leshya are also an infinite part of Kevalgyan. Therefore, in terms of their essence, those with inauspicious leshya are an infinite part of Kevalgyan.
 
The material quantity of each of the beings with Krishna, Neel, and Kapoot leshya is infinite. They are not diminished by infinite infinite Utsarpini-Avasarpini cycles. This means that on one hand, there is an infinite quantity of Kalpa times, and on the other hand, there is an infinite quantity of beings with inauspicious leshya. If we take one from each of these quantities, the quantity of Kalpa times will be exhausted, but the quantity of beings with inauspicious leshya will not be exhausted. This is the meaning.
 
In terms of their field, there are infinite infinite field quantities.
 
The quantity of beings with the three auspicious leshya, i.e., Tejas, Padma, and Shukla, is as follows:
 
The quantity of beings with Tejas leshya is as many as the number of grains of sand in the Ganges River. The quantity of beings with Padma leshya is an infinite part of the quantity of beings with Tejas leshya. The quantity of beings with Shukla leshya is an infinite part of the quantity of beings with Padma leshya.
 
The quantity of beings with Tejas leshya is slightly more than the quantity of Jyotishi Devas. The quantity of beings with Padma leshya is an infinite part of the quantity of Jyotishi Devas. The quantity of beings with Shukla leshya is an infinite part of the quantity of the length of a needle. This is the quantity of beings with Tejas, Padma, and Shukla leshya.
 
The quantity of Jyotishi Devas is obtained by dividing the size of the universe by the square of 256 angulas. The quantity of beings with Sanjeevi Tiryanch is an infinite part of the quantity of Jyotishi Devas.
 
The quantity of beings with Tejas leshya is as many as the number of Kalpa times. The quantity of beings with Padma leshya is an infinite part of the quantity of beings with Tejas leshya. The quantity of beings with Shukla leshya is an infinite part of the quantity of beings with Padma leshya. The quantity of beings with Tejas, Padma, and Shukla leshya is an infinite part of the quantity of beings with Avadhigyan.
 
Special Note: The quantity of beings with Tejas leshya is slightly more than the quantity of Jyotishi Devas. In sufficient time, all Jyotishi Devas are endowed with Tejas leshya. However, in insufficient time, these same Devas are endowed with Krishna, Neel, and Kapoot leshya. These fallen Jyotishi Devas, in their sufficient time,
 
1. Ra. Va. 422/10.
2. Teulessia Davpamanen Kevadia? 148.
Jangi Siyade Vehi Sadireya. 146. [Ghaval Pu. 7 p. 261].

Page #637:
---------------------------
## Gatha 531-542

There are countless parts of the Leshya path (673). Even the Vaanavyantara Devas are endowed with Tejo-Leshya after a considerable time. These Vaanavyantara Devas will be the guardians of the countless Jyotishis. Among these Vaanavyantara Devas, the countless beings are endowed with Krishna, Neel, and Kapoth Leshya. These countless Vaanavyantara Devas are equal to a part of their countless number. Among humans and animals, the beings endowed with Tejo-Leshya are equal to a countless part of the Jagatpratar, which is multiplied by the number of animals endowed with Padma Leshya. When these three numbers are combined with the Bhavnavasis and the Saudharma-Aishana numbers, the total number becomes slightly more than the Jyotishis.

**Question:** How many Bhavnavasis are there?

**Answer:** The Bhavnavasis are equal to countless Jagashrenis (37). These countless Jagashrenis are equal to a countless part of the Jagatpratar (38). The diameter of these countless Jagashrenis is equal to the Angul multiplied by the square root of the Angul, multiplied by the square root of the Jagashreni-ghanangul (36). In other words, the Bhavnavasis are equal to Angul x square root of Angul x square root of Jagashreni-ghanangul.

**Question:** How many Vaanavyantara Devas are there?

**Answer:** The number of Vaanavyantara Devas is obtained by dividing the Jagatpratar by the square of countless hundred Yojanas (43). The term "countless hundred Yojanas" means three hundred Yojanas, which when converted to Anguls and squared, becomes five hundred thirty billion, eighty-four million, sixteen thousand Kodi (53084160000000000). In other words, the Vaanavyantara Devas are equal to the result obtained by dividing the Jagatpratar by the square of three hundred Yojanas converted to Anguls.

**Question:** How many Saudharma-Aishana Devas are there?

**Answer:** The Saudharma-Aishana Devas are equal to countless Jagashrenis (48). These countless Jagashrenis are equal to a countless part of the Jagatpratar (46). The diameter of these countless Jagashrenis is equal to the Angul multiplied by the square root of the Angul, multiplied by the cube root of the Angul (50). The Saudharma-Aishana Devas in the Kalpas are equal to the cube root of the ghanangul multiplied by the Jagashreni.

**Question:** How many Jyotishis are there?

**Answer:** The Jyotishis are countless, and their number is obtained by dividing the Jagatpratar by the square of 256 Anguls multiplied by 7.

Page #638:
---------------------------
## Chapter 104/Go. Sa. Jivakanda, Verses 531-542

Those with Tejo-leshya are a countless fraction of the JAGATPRATAR, which is a number greater than the number of Tiryanch with Pachaleshya. Here, there is a difference of opinion among the Acharyas regarding the relationship of JAGATPRATAR to division, so the division is not taken into account. In this regard, one should refer to Dhaval Pu. 3, pages 230-232.

Tejo-leshya is only possible in humans who are sufficient in Lakshya-paryapta, because in Lakshya-paryapta humans, there are three inauspicious Neshya. Humans are numerous. Therefore, humans with Tejo-leshya are numerous. In this way, by adding together the number of Devas, Tiryanch, and humans with Tejo-leshya, a greater number of Jyotish Devas is obtained.

Those with Padma-leshya are a fraction of the number of sentient Panchendriya Tiryanch Yonis. [151] When the time of the downfall of Panchendriya Tiryanch Yonis is multiplied by a number, the time of the downfall of sentient Panchendriya Tiryanch Yonis is obtained. When this is multiplied by a number, the time of the downfall of those with Tejo-leshya is obtained. When this is multiplied by a number, the time of the downfall of those with Padma-leshya is obtained. Or, by dividing the number of Pratyangulas by the JAGATPRATAR, the number of those with Padma-leshya is obtained.

Those with Shukla-leshya are a countless fraction of the Palyopama, according to the amount of Dravya. [153] The Palyopama is taken away by those with Shukla-leshya from the end of the Muhurta. [154] Here, the time of downfall is only a countless number of Pravali. By dividing this by the Palyopama, the number of those with Shukla-leshya is obtained. The summary is this:

Those with Tejo-leshya are slightly more numerous than the Jyotish Devas. Those with Padma-leshya are a fraction of the number of sentient Panchendriya Tiryanch Yonis. Those with Shukla-leshya are a countless fraction of the Palyopama.

To clarify this topic, here is a brief explanation:

Those with Shukla-leshya are the least numerous. [17] Because the collection of extremely auspicious Leshya is only possible for a few. Those with Padma-leshya are countless times more numerous than those with Shukla-leshya. [180] The multiplier is a countless fraction of the JAGATPRATAR, meaning countless JAGASHRENI, because that multiplier is a fraction of the Palyopama, multiplied by the Pratyangula, and then divided by the JAGATPRATAR. Those with Tejo-leshya are a number of times more numerous than those with Padma-leshya. [181] Because the number of those with Padma-leshya is a fraction of the number of Panchendriya Tiryanch Yonis, when the Dravya of those with Padma-leshya is divided by the Dravya of those with Tejo-leshya, a number is obtained.

1. Dhaval Pu. 3, page 461. 2. Dhaval Pustak 7, pages 262-263. 3. "Padmaleshya dambamanega kevadiya? [150] Sapia panchidia tirikh jorinagina sankhejjad bhago. [151]" [Dhaval Pu. 7, page 263] and [Pakhal Pu. 3, Sutra 166, page 462]. 4. Pavan Pu. 3, page 463. 5. Dhaval Pu. 3, page 293, Sutra Tika. 6. "Sukkalessya danchapamaanega kevadiya? [151] Palidovamass prasakhejjad bhago. [153]" [Dhaval Pu. 7, page 263]. 7. "Dadehi palidoayamavahiradi antomuhutte rana. [154]" [Dhaval Pu. 7, page 264]. 8. Dhaks Pu. 7, page 264. 9. Ra. Va. 4/22/10. 10. Dhaval Pu. 7, pages 566-570.

Page #639:
---------------------------
**Ganas 543, 545**
**Leshya Marga/605**

"From the perspective of time, countless numbers of five-sensed Tiryanch Yonis are taken away by the countless numbers of Shravansarpini and Utsarpini." ||20||

**Meaning:** The number of five-sensed Tiryanch Yonis is countless kalpas. The beings with Padmaleshya are a countable portion of this number, therefore they are also countless kalpas in number. The beings with Tejoleshya are a countable multiple of those with Padmaleshya, therefore their number is also countless kalpas. The beings with Shukla Leshya are a countable portion of the first.

There are countless numbers of countless numbers of countless variations of Avadhijnana. Therefore, each of these beings with auspicious Leshya is a part of this immense multitude. This should be understood according to the principle of Bahutva.

**The Realm of Leshyas**

**Uvade Savyaloyamasuhanam.**
**Sahasamugdhaade Loyassa Sankhejj Vibhangam**
**Khesam Tu Tejataye.** ||543||

**Sukkasamugdhaade Prasankhaloga Ya Sathyalogo Ya.** ||545 First Half||

**Gathaarth:** In the case of inauspicious Leshyas, the realm is the size of all the lokas, compared to Svasthan, Samudhyat, and Uppaad. The realm of the three auspicious Leshyas, namely Teja, Padma, and Shukla, is a countable portion of the lokas. ||543|| The realm of Shukla Leshya is a countable portion of the lokas compared to Samudhyat, a countable multiple of the lokas, or all the lokas. ||545 First Half||

**Vishesharth:** The realm of Krishna, Neel, and Kapoot Leshyas is the size of all the lokas compared to Svasthan, Samudhyat, and Uppaad. The realm of Teja and Padmaleshyas is a countable portion of the lokas compared to Svasthan, Samudhyat, and Uppaad. The realm of Shukla Leshya is a countable portion of the lokas compared to Svasthan and Uppaad, a countable portion of the lokas compared to Samudhyat, a countless multiple of the lokas, or all the lokas. Now, the realm will be described based on the Dhaval Granth.

**Doubt:** What is meant by "realm"?

**Solution:** The realm is where beings "kshiyanti" (reside). This is the etymological meaning. Akash, Gagan, Devpath, Guhakarit (the dwelling place of Yakshas) are synonyms. Shravagan Lakshana, Atreya, Vyapak, Aadhar, and Bhoomi are synonymous with the material realm. From the perspective of Dravyarthik Nay, the realm is of one type. Or, from the perspective of the purpose of the shelter, the realm is of two types: Lokakash and Alokakash. The loka is where beings and other material substances are observed and found. Conversely, the Alok is where beings and other material substances are not seen. Or, from the perspective of the difference in the country, the realm is of three types: the region above the peak of Mandarachal (Mount Sumeru) is called Urdhvalok, the region below the base of Mandarachal is called Adholok, and the region enclosed by Mandarachal, i.e., the region of its size, is called Madhyalok.

"Ettha Loge Ti Butte Satt Rajjunam"
1. Dhaval Pu. 7 p. 252.
2. Ra. Va. 4/22/10
3. "Ghammaama Kaalo Puggal Jivaa Ya Santi Jaavdie. Ayasei So Logo Tattho Parado Loguti ||20|| [Brihad Dravy Sangrah] |

Page #640:
---------------------------
606/Go. Sa. Jivakanda
"The cows took 143,545 houses." Here, the positive realm of seven rajus should be taken. The mridangakar realm, as formulated by other acharyas, should not be taken, because its volume is 1641 rajus, which is a fraction of the volume of seven rajus (74747) 343 cubic rajus. There is no other region except the positive realm of seven gazes that can be called 'lok sanj
'lok sanjna.
Doubt- How do countless countless beings, countless murane pudgal lokaakashapraman countless kalana, lokaakashapraman dharma dravya and adharma dravya reside in the countless-region realm?
Solution- Just as the light of many lamps merges into the light of one lamp, or just as a lot of gold merges into a lead vessel filled with a special, subtle juice, or just as a needle and camel's milk, etc., merge into a pot filled with ashes, similarly, due to the power of specific avagahana, there is no contradiction in the aforementioned beings, pudgal praadi, etc., merging into the realm with countless regions.
The statement of region and touch is of three types: with respect to svasthan, samriddhat, and uppaad. Of these, svasthan is of two types: svarathan svasthan and vihar vatsvasthan. Of these, staying in one's own birthplace, city, or forest, etc., with activities like sleeping, sitting, walking, etc., is called svarathan svasthan. Staying outside one's own birthplace, city, or forest, etc., with activities like sleeping, sitting, and wandering, etc., is called vihar vatsvasthan. Samudyat is of seven types: 1. Vedana samudghara, 2. Kashay samudghara, 3. Vaikriyik samudghara, 4. Marananta samudghara, 5. Tejaska sharira samudghara, 6. Aharakar samudghara, and 7. Kevali samudghara.
Of these, spreading outwards from one's body by means of eye pain, headache, etc., to a region, and expanding to three times the size and height of the jivapradeshas, is called vedana samudghara. By spreading three times the height and three times the size, avagahana (343) becomes nine times. The expansion of jivapradeshas to three times the size due to the intensity of anger, fear, etc., kashayas, is called kashay samudghara. In this too, avagahana becomes six times. The expansion of the jivapradeshas due to the greatness of various riddhis, or due to the rise of a vaikriyik body, or due to the dev and naraki beings encompassing countless and countless yojanas with their bodies, or due to the jivapradeshas taking on a different form than their natural form, is called vaikriyik samudghara. Without leaving one's current body, from the region where one is situated to the region where one was born, and from the outside to one region, etc.,
1. Annal Pu. 4 p. 7-8-6-10. 2. Shraval. 4 p. 11-18. 3. "Na cha edavadirittamamnam satarajjughan pamanam lokasagidam khettam asthi." [Dhakar 34 p. 18]. 4. Vrihad Dravya Sangrah Gatha 20's commentary. 5. P. Pu. 4 p. 26; Go. Ji Ga. 667. 6. Dhaval Pu. 4 p. 26, Pu. 3 p. 266; Pu. 11 p. 18. 7. Dhaval Pu. 7 p. 301, Pu. 4 p. 635. 8. Dhaval Pu. 4 p. 26, Pu. 7 p. 266. 6. Dhaval Pu. 4 p. 63, Pu. 7 p. 301. 15. Dhaval Pu. 4 p. 26, Pu. 7 p. 266.

Page #641:
---------------------------
##  Verse 543, 545
##  Path of Taking/67

"The expansion of the living being's area of influence by three times the size of the body, a single pillar archway, the types of movement and urine, and the duration until the final moment are called the **Maranantik Samudghāt**." The expansion of the Tejaska body is called the **Tejaska Sharira Samudghāt**. It is of two types: **Nissaranātmaka** and **Anissaranātmaka**. Among them, the **Nissaranātmaka Tejaska Sharira Visaran** is of two types: **Prashastha** and **Aprashastha**. Among them, the **Aprashastha Nissaranātmaka Tejaska Sharira Samudghāt** is twelve yojanas long, nine yojanas wide, the thickness of a fingertip, red like a Japakusuma flower, capable of burning the earth and mountains, without an opponent, fueled by anger, originating from the left shoulder, and capable of expanding to the desired area. And the **Prashastha Nissaranātmaka Tejaska Sharira Samudghāt**, although similar in size and other aspects to the **Aprashastha Tejaska**, has the special characteristic of being white like a swan, originating from the right shoulder, arising out of compassion for beings, and capable of mitigating national disasters, famine, disease, etc. The **Anissaranātmaka Tejaska Sharira Samudghāt** is not relevant here.

The **Āhāraka Samudghāt** occurs for those who have attained **Riddhi**. Its detailed explanation has been given in verses 235-236.

The **Kevali Samudghāt** is of four types: **Danda**, **Kapāta**, **Pratara**, and **Lokapūraṇa**. Among them, the expansion of the Kevali's living being's area of influence by fourteen gazes, either in the form of the outer layer of the previous body or three times the size of the previous body, is called the **Danda Samudghāt**. The expansion of the entire area without the **Vāta Vālaya**, with the size and dimensions mentioned in the **Danda Samudghāt**, is called the **Kapāta Samudghāt**. The expansion of the Kevali Bhagavan's living being's area of influence throughout the entire Lok, except for the area where the **Vāta Vālaya** is not present, is called the **Pratara Samudghāt**. The expansion of the Kevali Bhagavan's living being's area of influence, the size of the **Dhana Lok**, throughout the entire Lok, is called the **Lokapūraṇa Samudghāt**.

The characteristics of the **Samudghāt** will be explained in verse 668, so it is not mentioned here.

**Upāpāda** is of two types: **Rjugalipūrvaka** and **Vigrahagatipūrvaka**. Each of these is of two types: **Maranantik Samudghāt** and **Tadvīparīta**. **Upāpāda** occurs at the time of its origin. The area of beings born from **Rjugalipūrvaka** is not found, because all the areas of the beings are contracted. **Vigraha** is of three types: **Pāṇimukta**, **Lāngalika**, and **Gomūtrika**. Among these, **Pāṇimukta** is one **Vigraha**. **Vigraha**, **Vakra**, and **Kuṭila** are all synonyms. **Lāngalika** is two **Vigraha**, and **Gomūtrika** is three **Vigraha**. The **Avagahana** of beings born from **Vigrahagati** without the **Maranantik Samudghāt** and beings born from **Rjugalipūrvaka** are the same at the time of their origin. The only difference is:

1. Dhavala Pu. 4 p. 27 and Pu. 7 p. 300.
2. Dhavala Pu. 4 p. 23-2.
3. Dhavala Pu. 4 p. 2.
4. Dhavala Pu. 4 p. 28-26.
5. Dhavala Pu. p. 300.

Page #642:
---------------------------
608/Go. Sa. Jivakanda
Gama 543,545

It is said that there is no rule of similarity in the size of both Avagahanas, because it contradicts the oneness of the institutions born from the rise of Karma called Granupurvi and the institutions born from the rise of Karma called Sansthana. In the first time of the beings born from the violent motion by killing, there are countless Yojan-proof Avagahanas, because the first time there is no contraction of the one, two and three Dandas spread earlier.

Thus, with these ten qualifications, namely two types of Svasthana, seven types of Samudghat and one Uppapad, the area is described as much as possible.

The Svasthana-Svasthana of the beings with Krishna Leshya, Neel Leshya and Kapoot Leshya is the location in all the worlds in relation to the terms Vedana Samudhal, Kashay Samudghat, Maranantik Samudghat and Uppapad. Because the beings with three inauspicious Leshyas are infinite. Or the Ekendriyas are predominant.

Doubt: Why is Viharavat Svasthana not mentioned along with Svasthana-Svasthana?

Solution: The Ekendriya beings are predominant in the three inauspicious Leshyas, because their number is infinite. There is no Viharavat Svasthana in Ekendriya beings, therefore it is not mentioned along with Svasthana-Svasthana.

Doubt: Why is Vaikriyik Samudghat not mentioned?

Solution: Vaikriyik Samudghat in Ekendriyas is only in the beings of Agni Kayik and Vayu Kayik, which are countless in number. Therefore, their area is not possible in all the worlds.

In relation to Viharavat Svasthana and Vaikriyik Samudghat, the beings with three inauspicious Leshyas reside in the countless part of the three worlds, the countable part of the Tiryanch Lok and the area countless times the size of two and a half islands. But in relation to Vaikriyik Samudghat, the said beings reside in the countless part of the Tiryanch Lok. Other terms are not possible in the three inauspicious Leshyas.

Doubt: Why are other terms not possible in the inauspicious Leshyas?

Solution: Aharak Samudghat and Tejas Samudghat are of the Sanayamis. There is a prohibition of three inauspicious Leshyas with Sanayam. Kevali Samudghat is of the Kevalis who have only Shukla Leshya. Therefore, these three Samudghats do not occur with the inauspicious Leshya.

The area of those with Tejo Leshya and Pala Leshya is described by the terms Svasthana-Svasthana, Viharavat Svasthana, Vedana Samudghat, Kashay Samudghat and Vaikriyik Samudghat. The beings with Tejo Leshya are in the three worlds.

3. "Aindhiemu Vidwarbadisatyag Gasthi"
1. Paval Pu. 4 p. 26-30. 2. Dhaval Pu. 7 p. 357. [Bhaval Pu. 4 p. 32]. 4. Dhaval Pu. 7 p. 357.

Page #643:
---------------------------
## Gatha 544
## Neshyamaargana/606

Beings with Padma Leshya reside in countless parts of the three lokas, countless parts of the Tiryanch Lok, and in countless regions of the Aḍhai Dweep, because the Devrathi are predominant here. The region is similar to the Maranantik Samudghat Pad, except that it is countless times larger than the Tiryanch Lok. Similarly, the region should be understood in relation to the Uppaad Pad.

Beings with Padma Leshya reside in countless parts of the three lokas, countless parts of the Tiryanch Lok, and in countless regions of the Aḍhai Dweep due to the Swasthanswasthan, Viharvatswasthan, Vedana Samapaat, and Kashay Samakshyat Pads. This is because the Niyantri Rashtri are predominant here.

The region of the four lokas and the Aḍhai Dweep is countless times larger than the Kriyik Samudghat, Maranantik Samudghat, and Uppaad Pads. This is because the Sanatkumar Mahendra Kalpa Devas are predominant here.

Beings with Shuvla Leshya reside in countless parts of the four lokas and in countless regions of the Aḍhai Dweep due to the Swasthanswasthan, Viharvatswasthan, and Uppaad Pads. The number of beings in the Uppaad is limited because they come from the human realm.

Beings reside in countless parts of the four lokas and in countless regions of the Aḍhai Dweep due to the Vedana Samudghat, Kashay Samudghat, Kriyik Samudghat, Dand Samudghat, and Maranantik Samudghat Pads. Similarly, the region of the three auspicious Leshyas should be understood in relation to the Taijas Samudghat and Aaharaka Samudghat Pads. The difference is that these beings reside in a countable part of the human realm.

The Dand Samudghat Kevalgyani with Shuvla Leshya reside in countless parts of the four lokas and in countless regions of the Aḍhai Dweep. The Kapat Samudghat Kevalgyani reside in countless parts of the three lokas, countless parts of the Tiryanch Lok, and in countless regions of the Aḍhai Dweep. The Pratar Samudghat Kevali reside in countless parts of the Lok. The Lokpuran Samudghat reside in the Marvlok.

To determine the Uppaad region, the Gatha Sutra states: "Marvi Asankhejjdimang Tassasanka Ya Viggahe Honti. Tassasanka Dure Uvvaade Tass Kha Asankha." (544)

Gathaarth: In the Saudharma-Ishaan heaven, countless beings die every moment, and a countless majority of them are destined for the Vigraha Gati. A countless majority of them are born, and a countless part of them are born from the second Dand. (144)

Vishesharth: In the Dhaval, this topic is discussed as follows: When establishing the Uppaad region, the Vishkambhsuchi of the Saudharma-Ishaan Devas is multiplied by the third class of Ghanangul (root) and then multiplied by the Jagathegi. This establishes the Uppaad region. By dividing this by the countless parts of the Palyopama, we get the number of beings born from the Saudharma-Ishaan related Uppaad Maga Kal. Again, a countless number of Yojanas is multiplied by the second Dand to get the number of beings born from the second Dand. This is understood as a countless part of the Palyopama. Another division should be established with a Pratarangul as the divisor. The Vishkambh is multiplied by the Jagathegi... (1. Dhaval Pu. 7, p. 358-356. 2. Dhaval Pu. 7, p. 356-360. 3. Dhaval Pu. 7, p. 353)

Page #644:
---------------------------
## Translation:

**610 / Go. Sa. Jivakanda**

The number of beings born from the movement of the body is countless times greater than the number of beings born from the movement of the soul, because there are many more variations in the body than in the soul.

When establishing the area of beings with Tejo-leshya (radiant aura) in the Uppaad-pad (stage of existence), one should establish the population of beings in the Saudharma Kalpa (heaven) and divide it by the countless parts of a Palyopam (a unit of time) to get the number of beings born at one time. Then, establish another countless part of a Palyopam as the divisor and obtain the number of beings reaching the Uppaad-pad with an Ayam (dimension) of one Raju (unit of length). Multiplying this by the number of Pratarangul (unit of length) in a Raju, we get the area of the Uppaad-pad.

Alternatively, the area can be determined as follows: When establishing the area of beings with Tejo-leshya in the Uppaad-pad, establish the population of beings in the Saudharma Kalpa and divide it by the countless parts of a Palyopam, which is the time of their entry. This gives the number of beings born at one time. Then, to obtain the number of beings born in the Prabhapatala (the highest layer of the Saudharma heaven), one should establish another countless part of a Palyopam as the divisor. By establishing this divisor, we get the number of beings reaching the Uppaad-pad with an Ayam of one and a half Raju. Multiplying this by the number of Pratarangul in a Raju, we get the area of the Uppaad-pad.

**Statement of the Three Heavens with Ashubha-leshya (unfavorable aura)**

**Gatha 545 (Second Half)**

**Meaning:** The three heavens with Ashubha-leshya touch all the worlds in three places.

**Explanation:** In the statement of the area, all the present-time specific areas have been established by taking refuge in all the paths. Now, what is being established through this Sparshana-anuyog (touching the path)? This question is not appropriate, because the Sparshana-anuyog refers to the touching of the specific area of the past.

**Gatha 545**

Beings with Krishna-leshya (dark aura), Neel-leshya (blue aura), and Kapoot-leshya (pigeon-colored aura) have touched all the worlds from their own place, the area near the Vedana-kapayamara-anta (end of suffering and death), and the Uppaad-pad, compared to the present time. From the Biharavat-sthana (place of the Biharas) and the Vaikriya-samudgat-pad (stage of existence), they have touched a countless part of the three worlds, a countable part of the Tiryanch-yoni (animal realm), and a countless number of times the area of two and a half islands in the past. The special feature is that from the Vaivithika-pad (stage of existence), they have touched a countable part of the three worlds and the Manushya-loka (human world).

Page #645:
---------------------------
## Gatha 546-547
##  Leniyamanga/611

And from the Tiryanch Lok, countless times the field has been touched, because five-fourteenth parts of the reacting Vayu Kayik beings are found to have experienced touch.  The Tanjas, Praharak, and Kevali Samudghat are not found in the Leniya beings.

Akalankadev has also said that the Vrishna, Neel, Kapoth, and Leshyavans have touched all the Lokas from the Svasthan, Samudghat, and Uppaad positions.

The statement of the touch of the Peet Leshya is thus: "Teuss Ya Saharanee Logass Asankhabhagamettam Tu. Adchodasabhaga Va Desurana Hoti Giyamen." ||546||

"Evam Tu Samudghavave Rav Choddasabhagayam Cha Kichuranam. Uvavaade Padhamapadam Divaddchoddas Ya Kinchuranam." ||547||

**Gathaarth:** The Peet Leshya touches a countless part of the Lokas in comparison to the Svasthan Svasthako, and in comparison to the Viharavat Svasthan, it touches a slightly lesser part, two-fourteenth (2/14). ||546||

In the same way, in the Samudghat, it touches a slightly lesser part, nine-fourteenth (9/14), and in the Uppaad position, it touches a slightly lesser part, one-and-a-half-fourteenth (1.5/14). ||547||

**Vishesharth:** The countless part of the Lokas is touched by the Tejo Leshya beings from the Svasthan positions. ||165||

Here, the field should be described, because the intention is of the present time. In comparison to the past time, it touches a slightly lesser part, eight-fourteenth (8/14). ||166||

In comparison to the Svasthan, a countless part of the three Lokas, a countable part of the Tiryanch Lok, and a countless times the field from two-and-a-half Dwips is touched. In comparison to the Viharavat Svasthan, a slightly lesser part, eight-fourteenth (8/14), is touched. Because while moving around, the Tejo Leshya Devas touch the field of two Rajus below and six Rajus above, up to the sixteenth heaven, from the second hell to the third hell.

**Shankha:** In the sixteenth heaven, there are no Tejo Leshya, only Shukla Leniya. Then how is it possible to touch six Rajus above?

**Samadhan:** The Niyogini Devis of the Devas of the sixteenth heaven are born in the Saudharma Yugal. ||5|| And they are Peet Leshya. The Devas take their Niyogini Devis in their Vimanas up to the sixteenth heaven.

The Tejo Leshya beings, who are surrounded by Bedna, Kashay, and Vaikriyik positions, touch eight-fourteenth (8/14) parts. Because these three positions are found everywhere in the Devas while they are moving around.

---

1. Dhaval Pu. 3 Sutra 163 p. 438, Bhutra 177 p. 434, Sutra 136 p. 423.
2. Ra. Va. 4/22/10.
3. Ghayala Pu. 7 p. 438.
4. Dhaval Pu. 5 p. 386.
5. "Tatstreenam Saudharmakalpopapateh." [Dha. Pu. 1 p. 338].

Page #646:
---------------------------
612/Go. Sa. Jivakanda
Gatha 540-546
The touch of the Maranantik Samudghat is 9/14 (1) part less than the touch of the Merutal, because the touch of the seven Rajus above is found with the two Rajus from the Merutal to the Nene.
The touch of the Tejo Leshyavale Jivas is 1.5/14 (1) part less than the touch of the Uppaad, because the Prabha Patala is situated only 1.5 Rajus above the Merumul.
Doubt: Why is the area not found to be more than 1.5 Rajus in the Tejo Leshyavale Devas born in the first Indrak Vimana of the Sanatkumar Mahendra Kalpas?
Answer: Because the first Patala of the Sanatvamara Kalpa is situated a little above the Sidharmakanapa.
Doubt: How is this known?
Solution: Because, if this is not accepted, the deficiency that has been stated in the appropriate 1.5 Raj area cannot be there.
The touch of the Padmaleshya and Shukla Leshya is the first step (the uncountable part of the Lok) from the Samudghat. The touch of the Desuran is 1/14 (1) part less than the Samudghat.
The first step (the uncountable part of the Lok) of the Uppaad is 5/14 (14) part less than the Desuran. The first step of the Shukla Leshya is 6/14 (1) part less than the three places.
Meaning of the Gatha: The Padmaleshya Jivas have touched the first step (the uncountable part of the Lok) from their own place. They have touched 1/14 (1) part less than the Samudghat.
The Uppaad Padgat Jivas have touched the first step (the uncountable part of the Lok) or 5/14 (14) part less than that. The Shukla Leshyavale have touched the first step and 6/14 (1) part less than that in three places.
Special Meaning: The Palenjavale Jivas have touched the uncountable part of the Lok from their own place and the Samudghat steps, or they have touched 1/14 (6) part less than the past time.
Explanation: The touch of the three Lokas, the countable part of the Tiryanlok, and the uncountable Guran area from the Prahai Deep is the touch of the Swasthan Pad.
1. Dhaval Pu. 7 p. 426-440.
2. Dhaval Pu. 5 p. 440.
3. Dhaval Pu. 7 p. 4.47.
4. Dhaval Pu.

Page #647:
---------------------------
## Verse 550

**"The number of realms touched by the gods with the white aura is slightly less than eight-fourteenths (2/7) of the total realms, because the gods with the white aura do not have the fatal *samudghāt* (state of being) in their one-sensed beings. The number of realms touched by the *upapāda* (state of being) is an innumerable fraction of the total realms, or slightly less than five-fourteenths (1/7) of the total realms compared to the past time. (207-208) This is because the *sahaṣrāra* kalpa (time period) is located five *rājū* (units of measurement) away from the base of Mount Meru. The beings with the white aura have touched an innumerable fraction of the realms from the *svasthāna* (state of being) and *upapāda* (state of being) states, or slightly less than six-fourteenths (3/7) of the realms compared to the past time. (206-211) 

**Explanation:** From the *svasthāna* (state of being) state, they have touched an innumerable fraction of the three realms, a countable fraction of the *tiryagloka* (realm of animals), and an innumerable multiple of the area from two and a half islands. From the *vihāravat* *svasthāna* (state of being) and *upapāda* (state of being) states, they have touched six-fourteenths (3/7) of the realms. This is because the beings who are born in the *pāraṇa-acyuta* kalpas (time periods) from the *tiryagloka* (realm of animals) and who perform the *nīla* *vihāra* (meditation) for six *rājū* (units of measurement) have touched this much area.

**Compared to the *samudghāt* (state of being), the beings with the white aura have touched an innumerable fraction of the realms, or all the realms. (550)

**Meaning:** However, (the beings with the white aura) have touched an innumerable fraction of the realms, or all the realms, compared to the *samudghāt* (state of being). (557)

**Special Meaning:** The special feature is that the beings with the white aura have touched an innumerable fraction of the realms from the *samudghāt* (state of being) states, or slightly less than six-fourteenths (3/7) of the realms compared to the past time. (213-214) This is because in the *pāraṇa-acyuta* kalpa (time period) gods, there are animals and humans who perform the fatal *samudghāt* (state of being). The touching of the realms compared to the *vedanā* (state of being), *kaṣāya* (state of being), and *vaikrīyika* *samudghāt* (state of being) is similar to the *vihāravat* *svasthāna* (state of being). Or, compared to the *kevalī* *samudghāt* (state of being), an innumerable fraction of the realms, or all the realms, is touched. (215-216) The beings who have attained the *daṇḍa* *samudghāt* (state of being) have touched an innumerable fraction of the four realms and an innumerable multiple of the area from two and a half islands. Similarly, the beings who have attained the *kapāṭa* *samudghāt* (state of being) have also touched this much area. The special feature is that they have touched a countable fraction of the *tiryagloka* (realm of animals), or a countable multiple of the area from the *tiryagloka* (realm of animals).

**Doubt:** Is it possible for the *kevalīs* (liberated beings) who have attained the *daṇḍa* *samudghāt* (state of being) to touch the said area?

**Solution:** The *utsedha* (power) of the *kevalīs* (liberated beings) who have attained the *utkṛṣṭa* *avagāhana* (highest knowledge) is one hundred *pāṭha* *pramāṇāṅgala* (units of measurement).

**References:**

1. Dhvala Pu. 7 p. 441
2. Dhvala Pu. 7 p. 442
3. Dhvala Pu. 7 p. 442
4. Dhvala Pu. 7 p. 443
5. Dhvala Pu. 7 p. 443
6. Dhvala Pu. 7 p. 443-444
7. Dhvala Pu. 7 p. 444"

Page #648:
---------------------------
614 / Go. Sa. Jivakanda
Verse 550

And its Natra part (125) i.e. twelve (12) pramana angulas in diameter. Its circumference is 12 x 16 + 16
(22%
thirty-seven angulas and forty-nine out of one hundred and thirteen parts of an angula
36
+ -
113
1
parts, the measure is 376. The formula for obtaining the circumference
÷
is to multiply the diameter by sixteen (16), then add sixteen, then divide by three, one, and one, i.e. 113, and then add the triple of the diameter, then the measure of the circumference will be obtained, even more subtle than the subtle.
Multiplying this circumference by the twelve (12) angula wide part of the diameter, i.e. three angulas, gives the Pratarangulas of the circular area, twelve angulas long and twelve angulas wide. This is slightly less.
65 12
(
37 X ×14 Raju 113
:).
4
Multiplying by fourteen Rajus gives the measure of the Danda area, this is the measure of one Kevali Danda Samudghat. Multiplying this by the number of Kevalis performing the Samudghat simultaneously gives the measure of the Danda area of the number of Kevalis performing the Samudghat simultaneously.
The area thus produced, when divided by the four lokas, namely the ordinary loka, etc., gives the measure of the Danda area of each of the four lokas, divided by the number of Kevalis in that loka. And dividing the said Danda area by the Manusha loka gives the number of Manusha areas obtained. Such is the special feature that the diameter of the Kevali who has attained the Danda Samudghat from each Asana is three times the diameter of twelve (12) angulas mentioned earlier, i.e. 36 x 16 + 16 108
times. Its measure is 36 angulas. Its circumference is
(24x24 +
:)
113
one hundred and thirteen angulas and twenty-seven parts out of one hundred and thirteen parts of an angula ( 1133 ). *
+
One
The method of obtaining the area of the Kevali who has attained the Kapata Samudghat is as follows: If the Kevali performs the Samudghat facing east or north, and performs the Samudghat from the Asana, then the Kapata area is thirty-six angulas wide. If the Kapata Samudghat is performed from Kayotsarga, then the Kapata Samudghat is twelve (12) angulas wide. Of these, the method of obtaining the Kapata area of the Kevali facing east is as follows: Establish an area fourteen Rajus long, seven Rajus wide and thirty-six (36) angulas thick, then cut it in the middle of the fourteen Rajus length, above seven Rajus, and place one area on top of the other, then the Jagatpratar becomes seventy-two angulas thick. The Kapata area of the Kevali facing east, who is in Kayotsarga, is twenty-four angulas thick Jagatpratar. The Kapata area of the Kevali who has attained the Samudghat from the Palyankasana facing north is thirty-six angulas
1. Mal Pu. 4 p. 46. 2. Dhaval Pu. 4. 42 3. Val Pu. 4. 48-49. 4. Dhaval Pu. 4 p. 49.

Page #649:
---------------------------
##  Gana 551-552
##  Lenyamageraga. 615

The Kevali who performs the *kaayotsarga* facing north, has a *kapaat* area of 12 *angul* in width, length and thickness, according to the *jagatpratar* measure. This is because, except for the *samudghaat* of the *vedatta*, the *pradesh* of the living being is not tripled. This *kapaat* *samudghaat* of the past Kevali, when measured according to the *pramaan* of the three worlds, *saamaanya lok*, etc., is equal to the *asannyaat* part of each of those three worlds. It is equal to the *sannyaat* part of the *tiryaglok* and is *asannyaat* times greater than 2.5 *dweep*.

The Kevali who attains the *pratar* *samudghaat* resides in a region equal to the *asannyaat* majority part of the *lok*. Except for the region equal to the *asannyaat* part of the *lok* which is blocked by the *balay*, he resides in the remaining majority part of the *lok*. The *pramaan* of the *ghanlok* is 343 *ghan* *raju*. If you divide one thousand twenty-four crore, nineteen lakh, seventy-three thousand, four hundred and seventy-seven *yojanas* by one lakh, nine thousand, seven hundred and sixty, the quotient obtained is 226 *yojanas*. This is the *ghanphal* of the *chaaturuddha* region. When this *chaaturuddha* region is subtracted from the *ghanlok*, the region of the *pratar* *samudghaat* is slightly less than the *lok* *pramaan*. When this region of the Kevali who attains the *pratar* *samudghaat* is measured according to the *pramaan* of the *adholok*, it is slightly less than two *adholok* and more than one-fourth of the *adholok*. When measured according to the *pramaan* of the *urdholok*, it is slightly less than two *urdholok* and more than one-third of the *urdholok*. The Kevali who attains the *lokpurana* *samudghaat* resides in all the *lokas*.

##  Leshya's Inferior and Superior Time Duration

The time duration of all living beings of the six *leshya* is the same. The inferior time duration of a living being is only *antmuhurt*. 551. And the superior time duration is respectively, *saadhik* *teetrim* *saagar*, *sattaras* (17) *saagar*, *saat* (7) *saagar*, *do* (2) *saagar*, *attharah* (18) *saagar* and *teetrim* (33) *saagar*. 552.

##  Special Meaning

According to the *kaalanugam* and *leshyamargna*, the time duration of all living beings is the same, irrespective of their *leshya*. The inferior time duration of all the *ashubh* *leshya* living beings, compared to one living being, is... 40-41.

Page #650:
---------------------------
616/Go. Sa. Jivakanda
Gatha 551-552
Antarmuhurta is ||28||
Just as in a Neelaleshya, the time of that Leshya of a living being present in it is destroyed, it becomes Krishna Leshya, and staying in it for the shortest Antarmuhurta time, it again becomes Neelaleshya.
Doubt- Why does it not become Kapootaleshya after Krishna Leshya?
Solution- No, because it is impossible for the power of Kapootaleshya transformation to be present immediately after the transformation of the living being from Krishna Leshya.
A living being present in the decreasing Krishna Leshya or the increasing Kapootaleshya has attained Neelaleshya. Then that living being stays in Neelaleshya for the shortest Antarmuhurta time, and due to the absence of any obstruction in the shortest time, it attains Kapootaleshya or Krishna Leshya as much as possible; because it is impossible for it to attain any other Leshya except these two. It is said that the shortest time is only in the decreasing Leshya. In this way, the time of Neelaleshya is obtained as Antarmuhurta.
A living being present in the decreasing Neelaleshya or the increasing Tejo Leshya has attained Kapootaleshya. That living being stays in Kapootaleshya for the shortest Antarmuhurta time, and if it has come from Tejo Leshya, then it should go to Neelaleshya, and if it has come from Neelaleshya, then it should go to Tejo Leshya. Otherwise, the shortest time of the living being that purifies the defilements and purity cannot be formed.
Doubt- Why is the shortest time not obtained here like the change in Yoga?
Solution- No, because it is impossible for the time to be obtained in one time due to the change in Leshya, or the change in place, or death and injury, like Yoga and Kapayas. The reason for this is that time is not obtained in one time due to the change in Leshya, because there is no destruction of that Leshya in the second time of the living being transformed from the desired Leshya. And similarly, there is no going to another Leshya in the second time of the living being that has gone to another Gunasthan with the desired Leshya. Time is not possible in one time due to the change in Gunasthan, because there is no going to another Gunasthan in the second time of the living being transformed from the desired Leshya. Time is not possible in one time due to injury, because there is no injury to the present Leshya in one time. And time is not possible in one time due to death, because there is no effect of death in the second time of the living being transformed from the desired Leshya.
The highest time of Krishna Leshya is 33 Sagaropama, the highest time of Neelaleshya is 17 Sagaropama, and the highest time of Kapootaleshya is 7 Sagaropama. ||285||4
1. "Gajivan Padatan Jahanang Prato Muddat. ||284||" [Dhaval Pu. 4 p. 455]. 2. Dhaval Pu. 4 p. 456. 3. Dhaval Pu. 4 p. 456-457, reason given in Dhaval Pu. 4 p. 468, first doubt-solution. 4. "Uvakammega Teettis Sattaras Satt Sagaroabamani Sadireyarikh. ||285||" [Dhaval 1.4 p. 457].

Page #651:
---------------------------
## Gāpa 551-552

**Leṇyāmargaṇā/617**

A being existing in the Nīlaleśyā, when its Kr̥ṣṇaleśyā comes to the fore, remains in that Kr̥ṣṇaleśyā until the end of the Antarmūhurta period, then dies and is born in the seventh earth (hell). There, it spends thirty-three sāgaropama periods with the Nīlaleśyā and then is released. Even after release, the same leśyā remains until the Antarmūhurta. Thus, the best period for the Kr̥ṣṇaleśyā is thirty-three sāgaropama periods plus two Antarmūhurta periods.

A being existing in the Kāpota leśyā, when its Mīlaleśyā comes to the fore, remains in that Mīlaleśyā until the end of the Antarmūhurta period, then dies and is born in the fifth earth (hell). There, it spends seventeen sāgaropama periods with the Nīlaleśyā and then is released. Even after release, the same leśyā remains until the Antarmūhurta. Thus, the best period for the Nīlaleśyā is seventeen sāgaropama periods plus two Antarmūhurta periods.

A being existing in the Tejo leśyā, when its leśyā period wanes, the Kāpotaleśyā comes to the fore. It remains in the Kāpotaleśyā until the end of the Annamurta period, then dies and is born in the third earth (hell). There, it spends seven sāgaropama periods with the Kāpotaleśyā and then is released. Even after release, the same leśyā remains until the Antarmūhurta. Thus, the best period for the Kāpotaleśyā is seven sāgaropama periods plus two Antarmūhurta periods.

A being remains in the Teja (Pīta), Padma, and Śukla leśyā for at least the Antarmūhurta period. || 180-181 ||

**Summary:**

A being existing in the Hīyamāna Pāleśyā, when its leśyā period wanes, the Tejo (Pīta) leśyā comes to the fore. It remains in the Pīta leśyā until the end of the Antarmūhurta period, then attains the Kāpota leśyā.

A being existing in the Hīyamāna Śuklaleśyā, when its leśyā period wanes, the Padmaleśyā comes to the fore. It remains in the Pāleśyā until the end of the Antarmūhurta period, then attains the Tejo (Pīta) leśyā.

A being existing in the Varṣamāna Padmaleśyā, when its leśyā period wanes, becomes the Śuklaleśyā. It remains in that state until the end of the Antarmūhurta period, then returns to the Padmaleśyā, as it is not possible to go to any other leśyā from the Padmaleśyā.

Thus, the worst periods for all three are mentioned.

The best period for the Pīta leśyā is two sāgaropama periods plus, for the Padmaleśyā is seventeen sāgaropama periods plus, and for the Śuklaleśyā is thirty-three sāgaropama periods plus. || 182 ||

1. Dhavala Pu. 4 p. 457. 2. Dhavala Pu. 4 p. 458. 3. Dhavala Pu. 4 p. 458. 4. "Teuleśśyāpamma leśśyā gukkale rimayā kechirā kālādo hāti? || 180 || Jahaṣṇaraṇ manto muhatta. || 181 ||" [Dhavala Pu. 7 p. 175]. 5. Dhavala Pu. 4 p. 462. 6. Dhavala Pu. 4 p. 462. 7. Dhavala Pu. 4 p. 472. 8. Dhavala Pu. 7 p. 175.

Page #652:
---------------------------
## 618 / Go. Sa. Jeevakanda
**Gatha 553 - 554**

A being existing in the Kāleśyā, due to the destruction of its world-time, became thin. It remained in the Antarmūhūrta and died, and was born in the Saudharma Kalpa. It lived for two and a half Sagaropama Kalpas and then perished. It remained with the Pīta Leśyā for the duration of the Antarmūhūrta and then went to another, non-contradictory Leśyā. Similarly, a being that remains in the Antarmūhūrta with the Padma and Śukla Leśyās, the most excellent, and is born again in the Devas with lifespans of eighteen and a half and thirty-three Sagaropama Kalpas, completes its lifespan and departs from there. It then remains with the Padma and Śukla Leśyās for the duration of the Antarmūhūrta and then goes to another, non-contradictory Leśyā. Such a being attains its own, most excellent time.

**Difference between the Inferior and Superior in the Leśyās**

The Antarmūhūrta is the inferior difference of the three inauspicious Leśyās, namely, Kṛṣṇa, Nīla, and Kāpota. The superior difference is slightly more than thirty-three Sagaras. The difference of the three auspicious Leśyās, namely, Pīta, etc., is also similar, but the superior difference is, by rule, an innumerable number of Pudgala transformations.

**Gāthārtha** - The inferior difference of the three inauspicious Leśyās, namely, Kṛṣṇa, Nīla, and Kāpota, is the Antarmūhūrta. The superior difference is slightly more than thirty-three Sagaras. The difference of the three auspicious Leśyās, namely, Pīta, etc., is also similar, but the superior difference is, by rule, an innumerable number of Pudgala transformations.

The inferior difference in time for beings with the Kṛṣṇa, Nīla, and Kāpota Leśyās is the Antarmūhūrta, because a being with the Kṛṣṇa Leśyā, upon going to the Nīla Leśyā, a being with the Nīla Leśyā, upon going to the Kāpota Leśyā, and a being with the Kāpota Leśyā, upon going to the Tejo Leśyā, returns to its previous Leśyā through the inferior time, and thus obtains a difference of the Antarmūhūrta measure.

The superior difference for beings with the Kṛṣṇa, Nīla, and Kāpota Leśyās is slightly more than thirty-three Sagaropama measures, because a human being with a lifespan of a previous category, from the time of conception until the age of eighty years, upon having six Antarmūhūrtas remaining, attains the Kṛṣṇa Leśyā form. Thus, beginning with the Kṛṣṇa Leśyā, and then going through the Nīla, Kāpota, Teja, Padma, and Śukla Leśyās in order, and then attaining the three auspicious Leśyās after taking restraint, the being remains for a time slightly less than the previous category. Then, it is born in the Devas with a lifespan of thirty-three Sagaropama Kalpas. From there, it is born again in the humans, and then goes through the Śukla, Padma, Teja, Kāpota, and Nīla Leśyā forms in order, and finally returns to the Kṛṣṇa Leśyā. Such a being obtains a superior difference in time for the Kṛṣṇa Leśyā of slightly more than thirty-three Sagaropama measures, which is less than the previous category by eight years and ten Antarmūhūrtas. Similarly, one should describe the superior difference in time for the Nīla Leśyā and the Kāpota Leśyā. The only difference is that when describing the difference for the Nīla Leśyā, one should say that it is less than the previous category by eight years, and when describing the difference for the Kāpota Leśyā, one should say that it is less than the previous category by six years, and that the superior difference in time is slightly more than thirty-three Sagaropama measures.

1. Dhavala Pu. 7 p. 176. 2. Dhavala Pu. 7 p. 228-221.

Page #653:
---------------------------
##  Gatha 555
##  Leshya Margna / 616

The **jghanya antarakaal** (shortest interval) of beings with **Tej, Padm, and Shukla Leshya** is only **antamhatam** (very small), because beings who go from their **avirodhi** (non-contradictory) **Leshya** to another **Leshya** due to **Tej, Padm, and Shukla Leshya**, and then return to their original **Leshya** after a **jghanya kaal** (short time), experience only a **jghanya antarakaal**.

The **utkrusht antarakaal** (longest interval) of **Tej, Padm, and Shukla Leshya** is **asankhyat pudgal parivartan pramaan anant kaal** (infinite time with countless changes of matter), because they attain **avivakshit** (unintended) **Leshya** from **vivakshit** (intended) **shubh Leshya** and experience the **antarakaal**. Then, after **asankhyat** (countless) parts of a **gravali** (a unit of time) of **pudgal parivartan** (changes of matter) with **Krishna, Neel, and Kapoth Leshya**, they attain the **vivakshit shubh Leshya** and experience the **utkrusht antarakaal** of those **shubh Leshya**.

In **Leshya Margna**, the statement about **bhaav** (emotion) and **alpbahutva** (smallness) is **bhaavaavochchhalesa prodayiya honti appbahugam tu**.

**Vashyapamane siddh idi lesa valida hoti** (It is proven by the measure of the universe that Leshya is small). || 55 ||

**Gathaarth** - All six **Leshya** are **prodayik** (arising from emotions). One should prove the **alpbahutva** of **Leshya** by the measure of **dravya** (substance). Thus, the description of **Leshya** is complete. || 555 ||

**Visheshayam** - Due to **prodayik bhaav** (arising from emotions), beings become **Krishna** (black) and other six **Leshya**. || 6 ||

In **uday** (arising), by establishing the **spardhak** (competitors) of **kashayabhag** (parts of passions) from the **jghanya spardhak** (lowest competitor) to the **utkrusht spardhak** (highest competitor) and dividing them into six parts, the first part is of **mandatam kashayabhag** (lowest part of passions) and the **kashay** (passion) arising from its **uday** (arising) is called **Shukla Leshya**. The second part is of **mandatar kashayabhag** (lower part of passions) and the **kashay** arising from its **uday** is called **Padm Leshya**. The third part is of **mand kashayabhag** (moderate part of passions) and the **kashay** arising from its **uday** is called **Tejo Leshya**. The fourth part is of **teebr kashayabhag** (intense part of passions) and the **kashay** arising from its **uday** is called **Kapoth Leshya**. The fifth part is of **teebratar kashayabhag** (more intense part of passions) and the **kashay** arising from its **uday** is called **Neel Leshya**. The sixth part is of **teebratam kashayabhag** (most intense part of passions) and the **kashay** arising from its **uday** is called **Krishna Leshya**. Since all these six **Leshya** arise from the **uday** of **kashay** (passions), they are **prodayik** (arising from emotions).

**Shankha** - If **Leshya** arises from the **uday** of **kashay**, then how does the **Leshya** of a **kshinakshay** (weak passion) being in the **12th guranasthan** (12th place of karmic influence) come into play?

**Samadhan** - Indeed, if **Leshya** is considered to arise only from the **uday** of **kashay**, then the absence of **Leshya** in **kshinakshay** beings comes into play. But **yoga** (state of being) arising from the **uday** of **sharira naam karma** (karma of body) is also **Leshya**, because it is also a cause of **karmabandh** (karmic bondage). Therefore, **Leshya** is **oudayik bhaav** (arising from emotions).

1. Dhaval Pu. 7 Pg. 230. 104-105.
2. "Prodha bhaaven || 6 ||" [Dhaval Pu. 7 Pg. 104].
3. Dhaval Pu. 7 Pg.

Page #654:
---------------------------
## Chapter 620/Go. Sa. Jivakanda
**Verse 556**

According to the Loshya Marggana, those with Shukla Leshya are the most scarce. They are a fraction of an innumerable part of the Pallapam, because a community of extremely auspicious Loshyas is only possible in a very limited way. Those with Padma Leshya are innumerable times more than those with Shukla Leshya. Those with Tejo Leshya are a countable number of times more than those with Padma Leshya, because when the substance of those with Padma Leshya is divided into the substance of those with Tejo Leshya, a countable number of forms are obtained, as they are a fraction of an innumerable part of the Panchaindriya-Tithanch-Yoninis. Those without Leshya are infinitely more than those with Tejo Leshya, and are infinitely more than the Abhyavya Siddhas. Those with Kapota Leshya are infinitely more than those without Leshya, and are infinitely more than the Abhyavya Siddhas, the Siddhas, and the first square root of all beings. Those with Neel Leshya are significantly more than those with Kapota Leshya, being an innumerable fraction more. The measure of this excess is infinite. Those with Krishna Leshya are significantly more than those with Neel Leshya, being an innumerable fraction more. This excess is infinite.

**The nature of beings without Leshya:**

Those who are free from Krishna and other Leshyas, who have transcended the cycle of Samsara (the six transformations), who have attained infinite bliss, and who have reached Siddhipuri, should be known as those without Leshya.

**Special Meaning:**

Due to the absence of the arising place and the tendency of Kshaya, there are beings who are free from the six Leshyas, including Krishna. Such beings are the Supreme Person, the Supreme Soul. They have transcended the ocean of Samsara, which is made up of the transformations of substance, space, time, existence, and state. They have attained infinite, eternal, unchanging, independent, and intangible bliss. Worldly happiness is dependent on the senses, it is uneven, it fluctuates, it is accompanied by obstacles, it is subject to destruction, and it is the cause of bondage. Therefore, worldly happiness is actually in the form of suffering. Shri Kundakunda Acharya has said:

"That which is accompanied by obstacles, which is subject to destruction, which is the cause of bondage, and which is obtained through the senses, is indeed suffering." [Pravachana Sara 76]

In contrast to this, beings without Leshya have a different nature. It has been said:

"There is no suffering, no happiness, no pain, no birth, no death, no old age, no youth, only Nirvana." [17]

1. Dh. Pu. 7.566-570.
2. Gh. Pu. 7 p. 570.
3. Gh. Pu. 1 p. 360, Pra. Pan. San. A. 1 Ga. 153.

Page #655:
---------------------------
## Gatha 557-558
## Bhavya Margana/621

Where there is no sorrow, no worldly pleasure, no pain, no obstacle, no death, no birth, no senses, no upsarga, no delusion, no bewilderment, no sleep, no thirst, and no hunger, that is the state of Nirvana, or the happiness of beings free from taking.

Thus, the fifteenth chapter of the Gommatamar Jivakanda, the Leshya Margana Jam, is complete.

16. The Bhavya Margana chapter: Those beings who are destined to attain Siddhi, or who are capable of attaining Siddhi, are called Bhavya-Siddh. In contrast, Prabhavya-Siddh are those who never escape from the cycle of Samsara.

**Gatha 557:** "Those beings who are destined to attain Siddhi, or who are capable of attaining Siddhi, are called Bhavya-Siddh. But they do not have the rule of destruction of their impurities, like the destruction of impurities in a Kanakoel (golden stone)."

**Gatha 558:** "The beings who are destined to attain Siddhi, or who are capable of attaining Siddhi, are like the destruction of impurities in a Kanakoel (golden stone)."

**Meaning of the Gathas:** Those beings who are destined to attain Siddhi, or who are capable of attaining Siddhi, are called Bhavya-Siddh. But they do not have the rule of destruction of their impurities, like the destruction of impurities in a Kanakoel (golden stone). In contrast, Prabhavya-Siddh are those who never escape from the cycle of Samsara.

**Special Meaning:** One who has embraced Nirvana is a Bhavya. Those who will attain Siddhi in the future are Bhavya-Siddh beings.

**Doubt:** If this is the case, then wouldn't the lineage of Bhavya beings be extinguished?

**Resolution:** No, because Bhavya beings are infinite. But a finite quantity cannot be infinite, because considering a finite quantity as infinite leads to a contradiction.

**Doubt:** How can a quantity that is constantly being spent, but does not have a source, be infinite?

**Resolution:** No, because if a quantity that is being spent and does not have a source is not considered infinite, then there would be no reason to consider anything as infinite. Even though it is being spent, an infinite quantity does not diminish. Secondly, if we assume that an infinite quantity with expenditure is completely destroyed, then time would also be completely destroyed, because both are similar in terms of having expenditure.

1. Dhaval Purana 1, page 394, Pra. Pa. San. Pra. 1, Ma. 156.
2. Dhaval Purana 1, page 150, page 45, 478; Pa. San. Pra. 1, Ga. 154.
3. "Nirinpuraskrito Bhavya." [Dhaval Purana 1, page 150].
4. "Bhavya Bhavishyatiti Siddhipa Te Bhavya Siddhayah." [Dhaval Purana 1, page 392].

Page #656:
---------------------------
## 622/Go. Sa. Jivakanda

**Chapter 557-558**

**Doubt:** If we accept this, what is the harm?

**Solution:** No, because if we accept this, then the destruction of all the kalas of time will also affect the swalakshararupa kalas of other substances, and therefore the absence of all things will be objectionable.

There is no rule that the excreta of magnificent beings like the golden rock will be destroyed, i.e., prevented.

**Doubt:** How can beings who do not know liberation become magnificent?

**Solution:** No, because their magnificence becomes a designation, not a requirement of knowing liberation. There is no rule that all beings who are capable of knowing liberation are free from kalas, because if we accept this completely, it will contradict the golden rock. Just as it is not certain that gold will be extracted from the mine and separated from the golden rock even though gold is present in the golden rock, similarly, even though a being is capable of attaining the Siddha state, it does not attain the Siddha state due to the lack of suitable material. Work is not done by the mere suitability of the material. Work also requires suitable external material, i.e., nimittas.

There are Prabhavya beings who are opposite to the Bhavyas, i.e., who are not capable of attaining liberation.

**Beings are Anadi Sant Bhavyasiddhik.** ||184|| Because the Bhavyabhava, which is obtained from the Anadi state, is destroyed at the end of the Aayogikevali.

**Doubt:** Just as there are Prabhavya beings, there are also Bhavyas, then why is the Bhavyabhava not called Anadi-Anant?

**Solution:** No, because there is an influence of the power of indestructibility in Bhavyatva. Although there are Bhavyas who exist from Anadi to Anantkal (Nitya Nigodhya), it is true, but in them there is a possibility of the destruction of the world in the form of power, not indestructibility.

**Beings are also Sadi Sant Bhavyasiddhik.** ||185||

**Doubt:** An Abhavya cannot attain Bhavyatva, because Bhavyabhava and Abhavya bhava are mutually exclusive, so there is a contradiction in accepting their existence in the same being in sequence. Even a Siddha is not Bhavy, because there is a contradiction in accepting the re-emergence of karma-asravas in beings whose karma-asravas have been completely destroyed. Therefore, Bhavyatva cannot be Sadi?

-
-
-
-
-
1. Dhaval Pu. 1 p. 262-263. 2. Dhaval Pu. 1 p. 15. 3. Dhaval Pu. 1 p. 363-314. 4. "Taviparita: Amnyah." [Dhavat Pu.15, 364]. 5. “Ampadimro Sapajjavasiido.।10।" [Dhaval Pu. 7 p. 176. 6. Dhaval Pu. 7 p. 176. 7. "Sadiyo Sapajjavasiido.। 165॥" [Dhaval Pu. 7 p. 177].

Page #657:
---------------------------
##  Bhavya Margana / 623

**Solution:** This is not a fault, because as long as the right knowledge (Samyaktv) is not attained, the bhavya state of the soul is infinite and eternal due to the application of the principle of synonymity (Paryayarthika Nay). This is because the cycle of birth and death (samsara) is not yet eradicated. However, upon attaining Samyaktv, a different bhavya state arises. This is because after attaining Samyaktv, the soul remains in the world only for the duration of the transformation of half-matter (ardha-pudgala). Thus, it is proven that bhavya souls are also finite.

**I**

Souls remain in the state of bhavya-siddhi for an infinite and eternal period. || 187 ||

**Gatha 556-560**

**Doubt:** The bhavya state is a name for a particular state of the soul, so it must be destroyed. Otherwise, it would imply that the state of abhavya is a substance.

**Solution:** Even though the abhavya state is a particular state of the soul, there is no rule that all particular states must be destroyed (like Meru mountain etc.). Because accepting this would lead to the concept of monism (Ekantvad). It is also not true that whatever is not destroyed must be a substance. Because that which has production, existence, and destruction is considered a substance.

**The nature of souls devoid of bhavya and prabhavya states**

Those who are devoid of bhavya and prabhavya states, but have attained the bliss of liberation (mukti-sukha) and are beyond the cycle of birth and death (samsara), should not be considered either bhavya or abhavya. || 556 ||

**Special Meaning:**  A liberated soul (siddh) cannot be bhavya-siddhi, because the bhavya state is destroyed at the time of the final liberation of the kevali. A liberated soul cannot be abhavya either, because they lack the power to perpetuate the cycle of birth and death. Those who cannot destroy the cycle of birth and death are abhavya-siddhi, but liberated souls have destroyed the cycle of birth and death and attained liberation. Therefore, a liberated soul cannot be prabhavya either. A liberated soul is neither bhavya nor abhavya, because their nature is different from both.

**The number of souls in the bhavya marga**

The number of souls in the prabhavya state is infinite. The number of souls in the samsara who are bhavya is infinite, but they are not liberated. || 560 ||

1. Dhaval Pu. 7 p. 177. 2. Pranadinon Apjjavasiidi. || 187 || 3. Dhaval Pu. 7 p. 178. 4. Pra. Pan. San. 1 Ma 157 p. 33, p. 582 Ma 148. 5. Ajogin Charimsamaye Viraasuralambhado. [Dhaval Pu. 7 p. 176]. 6. "Siddha Purana Ra Taviviriya Sattado." [Dhaval Pu. 7 p. 242].

Page #658:
---------------------------
## 624 / Go. Sa. Jivakanda

**Verse:** The quantity of the *bhavya* (liberated) souls is *jghanayuktanant* (infinitely infinite). After subtracting the quantity of *abhavya* (non-liberated) souls from all the worldly beings, the remaining quantity is the measure of *bhavya* souls. || 560 ||

**Explanation:** The *bhavya* souls who attain liberation are infinite in number, based on the quantity of *dravya* (substance). With respect to time, the *bhavya* souls who attain liberation are not diminished by infinite infinite *avsarpinis* (descendent cycles) and *utsarpinis* (ascendent cycles). The reason for not being diminished is that only the *pratiit* (past) time is considered here. Just as the *loka* (world) is divided into three types of *prastha* (time): *anagat* (future), *vartmaan* (present), and *pratiit* (past). Of these, the one that has not yet occurred is the *anagat* *prastha*, the one that is being created is the *vartmaan* *prastha*, and the one that has already occurred and is suitable for use is the *pratiit* *prastha*. Of these, the *pratiit* *prastha* is used to measure all the seeds. The verse related to this is as follows:

**Verse:** *Pattha tiha vihato pranamavo vattamant tivo ya. Evesu virena du mijjide samm bijam tu.* || 556-560 ||

The meaning of this has been explained above. Similarly, time is also of three types: *anagat* (future), *vartmaan* (present), and *pratiit* (past). Of these, the *pratiit* (past) time is used to know the quantity of all the living beings. The concluding verse related to this is:

**Verse:** *Kalo tiha vihalo apaagado vattamant tido ya. Evesu pravin du mijjide jivaraasi tu.*

Time is of three types: *anagat* (future), *vartmaan* (present), and *pratiit* (past). Of these, the *pratiit* (past) time is used to know the quantity of all the living beings. Therefore, the quantity of *bhavya* souls does not end, but the entire time of the *pratiit* (past) time ends.

**Doubt:** How is the quantity of *bhavya* souls measured with respect to *pratiit* (past) time?

**Solution:** On one hand, one should establish the time of infinite infinite *avsarpinis* (descendent cycles) and *utsarpinis* (ascendent cycles), and on the other hand, one should establish the quantity of *bhavya* souls. Then, one should subtract one time from the time of the *avsarpinis* and *utsarpinis* and one *bhavya* soul from the quantity of *bhavya* souls. In this way, by continuously subtracting the time of the *avsarpinis* and *utsarpinis* and the quantity of *bhavya* souls, all the time of infinite infinite *avsarpinis* and *utsarpinis* ends, but the quantity of *bhavya* souls does not end.

The quantity of *abhavya* souls who do not attain liberation is infinite. Here, one should understand *jghanayuktanant* (infinitely infinite) from infinite, because this is the way the teachings of the *Acharya* tradition are.

1. *Baval Pu.* 7, p. 264-265. 2. *Dhaval Pu.* 3, p. 26. 3. *Dhaval Pu.* 3, p. 29-30. 4. *Dhaval Pu.* 3, p. 25.

Page #659:
---------------------------
##  Verse 561

**Doubt:** How is the term 'infinite' applicable to the amount of the 'Prabhdy' (illuminated)  which does not attain 'Vyuchchitti' (liberation) due to the absence of 'Vyaya' (expenditure)?

**Solution:** There is no contradiction in considering the 'infinite' only in relation to the numbers that exist in the realm of 'Kevalgyan' (omniscience).

**Explanation:**

* The number of objects that the 'Bhutan' (living beings) perceive simultaneously is 'Asankhya' (innumerable).
* The number of objects that the 'Avadhigyan' (clairvoyance) perceives simultaneously is also 'Asankhya'.
* The number of objects that the 'Kevalgyan' perceives simultaneously is 'Anant' (infinite).
* Objects that are beyond the scope of 'Shrutagnyan' (scriptural knowledge) but are within the scope of 'Avadhigyan' are 'Asankhya'.
* Objects that are beyond the scope of 'Avadhigyan' but are within the scope of 'Kevalgyan' are 'Anant'.

According to this definition, the 'Ardha Pudgal Parivartan Kaal' (half-particle transformation time) is also 'Anant' because it is beyond the scope of 'Avadhigyan'. However, it is not 'Paramarth Anant' (absolute infinite) because it eventually reaches an end, i.e., it ceases to exist.

An amount that does not end despite continuous expenditure without any income is 'Akshay Anant' (imperishable infinite) or 'Paramarth Anant'.

Thus, the 'Bhavya Margana' chapter, the twelfth chapter of the 'Gommatamar Jeevakand', is complete.

**Chapter 17: Samyaktvamargna Adhikar**

**Verse 561:** The characteristic of 'Samyaktvam' (right faith) is to have faith in the six substances, five 'Astikaya' (categories of existence), and nine types of objects, as taught by the Jina, through 'Prajna' (wisdom) or 'Adhigam' (attainment).

**Explanation:**

* 'Samyaktvam' is to have faith in the teachings of the Jina, who is 'Vitrag' (free from passions), 'Sarvagya' (omniscient), and 'Hitopadeshak' (benefactor), regarding the six substances, etc.
* A person who is 'Ragi-Dveshi' (attached and hateful) cannot be a truthful speaker because he will speak favorably about what he likes and unfavorably about what he dislikes. Therefore, being 'Vitrag' is essential for truthful speech.
* A person who does not have knowledge of all things cannot be a truthful speaker because he may speak untruthfully due to ignorance.
* The welfare of the 'Atma' (soul) is the ultimate goal.

Page #660:
---------------------------
## Chapter 626, Life Chapter
## Verse 561

You are greatly afraid of suffering and desire happiness in every way. Therefore, I too, as a remover of suffering and a bringer of happiness, teach you what is beneficial to you.

"All beings desire to attain happiness quickly. This happiness is attained through the destruction of all karmas." [Self-Instruction Verse] - All beings desire to attain happiness quickly. Happiness is attained through the destruction of all karmas, meaning through liberation, because the happiness of liberation is independent and free from suffering. The teaching that speaks of karma destruction (liberation) and the causes of karma destruction (the path to liberation) is a beneficial teaching. The Jina has taught about both the state of liberation and the path to liberation, therefore the Jina is a beneficial teacher.

Thus, the Jina, being free from attachment, omniscient, and a beneficial teacher, is a truthful speaker. Therefore, the six substances taught by him - living beings, matter, dharma substance, adharma substance, space, and time - are also truthful. Except for time, the five substances - living beings, matter, dharma substance, adharma substance, and space - are multi-faceted and, being real, are the five categories of existence. The Jina has also taught about the nine substances - living beings, mind, pleasure, pride, restraint, liberation, merit, and demerit. Just as the Jina has spoken about these six substances, five categories of existence, and nine substances, to believe in them as he has spoken is right faith. Faith in the truth is right vision.

Truth, scripture, and substance are the truths, and faith in them, meaning attachment to them, is right vision. Faith in the truth is right vision, or having an interest in the truth is right faith. Or, right faith is that whose characteristic is the manifestation of calmness, emotion, compassion, and faith. This right faith is of two types: faith through instruction or faith through understanding. First, the characteristic of faith through instruction is as follows:

"Faith through instruction is said to be that which is born from the instruction of the one who is free from attachment." [Previous Verse 12] - Faith that arises from the instruction of the one who is free from attachment is faith through instruction.

The five categories of existence, the six categories of living beings, the time substance, and other substances are only to be understood through instruction. One who believes in them through the understanding of instruction is one who has faith through instruction.

Page #661:
---------------------------
Gapa 561
Samyaktvamanga/697
He who does not know the truth but has faith in the Jina's words, I desire all that the Jina has said. ||324||
[Swamikatikayana Upereksha] - One who does not know the truths but has faith in the Jina's words, desires all that the Jina has said. Such a person is also an Aajna Samyaktvī.
Doubt - Why does he not know the truths?   Solution   Due to the strong rise of karma like knowledge-obstruction, he does not know the Jiva and other things said by the Jina.
"Pradigamo'ryavabodhah."2 The knowledge of two substances is 'Adhigham'.
Although the subsidence, destruction or destruction-subsidence of darshanamohaniya karma is the same in both Samyaktv, but there is a difference in the external cause. The Samyakdarshan that arises from the knowledge of Jiva and other things due to external instruction is Adhigham Samyakdarshan.
Or, this gatha sutra is like the 'Tal-Pralamb' sutra, being a denamarshak, indicating the ten types of Samyakdarshan. These ten types are based on external causes.
Prajnamargasamudbhavamupadeshat sutrayojansankshepat. Vistaraarthabhyam bhavam aparamavadigaadhe cha ||11|| [Sratmanushasan]
- Arising from Prajna, arising from the path, arising from instruction, arising from sutra, arising from seed, arising from brevity, arising from expansion, arising from meaning Samyakdarshan, these eight types are based on external causes. Pravagadha and Paramavagadha, these two types are based on faith due to the companionship of knowledge.
Doubt - Is Kshayik Samyakdarshan Paramavagadha, and is Upsham or Kshayopnasham Avagah Samyaktv?
Solution - The faith that arises from the understanding of Anga and Angabahya Pravachan (Shastra) is Avagah drishti, and the faith that arises from the direct glimpse of all things in Kevalgyan is Paramavagah drishti. There cannot be Paramatragadha Samyaktv for the Chhapparathas. It is also said
"Drishtih sanaangabahya pravachanam avagaho sthita yaavagaha. Kanvlya-lokitarthe rudhiriha paramayadigaadheti sada ||24||"
[Pratmanushasan]
1. "Puman tar jinoditam jivadivastu jnanabaranganadikarma prabalodayat na vijanati na cha greti." [Swamikartikaya Preksha Ga. 324 par Shri Shubhachandracharya birachit tika]. 2. S. Si. 1/3. 3. S. Si. 1/3.

Page #662:
---------------------------
##  620/Go. Sa. Jivakanda
##  Gatha 562

This verse proves that except for Shruta Kevali or Kevali, other beings can have Kshayik Samyaktv but not Avgaadh or Parmavagaadh Samyaktv.

In the Tattvarth Sutra Moksha Shastra, the sutra "Tannisargadhighamadva ||1||3||" states that "Samyak Darshan arises from nature and from acquisition."

Samyak Darshan that occurs without external instruction is called Naisargik Samyak Darshan, and that which occurs with external instruction is called Adhigamja Samyak Darshan. Thus, there are various types of Samyak Darshan depending on external causes. Out of the ten types of Samyak Darshan, the nature of Prajna, Avgaadh, and Parmavagaadh Samyaktv has been explained. The nature of the remaining seven is as follows:

The second path of Samyak Darshan is to have faith in the Ratna Tray (three jewels) as the path to liberation and consider it beneficial.

The third path of Samyak Darshan is to have faith in the character of the Tirthankaras and other great beings, as described in the Pratyamanuyog.

The fourth path of Samyak Darshan is to have interest in the truth by listening to the character of the Muni's as described in the Charananuyog.

The fifth path of Samyak Darshan is to have faith in the truth by understanding the difficult truths through the seed words, with the help of the principles of Ganit Praadi, which are related to the Karananuyog.

The sixth path of Samyak Darshan is to have interest in the truth by briefly knowing the substances like Jiva, etc., through the principles of logic, as described in the Dravyanuyog.

The seventh path of Samyak Darshan is to have faith in the truth by listening to the Dvadashaang Shruta.

The eighth path of Samyak Darshan is to have faith in the truth from a specific meaning, which is manifested in a being who has attained specific Kshayopa Sham, without having heard the Shruta.

##  Names of the six Dravyas and their related Adhikars

##  Chhaddaanesu Ya Ranam Uvalakkhanuvaay Praththarane Kaalo | Praththarana Khettam Sankhatharan Saruvam Phalam Cha Have ||562||

##  Gathaarth:

There are seven Adhikars for the description of the six Dravyas. They are: 1. Name, 2. Upalaksharananuvaad, 3. Sthiti, 4. Kshetra, 5. Sankhya, 6. Sthan-Swaroop, 7. Phal. ||562||

##  Special Meaning:

The naming and differentiation of the six Dravyas is called the Naam Adhikar. The Adhikar that describes the characteristics of the six Dravyas is called the Upalaksharananuvaad Adhikar. The Adhikar that describes the state of the Dravyas in relation to their synonyms is called the Sthiti Adhikar. The Adhikar that describes the area covered by the Dravyas is called the Kshetra Adhikar. The Adhikar that describes the number of Dravyas is called the Sankhya Adhikar. The Adhikar that describes the movement or stillness of the Dravyas is called the Sthan Swaroop Adhikar. The Adhikar that describes the benefits of the Dravyas is called the Phal Adhikar.

Through these seven Adhikars, the Dravyas like Jiva, etc., will be described in detail, which will lead to a special knowledge of the Dravyas and purify Samyak Darshan.

1. "Ya Baayopadeshadne Pradur Bhavati Nan Sagi Kam | Yalpuroopadesh Poorvak Jivaady Adhigamanimittam Taduttaram |" [M. Si. 3]
2. Based on the Sanskrit commentary of Pratyamanushasan Shloka 12, 13, 14.

Page #663:
---------------------------
##  Verse 563-564

**Statement of the Right of Name (First Right)**

It is to be known that there are two types of substances: Jiva (living) substance and Ajiva (non-living) substance. Each of these is of two types: Rupa (form) and Arupa (formless). The Jiva residing in the world (Samsari Jiva) is Rupa. The Jiva liberated from Karma (Siddha) is Arupa. || 563 ||

Ajiva substance is Rupa in the form of Pudgala, Dharma, Adharma, Akasa, and Kala, these four are Rupa. || 564 ||

**Explanation of the Verse:**

Dravya (substance) is of two types: Jiva Dravya (living substance) and Ajiva Dravya (non-living substance). Each of these is of two types: Rupa (form) and Arupa (formless). The Jiva residing in the world (Samsari Jiva) is Rupa. The Jiva liberated from Karma (Siddha) is Arupa. || 563 ||

Ajiva Dravya (non-living substance) is Rupa in the form of Pudgala, Dharma, Adharma, Akasa, and Kala, these four are Rupa. || 564 ||

**Special Meaning:**

Murta (concrete) and Rupa (form) are synonymous. (Rupaṁ Mūrtirityarthaḥ S. Si. 5/5) Similarly, Amurta (abstract) and Arupa (formless) are synonymous. "Murta's state is Murta-tva, having form etc. || 103 ||" [Apapaddhati]

The state of Murta is having form, taste, smell, and touch. The state of Amurta is being devoid of form, taste, smell, and touch. The state of having taste, smell, and touch is the nature of Murta. The state of being devoid of taste, smell, and touch is the nature of Amurta. Although Jiva is inherently Amurta, it becomes Murta due to the entry of Pararupa (other form) (due to the bondage of Anadi Dravya Karma).

The object of Avadhijnana (clairvoyance) is Rupa (form). Due to Karma-bandha, Samsari Jiva also acquires Pudgala-bhava (form), thus becoming the direct object of Avadhijnana.

Jiva's Pradesha (regions) are Murta due to Anadi-kalin (beginningless) bondage. Therefore, there is no contradiction in their connection with the Murta body.

Jiva acquires Murta-tva (form) due to the Anadi (beginningless) connection of Karma and A-Karma. Due to Anadi-kalin Karma-bandhana (beginningless Karma bondage), Jiva lacks Amurta-tva (formlessness) in the Samsara state.

1. "Murta's state is Murta-tva, having form etc. || 103 || Amurta's state is Amurta-tva, being devoid of form etc. || 104 ||" [Apapaddhati]
2. "The state of having taste, smell, and touch is the nature of Murta. The state of being devoid of taste, smell, and touch is the nature of Amurta. Being devoid of form, taste, smell, and touch, they become Amurta." [Panchaastikaya Ga. 97 Tika]
3. "Jiva, being Amurta in nature, becomes Murta due to Pararupa (other form) [Panchaastikaya Ga. 67 Tika]
4. "Rupiṣvavaceḥ" || 23 || [T. Su. Sra. 1]
5. "Karma-sambandha does not create any separation or distinction between Jiva and Ajiva substances." [Javadhatral Pu. 1 P. 43]
6. "Due to Anadi-bandhana (beginningless bondage), there is no contradiction in the connection of Murta Jiva-avayava (parts of Jiva) with the Murta body." [Gha. 1 P. 262]
7. "Due to the beginningless connection of Karma and A-Karma, Jiva becomes Murta." [Ghaval Pu. 14 P. 45]
8. "Due to Anadi-bandhana (beginningless bondage), Jiva lacks Amurta-tva (formlessness) in the Samsara state." [Ma. 15 P. 32]

Page #664:
---------------------------
630/Go. Sa. Jivakanda
Verses 563-564
Ajiva dravya is of two types, based on the distinction of rupa and arupa. What are Shankar-jiva and ajiva?
Samadham- The characteristic of jiva is chetana. That chetana is of many types due to the difference in jnana, etc. and the opposite characteristic of it, i.e. achetan, is called ajiva.
Ajjivo puran rapebho puggaladhammo pradhamm prayasam.
Kalo puggalamutto ruvaaviguranam amutti sesa du ||15||
One should know these five ajiva dravyas: pudgal, dharma, adharma, akash and kal. Among these, pudgal is murtiman, being the holder of the gurugas like rup, etc. and the remaining four dravyas (dharma, adharma, akash, kal) are amurti. Pudgal is called so because of its nature of puran-galan. Pudgal dravya is murta because it is associated with qualities like rup, etc. Except for pudgal, the remaining dravyas, dharma, adharma, akash and kal are amurta because they do not have qualities like rup, etc.
Praagasakaljiva dhammaadhamma ya muttiparhiga. Muttam puggaladhadvam jivo khalu chevano tesu ||17|| [Panchastikaya]
Akash, kal, shuddha jiva, dharma and adharma are amurta dravyas. Pudgal dravya is murta. Among all these, only jiva is chetan. The nature of having the combination of sparsh, ras, gandh and varn is murta. The nature of having the effect of sparsh, ras, gandh and varn is amurta. Pranash is amurta, kal is amurta, dharma is amurta and adharma is also amurta. Jiva is amurta by nature, but it is also murta due to the influence of par rupa. Pudgal is only murta. Akash is achetan, dharma is achetan, adharma is achetan, pudgal is achetan. Only jiva is chetan.
Pudgal is rupa. ||5|| The transformation due to the shape of rup, etc. is called murti. Those who have rup are rupa, i.e. murtiman. Or, rup is a word for a particular quality, and those who have it are rupa. Ras, etc. are inseparable from rup, therefore they are included in rup.
Puggaladchvam muttam muttivirahiyam havanti sesarin purvadha ga. 37 ||[Niyamsar] Pudgal dravya is murta and the remaining dravyas are amurta.
1. "Tatra chetanalakshano jivah. Sa cha jnanadhibhedadaneka dha midyate. Sadviparyay lakshanah ajivah." [S. Si. 1.4] 2. Gadravya sangrah. 3. "Puranagalan swabhavattvat pudgal ityuchyate. Pudgalo murtah rupaadi gurugasahito yatah rupaadi gunabhavadamurta bhavanti gudgalachchheshaaschatur iti." [Brihad dravya sangrah ga. 15 ki toka] 4. "Sparsharas gandh varn sadbhav swabhav murta. Sparsharas gandhvarabhiav swabhavam amurta. Tatra amurtam akashan, pramurtah kalah, pramurtah swarup jivah par rupaaveshan murto'pi, amurti dharma, amrito'dharma, murtah pudgal evaik iti. Achetana pranakashan, prachetana kalah, achetan dharma, achetan adharma, achetan pudgal, chetana jiva evank iti." [Pan. Ka. Ga. 7 tika] 5. T. Su. A. 5. 6. M. Shi. 55.

Page #665:
---------------------------
## Nama 565-567
Mamyaktva Marga/631

**Translation:**

The characteristic of a Jiva is its **Upayoga** (function). The characteristic of Pudgala is the fourfold color (**Varna Chatushk**). The characteristic of the four substances, Dharma, etc., is **Gatihetutva** (cause of motion), **Sthitihetutva** (cause of rest), **Avgahanhetutva** (cause of penetration), and **Bartanahetutva** (cause of action). ||56||

The three actions, **Gatitriya** (action of motion), **Sthitikriya** (action of rest), and **Avgahan Kriya** (action of penetration), occur only in Jivas and Pudgalas. These actions do not occur in Dharma, etc., but they are **Sadhaka** (facilitators). ||566||

Just as a path is a facilitator for a traveler, a seat is a facilitator for one who sits, and a house is a facilitator for one who resides, in the same way, the three substances, Dharma, etc., are facilitators in motion, rest, and penetration. ||567||

**Explanation:**

**Upayoga** is the characteristic of a Jiva.

**Question:** What is **Upayoga**?

**Answer:** **Upayoga** is the result that arises from both internal and external causes and is dependent on **Chaitanya** (consciousness). It does not exist independently of **Chaitanya**. **Upayoga** is the transformation that occurs in conjunction with the **Chaitanya** quality.

**Question:** What are the internal and external causes?

**Answer:** The destruction of **Jnanaavarana** (veil of knowledge), **Darshanavarana** (veil of perception), and **Viryaantaraya** (obstacle to energy) karmas is the internal cause. The external causes are the senses like eyes, etc., and external objects like lamps, etc.

**Question:** What is a **Lakshana** (characteristic)?

**Answer:** A **Lakshana** is that which distinguishes one thing from another among a group of things that are combined together. For example, in a lump of gold and silver, the yellow color and heaviness are the distinguishing characteristics of gold and silver. Similarly, in the case of the body and the soul, even though they are united in bondage, **Jnana** (knowledge), etc., are the distinguishing characteristics that differentiate them.

**Footnotes:**

1. "Upayogo Lakshanam" ||2.8|| [Tattvartha Sutra]
2. "Ubhayanimitavashadupadyapaanachantanyanuvidhayi parigamah upayogah" [Sarvarth Siddhi]
3. "Chaitanya manubidhadhatyanvayarupena parigamati" [Panchaastikaya Gatha 40 Tatparyavritti Toka]

Page #666:
---------------------------
632/Go. Sa. Jivakanda
Gatha 563-594
Doubt - Use is unstable, therefore it cannot be a characteristic of the soul. If an unstable substance is made a characteristic, then the same situation will arise as if someone had identified Devadatta's house by saying, "The one on which Kopa is sitting is Devadatta's house." When Kopa flies away, the identification of Devadatta's house is lost.
Solution - No, because even when one use-moment is destroyed, another takes its place, the stream of use never breaks. Due to Paryayashti, even when the use related to a particular substance is destroyed, the use remains normal due to Dravyapita. If the complete destruction of use is assumed, then in the future, remembrance, recognition, etc. will not be possible, because the remembrance of a self-experienced substance is only by the self, not by another. The entire social interaction of the world will be lost due to the effect of remembrance.
The four colors, namely touch, taste, smell, and color, are the characteristics of Pudgala.
Doubt - Why is the mention of touch, taste, and smell not made in the Gatha?
Solution - No, because touch, taste, and smell are inseparable from color, so they are included in color. Or, they are included by the word 'chau'.
That which is touched, or the mere act of touching, is called touch. Touch is of eight types, due to the difference of soft, hard, heavy, light, cold, hot, smooth, and rough. That which is the form of taste, or the mere taste, is called taste. Taste is of five types, due to the difference of sour, bitter, sweet, and astringent. That which is smelled, or the mere act of smelling, is called smell. It is of two types, due to the difference of fragrance and foul smell. That which has any color, or the mere color, is called color. It is of five types, due to the difference of black, blue, yellow, white, and red. These are the basic differences of touch, etc. However, each has countable, uncountable, and infinite differences. Thus, those in which touch, taste, smell, and color are found are Pudgalas. They are always connected with Pudgala Dravya.
Jan Indiehi Gih Ruvam-Ras-Gandh-Phas-Parinam. Tan Triya Puggal-Damb Anant-Gun Jivrasi Do. ||207||
[Swamikartikeyanupreksha]
That which is capable of being perceived by the senses due to being of the form of color, taste, smell, and touch, is all Pudgala Dravya. Their number is infinite compared to the number of living beings, because there are infinite Pudgala Vargana located on each living being's region.
1. Rajavartika 2/8/21-22-23. 2. "Sparsharasa Gandh Bavant: Pudgalah ||23||" [T. Mu. Pra. 5]. 3. "Ramadyamiti Chetan, Tadavinabhavattadantarbhavah" [S. Si 5/5]4. S Si. 5/23. 5. "Pudagapadavyam Indriyagrahya Dhyasaganyampparinamattvat Pudgalaparyayattvat." [Swamivatikeyanupreksha Gatha 207 ki Teeka].

Page #667:
---------------------------
## Gatha 565-567

**Gatha 565-567**
The four qualities of form, taste, smell, and touch of the pudgala exist from the subtle atom to the great earth. Besides these, the various types of words, such as letters and non-letters, are also pudgala, i.e., they are synonymous with pudgala.

**[Pravachana Sara, Jneyatasyadhikār]**
- The inactive dharma dravya is a contributing cause in the movement of both the jiva and the pudgala, just as the path is a contributing cause for a traveler while walking. This is the benefit of the dharma dravya, i.e., being a contributing cause in the movement of jivas and pudgalas.

**Gatha 566**
**[Brihad Dravya Sangraha]**
"The inactive, formless, and unmotivated dharma dravya is a contributing cause in the movement of both the jiva and the pudgalas. Just as water is a contributing cause in the movement of fish, etc."

**Gatha 567**
**[Panchaastikaya, Uttaraardha 84]**
"Although dharma is indifferent towards the movement of jivas and pudgalas, it is a contributing cause for their movement."

**[Pravachana Sara, Gatha 41, Jeyatattvadhikār]**
"Being a cause (contributing cause) in the movement of jivas and pudgalas is a quality of the dharma dravya."

**Doubt:** Dharma dravya is said to be inactive, i.e., without action. What is meant by action here?

**Solution:** The acquisition of a dravya from one region to another due to internal and external causes is called action. Or, the change that is the cause of the acquisition of a different region is action. That which is devoid of such action is inactive.

**Doubt:** If dharma, etc., dravyas are inactive, then they are not produced. Therefore, the principle that all dravyas have three forms, production, etc., is contradicted.

**1. Brihad Dravya Sangraha, Gatha 14, Commentary.**
**2. "Although dharma is by nature indifferent towards the movement of jivas and pudgalas, it is a contributing cause for their movement." [Panchaastikaya, Gatha 84, Tatparyavritti].**
**3. "Dharma is the cause of movement." [Niyamasara, Gatha 30].**
**4. "The change that arises due to both internal and external causes is the cause of the acquisition of a different region, this is action." [S.Si. 5/7/5].**
**5. "The change that is the cause of the acquisition of a different region is action." [Panchaastikaya, Gatha 6, Samayavyakhya].**

Page #668:
---------------------------
## Chapter 634, Section 565-567 of the Jiva Kanda

There is no contradiction, because the three categories of production, etc., are formed in other ways. For example, these substances like Dharma (merit) are the cause of the motion, state, and perception of the soul and matter. Since there is a difference in the duration of these motions, etc., their causes should also be different. Thus, these three substances (Dharma, Adharma, and Akasha) become the product, expenditure, and substance in relation to each other.

**Doubt:** If the substances like Dharma are inactive, then they cannot be the cause of the motion, etc., of the soul and matter. Because, just as water, being active, is seen as the cause of the motion, etc., of fish, etc., otherwise not?

**Solution:** This is not a fault, because these are merely instrumental causes, like the eye organ. Just as the eye organ is merely instrumental in the perception of form, therefore, the perception of form does not occur even in the presence of the eye organ for someone whose mind is distracted. Similarly, it should be understood in the case of nature. Thus, Dharma, Adharma, and Akasha substances, being considered inactive, are cooperative causes in the action of the soul and matter.

Just as Dharma substance is a cooperative cause in the motion of the soul and matter, similarly, Adharma substance is a cooperative cause in the state of the soul and matter. For example, in the state of stillness, the cooperative cause is:

**"Adharma, which is the cause of the stillness of matter, is the cooperative cause of stillness. Just as a shadow, while moving, supports those who are walking, so is Adharma."** [Vrihad Dravya Sangraha, Verse 18]

- In common parlance, just as a shadow or the earth, while remaining still, supports travelers, etc., in their stillness, similarly, Adharma substance, while remaining still itself, supports the soul and matter in their stillness, but does not support the soul and matter while they are moving.

**"Just as Dharma substance is, so is Adharma substance, which, like the earth, is the cause of the state of stillness for the soul and matter."** [Panchaastikaya, Verse 56]

- Just as the earth, being still itself, does not make others still, but is an external cooperative cause in the stillness of horses, etc., similarly, Adharma substance, being still itself, does not make the soul and matter still, but is a cooperative cause in their stillness.

Being instrumental in motion and state is the benefit of Dharma and Adharma substances, respectively.

**Doubt:** What is benefit?

**"The benefit of Dharma and Adharma is that they are instrumental in motion and state."** [Tattvartha Bhashya, 5:17]

Page #669:
---------------------------
Gatha 565-567
Sampattvamarganga, 635
Samadhan: Gati upagrah and sthiti upagrah (being the instrumental cause in motion and being the instrumental cause in state) - this is the beneficence.
Doubt: Is it appropriate to consider the beneficence of the substance of dharma and adharma as that of akasha, since akasha is all-pervasive?
Samadhan - This is not appropriate, because akasha has other beneficence. The purpose of akasha is to provide abode to all substances. Just as akasha is for the purpose of abode, if it were also for the purpose of gati and sthiti, then why would the absolutely superior, naturally upward-moving siddha bhagavans, even though they have external and internal means, be stationed at the end of the lokakasha? Since the siddha bhagavans, after moving, remain stationed above the loka, therefore, the instrumentality of gati and sthiti is not in akasha. It is certain that the substances of dharma and adharma, which demarcate the loka and aloka, are the causes of gati and sthiti. Akasha is not the cause of gati and sthiti, because the delimitation of the loka and aloka can be established in this way. If akasha itself were considered the instrumental cause of gati and sthiti, then due to the omnipresence of akasha, there would be no limit to the gati and sthiti of jivas and pudgalas, resulting in the constant destruction of the previously established loka, therefore, akasha is not the cause of gati and sthiti. Dharma and adharma are the causes of gati and sthiti, not akasha.

Magasa pravacana gamana-diti karanehim dedi jadi. Uddaga vippadhirana siddha chittati kissa taratha. (2)
Mama uyaridvarana siddharana jinavaraihin pannasam. Tamma gamaga-thana prayase jana gastiti. (63)
Jadi havadi gamana-hetu pragasam thana-karanam tesi. Pasajjadi praloga-harani logassa ya anta paribud-dhi. (14)
Tama dhamma-dhamma gamana-diti karanani na pragasam.
Iti jinevarahin bharindam loga-sahavam sunatana. (65)

The meaning of these gathas has been explained above.

Pravacana-vana-joga jivadina viyae prayasam.
Jemham logagasam allogagasam iti vihim. (16)
- The substance that provides abode to the jivas and other substances is the akasha substance. Akasha is of two types - lokakasha and alokakasha.

Savvesi jivana selarana taha ya puggalana cha. 
Jam dedi vivaram akhilam tam loe havadi prayasam. (10)

Page #670:
---------------------------
636/Mo. Sa. Jivakanda
Gatha 565-567
- The sky is the one that gives space to all the beings in the world, and to the pudgalas, and to the remaining dharma, adharma, and kala dravyas.
"Prakashasyavagahaḥ ||18||" Giving space is the benefit of light.
Doubt: Beings and pudgalas are active by nature, so it is appropriate to give them space, but dharma and other dravyas are inactive and always connected, so how can they be avagahi?
Solution: No, because it is achieved by treatment. Just as even though it does not move, space is said to be omnipresent because it is found everywhere. Similarly, although the action of avagaha is not found in dharma and adharma dravyas, they are present everywhere in the lokaakasha, so it is treated as avagahi.
Doubt: If giving space is the nature of space, then vajra and other things do not get hurt from lodha and other things, and cows and other things do not get hurt from pitha and other things, but hurt is seen, from this it is known that giving space is not the nature of space?
Solution: This is not a fault, because vajra and lodha and other things are gross substances, so they get hurt in measure, therefore the ability of space to give space is not destroyed. Vajra and other things are gross substances, so they do not give space to each other, this is not a fault of space. Pudgalas that are subtle give space to each other.
Doubt: If this is the case, then giving space is not an extraordinary characteristic of space, because its presence is found in other substances as well?
Solution: No, because space dravya is the common cause of giving space to all substances, this is its extraordinary characteristic, so there is no fault.
Doubt: In alokaakasha, the nature of giving space is not found, from this it is known that this is not the nature of space?
Solution: No, no dravya abandons its nature.
Sha: This loka is infinite in extent. But in this loka there are infinite beings, and even more infinite pudgalas than them. The measures of the regions of lokaakasha are different kalānus, and there is one dharma and one adharma dravya, how do these fit into this loka?
1. Lattvarthamutra Adhyaya 5. 2. Sarvarth Siddhi 5/18.

Page #671:
---------------------------
## Gatha 568
## Samyaktvamarga-rana/637

**Samadhana** - Just as the light of many lamps in a storeroom, the gold in a hidden Nagaras's lump, the honey in a pot filled with camel's milk, and the sound of victory cries and bells, etc., in a cellar, find space due to the quality of penetration, similarly, in the countless regions of the universe, countless beings and other things can also find space.

**Avagahanam Payasam Jivaadi Savvadavyanaam ||30|| [Niyamasara]** - The substance that is the cause of penetration of all substances, including beings, is the space substance.

**Sayalaanam Davyaanam Jam Dad Sakkade Hi Pravagasam. Tam Ayasam Duviham Loyaloyaan Bhayen ||213|| [Swamikatikayanupreksha]** - The substance that is capable of giving space to all substances is the space substance, which is of two types due to the difference between the world and the underworld.

The specific description of the nature of the time substance is being done by the author himself in the previous Gatha 56, so it is not done here.

**Kal Duvya Yattanhedoo Kalo Vattan Gunam Aviya Dabarinchayesu. Kalaadhaareneva Ya Vattati Hu Savyadadhyaani ||568|| Gathaarth** - Time is that which is the cause of the existence of things. Even though substances have the quality of change, all substances exist based on time, meaning they change through their own cycles. ||568||

**Vishesharth** - It is the nature of every substance to undergo change. The external cause of that change is the time substance.

**Jivaadi Davyaanam Parivattan Karana Hav Kalo || Purvardha Gatha 33||** - The time substance is the cause of the change in the form of existence of beings and other substances. The main time, which has the characteristic of causing existence, is the cause of the existence of all six substances.

**Savyaanam Dadhwara Parinaam Jo Karevi So Kali || Purvardha Gatha 216||** - There is change, meaning cycles, in all substances like beings, matter, etc. The cycles are in the form of production, destruction, and existence. The one who does or causes these cycles is the definite time, meaning the time substance. Here, the cause of the existence of substances is the main time, which has the characteristic of causing existence.

**Note:** The translation uses the original Jain terms as requested. The explanations in brackets are provided for clarity.

Page #672:
---------------------------
## Translation:

**638 / Go. Sa. Jiva Kanda**

"That is the ultimate (main, definite) time."

The word "Vartana" is formed in the feminine gender by adding the suffix "Yuddha" to the root "Vart" in the Nijnant form; its etymology is "Vartate" or "Vartanamatram". Although Dharma etc. substances are themselves inclined to produce their new synonyms, that synonym cannot happen without an external cooperative cause, therefore, the synonym is the time that makes it happen, this is the benefit of the Vartana time.

**Doubt:** What is Nijnarth?

**Solution:** The synonym of the substance changes and the time that changes it is the meaning of the suffix.

**Doubt:** If this is the case, then time is a substance that acts, like "Shipy reads" and "Upadhyaya teaches"; here, Upadhyaya is the substance that acts?

**Gatha 566**

This is here...

**Solution:** This is not a fault. Because even in the Nimittamaatra, the form of the Hetukarta is seen. For example, in the cold season, the fire of the firewood burns, here the fire of the firewood is only Nimittamaatra, similarly, time is also Hetukarta.

**Doubt:** How does that time awaken?

**Solution:** The time, etc., special actions, and the time of cooking, etc., which happens through time, etc., while remaining in their own Raudika names like cooking, etc., the time-time name that is superimposed on it in the form of "Shradpakkal" etc., makes known the existence of the main time that is the cause of that name, because the secondary practice depends on the main one.

How is the benefit of the time substance in the Dharma etc. forms?

**Dhama Dhammadi Pragurulahu Ganga Tu Chhin Vi Vaddihi. Haasihi Vi Vadato Hayanto Vattabae Jala. || 566 ||**

**Gathaarth:** In Dharma-Adharma etc. (pure) substances, there is Vartana in the form of increase and decrease through six increases and six decreases in the Agurulaghu qualities. || 566 ||

1. "Paramatti" [Brihad Anya Sangrah Ga. 21 Tika] quoted in the Tika of Ga. 216.

**Special Meaning:** Dharma substance, Adharma substance, Akash substance, Kal substance and Siddhajeeva, these have natural Agurulaghu qualities.

**Doubt:** How is Agurulaghutva in Dharma, Dharma, Akash and Kal?

2. Sarvarth Siddhi 5 / 22

3. Swamikali

Page #673:
---------------------------
## Gatha 570 & 571

**Savyaktvamagamranaa / 636**

**Solution:** Due to the combination of the agurulghu guna (qualities) of the anaadi parinaamik (eternal) karma (actions).

**Doubt:** How is there agurulghu (heavy and light) in liberated (siddha) jivas (souls)?

**Solution:** Due to the relationship of anaadi karma (eternal actions) and no karma (no actions), the karma-udaya (arising of karma) created gurulghu (heavy and light) which liberated jivas are completely free from. Therefore, their natural gurulghu guna (qualities) manifest.

"In dharma (virtue) and other dravyas (substances), the agurulghu guna (qualities) increase through six increments in their indivisible parts and decrease through losses. This change is caused by the main kala (time) dravya (substance). "

"The change in dharma, adharma (vice), and aakash (space) is due to the loss and increase of the agurulghu guna (qualities)."

**How is kala dravya (time substance) the cause of change?**

**Gatha 570:**

"The kala dravya (time substance) itself does not change into another form, nor does it cause other dravyas (substances) to change into another form. It is the cause (hetu) of the change of various dravyas (substances) that undergo change."

**Explanation:** Through the process of sankrama vidhaan (transitional method), the kala dravya (time substance) does not change into another form with its qualities, nor does it cause other dravyas (substances) or their qualities to change into its form. Even though the kala dravya (time substance) is the cause, it does not change into another dravya (substance) or another quality. It is the indifferent, instrumental cause of the change of various dravyas (substances) that undergo change. Just as the kala dravya (time substance) is the indifferent cause, so are dharma (virtue) and other dravyas (substances). All dravyas (substances) are endowed with their own parinaaman (change) guna (quality), but they produce their own paryayas (modifications) only when they come together with the cooperative dravyas (substances) of kala (time), kshetra (space), and bhaav (emotion).

**Gatha 571:**

"By the support of kala (time), dravyas (substances) change through their own paryayas (modifications). The state of a paryay (modification) is only a moment compared to the state of shuddha (pure)."

**Explanation:** The purpose of a paryay (modification) is from the paryay (modification) itself, because a paryay (modification) lasts only for a moment.

Page #674:
---------------------------
## 640 / Go. Sa. Jivakanda
3
। This is how
are." And the purpose of the moment is from time. By pure nay, we mean the subtle ṛjusūtra nay, which is in its own state along with time, as opposed to the ṛjusūtra tay. Its origin is from the support of kāladravy.
-
Gāthā 570 571
The nimitta kāraṇa for the change in the sattā rūpa svabhāva of the jīva, as well as the pudgala, and also the dharma dravy, adharma dravy, and ākāśa dravy, is kāla dravy by rule.
Doubt - What is the sahakāri kāraṇa in the parināmana of kāla dravy?
Solution - Kāla dravy is the sahakāri kāraṇa in its own parināmana. Just as ākāśa dravy is the base of the remaining seven dravyas and its own base is also śrāpa, similarly kāla dravy is also the sahakāri kāraṇa in the parināmana of all other dravyas and is also the sahakāri kāraṇa in its own parināmana. * Or, just as a lamp, a pot, a cloth, and other substances, while being the illuminator of other substances, is also the illuminator of itself, and does not need another lamp etc. to illuminate it, similarly kāla dravy, while being the nimitta kāraṇa of the change of other jīva, pudgala, etc. dravyas, also changes itself, and does not need any other dravy for it [Ghaval Pu. 4 p. 320 - 321].
Samvāvasabhāvāṇam jīvāṇam tah ya pogalāṇam ca. Pariyaṭṭasambhūyo kālo piyameśa paṇṇatto ||23|| [Pañcāstikāya]
Doubt - Just as kāla dravy is its own upādāna kāraṇa and the sahakāri kāraṇa of its own parināmana, why are not all the dravyas, like jīva etc., also their own upādāna kāraṇa and the sahakāri kāraṇa of their own parināmana? What is the purpose of kāla in their parināmana?
Doubt - Can it be doubted?
Solution - It is not so, if there is no need for a different external sahakāri kāraṇa, then there will be no need for dharma, adharma, and ākāśa dravy, which are the sahakāri kāraṇa for the ordinary motion, state, and śravagāhana of all dravyas. The work of kāla is visible directly as a clock, day, etc., but the work of dharma dravy etc. is known only from śrāgama. If the effect of kāla dravy is accepted, then the effect of dharma dravy, adharma dravy, and ākāśa dravy will also be accepted in the same way, and then only two dravyas, jīva and pudgala, will remain, which is against śrāgama.
How can there be parināmana in alokaākāśa if there is an effect of kāla dravy in lokaākāśa?
1. "Kasamavati paryāyābhayanta." [Pañcāstikāya Gā. 16 Tātparyavṛtti Ṭīkā]. 2. "Vāmetaṁ taṁ ca samaśroti." | Go. Ji. Gā. 573]. 3. "Taca varttamāna samayamātraṁ tadviṣayapayamamā grāhyamṛjumūtra" [Sa. Si. 133]. 4. "Kāladravyam pareṣāṁ dravyāṇāṁ parinātiṣayatvān mahakārikāra svathāṣi." | Svāmi Kārttikēyānuprekṣā Ya. 210 Ṭīkā]. 5. 6. Bṛhadravyasangraha Gāthā 22 ko Ṭīkā.

Page #675:
---------------------------
##  Gatha 5.52-573
## Samyaktvamanga/641
##  Solution - Just as the rotation of one part of a wheel causes the entire wheel to rotate due to the impulse of the stick, similarly, since space is an indivisible substance, the presence of time substance in one part of space, called loka-akasha, does not hinder the transformation of the entire space.

## Vyavahar Kala
##  Vyavaharo viyappho bhedo tah pajjanoti eyho. Vavaharpravaddvaragatidi hu vavahar kalo du. ||572||
##  Pravara pajjayathi di kharanamettan hodi tan cha samproti. Donhmanunamadikkama kalapamanam have so du. ||573||

## Gatha-artha - Vyavahar, vikalpa, bheda, paryay, these are words with the same meaning. The state or condition of vyavahar is vyavahar kala. || 5.72|| The lowest state of paryay is just a moment, that is time. The time taken for two atoms to cross each other is the measure of time. || 5.73||

## Visheshartha - That which is suitable for vyavahar is vyavahar. Vyavahar, vikalpa, bheda, and paryay, these words have the same meaning. To speak of bheda or to speak of paryay, all this is the subject of vyavahar nay. Vyavahar, that is, the state or condition of paryay, is vyavahar kala, because the state is called kala. For example, the state of the pulse is the vyavahar kala called ucchvas. The lowest state of paryay of substances is just a moment, and that lowest state, just a moment, is called time. The time taken for two atoms to cross each other is the measure of time, which is vyavahar kala. The time taken for one atom to cross another atom is called time. 

##  The time taken for the bodies of two atoms, one moving upwards and the other downwards with suitable speed, to touch each other is called time.

##  Ghabheyapasattho paramanu-mandagaipavatta to. Viyamaranta-rakhetanjavadyan jaadi tan sama-kalo. ||

## [Swa. Ka. Pra. Ma. 220 Tika] - The time taken for an atom situated in one region of space to reach another adjacent region by moving with suitable slow speed is called one time.

## 1. Brihad-bhyasangraha Ga. 22 Tika. 2. Mwa. Ka. Pra. Ga. 220 Tika. 3. "Vyavahunu yogyo vyavahar: vikalpa: bheda: paryay ityeka-artha: ||" [Swa. Ka. Na. Ga. 220 Tika]. 4. "Sthiti: kasna-sanjnak" [Dravya Sangraha Ga. 21 Tika]. 5. Swa. Ka. Pra. Ga. 220 Tika. 6. "Manoranvantara vyatikram-kala: samaya:." [Dhaval Pu. 4 Pr. 318]. 7. "Dogam paramanunam sappa-asogga-vegesh udam-dho na galchatanam sarirehi mago-sa-phosana-kalo samgra-gama." [Dhaval Pu. 13 Pr. 268].

Page #676:
---------------------------
##  642 / Go. Sa. Jivakanda
**Verses 574-577**

**Doubt:**  Is space (akasha) an undivided substance? If so, how can it be divided into regions?

**Solution:**  Although space is an undivided substance, it is divided into two parts, Lokakasha (worldly space) and Alokakasha (non-worldly space), due to the presence of Dharmadravya (substance of virtue) and Adharmadravya (substance of non-virtue). These divisions have existed since time immemorial. Lokakasha is further divided into regions like the human realm, the realm of animals, the hell realm, and the heaven realm. The space occupied by one pudgala paramanu (atomic particle) is called a region (pradesh).

**Doubt:**  If the time taken by a paramanu to move from one region of space to another is called a "sanayam," then it should take fourteen "sanayams" for a paramanu to travel fourteen regions. How can a paramanu travel fourteen regions in one "sanayam"?

**Solution:**  A paramanu travels from one region of space to another adjacent region in one "sanayam." It takes one "sanayam" for it to travel at a normal speed. If the paramanu travels at a faster speed, it can travel fourteen regions in one "sanayam."  An analogy is that a man named Devadatta can travel one hundred yojanas in one hundred days at a slow pace, but with the help of knowledge, he can travel the same distance in one day at a faster pace. There is no obstacle to a paramanu traveling one region or fourteen regions in one "sanayam" depending on its speed.

**Verse 574:**  One "avali" (a unit of time) consists of a countless number of "sanayams." One "sanayam" consists of a countless number of "avalis." One "uchchvas" (breath) consists of seven "avalis." One "stoka" consists of seven "uchchvas." One "laba" consists of seven "stoka."

**Verse 575:**  One "nali" (hour) consists of thirty-three and a half "labas." One "muhurta" (moment) consists of two "nalis." One "sanayam" is less than a "muhurta." The remaining time is called "sesam."

**Verse 576:**  One "pakkha" (fortnight) consists of one month. One "ud" (day) consists of one "prayana" (journey). One "ghassa" (night) consists of one "prayana." And so on. The duration of time is countless.

**Verse 577:**  The duration of time is countless, but in the human realm, it is understood as follows: One "sanayam" is equal to four "yavaharas" (transactions).

Page #677:
---------------------------
## Verse 574-577
**Samyaktvamarga Ma/643**

One should know the muhurta (auspicious moment). Similarly, one should know the remaining day, fortnight, month, season, solstice, year, etc. The infinite and endless series of **jghanya-yukta-samkhyata** times is the time of conduct. ||575-576||

The celestial beings (devas) move only in the human realm, therefore, one should know the time of conduct similar to them. ||577||

**Special Note:** There is a series of **jghanya-yukta-samkhyata** times, which are the least significant. The definition of time has already been given in verse 573.

**Doubt:** What is the measure of **jghanya-yukta-samkhyata**?

**Solution:** One **parita-samkhyata** is the measure of **jghanya-yukta-samkhyata**. Alternatively, by thinning out the **jghanya-parita-samkhyata** and giving the same **jghanya-parita-samkhyata** to each digit, multiplying them together, a **jghanya-pustaka-samsapas** is obtained, which is similar to a series. By subtracting one from this measure, the **utkrista-parita-samkhyata** is obtained.

**Other:**

"Thinning out that very **jghanya-yukta-samkhyata** and multiplying it by itself." ||36||

"The **utkrista-jghanya-samkhyata** is similar to a series." ||37||

**Doubt:** How is the measure of **jghanya-parita-samkhyata** obtained?

**Solution:** In this regard, the **Trilokasar** text states in verses 14-15 and 26-35:

- To know the **samkhyata**, one should imagine four containers: **anavastava**, **shalaka**, **prati-shalaka**, and **maha-shalaka**. Each container has a diameter of one lakh yojanas and a height of one thousand yojanas. The **anavastava** container should be filled with mustard seeds, starting with two, and so on. Once the **anavastava** container is full, one mustard seed should be placed in the **shalaka** container. And, with the mind or with the help of a deva, take the number of mustard seeds in the **anavastava** container and place one seed in each island and ocean. From the island or ocean where the seeds are exhausted, down to Jambudvipa, the measure of all the previous islands and oceans should be equal. Create a second **anavastava** container and fill it with mustard seeds. The number of mustard seeds in the first container is the **gachcha** for the second **anavastava** container. The number of mustard seeds in the first and second **anavastava** containers is the **gachcha** for the third **anavastava** container. In this way, the measure of mustard seeds in successive **anavastava** containers is determined by the **gachcha** of the previous containers. After filling the second **anavastava** container completely, place another mustard seed in the **shalaka** container. Continue in this way, and when the **shalaka** container is full, place one seed in the **prati-shalaka** container. Empty the **shalaka** container and fill it again as before, and place another seed in the **prati-shalaka** container.

1. "The **jghanya-yukta-samkhyata** time is a series." (Swa. Ka, A. Ma. 220 Toka); "The **utkrista-jghanya-samkhyata** is similar to a series." (Tri. Sa. Ga. 37).
2. Trilokasar.

Page #678:
---------------------------
644 /Go. Sa. Jeevakanda
Gatha 574-577
Thus, when the Pratiśalākā Kuṇḍa is also filled with Trukas, then one Dāna Mahāśalākā Kuṇḍa will be filled. As they are filled in order, when these four Kuṇḍas are filled, then in the end, the number of mustard seeds in the remaining unfilled Kuṇḍa will be the measure of the Jghanya Parītāsaṁkhyāt. By subtracting one from this, the measure of the Utkrushta Saṁkhyāt is obtained. The time obtained in this way, multiplied by the Jghanya Yuktāsaṁkhyāt, is one Pāvalī.
That is the time of the Vyavahāra Kāla, Āvalī, Kshaṇa (Stoka), Lava, Muhurta, Divasa, Paksha, Māsa, Ṛtu, Prayana Saṁvatsara, Yuga, Pūrva, Parva, Palyopama, Sāgaropama, etc.
Jākā - Then how did this 'Kāla' come about?
Samādhana - No, because Kāla is that by which the states of Karma, Bhaya, Kāya, and Prāyu are conceived or counted, i.e., are known. Thus, the word Kāla is derived from
Kāla, Mamaya, and Praḍa are all synonyms.
The time taken for one Paramāṇu to move past another Paramāṇu is 'Samaya'. An uncountable number of Samayas make up one Prāvalī. An uncountable number of Prāvalīs, as applicable, make up one Ucchvāsa-Niḥśvāsa. Seven Ucchvāsas make up one Stoka Saṁjñika Kāla. Seven Stokas make up one Lava, and thirty-two Lavās make up one Nālī, and two Nālīs make up one Muhurta.
"Uchchhyāsānāṁ Sahasrāṇi Trīṇi Sapta Śatāni Cha | Trisaptatiḥ Punaḥ Teṣāṁ Muhūtoṁ Teke Iṣhyate (3773) ||10||"
- Three thousand seven hundred seventy-three (3773) Ucchvāsas make up one Muhurta.
"Aḍḍhass Praṇalasass Y Ṇiruvahavass Y Jiṇehi Jantuss | Ussāso Hissāso Ego Pāṇo Tti Prāhiddo Eso ||35||"
- The breath of a being who is happy, free from childhood, and free from worry about illness, etc., is called one Prāṇa. This is what the Śruta Kevali has said.
Many Āchāryas say that one Muhurta is made up of seven hundred twenty Prāṇas, but considering the breaths of a healthy human being, free from illness, etc., the statement of those Āchāryas does not hold true, because this Sūtra, which is evidence because it is the meaning of the Kevali,
1. "Tasa Samaya-Prāvalī-Bāpa-Laya-Mohan-Divasa-Pala-Māsa Uḍu-Prayana-Saṁbachchara-Nṛga-Pṛthv-Pabba-Palidovama-Sāgarovama-ādi-Rūvatādo." | Dhavala Pu. 4 p. 317] | 2. Dhavala Pu. 41.318, p. 3 p. 65 | 3. Dhavala Pu. 4 p. 318 | 4. Dhavala Pu. 3 p. 66 |

Page #679:
---------------------------
##  Gatha 574-5:17
Samyaktvamarga/645

"The statement contradicts with the above mentioned."
How does the statement contradict with the Shanka Sutra?

**Solution:**

Because, multiplying the seven hundred twenty breaths mentioned above by four, and adding nine hundred (863) less than the product, we get the number of breaths in a Muhurta as mentioned in the Sutra. This indicates that the number of breaths in a Upak Muhurta is contrary to the Sutra. If we assume that there are seven hundred twenty breaths in a Muhurta, then not only would there be twenty-one thousand six hundred (21600) breaths in a day (Ahoratra) as per the calculation of astrologers, but according to the Agama, there would be one lakh thirteen thousand one hundred ninety (113160) breaths in a day (Ahoratra).

When one time unit is removed from a Muhurta, the remaining time is called Bhinna Muhurta. When one time unit is removed from the Bhinna Muhurta, the remaining time is called Anta Muhurta. In this way, one time unit should be removed successively until the breaths are produced. All these time units, which are reduced one by one, are also the measure of Anta Muhurta. Similarly, one time unit should be removed from the remaining one breath until the Pravali is produced. The Pravali produced in this way is also Anta Muhurta. After that, dividing the Pravali by the innumerable part of the second Pravali, the obtained Pravali (the innumerable part of the Pravali) is also the measure of Anta Muhurta. This is one time unit less than Muhurta, Bhinna Muhurta, i.e., the best Anta Muhurta. Further, removing two time units, etc., up to the innumerable part of the Pravali, all these are Anta Muhurta.

The Panchastikaya Pramatita mentions the following divisions of time in practice:

**Samagro nimiso kada kala ya nali sado divaratti. Masa udu ayanam samvatcharo tti kalo parayatto ||25||**

- Time, Nimisha, Kastha, Kala, Nali, Day and Night, Month, Season, Ayan, Samvatsara, etc., are all dependent on other substances.

**Nimeshanam sahasrani pancha bhuya shatam taya. Dasha chamba nimeshah syu muhurte ganitaah budhah || (5110) ||11||**

- Wise men have calculated five thousand one hundred ten Nimishas in a Muhurta! 

1. Dhaval Pu. 3 p. 66. 2. Dhaval Pu. 3 p. 67. 3. Dhaval Pu. 3 p. 67. 4. Dhaval Pu. 3 p. 68. 5. "Sach ekasamayen hi to bhinnamuhurtah utkrishtantamhurtah ityarthah. Tato'ne dvisamayonaadya pavalyasanikhyatakbhagaantah sarve'ntam hurtah." [Swa. Ka. A. Ga. 220 Teeka], 6. Panchastikaya; Dhaval Pu. 4 p. 317. 7. Dhaval . 4 p. 318.

Page #680:
---------------------------
646/Go. Sa. Jivakanda
Verses 578-576
One day, or a day and night, is called an *aho-ratra*. Fifteen days make a *paksha*. Two *paksha* make a *mas*. Twelve *mas* make a *varsha*. Five *varsha* make a *yuga*. In this way, one should continue to count upwards until the *kalpa* is reached.

**Question:** What is the measure of the *nimisha*, *kastha*, and *kala*?

**Answer:** A *nimisha* is the time that elapses between the blinking of an eye, during which countless moments pass. Fifteen *nimisha* make a *kastha*, and thirty *kastha* make a *kala*. Twenty *kala* make a *naali*, or *ghatika* (hour).

**Question:** What is the measure of a *ritu* and an *ayana*?

**Answer:** Two *mas* make a *ritu*. Three *ritu* make an *ayana*. Two *ayana* make a *varsha*. One should also know the *palyopam*, *sagar*, and other practical measures of time.

**Question:** In the *devaloka*, there is an effect of day and night, so how is time measured there?

**Answer:** No, because time in the *devaloka* is measured according to the time here.

**Question:** Why is there a division of time (practical time) only in the *manushyaloka*?

**Answer:** "The *jyotishi* gods, like the sun and moon, constantly circumambulate Mount Meru in the *manushyaloka*. The day, night, *paksha*, *mas*, *ayana*, etc., are divisions of time created by them. Since the movement of the *jyotishi* gods takes place only in the *manushyaloka*, therefore, the division of practical time occurs only in the *manushyaloka*."

In other words, the measure of practical time is based on the past, present, and future. It is established by the countless *siddhantas*. The entire *jivatma*, from the lowest to the highest, is subject to this practical time. It is the time of the infinite *gurina*.

**Verse Meaning:** Practical time is of three types, based on the past, present, and future.

Page #681:
---------------------------
##  Verse 575-576
## Samyaktramargaga 647

Multiplying the number of Siddhas by the number of Aavalis gives the measure of the past. || 578 || The present is merely a moment of time. The future is infinite times greater than all beings and all Pudgalas. These three are the practical times. || 576 ||

**Explanation:**

The practical time is of three types: the perceived time, the future time, and the present time. The moments of the past time have already been consumed (destroyed). The moments of the future time will be, they are not yet born. The present time has only one moment existing. Although time is of three types in relation to the past, future, and present, it is of six types in relation to Gunasthiti time, Bhavasthiti time, Karmasthiti time, Karyasthiti time, Uppaadakaal, and Bhavasthiti time. Or, time is of many types, because the effect of time is separate from the results, and the results are found to be infinite.

While stating the measure of the past time, Shri Kundkundacharya has also said the same in the Niryasara: "Tivo Sankhejjavalihisiddha Maanam Tu." (Verse 31, Uttara). That is, the measure of the past time is obtained by multiplying the number of Siddhas by the number of Aavalis. The number of Siddhas is infinite, so the past time is infinite, which is infinite.

**Doubt:** Why is the perceived time said to be infinite times greater than the number of Siddhas?

**Solution:** The verse states that multiplying the number of Siddhas by the number of Aavalis gives the measure of the perceived time. There are a countless number of moments in one Aavali. Multiplying the number of Aavalis by the countless number of moments gives the countless number of moments obtained. Therefore, in relation to the moments, the perceived time is countless times greater than the Siddhas. In relation to the Aavali, the number of Siddhas is multiplied by the number of Aavalis. It is also said:

"Tashraateeta Sankhyataavali Gunita Siddharashirbhavati." [Swa. Ka. A. Ga. 221 Tika]

The number of Siddhas multiplied by the number of Aavalis is the measure of the past time.

**Doubt:** Why is the number of Siddhas multiplied by the number of Aavalis?

**Solution:** Because multiplying the number of Siddhas by the number of Aavalis gives an infinite result, which is the measure of the moments of the past time. The explanation is as follows:

Since it took 6 months for 608 beings to attain liberation,
6 months = 5 moments
passed,
then it took
608
1. Due to carelessness or inattention, the author wrote "Sara" instead of "Siddha" in the Niryasara, which has been passed down to this day. Because multiplying the number of institutions by the number of Aavalis does not give the measure of the past time. R. Ch. Mukhtar

Page #682:
---------------------------
648/Go. Sa. Life
Chapter 578-5.76
6 months 8 time 1 Siddha number series x Siddha therefore the present Siddha's liberation time is -..-     -.-...-.-=Past time
6081 (This much time has passed)
There cannot be less or more past time than this because in 6 months = time, the order of liberation of 608 is always fixed in the past time. Therefore, the proof of the past time = 6 months 8 time Siddha amount -     is certain and that number is Prablo - Siddha amount is measured.
The present one time is the present time. Because the times before the present one time are the past time form time. The future time from the present time is the future time. Therefore, the present time is only one time. It is also said
Tes pratiada janta prapant-gririnaday bhaavi-pajjaya. Ekko vi battamano ettiya-metto vi so kalo ||221||
[Swa. Ka. A.] The past time is infinite which is the Siddha amount multiplied by six Pabali proof, that is, the infinite part proof of the Jiva amount. The future (future) time is infinite times more than that, because the Pudgal amount is infinite times more than the total Jiva amount, and the time is infinite times more than that. Only one time is the present time, so much is the practical time
Sha-The past time is the infinite part of the Jiva amount, how is it known?
Solution—The past time is infinite times more than the Siddha amount, but the Jiva amount is infinite times more than the Siddha amount. This proves that the past time is the infinite part of the Jiva amount.
Doubt-The Pudgal amount is infinite times more than the Jiva amount, and the time is infinite times more than that, how is it known?
Solution—This is known from the Parsva sentences, which are as follows-'Sarbajivaraasi vaggijmarana baggijjamanna pratalogamettbamgaranadwaramani uri ganturan sadhya poggaladaravam pavavi. Puno sayapoggalavagvam yaggaijamanam vaggijjamanam pranatalogamesavagganadhanani uvari gantun savvakalam pavavi.' [Dhaval Pu. 13 p. 262-263]
By doing the successive squares of all Jivas, the infinite Lokapraman square place goes ahead and all Pudgal dravya is obtained. Again, by doing the successive squares of all Pudgal dravya, the infinite Lokamatr square place goes ahead and all time is obtained.
Out of this total time, the past time which is the infinite part proof of the Jiva amount is subtracted, the future time remains which is the perceived time, which is infinite times more than the Jiva amount and the Pudgal amount.

Page #683:
---------------------------
## Gatha 580
**Mamyaktva Margaga/649**

The term 'Kala' (time) is representative of the true nature of the definite time, and that definite time substance is imperishable. The relative time, i.e., the practical time, is born and destroyed, and is long-lasting. That means it lasts for a long time. ||580||

**Special Meaning:** In the ultimate reality, i.e., the definite time, the term 'Kala' is the primary term, and the terms like past, present, and future are secondary. In practical time, the terms like past, present, and future are primary, and the term 'Kala' is secondary, because this kind of usage is with respect to substances that have actions, and time is the action.

The characteristic of a 'Paryaya' (modification) is to be born and destroyed. The practical time called 'Samaya' (time) is also born and destroyed, therefore it is a 'Paryaya'. A 'Paryaya' cannot exist without a substance. It is also said:

"**Pajjayavijuvam Davam Dasvavijutta Ya Pajjaya Gasthi. Dohang Pranaranabhuvam Bhavam Samana Par Viti.** ||12||" [Pancastikaya] - A substance without 'Paryayas' and a 'Paryaya' without a substance do not exist, both are inseparable. Therefore, the substance of the practical time, which is in the form of 'Paryayas' like 'Samaya' etc., is the definite time. That practical time is long-lasting in the form of 'Palya' (moment), 'Sagara' (ocean) etc., i.e., it remains, and the time substance, i.e., the definite time, is eternal, i.e., imperishable, because it is beginningless and endless.

"**Kalo Parinamabhavo Parinamavo Dakhvakalasanbhuro. Voh Es Sahayo Kalo Khanabhanguro Rinayado.** ||2||" [Dhaval Pu. 4 p. 315] - The practical time is born from the transformation of 'Pudgalas' (particles), and the transformation of 'Pudgalas' etc. is through the time substance. Both have this nature. That practical time is momentary, but the definite time is fixed, i.e., imperishable.

That definite time, i.e., the time substance, is devoid of two types of smell, five types of taste, six types of touch, and five types of color. It is like the lower stone or nail of the potter's wheel, its characteristic is to be present, and it is as large as the 'Lokakasha' (space of the universe), i.e., there are as many time particles as there are regions of the 'Lokakasha'. It is also said:

"**Vavvapana Varaso Vavagadadogandha Afasa Ya. Agurulahugo Pramutto Vattalakkho Ya Kalo Ti.** ||24||" [Pancastikaya]

1. Dhaval Pu. 4 p. 315 Ga, 1.
2. S. Si. 5/22.
3. "Paryayasya Utpannprajvasitvat. Tatha Chokta Samayo Uppyanya Paddhasi. Sa Cha Paryayo Dravya Vina Na Bhavati" [Brihad Dravya Sangraha Gatha 21 Ko Teeka]1
4. "Kevacira Kalo? Pranadio Apjjavasido." [Ghaval Pu. 4 p. 321].
5. Dhaval Pu. 4 p. 314 and 315].

Page #684:
---------------------------
650/Go.Sa. Jivakanda
Gatha 581-582
The state of the six substances is similar to the state of the three times, because the state of the six substances is made up of the combination of the three times' *arthaparyaya* and *vyanjanaparyaya*. ||581|| In one substance, as many *bhuta*, *bhavishyat*, and *vartman* *arthaparyaya* and *vyanjanaparyaya* are there, that much is the substance. ||582||
Gatha-artha- The state of the six substances is the same, because all six substances are beginningless and endless. Or, as many *arthaparyaya* and *vyanjanaparyaya* are there in the three times, *bhuta*, *bhavishyat*, and *vartman*, that much is the state of the substances. In support of this, Gatha 582 is said.
Visheshartha- The state of the six substances is the same, because all six substances are beginningless and endless. Or, as many *arthaparyaya* and *vyanjanaparyaya* are there in the three times, *bhuta*, *bhavishyat*, and *vartman*, that much is the state of the substances. In support of this, Gatha 582 is said.
Sha- What is *arthaparyaya*?
Samadhan- The *paryaya* which is very subtle, happens in a very small moment, and is destroyed, and is not perceptible to speech, that is *arthaparyaya*.
Shankha- What is the characteristic of *vyanjanaparyaya*?
Samadhan- *Vyanjanaparyaya* is gross, stays for a long time, is perceptible to speech, and is also perceptible to the senses of the ignorant.
Shankha- Why are there two divisions of *paryaya*, *arthaparyaya* and *vyanjanaparyaya*?
Samadhan- *Arthaparyaya* stays for only one moment, and *vyanjanaparyaya* stays for a long time. To explain this difference created by time, these two divisions, *vyanjanaparyaya* and *arthaparyaya*, are made.
Suhma avayavisaaya kharakhino prathpaparyaya diva. Vajanaparyaya purana thula girgoyara chiravivastha ||25||
[Vasunanvi Shravakachar]
1. Swa. Ka. A. Ga. 220 Teeka. 2. Dhaval Pu. 1 p. 386, Pu. 3 p. 6. 3. "Tatra arthaparyayaa sukshmaa agakshayino tathavaggochara vishayaa bhavanti." Pan. Ka Ma. 16 Tatparya Vritti Teeka 14. "Nyanjanasamaa punah sthulaattirakalasthayino vaggocharaaichchastha rastiviṣayaaśca bhavanti." Pan. Ka. Ga. 16 Tatparyavasi Teeka] 5. "Ekasamayatino'rthaparyayaa bhayanta chirakalasthapino vyajanaparyayaa manyate iti kalakritabhedakapanartha." [Pan. Ka, Ga. 16 Teeka] 1

Page #685:
---------------------------
##  Gatha 583-565
## Samyakrama Ganga/651

- The **arthaparyaya** is subtle, the subject of knowledge, cannot be expressed in words, and is destroyed moment by moment, but the **vyanjanaparyaya** is gross, the object of words, and is permanent.
The **vyanjanaparyaya** is concrete, perceptible, imperishable, and stable. The **arthaparyaya** is subtle and perishes every moment (is destroyed). The **vyanjanaparyaya** exists in the **jiva** besides **pudgala**. The **samsari jiva** is concrete due to being bound by **karma** from beginningless time. In **dharmadravya**, **adharmadravya**, **akashdravya**, and **kaladravya**, only **arthaparyaya** exists. In **jiva** and **pudgala**, both **arthaparyaya** and **vyanjanaparyaya** exist. The **siddh jiva** is also pure in heart, therefore, only **arthaparyaya** exists in **siddh jivas**.

There are many **paryayas** in a **dravya**, and they are beginningless and infinite in succession. Therefore, the number of **paryayas** in a **dravya** is equal to the number of **dravya** itself, because **paryaya** cannot exist without **dravya**, and **dravya** cannot exist without **paryaya**. The **paryayas** that have been destroyed are called **bhuta** **paryayas**, and the **paryayas** that are not yet present, which will be according to the **paagami** **nimitta** and **upaadan** causes, are called **bhavishyat** **paryayas**, and the **paryayas** that are happening in the present are called **vartaman** **paryayas**. The time of these three **paryayas** is the time of the **dravya**, i.e., the state of the **dravya** is the same, which is beginningless and infinite.

To know the beginningless as beginningless, the infinite as infinite, the non-existent as non-existent, the non-existent as non-existent, and the effect as effect is **samyakgyan**, otherwise it is **mithyagyan**. The number of **paryayas** is equal to the state of the **dravya**. The state of the **dravya** is beginningless and infinite, and the state of the **paryayas** is also beginningless and infinite, in the form of flow, form, or succession.

The basis or field of **dravya** is **praagasa** **vajjitta**, **sabche** **logammi**, and **cheva** **patthi** **vahi**. **Vavi** **dhamma** **adhamma** **prayatti** **va** **achalida** **piccha**. ||583|| **Logass** **asankhejjavibhagappadi** **tu** **samvalogoti**. **Appapavesavisappanasanhare** **vavado** **jivo**. ||584|| **Poggalabbabbanam** **puran** **eyapadesadi** **honti** **bhajanijja**. **Ekkeko** **du** **padeese** **kalaanunam** **dhuvo** **hodi**. ||585|| **Sankhejjasankejjanaata** **va** **hoti** **poggalpadeesa**. **Logaagaseva** **thidi** **egpadeeso** **anussa** **have**. ||586||

1. "**Dharmaadharmanabhakalarthaparyayagocharah** | **Vyanjanarthasya** **vijneyo** **dvaavanyau** **jivapudgalo**. " [Swa. Ka. A. Ga. 220 Tiva] | 2. **Pacastikaya** Ga. 12 |

Page #686:
---------------------------
652/ Go. Sa. Jeevakand
Chapter 553-587
The subtle bodies of the living beings are always present in the space (lokaakasha). They are separated from the true space (lokaakasha) by the Shravana (hearing) of the true space. ||1587||
The limits of the palaka (the space occupied by a living being) are within the space (lokaakasha), not outside it. The dharma dravya (substance of virtue) and adharma dravya (substance of vice) are present throughout the space (lokaakasha). These two substances are present, active, and eternal. ||563|| Due to the contraction and expansion of the soul's regions, a living being, even if it occupies a fraction of a loka (world), is present throughout the entire space (lokaakasha) (in comparison to the Kevali Samudghat). ||584|| The pudgala dravya (substance of matter) exists from a single region of light to the entire space (lokaakasha). Each region of the space (lokaakasha) has a single kala (time) present. ||565|| There are skandhas (aggregates) with countable, uncountable, and infinite pudgala regions, but the pudgala paramanu (atom of matter) occupies only one region of space. ||586|| All six substances are present in all regions of the space (lokaakasha). The entire space (lokaakasha) is devoid of any other substances besides the space dravya (substance of space), it is empty. ||58||
Special Meaning - The dharma dravya (substance of virtue) and other substances are present in the space (lokaakasha), not outside it.
Doubt - If the space (lokaakasha) is the basis of the dharma dravya (substance of virtue) and other substances, then what is the basis of the space (lokaakasha)?
Solution - The space (lokaakasha) has no other basis, because it is self-established.
Doubt - If the space (lokaakasha) is self-established, then the dharma dravya (substance of virtue) and other substances should also be self-established. If the dharma dravya (substance of virtue) and other substances are considered to have another basis, then the space (lokaakasha) should also be considered to have another basis. This belief leads to a fault in the mind.
Solution - This is not a fault, because the space (lokaakasha) is self-established in terms of its existence, but it is considered to have a basis in terms of its location.
Because there is no other substance larger than the space (lokaakasha), it is the most infinite. But the dharma dravya (substance of virtue) and other substances are said to be present in the space (lokaakasha). In terms of this kind of existence, all substances are...
Doubt - In the world (samsara), those who are future in terms of time are the ones who have the relationship of basis and dependent, like the basis of berries is the tree. The space (lokaakasha) is future in terms of time, and the dharma dravya (substance of virtue) and other substances are produced later, this is not the case, so in terms of practical existence, the concept of a common basis and dependent does not arise?
Solution - This is not a fault, because the relationship of basis and dependent is seen in things that exist simultaneously. Like the form and other qualities in a pot, and the hand and other parts in the body.
The division of the world (loka) and the non-world (aloka) should be understood in terms of the presence and absence of the dharma dravya (substance of virtue) and adharma dravya (substance of vice). That is, the space (lokaakasha) is where the dharma dravya (substance of virtue) and adharma dravya (substance of vice) are found, and outside of this is the non-space (alokaakasha). If the presence of the dharma dravya (substance of virtue) is not accepted, then the division of the world (loka) and the non-world (aloka) does not arise, because there is no reason for the laws of motion of the living beings and the pudgalas.
1. Sarvarthasiddhi 5/12/

Page #687:
---------------------------
## Gatha 553-587
**Samyaktyamaganna/653**

The pervasiveness of Dharma-dravya and Adharma-dravya is throughout the entire Lokakasha. ||13|| Just as a pot remains in a house, in the same way, Dharma and Adharma dravya are pervading the Lokakasha. Although all these dravya reside in one place, they do not attain vyadhata (mutual interference) due to the power of pervasiveness.

A part of the Lokakasha, which is obtained by dividing it into countless parts, is called an "Asankhyatava" part. Those who have one Asankhyatava part as their beginning are called "Satra Asankhyatava" parts. One Jiva resides in one Asankhyatava part. In this way, one should know the pervasiveness of one Jiva from one, two, three, and four, and so on, up to the number of Asankhyatava parts and the entire Lokakasha. However, the pervasiveness of many Jivas is in all Lokas.

**Doubt:** If one Jiva resides in one Asankhyatava part of the Lokakasha, then how can countless Jivas with bodies reside in the Lokakasha?

**Solution:** Jivas are of two types: subtle and gross. Therefore, their residence in the Lokakasha is possible. The gross Jivas have bodies with Pratibhata (reflection). However, the subtle Jivas, although they have bodies, are so subtle that one Nigoda Jiva pervades as many regions of the Lokakasha as countless Jivas with ordinary bodies can reside in. They do not attain vyadhata with each other or with the gross Jivas. Therefore, there is no conflict in the pervasiveness of countless Jivas in the Lokakasha.

**Doubt:** If the regions of one Jiva are equal to the countless parts of the Lokakasha, then how can one Jiva reside in the beginning of the Lokakasha's inaccessible parts? Shouldn't it pervade the entire Lokakasha?

**Solution:** Although the Jiva is inherently formless, due to its eternal bondage, it becomes form-bound by attaining oneness. Due to its Karmic body, it resides in a large body. Therefore, its regions contract and expand. Like a lamp, its residence in the beginning of the Lokakasha's Asankhyatava parts is possible according to its body. Just as the extent of the lamp's light is not determined in the infinite space, but it is limited by the covering of other substances like a lid or a cover, in the same way, one should understand the Jiva's regions.

**Doubt:** Due to the mutual entry of the regions of Dharma-dravya and other dravya, they become mixed, leading to non-differentiation.

**Solution:** No, because even though they are in close contact with each other, they do not abandon their own nature. Therefore, non-differentiation is not attained. Shri Kundakunda Acharya has also said:

1. "Dharma-adharmayoḥ kritsne ||5/13||" [Sarvarthasiddhi]
2. Commentary on Sarvasiddhi Sutra 5/13.
3. Siddhi 5/15.
4. Sarvarthasiddhi 5/16.
5. Narsi.

Page #688:
---------------------------
654/Go, Sa, Jivakayer
Chapter 583-587
The six substances enter each other, give space to each other, and merge with each other, yet they never abandon their own nature. ||7|| [Panchaastikaya] That is, these six substances give space to each other and remain in their own place until their time, but there is no defect of mixture or interference in them. The word 'entry' is in relation to the active Jiva and Pudgal, because space is given to those who come. Dharma dravya, Adharma dravya, light and time are inactive substances, always present together, so the word 'space' is in relation to these four.
The entry of Pudgal takes place in a region of Lokakasha, etc., by choice. ||5/14||2 There is entry of one atom in one region of space. There is entry of two atoms, bound or unbound, in one region of space or in two regions. There is entry of three atoms, bound or unbound, in one or two or three regions of space. In the same way, one should know the entry of skandhas with a countable, uncountable and infinite number of regions in one, countable and uncountable regions of Lokakasha.
Doubt - It is justified that Dharma and Adharma are immutable, so it becomes possible for them to stay in one place without conflict, but Pudgal is material, so how can it stay in one place without conflict?
Solution - Their entry is their nature and due to subtle transformation, the material Pudgal does not encounter conflict in entry in one place, just as the light of many lamps remains in one place. Shri Kundkund Acharya has also said
Promaadhagaadharinathio Poggalkaayehi Savvado Logo. Sumehi Baavarehi Ya Pantaantehi Vivihim ||64|| [Panchaastikaya]
- This world is completely filled with countless skandhas of subtle and dense, various kinds of infinite Pudgal. Just as a kajjal pot filled with kajjal or the earth body, etc., is filled with subtle stationary Jivas without any difference, in the same way, this world is filled with countless, visible and invisible, various kinds of infinite Pudgal skandhas in all its countless regions.
Progaangagaadharinchido Poggalkaayehi Sambado Logo. Suhumehi Vaadarehi Ya Appaauggehi Joggehi ||76|| [Pravachansar]
1. Panchaastikaya Ga. 7 Tatparya Vriti Tika. 2. "Ekapradeshaadishu Bhajyaah Pudgalaanaam ||5/14||" (Tattvarth Sutra]. 3. Sarvarth Siddhi 5/15. 4. Panchaastikaya Ma. 64 Tatparya Vriti Tika.

Page #689:
---------------------------
## Gatha 583-587
Samvanda Margaga/155

- This world is packed full of subtle and gross, unusable and usable (unusable and usable in the form of karma-varga) pudgalas from all sides or everywhere.
Satyoya loyaayaso pugal-danvehi savavo bharido.
Suhame hi bayarehi ya naana-vih-satti-juttehi ||206|| [Swa.Ka.A.] - This entire lokaakasha is completely filled with subtle and gross pudgal dravya with various types of powers. The dense form of Jagashreni is spread throughout this entire lokaakasha in the form of subtle and gross pudgal dravya. The most excellent mahasakandha form of pudgal is pervading all the lokas, i.e., the entire world. There is such a great expanse of pudgal dravya that it is pervading all the lokas.

Due to the cause of bondage, the two qualities of snigdhatva and rukshatva* have an effect on the kaladravya, therefore the kalaanus do not bind with each other, hence each kalaanu is separate. The kalaanus in the form of nischya kala are situated separately on each prakasha pradesh. The graakasha dravya is divided into two parts: lokaakasha and alokaakasha. It is also said - "Tam graayasam duviham loyaaloyaana bheena ||" 213 Uttarardha.

[Swamikatikayanupreksha] - Wherever dharma dravya, adharma dravya, kala dravya, pudgal and jiva dravya are found, that is lokaakasha. Where jivaadi substances are visible, that is lokaakasha, and beyond that is the infinite alokaakasha.

"Lokyante drishyanta jeevaadipadartha yanna sa lokah, tasmaadabahi tamanantashuddhaakashamalokah." 5

Where jivaadi substances are visible, that is loka. Beyond this loka is the infinite pure aakasha, that is aloka.

Doubt - What is the purpose of pure aakasha?

Solution - Where there are no other dravyas besides aakasha dravya, i.e., where jiva, pudgal, dharma dravya, adharma dravya and kala, these five dravyas are not found, or which aakasha is devoid of these five dravyas, is empty, that is pure aakasha.

Aakasha dravya does not become impure due to not being bound with other dravyas, however, it is called pure aakasha because it does not share the same space with other dravyas. Where there are no other dravyas except aakasha dravya, that is pure aakasha, i.e., alokaakasha.

-

"
"

1. "Jagadyapini mahasakandhe sarvotkrishtmiti." [Swa. Ka, A. Bha. 206 ki tika]. 2. "Snigdharukshatvat bandhah." 5/33. [T. Su.]. 3. "Praakasham dvidha vimata lokaakashamalopaakasha!" [Sarvarthasiddhi 5/12] 4. Swa. Ka, Ya. Ga. 213 ki tika, Vri. Dra. San. Ga. 20 ki tika. 5. 1vaastikaya Ma. 3 Tatparyavasi tika.

Page #690:
---------------------------
656/Go. Sa. Jivakanda
Verse 5
-16

Statement of the number of Dravyas and the duration of the Vyavahar Kala.
Jivas are infinite, and from Jivas, there are infinite-fold Pudgalas. The three Dravyas, Dharma, Adharma, and Akasha, are one each. The duration of the Kalaanu is equal to the Lokapradesha. ||588||
There are Kalaanus on each Lokamasha Pradesha, which are one each and are different from each other like a heap of jewels. ||586||
The Vyavahar Kala is infinite-fold from the Pudgal Dravya. From the Vyavahar Kala, there are infinite-fold Akasha Pradeshas. ||510||
The Lokakasha Pradesha is the same as the Pradesha of Dharma Dravya, Adharma Dravya, and one Jiva. The Pradesha is as much as the Paramanu stays in the Akasha Kshetra. ||561||

Meaning of the Verse:
Jivas are infinitely infinite, and from Jivas, there are infinite-fold Pudgalas. The number of Kalaanus is innumerable, equal to the Lokakasha Pradesha. Dharma Dravya, Adharma Dravya, and Akasha Dravya are one each because they are indivisible.

Doubt:
Why are Kalaanus equal to the Lokapradesha?

Solution:
Because there is one Kalaanu on each Pradesha of the Lokakasha, and it is inactive. Therefore, the Kalaanus are equal to the Lokakasha Pradesha. It is also said:

"On each Pradesha of the Lokakasha, there are Kalaanus, which are one each and are different from each other like a heap of jewels, and their number is equal to the number of Lokakasha Pradeshas." ||22||
[Vr. Dravyasangraha]

These Kalaanus are:
1. Dhaval Pu. 41.315, p. 11 p. 76: Swa. Ka. A. Ga. 216 Tika; S. Mi. 5/36 Pan. Ba. Ga. 102 Tatparyavritti Tika.
2. "Tananantanantjiva: 16, tebhyo'pyanantguna: pudgalah 16 kha, lovakashapramitasanख्यeyakalanudravyaarin, pratyek lovakashapramanam dharmadharmadvayam." [Swa. Ka. M. Ga. 213 Tika]; "Dharmadhamakasha ekak ev prakhundadravyatvat kalana bo lokapradesha matra iti." [Swa. Ka. A. Ga. 216 Tika])
3. "Lokakashapramitasanख्यeyadnyaraviti." [Vah Dravyasangraha Ga. 22 Tika].

Page #691:
---------------------------
## Verse 58-561
**Samyaktvamarga-ga:** 657

"They are inactive." This means they do not move from one region to another. They are intangible because they are devoid of qualities like time-atoms and form.

It is written in the Parikarma that by repeatedly squaring the number of all living beings, one obtains the infinite expanse of the universe, which is the number of all pudgala dravyas, i.e., the number of pudgala atoms. Again, by repeatedly squaring the number of all pudgala dravyas, one obtains the infinite expanse of the universe, which is the number of all times, i.e., the number of all times in the experiential time. Again, by repeatedly squaring the number of all times, one obtains the infinite expanse of the universe, which is the number of all sky-series, i.e., the number of regions in the sky-series. From this, it is known that there are infinite jivas, and there are infinite times the number of pudgala dravyas than jivas, and there are infinite times the number of experiential times than pudgala dravyas. There are also infinite times the number of regions of space than experiential times. The measure of the multiplier is the infinite expanse of the universe.

Although dharma dravya, adharma dravya, and a-meed are as large as the earth, they are countless. The regions of one jiva are equal to the regions of the universe. They are countless because they cannot be counted, i.e., they have exceeded the limits of counting. A region is the space occupied by one indivisible atom. Dharma dravya and adharma dravya are present throughout the countless-region universe, therefore they are inactive.

During the time of the Kevali's complete liberation, the intermediate regions of the jivas are located in the regions of the earth, below Mount Sumeru, and between the Citra earth and the Bacha patala. The rest of the jivas' regions are spread out in all directions throughout the universe.

Although a dravya is indivisible, it is not a composite dravya like a pot, but its region is real, not metaphorical. The space occupied by a pot is not the same as the space occupied by a patala, etc. They are different. Patna is in a different region of space than Mathura. If space were not regional, Patna and Mathura would be in the same place.

**Doubt:** Is the concept of regionality in dharma dravya, etc., measured by the space occupied by a pudgala atom? Therefore, should we believe that they do not have their own regions?

**Solution:** Dharma dravya, etc., are beyond the senses, they are indirect, therefore, even though they have their own regions, we cannot know them directly. Therefore, they are measured by the size of an atom.

**Doubt:** There are nine types of countless, which one should we use for them?

1. "Kalaranavo nishkriya:" [Sarvarthasiddhi 5/36].
2. "Rupadiguṇāvirahadamūrtāḥ." [Sarvarthasiddhi 5/36].
3. Dhavala Pu. 13 p. 262-263 "Dharmaadharmakajīvāstulyāsan̄khyesa pradeśāḥ"| S. Si. 5/8).
4. "Prasankhyeyāḥ pradeśā dharmadharmakajīvānām. ||5/8||"[N.Su.].
5. "Lokākāśatulyapradeṇāḥ." [Ra. Va. 5/16/1].
6. Ra. Va.

Page #692:
---------------------------
658/Go. Sa. Jeevakanda
Verse 562
Solution - In the gross, subtle and subtle-subtle categories of Parota-Samkhyata, Yukta-Samkhyata and Asamkhyata-Samkhyata, the middle category of Asamkhyata-Samkhyata should be considered here.
Just as knowing the infinite infinitely does not diminish omniscience, similarly knowing the innumerable innumerably does not diminish omniscience. Omniscients do not know the meaning (the knowable) otherwise because they are true knowers.
The Dharma-dravya, Adharma-dravya, Akash-dravya and Jeeva and Pudgala, these five dravyas, when they become multi-regional, in which dravya's regions are mobile and which are immobile, this is explained in two verses.
Sammarubi Davan Avttidam Prachalia Pavesa Vi. Ruvi Jiya Chalia Tishiyappa Hoti Hu Padesa ||562||
Verse - The A-rupi dravyas are situated and their regions are immobile. The Ru-pi Jeeva-dravya is mobile and its regions (in comparison to mobile) are of three types. ||562||
Special Meaning - The Samsari Jeeva is Ru-pi and the Mukta (Siddha) Jeeva is A-rupi (Verse 563). The Pudgala dravya is Ru-pi. The Dharma-dravya, Adharma-dravya, Akash and Kal dravyas, these four are A-rupi (Verse 564). The A-rupi dravyas, that is, the Mukta Jeeva, Dharma-dravya, Adharma-dravya, Akash-dravya and Kal-dravya, are situated, that is, where they are situated, they remain situated there forever, they do not go elsewhere and they do not change their place. The regions of these situated dravyas are also not mobile, that is, they do not move from one region to another, they always remain immobile.
The Ru-pi Jeeva, that is, the Samsari Jeeva, has three states of its regions. The middle regions, in addition to other regions, are mobile or they are all mobile or some of them are mobile and some are immobile. Thus, the Samsari Jeeva regions have three states: 1. Mobile, 2. Immobile, 3. Mobile-Immobile. Mobile or Prasthiti; Immobile or Sthiti, these two words are synonymous. During the time of going to another birth, during the time of experiencing intense pleasure-pain or during the time of intense anger etc. Rupa-parinaamas, there is upheaval in the Jeeva-regions, that is Asthiti. The absence of upheaval is Sthiti. Of the Jeeva-regions, the middle regions always remain situated in all Jeevas without exception. All the regions of the Prayog-kaibalyas and Siddhas are immobile (situated). During the time of Vyayama, Dushtra, Paritaap etc., except for the said middle regions, the remaining regions are Asthiti (mobile). The regions of the Mesha-Praggias are both situated and Asthiti, that is, Chala-achala (mobile-immobile).
Due to Raga, Dvesha and Krodha or due to pains, due to fear or due to the path, due to the effort arising from these, the Jeeva-regions, like the water situated in the clouds, when they move, the Karma-regions that have attained Samavaya in them also move.
1. Ra. Va. 5/8/2.
2. Ra. Va. 5/8/16.

Page #693:
---------------------------
##  Verse 562
## Samyaktvamargana/656

**Doubt:** The middle regions of the soul (Jiva) do not contract or expand, therefore the karma regions located in them do not become unstable. So, is it not the case that all soul regions are always unstable?

**Solution:** This is not a fault, because it happens by taking refuge in the remaining soul regions, excluding those middle regions of the soul.

**Explanation:**  Soul regions devoid of afflictions like pain and fear, do not migrate, therefore the karma regions located in them are stable. And, those soul regions of the same soul that migrate, the karma regions located in them also migrate, therefore they are unstable. The soul is a combination of both, therefore it has both stable and unstable natures.

**Doubt:** Why are the eight middle regions of the soul always stable?

**Solution:** The middle regions of the soul are bound together by an eternal relationship. It is not that one region becomes unstable and another takes its place. From time immemorial, these eight middle regions have been bound together and will continue to be so for eternity. Therefore, these middle regions are always stable.

**Doubt:** When a soul takes on a new body at the time of death, it leaves its previous location and takes birth in another place. In this case, wouldn't these middle regions be unstable?

**Solution:** No, because during the process of disintegration (Bhavanta Ragaman), the middle regions remain stable. The other soul regions are unstable.

**Doubt:** Why shouldn't we believe that the soul regions of the sense organs do not migrate?

**Solution:** No. If we do not accept the migration of the soul regions of the sense organs, then we cannot explain how souls, moving at great speed, can perceive the earth and other objects. Therefore, while accepting the migration of the soul regions, we must also accept the migration of the soul regions of the sense organs. When children spin rapidly and then sit down, they see the earth and other objects spinning (rotating). This is because their soul regions, which are responsible for the functioning of their eyes, are moving rapidly. The soul regions that were initially...

Page #694:
---------------------------
##  660 Go. Sa. Jivakanda
##  Gatha 563

The inner-most state of being (antaranga) was in the form of liberation (nittī) in one time period. In another time period, other inner-most states of being (ātma-pradeśa) became the form of liberation. In a third time period, other inner-most states of being became the form of liberation. In this way, due to the changing of the inner-most states of being (ātma-pradeśa) as evidenced by the eye sense, those children (souls) appear to be wandering through earth and other elements. Just as a passenger sitting in a fast-moving train sees trees and other things moving.

**Doubt:** Are the inner-most states of being (ātma-pradeśa) of all souls (jīva) unchanging (acal)?

**Solution:** The inner-most states of being (ātma-pradeśa) of a liberated soul (ayogakevalī) remain unchanging. The inner-most states of being (ātma-pradeśa) of a liberated soul (prayogakevalī) are subject to change due to their connection with the karmic matter (pudgala) through the process of combination (saṁśleṣa). Therefore, a liberated soul (prayogakevalī) is embodied (mūrtika). A liberated soul (siddhā jīva) is disembodied (amūrtika).

**The matter (pudgala) is moving:** The matter (pudgala) is moving from the smallest particle (aṇu) to the countless (saṁkhyāta), innumerable (asaṁkhyāta), and infinite (ananta) particles. All the aggregates (skandha) are moving, but the regions of the final great aggregate (mahāskandha) are both moving and unchanging (chalāchal). || 563 ||

**Meaning of the Gatha:** The matter (pudgala) is moving from the smallest particle (aṇu) to the countless (saṁkhyāta), innumerable (asaṁkhyāta), and infinite (ananta) particles. All the aggregates (skandha) are moving, but the regions of the final great aggregate (mahāskandha) are both moving and unchanging (chalāchal). || 563 ||

**Special Meaning:** The words action (kriyā), force (bala), and state of being (asthiti) are synonyms. The matter of dharma (dharma dravya), the matter of adharma (adharma dravya), the matter of space (ākāśa dravya), and the matter of time (kāla dravya) are formless (arūpī) and therefore unchanging (niṣkriya). However, the embodied (saṁsārī) soul (jīva dravya) and the matter (pudgala dravya) are changing (chal) or active (kriyāvān) (Gatha 561). The embodied soul (jīva dravya) was discussed in Gatha 562. This Gatha discusses the activity of the matter (pudgala dravya).

**Doubt:** What is action (kriyā)?

**Solution:** Action (kriyā) is the change (paryāya) of the matter (dravya) from one region (kṣetra) to another region (kṣetrāntara) due to internal (antaranga) and external (bahiranga) causes. Action (kriyā) is the change (paryāya) in the form of pulsation (pariṣpanda) that is the cause of the attainment of another region (pradeśāntara-prāpti).

The matter (pudgala) that remains with external means (bahiranga sādhana) is active (kriyāvān).

**Doubt:** What are the external means (bahiranga sādhana) in the action (kriyā) of the matter (pudgala)?

**Solution:** The external means (bahiranga sādhana) in the action (kriyā) of the matter (pudgala) particles (aṇu) and aggregates (skandha) is time (kāla). Just as all souls (jīva) who become liberated (siddhā) by being devoid of karmic matter (pudgala) and non-karmic matter (nokarma) become free from action (kriyā) because they are devoid of external means (bahiranga sādhana). However, this does not happen with the matter (pudgala) because time (kāla) is always present. Due to time (kāla), the matter (pudgala) continues to act as much as possible.

**Great Aggregate (Mahāskandha)**

1. Jayadhaval Pu. 1 p. 43; Ghaghala' Pu. 1 p. 262; Pu. 14 p. 45; Pu. 15 p. 32, Pu. 16 p. 512.
2. "The change (paryāya) of the matter (dravya) that arises due to both internal (antaranga) and external (bahiranga) causes is the cause of the attainment of another region (kṣetrāntara-prāpti) and is action (kriyā)." [Sarvārthasiddhi 5/7].
3. "The change (paryāya) in the form of pulsation (pariṣpanda) that is the cause of the attainment of another region (pradeśāntara-prāpti) is action (kriyā)." [Pañcārītakā Gāthā Ṭīkā].

Page #695:
---------------------------
**Chapter 564-565**

The **MahaSkandha** is pervasive throughout the **Lokakasha** (space) and is therefore not movable, but it is considered movable because **Pudgala** atoms are constantly coming and going within it. This is why the **MahaSkandha** is called **Chala-Achal** (movable-immovable). This same state applies to the **PanchaMeru** and **Akritrim Chaityalaya** (artificial shrines), etc., meaning they are also **Chala-Achal** because they are eternal.

Although **Pudgala** atoms are **Ekpradeshi** (occupying one space), they constantly move from one region to another, sometimes becoming bound and transforming into **Skandha** form, and then separating again to become atoms. In this way, **Pudgala** atoms are active. **Khadisanta** **Pudgala** **Skandha** constantly move from one region to another, and they also undergo actions of separation, aggregation, and simultaneous separation and aggregation. Therefore, they are also movable. In this way, **Pudgala** is active, meaning movable, but the eternal, infinite, and artificial **Meru**, **Chaityalaya**, mountains, etc., and the **MahaSkandha** are **Chala-Achal** because they do not move from one region to another.

The 23 categories of **Pudgala** are:

* **Anu** category
* **Sankhya** category
* **Asankhya** category
* **Ananta** category
* **Ahar** category
* **Anahya** category
* **Tanjas** category
* **Agrahya** category
* **Bhasha** category
* **Agrahya** category
* **Manovarana** category
* **Agrahya** category
* **Kamaga** category
* **Shrava** category
* **Santaranirantara** category
* **Shunya** category
* **Pratyekashayara** category
* **Dhruva-Shunya** category
* **Badarani-God** category
* **Shunya** category
* **Sukshma-Nigoda** category
* **Shunya** category
* **MahaSkandha** category

**Explanation:**

* The term "**Granu** category" is a shortened name. Its full name is "**Ekpradeshi Paramanu Pudgala Dravya Vargana**" (category of one-space atomic **Pudgala** substance).

**Doubt:**

* How is it proven that **Pudgala** atoms are **M.P.** (movable-pervasive)?

**Solution:**

* They have the power to combine with other **Pudgalas**, so it is proven that atoms are **Pudgala** in form.

**Doubt:**

* Since atoms do not always remain in atomic form, does this not mean they are not **Dravya** (substance)?

**Solution:**

1. "**Nama:**" (Tattvartha Sutra 5:11)
2. "**Bhedadanuh:**" (Tattvartha Sutra 2:2)
3. "**Bhevasantratebhyah utpadyante:**" (Tattvartha Sutra 2:26)
4. "**Suhma Suksha Graha Path Dhvala Pu. 14 Pr. 117 Gatha 8**"
5. "**Dhvala Pu. 14 Pr. 117 Ga. 7 & 8**"

The **Gatha** (verse) 564 states: "**Anu Sankha Sankhejjata Vataggana Yagejhabhamro.**"

Page #696:
---------------------------
662/Go. Sa. Jiyakanda
Gatha 564-565
There is no solution, because the atoms of pudgala do not undergo production and destruction in the form of pudgala, therefore, the principle of dravyatva is established in them. ||
Above this, there is the dvīpradeśī paramanu pudgala dravya vargaṇā. ||5.7||2 The dvīpradeśī paramanu pudgala dravya vargaṇā is formed by the union of two communities of atoms with the qualities of ajaghaṇya, snigdha, and rūkṣa.
Doubt- Does the union of atoms occur ekadesena or sarvātmanā?
Solution- By adopting the dravyaathika nay, the union of two atoms occurs sarvātmanā in some way, because the atom is nirāvayava. By adopting the paryayaathika nay, the union occurs ekadesena in some way. It is not correct to say that the atom does not have parts, because if there were no upper, lower, middle, and upper-upper parts, then the atom itself would be the effect. These parts are not imagined, because the upper part, lower part, middle part, and upper-upper part of the atom are available even without imagination. And since the atom has parts, there is no rule that it should be divided everywhere, because if we assume this, then the absence of all substances is implied. It is also not correct to say that the atom is not made up of parts, because the atom appears as a group of parts. And there is no rule that the union of parts should be destroyed, because if the union is anādi, then it is not destroyed. Therefore, the dvīpradeśī paramanu pudgala dravya vargaṇā is established.
In the same way, there are tripradeśī, catuḥpradeśī, pañcapradeśī, ṣaṭpradeśī, saptapradeśī, aṣṭapradeśī, nava pradeśī, daśapradeśī, saṅkhyāta pradeśī, asaṅkhyāta pradeśī, ananta pradeśī, and anantānanta pradeśī paramanu pudgala dravya vargaṇās. ||78|| From the hīpradeśī paramanu pudgala vargaṇā to the utkrṣṭa saṅkhyāta pradeśī dravya vargaṇā, all these are saṅkhyāta pradeśī dravya vargaṇās. There are utkrṣṭa saṅkhyāta bhedas of these. By adding one digit to the utkrṣṭa saṅkhyāta pradeśī paramanu pudgala dravya vargaṇā, the jaghaṇya asaṅkhyāta pradeśī dravya vargaṇā is formed. Again, by adding one digit at a time, asaṅkhyāta pradeśī dravya vargaṇās are formed, and all these continue until the utkrṣṭa asaṅkhyāta saṅkhyāta pradeśī dravya vargaṇā is obtained. From the utkrṣṭa asaṅkhyāta saṅkhyāta, as many asaṅkhyāta pradeśī vargaṇās are formed as the number of utkrṣṭa saṅkhyāta that are reduced. These asaṅkhyāta pradeśī vargaṇās are different from the saṅkhyāta pradeśī vargaṇās. Asaṅkhyāta loka is a multiplier. All these are the third asaṅkhyāta pradeśī vargaṇās.
By adding one digit to the utkrṣṭa pra saṅkhyāta saṅsthāna pradeśī paramanu pudgala dravya vargaṇā, the jaghaṇya ananta pradeśī paramanu pudgala dravya vargaṇā is formed. Again, by increasing one digit at a time, the ananta pradeśī vargaṇās of the prabhavya, and the ananta bhaga pramana sthāna of the siddhas, are formed. The utkrṣṭa ananta pradeśī vargaṇā is ananta guṇī from its jaghaṇya. The multiplier is ananta guṇā from the prabhavya, that is, the ananta bhaga pramana of the siddhas. In this way, this ananta pradeśī dravya vargaṇā is the fourth. ||4||
6. Dhavala
1. Dhavala Pu. 14 p. 55. 2-3-4. Dhavala Pu. 14 p. 55. 5. Dhavala Pu. 14 p. 56-57. Pu. 14 p. 57. 7. One should understand 'one pradeśa' from one digit everywhere.

Page #697:
---------------------------
## Gatha 564-565
Samyaktvamanga/663

**Doubt:** Why are all these classifications one? 
**Solution:** Because all these classifications are one in an infinite way. All four of these classifications are non-grahyas.

The **Pudgala Dravya** classification of **Anantanantpradeshi** atoms, which is the most excellent, becomes the **Aahar Dravya** classification when one digit is added to it. Then, by adding one more in sequence, it becomes the **Aahar Dravya** classification of the last **Aahar Dravya** classification, going through an infinite number of **Abhavya**s and an infinite number of parts of **Siddha**s. This is a special increase from the least to the most excellent. The proof of the special is the infinite multiplication by **Abhavya**s, which is the same as the infinite part of **Siddha**s, and is also the infinite part of the most excellent **Aahar Dravya** classification.

The **Aahar Dravya** classification of **Pudgala Skandha**s suitable for the **Audarik, Vairyik, and Aaharaka** bodies is called the **Aahar Dravya** classification. When the **Aahar** classification is divided into countless parts, the **Aaharaka** body-suitable classification becomes the **Bahubhag Praman** classification. When the remaining part is divided into countless parts, the **Vairyik** body-suitable classification becomes the **Bahubhag Praman** classification. And the remaining one part becomes the **Audarik** body-suitable classification. | Dhavla Pu. 14 p. 560 | This is the fifth classification. 5.

When one digit is added to the most excellent **Aahar Dravya** classification, the first **Agrahan Dravya** classification, which is the most inferior, is obtained. Then, by adding one by one in sequence, it becomes the most excellent **Agrahan Dravya** classification, going through an infinite number of **Abhavya**s and an infinite number of parts of **Siddha**s. This is infinitely multiplied from the least to the most excellent. The infinite multiplication by **Abhavya**s, which is the same as the infinite part of **Siddha**s, is the multiplier. Thus, this is the sixth classification. 6.

The **Agrahan** classification is the name given to the **Pudgala Skandha**s that are unsuitable for the five senses, language, and mind. When one digit is added to the most excellent **Agrahan Dravya** classification, the most inferior **Taijas** body **Dravya** classification is obtained. Then, by adding one by one in sequence, it becomes the most excellent **Taijas** body **Dravya** classification, going through an infinite number of **Abhavya**s and an infinite number of parts of **Siddha**s. This is a special increase from its least to its most excellent. The infinite multiplication by **Abhavya**s and the infinite part of **Siddha**s is the proof of the special. Its **Pudgala Skandha**s are suitable for the **Taijas** body, therefore it is the **Agrahan** classification. This is the seventh classification. 7.

When one digit is added to the most excellent **Taijas** body **Dravya** classification, the first **Agrahan Dravya** classification, which is the most inferior, is obtained. Then, by adding one by one in sequence, it becomes the most excellent **Agrahan Dravya** classification, going through an infinite number of **Abhavya**s and an infinite number of parts of **Siddha**s. It is infinitely multiplied from its least classification to its most excellent classification. This is not suitable for the five senses, language, and mind. Therefore, its name is the **Agrahan Dravya** classification. This is the eighth classification.

When one digit is added to the second most excellent **Agrahan Dravya** classification, the most inferior **Bhasha Dravya** classification is obtained. Then, by adding one by one in sequence, it becomes the most excellent **Bhasha Dravya** classification, going through an infinite number of **Abhavya**s and an infinite number of parts of **Siddha**s. 
1. Dhavla Pu. 14 p. 50-56. 2. Dhavla Pu. 14 p. 56. 3. Dhavla Pu. 14 p. 60.

Page #698:
---------------------------
664/Go. Sa. Jiyakanda
Verses 564-565

The infinite part of the Pramarga, going to the place of the language substance category, is the excellent substance category. This is infinitely greater than its inferior category. The infinite part of its inferior category is the proof of the excellence. The atoms of the language substance category are suitable for all four languages, and they are also suitable for words like drum, kettledrum, cymbal, and the roar of clouds.

Doubt: How can the word for cymbal, etc., be considered language?

Solution: No, because language is considered language due to its similarity to language. By this reasoning, the word for cymbal, etc., is also considered language. This is the ninth category.

By adding one unit to the excellent language substance category, the most inferior category related to the third non-grasping substance category is obtained. Further, by adding one unit at a time, going to the place of the infinite multiple of the non-existent beings and the infinite part of the Siddhas, the excellent category related to the third non-grasping substance category is obtained. This is infinitely greater than its inferior category. The infinite multiple of the non-existent beings and the infinite part of the Siddhas is the multiplier. Its atoms are not graspable, because if it were not so, it could not be considered a non-grasping category. This is the tenth category.

By adding one unit to the excellent third non-grasping substance category, the inferior mind substance category is obtained. Further, by adding one unit at a time, going to the place of the infinite multiple of the non-existent beings and the infinite part of the Siddhas, the excellent mind substance category is obtained. This is infinitely greater than its inferior category. The proof of the excellence is the infinite part of the most inferior mind substance category. From this category, the mind substance is formed. This is the eleventh category.

By adding one unit to the excellent mind substance category, the most inferior category of the fourth grasping substance category is obtained. Further, by adding one unit at a time, going to the place of the infinite multiple of the non-existent beings and the infinite part of the Siddhas, the excellent category related to the fourth non-grasping substance category is obtained. This is infinitely greater than its inferior category. The infinite multiple of the non-existent beings and the infinite part of the Siddhas is the multiplier. This is not graspable. This is the twelfth category.

By adding one unit to the excellent category related to the fourth non-grasping substance category, the most inferior category of the karmic body substance category is obtained. Further, by adding one unit at a time, going to the place of the infinite multiple of the non-existent beings and the infinite part of the Siddhas, the excellent category related to the karmic substance category is obtained. This is infinitely greater than its inferior category. The infinite part of the inferior karmic category is the proof of the excellence. The atoms of this category are suitable for karmas. This is the thirteenth category.

By adding one unit to the excellent karmic category, the inferior category of the Dhruva skandha substance category is obtained.

1. Dhavala Pu. 14 p. 61.
2. Dhavala Pu. 14 p. 62.
3. Dhavala Pu. 14 p. 62.
4. Dhavala Pu. 14 p. 63.

Page #699:
---------------------------
##  Verses 564-565

**Verse 564**

The **Dhravaskandha** dravya-vargana is the highest vargana, which is infinitely greater than all other beings. It is infinitely greater than its own lowest vargana and infinitely greater than all other beings. This is the final indication of the **Dhravaskandha** term. All previous varganas are **Dhrava**. This **Dhrava** is not capable of receiving any further vargana. This is the fourteenth vargana.

**Verse 565**

Above the **Dhravaskandha** dravya-vargana is the **Santara-Nirantara** dravya-vargana. The vargana that goes on continuously with an interval is called the **Santara-Nirantara** dravya-vargana. This is a meaningful term. By adding one digit to the highest **Dhravaskandha** dravya-vargana, the lowest **Santara-Nirantara** dravya-vargana is formed. Further, by adding one digit at a time, the highest **Santara-Nirantara** dravya-vargana is formed, which is infinitely greater than all other beings. It is infinitely greater than its own lowest vargana and infinitely greater than all other beings. This is also an **Agrahana** vargana, because it is not capable of receiving food, energy, speech, mind, and karma. This is the fifteenth vargana.

Page #700:
---------------------------
666/Go. Ma. Jivakanda
Gatha 564-565

A being who has completely exhausted the lower-most body by the melting of the Audarika and Tanjamasa bodies for a period of time slightly less than the previous koti-kal, and has exhausted the Guma-shreni of the Karman body, has become a Bhavy at the end of his life. Thus, the Prakar, who is in the final stage of being a Kevali, has the most inferior of all body-dravya-varganas. Because his body lacks Nigoda jivas.

The Karmashik Naraki jiva should be made to excel in both the Pujas of the Karman body until he attains the most excellent dravya at the end of his life.

Doubt: The Visrasopachya of the Graharak body is countless times greater than the Visrasopachya of the Bakriyik body. Therefore, why is each body-vargana not considered to be related to one jiva, by taking the six Pujas of the Aharak, Tejas, and Karman bodies in the Pramattasanyata Gunasthan?

Solution: No, because in the Naraki jiva at the end of his life, the most excellent dravya of the Tejas and Karman bodies is not available elsewhere. Where the Tejas and Karman bodies are inferior, there each body-dravya-vargana is the most inferior, and where their most excellent dravya is available, there each body-dravya-vargana is the most excellent. But the Pramattasanyata manushya does not have an excellent body-dravya-vargana, because the dravya of the Tejas and Karman bodies melts due to the exhaustion of their Gunadharani and the melting of the lower-most body. If it is said that there are many dravya-varganas of the Aharak body from the melted dravya of the Tejas and Karman bodies, then this is also not correct, because this would be an infinite part of them. Therefore, the Pramattasanyata Gunasthan does not have an excellent body-dravya-vargana.

Here, the Karman body is the name given to the community of Karma-pradesha of the Path type accumulated within the Karma-sthiti-kal. The Tejas body is the name given to the community of Karma-pradesha accumulated within the sixty-six Sagar kal. The Vairyik body is the name given to the community of Karma-pradesha accumulated within the thirty-three Sagar kal. The Audarika body is the name given to the community of Karma-pradesha accumulated within the three Paly kal from the time of taking the small Bhav-grahan. And the Aharak body is the name given to the community of Karma-pradesha accumulated within the Ant-muhurt kal. Therefore, the Naraki jiva should be given excellent ownership only at the end of his life. This is the seventeenth vargana. 15.

By adding one mark to the excellent body-dravya-vargana, the most inferior dravya-vargana related to the second dravya-vargana is the most inferior dravya-vargana. By going through the infinite-fold dravya-varganas from all the jivas in the order of one more than one, the excellent dravya-vargana is produced. It is infinite-fold greater than the inferior vargana. The countless part of all jivas is the multiplier. Like the one-sided vision, it is always situated in the form of zero. This is the eighteenth vargana. 18. 7.
 - 1. Dhaval Pu. 14 p. 5-66. 2. V 3. Pabal Pu. 14 p. 77. 4. Dhaval Pu 14 p. 77-78 1 5. Dhaval Pu. 14 p. 78. 6. Dhaval Pu. 14 p. 83. 7. Dhaval Pu. 14 p. 84.

Page #701:
---------------------------
## Samyantramargaga / 667

When one unit, i.e., one pradesha, is added to the most excellent Vashunya Dravyavanga, the most inferior Badar Nigoda Dravyavanga is formed. It exists during the final stage of Ksheenakashay. The Jiva, who was born as a human being of a previous koti due to the Kshapita Karmanik Vidhi, and after being born in the womb, and after the time of Grauh Varsha and Antarmuhurta, simultaneously embraced Samyaktva and Samyama, and then, after shedding the most excellent Grisharagi Nirjara of karmas for a period slightly less than the previous koti, and when the Antarmuhurta time remained, ascended to the Kshapaka Shreni. Subsequently, after shedding karmas through the most excellent Vishuddhi in the Kshapaka Shreni, and becoming Ksheerakashay, this Jiva witnesses the death of countless Badar Nigoda Jivas in the first moment. In the second moment, a significantly larger number of Jivas die. Similarly, in the third and subsequent moments, an even larger number of Jivas die. This sequence continues from the first moment of Ksheenakashay until the time of Prithaktvamavali. Beyond this, a larger number of Jivas die in each subsequent moment. This sequence continues until the time of the Pravali's Sankhyatava part remains in the Ksheenakashay time. After this, a number of Jivas die in each moment, multiplied by the previous number. In this way, an immeasurable number of Jivas die until the final moment of Ksheenakashay. The multiplier is the Sankhyatava part of the Palyopama in every instance.

**Gatha 564-565**

Here, in the final moment of Ksheenakashay, the Pulvis, which are the immeasurable part of the Pravali, and which are incomplete due to the Nigoda bodies of the separate Sankhyat Lokas, contain an immeasurable number of Nigoda Jivas. The combination of karma and nokarma of these Jivas, which is filled with infinite Visramopachya, is the most inferior Badar Nigoda Vargana. The most excellent Badar Nigoda Vargana exists in the body of the Mooli of the Svayambhuraman Dweep, because the Mooli's body contains an immeasurable number of Pulvis, which are the part of the Jagachhreni bound together. Thus, this is called the 16th Vargana.

When one unit is added to the most excellent Badar Nigoda Vargana, the most excellent Vargana of the third Dhruvashunya Vargana is formed. Again, above this, by the sequence of increasing Pradeshas, the most excellent Vargana of the third Dhruvashunya Vargana is formed, which is located at a distance multiplied by infinity from all Jivas. The difference between the most inferior and the most excellent Vargana is immeasurable. The multiplier is the immeasurable part of the Gragula. This is the 20th Vargana.

When one unit is added to the most excellent Dhruvashunya Vargana, the Sukshma Nigoda Dravyavargna is formed. It is visible everywhere in water, on land, and in the sky, because it does not have the same Desha Niyama as the Badar Nigoda Vargana. This most inferior Sukshma Nigoda Vargana is only for the Sukshma Nigoda Jiva who has come through the Kshapita Karmashik Vidhi and the Kshapita Gholman Vidhi, and not for others, because there is a contradiction in the existence of the most inferior Dravya. The most excellent Sukshma Nigoda Vargana is visible in the combination of the six Jeevanikayas bound together in the body of the Mahamatsya. From the most inferior Sukshma Nigoda Vargana to the most excellent Sukshma Nigoda Vargana, there is only one competitor, because there is no difference in the middle. The difference between the most inferior and the most excellent Vargana is immeasurable. The multiplier is the immeasurable part of the Patya. This is the 21st Vargana.

**2. Dhaval Pu. 14 p. 61**
**1. Dhaval Pu. 14 p. 85**
**3. Dhaval Pu. 14 p. 111**
**4. Dhaval Pu. 14 p. 112-113**
**5. Dhaval Pu. 14 p. 113-114**
**6. Dhaval Pu. 14 p. 116**

Page #702:
---------------------------
## Chapter 668, Section 6: The Living Beings

**Verses 566-600**

In the **Dravya** classification of **Nigoda** (subtle matter), the fourth **Dhr** (non-existent) classification with zero **Vargana** (category) is the most **Jghanya** (inferior).  Then, going to the **Utkrushta** (superior) **Dhr** (non-existent) **Dravya** classification, which is an infinite number of times greater than all living beings, is the most **Utkrushta** (superior). This is an **Asankhyata** (innumerable) number of times greater than the **Jghanya** (inferior). The **Jagattara** (world) is an **Asankhyata** (innumerable) part of the **Gunakara** (multiplier), which is an **Asankhyata** (innumerable) **Jagashreni** (world series) in size. This is the 22nd **Vargana** (category).

In the **Utkrushta** (superior) **Dhr** (non-existent) **Dravya** classification, adding one **Anka** (digit) results in the most **Jghanya** (inferior) **Maha-Skandha** (great mass) **Dravya** classification. Then, going to the **Utkrushta** (superior) **Maha-Skandha** (great mass) **Dravya** classification, which is an infinite number of times greater than all living beings, is the most **Utkrushta** (superior). This is a **Vishesh** (special) **Adhik** (greater) than the **Jghanya** (inferior). The **Vishesh** (special) size of the most **Jghanya** (inferior) **Maha-Skandha** (great mass) **Vargana** (category) is obtained by dividing the **Pallya** (measure) by an **Asankhyata** (innumerable) part. This is the 23rd **Vargana** (category).

**Explanation of the **Prati-Gag** (reverse) and **Gunakara** (multiplier) for obtaining the **Utkrushta** (superior) from the **Jghanya** (inferior):**

In the **Paramanu** (atom) **Vargana** (category), there is no difference between the **Jghanya** (inferior) and the **Utkrushta** (superior). In the remaining **Vargana** (categories), there is a difference between the **Jghanya** (inferior) and the **Utkrushta** (superior).

To obtain the **Utkrushta** (superior) in the **Grahana** (absorption) **Vargana** (categories), the **Pratibhaga** (fraction) is an **Anantava** (infinite) part of the **Siddha** (liberated beings). To obtain the **Utkrushta** (superior) in the final **Maha-Skandha** (great mass), the **Pratibhaga** (fraction) is an **Asankhyata** (innumerable) part of the **Pallya** (measure).

In the **Sankhyata** (countable) **Paramanu** (atom) **Dravya** classification, the **Gunakara** (multiplier) is **Sankhyata** (countable), and in the **Asankhyata** (innumerable) **Pradeshi** (regional) **Paramanu** (atom) **Dravya** classification, the **Gunakara** (multiplier) is **Asankhyata** (innumerable). In the **Ananta** (infinite) **Paramanu** (atom) **Dravya** classification and the four **Agrahana** (non-absorption) **Vargana** (categories), the **Gunakara** (multiplier) is an **Anantava** (infinite) part of the **Siddha** (liberated beings) or an **Ananta** (infinite) multiplication by the **Abhavya** (non-existent).

In the **Dhr** (non-existent) and other three **Vargana** (categories), the **Gunakara** (multiplier) is an **Ananta** (infinite) times greater than the **Jiva-rashi** (number of living beings). In the **Vargana** (category) beyond that, the **Gunakara** (multiplier) is an **Asankhyata** (innumerable) part of the **Pallya** (measure). In the **Vargana** (category) beyond that, the **Gunakara** (multiplier) is the **Jiva-rashi** (number of living beings) divided by an **Asankhyata** (innumerable) number of **Loka** (worlds).

Beyond that, the **Gunakara** (multiplier) is, in order, an **Asankhyata** (innumerable) part of the **Shreni** (series), an **Asankhyata** (innumerable) part of the **Suchi-anguli** (needle-finger), an **Asankhyata** (innumerable) part of the **Pallya** (measure), and an **Asankhyata** (innumerable) part of the **Jagat-pratar** (world-extent). Multiplying the **Jghanya** (inferior) by its respective **Gunakara** (multiplier) results in its own **Utkrushta** (superior).

**Verse 600:**

The **Paramanu** (atom) **Vargana** (category) has no distinction between **Jghanya** (inferior) and **Utkrushta** (superior). The remaining **Vargana** (categories) have a distinction between **Jghanya** (inferior) and **Utkrushta** (superior).

**Notes:**

1. **Dhavala** (commentary) **P. 14, pp. 116-117**
2. **Dhavala** (commentary) **P. 14, p. 117**

Page #703:
---------------------------
## Gatha 601-603
**Samyaktvā / 666**

**Special Meaning:** This statement has already been made in the special meaning of Gatha 564-565.

The difference between the lower **Jghanay** classification and the higher **Utkrushta** classification is filled by adding one unit to the lower **Utkrushta** classification. This is how the **Jiranaditta** **Puggaladravya** is. || 601 ||

**Gatha Meaning:** In the twenty-three classifications of **Puggaladravya**, adding one unit to the **Utkrushta** classification below it results in the measure of the higher **Jghanay** classification. This is what the **Jina** (**Shrutakevali**) has said. || 601 ||

**Special Meaning:** See the topic of Gatha 434-505.

The specific statement of these twenty-three classifications should be seen in the **Dhaval** book, chapter 14. The six types of **Puggal** are:

1. **Prithvi** (Earth), 2. **Jala** (Water), 3. **Chhaya** (Shadow), 4. **Chauridiyavishayakarma** (Objects of the four senses), 5. **Karmanavargna** (Karma classification), and 6. **Paramanu** (Atom). These six types of **Puggaladravya** have been stated by **Jineendra**. || 602 ||

1. **Badarabadar**, 2. **Badar**, 3. **Badar Sukshm**, 4. **Sukshm Badar**, 5. **Sukshm**, 6. **Sukshm Sukshm**. These are the names for **Prithvi**, **Jala**, etc. || 603 ||

**Special Meaning:** That which can be divided and combined, and can be moved from one place to another, is **Badarabadar** **Puggal**, like wood, stone, earth, etc. That which cannot be combined after being divided, is **Badarabadar**, like land, mountains, etc. That which cannot be divided and combined, but can be moved from one place to another, is **Badar**, like water. Or, that which combines immediately after being divided, is **Badar**, like oil, water, etc. That which cannot be divided and combined, and cannot be moved from one place to another, is **Badar Sukshm**, like shadow. || 603 ||

Or, that which cannot be held in the hand, or cannot be grasped by the hand, and cannot be taken to another place, is **Badar Sukshm**, like shadow, sunlight, etc. The external objects that are the subject of the four senses, except for the sense of sight, are **Sukshm Sthul**. || 603 ||

Or, that **Puggal** which is not the object of the sense of sight, but is the object of the other four senses, is **Sukshm Badar**. || 603 ||

**Karma** is **Sukshm**, that which is the object of **Deshavadhi** knowledge is **Sukshm**. || 603 ||

Or, the causes that are suitable for **Jnanavaran** and other **Karmas** are **Sukshm**, because these are not the object of the senses. || 603 ||

**Paramanu** is **Sukshm Sukshm**, that which is the object of **Sarvavadhi** knowledge is **Sukshm Sukshm**. || 603 ||

Beyond the causes, that is, beyond the **Karmanavargna**, even the **Shranuk** and **Skandha** are **Sukshm Sukshm**. || 603 ||

1. **Dhaval** 3, 3; **Jayabaval** 1, 215; **Vasunandi Shravakachar** Gatha 18; **Laghu Dravya Sangrah** Gatha 7; **Panchaastikaya** Gatha 76; **Sva. Ka. Pu.** 136. || 603 ||
2. **Sva. Ka. Pra. Pu.** 136. || 603 ||
3. **Sva. Ka. Pra. Pu.** 136. || 603 ||
4. 6, 8, 10, 12, 14; **Pan. Ka. Ga.** 76 commentary. || 603 ||
5. 7, 6, 11, 13; **Sva. Ka. Ma.** Gatha 206 commentary. || 603 ||

Page #704:
---------------------------
## Translation:

**670 / Go. Sa. Jivakanda**

The distinctions of Badarabadar etc. in the *toka* of *Swamikartikeyanupreksha* *Gatha* 206 are made with respect to the *pudgala* of *graha* (atoms), therefore, even the *paramanu* (ultimate atom) is included in the *sukshmasukshma* (extremely subtle). However, the distinctions of Badarabadar etc. in the *toka* of *Panchaastikaya* are made with respect to *kashya* (space), therefore, they have not included the *paramanu* and have only mentioned the *sukshmasukshma* up to *skandha* (aggregate). Because *paramanu* is not a *skandha*, but is the subject of *sarvavadhi* (omniscient) knowledge. It is not the subject of *deshavadhi* (knowledge of space) or *paravavadhi* (knowledge of others) knowledge.

**Another way of describing the distinctions of *pudgala***

*Skandha* is the totality of all *pudgala* substance, half of that *skandha* is *desha* (space). Half of the *skandha* is *pradesha* (region). *Paramanu* is indivisible. || 604 ||

**Explanation of the *Gatha***

"**Sayalsamatta**" has been interpreted differently by different commentators. In the commentary of *Moolaachar*, Shri Vasunandi Acharya has interpreted it as follows:

"**Sayal** means *paramanu* inclusive of all distinctions. **Samatta** means all, i.e., all *pudgala* substance. Therefore, *skandha* means *pudgala* substance inclusive of distinctions, general and specific."

He has interpreted "**Sayal**" not as "all" but as "inclusive of distinctions up to *paramanu*". He has interpreted "**Samatta**" as "all", i.e., all *pudgala* substance. Thus, *skandha* has been interpreted as *pudgala* substance inclusive of distinctions, general and specific. This is also stated in *Vasunandi-Shravakaachar* as follows:

"**Sayalam munehi sandham.**" All *pudgala* substance is called *skandha*. Shri Vasunandi Acharya has called all *pudgala* substance as *skandha*.

Shri Shramritachandra Acharya has interpreted it as follows:

"**Anantanantparamanvaarabbho'pyekah skandho naama paryayah.**" Even though it is made up of infinite *paramanu*, it is called *skandha*.

Shri Jayasen Acharya has interpreted it as follows:

"**Samassto'pi vivakshitaghatapataghakhandaroop: sakal ityuchyate tasyanantaparamanupindasya skandhasanjna bhavathi.**" All, i.e., the form of the desired pot, cloth, etc., is called *sakal*. The mass of infinite *paramanu* is called *skandha*.

Shri Shubhachandra Acharya has commented on *Swamikartikeyanupreksha* *Gatha* 206 and 272 as follows:

"**Skandham sarvaanshasampurna bhanthi.**" That which is complete in all parts is *skandha*.

Shri Vasunandi Acharya has included all *pudgala* substance in *skandha*, but other Acharyas have called the pot, cloth, etc., which are one indivisible *pudgala* substance, as *skandha*, because it is complete in all parts. *Skandha*

1. *Panchaastikaya* *Gatha* 75, but "**y**" is replaced by "**du**". *Moolaachar* 5334, but "**paramanu chey shravibhagi rat hain**, *Swa. Ka. Pra. Gatha* 906 commentary, *Vi. Pa.* 1165. || 2. *Pan. Ka. Gatha* 75 *samaya vyakhya toka*. || 3. *Pan. Ka. Gra. Gatha* 75 *tatparyam vrutti tika*.

Page #705:
---------------------------
Gatha 605-608
The path of right faith (samyaktva-marga) is the 'region' (desa). Half of the skandha (aggregate) is called 'skandha-pradesa' (region of the skandha). One should continue the journey until the dvigrasya (two-molecule) is attained, as all are regions. The paramanu (atom) is indivisible, so it is called a participant (pratibhagi) in the dravyarthika naya (the real viewpoint).

The half of the skandha is the paryaya (mode) called skandha-desa, and the half of that is the paryaya called skandha-pradesa. Thus, due to the divisions, there are infinite paryayas in the form of skandha-pradesas up to the dvigrasya skandha. The indivisible one with one pradesa (region) is the last part of the skandha, which is the paramanu.

Sri Jayasena Acharya has explained this with an example - like making a pinda (lump) of 16 paramanus and then reducing one paramanu at a time, the skandhas will have differences up to 9 paramanus, i.e., the least skandha of 9 paramanus and the highest skandha of 16 paramanus, and the intermediate differences are to be known. They will call the lump of 8 paramanus as skandha-desa, as it is half of 16. In this also, by reducing one paramanu at a time, there will be differences of skandha-desas up to 5 paramanus, i.e., the least skandha-desa of 5 paramanus and the highest skandha-desa of 8 paramanus, and the intermediate differences.

The lump of 4 paramanus is called skandha-pradesa. In this also, by reducing one paramanu at a time, the regions (pradesas) are up to 2 paramanus skandha, i.e., the least skandha-pradesa of 2 paramanus and the highest skandha-pradesa of 4 paramanus, and the intermediate 3 paramanus skandha-pradesa. These are all the divisions of the skandha. The smallest indivisible pudgala (matter) is called paramanu.

Gatha 605: The dharma, etc., three substances are the niyama (rule) by which the gati (motion), sthiti (state), and avagaha (penetration) activities are performed. The kala (time) substance is also the cause of the performance of these activities.

Gatha 606: The jivas (souls) mutually fill up (purna) the pudgala (matter), and the dehavirya (bodily energy) is the cause of their activities. 

Gatha 608: The ahara-vargana (food-aggregate) and the tithis (lunar days) become the causes of anger, and the tejovargana (luminous aggregate) becomes the cause of the rise and fall of the tejas (luminous) body. Gradually, the bhasa (speech) and marana (death) occur due to karma.

Page #706:
---------------------------
672 / Go. Sa Jivakanda
Gatha 605-608
Hai || 607 || From the Bhashavarna, speech is created, from the Manovangana, mind is created, and from the Karman Varganas, eight types of karma are bound, thus it has been said by the Jina (Shrutakevali).
|| 606 ||
Special Meaning - In Gatha 567 and 568 and their special meanings, the motion etc. of Dharma Dravya, Adharma Dravya, Akash Dravya and Kal Dravya has been explained in detail.
To behave in the form of master and servant, and teacher and disciple, etc. is Parsparopagraha. The master benefits the servant by giving wealth etc., and the servant benefits the master by speaking of his benefit and prohibiting his harm. The teacher benefits the disciples by giving teachings that are beneficial in both worlds, and by engaging them in action according to those teachings. The disciples also benefit the teacher by behaving in a way that is conducive to the teacher. Or, the disciple benefits the teacher by serving him, by bowing at his feet, etc. In the same way, father-son, husband-wife, friend-friend benefit each other.
Pudgala also benefits the Jiva. It has also been said - 'Sharor-vad, Manah - Pranapanah Pudgalanam ||5 / 163
Jivass Bahu-Payaram Ubadharam Kurabi Puggalam Davvam.
Deham Cha Inviyani Ya Varani Ussas - Nissasan || 208 ||
[Swamikartikeyanupreksha]
- Body, speech, mind and Pranapan (breathing) are the benefits of Pudgalas. Pudgal Dravya benefits the Jiva in many ways, it creates the body, it creates the senses, it creates speech and it creates breathing.
In the special meaning of Gatha 564-565, it has been explained in the statement of the 23 Varganas of Pudgala that from the Prahar Varganas, the Audarik, Vaikriyik and Aharak bodies are created. From the Tejas Vargana, the Tejas body is created, from the Bhasha Vargana, speech is created, from the Manovangana, mind is created, and from the Karman Varganas, eight types of karma or the Karman body is created. These five Varganas are the Grahya Varganas, and the rest are the A-grahya Varganas, because they are not fit to be grasped by the Jiva.
The class of Pudgala Skandhas that are grasped to create the three bodies is the Ahar Chana. That is, the Audarik body, the Vaikriyik body and the Aharak body, the Dravyas that are grasped to transform into the Audarik, Vaikriyik and Aharak bodies, the Dravyas are called the Ahar Dravya Vargana. Within the Ahar body Vargana, some Varganas are fit for the Audarik body, some Varganas are fit for the Vaikriyik body, and some Varganas are fit for the Aharak body. Thus, the Ahar Vargana is of three types.
1. Sarvarthasiddhi 5/20. 2. Swamikartikeyanupreksha Gatha 210's commentary. 3. Tattvarthamutra. 4. Dhaval Pu. 14
P. 546-547.

Page #707:
---------------------------
## Gatha 605-608
Samyaktvamarga/673

**Doubt:** Are the three types of Aahara-vargana (food-categories) mutually equal or do they have different degrees of extent?

**Solution:** The Praudarik (subtle) body-substance categories are the most limited in terms of extent. 1785. The Vaikriyik (gross) body-substance categories are countless times greater in terms of extent. 766. The Aahara (food) body-substance categories are countless times greater in terms of extent. 787. This statement is made in comparison to the categories that can be attained by the same Yoga at the same time, because it is possible for the three types of beings to have the same Yoga at the same time. This shows that the extent of these three bodies is not the same. It is also said:

"Pradesato'sankhyeyagunam praaktaijasat ||2||38||" [Tattvarth Sutra] ... The Praudarik, Vaikriyik, and Aahara bodies, which are prior to the Taijas (luminous) body, are countless times greater in extent than the subsequent body.

**Doubt:** Are the categories of these three bodies different from each other due to the difference in Avagaha (absorption) and the difference in number? Or is the Aahara-vargana just one?

**Solution:** No, because the unity of these categories is taught in relation to the effect of the difference caused by the Agrahan (non-absorption) categories.

**Doubt:** The Karman (karma) body does not have any form, so it is not appropriate to consider it as Pudgalik (material)?

**Solution:** No, the Karman body is also Pudgalik, because its fruit is related to material objects. Just as rice, etc., which are cooked in relation to water, etc., are Pudgalik, similarly the Karman body also bears fruit when it comes into contact with material objects like sugar and molasses, etc. Therefore, the Karman body is Pudgalik.

There are two types of Vachan (speech): Dravya Vachan (substance speech) and Bhava Vachan (emotion speech). Of these, Bhava Vachan is caused by the destruction and pacification of the Veerayantaraaya (obstruction of energy) and Matijnanaavaran (obstruction of knowledge) and Shrutajnanaavaran (obstruction of scriptural knowledge) karmas, and by the Angopaang (limb-related) karma. Therefore, it is Pudgalik, because in the absence of Pudgalas, Bhava Vachan cannot be manifested.

1. Dhaval Pu. 14 p. 560-561.
2. Dhaval Pu. 14 p. 562-564.
3. Dhaval p. 14 p. 547.
4. Sarvarth Siddhi 5/16.

Page #708:
---------------------------
674 / Go Ma Jeev Kaasht
Because the soul, which is endowed with such power, causes the transformation of the pudgal in terms of speech, therefore the dravya speech is also pudgalic. Secondly, it is also known from the fact that the dravya speech is the object of the auditory sense that the formation is pudgalic.
Doubt - Why is speech not the object of other (different) senses?
Solution - The olfactory sense perceives smell, it does not obtain taste etc., similarly, other senses do not have the ability to perceive speech.
Doubt - Are words abstract?
Gatha 605-608
Solution - No, because words are perceived by the tangible senses, they are stopped by tangible walls etc., their destruction is seen by adverse wind etc., and their suppression is seen due to other reasons, from this the tangibility of words is proved.
Mind is of two types, dravya mind and bhav mind. The bhav mind, which is characterized by attainment and use, arises from the support of pudgals, therefore it is pudgalic. And the mind which is transformed into the form of mind due to the destruction and cessation of knowledge-obscuring and vigor-hindering karmas, and due to the cause of the goshang karma, which are beneficial to the soul in the face of the use of contemplation and remembrance of the qualities and defects of the pudgal, is also pudgalic.
Doubt - Mind is an independent dravya. It is devoid of transformation like form etc. and is only an atom, therefore it is wrong to consider it pudgalic.
Solution - This kind of doubt is wrong. Is that mind connected to the soul and the senses or unconnected? If it is unconnected, then it cannot be beneficial to the soul and cannot help the senses. If it is connected, then it cannot benefit other regions except the region in which it is connected to the transformation. Therefore, it is proved that the mind is not atomic, but is present pervading all the regions of the soul.
Doubt - There is a quality called adrishta, under its influence this mind wanders like a wheel of fate in all regions?
Solution - No, because the quality called adrishta does not have such power. Because it is an abstract and inactive quality of the soul. Therefore, this quality is also inactive, therefore it is unable to initiate action elsewhere. It is seen that a particular dravya called air, being itself active and tactile, is the cause of pulsation in plants, but it is characterized, therefore it cannot be the cause of action.
Contrary to that
The soul, which is expected to arise, is contained in the body, the air which is expelled by the vigor-hindering and knowledge-obscuring karmas, and the ango-pang karma, the exhalation characteristic of that air is called prana

Page #709:
---------------------------
##  Gatha 656-613
### Samyaktvamagamana/605

The same soul, which takes in the external air, is called apana, the characteristic of exhalation. Thus, these pranapana, which have the characteristics of inhalation and exhalation, also benefit the soul, because they keep the soul alive. These mind, prana and apana are concrete, because their impact, etc., is seen by other concrete substances. For example, the mind is impacted by things like lightning, which causes fear, and by alcohol, etc., which causes intoxication. And prana and apana are impacted by the hand, clothes, etc., when the mouth is covered. But the abstract cannot be impacted by concrete substances, from which it is understood that all these are concrete. And from this, the existence of the soul is proven.

In addition to these, there are also benefits of pudgala in happiness, sorrow, life and death. When the bound vedaniya karma, etc., associated with the soul, attains maturity due to external causes like dravya, etc., the pleasure or joy that the soul experiences is happiness. Similarly, the results that are in the form of affliction, which arise from the rise of asata vedaniya karma, are sorrow. In the state of existence, the continuous breathing of the living being due to the rise of karagrayu karma, its non-cessation is life, and its cessation is death. Generally, death is not pleasing to anyone, but even death is pleasing to a creature who is distressed by illness, pain, sorrow, etc. Therefore, it has been included in the category of benefits. Here, the word "benefit" does not refer to desirable things, but to all the actions that take place due to pudgalas. Sorrow is also undesirable, but it has been mentioned because it is a function of pudgala.

Pudgalas also have their own means of purification. For example, bronze is cleaned with ash and water is cleaned with katak fruit.

The statement about the binding of the adhibhagi pudgala paramanu is:

**Giddhattam lukkhattam bandhass ya karanam tu eyaddi. Sankhejjasaankhejjanaantaviharinaddhanukkhaguna. ||606||**

**Egguranam tu jaharanam rinavattam vigugatigunasankhejjasa-. Sankhejjagatguna hodi taha rukkhabhavam ca. ||610||**

**Evam guranasanjutta paramanu adivaagganammi thiya. Joggadugaanam bandhe donham bandho hane rinayama. ||611||**

**Giddharinaddha e bajjhanti rupakharukkha ya poggala. Giddhalukkha ya bajjhanti ruvaaruvvi ya poggala. ||612||**

**Ridhidarolimajhe visarisajadi ssa samaganam ekkan. Ruvitti hodi sapana sesaranam ta pravitti. ||613||**

1. Sarvarthasiddhi 5/16. 
2. "Sukha dukha jivitamaranopamahaasca. ||5.20||" [Tattvarthasutra]. 
3. 4. Rajanaatik 5/20. 
5. Dhavala Pu. 14 p. 31 Ga. 34.

Page #710:
---------------------------
656/Go. Sa. Jivakanda
Go. 601-616

The term "ruthi" refers to the two-fold nature of the "giddhanu" (a type of atom) and the "lukkhanu" (another type of atom). The "aravi" (non-material) nature of the "rukkha" (tree) is also known as "tanva" (body). ||614||

The "niddha" (dense) and the "lukkha" (light) are both difficult to understand. The "niddha" and the "lukkha" can bind together, whether they are similar or dissimilar. ||615||

The "rinaddhi" (dense) and the "sama" (similar) are both "dotigada" (two-fold) and "duuttara" (two-fold). Both the "sama" (similar) and the "visama" (dissimilar) are "sarisidara" (similar in nature). ||616||

The "votigapbhav" (origin of the "voti" - a type of atom) and the "duuttara" (two-fold) are both "sarana" (refuge) and "dugana" (two-fold). The "giddha" (dense) and the "lakkha" (light) are both "jahsnu" (enduring) and "bhaya" (fear). ||617||

The "rinaddhidaravaraguna" (dense, light, and other qualities) are "aidi" (bound) to the "sparadhana" (material world). The "bahirantaranga" (external and internal) qualities are "sangade" (connected) to the "gunantara" (other qualities). ||618||

The "riddhidaraguana" (dense, light, and other qualities) are "ahi" (bound) to the "parinama" (transformation) of the "bandha" (bond). The "sankhejjasaankhejjanaantapade" (countable, uncountable, and infinite) are "sarana" (refuge) and "khandhara" (destroyed). ||619||

**Gathaarth:**

The "snigdhatva" (smoothness) and the "rukshatva" (roughness) are caused by the "bandha" (bond). The "snigdha" (smooth) and the "ruksha" (rough) have countless, uncountable, and infinite variations. ||606||

The "snigdhatva" (smoothness) refers to the "jghannya" (inferior) quality. There are "dviguga" (two-fold), "triguna" (three-fold), "sankhyata" (countable), "asankhyata" (uncountable), and "ananta" (infinite) qualities. Similarly, there are "rukshatva" (roughness) qualities. ||610||

In this way, the "gunasamyukta" (quality-combined) "paramanu" (atom) is located in the "prathama vargana" (first category). The "paramanu" (atom) with two or more qualities is capable of binding. The binding of two "paramanu" (atoms) is a rule, not of less. ||611||

The "snigdha pudgala" (smooth atom) does not bind with other "snigdha pudgala" (smooth atoms), and the "ruksha pudgala" (rough atom) does not bind with other "ruksha pudgala" (rough atoms). However, the "sarasa" (similar in quality) and the "visadasa" (dissimilar in quality) "snigdha" (smooth) and "ruksha" (rough) "pudgala" (atoms) bind with each other. ||612||

The "visadrusha jati" (dissimilar type) "samguna" (similar quality) atom between the "snigdha" (smooth) and "ruksha" (rough) rows is called "rupa" (form), and the rest are called "arupa" (formless). ||613||

The "dviguna" (two-fold) "snigdha" (smooth) atom is "rupa" (form), but the "ekaguna" (one-fold) and "triguna" (three-fold) or more "snigdha" (smooth) atoms are "arupa" (formless). Similarly, this should be understood in relation to the "ruksha" (rough) atoms. ||614||

The "snigdha pudgala" (smooth atom) binds with the "snigdha pudgala" (smooth atom) that has two more qualities, and the "ruksha pudgala" (rough atom) binds with the "ruksha pudgala" (rough atom) that has two more qualities. The "snigdha pudgala" (smooth atom) binds with the "ruksha pudgala" (rough atom) when there is a "visama" (dissimilar) or "sama" (similar) quality, except for the "jghannya" (inferior) quality. ||615||

In both the "snigdha" (smooth) and the "ruksha" (rough), there is a "samadhara" (similar flow) when there is an increase of two qualities after two qualities, and there is a "visamadhara" (dissimilar flow) when there is an increase of two qualities after three qualities. Both the "sadasa" (similar) and the "visadrusha" (dissimilar) are present in both the "sama" (similar) and the "visama" (dissimilar). ||616||

In the "snigdha" (smooth), there is an increase of two qualities after two qualities, and an increase of two qualities after three qualities. Because there is a difference of two, the "snigdha" (smooth) binds with the "snigdha" (smooth). Similarly, this should be understood in relation to the "ruksha" (rough), but the "jghannya" (inferior) does not bind in both. ||617||

The "snigdha" (smooth) and the "ruksha" (rough) are...

1. Dhavala Pu. 14, p. 33, Ga. 36, Rajachatik 5/36.

Page #711:
---------------------------
Gatha 606-616
Sabhyatvamargana / 677

1. The paramanu (atomic particle) with the lowest qualities is not capable of being bound anywhere, either in its own or in another's place. However, when the external and internal causes come together, it attains the qualities and gets bound.

2. When bound, the paramanu with more snigdha (oily/viscous) or ruksha (dry) qualities assimilates the one with lower qualities. The binding of that paramanu can be with a countable number of pradesha (spatial units), with innumerable or infinite pradesha skandhas (aggregates), or even with another paramanu.

Visheshaartha:
- Binding occurs due to snigdha or skilled qualities. The pudgala (matter) with the parya (mode) of snehana (oiliness) produced by external and internal causes is snigdha. Its derivation is 'snihyate smeti snigdhah'.
- The pudgala with the parya of rukhshata (dryness) is ruksha. The dharma (property) of snigdha pudgala is snigdhata, and of ruksha pudgala is rukhshata.
- The binding with characteristics like dvyanuka (diatomic) etc. is the function of snigdhata and rukhshata.
- When two paramanus with snigdha and ruksha qualities combine, the skandha named anu is formed. Similarly, skandhas with countable, innumerable, and infinite pradesha are produced.
- There are variations of snigdha quality like one, two, three, four, countable, innumerable, and infinite. Similarly, there are variations of ruksha quality.
- Just as oil, goat's milk, cow's milk, buffalo's milk, and camel's milk have increasing amounts of snehaguna, and panshu, kannika, and sharkara have lesser amounts of rukhshaguna, a similar inference of more or less snigdha and ruksha qualities can be made for paramanus.

Shanka: What is the characteristic of samshlesha bandha (compound binding)?
Samadhan: The binding that occurs due to the mutual samshlesha (combination) of lac and wood is samshlesha bandha. The word jatu (lac) indicates the acceptance of vajralepa (diamond-like coating) and maina etc. sticky substances.

Shanka: If one quality is called the lowest quality, then what is the measure of that lowest quality?
Samadhan: No, that lowest quality arises from infinite vibhaga praticchedas (divisional sub-units).

Shanka: What are vibhaga praticchedas?
Samadhan: The minimal increase in a paramanu is called vibhaga praticcheda. Based on this measure (of vibhaga praticcheda), the lowest or highest qualities of a paramanu can be determined, which are infinite times more than all living beings.

Shanka: If the word 'one quality' is used for the lowest quality with infinite vibhaga praticchedas, then the use of 'two qualities' should be there for two lowest qualities, otherwise the word 'two' would not be available.

Page #712:
---------------------------
678 / Go. Sa. Jiva Kanda
Solution - This is not a fault because when there is an increase in the indivisible intersection of the inferior quality, two quality states are seen.
Doubt - How is the second quality name of the same indivisible intersection?
Solution - Because only that much difference in quality is seen in the difference in substance. The second quality name is of the second special state of the Guga and the third quality name is of the third special state. Therefore, with the inferior quality (when there is an increase in one indivisible intersection), double and triple become.
Gatha 606-618.
These quality-possessing atoms have an initial (first) classification. Because the first classification has one chain name. Of these, two atoms with initial qualities are capable of bonding. The bonding rule is at least two atoms. When these two atoms bond with each other, the name becomes. Smooth atoms do not bond with other smooth atoms because they are the same in terms of smooth quality. Rough atoms do not bond with other rough atoms because they are the same in terms of rough quality. Smooth pudgal and rough pudgal achieve mutual bonding because they have diversity (heterogeneity).
Doubt 1 - Does the bonding of smooth and rough pudgal occur in relation to the indivisible intersections of qualities or does the bonding of dissimilar smooth and rough pudgal occur in relation to the indivisible intersections?
Solution - Those pudgal which are composed of smooth and rough qualities, which are the same in relation to the indivisible intersections of qualities, are called shaped. They also bond. Shapeless, i.e., those with dissimilar indivisible intersections, also bond. Smooth and rough pudgal bond with each other, whether they are the same or different in terms of the number of indivisible intersections of qualities.
Doubt - Does smooth not bond at all with smooth or rough with rough?
Solution - If bonding occurs, then with two quality pudgal, if the bonding is in the state of smooth, then it occurs only with the more smooth pudgal. If the bonding of rough pudgal with other rough pudgal is in the state of more rough pudgal, then it occurs only with the more rough pudgal. Bonding does not occur with other ferve and rough with rough. It is also said
"Dvadhika vigunanaam tu || 5 / 36 ||" [Tattvarth Sutra]
- Bonding occurs of those with two more qualities. For example, bonding does not occur between two smooth quality atoms with one smooth quality atom, with two smooth quality atoms, with three smooth quality atoms, but bonding does occur with four smooth quality atoms, and similarly, bonding occurs between the same two smooth quality atoms with five smooth quality atoms, and similarly with six, seven, eight numbers, innumerable and
1. Val Pu. 14 p. 451. 2. Gaval Pu. 14 p. 31 and 32. 3. Chanal Pu. 14 p. 33.

Page #713:
---------------------------
## Gatha 6.6-616
**Mambandhamarana/676**

An infinite number of **snigdha** (smooth) **guna** (qualities) **bala** (possessing) **paramanu** (atoms) do not bind with each other. Similarly, a **paramanu** with three **snigdha guna** binds with a **paramanu** with three **snigdha guna**, but not with any other **paramanu** with a different number of **snigdha guna**. A **paramanu** with four **snigdha guna** binds with a **paramanu** with six **snigdha guna**, but not with any other **paramanu** with a different number of **snigdha guna**. This should be understood in the same way for all other cases.

Similarly, a **paramanu** with two **ruksha** (rough) **guna** does not bind with a **paramanu** with one, two, or three **ruksha guna**. It binds with a **paramanu** with four **ruksha guna**. However, it does not bind with any **paramanu** with five or more **ruksha guna**. In the same way, the binding of a **paramanu** with three **ruksha guna** should be understood.

**Doubt:** According to the rule that **snigdha guna** and **ruksha guna** **paramanu** bind with each other, does this mean that all **paramanu** bind with each other?

**Solution:** A **paramanu** with the lowest number of **guna** does not bind with any other **paramanu**. A **paramanu** with the lowest number of **snigdha guna** and a **paramanu** with the lowest number of **ruksha guna** do not bind with each other, neither in their own place nor in another place. Except for the **mula** (primary) **paramanu**, other **snigdha guna** **paramanu** bind with **ruksha guna** **paramanu**, and **ruksha guna** **paramanu** bind with **snigdha guna** **paramanu**.

In the commentary of **Sarvarthasiddhi** and **Rajabhatika** (A. 5, S. 36), this **Gatha 615** is quoted, but the meaning given there is that the rule of two more **guna** applies even when a **snigdha guna** **paramanu** binds with a **ruksha guna** **paramanu**, and vice versa.

Thus, **Sri Pujyapada** and other **acharyas** have given a different meaning than **Sri Vira Sena Acharya** for the same **Gatha**. Which meaning is correct? Since no decision has been reached in the present time, both meanings have been written down.

**(1)**
**Krapka**
**Gunaansha**
**Sashabandha**
**Visadrusha Bandha**
**Nahi**
**Jghanya Jghanya**
**Nahi Jghanya + Ekadhi Adhik**
**Nahi Jghanyaetara + Samajghanyaetara**
**Nahi Jghanyaetara + Ekadhikajghanyaetara**
**Nahi Jghanyaetara + Dwayadhikajghanyaetara**
**Ha Jghanyaetara + Vyadhi Adhik Jghanyaetara**
**Nahi**

**To Date the**
1. **Madhisiddhi 5/36**
2. **Dhaval Pu. 14 P. 33**

Page #714:
---------------------------
## 680/Go. Sa. Jivakanda
(2)

| Rank | Guna | Sahabandha | Dvayam Chakkam Kalam | Visajandha |
|---|---|---|---|---|
| 1 | Jghanya + Jghanya | No | In Kala | No |
| 2 | Jghanya + Ekadhi Adhik Jghanye Tara Samajghanye Tara | No | Panchaastikaya Ka Kathana | No |
| 3 | Jghanye Tara + Ekadhi Jghanye Tara Jghanye Tara Yadhik Jghanye Tara | No | Panchayasgirda Hodi. Padesapachayo Jamha Sthitti Siddhi | No |
| 4 | Jghanye Tara Tryadi Shradhik Jghanye Tara | No |  | No |
| 5 | I | Yes |  | Yes |
| 6 |  | No |  | No |

**Gatha 620**

**Doubt:** What is the meaning of Parinamika?

**Solution:** To achieve a different state from one state is Parinamika. For example, wet jaggery with a sweet taste, due to its quality, transforms the dust that falls on it, making it Parinamika. Similarly, other things with more qualities become Parinamika for those with fewer qualities. This results in the abandonment of previous states and the emergence of a third, different state. Therefore, there is uniformity among them. When there is Bandha, a third unique state arises, becoming a Skandha. The abandonment of duality and the attainment of unity is called Bandha. Unity is called Bandha.

**Gatha 620:** There is no Pradesh Prachaya in Kala, therefore, except for Kala, the remaining five Dravyas are called Panchaastikaya.

**Special Meaning:** "Pudgalanor Upcharato Nana Praveshtvam, Na Cha Kalaago: Snigdharukhtvabhavat Rijutvaach. ||1701||" [Shraalappaddhati] Due to Upchar, Pudgal Paramanu has Nana Pradesh nature because it attains Bandha, but even with Upchar of Kalaanu, there is no Nana Praveshtva Bhava because Kalaanu has the effect of Snigdha-Rukha Guna due to Bandha, and it is stable because it is inactive.

**Doubt:** Just as there is Kayatva of multiple Pradesh forms due to Skandha Paryaya of a single Pudgal Paramanu in terms of Dravya, why is Kayatva not said to be due to Paryaya of Kalaanu even when it is one in terms of Dravya?

**Solution:** No, because Kala Dravya is affected by Bandha caused by Snigdha-Rukha Guna, therefore, it cannot be Kay.

1. "Bhavantaraapadana Parinamikatvam." [M. Si. 5/37]
2. [Rajavartika 5/37/2] "Purnvaavastaprachyaavapurvak Taatiyakamavastantara Pradurbhavatityekaskastvamupapadyate."
3. "Bandhi Gaam Dubhavpariharaena Etaavati" [Dhaval Pu. 13 P. 7].
4. "Eki Bhavo Bandha." [Babal Pu. 13 P. 348].
5. Vridhad Uvyasangrah Ma. 26 Ki Teeka.

Page #715:
---------------------------
##  Verse 620

**Doubt:** What are the Astikayas? What is the nature of Astikayas?

**Solution:**  Jiva, Pudgala, Dharma, Adharma, and Akasha are the five Astikayas, because they are real (sat) and occupy multiple regions (bahupradeshi).  Shri Kundakunda Acharya has also said:

"Jiva, Pudgala, Dharma, Adharma, and Akasha are real and occupy multiple regions." (4)

[Pancha Astikaya]

1. Jiva, Pudgala, Dharma, Adharma, and Akasha are permanent and unique in existence, and they are large in regions. These five substances exist in their own Maha-satta and Avanta-satta, and are unique to their own existence. Therefore, they are real. These five substances also have a body (kaya), because they are large in particles (pranu-mahan). Here, the word "anu" refers to the smallest particle (pradesh). That which is made up of many particles (pradesh) is called "pranu-mahan".

**Doubt:** How is it possible for a single-region Pudgala atom to have a body?

**Solution:** Due to the combined power of smoothness (snigdhatva) and roughness (rukshatva), the atom is the cause of the body (skandha). Therefore, it has a body by implication (upachaar). (2)

"Those who have the nature of existence (asti) with various qualities and states are Astikayas." (5)

[Pancha Astikaya]

- Jiva, Pudgala, Dharma, Adharma, and Akasha are substances that are made up of parts (pravayi), and regions (pradesh) are their parts. These five Astikayas are unique to their regions, therefore, their existence is proven.

Thus, this is the knowledge (pramaya) that these substances are of six types due to the difference between Jiva and Ajiva.  Except for time (kal), the remaining five substances are Astikayas. Because they exist, they are real (asti), and because they are like a body (kaya) and occupy multiple regions, they are called "kaya".  Combining "asti" and "kaya" gives us "Astikaya".  Jiva, Dharma, and Adharma have countless regions, and Akasha has infinite regions. Pudgala has countable, countless, and infinite regions. Thus, there are three types of regions in Pudgala. Time has only one region, therefore, time is not a "kaya".

1. Pancha Astikaya, verse 4, Samaya Vyakhya Teevan.
2. Pancha Astikaya, verse 4, Yamvritti Teeka, Samaya Vyakhya Teeka.
3. Pancha Astikaya, verse 5.

Page #716:
---------------------------
682/Go, Sa, Jeevakaapar
Gatha 621
Nav Padarth Ranav Ya Padattha Jeevajeeish Taanam Cha Punnapayadurg. Pasavasanvaranijjarbandha Mokkho Ya Hotititti. ||621||
Gathaarth-Jeev and Ajeev (Pudgal) and their punya and paap these two and graasrav, sanbar nirjara, bandh and moksh these nine padarth are. ||621||
Vishesharth-Mool dravy jeev and ajeev are. Ajeev is of five types: pudgal, dharm, adharm, graakash and kaal. Out of these, dharm, adharm, prakaash and kaal these four dravy are amurtik, therefore they do not attain bandh! Pudgal is murtik. Due to snigdh and maksh gun, it attains bandh as said in Gatha 606. Jeev is amurtik by nature but due to anaadi-karmabandh, the sansari jeev is becoming murtik. Therefore, due to the mutual bandh of pudgal and sansari jeev, praastrab, sanvar, nirjara, bandh and moksh these five avasthaas are. Samrav bandh these two are punya and paap two-two forms. In this way, jeev, ajeev, paasab, sanvar, nirjara, bandh and moksh these seven tattva and in these punya and paap these two joining together, nav padarth become.
_Out of these nav padarth, punya, paap, graastrab, sanvar, nirjara, bandh and moksh these are jeev swaroop as well as ajeev swaroop. Shri Amritchandraacharya has stated this in the tika of this gatha -
Jeevajeeva Bhaava Punna Paavam Cha Graasavam Teshi.
Sanvar-Nijjar-Bandho Mokkho Ya Havanti Te Attha. ||108|| [Panchaastikay]  Jeev and ajeev two mool padarth and their punya, paap, paasav, sanvar, nirjag, bandh and moksh these nav padarth are. Chaitanya whose lakshan is, that is jeev padarth. Chaitanya's abhav lakshan wala is ajeev. These two are mool padarth. Jeev and pudgal roop ajeev, due to the mutual bandh of these two, other seven padarth are. Jeev's shubh parinaam, that is jeev punya. Shubh parinaam's nimitt se pragati karma parinaam happens, that is pudgal (ajeeb) punya. Jeev's ashubh parinaam, that is jeev paap and their nimitt se pudgal's aprashasht karma roop parinaman happening, that is ajeev paam. Jeev's moh raag dvesh roop parinaam, that is jeev-maasrav. Their nimitt se yog dwara paane wali poudgalik karmaran vargana, that is ajeeb praasrab. Jeev's moh raag dvesh roop parinaam's nirodh, that is jeev sanbar. Its nimitt se saang dwara pravesh hone wali karman barganaon's nirodh, that is ajeev sanbar. Karma's shakti nash karne mein samarth, such jeev's parinaam, that is jeev nirjara. Its prabhaav se poudgal karmon's neeras ho kar ekden sankshay, that is ajeev nirjara. Jeev's moh-raag-dvesh parinaam, that is jeev bandh. Their parinaam's nimitt se karmon's jeev ke saath anyoany avgaahan ho jaana, that is ajeev bandh. Jeev's atyant shudhatmoplabdhi, that is jeev moksh. Poudgalik sarv karmon's jeev se atyant vishelag ho jaana, this is ajeev moksh.
1. Ga. Ji. Ga. 563. 2. Panchaastikar Ga. 108 Samayabyaakhya Deeka.

Page #717:
---------------------------
##  Verse 622
##  Path of Right Conduct / 683

There are two kinds of beings: those with merit and those with demerit. A being who possesses right faith and vows is a being of merit. The opposite is a being of demerit. || 622 ||

**Explanation of the Verse:**

In verse 623, it is stated that beings with wrong faith and those with wrong conduct are both considered to be beings of demerit. This is because both wrong faith and wrong conduct are contrary to right faith. The explanation of this will be discussed in the commentary of verse 623. Here, we are explaining which being is a being of merit and which is a being of demerit.

"Beings who are endowed with auspicious and inauspicious consequences are beings of merit and demerit respectively." || 1 ||

Shri Kundakunda Acharya has also stated in the Mulachara:

"A being who is endowed with right faith, right knowledge, the five great vows, and the restraint of passions, i.e., the three jewels, is a being of merit. A being who is not endowed with the three jewels is a being of demerit." || 2251472 ||

Among the three jewels, conduct is the most important, because "conduct is indeed dharma." The fruit of liberation is attained through the tree of dharma, which is conduct, not through its roots.

**Doubt:**

In the "Dravyasangraha," a being endowed with auspiciousness is called a being of merit. What is meant by auspiciousness there?

**Resolution:**

In the commentary of the "Dravyasangraha," Shri Brahmadeva Suri has quoted the following two verses regarding auspiciousness:

"One who vomits out the poison of wrong faith, who cultivates the feeling of right faith, who performs excellent devotion, who is devoted to feeling-salutation, who is always immersed in knowledge, who is a protector of the five great vows, who restrains the four passions, who conquers the strong senses, who strives for the perfection of austerities, and who is the opposite of this is a being of demerit." || 1 ||

"A being who is endowed with such auspiciousness is a being of merit." || 2 ||

1. Brihad Dravyasangraha, Verse 38
2. Prachchana Sara, Verse
3. Brihad Dravyasangraha, Commentary on Verse 30

Page #718:
---------------------------
##  Chapter 684,  Jiva Kanda
##  Verse 122: "That which purifies the soul or by which the soul is purified is punya. That which protects the soul from the auspicious is papa."

**The statement of the wrong view (mithyadristi) and the statement of the right view (samyagdristi) are both considered papa, but the wrong view is an infinite number of times more severe than the right view.**

**Verse 623:** The wrong view (mithyadristi) is a papajiva, which is infinite in number. The right view with the taint of wrong view (sasadan samyagdristi) is also a papajiva, but it is only a fraction of the infinite number of wrong views. The arising of a single infinite-bound karma causes a fall into the wrong view (sasadan) guna-sthana.

**Explanation:** The words mithya, vithath, vyaneek, and asatya are synonyms. The word dristi means vision or faith. Those jivas who have a wrong view (mithyadristi) due to the arising of the wrong view karma in the form of opposite, isolated, humble, doubt, and ignorance are called mithyadristi jivas.

The negation of right view is called sasadan. One who is afflicted with this sasadan is called sasadan samyagdristi. One who has lost their right view due to the arising of a single infinite-bound karma, but has not attained the wrong view (mithyadristi) state, but is facing the wrong view (mithyadristi) guna-sthana, is called sasadan samyagdristi.

**Doubt:** Since the sasadan samyagdristi does not have the arising of wrong view (mithyadristi), it does not have a false vision, therefore it cannot be a papajiva?

**Resolution:** No, because the opposite attachment (viparita-abhinivesha) is of two types. It arises due to the wrong view (mithyadristi) and also due to the arising of infinite-bound passions. The sasadan guna-sthana has the arising of infinite-bound passions. Therefore, due to the opposite attachment (viparita-abhinivesha) generated by the infinite-bound passions, the one with the sasadan guna-sthana is also a papajiva.

This will attain the wrong view (mithyadristi) guna-sthana according to the rule, therefore it is called a mithyadristi papajiva.

**Doubt:** The infinite-bound passions are charitra-mohaniya karma, then how can they destroy the right view?

**Resolution:** The infinite-bound passions are dual in nature. Therefore, they also destroy the right view.

**References:**

1. Sarvartha Siddhi 6.3
2. Paval Purana 1, page 162
3. Bhanal Purana 1, page 163
4. Gachchhal 1, page 361
5. Dhaval Purana 6, page 12

Page #719:
---------------------------
## Gatha 624
### Samyaktvam Aganga // 605

The right faith (Samyaktvam) destroys the four types of passions (Kashaya) as follows:

1. **Anantaanubandhi Kashaya** destroys the **Des-Sayal-Charitra** (conduct of the world and the self).
2. **Apratyakhyan Kashaya** destroys the **Des-Sayal-Charitra** (conduct of the world and the self).
3. **Pratyakhyan Kashaya** destroys the **Sakal-Charitra** (all conduct).
4. **Sanjwalan Kashaya** destroys the **Yathakyat Charitra** (conduct as described).

**Doubt:** If Anantaanubandhi Kashaya is a **Charitramohaniya Karma** (karma that obscures conduct), then what kind of conduct does it destroy?

**Solution:** Anantaanubandhi Kashaya's influence on conduct is not futile, because it is the cause of the endless flow of **Apratyakhyan** etc. and its futility would contradict this.

**The number of beings in the first twelve Gunasthanas:**

* **Mithyadristi** (wrong faith) beings are **Ananta** (infinite).
* **Savayasasaran-Missavirada** (those who have attained the first stage of liberation) are **Pallya** (a fraction of an infinite number).
* **Duarana** (those who have attained the second stage of liberation) are **Asankhyat** (innumerable).
* **Sansankhyat** (those who have attained the third stage of liberation) are **Sansankhyat** (innumerable).

**Explanation:** Mithyadristi beings are infinite in number. Infinity has many types.

**There are eleven types of infinity:**

1. **Namaanant** (infinite in name)
2. **Sthapananant** (infinite in establishment)
3. **Dravyanant** (infinite in substance)
4. **Sasvatanant** (infinite in eternity)
5. **Gananant** (infinite in number)
6. **Anedeshik Anant** (infinite in non-locality)
7. **Ekanant** (infinite in oneness)
8. **Ubhayanant** (infinite in both ways)
9. **Vistaranant** (infinite in expansion)
10. **Sarvanant** (infinite in all)
11. **Bhavanant** (infinite in existence)

**Doubt:** Which type of infinity is relevant to the nature of the universe?

**Solution:** **Gananant** (infinite in number) is relevant to the nature of the universe.

**Doubt:** How do we know that Gananant is relevant to the nature of the universe?

**References:**

1. **Dhaval Pustak 6, page 43**
2. **Dhaval Pustak 3, page 11**
3. **Dhaval Pustak 3, page 16**

Page #720:
---------------------------
## 6.6/Go. Sa. Jeevakanda
**Verse 624**

**Solution:** It is known from the proof presented in the form "Mithyaashti Jeevas are Anantaanant" that there is a purpose in the Anantaanant in the nature. Apart from this Anantaanant, there are no other ten types of Anantaanant that are presented in the proof, because they are not seen in the form of calculation.

**Doubt:** If there is a purpose in the Anantaanant in the nature, then why are the other ten types of Anantaanant presented here apart from the Anantaanant?

**Solution:** "Pravaganivaranatupyayavassa paroovarana-rinmittam cha. Sansayavinasana? Tacchatyavadharana cha ||12||"

All the Anantaanant are mentioned here to eliminate the irrelevant subject, to present the relevant subject, to destroy the doubt and to establish the truth.

Anantaanant is of three types - Paritaananant, Yuktaanant and Anantaanant. It is known from the mantra "Mithya Drishti Jeevas are Anantaanant. They are not taken away by the Avasarpini and Utsarpini" that Mithya Drishti Jeevas are Anantaanant.

That Anantaanant is also of three types - Jghanya Anantaanant, Utkrishta Anantaanant, Madhyama Anantaanant. It is known from the Aarsh Vachan "Wherever Anantaanant is seen, there Madhyama Anantaanant is accepted" that Madhyama Anantaanant is accepted here.

**Doubt:** That Madhyama Anantaanant is also in the form of Ananta Vikalp. Which Vikalp is acceptable here?

**Solution:** From Jghanya Anantaanant, going up to the Ananta Varga Sthan and from Utkrishta Anantaanant, coming down to the Ananta Varga Sthan, the amount that is possible is acceptable here from Anantaanant. Or, the amount that is produced by three times the Varga-Sangit of Jghanya Anantaanant, and the amount that is produced by the addition of six Dravyas to the Ananta Guni, is the amount of Mithyaashti Jeevas that is less than the Ananta Guni Madhyama Ananta Pramaan.

In the Seena Bar Varga-Sangit amount, Siddha, Nigoda Jeeva, Vanaspati Kayik, Pudgal, Kaal's Ramaya and Alokaakaaan these six Anantaanant should be added. The amount that is produced by adding these six amounts that are to be added is called "Six Dravya Prakshipt amount". In this way, the number of Madhyama Anantaanant that is Ananta Guni more than the three times Varga-Sangit amount and Ananta Guni less than the Six Dravya Prakshipt amount is the amount of Mithyaashti Jeevas.

1. Dhaval Pu. 3 Page 17. 2. Dhaval Pu. 3 Page 18. 3. Dhaval Pu. 3 Page 16. 4. Dhaval Pu. 3 Page 16. 5. "Siddha Sinngodjeeva Vaafdi Kaaloy Pogala Chey. Manbamaloogagaasam Chhappde Nantapakmeva." Ti. Pa. 4/312: "Siddha Giyod Sahiy Vaakdipoggajpama Ana Nguha. Kaal Alogagaasam Chhacche Degaantapakdevaa." Tri. Sa. Ga, 46. 6. Shraval Pu. 3 Page 26.

Page #721:
---------------------------
## Samyak Margna / 687

The duration of the obstruction of Samyagmiyadristi is an uncountable multiple of the duration of the obstruction of the Sant Samyashti. The duration of the obstruction of Samyagmadhyadristi is seven hundred times the duration of the obstruction of Samyagmiyadristi. The duration of the obstruction of Sanayatasanayat is an uncountable multiple of the duration of the obstruction of Sasadan Samyagdristi. The duration of the obstruction of Sanayatasanayat is an uncountable multiple of the Sanayatasanayat dravya praman. The dravya praman of Sasadan Samyagdristi is an uncountable multiple of the dravya praman of Sanayatasanayat.

**Gatha 624**

**Doubt:** The highest duration of the Sanayatasanayat gunasthan is a countable number of years, and the highest duration of the Sasadan Samyagdristi gunasthan is six avali. Therefore, the duration of their upkrama should be according to their respective gunasthan duration. So, the dravya praman of Sanayatasanayat should be a countable multiple of the dravya praman of Sasadan Samyagdristi?

**Solution:** This is not a fault, because the results related to the Sasadan gunasthan, which are opposed to Samyaktva and Charitra, are extremely rare due to the karma nirjara, which is the cause of the Sanayama-Sanayam results, in the form of an uncountable multiple series at every moment. Therefore, at every moment, the number of jivas attaining the Sasadan Samyagdristi gunasthan is an uncountable multiple of the number of jivas attaining the Sanayama-Sanayam at every moment.

The dravya praman of Samyagmithyadristi is a countable multiple of the number of Sasadan Samyagdristi jivas, because the duration of the upkraman within six avali of Sasadan Samyagdristi is a countable multiple of the duration of the upkraman of the Samyagmithyadristi gunasthan, which is an antarmuhurta praman. The multiplier is a countable time. The dravya of Asanayat Samyagdristi is an uncountable multiple of the dravya of Samyagmithyadristi, because the duration of the upkraman of Asanayat Samyagdristi, which occurs within an uncountable number of avali from the duration of the upkraman of Samyagmithyadristi, is an uncountable multiple. Or, at every moment, the number of jivas attaining Vedak Samyaktva is an uncountable multiple of the number of jivas attaining Samyagmithyatva. And, because of the reason that an uncountable part of Vedak Samyagdristi attains Mithyatva, and an uncountable part of that also attains Samyagmithyatva, and according to the principle that "the expenditure of the always existing quantities should be proportional", the number of jivas who attain Mithyatva from the Asanayat Samyagdristi jivas, who have the existence of mohaniya karma, is equal to the number of jivas who attain Vedak Samyaktva from Mithyadristi. Therefore, it is proven that the dravya of Asanayat Samyagdristi is an uncountable multiple of the dravya of Samyagmithyadristi. This explanation is important here. The uncountable part of avali is the multiplier.

**Doubt:** These jivas are not existing, because there is a loss and increase in these quantities. If it is said that there is no loss and increase in these quantities, that is also not correct. If the income and expenditure of these quantities is not considered, then the effect of moksha will also be lost. The duration of Sasadan and other gunasthan is not anadi paryayavasit (infinite), therefore, there is also loss and increase in these quantities. If these quantities are considered existing, then they can be divided, otherwise not, because the division of non-existing quantities can only be considered as non-existing.

**9. Dhaval Pu. 3. 116-116. 2. Saval Pu. 3 p. 116-120.**

Page #722:
---------------------------
68/Go, Sa. Jivakanda
Gatha 325-626

The proof has been stated by taking recourse to the excellent collection of the trikala-related Samadhan-Sasadan Samyagdrishti Rashees, therefore there is no increase or decrease from that expectation. Therefore, the statement of the aforementioned Bhagaharas becomes established. The statement by Ankasandrishti is as follows:

"Panntathi cha sahasaa panchasayaa khalu chouttaraa toas. Palidovam tu edam vidharana sanditthinaa ditu. ||3|| Visahasam pradyala chhannau di cheya chadu sahasasaasi. Sol sahasaaricha purano tiginasayaa bajarasidi yaa. ||36|| Panchasaya vaarasuttaramuddiwai tu laksha dawai.
Sasaran-missasaanjad · viradaaviradaaran gu kaman. ||4|| -Satha hazaar panch sau chhattis ko palyopama maan kar kathana kiya gaya hai. Samaadan Samyagdrishti Jivarashee ka pramaan 2048, Samyamithyadrishti Jivarashee ka pramaan 4066, Asanyatta Samyagdrishti Jivarashee ka pramaan 16364 aur Sanyata-Sanyata Jivarashee ka pramaan 512 aata hai.

Sasadan Samyagdrishti sambandhi Bhagahar 32, Samyagmithyadrishti sambandhi Bhagahar 16, Asanyana Samyagdrishti sambandhi Bhagahar 4 aur Sanyata-Sanyata sambandhi Bhagahar 128 hai.

Pramatta va apramatta sanyata jivon ki sankhya tiradhi-say-ranavaranuvi chhannau di appamata ve kodi.
Pancheva ya teranau di ranavatuvisayachchuttaram pamade. ||625||" Gathaarth -Pramatta-sanyata jivon ka pramaan panch karod teranave lakh pradanave hazaar do sau chhah hai aur apramatta-sanyata jibon ka pramaan do karod chhayaanave lakh niyanave hazaar ek mau teen hai. ||625||

Vishesharth -Pramatta-sanyata jivon ka pramaan 56368206 hai aur apramatta mayata jivon ka pramaan 26666103 hai.

Shankha-Apramatta-sanyata ke dravyapramaan se pramatta-sanyata ka dravyapramaan kis karan se doona hai? Samadhan-Kyonki apramatta-sanyata ke kaal se pramatta-sanyata ka kaal duguna hai.

Chagen gunasthanon ke upashamak va kshapak jiyon ki sankhya tisayan bharanti kei chauruttaramastapanyam kei. Upasamaga parimaanam khavaagan jaan tadugaranam. ||626||

1. Praval Pu. 3 Pri. 70-71. 2. Dhaval Pu. 3 Pri. 88. 3. Dhaval Pu. 3 Pri. 88. 4. Pavan Pu. 3 Pri. 60 kintu "tigahhip-sad" paat hai aur 'made' ke sthan par 'ya' paat hai. 5. Dhaval Pu. 3.60 6. Dhaval Pu. 3 Pri. 64 Ga. 45.

Page #723:
---------------------------
Chapter 626
Samyastvamargna/656
Gatharth - Some Acharyas say the number of Upshamka jivas is three hundred, some Acharyas say three hundred and four (304), and some Acharyas say three hundred and four minus five (304-5) 296. This is the number of Upshamka jivas. The number of Kshapaka jivas is double this. || 626 ||
Vishesharth - When all the jivas accumulated in the time of a Path are collected together, the total number of jivas is six hundred and eight. The method of adding the numbers is as follows: By establishing the Path in the form of a Gachchha, taking thirty-four as the Adi (beginning) and twelve as the Uttar (addition), and adding according to the rule of the "Pavamegana Viheenam" etc. Sankalan Sutra, the number of Kshapaka jivas is obtained as 608. (8-1-77-2-334 12 =42, 421-34 - 76; 764-608)
Uttardalahya Gachche Pachayadaloone Sagadimesth Puno.
Pakvivia Gachchhagurighade Uvasam-Khavagaana Parimanam. ||44|| - By halving the Uttar (addition) and multiplying it by the Gachchha, the number obtained is then reduced by half the Prachay, and then the Praadi number is added to it, and then the resulting amount is multiplied by the Gachchha again, the number of Upshamka and Kshapaka jivas is obtained.
For Kshapakas, Praadi is 34, Prachay is 12, Gachchha is 8 | For Upshamkas, Praadi is 17, Prachay is 6, Gachchha is 8; Prachay 122 = 6; 645 Gachchha 48; 45-2 half of Prachay == 42, 42+ 34 Adi 76; 7648 Gachchha %D608 Kshapaka jivas. 6:2=3; 348=24; 24 ? = 21:21+17 = 38; 1848 304 Upanamka jivas] This is the Uttar (northern) view. By subtracting 10 from 608, the Dakshin (southern) view is obtained.
Chauruttara Tinnisayam Pamanam Uvasamagarana Keitu.
Tam Chev Ya Panchurn Bhaanti Keitu Tu Parimanam. ||46|| - Some Acharyas say the number of Upshamka jivas is 304, and some Acharyas say five less than 304, that is 266. In each Gunasthan, the number of Upshamka and Kshapaka jivas is 17.
Ekkekka Gunatthanee Attasu Samayesu Sanchidaanam Tu. Attasaya Sattar Gaudee Uvasam-Khavagaana Parimanam ||46||'
- In each Gunasthan, the number of Upshamka and Kshapaka jivas accumulated in the time of a Path is eight hundred and sixty-nine.
1. "Padamerea Ga Viheenam Du Bhajidam Utarena Sangunidam. Pabhavajui Gadagunidam Padarinadam Tam Vijanaahi. ||164||" [Vi. Sa. Ga. 164] 2. Gachala Pu. 3 p. 63. 3. Dhavala Pu. 3 p. 64. 4. Ghadhala Pu. 3 p. 64. 5. Dhavala Pu. 3 p. 65.

Page #724:
---------------------------
## 690/Go. Sa. Jiva Kanda
**Verse 12-128**

"From these excellent, evidence-bearing beings, not all attain the state of 'one matha' (one head) at all times. Therefore, many Acharyas reduce the number 304 by five. This explanation of reducing by five is in the form of a flow, is right, and is based on the tradition of the Acharyas. The explanation of 304 is not in the form of a flow, is wrong, and is not based on the tradition of the Acharyas."

**Entry vs. Subsequent Times:**

"In the subsequent times, the number of Upasama Jivas is sixteen in the first time, twenty-four in the second time, thirty in the third time, thirty-six in the fourth time, forty-two in the fifth time, forty-eight in the sixth time, fifty-four in the seventh time, and fifty-four in the last, eighth time. These are the Upasama Theranis." (627)

**Explanation:**

"In each Gunasthan of the Upasama श्रेणी, one Jiva enters from the lowest, having subdued the Charitramohaniya in one time, and fifty-four Jivas enter from the highest. This is a general statement. In contrast to the general statement, within eight times, which are more than six months apart, there are eight times in the Upasama श्रेणी that are continuously close to each other. In these,

* In the first time, starting from one Jiva, up to sixteen Jivas ascend the Upasama श्रेणी.
* In the second time, starting from one Jiva, up to twenty-four Jivas ascend the Upasama श्रेणी.
* In the third time, starting from one Jiva, up to thirty Jivas ascend the Upasama श्रेणी.
* In the fourth time, starting from one Jiva, up to thirty-six Jivas ascend the Upasama श्रेणी.
* In the fifth time, starting from one Jiva, up to forty-two Jivas ascend the Upasama श्रेणी.
* In the sixth time, starting from one Jiva, up to forty-eight Jivas ascend the Upasama श्रेणी.
* In the seventh and eighth times, starting from one Jiva, up to fifty-four Jivas ascend the Upasama श्रेणी."

**Entry vs. Subsequent Times:**

"In the subsequent times, the number of Kshapaka Jivas is thirty-two in the first time, forty-eight in the second time, sixty in the third time, seventy-two in the fourth time, eighty-four in the fifth time, ninety-six in the sixth time, one hundred and eight in the seventh time, and one hundred and eight in the eighth time. This is what should be known." (628)

**Explanation:**

"Within eight times, which are more than six months apart, there are eight times in the Kshapaka श्रेणी. Generally speaking, one Jiva attains the Kshapaka Gunasthan from the lowest, and

1. Dhaval Pu. 3 p. 62
2. Shraval Pu. 3 p. 61
3. Dhyan Pu. 3 p. 60-61
4. Dhaval Pu. 3 p. 63

Page #725:
---------------------------
## Gatha 626
## Samyaktvamargana/661

**One hundred paths of the **Kshapaka** Gunasthan are attained in an excellent manner.**

**By taking refuge in the special, the **Prarupana** is done, and in the first time, a being starting from the beginning ascends to the **Kshapaka** category up to thirty-two beings in an excellent manner.**

**In the second time, a being starting from the beginning ascends to the **Kshapaka** category up to forty-eight beings in an excellent manner.**

**In the third time, a being starting from the beginning ascends to the **Kshapaka** category up to sixty beings in an excellent manner.**

**In the fourth time, a being starting from the beginning ascends to the **Kshapaka** category up to seventy-two beings in an excellent manner.**

**In the fifth time, a being starting from the beginning ascends to the **Kshapaka** category up to eighty-four beings in an excellent manner.**

**In the sixth time, a being starting from the beginning ascends to the **Kshapaka** category up to ninety-six beings in an excellent manner.**

**In the seventh and eighth time, a being starting from the beginning ascends to the **Kshapaka** category up to one hundred and eight beings in each time in an excellent manner.**

**The number of **Sayogi** Kevalis is eight hundred ninety-eight thousand five hundred and two.**

**I bow to them.**

**Special Note:**

**If the **Path Time** is more than six months, then forty thousand eight hundred and forty-one **Siddh Samaya** are attained. In this way, by calculating (4064148), three hundred twenty-six thousand seven hundred and twenty-eight (326728) **Siddh Samaya** are attained.**

**If three beings in six **Siddh Samaya** and two beings in two times attain **Keval Jnana**, then twenty-two (22) **Yogiji** are accumulated in the **Path Time**. If twenty-two **Sayogi** Jins are attained in the **Path Siddh Samaya**, then how many **Sayogi** will be attained in three hundred twenty-six thousand seven hundred and twenty-eight (326728) **Siddh Samaya**? By calculating in this way (326728:-8422), eight hundred ninety-eight thousand five hundred and two (898502) **Sayogi** Jins are attained.**

**Where half of the previous **Siddh Kala** is attained, the calculation is done in this way. If forty **Sayogi** Jins are attained in the **Path Siddh Samaya**, then how many **Sayogi** Jins will be attained in one hundred sixty-three thousand three hundred and sixty-four **Siddh Samaya**? By calculating in this way, the aforementioned number of 898502 **Sayogi** Jins is attained.**

**Or, where one-fourth of the previous **Siddh Kala** is attained, which is eighty-one thousand six hundred and eighty-two **Siddh Samaya**, the calculation is done in this way. If eighty-eight (8) **Sayogi** Jins are attained in the **Path Time**, then how many **Sayogi** Jins will be attained in eighty-one thousand six hundred and eighty-two **Siddh Samaya**? By calculating in this way, the same aforementioned 898502 **Sayogi** Jins are attained.**

**-**

**... -**

**1. Dhaval Pu.**
**Page 62-63.**

**2. Bathal Pu.3 Page 66.**

**3. Dhaval Pu.3 Page 64.**

Page #726:
---------------------------
6.62/Go. Sa. Jivakanda
Nagaatha 630
The number is obtained. Similarly, one should state it knowing it elsewhere.'
Pramagarani
Phalarapit
Isaharaashi
Vanyapramaraana
8 Samaya
22 Kevali
Mamaya 326728
898502
2 Samaya
44 Kevali
Samaya 163364
98502
8 Samaya
88 Kevali
Samaya 81682
6502
8 Samaya
176 Kevali
Samaya 40841
81-502
According to the Uttar-Maanyata, the number of Sayogi Jinas is six months more than the number of Siddhasamaya obtained in the text. If the text obtains Siddhasamaya in six months, then how many Siddhasamaya will be obtained in four thousand seven hundred twenty-nine times the text time? Thus, by doing a traigashika, thirty-seven thousand eight hundred thirty-two Siddhasamaya will be obtained. Now, the number of Sayogi Jinas accumulated in this time is stated. It is as follows... In each Samaya of the text time, there are fourteen Sayogi Jinas. In 414 Samaya (112 = 112), one hundred and twelve Sayogi Jinas are obtained. Then, how many Sayogi Jinas will be obtained in thirty-seven thousand eight hundred thirty-two Siddhasamaya? Thus, by doing a traigashika, five lakh twenty-nine thousand six hundred forty-eight Sayogi Jinas are obtained.'
Pancheva Sahasssa Honti Sahasssa Taheva Ugatiisa. Charch Saya Adyaala Jogijinaan Hade Sankhya. ||54||
- The number of Sayogi Jina Jivas is five lakh twenty-nine thousand six hundred forty-eight. This is according to the Uttar-Maanyata.
Pramaaya Raashi
Phal Gashi
Iccha Gani
Labdha
6 Maah 8 Samaya
8 Samaya
4726
37832 Samaya
Samaya
112 Kevali
37832 Samaya
529648 Kevali
In comparison to knowledge, Vedas, Avagaahana, etc., the number of Aapko in one Samaya is as follows: In this Samaya, there are many Buddhas, Purushavedas, etc. From this, the number of Sragdo is fourteen. ||630||
1. Dhaval Pu.3 P. 66-67. 2. V 3. Dhaval Pu. 3 P. 100.

Page #727:
---------------------------
Gatha 631-633
Samyaktva-marga-gana/663
Patteyabuddha-titthakaratthiranausayamaranohinarajuda. Dasacchakkayosadavisatthavisam jahakamaso ||631|| Jetthavarabhummajjhimogahana-ga du cari attham. Jugavam havanti khavaga upasama-ga addhamedesim ||632||

The meaning of the verses is as follows:

In one moment, 108 Bodhisat Buddhas, 108 Purusa-vedis (knowers of the male nature), and 108 celestial beings who have fallen from heaven, all ascend the Ksapaka series. 

There are 10 Pratyeka-buddhas, 6 Tirthankaras, 20 Stri-vedis (knowers of the female nature), 10 Napumsakas (knowers of the neuter nature), 20 Manaḥparyaya-jñanis (knowers of others' thoughts), and 28 Avadhi-jñanis (possessors of the clairvoyant knowledge).

There are 2 of the highest degree of penetration, 4 of the lowest degree, and 8 of the medium degree of penetration. All of them together become Ksapakas. Among them, those with the Upasama series (of equanimity) are predominant.

Gatha 633 states that the number of all the Samyatas (the restrained ones) is such that the first digit is 7, the last digit is 6, and the middle digits are 9-9. I reverentially salute them with folded hands.

Page #728:
---------------------------
## Translation:

**664 / Go. Sa. Jivakanda**

**Special Meaning - Doubt:**  It was said that Sri Padmaprabha Bhattarak had more disciples than all other Tirthankaras, as he was surrounded by 330,000 (330,000) Muni ganas. Multiplying this by 170 gives 51 million 600 thousand Sanayats. However, this number does not match the spread of Sanayats mentioned elsewhere. Therefore, this verse is not accurate.

**Solution:** This is the Hundavasarpini, compared to other Avasarpini. Therefore, due to the greatness of the Yuga, the number of disciples of Tirthankaras in the Hundavasarpini is smaller than in other Avasarpini. This is because the Tirthankaras in other Avasarpini have a larger disciple family. Secondly, the number of humans in the Bharat and Airavat regions is not as large as in the Videha region. Therefore, the number of disciples of a Tirthankara in those two regions cannot be equal to the number of disciples of a Tirthankara in the Videha region. However, the number of humans in the Videha region is greater than in the Bharat and Airavat regions. This is explained as follows:

"The number of humans in the Antaradvipas is the least. The number of humans in Uttar Kuru and Dev Kuru is equal to them. The number of humans in Hari and Ramyak regions is greater than them. The number of humans in the Haimavat and Hairanyavat regions is greater than them. The number of humans in the Bharat and Airavat regions is greater than them. The number of humans in the Videha region is greater than them. Since there are many humans, there will be many Sanayats. Therefore, the criticism based on the number of Sanayats in this region is not accurate."

The statement of the Uttar Manayata is as follows:

**Parimanam. Pamattanam. || 52 ||**

**Verse 633**

The number of disciples in this number verse is:

**Ve Kodi Sattavisa Honti Sahassa Taheb Navaranudi.
Chausad Shradvanaudi Parisankha Hodi Vidiyagune. || 53 || 3**

- [According to Uttar Manayata] The number of Pramatt Sanayats is 46,666,664.

**Panchech Samasahassa Honti Sahassa Taheb Tetisa. Adusaya Chosisaja Javasam - Khabagaran Kevalikho. || 55 ||**

- [According to Uttar Manayata] The number of Grapramatt Sanayats, who are in the second Gunasthan, is 22,766,468.

- [According to Uttar Manayata] The total number of all four Upshamkas, five Kshapaks, and Kevali is 533,834.

By combining all these Sanayats, the total number of Rishis in all 170 Karma Bhoomigats is:

1. Gh. Pu. 3 p. 90-96. 2. Vann Pu. 3 p. 66. 2. Pra. Pu. 3 p. 100/ 4. Ghawala Pu. p. 101.

Page #729:
---------------------------
## Gatha 634-640
Savyatrantramagamsar / 665
(The total number of Jivas in the 6th and 7th Gunasthanas is 66666666. This is calculated as follows: 46666664 Jivas in the 6th Gunasthanas (Pramatta-Samyata) + 22766468 Jivas in the 7th Gunasthanas (A-Pramatta-Samyata) + 533034 Kevalis (who are in the 4th and 5th Kshapaka and 4th Upa-Shamaka Gunasthanas) = 66666666.)
"Chakkadi chakkta channavamajja ya sanjada sanve. Tigabhajida vigagurigadapamattarasi patta du 56."
The total number of Samyata Jivas is represented by a number that has six at the beginning and six in the middle (6666666). Dividing this number by three gives the number of A-Pramatta-Samyata Jivas (in the 7th, 14th, and 21st Gunasthanas). Multiplying this third part by two gives the number of Pramatta-Samyata Jivas in the 6th Gunasthanas. (66666666 ÷ 3 = 23333332 A-Pramatta-Samyata Jivas, 23333332 x 2 = 46666664 Pramatta-Samyata Jivas. This is according to the accepted view.)
There is a difference between the Northern and Southern views on this matter.
The duration of the Avahara Kala (the time spent in the first four Gunasthanas of the four Gatis) and the relative abundance and scarcity of Jivas in each Gati is described as follows:
"Ghasanjay missa sasar sammaran bhagahara je. Ruuranavaliyasankajezzeri gah bhajya tattha shikkhite." 634
"Devanam shravahara honti asankhen tariye pravahariya. Tattheva ya pakkhitte sohammisaag shravahara." 635
"Sohammsaranaharamsankher ya gurave. Uvari shrasanjada misstay- sasara sammaran shravahara." 636
"Sohammadaasarajoisivaran- bhavaran- liriya pudhvisu. Avirda- misse sankham sankhasankhaguna sasane dese." 637
"Charamdharaasaragahara graranav- sammaran praranapharidi. Antim gaveccatam sammaramsankha sankha- guranahara." 638
"Tatto tanuttaan vamagamana uddisarana vijayadi. Sammanan sankhaguno sharagada misse asankhaguno." 639
"Tatto sankajezzaguna sasarasammanan hodi sankhaguno. Utane kamaso parasttach durasandithi." 640
1. Dhavala E 3 p. 101.

Page #730:
---------------------------
666/Go. Sa. Jivakanda
Maya 634-641

When the Palle are divided by their respective divisors, the measure of their respective amounts is obtained. By subtracting the number of Jivas who have attained the Gunasthanas from their respective total amounts, the amount of Mithyast Jivas is obtained. ||641||

**Special Note:** Ga. 634-641 - When one less than the lower rare (one less than the innumerable part of a Pravali) is divided into the upper rare Progh, the time of conduct (divisor) of the Asanyat Samyagdristi is obtained.

Page #731:
---------------------------
## Gatha 634-649
**Samyaktvam Maganga / 667**

Only an innumerable part of the Avali receives the projection rods. When the duration of the non-virtuous Samyakdrishti is multiplied by the innumerable part of the Avali, the duration of the virtuous non-virtuous Samyakdrishti is obtained.

Multiplying the duration of the virtuous non-virtuous Samyakdrishti by the innumerable part of the Avali gives the duration of the virtuous Mithyadrishti living beings. This is because the duration of the virtuous Mithyadrishti is innumerable times less than the duration of the non-virtuous Samyakdrishti.

Multiplying the duration of the virtuous Mithyadrishti by the innumerable part of the Avali gives the duration of the virtuous Sasadan Samyakdrishti living beings. This is because the duration of the Sasadan Samyakdrishti is innumerable times greater than the duration of the virtuous Mithyadrishti. Alternatively, only an innumerable part of the living beings who attain the Mithyatva-Gunasthan attain the Sasadan Samyakdrishti Gunasthan. Therefore, the duration of the virtuous Sasadan Samyakdrishti is also innumerable times greater than the duration of the virtuous Mithyadrishti.

Dividing the duration of the virtuous non-virtuous Samyakdrishti by the innumerable part of the Avali and adding one part of it to the same duration of the virtuous non-virtuous Samyakdrishti gives the duration of the non-virtuous Samyakdrishtis of the Saudharma and Aishana heavens. Multiplying this by the innumerable part of the Avali gives the duration of the virtuous Mithyadrishtis of the Saudharma and Aishana heavens. This is because there is a difference between the duration of the Samyakdrishtis and the Mithyadrishtis. Multiplying the duration of the Mithyadrishtis by the innumerable part of the Avali gives the duration of the virtuous Sasadan Samyakdrishtis of the Saudharma and Aishana heavens. This is because there is a difference between the duration of the Mithyadrishtis and the Sasadan Samyakdrishtis. Alternatively, there is a difference in the number of living beings who attain these two Gunasthanas.

Multiplying the duration of the virtuous Sasadan Samyakdrishtis of the Saudharma and Aishana heavens by the innumerable part of the Avali gives the duration of the virtuous non-virtuous Samyakdrishtis of the Manatkumar and Maheindra heavens. This is because due to the abundance of good karma, not many living beings are born there. Similarly, this should be extended to the Tar-Sahasrar Kalpa.

Multiplying the duration of the virtuous Sasadan Samyakdrishtis of the Tar-Sahasrar Kalpa by the innumerable part of the Avali gives the duration of the virtuous non-virtuous Samyakdrishtis of the Jyotishis. This is because there is a strong influence of those living beings who are born with Vyudgrahit etc. Mithyatva and who attain Samyaktvam in the heavens that are against the Jinasasana.

Multiplying the duration of the virtuous non-virtuous Samyakdrishti Jyotishis by the innumerable part of the Avali gives the duration of the virtuous Mithyadrishti Jyotishis. Multiplying this by the innumerable part of the Avali gives the duration of the virtuous Sasadan Samyakdrishti Jyotishis. Similarly, the duration of the Varnantantar and Bhavanvasi Devas should be calculated in sequence. This is because it is not possible for many Samyakdrishtis to be born in those who have their vision covered by Mithyatva.

1. Bhavanvasi Sasadan Samyakdrishtis' duration from the non-virtuous Samyakdrishti's duration.

1. Dhaval Pu. 2 p. 156. 2. Dhaval Pu. 3 p. 156-160. 3. Dhaval Pu. 3 p. 262-283. Gu. 3 p. 283.
4. Patral.

Page #732:
---------------------------
668/Go. Sa. Jivakanda
Chapter 634-641

Time is countless. Therefore, the duration of the conduct of those who are non-Jain and have false faith is countless. Therefore, the duration of the conduct of those who are non-Jain and have right faith is countless. Therefore, the duration of the conduct of those who are restrained and unrestrained is countless. And from the duration of the conduct of those who are restrained and unrestrained, the duration of the conduct of those who are non-Jain and have right faith in the first hell earth is countless. Therefore, the duration of the conduct of those who are non-Jain and have false faith is countless. Therefore, the duration of the conduct of those who are non-Jain and have right faith is countless. In the same way, it should be taken up to the seventh hell earth.

From the duration of the conduct of those who are non-Jain and have right faith in the seventh earth, the duration of the conduct of those who are non-Jain and have right faith in the Aananta-Praanat is countless, because there are not many long-lived beings with good karma. Multiplying this duration by countless, we get the duration of the conduct of those who are non-Jain and have right faith in the Maaran-Achyut Kalpa, because in the upper kalpas, due to the abundance of good karma generated, there are more long-lived beings than in the lower kalpas, where there are fewer beings with less merit and less existence. Even though there are more beings in the lower kalpas, they are still countless. Because the human race is the seed for the beings born in the upper kalpas, and the human race is countless, therefore, the number of beings in the lower kalpas is countless times greater than in the upper kalpas. Here, the multiplier is countless time. This same order should be taken up to the duration of the conduct of those who are non-Jain and have right faith in the upper Veeyak. From the duration of the conduct of those who are non-Jain and have right faith in the upper Veeyak, the duration of the conduct of those who have false faith in the Graamat-Praagat is countless. Therefore, the duration of the conduct of those who have false faith in the Paaran-Achyut is countless. In the same way, it should be taken up to the upper (final) Graaveyak. From the duration of the conduct of those who have false faith in the upper Graaveyak, the duration of the conduct of those who are non-Jain and have right faith in the Anudish is countless. Therefore, the duration of the conduct of those who are non-Jain and have right faith in the Anuttaravaasi Devas, Vijay, Vaijayant, Jayant, and Aparajit, is countless. Here too, the multiplier is countless time. Therefore, the duration of the conduct of those who are non-Jain and have false faith in the Aananta-Praanat is countless. The multiplier is the countless part of the Aapali. Therefore, the duration of the conduct of those who are non-Jain and have false faith in the Paaran-Achyut is countless. In the same way, it should be taken up to the upper (final) Veeyak. From the duration of the conduct of those who are non-Jain and have false faith in the upper Graaveyak, the duration of the conduct of those who are non-Jain and have right faith in the Paanat-Praaranat is countless. Therefore, the duration of the conduct of those who are non-Jain and have right faith in the Praaran-Achyut is countless. In the same way, it should be taken up to the upper Veeyak. The multiplier is countless time.

From the duration of the conduct of those who are non-Jain and have right faith in the upper (final) Adeyak, the amount of their substance is countless, because by dividing the duration of the conduct by the Palyopama, we get the amount of substance. From this amount of substance, the amount of substance of those who are non-Jain and have right faith in the upper medium Adeyak is countless. In this way, from the inverse order of the duration of the conduct, it should be taken up to the point where the substance of those who are non-Jain and have right faith in the Saudharma and Aishana Kalpas is obtained. From the substance of those who are non-Jain and have right faith in the Saudharma Kalpa, the Palyopama is countless. The multiplier is the duration of the conduct.

1. Dhaval Pu. 3 p. 268-266. 2. Dhaval Pu. 3 p. 266. 3. Dhaval Pu. 3 p. 266. 4. Dhaval Pu. 3 p. 283. 5. Dhaval Pu. 3 p. 266. 6. Dhaval Pu. 3 p. 300. 7. Dhaval Pu. 3 p. 269 and 300.

Page #733:
---------------------------
## Verse 642-643

**Verse 642**
In the realm of the *guna sthānas* (stages of spiritual progress), there are thirteen crore (130 million) human beings in the *desasanayata* (controlled) state, fifty-two crore (520 million) in the *sāsadan samyagdṛṣṭi* (controlled right faith) state, and twice as many in the *samyagmithyadṛṣṭi* (mixed right and wrong faith) state, which is one hundred and four crore (1040 million). The number of humans in the *asanayata samyagdṛṣṭi* (uncontrolled right faith) state is seven hundred crore (7000 million).

**Explanation:**
Generally speaking, the number of humans in each of the four *guna sthānas* (controlled right faith, mixed right and wrong faith, uncontrolled right faith, and controlled) is countable. The number of humans in the *sāsadan samyagdṛṣṭi* state is fifty-two crore (520 million). The number of humans in the *samyagmithyadṛṣṭi* state is twice the number of humans in the *sāsadan samyagdṛṣṭi* state, which is one hundred and four crore (1040 million). The number of humans in the *asanayata samyagdṛṣṭi* state is seven hundred crore (7000 million). The number of humans in the *sanayata* (controlled) and *asanayata* (uncontrolled) states is thirteen crore (130 million). As it is said:

> *Samyaktvamagamgaṇā* (696)
> Thirteen crore in the *desasanayata* state, fifty-two crore in the *sāsadan* state.
> Twice as many in the *samyagmithyadṛṣṭi* state, seven hundred crore in the *asanayata* state.

However, some *ācāryas* (teachers) say that the number of humans in the *sāsadan samyagdṛṣṭi* state is fifty crore (500 million) based on the following verse:

> Thirteen crore in the *desasanayata* state, fifty crore in the *sāsadan* state.
> Twice as many in the *samyagmithyadṛṣṭi* state, seven hundred crore in the *asanayata* state.

There are two opinions regarding the number of humans in the *sāsadan samyagdṛṣṭi* state: one is fifty-two crore (520 million) and the other is fifty crore (500 million). However, the opinion of fifty-two crore (520 million) is accepted as it is the traditional view of the *ācāryas*.

**Verse 643**
In the realm of *jīva* (living beings) and *ajīva* (non-living beings), there are two types of *karma* (action): *puṇya* (merit) and *pāpa* (demerit). *Puṇya* is the *dravya* (substance) of good qualities, and *pāpa* is the *dravya* of bad qualities.

**Explanation:**
Both *jīva* and *ajīva* have both *puṇya* and *pāpa* aspects. The discussion of *puṇya jīva* (meritorious living beings) and *pāpa jīva* (demeritorious living beings) has already been covered in verse 622. Here, the discussion is about *ajīva puṇya-pāpa* (non-living being merit and demerit), which refers to *puṇya dravyakarma* (meritorious substance action) and *pāpa dravyakarma* (demeritorious substance action). The names of the *puṇya* qualities are as follows:

* *Sātavedanīya* (capable of experiencing seven types of sensations)
* *Tiyancāyu* (life span of three *kalpas*)
* *Manuṣyāyu* (life span of a human)
* *Devāyu* (life span of a god)
* Three *āyu* (life spans)
* *Manuṣyadvika* (human state, human knowledge)
* *Devadvika* (god state, god knowledge)
* Five bodies
* Five senses
* *Samacaturasrasansthāna* (square-shaped body)

**Note:** The terms *guna sthānas*, *desasanayata*, *sāsadan samyagdṛṣṭi*, *samyagmithyadṛṣṭi*, *asanayata samyagdṛṣṭi*, *sanayata*, *asanayata*, *jīva*, *ajīva*, *karma*, *puṇya*, *pāpa*, *dravya*, *ācāryas*, *sātavedanīya*, *tiyancāyu*, *manuṣyāyu*, *devāyu*, *manuṣyadvika*, *devadvika*, *samacaturasrasansthāna* are all Jain terms.

Page #734:
---------------------------
## 700/Go. Sa, Jiva Kanda
**Verse 643**

The three Angopangas, Audarik Angopanga, Bainkarik Angopanga, and Paharak Angopanga, are characterized by:

* **Auspicious Vihayogati:**  Adi Sanhanan (i.e., Vajra Vrishabha Narach Sanhanan), auspicious Varna-Gandha-Rasa-Sparsha, Agurul Tru, Parghat, Ucchvas, Udyot, Patap, Sachatuska, Sthira, Shubha, Subhaga, Susvara, Nirman, Padev, Yash Kiti, Tirthankara, and Uchchagotra. These are 42 auspicious, Shubha, or Pushya-Prakritis.

**The names of the Pap Prakritis are as follows:**

* **Those eligible for Jnanaavaran:**  Five Antaray, nine Darshanavaran, three Mohaniya, Narakagati, NarakagatyAnupurvi, Tiryaanggati, TiryaanggatyAnupurvi, the remaining five Sansthan without Adi, the remaining five Sanhanan without Adi, Aprashast Varnachatushka, Aprashast Vihayogati, Upghat, Ekendriyajati, Narakayu, three Vikalendriy Jatis, Asataavedaniya Apariapt, Sthavar, Sukshma, Sadharan, Durbhaga, Duhsvara, Ayash Kiti, Anadeya, Asthira, Ashubha, and Nichchagotra. These are 82 Aprashast, Ashubha, or Pap Prakritis.

**Doubt:**  Since all Karman Varganas are Paudgalik and of one kind, how can some of them be called Punyakarma Prakritis and some Pap?

**Solution:**  There is a difference in these Prakritis due to the difference in the power of giving different fruits in different Karmas, i.e., due to Anubhag. It is said:

* Those Prakritis whose fruit-giving power, i.e., Anubhag, is like Gud, Khand, Shakkar, Amrit, and progressively sweeter, are Punyakarma Prakritis. Those whose Anubhag is opposite to this, like Nam, Kanjir, Vish, Halahal, and progressively bitter, are Pap Karb Prakritis.

**Doubt:**  Does Punyakarma only give the taste of sweetness to the Rasna Indriya, or are there other benefits?

**Solution:**  Gud, Khand, Shakkar, Amrit are only metaphors. The meaning is that just as drinking Amrit makes a person immortal, similarly, the cooperation of Punyakarma Uday makes the Jiva immortal, i.e., he attains the Arhant and Siddhapad. It is also said: "Punatyatmanam puyate'nenneti va punyam, tatsavadyādi."

* That which purifies the Atma or by which the Atma is purified is Punya, like the seven Vedaniya, etc., Punya Prakritis.

**Doubt:**  Punyakarma is a form of Prasrava Bandha. Man and Bandha are Heya Tattvas, because they increase Samsara. How can such Punyakarma purify the Atma?

**Solution:**  Not all Karmaprakritis are the cause of Samsara वृद्धि. Some are also the cause of Moksha. The sixteen Karan Bhavana, which are the cause of the Prav and Bandha of the Nirthakara Prakruti, are those sixteen...

**2. Pra. Pan. San., 266, Verse 456-456.**
**3. Pra. Pan. San., Page 276.**
**1. Pra. Pan. San., Page 265, Verse 453-455.**
**4. Sa. Si. 6/33**

Page #735:
---------------------------
##  Verse 643
##  Samptvamanga/701

In the Digambara Jain tradition, the sixteen **bhavanas** (emotions) are revered because they are the cause of the **Tīrthankara** nature. When a being bound by karma attains liberation, they achieve the **Arhat** state and become a **Tīrthankara**.  

Shri Kundakunda Acharya has said:
"**Puṇṇaphala Arahata**" (45) - meaning, the Arhat state is the fruit of virtuous actions.

"**Manushya gatou kevalgyanopalakshit jeevadravy sahakarikarana sambandh praarambhasya anantanupam prabhavasya achintya vishesh vibhootikaranasya balokya vijaykarasya tirthankaranam gotrakarma nah karanani shodashabhavana bhavayitavya iti.**"

In this world, the **Tīrthankara** name-karma is the cause of the **kevalgyan** (omniscience) arising in a human being. The effect of the **Tīrthankara** karma's arising is infinite and unparalleled. It is the cause of unimaginable glory and victory over the three realms. Therefore, one should contemplate these sixteen **bhavanas** that are the cause of the **Tīrthankara** name-karma.

"**Punyat surasura narorag bhogasara shrir ayu aprAmit rupasamriddhyo gauh. Samrajyam andram apunarbhav bhavanishta praarhantam antya rahitakhil soukhyam agryam.**" (16, 72)

- The supreme enjoyments of the senses, wealth, long life, unparalleled beauty, prosperity, excellent weapons, the empire of a Chakravarti, the Indra position, the Arhat state which prevents rebirth in the cycle of existence, and the supreme liberation which grants infinite happiness - all these are attained through virtuous actions.

"**Punyat kradhar shriyam vijayini maindri cha divyashriyam punyattithakara shriyam cha paramam nashreyasinchashnute. Punyadityasubhrishchian chatasriranama avirbhaveth bhajanam. Tasmat punyam uparjayantu sudhiyoh punyajineendragamat.**" (30, 126)

- Through virtuous actions, one attains the wealth of a victorious Chakravarti, the divine wealth of Indra, the wealth of a **Tīrthankara**, and the supreme liberation, the ultimate good. Thus, through virtuous actions, a being becomes worthy of all four types of wealth. Therefore, O wise ones, acquire virtue according to the teachings of the Jina.

"**Punyaprakritiyas tirthapad adi sukha khanayah.**" (5) - Those who are of virtuous nature are the ones who possess the happiness of the **Tīrthankara** state and other such states.

**Doubt:** The Arhat state and the happiness of liberation are attained through the transformation of the self and the destruction of karma. How can virtuous actions be a contributing cause? Karma is an obstacle, not a cause.

**References:**

1. Pravachana Sara
2. Charitra Marga, page 50
3 & 4. Mahapurana
5. Mulachar Pradeep, page 200

Page #736:
---------------------------
702 / Go. Sa. Jeevakaand
Solution - No living being has attained or will attain the bliss of liberation without the emergence of human motion, Vajravrishbhanaraach Sanhanan, high-caste lineage, and other virtuous qualities. All the propagators who have attained liberation or will attain liberation have or will have the emergence of these virtuous qualities.
Verse 644-645
Upon the binding of the Tirthankara nature, liberation will be attained in the third existence at the most. Without the attainment of the aforementioned human motion, excellent Sanhanan, etc., the entire Ratna Tray, which is the cause of liberation, cannot be attained even in the three times.
"Mokshasyaapi parampunyaatishya charitravisheshatmak pourushaabhyameva sambhavaat." Shri Vidyanaandi, the great logician and teacher, has said, "Liberation is attained due to these two causes: the excess of supreme merit and the virtue-like human effort."
"Nischyadharmo yadyapi siddhagaterupaadanakaaranam bhavyanaam bhavathi tathaapi nidaanarahita parinaamaupaajita tirthankara prakrityusama sanhananaa di-vishist punya roop-karmaapi sahakarikaaranam bhavathi, tatha yadyapi jeeva- pudgalanaam gatiparinateh svaakiopaadanakaaranamathi tathaapi dharmaastikaayoapi sahakarikaaranam bhavathi."
- Just as the decisive Dharma is the cause of the attainment of the Siddha state for the worthy ones, even though it is the cause of attainment, the Tirthankara nature, excellent Sanhanan, etc., which are obtained from the results without a cause, are also the contributing causes for the attainment of the Siddha state. Similarly, the moving living beings and the Pudgalas are the cause of their own motion, but the Dharma substance is the contributing cause in that motion. In this way, the contribution of the emergence of virtuous karma is proven for the bliss of liberation.
Praav, Sanvar, Nirjara, Bandh, and Moksha's substance measurement is time-bound only for Praasav Sanvar, but Nirjara's excellent substance is immeasurable and time-bound. || 644 || Bandh is also time-bound. (The liberation occurs when the substance karma, which is multiplied by the loss of qualities, is destroyed, which is slightly less than the time-bound measurement). Therefore, the substance of liberation is said to be slightly less than one and a half times the time-bound measurement. In this way, one should have faith in the principles. || 645 ||
1. Stri Pr. 257. 2. Panchaastikaaya Ga. 85 Tatparyavritti.

Page #737:
---------------------------
Gatha 644-645
Samyaktva-marga-na / 703
Visheshartham "Samaye prabaddhyate iti samayaprabaddha:" - That which is bound in one time-instant is called samayaprabaddha.

- How many divisions are there in samayaprabaddha?

Shanka (Doubt)
Samadhan (Resolution)
In one samayaprabaddha, the quantum of pudgala-dravya is infinite. It is also said:

Pancha rasa-panchavarnebhi parinayadu-gandha-chaduhipha-sehi. 
Davimara-tapasam jivehi pranata-gunahi-nam. || 2 ||

Sayala-rasa-rupa-gandhehi parinada-charama-chaduhim pha-sehi.
Siddha-do 'bhavva-do 'nantima-bha-gam gunam dravvam. || 1961 || 3

"Pranata-pasa sava-jiva-hi pranata-guna-hi abhava-siddha hi kamma-bandha joga pudgala-dravvam hoi."

The pudgala-dravya bound in karmic bondage is infinitely less than the qualities of the Siddhas, and infinitely more than the qualities of all living beings. This is the samayaprabaddha.

Whatever dravya is bound, that much dravya undergoes asrava (influx) in each time-instant. Thus, the quantum of dravya-karma bound in one samayaprabaddha is the measure. And the stoppage of this dravya-karma is dravya-samvara. 

Shanka - Since the stoppage of influx is samvara, asrava should have been mentioned.
Samadhan - Asrava is of two types: (1) Bhava-asrava and (2) Dravya-asrava.

Prasavadi jerana kammam parinamenana parono sa vippo.
Bhavasa-yo jinutto kammasa-varanam paro hodi. || 26 || [Dravya-sangraha]

1. Dhavala, Vol. 12, p. 478. 2. Prabhacandra, Pramana-naya-tattvalokalamkara, p. 280, Mantra 465. Pujyapada, Sarvarthasiddhi, p. 624. 5. "Asrava-nirodha: samvara." [Tattvartha-sutra 9/1]. 624, Mantra 120. 2. Gommatasara, Karmakanda, 6, Samayika-siddhi 9/1. 4. Prabhacandra.

Page #738:
---------------------------
## 704 / Go. Sa. Jiva Kanda
## Gatha 644-645

- The inflow of karmas due to the Jain soul's transformations is called **Bhavasrava**. The inflow of karmas as a substance is called **Dravyasrava**.
- "The **Dravyasrava** is the substance that comes together like a **pudgala**. It is the medicine for the eight karmas like **Jnanavarana**. It is infinite in its qualities and is measured by the infinite parts of the **Siddhas**." [Dravyasangraha]
- "The **Dravyasrava** is known as the **pudgala** that is suitable. The evidence is the **Ekasamyapravaddha** alone, which is from the **Prabhavyas**."
- The shedding of karmas in parts, their disintegration, is called **Nirjara**. There are two types of **Nirjara**:
- "The **Nirjara** is of two types. One is **Savipaka**, obtained at the same time, and the other is **Avipaka**, done through **tapas**. The first **Nirjara** is for the beings of all four **gatis**, and the second **Nirjara** is for the **vrati** beings." [Swa. Ka. Pra.]
- "The **Nirjara** that occurs due to the ripening of karmas, after the being has wandered for a long time in the ocean of the world, which is the four **gatis**, filled with whirlpools of various types of births, and has entered the stream of **Anubhavodayavali**, is called **Vipakaja Nirjara**. Just as mangoes and jackfruits are ripened prematurely by a special process, similarly, the karma that has not yet ripened, but is brought into the **Udayavali** by force through the power of a special **Shramik** action, and is experienced, is called **Avipaka Nirjara." [Swa. Ka. Pra.]
- The **Dravyasrava** binds according to the **Ekasamyapravaddha** measure, and generally, the **Dravyakarma** ripens according to the **Ekasamyapravaddha** measure and attains **Nirjara**. This is **Vipaka Nirjara**. Some **Dravyakarma** is bound according to the **Sattva** measure, which is less than half of the **Gugahanis**.
- "The **Dravyakarma** that is bound according to the **Sattva** measure is less than half of the **Gugahanis**." [Go. Ka.]
- In **Avipaka Nirjara**, there is **Nirjara** of **Dravyakarma** that is infinite times the **Nirjara** of the **Satripaatra** in each moment. It is said:
- "The **Nirjara** from **Mithyadristi** to **Samyagdristi** is infinite times greater due to the special purification. That is, as long as the **Ananta Anuvrudhi** purification occurs, there is **Nirjara** of infinite qualities. From that..." [Ma. Li. 9/24]
- "The **Nirjara** of **Dravyakarma** is infinite times greater than the **Nirjara** of the **Satripaatra** in each moment." [Swa. Ka. A. G. 103 Tika]
- "The **Nirjara** of **Dravyakarma** is infinite times greater than the **Nirjara** of the **Satripaatra** in each moment." [Rava Siddhi 8/23]
- "The **Nirjara** of **Dravyakarma** is infinite times greater than the **Nirjara** of the **Satripaatra** in each moment." [Swa. Ka. A. G. 103 Tika]
- "The **Nirjara** of **Dravyakarma** is infinite times greater than the **Nirjara** of the **Satripaatra** in each moment." [Rava Siddhi 8/23]
- "The **Nirjara** of **Dravyakarma** is infinite times greater than the **Nirjara** of the **Satripaatra** in each moment." [Swa. Ka. A. G. 103 Tika]
- "The **Nirjara** of **Dravyakarma** is infinite times greater than the **Nirjara** of the **Satripaatra** in each moment." [Rava Siddhi 8/23]
- "The **Nirjara** of **Dravyakarma** is infinite times greater than the **Nirjara** of the **Satripaatra** in each moment." [Swa. Ka. A. G. 103 Tika]
- "The **Nirjara** of **Dravyakarma** is infinite times greater than the **Nirjara** of the **Satripaatra** in each moment." [Rava Siddhi 8/23]
- "The **Nirjara** of **Dravyakarma** is infinite times greater than the **Nirjara** of the **Satripaatra** in each moment." [Swa. Ka. A. G. 103 Tika]
- "The **Nirjara** of **Dravyakarma** is infinite times greater than the **Nirjara** of the **Satripaatra** in each moment." [Rava Siddhi 8/23]
- "The **Nirjara** of **Dravyakarma** is infinite times greater than the **Nirjara** of the **Satripaatra** in each moment." [Swa. Ka. A. G. 103 Tika]
- "The **Nirjara** of **Dravyakarma** is infinite times greater than the **Nirjara** of the **Satripaatra** in each moment." [Rava Siddhi 8/23]
- "The **Nirjara** of **Dravyakarma** is infinite times greater than the **Nirjara** of the **Satripaatra** in each moment." [Swa. Ka. A. G. 103 Tika]
- "The **Nirjara** of **Dravyakarma** is infinite times greater than the **Nirjara** of the **Satripaatra** in each moment." [Rava Siddhi 8/23]
- "The **Nirjara** of **Dravyakarma** is infinite times greater than the **Nirjara** of the **Satripaatra** in each moment." [Swa. Ka. A. G. 103 Tika]
- "The **Nirjara** of **Dravyakarma** is infinite times greater than the **Nirjara** of the **Satripaatra** in each moment." [Rava Siddhi 8

Page #739:
---------------------------
## Gatha 686-648
## Samyaktvamarga/705

The number of karma-nirjara (karma-shedding) of an Anuvratadhari (one who observes minor vows) is innumerable. The number of karma-nirjara of a Mahavrata-dhari (one who observes major vows) is innumerable times greater than that. The number of karma-nirjara of one who has renounced the four infinite-binding kshayas (passions) - anger, pride, deceit, and greed - is innumerable times greater than that. The number of karma-nirjara of one who has destroyed the Darshan-mohatrika karma (karma that obscures knowledge) is innumerable times greater than that. The number of karma-nirjara of one who is in the Upshama (subduing) category is innumerable times greater than that. The number of karma-nirjara of one who has subdued moha (delusion) is innumerable times greater than that. The number of karma-nirjara of one who is in the Kshapaka (destroying) category is innumerable times greater than that. The number of karma-nirjara of one who has weakened moha is innumerable times greater than that. The number of karma-nirjara of a Sayogi-kevali (one who has attained liberation with the body) is innumerable times greater than that. And the number of karma-nirjara of a Prayogi-kevali (one who has attained liberation without the body) is innumerable times greater than that. Thus, the Prayogi-kevali has the most excellent karma-nirjara, which is innumerable times greater than the time-bound measure. Here, the purpose is to shed avipaka karma (karma that bears fruit in the future), because the substance of avipaka karma-nirjara is innumerable times greater than the time-bound measure. The substance of savipaka karma-nirjara (karma that bears fruit in the present life) is only one time-bound measure.

The triangular diagram clearly shows that the substance of sattva karma (karma that affects the body) is slightly less than one and a half times the time-bound measure. At the end of the fourteenth gunasthan (stage of spiritual development), this sattva karma is destroyed and liberation is attained. Therefore, the substance of moha (delusion) is sattva karma, which is slightly less than one and a half times the time-bound measure.

"When the Darshan-moha karma is destroyed, the pure shraddha (faith) that arises is called kshayika samyaktvam (the right faith that leads to liberation). It is eternal and the cause of the destruction of karma." (646)

"Even if it is corrupted by words or reasons that destroy shraddha, or by forms that cause fear to the senses, or by the sight of repulsive objects, or even by the entire three worlds, it does not waver." (647)

"It is the human being who is the beginner of the destruction of Darshan-moha karma at the feet of the Kevali, but it is the Kevali who is the finisher of it everywhere." (648)

## Special Meaning

The power of the three karana-labdhi (acquisition of karana) - pradhakarana (primary karana), apurvakarana (secondary karana), and anivatti-karana (unavoidable karana) - and the destruction of the four infinite-binding kshayas - anger, pride, deceit, and greed - are the causes of liberation.

1. Swa. Ka. Anu. Gatha 106-108
2. "Bandhahetvabhavanirjarabhyam kritsnakarmavipramoksha moksha." 10/2 [Tattvarthamautra]
3. Dhavala Pu. 1 p. 365 Ga. 213, Pra. Pa. Sa. p. 34 Ga. 160
4. Dhavala Pu. 1 p. 365 Ga. 214; Pra. Pa. Sa. p. 344 Ga. 161
5. Jayadhavala Pu. 13 Ga. 110 p. 2, Pra. Pa. Sa. p. 42 Ma. 202

Page #740:
---------------------------
706/Go. Ma. Jivakanda
Gatha 646-640

In the destruction of these three natures of Mithyatva-Mamyagmithyatva-Samyaktva Prakriti Darshanamohaniya Karma, the Samyaktva that occurs from the destruction of these seven natures is called Kshayik Samyaktva. Due to the extreme destruction of the opposing Karmas, Kshayik Samyaktva is extremely pure. Having attained Kshayik Samyaktva, it never leaves again, therefore it is eternal. Having attained the increase of purity, it becomes capable of attaining the Kshapaka श्रेणी by destroying the seven natures in one of the four Gunasthanas: Asanyata Samyamshati, Sanyatasanyata, Pramattasanyata, and Apramattasanyata. Therefore, Kshayik Samyagdarshan is said to be the cause of the destruction of all Karmas.

The Jiva who destroys Darshanamohaniya first performs the three Karans: Adhapravrittakaran, Apurvakaran, and Anivrittikaran, and disconnects the Anantanubandhi Chatuk. In Adhapravrittakaran, there is no Sthitighāt, Anubhāgghāt, Guranashreni, or Gunasankram. Only the Ananta Gunas are purified and continue until the end of the Adhapravrittakaran period. The only difference is that it binds to another Sthiti, but it binds to a Sthiti that is less than the previous Sthiti by a fraction of the Palyogam. In the first instance of Adhapravrittakaran, the Sthitibandh that occurs at the end is less than the Sthitibandh that occurs at the beginning by a fraction of the Palyogam.

In the first instance of Apurvakaran, there is another Sthitibandh that is less than the previous Sthitibandh by a fraction of the Palyogam. At the same time, it begins the Sthiti Kandakas that have a fraction of the Palyogam or a fraction of the Magropam for all Karmas except Aayu Karma. At the same time, it begins the Anubhag Kandakas that have a fraction of the Ananta Bahubhag for the Aprashasta Karmas. At the same time, it also begins the Gunasankram of the Anantanubandhi Kashayas. In the first instance, it performs the Sankram of the Pradesh that is multiplied by the Asambhavata Guna from the first Sankram. In the second instance, it performs the Sankram of the Pradesh that is multiplied by the Asankhyata Guna. This process should continue until the end of the Apurvakaran period. It performs the Galitavasesha Gunathani for all Karmas except Aayu Karma. This is how the process of Gunadeshi should be described during the Apurvakaran period. The only difference is that in the first instance, it performs the Apकर्षण of the Pradesh that is multiplied by the Asankhyata Guna in the second instance. This process should continue until the end of the Anivrittikaran period. In the first instance, the Pradesh that is given is multiplied by the Asankhyata Guna in the second instance by the Gunashreni. This process should continue until the end of the Anivrittikaran period. In this way, the Apurvakaran period ends. The Sthiti Sattwa and Sthitibandh that are related to the first instance of Apurvakaran are less than the Sthitimatwa and Sthitibandh that are related to the last instance of Apurvakaran by a fraction of the Palyogam.

In the first instance of Anivrittikaran, another Sthitibandh, another Sthiti Kandak, another Anubhag Kandak, and another Gunashreni begin simultaneously. As the fraction of the Palyogam of the Anivrittikaran period passes, the Anantanubandhi Chatuk is consumed by a special Ghat.
2. Ma. Mi. 10/113. Praval Pu. 6 p. 248-246.
4. Chaval
1. Mbar Ka. A. Ga. 308 Tika. Pu. 6 p. 246-251.

Page #741:
---------------------------
##  Gaya 646-648
## Samyaktvamargna / 707

The state of being (sthi-sattva) of a five-sense being with limited knowledge (shra-samjñi) becomes similar to the state of bondage (sthi-bandha) of a five-sense being. After thousands of such states (sthi-rushi) have passed, the state of being (sthi-sattva) of the four-sense being with infinite attachments (ananta-anubandhi) becomes similar to the state of bondage (sthi-bandha) of a four-sense being. In this way, the state of being (sthi-sattva) becomes similar to the state of bondage (sthi-bandha) of three-sense, two-sense, and one-sense beings, and finally becomes equal to the number of the smallest unit (palyopam).

Then, the number of the state-sections (sthi-kaandaka) of the four-sense being with infinite attachments (ananta-anubandhi) is a large number (sankhyat bahu-bhag) compared to the state of being (sthi-sattva), and the number of the state-sections (sthi-kaandaka) of the remaining karmas is equal to the number of the smallest unit (palyopam). In this way, after thousands of state-sections (sthi-kaandaka) have passed, the remaining state of being (sthi-sattva) is destroyed by an immeasurable number (asankhyat) of parts of the remaining state of being (sthi-sattva) when the state of being (sthi-sattva) with the knowledge of the most difficult to attain (dura-aprakrushta) remains.

**Doubt:** What is meant by the most difficult to attain (dura-aprakrushta)?

**Solution:** When the smallest unit (palyopam) is divided by the largest number (utkrusht sankhyat), the quotient obtained is reduced one by one until the quotient obtained by dividing the smallest unit (palyopam) by the smallest number (jghany parita-sankhyat) is obtained. All the variations of the state (sthi) are called the most difficult to attain (dura-aprakrushta).

The remaining good karma (sattva-karma) from which a large number (sankhyat bahu-bhag) is taken to destroy the state-section (sthi-kaandaka), and the remaining good karma (sattva-karma) remains as an immeasurable number (asankhyat) of parts of the smallest unit (palyopam) according to the rule, is called the most difficult to attain (dura-aprakrushta) with respect to the number of parts of the last smallest unit (palyopam).

After that, the last state-section (sthi-kaandaka) with the size of an immeasurable number (asankhyat) of parts of the smallest unit (palyopam) is pierced by the time of destruction (utkirana kala) of only one internal moment (antar-muhurta), and at the end of the time of destruction (granivritti-karan), it transmits the external state of being (sthi-sattva) to the external state of being (sthi-sattva) through its own nature (parasvarupa), and after the internal moment (antar-muhurta) has passed, it begins the destruction of the delusion (mohani).

The results of the destruction of the delusion-causing karma (darshan-mohaniya karma) are of three types: downward tendency (adhah-pravritti-karan), unprecedented action (apuurva-karan), and non-action (ani-vritti-karan). These should be described in the same way as they were described in the disassociation of the infinite attachments (ananta-anubandhi) [For details, see Dhavala 6, pp. 254-263 or Jayadhavala 13, pp. 14-64].

When the last state-section (sthi-ross) ends, the being becomes fulfilled (kritakritya-vedaka). Even if the being dies, attains misery (sanklesha), or attains purity (vishuddhi) within the time of being fulfilled (kritakritya-vedaka), the destruction of the immeasurable number (asankhyat) of time-sections (samaya-pratradha) continues as long as there is a time-section (samaya-pratradha) with a larger number (sankhyat) of parts remaining.

The one who has destroyed the delusion-causing karma (darshan-mohaniya karma) has many births in the world, but not more than three births, excluding the birth of the supporter (prasthapika-bhava). It is said:

"The one who has destroyed the delusion-causing karma (darshan-mohaniya karma) has many births in the world, but not more than three births, excluding the birth of the supporter (prasthapika-bhava)."

**[1. Dhavala 6, p. 251. 2. "What is the most difficult to attain (dura-aprakrushta)? The quotient obtained by dividing the largest number (utkrusht sankhyat) is reduced one by one until the quotient obtained by dividing the smallest unit (palyopam) by the smallest number (jghany parita-sankhyat) is obtained. All the variations of the state (sthi) are called the most difficult to attain (dura-aprakrushta)." [120 Tika] 3. Jayadhavala 13, p. 45. 4. Dhavala 6, p. 252. 5. Dhavala 6, p. 263. 6. Jayadhavala 13, p. 1.]**

Page #742:
---------------------------
70/Go. Sa, Jeevakaanda
Gaatha 646-14%
_ - A Kshayik Samyagdristi Jeev, due to the influence of Praayu-bandh, is born in the realms of Devas and Narakas. He experiences the connection with the ultimate body in the Anantar Bhava, after being born in Deva, Peera, and Naraka Bhavas, and attains liberation. Thus, he experiences only three Bhavas related to the destruction of Darshanmohaniya. However, a Jeev who is born in the Tiyachas or Manusyas due to the influence of Vayu, which had previously attained Bandh, experiences three Bhavas excluding the Bhava of the initiation of destruction, because it is a rule that he attains Nirvaaga after being born in Devas from the Bhogbhoomi and then being born in Manusyas after being expelled from there.
The destruction of Pratipaksh Karmas leads to Kshayik Samyaktva. Therefore, a Kshayik Samyagdristi does not deviate from Samyaktva due to any external causes. The combination of both internal and external causes leads to the accomplishment of an action. An action cannot be accomplished by only one cause. The Pratipaksh Darshanmohaniya Karma of Samyaktva is destroyed in the Baraagaar of Anantanuhami Kashaag. A Samyagdristi cannot deviate from Samyaktva due to Ku-yukti etc. A Kshayik Samyagdristi never attains Mithyatva, never doubts in any way, and does not experience wonder upon seeing the excesses caused by Mithyatva.
Vasanamohe Khavive Sizhadi Ekkev Tadiye Turiyabhave. Naadhikkamadhi Turiyabhavan Na Vinassadi Sesasamm Va ||164||
- Upon the destruction of Darshanmohaniya Karma, a Jeev either attains liberation in the same Bhava, or in the third Bhava, or in the fourth Bhava. He does not transgress the fourth Bhava.
This Jeev initiates the destruction or commencement of Darshanmohaniya Karma in the Jambudweep, Basakokhand, and Pushkarad, these three Aadi Dweeps, and in the Lavana and Kalodak, these two Samudras. He does not do so in the remaining Dweeps and Samudras, because there is a lack of conducive causes for the destruction of Darshanmoha in them. Even in the three and a half Dweeps, the initiation takes place in the fifteen Karmabhoomis, not in the Bhogbhoomis. Even in the Karmabhoomis, only the eligible Manusyas initiate it, not the Devas or Niryaas.
Doubt- How do the Jeevs born in Manusyas initiate the destruction of Darshanmohaniya in the Samudras?
Solution- No, because it is possible for the Jeevs residing in the Samudras due to the influence of Vidya etc. to experience the destruction of Darshanmoha.
The phrase 'Ke Valimule' found in the Gaatha indicates that the initiation of the destruction of Darshanmoha takes place in the same time period as the Jeev's existence, not in any other time period. This negates the initiation of the destruction of Darshanmoha for the Manusyas born in the Du:pma, Du:shma-Du:shma, Sushma-Sushma, and Sushma time periods.
1. Jayadhaval Pu.13 Pu.10. 2. Dhaval Pu. 1 Pri. 171.
3. Lampisaar, Swa. Ka. Pra. Ga. 308 Teeka.

Page #743:
---------------------------
## Gatha 646

**How can humans born in the Dushama Kala, who are afflicted by the Dushama, overcome the delusion of perception?**

**Solution:**

In the Dushama Kala, Lord Rishabhdev was the Tirthankara. In this Dushama Kala, the third time period, the one-sense beings, starting with Bhardan Kumar, who were born from the Avinipi, overcame the delusion of perception.

Those who are destined to become Tirthankaras themselves initiate the destruction of the delusion of perception karma. Otherwise, the Tirthankarhood of Krishna and others who emerged from the third earth would not be possible.

Only at the feet of the Kevali does a human being attain such purity that they can begin the destruction of the delusion of perception karma. Such purity is not possible elsewhere. However, those who are destined to become Tirthankaras in the same existence and who have destroyed the Tirthankara nature in the previous third existence, possess such purity in their results, due to the presence of the Tirthankara nature, that they can destroy the delusion of perception karma themselves.

From the first moment of becoming a Kritakritya Vedak until the time of the Karmic cycle, the being who destroys the delusion of perception is called a Nishthaphak. The being who begins the destruction of the delusion of perception, after becoming a Kritakritya Vedak, is born in all four realms due to the influence of the Ayubandha and completes the destruction of the delusion of perception. This is because there is no contradiction in the existence of the Bhutaleshya-results in those realms due to their birth in those realms.

**"The form of the objects that are mobile, impure, and dense, which arises from the delusion of perception (Samyaktva nature), should be known as the Vedak Ramyanv."**

**Special Meaning:**

There are three natures of the delusion of perception karma: Samyaktva nature, Mithyatva nature, and Tadubhay (Samyagmithyatva) nature. The delusion of perception in which this being is turned away from the path prescribed by the omniscient, is indifferent to the understanding of the truths, and is incapable of considering what is beneficial and harmful, is the Mithyatva delusion of perception. When the delusion of perception form, due to auspicious results, stops its own ripening (svavipak) and remains in a neutral state, not hindering the understanding of the soul, then it is the Samyaktva delusion of perception. The person who understands this is a Samyagdristi.

The four infinite-binding passions, Mithyatva, and Samyagmithyatva, these six natures, through their arising, destruction, and permanent state of suppression, and the understanding of the truths that arises from the arising of the Samyaktva nature, which is not a destroyer of the world, is the Kshayopakshamik Samyaktva.

**References:**

1. Dhaval Pu. 6, p. 244-247
2. Dhaval Pu. 6, p. 240-248
3. Swa Ka. A. Ga. 306 Tika
4. M. Mi. 18
5. S. Si. 2/5
6. Dhaval Pu. 1, p. 366, Ga. 215

Page #744:
---------------------------
71 / Go. Sa. Okand
Pranavad chhanhan sajayi - sven udayamanaanam. Sammat - kamma udaye khayauvasamiyam have sammam. ||306||
Gatha 642
[ Swa. Ka. Pra. ]
- Anantanubandhi krodha-mana-maya-lobha, mithyatva and samyagmithyatva, these six prakritis, from their arising and ceasing, i.e., from the effect of arising in the form of poison, halaahal, etc., from the form of wood, from the form of stone and bone, and from the transition of anantanubandhi krodha, mana, maya, lobha, through the form of apraatyakhyanayadi, etc., from the transition of mithyatva and samyagmithyatva, and from the arising of samyak prakriti, there arises kshayopa-samyaktv, with chal, malin, agadha doshas. The nature of chal, malin, agadha has been explained in the tika (vishesharth) of Gatha 25.
I
Shankha - How does kshayopa-samyaktv get the designation of vedak samyagdarshan?
Samadhan - The samyaktv of a jiva who experiences the arising of darshan mohaniya karma is vedak samyaktv.
Shankha - How can those whose darshan mohaniya karma is arising attain samyagdarshan?
Samadhan - There is no contradiction in the fact that even when the arising of the deshghati prakriti of darshan mohaniya is present, there is a part of shraddha in the nature of the jiva.
1. Dhaval Pu. 1 p. 368 Sutra 146 koti ka.
Samyaktv which remains with the arising of the deshghati spardhakas of samyaktv prakriti is called kshayopa-samik. From the ceasing of the arising of the sarvaghati spardhakas of mithyatva, from their upanam in the form of sadavastah, and from the ceasing of the arising of the sarvaghati spardhakas of samyagmithyatva prakriti, and from their upasham in the form of sadavastah, or from anudayopa-samana, and from the arising of the deshghati spardhakas of samyaktv prakriti, many acharyas say that there is kshayopa-samik bhav, but this statement does not occur, because if it is accepted, there is the possibility of prativyapti and adhyapti doshas. Or, this lakshan of kshayopa-sam of the kritakritya vedak does not occur.
Shankha - How does the ativiyapti dosha occur?
Samadhan - If, in vedak samyaktv, the main thing is not the arising of samyak prakriti, but only the kshayopa-sam of mithyatvaadi, then, in comparison to saadi mithyadrishti, the arising and ceasing of samyak prakriti and samyagmithyatva prakriti, and the upasham in the form of sadavastah, and the arising of mithyatva prakriti, mithyatva gunasthan will also have to be considered kshayopa-samik, because there also the lakshan of kshayopa-sam occurs.
Shankha - Then how does kshayopa-samik bhav occur?

Page #745:
---------------------------
##  Gaya 650-651
## Sambhavbharggagga/711

When the power of the faith that destroys the meaning of the existing state is weakened in the competitors of the nature of Samyaktva, then their name is Kshayika. The pacification of the weakened competitors, i.e., the happiness, is called Kshayopaśama. The Samyaktva that arises from it is Kshayopaśamik. This statement happens.

The point is that even when karmas are arising, the part of the Jiva's guna that remains available is the Kshayopaśamik state. (3.5.185) Shri Brahmadeva has also said that the manifestation (attainment) of the one-sided (pranik) knowledge, etc., guna, while the country-betraying competitors are arising, is the Kshayopaśamik state.

The Jiva who is Vedak and Mamya-gdasht is weak in faith, therefore, just as an old man holds a piece of wood loosely in his hand, so too he is loose-grip in the matter of Tattvarth, therefore, it does not take long for him to contradict that Samyaktva from wrong reasons and wrong conclusions.

The nature of the one who is endowed with pacification is: "Five difficult, ten, delusion, and pacification arise, which is the endurance of effort. The pacification-endowed death is like pure water free from dirt and mud." ||650|| "Kshayopaśama, purity, preaching, suitability, and action, these five are the attainments. Of these, four are common. But when there is the attainment of action, Samyaktva is definitely there." ||651||

**Gatha-arth:** Just as water becomes pure by going below the mud, in the same way, the faith in the substance that arises from the pacification of the Darshan-mohaniya karma is the pacification-Samyaktva. ||650|| Kshayopaśama, purity, preaching, suitability, and action, these five are the attainments. Of these, four are common. But when there is the attainment of action, Samyaktva is definitely there. ||651||

**Vishesharth:** Just as the mud in water is pacified in relation to the substance like Katak, etc., in the same way, the non-manifestation of the karma's own nature in the soul is pacification. The five attainments are: 1. Kshayopaśama attainment, 2. Purity attainment, 3. Preaching attainment, 4. Suitability attainment, 5. Action attainment. These five attainments are before the manifestation of the first pacification. Their detailed explanation is in the Labdhisar granth, here it is also said briefly.

"The karma-mal-rupa-patala's fruit-giving power, i.e., the anubhag, when it arises, becomes infinitely diminished at every moment, that is the Kshayopaśama attainment." ||4|| [Labdhisar]

1. Shraval Pu. 5 p. 200 | 2. Dhaval Pu. 1 p. 171 | 3. Dhaval p. 1 p. 366 | 205; Labdhisar Ga. 3 | 5. Sarvarthasiddhi |
4. Dhaval Pu. 6 p. 136

Page #746:
---------------------------
712/Go. Sa. Jivakanda
Verse 651

Dhavala also said that when the sections of the karma-mala-patala, which are the result of past accumulated karma, are purified and become infinite in number, they are called udirana. At that time, the attainment of kshayopa-shama occurs.
The state of the jiva, which is the result of the attainment of kshayopa-shama, is called visuddhi. It is the cause of the bondage of the satta, etc., auspicious natures, and the opposite of the bondage of the asatta, etc., inauspicious natures.
Dhavala also said that the sections of the karma-mala-patala, which are purified and become infinite in number, are called udirana. The state of the jiva, which is the result of the attainment of kshayopa-shama, is called visuddhi. It is the cause of the bondage of the satta, etc., auspicious natures, and the opposite of the bondage of the asatta, etc., inauspicious natures.
The benefit of the acharya, etc., who teach the six dravyas and nine padarthas, or the attainment of the power to hold the taught padarthas, is called deshana-labdhi.
Dhavala also said that the teaching of the six dravyas and nine padarthas is called deshana. The attainment of the acharya, etc., who are transformed by that deshana, and the attainment of the power to grasp, hold, and contemplate the taught meaning, is called deshana-labdhi.
The jiva who has attained the three aforementioned labdhis, due to the increase in purity, cuts off the seven karmas except for ayu, and makes the remaining karmas into kodakodi. The jiva also makes the anupragata karmas into dvisthanika, i.e., lata-daru form. The attainment of this ability is called prayogya-labdhi.
Dhavala also said that the attainment of the ability to cut off the seven karmas except for ayu, and make the remaining karmas into kodakodi, and the anupragata karmas into dvisthanika, i.e., lata-daru form, is called prayogya-labdhi. Because the jiva is eligible for karana-labdhi when these states are attained.
These four labdhis are common to both bhavya and prabhavya jivas, because both types of jivas can attain these four labdhis. However, the three karanas, adha-karana, apurva-karana, and anivritti-karana, are only found in bhavya mithya-drishti jivas, because they are not found elsewhere.
4. G.P. 6 p. 204-205.
5. Pavan P. 6 p. 205.
6. Dhavala P. 6 p. 136.
1.2.3. Dhavala P. 6 p. 204.

Page #747:
---------------------------
## Samyaktvamala / 713

There are three types of purities based on the distinction of **praghāpravṛttakarana**, **apūrvakarana**, and **nivṛttikarana** for a being who has attained **samyaktvam**.

The purity with the characteristic of **praghāpravṛtta** is called **adhaḥpravṛttakaraṇa**, because the **uparitan** (later) **samayavarti** (time-bound) **parināma** (result) becomes similar to the **adhaḥ** (earlier) **samayavarti** **parināma**, therefore the term **adhaḥpravṛtta** is meaningful.

**Gāthā 650-651**

The **karana** (cause) in which the **karana** **parināma** of the existing being are **adhaḥ** (downward) [i.e., the **uparitan** (later) time **parināma** are similar to the **adhaḥ** (earlier) time **parināma**] is called **adhaḥpravṛttakaraṇa**. This implies that the **parināma** of the **uparim** (later) time are also found in the **adhaḥ** (earlier) time.

The **karana** in which each time there are **apūrv** (unequal), **niyamataḥ** (regularly) **anantaguna** (infinitely multiplied) **karana** (cause) i.e., **parināma** (result), is called **apūrvakarana**. The **parināma** that occur in this **karana** are **asankhyāta** (innumerable) **loka** (world) **pramaṣā** (time) in each time and are not similar to the **parināma** situated in other times.

The **karana** in which there is no difference in **parināma** (result) for the existing being in one time is called **anivṛttikarana**.

**Samae samae bhinna bhaava tamha prapūbakaraṇo hu. Praṇiṭṭi vi taham vi ya parisamaya ekkaparinama ||36|| [Labdhisāra]**

The **parināma** of beings are different from time to time, such **parināma** are called **apūrvakarana**, and where there is only one **parināma** in each time, it is called **anivṛttikarana**.

**Kara** is the name of **parināma**. The **apūrv** **karana** are **prapūrvakarana**, which means similar **parināma**.

In **anivṛttikarana**, there is only one **parināma** for each time, because here there is the effect of the difference between **jghanya** (inferior) and **utkṛṣṭa** (superior) **parināma** in one time.

Above (later) these three **karana** is the time of **upasama**. The specific time in which **darśana** (perception) **mohaniya** (delusion) is **upasānta** (subdued) and exists is called **upamānāda**. This means the time of **upasama** **samyakdṛṣṭi** (right perception).

**Śaṅkā** - What is called the **upasama** of **darśana** **mohaniya**?

**Samādhana** - The state of **darśana** **mohaniya** being subdued by **karana** **parināma** and existing without the **udaya** (arising) **rūpa** (form) **paryāya** (state) is called **upasama**.

**"Tamuttamaddha savovasa mera hoi uvasanto" || Pūrṣardha Gā. 103 ||**

1. **Dhavala Pu. 6 p. 214**
2. **Dhavala Pu. 6 p. 217**
3. **Jayadhavala Pu. 12 p. 233**
4. **Jayadhavala Pu. 12 p. 234**
5. **Jayadhavala Pu. 12 p. 314**
6. **Dhavala Pu. 6 p. 221**
7. **Jayadhavala Pu. 12 p. 234**

Page #748:
---------------------------
714/ Go. Sa. Jivakanda
All the darshanamohaniya karmas are pacified by the absence of their arising, and they remain pacified for a period of time equal to an antarmukhurta. When it is said "savvovasame", it should be understood that all the darshanamohaniya karmas are pacified, because the pacified state of the three karmas, namely mithyatva, samyaktva, and samyagmithyatva, is seen to be divided according to their nature, state, section, and region.
In the first moment of the pacified darshanamohaniya, that is, in the first moment of attaining samyagdarshan, three distinctions arise, namely samyaktva, samyagmithyatva, and mithyatva.
How do these doubts arise?
Solution - Just as there are three parts when grains are pounded by a machine, similarly, there is an effect of opposition in the arising of the three distinctions of the darshanamohaniya, which are pounded by the results of shranivrittikaran.
Without the destruction of the kandaka, the section of the mithyatva karma is spoken of, and by transforming it into the form of the section of the samyaktva nature and the samyagmithyatva nature, it produces three karmas, that is, distinctions or divisions, of one karma in the form of mithyatva, in the first moment of attaining the first pacification of samyaktva.
Michchatt missa samm saruveera ya sattivo ya shrasankhanantena ya
Gatha 650
Tatidha yada.
Honti bhajiyakama 1600. [Labdhisar]
- The mithyatva dravya becomes three kinds, namely mithyatva, mishra, and samyaktva mohaniya. In relation to the dravya, the countless part of the mithyatva is the dravya in the samyaktva nature and the mishra nature, and the infinite part of the mithyatva is the section in the samyaktva and the mishra nature.
In the first moment of the first pacification of samyaktva, it cuts off the infinite samsara and makes the samsara state only a half-pudgala transformation. It is also said:
"Ekkena shraadiyamichchha. Ditthina tithig karavani kadhun uvasamasammattam padiyshnapatamasamae pranto sansari dvisno shraddhapompalpariyattamesi ko."
1. Jayadhaval Pu. 12 p. 315. 4. Dhaval Pu. 5 p. 11.
- One anadi mithyadristi jiva, by performing three actions, attains the first pacification of samyaktva, and in the first moment of attaining it, cuts off the infinite samsara and makes it only a half-pudgala transformation. Such a great work is done by the result of the first pacification of samyaktva. The first pacification of samyaktva result, or the ativivrittikaran, has such power that it cuts through the infinite-infinite samsara time and makes it only a very small half-pudgala transformation. In other ways, the samsara state cannot be only a half-pudgala transformation.
2. Jayadhaval Pu. 12 p. 281.
3. Dhaval Pu. 6 p. 235.

Page #749:
---------------------------
## Gatha 652

A being who is worthy of liberation,
A being who is a *bhavy* of the four *gatis*,
A being who is *sanjñi* and *paryāpta*,
A being who is pure,
A being who is *sākāra* and useful,
A being who is awake,
A being who is spacious and accepting,
And a being who is *nandhi* and *samyukta*,
Attains *samyaktva*. || 652 ||

**Gatha-artha:** A *bhavy* of the four *gatis*, a being who is *sanjñi* and *paryāpta*, pure, *sākāra* and useful, awake, spacious and accepting, and *nandhi* and *samyukta*, attains *samyaktva*. || 652 ||

**Viśeṣārtha:** Among the beings of the four *gatis* - hell, animal, human, and god - any being who is a *bhavy* of any of these *gatis* can subdue the *darśana-mohaniya* karma. It is also said:

"Who is a *bhavy* in the *uvasāma* state? A being who is a *bhavy* in the four *gatis*, a being who is a *bhavy* in the *uvasāma* state. A being who is a *bhavy* in the four *gatis* is also a *bhavy* in the *uvasāma* state, because a being who is a *bhavy* in the *uvasāma* state is also a *bhavy* in the five senses, in the one sense, and in the disabled senses. A being who is a *bhavy* in the five senses is also a *bhavy* in the *sanjñi* state, but not in the *asanjñi* state. A being who is a *bhavy* in the *sanjñi* state is also a *bhavy* in the *garbha-upāntika* state, that is, in the state of being born in the womb, but not in the *sammūcchi* state. A being who is a *bhavy* in the *garbha-upāntika* state is also a *bhavy* in the *paryāpta* state, but not in the *aparyāpta* state. A being who is a *bhavy* in the *paryāpta* state is also a *bhavy* in the beings who have a lifespan of a countable number of years, and also in the beings who have a lifespan of an uncountable number of years.

Except for the *labdhya-paryāpta* and *nirvṛtti-paryāpta* states, only a being who is *paryāpta* in the state of *nivrṛtti* according to the rules is worthy of the first birth of *samyaktva*.

"In the ocean of faults, in the *samvariya-bharaṇa* state,
In the disease of *gaha-jodisī*,
In the state of *abhijoga-abhijaggi*,
The *uvasāma* state becomes the state of *boddhva*. || 66 || 3

The *darśana-mohaniya* karma is subdued in the hell beings who reside in the hells, in the *bhavana-vāsī* gods who reside in all the *bhavanas*, in the *sanjñi* and *paryāpta* animals who are five-sensed and reside in all the islands and oceans, in the humans who reside in the two and a half islands and oceans, in the *vyantara* gods who reside in all the *vyantara-vāsas*, in the *jyotiṣka* gods, in the gods who reside in the *vimānas* up to the ninth *graiveyaka*, and in the gods who are *grabhīya* and *anabhiyoga*.

1. *Jayadhavala* Pu. 12 p. 266. 2. *Dhavala* Pu. 6 p. 238. 3. *Jayadhavala* Pu. 12 p. 260.

Page #750:
---------------------------
716/Go. Sa. Jivakanda
Chapter 652

**Doubt:** How can the first Samyaktva arise in countless oceans devoid of living beings?

**Solution:** It is not possible, because even there, the emergence of Nirya Samyaktva, brought about by the actions of the former enemy gods, is found to be prevalent.

**Doubt:** Why does Samyaktva not arise in the upper Anu-disha and Anuttara Vimāna-vāsi Devas, above the Navagraha?

**Solution:** It does not arise because the rule is that only Samyagdṛṣṭi beings are born in them.

"In the ocean, the Patu-vago, the Niḍha-vago, and the Majjhimo are all worthy of being worshipped. In the same way, in the Joga, the Jahan-nago is also worthy of being worshipped." - The being who begins the process of pacifying Darshan-moha is called a Prasthāpaka from the first moment of Adhaḥ-pravṛtta-karaṇa to the end. That being is suitable for Sākāra, that is, the use of knowledge, because at that time there is opposition to the tendency of Darshan-upayoga in the form of Pavichāra. Therefore, only one of the three, Mati, Śruta, and Vibhang, is used by him, not the Anākāra use. Because the A-vimarshaka and the general-grasping consciousness-based use cannot lead to the attainment of Samyagdarshan, which is characterized by the Tattvārtha-dṛṣṭi, which is the nature of Vimarshaka. Only a being who has evolved from the awakened state is capable of attaining Samyaktva, not others, because the Nir-drā-rūpa-parināma is contrary in nature to the Viśuddhi-rūpa-parināmas, which are capable of attaining Samyaktva. Thus, by establishing the rule of Sākāra-upayoga for the Prasthāpaka, in the Niṣṭhāpaka state and in the Madhyama (middle) state, one of the two, Sākāra-upayoga and Anākāra-upayoga, is to be worshipped. The being who ends the pacification of Darshan-moha is called a Niṣṭhāpaka. He is a Niṣṭhāpaka when he has the tendency to enter the interior by gradually dissolving all the first states. There is no contradiction in being a Niṣṭhāpaka with either Sākāra-upayoga or Anākāra-upayoga. The same should be said for the Madhyama state.

Of the three Leshyas, Pīta, Padma, and Śukla, one is the Vardhamāna Leshya by rule. None of these Leshyas are Hiyamāna. This being does not have the three inauspicious Leshyas, namely Kṛṣṇa, Nīla, and Kāpota.

**Doubt:** The rule of the three auspicious Leshyas, Vardhamāna, is not established here, because the three inauspicious Leshyas are also possible when they are engaged in the emergence of Samyaktva of the Nārakas.

**Solution:** This is not a fault, because it has been said in relation to the Tiryanchas and the Manusyas.

1. Jayadhavala Pu. 12 p. 266.
2. Jagadhavala Pu. 12 p. 320.
3. Jayadhavala Pu. 12 p. 304.
4. Jayadhavala Pu. 12 p. 304.
5. Jayadhavala Pu. 12 p. 204.
6. Jayadhavala Pu. 12 p. 305.

Page #751:
---------------------------
## Gatha 653
## Samyavanamargna/717

There, when humans attain Samyaktva, other Leshyas are not possible except for the three auspicious Leshyas. Because the extremely dull, purified, and often-seeing being has a vile yellow Leshya.

**Doubt:** Why is there no mention of Devas and Narakas here?

**Solution:** Because they have their own established Leshyas. Here, the primary focus is on the changing Leshyas of Tiryanchas and humans.

Although the Gatha does not mention Yoga and Veda, they are mentioned in Kapayapahar and Jayadhaval. Based on that, it is also stated here:

From any of the four types of Manoyogas, from any of the four types of Vachanayogas, and from any of the Praudarik Kayayoga and Vaikriyik Kayayoga, the transformed being begins the process of diminishing Darshanmoha. Similarly, it should be said for the Nishthaphak and Madhyam Avastha beings, because in both these states, there is no attainment of a rule different from the Prasthaphak.

When a being attains Samyaktva, one of the three Vedas becomes the result. Because, in terms of Dravya and Bhava, there is no contradiction in the being attaining Samyaktva with the inner Veda Paryaya from the three Vedas.

This being should have the combined presence of Kshayopa-sham, Vishuddhi, Deshana, and Prayogya, which are obtained due to the cause (Karanalabdhi). Because without them, the action of diminishing Darshanmoha cannot begin.

With the bondage of any of the four Prayus, Samyagdarshan can occur, but Anuvrat and Mahavrata can only be attained with the bondage of Devauga. This is stated in one Gatha:

**Chatarivi Khettai Paugabandherana Hodi Sammattam.**
**Anuvadam Mahatvadain Ran Lahai Devaugam Mottu. ||653||**

**Gatha Meaning:** Even with the bondage of the four types of Karma related to the four Gatis, Samyagdarshan can arise. But Anuvrat and Mahavrata cannot be attained with the bondage of any other Prayu except Devauga. ||653||

1. Jayapaval, p. 12, p. 205.
2. Jayadal, p. 12, p. 205.
3. Jayadhaval, p. 12, p. 305-306.
4. & 5. Jayadhaval, p. 12, p. 206.
6. Dhaval, p. 1, p. 326, Gatha 166. Pra. Pan. San. p. 42, Gatha 201; Go. Ka. Gatha 334.

Page #752:
---------------------------
##  Verse 654
718/Go. Ma. Jivakash

**Special Meaning:** Neither gods nor hell-beings have either Anuvrata or Mahavrat.  Tiryantras have Anuvrata. If Tiryantras have a bond of hell-life, animal-life, or human-life, then they cannot even take Anuvrata; however, they can attain Samyaktva. Humans can have both Anuvrata and Mahavrat. If they have a bond of hell-life, animal-life, or human-life, then they cannot take Anuvrata or Mahavrat, but they can attain Samyaktva. Even if gods and hell-beings have a bond of animal-life or human-life, they can still attain Samyaktva.

**Verse:**

"The one who has fallen from Samyaktva and has not attained Mithyatva, is a Sasadan Samyagdristi Jiva. He is united with the fifth state." ||654||

**Special Meaning:** Sasadan Gunasthan is attained only after falling from the first Upasham Samyagdarshan, not from any other Samyaktva. However, according to the opinion of Kashayapahuḍ, Sasadan Gunasthan is possible even after falling from the second Upasham Samyaktva. The fifth state of Sasadan Samyagdristi is called the Pariṇāmik state. However, this Pariṇāmik state is not eternal like Bhavyatva, etc., but it is called Pariṇāmik in relation to Darshanmohaniya Karma, which is finite.  There is a special explanation regarding this verse in the special meaning of verse 16. You should refer to it. It is not being written here due to the fault of repetition.

The Samyagdristi Jiva who has made the infinite-bound fourfold (Anantānubandhi Chatushk) non-existent through dispassion, when he attains Mithyatva or Sasadan, then in the first moment of Mithyatva or Sasadan, the infinite-bound fourfold is found to be existent.

**Doubt:** How does the non-existent infinite-bound fourfold arise in Sasadan from the existent form?

**Solution:** From the Sasadan Pariṇāmas.

**Doubt:** What is the reason for the arising of these Sasadan Pariṇāmas?

**Solution:** From the arising of the infinite-bound fourfold.

**Doubt:** What is the reason for the arising of the infinite-bound fourfold?

**Solution:** The arising of the infinite-bound fourfold is due to the special Pariṇāmas. Due to the greatness of the Pariṇāmas, the substance of the remaining Kashayas is transformed into the infinite-bound form in the Sasadan Gunasthan at that very moment, and its arising is seen.

1. Pra. Pan. San. Pri. 35 Verse 168.
2. Jayadhaval Pu. 4 Pri. 24.
3. Jayadhavan Pu. 10 Pri. 124.

Page #753:
---------------------------
## Gatha 655-656
**Samyaktvamarganga/716**

For the living being whose essence exhibits both faith and disbelief, one should know him to be like the **virata** and **avirata**, a **samyagmithyaishti**. ||655||

**Gathaartha:** The living being whose essence exhibits both faith and disbelief, should be known as **samyagmithyaishti**, similar to **virata** and **avirata**. ||655||

**Visheshartha:** This Gatha describes **samyagmithyaishti**. Gatha 21 also describes **samyagmithyaishti**. Therefore, to understand it better, one should refer to the **visheshartha** of Gatha 21.

The characteristic of **mithyaishti** is that the living being does not have faith in the teachings of the Jinas, but has faith in the **asadbhava** (non-existence) of the taught and untaught. ||656||

**Visheshartha:** This Gatha is similar to Gatha 18, therefore one should refer to the **visheshartha** of Gatha 18.

The meaning of **mahadi prasambhava** is that the **mithyaishti** living being, due to the rise of **mithyatva**, has faith in the **asadbhava** (non-existence) of the true nature of the **paramartha** (ultimate reality).

In **Samyaktvamarganga**, if there are **sankejjya** (countable) **kshayik samyagdristi** (liberated souls) born in the **vasupudhatta** (heavenly abode) during a **khaya** (period of time), then how many **kshayik samyagdristi** will be born in the **sankejjya palya** (countable period of time)? By calculating this way, the number of **kshayik samyagdristi** is obtained by dividing the **palya** by the **sankejjya pavali** (countable period of time). Multiplying this by the **asankejjya** (uncountable) part of the **pavali**, we get the number of **vedak samyagdristi** (liberated souls who have attained knowledge). The **upanam samyagdristi** (liberated souls who have not attained knowledge) are **asankejjya** (uncountable) times less than the **kshayik samyagdristi**. ||657-658||

**Nalya** (period of time) is **asankejjya** (uncountable) times...

1. Pra. Pan. San. Pri. 36 Ga. 166 | Pra. Pan. San. Pa 36 Ga. 100.
2. Go. Ji. Gatha 18, Dhaval Pri. 6 Pri. 342, Jayadhaval Pu. 12 Pri. 322.

Page #754:
---------------------------
## 720 Go. Sa. Jivakanda

**Part Sasadan** is the desired amount of **Samyagdrsti** souls. From this, there are **Samyagmithyadrsti** souls in a number-fold amount. All worldly souls devoid of these are the burden of **Mithyadrsti**. || 659 ||

**Gatha 657-656**

**Special Meaning:** The **Vedak Samyagdrsti** souls have an **avahar kal** (duration of existence) of an **asankhyat** (incalculable) part of an **avali** (a specific time period). The **Kshayik Samyagdrsti** souls have an **avahar kal** of a **sankhyat** (countable) **avali**. The **Upsham Samyagdrsti**, **Sasadan**, and **Samparimithyadrsti** souls have an **avahar kal** of an **asankhyat** **avali**. Among these, the **Sasadan Samyagdrsti** souls are the fewest. The **Samyagmithyadrsti** souls are a number-fold amount from them, with a number-fold time multiplier. The **Upsham Samyagdrsti** souls are an **asankhyat** fold amount from them, with an **asankhyat** part of an **avali** as the multiplier. The **Kshayik Samyagdrsti** souls are an **asankhyat** fold amount from the **Upsham Samyagdrsti** souls, with an **asankhyat** part of an **avali** as the multiplier. The **Vedak Samyagdrsti** souls are an **asankhyat** fold amount from the **Kshayik Samyagdrsti** souls. From them, the **Siddh** (liberated souls) are an **ananta** (infinite) fold amount. From the **Siddh**, the **Mithyadrsti** souls are an **ananta** fold amount. || 2

**Doubt:** It is said **avahar kal**, why not **praman** (number)?

**Solution:** By dividing their respective **avahar kal** by a **pal** (moment), their own amount of **praman** is obtained. Thus, by saying **avahar**, the **praman** (number) is known.

**Doubt:** It is only said that **Sasadan Samyagdrsti** souls are the fewest, without mentioning how many. This alone does not provide knowledge of the **praman**.

**Solution:** The **avahar kal** of **Sasadan Samyagdrsti** souls is an **asankhyat** **avali**. Dividing this **avahar kal** by a **pal** results in an **asankhyat**, indicating that the **Sasadan** souls are **asankhyat**.

**Doubt:** The **avahar kal** of **Sasadan Samyagdrsti**, **Samparimithyadrsti**, and **Upsham Samyagdrsti** souls is stated as an **asankhyat** **avali**, suggesting that their numbers are equal.

**Solution:** There are **asankhyat** variations within **asankhyat**. Although their **avahar kal** is generally stated as an **asankhyat** **avali**, their **avahar kal** is different. The **avahar kal** of **Sasadan** is a number-fold part of the **avahar kal** of **Samyagmithyadrsti** souls, and an **asankhyat** part of that is the **avahar kal** of **Upsham Samyagdrsti** souls.

Thus, the seventeenth chapter named **Samyaktva Margna** in the **Gommatasar Jivakanda** is complete.

1. V. Pu. 7 Pu. 266-267 || 2. V. Pu. 7 Pu. 472-573.

Page #755:
---------------------------
## Gatha 660-663
**18. The Authority of the Category of Cognition**
**Marganaa / 721**
**The Nature of Sanji and Asanji Beings**
The destruction and cessation of the karma of the covering of the non-sense organ (mind) and the knowledge arising from it is cognition. The one who has this cognition is Sanji, and the Asanji has only sense-organ-based knowledge. ||660||
The being who receives education, action, instruction, and conversation through the support of the mind is Sanji. The opposite of this is Asanji. ||661||
The being who contemplates duty and non-duty before acting, learns the truth, and hears when called by name is Samanaska. The opposite of this is Amanaska. ||662||

**Explanation of the Gatha:**
The covering karma of the non-sense organ (mind) is destroyed and ceases, and the knowledge arising from it is cognition. The one who has this cognition is Sanji, and the Asanji has only sense-organ-based knowledge. ||660||
The being who receives education, action, instruction, and conversation through the support of the mind is Sanji. The opposite of this is Asanji. ||661||
The being who contemplates duty and non-duty before acting, learns the truth, and hears when called by name is Samanaska. The opposite of this is Amanaska. ||662||

**Special Explanation:**
The one who knows well is Sanji, that is, the mind. The one who possesses this mind is Samanaska. The mind is of two types: Dravya mind and Bhava mind. The Dravya mind arises from the rise of the karma called Pudgala-vipaki Angopanga, and the Bhava mind is the Atma-vishuddhi that requires the destruction and cessation of the karma of Veeryantaraya and the covering of the non-sense organ. Those who do not possess the mind are Amanaska. Thus, based on the presence and absence of the mind, worldly beings are of two types. Those who are Samanaska are the Sanji beings. The word Sanjna has many meanings. Sanjna means name. If beings with names are considered Sanji, then all beings would be considered Sanji. If Sanjna is taken to mean knowledge, then all beings would be considered Sanji because all beings are of the nature of knowledge. If Sanjna is considered to mean the desire for objects like food, then the same fault arises as before. Thus, to avoid the fault of considering all beings as Sanji, only Samanaska beings are called Sanji.

**Doubt:**
The characteristic that the one who knows well is Sanji will apply to beings with only one sense organ, etc., and therefore will lead to the fault of Atiprasanga.

**References:**
1. Dhaval Pu. 1 p. 152 Ga.
2. Pra. Pan. Sa. Pu. 36 Ga. 173.
3. Pra. Pan. Sa. Pu. 36 Ga. 174.
4. Dhaval Pu. 1 p. 152.
5. Sa. Si. 2011.
6. Sa. Si. 224.

Page #756:
---------------------------
722/Go, Sa, Jivakanda
Verse 663
Solution - This is not the case, because the mind of the Ekendriya etc. is not found. Or whoever accepts education, action, advice and praise is a Sanjee.
Education is the method of benefit and the prohibition of harm. To learn from the actions of others or to act in that way is action. To learn and act through advice is advice. To come when called by name is praise, or to recite a verse etc. is praise.
Doubt - Are the Sayogkebali also Sanjee because they have mind?
Solution - No, because their mind is devoid of the covering karma, so they do not perceive external meaning, therefore they cannot be called Sanjee.
Doubt - Then are the Kevali Asanjee?
Solution - No, because those who have directly perceived all substances, it is contradictory to consider them Asanjee.
The number of Sanjee and Pramangjee beings is equal to the number of Devrashi.
Therefore, the number of Asanjee beings is obtained by subtracting the number of Sanjee beings from the total number of beings in the world. ||663||
_Meaning of the verse - The number of Sanjee beings is slightly more than the number of Devas. By subtracting the number of Sanjee beings from the total number of beings in the world, the number of all Asanjee beings is obtained. ||663||
Special meaning - The main Devas are among the Sanjee beings, because the Sanjee beings of the remaining three gatis are a fraction of the number of Devas. Therefore, it is said that the number of Sanjee beings is slightly more than the Devas.
Doubt - How many Devas are there?
Solution - They are innumerable. The number of Devas is obtained by dividing the Jagatpratar by the square of two hundred and fifty-six Sucyangal.
Doubt - How many more Sanjee beings are there than Devas?
Solution - There are innumerable more Sanjee beings than the number of Devas. Or the number of Sanjee beings is a fraction more than the number of Devas. The time of the Devas is the square of two hundred and fifty-six Sucyangal, i.e.
4. Dhaval Pu. 3. P. 386.
1-2. Dhaval Pu. 1. 152 and note no. 2. 3. Avani. 1. P. 408. 5. Dhaval Pu. 3 P. 482. 6. Dhaval Pu. 3 P. 268-266. ||

Page #757:
---------------------------
##  Gatha 664-664
## Aharmarganga / 723

If one takes one Pratarangul out of 65536 Prataranguls and divides it into a number of parts and removes one part from them and mixes the remaining multi-parts in it, then it is the time of the Avahara of the sentient beings. Dividing this by the Jagattar, the number of sentient beings is obtained.

All the beings in the world are not taken away by the infinite number of non-sentient beings.

They are infinite. If the number of sentient beings is reduced by an innumerable amount, there remains a number which is infinite and infinite in the number of Shravasarpini and Utsarpini.

Thus, in the Gommatamar Jivakanda, the 18th chapter named Shashi Bhagaranga is complete.

## 16. Shraharmarganga Adhikar
## The nature of Aharak

The being who receives the appropriate classifications of body, speech and mind, which are the result of the Karma-Udaya of the body, is called Aharak. || 664 ||

The being who receives the appropriate classifications of any one of the three bodies - Audarik, Vaikrimik and Aharak - and the classifications of speech and mind according to the rules, is called Aharak. || 665 ||

## Special Meaning:

The act of receiving the Pudgalas which are suitable for the three bodies and six Paryaptis is called Ahar. The Pudgal Pind which is suitable for the Audarik etc. bodies, is called Ahar, which is outside the body, i.e., the act of receiving it. The Ahar classification creates the three bodies (Audarik, Vaikrimik and Aharak bodies).

## Doubt:

Are the same classifications used to create the Audarik and Vaikrimik bodies as those used to create the Aharak body? If not, how can it be said that the Ahar classification creates three bodies?

## Solution:

It is not correct to say so. Although, generally, through the Ahar classification,

1. Dhaval Pu. 452.
2. Dhaval Pu. 3, page 483.
3. Dhaval Pu. 1, page 152, Gatha 68, Pra. Pa. Sa. page 27, Gatha 176.
4. "Trayananam Shariraananam Vannanam Paryaptiinaam Yogya Pudgal Grahaghamaharah." [Sa. Si. 2/30]
5. "Sharira Prayogya Pudgal Pind Grahanam Aharah." [Ba. Pu. 1, page 152, Pu. 7, page 7].
6. Go. Ji. Gatha 607.

Page #758:
---------------------------
724/Go. Sa. Jivakanda
Chapter 666

It is said that the Audarik, Vaikriyik, and Aharak bodies are formed from three types of Ahar (food) categories. However, in a specific context, the classifications of these three bodies differ. The Ahar categories that form the Audarik body do not form the Vaikriyik and Aharak bodies. The Ahar categories that form the Vaikriyik body do not form the Audarik and Aharak bodies. The Ahar categories that form the Aharak body do not form the Audarik and Vaikriyik bodies. This is because the Ahar categories that form the Audarik, Vaikriyik, and Aharak bodies are distinct. However, since there is no obstruction from the Agrahya (unacceptable) category for these three types of categories, they are considered as one category.

**Doubt:** Which type of Ahar, from Kavalaahar etc., makes a being Aharak (food-consuming)?

**Solution:** In the Ahar category, the term 'Ahar' should be understood as excluding Kavalaahar, Lepaahar, Umaahar, Manasikaahar, and Kahiahar, and only Nokarmaahar should be considered.

**Doubt:** Why should the Nokarmaahar category be considered?

**Solution:** If Kavalaahar etc. are considered, then there is a conflict with the Aharakal (food-consuming time) and Birah (interval). The Nokarma category is consumed continuously, but Kavalaahar etc. are not consumed continuously.

**Doubt:** How does a being become Aharak according to the Ahar category?

**Solution:** A being becomes Aharak due to the arising of the Karma-pratikrti (Karma-substance) called Audarik, Vaikriyik, and Aharak body.

**Doubt:** Why does a being not become Aharak due to the arising of the Tejas and Kaman body?

**Solution:** It does not, because if that were the case, then a being would also become Aharak in the Vigraha-gati (state of liberation), which is not the case, because a being is Anaharak (non-food-consuming) in the Vigraha-gati.

The statement about Aharak and Anaharak beings is only for the Kevali, Samugghda, Ayogika, and Siddha.

**Gatha:** Those who have attained Vigraha-gati, Kevali, Samugghda, Ayogika, and Siddha Bhagavan are Anaharak, the rest of the beings are Aharak. ||666||

3. Dhaval Pu. 7
1. Dhaval. Pu. 14 p. 546-453. 2. Dhaval. Pu. 15406 Mutra 176 commentary. p. 11334. Dhaval Pu. 1 p. 153 Ga. 66; Pra. Pan. San. p. 37 Ga. 177.

Page #759:
---------------------------
## Gatha 666
## Graharmarggana/725

**Special Meaning:**  "Vigraha" refers to the body. The motion associated with it is called "Vigraha Gati".  A living being, due to the arising of "Sharira Nama Karma" (body-name karma), is capable of constructing its own body by absorbing various types of "Pudgalas" (matter particles). Therefore, the body is absorbed by the "Samhari Jiva" (the living being that gathers). Hence, the body is called "Vigraha". The motion associated with such "Vigraha" (body) is called "Vigraha Gati".

Alternatively, the word "Vi" means "opposite" and "Graha" means "destruction". Therefore, "Vigraha" also means "Vyapaat" (destruction), which signifies the prevention of the absorption of "Pudgalas". Hence, the motion associated with the prevention of the absorption of "Pudgalas" is called "Vigraha Gati".

Alternatively, "Vigraha", "Vyaghāt" (destruction), and "Kautilya" (cunning) are synonyms. Therefore, the motion associated with "Vigraha" (cunning) is called "Vigraha Gati". A living being who attains this motion is called "Vigrahagatimaan".

A living being that moves from one motion to another has four types of motions: "Ishugati", "Panimukta Gati", "Langalika Gati", and "Gomutrika Gati". The first motion is without "Vigraha" (bend), while the remaining motions have "Vigraha" (bends).

"Riju Gati" (straight motion) is a single-time "Ishugati". Just as an object thrown obliquely by hand has a single-bend motion, similarly, the single-bend motion of a worldly living being is called "Panimukta Gati". This motion is two-time. Just as a plow has two bends, the two-bend motion is called "Langalika Gati". This motion is three-time. Just as a cow's urination while walking has multiple bends, similarly, the three-bend motion is called "Gomutrika Gati". This motion is four-time.

In the single-bend "Panimukta Gati", the living being is "Anaharak" (without food) for one time. In the two-bend "Langalika Gati", the living being is "Anaharak" for two times. In the three-bend "Gomutrika Gati", the living being is "Anaharak" for three times.

"Dhat" refers to the previous form of action. Its natural meaning is the state of actions, the destruction of the section. The successive "Dhat" is called "Udghāt", and the appropriate "Udghāt" is called "Samudghāt".

**Doubt:** How is appropriateness possible in this "Dhat"?

**Solution:** It is possible because the "Dhat" that occurs over a long period of time is greater than the "Dhat" that occurs in one time. Therefore, appropriateness is found in this "Dhat".

A "Kevali" (liberated being) who attains "Samudghāt" is called "Samudghātgat Kevali".

"Kevali Samudghāt" is of four types: "Danda", "Kapat", "Pratar", and "Lokapurana". The four actions of returning are: "Pratar", "Kapat", "Danda", and "Sharira Pravesh". Among these, "Pratar", "Lokapurana", and "Puna Pratar" (returning again) are the three states in which "Samudghātgat Kevali" remains "Anaharak" for three times. The "Anaharak" period of "Ayog Kevali" is "Antarmuhurta" (a very short time). Even the 15 "Siddh Bhagwan" (liberated beings) are...

1. Dhaval Pu. 1 p. 266
2. Dhaval Pu. 1. 269-300
3. Dhaval Pu. 1. p. 300
4. "Takam Dvau Triva Anaharakah." ||2/30|| [N. Su.]
5. Dhaval Pu. 1 p. 300
6. Dhaval Pu. 1 p. 301
7-9 Dhaval Pu. 5 p. 155

Page #760:
---------------------------
726/Go. Sa. Jivakanda
Verses 667-668: They are Anaharaka. Due to the influence of the yogas of Aayogakevali and Siddha Bhagwan, they are Anaharaka due to the influence of the reception of the Nokarmavargana.
Aharaka Jivas are from Mithyadristi to Mayogikevali Gunasthan.
Jivas who have attained Vigraha Gati, Mithyatva, Sasadan and Avirat Samyagdristi, these three Gunasthanas, the four Gunasthanas of the Sayogikevali of the Samudghtagat Kevalis, and the Aayogakevali and Siddha are Pramaharaka. It is also said:
"Prataryorlokapurane cha Karmanah. Tatra Anaharaka iti." [Swa. Ka. A. p. 388 Ga. 487 Tika]
In both Pratar Samudghala and Lokapurana, there is Karman Kayayoga and the state of Anaharaka.
The nature and division of Samudghata: "Malasariramchhandiya Uttaradhehas Jivapindass. Piggamana Dehado Hodi Samudghdadanam Tu." [667]
"Veyaranakasayavegubdhiya Ya Maranatiya Samudghdado. Tejaaharo Chattho Sattamo Kevalonam Tu." [668]
Verse Meaning: The departure of the regions of the Jivapinda from the body, without leaving the original body, is Samudghata. [667]
That Samudghata is of seven types: Vedana, Kashaya, Bairyik, Maranantik, Tejas, Paharak and Kevali. [668]
Special Meaning: The detailed explanation of Samudghata has already been given in the commentary of verse 543 while explaining the field and touch of Lenya Margana. However, it is being explained again here according to the original verses. In verse 667, "Uttaradhehas" refers to the Tejas body and Karman body. Only the Atma Pradesh does not come out, but the regions of the Karman body and Tejas body located on them also come out.
"Mulasariramchhandiya" means without leaving the original body. This statement is said in relation to the other six except Kevali Samudghata. Because in the Lokapurana Samudghana state, Kevali
1. Dhaval Pu. 7 p. 406. 2. Dhaval Pu. 1 p. 410. 3. In the printed book, this verse is numbered 668, but it is not appropriate to mention the divisions of Samudghata without explaining its nature. Therefore, verse 668 has been written as 667 and verse 667 as 665. These two verses are quoted in the commentary of Vahd Dravya Sangrah Ga. 10 and Swa. Ka. M. Ga. 176. Ga. 668 Pra. Pan. San. p. 41 Ga. 196 and Dhaval Pu. 4 p. 26 Ma. 11.

Page #761:
---------------------------
## Gatha 667-668

**When the soul's every region spreads over every region of the Lokakasha, all the Atma-pradeshas leave the original body.**

**Doubt:**  The Kevali's body is in certain regions of the Lokakasha.  Therefore, the Kevali's Atma-pradeshas are also in those regions.  So, do all the Atma-pradeshas not leave the original body?

**Solution:**  The Kevali's Atma-pradeshas are in the regions where the Kevali's body is, but those Atma-pradeshas have no connection with the body.  Just as the Kevali's Atma-pradeshas are in the regions where the Naraki's bodies are, but those Atma-pradeshas have no connection with the Naraki body, only a single-region penetration.  Similarly, the Kevali's Atma-pradeshas have no connection with the Kevali's body, only those regions are in the form of a single-region penetration.  All the Kevali's Atma-pradeshas leave the body and spread throughout the Lokakasha, otherwise, all the Atma-pradeshas cannot spread throughout the Lokakasha.

**What is the characteristic of Samudhata?**

**Solution:**  "Samudhata is the outward movement of the Atma-pradeshas together." [Ra Va. 1/20/12]  The word 'Samudhata' is derived as follows:  Here, the root 'han' is preceded by the prefixes 'sam' and 'ut', and the suffix 'ghan' is added in the sense of 'bhaava'.  Thus, the word Samudhata is formed.  Here, the root 'han' signifies the action of movement.

1. **Vedana Samudhata:**  The outward movement of the Atma-pradeshas from the body without leaving the original body due to the experience of intense pain is Vedana Samudhata.  For example, the effort made by Ramachandra, etc., when afflicted by Sita, etc., is Vedana Samudhata.

2. **Kasaya Samudhata:**  The outward movement of the Atma-pradeshas for the destruction of another due to the rise of intense Kasaya without leaving the original body is Kasaya Samudhata.  For example, Kasaya Samudhata is clearly seen in the battle by the red eyes, etc., of the warriors.

3. **Vaikriya Samudhata:**  The outward movement of the Atma-pradeshas for the purpose of performing Vikriya without leaving the original body is Vaikriya Samudhata.  It occurs in the case of Maharshis and Devas like Vishnu Kumar, etc.

4. **Marananta Samudhata:**  At the time of death, the outward movement of the Atma-pradeshas from the original body to touch the region where the Pratiyu is bound is Marananta Samudhata.

**Doubt:**  Why are Vedana Samudhata and Kasaya Samudhata not included in Marananta Samudhata?

1. Swa. Ka. Anu. Ga. 176, Commentary p. 115.

Page #762:
---------------------------
72/Po. Sa. Jivakanda
Gatha 667-668
Samādhana-vedanā samudghāta and kaṣāya samudghāta are not included in the mārāṇātika samudghāta because only those beings who have bound their lifespan experience mārāṇātika samudghāta. However, vedanā and kaṣāya samudghāta occur in both bound-lifespan beings and unbound-lifespan beings. Mārāṇātika samudghāta definitely occurs in the direction of the area where it is generated. But other samudghātas do not have this rule of moving in one direction, as they are found to move in all ten directions. The length of mārāṇātika samudghāta is excellent, extending to the end of its generated areas, but this is not the rule for other samudghātas.
5. Tejas samudghāta (inauspicious): Seeing a cause that produces evil, a great muni, a repository of restraint, becomes angry, and from his left shoulder emerges a radiant being, like a pile of vermilion, four yojanas long, with a base diameter the size of a fingertip, and a front diameter of nine yojanas, shaped like a cat, and circumambulates to the left, burning the object against which the muni is angry, and then also consumes the muni himself. Just as a being emerged from the body of Dvaipāyana muni and burned the city of Dvārikā, and then consumed Dvaipāyana muni himself, and then the being itself was consumed. This is the inauspicious tejas samudghāta.
Tejas samudghāta (auspicious): Seeing the world suffering from disease, famine, etc., a great sage, a repository of supreme restraint, feels compassion, and from his right shoulder emerges a being of the same size as the previous one, with a gentle nature, circumambulating to the right, removing disease, famine, etc., and then returning to its place and entering the original body. This is the auspicious tejas samudghāta.
6. Prāhārak samudghāta: When doubt arises in a step or an object, a great sage, endowed with supreme power, without leaving his original body, from the middle of his head emerges a being, one hand in size, with a nature like pure crystal, and goes to where the omniscient one is, sees him, removes the muni's doubt, returns to its place, and enters the original body. This is the prāhārak samudghāta.
7. Kevala samudghāta: There are four kevala samudghātas: daṇḍa, kapāṭa, pratar, and lokapūraṇa.
'Bound by reading, what is done, what is spoken, and what is thought, at that time. Therefore, the first, and also the fourth, is lokapūraṇa.' (186)
'In the fifth time, that is the mānthāraṇya. In the seventh, the kavārḍa is covered, and in the eighth, the daṇḍa.' (17)
'The daṇḍa-buga, the orāla, the kavāijugala, and the parya-samvaraṇa.
The misso-rala, the bhariṇaya, the karma-ina, the rest, and the praṇahāra.' (18)
- The kevali Bhagavan, in the first time, performs the daṇḍa-rupa samudghāta. The second time - - - 1. Chabala Pu. 4, p. 27. 2. Svā. Kā. A. Gāthā 176, commentary. 3. Prā. Pa. Sa. p. 411. 4. V. 5. Prā. Pa. Sa. p. 42.

Page #763:
---------------------------
Village. 667-668
On the path of Shramana 726
They perform the Kapata-rupa Samudghata. In the third time, they perform the Pratara-rupa and in the fourth time, they perform the Lokapurana Samudghata. In the fifth time, they contract the Atmapradeshas of the Sayogijina Lok, which are located in the Vivara. Again, in the sixth time, they contract the Atmapradeshas of the Mandhana (Pratara) gat. In the seventh time, they contract the Atmapradeshas of the Kapata gat and in the eighth time, they contract the Atmapradeshas of the Danda Samudghata gat. In both the Danda Samudghatas, the Danda-dvika, there is Shradarik Kayayoga. In the Kapata-yugal, that is, in both the Kapata Samudghatas, which are in the state of expansion and contraction, there is Praudarik Mishra Kayayoga. In the remaining times, that is, in the third, fourth and fifth times, there is Karman Kayayoga and in those three times, the Kevali Bhagwan remain Anaharak.
Doubt- Is the Samudghata of the Kevalis Hetooka or Nirhetooka? The second option, that it is Nirhetooka, cannot be formed, because if this is assumed, then all the Kevalis will attain the opportunity of Moksha only after performing the Samudghata. If it is said that all the Kevalis attain Moksha only after performing the Samudghata, if this is assumed, what is the harm in it? It is also not right to say so, because if this is assumed, then the number of Kevalis who perform the Lokapurana Samudghata will be twenty after the Varshaprithaktva, this rule cannot be formed. The Kevali Samudghata is Hetooka, this first side is also not correct because no Hetooka is found for the Kevali Samudghata. If it is said that the state of the three Aghatiya Karmas is more than the state of the Ayu Karma, this is the reason, this is also not right, because in the Tam time of Kshina Kripaya, the state of all the Karmas is not the same, so the opportunity of Samudghata of all the Kevalis will be obtained.
It is formed,
Solution- According to the Upadesha of Yativrishabhacharya, in the Charma time of Kshina Kshaya Gunasthan, the state of all the Kims is not the same, so all the Kevalis attain Moksha only after performing the Samudghata. But according to the opinion of those Acharyas who have the rule of twenty numbers of Kevalis who perform the Lokapurana Samudghata, according to their opinion, some Kevalis perform the Samudghata and some do not.
Doubt- Which Kevalis do not perform the Samudghata?
Solution- Those whose Sansara-vyakti, that is, the time of staying in the world, is equal to the state of the three Karmas, Vedaniya, etc., they do not perform the Samudghata, the rest of the Kevalis do.
Doubt- Why is there a difference in the state of Sansara-vyakti and the state of the remaining three Karmas, when they are equal to the results like Nivritti, etc.?
Solution- No, because when the Sansara-vyakti and the state of Karma are equal to the results of the form of Anivritti, which are the cause of the Ghat, there is a contradiction in considering the Sansara to be equal to the state of the three Karmas.
Doubt- What is the reason for Sansara-vichched?
1. Dhaval Pu. 1 Page 301-302.

Page #764:
---------------------------
730/Go, Sa. Jivakash
Gatha 66.7-668
Solution - The knowledge of the twelve angas, intense devotion in them, Kelisamudghat and the result of Anivritti, all these are the causes of the destruction of the world. But all these causes are not possible in all beings, because the beings who have ten and nine previous births are also seen to ascend to the क्षपक category. Therefore, there is no karma situation there like that of a human being. In this way, while destroying the स्थितिकाण्डकों of the countless parts of the पल्योपम, which are obtained by destruction according to the rule at the end of the moment, and which have the dimension of the पावली dimension, many beings complete the remaining karmas like प्रायु without any समुद्घात. And many beings do the शोष karmas by समुद्घात, like reducing the प्रायु. But this destruction of the world is not possible in the Kevali at first. Because at first, all beings get the same result like the destruction of the स्थितिकारक.
Doubt - When there is no excess in the results, i.e., the results of all Kevalis are the same, then why should the destruction of the world not happen in the past?
Solution - No, because even though the results remain the same as the Vitaragarupa results, the destruction of the world is caused by the specific results that arise from the आत्मा, in comparison to the प्रायु karma of the अन्तर्मुहर्त evidence.
Doubt - Why should it not be considered that the Acharya who explains this meaning in this way is going against the sutra, which is not explained by other Acharyas?
Solution - No, because the statement of the Acharyas who propound the interval of वर्षपृथक्त्व is in conflict with the aforementioned statement.
Doubt - The being who has attained Kevalgyan when six months of प्रायु karma remain, is liberated only by समुद्घात. The remaining beings do समुद्घात and also do not do it. The relevant proof verses are as follows:
"छम्मासा उवसेसे उप्पण्णं जस्स केवलं जाणं । स-समुग्घानो सिज्झइ सेसा भज्जा समुग्याए ॥१६७॥ छम्मासाउगसेसे उप्पण्णं जेसि केवलं जाएं।
तं णियमा समुग्घायं सेसेसु हवंति भयणिज्जा ॥२०॥" Why are these verses not accepted?
Solution - No, because there is no reason to believe in this alternative, therefore the aforementioned verses are not accepted.
Doubt - The following verse states the reason for doing and not doing समुद्घात...
1. Dhaval Pu. 1 p. 302-303.
2. Dhaval Pu. 1 p. 303. 3. Pra. Pan. San. p. 42.

Page #765:
---------------------------
## Verse 667-668:

Those whose name, lineage, and karmic experiences are similar to their lifespan karma, attain liberation without undergoing a *samudghāt*. Others attain liberation through *samudghāt*. ||168||

**Why is the teaching of this verse not accepted?**

**Solution:** The meaning expressed in this verse, that some beings undergo *samudghāt* while others do not, cannot be accepted as a reason. This is because all beings experience the destruction of their karmic states through the same process of *pranivṛtti* (retraction). Therefore, it contradicts the idea that their karmic states are similar to their lifespan. Furthermore, even in the final stage of the *kṣīṇakṣāya* (diminished passions) *guṇasthāna* (stage of spiritual development), the three *aghāti* (non-destructive) karmas are present in all beings in a very subtle form, like a tiny fraction of a *palya* (a unit of time).

**Doubt:** The *āgama* (scripture) is not a subject of logic. Therefore, it is not appropriate to refute the meaning of the aforementioned verses using logic.

**Solution:** No, because the meaning of these verses has not been definitively established by the *āgama*. Or, if the meaning of these two verses is definitively established by the *āgama*, then their interpretation should be accepted.

When the lifespan is reduced to a single *antarmuhūrta* (a very short period of time), and the karmic states of name, lineage, and karmic experiences are greater than a single *antarmuhūrta*, then the Lord, through the special *ātmopayoga* (self-use) *pratiśaya* (reversal) *vyāpāra* (activity), with the help of the *yathāsyāt* (as it should be) *cāritra* (conduct), and with the support of the *mahāsanvara* (great restraint), is able to quickly destroy the karmas and remove all karmic impurities. This is done through the *daṇḍa* (rod), *kapāṭa* (door), *pratar* (front), and *lokapūraṇa* (world-filling) *samudghāt* (expulsion) in four stages.

The *kevali* (omniscient being) who undergoes *samudghāt* does so by facing either east or west, through *kāyoatsarga* (expulsion of the body) or through *palyaṅkāsana* (sitting on a bed). In the case of *daṇḍasamudghāt* through *kāyoatsarga*, the extent of the *kevali*'s original body expands in the form of a rod, reaching a length of slightly less than fourteen *rāju* (a unit of measurement), encompassing the *jīvapradeśa* (regions of life). Here, the term "slightly less" refers to the area that is blocked by the *bālavṛtta* (hair-like circle) above and below the *loka* (world). This should be understood because, by nature, the *jīvapradeśa* of the *kevali* does not enter the *vātavṛtta* (wind-like circle) in this state. Similarly, the *daṇḍasamudghāt* of the *kevali* who undergoes *samudghāt* through *palyaṅkāsana* should be understood as follows. The special feature here is that the extent of the *daṇḍasamudghāt* in this state is three times the extent of the original body.

Just as a *kapāṭa* (door) is relatively thin but extends in length and width, similarly, in the case of *kapāṭasamudghāt*, the *jīvapradeśa* expands beyond the original body, or even three times the original body, reaching a dimension of slightly less than fourteen *rāju* in length and a width of seven *rāju*, or even greater than that.

1. *Dhavala* (White) *Pū* (Part) 1, page 2041
2. *Dhavala* *Pū* 1, page 3041
3. *Jayadhavala* *Phalataṇa* (Fruit), page 2278

Page #766:
---------------------------
732 / Go. Sa. Jeevakend
Verse 666
"It remains, that door is called Samudhat, because in this Samudhat, the shape of the door is clearly found."
Except for the three Vatavalyas, the Atmapradeshas spread throughout the entire Lok when the third time-period Prater Samudhat occurs. In the fourth time-period, the Atmapradeshas spread even in the three Vatavalyas. This is the Lokpuran Samudhat.
Samudhats are given
"Aharakmarananti ya durga piriyamera egaviligantu. Dasadisi gada hu sesa panch samugdhadaya honti." || 666 ||
Verse Meaning - In the two Samudhats, the Praharak Samudhat and the Maranantak Samudhat, the Atmapradeshas travel in only one direction. In the remaining five Samudhats, they travel in all ten directions.
|| 666 ||
Special Meaning - The Aharak and Maranantak Samudhats occur in one direction. Due to the श्रेणीगति ( श्रेणीगति ) during the creation of the body, the Aharak Samudhat travels in one direction (towards the Kevali or Shruta Kevali). Countless Atmapradeshas emerge and create an Aharak body of an Aratni measure. Where the being in Narak etc. is to be born (according to the previous life), the Atmapradeshas emerge in that direction. In the remaining five Samudhats, the Atmapradeshas emerge in all six directions, according to the श्रेणी ( श्रेणी ), up-down, east-west, north-south. In the Aharak Samudhat, a Praharak Putala of one hand measure travels in the same direction as the Kevali or Shruta Kevali. It does not travel in any other direction. If the Kevali or Shruta Kevali is in Vidisha, then the Aharak body bends and reaches that place, because the Aharak Putala has अनुश्रेणि गति ( अनुश्रेणि गति ). In the Maranantak Samudhat also, the Atmapradeshas spread towards the area where the being is born, they do not go towards any other area. This also has अनुश्रेणि गति ( अनुश्रेणि गति ). Therefore, these two Samudhats are called Ek Dik (one direction). In the five Samudhats, Vedana etc., the Atmapradeshas spread all around and up and down, therefore it is said that they spread in six directions. But when the Atmapradeshas spread around the body, they also go to the Vidishas, therefore, counting the Vidishas separately, it is said that they spread in ten directions. There is only a difference in words in saying six directions and ten directions, there is no difference in meaning, because both mean the same thing.
The time period of the six Samudhats, Vedana, Kapat, Vaikriyik, Maranantak, Tejas and Baharak, is countless time periods. The time period of the Kevali Samudhat is eight time periods. The four time periods of Dand, Kapat, Prater, Lokpuran, and again the four time periods of Prater, Kapat, Dand and entering the own body, thus the time period of the Kevali Samudhat is eight time periods.
1. Jaybhavan Falatan p. 2276 2. Swa. Ka. Anu. G. 467 Tika p. 308 || 4. G. Va. 1/20/12.
3. Rajavartika 1/20/12 |

Page #767:
---------------------------
## Verse 66.671
**Maharamarga /733**

The duration of the **paharak** state is as numerous as the countless parts of an angul (finger). The duration of the **anahaarak** state in the karmic body is three moments. 

**Explanation:** The duration of the **paharak** state is the longest for all living beings, but for a single being, the shortest duration of the **paharak** state is three moments less than the **antmuhurt** (the last moment). For example, a being born in the realm of **sukshma ekendriya** (minute single-sensed beings) after three **moḍe** (transformations) becomes a **paharak** in the fourth moment. Then, after consuming food, it is cut off by the **kadali ghat** (the blow of the banana tree) and finally exits through another transformation. This being experiences only three moments less than the **antmuhurt** as the shortest duration of the **paharak** state. The longest duration of the **paharak** state is as numerous as the countless parts of an angul, extending to the countless **akspirani-utsapini** (inhalation-exhalation) moments.

The shortest duration of the **anahaarak** state for a single being is one moment, as this is the duration experienced by beings born after one transformation. The longest duration of the **anahaarak** state is three moments, as this is the duration experienced by beings who are **samudghat** (fully developed) and have three transformations. The longest duration of the **anahaarak** state is the **antmuhurt**, as this is the duration experienced by **ayogikevali** (non-liberated) beings. Alternatively, it is equal to the duration of the pronunciation of five short syllables.

The number of **paharak** and **anahaarak** beings is equal to the number of beings with karmic bodies. The number of **paharak** beings is the remainder after subtracting the number of beings with karmic bodies from the total number of beings in the world.

**Explanation:** If the entire population of beings is accumulated in the **antmuhurt** (last moment) of the **sandhyat pavali** (evening twilight), then how much will be accumulated in three moments? By multiplying the desired quantity by the fruit quantity and dividing the product by the standard quantity, we get the total number of beings divided by the **antmuhurt**. This is the number of **anahaarak** beings. Here, the number of **ayogi** (non-liberated) beings is significant, because:

1. **Dhaval Pu. 5. 184 and 1.5. P. 403**
2. **Dhaval Pu. 7 P. 185**
3. **Dhaval Pu. 4 P. 488**
4. **Dhaval Pu. 3**

Page #768:
---------------------------
## 734 Go. Sa. Jivakanda
## Khaya 672-675

There are only 608 [types of] Karman-Kayogi Jivas, while the number of Samsari Jivas is infinite. Therefore, when the infinite number of Samsari Jivas is divided by the number of Antam-Mahant, the quotient obtained is the number of Praman. Subtracting this infinite number from the total number of Samsari Jivas gives us the number of Praharak Jivas. Alternatively, when all Samsari Jivas are divided into countless parts, one part represents the Anaharak Jivas, while the majority of the parts represent the Praharak Jivas. The number of Graharak Jivas is countless times greater than the number of Anaharak Jivas, and the multiplier is Antarmuhurt.

Thus, the chapter named Prahar Margna in Gommatsar Jivakaraastra is complete.

## 20. Upayogadhikari

The feeling of a Jiva towards a Vaththurinimittam (object of knowledge) is called Upayog. This Upayog is of two types: Sakar and Anakar.

## 672.

Five types of knowledge and three types of ignorance are Sakar Upayog. Four types of Darshan are Anakar Upayog. All these are characteristics of a Jiva, meaning that five types of Sakar Upayog and four types of Anakar Upayog are the characteristics of a Jiva.

## 673.

The knowledge of Mati, Shruta, Avadhi, and Manahparyaya, which grasps its respective object specifically until the end of the Antarmuhurt, is Sakar Upayog.

## 674.

The grasping of all objects by the Indriya, Man, and Avadhi is Anakar Upayog. Its duration is also Antarmuhurt.

## 675.

**Special Note:** The characteristic of a Jiva is Upayog. It is the cause of both internal and external types of Nimittam.

Page #769:
---------------------------
## Translation:

**Usage/735**

Usage is the result of the activity of the soul, which is the essence of consciousness and does not exist anywhere else except in consciousness.

**Doubt:** What are the external causes?

**Verse 672-675:**

**Solution:** There are two types of external causes: those related to the soul and those not related to the soul. The senses like eyes, etc., which are formed in the body associated with the soul, are external causes related to the soul. A lamp, on the other hand, is an external cause not related to the soul.

**Doubt:** What are the internal causes?

**Solution:** Internal causes are also of two types: those related to the soul and those not related to the soul. The internal cause not related to the soul is the internal activity of the soul, which is the result of the interaction of the soul with the categories of mind, speech, and body. This interaction is the internal cause.

**When both these causes are present, the result is the activity of the soul, which is the manifestation of the soul's consciousness. This activity is called usage, and it is the characteristic of the soul.**

**Sadvidvidho'shtachaturbhedah ||2|| [Tattvarthasutra]**

- This usage is of two types: concrete usage and abstract usage. Concrete usage is of eight types, and abstract usage is of four types. Concrete usage is knowledge, and abstract usage is perception.

**Usogo duvippo dansanaganam cha dansanam chadusha. Chakkhu chakkhu shrohi dansanamadi kevalam neyam ||4|| [Vrihad Dravyasangraha]**

**Ganam praduviyayam madi sudi shrohi pranananaraarikha. Marapjayakevalamavi pachapavakhabheyan cha. ||5|| [Vrihad Dravyasangraha]**

- Usage is of two types based on the distinction between knowledge and perception. Of these, perceptional usage is of four types: visual perception, extra-visual perception, clairvoyance, and omniscience. Knowledge is of eight types: intellectual knowledge, scriptural knowledge, clairvoyance, intellectual belief, scriptural belief, clairvoyant belief, mind-perception, and omniscience. These have two divisions: direct and indirect.

**Doubt:** What is meant by concrete usage and abstract usage?

**Solution:** Usage that is accompanied by form is knowledge usage, because it is accompanied by form.

1. S. Si. 2/6 | 2. Ra. Ba. 2/8/10 3. Ra. Ba. 2/6 | 4. "Sakaram jnanam anakaram darshanamiti" [S. Si. 2/6]

Page #770:
---------------------------
736 / Go. Sa. Jivakanda
The use that is formless is called darshanopयोग, because it is devoid of form.
Doubt - What is called form?
Solution - The name of karma-kर्तृ भाव is form. The use that remains with that form is called form. 'By evidence, past karma is called form, that is, in evidence, the external object that is different from oneself, which appears as an object, is called form. That form which is not found in use, that use is formless, that is, it is called darshanopयोग.
Doubt - The perception of existence that is endowed with direction, country and form, before the light of electricity, cannot be called ज्ञानोपयोग, because the perception of a particular substance is not found in it.
Verse 676
Solution - No, because there is karma found there, separate from knowledge, therefore it is also knowledge. There, the perception of existence endowed with special features like direction, country, form and color is found.
-
The use that makes the inner object its object has been accepted as formless use. It is also not the case that the inner use is object-shaped, because in it, karma separate from the substance in the form of the doer is not found.
Inner use is called darshanopयोग. The reason is that the meaning of form is 'karma-kर्तृत्व', the understanding of meaning that occurs without it is called formless use. One should not doubt that there is karma-kर्तृत्व in inner use, because in it, there is a clear absence of karma in relation to the substance and the field. *
The number of beings in the right of use
Gaṇuvajog judāṇaṁ parimāṇaṁ gaṇamaggaraṇaṁ va have | Daṁsaṇuvajogiyāṇaṁ daṁsaṇamaggaraṇaṁ va uttakamo || 676 ||
Gāthārtha - The number of beings with ज्ञानोपयोग should be understood like the beings with ज्ञानमार्गरणा, and the number of beings with दर्शनोपयोग should be understood like the beings with दर्शनमार्गणा. || 676 ||
Special meaning - According to ज्ञानमार्गणा, the number of ignorant and śruta-ignorant beings is infinite like the number of eunuch-knowers, who are not taken away by the infinite-infinite śravasaṛpiṇī utsarpiṇīs, that is, they are medium infinite. They are slightly more than the deva-vibhanga-knowers, that is, the number of deva-vibhanga-knowers is obtained by dividing the world into two hundred and fifty-six squares of fingers. In this, adding the number of vibhanga-knowers of three movements, the number of all vibhanga-knowers is obtained. The number of mati-knowers, śruta-knowers and avadhi-knowers is an innumerable part of the number of patyopama, that is, an innumerable part of the number of pravali.
1. Dhaval Pu. 13 p. 207. 2. Jayadhaval Pu. 1 p. 331. 3. Jamaghval Pu. 1 p. 338. 4. Dhaval Pu. 13 p. 207 208. 5. Dhaval Pu. 11 p. 233.

Page #771:
---------------------------
## Chapter 677-678
## Inclusion / 737

By dividing the portion in the analogy of the portion, the number of these three knowers is obtained. The number of Manahparyaya-jnanis is countless. The number of Kevala-jnanis is infinite, because even the Siddha Bhagwan is a Kevala-jnanis.

Chakshusdarshanis are innumerable, because by subtracting the world-transcending from the square of the number of the part of the index finger, the amount of Chakshusdarshanis is obtained. The number of Prachakshusdarshanis is equal to the number of Matiprajnanis. The number of Avadhi-darshanis is equal to the number of Avadhi-jnanis, and the number of Kevala-darshanis is equal to the number of Kevala-jnanis.

Thus, the twentieth chapter called Upayaprarupana in the Gommatasar Jivakanda is complete.

## 21. Antarma-adhikār

Having stated the twenty Prarupanas, now the Antarbhava-adhikār is stated.

## Pledge

Gunajiva, Pajjatī, Pārāṇā, Saṇṇā, Ya, Maggaṇuvajoga, Joga, Paruvidyā, Proghāsesu, Patteyaṃ ||677||

## Gāthārtha

The Gunasthānas, Jivasamās, Paryāpti, Prāṇa, Saṇṇā, Maggaṇā, and Upayoga will be described in the Oga (Gunasthānas) and in the Ādesha (Margaṇās). ||677||

## Description of Gunasthānas in Margaṇās

Capaṇa, Coddasa, Cauro, Khirayāvisu, Boddasaṃ, Tu, Pañcaṣakhe, Tasakāye, Sesidikāye, Micchaṃ, Guṭṭā ||678||

## Gāthārtha

There are four Gunasthānas in the Naraka-gati, five Gunasthānas in the Tiryancha-gati, fourteen Gunasthānas in the Manusya-gati, and four Gunasthānas in the Deva-gati. There are fourteen Gunasthānas in the Panchendriya and its Kāya, and one Mithyātva Gunasthāna in the remaining Indriyas and Kāya. ||678||

## Special Meaning

In all the Narakas, there are four Gunasthānas. In the Aprāpya state, only in the first Naraka is there the fourth Gunasthāna. In the remaining six Narakas, there is only the first Mithyātva Gunasthāna. The second and third Gunasthānas are not present in any Naraka in the Prāpya state. In the Tiryanchas, there are five Gunasthānas, but the third and fifth Gunasthānas are present only in the Saṇṇī Panchendriya Prāpya and Nirmancha Prāpya states. However, the second and fourth Gunasthānas can be present in both the Prāpya and Aprāpya states. The first Gunasthāna is possible in all states of all Tiryanchas. In humans, there are fourteen Gunasthānas. In the Nirvṛtti-Prāpya state of a human, the first, second, and fourth Gunasthānas are present, but in the fourteenth...

1. Dhavala Pu. 7 p. 266-271
2. Dhavala Pu. 7 p. 260-262

Page #772:
---------------------------
## Translation:

**738 / Go. Sa. Jivakanda**

The first Gunasthan of a human being who is capable of attaining liberation (Labhya Paryapt) is not in the state of Nirvritti Paryapt. It is in the state of Paryapt. There are four Gunasthanas in Devas. In the state of Aparyapt, the first, second, and fourth Gunasthanas are present. The third Gunasthan is only present in the state of Paryapt. In the case of Bhavanatrik Devas, only the first and second Gunasthanas are present in the state of Paryapt. The third and fourth Gunasthanas are only present in the state of Nirvritti Paryapt.

**Matha 679-684**

According to Indriyamargna, there are fourteen Gunasthanas for a sentient being with five senses who is capable of attaining liberation (Sanjni Panchendriya Paryapt). However, in the state of Nirvritti Paryapt, only the first, second, and fourth Gunasthanas are present. The third and fifth to tenth Gunasthanas are only present in the state of Paryapt. The thirteenth Gunasthan is also possible in the state of Paryapt, except for the Kevali Samudghan. For all beings from Ekendriya to Prasanjni Panchendriya, the first Gunasthan is Mithyatva.

According to Kayamargna, there is only one first Gunasthan, Mithyatva, for stationary beings (Sthavar). In the case of beings with five senses (Panchendriya), fourteen Gunasthanas are possible. The first, second, and fourth Gunasthanas are possible in the state of Aparyapt. The remaining Gunasthanas are only present in the state of Paryapt. The thirteenth Gunasthan is also possible in the state of Aparyapt, except for the Kevali Samudghan.

**Yom Ganga's Statement on Gunasthanas**

In the middle, there are four types of Manovalan Yogas, from Sanjni Mithyatva to Kshina Kshaya Gunasthan. The remaining Manoyog and Vachan Yog are present until Sayog Kevali. However, even for beings with impaired senses (Anubhay Vikalendriya), there are...

**1.2.3. Dhaval Pu. 2 Gati Ma Ganga, Indriyamargna, Kayamargna**

**Viyalado ||676||**

**Jogoti.**

**Riyame. ||680||**

**...**

**"Vedayade Kavadajogimmi |**

**Tiriyevi Ya Donivi Hontitti Jinehi Sihi. ||681||**

**Veguvam Pajjate Ivare Khalu Hodi Tassa Missam Tu. Surariyachautthanes Misese Rahi Missajogo Hu. ||682||**

**Shraharo Pajjante Ivare Khalu Hodi Tassa Misso Du. Tomuttakale Chhatthugune Hodi Shraharo ||683||**

**Shroliyamassan Va Chauguragatthane Su Hodi Kammaiyam. Durgadviviggahkale Jogiss Ya Padaralogpurange. ||684||**

**Gatharth:**

The middle four Manovalan Yogas are from Sanjni Mithyatva to Kshina Kshaya Gunasthan. The remaining Manoyog and Vachan Yog are present until Sayog Kevali. However, even for beings with impaired senses (Anubhay Vikalendriya), there are...

Page #773:
---------------------------
## Gatha 676-684:

**Gatha 676:** The *Dārik* body-yoga is from the *sthāvara* (stationary) state to the *sayogakevali* state.

**Gatha 680:** The *Audārik* mixed body-yoga is in the four *guṇasthāna* (stages of spiritual progress) of *mithyātva* (false belief), *sāsādana* (initial stage of right faith), *asanyata* (uncontrolled) *samyagdṛṣṭi* (right faith), and *sayogakevali*.

**Gatha 681:** The *asanyata* *samyak* (right faith) is only for the *puruṣavedī* (human) and the *kapāṭagata* (door-opening) *sayogakevali* has the *Dārik* body-yoga.

**Gatha 682:** The *vaikriyika* (transformational) body-yoga of the *deva* (divine) and *nārkī* (hellish) beings has four *guṇasthāna*. In the *aparāpta* (incomplete) state, the *vaikriyika* mixed body-yoga has three *guṇasthāna* without the *mithyātva* *guṇasthāna*.

**Gatha 683:** The *āhārak* (food-related) body-yoga of the *muni* (ascetic) in the *aparāpta* state has the *āhārak* mixed body-yoga, which lasts for a short time.

**Gatha 684:** Similar to the *Dārik* mixed body-yoga, the *kārmaṇ* (karmic) body-yoga also has four *guṇasthāna*. The *kārmaṇ* body-yoga is present in the *vigraha* (physical form) of the four *gati* (paths of existence) and in the *pratar* (first) and *lokapūraṇa* (world-filling) states of the *sayogakevali*.

**Special Meaning:** The term "**mabhimchāumaṇavaṇe**" in the *gāthā* refers to the two middle *manoyoga* (mental yoga) - *asaty* (false) and *ubhay* (both) - and the two middle *vacanayoga* (speech yoga) - *asaty* and *ubhay* - for a total of four yogas. These four yogas have twelve *guṇasthāna* from *mithyātva* to *kṣīṇakṣayā* (exhausted passions). However, these four yogas are only for the *saṁjñī* (conscious) beings. The remaining *saty* *manoyoga* and *saty* *vacanayoga*, and *anubhay* *manoyoga* and *anubhay* *vacanayoga* have thirteen *guṇasthāna* from *mithyātva* to *sayogakevali*. The *anubhay* *vacanayoga* is also present in the *vikalacatuṣka* (four types of imperfect beings) - *dvīndriya* (two-sense), *trīndriya* (three-sense), *caturindriya* (four-sense), and *prasajñī* *pañcendriya* (conscious five-sense) - and they have one *mithyātva* *guṇasthāna*. The *asajñī* *pañcendriya* (unconscious five-sense) beings are called *vikal* because they lack a mind. Thus, the *gāthā* describes the owners of the four *manoyoga* and four *vacanayoga* and the *guṇasthāna* present in them.

The *Dārik* body-yoga has thirteen *guṇasthāna* from *mithyātva* to *sayogakevali* in the *aparāpta* state. The *Audārik* mixed body-yoga is in the *aparāpta* state and has four *guṇasthāna* - *mithyātva*, *sāsādana*, *asanyata* *samyagdṛṣṭi*, and *sayogakevali*. The fourth *guṇasthāna* is for the *puruṣavedī* human or animal because the *samyagdṛṣṭi* does not take birth in a human or animal with *aprashasta* (unrefined) *veda* (knowledge). The *sayogakevali* has the *Dārik* mixed body-yoga in the *kapāṭa* (door) opening state. Therefore, the *Dārik* mixed body-yoga has the thirteenth *guṇasthāna*.

**Doubt:** Are the *kevali* (omniscient) who have attained the *kapāṭa*, *pratar*, and *lokapūraṇa* states *aparāpta* or *aparāpta*?

**Solution:** They cannot be considered *aparāpta* because the *Dārik* mixed body-yoga and *kārmaṇ* body-yoga are for the *aparāpta*, therefore they are *aparāpta*.

**Doubt:** There is a statement that *samyagmithyādṛṣṭi*, *sanyatāsanyata*, and *sanyata* are *aparāpta* by rule. This proves that the *sayogakevali* are *aparāpta*. Why not consider the other beings with the *Audārik* mixed body-yoga as *aparāpta* except the *sayogakevali*?

Page #774:
---------------------------
740 / Go. Sa. Jivakanda
Gatha 676-684
Solution - This cannot be accepted, because the Audarikamishra Kayayog is of the Paryaptakas. This proves that the sixth Gunasthanavarti Sanayat are also Aparyaptakas.
Doubt - Since the Audarikamishra Kayayog is of the Aparyaptakas, as mentioned in the Sutra, due to the Kevali state being intended in the Kapata-Samudghat, what is the significance of the word "Niyam" (rule) used in the Sutra "Jivas are Paryaptakas by rule in the Sanayat state"? And in such a situation, the question arises whether the word "Niyam" used in the said Sutra is purposeful or purposeless?
Solution - The second option cannot be accepted out of these two options, because it is contradictory to have purposelessness (meaninglessness) in the elements derived from the words of Shri Pushpadanta. And the publication of the Sutra's eternality cannot be the result of the word "Niyam", because if this is accepted, then the Sutras that do not contain the word "Niyam" will have the context of impermanence. But this is not the case, because if this is accepted, then the word "Niyam" in the Sutra "Audarik Kayayog is of the Paryaptakas" will have an effect, leading to the context of the presence of Audarik Kayayog in the Aparyaptakas, which is not desirable. Therefore, the word "Niyam" used in the Sutra is indicative, not regulatory. If this is not accepted, then the context of its meaninglessness will arise.
- What is indicated by this word "Niyam"?
Doubt
Solution - This indicates that the Sutra "Jivas are Paryaptakas by rule in the Samyagmadhyadristi, Sanatasanayat and Sanayat state" is impermanent. The name of the eternal is the uniform tendency in its subject, and the name of the impermanent is the tendency in its subject in some places and not in others. From this, the Aparyaptakana of the Samyagmithyadristi, Sanatasanayat and Sanayats who produce the next body, and the Kevalis who have attained Kapata, Pratar and Lokapurranasamudghat, is proved.
3
Doubt - The body that is started is Aparyaptak because it is incomplete. But in the Sayogi state, the body does not start, so the Aparyaptakana of the Sayogi cannot be formed?
Solution - No, because the Yogis who are devoid of the six Paryaptak forms of power in the Kapata or other Samudghat states are therefore Paryaptak.
In the Vaitrivik Kayayog in the Paryaptak state of Devas and Narakas, there are four Gunasthanas: Mithyatva, Samadan, Samyagmithyatva and Asanayat Samyatrava, i.e., the first, second, third and fourth. In the Aparyaptak state of these, in the Vaikriyikamishra Kayayog, Samyagmithyatva is not the fifth Gunasthan. This is a special feature that in the Vaikriyikamishra Kayayog of Narakas, the second Gunasthan, Samadan, is also not present, i.e., there are only two Gunasthanas, the first and the fourth. In the Kriyikamishra Kayayog of Devas, there are three Gunasthanas: the first, second and fourth. In the Vaikriyikamishra Kayayog of Bhavan Devas and all Devis, there are two Gunasthanas: the first and the second.
1. Dhaval Pu. 2 p. 441. 2. Ghatal Pu. 2 p. 443. 3. Dhaval Pu. 2 p. 4434 La Pu.
2. Pu.
444.

Page #775:
---------------------------
##  Verse 685
##  Antarbhav/741

The **Praharak Samudghat** occurs only in the sixth **Gunanasthan**. The **Apay** of those in the sixth **Gunanasthan** is in the **Pit-Avastha** and their **Kayayog** is **Mishra**. This **Praharak-Mishra Kayayogi** has one **Pramat** **Samyat** **Gunanasthan**. The time of this **Praharak-Mishra Kayayog** is **Antam** because the **Praharak-Mishra Kayayogi** does not die. The time required for **Paryapti** to be complete is **Antam**, and it cannot be completed in less time.

Similar to **Audarik-Mishra Kayayog**, **Karmna Kayayog** has four **Gunanasthan** in the **Vigrah-Gati** of all four **Gati** beings: **Mithyatva**, **Sasadan**, **Avirat-Samyadashti**, and **Mangni** (which are the first, second, **Vadha**, and **Rahva** respectively). The special characteristic is that **Audarik-Mishra Kayayog** occurs only in humans and animals, but **Karmna Kayayog** occurs in the **Vigrah-Gati** of all four **Gati** beings. In the thirteenth **Gunanasthan**, **Audarik-Mishra Kayayog** occurs in **Kapat Samudghat**, but **Karmna Kayayog** occurs in **Pratar** and **Lok-Puran Samudghat**.

At the time of **Kapat Samudghat**, the **Pradesha** of the **Jiva** cannot be connected to the **Purva Sharira** with the **Anguli Avagahana** because the **Pradesha** of the **Jiva** is spread over fourteen **Raju** **Mayam** and seven **Raju** **Vistara** or fourteen **Raju** **Mayam** and one **Raju** with increasing **Vistara**. If a connection is assumed, then the **Audarik Sharira** would have to be **Parimaran** of the **Jiva**'s **Pradesha**. But this cannot happen because the body that holds the **Vipnat Bandha** lacks the power to spread in the aforementioned **Pramag** form. If the power of the **Mula Sharira** to spread is assumed, then **Audarik-Mishra** and **Karmna Kayayog** cannot be formed. Therefore, **Kapat**, **Pratar**, and **Lok-Puran Samudghat** have no connection with the old **Mula Sharira** of the **Kevali**.

In the **Ved Margna**, the **Gunanasthan** are described as follows:

**"Thavar Kayappha-di San-do Ses-a Asan-ni-ma-di Ya. Parin-ay-atti-ss Ya Pad-ha-mo Bha-go-tti Ji-ne-hi Git-ti."** (65)

**Meaning:** In the **Napusak Ved**, the **Gunanasthan** from **Thavar Kay** to the first part of **Anivrittikaran** are present. The remaining **Gunanasthan** from **Prasanni Panchendriya** to the **Saveda-bhag** of **Anivrittikaran** are present in the **Stri-Ved** and **Purush-Ved**. This has been said by the **Jina** (the **Shruta Kevali**). (685)

**Special Meaning:** From **Ekendriya** to **Chaturindriya**, the **Jiva** is in a state of **Sammurchan** and therefore they are **Napusak Vedi**. Therefore, the **Gunanasthan** from the first **Gunanasthan** of **Thavar Kay** (i.e., **Ekendriya**) to the first part of the ninth **Gunanasthan** (**Anivrittikaran**) are present in the **Napusak Ved**. The **Stri-Ved** and **Purush-Ved** are for the **Garbhaja** and **Uppapad Janma** **Devas**. The **Asan-gni Panchendriya Jiva** are also **Garbhaja** and they have **Tri-Ved** and **Purush-Ved**. Therefore, in the **Stri-Ved** and **Purush-Ved**, the **Gunanasthan** from the first **Gunanasthan** of the **Asan-gni Panchendriya Jiva** to the **Saveda-bhag** of the ninth **Gunanasthan** (**Anivrittikaran**) are present. In this way, there are nine **Gunanasthan** in each of the three **Veds** (**Stri-Ved**, **Purush-Ved**, **Napusak-Ved**), i.e., from the **Mithyatva Gunasthan** to:

1. **Chavan Pu.** 2 **Pri.** 660. 2. **"Narak-am-mu-ch-chhi-no Na-pu-sa-ka-ni."** (2150) [**Ta Nu.**]

Page #776:
---------------------------
## Translation:

**742 / Go. Sa. Jobakanda**
**Verse 686**

There are nine Gunasthanas up to the Gunasthana of Anivrittikaran. In the Aparisapta state of Strivedi, there are only two Gunasthanas: Mithyatva and Sasadan. In the Aparisapta state of Napumsakavedi, there are three Gunasthanas: Mithyatva, Sasadan, and Sant Samyashti. In the Aparisapta state of Purushavedi, there are four Gunasthanas: the first, second, fourth, and sixth.

**Doubt:** How is the fourth Gunasthana, Asant Samyagdristi, possible in the Aparisapta state of Napumsakavedi? Why is the fourth Gunasthana not present in the Aparisapta state of Strivedi?

**Solution:** A Kritakritya Vedak Samyandristi or Kshayik Samyagdristi, who has previously bound the Narakayu and later initiated Kshayik Samyaktva at the feet of a Kevali or Shruta Kevali, is born in the first Naraka after death. In Naraka, there is always Napumsakavedi. Thus, the fourth Gunasthana is possible in the Aparisapta state of Napumsakavedi Naraki. A Samyagdristi Jiva is not born in Strivedis after death. Therefore, the fourth Gunasthana is not present in the Aparisapta state of Strivedi. It is also said:

"Suttimaasu Pudhavi Jois-Van- Bhavan Sab Itthisu.
Desu Samuppannajai Sammaitti Du Jo Jivo." || 133 ||

- A Samyashti Jiva is not born in the six lower Naraka Prithvis, in the Jyotishi, Vyantar, and Bhavanwasi Devas, and in all types of women.

Those who have previously bound the Aayu Karma, their Samyagdarshan does not contradict the general Aayu related to that state, but it does contradict the specific Aayu related to that state. There is a contradiction with the birth of Samyagdristi in Bhavanwasi, Vyantar, Jyotishi, Prakirnak, Shrabhiyogya, Mor, Kilvidhik Devas, in the six lower Narakas, in all types of women, in Napumsakavedi, in Vikalendriyas, in Ekendriyas, in Labdhyaparisaptaka Jivas, and in Karmabhumij Tiryanchas. Therefore, a Samyagdristi Jiva is not born in these places. In Naraka, there is only Napumsakavedi. Those who have previously bound the Narakayu and later attained Samyagdarshan, Samyagdarshan does not have the power to prevent their birth in Naraka. Thus, only Asant Samyagdristi is born in the Napumsakas of the first Naraka.

**Statement of Gunasthanas in Rishayamargagga:**

"Thavar Kay Padavi Prashiti - Bi-Ti Chauthbhagoti.
Kohatiyam Loho Puran Suhamasuragoti Dishneyo." || 686 ||

**Meaning of the Verse:**

From the Thavar Kaya Padavi to the second part of Anivrittikaran, from the Manakshaya Thavar to the third part of Anivrittikaran, from the Mayakshaya Thavar to the fourth part of Anivrittikaran, and from the Lobhakshaya Thavar to Sukshmaraga, should be known. || 686 ||

1. Dhaval Pu. 2 Bandamargena.
2. Dhaval Pu. 2 Pri. 450.
3. Dhaval Pu. 1 Pri. 206.
4. Ghal Pu. 1. 337.
5. Dhaval Pu. 1 Pri. 336.

Page #777:
---------------------------
## Gatha 687-688
## Chapter 43
## Special Meaning:

From the stationary body (sthāvarakāya) or one-sensed beings to the sentient five-sensed beings, there are four types of kṣayās (passions). In the stationary body, the mithyātva (false belief) guṇasthāna (stage of development) is the norm. Therefore, from the stationary body onwards, the meaning of saying "aigā" (this) is that from the mithyātva guṇasthāna to the ninth guṇasthāna, anivṛttikaraṇa (cessation of passions), there are respectively krodha (anger), māna (pride), and māyā (deceit) kṣayās in the second, third, and fourth parts. This proves that there are nine guṇasthānas in these three kṣayās, from the first guṇasthāna to the anivṛttikaraṇa guṇasthāna, and there are ten guṇasthānas in the lobha (greed) kṣayā, from the first mithyātva guṇasthāna to the tenth guṇasthāna, sūkshma sāmprāya (subtle attachment). The twelfth, thirteenth, and fourteenth guṇasthānas are for the akṣayī (passionless) beings, because in these four guṇasthānas, the arising of any kṣayā is not possible.

## Doubt:

Is the existence of kṣayās less in the sādhus (ascetics) who have the apūrva karaṇa (unprecedented action) etc. guṇasthānas?

## Solution:

No, because the existence of kṣayās is taught there, in comparison to the avyakta (unmanifest) kṣayās.

## Doubt:

When the arising of the remaining three kṣayās is destroyed, why doesn't the lobha kṣayā also get destroyed at the same time?

## Solution:

The lobha kṣayā is not destroyed in the anivṛttikaraṇa guṇasthāna, because the final limit of the lobha kṣayā is the sūkshma sāmprāya guṇasthāna. Therefore, even when the arising of the three kṣayās, krodha etc., is destroyed, the lobha kṣayā is not destroyed in the anivṛttikaraṇa guṇasthāna.

## Doubt:

Even though there is the existence of infinite kṣayā-dravya (substance of passions), why is the upashānta (calm) kṣayā guṇasthāna called kṣayā-rahita (passionless)?

## Solution:

In comparison to the effect of the arising of the kṣayā, there is passionlessness in it.

## Gāthā:

"The knowledge of death and the knowledge of life are from the stationary body to the sāsadana guṇasthāna. The knowledge of division is from the sentient beings to the sāsadana samyaktva (right faith)." (687)

"The non-samyag-jñāna (non-right knowledge), the aviradha samyag-dṛṣṭi (uninterrupted right vision), is from the sixth guṇasthāna to the kṣīṇa kṣayā (exhausted passions). The manas-paryaya-jñāna (knowledge of mental states) is from the sixth guṇasthāna to the kṣīṇa kṣayā." (688)

Page #778:
---------------------------
744/Go. Ma. Jivakanda
Gatha 687-685
It is only the Jina and the Siddha who have Kevala Jnana. ||688||
Special Meaning - The stationary body, i.e., the one-sensed beings, have only one Mithyatva Gunasthan, therefore, the stationary body or the one-sensed beings have the Mithyatva Gunasthan. In this way, there are only two Gunasthanas in Matyajnan and Shrutajnan, Mithyatva and Sasadan. There are also only two Gunasthanas in Vibhang Jnana, Mithyatva and Sasadan. However, Vibhang Jnana does not occur in the non-conscious beings, to make this known, the word "Sanjee" has been used in the Gatha. This negates the Prasanjee and the A-paryapnaka.
Doubt - Even if the Mithyaishti Jiva has both Mati and Shruta Prajnana, because Mithyatva Karma arises there, but Mithyatva does not arise in Sasadan, therefore, both these Jnanas should not be in the form of ignorance?
_ Solution - No, because the opposite of Abhinivesha is called Mithyatva, and it arises from both Mithyatva and Ananta-anubandhi. The Ananta-anubandhi of the one who has Sasadan arises, therefore, both Prajnanas are possible there.
Question - How can the one-sensed beings have Shat Jnana? Because, due to the absence of the Shrotra Indriya, the knowledge of the object of the word, i.e., the Vachya, cannot be known. Therefore, they do not have Shruta Jnana.
Solution - This is not a fault, because it is not a rule that only the knowledge of the object that arises from the word is called Shruta Jnana. But the knowledge of the Lingi that arises from the Linga, which is different from the word, is also called Shruta Jnana.
Doubt - How is such Shruta Jnana possible for the beings without a mind?
Solution - No, because the tendency towards the benefit and the avoidance of harm is seen in the beings with the vegetable body, without a mind, therefore, to consider them as beings without Shruta Jnana, there is a fault of Anekanta from them.
Doubt - Why does Vibhang Jnana not occur in the beings with impaired senses? Solution - No, because the cause of Vibhang Jnana, i.e., Kshayo-pashama, does not occur there. Doubt - Why is that Kshayo-pashama not possible in the beings with impaired senses?
Solution - No, because the Kshayo-pashama of the Avadhi Jnana Avarana is Bhava Pratyay and Guna Pratyay. But these two types of causes are not found in the beings with impaired senses, therefore, Vibhang Jnana is not possible for them.
1. Dhaval Pu. 1.361.

Page #779:
---------------------------
## Gatha 667-688
**Inclusion / 745**

**Doubt:** The knowledge of the division of gods and hell beings is a bhavprayaya. It can also happen in an insufficient time, because even in sufficient karma, there is a possibility of finding the Bharatpur of knowledge?

**Solution:** No, because "the sentence that makes the general subject known remains in the specifics." According to this sentence, gods and hell beings with insufficient state are not the cause of Tribhanga knowledge. But only gods and hell beings with sufficient state are the cause of Vibhang knowledge, therefore Vibhang knowledge does not occur in insufficient time.

**Praabhinivodhik (mati) knowledge, Shruta knowledge and Avadhi knowledge, all three are present in nine Gunasthanas from restrained Samyagdarshi to Ksheenakashay Vitraag Chhadmasth Gunasthan.** || 120 || 2

**Doubt:** In unrestrained Samyagdarshi beings related to gods and hell beings, there may be a good state of Avadhi knowledge, because their Avadhi knowledge is Bhavanimittak. Similarly, in the higher Gunasthanas like Deshaviriti etc., Avadhi knowledge may remain, because the qualities that are the cause of the origin of Avadhi knowledge are found in a good state there. But in unrestrained Samyagdarshi Tiryanch and humans, its good state cannot be found, because the Bhava and qualities that are the cause of the origin of Avadhi knowledge are not found in unrestrained Samyagdarshi Tiryanch and humans?

**Solution:** No, because the good state of Samyagdarshan, which is the cause of the origin of Avadhi knowledge, is found in unrestrained Samyagdarshi Tiryanch and humans.

**Doubt:** Since the non-occurrence of Avadhi knowledge in all Samyagdarshis cannot be otherwise, it is known that Samyagdarshan is not the cause of the origin of Avadhi knowledge?

**Counter-doubt:** If this is the case, then the non-occurrence of Avadhi knowledge in all restrained beings cannot be otherwise, therefore restraint is also not the cause of Avadhi knowledge?

**Answer to the counter-doubt:** Specific restraint is the cause of the origin of Avadhi knowledge, therefore not all restrained beings have Avadhi knowledge, but only some do.

**Solution to the doubt:** If this is the case, then it should be assumed here as well that in unrestrained Samyagdarshi Tiryanch and humans, specific Samyaktva is the cause of the origin of Avadhi knowledge. Therefore, not all Samyagdarshi Tiryanch and humans have Avadhi knowledge, but only some do.

**Doubt:** In all three types of special Samyagdarshan, namely Aupamik, Kshayik and Kshayopashaamik, there is a deviation seen in the origin of Avadhi knowledge. Therefore, it cannot be said that special Samyagdarshan is the cause of the origin of Avadhi knowledge. *

1. Dhaval Pu 1. Pg. 362-363. 2. "Praabhiriaan Sudkhaan Ohiiaagamasanjadasammaaitetriyampadristi Jaay Khee Eka Veer Gachhadummatya Ti ||120|| [ Dhaval Pu. 1 Pg. 364 ]. 3. Dhaval Pu. 1 Pg. 365 | 4. Dhaval Pu. 1 Pg. 365.

Page #780:
---------------------------
746/Go. Sa. Jivakanda
Gatha 687 688
If it is so, then even in the Sangama,
The five types of special restraints, namely, Dopa sthapana, Pariharavishuddhi, Sukshmasamparaya, and Yathasyat, along with Deshabirati, are seen to be the cause of the emergence of Avadhijnana. Therefore, the emergence of Avadhijnana is due to special restraint. This cannot be said, because the objection and rebuttal are the same when both Samyagdarshan and restraint are considered as the cause of the emergence of Avadhijnana.
Solution to the doubt - In the innumerable Lokapramans, there are many special types of results of restraint, which are the cause of the emergence of Avadhijnana, therefore the aforementioned defect does not arise.
Solution to the doubt - If it is so, then in the innumerable Lokapramans, there are many special types of results of Samyagdarshan, which are the cause of the emergence of Pravvijnana, being associated with other cooperative causes. This is certain.
Man:paryayajani Jiva, from Pramattasanyata to Kshina kshaya Vitrag-dyastha Gurunasthan, are like this. || 121 || 3
Doubt - Why do the Jivas residing in the lower Gunasthans, starting from Deshavirata, not have Man:paryayajnan? Solution - No, because there is a contradiction between restraint and non-restraint, and the emergence of Man:paryayajnan with restraint.
Doubt - If Sangama alone is the cause of the emergence of Man:paryayajnan, then why do the warriors in the battle not have it?
Solution - If only restraint were the cause of the emergence of Man:paryayajnan, then it would be so. But there are other causes of the emergence of Man:paryayajnan, therefore, due to the absence of those other causes, Man:paryayajnan does not arise in all the restrained ones.
Doubt - What are those other causes?
Solution - Special types of Dravya, Kshetra, Kala, etc., are other causes, without which Man:paryayajnan does not arise even in the restrained ones.
Kevalajnani Jiva are in three places: Sayogikevali, Yogikevali, and Siddha. || 122 ||
Doubt - Parihant Parameshthi does not have Kevalajnan, because there is a state of harmony of the mind, which has arisen from the destruction and cessation of the Noindriyaravan Karma?
1. Dhaval Pu. 1 p. 366 1 2. Majjaghi Gamattamanjad Pahuii Jav Ti || 121 || . [Yal Pu. 1 366] . 3. Dhaval Pu. 1 p. 366-367. Jogivli Ajogindi Siddha Chedi. || 122 || Shraval Pu. 1 p. 267] 1
Svikay Viramasha 4. "Ni Lasu

Page #781:
---------------------------
## Gatha 686-660
## Anta Vi/747

**Solution:** No, because the *jnaanavaran* karma of an Arihant Parameshthi, whose all *pravaran* karmas have been destroyed, does not undergo *kshayopasham*. Therefore, the mind, which is the function of *kshayopasham*, does not exist in them. Similarly, the *sadbhaav* of the mind cannot be said in relation to the power generated by the *kshayopasham* of the *veeryantray* karma, because there is a contradiction in accepting the *sadbhaav* of the power generated by the *kshayopasham* of the *veeryantray* karma of a being whose *veeryantray* karma has been destroyed.

**Doubt:** Then how can an Arihant Parameshthi be considered *sayogi*?

**Solution:** No, because the *parispand* of the *aatmapradeshas* that are the cause of the origin of the first (truth) and fourth (experience) languages is found there. Therefore, there is no contradiction in considering an Arihant Parameshthi to be *sayogi* in this regard.

**Doubt:** In the absence of the mind of an Arihant Parameshthi, the *sadbhaav* of *vachan*, which is the function of the mind, cannot be found.

**Solution:** No, because *vachan* is a function of *jnaan*, not of the mind.

**Doubt:** How can *karmik* *vachans* be generated from *akram* *jnaan*?

**Solution:** No, because the creation of a pot by a potter who possesses *akram* *jnaan* related to the pot is seen in a sequential manner. Therefore, there is no contradiction in accepting the generation of *karmik* *vachans* from *akram* *jnaan*.

**Doubt:** If the *manoyog* of a *sayogikevali* is absent, then there will be a contradiction with the statement in the Gatha that *saty* *manoyog* to *asatyampa* *manoyog* *sanjnee* *mithyadrishti* goes up to *sayogikevali*.

**Solution:** No, there is no contradiction in accepting the *sadbhaav* of the mind in relation to the *sadbhaav* of the *saty* and *anubhay* languages, which are the functions of the mind. Alternatively, there is no contradiction in accepting the *sadbhaav* of the mind in a *sayogikevali* in relation to the existence of the power generated by the *nokarma* in the form of *manovargna* which is the cause of the *parispand* of the *jeevapradeshas*.

**Samyamaggaaran:** The statement of the *munasthanas* is *prayodotti* and *aviramanam* *dese dese* *pamatta* *idare ya*. *Pariharo* *samaaiyachedo* *chhatthadi* *thulootti*. ||686||

**Suhamo** *suhamakasaye* *sante* *khine* *jine* *jahakhaadam*. *Sanjamamanggaaran* *meva* *siddha* *ranasthiti* *gitthi*. ||660||

1. Dhaval Pu.1 p. 36.7
2. Dhaval Pu. 1 p. 368

Page #782:
---------------------------
748/Go. Sa, Jivakanda
Gaya 686-660
Gayaarth- There are four Gunasthanas in Avirat. There are five Gunasthanas in Deshasanyata. There are two Gunasthanas in Parihar Vishuddhi Samyama, namely Pramatta and Aprammatta Samyata. From the sixth Gunasthan to the ninth Gunasthan, namely Badar Sampray, there are Gunasthanas in Samayik and Chhedopasthapana Samyama. ||686||. In Sukshma Sampray Samyama, there is the tenth Gunasthan called Sukshma Kashaya. In the two Jilas, namely Upshant Kashaya, Ksheen Kashaya, and Sayogkevali and Ayogkevali, there is Pratha Vad Charitra, i.e., in the Yatharuyat Charitra, there are the aforementioned four Gunasthanas. There is no difference in the Samyama Margna of Siddhas. ||660||.
Vishesharth.. In Samayik and Chhedopasthapana Shuddhi Samyama, there are Gunasthanas from Pramatta Samyata to Anivritikaran Gunasthan. ||12||. 'In Parihar-Shuddhi-Samyata, there are two Gunasthanas, namely Pramatta and Aprammatta. ||126||.
Shanka- Why is there no Samyama in the above mentioned Prathav, etc., Gunasthanas?
Samadhan- No, because the souls of those who are immersed in the ocean of nectar, which is Dhyan, who follow Vachan-Yama (silence), and who have contracted the coming and going form of business, cannot have the Parihar of their auspicious and inauspicious actions, because only the one who is inclined to do actions like coming and going can have Parihar, the one who is not inclined cannot. Therefore, Parihar-Shuddhi-Samyama cannot be formed in the eighth, etc., Gunasthanas, which have attained the above mentioned Prathav, etc., Dhyan state.
Shanka- Is Parihar-Shuddhi-Samyama one Yama form or five Yama forms? If it is one Yama form, then it should be included in Samayik, and if it is five Yama forms, then it should be included in Chhedopasthapana. There is no possibility of a third Samyama different from these two Samyamas, in terms of the Dravyarthik and Paryayathic Nay of the man who holds Samyama, therefore, Parihar-Shuddhi-Samyama cannot be formed?
Samadhan- No, because Parihar-Shuddhi-Samyama is different from Samayik and Chhedopasthapana in terms of the Atishy of Riddhi form.
Shanka- This Jiva becomes Parigat from the Paryay of Parihar Riddhi form without abandoning the state of Samayik and Chhedopasthapana, therefore, this Samyama cannot be different from Samayik-Chhedopasthapana.
Samadhan- No, because it is different from those two Samyamas in terms of the Parihar Riddhi, which was not present before but was born later, therefore, it is certain that Parihar-Shuddhi-Samyama is different from Samayik and Chhedopasthapana.
1. "Mamayik-Chhedop Batuavan-Muddi-Sanjada Pamattasan Jad-Pphudi Jav Praniy Shti Si. ||125||." [D. Pu.1 P. 374 || 2. "Parihar-Sriddi-Sanjada Dasu Nagara, Pamattasanjad Tane Apamattmajad-Tane. ||126||' Dhaban P. 1 P. 375] 3. Paval Pu. 1 P. 375.

Page #783:
---------------------------
##  Gama 686-660
##  Antarbhāv / 746

**Doubt:**  Does the power of *parihar-ṛddhi* also exist in the eighth and subsequent *guṇasthānas* (stages of spiritual progress) of the thread of *yādi* (a type of spiritual practice)? If so, should we accept the *sadbhāv* (harmonious state) of this *samyama* (spiritual restraint)?

**Solution:**  No, although *parihar-ṛddhi* is found in the eighth and subsequent *guṇasthānas*, the function of *parihar* (restraint) is not found there. Therefore, the influence of *parihar-śuddhi-samyama* is not present in the eighth and subsequent *guṇasthānas*.

**Doubt:**  Is *sūkṣma-sāmprāya-samyama* one type of *yama* (restraint) or five types? If it is one type, then *pañtrayama* (five types of *yama*) cannot lead to liberation or ascent to the *upasama-śreṇī* (category of spiritual progress) through *chedopasthāpana-samyama* (a type of spiritual practice). This is because liberation and ascent to the *upasama-śreṇī* cannot be achieved without attaining the *sūkṣma-sāmprāya-guṇasthāna*. If *sūkṣma-sāmprāya* is five types of *yama*, then the beings who practice *sāmayika-samyama* (a type of spiritual practice) will have both the aforementioned faults. If *sūkṣma-sāmprāya* is considered to be both one and five types of *yama*, then there will be two types of *sūkṣma-sāmprāya* due to the difference between one *yama* and five *yamas*.

**Solution:**  The first two alternatives are not correct because we have not accepted them. Similarly, the fault mentioned in the third alternative is also not possible because there is no difference in *sangama* (union) due to the difference between five *yamas* and one *yama*. If there were a difference in *samyama* due to the lesser or greater intensity of one *yama* and five *yamas*, then there would be a difference in *samyama*. But this is not the case because there is no special characteristic in either of them with respect to *samyama*. Therefore, there are not two types of *sūkṣma-sāmprāya* in relation to those two.

**Doubt:**  If there cannot be two types of *sangama* in relation to those two, then how can the teaching of five types of *samyama* be possible?

**Solution:**  If five types of *samyama* do not occur, then it is not true.

**Doubt:**  Then how many types of *samyama* are there?

**Solution:**  There are four types of *samyama* because the fifth type, *sangama*, is not found.

**Explanation:**  There are four *guṇasthānas* in *kṣīṇakṣāya-vītarāga-chhadmastha* (a state of spiritual progress), *yathakhyāta-śuddhi-sangata* (a state of spiritual progress), *upasāntakapāya-vītarāga-chhadmastha* (a state of spiritual progress), *rāyogikevalī* (a type of liberated being), and *ayogikevalī* (a type of liberated being).

**Explanation:**  There is one *guṇasthāna* in *sanvatāsamyata* (a type of spiritual practice), which is *ekadeśavirat* (a state of spiritual progress), meaning *samyama-samyama-guṇasthāna* (a state of spiritual progress).

Page #784:
---------------------------
## 750 Go. Sa. Jivakanda

**Verse 661:** Unrestrained beings range from one-sensed (false faith) to unrestrained right faith in the quality-stages. ||13||

**Doubt:** Are there many false faith beings who are restrained? **Solution:** No, because restraint cannot arise without right faith. **Doubt:** What kind of restraint do the liberated beings have? 

**Solution:** They do not have any restraint (from the path of restraint). They are not restrained because they lack intentional cessation. They are neither restrained nor unrestrained, because all their sinful actions have been destroyed. ||2|| They are not unrestrained in the sense of two types of unrestraint, namely, restraint of the senses and non-violence towards living beings, because they do not have any inclination towards these two subjects. Similarly, they are not restrained because they lack intentional restraint from worldly objects. Accordingly, the restraint and unrestraint, both combined, do not affect the liberated beings. [Dhaval Pu. 7 p. 21]. Thus, even though the seven types of the path of restraint affect the liberated beings, they do not have any karmic residue of the character-obscuring karma due to its destruction. This is because the destructive emotions do not have any destruction or effect.

**Verse 66:** The eye-sight ranges from four-sensed to subtle delusion. The non-eye-sight ranges from stationary body (false faith) to subtle delusion. The clairvoyance ranges from uninterrupted right faith to subtle delusion. The omniscience is only in the Jinas and the liberated beings. ||661||

**Explanation:** The eye-sight has twelve quality-stages, ranging from false faith to subtle delusion. The phrase "from four-sensed" in the verse negates the one-sensed, two-sensed, and three-sensed beings. This means that the one-sensed to three-sensed beings do not have eye-sight. The four-sensed beings have only one quality-stage of false faith. Therefore, we should understand it as "from four-sensed beings, i.e., from the quality-stage of false faith". The non-eye-sight ranges from stationary body, i.e., one-sensed (false faith) to subtle delusion.

Page #785:
---------------------------
## Translation:

**Inclusion / 751**
**Verse 662-663**

It is from (the) **Gunasthanas** that it happens, because the **sthavar kaya** are one-sensed and **mithyadristi**. Even in **prachakshudarshan**, there are twelve **Gunasthanas** from **mithyatva** to **kshinakashaya**. In **avdhidarshan**, there are nine **Gunasthanas** from **asanyata samyaktava** to **kshinamoha**. In **kevaldarshan**, there are two **Gunasthanas**, **sayogakevali** and **prayogakevali**, and **siddha jivas**.

**Statement of Gunasthanas in Shyamaganga**

**Praviradasammoti prasuhritiyalesa | Suhatinisssa || 662 ||**
**Variya sukka lesa sajogi charimoti hodi riyameṇa | Gayajogimmi vi siddha lesa gatthitti siddiṭṭha || 663 ||**

**Verse Meaning:** The three **ashubha lesyas** are from **sthavar kaya** to **avirat samyakta**. The three **shubha lesyas** are from **sanjni** to **aprammatasanyata Gunasthanas**, but the **shukla lesya** is up to the end of the **sayogakevali Gunasthanas**. There are no **lesyas** in **prayogakevali** and **siddhas**. || 662 - 663 ||

**Special Meaning:** In **krishna lesya**, **nila lesya**, and **kapota lesya**, there are **sthavar kaya**, i.e., one-sensed, to **asanyatasamyag Gunasthanas**. || 137 || i.e., in the three **ashubha lesyas**, there are the first four **Gunasthanas**.

**Doubt:** Why are the three **lesyas** only up to the fourth **Gunasthanas**?

**Solution:** The harmony of the arising of **tivratam**, **tivratar**, and **tivrakashaya** is found only up to the fourth **Gunasthanas**, therefore, the three **ashubha lesyas** are only up to this point.

**-**

The beings with **pota** and **padma lesya** are from **sanjni mithyadristi** to **aprammatasanyata Gunasthanas**. || 138 || i.e., in these two **lesyas**, there are the first seven **Gunasthanas**.

**Doubt:** How are these two **shubha lesyas** found up to the seventh **Gunasthanas**?

**Solution:** Because the arising of **tivra praadi kshayas** is not found in these beings with **lesyas**.

The beings with **shukla lesya** are from **sanjni mithyadristi** to **sayogikevali Gunasthanas**.

**Doubt:** What about the beings whose **kshayas** have become **kshin** or **upashanta**? Do they have **shukla lesya**?

1. "Kihlesya malensya kaule risya divyadidi jav asanjadasammaidini || 137 ||" [Ghaval Pu. 1 p. 360]
2. Yaval. 1 p. 391
3. "Te ulesya pammalesya sagiminchhaid pphudi jav dyappammatamanjdatti || 13 ||" [Chaval Pu. 1 p. 361]
4. V. Pu. 1 p. 361
5. "Shukkalemmiya mathila [Bal Pu. 1 p. 361]

**Note:** The terms in bold are Jain terms.

Page #786:
---------------------------
752/Go. Sa. Jivakanda
Verses 664-625 How is it possible?
Solution: No, because in those beings whose passions are weak or subdued, the cause of the lotus-like body is found in yoga, therefore there is no objection in considering them to be of the white leshya!
All beings who have escaped from the thirteenth gunasthana are without leshya. ||140|| Doubt - How is this?
Solution - Because there is an absence of bhuta yoga and kshaya due to bondage there. In this way, considering the thirteen gunasthanas in the white leshya, the payogavali and the Siddha beings have been described as without leshya.
In the Bhavya marganga, the statement of the gunasthana is Thavarakaya-ppahu-di prajogic charimotti honti bhavasiddha.
Micchaidittane prabhavasiddha havanti ti ||664|| Verse meaning - In the Bhavya Siddha, there are from the Thavarakaya (mithyatva gunasthana) to the last gunasthana called Aयोगि. In the Abhavya Siddha, there is only one mithyatva gunasthana. ||664||
Special meaning - The Bhavya Siddha beings are from the Ekendriya to the Aयोगिकेवली gunasthana. ||142|| All the beings who have attained or will attain the Siddha state till today have come or will come from the Nitya Nigoda, therefore the Bhavya beings are always found in the Thavarakaya or Ekendriya. From the second to the fourteenth gunasthana, they are only of the Bhavya beings. By saying Thavar or Ekendriya, one should understand the Mithyatva gunasthana, because in the Ekendriya and the Thavar, there is only one Mithyatva gunasthana.
The Abhavya Siddha beings are from the Ekendriya to the Sanjni Mithvatvadristi. ||143|| The Abhavya beings are found in the fourteen jivasamasas, but only their one Mithyatva gunasthana is found, because without the Prathamo-pashama Samyaktva, there are no three parts of the Mithyatvakama, and the Abhavya beings do not have the power to attain Samyaktva.
In the Mammatvad marganga, the statement of the gunasthana is Miccho sasarag-misso sagasagatha-emmi hodi prayadado. Padhamuvasamavedagasammatadurg appamatto ti ||665||
1. Dhaval Pu. 1 p. 361. 2. "Tang parmale-sia. ||140|| | Dhan Pu. 1 p. 362] | 3. P. Pu.1 p. 312. 4. "Bhavasiddhi-aid-i-sphadi jav prajogic keli ti!". ||142|| [Ghal Pu. 1 p. 364] | 5. "Prabhavasiddhi-a-ed-i-pahristi jav sami-micchaitt-i si. ||143||" [Dhaval Pu. 1 p. 364].

Page #787:
---------------------------
## Gatha 666

**Gatha 666**
Mishtva (false belief) and Sasadan (mixed belief) have their own individual Gunasthanas (stages of spiritual progress).  The Asanyata Samyagdristi (uncontrolled right faith) in the Prathmopaśama Samyaktva (first stage of right faith) and the Bedak (Kshayopaśama) Samyaktva (stage of destruction of passions) are from the fourth Gunasthan to the seventh Gunasthan, which is the Apratmatasanyata (unwavering controlled) Gunasthan. ||665|| The Dvitiyopaśama Samyaktva (second stage of right faith) with Avirata Samyagdristi (uninterrupted right faith) is from the fourth Gunasthan to the eleventh Gunasthan, which is the Upshantamoha (subdued delusion) Gunasthan. The Kshayika Samyaktva (temporary right faith) also has Avirata Samyagdristi from the fourth Gunasthan to the Siddhas (liberated souls). ||666||

**Explanation:**
The Kshayika Samyagdristi is from the Asanyata Samyagdristi Gunasthan to the Ayogikevali Gunasthan (stage of the non-functional Kevali). ||145|| Although Siddhas also have Kshayika Samyagdarshan, they are beyond Gunasthanas, so they are not included in this Sutra. The Kshayika Samyagdristi has Kapota, Peet, Padma, and Shukla Leshya (shades of karma) during the sufficient time. ||2|| The Kshayika Samyagdristi can be born in the first Naraka (hell) after death. The first Naraka has Kapota Leshya, so Kapota Leshya is said to be during the insufficient time. The three auspicious Leshyas are for the Devas (gods) during the insufficient time for the Kshayika Samyagdristi. Other specific details should also be considered. From the second to the seventh Prithvi (earth), the Naraki Jivas (hell beings) are not in the Asanyata Samyagdristi Gunasthan with Kshayika Samyagdristi. The Tiryanch (animals) are not in the Kshayika Samyagdristi Gunasthan in the Sanayata-Asanyata Gunasthan (controlled-uncontrolled stage).

**Doubt:**
Why are there no Kshayika Samyagdristi Jivas in the Tiryanch in the Sanayata-Asanyata Gunasthan?

**Solution:**
No, because if Kshayika Samyagdristi Jivas are born in the Tiryanch, they are born in the Bhogbhumi (world of enjoyment), not elsewhere. The Anuvrata (minor vows) cannot be born in the Bhogbhumi, because it contradicts the Agam (scripture). The Tiryanch Jivas are not in the Kshayika Samyagdristi in the Asanyata-Samyagdristi and Sanayata-Asanyata Gunasthan. The Bhavanavasi, Vanavyantar, and Jyotishi Devas (gods) and their wives, and the Saudharma and Ishana Kalpavasis (gods) are not in the Kshayika Samyagdristi in the Asanyata Samyagdristi Gunasthan.

**Doubt:**
Why is there no Kshayika Samyagdarshan in the mentioned places?

**Solution:**
No, because the Darshanamohaniya (delusion of perception) is not destroyed there. The Jivas who have destroyed the Darshanamohaniya in the previous Paryaya (cycle of existence) are not born in the Bhavanavasi, etc., the first Devas, and all the Devis (goddesses).

**Note:**
The sufficient time for the Kshayika Samyagdristi in the Manushya Gati (human path) is the sufficient time for the Manushya (human) in the sufficient state.

**References:**
1. Sammadi 2, Dhaval Purana 2, Prithvi 811
2. Dhaval Purana 1, Prithvi 402 / Purana 1, Prithvi 406
3. Dhaval Purana 1, Prithvi 401, Sutra 155
4. Dhaval Purana 1, Prithvi 402, Sutra 959
5. Dhaval Purana 1, Prithvi 403, Sutra 961
6. Dhaval Purana 1, Prithvi 406, Sutra 193
7. Dhaval Purana 1, Prithvi 366
8. Dhaval Purana 1, Prithvi 406, Sutra 145

Page #788:
---------------------------
754 / Go. Sa. Jivakanda
Verse 666
Kshayik and Kshayopaśamik Samyaktva exist, but Prathamopaśam Samyaktva exists in a sufficient state. In Manushyatī, Kshayik, Kshayopaśamik, and Aupaśamik Samyaktva all exist in a sufficient state, not in an insufficient state. In Manushyinīs, Kshayik Samyaktva is in relation to Bhava-veda. In Dravyastrī, Kshayik Samyaktva does not exist. We have Samyagvṛṣṭi, Sanyata-sanyata, and Sangata Gunasthānas in Kshayik Samyagdṛṣṭi, Vedak Samyagdṛṣṭi, and Upaśam Samyagdṛṣṭi.
Vedak Samyagvṛṣṭi beings are from Asanyata Samyagdṛṣṭi to Praprāmattasanyata Gunasthāna. || 146 || 3 In Naraka, Vedak Samyagdarshan exists in a sufficient state, but in the first Naraka, Kṛtakṛtya-vedak also exists in a sufficient state. In the sufficient state of Panchaindriya Sanjī Tiryancha, Vedak Samyagdarshan is the fourth Gunasthāna. But in the insufficient state of Bhogabhūmi Puruṣavedī Tiryancha, Kṛtakṛtya-vedak Samyaktva has one Asampat Samyagdṛṣṭi as the fourth Gunasthāna. In the Manushya Gati, in the sufficient and insufficient states of Manushyas, Vedak Samyaktva is the fourth Gunasthāna, but in the sufficient state, it is from the fourth to the seventh Gunasthāna. In Devas, Vedak Samyaktva is also the fourth Gunasthāna. In the fourth Gunasthāna, Manushyas in the insufficient state have all six Leshyās, because from the first Naraka to the sixth Pṛthivī, Asanyata Samyagvṛṣṭi Nārikīs die and are born as Manushyas with their respective inauspicious Leshyās, which is why Kṛṣṇa, Nīla, Kāpota Leshyās are found. Similarly, Asanyata-samyagvṛṣṭi Devas also die and are born as Manushyas with their respective Pīta, Padma, and Śukla Leshyās.
Prathamopaśam Samyaktva has four Gunasthānas from the fourth to the seventh. Dvitīyopaśam Samyaktva has eight Gunasthānas from the fourth to the eleventh. From Vedak Samyaktva, Dvitīyopaśam Samyaktva arises. From Mithyātva, Prathamopaśam Samyaktva arises.
Anantānubandhī is considered to be Māna, Māyā, and Lobha.
Samyak-prakrti, Samyak-madhyātva, Mithyātva, these four Prakrtis, in the Sanyata Samyagdṛṣṭi to Aprāmattasangata Gunasthāna, the being residing in these four Gunasthānas is considered to be Uṣṇama-karana. To reside in other Prakrti forms, abandoning one's own form, is considered to be Upaśam for Anantānubandhī, and not in Udaya. The Upaśam of the three Prakrtis of Darśana-mohaniya is not considered to be in Udaya. Thus, Vedak Samyagvṛṣṭi, in any Gunasthāna from the fourth to the seventh, becoming Dvitīyopaśam Samyagdṛṣṭi, is inclined to ascend the Upaśam-śreṇī.
1. "Manuvṛṣṭi Paryāptikānāmeva Nāparyāptikānām. Kshayikam Punarbhāva-vedeneva. Itrya Vedastrīgaṇām Tāsām Nāyikāsambhavāt." [Sa.Si. 1/7/2. Chambal Pu. 1 Pṛ. 405 Sūtra 164. 3. Dhaval Pu. 1 Pṛ. 367 Sūtra 146. 4. Bhaval Pu. 2 Pṛ. 450 and 464 011. 5. Dhaval Pu. 2 Pu. 473 and 11. 6. "Pratādhīkoṣa-Māna-Māyā-Lobha Mammat-Sammāmicchhat Mittamitri Edāo Satt Payadīśrām Śrasañjadasammāili Hūḍi Jāv Appamattamando Tilāba Esu Jo Vā Mo Vā Uvasāmandi. Saeṁ Khudḍiyām Athaga-Paryāḍasamātānubandhīnām Utrasamo Damsa-gatiyassa Udayābhāvo Uchasamo" [Dhaval Pu. 1 Pṛ. 210] "Caturtha Pachamaṭa Saptameṣu Gunasthāneṣu Madhye Śranyatamgunasthāne Anantānubandhī Caturṣkasyā Mithyātva-prakrti-trayasya Ca Karapavidhāna Dharmayāt Upaśamaṁ Kṛtvā Upaśamasamaṣṭibhaṁvati." [Strā.Kā.A. Gā. 484 Ṭīkā] "Anantānubandhikrodha-Māna-Māyā-Noma-Samyaktva-Mithyātva-Abhyamithyātvani Tyetāḥ Saptaprakrtiḥ Santasadi-sanyata-sanyata-prāmattasampātādīnām Madhye Koyek Upaśamyati" [Mūlācāra Paryāptyadhikāra 12 Gā. 205 Ṭīkā].

Page #789:
---------------------------
I
Gova 667
Antarvaha / 755
It happens. Beings with the Upasama श्रेणी die with the second Upatham Samyaktv and are born in the Devas, therefore they obtain the second Upasama Samyaktv in a relatively short time. Anadi Mithyadristi or Sadi Mithyadristi beings are found to receive the first Upasama Samyaktv in all four gatis, but they do not attain death, because there is no death in the first Upasama Samyaktv. "With the knowledge of Manah Paryaya, a being who has descended from the Upasama श्रेणी and attained the Pramattasanyata Gunasthan, obtains the knowledge of Manah Paryaya with the second Upasama. But a Mithyatva-returned Upatham-Samyagdristi Pramattasanyata being does not obtain the knowledge of Manah Paryaya, because the origin of the knowledge of Manah Paryaya in the first Upasama Samyagdristi is not possible. The Upasama Samyagdristi does not have the Soodarikamishra Kayayog, Praharak Kayayog, Aharak Mishra Kayayog, and Pariharavishuddhi Samyama. 3
2
In Mithyatva, there are both Sadi Mithyadristi and Anadi Mithyadristi. This should be understood as the same as the first Gunasthan, because it only has one Vayumarupan.
1
The statement of Sasadan Sampashti should be understood according to the second Gunasthan, because it only has one second Gunasthan called Sasadan.
The statement of Samyagmithyadristi should be understood according to the third Gunasthan, because it only has one third Gunasthan.
In Sanjnimaargna, the statement of Gunasthan is like opening a box of treasures. There are beings who are Asanji from the Thavaraapad to the Panchendriya. ||667||
Gaatharth - Sanji beings are from Sanji Mithyadristi to Ksheenakashay, according to the rules. From Thavaraapad to Asanji Panchendriya, there are Asanji beings. ||667||
This is the only available commentary on the Gommatsar Jeev Kaand by Pandit Ratanchandji Mukhtar (Saharanpur). Due to the ravages of cruel time, he was unable to write the commentary on the last 38 Gaathas. The commentary on these Gaathas has been written by the worthy disciple of Mukhtar Sa., the present-day unparalleled scholar of Karananuyog, young Pandit Jawaharlalji Jain Siddhanta Shastri (Bhindar).
|| Om Hrim Shripadmaprabhave Namah || Pranamami Sunarveshmanantashcha Munishvaran. Jinvaani Tatha Vande Sarvalokopkariinim ||1||
Iti Pranaty Sambhavannya Sarvajeevahitaya Vai. Teeka's Yatha Shakti Sampurnikriyate Maya ||2||
Atha Avashishta Teeka Prarabhyate
Special meaning of Gaatha 667 - Here it is being told how many Gunasthan are there in Sanjnimaargna. So, both Sanji and Asanji are present in Sanjnimaargna. Khandagam
I
'It is also said that Sanji p.430 and Go. Ji. Ma 730. 2. Dhaval Pu. 2 p. 822. 1. Gachal Pu. 2 p. 618.
1. Dhaval Pu. 2

Page #790:
---------------------------
756 / Go. Ma. Jivakanda
Verse 668
From the translation of Margara, there are Sanji and Asanji Jivas. That is, Samansk and Amansk are the two forms of Sanji Marg. Therefore, both are mentioned in this verse about Sanji Marg. (Know this everywhere.) There, Sanji Jivas are from the first Gunasthan to the twelfth Gunasthan. And those Jivas who are in the first Gunasthan by rule, are only in the Mithyadristi Gunasthan. Pujyapada Acharya has also said that there is only one Mithyadristi Gunasthan in Sanji. Therefore, Asanji, up to Panchendriya, wherever they are Asanji, the Gunasthan is also called Mithyatva.
In Aharamarg, the pure
Thavar Kaya reaches the Sayogi Charimoti, it is called Aharak. Karmai Pranahari, Ajogin Siddhi, they are also called Anahari. ||668||
Meaning - From Thavar Kaya to the Sayogi Gunasthan, they are Aharak. Karmaka Yoga ones, Ajogin Kevali Bhagwan and all Siddhas are Anahari. ||668||
Special Meaning - Here, Gunasthan is mentioned in Aharamarg. There are two types of Aharamarg (1) Aharak (2) Naharak. So, Thavar Kaya (Ekendriya) Mithyatvi to the thirteenth Gunasthan, Sayogi, all Jivas are Aharak. * And Karmaka Kaya Yogi Jivas, Ajogin Kevali Bhagwan and all Siddhas are Anahari.
Doubt - In which Gunasthan are they Anahari?
Solution - (1) Mithyadristi (2) Sasadan (3) Asanyat Samyagvati (4) Sayogkevali (because Karmayoga is possible in these four) and (5) Prayogkevali; in these five Gunasthan, Jivas are Anahari, in other Gunasthan, they are Aharak.
Doubt - Even in the Karmaka Kaya Yogi state of Kaka Yoga Jivas, there is the existence of Karma's reception, so why are Karmaka Kaya Yogi Jivas not called Aharak, so that Anahari are only Prayogi and Siddha?
Solution - They are not called Aharak because during Karmaka Kaya Yoga, the Nokvargana's Ahar has a maximum of three times of separation time. In essence, the reason for the Anahari state of Karmaka Kaya Yogi Jivas is the absence of the reception of their Nokvargana.
2. Suggi Miccha Itrippanndi 1. Saviyatra Prathi Mani Amipi || 172 || Jivasthan, Shatkhandagam. Jav Khognakasay Viyaram Chhadumatta Ti. || 173 || 14 Jivasthan Shatvam Sarvashi 1 | 3. Asanjipu Ekamev Mithyadrististanam. S. Si. 1/8 . 2/586 Navi Sanska. Evam Patkan. 1 / 174. 4. Graharanuvaadena Aharim Mannuma Ali Terahgugaadashai Shravala Ghu. 2/836, S. Si. 1/8 Prakarga 44 / 1.24. 5. Pranaharachumuthane Su Viggagah Samavanya, Kevalon Va Samupadadam Jogikevali Siddha Chedi || 177 || Shra Jivasthan | Pra. P. Sangrah 1/177; M. Si. 1/8/44: Sanskrit Pan. Sangrah 1 / 324 Dh. Pu. 1/4/21 Sha. Pu. 2 P. 850, 051 Dhaval Pu. 1 P. 154 Evam Go. Ji. 666. Pu. 2 || Patra 670 Gaharin, Lokammagaharanaabhavad.
6. Dhaval

Page #791:
---------------------------
## Gatha 696-700

**Gatha 696:** In the Guṇasthāna of Mithyātva, there are fourteen Jīvasamāsas. In the Guṇasthānas of Māsādana, Asanyata, and Pramatta-sanyata, there are two Jīvasamāsas: Sañjī-paryāpta and Sañjī-aparyāpta. In the remaining Guṇasthānas up to the twelfth, there is only one Jīvasamās: Sañjī-paryāpta. From the 'y' in the first half of the Gatha, it is known that there are two Jīvasamāsas in Sayoga-kevali: Sañjī-paryāpta and Sañjī-aparyāpta. From the 'du' (Sanskrit 'tu') in the second half of the Gatha, it is known that there is only one Jīvasamās in Ayoga-kevali: Sañjī-paryāpta.

**Gatha 700:** In the Tiryaṅga-gati, there are fourteen Jīvasamāsas. However, in the remaining three gatīs: Naraka-gati, Manusya-gati, and Deva-gati, there are only two Jīvasamāsas: Sañjī-paryāpta and Sañjī-aparyāpta. Thus, one should know the Jīvasamāsas in all the Mārgagaṇas as explained above.

**Special Note:** In the Jāti-mārgagaṇa, there are four Jīvasamāsas related to the Ekendriya-jāti (Bādar, Sūkṣma, and their Paryāpta and Aparyāpta). In the Dwīndriya-jāti, there are two Jīvasamāsas related to the Dwīndriya. In the Trīndriya-jāti, there are two Jīvasamāsas related to the Trīndriya (Trīndriya-paryāpta and Trīndriya-aparyāpta, this should be applied everywhere). In the Caturindriya-jāti, there are two Jīvasamāsas related to the Caturindriya. In the Pañcendriya-jāti, there are four Jīvasamāsas (Sañjī and Asanji Pañcendriya, each with Paryāpta and Aparyāpta, making a total of four).

In the Kāya-mārgagaṇa, there are ten Jīvasamāsas in the Trasakāya (Ekendriya, Dwīndriya, Caturindriya, Asanji and Sañjī - a total of five. Each of these has Paryāpta and Aparyāpta, making a total of ten). In the Sthāvarakāya, there are four Jīvasamāsas (Ekendriya Sūkṣma and Bādar, and their Paryāpta and Aparyāpta - a total of four). This should be applied to each of the five Sthāvarakāyas.

In the Yoga-mārgagaṇa, there is only one Jīvasamās in the Manoyoga: Sañjoga-gati. In the Vacanayoga, there are five Jīvasamāsas possible from Ekendriya to Sañjī-nak in the Paryāpta state. (Except for Asatyamṛṣā, there is only one Jīvasamās in the other Vacanayogas: Sañjī-paryāpta, this is a special note).

Page #792:
---------------------------
758/Go. Sa. Jivakanda
Verse 700: All living beings are in the state of Kayayoga. In the Praudarik Kayayoga, there are 7 sufficient Jivasamas and 7 insufficient Jivasamas in the Pro. Mith. In the Vaikriyik Kayayoga, there is one sufficient Jivasamas called Sanji and one insufficient Jivasamas called Sanjni in its mixture. Know the Jivasamas in the Saharakayoga like Vaikriyik Yoga and in the Aharakamisra like Vaitripiyamishra. There are also insufficient Jivasamas in the Kamara Yoga.
In the Vevamargrana, there are Jivasamas in the Striveda - Sanji Paryapt, Sanji Aparyapt, Asanji Panchendriya Paryapt and Asanji Panchendriya Aparyapt. There are also 4 Jivasamas in the Purushaveda like the above. But in the Namak Veda, only 14 Jivasamas are possible.
In the Kashayamargrana, there are 14 Jivasamas of the Shrodhakashayi Jivas in the Krodha Kashay (or in general). There are also the same number of Jivasamas in other Kashayas as in the Krodha Kashay.
In the Gyanamargrana, there are 14 Jivasamas in the Mastithata Pragyan (in general), one Sanji Paryapt Jivasamas in the Vibhang Gyan, two Jivasamas - Sanji Paryapt and Aparyapt - in the Matishruta Gyan, one Sanji Paryapt Jivasamas in the Manahparyaya Gyan, and two Jivasamas - Sanji Paryapt and Sanji Aparyapt - in the Kevalgyan, or one Paryapt Jivasamas (in relation to A yogi) and one Pratiti Jivasamas (in relation to Siddhas).
In the Sanayamargrana, in general, there are two Jivasamas possible in Sanayam - Sanji Paryapt and Sanji Aparyapt (in particular, both are possible for Pramattasanyata, but only one Jivasamas called Sanji Paryapt is possible for Apramattasanyata). Both are possible in Samayik and Chhedopasthapana Sanayam, one (only Sanji Paryapt) in Pariharvishuddhi Sanayam, one Sanji Paryapt Jivasamas in Sukshmasamparaya Sanayam, and two Jivasamas (Sanji Paryapt and Sanji Aparyapt) in Yathakyata Shuddhi Sanayam (or Prathakyata Shuddhi Sanayam). There are 14 Jivasamas possible for Asanyata Jivas. There is also one Sanji Paryapt Jivasamas for Sanyata Sanyatas.
In the Varshanamargrana, there are generally 6 Jivasamas in Chakshudarshini, i.e., Chakshudarshan - 2 each for Chaturindriya Paryapt and Aparyapt, and 4 for Panchendriya Sanji Asanji and their Paryapt and Aparyapt. So, the total is 2+4=6. Even in the Aparyapt Kala, due to the presence of Kshayopasham in Chakshudarshan, or
These are the 6 Jivasamas, understand it as Go. Sa. In Achakshudarshan, there are generally 14 Jivasamas. There are two Jivasamas (related to Sanji) in Avadhi Darshan. And know it like Kevalgyan in Keval Darshan, i.e., Sanji Paryapt and Aparyapt, these two.
In the Leshyamargrana, there are generally 14 Jivasamas in Ashubhatraya Leshya. 12 Shubhaleshys
1. Dh. Pr. 2 Pr. 638; Pra. Pan. Ma. 4.11583. 2. Gh. Pr. 2 Pr. 666 but in the Prakrit Panchasangrahantha, 6 Jivasamas are mentioned in the Chaudarik Bhisrayoga and Kamakayayoga. Pra. Pan. Sa. 1.4 G. 12 page 83. 3. Pa. Pu. 2 Pr. 674; Pra. Pan. Sa. 4.14. Pr. 83 4. . Pu. 2 Pr. 265 Pra. Pan. Sa. 4.11.83. 5. Gh. Pu. 2 Pu 686, Pra. Pan. Sa. 111883. 6. Gh. Pu. 2 Pr. 701. 7. Dh. Pu. 21713. 8. Gh.2/732740 and Pra. Pan. Sa. 4/16/84 1. Gh. 2/436 and Pra. Pan. Sa. 4/16/84 | 3. Dh.2/740. 10. Dh. 1044. 11. Pr. 2/751 Pra. 5. Sa. 4/17/4. 12. Dh 2/750-766 and Pan. Sa./18/84-5. Even in the Paryapt Kala, due to the absence of Kshayopasham in Vakshranjan, they say that there are 14 Jivasamas in relation to Shakti. 1 Sa. Manak Ga. 17 Tika.

Page #793:
---------------------------
##  Verse 701
## Grantharbhav / 756

There are two types of Jivasamas in the case of Tejo-leshya: Sanji-paryapt and Sanji-aparyapt. Because even in the case of Pancha-indriya Avishishta Shubh-leshya, only Sanji-paryapt and Sanji-aparyapt are present. These two Jivasamas are present in the case of Ashubh-leshya.

In the case of Bhavya-mana, there are 14 Jivasamas in both Bhavya and Bhavya. In the case of Samyak-marg-na, there are two Jivasamas: Samyak-paryapt and Samyak-aparyapt. And there are also Atit Jivasamas. It should be understood that this applies to all Marg-na, as much as possible.

These are the Jivasamas that are present in the case of Kshamitva. In the case of Vedak-samyak-vi and Upsham-samyak-vi, these two should be known. There are 14 Jivasamas in the case of Mithya-shti and two Jivasamas in the case of Sasadan. This is the opinion of Bhagwan Veersenacharya etc., but according to the opinion of Panchasangrahakar etc., Sasadan-samyak-tva is possible in all seven Jivasamas: Aparyapt and Sanji-paryapt. There is only one Sanji-paryapt Jivasamas in the case of Samyak-mithya-tva.

In the case of Sanji-marg-na, there are 12 Jivasamas related to Sanji (Sanji-paryapt and Sanji-aparyapt) and also 12 Jivasamas related to Prasanji in Sanji (excluding the ones related to Sanji).

In the case of Grahar-marg-na, there are all 14 Jivasamas for Aharak and 7 Aparyapt Jivasamas for Anaharak. There is one Sanji-paryapt Jivasamas related to Yogi. And there are also Atit Jivasamas.

##  In the case of Gunasthanas, Paryapti and Pran:

Paryapti and Pran are easy. In Sayogi-kevali, there is no Bhav-indriya. So there are 4 Pran: Vachan, Shwaso-chchwas, Aayu and Kayaval. Or there are also 3 and 2 Pran here. In the case of A-yogi, there is only Aayu-pran.

##  Special Note:

Until the 12th Gunasthan, all Paryapti and all Pran are present. From the perspective of Dravya-indriyas in Sayogi, there are 6 Paryapti and 4 Pran. There are 5 Indriya-pran and 1 Manah-pran, a total of 6 Pran, which are not present here. In this way, in these 4 Pran of Sayogi-kevali, when Vachan-yoga is exhausted, only 3 Pran remain. And then, when Ucchwas-nishwas is exhausted, only 2 Pran remain.

##  References:

1. Cha. 2/736 and Pan. San. 4/18/85
2. Gha. 2/586, 560
3. Veersenacharya: Nemichandracharya Go. Ji. 696
4. Dha. 20430 and Go. Ji. 666
5. Pra. Pan. San. Shatak 4, Sa. 201.86
6. Pan. Sangrah 4.16.05
7. Va. 21432 and Pan. San. 4.16.84-75
8. Pra. Pan. San. Shatak 4, Sa. 201.86
9. M. Pan. San. 4/20186

##  End of Verse 701

Page #794:
---------------------------
760/ Go. Sa. Jivakanda
There is only one Ayuprana for a Yogi.
Doubt- Why are not ten Pranas said for a Kevali, in comparison to the Dravyaindriyas?
Gatha 701
Solution- If the Dravyaindriyas are included in the Pranas, then in the case of Sanjeevi beings, there would be a lack of seven Pranas in their inadequate time, and only two Pranas would be said; because, they lack Dravyaindriyas. Therefore, it is proven that a Sayogi cannot have ten Pranas.
Doubt- Many travelers say ten Pranas in comparison to the existence of Dravyaindriyas, so is their saying not valid?
—
Solution- Yes, according to the statement of Bhagwan Veerasen Swami, their saying is not valid, because, Sayogi Jins do not have Bhavaindriyas. The five Indriyaavaranakarmans are called Bhavaindriyas. But, since the Jins have completely destroyed their Avaran Karma, they do not have that Kshayopapsham, therefore, in the absence of these Kshayopabhavaindriyas and Bhayaman, a Kevali Bhagwan has only four Pranas, excluding the six, this should be known. 3
Doubt- What is the reason for a Yogi having only one Ayuprana?
Solution- The Yogi Kevali does not have the Indriya Pranas in the form of Kshayopapsham of the Jnanavaran Karma, because, after the destruction of Jnanavaran etc. Karmans, the absence of Kshayopapsham is found. Granapan, Bhasha and Manahpranas are also not theirs, because, the Pranas born from Paryapti are the effect of their Sanjnawali Shakti. They also do not have Kayabal Pranas, because, they are the effect of the arrival of Karma and Nokarma born from the Uday of their Sharira Karma. Therefore, a Yogi Bhagwan has only one Ayuprana. By taking refuge in Upchar, they also have one Pran, six Pranas or seven Pranas, but this text is secondary. [Such refuge in Upchar is also possible for a Sayogikevali.]
Doubt- Does a Yogi Bhagwan have Graha Paryaptis?
There, 1. Vaguchchh, Vas, Nishvas, Ayukaya Pranas, these four are for a Mayogi Jin, the remaining Indriya Manah Pranas are six. The Shraya is three for a Vagyogi who has rested. Again, two for Ucchvas and Nishvas who have rested. One Ayuprana for a non-Yogi. Pra. Pa. Sa. 412 | Page 6 and also Gh. 20423, 447, 448, 531, 656, 973, 730, 853 etc. There is a special point here that in the above mentioned places in the Ghabhala, there is no Ayupranarupana for a Sarvayogi. But, in Panchasangraha (Page 86 Gatha 20 Tika, Shatak), there is also Pranatrayarupana in the present Jivakanda (Gatha 701). Pranatrayarupana is done in relation to the time of Yoga Nirodha. It should be known that even in the state of Linah Samudghataparyapti, there are two, and even in the time of Trayodashgunasthanant, there are two (Ayuh Kayamach). || 2. Dh. Pu. 2 Page 448 If you take the Dravyaindriyas, then there will be seven Pranas in the case of a Mayogi, and two Pranas in the case of a Sayogi, due to the absence of the five Dravyaindriyas. 3. Pa. Pu. 2 Page 447-48 | 4. Dh. 2 / 449-50 5. Uvtramasmikaran, one or six or seven Pranas are there. Gh 2/450.

Page #795:
---------------------------
Gatha 702
Antarbhava/761
Samadhan - Yes, the six paryaptis (completions) exist. The reason for the existence of the six is that the paryaptis that have come from the past continue to exist in the same way. Therefore, the statement that the six paryaptis do not exist for the ayogi (non-ascetic) is not contradictory. It is correct that here no activity arises from the paryaptis.
Shanka - How many pranas (life-forces) does a Kevali (omniscient being) have during the time of the audārika-miśra and kārmaṇa-kāyayoga?
Samadhan - Two, āyu (life-span) and kāya (body) pranas. The specific point is that in the kārmaga-kāyayoga, the Kevali has only these two (āyu and kāya) pranas. Even in the audārika-miśra state, due to the state of aparyāptāvasthā (incompleteness), only the appropriate two pranas are formed. Or, the paryaptis (completions) that are the cause of the aforementioned pranas are present in relation to the existing body of the Kevali, so from the sixth time, the two pranas of vācana-bala (power of speech) and śvāsocchvāsa (respiration) can be considered. In this way, four pranas can also be said to be of the Kevali in the audārika-miśra state.
Guṇasthānas mein sanjñā, chaṭṭhottī, paḍhamasaṇṇā, sakajja, seṣā ya kāraṇāvekkhā. Putto paḍhamarinnayaṭṭho, suhamoṭṭi kameṇa seṣāno ||702||
Arthāt, up to the sixth guṇasthāna (spiritual stage), the four sanjñās (cognitions) are sākārya (active). *The first sanjñā is not present earlier. The remaining three sanjñās exist in relation to the cause, successively up to prāpūrvakaraṇa, the first part of anivṛttikaraṇa, and sūkṣmasāmparāya respectively.

Page #796:
---------------------------
762/Go. Sa. Jivakanda
Gatha 703

No, therefore, there is no action either. ) The remaining three cognitions are also not actions in the form of action, because in the previous Sānādi Gunasthanas, running away from fear, sexual play, and accepting possessions are not seen as actions. In the seventh and beyond, the remaining three cognitions are mentioned by way of treatment, and the reason for the treatment is the arising and fading of the karmas that are the cause of those three cognitions. Therefore, from the point of view of karma-arising alone, there are three cognitions without the food of the non-negligent restrained. These three cognitions are also present in the Apurvakarana. In the first part of the Anivrittikara Gunasthanas, there are only two cognitions: sexual intercourse and possessions.

Why?

The reason for these two cognitions is that at the end of the Apurvakarana Gunasthanas, the arising and fading of fear have been destroyed. Therefore, the cognition of fear is not there. Therefore, only the aforementioned two cognitions remain. In the second part of the Anivrittikara, the cognition of sexual intercourse is also not there because the arising of the Ved-Nok-Pay karma is destroyed. That is, after the internalization, the arising of the Ved is destroyed when it goes to the Antamaha. Therefore, the second part of the beings do not have the cognition of sexual intercourse. Therefore, only the cognition of possessions remains by way of treatment (the reason for the treatment is the existence of karma) in the second, third, fourth, and fifth parts of the Anivrittikara. In the Sukshma-Samparaya, the cognition of possessions is also in a subtle (small) form because here there is only the arising of subtle greed, not gross greed. In the eleventh Gunasthanas, the cognitions attain a state of quiescence. It is also said that the reason for the quiescence of the cognitions is that here there is complete quiescence of the Mohaniya karma, therefore, the cognitions that arise from it also remain quiescent. Therefore, here it is called quiescent cognition. But in the twelfth and beyond, all the Gunasthanas, one should know the full effect of the cognition, because the passions are completely destroyed here, therefore, the destruction of the cognitions is natural. In this way, in the quiescent and beyond Gunasthanas, the cognitions are not without action, because in the absence of the cause, there is an absence of action.

The map of the number of cognitions (and their extinction) according to the Gunasthanas is as follows:

Gunasthanas
| Gunasthanas || 2 | 3 || 5 | - | | 10 11 12 13 | 14 | Cognition || 4 | 4 | « | 4 | 4 | 3 | 3 | 2 | • • • Extinction | • | | | 1 | 1 | 1 . 1 | . ... |

In the Gunasthanas, the path of liberation is easy because of the previous teachings. In the Gadinadis, the wrong views are destroyed and the right views arise. || 703 ||

1. Padam-Parinayattigan Bhanaya Mage ....... ....... Papuvakarna Charimsamaye Bhaysass Udiramodaya Gata Nera Bhaysapma Mathi 1 Gh. 2438.
2. Dh. 2/441.
3. Gh, 21442.
4. Ashantadipu Karya Rahitagi Na, Karana Bhavace Kavyabhavaha. Pra. Pan. San. Adhi 4/Ga. 2./Tika.

Page #797:
---------------------------
## Gatha 703

**Verse 703**

The paths of transmigration and their usage are easy to understand in the Gunasthanas, as we have already explained. Because, by mentioning Mithyastva, etc., in the paths of transmigration, their explanation becomes clear. ||703||

**Explanation of Transmigration in Gunasthanas:**

**Transmigration:**

* **Naraka (Hell) Transmigration:** In the first four Gunasthanas, Naraka transmigration is possible. In the first Gunasthana, both sufficient and insufficient Naraka transmigration is possible. In the second Gunasthana, Naraka transmigration is only sufficient. In the third Gunasthana, Naraka transmigration is only sufficient. In the fourth Gunasthana, the beings with Naraka transmigration are insufficient, sufficient in the first Naraka, but sufficient in the remaining Narakas (in the fourth Gunasthana).

* **Tiryach (Animal) Transmigration:** In the fifth Gunasthana, Tiryach transmigration is possible. In the first and second Gunasthanas, Tiryach transmigration is both sufficient and insufficient. In the third Gunasthana, it is sufficient by rule. In the fourth Gunasthana, it is sufficient, but also insufficient in comparison to the Bhogbhumi. In the fifth Gunasthana, Tiryach transmigration is sufficient by rule.

* **Manushya (Human) Transmigration:** In all Gunasthanas, beings with Manushya transmigration are possible. In the first, second, fourth, sixth, and thirteenth Gunasthanas, both sufficient and insufficient Manushya transmigration is possible. In the remaining Gunasthanas, only sufficient Manushya transmigration is possible.

* **Dev (Celestial) Transmigration:** This is possible in four Gunasthanas. In the first, second, and fourth Gunasthanas, Dev transmigration is both sufficient and insufficient. In the third Gunasthana, Dev transmigration is sufficient by rule. (In comparison to the Bhavna Trika, in the fourth Gunasthana, Dev transmigration is only sufficient by rule.)

* **Ekaindriya (One-sense) Beings:** Only in the first Gunasthana, all types of Ekaindriya beings are both sufficient and insufficient. (However, according to some Acharyas and scholars, Sasadan is also possible in Ekaindriya beings. According to them, insufficient Ekaindriya beings are also possible in the second Gunasthana. This should be understood for Dviindriya, etc., up to Asanji Pancha. Ap.)

* **Dviindriya (Two-sense), etc.:** All of these are both sufficient and insufficient only in the first Gunasthana. [According to other opinions (as before), Vikalatraya beings in the insufficient state, i.e., insufficient Dviindriya, insufficient Triindriya, insufficient Chaturindriya, and Prasani Panchaindriya beings, and insufficient Asanji Panchaindriya beings are also possible in the second Gunasthana.]

* **Sau Panchaindriya (Perfect Five-sense Beings):** These are sufficient in all Gunasthanas, but insufficient in the first, second, fourth, sixth, and thirteenth Gunasthanas.

* **Asakaya (Formless Beings):** Sufficient Asakaya beings are possible in all Gunasthanas, but insufficient Asakaya beings are only possible in the first, second, fourth, sixth, and thirteenth Gunasthanas. [Dviindriya, etc., up to Prasanji Panchaindriya beings are both sufficient and insufficient.

**1. Mithyadristi Gunasthana.**

**Mangrahkar Aminayati:** Bhoonabali, Pujyapada Acharya, Jivaprabodhini Kar, etc.

Page #798:
---------------------------
764/Go, Sa. Jiva Kanda
Gatha 704
In the first Gunasthan, there are both Paryapta and Aparyapta. However, according to a different opinion, only Aparyapta are present in the second Gunasthan, while Sanjnee are both Paryapta and Aparyapta in the second Gunasthan.
Sthavarakaya - In these, it is only possible for Paryapta and Aparyapta to be in the Mithyatva Gunasthan. [According to a different opinion, Aparyapta of Badar, water, earth, and plants are possible in the second Gunasthan.]
Yoga in Gunasthanas
Tisu teram is misse sattsu ev chhatthayammi eyara.
Jogi mmi satt joga prajogi thaanm have sunnam. ||704|| Gathaarth - There are thirteen in three, ten in Mischa, nine in seven, eleven in the sixth, seven Yogas in Sayogi, and the Ayogi sthana is empty. ||704||
Vishesharth - Three, meaning the first, second, and fourth Gunasthan, have 13 Yogas. This means that out of the total 15 Yogas, excluding Praharak and Aharak Mishra, the other 13 Yogas are present in the 1st, 2nd, and 4th Gunasthan. Mishra, meaning Samyag Mithyatva Gunasthan - in the third Gunasthan, out of the aforementioned thirteen, Vaikayik Mishra, Praudarik Mith, and Kamaga, these three are subtracted, leaving 10 Yogas. In the sixth Gunasthan, out of these ten, Vaikayik is subtracted and Aharak Dwik Yoga is added, resulting in a total of 11 Yogas. And in the seventh, nine, meaning the fifth Gunasthan, which is Sanjata Sanjat, and the six Gunasthanas from the seventh to the twelfth, these seven Gunasthanas, out of the aforementioned ten, Vaikayik Yoga is subtracted, leaving the remaining Yogas. In Sayogi Kevali, there are seven Yogas: Satya and Anubhay Vachan and Manoyoga, and Audarik, Audarik Mishra, and Karmaran. In Ayogi, there are no Yogas. Now, they also explain the Ved, etc., Marmanas in a concise way and in terms of Gunasthanas - .. Margana
In which Gunasthanas? Vedmargana - All three Vedas are present in the ninth Gunasthan, up to the first part of the Veda. Kashaymargana - Out of these, the four Amanta Anubandhi Kashayas are the four Krodha Kashayas that attain Uday in the first and second Gunasthanas, and not beyond. In the third Gunasthan, the three (types of four Mana Kashayas, four each) Kashayas (Udit) remain without Ananta Anubandhi. In the fifth Gunasthan, the two Kashayas remain without Ananta Anubandhi and four Maya Kashayas, Apratyabhyan. From the sixth Gunasthan onwards, only one Kashaya (the four Sajwalan Kashayas) remains, up to the second part of the ninth, which is called Anivriti. In the third part, three Kashayas remain without Sajwalan Krodha. In the fourth part, only Sajwalan Maya and Lobha remain. And in the fifth part, only Lobha remains.
1. Tisu terege das gav sattam inakmhi hunti ekkaag.
Imhi masakoma ajo bataanm havad sapana ||74|| Pra. Pan. San. Pataka. 103rd San. Pan. San. || 12-13 p.12. 2. Pan dashayanganam namani purvam (216-241 gatha paryant) ityenasu gatham proktani iti nochyante. 3. Dhaval 2/435-439.

Page #799:
---------------------------
##  Verse 104

**Subtle Subtlety (Sookshma Maampraaya) Gunasthan:** In the Subtle Subtlety Gunasthan, the subtle greed (Kapaay) remains. In all the higher Gunasthanas, there are no Kshayaas.

**Knowledge Path (Gyaan Maargna):** In the first and second Gunasthanas, there are only three types of knowledge (Myaan). Even in the mixed (Mishch) state, the three types of knowledge (Graadi) are mixed. In the fourth and fifth Gunasthanas, there are three right knowledges (Samyagyaan): Mati, Shraut, and Avadhi. From the sixth to the twelfth Gunasthanas, along with the above three, there is also Mind Perception (Manah Paryaya). Further, in the thirteenth and higher Gunasthanas, there is only pure knowledge (Kevalgyaan).

**Restraint Path (Sanyam Maargna):** In the first four Gunasthanas, there is the path of unrestraint (Asanyam Maargga). In the fifth Gunasthan, there is only restraint of the body (Deshasanyam). In the sixth and seventh, there are three restraints: Samaayik, Chhedoshthapana, and Parihaar Vishuddhi. In the eighth and ninth Gunasthanas, there are only Samaayik and Chhedoshthapana restraints. In the tenth, there is the restraint of Subtle Subtlety (Sookshma Saampraaya). In all the higher Gunasthanas, there is the restraint as described (Yathaakhyaat Sanyam). This is also called the restraint beyond description (Atharakhyaat Sanyam) by Pujyapadaacharya and others.

**Vision Path (Darshan Maargna):** In the first three Gunasthanas, there are two visions: Chakshu and Achakshu. From the fourth to the twelfth Gunasthanas, there are three visions: Chakshu, Prachakshu, and Avadhi Darshan. In the higher Gunasthanas, there is only pure vision (Keval Darshan). (In the Pancha Sangrah, Avadhi Darshan is also mentioned in the third Gunasthan! Why is the vision of doubt-removal (Shankha Vibhang Darshan) not mentioned in the first and second Gunasthanas?

**Solution:** Because it is included in Avadhi Darshan. Similarly, in the Siddhivinishchay, it is said: "Avadhigyaan and Vibhanggyaan are included in Avadhi Darshan."

**Leshya Path (Leshya Maargna):** In the first four Gunasthanas, there are all six Leshyas. From the fifth to the seventh Gunasthanas, there are only three auspicious Leshyas. Beyond this, until the state of being united with the Supreme (Sayogi), there is only the white Leshya (Shuklaleshya). The state of being separated from the Supreme (Ayogi Gunasthan) is without Leshya. It is noteworthy that according to Pujyapada, the author of Sarvarth Siddhi, even those who are free from attachment (Nirgranth), who are engaged in the practice of restraint (Sanyat), and who are in the state of being united with the Supreme (Sayogi), can have inauspicious Leshyas. However, according to Dhavala, after the fourth Gunasthan, the three inauspicious Leshyas are impossible.

**Bhavya Path (Bhavya Maargna):** In the first Gunasthan, there are both Bhavya and Abhavya. From the second to the twelfth Gunasthanas, there are only Bhavya. In both the state of being united with the Supreme (Sayogi) and the state of being separated from the Supreme (Ayogi), there are only Bhavya.

**References:**

1. Gh. 2/436 to 442
2. Sayogi-Kevalin Bhavya Maage Asthi... Kevan Gaanan... Evam Prayogik Kevalin Tampi Jaatavyam. 5.2/44-
3. Dh. 2/432
4. Pan. Ma. Gaatha 64.66, Page 100
5. Vihang Darshanam Ki Pahibida, Tassa Prohidasago Antbhaavaada. Tatha Siddhivinishchay Apui Tam... "Avadhivi. Bhangyogbaghi Darshan Meva" Iti. Dhavala Page 13, Patra 356
6. Ma. Mi. 946; Na. Vr. 6.47.316; Ga. Va. 6146 Bakush Pratisevnaanusheelayo: Padapi. Karakuineenasy Uttaraaschanaapta:
7. Gh. 2435 Drishyatam (Nakshatra 13 Graadi Tatha Dh. 21801)
8. Gh. 2/448 to 150, Gh. 1/365, Sa. Si. 18, Pu. 23, Page 26. Page 38, Page 56; San. Pan. San. 11215, Page 6.

Page #800:
---------------------------
756/Go. Sa. Jivakanda
Gatha 05

Yes, those who have transcended the Gunasthanas (stages of spiritual progress) and attained Siddhi (liberation) are devoid of the duality of Bhavy (destined for liberation) and Abhavy (destined for rebirth). In other words, they are neither Bhavy nor Abhavy. However, in the Panchasangraha, only 12 Gunasthanas (up to Kshina-kapaya) are mentioned in relation to the Bhavy path. It is also stated that the term Bhavy is not applicable to the Sayogi (those who have attained liberation but still have a subtle body). (Although the Dhavala, Sarvarthasiddhi, etc., mention 14 Gunasthanas for the Bhavy, the Panchasangraha mentions only 12 for them.)

Samyak-tva (right faith) and Mithyatva (wrong faith) occur only in the first Gunasthan. Sasadan Samyak-tva (right faith with a subtle body) occurs only in the second Gunasthan. Sabhya Mithyatva (wrong faith with a subtle body) occurs only in the third Gunasthan. From the fourth to the seventh Gunasthan, all three - Vedak (knowledge), Upshama (tranquility), and Kshayik (destruction of karmas) - are present. In the higher stages, in the Upshama category of Gunasthanas, Upshama or Kshayik Samyak-darshan (right perception) is possible. In the Kshapadharani category of Gunasthanas, only Kshayik Samyak-tva is present. And in the Gunasthanas beyond the twelfth, as well as in the state of Siddhi, only Kshayik Samyak-tva is present.

Sanji-margana (with consciousness) and Asanji (without consciousness) are possible only in the first Gunasthan or in the first and second Gunasthan. And Sanji is present in all Gunasthanas (up to the twelfth). In the thirteenth and fourteenth Gunasthan, the Jiva (soul) is neither Sanji nor Asanji, meaning it is devoid of the duality of Sanji and Asanji.

Maharamargna (with a gross body) - in the first, second, fourth, and thirteenth Gunasthanas, there are Anaharak (those who do not consume food), but they are only Ayogi Anaharak (those who do not consume food due to their lack of merit). In the remaining nine Gunasthanas, according to the rule, they are Praharak (those who consume food). (Those who have transcended the Gunasthanas and attained Siddhi are Anaharak.)

The statement about the uses in the Gunasthanas is as follows:

"Two in five, and two in six, six in the mixed form. Seven in seven uses, two in the Jinas, and two in the Siddhas." (705)

Meaning: There are five uses in the second Gunasthan, six in the sixth Gunasthan, and six mixed uses in the mixed Gunasthan. There are seven uses in the seventh Gunasthan, two uses in the Jinas, and two uses in the Siddhas. (705)

Special Meaning: The inclination of the Jiva towards the reception of an object is called "Upayoga" (use). There are two main types of Upayoga: Gnan-Upayoga (use of knowledge) and Darshan-Upayoga (use of perception). The first type, Gnan-Upayoga, has the following sub-types: Kumati (wrong knowledge), Kushruta (wrong hearing), Ku-pravadhi (wrong clairvoyance), Mati (right knowledge), Shruta (right hearing), Avadhi (right clairvoyance), Manah-paryaya (right knowledge of the mind), and Kevala (perfect knowledge). The second type, Darshan-Upayoga, has four sub-types: 1. Gh. 2/451 Siddharananti bhannammane Gova Bhavasiddhia, Neva Abhayasiddhima Hoti. Go. Ji. 556. 2. Madhye Mithyadrishtaadiane Kshiga Kashayantani Dvadash 12 Sayogayogayom-avy-padesho Nastini. Pra. Pan. San. 4/17/100. 3. Gh. 2/533 Yatha Asashiin Bhannammane Asthi Evam Gatham.... 6. Idam Kathana Prakrutpanchasangrahamatanusar Vartate - Yatha Pras Girnayammi Jive Donn Iya Micchaai Bohatya. Pra. Pan. San. 4/69/101. 5. Dh. 144-45 6. Pra. Pan. San. 4/70 Pr. 101-102 Evam Gh. Pr. 457 Paryant. Esha Dh. 2/836 Se 255. 7. Go. Ji. 672, Go. Ji. 7, Pra. Ma. San. Pr. 1 Ga. 178. 3.7 Graadi. Gh. 2/416.

Page #801:
---------------------------
## Gatha 706-707

**Gatha 706**

**How many of the twelve types of knowledge are present in each of the twelve Gunasthanas?**

In the first two Gunasthanas, there are five types of knowledge: two types of Gunasthana, three types of Mithya Jnana, and two types of Darshan.

In the fourth and fifth Gunasthanas, there are six types of knowledge: Mati Shruta, Avadhi Jnana, Chakshu, Prachakshu, Avadhi Darshan, and Manahparyaya Jnana.

In the third Gunasthana, called Mishra, all six types of knowledge are present in a mixed form.

In the seventh to twelfth Gunasthanas, there are seven types of knowledge, including Manahparyaya Jnana.

In the case of Sayogi, Prayogi, and Siddhas, there are only two types of knowledge: Kevala Jnana and Kevala Darshan.

Thus, the twenty-first chapter of the Gommatasar Jivakanda, called Antarbhavaruprana, is complete.

**Gatha 707**

**The twenty types of Alap in the Gunasthanas and Marganasthanas**

**Salutation to Gautam Sthavir.** I will explain the twenty types of Alap, which are classified into three categories: Samanya, Paryapt, and Aparyapt, in the Gunasthanas and Marganasthanas.

These Alap are also different in the nine Gunasthanas, which are divided into five parts based on the differences in Ved and Kashaya.

**Explanation:**

The twenty types of Alap are:

1. Gunasthana
1. Jivasamaas
1. Paryapti
1. Pran
1. Sanjni
14. Marganasthanas
1. Upayoga

**Total: 1 + 1 + 1 + 1 + 1 + 14 + 1 = 20**

**Doubt:**

What is Alap?

**References:**

1. Gommatasar Jivakanda 673, Panchastikaya Mula 41-42, Dharma 2/416, 1/4/73, pages 102-103
2. Prapancha Paddhati Sangraha
3. Vachanas 2/1, Prapancha Jivakanda Gatha 2

**Chart of Knowledge Types in Gunasthanas:**

| Gunasthana | Darshan | Jnana | Upayoga | Alap |
|---|---|---|---|---|
| 1 | 3 | 6 | 2 | 12 |
| 2 | 2 | 6 | 2 | 12 |
| 3 | 2 | 6 | 2 | 12 |
| 4 | 2 | 6 | 2 | 12 |
| 5 | 2 | 6 | 2 | 12 |
| 6 | 2 | 6 | 2 | 12 |
| 7 | 2 | 6 | 2 | 12 |
| 8 | 2 | 6 | 2 | 12 |
| 9 | 2 | 6 | 2 | 12 |
| 10 | 2 | 6 | 2 | 12 |
| 11 | 2 | 6 | 2 | 12 |
| 12 | 2 | 6 | 2 | 12 |

**Note:**

* The chart shows the number of types of Darshan, Jnana, and Upayoga present in each Gunasthana.
* The Alap column indicates the total number of Alap types in each Gunasthana.
* The chart does not include the specific types of Alap.
* The chart is based on the information provided in the Gatha.
* The chart is a simplified representation of the complex system of knowledge in Jainism.

**Key:**

* **Darshan:** Perception
* **Jnana:** Knowledge
* **Upayoga:** Application
* **Alap:** Discussion
* **Mishra:** Mixed
* **Paryapt:** Sufficient
* **Aparyapt:** Insufficient
* **Samanya:** General
* **Gunasthana:** Stage of spiritual development
* **Marganasthana:** Stage of spiritual progress
* **Ved:** Scriptures
* **Kashaya:** Passions
* **Anivrittikaran:** Cessation
* **Jivasamaas:** Aggregation of souls
* **Pran:** Life force
* **Sanjni:** Consciousness
* **Kevala Jnana:** Perfect knowledge
* **Kevala Darshan:** Perfect perception
* **Sayogi:** Those who have attained liberation
* **Prayogi:** Those who are on the path to liberation
* **Siddhas:** Those who have attained perfect liberation
* **Gommatasar Jivakanda:** A Jain scripture
* **Antarbhavaruprana:** The twenty-first chapter of the Gommatasar Jivakanda
* **Gautam Sthavir:** A Jain sage
* **Prapancha Paddhati Sangraha:** A Jain scripture
* **Vachanas:** Jain scriptures
* **Prapancha Jivakanda:** A Jain scripture
* **Panchastikaya Mula:** A Jain scripture
* **Dharma:** A Jain scripture

Page #802:
---------------------------
768/Go. Sa. Jivakanda
Gatha 708-710
Solution - In terms of Gunasthanas, Jivasamas, Paryaptis, Pranas, Sanjnas, Indriyas, Kayas, Yogas, Vedas, Kashayas, Gyanas, Samyamas, Darshanas, Leshyanas, Bhavayas, Abhakshyas, Samyaktvas, Sanji-Asanshis, Ahari-Manahaaris, and in use, the examination of beings that is characterized by sufficient and insufficient adjectives is called Prarupana.
In Mugasthanas, Palap
Proghe Micchbugevi Ya, Prayadapamatte Sajogithanamm.
Tinnav Ya Palava, Sesesikko Have Riyama ||708|| Gathaarth - In Mugasthanas, there are three Palapas in Mithyatvadvik and Asanyat, Pramat and Sajogisthan. In the rest, there is only one by rule. ||708||
Vishesharth - In these five Gunasthanas of Mithyatva, Sasadan, Asanyat, Pramatsamyat and Sayogi Kevali, there are all three Palapas: Paryapt, Aparyapt and Samany. But in the remaining Gunasthanas, there is only one Paryapt Palap in these nine Gunasthanas: Pani Mishr, Desh Samyat, Apramatsamyat and Apurvakaranadhik Shina Kashayaparyant 5 and Ayogi Kevali Gunasthan. Further, the Acharya says this Gatha for clarification.
Samaranam Pajjattam Apajjatam Chedi Tini Palava.
Dudhiyappam Apajjatam Laddhirinavattagan Chedi ||709|| Gathaarth - There are three Palapas: Samany, Paryapt and Aparyapt. Again, there are two types of Aparyapt Palap: (1) Labdhyaparyapt (2) Nityaparyapt ||709||
Duviham Pi Apajjatam, Proghe Miccheva Hodi Rinayamen.
Sasaranaprayadapamatte Nivyattiapuranago Hodi ||710|| Gathaarth - Both types of Aparyapt Palap (Labdhyaparyapt and Nityaparyapt) are only in the Mithyatva Gunasthan out of all the Gunasthanas. In the three Gunasthanas of Sasadan, Asanyat and Pramatsamyat, there is Nityapatti Palap. ||710||
Vishesharth - Here it is explained that both types of Aparyapt Palap are only in the first Gunasthan. Because, Labdhyapatti is only in the Mithyatva Gunasthan. Also, the rise of the Karma called Aparyapti is only up to the first Gunasthan. It is not in the Gunasthanas beyond that.
Shankha - What is the Karma called Aparyapti? Solution - The rise of which does not make any Paryapti complete, i.e. it is Labdhyapatti Avartha.
1 Gh. 2/1 2. Ladhi Anushyam Micchathe. Go. Ni. 127. 3. Go. Ka. 265.

Page #803:
---------------------------
##  Verse 711-12
##  Malaap/766

"The karma called 'aparyapti' does not arise in the Samaanaadi, so the Maasaadanaadi jivas cannot attain the 'labdhi-aparyaptak' state."

**Doubt:** "Then, does the 'paryapti' karma arise in the 'nitya-paryaptak' state? Because, here, the 'nirvritti-paryaptak' state is described as having the Saasaadanaadi gupsthana."

**Solution:** "Yes, the 'paryapti' karma does arise in the 'nitya-paryaptak' state."

Here, there might be a doubt that the Sayogakevali should also be called 'nitya-paryaptak'. Why is it not said? It is said:

"Jogam padi jogijine hodi huniamaa apunya gattam tu.
Pravesesaravattane pajjatalaavago eshako." ||711||

**Verse Meaning:** "In comparison to Yoga, the Sayogijina has a natural incompleteness, meaning 'aparyapti' (i.e., 'aparyaptak' palap). In the remaining nine places (nine gupsthana), only the 'paryaptak' palap exists." ||711||

**Special Meaning:** Even the Sayogakevali has the 'aparyaptak' palap, but it is possible only in comparison to Yoga. Because, the Sayogakevali's body is complete, and they have the 'paryapti' karma-udaya, as well as Kayayoga. Therefore, their 'aparyapti' is said in a secondary sense, due to the incompleteness of Yoga. Therefore, the 'Sayogikevali' can also be called 'nirvritti-paryaptak' in comparison to 'apurn-yoga'.

In the fourteen margagaras, the palap in the Naraka gati is:

"Sattahna pudhviinam, prothe micche ya tini palaava.
Padhamaviradevi taha sesaanam punnagalaavo." ||712||

**Verse Meaning:** "In the seven earths, in the gunasthana, there are three palaps in the Mithyatva gunasthana. In the first earth, in the Avirat gunasthana, there are also three palaps. In the remaining earths (i.e., from the second to the seventh Naraka), there is only one 'paryaptak' palap in the Avirat gunasthana." ||712||

**Special Meaning:** In all the Narakas, the Naraki is found in both the 'paryaptak' and 'aparyaptak' states in the Mithyatva gunasthana. Therefore, in all the earths, there are three palaps in the Mithyatva gunasthana. In the first earth, Samyagdristi takes birth due to the bondage of Narakayu in the past. Therefore, in the first earth, there are three palaps because both the 'paryaptak' and 'aparyaptak' states exist in Samyaktva. In the remaining six earths...

Page #804:
---------------------------
## Verse 713
770 / Go. Sa. Jivakanda

In the Virata Gunasthan, there is only one Paryapta Alap (because Samyashti do not take birth there). In all the Prithvis, there is only one Paryapta Alap in the Sasadan Gunasthan, because the Sasadan Gunasthan-dwelling Tiryanch Manusyas do not attain the results that make them eligible for Narakagati. 2 And the Sasadan-guna Devas and Narakis do not go to Narak (meaning they only go to Deva and Narak, not Narak). Therefore, due to the absence of birth in Narak, including the Sasadan Gunasthan, the Sasadan Gunasthan has an effect in the Paryapta state in all seven Naraks.

Therefore, there is only one Paryapta Alap in the Sasadan Gunasthan in all seven Prithvis. And in the Misra (third) Gunasthan, there is also only one Paryapta Alap in all seven Prithvis; because, the Misra Gunasthan-dwelling being is not found in the Aparyapta state in Narak. The reason is that in the Misra Gunasthan, there is no Ayubandha in any of the four Gattis.

And "In the Gati where there is no Vanya of the Grahukarma, there is also an absence of exit from that Gati, including that Gunasthan; this is the rule for all beings except the Kshaya Upashamakas. According to this rule, since the Misra Gunasthan-dwelling being cannot die, how can it be present as a Paryapta Naraki? Therefore, in Misra, only one Paryapta Alap is possible in all seven Naraks; because there is an effect of the Agam that tells about the existence of the Misra Gunasthan in the Aparyapta state.

## Alap in Tiryanch Gati
Tirya-ukkarodhe mithya-duge adir-de ya tishne va.
Variya jori-pari athave pun-go ses-evi pun-no du. || 713 ||

## Meaning of the Verse
In the four Gunasthanas of the Tiryanch - Mithyatva, Dvik, and Avirata Gunasthan - there are three Alapas. The special feature is that in the Prasanyata Gunasthan of the Yonini Tiryanch, there is only one Paryapta Alap. In the remaining Gunasthanas, there is also only one Paryapta Alap. || 713 ||

## Special Meaning
There are five types of Tiryanch. 1. Tiryanch 2. Panchendriya Tiryanch 3. Panchendriya Tiryanch Paryapta 4. Panchendriya Tiryanch Yonini and 5 Panchendriya Tiryanch Aparyapta. Of these, the Panchendriya Tiryanch Aparyapta has only one Mithyatva Gunasthan. 11 The first five Gunasthanas are possible for the four Tiryanch before the Yonini. 11 There, in the first, second, and Asanyata Gunasthanas, there are three Alapas. But in the Asanyata Gunasthan of the Yonini Panchendriya Tiryanch, there is only one Paryapta Alap. 11

Page #805:
---------------------------
## Papa 714-715

**Papa/771** Because a Samyaktvī never takes birth in a Ghoniṇī, so that the Nitya-paryāpta Yoniṇī also become Samyaktvī. And the rest, that is, the third and fifth Gurugasthanas, one should know only the Mula-moghvat (just like the statement in the Ranasthanas) as a Paryāptalāpa.

**Tericchīyaladdhiyappajjate ekko apuṇṇa pālavo.**
**Mūloghan manuṣatiye manuṣiriṇprayadamhi pajjatto.** ||714||

**Gāthārtha:** In the Labdhya-paryāpta, there is only one incomplete (aparyāpta) Pālāpa. In the three Manus, there is a Bālāra similar to the Mūloghan. These have the special feature that in the Avirata Gunasthanas of the Manuyani, there is only one Paryāpta Pālāpa. ||714||

**Viśeṣārtha:** There are four types of humans: Manushya, Manushya-paryāpta, Manuyani, and Manushya-aparyāpta. There are 14 Gunasthanas for these three: Manushya, Manushya-paryāpta, and Manuyani. If it is said here that in this way, the 14 Gurugasthanas of the Manuyani will be established, and the woman will attain liberation, that is not the case. Because the Satchel, Māyācāramāyī, and Apāvītra women, what to say of liberation, even restraint is not possible. Here, the predominance is of Bhāva-veda, not Dravya-veda. Therefore, in the said three divisions, the 14 Gunasthanas are established, and there are Pālāpas similar to the possible Pālāpas in the Gunasthanas. The rest of the statement is simple.

**Maṇasigi pamatavirade pāḍāradūgam tu gatthi riṇayameṇa.**
**Avagadavede manuṣiriṇ saṇā bhūdagavimāsejj.** ||715||

**Gāthārtha:** In the Pramatta-virata Gunasthanas of the Manuyani, there is no Prāhāradvik by rule. In the Avagana-veda state, the 'Manuyani' which is called Mithunasamjñā is said in relation to the Bhūtagati Nyāya. ||715||

**Viśeṣārtha:** In such a Manuyani, who is 'Bhāvastī and Dravyamāpa', in the sixth Gunasthanas called Pramatta-virata, the rise of the Āhārak Śarīra and the Āhārak Angopānga cannot happen by rule.

**Śaṅkā:** What is the reason for the Āhārak Kāyayoga and the Grāhārak Miśra Kāyayoga not happening in the Maripanī?

**Samādāna:** Although those who have a Stīveda in relation to Bhāva and a Purusha-veda in relation to Dravya, those (Bhāvastī) Jīvas also attain restraint. But the Manushya who have a Stīveda in relation to Dravya do not attain restraint. Because they are Satchel, that is, they are with clothes. Still, the Grāhārak Ṛti does not arise in the restrained Manushya who have a Stīveda in relation to Bhāva and a Purusha-veda in relation to Dravya.

1. Dh. 1/336 and Dh. 1/210; Prā. Pa. Sa. 1/1163 p. 40 and Sa. Pañcasangraha 1/267
2. Paṭṭ. Gla. 1/88 Ba 1/85; Gh. 1/328, 330.
3. Sa. Si. 1/7/17 Ṣaṭ Pa. 1/63
4. 7.2/503
5. 5.2/504 Me 532
6. Gh. 1/335 .2/515: Yogasāra Prāmat Gaṭhā 43 to 467, Paṭṭha Bhāvadegā Payadanga Davavederaṇ. Gh. 2/515
8. See Go, Ji. 708 in 711.

Page #806:
---------------------------
772/ Go. Sa. Jivakanda
Gatha 716-717

Therefore, eleven yogas are said to be without the dvandva of the attack of those who have the passion for women. The word 'tu' is to be taken that there is no manah-paryaya and pariharavisuddhi in them (human beings). That is, without the manah-paryaya of human beings, seven jnanas and without pariharavisuddhi, six samyamas are possible.

Shankara, can it not be that the udaya of the nama-karma of the aharika body and the udaya of the nama-karma of the angopanga of the aharika (human being) also do not occur?

Solution - How can it be? It is not possible. It has already been said above. The rest of the statement is easy.

Garaladdhipajjatte eko du apunnago du alavo. Lessabhedavibhinna, satta viyappa suratthacha.//716//

Meaning of the Gatha - In the human labhdhyaparyaptaka, there is only one apurnakaalaapa. In the deva-gati, there are seven alternatives according to the difference of the lesyas.//716//

Viseshartha - The human labhdhyaparyaptakas are also, by rule, samyag-drsti, pancendriya, and mithyadrsti. And being labhdhyaparyapta, they are aparyapta in the six paryaptis. And due to their being labhdhyaparyapta, only one labhdhyaparyapta alaapa is possible. In the devas, according to the difference of the vesyas, the following seven differences occur:
1. The lowest degree of the tejoleshya of the three (Bhavanatrika) 
2. The medium portion of the tejoleshya in the two (Saudharma, Aishana)
3. The highest and the lowest portion of the tejoleshya in the two (Sanatkumara, Mahendra)
4. The medium padma-leshya in the six (Brahma, Brahmaloka, Lantava, Kapishtha, Shukra, Mahaśukra)
5. The highest padma-leshya and the lowest shukla-leshya in the two (Shatara, Sahasrara)
6. The medium shukla-leshya in the thirteen (Anata, Pranatata, Prana, Acyuta, and nine Graiveyakas)
7. The highest shukla-leshya in the fourteen (nine Anudiśa and five Anuttaravasis)

These seven places are known to be different according to the difference of the lesyas of the devas.

Savvasuranam sodhe micchadduge avirave ya tinneva.
Variya bhavarapattikaripatthī ca ya avirade putto.//717//

1. Here, the jivas who have the mixed body (aharika) are present. Why? Because the nature of the passion for women is to be manifested in the pudgala-vesa, those jivas who have become women in the next birth, they also manifest the nature of the passion for women. Therefore, the power of the mixed body also arises in the male human beings. This is the reason why the mixed-body-dwelling is said to be the abode of the passion for women.
2. The remaining part is to be understood that without the seven branches of pariharasamyama, six samyamas are possible.
3. Go. Kra. 301.
4. Dh. 2/532
5. Pa. 2/536: Pañ. Sa. 1/100 - 169 p. 40; Go. Ji. 533-534.

Page #807:
---------------------------
## Gatha 717
## Palap/753

**Gathary:** All Devas have three Palaps in their four Gunasthanas: Mithyatva, Sasadan, and Avirat. The special feature is that Bhavanatrik and Kalpavasini Devis have only one Palap in their Avirat Gunasthana. ||17||

**Special Meaning:** There are a total of four Gunasthanas possible for all Devas. In the first, second, and fourth Gunasthanas, all three Palaps are present because in these Gunasthanas, Devas are seen to have birth and also Mithyatva, Sasadan, and Asanyat Samyaktv Gunasthanas in their Avyapt state. This means that Devas are both Avyapt and Vyapt in Mithyashti, Mamadan Samyagdristi, and Asanyat Samyagdristi Gunasthanas. All Devas are Vyapt in the third Gunasthana as a rule. Therefore, there is only one Vyapt Palap in this third Gunasthana.

**Doubt:** How can Devas be Vyapt in the third Gunasthana as a rule?

**Solution:** Because they do not die with the third Gunasthana, and the Mavyarimathyastra Gunasthana does not arise even in the Avyapt period.

**Doubt:** If we accept the rule that they are only Vyapt in the third Gunasthana, then does this lead to Ekantvad?

**Solution:** No, because there is no contradiction in the existence of Ekant in Anekantagabhit.

Bhavanavasi, Banvyantar, and Jyotishi Devas and their Devis, as well as Saudharma and Aishankarpabasini Devis, are all Vyapt and Avyapt in Mithyashti and Masadan Samyagdristi Gunasthanas, because the birth of such beings with these two qualities is seen in the appropriate Devas and Devis. However, the special feature is that Devas and Devis in Samyagmithyatva and Avirat Samyaktv Gunasthanas are Vyapt as a rule, because they do not die and take birth in them. Therefore, there is only one Vyapt Palap in the Asanyat Gunasthana of Bhavanatrik and Kalpavasini Devanganas.

**Doubt:** It is true that a being with a mixed Gunasthana does not take birth in the appropriate Devas and Devis, because the being does not die with the Samyagmithyadristi Gunasthana. But it is not true that a being with Asanyat Samyagdristi does not take birth in the said Devas and Devis.

**Solution:** No, because a being with Mithyashti does not take birth in the lower Devas.

**Meaning:** A being with Samyagdristi, which is born in Narakas and Niyantas who have attained the lower state, does not take birth in Bhavanavasi Devas and Devis who have attained the higher state, and in Kalpavasini Devis.

1. Pad Khan. 1/28, Dh. 1/226 2. Shat Ban. 1/6; P. 1/336. 3. Pat Khan. 1/954. Dhaval 1/337, Pavan 6/451, 463.464 5, Dhaval 1/337. 6. Sha. No. 1/67 | 7. Shra. 1/336, 5.1/210 Pra. Pan. M 1/163/41 8. Dh. 2/563 6. Dhaval Pu. 1/338 *Mo. Ji. 24 Gh. 5/31; 4346.

Page #808:
---------------------------
774/Go. Sa, Jivakanda
Why does Maya 718-716 not arise?
Solution - No, because those who were Mithyadristi at the time of the destruction of the Ayukarma and who have subsequently attained Samyagdarshan, the Samyagdarshan does not have the power to prevent the birth of such beings in Narakadi-gati.
Doubt - Why do Samyagdristi beings not take birth in Devas, just as they do in Naraka-gati?
Solution - This is correct, because this is what we desire. Doubt - Then will the birth of Asanyata Samyaktvi also be obtained in Bhavanavasi etc.?
Solution - No, because those who have previously bound Ayukarma, their Samyagdarshan does not conflict with the Ayusamanya related to that particular Gani, but it is found to conflict with the particularity of birth related to that particular Gati. In such a situation, there is a proven conflict in the birth of Asanyata Samyaktvi in Bhavanavasi, Vyantravasi, Jyotishi, Prakirnak, Abhiyogya and Millishik Devas, in the lower 6 Prithivis, in all Strimas, in the first Narakvima, in all Napusakas, in Vikalatraya, in Sthavaras, in Labdhvaparyaptakas and in Karmabhumijati.
In essence, Samyaktvi do not take birth in Naraka and after death they do not take birth in Bhavanatrik Devas and all Devis, therefore, there is only a possibility of Paryapnaanaap in Asanyata there.
Misra Punjalayo Anahisanu Uttara Hu Te Samma.
Pravirad Tinnalava Anuddisanu Uttara Hoti ||718|| Gatharth - In Devas, there is only Paryapta Graalap in Misra Gunasthan. Anudish and Anuttara Vimanasasi, Ahminndra, all are Samyaktvi by rule. Therefore, there are 3 Graalaps in their Asanyata. ||718||
Vishesharth - Misra Gunasthan is possible till the last Veyak. Therefore, there is only Paryapta Graalap in the Misra Gunasthan of Ahminndras till there. But above, all are Samyaktvi because here, everyone has only one Avirat Samyagdristi Gunasthan. This is the Pragam-Vachan. Therefore, there are three Graalaps in their Asanyata Gunasthan.
Indriya Margagga Me Graalap Badarsuhamei Diyabiticharidiyagrasani Nan Jiwanam. Proghe Pune Tini Ya Apunnage Puran Apushno Du ||716||
1. Dh. 1/336. 2. P. Gwan, 1/66. 3. B. 2/567 and S. Si. 1/7/Prakarana 28/ and M. Si. 4/26 and. 1/341 Sutra 10. 4. Dhaval Pu. 2 Patra 466-470.

Page #809:
---------------------------
## Gatha 720-723

**Alaap / 775**

**Gathaarth:** Among the beings like Chadar (cloth), Sukshma (subtle), Ekendriya (one-sensed), Dwi-Tri-Chaturindriya (two, three, four-sensed) and Prasangya Panchendriya (conscious five-sensed), those who have the rise of Purna (complete) Karma, have three Alaaps, and those who have the rise of Purna (complete) Name, have only one Purna (incomplete) Alaap. || 716 ||

**Vishesharth:** Here, those who have the rise of Apurna (incomplete) Name, will have only Labdhyapurna Alaap, not Nirvrittyapurna Alaap. The rest of the Nirvrittyapurnajiva (being with complete liberation) have all three Alaaps. The rest of the statement is easy to understand.

**Directly, the Mithya Guna-Padavan (false qualities) are the Mula-Praala (root Alaaps). Labdhyapurna (complete attainment) has only one Alaap. || 720 ||**

**Mula:** Purna (complete) is the Alaap.

**Vishesharth:** In Prasangya Panchendriya, there are 14 Guna-sthans (quality-places) from the beginning. In the first Guna-sthan of Prasangya, all Alaaps are present, and in the Guna-sthan-Pratipanna (those who have ascended to higher Guna-sthans), the Alaaps should be known as the same as the Mula (root). [That is, in the first Guna-sthan, there are three Alaaps each of Sasadan, Asangat Samyag-Vratti, Pramatta and Sayogi, and in the other Guna-sthans, there is only Purna Alaap for the Prasangya Panchendriya, like Misra, Desha-Birat, Apramatta, etc., A-Yogyanta (non-qualified).

**Alaap in Kay-Margna:**

**Bhuma, Utteva, Kari, Nacha, Chadu-Grag, Adi, Rig, Odag, Tigshni, Tana, Thula, Edar, Su, Vi, Patte, Ge, Tad-Bhede, Vi. || 721 ||**

**Tasa-Jiwanam Shraghe, Mithya-Adi-Gune Vi Progh Shraala-Pro. Pune Ekko's-Pajjati Hodi Praala. || 722 ||**

**Gathaarth:** In Prithvi (earth), Jal (water), Agni (fire), Vayu (air), Nitya (eternal) and Chatur-Gati (four-fold beings), Nigov (those who have attained liberation), there are three Alaaps in each of the Badar (gross) and Sukshma (subtle), each Vanaspati (plant), Samprasthita (established) and Aprasthita (not established). In the Trasas (three-sensed beings), the Alaaps should be known as the same as the Guna-sthans in the fourteen Guna-sthans. In all the above beings (from Prithvi to Sakay), there is only one Purna Alaap for the Labdhyapurna (complete attainment). || 721-722 ||

**Alaap in Yogmaya:**

**Ekkara-Sajogara, Pun-Gag-Dana, Sapunya-Shraala-Yo. Mis-Chauv-Kassa Puro Sag-Eka-Kaka Pun-Ya-La-Shro. || 723 ||**

**1. Pra. 2/561. 2. 2/506.**

Page #810:
---------------------------
776 / Go. Sa. Jivakanda
Gacha 724
Gatha
There is a distinct articulation for each of the eleven yogas in their respective perfect states (paryaptavastha). The remaining four mixed yogas have a distinct articulation in their imperfect state. || 723 ||
Special Meaning - The eleven yogas in their perfect state are: 4 manoyog, 4 bachanyog, 1 praudarikakayayog, 1 aharakkayayog, 1 vaikreyikakayayog. The four mixed yogas are: praudarik mishra kayayog, aharak mishra kayayog, vaikreyik mishra kayayog, karman kayayog. The remaining statements are easy to understand.
Gatha Meaning - From the vedmarg to the aharmarg, there is a distinct characteristic in each of their respective gunasthans (meaning, whatever gunasthans are possible in each of the ved or marg, the articulation that occurs in the original gunasthans should be understood as those of the respective margs). This is so much so that there is no aharakdvik for the neuter and female. || 724 ||
Special Meaning - Doubt - Why is there no neuter or female ved for the aharakkayayogi and tanmiyogi?
Statement of the articulations of the remaining margs
Dadaharot y sagunattaranaranamogh shralap.
Variy sanhitthi, gatthi hu aharagarag dugam. || 724 ||
Solution - Because aharakridhi does not arise with the ashubhaveds.
Articulation from vedmarg to aharmarg
Possible Gunasthans
Margrana
Ved Margrana
Female Neuter Ved
Purusha Ved
Kshaya Margrana
Krodh, Man, Maya and Lobh
Up to 16 saved bhags | Articulation of three for female-neuter in 1, 2, 4. Perfect articulation in the remaining gunasthans | This is so much so that there is perfect articulation in this gunasthan for the female ved.
Articulation of three for purusha ved in 1, 2, 4, 6. Perfect articulation in the remaining.
From 1 to 10
Possible Articulation
1. Go. Ka. Gatha 316 . 2/668.
Articulation of three in 1, 2, 4, 6. Perfect articulation in the remaining. Understand this in the same way for all four kayas separately.
This is so much so that the gunasthans are up to 10 in krodh, man, maya and lobh.

Page #811:
---------------------------
## Gatha 724
**Palap/550**
**Margarana**
**Samhbay Gurugasthan**
-  |-
**Samhhav Pralaap**
-
-
-
**Ubhayyatra Palap Tray**
Jnanmarggana Mati Shruta Ajnan Vibhang Matishrutavadhignan Manahparyayajnan
4se
Paryaptalap | 4, 6 mein Palap Tray, shesh mein Paryapt Palap
Ek Paryaptalap (Sarvatra) | 13v mein Palap Tray | 14v mein ek Paryapt Palap |
**Kevalgyan**
**Samyamamarggana Asanayam**
1se 4
Samyamasanyam
| 1, 2, 4 mein Palap Tray | 3 mein Paryapt Palap | Paryapt Palap | 6 mein Palap Tray, shesh mein (7, 8, 6) mein Paryapt Panaap ek matra Paryapt Palap ek matra Paryapt Palap | ek matra Paryapt Palap (par 13v mein Palap Tray)
**Samayik Chhedo. Pariharvishuddhi Sushmasamparay**
HAM
10va
Yathasyat
11 me 14
**Darshanmargma Chakshu, Achakshu Avadhi**
M 12
se 12
| 1, 2, 4, 6 mein Palap Tray | Shansh mein Paryapt Palap | 4. 6 mein Palap Tray | Shesh mein Paryapt Palap | 13v mein Palap Tray | 14v mein Paryapt Palap |
**Keval**
13 se 14
**Leshyamarggana Ashubhtray Shubhdwik**
1, 2, 4 mein Alap Tray | Shesh mein Paryapt Palap |
1 se 17
**Shukla**
| 1, 2, 4, 6. 13
||
**Bhavyamaarggana Abhavya**
1 pehla
Palaptram
Bhavya
| 1, 2, 4, 6, 13 mein Gralaap Tray | Shesh mein Paryapt Palap

Page #812:
---------------------------
## 778/Go. Sa. Jivakanda

**Margarana**

* Samyaktva Marga
* Mithyatva
* Sasadan
* Misra
* Upasham Samyaktva
* Kshayopaasham Samyaktva
* Kshayik Samyaktva
* Sanjee Margana
* Amanjee
* Sanjee
* Aahar Margana
* Anaaharak
* Shraaharak

**Sambhav Guranasthan**
(But according to Pra. Pan. San. Pu. 100, 101, 1 to 12 Gunasthan are Bhavy's)

* First Gunasthan
* Second
* Third
* 4 to 11
* 4 to 7
* 4 to 14
* 1 Pratham
* 1 to 12
* 1, 2, 4, 13 and 14
* 1 to 13

**Sambhav Shraalap**

* Aalaap Tray
* Aalaap Ath
* Paryapt Aalaap

**I**

* Aalaap Tray in the fourth, Paryapt Shraalap in the first compared to Dvitiyopaasham. Paryapt Shraalap in the rest.
* Aalaap Tray in the fourth and sixth. Paryapt in the rest.
* Aalaap Tray in 4, 6, 13. Paryapt in the rest.
* Aalaap Tray.
* Aalaap Tray in 4, 6. Paryapt in the rest.
* One Aparyapt Aalaap in 1, 2, 4, 13. Paryapt Aalaap in 14.

**Gatha 725**

* Aalaap Tray in 1, 2, 4, 6, 13. Paryapt Aalaap in the rest.

Thus, they say that from Ved to Aahar Margana, Aalaap is called, and further 20 Praarupana are described in the Shramadhesh.

**Gujivapajjatti, Parana Santa Gaindaia Kaya.
Joga Vedaksaaya, Khaargazma Dansana Lessa. ||725||**

* 1. "We are Yima" - From this statement, there is one Paryapt Aalaap for the Yogini.

Page #813:
---------------------------
## Gatha 726-727
## Palap/759

**Gatha 726:**
All these, including the Bhavyas, the Sopi, the Pahara, and the Uvoga, are to be arranged in the appropriate manner in the Gunasthanas and Marganasthanas.

**Gatha 727:**
Where the primary Jivasamas are mentioned in the Progh (Gunasthanas) or Adesh (Marganasthanas), the total number of Jivasamas is obtained by multiplying the number of Jivasamas up to the 19th by 1 (general), 2 (general and sufficient), and 3 (general, sufficient, and insufficient).

**Explanation of Gatha 726:**
The 14 Gunasthanas, 14 Jivasamas, 6 Paryaptis, 10 Pranas, 4 Sanjnas, 4 Gatis, 5 Indriyas, 6 Kayas, 15 Yogas, 3 Vedas, 4 Kashayas, 8 Gyanas, 7 Samyamas, 4 Darshanas, 6 Leshyas, Bhavyabhavya, 6 Samyaktvas, Sanjnitvasanjnita, Praharakanahaarak, and 12 Upayogas are all to be arranged in the Gunasthanas and Marganasthanas in a way that is consistent with the Agamas. For example, in the first Gunasthan, how many of the 20 categories (Gunasthanas, Jivasamas, Paryaptis, Pranas, etc.) are possible? Similarly, the 20 categories should be arranged in the second and subsequent Gunasthanas and in all the Marganasthanas.

**Explanation of Gatha 727:**
In the Gunasthanas and Marganasthanas, the number of Jivasamas up to the Sanji Panchendriya (five senses) is 16. Multiplying this number by 1 (general) gives 16, multiplying by 2 (general and sufficient) gives 32, and multiplying by 3 (general, sufficient, and insufficient) gives 48.

**Summary:**
There is one Jivasama for the "general being" and two for the "As and sthavar" (non-sentient beings). There are three Jivasamas for the "ekendriya" (one sense), "vikaleendriya" (impaired senses), and "gakaleendriya" (impaired senses). In this way, there are 16 Jivasamas.

The following are the Grahas: Prithvi, Jala, Agni, Vayu, Nityanigoda, Chaturgatinigoda. These are further divided into Badar and Mukshma, each with and without a base, and into Dwiindriya, Triindriya, Chaturindriya, Asanji Panchendriya, and Sanji Panchendriya. In this way, there are 19 Jivasamas from the "general being" to the 19th. Multiplying these by 1, 2, and 3 gives...

For more information, refer to the second part of the Ghavla.

Page #814:
---------------------------
750/Go. Sa. Jivakan
Gava 728.726
There are 16, 38 and 50 Bhedasthanas respectively. This specific explanation is not being given because it has already been stated in detail in this text. Now, the twenty Bhedas mentioned by the 'Gunajiya Pajjattipana...' are planned by this gatha.
Veeramuhkamalarinaggayasayalasuyaggahanpayouranasammattham.
Gamiouran Goyamamaham, Siddhatalavamanuboccham. ||728||
Gathaarth - I bow to Gautam Ganadhar, who is capable of receiving and revealing all the scriptures that came out of the lotus mouth of Mahavira Swami. Now I will speak about the Siddhanta. ||728||
So what
The name of the special text is Gommatasar. Therefore, the statement of 20 Prarupanas has been made in a summary form. The same is the case with Siddhanta Alap. The main issues related to the Siddhanta have been stated by Acharya Shri in the previous 6-7 gathas. Siddhanta Alap means some statements related to the Siddhanta. This is all that Acharya Shri wanted from 'Siddhanta Alap'. One should understand the detailed explanation from the second book of the Dhavala Tika of the Pat Khandagam (from page 418 to the last page). Due to the fear of excessive length of the text, that Prarupana is not being done here.
The rule to be considered in the statement of Siddhanta Alap is Manapjjavpariharao Patamuvasammat Do piran Pahara.
Edesu Ekkapgave Gasthitti Asesayam Jane. ||726||
Gathaarth - One should know that if there is one of these four - Manahparyaygyan, Parihar Vishuddhisayam, Prathamopasham Samyaktav and Graharakdway (Aharak and Aharakmith), then the other three Bhedas do not exist. ||726||
Vishesharth - If there is one of the above 4 Marganamas (in any being), then there are not 3 Marganas (in that being). For example, if a being has Manahparyaygyan, then it will not have Parihar Vishuddhisanyam, Prathamopasham Samyaktav and 'Graharaksharir and Aharak Angopang'. One should know this. ||726||
Shankha - Then, in this way, it is not possible for the Yahaarakkayayogi and Praharakmith Kayayogi Muni Raj to have Upasham Samyaktav?
Samadhan - No, such Muni Rajdhi can only have Bhayyik and Kshayopaamik - these two Samyaktavs.
1. Go. Ji. 77-785 3-Me762. Go. Ji. 3||vam Go. Ji. 726 and Dh. 2/12|| Pra. Pan. Gan. 1/2. 3. Written according to the statement of Siddhanacharya Panditkalagavatmahodayana. 4. Pra. Pan. San. 1/1/1641.41 and San. Pan. San. 1/340 and Gh. 1/824 Ga. 240. But there, in the first half, in 'Mranapjjav Parihage', the text is 'Uvasamasammas Doshiya Yaahara'. Even that is the correct reading of the text 'Padambammammatt'. [Tikaakar]

Page #815:
---------------------------
...
...
Gatha 726
Palap/761
-
-
-
"-.-
-
"Because, Upshama Samyaktv cannot become a Yoga related to Aharak body or Aharak."
Doubt- The word 'Padhamuvasammatta' has come in the Gatha, from this it is proved that this is not the case for Dvitiyopahsama Samyaktv. Is this correct?
Solution- It is correct, what is the doubt in this?
Doubt- Then, "It is correct to say that Aharakdvik, Pariharvishuddhi and Man:paryaya are possible with Dvitiyopahsama Samyaktv."
Solution- It is not like that, the same is said- Just like Manahparyayajnan, Parihar Vishuddhisanyam and Aharakdvik cannot happen with Prathamopahsama Samyaktv (all three), similarly, with Dvitiyopahsama Samyaktv, none of them (all of them) can happen, this is not the case. Manahparyayajnan can happen with Dvitiyopahsama Samyaktv. Yes, Pariharvishuddhi and Aharakdvik do not happen with Dvitiyopahsama Samyaktv, this much is correct. In essence, with Dvitiyopahsama, all three Marganas are not prohibited, only two Marganas are prohibited.
Doubt- How is Manahparyayajnan possible with Dvitiyopahsama Samyaktv?
Solution- The one who attains Dvitiyopahsama Samyaktv from Vedak Samyaktv, Manahparyayajnan is found in the first time of that Upshama Samyaktv. But, Manahparyayajnan is not found in the Upshama Samyaktdrishti Jiva who has come directly from Mithyatva.
Because, the time taken to produce Manahparyayajnan from the first time of the Upshama Samyaktv, including the time of the Upshama Samyaktv, from the time of the Upshama Samyaktv attained from Mithyatva, is very long. Therefore, Manahparyayajnan is possible with Dvitiyopahsama Samyaktv. That is, the time of Prathamopahsama Samyaktv remaining with Prathamopahsama Samyaktdrishti is only Antarmuhurt. And this Antarmuhurt time is less than the time taken to bring special Samgraha to produce Manahparyayajnan after taking Samyam. Therefore, Manahparyaya cannot be produced in the time of Prathamopahsama Samyaktv, but Dvitiyopahsama Samyaktv is only of the special Samyami who is facing the Upshama category. Therefore, there is no need to produce special Samyam for Manahparyayajnan separately here. Therefore, Manahparyayajnan is possible even in the first time of attaining Dvitiyopahsama Samyaktv.
1. Dhaval 2/668-666. 2. Go. Ji. 726, Dh. 2/024 (Bhasha Toka), Pra. Pan. Ma. 1 Ga. 164 P. 41; San. Pan. Sa. 1/40 Praadi. 3. Gh. 2/728-726 and Pra. 022 D P. 824 Praadi. 4. Dh. 2/735 and 2/823; 2/824 (Naksha 500). 5. Babhan Pu. 2/668. 6. Manapjjavanamien Bhanmag Asthi....tini Sammatagi; Bandagasammvanshayadavasammasammatta Sammaadins Padhamamaye Vi Magapjanavaganuvlam Bhaado. (Mittapachchayad-Ubammama Maitritamma Bhagapjjavananang Ga Valabhade, Micchattpachchaadukkasbammamammmankaaladdaa Vi Gahiadasalam Pahamsamayado Sab Jahanamanapajjavananaangppaagaasajam Kaalams Bahutubalabhado. Dh. 2/72-726 and 122.

Page #816:
---------------------------
782 / Go. Sa. Jivakanda
Doubt - Why can't Pariharavishuddhisanyam, Upasham Samyagvasthi Muniraj be achieved?
Solution - The reason is that the first Upasham Samyagdristi Jivas, who have been left behind by Mithyatva, do not attain Pariharavishuddhisanyam, because the time of the first Upasham Samyaktva is very short, therefore, there is an influence of the possibility of the existence of specific restraints, Tirthankara Charanamul Vasati Pratyakhyan Mahasagar reading, etc., which are the causes of the origin of Pariharavishuddhisanyam within it. There is also a possibility of Pariharavishuddhisanyam for the second Upasham Samyagdristi Jivas who ascend to the Upasham category, because even before ascending to the Upasham category, when the Antarmukhurtakal remains, the Pariharavishuddhisanyami stops his movements, etc. And there is also a possibility of Pariharavishuddhi for the second Upasham Samyaktva restrained Jivas who have descended from the Upasham category, because after the destruction of Upasham Samyaktva, the movement of the Pariharavishuddhisanyami is possible again.
Gatha 730
1
Doubt - At the time of the Muni's departure (from the category) to the Devagati (at the time of departure to the Vigrahagati), the second Upasham Samyaktva is found in the state of inadequacy, so why can't Pariharavishuddhi be formed there?
Solution - No, because at that time the fourth Gunasthan of that second Upasham Samyaktva is found. And in the fourth Gunasthan, the teaching of Pariharavishuddhisanyam is not found in the Agam.
Doubt - How many restraints are there in the 5 restraints of Pariharavishuddhisanyam?
Solution - There is only one Pariharavishuddhisanyam.
Or, such a Pariharavishuddhisanyam also holds other restraints, such as the one that is endowed with 5 Samitis and 3 Guptis, always avoids all kinds of yoga, and holds the 5 Yama-shaped Chhedopasthapana restraints and one Yama-shaped Samayik restraint, is called Pariharavishuddhisanyam.

Page #817:
---------------------------
Gapa 730
Palap/783
A being who dies according to the *leshya* of a woman attains *devagati* (heavenly realm), and in that *devagati*, within an insufficient period, attains the second *upasama* *samyaktvam* (perfect knowledge). ||730||

**Special Meaning:** The only reason for a being to go to the heavens is that such a being does not die in the *upasama* category of *abaddha* *prayushka* (unbound *prayushka*), and even if there is a *prayubandha* (bond of *prayushka*), according to the rule, such a being can only have a *devayu* (heavenly lifespan), because if there is a bond of *naraka* (hell), *tiryanch* (animal realm), or *manushya* (human realm) *prayu* (lifespan), then it is impossible for that being to ascend the category or attain *samyama* (self-control) (including *pama* *samyama*, *desh* *samyama*, and *sangam* *samyama*). Therefore, such a being can only attain a *devayu* (heavenly lifespan) in any situation (before death) except for a *sattva* *manushyayu* (human lifespan with good qualities), not any other. Therefore, it is said that such a being goes only to the heavens.

**Question:** From which *gunasthan* (stage of spiritual development) does the second *upasama* *samyaktvam* arise?

**Answer:** It can arise from any *gunasthan* from the *asanyata* *samyaktvam* (uncontrolled perfect knowledge) to the *apramatta* *samyata* (perfectly controlled perfect knowledge).

**Question:** What is the second *upasama* *samyaktvam*?

**Answer:** The *upasama* *samyaktvam* that arises from the *kshaya* *upasama* *samyaktvam* (perfect knowledge of destruction) while ascending the *upasama* category is called the second *upasama* *samyaktvam*.

**Question:** Where exactly does the second *upasama* *samyaktvam* occur?

**Answer:** In two places: in the sufficient *manushya* *gati* (human realm) and in the *nirvrita* *aparyapta* *devagati* (heavenly realm with insufficient merit).

**Question:** Can a being with the second *upasama* *samyaktvam* attain *samadhan* (liberation) if six *pravali* (stages of spiritual development) remain within the period of the second *upasama* *samyaktvam*?

**Answer:** Yes, but this is according to the teachings of the *Chuni Sutra* (written by *Yativrishabha* *Acharya*) which is based on *kashaya* *praabhut* (influence of passions). However, according to the teachings of *Bhagavan* *Bhutbali*, a being who has descended from the *upasama* category does not attain the *samadhan* *gunasthan* (stage of spiritual development). In the absence of *prajna* (wisdom), both *ubhayaman* (both extremes) and *kevali* *sannidhi* (nearness to liberation) are to be collected.

1. *Handi tisuu pradhaasu ekega vi baddegaa ga sako vaasaae jasamaameenu, teran kaaraneega gigya-tirikkh-maranasadyo ga gachchadi.* (D. 61331) || *Dagi. K. 334-335* and *Labdhisar B. 351*.
2. *Go. K. 334-35, Go. J. 653*.
3. *B. 1.211-12* and *Karma Prakriti* (Prave.) *Granth* p. 267, and *Kartikayanupreksha Ya. 484* commentary, *Moolaachar. 12.275* commentary.
4. (i) *D. 2/434*, (ii) *Paryaptam anushayasamyaamin ev dvitiyopasamasamyaktvan bhavati iti dhavlaayaam dvitiya pustake 726 prushte likhitam*. *Paryaptavastayaa cha dvitiyopanasampkvinodevagati ev [Gh. 2 p. 821] iti agamvachanaach cha*. *D. 21538*.
5. *Edirase uvammasammattadhaap mama tarado asanjam di pacchhejj, sanjamasaam jam pi gachchadrej, do vi gachchejj. Is pravaliyaasu memaasu pramaan pi gachchejj.* || 542-543 *Sutra*, 14 *Charik Up. Pradhi. Pataman Upanamakriya Vishesh* p. 726 *Kapayapasuutta Chagi Mutrmay*.
6. *Uvammameddida pradidhagaana maasan-marana bhaavado tipi kado gavade? Edamhado vev bhuudabali-shayandi [yat 'saasadanaanaam jaghanyana palyopama sankhyey-maagpramitamantaram. D. 5 p. 11. *Gh. 6.331* and *L. Sa. 348, 350* [Pratra matadwayam nirupitam vartate].

Page #818:
---------------------------
## 784/Go. Sa. Jivakanda
**Verse 731**

A question arises from reading "Mag-sag lessa bharide" in the Shanka-gatha: From which Leshyas will the Dvitiyopa-shama-samyaktvi be born? And where in the Devas do these Samyagdrstis arise?

... This is called Devak Mayaav. By subduing the Upashama and ascending the Upashama श्रेणी (category), then descending from there, the जीवs attain Pre-Upashamic Samyaktva in the insufficient time of the Saudharma-Aishana Kalpavasis Devas, having passed through the Upashama Samyagdrsti Gunasthanas of Pramannamayat, Apramatta-samyat, Asanyat, and Samyata-samyat, and having experienced the medium Tejo-leshya, and then dying.

And, if the same जीवs, having attained the same Gunasthanas, die after experiencing the excellent Tejo-leshya or the inferior Padma-leshya, they are born in the Sanat-Kumar and Mahendra Kalpas with the Pre-Upashamic Samyaktva.

And, if the same Upashama Samyagdrsti जीवs die after experiencing the medium Padma-leshya, they are born in the Brahma and other six Kalpas.

And, if the same Upashama Samyagdrsti जीवs die after experiencing the excellent Padma-leshya or the inferior Shukla-leshya, they are born in the Devas of the eleventh and twelfth heavens with the Aupa-shamic Samyaktva.

And, if they ascend the Upashama श्रेणी and then descend without dying, and die after experiencing the medium Shukla-leshya, they are born in the thirteen, fourteen, and up to the ninth Greveyak, in these thirteen (heavens) with the Upashama Samyaktva.

And, if the aforementioned Upashama Samyagdrsti जीवs die after experiencing the excellent Shukla-leshya, they are born in the nine Anudish and five Anuttar Bimanovaami Devas with the Upashama Samyaktva.

Thus, death occurs according to the Leshya. And, due to this (above mentioned) reason, the Pre-Upashamic Samyaktva is attained in the insufficient time of all the Asanyat Samyagdrsti Devas from the Saudharma heaven upwards (i.e., up to the Sarvarthasiddhi).

The nature of the Siddhas who are beyond the Gunasthanas is the Siddha-aran, Siddha-gai, Kevala-aran, and Darshan, Kshayik Samyaktva, Anahar, and the simultaneous occurrence of Jnan-upayog and Darshan-upayog. ||731||

**Meaning of the Verse:** The Siddhas have the Siddha-gati, Kevala-jnana, and Kevala-darshan, Kshayik Samyaktva, Anahar, and the simultaneous occurrence of Jnan-upayog and Darshan-upayog. ||731||

**Special Meaning:** This verse implies that the Siddhas do not have the four Gatis, four impure Jnan, three Darshan, and the Vedak or Upashama (both) Samyaktva or Mithyatva, Sasadan or Mithya-bhav, and Grahar (of Karma-nov-arm), and the sequential occurrence of Jnan and Darshan, which are all created by Karma-udaya.

Another point is that, regarding what the Siddhas are, this same text, in the Karma-kanda, states:

"Out of the five Bhavas - Maupashamik, Kshayik, Mishr, Audayik, and Parinamik - the Siddhas have two Bhavas: Kshayik and Parinamik. And, with respect to the further divisions of these two, the Siddhas have Samyaktva, Jnan..."

1. Dh. 2/562.

Page #819:
---------------------------
##  Verse 732
##  Palap/785

The five states of being are: **Darshan** and **Veerya** (these four are **Kshayik**), and **Jeevattva** (one **Parigamik** state).  It is also important to know that **Kshayikdaan** is a **Gurag** of Siddhas, similar to **Kshayikveerya**.  Similarly, it is important to know that Siddhas possess qualities like **Siddhgati**, **Kevaljnan**, **Maniv Deerg**, **Karishda**, **Ayik Charitra**, etc.  

Although the question here is about which **Praroopana** belong to Siddhas out of the twenty, it is stated that Siddhas possess six **Praroopana** out of the twenty, namely **Siddhgati**, **Kevaljnan**, **Kevaldarshan**, **Mamyavattva**, etc., as mentioned in the verse.  The remaining fourteen **Praroopana** (20-6=14) will be discussed in the following verse.  These fourteen **Praroopana** are absent in Siddhas (such as **Gunasthanatit** etc.), but **Kevaljnan**, **Kevaldarshan**, and **Samyaktv** are also **Kshayik** states of Siddhas.  Therefore, the above statement about the states of being is made to indicate the existence of other **Kshayik** qualities of Siddhas.

**Doubt:** Can Siddhas be called **Akashay** (free from **Kshaya**), **Aved** (free from **Ved**), etc., when they are influenced by **Kshayamarg** and **Vedmarg**?

**Solution:** Why not?  It is not against the scriptures to say that Siddhas possess qualities like **Prakapayatva**, **Avedatva**, etc., due to the absence of **Kshaya**, **Ved**, etc.

**Doubt:**  Then, in comparison to the influence of **Marggana**, can Siddhas also be called **Niryogatva**, **Niriendriyatva**, etc.?

**Solution:** Why not?  Siddhas can also be called **Niryogatva**, **Niriendriyatva**, **Nikashayatva**, **Niryogatva**, **Nirvedatva**, etc.

**Doubt:** You mentioned **Charitra** in Siddhas.  How is **Charitra** possible in Siddhas?  In **Karmakand** (Verse 816-821), **Charitra** is not mentioned in Siddhas.

**Solution:** Siddhas also possess **Akraayaroop Charitra**.  Their **Charitra** is **Nirmalparaya** (pure).  This has been mentioned before.  In **Karmakand**, the statement is general.  There is no prohibition on **Charitra** or **Kshayik Charitra** in Siddhas.

Siddhas are free from: **Guragjeevathaan**, **Sanappajatti**, **Parana**, **Pariheeran**.

**Sesaranavamganna Siddha Suddha Sada Hoti. ||732||**

**Meaning of the Verse:** Siddhas are free from **Gunasthan**, **Jeev Samaas**, **Sanjna**, **Paryapti**, and **Praran**.  They are also free from:

1. **Go. Ka. 821, 822, 816**
2. **Sa. Si. 214**
3. **Gh. 13110**
4. **San. Ga. 14**

Page #820:
---------------------------
786/Go. Sa. Jivakanda
Gatha 733
0
0
 -
| Mu. | Ji. ! P.
! . . . | .
Pra. | San.
(Except for the five mentioned in the previous Gatha: Siddhagati, Kevalgyan, Kevaldarshan, Bhayyik Samyaktv and Anahar) there are no other nine paths. They are found to be established. They always remain established and pure. (Because,
It is impossible for them to be contaminated again by impurity.) ||732||
Pratit Vishesharth - For clarification, the twenty Dharupanas in Siddhas can be explained as follows. For example, Siddhas
Pratit's past Gunasthan, Pratit Jivasamas, Atitparyapti, Pratit Pran, Kshirasanjna, Siddhagati, [or Pragatitva (in comparison to the absence of the four Gati's Kshina San.)] Atit Jati, Akaya, Ayog, Apgatved, Akashay, Kevaljhan, Samyam, Asamyam and Samyamasamyam these alternatives
Free from Siddhagati, Kevaldarshan, Dravyabhavatah Aleshya, Bhavyabhavya Vikalp
Aindriya-free, Kshayik Samyaktv, Sanjnikasanjnik Vikalpaatit, Anaharak, Sakar-Anakar both uses simultaneously applicable - in this way | Pratitkaya Prarupana is.
Pra yogi 20 Bhedon ke Gyan ka Upay and Phal
Apganved Nikkhede Eyathe, Nayappamane Nitti Praniyog. Maggai Vinson Bhayyam, So Jaragai Prappasambhav ||733|| | Kshina Kapya
Gathary - He who knows the twenty differences in Nikkhepa, Ekarthe, Nay, Praman and Ma Kevalgyan Nigakti and Anuyog, he knows the true nature of the soul.
Anubhay Vishesharth - He who throws in any one decision or judgment
Kevaldarshan is, that is, he who decides the undecided thing by its name etc.
Gralaya Karata is called Nikkhepa. ' Or it can also be said that by negating the uncreated meaning and establishing the created meaning
Anubhay Bala Nikkhepa is. Or by removing the alternatives of doubt, delusion and non-determination, he who establishes in certainty is called Nikkhepa.
Kshayik
, or in relation to the external meaning, whatever alternatives there are, he who states them is called Nikkhepa. ' And that name, establishment,
Bhanubhay Dravya and Bhav are of four types due to their differences. '
Anaharak Pranabhoot Asadharan Lakshana Ekarthe is called. For example, Jiva
Gakar-Anakar's characteristic is consciousness. Or there is only one meaning, those words are Ekarthe
Yugapat 1. Dh. 2/451/570855/562 .. ........1855 Praadi. 2. Gh. 111 3. Gh. 13.3 Jayaghavla. 4, Gh, 1316 | 5. Dh. 13/498.
Siddho ke 20 Prarupma
"  -
Gya. | San. Da. | Ne. . Ma. | Na. | Mani.

Page #821:
---------------------------
Gaya 733
Palap 67

It is said that both the words "Prāṇa" and "Jīva" are indicative of the same meaning, Ātmā (soul).
The intention of the knower is called Naya. Or, the alternative of Śruta-jñāna is called Naya. Or, the knowledge that takes hold of one aspect, i.e., a part of an object, in a correct manner through Pramaṇa (correct knowledge) is called Naya. Or, that which makes an object attain a single nature by removing it from various natures, is Naya. Or, it can be said that Naya is that which takes hold of a part of an object. Or, it can also be said that the examination of one aspect of an object is the characteristic of Naya. 5
This Naya is in the form of an element of Pramāga. It has two main divisions: 1. Dravyāthika 2. Paryāyāthika. Or, it can also be said that these are the two main divisions of Nayas: 1. Niścaya 2. Vyavahāra. These two main Nayas have further divisions, which are countless or even infinite.
Pramaṇa is the receiver of all objects. The knowledge by which the nature of an object is known, is determined, is Pramaṇa.
In essence, Aniyan Pramaṇa is that which takes as its object an object with many aspects (a complete object), and Niyan Naya is that which takes as its object an object with one aspect.
The way in which a word is derived, in the sense of the meaning of that word, through a Triya, Pratyaya, etc., is called Nirukti. For example, "He who lives, will live, and in the past, there is 'Jī' and 'Va', he is called Jīva."
The special means of knowing Jīva, etc., is called Anuyoga. They are (6 divisions): Nirdeśa, Svāmitva, Sādhana, Adhikāraṇa, Sthiti, and Vidhāna.
Thus, one who knows the 20 Prarūpaṇas mentioned earlier through these appropriate Nikṣepa, Ekārtha, Naya, Pramāga, Nirukti, and Anuyoga, knows the nature of the Ātmā.
Thus, the twenty-second chapter, called Palāpa Prarūpaṇā, in the Moṃmaṭmār Jīvāḍ is complete.
1. Prā. Pati 151, Dhavalā. 2. Pā. P. 181 and Samyasāra Sā. Pū. 150. 3. Prā. P. 181, Syādvāda Majarī 310. 4. Svā. Kāti, Anu Gā, 263. 5. Pravachanasāra 181 Tā. Vr. 6. Prā. P. Nayādhikāra 367, P. 1012 and M. Si. 1.33 8. Mā. P. 77. Sakalavastugrāhaka Pramaṇa, Pramiyete, Parichiite Vastutattvaṃ Yena Jñānena Tantrāmaranam. Or, Samyagjñāna Pramāranam Prā. P. 34. 9. Rā. Bā. 1/4/7 Jīvati, Ajīvat Jīviṣyati iti vā Jīvaḥ. Svā. Kāni. Pr. 11- Lokānuprekṣā. Gā. 136 Ṭīkā 10. T-Sū. 117.

Page #822:
---------------------------
788/Go. Sa. Jivaka
Gatha 734
In the end, Nemichandracharya says this auspicious verse: Ajinaseen Guru, who preserves the multitude of qualities of Prajjajjaseen, is the Guru of the three worlds. The Gommata king Jayavant is the one whose Guru is that Guru. ||734|| Gatha-artha- The Arya Ajinaseen Guru, who preserves the multitude of qualities of Arya Aryaseen, is the Guru of the three worlds. The Gommata king Jayavant is the one whose Guru is that Guru.

Page #823:
---------------------------
Table of Contents
* Table of Contents
Verse
Page
mim
155
281
364
481 148
146
641
Page Head 186: Anno Muhme 242 Anno Muhuttameta 405 | Addhatteras Waram 483: Apdididapatteyam 483 | Apdididapattaya 488 | Appparobhaya 486 | Ayadoti Chha 467 | Ayadoti Hu Avi 733 | Avarai Bwadarim 463 | Avaraddha Avasva 10 Gharparitta 88 | Avaramprina
Pravara Pajjaya Avambarigigi
| Avaruwarammi 111 / Avare Barasansatra 522 | Avaroggahana 441 | Avaromagahana 691 | Avage Juttagano 426 Avgahivat
Avgehivan 671 ! Abar Tu Nahi
Avar Davvamuda
Avaransamuda Hati 61 Arasamuda Ma 425 | Pravaram Hodi Gran 218 | Avahir Tetis
Avahiyedi Ti Prohi Pradhvadhadi Granto Amahayanan Amuranamsamve
Asuranamsan 68 | Asuharan Var
Aibhimadamsaragana Angulanasanka Angalgrasansatra Angulumakha Angul Asanka Angulprasanka Angul Asanka Angulprasanka Angulasanka Angulmavaliya Angovanmridyado Ajjajjamenguna Prajjavamalechha Ajjiwemuyarubi Attattisalava Atubihkrama Attah Kammaragan Attarasachhattis Attvasayasahasamsa Adkodaiyey Prananatyan Hodi Annanaganavayaren Manuloham Vedano Anuloham Vedana Anusankhamane Atyavaram Cha Atyado Atyantar Asthi Anana Jiwa Antarbhavaprab Antaramaharukma Antomuhuttakal Angomuttamete Antobhuhanameno
405 146
-
-
mar orr -*
-
-
....
465 306
58
581

Page #824:
---------------------------
710/Go. Sa. Jivakanda
Page
148
:
Gaya Grahami Da Jah Deva Ahi Muhanyami Ya Ahi Yaro Pahudayam
124
:
:
Page | Gatha
Igi Purise Vattim
Igi Vanam Igi 421 Igi Vitinapan
Igi Vini Chava Cha Igi Yisamoha Ichchindra Sincha Indiyakaye | Indiyakayakagi Indiya Go Indiya Indiyam Go Dina Iha Jahi Bahiya
276
Paudhara Si Maga San Bajjita Swagabagi Padim Chhadrana Adim Sammat
503
GFG
182 5.17
Pradeshe
185
440 |
| Iha Gakaragan
+
'*
990
0
"
Bhabhi Yamasura Pramani Parana Mayare Muddayade Pravalin Sankhasan Pravali Asankha Bha Pravali Asankha Gravali Asankha Pravali Asankha Shravalin Sankha Pravali Asankha Pravali Asankha Pavali Yapudhatta Avasaya Hu Prasav Sanvar Prahar Di Agaran Aha Di Sarogga Ahar Sariri Mahara Dansasaran Pahara Ssu Dayen Ahar Yamu Nastam Ahar Kayajo Ahar Vagana Do Grahar Maranam Bahar O Pajase
Ukkam Madi Di Ukkass Sankha Mettam Uttama Pragamhi Udaya Vanasari Udaye Du Apunna Udaye Duvanapha Upayapugvagani Ya Ubajago Bana Ubadharan Dansasaranaran Unna Vadagabbha Jesu Uvvada Maragani Ya Unbadha Sura Shiya Unbade Acchittam Ubbadde Shidu Sara Untra Samasu Hamahare Ubasante Khog Ubasatvira Uvvade Padam Najanaka Baurak
.w
Wi muln6Nn.ki.MA.....1 mod.com
NANGKa x० ०. 1. Mr.REG.
405
| E Indiya Pahdi 441 | Gai Indiya Ras. Sa
Igidgapancha

Page #825:
---------------------------
## Gatha

Together, in this very time,
One indeed is eight, and one is four, one is one,
One is time, eleven are the paths,
One is the quality, which is one in the body, in this quality, two are divided.
Thus, the feelings have gone,
From the letters,
In the two worlds,
From the words, O, to the countless,
These are the Buddhas, and the countless beings, and the superiors,
And the qualities are combined, and you are the perfect ones,
The stream of the Gatha,
The stream of the teachings, or
The stream of the place of the vow,
The stream of the friend, the stream of the utterance, the stream of the utterance, the stream of the utterance,
The stream of the utterance, and the stream of the utterance, the stream of the utterance, the stream of the utterance,
The fruit of the vow, the root of the vow,
111011 le
Page
Gatha
427 | Kshpavavahara
56 Kappasuranam
405 ! Kammaiyakaya 386 Kammaiyavagaranam 420 Kammev ya Kammabhavam 335 | Kammoraliy
775 | Kamavannuttar 675 Kaugiil Kinnh
271
57 Kalavisesena
456 | Kale Channa
10 Kalo Ullesssa
417 Kalovi ya Vavaeso
Kalangrasssiy
Kanhat Ukkaranam
Kinhatiyara
Kivharseranam Muda
650
410
155
18
Kaa Kaa Kaa
2415 Kinhen Silasamaro
Kinha Rasila Kaa
146 675 Kinhadirasi
611 Kindradilems
Krimirayantraka
317
665
776
567
768
܀܀
Kummany Jo Kevalaranaradi
Kevalanararanam
Kohadikasaayanam Kodiumharasai
38 Bandham Sayal
337
316 | Khayab Samiy
728
Bage Yakhi Mohe 5.27vi Sargamahohe Tado Muh
Khandha Asankhaloga
742
264 | Gaidiyemu
www
19.
=II
WW17
Gathasuchi / 72
Page
452
507
733
46
312
341
425
5.81
567
427
Yee
615
646
636.
42%
5.65
Tex
365
576
600
620
356
126
176
6.00
365
114
670
271
711
10:5 30%
ܘܘ܀
160

Page #826:
---------------------------
## 712 Go. Sa. Jeevakanda
**Gatha**
**650**
**Page | Gatha 197** Drittanaanam Aadi 418 Hotti Padham '446 Chantravattaanam
**Name**
**Chhapayaniil** 132 Panchaadhi 35.0 Chhapanchavanavi 522 Tramsay Jojan
**Dassaypanasai** 537 | Chhaddi Sayam 778 Letapay Pari
**Gai.Udayaj Gachchasama Takka Gatanamanag Gaditharagoggah Madhithanoggah Gabbhajjivaanam Gabhag Puiththi Gauyachatt Gurgajiva Gunajiva Pajjati Gunajiiba Pajjati Gugajivatha Gurupacchaigo Gudhasirasandhi Goyamtheram**
577 155 625
446
785
295
266
126 271
**Ghanabhangulpadham**
278
}
**Janabadassammadi**
**Jattass Paham** 767
**Jatthev Kumarah Jamman Khalu Samman Jambudvivam Bharho Jamha Ubarim Jan Samaan**
**Jah Kanchanamgi** 737 | **Jahkhadasanjammo** 750 | **Jah Pushnaapunnai** 427 | **Jah Bharavho** 566 **Jaijaramarana** 24. **Jai Aviranaabhavi** 586 | **Jaanai Kajjakajja**
**Jaanai Tikal Jahib Jasu V**
**Jeevadug Uttatt** 446 **Jeeva Pragatsankha** 665 **Jeeva Chaudasbheya**
**Jeevajeevam Davyam** 588 **Jobaanam Cha Ya Raasi** 516 **Jeevaadoragat** 511 | **Jeevaadotang** 421 | **Jiviidare Kamma**
6
1
4
**Chaugaisaruv Chauu Pan Chois Chauravakthavar Chausadvipadam Chakkhun Jan Pay Charakhusodan Chandi Namuch Vattariv Khe Chadgadi Bhatro Chadimadi Chandaravijambu Barmadharasaanan Charimrubbakana Chaagi Bhaddo Chokho Nitiyamchintiyam Chitiyamchitiyam Chaudasammaga**
h
527
683
656 562
416
656
405

Page #827:
---------------------------
## Gatha 763

**Page**

Page | Gatha 663 | Parana Panchaviha 314 Ganubajog Juda 117 | Garayatirikta
| Gikkhith Bidhiya

**Gatha**

Jetthavavaddabaddha Jaisi Na Santi Jahi Aranya Jehim Dulukhi Joimivaran Joisiyantago Joisiyado Ahiyo Jogpautti Lessa Jog Padi Jogi Jogi Chaurakkhanam Jo Va Sacchmoso Jo Tasbahadu
786 134
56
Cam
675
675 676
Thanehidhi Jionihi
511 | Picchidaradhadu
Niddapale 573 Gidavacharan
| Rigaddesavanaparinama Giddattam Lugakhattam Giddarinaddha Na Giddhassa Giddhena Riddhidaroli Riddhidaravaragu Giddidar Guna
Riddhidare Sama 567 | Ni Mulakhandha
Niyakhette Kevali
Riparaya Kinha 586
Sissamsaviga Garaiya Khalu Gobiththi Raneev Goindiyavaran Goindiyatti Go Indiyessu Vi
Rango Kammuralasan 281
578
135
346
Pattaksaye Gadvapamae Padhama Nattasepasamado Nay Kunai Pakhavayam Nay Je Bhavaghava Gay Parinadhi Ranay Pattiya Gay Mitta Nay Sacchmom Gatiriyaag Paratiriya Rag Ramati Jado Ranaraladdhimappajjata Naraloetti Ya Navami Asarakha Ra Matra Ya Padattha
Vari Ya Dus Gagari Bisesa Ravari Samugya Gavari Ya Mukka Navi Indiya
11.00A KI
m par .
COM
225
485
Najjogo Samana | Tattu Uvari
| Tattu Egar 682 | Lattu Kammaiya 335 | Tattu Nanuttaranam
] Nattu Lantva | Tattu Sankhejj Navruhamangulassa Tadiyavastro Anta
508

Page #828:
---------------------------
764 / Go. Sa. Ji. Kand
Gatha
Tadayakasaya nalaliin madhuga tabhadiye charimo
Navivadyam kapparan
Nasachadujugaran nasjivaan tasara sipudhavi
Tassamayabaddha
Tassuvari igi
Nasheena sammari
Tahi samuddha tah se sadevaa
Tam suddhasalaaga
Taapam samayabaddha
Tarisa parinaam
Tigurana satguna tinakarikhi
Nisiya
Tilisiyajoy
Nisiyasatti tinnh dopah dopah
Timich punn tiyakal visay
Tiradhiyasay
Tiriyagadee tiriyatraunka
Tiriye pravaram
Tiriyati kudil tibbatma tibbva
Tisayam bhanthi
Tisu teram das teesan baasi jamme
Teutiya evam tej prasankha
Ussay satta teuu teuu teuu
Tak padhme suk
Gatha
Pruth 535 Teja sarirajet
221 Tetisavenjarsai terasakodi dese
147
522 Terichchriyaladdhi 115 vi trisease e
775 Teshi samase 282 to vasay ajbhay
317
147
247
342
340
Yavar kay pahudi
Yavar kay p
Dhavar kayapp
Shravar kayapp
Thavar ka yapp
Yavar kay p
Thavar sankha
Thothra timu
42
317
58
225
347
163
225 Dantr khettam kaalam
240 Davvam khettam kaalam
Dakkama kaliya
567
248
Das chaudasadu 515 Dasvihasanache
68 Das sagiraan samoh
757 770 Samod
505 Dasamaav 202 Dansanavayasamaiy
581 Dahi dubhi va 688 Dingachhedesavahi 764 Dichchede va hi
536 Divasaan pakho maaso diivvati jado
618
602
Dugati gabhava ha 611 | Dugavaar pahuda do 567 Duvishi shram
581 Devaranam avahara
th
v
।।।।
Pruth
33.7
427
666
771
253
402
441
741
743
742
75.1
752
756
244
35.0
520
4.55
680
422
*&#
182
705.
706
711
541
24
28.7
503
642
210
52.5
422 768 665.

Page #829:
---------------------------
## Table of Contents/765
**Page**
4.74 517
**Verse**
Devāhi sādireya Devāhi mādireya Devāhi sādirego Desavirade Desabahīvara Desohimbar Desāhimjbha Desohiram Ya Doguṇāṅgaṇaddhāṇu Dopaham Pancay Doligaphabhab
485
'425
186 506
Dhaṇuvīsaddas Dhammagurugamgaṇā Dhammādhammādī Dhūvaddhavarūve Dhūvakosu Bhaya Dhūvähārakkamma Dhruvähārassā Paṁāṇaṁ Dhūlig Chakkattāgā
pour TUTUS > SU"
612
Māthā Pajjāyakāvara
Paḍibādī De. 722 | Paḍivādī Pugā
| Paḍhamṛgvā Al466 Padam Paṁadapamā
| Paḍ Muvasamasahī 485 Pāgane Tas
Paśyāṭṭadāl Paṇ Paraśaragatimā Paṇgāva Gigajjā | Pagīadarasaṁbhoyā Paṇ Bīma Joya Patnayabuddhanittha Paṁadādīcaj Paṁmassā Ya Saṭṭāgā Paṁmukkasasamuṁdā Paramaṇasiṭṭiyamṭṭha
Paramaṇupādīyāī 482
Paramaṇuvagaṇādā Paramaṇahi Aṇa Paramāvahibara Paramāvahiras Paramāvahipps Paramāhidavya
Pallatiyaṁ Uva 420 | Palasamūgā 135 | Pallāsaṁkhagaṇam
| Pallāmukhajjaya
Pallāsambejjā 562 | Pallāmabajjā 566 Pallāmakhejjā 3.75 ' Passadi Prohī 562 | Pahiyā Je Chāpu 165 | Puśvaragahaṛaṇe 221 | Puggalacittraī 161 | Pudidagāgarip 756 : Pṛḍhavī Pāū Teū
4.urt.
Nonukkasasams
mo
N
Paccakkhāṇadayaṁdo Paccavakhāṇeve Pañcakhatiri Pañcamihicahu Pabi Indiya Pañcarasa Patra Pañcasamimido Nigutto Paveva Honni Magā Pajjattasmaya Pajjattasārīrassā Pajjattmaṇusmāgāṁ Pajjattīpaṭṭhavaṇa Pajjattī Pāṇāvi
485
.......NK
362 286 164

Page #830:
---------------------------
766/Go. Sa. Jivakash
Page
Page | Gatha 277 / B J Jorani Bhude 666 | Besadayagar
344 345
465
Gatha Pudhavi Adi Chah Pudabi Jalnch Punyajhargan Parisichchisan Purugunbhoge Purumahdaru Puvan Jalathal Puvapuvafadadhay Puhuhuhkasy Poggal Davamhi Poggaldabayan Potjarayuj
.NK
Daya
467
Bhattam Devi Chandapah Bharangammi Addh Bhavatiyarana Bhavapainaigo Ohi Bhavapacchaigo Sur Bhanvattaranassa Jogga Bhavasammattavi Bhavia Siddhi Bhavanam Samanna Bhavaddo Challemsa Bhasamavamga Bhinna Samayasiddhi Bhumaauteu Bhupaauteuvaau Bhoga Punyaga
616
Phasarasgandh
702 386 248
775
Byar Nm muv
578
2c
Bandho Samayapa Vahubahuviham Cha Bahubhage Samabhaggo Bahuvattijadi Bahuvihbhappa Badarmaau Chadarateubaau Badarapunsaateu Badarabadar Badarmuhame Badar Suhma Badarsahma Badarsanjal Badarsanjalag Babi Sasatt Barutarasay Bahirpayohim Bitinap Punna Bitichapmaag Bidhiyuvasam Vihi Tihi Chaduhi
Magganauvjoaga
Mabhimesera 305 | Majjhimachau 338 Majjhimadavvam Khetan 666 Majjhimapadkavar 116 Mati Jado 24.7 | Magadavavaggaraga
Magadavvavagara Maranpajjab Cha
Maranpajjan Cha 155 Maganpajjabpariharao 426 Manbayanar
| Mag Bayarmaranan 141 Maranasahyaean 248 Manusinipamatt
Madinavaran 275 | Madisudaprohi
KK ... xx 0 0 0GAIK " .OG
771

Page #831:
---------------------------
The Gatha:

The one with dull intellect desires death,
Countless are the deaths.
The sweet nectar-like maya, the delusion in the mind,
The living beings are false, the false view, the false conduct, the false state.
The living being,
The false triad,
Truly false, false indeed,
The false transmigration,
The false rise, the false transmigration, the false doctrine, the mixed, the mixed merit,
Contemplates who was previously the root-born, the root body, the root stem, the sprout.
By the name of the sacrificer,
The wounded one cries out with another's cry, then he cries.
The acquired doctrine, the mark, he proclaims.
Truly the color, the color of whom, the world, the world-space regions, the world-space region.
...
Y
L
...
Page
Gatha
4.87
Logagasaya
ོ་
Langanamasam
601 Loganamasam
2.76
Shao
58
18
757
738
684
685 Battisamprada
Rimitam
Vatthussa pade samiditavasa
ĐT Tâ
ê
752
378
7.74
721
===
726
Vagganaraasi
Goda
446
Sorr Vanarahekala Vanāvattapamātre
Varakāsa
Vavahāro puna kā bahāro pu
Ti
Vavahāro pur
Bahāro viya
Bādarahame
Paranōnātam
Bāsapute khayiya
Triladīva
Vikahā tahā
Vigghahsadimā vidāvalilōgānam
148 146 Vidiyuttrasabha
587 : Bivarīyamōhi
Vivihagurana
Visajjantakūḍa
Visayāraṇam visa
170
573
566
Vīramuhakamala 581 Vīriyajudamadi 651 Bīsa bīsam pāhuḍa
652 Veguvam pajjatam 656 Vegubbiyo āhāro
..
V
Gāthā sūcī / 767
Page
656
22E
581
484
5.77
5.66
635
34
660
734
362
530
ico
564
642
646
656
641
774
44 1
716
511
34
724
284
753
350
*
376
382
780
182
422
738
313

Page #832:
---------------------------
798/Go. Sa. Jivakanda
Head, Veguviya Uttattham, Ve Gudhviyavarasam, Benjanapattha, Venavamulora, Vedasudiragae, Vedadaaharoatti, Veyanakasaya
.at .w.w.
Page 766 165 505 663 114
w
716
352
SV
107 3.41
AP
..
Page - Gatha 304 Sattah Pudhaviinam 337. Satadina Chhammasa! Manam Akhidimmi
Sattadi Amrita 344
Sadamivasan Kho Sampugnan Tu Samaga Sahaharanam
Sambhabamarano Maccho 581 Samo Hu Vattama
Sammatadesaghadi 507
Mammatadesa Sasammatamichchhapani
Sammatarayana 486 | Sammatuppanie 128. Samayatayasankha
Sammaiitti Jivo Sammaamichchhu Daye Manvangang Sambhava Savvam Cha Loyanalli Mandamarutri Sadhvasamaasena Vahi
| Sabvasamaaso 282
Madhvamuraanam Proch | Sanchaavihissa Eka | Sabvepi Putabhanga | Sabvesi Suhmaaranam Samvohitti Ya Ke
Sansari Panchakka 605 Sagari Uvajogo
Santarrarinarantarena 743 | Samagajiva
Samanna Garaiya Mamannna Panchidi Samoona Ya Evam Samagana Tipanti | Mamaran Pajjattam
.
5.07
X
Sankama Chhatana Sankamagan Sattag Saikkisaana Padhau Sakko Jambudhib Sanskha Nah Patthage Sanvanida Sama Sankhavalaya Jogi Sankhatra Lihida Sankhegro Progo Sanvejjapame Kale Mambejjasan Snejja Sangjejjasa Sangvesam Jugalamhi Sagamaranaihi Vibhatte Sagasagasan Kha Samasagakheta Sagasagravakha Sanghiiya Sayala Sanjalaranokasa Sanjalganokasa Sattaanasamurgha Santhavidurana Evam Sapanalig Sanarasai Sanniassavaara Sapani Protre Michche Sani Manippa Sattah Ubasamdo
366
Hurry:
xx.
0
mors 15
0" day॥

Page #833:
---------------------------
**Table of Contents/761 Page 747 9. Page! Gatha 451 Muhumandarigrig 28.5. Muhumgiwate 265 | Manamo Muhum Gadi Mui Angul 136 | Sethi Sui Palla Selagkinhe Srishn Melattikattevette Sansattharasa Gramsa 784 Solasayam Chau Mobakkramanubakkam So Sanjharb Ga Gi | Mohmmasaran Mohhammaadama | Sohammisaga Salasasay A' or box 2 mama Gatha Mamaiyachao Maharnavadare Maharagadayena Saharanmayaag Sahiumahasplameka Sikkhakiriyu Siddhamuddh Siddhaantim Siddhara Siddhagai Sil Grihavi Silasala Venu Sidi Satthi Tal Sileasi Sampatto Sukkassa Samuggha Sunh Dugaiigi Suttado Nan Samm Nudkeval Cha Ganam Suhamaringod Muhumanigod Sahamgigod Muhumanigod Suhamasigod Muhumanigod Muhadrukw Subah Muhamesu Sankh p ur ).me.au 508 Nur. 515 13.7 | Hidi Hodi Hai 242 | Hadim Ukkams 403  /  Hetta Jemmi 403  /  Hedimchapuduvig 103 | Hetimalappuviagaan 456  /  Honni Aniyadhiga 351 Honni Nava Igi 282 | Hodi Atim -. . - imna . ." -**

