Catalog link: https://jainqq.org/explore/090180/1

Page #1:
---------------------------
|| Shri Vitragaya Namah ||
Acharya Shri Nemichandra Siddhantchakravarti Virachit Gommatasar Karmakanda
('SiddhantgyanadIpika' Hindi Tika Samanvit)
Tika ki Aryika 105 Shri Adimati Mataji
卐
Prakashak Acharya 108 Shri Shiv Sagar Granthmala
Shri Shantivir Digambar Jain Sansthan Shri Shantivirnagar, Shri Mahavirji - 322221
Phone: 07469-24482 VEXSISISISISISISISISISISISISISIS 

Page #2:
---------------------------
From the first edition:

* *Antardhvani*  The thought arose in the mind of Dharasenacharya, who lived in the caves of Girinagar (Girnar region), that if the present Shruta is not written down, its tradition will be broken, due to the fear of the passage of time. As a result, he sent a letter to the Sadhus present at the Yatisammelan in Mahimangari, saying, "My age is declining, so please send two intelligent Sadhus to me, to whom I can teach the Makaprabhutganthama that is within me; otherwise, that knowledge will be lost after me." The Munis present at the Yatisammelan in Mahimangari greatly honored Dharasenacharya's letter and sent two intelligent Sadhus towards Girinagar. These two Sadhus are known as Pushpadanta and Bhootbali.

Upon reaching Girinagar, Dharasen tested the intelligence of both Sadhus and made them study Satkarma Prabhut. After the study, they composed the scriptures. These compositions of Acharya Pushpadanta and Bhootbali became famous as Jivatthana, Khuddabandh, Bandhasamittvichya, Veyanakhand, Vagganakhand, and Mahabhand. The above six chapters together are called Shatkhandagabha. Virasenaswami wrote a commentary on them called Dhavala. Nemichandraacharya had practiced these six chapters very well. He himself wrote in Karmakanda:

"Jah chakkena ya chakki chakkhand sahiyam avigghen.
Tah mai chakkena maya chakkhandam sahiyam sammam." ||367||

Meaning: Just as a Chakravarti, with his Chakra Ratna, conquers the six regions of Bharat Kshetra without any obstacles, in the same way, I have conquered the Parmagam, including the six chapters, with my Chakra Ratna of intellect.

Nemichandraacharya was a famous Acharya of the Deshiyan gana. He has mentioned Acharya Voranandi, Abhayanandi, Indranandi, and Kanakanandi with great reverence as his Gurus. See some examples:

"Jassa ya payapasayena nanta sansarjalahamuttieno.
Virindanandivachcho namami tam abhayanandi gurum." ||K.Ka. 436||

Meaning: I bow to Abhayanandi Guru, whose grace has enabled Viranandi and Indranandi to cross the ocean of infinite Samsara. 

Page #3:
---------------------------
I bow to the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious, the victorious,
Page #4:
---------------------------
Swadhyay was stopped. Chamundarayan asked why Swadhyay was stopped. Nemichandracharya said that the right to study Agam scriptures is not for householders. Then how can we householders know this? In response to this question of Chamundarayan, Nemichandracharya composed Gommatasar. I understand the essence of the story to be that ordinary people cannot grasp the profound discussions of Shatvandaagam, so Nemichandracharya made an effort to simplify those profound discussions, and the name of the effort became 'Gommatasar'.

Gommatasar is divided into two parts - Jeevakand and Karmakand. Jeevakand describes the principles related to Mahakarmapraabhrut, Jeevasthan, Kshudrabandh, Bandhswamitva, Vedanakhand and Varganakhand, and Karmakand describes Mahabandh. In addition to Mahabandh, Karmakand also includes many topics from Shatkhandagam's Prakritisamutkirtan and Jeevattaanchulika etc. Jeevakand describes the worldly beings through twenty-Prarooppappas, and Karmakand presents the description of the states of binding, arising and being of karmas. Jeevakand contains various gathas from Dhavala, and they are compiled so beautifully that they have become a part of the text.

The eleventh-century scholar Acharya Nemichandra Siddhantachkravarti also created three other texts besides the aforementioned Jeevakand and Karmakand - Labdhisar, Kshapanasar and Triloksar. It is a matter of joy that all five texts have been published with Hindi translations and are being used for Swadhyay by those interested in the truth. A new edition of Triloksar has been edited and translated by Pujya Shri 105 Vishuddhamati Mataji and published from Shantivirnagar with many annotations. New editions of Jeevakand and Karmakand have been edited and translated by Siddhantacharya Pt. Kailashchandraji and published from Bharatiyajnanapith with the commentary by Keshavvarni. Labdhisar-Kshapanasar has been published from Rayachandra Granthamala and Jain Siddhanta Prakashini Sanstha Kolkata.

The present edition of Karmakand is being published with many annotations under the editorship of Shri Ratanchandraji Mukhtar Saharanpur, a distinguished expert in Karananuyog. The editor has clarified the subject by comparing the topics from Dhavala, Jay-Dhavala and Mahabandh etc. The commentary of the text was written by Acharya Kalpshri Shruta Sagarji Maharaj Sanghasth 105 Aryika Shri Adimati Mataji.

It can be said with certainty from the topics presented in Karmakand that this is an important text that describes the essence of karma literature in detail. Until one knows the karmic natures, their binding and their causes, one cannot find a way to eliminate them. 

Page #5:
---------------------------
(6)
This is a text on Karmakanda. Earlier, it was complete in the Shastri classrooms, but now due to the abundance of subjects and the unavailability of the commentary written by Pandit Todarmalji, it has become difficult to read and study. Therefore, only Bandhodayasattvadhikar, i.e., 357 verses, have been retained. Due to the discontinuation of reading and studying, the remaining part is mostly unknown to scholars and modern students.
Shri Ratanchandraji Mukhtar is a cultured soul from a previous birth. Despite not having studied systematically in any school or college, he has gained good knowledge of the principle texts through self-study alone. In the editing and publication of the Dhaval, Jayadhaval, and Mahabandh texts, the learned editors have respectfully accepted your opinions and suggestions. You have edited this edition of Karmakanda after examining it with the Dhavala and other texts. In this present edition, each topic has been clarified with references, making it extremely important for self-study enthusiasts and students.
▾
Acharyakalp Shri Shruta Sagarji Maharaj is well aware of your studious nature, talent, and ability to edit texts. Therefore, he has planned to publish this refined edition of Karmakanda by having you edit the commentary written by 105 Aryika Adimatiji. Acharyakalp Shri Shruta Sagarji Maharaj is also known by his name and qualities. You have a good understanding of Karananuyoga. You have carefully compiled each topic. The publication of this present edition of Karmakanda is the result of your inspiration. It has come to my knowledge that Mukhtar Sahib Shri Ratanchandraji is also preparing a similar edition of Jeevakanda, including commentary and editing. Seeing his devotion to Shruta in his old age fills my heart with great joy. Mukhtar Sahib himself has already edited and refined the Labdhisar-Kshapanasar with a new commentary, which is soon to be published by this Achary Shiv Sagar Di. Jain Granthamala, Shantivirnagar. I hope these works of the learned editor will receive full respect in the scholarly world.
Acharyakalp Shri Shruta Sagarji Maharaj has been gracious to me by giving me the opportunity to write a few lines on the literature published from Shantivirnagar. I am very grateful to him for this kindness.
Sagar 2-6-1980
Triniit Pannalal Sahityacharya 

Page #6:
---------------------------
* Foreword *
First Edition:
The twelve-Anga-Gijjha, the essence of the Vilva-Mal-Mud Dasanuttilaya.
Various-excellent-charan-bhusa, seen by the good-devaya, Suiran. || The last Tirthankara, Vardhaman - Mahavira's divine voice, emitted, composed in the form of twelve-Angas by Naunamagana-dhara and traditional, modern and Arati-va Acharyas, has been divided into the first-karan-charan and dravya-anuyoga-rupa anuyoga-chatuṣṭaya of the Jinavani. In the anuyoga-chatuṣṭaya, the Karananuyoga-sambandha Kayapahuḍ, Ṣaṭkhaṇḍāgama, Mahābandhādi special texts have a direct connection with the Veeraprabhu's voice. While deeply studying these texts written by Bhagavan Mahavira's voice, Bhagavad Gunadhara-acharya and Pujya-yat Bhutbali-Pushpatata-acharya, Shri Namchandra-acharya, who attained Siddhanta-chakravartitva, created Gatha in Chanda-bandha in the form of Gommatasaradi texts in the Akrit-bhasha. The Acharya-deva's Karma-siddhanta and Karma-kshapana-related unparalleled creations were published from Calcutta about 60 years ago with Sanskrit commentaries and Pandit Pravara Todarmalji's Dhundhari-bhasha. Based on this, scholars of the society have been studying, contemplating and thinking, but the need for the publication of these texts with pure modern Hindi commentaries has always remained. In this direction, the Rayachandra-granthamala has published the pure Hindi translation of Gommatasara-karmakanda-jivakandadi texts in 2-3 editions, but it only partially fulfills the objective, because these editions have not translated the Sanskrit commentary of the aforementioned texts of Nemichandra-acharya verbatim, but rather a summary statement is found. Based on the same concise Hindi commentary, reading and teaching has been going on in the world of knowledge. Only the aforementioned texts' commentary by Pandit Todarmalji was available to special inquisitive people. Pujya Aryika Gyanamati Mataji's goal was this, she expressed her feelings to the people close to her to fulfill the long-cherished need of the society, but that feeling only remained expressed.
In 1973, the disciples of Param Pujya 108 Acharya Shri Dharmasagarji Maharaj, Muni-yugal (Pujya 108 Shri Sambhavsagarji and Vardhamanasagarji Maharaj), 5 Aryikas (Gyanamatiji, me, Shreshthamatiji, Ratnamatiji, Yashoamatiji) and the small Santhambhati-ji had Chaturmas in Najafgarh (Delhi). During the Chaturmas-pravas, one day Mataji again expressed her aforementioned thoughts in this way, "The translation of Gommatapsara-Trilokasaradi texts written by Acharya Shri Nemichandra-siddhanta-chakravarti in modern Hindi and their publication will help the new generation in studying these texts and their interest in Karananuyogi texts will also awaken. The lack of study of these mathematics-based texts will increase the trend." In those days, the study of Jain-geography-related Tilayapannatti-Trilokasaradi texts was also going on in the Sangha, so the idea was to first translate the Dhundhari-bhasha of Pandit Pravara Todarmalji's Trilokasara into pure Hindi, but when it was known that Aryika Vishuddhamatiji's, based on Madhavachandra Traividyadeva-acharya's Sanskrit commentary, 

Page #7:
---------------------------
##  Sarva 
(<)
By | Hindi commentary and with the blessings of the most revered Acharya Kalp Shri Shruta Sagarji Maharaj, its publication has been done by Acharya Shri Shiv Sagar Di. Jain Granthamala, Shri Shantivirnagar, then the thoughts of doing the work of Triloka Laargranth were postponed.
A few days after this, or a few days later, I received inspiration from Mataji that "Aadimatiji! The work of Triloka Saar has been done. Now you have to start the work of Gommat Saar Karmakand." Along with this inspiring order, guidance was also given that, taking the commentary of Pandit Todarmalji as a basis, if necessary, with the interpretations given in the Sanskrit commentary and the original, a new translation in pure Hindi should be done by adjusting the interpretations from the Marathi commentary of Gommat Saar Karmakand in their respective places.
Mataji herself was capable of doing this great work, because she is an expert in the subjects of Nyaya, Grammar, Literature, Spirituality and Principles. She has translated the Nyaya Granth like Ashta Sahasri, which is considered to be difficult, the Grammar Granth like Katantra Vajendra Prakriya, the spiritual Granth like Niyam Saar, and the Granth like Asrav Tribhanga and Bhav Tribhanga, which are related to Karma, and the translation work of many other Granth like Nyaya Kumud Chandra is in progress. She has also independently created various Granth that expound on various subjects like Nyaya Saar, Triloka Bhaskara, etc. Praise composition has also been her favorite subject, therefore, the poetic translation of Granth like Samadhi Shatak, Ishtopadeś, Dravya Sangrah, etc., and many of her own hymns have also been published. Her oratory skills also hold an important place in society. Her soft voice, with magnetic attraction, easily inspires the benevolent, noble beings. As a result, many noble beings have received inspiration from her and have taken the initiation of Acharya Shri Shiv Sagarji and Acharya Shri Dharma Sagarji Maharaj Muni, etc., and paved the way for self-realization. Mataji herself has taught her close ones the comprehensive study of Jain philosophy. As a result, Aryika Jinmatiji is also a learned Aryika, she has also translated 'Pramay Kamal Martand' under your inspiration. In the presence of these two Aryikas (Gyanmatiji and Jinmatiji), I got the opportunity to study various subjects of Jain philosophy.
You, the most learned Gyanmati Mataji, have infinite favors on me, because after getting the life of widowhood at a young age, to move on the path of self-realization, there was a search for an Aryika who would be like a mother, who would be a constant source of knowledge, who would be a gentle guide for my benefit, and that was fulfilled when I met you. When I saw you for the first time, it felt like I had found my mother, who had been separated from me for a long time. You are a Bal Brahmachari. Inspired by your boundless inspiration, in 1961, in Sikar (Raj.), I got the auspicious opportunity to take the Aryika initiation from the most revered, ever-memorable, virtuous, compassionate Guru, Acharya Shri 108 Shiv Sagarji Maharaj, in the form of an excellent, womanly restraint.
As I have written before, Mataji herself was capable of accomplishing this great work, however, the greatest characteristic of her life is that she wished for the all-round progress of those who lived close to her. This was the reason why she never left anyone behind in the pursuit of knowledge. It was this generosity that... 

Page #8:
---------------------------
(1)
FACHI
As a result, Mataji inspired me. I was also delighted to receive her great compassion and instructive blessings and began writing the translation by starting it with a mangalacharan in the presence of Mataji herself. Under her guidance, this work was almost half complete, after which, due to some reason, I lost Mataji's presence in 1975 and the translation work also stopped due to many reasons. In 1976, when the Sangh of Param Pujya Acharya Shri Dharmasagarji Maharaj and Acharya Kalpshri Shruta Sagarji Maharaj was in Badot (U.P.) for Chaturmas, one day Aryika Shrutamatiji (who had received Aryika Diksha from Acharya Shri Dharmasagarji in 1974 after being inspired by Gyanmati Mataji) said with special insistence, "Mataji! The work of Jinvano-seva that Amma (Gyanmatiji) entrusted to you in Najafgarh will remain incomplete, won't it?" Hearing this statement of Shrutamatiji, inspiration arose in my heart and the work started again. In the Chaturmas of Padanaganj-Kishangarh in 1977, this great work was completed. Because how could a work remain incomplete, which was inspired by Parmopakari Mataji and then started by her herself!
After the Chaturmas of Madanaganj-Kishangarh, the Sangh of Param Pujya 108 Acharya Shri Dharmasagarji Maharaj went towards Bihar Ajmer, Acharya Kalpshri Shruta Sagarji Maharaj was also with them. Upon reaching Ajmer, I and Shrutamatiji humbly requested the ever-studying, embodiment of affection, expert in Karpya Anuyog, Shruta Nidhi, Param Pujya Acharya Kalpshri Shruta Sagarji Maharaj to see the newly written commentary of Gommatasar Karmakand. Pujya Maharaj Shri accepted the request and graciously started looking at the commentary. When I requested Pujya Muni Shri Vardhaman Sagarji Maharaj to read the commentary, he also readily joined this work. In this way, almost 150 verses were read in front of Acharya Kalpshri, then Pujya Maharaj Shri expressed his heartfelt feelings that if Pandit Ratnachandji Mukhtar Sa. would see this commentary, it would be even more beautiful, because he is a distinguished scholar of Karan Anuyog in the present time. With this expression of feelings, Maharaj Shri immediately sent news to Panditji by letter, upon receiving his ready consent,
those 150 verses were sent to him and the further work continued in the presence of Maharaj Shri. The work would have been done up to about 300 verses when it was decided that the Sangh of Acharya Kalpshri and 6 Muni Rajas including Ajit Sagar would have Chaturmas in Anandpur Kalu (Raj.). In this Chaturmas of 1978, Mukhtar Sa. himself came in the presence of Acharya Kalpshri and here the reading of the commentary from beginning to end was done in the presence of Param Pujya Maharaj Shri with the help of Muni Shri Vardhaman Sagarji Maharaj. Panditji has refined the commentary by giving his unique suggestions for correction and addition, taking the basis of great texts like Dhaval, Jayadhavala etc. Along with this, he also suggested the name of this new commentary as Siddhanta Gyandeepika, therefore, according to your suggestion, the commentary has been named as such.
After the reading of the commentary was completed, Muni Shri Vardhaman Sagarji took upon himself the responsibility of making the press copy of the refined and revised commentary and with almost 7-8 months of tireless hard work, 

Page #9:
---------------------------
I have prepared the press copy and also expressed my views in the printing process, fully cooperating in making the book beautiful from beginning to end. Seeing the dedication of the revered Muni Shri in doing this work, I wish that you remain engaged in the service of Jinvani Pataki day and night. After initiation, you have endured many physical hardships, and even during the publication of this book, you have worked hard without worrying about physical ailments. I express my gratitude to you.

The main reason for the completion of this great work has been the great grace and auspicious blessings of the most revered Acharya Kalpshri Shruta Sagarji Maharaj and the original source of inspiration, the revered Aryika Ratna Shri Gyanmati Mataji, because I was not capable of completing this great work. If the blessings of the above-mentioned renunciants had not been with me, it would have been very difficult for me to complete this work. In this great sacrifice, the hard work of Mukhtar Sa. Shri Ratanchandji cannot be forgotten. At the age of 76, his unparalleled dedication and enthusiasm for work are exemplary. Expressing my gratitude to the most revered both Maharaj Shri and Mataji, I humbly bow at their feet and always pray for their continued blessings. Along with this, I also wish Mukhtar Sa. all the best from Veer Prabhu that he may live long and continue to serve Jinvani in the same way. The entire arrangement related to the publication of the book is by Acharya Kalpshri's Sangha sth. Br. Ladmalji. The enthusiasm you have for the propagation of Jinlag in your old age seems like that of a young person. My blessings are also with him that he may live long and remain engaged in the service of Jinvani and its propagation. What more can be said?

This new edition:

The work of revising this new edition of Gommatasar Karmakand was started by Pandit Jawaharlalji Siddhanta Shastri even when he was ill, but despite much effort, he was only able to revise 83 pages of this book. He also gave some notes in their respective places. But due to his declining health, he could not revise the entire book. May he remain healthy. May he uplift and propagate Jinvani through his work; may Panditji live long, this is my wish.

The editor of this edition is Dr. Chetan Prakashji Patni. He has revised and edited many books. You have a special interest in the publication of Jinvani. Through you, many important works have been published and are being published. My wish and blessing is that you may remain healthy and continue to serve Jinvani Mata, enhancing the dignity of civilized knowledge.

Shri Kshemankar Patni of Nidhi Computers is also deserving of my blessings for the flawless and beautiful presentation of this voluminous book.

- Aryika Adimati

Page #10:
---------------------------
## Editorial
**First Edition:**

The event took place approximately 45 years ago, in 1935, corresponding to Vikram Samvat 1991. On the auspicious occasion of the Dasalakshan Parva, the renowned scholar of Vijagat, the late Shri Manikchandji Kaundeya 'Nyayacharya', was invited to Saharanpur to deliver a discourse. During the discourse, while explaining the Tattvartha Sutra, he described the nature of Upshama Samyag Darshan. However, due to the slight decay of knowledge (Alpkshayopshama), I couldn't understand the nature of Upshama Samyag Darshan as presented by him according to the Agamas. But I did understand that attaining Samyag Darshan could be my salvation.

After the discourse ended, to quench my curiosity, I asked the Panditji about the means of attaining Prathamopa-shama-Samyaktva and its nature, and in which text it was described. The Panditji, with a natural response, said that Acharya Shri Nemichandra Siddhanta Chakravarti had elaborated on it in the 'Labdhisar-Kshapanasar' text. That's it! As if "a blind person had received two eyes," I felt as if I had found a treasure. I decided to study the aforementioned text.

In those days, there was a restriction on studying printed scriptures in the Jain temples of Saharanpur. Only handwritten scriptures were allowed to be read, and that too while wearing pure clothes. This was the reason why printed texts were not available in a religious city like Saharanpur. As per my decision, I obtained a handwritten copy of 'Labdhisar-Kshapanasar' from the personal scripture collection of the late Lala Jambuprasadji Rais and started studying it in the morning hours in the Jain temple built by the late Lala Bhagwandasji.

Being unfamiliar with Hindi, Sanskrit, and Prakrit languages, and not even knowing the names of the Karma-Prakritis, only knowing Urdu and English, my attempt to study such a great text like 'Labdhisar-Kshapanasar' felt like a lame person trying to climb a difficult and high mountain. Despite knowing my inadequacy, the strong inner motivation kept me going, and despair never took over me. The lamp of hope continuously illuminated my mind, making it stronger and stronger. As a result, the study continued, because the feeling of self-interest was strong.

On the first day, I read the first page of the preface written by Pandit Pravar Todarmalji for the text, but even after an hour of effort, I couldn't understand anything. So, I stopped studying that day, as it was time for my legal work. Similarly, on the second day, I studied the same page of the preface, but there was no progress compared to the previous day. I still couldn't understand anything. However, due to continuous efforts, the subject matter of the preface gradually became clear, and the saying "Karat Karat Abhyasake Jadmati Hot Sujan" (Practice makes perfect) became a direct experience in my life. 

Page #11:
---------------------------
The book Labdhisar-Kshapanasar contains a lot of mathematics, and mathematics was my main and favorite subject during my student life. Therefore, my attraction towards Karananuyoga related to Jain philosophy gradually increased. As a result, I got the opportunity to study almost all the major books available on Karananuyoga in my life. Similarly, once Shriman Pandit Heeralalji Siddhanta Shastri had come here to compare the manuscript of the Dhaval Granthraj from the Saharanpur Shastra Bhandar. During that time, he also explained the Siddhanta Granth Shri Dhaval for an hour every day. Since I had developed a special interest in self-study, I used to come to the temple from the court, two miles away, for an hour to listen to his lectures. Panditji was also editing the Dhaval Granth at that time, which is why he had come to Saharanpur. When two books of the Dhaval Granth were published, the said Siddhanta Shastriji was invited to Saharanpur Samaj for a lecture on Dasalakshan Parva. He came and inspired me to order both the books for my personal Shastra Bhandar. However, I thought that I would not be able to understand these Granthraj, so they remained in the cupboard of the Shastra Bhandar.
One day, I and my younger brother Nemichandji Vakil thought that we should read these books to see what they contain. As a result of this inquisitive attitude, my brother started studying Dhaval first and second books, but due to the slowness of Kshayopa Sham, he understood very little. Despite this, both brothers were not discouraged and continued to order the upcoming published parts of the Dhaval Granth and studied them, but there was no change in the situation. We kept sending some of the topics that we didn't understand to Shri Pandit Phoolchandji Siddhanta Shastri and Shri Pandit Horalalji Siddhanta Shastri. The said scholars also kindly provided solutions to them. When the fifth book of the Dhaval Granth was published, we ordered it and studied it, and it felt as if the doors of knowledge had opened. Studying this book not only helped me understand its subject matter, but it also clarified the subject matter of the previous books. In this way, the brother duo's continuous hard work not only clarified the subject matter, but also helped us understand the errors in the printed translation due to the carelessness of the scribes and the difficulty of the subject matter.
The above facts are not written for self-praise. The intention behind writing this is that when studying the Jain scriptures, one should not get discouraged if the subject matter is not clear, but should continue to strive. It is also said - "TRY AND TRY AGAIN UNTIL YOU SUCCEED." You should try again and again until you succeed. There is also a story related to this:
Once, a king was defeated in a war and fled the battlefield and hid in a house. In the room where he was sitting, he saw a spider trying to reach the ceiling of the room by a thread, but after climbing a short distance, it fell back to the earth. Not once, twice, or thrice, but a total of 99 times it failed in its purpose, yet it continued to try, and in its final attempt, it succeeded in reaching the ceiling. 

Page #12:
---------------------------
(13)
She arrived. Seeing this, the king thought to himself, "A small creature, after failing 99 times, still made an effort (while I am hiding here, like a frightened deer, doing nothing for my poor people) and I, like a cowardly deer, am hiding here, doing nothing for my people." He got up and, reorganizing his army, fought and won. The point is that due to the lack of knowledge, one should not be averse to the study of great scriptures, but should be diligent, because study weakens the power of the section of the veil-removing karma, which increases the destruction of knowledge.
This was also the view of P.P.A.K. Shri 108 Shruta Sagarji Maharaj. Although you were born into the Oswal family, followers of the Svetambara religion, your inclination was towards the Digambara religion. As a result, you practiced knowledge worship while remaining in the household, and also practiced rigorous self-realization. At the age of 49, P.P. Padamparag Bagbanakali 108 Acharya Shri Shantisagarji Maharaj's first disciple and successor, P.P. Charitra Chudamani 108 Acharya Shri Veersagarji Maharaj, took the minor initiation from Todaraysingh (Rajasthan) and after 3 years, took the monk initiation from the same Acharya Shri in Jaipur Khania. True to your name, you are constantly engaged in Shruta worship. Knowing this, in 1959, in the month of Bhadrapad, I went to Ajmer with Seth Badriprasadji Sarawagi Patnawalas to see P.P. Acharya Shri 108 Shivsagarji Maharaj and his congregation. There, sitting in the presence of P.P. Shruta Sagarji Maharaj, I was very happy to see your dedication to knowledge worship. In those days, you were studying the Dhvalagranth. Although you do not know school mathematics well, you have easily solved the difficult mathematics in the Triloksar Granth based on Mahajani mathematics.
Since 1963, I have been constantly in your presence. In 1969, when I went to Pratapgarh (Raj.) for the Chaturmas to see the Acharya Sangh, I also saw Aryika 105 Gyanamatiji of Acharya Shri Shivsagarji Maharaj's congregation, and inspired by her, Aryika 105 Jinamatiji and Adimatiji, who were initiated by Acharya Shri Shivsagarji. I was also very happy to see the three Aryikas, because they were also very interested in Karana Anuyog and were studying Triloksar and Lokvibhaag in those days. I also started participating in it daily. Now, the three Aryikas are living separately. Shri Gyanamati Mataji is often staying with the other two Aryikas near Hastinapur. Shri Jinamati Mataji is in the congregation of Acharya Shri Dharmasagarji Maharaj, and Shri Adimatiji is in the congregation of A.K. Shri Shruta Sagarji Maharaj. In 1973, during the Chaturmas in Najafgarh (Delhi), inspired by Gyanamati Mataji, Adimatiji wrote a commentary on Gommatsar Karmakand, incorporating the references from the Dhundhari Bhasha commentary by Pandit Pravar Todarmalji and the Marathi commentary. The reading of it began in the presence of A.K. Shri with the help of Muni Shri Vardhaman Sagarji, and after about 300 verses were read, Maharaj Shri gave me the commentary, saying... 

Page #13:
---------------------------
It is said that the responsibility of editing this commentary is to be taken by Ampka and it should be revised and enhanced according to the principles of Dhavala and other authoritative texts. Although it seemed difficult for me to complete this task in my old age, I have been able to complete this arduous task with the blessings of Pujya Acharya Shri and the utmost cooperation of Pujya Vardhaman Sagarji. The main person behind this great sacrifice is Acharya Shri and his auspicious blessings have been my support.

Acharya Kalp Shri Shruta Sagarji's congregation includes Shri 108 Vardhaman Sagarji. You received Muni Diksha from Acharya Shri Dharmasagarji. You are a young Muni and have also received worldly education, therefore you have knowledge of English and mathematics. Your writing is very beautiful. You have been the main person in the reading of this commentary. You are a seeker of knowledge and are constantly engaged in self-study. The feeling of compassion and service is deeply ingrained in you. You have prepared the press copy with hard work and provided invaluable assistance in the printing of the book from beginning to end. I am very grateful to both Muni Rajas, whose blessings and cooperation have made this great work possible.

Although I have edited this book, the original commentary of this book is by Aryika Adimatiji. It is due to her hard work that the new commentary of Gommatasar Karmakanda could be published, therefore the full credit goes to Mataji.

All the arrangements for the publication of the book have been made by Br. Ladumalji of A.K. Shri's congregation. You are old, your health is often unfavorable, yet you have the enthusiasm of young people. You are not a special scholar yourself, yet you have a passion for the spread of Jain teachings, which is why you are particularly interested in publishing translations of texts written by ancient Acharyas in pure Hindi or commentaries on texts. You are constantly engaged in the welfare of the Sadhus, you are a celibate. It is due to your good efforts that the publication of this vast book has been possible in such a short time.

I am also grateful to Shri Nemichandji Bakliwal, the owner of Bakliwal Prints, Madanganj-Kishangarh, and his sons Shri Gulabchand and Bhupendra Kumar, who printed this book very skillfully and promptly. Although the printing of this book seemed difficult due to the large number of references in the present book, you completed the printing with great patience and hard work, therefore, thanks are due. What more can be said to the knowledgeable?

Akshay Tritiya, Vikram Samvat 2037
Ratanchand Jain Mukhtar
Saharanpur (U.P.)

Page #14:
---------------------------
* **New Edition Presented**

It is with great pleasure that we present this new edition of Gommatasar Karmakanda to the students and scholars of Karananuyoga. More than two decades have passed since the first edition and this one.

The first edition of this difficult text was meticulously prepared by the distinguished scholar of Karananuyoga of this time, Pandit Ratnachandji Mukhtar, who, with the help of Dhavala, Jayadhavala, and Mahabandha, etc., has made many corrections and additions. This new edition is limited to correcting printing errors of the first edition, refining the language, and clarifying the subject matter wherever it seemed necessary. Hopefully, this will be of some benefit to the learned students.

Mukhtar Saheb was a profound scholar of the Siddhanta texts. He acquired this unique ability solely through self-study. He was both intelligent and determined. I had close contact with him during the editing of Trilokasar, which was annotated by Aryika Vishuddhamatiji. His personality, speech, and writing were all authentic. I bow to that holy soul!

The commentary on the text was written by the revered Aryika 105 Adimataji, and the revered Aryika Shrutamati and Subodhamatiji engaged me in the work of editing and publishing this text, for which I am deeply grateful.

Revered Adimataji is constantly engaged in the treasure of knowledge. Even with ill health, she does not become indifferent to study and writing. You have recently written a Hindi commentary on 'Bhagavato Aradhana', which is also soon to be published. It is right, to bear hardship in the service of Jinvani is the means of Karma Nirjara. I humbly bow at the feet of Aryika.

At the time of the publication of the first edition, the main source of the manuscript was Acharya Kalp 108 Shri Shruta Sagarji Maharaj. He was truly worthy of his name and qualities. I am eternally indebted to that Gurudev. 

Page #15:
---------------------------
You were the first to engage me in the study, contemplation, and publication of the Jinavani. My revered father, Mahendrakumarji Patni, became Muni Samatasagarji only after receiving the blessings of your feet. I have always been blessed by your affectionate blessings. I offer my humble obeisance to that holy soul.

I am also indebted to Muni Vardhamanasagarji (now Acharya) for his support in reading. You have always encouraged me to publish this new edition quickly. I offer my humble obeisance at your feet.

I also offer my humble obeisance to the revered Muni Shri Gunasagarji Maharaj, whose affection has always inspired me to complete my work as soon as possible.

I am also deeply indebted to my well-wisher and unique collaborator, Pandit Jawaharlalji Siddhanta Shastri, from whom I have always received sound advice and proper guidance. You are truly the successor of Pandit Ratanchandji Mukhtar and are one of the foremost Karananuyoga-knowers today. I wish you a speedy recovery and long life.

I thank Nidhi Computers, Jodhpur, Shri Kshemankar Patni, for the beautiful, flawless, and well-organized publication of this complex text, replete with tables, tables, and mathematical statements. The staff of Hindustan Printing House deserve thanks for the clean and attractive printing.

'Aviral' 54-55, Indra Vihar Section 7 Extension Scheme New Power House Road, Jodhpur
Dr. Chetanprakash Patni
Editor Akshaya Tritiya, VS 2060
May 4, 2003 

Page #16:
---------------------------
## Introduction

The world is constantly in motion, with 608 souls attaining liberation every 8 moments in the 6 Atishaya (extraordinary) periods, and 608 souls entering the realm of activity from the state of eternal bondage. This maintains a constant number of souls in the realm of activity. Thus, liberated souls have existed since time immemorial, as have worldly souls. There has never been a time when there were worldly souls but no liberated souls, because all substances exist with their opposites, as the principle "Savapayatta Sapadivakkha" stated by Shri Kundakunda Acharya. If the absence of liberated souls is ever assumed, it would lead to the absence of worldly souls, their opposite.

If it is said that the number of souls attaining liberation is constantly decreasing, leading to the eventual liberation of all souls, this is incorrect. Because the number of liberated souls is infinite, and there are countless souls in a single body of bondage, as stated:

"Ev Vigodasarira Jiwadavba-pyamandodo Dittha.
Siddehi Anantguna Savvena Vitid-kalena | Go. Ji. Ka. 196 |"

## Further Explanation

Another point is that if all liberated souls were to attain liberation, the absence of liberated souls would lead to the absence of their opposite, the souls destined for liberation. The absence of both types of souls would lead to the absence of worldly souls. The absence of worldly souls would then lead to the absence of liberated souls, as all substances exist with their opposites. The absence of both types of souls would lead to the absence of soul substance. The absence of soul substance would then lead to the absence of its opposite, non-soul substance. However, this is not the case, as soul and non-soul substances are eternal and infinite, and their absence is impossible. The number of soul and non-soul substances cannot decrease or increase, as all six substances are eternal and permanent. Science also states that "Nothing is created, nothing is destroyed".

Thus, since liberated souls have existed since time immemorial, the path to liberation has also existed since time immemorial. The path to liberation never ceases in the realm of the liberated. All liberated souls, or Siddhas, were once worldly souls who walked the path to liberation, severed their karmic bonds, and attained liberation. The word "liberated" itself indicates the existence of previous bondage.

Therefore, the path to liberation, being eternal and flowing like a river, becomes self-evident and beyond human intervention. Tirthankaras and others...

1. J. Dh. Pu. 3. P. 200/
2. Dh. Pu. 14 P. 235.
3. Nityavasthanitanyrupaani (T. Su. 5/4)
4. "Muktaschet Prak Bhavedbandho No Bandho Mochanam Katham. Abandhe Mochanam Naiv Muncherthi Nirarthaka. Bri. Dra. San. Gathaha 57 Ki Teeka" 

Page #17:
---------------------------
(18)
Its commentator is not the author. In the same way, the principles that have been flowing down from time immemorial are called Anadi Siddhanta-pada, such as Dharma-astikaya, Adharma-astikaya, etc. Since it is A-paurusheya, the Siddhanta is Anadi. 1 Agam, Siddhanta and Pravachana are synonymous. Therefore, the Dvadashaanga Shruta is also Anadi Siddha. The Kevala-jnana of all Tirthankaras is the same, therefore its work, the Divya-dhvani, is also the same, because the special nature of the cause brings about the special nature of the effect, as said by Shri Amritachandracharya. That Divya-dhvani is called Beeja-pada, which is devoid of concise word formations and is combined with many signs that are the cause of knowledge of infinite meanings. 18 Languages and seven hundred Ku (small) languages are the form-giving meaning-makers of those many Beeja-pada, which are Dvadashaanga-atmaka. And the Ganadhara Bhattaraka are the authors of the twelve limbs that are the form-givers of the meaning that is absorbed in the Beeja-pada. That is, the commentator of the Beeja-pada is called the author of the text. A being who is filled with raga, dvesha and moha cannot be the form-giver of the above-mentioned Ardha, because he lacks the rule of truthfulness.
Although the Dvadashaanga Shruta is Anadi and A-paurusheya in the form of a flow, in the present Panchama-kala, the Yuga-pravartan of the last Tirthankara, Bhagavan Mahavira, is taking place in the Bharat Kshetra of the Jambudvipa. In this regard, Bhagavan Mahavira is the meaning-maker and Gautam Ganadhara is the author of the text.
This Dvadashaanga is the last Drishtivada Anga and it has five divisions: 1. Parikarma 2. Sutra 3. Prathamanuyoga 4. Purvagata 5. Chuulika. Of these, Purvagata is of 14 types. From the Sutras of the second Agrayani-purva among them, the Sutras of the Shatkhandagama were mostly composed, but the Samyaktvotpatti-chuulika came from the second division, 'Sutra', of the twelfth Anga called Drishtivada, and the Gati-agati-chuulika came from the fifth Anga called Vyakhyaprajnapti.
After the Nirvana of Bhagavan Mahavira, there were three Kevalis in 62 years, five Shruta-kevalis in 100 years, eleven Dasapurvi in 183 years, five Gyaraha-anga-dhari in 220 years and four Ekanga-dhari Acharyas in 118 years. After that, all the Angas and the knowledge of the Purvas was received by Shri Dharasenacharya through the Acharya parampara. Pushpadanta and Bhootbali Acharya received it from Dharasenacharya and wrote down those Sutras and divided them into six sections. Therefore, this text was named Shatkhandagama.
In the fourth division, Purvagata, of the twelfth Anga called Drishtivada, there are 14 divisions, including Utpadapurva, Agrayani-purva, etc. The fifth, Jnana-pravadapurva, has 12 Ardha-adhikars. Each Adhikar has twenty Prabhritas. The Kashayap-ahud was composed from the third Pejjado-sha-prabhrita under the tenth Vastu-adhikar of the fifth Purva called Jnana-pravada.
1. Dh. Pu. 1 p. 349.
2. Dh. Pu. 1 p. 76.
3. Dh. Pu. 1 p. 21.
4. "Karana-visheshat-karyavisheshasyatrasyam bhavitvat (Pra. Sa. Ga. 255 Teeka) 

Page #18:
---------------------------
There are 16,000 middle terms (madhyama pada) starting with *pajjadosha*, which have a total of 2,61,00,000,00,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,00
Page #19:
---------------------------
(20)
That is, just as the Chakravarti of the Jil type has perfectly achieved the six sections of the Bharat Kshetra with his Chakra Ratna, in the same way, I have also perfectly achieved these six sections of the Siddhanta Grantha, which are the forms of the Jiva Sthan, Kshudra Bandha, Bandha Swami, Vedana Khand, Vargana Khand, and Maha Bandha, with the Chakra of Buddhi.  Nemichandracharya's Guru Smaraṇ
I bow to the Muniśvara named Abhayānandin, the Guru named Indranandin who is a master of the ocean of scriptures, and the excellent Guru named Vīranandin. I will speak of the causes of the Karma Prakṛitis. ||785|| Go. Ka. || That is, I will speak of the causes of the Karma Prakṛitis after bowing to the Muniśvara named Abhayānandin, the Guru named Indranandin who is a master of the ocean of scriptures, and the excellent Guru named Vīranandin. In the above verse, the Acharya has remembered his three Gurus. The place of composition of the Gommatasara
The Gommatasara was composed in the same Jinalaya where a one-hand-tall statue of Sri Neminath Bhagavan made of Indranilamani is installed, which was built by Gommataraya (Chamundaraya) on Chandragiri. Therefore, the memory of Neminath Bhagavan is mentioned in the following verse in the Ayamangal of the Gommatasara.
The perfect, pure, I bow to the Jina Indra, Neminath, the spotless one. I will speak of the supreme liberation of the Jiva, the ornament of the qualities. ||1|| Go. Ji. Time of composition
Sri Chamunda Raya himself has written his Chamunda Purana, in which he has given the distribution of his works, but there is no mention of the construction of the statue and the Gommatasara. That Purana was written in the Saka Samvat 1.00, which is equivalent to the Vikram Samvat 1035. The fact that there is no mention of the construction of the statue and the Gommatasara in the Chamunda Raya Purana suggests that these works were done after the Vikram Samvat 1031. The time of the installation of the Gommatesvara statue, which is said to be Bahubali, is said to be Vikram Samvat 1037-38. At that time, the reign of Rachmalla in Gangadesha was going on. While writing the commentary on the Trilokasara, Sri Madhavacharya, who was a contemporary of Nemichandra Siddhanta Chakravarti, has interpreted the word 'Balgovinda' that appears in the Mangalacharan of the Trilokasara as the minister of the Ganga king Rachmalla, Chamunda Raya. This suggests that this book was written during the reign of Rachmalla. The reign of Sri Rachmalla lasted until Vikram Samvat 1041, so it appears that the Gommatasara was composed between Vikram Samvat 1037-1041.
1. Dh. Pu. 1 to 6. 4. Dh. Pu. 9 to 12.
2. Dh. Pu. 7/ 5. Dh. Pu. 13-14.
3. Dh. Pu. 8| 6. Mahananda Part 1 to 51 

Page #20:
---------------------------
## Compositions of Nemichandracharya

The three texts composed by Shri Nemichandracharya are mentioned in the following verse in the **Bahubali Charitra**:

> **सिद्धान्तामृतसागरं स्वमतिमन्थक्ष्मामृदालोड्य मध्ये । लभेऽभीष्टफलप्रदानपि सदा देशीगणाग्रेसरः ॥**
> **श्रीमद् गोम्मट - लब्धिसारविलसत् त्रैलोक्यसारामरक्ष्माज श्रीसुरधेनुचिन्तितमणीन् श्री नेमिचन्द्रो मुनिः ॥ ६३ ॥**

The three texts mentioned in the verse are: 1. **Gommatasar**, 2. **Labdhisar**, 3. **Trilokasar**.

By dividing **Gommatasar** into two parts, **Jivakanda** and **Karmakanda**, and including **Kshapanasar** along with **Labdhisar**, there are five texts: **Gommatasar Jivakanda**, **Gommatasar Karmakanda**, **Labdhisar**, **Kshapanasar**, and **Trilokasar**.

**Labdhisar-Kshapanasar** contains the essence of the 11th, 12th, 13th, 14th, and 15th **Kshayapasahud** chapters, while **Trilokasar** contains the essence of **Tiloyapannatti** by **Yativrishabhacharya**.

## Special Features of the Present Commentary on Karmakanda

**Gommatasar Jivakanda** and **Kapar** were written by Shri Kerthi Bhag, and the present available Sanskrit commentary was based on his **Karnataka Vritti**. Based on this Sanskrit commentary, Panditpravar Shri Todarmalji translated it into **Dhundhari** language, which was published in Calcutta in the journal **Shastrakar** about 60-62 years ago. However, it is currently unavailable. During Panditji's time, **Dhwala**, **Jayadhwala**, and **Mahabanda** texts were not available. It is fortunate that now **Dhwala** and other great texts have been published with Hindi translations.

There are some places in the Sanskrit commentary and the **Dhundhari** translation that are not in accordance with **Dhwala** and **Jayadhwala**. There are also some **Gatha**s on which the Sanskrit and Hindi commentators have not provided specific explanations. However, specific explanations are found in the **Prakrit Vritti** of **Panchasangrah** published by the **Bharatiya Gyanpeeth**. Therefore, the special meaning of those **Gatha**s has been written according to the **Prakrit Vritti** of **Panchasangrah**.

In many places, changes (forward and backward) have been made to clarify the chapters in the correct place according to the **Gatha** order found in the printed copies.

The original prose part has been omitted from the printed **Karmakanda**. For example, in **Gatha 22**, the number of **Uttarabhed** forms of the eight original **Prakriti**s is mentioned, and in **Gatha 23-24-25**, the functions of the five **Nidra**s are explained. However, it is not known which original **Karma** these **Prakriti**s belong to. Therefore, it appears that there was an original text between **Gatha 22** and **23** which mentioned the names of the **Uttaraprakriti**s of **Jnanavaran** and **Darshanavaran Karma**. Similarly, after **Gatha 25**, there were **Uttaraprakriti**s related to **Vedaniyakarma**, and the distinction of **Mohaniyakarma** and **Darshanamohaniyakarma**. 

Page #21:
---------------------------
(22)
There is no mention of the names of the Uttaraprakritis. Similarly, in Chapter 27, after verses 28, 132, there are no names for some of the Uttaraprakritis of Namakarma, and there are also no names for the Uttaraprakritis of Gotrakarma, which should have been after verse 33. This entire statement was in the original prose section, which was omitted in the printed copies. In addition, there were some verses on which no Kannada commentary or Sanskrit commentary was written. It is possible that these verses were not available to the Kannada commentator. These verses are also not in the printed copies. In the year 1947, in the 8th issue of the 8th-9th Kiran of "Anekanta," an article by a writer published the prose section and the verses, which have been gratefully accepted and incorporated into this commentary in their respective places. The verses that have been added have been included with numbers like "k," "kh," etc., so that there is no change in the order of the verses. For example, 9 verses, such as 360 "k," etc., have been added in their respective places, which are between 360 and 390. Subject Introduction
Gommatasar Karmakanda has 9 chapters: 1. Prakriti Samutkirtan, 2. Bandhodaya Satvaadhikaran, 3. Satvasthanbhangadhikaran, 4. Trichoolikaadhikaran, 5. Sthanasamutkirtanadhikaran, 6. Pratyaadhikaran, 7. Bhavachoolikaadhikaran, 8. Trikaranchoolikaadhikaran, 9. Kramsthittirchanadhikaran.
The Prakriti Samutkirtan chapter has 86 verses, which include the Mangalacharan, followed by the names of the eight original Karmas and their Uttaraprakritis, the functions of some special Prakritis, the names of the Ghati-Aghati order, the places of origin of the beings with six Sanhananas, the Sanhanana of women (Dravyastri), the functions and the time of the Kashayas, the Pudugalvipaki-Bhavavipaki-Kshetravipaki-Jivavipaki Prakritis, the statement of the Koka by the four Nikshepas, and the complete description of all the nine Karmas.
The Bandhodaya Satvaadhikaran chapter has 270 verses from 87 to 357. These verses describe in detail the Bandha-Udaya and Satva, Bandha-Udaya and Satvavyucchetti, and Abandha-Anudava and Asattva, which are also called Bandha Tribhangi, Udaya Tribhangi, and Satva Tribhangi, in relation to Gunasthan and Margana. The Bandha section contains a detailed description of the Prakriti-Sthiti-Anubhag and Pradeshbandha. The chapter also discusses the time of Aabaadha, the order of the Karmanishakas and their nature, the places of the Anubhag like Lata, Daru, etc., the causes of Pradeshbandha, the Yogasthans that are the cause of Pradeshbandha, their owners, and the presence of Alpabahutva in them, Udirana, Udvelana, etc. This chapter also discusses in detail how the Anantavebhag of the Siddhas and the Anantagunita Samayaprabaddha from the Abhavya Rashi are divided in the original and Uttaraprakritis of the Jnanaacharanadhikarma.
The Satvasthanbhangadhikaran chapter has 40 verses from 358 to 397. This chapter describes in detail the bhangas of the Satvasthans and their differences in relation to the Satva, and Acharya Dev has described in detail how many Satvasthans can occur in how many Gunasthans and in how many ways. This chapter also contains the statement of Satvasthan as stated by Kanaknandi Acharya. 

Page #22:
---------------------------
The **Tricholika** chapter, which is the third chapter, contains 43 verses from 398 to 450. The first ten verses, from 398 to 407, discuss the nature of **Bandhavyuchchitti** (cessation of bondage) before **Udayavyuchchitti** (cessation of arising), the nature of **Bandhavyuchchitti** after **Udayavyuchchitti**, the nature of **Bandhavyuchchitti** along with **Udayavyuchchitti**, **Svodyabandhi** (self-arising bondage), **Parodyabandhi** (other-arising bondage), **Svaparodyabandhi** (self-and-other-arising bondage), and **Santaranirantarabandhi** (continuous bondage). These ten verses answer the nine questions raised in the **Navaprashnadhūlika** (nine questions).

The second chapter, **Panchabhagahaara**, contains 15 verses from 408 to 435. These verses discuss the five **bhagahaaras** (divisions): **Udvellana** (agitation), **Vidhyata** (knowledge), **Adhahpravritti** (downward tendency), **Gunasanakrama** (transmission of qualities), and **Sarvasanakrama** (universal transmission). The chapter also discusses the concept of **sanakrama** (transmission).

The third chapter, **Dashakarana**, contains 15 verses from 436 to 450. These verses discuss the ten **karanas** (causes): **Bandha** (bondage), **Utkarshana** (elevation), **Apakarshana** (debasement), **Sanakrama** (transmission), **Udirana** (excitation), **Satta** (existence), **Udaya** (arising), **Upshama** (cessation), **Nidhatti** (destruction), and **Nikachana** (removal). The chapter also explains which **karana** operates at which **gunasthan** (stage of spiritual progress).

The **Sthanasamutkirtanadhikari** chapter, which is the fourth chapter, contains 334 verses from 451 to 784. This chapter discusses the **bandha** (bondage), **udaya** (arising), and **sattva** (existence) of **prakritis** (substances) at each **gunasthan** (stage of spiritual progress). It also explains the number of **prakritis** that can be bound, arise, and exist at a given time for a particular **jina** (liberated being). The chapter also discusses the **udayasthan** (stage of arising) of **mohaniya karma** (karma that obscures knowledge) in relation to **upayoga** (use), **yoga** (practice), **samyama** (control), **leshya** (tendencies), and **samyaktva** (right faith). The chapter also discusses the **sattvasthan** (stage of existence) of **mohaniya karma**. The chapter also discusses the 41 **jivapada** (stages of the soul) of **sadhi karma** (karma that binds the soul to the cycle of birth and death) and the **trisanyogi bhang** (breaking of the three-fold conjunction of bondage, arising, and existence).

The **Pratyayadhikari** chapter, which is the fifth chapter, contains 25 verses from 785 to 810. This chapter discusses the **mula** (root) and **uttar** (secondary) **pratyayas** (impressions) in relation to the **gunasthanas** (stages of spiritual progress). It also discusses the **vishesh pratyayas** (specific impressions) of **karmabandha** (karma bondage) that are caused by **atmaparinam** (transformations of the soul), such as **jnanavarana** (karma that obscures knowledge).

The **Bhavachoolika** chapter, which is the sixth chapter, contains 85 verses from 815 to 895. This chapter discusses **bhavas** (emotions), their **uttarabheda** (secondary divisions), **sthanabhang** (breaking of the stage), **padabhang** (breaking of the position) in relation to the **gunasthanas** (stages of spiritual progress), **mithyamata** (false beliefs), **ekanta niyativada** (absolute determinism), and other **mithyamata** (false beliefs).

The **Trikaranachoolika** chapter, which is the seventh chapter, contains 17 verses from 896 to 912. This chapter discusses the nature and duration of **adhakarana** (lower cause), **apuurvakarana** (previous cause), and **anivrittikarana** (non-cessation cause).

The **Karmasthitirachanaadhikari** chapter, which is the eighth chapter, contains 52 verses from 913 to 964. This chapter discusses the **karmasthitirachana** (structure of karma), **ajhasandristi** (non-perception), **arthasandristi** (perception), **trikonayantra rachana** (structure of the triangular diagram), and the divisions and **adhyavasaya** (determination) of **sthitilbandha** (bondage of the state). The chapter concludes with eight verses of praise for the author.

The **Panchasangraha** published by the Bharatiya Gyanapith is a collection of **Panchasangrahas** in Prakrit and Sanskrit. The names and times of the authors are unknown, so it is not possible to say which is older, the **Gommatasar** or the **Panchasangraha**. The editor and translator of this **Panchasangraha** is Shri Pandit Heeralalji Siddhantashastri Sadhumal (Jhansi). Many verses in the Prakrit **Panchasangraha** and the **Gommatasar** are similar. 

Page #23:
---------------------------
Jain theory states the relationship between karmic bondage (paudgalik karma bandha) and the transformation of the soul (atma parinam). It is certain that the transformation of the soul will be in accordance with the ripening of karma (karmodaya), there can be no disparity. However, with the same transformation of the soul (sthitibandha adhyavasaya), the final maturation of the knowledge-obscuring karma (matijnanaavaran) takes 30 koḍakoḍī sāgara (a unit of time) while the initial maturation takes 3000 years. With the same transformation of the soul, the final maturation of the scripture-obscuring karma (śrutajnanaavaran) etc. can be 30 koḍakoḍī sāgara minus an immeasurable fraction of a moment (palyopam). (Mahabanda, Vol. 3, p. 1) Similarly, with the same transformation of the soul, the infiniteth part of the section of the knowledge-obscuring karma that is bound in the final stage (antama spardhak) is present in the initial stage (prathamaspardhak). The transformation of the soul that leads to the superior section of the knowledge-obscuring karma also leads to the inferior section of the scripture-obscuring karma etc. bound with the knowledge-obscuring karma, which can be infinitely less. (Mahabanda, Vol. 5, p. 1) It is not a rule that the state of bondage (sthitibandha) and the section of bondage (anubhagabandh) occur in accordance with the transformation of the soul (atma parinam) and the transformation of the passions (kṣayā rūpa parinam), but it is a rule that the transformation of the soul occurs in accordance with the ripening of the sections of karma (karma anubhagoday). This is because the sutra says, "chīpāko'nubhavaḥ." Those who do not believe in the transformation of the soul in accordance with the ripening of karma have to believe in the agency of God, because no being can independently go to hell. The ripening of karma like the hellish life (narakāyu) takes them to hell. It is also said, "Without the bondage of the hellish life, the false views (mithyadarshan), non-restraint (avīrati), and passions (kṣayābhāva) do not have the power to cause birth in hell." (Dhavala, Vol. 1, Sutra 25, Commentary, p. 205)
Every human being thinks about karma and its fruits, because every individual wants to see and know what the fruit of their actions and thoughts is. Therefore, they also decide what thoughts and actions should be performed to obtain a particular fruit. Thus, all the historical, social, and religious thinking of culture makes karma and its fruits its subject. This is discussed in detail in this book.
Akshayatṛtīyā, Vikram Samvat 2037
Ratanchand Jain Mukhtar
Saharanpur (U.P.)
* Index.*
Dhavala
A. Chapter Go, K. Gommatasar Karmakanda K.Pr. Karmaprakriti
(Bharatiya Jnanapith) J.Dh. Jayadhavala
(Di. Jain Sangh Chaurasi, Mathura)
Book Pra.Pan.San. Prakrit Panchasangrah
(Bharatiya Jnanapith
M.Bandha Mahabanda
(Bharatiya Jnanapith) Ra.Va. Tanvarthrajavartika
(Bharatiya Jnanapith) S.Si. Sarvarthasiddhi
(Bharatiya Jnanapith Tri.Sa. Trilokasar

Page #24:
---------------------------
* Table of Contents *
Verse No. | Page No.
Topic
Om 1. Chapter on the Description of Nature
Invocation
The meaning of nature, karma and the eternal relationship of the soul, the elimination of the mutual dependence fallacy and the explanation of how it is somehow concrete. Due to the birth of the body, the living being takes on all the karmic consequences. The eternal part of the Siddhas is the measure of time, bound by time, bound again and again, each time a time-bound birth arises and is destroyed, and the substance remains with the multiplied measure of time-bound karma due to the loss of sensory faculties. The types of substance-karma and the types of substance-karma.
The names of the eight karmas and their harmful and non-harmful aspects, and the function of all eight karmas. The main qualities of the living being are perception, knowledge and right faith. The attainment of the eight karmas is explained through an example. The nature of the kok is explained. The number of sub-divisions of the eight karmas, including knowledge-obscuring karma, etc. The names of the sub-divisions of knowledge-obscuring karma and perception-obscuring karma. The functions of the five types of sleep, including lethargy, etc. The names of the sub-divisions of feeling-obscuring karma and delusion-obscuring karma. From the first stage of right faith, there are three divisions of wrong faith, including wrong faith in substance, countless times less than right faith, and right faith in substance, countless times less than wrong faith.
9-17
The names of the sub-divisions of conduct-obscuring karma, delusion-obscuring karma, lifespan karma and name karma, and the statement of the substance of the sixteen passions. The five types of body-binding name karma, the fifteen types of body-destruction name karma, the types of body-formation name karma, and the types of limb-and-organ name karma. 

Page #25:
---------------------------
## Verse No. | Page No. | Topic
28 | 34 | Names of the eight limbs and instructions on the auxiliary limbs. Names of the six types of karmas, where a being reborn after death based on the type of karma, the three inferior types of karmas for women, the four types of varna, the types of anupurvi, the six types of arulghushatka, and the names of the ten sapratipakshi-prakritis.
28 | 35-38 | The characteristics of aatpa and udyot mamakarma, the names of the different types of gotra and antaraya karma.
28 | 39-40 | The etymology and characteristics of uttaraprakritis. The attainment of kevalgyanavaran, the sthiranam karma, the names of the seven dhatus, their formation, time, and names of the seven dhatus like vata, pitta, etc. The five types of bandha and five types of sanghata in the sharirnam karma, the twenty types of varna, etc. in the varnachar, the inclusion of janturbhava bandha, the number of uday and sattvarup prakritis, the names of satraghati and deshghati prakritis, the names and number of punya and pach prakritis.
30 | 41-44 | Anantaanubandhi kshaya destroys samyagdarshan, and the other three kshayas destroy charitra in their respective order.
31-32 | 46 | The dwelling time of kshayas.
33 | 47-51 | The names of pudgalvin and bhavavipaki prakritis.
33 | 52-68 | The statement of the four types of charanichepas, namely nama, etc.
33 | 69-85 | The statement of the names of the mool and uttaraprakritis, the uday of the mool and uttaraprakritis, the noaagambhav karma.
33-35 | 35-41 | The right to bandhodayasattva.
2 |  | Mangalacharan, the characteristics of the mantra, the praise, and the dharmakatha (substance). 

Page #26:
---------------------------
##  Gatha No.
89
Guide:- Acharya Shri Trisar Ji Maharaj
90
11
92-93
94-602
103 - 104
105-107
108-109
115 latter half to 119 first half
Page No.
48
48
re
49-50
50-54
56
58
161-62
63
66-68
110
111 - 112
113
114- 115 74-75
first half
72
13-60
119 latter half 81-11
to 121
122-126
125
29-102
101
(27)
Subject
Four types of bondage based on nature, state, section and region, and within these, four sub-types each: excellent, mediocre, inferior and non-existent.
Four sub-types of excellent etc.: Sadi, Anadi, Dhruva, Adhuruva.
Four types of bondage of those karmas which bind the jivas in the Gunasthanas with the qualities of Mithyatva etc.: mediocre, inferior, non-existent and Sadi etc.
Nature Bondage
Special rules for Tirthankara nature bondage
Bondage and cessation of bondage in Gunasthanas
Number of bondage and non-bondage natures in Gunasthanas
Natures of bondage and cessation of bondage in Naraka Gati
Natures of bondage and cessation of bondage in Tiryancha Gati
Natures of bondage and cessation of bondage in Manushya Gati
Natures of bondage and cessation of bondage in Deva Gati
Bondage, non-bondage and cessation of bondage related to Indriya Margana
Bondage, non-bondage and cessation of bondage related to Kaya Margana
Bondage, non-bondage and cessation of bondage in Yoga Margana
Bondage, non-bondage and cessation of bondage in the remaining Marganas
Sadi, Anadi, Dhruva and Adhuruva bondage
Counterpart and non-counterpart natures
||  Thus ends the chapter on Nature Bondage || 

Page #27:
---------------------------
(28)
Verse No.
|
Page No. |
Topic
Status
| 102  Atkoka Utkrishta-Sthiti-Bandha 128-134 103-504 | Uttar-Prakrities' Utkrishta-Sthiti-Bandha 135-538 1504-1.05 | Utkrishta-Sthiti-Bandha's Swami
| Mula-Prakrities' Jghanya-Sthiti-Bandha 140-543 | 106-107 | Unar-Prakrities' Jghanya-Sthiti-Bandha 144-145 | 553 Ekendriya and Vikalatraya Jivas' Sthiti-Bandha 546-547
| Avadha-Kal and Avadha-Kanda 148
Fourteen Jiva-Samasas' Utkrishta and Jghanya-Sthiti Bhed 142
| Sukshma-Badar, Paryaya-Aparayapta Ekendriyadi Jivas' Utkrishta and Jayanya-Sthiti's Shalak by Katha
Sangi Paryapta-Aparayapta Jivas' Utkrishta and Jghanya-Sthiti 124
Jghanya-Sthiti-Bandha's Swami 152-153 | 124-525 Adhanya-Sthiti Madi etc. Four Bhed 154
Three (Manushya-Tiryanch and Dev) Adhuke Atirkt Shreshtha Shubha and Ashubha-Karmas' Sthiti-Bandha | Ashubha hai.
Avadha-Ka Lakshana
| Mula and Uttar Prakrities' Avadha 194-916 771-772
23
158, 917 | 128, 572 Ayukarma's Avadha 559, 958. 129 Udirana's Apeksha Avadha-Kal. Prabhava-Sambandha Ayuki Udaran nahi hoto 160-162 | 130-131 Bhisheka-Rachana and Chaya Prapt Karna's Vidhi Adi's Katha
919-940
174-788
|| Iti Sthiti-Bandha-Prakarana || 

Page #28:
---------------------------
##  Gatha No.
163
164-169
170-177
178-179
180
181
182
185
186
187
188
189
190
191
192-195
196
197 - 204
## Page No.
143
183-184 142
205
206
133
134- 135  **Excellent Anubhagbandhake Swami**
137 - 139 | **Jadhanya Anubhagbandhake Swami**
139
140
141
142
( 29 )
152
152 - 166
165
167
168
## Anubhagbandhaprakaran
**Shubh-Ashubhprakritiyonke Anubhagbandhake Karan Vishuddha Va Sankleshparinam**
## Subject
**Parivartanaman Va Aparivartanaman Madhyamparinam**
**Ekkshetra**
**Ekkshetra Ka Lakshana**
**Anubhagbandhasambandhi Dhruva, Adhruva, Sadi, Anadi**
**Anubhagka Lakshana Tatha Ghatiya Karmonka Anubhag Lata Adirrup Darshanmohniyasambandhi Deshghati Tatha Lata Adi Vibhajan**
**Deshghati Va Sarvghati Prakritiyaan**
**Aghatiyakamka Anubhag, Puny Va Paprup Prakritiyaan**
## Ni Anubhagprakan
**Pradeshabandha**
**Sthit Kabargnaonko Atma Apne Sarvpradeshonse Bandhta Hai**
1.44
145
145
146
૬૪
147
148
**Samayaprabaddhka Swarup**
148 - 150 **Karmapradeshonka Athkamonmen Bantwara**
**Pudgaldravya Ka Anantbabhag Karmarup Hone Bogya Hai, Shesh Anantbahubhag Ayogya Hai. Bhootkalmen Sarvjeevon Ke Dwara Bandhagya Pudgaldravya Sadi Hai**
**Ekkshetrasambandhi Tatha Anekkshetrasambandhi Sadi Yogya Va Ayogyapudgal Dravya Ka Praman**
**Jeev Sadi, Anadi Va Ubharup Karmyudgalko Grahan Karta Hai**
**Uttarprakritiyonmen Bantwareka Kram**
**Sarvghati Tatha Deshghati Men Bantwara**
| **Mithyatva Va Barahkashayka Dravya Sarvghatirup Hi Hai**
**Nokashayoka Bandh Kitne Kaltak Hota Hai, Tatsambandhi Alpbahutva**
**Namakarmasambandhi Pind Va Apind Prakritiyon Tatha Antarayakarmaki Prakritiyon Men Viparitkramse Dravya Deneka Kathana** 

Page #29:
---------------------------
(30)
Verse No. | Page No. | Topic
207-209 | 170-171 | Distinction between Utkrishta (Excellent) and Adhi (Inferior) Pradesh (Region) etc.
210-217 | 172-177 | Utkrishta (Excellent) and Jaghanya (Inferior) Pradesh (Region) - Swami - Arart 4 Suhas
218-222 | 179-181 | The nature of Yoga, Uppaad Yoga, PariNaam Yoga, EkaantaAnuvrudhi Yoga.
223-227 | 182-184 | The number and components of Yoga-Sthaans (Yoga-Places), their nature and number
228 |  Prashramvaana, Chaya, Vargana (Nishaek) related to Anasandridhi
229 | 185 | Each competitor's first Vargana (Classification) etc. in one Varga (Classification) is indivisible and there is an increase in Yoga-Sthaans (Yoga-Places)
230-231 | 186-195 | The second Yoga-Sthaan (Yoga-Place) occurs when the number of Adhanya (Other) competitors increases by an immeasurable fraction of an Angul (Finger). With this increase, there is no new competitor ahead of the Charam (Extreme) competitor, but a new competitor appears when the rank increases by an immeasurable fraction of the Angul (Finger).
232-240 | 193-194 | In the 14 Jeeva Sama (Living Beings), the Uppaad EkaantaAnuvrudhi PariNaam Yoga has 84 Jaghanya (Inferior) and Utkrishta (Excellent) Sthaans (Places) in this way, the statement of Alpa (Few) and Bahul (Many).
241 | 14 Jeeva Sama (Living Beings) related to 84 Sthaans (Places), the Uन्नरवती (Elevated) Sthaan (Place) is multiplied by an immeasurable number of times compared to the previous Sthaan (Place).
242 | The time of Uppaad Yoga Sthaan (Yoga-Place), EkaantaAnuvrudhi Yoga Sthaan (Yoga-Place), and PariNaam Yoga Sthaan (Yoga-Place)
244-246 | 199 | The time of PariNaam Yoga Sthaan (Yoga-Place) is less or more than the time of other Yoga Sthaans (Yoga-Places)
247-249 | 203-204 | The Yoga Adhvaan (Path) of Dravya (Non-Living Beings), the loss of various Gunas (Qualities), the measure of Guna (Quality) loss
250 | The measure of the increase in time bound by Yoga increase
251-256 | 207-209 | The order of increase from Jaghanya Yona Sthaan (Inferior Birth Place) to Utkrishta Bhog Sthaan (Excellent Enjoyment Place), the measure of Yoga Sthaans (Yoga-Places)
257 | The reason for Bandha (Bondage) due to Prakriti (Nature) etc.
259-215 | Yoga Sthaan (Yoga-Place), Prakriti Bhed (Nature Distinction), Sthiti Bhed (State Distinction), Sthiti Bandha Adhyavasaya Sthaan (State Bondage Determination Place)
260 | 218 | Anubhaag Bandha Adhyavasaya Sthaan (Part Bondage Determination Place), the Alpa (Few) and Bahul (Many) of Karma Pradeshas (Karma Regions)
||  Iti Pradesh Bandha Prakaran ||
Uday Prakaran (Arising Chapter)
261-262 | 226 | Rules related to Aahaaraka (Food), Tirthankara (Liberated Soul), Misra (Mixed), Samyaktava Prakriti (Right Faith Nature), and Anupurvi Uday (Sequential Arising)
197

Page #30:
---------------------------
## 24
- YExt
Thari A R
**Verse No. | Page No.**
**Topic**
263-272 | 227-232 **Udayavyuchchitti** 273-275 | 234 **The Kevali Bhagwan does not have seven or eight Udayas and Indriya-janit Sukha-Dukha.** 276-277
**Gunasthanas** have Uday and Anudaya Prakritis 278-280 | 236-237 | **Uday and Utirnana** are special in the three Gunasthanas 281-283 | 237 | **Udirana-Anudaurana** form of Prakriti in Gunasthanas 284-282 | 238-240 | **Marganas** have special characteristics related to Uday 290-292 | 240 **Pradhamanaraka** has Uday and Udayavyuchchitti
| 241 **From the second to the seventh Naraka**, there is Karmodaya and Udayavyuchchitti 294-297 | 242-245 **In Tiryanchgat**, there is Uday and Udayavyuchchitti 298-301 | 246-250 **In Manushya Gati**, there is Uday and Udayavyuchchitti 302-303 255 **In Bhogbhumi Manushya and Tiryanch**, there is Uday and Udayavyuchchitti 304-305 | 253-254 | **In Dev Gati**, there is Uday and Udayavyuchchitti 306-308 256 **In Indriya Margana**, there is Uday and Udayavyuchchitti 309-310 Pu./259-260 | **In Kaya Margana**, there is Uday and Udayavyuchchitti U.310-319 / 262-271 | **In Yoga Margana**, there is Uday and Udayavyuchchitti 320-321 | 273-275 | **In Veda Margana**, there is Uday and Udayavyuchchitti
278 **In Kashaya Margana**, there is Uday and Udayavyuchchitti 323-325 Pu.
| 282-281 | **In Jnana Margana**, there is Uday and Udayavyuchchitti 284 **In Maya Margana**, there is Uday and Udayavyuchchitti
287 **In Darshan Margana**, there is Uday and Udayavyuchchitti 325 U.-326 282 **In Leshya Margana**, there is Uday and Udayavyuchchitti in Krishna-Mil-Kapota Leshya
| 291 **In Shubha Leshyas**, there is Uday and Udayavyuchchitti 328-329 294 **In Bhavya-Abhavya and Upshama-Kshayopaashan and Kshayik Samyaktv**, there is Uday and Udayavyuchchitti 330-335 Pu. 219 **In Sanjnamaran**, there is Uday and Udayavyuchchitti 331 U. 332 302 **In Ahar Margana**, there is Uday and Udayavyuchchitti
।। **Iti Uday Prakaran** ॥ 

Page #31:
---------------------------
## Verse No.
**Topic**
**Sattva Prakarana**
337
**Mithyatva Guna Sthana**
**334**
**Tīrthankara and Āhāraka**
**335-336**
**306**
**307**
**338-341**
**312**
**344-348**
**316-321**
**349**
**350-351**
**352-353**
**328-330**
**354**
**355**
**333**
**356**
**358**
**337**

**Mithyatva Guna Sthana**
**334**
**Tīrthankara and Āhāraka**
**335-336**
**306**
**307**
**338-341**
**312**
**344-348**
**316-321**
**349**
**350-351**
**352-353**
**328-330**
**354**
**355**
**333**
**356**
**358**
**337**

**Mithyatva Guna Sthana**
**334**
**Tīrthankara and Āhāraka**
**335-336**
**306**
**307**
**338-341**
**312**
**344-348**
**316-321**
**349**
**350-351**
**352-353**
**328-330**
**354**
**355**
**333**
**356**
**358**
**337**

**Mithyatva Guna Sthana**
**334**
**Tīrthankara and Āhāraka**
**335-336**
**306**
**307**
**338-341**
**312**
**344-348**
**316-321**
**349**
**350-351**
**352-353**
**328-330**
**354**
**355**
**333**
**356**
**358**
**337**

**Mithyatva Guna Sthana**
**334**
**Tīrthankara and Āhāraka**
**335-336**
**306**
**307**
**338-341**
**312**
**344-348**
**316-321**
**349**
**350-351**
**352-353**
**328-330**
**354**
**355**
**333**
**356**
**358**
**337**

**Mithyatva Guna Sthana**
**334**
**Tīrthankara and Āhāraka**
**335-336**
**306**
**307**
**338-341**
**312**
**344-348**
**316-321**
**349**
**350-351**
**352-353**
**328-330**
**354**
**355**
**333**
**356**
**358**
**337**

**Mithyatva Guna Sthana**
**334**
**Tīrthankara and Āhāraka**
**335-336**
**306**
**307**
**338-341**
**312**
**344-348**
**316-321**
**349**
**350-351**
**352-353**
**328-330**
**354**
**355**
**333**
**356**
**358**
**337**

**Mithyatva Guna Sthana**
**334**
**Tīrthankara and Āhāraka**
**335-336**
**306**
**307**
**338-341**
**312**
**344-348**
**316-321**
**349**
**350-351**
**352-353**
**328-330**
**354**
**355**
**333**
**356**
**358**
**337**

**Mithyatva Guna Sthana**
**334**
**Tīrthankara and Āhāraka**
**335-336**
**306**
**307**
**338-341**
**312**
**344-348**
**316-321**
**349**
**350-351**
**352-353**
**328-330**
**354**
**355**
**333**
**356**
**358**
**337**

**Mithyatva Guna Sthana**
**334**
**Tīrthankara and Āhāraka**
**335-336**
**306**
**30
Page #32:
---------------------------
(33)
Verse No.
Page No.
Topic
337 Statement of the promise to state the number of Ayubandha and Abandha in relation to Sattvasthana and Bhangas 56 Number of distortions in the state of Ayubandha
| Names of 66 Asattva-rupa Prakritis of Sayogi-kevali and the number of Sattvasthana Prakritis in Gunasthana
361 339 Names of Asattva-Prakritis in Gunasthana 362-363 341 Number of Sattvasthana in Gunasthana 363 a
Statement of Ayubandha and Abandha with Sattvas of Tirthankara in Mithyatva Gunasthana
| Number of Bhangas in Sattvasthana 364 a-b |342 Bhangas in relation to Ayubandha of Ayuk 365-371 | 343-350 | Description of Sattvasthana and Bhangas in Mithyatva Gunasthana 372-375 b 358-360 | Sattvasthana and Bhangas in Sasadan and Misra Gunasthana 376-381 365-366 | Sattvasthana and Bhangas in Asanyata Gunasthana
| Tirthankara with three Kalyanakas 382 380 | Sattvasthana and Bhangas in the fifth, sixth, and seventh Gunasthana 383-384 | 382-392 Sattvasthana and Bhangas in A-purvakarana Gunasthana (Upshamaka)
342
385
| A-nivrittikarana-Sukshma-saparaya and Upshama-moha. Similar to A-purvakarana Upshamaka
387 Sattvasthana and Bhangas in Kshapaka A-purvakarana 386-388 |388-389 and 391-392 | 312 | Sattvasthana and Bhangas in Kshapaka A-nivrittikarana 389 390 | Sattvasthana and Bhangas in Kshapaka Sukshma-saparaya and Kshina-moha Gunasthana
Sattvasthana and Bhangas in Sayogi and A-yogi Gunasthana
There is no Sattvas of four Ananta-anubandhi in Upshama श्रेणी and the first 8 Kshaya of Kshapaka श्रेणी 392 | According to the second opinion, there are four places without Maya in A-nivrittikarana Kshapaka 393-394 |393 Statement of Gunasthana and Bhangas in relation to other opinions 

Page #33:
---------------------------
(34)
Verse No.
Page No.
Subject
314
396-397
394
| The fruit of reading, listening, or contemplating the Sattva-sthānas is the bliss of liberation. The Sattva-sthānas were explained by Shri Kanaknandi Acharya, and the characteristics of the Siddhanta-chakravarti
||  Thus ends the Sattva-adhikar ||
4.  Triculika-adhikar 398
| Mangalacharan, Navaprashna-culika, Mantra-bhashahar-culika, Dashakarna-culika 399-407 | 396-400 | The names of the nine questions, the characteristics of the Santara and Nirantara of the related natures, the characteristics of Nyuchchhitta 400-401 | Bandha-vyuchchhiti and Udaya-vyuchchhiti, both are considered as Putra-bhir and Yugapat 402-403 | 398 | Strodaya and Sarodaya, and Svodyararodaya-bandha 404-407 | 391-400 | Santara and Nirantara, and Sandaranirantara-bandha
|| Thus ends the Navaprashna-culika ||
| 397
408
409-410
415-413 415-428
Panchabhagahar-culika Mangalacharan | 405-46 | The names, characteristics, and functions of the Panchabhagahar, when there is bandha, there is transition
405-478 Which nature undergoes which transition where, and what should not be understood. | 408-857 408 | The names of the eleven Tirthacharya-krtis
| The state and the Anu-bhaga-bandha are up to the Sukshma-saparayan-sthana. The transition is up to that point. 423 | The Panchabhagahar and the Karpan-apahar related Alp-bahutva
|| Thus ends the Panchabhagahar-culika ||  Atha Dashakarna-culika
429
430-435
Mangalacharan 

Page #34:
---------------------------
## Standard:-Pahās
**Subject**
**Or**
**Verse No.**
**Page No.**
| 425 | Names and characteristics of the ten karmas | 432-435 | The ten karmas in karma-prakriti and guna-sthānas | 433 |  Utkarshana and sankramana occur only at the time of binding
| Upashāmanākarana, nidhattikarana, nikāchitakaraṇa, these three are destroyed in the first samya of the pushpa-sthāna of anivrittikarana
||  Iti dasakaraṇachūlikā || 75. Sthānasamutkīrtanādhikāra
| Mangalācharana-pūrvaka, a promise to tell about the binding, arising, and sattva-sthānas of the prakritis | 436 | In the guna-sthānas, the binding of the mūla-prakriti, and in the three guna-sthānas of upashānta-moha, etc.
| The binding of the sātavedaniya
| In the mūla-prakritis, the binding of bhujakāra, alpantara, avasthita, avaktāvya | 438-439 | The arising and udiranā-sthānas of the mūla-prakritis
| The sattva-sthānas of the mūla-prakritis | 439 | The statement of the binding-sthānas of each karma in jñānāvarana, etc.
453
454-456
459-460
440
The binding-sthānas of the dasanāvarana, bhujakāra, alpantara, avasthita, and avaktāvya binding
462
441
463-465
466-467
468
The arising-sthānas of the darśanāvarana
The sattva-sthānas of the darśanāvarana | 441-442 | The statement of the 50 binding-sthānas of the mohaniya in the guna-sthānas, in them the bhuvāndhi-prakriti
| The statement of the bhangas in the binding-sthānas of the māhanīya-karma | 445 | The number of bhujakāra, alpantara, and avasthita bindings in the binding-sthānas of the sāhaniya-karma
| The characteristics of the bhujakāra, alpantara, avasthita, and avaktāvya bindings, and the description of their numbers | The statement of the bhangas of the bhujakāra bindings of the mohaniya
The bhangas of the alpantara bindings of the māhanīya
The bhangas of the avaktāvya and avasthita bindings of the mohaniya
469-480
471-472
450
452

Page #35:
---------------------------
(36)
Verse No.
Page No.
Topic
475-489
452
478
456
490-507
The origin of Mohaniya Karma, their destruction and the number of their natures
One Avali until the rise of the non-connector in the falsehood of the Ananta Anubandhi. The use of the origin of Mohaniya Karma and their natures in the Gunasthanas, Yoga, Samyama, Desha Samyama. Statement regarding Leshya and Samyaktva, which Leshya is present in Kiranastag? The Sattvasthan of Mohaniya Karma. Statement of the 41 Jeevapadas which are the basic foundation of the Sattvasthan named Karma related places in the Bandhasthan of Mohaniya Karma
. - 508-515 |479 516-518 |484 519-520 | 487 521
487 522-523 |488
Statement of the Bandhasthan of Nama Karma in the Gunasthanas
Statement of the Karma Pada which is the Bandhasthan of Nama Karma
|488
Which Jeevapada does Atap Aaug, Udyot Prakriti bind with?
525
| Which Jeeva with which Gati binds with the Tirthankara Prakriti? 526-529 |489 The Dhruva Prakritis of Nama Karma
The divisions of Bandhasthan
The destruction of Bandhasthan 538-543
Where does a Jeeva of Kris Gati get born after death and what all can he attain? 544-551
Statement of the Bandhasthan of Nama Karma in the 14 Marganas
| The repeated destruction in the Bandhasthan of Nama Karma 554-555
The number etc. of Bhujkar, Alpatar, Avasthit and Abaktalva Sthan in the Bandhasthan, 563-582 | 519-533 | The characteristics of Bhujkar etc.
| From which Gunasthana can one fall or rise to which Gunasthana? 560-561 518 | Which Gunasthana holders do not attain death? 562 | 518 | The arrangement of death in the four parts of the Kritkritya Vedak Kala 583-598 534-543 | The Udayasthana of Nama Karma 586-587 535 The six Paryayanas in the Kevali Samudghat 

Page #36:
---------------------------
(37)
Verse No.
Page No.
Subject
536 The nature of the Tirthankara is the same as that of a Kevali. 588-608 | 536-553 The six types of Karma, their places of origin, and their destruction. 62 Mimikamasattvasthama
Humanity, the gradual destruction of the Avyogi Gunasthana, the two extreme times, or the extreme time, the agitation, the nature, 612-617 558-560 Swami and the order
| 559 The time suitable for Veda, the time suitable for Upashma Samyaktv 618-619 | 560-561 The first Upashma Samyaktv, Veda Samyaktv, Desha Samyama, the infinite Anubandhi, the Vishayajana, the complete Samyama
and Upashmani how many 627-629 | 564-566 | The bondage, origin, and destruction of Sattvas related to the original nature 630-634 567-568 | The bondage, origin, and destruction of Sattvas in the subsequent natures 635-638 | 569-570 | The three-fold destruction of Gotra Karma 639-649 | 571-575 | The three-fold destruction of Ayu Karma 650-652 | 577 The number of destructions in the three Gunasthana of Vedaniya, Ayu, and Gotra 653-691 | 578-602 | The destruction of Mohaniya Karma in the Gunasthana 692-731 603-624 The bondage, origin, and destruction of Sattvas related to Nama Karma in the Gunasthana and Marganas 740-784 624-660 The statement of Nama Karma, considering one as the base and two as the object
Om 6. The authority of Bandha Pratyaya 785 661 Mangalacharana 786-790 661-663 The types of Pratyaya, the Pratyaya Kshepaka in the Gunasthana 7 verses | 664-665 | The statement of the separation and non-origin of Pratyaya, the Pra.Pan.San. | 668-676 The Pratyaya Kshepaka in the Marganas 17 verses
| The place of Pratyaya, the types of places, the types of Kutas, the pronunciation of Kutas, and the destruction of Pratyaya in the Gunasthana 672 

Page #37:
---------------------------
(38)
Gatha No.
Page No.
793 1673 | Types of Pratyayasthana 794-798 | 675-685 | Types of Kूट in Bandhapratyaya, Kूट pronunciation and Bhangasankhya
| 685 Ekasanyogi, Dwisanyogi, Trimsanyogi etc. Bhangasankhya calculation Karan Sutra Ganit 800-810 686-693 | Special Pratyayas of Anubhagabandh in Jnanavaran etc. Karmas
| Mahabandhagranthanusar Pratyayas ka kathana 695 Ratnatraya Bandha ka bhi aur Moksha ka bhi karan hai
|| Iti Bandhapratyayaadhikār || |
77. Bhavachulikaadhikār
| Mangalacharanasahit Bhavanarupana kahane ki pratijna 812-819 | 696-700 | Statement of five Bhavas like Aupashamik etc. 811 Tika
Jivattva, Bhavya, Abhavya Audayik hai 819 Tika
| Siddha Upchar se Jiv hain 819 Tika
Atma Moort ya Amoort 820-875 702-050 ] Gunasthana and Marganama in Pratyekag and Sanyogi Bhang
750 | Statement of Ekantamatas, Kriyavadi etc. Bhed
| Kriyavadiyon ka Bhedon ki Utpanni 879
| Ekantakalavada ka lakshan 882
752
Ishwarkritavada Ekanta | 752 Atmavda Ekanta 882 752
Niyativada Ekanta
Svabhavavada Ekanta | 752-553 Akriyavadiyon ke Bhang | 753 | Ajnanavada ke Bhang
Vanvikrayatiya ke Bhang 890 755 Purusharthavada Ekanta 891
Daivaavada Ekanta | Sanyogavada Ekanta
876
او - وان
د پاو |
884-85
886-87
888-89 

Page #38:
---------------------------
Page No.
'823
'757
898-908
771
Verse No.
   Subject 755 Lokavada 756
Whatever words are spoken, they are not defeated by the victorious Sri Vidyapa II | The words of the Supreme Time are 'completely'
8. Trikaranchulikaadhikaara
Mangalacharan |757 Names of the three karans
758-767 | Adhaakaran and Anukrushtirachana .909-910 767 | Apoovarnakaran, Sthitikaandak, Anubhaagakaandak, Gunashreni 911-912 | 770 Anivritikaran
+9. Karmasthitirachanaadhikaara
Mangalacharan 914-916 | 771-772 Avaadhaakaal, seven karmas 156-155 917, 158 772, 128 Ayukarma's Avaadha 218,159 773, 129/ Udeerna's Avaadhaakaal 919-240 | 774-788 Nisekarachana 160-162 130-131 941 788 | After the Avaadhaakaal ends, Niseka formations happen in order
789 Ekasamayaprabaddhapramaaj binds and is destroyed in the same way 943 789 Sattaroopa dravya, some less, half-double loss, multiplied by the time-bound
Method of joining the Trikonayantra 945-946 |790-791 Statement of the types of Sthiti, continuous blindness and differences in Karanparinaamas, binding and unbinding 947-962 |791-802 Sthitibandhaadhyavasayaasthaan 963-964 |803 Sthitibandhaadhyavasayaasthaana, Anubhaaghaadhyavasayaasthaan 965-972 |804-805 | Prashasti
| ॥Iti Gommatsaarakarmakaandah॥ 

Page #39:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda
SiddhantagyanadIpika Hindi Tika
Ath Prakriti SamutkirtanadhikAra
। Mangalacharanam ॥
Panamiy Sirasa NemI, GunarayanaVibhushanam MahavirAm ।
Sammattarayananilayam, PayadisamuktItTanam Voccham ॥१॥ Artha – Jo Samyaktva Adi GunarUpI Ratnon Ke Sthan Hain, Gunaratnon Se Vibhushan Hain, MoksharUpI Mahalakshmi Ko Dene Wale Hain, Aise NemInath Tirthankar Dev Ko Mastak Jhukakar Pranam Kar Main Prakriti Samutkirtan Namk Granth Kahta Hun.
VisheshArtha - GyanavaranAdi Mul Bhed Tatha Unke Uttar Bhedon Sahit Samutkirtan Arthat SwarUp Varnan Hai Jisme Use Prakriti Samutkirtan Granth Kahte Hain. So Kya Karke Main Aise Granth Ko Kahunga? Shri NemInath Tirthankar Ko Sir Navakar Namaskar Karke Kahunga. Kaise Hain Ve NemInath Bhagavan ? GunarUpI Ratn Ke Abhushan Se Jo Vibhushan Hain, Punah Kaise Hain ? Jo Mahan Vi-Vishist I-Lakshmi, Usko Rati– Dete Hain Ve Mahavir Hain, Punah Kaise Hain? AtmaswarUp Ki Upalabdhi Rup Jo Samyaktva Ya Kshayik Samyaktva, Vahi Hua Ratn, Uske Jo Sthan SwarUp Hain. In Gunon Se Vishist Isht Devata-Namaskar Purvak Prakriti Samutkirtan Granth Ko Kahne Ki Acharya Ne Pratijna Ki Hai. 5. Payadi Samuchittanam - PayadisarUvanirUva (Dh. Pu. 6 Pri. 5 Su. 3 Ki Toka) 

Page #40:
---------------------------
## Gommatasar Karmakanda-2

**Meaning:** Here, the author, Shri Nemichandracharya, after saluting Lord Neminath, promises to explain the 'Prakriti Samutkirtan' text, which describes the nature of the original karma, including its different aspects and the unveiling of knowledge. What is the meaning of the word 'Prakriti'? In response, the Acharya says in the Sutra:

**Sutra:**
*Payadi sil sahavo, jivanganam anaisambandho.*
*Kanayovale malan va, tanasthittan sayam siddh.* ||2||

**Meaning:** Prakriti, Sheel (character) and Swabhav (nature) are one. Just as there is an eternal connection between the dust and the celestial stone, similarly, there is an eternal connection between the Jiva (soul) and the body (karma). The existence of both is self-evident.

**Special Meaning:** The meaning of Prakriti is Sheel or Swabhav. For example, the upward movement of fire, the horizontal movement of air, and the downward movement of water are their natural tendencies. Similarly, whatever exists independently of any cause and is inherent in itself is its Swabhav. The Jiva's nature is to undergo transformations like Raga (attachment) etc., and the nature of karma is to undergo transformations in accordance with those. The existence of the Jiva is established by the 'Aham' (I) perception, and the existence of karma is established by the increase and decrease of knowledge in the Jiva, because without Avarana karma (covering karma), there cannot be liberation.

**Doubt:** If Raga etc. arise due to the rise of karma, and karma is bound due to Raga etc., then there is a circular dependency, because karma cannot be bound without Raga etc., and the binding and rising of karma cannot happen without Raga etc.

**Solution:** The binding of the Jiva and karma has been happening since time immemorial. Secondly, Raga etc. arise due to the rise of previously bound karma, and new karma is bound due to Raga etc. If the same karma binding were the cause of Raga etc., then circular dependency would be possible, but that is not the case.

**Doubt:** The Jiva is non-material, and karma is material. The binding of the material and non-material is impossible. If the material and non-material were to bind, then there would be a possibility of karma binding even for things like space.

**Solution:** It is not entirely true that the Jiva is non-material. In relation to the karma-bound state and due to its association with it, the Jiva is somewhat material, and in relation to its pure form, it is somewhat non-material. It is also said:

1. Sarvarthasiddhi 8.3
2. Sagadparinamanamatmanah swabhavah ragadyutpadakatvam tu karmanah. Karmakanda Sanskrit Teeka, Sutra 2.
3. Jayadhaval, Part 1, Page 56. 

Page #41:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-3

Bound by karma, the soul is one in essence, but many in its characteristics. Therefore, the soul's non-material nature is characterized by anekantavada (many-sidedness). It is both existent and non-existent, depending on the perspective.

Amritachandracharya also said: "The soul is non-material in its essence, but becomes material due to the influence of external factors."2 The soul is non-material in its essence, but becomes material due to the influence of external factors. He further stated: "Due to the binding of the soul's parts by karma since beginningless time, there is no contradiction in their connection with the material body."3 The soul's parts are bound by karma since beginningless time, and therefore are material. Hence, there is no contradiction in their connection with the material body.

"Due to the binding of the soul by karma since beginningless time, it is not possible for the soul to be non-material in its worldly state."4 Since the soul is bound by karma since beginningless time, it is not possible for the soul to be non-material in its worldly state. Now, we will discuss how the worldly soul interacts with karma and its sub-categories.

With the rise of the body-karma, the soul takes in karma and its sub-categories. It absorbs them completely, just as a heated iron ball absorbs water completely.3

**Explanation:** The term "body" refers to the five types of karma: audarika, vaikriyika, aharaka, taijasa, and karman. The soul, with the rise of karman karma, takes in the eight types of karma, including jnana-avarana (knowledge obscuring), etc. The soul, with the rise of the other body-karma, takes in the corresponding sub-categories of karma.

How many material atoms does the soul absorb each moment, as it takes in karma and its sub-categories? This is explained in the following sources: 5. Sarvarthasiddhi, A. 2, Sutra 7, commentary; Brihad-Dharma-Sangraha, verse 7, commentary. 2. Panchastikaya, verse 97, commentary; Tattvarthasara, 5/16-19. 3. D.P. 1, p. 292. 4. D.P. 15, p. 31. 

Page #42:
---------------------------
Gommatasar Karmakanda-4

**Verse 4:**

The infinite part of the Siddhas, and the infinite multitude of Abhavyas, which is infinitely greater than the infinite part of the Siddhas, binds the time-bound (Samaya-prabaddha) at every moment, and binds the karma particles, which are devoid of the characteristics of the Yogas, in a way that is less than the maximum.

**Meaning:**

Just as a magnet with greater power attracts more iron particles, and a magnet with lesser power attracts fewer iron particles, similarly, the soul, due to the lesser or greater power of its Yogas, attracts fewer or more karma particles.

**Verse 5:**

At every moment, one Samaya-prabaddha is destroyed, but through practice, many Samaya-prabaddhas are destroyed. However, some Samaya-prabaddha remains in the state of existence, multiplied by one and a half times the loss of its qualities.

**Meaning:**

At every moment, a group of atoms, representing various types of karma, bears fruit as a Samaya-prabaddha and is destroyed. This means that it is destroyed in the form of its manifestation. However, due to the special effort of penance and the causes of practice, such as the right faith, knowledge, and conduct of the soul, the destruction of the Samaya-prabaddha takes place in eleven stages, as mentioned in the Gunasthanas. Due to this, many Samaya-prabaddhas are destroyed at one time. However, the Samaya-prabaddha that remains in the state of existence is multiplied by one and a half times the loss of its qualities.

**Doubt:**

If it is said that one Samaya-prabaddha is bound at every moment, and one Samaya-prabaddha is destroyed at every moment, then how can it be said that the state of existence is multiplied by one and a half times the loss of its qualities?

**Solution:**

To resolve this doubt, one should refer to verses 942-943-944 of this text.

**Explanation:**

Here, two ways of describing the infinite nature of the atoms are presented to determine their fixed location. For example, these atoms are as numerous as the infinite part of the Siddhas, but they are infinitely greater in number than the Abhavyas. This means that an infinite part of the Siddhas is considered here, which is infinitely greater than the Abhavyas. 

Page #43:
---------------------------
## Gommatasar Karmakanda-5

**General Karma is classified into two types based on substance and state:**

* **Karma** is one type in general, but two types in terms of substance and state.
* **Pudgalpinda** is called **dravya karma** (substance karma), and the power to produce results within it is called **bhavakarma** (state karma).

**Explanation:**

* The effects produced by the power of the cause in action, such as ignorance, anger, etc., are also **bhavakarma**.

**General Karma is also classified into eight types, or one hundred and forty-eight, or countless types:**

* **Karma** is also eight types, or one hundred and forty-eight, or countless types.
* Among these eight types, there are two categories: **ghaatiya** (destructive) and **aghaatiya** (non-destructive).

**The eight types of Karma are:**

* **Jnanavarana** (knowledge obscuring), **darshanavarana** (perception obscuring), **vedaniya** (experiential), **mohaniya** (delusive), **ayu** (life span), **nama** (name), **gotra** (lineage), and **antaraya** (hindrance) are the eight fundamental natures (swabhava) of karma.

**Classification of ghaatiya and aghaatiya karma:**

* **Jnanavarana**, **darshanavarana**, **mohaniya**, and **antaraya** are the four **ghaatiya** karmas, as they destroy the qualities (devatvarup) of the soul.
* **Ayu**, **nama**, **gotra**, and **vedaniya** are the four **aghaatiya** karmas, as they do not destroy the qualities (devatva prakat hone rup) of the soul.

**Notes:**

* 1. Pra. Pan. San. Prakriti Samutkirtanadhikarika Gatha 2, Param Tantra Gathaottarardhe "Aauganama Godam Tahantaraayam Cha Mulaao" itipath.
* 2. J.D. Pustak 1, Page 67. 

Page #44:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-6 now describes the qualities of the soul that are destroyed by karma:

**Kevalanana, Dansanam, Anantviriya, Khayik Samyaktava, and Khayik Charitra (by the word 'cha').**
**Khayik Guna, Madiyadi, Khaovasamie, Ya Ghadi Du.** (10)

**Meaning:** Kevalgyan (perfect knowledge), Kevaldarshan (perfect vision), Anantviriya (infinite power), Khayik Samyaktava (temporary right faith), and Khayik Charitra (temporary right conduct), along with the five types of Khayik Bhava (temporary feelings) like Dana (charity) and the Khayopashamic Bhava (temporary calming feelings) like Mati (intellect), Shruta (scriptural knowledge), Avadhi (clairvoyance), and Manahparyaya (telepathy), are all destroyed by karma like Gnanavaran (veil of knowledge). Therefore, they are called Ghatiya (destroyed).

Now, the first function of the Aghatiya (undestroyed) karma is called Ayukarma:

**Kammakayamohavaddhiyasansaramhi Ya Anadijuttamhi.**
**Jivasas Avaththanam, Karedi Aau Halivva Naran.** (11)

**Meaning:** The Aayu karma causes the growth of the Anadi Chaturgati (four states of existence) due to the Moh (delusion) arising from the karma's उदय (manifestation). This Aayu karma is responsible for the soul's existence in these four states, just like a piece of wood holds a man captive.

**Special Meaning:** The existence of Aayu karma can be understood from the fact that the state of the body cannot be otherwise (Dehatthidi Annahanuvavattido).

The function of the Nama karma is described as follows:

**Gadi Adi Jivabhedam, Dehaadi Poggalana Bhedam Cha.**
**Gadiyantarparinamana, Karedi Namam Aneyaviham.** (12)

**Meaning:** Nama karma is of many types due to the differences in गति (state of existence) and other factors. It creates differences in the पर्याय (state of existence) of the soul, like Naraki (hell-bound), and differences in the पुद्गल (matter) like Audarik Sharira (physical body). It also causes the soul to transition from one state to another. Thus, Nama karma performs many functions.

**Special Meaning:** Nama karma is of three types: जीवविपाकी (soul-fruiting), पुद्गलविपाकी (matter-fruiting), and क्षेत्रविपाकी (field-fruiting). The one whose fruit is in the soul is जीवविपाकी, the one whose fruit is in the matter is पुद्गलविपाकी, and the one whose fruit is in the state of existence is क्षेत्रविपाकी. Thus, Nama karma, like a painter, creates many types of जीवविपाकी, etc.

1. Dh.Pu. 6 Sutra 9's commentary. 

Page #45:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-7

It describes the transformation of nature. It is said, "Naanamainoti iti naama" - the karma that creates in various ways is called naama karma. Now, the function of gotra karma is said -

"Santaanakamenagayajivaavaranassa godamidi sapana. || ..
Uccham neecham charanam, uccham neecham have godam. ||13||"

Meaning - The conduct of a living being that has come down through generations is called gotra. High and low conduct leads to high and low gotra.

Special Meaning - "Uccha-neecham gamayatiti gotram" - that which causes high and low conduct is called gotra. Similarly, "Gamayatyuccha-neechakulamiti gotram" - that which makes one aware of high and low families or that which makes one attain a high or low family is called gotra. "Na cha nishphalam gotram, deekshayogyasadhvaachaaraanaam sadhvaachaaraaih kritsambandhanaam aaryapratyayabhidhaanavyavhaaranibandhanaanaam purushaanaam santaan: uccairagotram tatrotpattihetukarmapyuccaira gotram. ........ tadviparitam neechaira gotram." - It is not that gotra karma is fruitless, because the lineage of those who have virtuous conduct worthy of initiation, who have established a relationship with those who have virtuous conduct, and who are 'Arya' - those who are involved in such knowledge and verbal conduct - is called high gotra, and the karma that is the cause of their birth is also high gotra. ...... The opposite of that is low gotra.

There is also a proverb about the conduct of family tradition -

A jackal cub was raised by a lioness from childhood. It used to play with the lion cubs. One day, while playing, all the cubs went to a forest. There they saw a herd of elephants. The lion cubs faced the elephants, but the jackal, who had the cowardly nature of its family ingrained in it, ran away at the sight of the elephants. Then the lion cubs, knowing it as their elder brother, imitated it and returned to their mother. They complained to the lioness that it had stopped them from hunting. Then the lioness said a verse to the jackal cub, which is as follows:

1. Dh.Pu. 13 p. 262 Sutra 100 commentary. 3. Dh.Pu. 6 p. 13 Sutra 11 commentary
2. Dh.Pu. 13 p. 387 Sutra 134 commentary. 4. Dh.Pu. 13 p. 389 Sutra 135 commentary. 

Page #46:
---------------------------
Gommatasar Karmakanda-8

You are a hero, you are learned, you are handsome, son!
In the family you were born, elephants are not killed. (Therefore, if you don't run away from here, your life will not be saved.)

Meaning - The karma of Rajotirya becomes Anushya. No matter how much a person is endowed with knowledge and other qualities, the karma does not disappear in that state, because just as the body, mind and intellect are formed from Rajotirya, so are the thoughts of the living being. Food and external environment also have an impact on thoughts.

Now the functions of Vedaniyakarma are said to be -

Experiencing the objects with their forms etc. through the senses is Vedaniya. To experience it in the form of happiness is Saatavedaniya and to experience it in the form of sorrow is Asaatavedaniya. Therefore, the karma that causes the experience of happiness and sorrow is Vedaniyakarma.

Special Meaning - 'Vedhat iti Vedaniyam' i.e. whatever is experienced is Vedaniya. Saatavedaniya karma is that which brings together the material that causes the removal of sorrow and destroys the power of the material karma that produces sorrow. Asaatavedaniya karma is that which causes sorrow to a living being who is naturally happy and is a repellent of the material that causes the alleviation of sorrow.

To explain the order of the coverings, first the main qualities of the living being are mentioned -

The worldly living being sees the object and knows it. Afterwards, he believes it with certainty through the seven-fold categories of existence, non-existence, etc. Thus, perception, knowledge and rightness are the qualities of the living being.

1. Dh. Pu. 6 p. 10 Sutra 7 commentary. 2. Saatavedaniya is the best (most auspicious) because it produces excessive happiness. Dhavala 12/46 3. Gh. Pu. 13 p. 357 Sutra 88 commentary. 

Page #47:
---------------------------
## Gommatasar Karmakanda - 9

Now the reason for the sequence of karma like Jnanavarana etc. is being told -

**Abbarahidadu puvvam, naanam tatto hi sanam hodi.**
**Sammattamado viriyami, jeevajeevagadami di charime.** ||16||

**Meaning:** Among the qualities of the soul, Apana is the primary. Therefore, knowledge is placed first. After that, Darshan is mentioned, and then Samyaktva. Viriya is in the form of power, which is found in both the living and the non-living. Therefore, it is mentioned last.

**Special Meaning:** The rule of grammar is to place what has fewer letters first. For this reason, knowledge is mentioned first because it has fewer letters and is the most revered. Then, Darshan and Samyaktva are mentioned in sequence, and finally, Viriya is placed last because there is the power of knowledge etc. in the soul and the power of the body etc. in the Pudgala. In this way, one should know the sequence of the covering of knowledge etc., i.e., Jnanavarana, Darshanavarana, and Mohaniya and Antaraya.

Although Antaraya karma is destructive, why is it mentioned at the end of the non-destructive karma? The solution to this is given in the next verse -

**Ghadivi aghadi va. Nisasanam ghadane asakkaddo.**
**Namatiyanimittado, vigdham padhidam aghadi charimzhi.** ||17||

**Meaning:** Although Antaraya karma is destructive, it is not capable of completely destroying the qualities of the soul like non-destructive karma. Antaraya karma performs its function due to the cause of name, lineage, and Vedaniya; therefore, it is mentioned at the end of the non-destructive karma.

Now the sequence of other karma is being told -

**Aubleena avadhiddi, bhavassi idi naamamaupuvvam tu.**
**Bhavamassia nichuccham, idi godam naamapuvvam tu.** ||18||

**Meaning:** Due to Ayukarma, there is existence in Bhava. Therefore, Ayukarma is mentioned before Namakarma, and due to the support of Bhava, there is lowliness or highness. Therefore, Namakarma is mentioned before Gotrakarma.

Why is Vedaniya karma, even though it is non-destructive, mentioned in the middle of the destructive karma? This doubt... 

Page #48:
---------------------------
The Gommatasara Karmakanda-10 Samadhana Swarupa Gatha says:

"Vedaniya karma, due to the power of mohaniya karma, destroys the (avyabath) qualities of the jiva, like ghatiya karma. Therefore, mohaniya is placed before vedaniya in the midst of ghatiya." (19)

**Explanation:**

Vedaniya karma destroys the jiva's qualities (avyabathguna) only when it arises due to the rati-arati (attraction-repulsion) aspects of mohaniya karma. It brings together the objects of the senses, which are the causes of sukha (pleasure) and dukha (pain), and makes the jiva experience them. Therefore, vedaniya is placed before mohaniya in the midst of ghatiya karma.

The nature of an object is neither good nor bad. As long as raga (attachment) and dvesha (aversion) exist, the jiva considers some things desirable and others undesirable. The same object may be pleasant to one person and unpleasant to another. For example, the bitter neem leaf is unpleasant to humans but pleasant to camels. This proves that the object itself is neither pleasant nor unpleasant. If the object were inherently so, it should appear the same to both. Therefore, it is established that vedaniya arises only due to raga-dvesha, which is mohaniya karma, and only then does the jiva experience pleasure and pain through the senses.

Without mohaniya karma, vedaniya karma is like a strong army without a king. It cannot cause the experience of pleasure and pain arising from the senses, but it does destroy the avyabathguna.

Thus, the order of karma is established as follows:

"Jnana-avaran, darshan-avaran, vedaniya, mohaniya, ayu, nama, gotra, and antaraya - this order of karma is established as the same as the previous order." (20)

Now, the nature of karma is explained through an example:

"Just as the potter, the merchant, the carpenter, the blacksmith, the farmer, the weaver, and the laborer have their own specific functions, so too karma should be understood in the same way." (21)

1. Pra. Pan. San. Prak. Samu. Gatha 3. 

Page #49:
---------------------------
Gommatasar Karmakanda - 11

Meaning:  Just as a cloth covering a deity's face obscures knowledge, a doorkeeper obstructs vision, a honey-coated sword is painful, intoxication is intoxicating, a plow is like lifespan, a painter is like name, a potter is like lineage, and a storekeeper is like an obstacle karma.  Understand the nature of Jnanavarana and other karmas in the same way as these.

Special Meaning: 'Jnanam Aavrunoti' means that which covers knowledge is called Jnanavaraniya karma. Its nature is like a cloth covering a deity's face, which prevents the deity's knowledge from being known. Similarly, Jnanavarana karma covers knowledge, meaning it prevents the knowledge of things. That which covers vision, meaning it prevents seeing things, is Darshanavarana. Its nature is like a doorkeeper. Just as a doorkeeper prevents someone from seeing the king, this karma prevents the vision of the king-like object, the self. (Inner-directed consciousness is called vision). That which causes the experience of sensory pleasure and pain, or destroys unhindered qualities, is Vedaniya karma. Its nature is like the edge of a honey-coated sword, which gives some pleasure when tasted, but causes pain when the tongue is cut. Similarly, pleasant and unpleasant experiences arise. That which intoxicates, makes unconscious, or makes inattentive is Mohaniya karma. Just as drinking alcohol makes a person crazy, 'Moha' intoxicates the soul.

-

That which 'Eti', meaning it is the cause of taking on a state of existence, is Ayukarma. Its nature is like a shackle or a wooden device. Just as a shackle or a wooden device keeps a person in their place and prevents them from going elsewhere, similarly, Ayukarma keeps the soul bound in the states of existence of humans, hell beings, etc. That which 'Nana Minoti', meaning it creates many types of actions, is Namakarma. It is like a painter, just as a painter creates many types of paintings, similarly, this Namakarma causes the soul to take on many forms, such as hell beings, etc. That which 'Gamayati', meaning it gives or causes knowledge of the soul's high and low states, is Gotrakarma. Just as a potter makes small and large vessels from clay, similarly, Gotrakarma gives knowledge of the soul's high and low states. That which 'Antarameti', meaning it creates a difference or obstacle between the giver and the receiver, is Antaraya karma. Its nature is like a storekeeper. Just as a storekeeper creates obstacles in giving to others, not allowing them to give, similarly, Antaraya karma creates obstacles in giving, receiving benefits, etc. In this way, the nature of these eight root karmas has been explained through their word meanings.

I

The five, nine, two, twenty-eight, and four are called the consequences of the eight root karmas.
They are consequences themselves, or they are consequences of other consequences. || 22 || 

Page #50:
---------------------------
Gommatasar Karmakanda-12
- Meaning - There are five, nine, two, twenty-eight, four, ninety-three or one hundred and three, two and five Uttarabheda of the eight karmas, namely, Jnanavaraniya, Darshanavaraniya, Vedaniya, Mohaniya, Ayu, Nama, Gotra and Antaraya, respectively.
The Sutra quoted from the palm leaf original Go. K.
Nanavaraniyam Dasanavaraniyam Vedaniyam Mohaniyam Aauganamam Godam Antarayam Chei. Tattha Nanavaraniyam Panchaviham Abhinibodhiya-Sud-Ohi-Manaparyava Nanavaraniyam Kevalananavaraniyam Chei. Dasanavaraniyam Navaviham Thiangiddhi Nihanida Payalapayala Nidda. Ya Payala Ya Chakkhu-Achakkhu-Ohi Dansasanavaraniyam Kevaladasanavaraniyam Chei.
Meaning of the Sutra - (There are eight basic types of karma) Jnanavaraniya, Darshanavaraniya, Vedaniya, Mohaniya, Ayu, Nama, Gotra, Antaraya. Among these, Jnanavaraniya is of five types - Abhinibodhak-Shruta-Avadhi and Man:paryayajnanavarana and Kevalajnanavarana. Darshanavarana is of nine types - Styanagridhi, Nidranidra, Prachala Prachala, Nidra and Prachala, Chakkhu-Achakkhu-Avadhi Darshanavarana and Kevaladarshanavarana.
Now, we will explain the function of Nidras among the Uttarabheda of Darshanavaraniya - - Thanudayanutthavadde, Sovad Kammam Karedi Jappdi Ya.
Niddani Ddudayena Ya, Na Ditthimuggadidam Sakko ||23|| Meaning - Even when awakened from the Styanagridhi Nidra, he remains asleep, performs actions in that sleep, and also speaks, but there is no awareness. Due to the rise of Nidranidra karma, even when made aware in many ways, he cannot open his eyes.
Payalapayala Udayena Ya, Vahedi Lala Chalanti Angai.
Nihudaye Gachchanto, Thaai Puno Vaisadi Parei ||24|| Meaning - Due to the rise of Prachala Prachala karma, saliva flows from the mouth and limbs move, but there is no awareness. Due to the rise of Nidra karma, he walks, stands up, sits down, falls down, etc.
Payaludayena Ya Jivo, Isummiliya Suvei Suttovvi. Isan Isan Jandi, Muhum Muhum Sovadde Mandam ||25|| 

Page #51:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-13 Meaning - Due to the rise of Prachalakarma, this being sleeps with its eyes slightly open and even while sleeping, it knows a little, repeatedly experiencing a state of light sleep.
Special Meaning - This sleep is like the sleep of a dog and is less harmful than all other types of sleep. Thus, the function of some aspects of Darshanavaranayakarma is explained. Sutra quoted from the original palm leaf manuscript of Gom. Ka.
Vedaniyakarma is of two types - Saatavedaniy and Asatavedaniy. Mohaniyakarma is of two types - Darshanamohaniya and Charitramohaniya. Darshanamohaniya is of one type with respect to bondage - Mithyatvarupa; with respect to rise and existence, it is of three types - Mithyatva, Samyagmithyatva and Samyaktva-prakriti.
Just like the grains of kodra, which are crushed by a mill, the karma-dravya, which is in the form of Mithyatva, becomes three types in terms of dravya-pramana, gradually decreasing by an infinite number of times - infinite number of times.
Special Meaning - Just as kodra - a particular type of grain, when crushed, becomes three forms - rice, grains and husk, similarly, the karma-dravya in the form of Mithyatva also undergoes transformation into Mithyatva, Samyagmithyatva and Samyaktva forms due to the instrument of Prathamo-pashama-samyaktva. Among these, Mithyatva is the most abundant. Samyagmithyatva is less abundant than that by an infinite number of times, and Samyaktva is even less abundant than that by an infinite number of times.
The number of atoms of the seven karmas, excluding Ayukarma, is slightly less than one and a half times the number of atoms of the time-bound pramana, multiplied by the factor of decrease. Dividing this number by seven, the resulting number is the number of atoms of Mohaniya. Among these, the number of atoms of Darshanamohaniya is infinite. 1. "Jantena dalijjamanakohavesu kodavy-tadulddhatandulaanam va dasanamananiyass apuvadikaranehi dalijass tivihnu balabha." That is, in the kodra crushed by the being, the kodra, rice and half rice, like these three divisions, the Darshanamohaniya crushed by the apuvadikarana etc. transformations, is found to be of three types (Dhaval Pu. 6 p. 38 and 39). See also Dha. Pu. 13 p. 358 in this regard. 

Page #52:
---------------------------
Gommatasar Karmakanda-14

When a part is given, one part is the measure of the atoms of the nature of all-destroying (sarvaghati) and the remaining part is the measure of the atoms of the nature of country-destroying (deshghati). In the atoms of the all-destroying nature, one part is the measure of the atoms of the all-destroying nature, which is divided into 17 natures, i.e., one false belief (mithyatva) and sixteen passions (kashaya). To divide into 17 parts, the measure that comes is the measure of the atoms of the false belief nature. At the time of the first attainment of the first cessation (prathamopaśama) of right belief (samyaktv), there are three karma-ash of the karma of false belief. At the first time, the right-seeing (samyagdṛṣṭi) being with the first cessation (prathamopaśama) takes the karma-regions that have been aroused by false belief and gives the majority of them to the false belief (mithyatva) and from that, gives the remaining karma-regions to the right belief nature (samyaktvaprakṛti) which is devoid of the cave of non-action (asankharagufā). At the first time, from the regions given to the false belief (samyagmithyatva), in the second time, it gives an innumerable number of regions to the right belief nature (samyaktvaprakṛti) and at the same time, i.e., in the second time, it gives an innumerable number of regions to the false belief (samyagmithyatva) compared to the regions given to the right belief nature (samyaktvaprakṛti). In this way, until the time of the end of the time of the transition of qualities (guṇasankramaṇa), it fulfills the karma of right belief (samyaktv) and false belief (samyagmithyatva) by the transition of qualities (guṇasankramaṇa). In this way, there are an innumerable number of atoms of right belief (samyagmithyatva) that are less than the atoms of false belief (mithyatva). There are an innumerable number of atoms of the right belief nature (samyaktvaprakṛti) that are less than these. In this way, there are three forms of the atoms of false belief (mithyatva).

Doubt - How can the substance that was in the form of false belief (mithyatva) be made false belief (mithyatva)?

Solution - The measure of the substitution series (atisthāpanāvalī) was reduced from the previous state of false belief (mithyatva). By this rule, the Acharya has said that the substance of false belief (mithyatva) has been made into three forms in an innumerable number of times less than the previous state.

Example - For example, the number of atoms of time-bound (samayaprabaddha) is 6300. The number of quality loss (guṇahāni) is 8. And the measure of one and a half times the quality loss (deḍaguṇahāni) is 12. 6300412 - 75,600. This is the atomic form of the substance of the seven karmas (sattvadravy). The atoms of the seven karmas are 75,600, then there will be 10,800 atoms of the obscuring karma (mohaniyakarma). Now, how will the atoms of the obscuring karma (mohaniyakarma) be divided into 25 of the character-obscuring (cāritramohaniya) and one of the knowledge-obscuring (darśanamohaniya) in these 26 karmas, that is what we are explaining -

Out of the 26 natures, sixteen passions (kaṣāya) and false belief (mithyatva) are 17 all-destroying natures (sarvaghati) and the remaining 9 natures are country-destroying (deshghati).

In the atoms of the obscuring karma (mohaniyakarma), by dividing by infinity, the quotient that comes is the substance of the all-destroying (sarvaghati) and the remaining substance is the country-destroying (deshghati). That is, the number of atoms of the obscuring karma (mohaniyakarma) is considered to be 10,800 and 5. Dhval Pustak 6 Page 235-236 

Page #53:
---------------------------
Gommatsar Karmakanda-15

The number of anantas is considered to be 8. Dividing this number of anantas (8) by 10,800, we get 5350. This dravya is of 17 sarvaghati prakritis. Therefore, dividing this dravya by 17, we get 1350/17 = 79, which is approximately 80. This should be understood as the dravya of each sarvaghati. The same amount of dravya is also of mithyatvakarma. Subtracting 1350 (sarvaghatidravya) from 10,870, we get 9450, which is the dravya of deshghati.

Understand the paramanus of samyagmithyatva prakriti as the countless parts of 797 (approximately 80), and understand the paramanus of samyaktva prakriti as the countless parts of samyagmithyatva. The remaining countless parts of paramanus are of mithyatva prakriti. This sutra is quoted from the palm leaf manuscript of Gom. K.

Charitramohaniya karma is of two types - kshayavedaniya, nokhayavedaniya. Kshayavedaniya is of 16 types. Their order in terms of kshapana is as follows - anantanubandhi-kroha-mana-maya-loha 

Page #54:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda - 16

The disassociation of these four happens simultaneously from the fourth to the seventh Gunasthanas. In the first part of the ninth Gunasthan, the eight of them, namely, Apraatyakhyanavaran-krodha-mana-maya and lobha, and Pratyakhyanavaran-krodha-mana-maya-lobha, are destroyed simultaneously. After that, in the end, Sanjwalan-krodha, Sanjwalan-mana, and Sanchalan-maya are destroyed one after the other. In the tenth Gunasthan, Sanjwalan-lobha is destroyed.

In terms of the distribution of dravya, the most dravya is given to Anantanubandhi-lobha, and the dravya less than Anantanubandhi-lobha is given to Anantanubandhi-maya. In the same way, Anantanubandhi-krodha, Anantanubandhi-nana, Sanjwalan-lobha, Sanjwalan-maya, Sanjwalan-krodha, Sanjwalan-mana, Pratyakhyanavaran-lobha, Pratyakhyanavaran-maya, Pratyakhyanavaran-krodha, Pratyakhyanavaran-mana, Apraatyakhyanavaran-lobha, Apraatyakhyanavaran-maya, Apraatyakhyanavaran-krodha, and Apraatyakhyanavaran-mana are given less and less dravya.

Nokshayavedaniya is of nine types: Purushaved, Strived, Napumsakaved, Rati, Arati, Hasya, Shoka, Bhaya, Jugupsa.

Ayukarma is of four types: Narakayu, Tiryanchayu, Manushayau, and Devayu.

Namakarma is of 42 types, based on the difference between Pind and Apind prakritis: Gati, Jati, Sharira, Bandhan, Sanghata, Sansthan, Angopang, Sanhanan, Varna, Gandha, Rasa, Sparsha, Anupurvi, Agurulaghu, Upghata, Parghata, Ucchvasa, Atap, Udyot, Vihayogati, Bas, Sthavar, Badar, Sukshma, Paryapt, Aparyapt, Pratiyeksharira, Sadharansharira, Sthira, Asthira, Shubha, Ashubha, Subhaga, Durbhaga, Susvara, Duhsvara, Aadeya, Anaadeya, Yashaskirti, Ayashaskirti, Nirman, and Tirthankara Namakarma.

Among them, Gatinamkarma is of four types: Narakgati, Tiryanchgati, Manusya-gati, and Devagati.

Jatinamkarma is of five types: Ekendriyajati, Dwindriyajati, Triendriyajati, Chaturindriyajati, and Panchendriyajati.

Shariranamkarma is of five types: Audarikasharira, Vaikriyaksharira, Aharaksharira, Taijassharira, and Karmanasharira.

Sharirabandhanamkarma is of five types: Audarikasharirabandhanamkarma, Vaikriyaksharirabandhanamkarma, Aharaksharirabandhanamkarma, Taijassharirabandhanamkarma, and Karmanasharirabandhanamkarma.

Now, the breaking of these five Sharirabandhanamkarma is called:

"Tejakammehi te, teja kammena kammana kamm. Kaysanjoge chaduchaduchaduduge ekkan cha payadio." (27)

Meaning: When Audarik, Vaikriyak, and Aharak are bound together with Taijas and Karman, there are four-four breaks. When Taijas is bound together with Taijas and Karman, there are two breaks, and when it is bound together with Karman, there is one break.

Special Meaning: Audarik-Audarikasharirabandhan, Audarik-Taijassharirabandhan, Audarik-Karmanasharirabandhan, Audarik-Taijas-Karmanasharirabandhan. These are the four breaks in relation to Audarik. 

Page #55:
---------------------------
There are four types of **Vaikriya** body-bond: **Vaikriya-Vaikriya** body-bond, **Vaikriya-Tejas** body-bond, **Vaikriya-Karman** body-bond, and **Vaikriya-Tejas-Karman** body-bond. Similarly, there are four types of **Aharaka** body-bond: **Aharaka-Aharaka** body-bond, **Aharaka-Tejas** body-bond, **Aharaka-Karman** body-bond, and **Aharaka-Tejas-Karman** body-bond. 

There are two types of **Tejas** body-bond: **Tejas-Tejas** body-bond and **Tejas-Karman** body-bond. Finally, there is one type of **Karman** body-bond: **Karman-Karman** body-bond. 

In total, there are fifteen types of **Sharirabandhana** (body-bond) **Namakarma** (karma that binds the body). These fifteen types are based on the different combinations of **Sanghabandha** (binding together).

The five types of **Sharirabandha** (body-bond) - **Audarika-Audarika**, **Vaikriya-Vaikriya**, **Aharaka-Aharaka**, **Tejas-Tejas**, and **Karman-Karman** - are inherent in the fifteen types. For example, **Audarika-Audarika** body-bond is a combination of two similar **Audarika** bodies. Therefore, the **Audarika** body-bond is inherent in the **Audarika** body-bond. Similarly, the other four types of **Sharirabandha** are also inherent in the fifteen types. 

Therefore, subtracting five from fifteen, we are left with ten. When these ten are added to the ninety-three types of **Namakarma**, we get a total of one hundred and three types of **Namakarma**.

This is a quote from the **Tadpatra** (palm leaf manuscript) **Mula Go.K.** (original text):

"The body is bound by five types of **Sanghadana** (binding together): **Audarika**, **Vegujjiya**, **Aharaka**, **Tejas**, and **Karmaiya**. The body is bound by six types of **Sharirasanthanana** (body formation): **Samachaura** (square), **Santhanana** (formation), **Aggo** (head), **Udaparamandala** (upper circle)."

Here, the **Agam** (scripture) only mentions five types of bodies and their combinations, which results in fifteen types of body-bond. For example, the **Audarika** body **NoKarma** (non-karmic) **Skandha** (aggregate) binds with another **Audarika** body **NoKarma** **Skandha**, resulting in **Audarika-Audarika** body-bond. Similarly, the **Audarika** body **Pudgala** (particle) binds with the **Tejas** body **Pudgala** in a living being, resulting in **Audarika-Tejas** body-bond. The **Audarika** **Skandha** binds with the **Karman** **Skandha** in a living being, resulting in **Audarika-Karman** body-bond. This is the purpose of explaining these combinations of body-bond. (**Dhaval** 14/42 and **Dhaval** 13/31-33)

Therefore, there are fifteen types of body-bond. Consequently, there are fifteen types of **Sharirabandhana Namakarma** (karma that binds the body), which are the causes of these fifteen types of body-bond. The function of **Sharirabandhana Namakarma** is to bind the **Audarika** body **NoKarma** **Skandha** with another **Audarika** body **NoKarma** **Skandha** when it arises. Similarly, the **Sharirabandhana Namakarma** that binds the **Audarika** body **Pudgala** with the **Tejas** body **Pudgala** in a living being is called **Audarika-Tejas** body-bond **Namakarma**. The same applies to the remaining thirteen types. The **Go.K.** 27 describes the fifteen types of **Sharirabandhana Namakarma**. 

Page #56:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-18 Sadiy-Kujj-Vaman-Hundasarirasanthanam Chedi. Sarira-Angovang Namam Triviham-Oralaiy, Vegubviy, Aharasariraangovangnanam Chedi.
Sutraarth -  There are five types of Sarirasanghatanam karma - Audarik Sarirasanghatanam karma, Vaikriyaka Sarirasanghatanam karma, Aharaka Sarirasanghatanam karma, Taijasa Sarirasanghatanam karma and Karman Sarirasanghatanam karma. There are six types of Sarirasanthanam karma - Samachaturasrasanthanam karma, Nyagrodhaparimandalsanthanam karma, Swatisanthanam karma, Kubjakasanthanam karma, Vamansanthanam karma and Hundakasanthanam karma. Sariraangopangnam karma is of three types - Audarik Sariraangopangnam karma, Vaikriyaka Sariraangopangnam karma and Aharakshariraangopangnam karma. ...... ...... Now we will name the parts of the body -
Nalaya Bahu Ya Taha, Niyambaputti Uro Ya Siso Ya.
Astrev Du Angai, Dehe Sesa Uvangai. ||28||
Artha - Two legs, two arms, the back of the buttocks-waist, back, heart and head, these eight are the limbs of the body, the rest like eyes-ears etc. are called the appendages. 'Tadpatraiy Mula Go. K. Se Udhhut Sutra
Sanhadnanam Chaviham Vajrisahanarayasanhadnanam Vajnaray-Narayaddhanaraykhiliy-Asampatta Sevati-Sarirasanhadnanam Chei.
Sutraarth - Sanhanannam karma is of six types - Vajrarbha Narach Sanhanannam karma, Vajranarach Narach-Ardhanarach-Kiliti-Asamprapta Asrupatika Sarirasanhanannam karma.
Note - The reason for mentioning Vajrarbha Narach Sanhanan separately is that only those beings who have this Sanhanan can attain liberation.
1. Legs, arms, stomach, buttocks, chest, back, head: These are the 8 limbs.
The bones of the head, head, forehead, shoulder joint, ears, nose, eyes, eye sockets, chin, cheeks, lips, edges of the lips, palate, tongue, neck, nipple, breast, fingers etc. are the appendages. (Nalakbahurudaranitambhor: prushthshiransyastavanganini, upanganini cha murdhakaroti-mastak-lalatasandhi bhrukarnaasikaanayanakshikupahanukapholaadharosthhasrik talujingagrevaastan chunchukaangulyadini bhavanti.)
(Moolaachar 1236 p. 364 Bhag 2 Gyanapith Prakashan Anu. Pu. Gyanamati Ji) 

Page #57:
---------------------------
## Gommatasara Karmakanda-19:

**Chapter 19 of the Gommatasara Karmakanda explains how beings with six types of sanhanas (karmic bonds) are born in different realms. It does so in four verses:**

**Verse 29:**

Beings with the Sevatta sanhana are born in the Saudharma Yugal (heaven) and continue to be born in the subsequent heavens up to the fourth Lantava Kapishta Yugal, which is the eighth heaven. Those with the Kilka sanhana are born two Yugals higher, up to the twelfth heaven. Those with the Ardhanaracha sanhana are born two Yugals higher than those with the Kilka sanhana, up to the sixteenth heaven.

**Verse 30:**

Beings with the Naracha, Vajranaracha, and Vajrarashabhanaracha sanhanas are born in the Navagraiveyak (nine-headed) realm. Those with the Vajranaracha and Vajrarashabhanaracha sanhanas are born in the Navanudish (nine-directional) Vimanas (celestial vehicles). Those with the Vajrarashabhanaracha sanhana are born in the Panchaanuttar (five-superior) Vimanas.

**Verse 31:**

If beings with six sanhanas are born in hell, they reach the third hell called Megha. Those with the five sanhanas (excluding Sevatta) reach the fifth earth called Arishta. Those with the four sanhanas (starting with Ardhanaracha) reach the sixth earth called Maghavi. Those with the Vajrarashabhanaracha sanhana reach the seventh earth called Madhavi.

**Verse 32:**

The last three sanhanas are found in the women of the Karmabhoomi (earthly realm). The first three superior sanhanas are not found in the Karmabhoomi, as stated by the Jina (Tirthankara). 

Page #58:
---------------------------
Gommatasar Karmakanda - 20
Special Meaning - The half-naraach, nailed and sripatika, these three sanhananas of the dravya striyas of the karmabhoomi, remain in existence. Without the vajrarashabhanaraach sanhanan, the dravya striyas do not attain moksha.
Quote from the original palm leaf Gom.K.
There are five kinds of varna karma - black, blue, red, yellow and white. There are two kinds of gandha karma - fragrant and foul. There are five kinds of rasa karma - bitter, pungent, astringent, sour and sweet. There are eight kinds of sparsa karma - hard, soft, heavy, light, rough, oily, cold and hot. There are four kinds of anupurvi karma - hell-bound anupurvi, animal-bound anupurvi, human-bound anupurvi and god-bound anupurvi. There are six kinds of agurulaghu - upghat, parghat, ucchvas, aatap and udyot. There are two kinds of vihayogati karma - auspicious vihayogati and inauspicious vihayogati. There are twelve kinds of auspicious vihayogati - fear, badar, sufficient, every body, stable, auspicious, prosperous, good voice, worthy of respect, fame, creation and tirthankara. There are twelve kinds of inauspicious vihayogati - stationary, subtle, insufficient, ordinary body, unstable, inauspicious, unfortunate, bad voice, unworthy of respect, infamy.
Now you tell the characteristics of udyotprakriti.
"The fire of the original body is hot, the fire of the first body is hot and strong. The fire of the third body is hot and the fire of the fourth body is udyot."
1. The first sanhanan and the first sthana of the bhogabhoomi, every couple, that is, both the woman and the man, is vajravrishabha naraach and samacatusra. They are called "Arya".
2. Dhavala 8/200 

Page #59:
---------------------------
## Gommatasara Karmakanda-21

**Meaning:** Both the root and the glow of fire are hot, hence the origin of the Uṣṇasparśa-nāmakarma. That which has only glow, i.e., heat in its rays, is called Ātapa (sunlight). (The Ātapanāmakarma should be understood to arise in the disc of the sun and in the Badaraparyāpta-pṛthvīkāyika Tiryāñcajīvas born in the Suryakāntamani). And that which has no glow at all, its origin is the Udyotanāmakarma.

**Quote from the Tālpatra-īya Mūla Go. Ka.:**

"Godakammam duviham ucca-nīcagodam ce'i. Antarāya pañcaviham dāna-lābha-bhoga-upabhoga-dhīriya-antarāyaṁ ce'i."

**Meaning of the Quote:** There are two types of Gotrakarma: Uccagotra and Nīcagotra. There are five types of Antarāyakarma: Dānāntarāya, Lābhāntarāya, Bhogāntarāya, Upabhogāntarāya, and Dhīriyāntarāya.

**Special Meaning:** The binding together of the Karmanavarganas, which are fit for Karma, in the form of Ekakṣetrāvagāha in the Ātmapradeśas, is called Bandha, like milk and water. Just as various types of juice, seeds, flowers, fruits, etc., placed in a particular vessel, become mixed with the wine, similarly, the Karmanavarganas also become mixed with the Karmabhāva due to the influence of Yoga and Kaṣāya.

The various Pudgalakarmavarganas, which are taken in by the same soul, become transformed into different types of Karma, such as Jñānāvaraṇa, etc., just as the food eaten at one time is transformed into juice, blood, etc.

Now, the explanation of the Uttaraprakṛtis:

That which covers the Matijñāna is called Matijñānāvaraṇa. That which covers the Śruta-jñāna is called Śruta-jñānāvaraṇa. That which covers the Avadhijñāna is called Avadhijñānāvaraṇa. That which covers the Manahparyaya-jñāna is called Manahparyaya-jñānāvaraṇa. And that which covers the Kevalajñāna is called Kevalajñānāvaraṇa.

**Doubt:** Does the Abhavya have the power of Manahparyaya-jñāna and Kevalajñāna? If he does, then he is not an Abhavya. And if he does not have the power, then it is pointless to talk about the covering of these two types of knowledge.

**Solution:** From the Dravyārthikanyāya, he has the power of both these types of knowledge, but from the Paryāyārthikanyāya, there is no individualization of the power. Therefore, the faults you have pointed out are not possible. Just as gold is present in the form of power in a blind stone, but it is not individualized, so it should be understood.

**Reference:** Dhvala Pu. 6, pp. 7 & 8. 

Page #60:
---------------------------
Gommatasar Karmakanda-22

That which covers or by which covering is done is called Avaranakarma. There are four types of Darshan Avaran Karmas that cover the four types of Darshan: Chakshudarshana Avaran, Achakshudarshana Avaran, Avadhi Darshan Avaran, and Keval Darshan Avaran. There are also five types of Nidra, the characteristics of which have been previously explained by Nemichandracharya himself.

There are two types of Vedaniya: Saataroopa and Asataroopa. Their characteristics have also been explained previously.

There are two types of Mohaniya Karma: Darshan Mohaniya and Charitra Mohaniya. Darshan Mohaniya has three types: Mithyatva, Samyagmithyatva, and Samyaktva. In terms of Bandha, there is only one type, Mithyatva, but in terms of Udaya and Sattwa, there are three types.

Mithyatva is the state of being a Mithyadristi, where the soul is turned away from the path established by the omniscient, is disinterested in the truth, and is devoid of thoughts about the welfare and harm of the soul. Just as the intense power of the husk of rice is reduced and becomes muddy when it is washed, similarly, when the intense power of Mithyatva in a substance is slightly reduced and becomes weak, it is called Samyagmithyatva. Just as eating washed intoxicating rice makes one slightly intoxicated and also clever, similarly, the Udaya of Samyagmithyatva nature leads to a mixed result in the soul, a mixture of Samyak and Mithyatva. This means that there is simultaneous belief in the truths spoken by the omniscient and the untruths not spoken by the omniscient. Samyaktva nature is that which does not stop the belief of the soul but destroys the purity and stability of Samyaktva.

Charitra refers to the act of conduct or that by which conduct is done or conduct itself. That which deludes this Charitra or by which this Charitra is deluded is called Charitra Mohaniya Karma. Charitra Mohaniya Karma is of two types: Kashaya Vedaniya and Nokshaya Vedaniya.

That which destroys the qualities of Charitra in the soul is called Kashaya. And that which is slightly (kinchit) Kashaya is called Nokshaya. There are sixteen types of Kashaya Vedaniya: Ananta Anubandhi Krodha, Mana, Maya, Lobha; Apratyakhyana Avaran Krodha, Mana, Maya, Lobha; Pratyakhyana Avaran Krodha, Mana, Maya, Lobha; Sajwalan Krodha, Mana, Maya, Lobha.

Mithyatva is infinite because it is the cause of infinite samsara. That which is a constant companion (Anubandhini) of Mithyatva is Ananta Anubandhi. That which is 'A' - slightly Pratyakhyana - Samyama, meaning Desha Samyama or...

1. J.D.P. 5 page 130
2. "Sukha dukha bahushasya karmakshetra krishantiti kshayaah. Sukha dukha roopi nana prakar ke dhannya ko utpann karne vale karma roopi kshetra ka jo karshan karti hai, arthat phal utpann karne yogya karti hai, vah kshaya hai." (Dhaval P. 1 page 141) 

Page #61:
---------------------------
Gommatasar Karmakanda-23

**Kshaya**

When one does not even slightly give up anger, pride, deceit, and greed, it is called **Apratyaakhyanakrodha-mana-maya-lobha**. **Pratyaakhyanakshaya** does not allow for complete restraint. Restraint that is unified and shines brightly is called **Savalan**. (This kshaya destroys restraint as it is known). In this way, there are 16 types of **Kshayavedaniya**.

**Nokshaya**

**Nokshaya** is the experience of slight kshaya. It has nine types:

* **Hasya** is the experience of laughter.
* **Rati** is the experience of pleasure in a place or object.
* **Arati** is the experience of displeasure in a place or object.
* **Shoka** is the experience of sorrow caused by the loss of something dear.
* **Bhaya** is the experience of fear.
* **Jugupsa** is the experience of disgust, either by revealing one's own faults or the faults of others. Alternatively, it is the experience of feeling dejected.
* **Strived** is the experience of feelings related to women.
* **Purushaved** is the experience of feelings related to men.
* **Napunsakaved** is the experience of feelings related to eunuchs.

**Ayukarma**

**Ayukarma** is the karma that causes and sustains birth in the realms of humans, animals, and hell. It has four types:

* **Narakayu** is the karma that causes and sustains birth in hell.
* **Tiryancyayu** is the karma that causes and sustains birth in the animal realm.
* **Manushyayu** is the karma that causes and sustains birth in the human realm.
* **Devayu** is the karma that causes and sustains birth in the heavenly realm.

**Namakarma**

**Namakarma** has 42 types, which are categorized as **pinda** and **apinda** in nature.

**Gati**

**Gati** is the karma that causes the soul to move from one state of existence to another.

**Gatinamkarma**

**Gatinamkarma** is the karma that causes the soul to perform actions related to its state of existence. It has four types:

* **Narakgati** is the karma that causes the soul to be born in hell and perform actions related to hell.
* **Tiryanchgati** is the karma that causes the soul to be born in the animal realm and perform actions related to animals.
* **Manushygati** is the karma that causes the soul to be born as a human and perform actions related to humans.
* **Devgati** is the karma that causes the soul to be born in the heavenly realm and perform actions related to the heavens.

**Other Karma**

* **Rati** is the experience of delight or the karma that causes the soul to be attached to objects of desire.
* **Arati** is the experience of aversion or the karma that causes the soul to be averse to objects, places, time, or feelings.
* **Shoka** is the experience of sorrow or the karma that causes sorrow.
* **Jugupsa** is the experience of disgust or the karma that causes disgust.

(D.P. 6, pp. 47-48)

* **Gati** is the transition from one existence to another. (Dhaval P. 1, p. 535) 

Page #62:
---------------------------
........
....... - Gommatasara Karmakanda-24
The state of being a human, where the soul attains the human category and its feelings and actions are in the form of a human, is called human existence. The state where the soul attains the divine category and its feelings and actions are in the form of divine existence, is called divine existence.
The karma that brings together the living beings in the above-mentioned states in a way that is similar to the non-deviating characteristics is called jati karma.
There are five types of jati karma - ekaindriya, dwiindriya, triindriya, chaturindriya and panchendriya jati.
The karma that causes the soul to take on a one-sense body is called ekaindriya jati. The karma that causes the soul to take on a two-sense body is called dwiindriya jati. The karma that causes the soul to take on a three-sense body is called triindriya jati. The karma that causes the soul to take on a four-sense body is called chaturindriya jati. The karma that causes the soul to take on a five-sense body is called panchendriya jati.
The karma that causes the formation of the body is called sharir karma. It has five types - audarik, vaikriyik, aharak, taijas and karman sharir. The karma that causes the formation of the audarik sharir is called audarik sharir. The karma that causes the formation of the vaikriyik sharir is called vaikriyik sharir. The karma that causes the formation of the aharak sharir is called aharak sharir. The karma that causes the formation of the taijas sharir is called taijas sharir. The karma that causes the formation of the karman sharir is called karman sharir.
The karma that causes the mutual connection of the regions of the pudgal skandha in the form of food, which are taken in due to the sharir karma, is called bandhan karma. It has five types, based on the types of audarik etc. And there are 15 types of breaking of the connection of audarik-audarik etc.
The karma that causes the regions of the audarik etc. bodies to become one, without any gaps, in the form of entering one field, is called sanghat karma.
The karma that causes the shape of the audarik etc. bodies to be formed is called sansthan karma. It has six types - sama chaturasra, nyagrodha parimandala, swati, kubjak, vaman and hundak sansthan. 1. Difference between bandhan and sanghat karma!
The mutual connection of the pudgal skandha of the audarik etc. bodies is the function of sharir bandhan karma. If sharir bandhan karma does not occur, then this body will become like a sand-made human body. The mutual entry and exit of the atoms of the audarik etc. bodies, making them one, without any gaps, is the function of sanghat karma. If sanghat karma does not occur, then the body will remain like a sesame seed laddu. The karma that causes the audarik etc. atoms, which are bound together by the one-form bandhan, to become smooth due to the karma that causes the audarya... 

Page #63:
---------------------------
..:.::
:.. Gotasar Karmakand-25
The karma that causes the differentiation of limbs is called Angopang Karma. It has three divisions - Audarik, Vaikriya and Aharak Angopang.
The karma that causes the specific binding of bones is called Sanhanan Karma. It has six divisions - Vajrarṣabhanārāc, Vajranārāc, Nārāc, Ardhanārāc, Kilita and Asamprapta Sṛpāṭikā Sanhanan.
Sanhanan is the name for the group of bones. The one that is bound is called Rṣabha and the one that is impenetrable like a vajra, i.e., which cannot be pierced, is called Vajra. Nārāc is the name for the nail. For example, there is an iron nail between the hinges of a door. Therefore, the body in which there are vajra bones, vajra rṣabha, vajra nārāc is called Vajrarṣabhanārāc Śarīra Sanhanan. In which there are no vajra bonds, it is bound by ordinary bonds, but the nail and bones are vajra; the body that arises from this is called Vajranārāc Śarīra Sanhanan. The karma that causes the union of bones nailed with ordinary nārāc without vajra is called Nārāc Śarīra Sanhanan. The karma that causes the union of bones to be half-nailed is called Ardhanārāc Śarīra Sanhanan. The karma that causes the bones to be not vajra, but they are caught together by means of a point and a hole is called Kilita Sanhanan. The karma that causes the bones to be bound together by nerves like the bones of a reptile is called Asamprapta Sṛpāṭikā Sanhanan Karma.
The karma that causes the color of the body is called Varṇa Karma. It has five divisions - Kṛṣṇa, Nīla, Rakta, Harita and Śukla.
The karma that causes the smell in the body is called Gandha Karma. It has two divisions - Sugandha and Durgandha.
The karma that causes the taste in the body is called Rasa Karma. It has five divisions - Tikta, Katu, Kaṣāya, Amla and Madhura.
The karma that causes the touch in the body is called Sparśa Karma. It has eight divisions - Karkasa, Mṛdu, Guru, Laghu, Śīta, Uṣṇa, Snigdha and Rukṣa. The karma that causes the body to retain the shape of the previous body in the movement of the body,
it gets the oneness of form is called Śarīra Sanghāta Karma. In essence, the body atoms come together due to the rise of Bandha Karma, but they remain with holes like the husk of sesame seeds. Due to the rise of Sanghāta, those same atoms become smooth like the husk of flour (or like the atoms inside a couch) everywhere one with each other (= without holes).
(Mūlācāra, p. 362-63, Part 2, Jñānapiṭha, Anuv. Pū. Jñānamati Ji) _ The branches are bound to the trunk of the tree, the arms are bound to the trunk, the fingers are bound to the arms. This is Bandha Karma. The absence of unnecessary holes in the body, except for the necessary holes, is the work of Sanghāta. (Ślo.vā, 7/63 Bhāṣā) 

Page #64:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-26

Anupurvi is said. It has four divisions - NarakagatyAnupurvi, TiryanchagatyAnupurvi, ManushyaGatyAnupurvi and DevagatyAnupurvi. The NarakagatyAnupurvi is the shape of the previous body from whose arising the body of the PanchendriyaParyaptaJiva who attains Narakagati arises. Similarly, know the other three also.

Agurulughunamakarma is that karma from whose arising the body does not fall down like a lump of iron and does not go up even though it is light like cotton wool. . . . . . 'Upeitya Pat: Upadhat:' The name of one's destruction is Upadhat. UpadhatanamaKarma is that karma from whose arising one's own destruction happens from one's own limbs. For example - big horns, long breasts, big belly etc.

ParghatanamaKarma is that karma from whose arising there are limbs capable of destroying others. For example - sharp horns, nails, poison in the fangs of snakes etc.

AtapanamaKarma is that karma from whose arising there is a body in the form of fire. This nature arises in the BadarpruthvikaayikaParyaptaJivas born in the disc of the sun. Or it also happens in the Suryakantmani.

UdyotanamaKarma is that karma from whose arising there is a body in the form of radiance. Its arising is found in the disc of the moon and stars and in the Tiryanchas like fireflies etc.

VihayogatinamKarma is that karma from whose arising there is movement in the sky. It has two divisions - Prashasta and AprashastaVihayogati.

TrasanamaKarma is that karma from whose arising birth happens in the Dwindriyadi Jivas. BadarnamaKarma is that karma from whose arising one gets a body that stops others and is stopped by others. That karma from whose arising there is fulfillment of food etc. 1. This kind of definition of Parghat is also found in KarmaPrakriti p. 31 (Jnanapeeth), Dhavala 6/59, Dhavala 13/364, H. Pu. 58/
263 Page 901 Go. Ka. Gatha 33's Kannada and Sanskrit commentaries Go. Ka. 21 Pandit Manoharlalji Shi. Sha. commentary. Pra. Pan. San. p. 558-59, J. Si. Pra. p. 69, T. Sa. 5/37 (Dr. Pannalal Sahityacharya) (Shwe. Sabhashya Tattvarthadhigam Bhashya 8/12/371) etc. According to this definition, Parghat is proved to be of auspicious nature. But in Sarvarth Siddhi 8/11 p. 297 (Jnanapeeth), the definition of Parghat is given like this - ParghatanamaKarma is that karma from whose arising there is destruction by means of weapons etc. (Yanimittah: Par-Shastradaoghat: Tatparghatanama) and this kind of definition is also given in Ra. Va. 8/11/14 p. 488, Shlo. Va. 8/11 Part 7 page 64 (Kunthusagar Granthamala). From this, Parghat nature gets inauspiciousness. In Mulaachar 1237 Acharavritti, both kinds of definitions of Parghat are collected. In Shloka Vartika Part 7 p. 64-65, in the language commentary, it is written that since Parghat is counted in the auspicious nature, therefore this definition of Parghat is good that "ParghatanamaKarma is that karma from whose arising the limbs like sharp horns, nails, fangs etc. which destroy others are formed." 2. Mulaachar p. 366 Part 2 Jnanapeeth 

Page #65:
---------------------------
Gommatasar Karmakanda - 27

The karma called 'Paryapta' is complete. There are six types of Paryaptis - Ahar, Sharira, Indriya, Shwasochchhwas, Bhasha, and Man Paryapti.

The Sharira karma, which gives rise to a body, is called 'Pratiksha Sharira karma' when it gives rise to a body whose owner is one and the same. The Sharira karma, which gives rise to Rasa (plasma) and other Dhatus (tissues) in their respective forms, is called 'Sthira karma'. It is said:

"From Rasa comes Rakta (blood), from Rakta comes Maas (flesh), from Maas comes Meda (fat), from Meda comes Asthi (bone), from Asthi comes Majja (marrow), and from Majja comes Shukra (semen). And from Shukra comes progeny." (1)

"Vata (air), Pitta (bile), and Shleeshma (phlegm), Sira (veins), Snayu (tendons), and Charma (skin), and Jatharagni (digestive fire) - these seven are called Upadhatus (sub-tissues) by the wise." (2)

**Meaning of the verses:**

Rasa transforms into Rakta, Rakta into Maas, Maas into Meda, Meda into Asthi, Asthi into Majja, and Majja into Shukra. These seven Dhatus transform into each other in a sequential manner. It takes 30 days for these Dhatus to form, so each Dhatu takes 4 and 2/7th days to form. However, these seven Dhatus do not disappear; they remain in their respective forms. Therefore, this is called Sthira karma.

Similarly, Vata, Pitta, Shleeshma, Sira, Snayu, Charma, and Udaraagni (digestive fire) - these seven Upadhatus also remain stable in the body, transforming into each other.

The karma that gives rise to beautiful (handsome) limbs like the head, etc., is called 'Shubha karma'. Or, the limbs above the navel are considered auspicious. The karma that gives rise to affection from others is called 'Subhaga karma'. Or, the karma that gives rise to good fortune. The karma that gives rise to a pleasing voice is called 'Susvara karma'. The karma that gives rise to a body with radiance and luster is called 'Aadeya karma'. Or, the karma that gives rise to acceptance by the masses is also called Aadeya karma. The karma that gives rise to the fame of one's virtuous qualities in the world is called 'Yasha Kirti karma'. The karma that gives rise to the formation of limbs, organs, etc., in the body is called 'Nirman karma'. It has two types - Sthan Nirman and Praman Nirman. The karma that gives rise to the placement of eyes, etc., in their respective places as per the requirements of the species is called Sthan Nirman. And the karma that gives rise to the limbs, etc., in their appropriate size and proportion, based on the species and time, is called Praman Nirman. The karma that gives rise to the Arhatpada (state of an Arhat) is called 'Tirthankara karma'.

The karma that gives rise to a being with one sense organ is called 'Sthavara karma'. The karma that creates the subtle body is called 'Sookshma karma'. The karma that is responsible for the absence of the completeness of the six Paryaptis is called 'Aaparyapta karma'. One body...

1. S. Si. 8/11 Tika
2. Dh. Pu. 6 p. 63.
3. Dh. Pu. 6 p. 65.

Page #66:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda - 28

Anantjeeva Swami is the one who experiences an infinite number of bodies. The karma that causes this is called **Sadharana Namakarma**. It arises in **Nigodajeevas**. 

**Asthiranama Karma** is the karma that causes the elements (dhatu) and sub-elements (upadhatu) to be unstable, meaning they constantly transform into each other. 

**Ashubhanamkarma** is the karma that causes the body to have unpleasant and unattractive features. Alternatively, it is the karma that causes the lower parts of the body, below the navel, to be inauspicious.

**Durbhaganamkarma** is the karma that causes one to be disliked by others, even if they possess good qualities like beauty. Alternatively, it is the karma that causes misfortune.

**Duhswaranamkarma** is the karma that causes one to have an unpleasant voice.

**Anadeyanamkarma** is the karma that causes one to have a body that is not attractive. Alternatively, it is the karma that causes one to not be accepted by the majority.

**Avasha Kirtinamkarma** is the karma that causes one to have a bad reputation.

**Uchchagotra** is the karma that causes one to be born in a family with good conduct. **Nichagotra** is the opposite.

**Danantarayakarma** is the karma that causes one to be unable to give charity, even if they have the desire to do so.

**Labhanantarayakarma** is the karma that causes one to be unable to gain profit, even if they desire it.

**Bhoganantarayakarma** is the karma that causes one to be unable to enjoy pleasures, even if they desire them.

**Upbhoganantarayakarma** is the karma that causes one to be unable to consume food, even if they desire it.

**Veeryantarayakarma** is the karma that causes obstacles in the production of semen.

Further, the **Abhedavivaksha** (non-differentiation) in the **Uttarprakritis** (higher natures) of **Namakarma** are described as follows:

**Dehe Avinabhavi, Bandhanasanghad Idi Abandhudaya. Varnachaukke Abhinne, Gahide Chattari Bandhudaye.** || 34 ||

**Meaning:** The five **bandhas** (bondages) and five **sayatas** (types of bodies) are included within the five bodies. Therefore, these ten **prakritis** (natures) do not have **bandha** (bondage) or **udaya** (arising). Similarly, the **prakritis** like **varna** (color) are included within the **varnachautushka** (four basic colors). Therefore, only four **prakritis** have **bandha** and **udaya**.

**Note:** In **Ra.Ba. 8/11/34-35**, it is written that the karma that causes the body to remain stable even after performing difficult austerities like fasting is called **Sthiranama**. The karma that causes the body to become thin even after performing light austerities like fasting or due to exposure to cold or heat is called **Asthiranama**. 

Page #67:
---------------------------
## Gommatasara Karmakanda - 29

**Special Meaning:** Among the five bodies, which are the divisions of the **namakarma**, the **audarika** etc., are included in their respective **bandha** and **sanyaat**, because they have an inseparable relationship with the bodies. Therefore, the **bandha-udaya** of these ten **prakritis** occurs along with the bodies. Similarly, the twenty **prakritis** of **varna** etc. are also not different in **bandha-udaya** because they are contained in the fourfold **varna-rasa-gandha-sparsa**. However, they are counted separately in **sattva**. Therefore, **bandha** and **udaya** are said to be of only four **prakritis**, namely **varna** etc.

Now, the **bandha-udaya** and **sattva**-like **prakritis** are described in four verses:

**Five, nine, two, twenty-six, four, sixty-four, two, and five, these are the bandha prakritis in order.**

**Special Meaning:** Five **jnanaavarana**, nine **darshanavarana**, two **vedaniya**, twenty-six **mohaniya**, because **samyaktva** and **misra** **prakritis** do not have **bandha**, only **udaya** and **sattva** occur. And four **ayu**, sixty-four **namakarma**, because the five **bandhanas** and five **sanghatas** are included in the five bodies, and the sixteen **prakritis** of **varna** etc. are included in the **varna** fourfold, so these twenty-six **prakritis** are not counted separately in **bandha**. Two of **gotra** and five of **antaraya**, thus 120 **prakritis** are said to be **bandha**-worthy.

**Five, nine, two, twenty-eight, four, sixty-four, two, and five, these are the udaya prakritis in order.**

**Meaning:** Five **jnanaavarana**, nine **darshanavarana**, two **vedaniya**, twenty-eight **mohaniya**, four **ayu**, sixty-four **namakarma**, two **gotra**, and five **antaraya**, all these together make 122 **prakritis** that are **udaya**-worthy. Now, the difference and non-difference of **bandha** and **udaya**-worthy **prakritis** are explained:

**In terms of difference, there are one hundred and forty-six bandha-worthy prakritis, excluding misra and samyaktva prakritis. In terms of non-difference, there are 120 bandha-worthy prakritis. In udaya, there are 148 prakritis in terms of difference, but 122 prakritis are udaya-worthy in terms of non-difference.**

**1. Pra. Pan. San. Pra. Samu. Adhi. Gatha 5** 

Page #68:
---------------------------
Gommatasar Karmakanda-30
Five, nine, two, twenty-eight, and four, in this order, are ninety-nine.
Two, five, and the aforementioned, these are one hundred and forty-eight sattvayoga.
Half - five jnanaavarana, nine darshanavarana, two vedanoy, twenty-eight mohaniya, four ayu, ninety-nine.
Namekarma, two gotra, and five antaraya, these one hundred and forty-eight prakritis are sattvayoga.
Further, in ghatiyakarma, there are two types: sarvaghati and deshghati. First, we will discuss sarvaghati.
The karma prakritis are called:
Kevalananaavarana, dasanchakkam, kasayabarasan,
Miccham cha sarvaghadi, sammamichcham abandhamhi. ||39||
Meaning - Kevaljnanaavarana, six darshanavarana, twelve kasaya, and mithyatva, these twenty prakritis are bandha.
In comparison, they are sarvaghati, but samyagmithyatva prakriti is sarvaghati in comparison to abandha.
Special meaning - Kevaljnanaavarana, kevaldarshanavarana, styanagridhi, etc., five nidra, and anantanubandhi, apratyakhyan, pratyakhyan, krodha, mana, maya, lobha, these twelve kasaya, and mithyatva, these twenty bandhayoga prakritis are sarvaghati.
And samyagmithyatva prakriti is somewhat sarvaghati, but not bandhayoga. It is sarvaghati in the form of jatyanta in udaya and sattva. Therefore, twenty-one prakritis are sarvaghati in comparison to udaya and sattva.
Then, the deshghati prakritis are called:
Nanaavarana chaukkam, tidasanam, sammagam cha sanjalanam.
Nav nokasaya vigdham, chhanvisa deshadhadio. ||40||
Meaning - Four jnanaavarana, three darshanavarana, samyaktva prakriti, four sanjalan, nine nokasaya, and five antaraya, these twenty-six prakritis are deshghati.
Special meaning - Mati, shruta, avadhi, man:paryaya, these four jnanaavarana, chakshu, achakshu, avadhi, these three darshanavarana, samyaktva, and sanchalan, krodha, mana, maya, lobha, hasya, rati, arati, shoka, bhaya, jugupsa, strived, punved, napumsakaved, these fourteen mohaniya, dan, labha, bhog, upbhog, and virya, these five antaraya, thus, all together, twenty-six prakritis are deshghati.
Doubt - Why are these twenty-six prakritis called deshghati?
Solution - These twenty-six prakritis do not completely destroy the jeevagunas, therefore, they are deshghati. 

Page #69:
---------------------------
Gommatasar Karmakanda-31

Just as the karmas like matigyaanavaran etc. continue to function even when they arise in the 12th gunasthan, these natures are called deshghati. And in the kshayopaashmik bhavas, their deshghati competitors also arise.

By mentioning the sarvaghati-deshghati differences of ghatiya karmas, the two types of aghatiya karmas, prashasht and aprashasht, are described. First, the prashasht (punya) natures are described in two verses:

Saadam tinnevaau, uchvam narasuradugam cha panchindi. Deha bandhan sanghaadangovaangai vannachou. ||41||
Sapcharatjarimhai, avghaluunaguruchakka saggamana.
Tasabarassatthsatthi, baadalambhedodo sattha. ||42|| Jummam ||

Meaning: Saataavedaniya, tinaayu, uchchgotra, manushya gati, manushya gaty anupurvi, devagati, devagaty anupurvi, panchendriya jaati, panch sharira, panch bandhan, panch sayaat, tin ango paang, varn chatushk, sama chaturasra sansthan, vajrarashabhanaraach sanhanan, upghat bina agurulghushtak, prashasht viha yogati, tras aadi baarah ye adasath prakritiyaan bhed vivaksha se hain tatha abhed vivaksha se punya prakritiyaan 42 hi hain.

Special Meaning: In the above verse, the punya prakritiyaan mentioned as tinaayu are tiryanch, manushya and devaayu. In varn chatushk, varn, gandh, ras and sparsh are included, but here only the auspicious varn etc. chatushk are to be considered. When these are differentiated, there are 5 types of varn, 2 types of gandh, 5 types of ras and 8 types of sparsh, making a total of 20 types. This is according to bhed vivaksha, but according to abhed vivaksha, only the auspicious varn etc. four are to be considered. Upghat bina agurulghushtak means agurulghu, paradhat, uchchvas, aatap and udyot, these 5 prakritiyaan are to be known. The 12 prakritiyaan like sa, baadar, paryaapt, pratyek sharira, sthira, shubh, subhag, suswar, aadey, yashas kirti, nirman and teerthankar are as follows. According to bhed vivaksha, there are 68 prakritiyaan, and according to abhed vivaksha, there are 42 prakritiyaan. This means that the 5 bandhan and 5 sangyaat are inseparable from the 5 shariras, so they are not counted separately, making 10 prakritiyaan less. And from the 20 prakritiyaan of varn etc., only the varn chatushk is considered, making 16 prakritiyaan less. Thus, by reducing these 26 prakritiyaan, there are only 42 prakritiyaan according to abhed vivaksha, and by including these 26, there are 68 prakritiyaan according to bhed vivaksha. Here, the punya (prashasht) prakritiyaan are mentioned by listing their names separately. This same point is mentioned by Umaswami Acharya in Tattvarth Sutra using a concise sutra: "Saataavedaniya, shubhaayu, naama karma ki shubh prakritiyaan tatha shubh gotra (uchchgotra) are punya roop. 1. "Sadvedya shubhaayur naama gotraani punyam" Tattvarth Sutra. 8/25! 

Page #70:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-32

Now, two verses describe the unrefined natures:

"Ghadi, nichamasada, niraya, nirayatiriyadug, jaadisanthaanasanhadin, chadupanapanaga, cha vannachou." ||43|| "Uvaghadamasaggamana, thavaradasaya, cha appasattha hu. Bandhudaya, padi bhede, adanaudisaya, duchadarasididare." ||44||

**Meaning:**

The 47 natures of the Ghatiyakarma, as well as the low lineage, asatavedaniya, narakayu, narakagati, narakagaty anupurvi, tiryanchagati, tiryanchagaty anupurvi, 4 jati, 5 santhana, 5 sanhanana, (inauspicious) varn chatushk, upghata, aprashastha vihayogati, and 10 thavaradi are unrefined (sinful) natures.

From the perspective of differentiation, there are 98 natures of bondage and 100 natures of emergence. From the perspective of non-differentiation, when the 16 natures of varnadi are subtracted, there are 82 natures of bondage and 84 natures of emergence.

**Special Meaning:**

Here, the natures of the Ghatiyakarma are mentioned as unrefined natures. The Ghatiyakarma themselves are unrefined. Their 47 natures are: 5 jnanaavarana, 9 darshanavarana, 28 mohaniya, and 5 antaraya.

And, low lineage, asatavedaniya, narakayu, narakagati, narakagaty anupurvi, tiryanchagati, tiryanchagaty anupurvi, 4 ekendriyadi jati, 5 nyagrodhamandaladi santhana (excluding sama chaturasra santhana), 5 vajranarachadi sanhanana (excluding vajrarashabhanaracha), inauspicious varna, gandha, rasa, sparsa, upghata, aprashastha vihayogati, thavara, sukshma, aparyapta, sadharana, asthira, ashubha, durbhaga, duhsvara, anadeya, and ayashaskirti.

When these 16 varnadi are subtracted, there are 84 natures of emergence. And, when the samyagmithyatva and samyaktava natures are subtracted from the 47 Ghatiyakarma, there are 82 natures of bondage.

From the perspective of differentiation, when the 16 varnadi are added, there are 98 natures of bondage and 100 natures of emergence. When the samyagmithyatva and samyaktava natures are added, there are 100 natures of sin (unrefined).

**Doubt:**

In Gom.K.Ga.Sa. 41, tiryancha ayu is mentioned as a refined nature, but here in verse 43, tiryanchagati is mentioned as unrefined. What is the reason for this?

**Solution:**

No one desires to go to tiryanchagati, therefore it is considered an unrefined nature. However, once in tiryanchagati, no one desires to die, therefore tiryancha ayu is considered a refined nature.

No one desires to go to narakagati, nor does anyone desire to stay there, therefore both narakayu and narakagati are considered unrefined natures.

When King Shubha learned that he would become a dung beetle after death, he told his son to kill it, because he did not want to go to tiryanchagati. However, when the king was reborn as a dung beetle, his son went to kill him, but the beetle entered the dung to protect itself, because it did not want to die (it did not want to end its lifespan). This shows that tiryancha ayu is a refined nature. 

Page #71:
---------------------------
## Gommatasar Karmakanda - 33

Now, the functions of the infinite-binding (anantaanubandhi) and other passions (kashayas) are explained:

**Verse 45:**

The first infinite-binding passion (anantaanubandhi kashaya) destroys right faith (samyaktvam), the second, non-rejection (apratyakhyan) destroys the conduct of the country (deshcharitra), the third, rejection (pratyakhyan) destroys the conduct of all (sakalcharitra), and the fourth, agitation (sanjvalan) destroys the conduct as it is known (yathakyatcharitra). Therefore, their names are according to their qualities.

**Explanation:**

Because it is the cause of infinite transmigration, false belief (mithyatva) is infinite. That which is connected with it is infinite-binding. Non-rejection destroys slight restraint (ishatsanyam) and restraint of the country (deshasanyam). Rejection does not allow for complete restraint (sakalsanyam). Agitation is the passion that manifests with restraint as one (sam), being uniform. Similarly, the remaining nine passions (navakashaya) and knowledge-obscuration (jnanavarana) etc. also have meaningful names.

**Verse 46:**

Now, the duration of the latent impressions (vasanakala) of the passions is explained:

The duration of the latent impression of agitation is an antarmukhuta (a very short period), of rejection is a fortnight (paksha), of non-rejection is six months (chhammasa), and of the infinite-binding is countable, uncountable, and infinite (sankha-sankhana-tabhava).

**Explanation:**

The name vasanakala is given to the duration for which the impression of the passion remains, even though there is no manifestation (udaya). For example, a man becomes angry and then engages in some work, causing his anger to subside. Now, his anger is not manifesting, but the latent impression (vasana) remains, because he does not have a feeling of forgiveness towards the person he was angry with. Similarly, one should know the duration of the latent impression of all passions.

**Verse 47:**

The karmic effects of the pudgala (matter) are explained:

The 50 karmas from body karma (dehakarma) to touch karma (sparshakarma), and the pairs of creation (niminana), heat (atpa), stability (thira), auspiciousness (shubha), and each (pratyek), and the three of heavy (aguru), light (laghu), etc., these 62 karmas are the karmic effects of the pudgala. 

Page #72:
---------------------------
Gommatasar Karmakanda-34 Special Meaning - Body 5, Bondage 5, Aggregation 5, Institution 6, Limb 3, Consolidation 6, Color 5, | Smell 2, Taste 5, Touch 8 these 50 and Construction-Heat-Illumination-Stable-Unstable, Good-Bad, Each Body, Ordinary Body, Heavy-Light, Injury and External Injury these all 62 natures are Pudgala-Vipaki, because their fruit falls in Pudgala (body), like from the rise of Body-Karma, Pudgala body-form transforms ... ..... ....... ... ... :: .. .. ... ... . Further, Bhava-Vipaki-Kshetra-Vipaki and Jiva-Vipaki natures are said -
Auni Bhava-Vivai Khetta-Vivai Ya Anupuviyo.
Attathari Avasesa Jiva-Vivai Munayavva ||48|| Meaning - All four Ayus are Bhava-Vipaki and all four Anupuvi are Kshetra-Vipaki. Their rise happens only in the disintegration-motion. Jiva-Vipaki natures are 78, because those which are the cause of producing the hell-etc. states of the Jiva are called Jiva-Vipaki. Now the names of Jiva-Vipaki natures are said -
Vedaniyagodhaadiinekaavannantu Naamapaydiinam.
Sattaavisaa Cede Attathari Jiva-Vivai ||49|| Meaning - Two of Vedaniya, two of Gotra, 47 of Ghatiya-Karma (these 51 natures and), 27 of Nama-Karma these all 78 natures are Jiva-Vipaki.
Special Meaning - Vedaniya-Karma is also Pudgala-Vipaki, because it mixes external material. "Jiva-Poggal Vishaittantu Saadaavedaniyassa Paavedi Tiche Na, Ittattado" If it is said that Saataavedaniya-Karma gets Jiva-Vipaki and Pudgala-Vipaki-ness, there is no fault in that, because this is desirable
The 27 natures of Nama-Karma mentioned in Jiva-Vipaki natures are said -
Tiththayaran Ussasan Baadarapjazzattasusssaraadejam.
Jasatasavihayasubhagadu Chaugai Panajai Sagavisaa ||50|| Meaning - Tirthankara, Ucchvasa, Baadar, Sukshma, Paryapta, Aparyapta, Susvara-Dusvara, Aadeya-Anaadeya, !
1. Dh. Pu. 6 p. 36. 

Page #73:
---------------------------
Gommatasar Karmakanda-35:  There are 27 types of name-karma, namely: Yasaskirti-Ayaskirti, Bas-Sthavar, Prashast-Aprashast Vihayogati, Subhag-Dur Bhag, Charagati, Panchjati. These 27 types are also called:

Gadi Jaadi Ussasan Vihayagati Tasatiyan Jugalam Cha.
Subhagadichaujuugalam Tiththayaram Chedi Sagavinsam. ||51||

Meaning: Charagati, Panchjati, Ucchvas, Vihayogati, Sa-Badar-Paryapt-Subhag-Suswar-Adey and Yasaskirti's pair, and Tirthankar, these are the 27 types of name-karma that are Jeevvipaki. Further, in the next 34 verses, the four types of Nikshepa are explained, targeting the students of medium interest.

Naam Thavana Daviyan Bhavoti Chauvvihan Have Kamma.
Payadi Pavam Kamma Malanti Sanna Hu Naamamalam. ||52||

Meaning:  General Karma is of four types based on name-establishment, substance, and state.  Prakriti-Papkarma and Mala are called Naamamala. These should be known as name-nikshepa karma.

Special Meaning:  Nikshepa is the act of placing something in a particular category or decision, i.e., deciding an undecided thing by its name, etc.  The complete reason for name-nikshepa is the speaker's intention.  For example, a father can name his son whatever he wants, just like the speaker, without considering the qualities, names things according to his own will for the sake of public recognition.  The substance, qualities, actions, and associated substances, and the substance that is part of the whole, are considered other causes.  (Shlo. Va. Part 2, Page 171, Verse 2)  Without considering other causes, the name arises solely from the speaker's intention. (Shlo. Va, 2/170)  Therefore, the naming done solely based on the speaker's intention is considered name-nikshepa by the Acharyas.  Name-nikshepa is not associated with body, caste, qualities, actions, substance, definition, etc.  That is, without considering caste, etc., any object can be given any name solely based on the speaker's intention, and that is name-nikshepa.  For example, the word "horse" is used for specific animals based on caste.  But using the word "horse" for a human, a part of a gun, or a piece of coal is name-nikshepa.  Similarly, the word "crow" is used for a specific bird based on caste, but using the word "crow" for a part of the throat or a stopper in a bottle is name-nikshepa.  The cause of the word is different from the intended meaning, and caste, qualities, etc., are other causes.  Without considering these other causes, but based on the intended meaning, the naming done by the speakers is name-nikshepa.  Therefore, naming based on the inherent qualities from the beginning of time, considering caste, substance, etc., is not name-nikshepa.  That is, name-nikshepa does not require inherent qualities from the beginning of time, nor does it require caste, etc. (Shlo. Va, Part 2, Page 262) 

Page #74:
---------------------------
## Gommatasar Karmakanda-36

Naming is called **namakarma**. The four other causes of **namanikshepa** are: **jati**, **dravya**, **guna**, and **kriya**.

**Jati-nimittak** names are like **gau** (cow) and **manushya** (human). **Samyoga-dravya-nimittak** names are like **dandi** (staff-bearer), **chhatri** (umbrella-bearer), and **mauli** (wearing a crown). **Samavaya-dravya-nimittak** names are like **kana** (blind) and **kubada** (hunchback). **Guna-nimittak** names are like **krishna** (black) and **rudhira** (blood). **Kriya-nimittak** names are like **gayak** (singer) and **nartaka** (dancer).

Apart from these four causes, there is no other cause for the occurrence of **sanjna**.

The **karma** word, which is devoid of the meaning of the object, is called **namakarma** in the form of **sthapana**.

**Sarisasarise davve madina jivattthiyam khujam kammam.
Tam edanti padittha thavana tam thavana kammam. ||53||**

**Meaning:** The general **karma** that is present in all the regions of a living being due to the establishment by one's own intellect in a similar or dissimilar object, is called **sthapana karma**.

**Special Meaning:** **Sthapana-nikshepa** is of two types: **sadbhavasthapana** and **asadbhavasthapana**. In these two, the object that is established should be understood as **sadbhavasthapana** in the object that takes on the form of that object, and the object that is established should be understood as **asadbhavasthapana** in the object that is devoid of the form of that object.

Further, the nature of **dravya-nikshepa** is described as follows:

**Davve kammam duviham agamanuoagamanti tappadham.
Kammaagamparijanugajeevo uvajoga parihino. ||54||**

**Meaning:** There are two types of **dravya-nikshepa karma**: **agama-dravya-karma** and **no-agama-dravya-karma**. The living being who knows the **karma-rupa-shastra** but does not use it in the present is called **agama-dravya-karma-nikshepa**.

The **karma** that is not **agama-dravya-nikshepa** is described as follows:

**Januga sarira bhaviyam tavvadirittam tu hodi jam vidiyam.
Taththa sariram tiviham tiyakalagayanti do sugama. ||55||**

**Meaning:** The body that is formed by **januga** (knowledge) and is devoid of **tavv** (attachment) is called **vidiya** (knowledge). This body is of three types and is destroyed in three periods.

**1.
Gh. Pu. 1 Pr. 17|
2. Dh. Pu. 1 Pr. 20.**

Page #75:
---------------------------
## Gommatamar Karmakanda - 37...

**Meaning:** There are three types of Noagamadravya Karma - Jnayakashayara, Bhaavi and Tadvyatirikt. Among these, Jnayakashayara has three types - Bhoot, Bhaavi and Vartaman. Of these, two are easy to understand.

**Special Meaning:** The body of a being who knows the nature of Karma is called Jnayakashayara Noagamadravya Karma. It has three types - Bhoot, Vartaman and Bhaavi. The body with which a being knows the nature of Karma in the present is called Vartamanshayara. The body that it left behind is called Bhootshayara and the body that it will take in the future is called Bhaavishaya.

Just as the Rajaparyaya is the basis for the attainment of the form of a king in both the future and past lives of a being, similarly, the Karmaparyaya is the basis for the attainment of the form of Karma in both the past and future bodies of a being who has undergone transformation.

**Next, the types of Jnayakabhootshayara are described:**

**Bhudam tu chudam chaidam chadanti tedha chudam sapakena.
Padidam kadali ghadaparicchagena unayam hodi. ||56||**

**Meaning:** There are three types of Jnayakabhootshayara - Chyut, Chyavit and Tyakt. The body that is shed due to the completion of its lifespan without any other reason is called Chyut. It is devoid of Kadali ghat and Sannyas.

**The characteristic of Kadali ghat:**

**Visaveyanarattakhay bhayasatthagghaanasankileshehin.
Ussasahaaranaam nirohado chhijjade aau. ||57||**

**Meaning:** The depletion of lifespan due to consuming poison, pain, loss of blood, fear, injury, distress, cessation of breathing, lack of food, etc. is called Kadali ghat (untimely death).

1. For a detailed explanation, refer to Dharma Purana 1, pages 22 to 26.
2. Dharma Purana 1, page 23, Bhavapahudu Gatha 25.
3. King Shrenik attained Kshayik-Samyagdarshan. A being with Samyagdristi cannot be bound by the Karma of Naraka (hell). Therefore, King Shrenik's binding to Naraka Karma must have occurred before attaining Samyagdristi. King Shrenik did not die an untimely death because untimely death does not occur after the binding of the lifespan of the next life. It is said: "Par-bhaviyaauae badde pacchaa bhujjamaanauassa kadali ghado natthi jaha saruvena cheva vededitti." (Dharma 10/237) After the binding of the lifespan related to the next life, there is no untimely death for the lifespan being enjoyed, but it experiences the pain for as long as it was bound. 

Page #76:
---------------------------
Gommatsar Karmakanda-38
Special Meaning - In addition to the reasons mentioned in the verse, there are many other reasons that lead to untimely death. For example, "death due to cold, fire, water, falling from very high mountains or trees, and breaking of limbs, and death due to yogadharana for the sake of rasavidya and various incidents of injustice, etc. are called kadali ghatamaraṇa." Now the characteristics of the abandoned-rejected and the body of the knower of the past are described -
Kadali ghadasamedam cha agaviheenam tu chaidami di hodi.
Ghadeṇa va aghadeṇa va padidam chagena chattami di. ||58|| Meaning - The knower whose past body has been destroyed by untimely death, but who is devoid of renunciation, is called chavit. The one who has been abandoned with or without kadali ghat, but with renunciation, is called tyakt. Now the divisions of the tyakt body are described -
Bhattapainainginipauggavidhihim chattami di tivham.
Bhattapainaa tivhaa jahaṇṇamajjhimavara ya taha. ||59|| Meaning - There are three divisions of the tyakt body - bhaktapratijna, ingini, and prayogya vidhi. Among these, there are also three divisions of bhaktapratijna - utkrisht, madhyam, and jaghanya. Now the time of the jaghanya and other divisions is described -
Bhattapainaaivhi jahaṇṇamantomuhuttayam hodi.
Varisavarisaa jettha tammje hodi majjhimaya. ||60|| Meaning - The time of the bhaktapratijna, i.e., the renunciation that occurs due to the vow of giving up food, is from jaghanya to antarmuhurta, and for utkrisht it is 12 years. And from antarmuhurta onwards, the time increases by one muhurta each time, and all the divisions up to twelve years are to be known as the divisions of madhyam kala.
1. Himajalanasalilaguruyar pabbayataruruhanpadanbhangehi.
Rasavijja joya dharana anayapasanagehi vivihehi. ||26|| Bhavaprabhrut. || 

Page #77:
---------------------------
Gommatsar Karmakanda-39
Characteristics of Ingini and Prayopgamana (Prayogya Vidhi) -
Appovyaravekkham paravyarunamaginomaranam.
Saparovyarahinam maranam paovagamana midi ||1|| Meaning - At the time of death, one should take care of their own body, not by others. The death that occurs in this way is called Inginimaran. And to leave the body without taking care of it by others or oneself, this type of death is called Prayopgamana maran. Further, the second aspect of Noaagamadravya is called -
Bhaviyanti bhaviyakale kammaagamajanago sa jo jivo.
Janugasarira bhaviyam evam hoditti nidhi ||32|| Meaning - The being who will be the knower of the karma-svarupa-agama in the future, that being is the jnanak-bhavi-shariri. Thus, the characteristics of the bhavi-jnanak-shariri have been stated by the Sarvagna. Further, the third aspect of Noaagamadravya karma, 'tadvyatirikt', is called -
Tavvadirittam duviham kamma nokammamidi tahin kamma.
Kammasaruvendagaya kamma davvam have niyama ||63|| Meaning - There are two aspects of tadvyatirikt - karma-tadvyatirikt and nokarma-tadvyatirikt. The pudgaladravya that has become the root of jnana-avaran etc. and the uttaraprakriti-rupa of mati-jnana-avaran etc. is called karma-tadvyatirikt-noaagamadravya-karma.
Then, the characteristics of nokarma-tadvyatirikt and the aspects of bhavana-nikshepa-rupa-karma are stated -
Kammadavvadannam davvam nokammadavvamidi hodi.
Bhave kammam duviham agamaanoagamamti have ||64|| 1. 'Janugasariri' iti pratibhati. 2. Jiva cannot be the body, it can be the shariri. Therefore, the word shariri is written here. In the gatha, 'Janug-sariri bhaviyam' has been written by the lipikara instead of 'Janugasarira bhaviyam' and the same tradition has continued. It seems that the tradition of misinterpretation of meaning has been going on due to the omission of one matra, because the description of the future body has already been done by the Acharya himself in gatha 55, here the topic of bhavi-jiva (shariri) is available. 

Page #78:
---------------------------
Gommatsar Karmakanda-40

Meaning - The external cause, which is a substance different from the substance transformed by karma, is the non-karma, non-agamic substance-karma. There are two types of bhavana-nikshepa karma - agamic bhavana karma and non-agamic bhavana karma. The nature of agamic bhavana nikshepa karma is -

"The jiva who knows the agamic (scripture) that expounds the nature of karma and is engaged in the contemplation of that scripture in the present time, should be known as agamic bhavana karma."

Further, non-agamic bhavana nikshepa is called -

"The jiva who is experiencing the fruits of karma is non-agamic bhavana karma."

Thus, in terms of nikshepa, ordinary karma should be known by rule as four types.

Karma types in terms of nikshepa:

| Name | Establishment | Substance | Form | Non-form | Agamic Substance | Non-agamic Substance | Agamic Bhavana | Non-agamic Bhavana | Knower Body | Future | Other than that | Past | Present | Future |
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
| Karma | Non-karma | Bhakt-pratijna | Ingini | Prayopgamana | N | Medium | Medium | Inferior | Excellent | Excellent | Time | Time |

Page #79:
---------------------------
Gommatasar Karmakanda-41 now describes the differences in the four depositions of name, etc., in the original and subsequent natures -
Mūluttarapayadīṇam ṇāmādi evameva ṇavari tu.
Sagṇāmeṇa ya ṇāmaṁ ṭhavaṇā daviyaṁ have bhāvo. ||67|| Meaning - The original nature of karma is eight and the subsequent nature is one hundred and forty-eight. There are four depositions of name, etc., in both of these. Their nature is like that of general karma, but the special feature is that the name, establishment, substance and भावनिक्षेप are according to the name of the nature. There is some special feature in the above statement, so it is said -
Mūluttarapayadīṇam ṇāmādi cauvvihaṁ have sugamṁ.
Vajjittā ṇokammaṁ ṇoāgamabhāvakaṁmaṁ ca. ||68|| Meaning - It is easy to know the four depositions of name, etc., of the original and subsequent natures, but it is difficult to understand the nature of nokarma and noāgamabhāvakaṁma.
Special meaning - Earlier, two types of substance deposition were made, āgama and noāgama. There are three types of noāgama, namely, jñānakāya, bhāvi and tadvyatirikta. There are two types of tadvyatirikta, karma and nokarma. The word 'nokarmadravya karma' should be understood as nokarma tadvyatirikta noāgamadravya. The substance, field, time, being and भाव which are the cause of the fruit in the form of the rise of the nature, should be understood as the nokarmadravya karma of those respective natures. Now, first of all, the nokarma of the original natures is said -
Paḍpaḍihārasiṁmajjā āhāraṁ deha uccaṇīcaṁga.
Bhaṇḍārī mūlāṇam ṇokammaṁ daviyakammaṁ tu. ||69|| Meaning - The nokarmadravya of jñānāvaraṇakarma is cloth and the nokarmadravya of the remaining seven karmas are, in order, restraint, sword, liquor, food, body, high-low body and storekeeper, these eight types should be known.
Special meaning - The nokarmadravya of jñānāvaraṇakarma is the cloth that is wrapped around the object, which prevents the knowledge of the object. The nokarmadravya of darśanāvaraṇakarma is the doorkeeper appointed at the door, who does not allow the observation of the self-nature, which is like the king. That is, it does not allow the inward-directed light of consciousness. The nokarma of vedanīyakarma is the honey-filled sword, which is the cause of pleasure and pain for the rise of vedanīyakarma. 

Page #80:
---------------------------
Gommatsar Karmakanda-42

Mohaniya's nokarma is madya, which destroys the qualities of samyagdarshan, etc., of the jiva for the rise of mohaniya. The nokarma of ka is four types of food, which is the cause of the strength of the body, hence it is the cause of the state in the body. The nokarma of namakarma is audarik, etc., body. The nokarma of gotrakarma is dravya, high-low body, which reveals the high-low kula for the rise of gotrak. The nokarma of antarayakarma is dravya, bhandari, which obstructs the bhog-upbhog-shaped object for the final karma-udaya. Further, in the Uttar Prakritis, the nokarma of the Uttar Bhedas of Jnanavarana are first mentioned -

Padavisayaphudi davvam madisudavaghdadkaranasanjuttam.
Madisudavohanam pun nokamm daviyakamam tu ||70||

Meaning - The substances like varu, etc., which cover the nature of the object, are the nokarma of matijnanavarana. Indriyavishayai Shruta Jnanavarana's nokarma are those which do not allow Shruta Jnan to happen.

Ohimanpajjavamanam padighdanimittsankilesayar.
Jam bajjhatam tam khalu nokamm kevale natthi ||71||

Meaning - The external object, which produces the sanklesha parinamas that destroy the avadhi jnan and man:paryay jnan, is the nokarma dravya of avadhi-man:paryay jnanavarana. There is no nokarma dravya of kevaljnanavarana.

Special Meaning - Kevaljnan is kshayik, there is no object that is sankleshakarak that stops it. Avadhi and man:paryay jnanavarana are kshayopashami jnan, hence they have nokarma. The nokarma of the Uttar Prakritis of Darshanavarana are mentioned -

Panchanham nihanam mahisadhip hudi hodi nokamm.
Vaghdadkarapaddi chakkhuachakkhun nokamm ||72||

Meaning - The nokarma dravya of the five nidra-shaped darshanavarana are objects like buffalo's curd, etc. The nokarma dravya of chakkhuabakshudarshanavarana are objects like vyaghatakarak pat, etc.

The nokarma dravya of the Uttar Bhedas of Avadhi-Kevaldarshanavarana and Vedaniya are mentioned -

Ohikevaldasananokam tam tan nan bhangoy.
Sadeedaranokam ittaninnapanadi ||73|| 

Page #81:
---------------------------
## Gommatsar Karmakanda - 43

**Margad**

**Meaning:** The nokarmadravya of Avadhi Darshanavaran and Keval Darshanavaran is the same as Avadhi Gnanavaran and Keval Gnanavaran. The nokarmadravya of Satavedaniya is desirable food, drink, etc., and the nokarmadravya of Asatavedaniya is undesirable food, drink, etc. Now, the nokarma of the Uttaraprakritis of Mohaniya Karma are as follows:

**Verse 74:**

**Meaning:** The nokarmadravya of Samyaktva Prakriti is the six Ayatanas. The nokarmadravya of Mithyatva is the six Anayatanas. Ayatanas and Anayatanas, both combined, are the nokarmadravya of Samyag-Mithyatva Prakriti. These are their nokarma by rule.

**Special Meaning:** The six Ayatanas are: Jin Pratima, Jin Mandir, Jin Agam, Shastragyan, Sutap, and Sutapsvi. The six Anayatanas are: Kudeva, Kudeva Mandir, Kushashtra, Kushashtragyan, Kutap, and Kutapsvi.

**Verse 75:**

**Meaning:** The nokarma of Anantanubandhi is the six Anayatanas, etc. The nokarmadravya of the remaining Kshayas, by rule, is the company of wicked people, such as the destructive poetry, drama, and Kokashastra, etc., of Deshacharitra, Sakalcharitra, and Yathakyat Charitra.

**Verse 76:**

**Meaning:** The nokarma of Strived is the female body, the nokarma of Purushaved is the male body, and the nokarma of Napumsakaved is the eunuch body. The nokarma of Hasya is the Vidushaka, etc. (jokers who make fun), the nokarma of Rati is a virtuous son, because there is great affection for a virtuous son.

**Verse 77:**

**Meaning:** The nokarma of Arati is the separation from the desired and the association with the undesired. The nokarma of Shoka is the death of a virtuous son, etc. The nokarma of Bhaya is fearsome things like lions, etc. The nokarma of Jugupsa is a condemned thing. 

Page #82:
---------------------------
## Gommatsar Karmakanda - 44: No-Karma of Ayukarma and Gati Karma

**No-Karma of Ayukarma and Gati Karma:**

**Verse 78:**

* **Niryaayus** (hell-life) **No-Karma:** Unwholesome food.
* **Remaining three Ayus** (human, animal, celestial) **No-Karma:** Food and drink that are pleasing to the senses.
* **No-Karma of all four Gatis** (hell, animal, human, celestial): The four-fold field of Gatis, i.e., the place of birth (Yoni).

**No-Karma of Nama Karma:**

**Verse 79:**

* **No-Karma of the four Gatis (Niryaadi)**: Their respective fields (Yoni).
* **No-Karma of Jati Karma:** The formation of the Pudgala (matter) in the form of Dravya (substance) and Indriya (sense organs).

**Verse 80:**

* **No-Karma of the five Jatis (Ekaindriyaadi)**: Their respective Dravya Indriyas (sense organs).
* **No-Karma of Deha Karma (body karma):** The Skandha (aggregates) of Pudgala (matter) that arise from the Deha Karma.

**Verse 81:**

* **No-Karma of Audarik (noble), Vaikriya (changeable), Aharak (food), and Tejas (fiery) Deha Karma:** The Skandha (aggregates) of Pudgala (matter) that arise from their respective Deha Karma.
* **No-Karma of Karman Deha (karma body):** The Vinasopachya (matter that is capable of becoming karma).

**Verse 82:**

* **No-Karma of Bandhana (bondage), Pahudi (liberation), Samanniya (congregation), and Sesha (remaining) Deha Karma:** The body itself.
* **Note:** It is important to understand the specific No-Karma of each field (Kshetra) in a sequential manner. 

Page #83:
---------------------------
Gommatasar Karmakanda-45

Meaning - From the karma called "Sharirabandhan" to all the Pudgalavipaki (matter-producing) natures, their nokarmadravya (material of the karma) is the karmashaya (karma body) itself. (Because the material cause of the Pudgalarupa (matter-form) and Jivabhava (soul-state) and the work of Sukhadi (happiness etc.) is the classification related to the body.) The four Anupurvi (sequential) natures of Kshetravipaki (field-producing) have their own Kshetra (field) as their nokarma, which is the form of their movement. It should be known that... Thirajamyamya Shirabhirrasfahiraadiini Suhajugassuham. Asuham Dehavayavam Saraparinaadapoggalaani Sare. ||83||

Meaning - The nokarmadravya of the Thira (stable) nature is the Rasa (fluid), Ruhira (blood) etc. that remains in its own place. And the nokarma of the Amya (unstable) nature is the Rasa, Ruhira etc. that moves from its own place, i.e., the form of Parinaman (transformation). The nokarma of the Shubha (auspicious) nature is the beautiful parts of the body, i.e., the parts above the navel. And the nokarma of the Ashubha (inauspicious) nature is the inauspicious parts of the body, i.e., the parts below the navel. The nokarma of the Svaranama (voice) karma is the Pudgalaskandha (matter-aggregate) in the form of language-classification, which is transformed into the form of a good voice and a bad voice. The nokarma of the Uttarabheda (sub-divisions) of Gotra (lineage) and Antaraya (hindrance) karma are said to be:

Uccassuccan Deham Nicham Nicassu Hodi Nokamman.
Danadichaukkaanan Vigghaganganagurispahudi Hu. ||84||

Meaning - The nokarmadravya of the Ucchagotra (high lineage) is the body born in a traditional (virtuous conduct) family. And the opposite of this is the nokarma of the Nichagotra (low lineage). The nokarma of the four Antarayas (hindrances) like Dana (charity) etc. should be known as the mountain, river, man, woman etc. that create obstacles in Dana etc.

Viriyassu Ya Nokamman Rukkhaharadabalaharandavvan.
Idi Uttarpayadinam Nokamman Davvakamman Tu. ||85||

Meaning - The nokarma of the Viriyantaraya (hindrance of effort) is the substance that destroys strength, like rough food etc. Thus, the nokarmadravya of the Uttaraprakritis (sequential natures) has been stated. Now, the Noaagamabhavakarma is said to be:

No Aagamabhava Pun Sagasagakammaphalasamjudo Jivo. Poggalavivaiyaanam Nasthi Khunoaagamo Bhavo. ||86||

Meaning - The Jiva (soul) who has the Noaagamabhava (non-arrival) is the one who is connected with the fruits of all karmas. There is no Noaagamabhava for the Poggalavivaiya (matter-differentiations). 

Page #84:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-46
Meaning - The living being should know the karma that is the cause of the fruit that it is experiencing as the noaagamabhaavaka karma. The pudgalavipaaki prakritis are not noaagamabhaavakarma. :: Special - When the pudgalavipaaki prakritis arise, the remaining seven vedaniya etc. prakritis cannot produce happiness etc. without their cooperation. For this reason, the pudgalavipaaki prakritis are not called noaagamabhaavakarma. In this way, the distinctions (original and subsequent nature forms) of general karma were described by naming them as names, substances, and states, and describing their true nature.
The first chapter of the Hindi commentary "Siddhantgyanadīpika" on the Gommatasara Karmakanda by Shri Nemichandra Siddhantachakravarti, titled "Prakritisamutkirtan", is complete.
J卐卐 

Page #85:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-47
**Chapter on Bandhodaya-Sattva**

**Introduction**
We pledge to expound the doctrine of Bandha-Udaya-Sattva, which is the essence of the fivefold path (Pancharan).

**Salutation**
I bow to Nemichandra, the great Tirthankara, whose prowess is independent of any external aid.

**Praise**
I will speak of the Bandha-Udaya and Sattva in the context of the flow of karma (Oga) and the stages of spiritual progress (Gunasthan).

**Definition of Praise (Stava)**
A text that comprehensively describes all aspects of a subject, either in detail or concisely, is called a Stava.

**Definition of Eulogy (Stuti)**
A text that describes a single aspect of a subject, either in detail or concisely, is called a Stuti.

**Definition of Dharmakatha (Religious Discourse)**
A text that describes the details of a single aspect of a subject, either in detail or concisely, is called a Dharmakatha.

**Explanation**
For example, a hymn praising all twenty-four Tirthankaras is called a Stava. Similarly, a text that explains the meaning of all aspects of a subject, either in detail or concisely, is called a Stava here. Likewise, a hymn praising a single Tirthankara is called a Stuti. Similarly, a text that explains the meaning of a single aspect of a subject, either in detail or concisely, is called a Stuti here. There are twenty aspects (Vastu) within a single aspect (Anga), so a text that explains the details of a single aspect of a subject, either in detail or concisely, is called a Dharmakatha. Since each aspect (Vastu) deals with Dharma, it is called Dharmakatha here. Vastu and Dharmakatha seem to be synonyms here. 

Page #86:
---------------------------
## Gommatasara Karmakanda-48: On the Binding of Karma

This section of the Gommatasara Karmakanda describes the four types of binding of karma, which are classified based on **nature (prakriti), duration (sthiti), intensity (anubhaga), and extent (pradesa)**. 

**The four types of binding are:**

* **Prakriti Bandha:** The binding of the karmic matter (pudgala) to the soul (jiva).
* **Sthiti Bandha:** The duration of the binding of the karmic matter to the soul.
* **Anubhaga Bandha:** The intensity of the karmic matter, which determines its potency to produce results.
* **Pradesa Bandha:** The extent of the karmic matter, which determines its influence on the soul.

**Within each of these four types of binding, there are four further classifications based on their intensity:**

* **Utkrisht Bandha:** The most intense binding.
* **Anutkrisht Bandha:** The binding that is less intense than the utkrisht bandha.
* **Jghan Bandha:** The least intense binding.
* **Ajghan Bandha:** The binding that is more intense than the jghan bandha.

**The four types of binding are further classified based on their duration:**

* **Sadi Bandha:** The binding that is temporary and can be broken.
* **Anadi Bandha:** The binding that has existed since the beginning of time and has never been broken.
* **Dhruva Bandha:** The binding that will never be broken.
* **Adhruva Bandha:** The binding that will eventually be broken.

**The intensity of the binding (utkrisht, etc.) is determined by the following factors:**

* **The nature of the soul:** The soul's state of being (mithyatva, etc.) determines the intensity of the binding.
* **The nature of the karma:** The type of karma (jnanakarma, etc.) determines the intensity of the binding.
* **The extent of the karma:** The amount of karmic matter bound to the soul determines the intensity of the binding.

**The intensity of the binding (utkrisht, etc.) is also determined by the following factors:**

* **The intensity of the karmic matter:** The intensity of the karmic matter determines the intensity of the binding.
* **The duration of the karmic matter:** The duration of the karmic matter determines the intensity of the binding.
* **The extent of the karmic matter:** The extent of the karmic matter determines the intensity of the binding.

**The intensity of the binding (utkrisht, etc.) is also determined by the following factors:**

* **The intensity of the karmic matter:** The intensity of the karmic matter determines the intensity of the binding.
* **The duration of the karmic matter:** The duration of the karmic matter determines the intensity of the binding.
* **The extent of the karmic matter:** The extent of the karmic matter determines the intensity of the binding.

**The intensity of the binding (utkrisht, etc.) is also determined by the following factors:**

* **The intensity of the karmic matter:** The intensity of the karmic matter determines the intensity of the binding.
* **The duration of the karmic matter:** The duration of the karmic matter determines the intensity of the binding.
* **The extent of the karmic matter:** The extent of the karmic matter determines the intensity of the binding.

**The intensity of the binding (utkrisht, etc.) is also determined by the following factors:**

* **The intensity of the karmic matter:** The intensity of the karmic matter determines the intensity of the binding.
* **The duration of the karmic matter:** The duration of the karmic matter determines the intensity of the binding.
* **The extent of the karmic matter:** The extent of the karmic matter determines the intensity of the binding.

**The intensity of the binding (utkrisht, etc.) is also determined by the following factors:**

* **The intensity of the karmic matter:** The intensity of the karmic matter determines the intensity of the binding.
* **The duration of the karmic matter:** The duration of the karmic matter determines the intensity of the binding.
* **The extent of the karmic matter:** The extent of the karmic matter determines the intensity of the binding.

**The intensity of the binding (utkrisht, etc.) is also determined by the following factors:**

* **The intensity of the karmic matter:** The intensity of the karmic matter determines the intensity of the binding.
* **The duration of the karmic matter:** The duration of the karmic matter determines the intensity of the binding.
* **The extent of the karmic matter:** The extent of the karmic matter determines the intensity of the binding.

**The intensity of the binding (utkrisht, etc.) is also determined by the following factors:**

* **The intensity of the karmic matter:** The intensity of the karmic matter determines the intensity of the binding.
* **The duration of the karmic matter:** The duration of the karmic matter determines the intensity of the binding.
* **The extent of the karmic matter:** The extent of the karmic matter determines the intensity of the binding.

**The intensity of the binding (utkrisht, etc.) is also determined by the following factors:**

* **The intensity of the karmic matter:** The intensity of the karmic matter determines the intensity of the binding.
* **The duration of the karmic matter:** The duration of the karmic matter determines the intensity of the binding.
* **The extent of the karmic matter:** The extent of the karmic matter determines the intensity of the binding.

**The intensity of the binding (utkrisht, etc.) is also determined by the following factors:**

* **The intensity of the karmic matter:** The intensity of the karmic matter determines the intensity of the binding.
* **The duration of the karmic matter:** The duration of the karmic matter determines the intensity of the binding.
* **The extent of the karmic matter:** The extent of the karmic matter determines the intensity of the binding.

**The intensity of the binding (utkrisht, etc.) is also determined by the following factors:**

* **The intensity of the karmic matter:** The intensity of the karmic matter determines the intensity of the binding.
* **The duration of the karmic matter:** The duration of the karmic matter determines the intensity of the binding.
* **The extent of the karmic matter:** The extent of the karmic matter determines the intensity of the binding.

**The intensity of the binding (utkrisht, etc.) is also determined by the following factors:**

* **The intensity of the karmic matter:** The intensity of the karmic matter determines the intensity of the binding.
* **The duration of the karmic matter:** The duration of the karmic
Page #87:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-49 Special Meaning - The living being who ascends the Upshama श्रेणी goes to the tenth गुणस्थान. There, he attains an excellent अनुभागबन्ध of the high गोत्र. Afterwards, he goes to the Upshantakषायगुणस्थान. Later, the same living being returns to the tenth गुणस्थान, then he attains an unexcellent बन्ध of the high गोत्र. There, this unexcellent बन्ध is called सादि बन्ध, because previously there was an absence of this बन्ध, but it started happening again. From the सूक्ष्मसापरायगुणस्थान, the बन्ध of this nature for the living beings of the lower गुणस्थान is अनादि, for the अभव्य living beings it is ध्रुवबन्ध, and for those of the Upshama श्रेणी, when the excellent बन्ध happens after the absence of the unexcellent बन्ध, it is अध्रुवबन्ध.

Even in अजघन्य, these four types of बन्ध are as follows:

The नारकीजीव who goes to the seventh नरक, the बन्ध he does of the low गोत्र before the peak time of मिथ्यात्व is अनादिबन्ध. And the same living being, when he becomes inclined towards प्रथमोपशमसम्यक्त्व, he had done अयअनुगमध of the low गोत्र at the peak time of मिथ्यात्व. Having become सम्यग्दृति, he again becomes मिथ्यादृष्टि due to the rise of मिथ्यात्व, then he does the अजघन्य अनुभाग बन्ध of the low गोत्र. Thus, in that place, there is सादिबन्ध of the low गोत्र. Then, the बन्ध of the low गोत्र that happens in the second and subsequent times of the same मिथ्यादृष्टि living being is अनादि. And the अजघन्यअनुभागबन्ध of the low गोत्र of the अभव्यजीव is ध्रुवबन्ध. Except for अजघन्य, when it is attained by जघन्य, that बन्ध is अध्रुव. Thus, in the अनुभागबन्ध of the अजघन्य low गोत्र, there are four distinctions: सादि, अनादि, ध्रुव, and अध्रुव. Similarly, wherever possible, know these four types: सादि, अनादि, ध्रुव, and अध्रुव in other बन्धs as well. There are no four distinctions like उत्कृष्टादि in प्रकृतिबन्ध. In the remaining situations, there are distinctions like उत्कृष्टादि in अनुभाग and प्रदेशबन्ध.

The rule of प्रकृतिबन्ध in the अथानन्तर गुणस्थान is stated as follows:

सम्मेव तित्थबन्धो आहारदुर्ग पमादरहिदेसु।
मिस्सूणे आउस्स य मिच्छादिसु सेसबंधोदु ॥१२॥

Meaning: The बन्ध of the तीर्थंकरप्रकृति happens only in the सम्यक्त्व अवस्था. The बन्ध of आहारकद्विक happens in the अप्रमत्त गुणस्थान. The बन्ध of आयु happens from the मिथ्यात्वगुणस्थान to the अप्रमत्तगुणस्थान, without the मिश्रगुणस्थान.

Special Meaning: The बन्ध of the तीर्थंकरप्रकृति happens only in सम्यग्दृष्टि, from the fourth गुणस्थान to the sixth part of अपूर्वकरण. The बन्ध of आहारकशरीर-आहारकअङ्गोपाङ्गका happens from the अप्रमत्त गुणस्थान to the sixth part of अपूर्वकरण. And the बन्ध of आयुकर्म happens from the मिथ्यात्वगुणस्थान to the अप्रमत्तगुणस्थान, without the मिश्रगुणस्थान and the मिश्रकाययोग that has attained the निर्वृत्तिअपर्याप्तअवस्था. Know the बन्ध of the remaining प्रकृतिs in their respective मिथ्यादृष्टि etc. गुणस्थानs, until their बन्धव्युच्छित्ति. 

Page #88:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-50

Further, the specific rule of the bondage of the Tirthankara nature is stated:

**Padhamuvasamiye Samme Sesatiye Avirdaadhichattari... Tiththayarbandhaparambhaya Nara Kevalidugante.** ||13||

**Meaning:** In the first Upasama Samyaktv, and in the remaining three, the second Upasama Samyaktv, Kshayopa-samik Samyaktv and Kshayik Samyaktv, from the state of Asanyata to the state of Apramatta Gunasthan, only a human being initiates the bondage of the Tirthankara nature at the feet of a Kevali or Shruta Kevali.

**Special Meaning:** The reason for separating the first Upasama Samyaktv here is that, "since its duration is an Antarmuhurta, the sixteen Karana Bhavanas cannot arise in this Samyaktv, therefore, there is no bondage of the Tirthankara nature in this Samyaktv," some have opined.

**"Only a human being initiates the bondage of the Tirthankara nature,"** this statement implies that beings of other Gatis cannot initiate the bondage of the Tirthankara nature, because they lack the specific materials. And the bondage of the Tirthankara nature occurs in the remaining three Gatis, excluding the Tiryanch Gati. The peak duration of this bondage is eight years plus an Antarmuhurta, and the minimum duration is two Koti Purvas and thirty-three Sagaras. The rule is that this bondage begins only at the feet of the two Kevalis, because the necessary Parinam Vishuddhi for initiating the bondage of the Tirthankara nature cannot occur elsewhere.

Here, the bondage of the Tirthankara nature is described from the fourth Gunasthan to the seventh Gunasthan. And in the special meaning of the 92nd verse, the bondage of the Tirthankara nature is stated from the fourth Gunasthan to the sixth part of the A-purvakarana Gunasthan. The implication here is that the bondage of the Tirthankara nature begins from the fourth Gunasthan to the seventh Gunasthan, but continues until the sixth part of the eighth Gunasthan. Now, the bondage-cessation in the Gunasthanas is stated:

**Solas Panavis Nabham Das Chaur Chakkeka Bandhavochhinna... Dug Tisa Chaduruvve Pan Solesa Jogino Ekko.** ||94||

**1.** The reason is that in the final birth in which a being becomes a Tirthankara, he remains in the Tirthankara state until the duration of the Varsha Prithaktva, according to the rule, and performs activities like Vihar, etc. (Dhaval 12/494, Dhaval 7/57, Shatkhand Parishilaan... etc.) And the bondage of the Tirthankara nature does not occur in the state of the Tirthankara nature's emergence. Therefore, the duration of the Varsha Prithaktva has been reduced. 

Page #89:
---------------------------
## Gommatasara Karmakanda-51

**Meaning:** In the first Gunasthan, there is a cessation of the binding of all sixteen Prakṛtis. From the Sasadan to the Aprammatta Gunasthan, there is a cessation of binding of 25, zero, 10, 4-6-1 Prakṛtis respectively. In the first part of the Apurvakarana, there is a cessation of two Prakṛtis, in the sixth part, thirty, and in the seventh part, four. In the ninth Gunasthan, there is a cessation of five Prakṛtis, in the tenth Gunasthan, sixteen, and in the case of the Sayoga Kevali, there is a cessation of one Prakṛti.

**Special Meaning:** There are two Nayas (principles) of cessation of binding: **Utpādānuchchheda** and **Anutpādānuchchheda**. Utpādānuchchheda is also called **Dravyārthikamaya**. According to this Naya, where there is existence, there is destruction. Where there is no existence, how can there be attachment in the mind? And if it doesn't arise in the mind, then due to the absence of speech, there is no manifestation, and due to the absence of manifestation, there cannot be any activity of conduct. This is because there is no substance called "absence," and there is no true evidence to know it.

Evidence only knows the real form of a thing, it doesn't deal with the unreal form. If we assume that evidence deals with the unreal form, then we would have to assume that evidence deals with the horns of a donkey, but this is not the case because the horns of a donkey are non-existent. Therefore, where there is existence, there is also non-existence.

**Anutpādānuchchheda** is the subject of the **Paryāyārthik** Naya. According to this Naya, where there is no existence, there is absence. When there is the attainment of existence, there is the negation of absence, because without the negation of existence, absence cannot exist. It is also not the case that there is no destruction of Karmas, because the harmful and non-harmful Karmas are not found everywhere. In other words, there is no absence of what is in the form of existence. Therefore, there is a mutual contradiction between existence and absence. Hence, it is appropriate to say "non-existence" where there is non-existence.

In the Syābād, both Nayas are non-contradictory. Therefore, in the statement of cessation, the statement is made according to the **Utpādānuchchheda** Naya, which is in the form of the **Dravyārthik** Naya.

**Utpāda** means the cessation of the existing, the non-destruction form is the **Utpādānuchchheda** Naya. Thus, according to the **Dravyārthik** Naya, there is a cessation of binding at the peak time of each Gunasthan. According to the **Paryāyārthik** Naya, the destruction of the binding of those Prakṛtis occurs after that final time.

**Vyuchchitti** means separation, but where there is said to be separation, there is also their union. For example, two men lived in a city, one of them went to another place. Someone asked him where they separated, and he said, "We separated in that city." Thus, separation is said to have occurred where there was union. Similarly, wherever there is a cessation of the binding, arising, or existence of Karmas, it is said to be a cessation. 

Page #90:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda -
4-52

There, the binding, arising, or existence of those karmas remains, it does not remain beyond that. Knowing the nature of vyuchchitti like this is the meaning of dravyarthikanaya, and when asked the same man, it was also said that we left such and such a city and came to such and such a city, and then separated from there, just as the absence of saṃyoga happened, the absence of me happened, knowing this is the meaning of paryayarthikanaya.

Now, the names of the natures of vyuchchitti related to the first gunasthan are mentioned.

Mithyatva, huṇḍakasamsthāna, napumsakaved, asampraptaasṛpāṭikāsanhana, ekaindriyajāti, sthāvara, ātapa, sūksma, aparyāpta, sādhāraṇa, vikalatraya (dvīndriya-trīndriya-caturindriya) narakagati, narakagatyānupūrvi and narakāyu, these 16 natures have their binding vyuchchitti at the end of the mithyatvagunasthan.

In the second gunasthan, the natures that are vyuchchinn from binding are mentioned.

Vidyagune aṇathīṇatidu Bhagatisanṭhāṇasanhādi caukkaṃ. Duggamaṇitthīṇīcaṃ tiriyadu gujjovatiriyāū. || 96 ||

Meaning - At the end of the second gunasthan, anantānubandhi caturṣka, styānagr̥ddhi, nidrā-nidrā, prachalāprachalā, durbhaga, duḥsvara, anādeya, nyagrodhaparimaṇḍala, svāti, kubjaka and vāmanasamsthāna, vajranārācanārāca ardhanārāca and kīlitasanhana, apraśasta - vihāyogati, strīved, nīcagotra, tiryanchagati, tiryanchagatyānupūrvi, tiryanchayau and udyota, these 25 natures are vyuchchinn.

Special Meaning - These 25 natures bind even with mithyadṛṣṭi without the arising of anantānubandhi, and in sāsadana devoid of the arising of mithyatva, they bind only with anantānubandhi. Thus, their cause is both mithyatva and anantānubandhi, know this.

Further, the names of the natures of bandhavyuchchitti in the fourth and fifth gunasthan are mentioned.

Ayade bidiyakasaaya vajjaṃ orālamaṇudumaṇuvaū. Dese tadiyakasaaya niyameṇiha bandhavocchinnā. || 97 || 

Page #91:
---------------------------
## Gommatasar Karmakanda - 53

**35**

**Meaning:** In the fourth Gunasthan (stage of spiritual progress), the four Kashayas (passions) of the second A-pratyakhyana Avarana (veil of non-recognition), Vajrarashabha Naracha Samhanana (destruction of the pride of being a Vajrarashabha), Audarik Sharira (subtle body), Audarik Angopanga (subtle limbs), Manushya Gati (human birth), Manushya Gaty Anupurvi (successive human births), and Manushya Ayu (human lifespan) - these 10 natures are liberated from bondage. And in the Desha Samyata Gunasthan, the four Kashayas of the Pratyakhyana Avarana are liberated from bondage.

**Re**

**Meaning:** In the sixth Gunasthan, the six natures of Asthir (unstable), Ashubh (unfortunate), Asata Vedaniya (unpleasant), Ayashas Kirti (bad reputation), Arati (discontent), and Shok (sorrow) are liberated from bondage. And in the Aprammatta Gunasthan, the bondage of one Deva Ayu (divine lifespan) is liberated.

**M**

**Meaning:** In the Nivritti (liberation) or A-purvakarana Gunasthan, in the first part of the Maranurhit (death-free) stage, while ascending the ladder of spiritual progress, the two natures of Nidra (sleep) and Prayala (laziness) are liberated. In the sixth part, the 30 natures of Tirthankara (liberated soul), Nirmana (creation), Prashasta Vihayoga Gati (liberated state), Panchendriya Jati (five-sense beings), Tejas (radiant body), Karman (karmic body), Aharak Sharira (food-consuming body), Aharak Angopanga (food-consuming limbs), Sama Chaturashtra Sansthan (square-shaped body), Deva Gati (divine birth), Deva Gaty Anupurvi (successive divine births), Vaikriyik Sharira (changeable body), Vaikriyik Angopanga (changeable limbs), Sparsha (touch), Rasa (taste), Gandha (smell), Varna (color), Aguru Laghu (heavy and light), Upghāt (harm to oneself), Parghāt (harm to others), Ucchvas (exhalation), Sa (being), Badar (obstruction), Paryāpta (sufficient), Pratiyaka Sharira (individual body), Sthir (stable), Shubh (auspicious), Subhaga (beautiful), Susvara (sweet voice), and Aadeya (worthy of respect) are liberated. And in the equal part, the four natures of Hasy (laughter), Rati (attachment), Bhaya (fear), and Jugupsa (disgust) are liberated from bondage.

**Special Meaning:** In the eighth Gunasthan, out of the seven parts, the first, sixth, and seventh parts are the only ones where the above 36 natures are liberated. There is no liberation in the remaining parts. Different beings at the same time can have different outcomes, hence this is called the Nivritti Gunasthan.

**Now, An-nivritti Karana (non-liberation) - in the Sukshma Samparaya Gunasthan, the natures liberated from bondage are:** 

Page #92:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-54: The four kṣayās of the male are in the five parts of the aṇiyatṭipāñcabhāge, in order.
First, the vigdha, daśana, caujasaucca, and suhumante. ||101||
Meaning: In the five parts of the bandhavyucchedti, anivṛttikaraṇa, guṇasthāna of the five prakrtis of the puruṣaved, sajjvalana, the bandhavyucchedti of the five jñānāvaraṇa, five antarāya, four darśanāvaraṇa, yaśaḥkīrti, and uccagotra, these sixteen prakrtis, occurs at the end of the sūksmasāmpārāyaguṇasthāna.
Special Meaning: The word "ante" here is antadīpaka, meaning to understand the vyucchedti of all prakrtis at the end of the guṇasthāna, but it should be understood as much as possible in the seventh, eighth, and ninth guṇasthānas. Now, bandhavyucchedti is said to occur in the upaśāntamoh, kṣīṇamoh, and sayogakevalīguṇasthānas.
In the upaśāntakṣīṇamoh, the yogi has a sātavedanīya bandha that is samayiṭṭhidī sāda.
The bandha of the payaḍīna is nayavvo, and the ananta is also there. ||102||
Meaning: In the upaśāntamoh, kṣīṇamoh, and sayogakevalīguṇasthānas, there is a sātavedanīya bandha that is of one time, and at the end of the sayogakevalī, there is only the bandhavyucchedti of the sātavedanīya. In the ayogakevalī, there is no bandha because there is no yoga due to the absence of the cause of bandha, and there is also no vyucchedti. Thus, the end of the bandha of the prakrtis (bandhavyucchedti), the infinity of bandha (meaning the existence of bandha), and the word "ca" should be understood as abandha.
The bandhavyucchedti in the guṇasthānas:
Guṇasthāna | Vyucchedti prakrtis | Number of names of vyucchedti prakrtis | Mithyātva
Mithyātva, huṇḍakasaṁsthāna, napuṁsakaved, asamprāptāsṛpāṭikāsanhana, ekaindriyajāti sthāvara, ātapa, sūksma, aparyāpsa, sādhāraṇa, dvīndriya, trīndriya, caturindriya, narakagati, narakagatyānupūrvī, and narakāyu. Anantānubandhī kṣayā 4, styānagrṛddhi, nidrā-nidrā, pracalāpracalā, durbhaga, duḥsvara, anādeya, nyagrodhaparimaṇḍala-svātikujbaka, and vāmanasam sthāna, vajranārāca-nārāca-ardhanārācakīlitasaṁhana, apraśastavihayogati, strīved, nīcagotra, tiriyañcagati-tiriyañcagatyānupūrvī, tiriyañcāyu, and udyota.
Sāsādana 

Page #93:
---------------------------
Gompargar Karmakanda-55..
Mixed Asanyata
Desasanyata Pramatta
Aprabha
Apratyakhyana's four Kashayas, Vajrarasbhanaraachasanhanan, Audarikasharira, Audarikangopang, ManushyaGatiManushyaGatyAnupurvi and Manushyaayu. PratyakhyanaAvarana's four Kashayas. Asthir, Ashubha, AsataVedaniya, Ayash Kirti, Arati and Shok. De Vayyu (here in SwasthanaApramatta, know the Bandhnishthapanavyuchchitti of De Vayyu | In SatiShayApramatta, there is no vyuchchitti of De Vayyu, because in SatiShayApramatta, there is no Bandha of De Vayyu.) Nidra and Prachala. In this part, while climbing the UpshamaShreni, there is no death. | Tirthankara, Nirman, Prashastavihayogati, PanchendriyaJati, Tejas, Karman, MaharakSharira-AharakAngopang, SamaChaturasraSansthan, DevGati, DevGatyAnupurvi, VaikriyikSharira, VaikriyikAngopang Varnaadi 4, Agurulaghu, Upghāt, Parghāt, Uchchvas, Tras, Badar, Paryāpta, Pratiyeksharee., Sthir, Shubha, Subhaga, Susvara and Aadeya. Hasya, Rati, Bhaya and Jagupasa.
Apuurvakaran (Prathamabhag) Shashthabhag
Sammabhag Anivritikaran: Prathamabhag Dvitiyabhag Tritiyabhag Chaturthabhag Panchamabhag SukshmaSamparaya
PurushaVed SajwalanKrodh SajwalanMan SanjwalanMaya SanchalanLobha JnanaAvarana 5, DarshanAvarana 4, Antaraya 5, Yash:Kirti and UchchaGotra.
UpshantaMoh KsheenaMoh Sayogi
SataVedaniya.  _In this way, all 120 Prakrutis are said to be Bandhayogya. Their BandhaVyuchchitti should be known in the above order. 

Page #94:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda - 56

Note:
This is in relation to Samanami.

Now, the bound and unbound forms of the natures are described in two verses:

-
Sattarsekaggasyam chausattarttari sagatthi tevatthi.
Bandha ragannaduviis sattarasekodhe. || 103 ||

Meaning: This is the order of the binding of the 117-101-74-77-67-63-59-58-2217-1-1 and 1 natures in the Gunasthanas of Mithyatva, etc., respectively, up to the Sayogi Gunasthana.
= 19

Special Meaning: From the perspective of non-difference, 120 natures are said to be capable of being bound. Of these, in the Mithyatva Gunasthana, there is binding of 117 natures, because here the binding of the three natures of Tirthankara and Aharaka-dvik does not occur. Therefore, these three, plus the 16 natures that are disintegrated in the Mithyatva Gunasthana, make a total of 16 + 3 natures that are not bound. Therefore, in the Sasadan Gunasthana, there are 101 natures capable of being bound. In this Gunasthana, the natures that are disintegrated by binding, as well as the binding of Deva-ayu and Manusha-ayu, do not occur in the Misra Gunasthana. Therefore, there are 25 + 2 = 27 natures that are not bound. Therefore, in the Misra Gunasthana, there is binding of only 74 natures.

In the Asanyata Gunasthana, by adding Tirthankara, Deva-ayu, and Manusha-ayu to the aforementioned 74, there is binding of 77 natures. In the Chaturtha Gunasthana, by subtracting the 10 natures that are disintegrated, there are 67 natures capable of being bound in the Deshasanyata Gunasthana. In the Panchama Gunasthana, there is disintegration of four natures. By subtracting these from the 67, there is binding of 63 in the Pramatta-sanyata. Here, by subtracting the six disintegrated natures and adding the Aharaka-dvik, there is binding of 59 in the Apramatta Gunasthana. Here, there is disintegration of one Deva-ayu. Therefore, by subtracting this, there is binding of 58 in the A-purvakarana. In the seven parts of this Gunasthana, there is disintegration of 36 natures in the first, sixth, and seventh parts. By subtracting these, there is binding of 22 natures in the Anivrittikarana. In the five parts of this Gunasthana, there is disintegration of five natures. Therefore, by subtracting these, there is binding of 17 natures in the Sukshma-samparaya. Here, there is disintegration of 16 natures. By subtracting these, one Satavedaniya nature remains. Its binding should be understood in the Upshanta-moha, Kshina-moha, and Sayogi-kevali Gunasthanas.

Tiya unavisa chhattiyatalam tevanna sattavannam cha.
Sages virahi say tiyaunavisa sahiya viisasyam. || 104 ||

Meaning: In the Gunasthanas of Mithyatva, etc., respectively, there are 3-19-46-43-53-57-61-62-98-103-119-119-119 and 120 unbound natures. 

Page #95:
---------------------------
## Gommatasara Karmakanda 57d:

**Special Meaning:** In the Mithyatva Gunasthan, there is no bondage of the three natures: Tirthankara, Aharakadvik, and the remaining 16 natures. Combining these three with the 16 natures in the Vyuchchhinna form, there are 19 natures in the Sasadan Gunasthan. Combining these 19 with the 25 natures in the Vyuchchhinna form and the Devayu and Manushayau, there are 46 natures in the Mishragunasthan. Subtracting the Tirthankara, Devayu, and Manushayau from these, there are 43 natures in the Asanyata. Adding the 10 natures that become Vyuchchhinna from the bondage in the Chaturth Gunasthan, there are 53 natures in the Deshasanyata Gunasthan. Adding the four natures that attain Vyuchchhinna to these, there are 57 natures in the Prammatasanyata. Adding the six natures that become Vyuchchhinna in the sixth Gunasthan to these 57 natures and subtracting the Aharakadvik, there are 69 natures in the Aprammat. Adding one Devayu to these, there are 62 natures in the Apurvakaran Gunasthan. Adding the 36 natures that attain Vyuchchhinna in this Gunasthan to the 62, there are 98 natures in the Anivrittikaran Gunasthan. Combining the 5 natures that become Vyuchchhinna here with the 98, there are 103 natures in the Sukshmasampray Gunasthan. Adding the 16 natures that become Vyuchchhinna from bondage to the 103, there are 119 natures in the Uparitan, Upshantamoha, Kshinamoha, and Sayogakevali Gunasthanas. Adding one Satavedaniya nature to these, there are 120 natures in the Ayogakevali Gunasthan.

**Overview of Bondage, Liberation, and Natures Becoming Vyuchchhinna from Bondage in the Gunasthanas:**

| Gunasthan | Mithyatva | Sasadan | Mishra | Asanyata | Deshasanyata | Prammatavirat | Aprammatavirat | Apurvakaran | Anivrittikaran | Sukshmasampray | Upshantamoha | Kshinamoha | Sayogi | Ayogi |
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
| **Liberated Natures** | 3 | 19 | 46 | 43 | 53 | 57 | 61 | 62 | 98 | 103 | 119 | 119 | 119 | 120 |
| **Bound Natures** | 117 | 101 | 74 | 67 | 63 | 59 | 58 | 22 | 17 | 1 | ? | 1 | 1 | 0 |
| **Natures Becoming Vyuchchhinna from Bondage** | 16 | 25 | 0 | 10 | 4 | 6 | 1 | 36 | 5 | 16 | 0 | 1 | 0 | 0 |
| **Special** | 3 (Aharakadvik, Tirthankara) | 46 (19 + 25 = 44 + 2 (Manushayau, Devayu)) | 43 (46 - 3 (Tirthankara, Devayu, Manushayau)) | 61 (63 - 2 (Aharakadvik)) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 

Page #96:
---------------------------
## Gommatasara Karmakanda-58

**Regarding the *Marganas*, in the *Gati-Margana*, the *Abandha* (non-binding) and *Bandha* (binding) related to the *Naraka-Gati* (hellish realm) and the *Bandhavyuchchitti* (cessation of binding) are described in three verses:**

... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Page #97:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-59 and Abandhaprakriti 31. In the Asanyata Gunasthan, there are 10 Vyuchchitti Gunasthanokta, 72 Bandha including Manushyayu-Tirthankara, and 29 Abandha prakriti. In the first, second, and third Narakas, the Bandha-Abandha and Bandhavyuchchitti prakriti are as follows:

**Prakriti** | **Bandha** | **Abandha** | **Vyuchchitti**
------- | -------- | -------- | --------
Mithyatva | 100 | 0 | 4 (Tirthankara, Mithyatva, Hundakasanstahan, Napumsakaved, Sripatikasanhanan)
Saladan | 96 | 4 | 25 (Gunasthanokta)
Mishra | 70 (excluding Manushyayu) | 30 | 0
Asanyata | 71 (including Manushyayu) | 29 | 10 (Gunasthanokta)

**Note:**

* In the Mithyatva Gunasthan, there is no Bandha of Ay in this Gunasthan.
* In the Asanyata Gunasthan, the Bandha of the two prakriti (Tirthankara-Manushyayu) occurs in this Gunasthan.

**Further Explanation:**

* When going to the second and third Narakas, Samyaktva is lost, and the Bandha of the Tirthankara prakriti stops for one Antarmuhurta. After the Antarmuhurta, the Bandha of the Tirthankara prakriti starts again after attaining Vedakasamyaktva.
* In the three Narakas of Anjanadi, there are 100 Bandha-worthy prakriti without the Tirthankara prakriti. The rest of the explanation is similar to Dharmadi.
* In the Mithyatva Gunasthan, there are 4 Vyuchchitti prakriti, 100 Bandha prakriti, and no Abandha.
* In the Saladan Gunasthan, there are 25 Vyuchchitti prakriti, 96 Bandha prakriti, and 4 Abandha prakriti.
* In the Mishra Gunasthan, there are no Vyuchchitti, 70 Bandha prakriti (excluding Manushyayu), and 30 Abandha prakriti.
* In the Asanyata Gunasthan, there are 10 Vyuchchitti prakriti, 71 Bandha prakriti (including Manushyayu), and 29 Abandha prakriti.

**Note:**

* The numbers in parentheses indicate the number of prakriti in each category.
* The term "Gunasthanokta" refers to the prakriti mentioned in the Gunasthan section of the text.
* The term "Manushyayu" refers to the prakriti related to the human lifespan.
* The term "Antarmuhurta" refers to a very short period of time.
* The term "Vedakasamyaktva" refers to a state of perfect knowledge and understanding.
* The term "Dharmadi" refers to the other categories of prakriti discussed in the text. 

Page #98:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-60

**Fourth, Fifth, and Sixth Narakas**

In the fourth, fifth, and sixth narakas, the binding, non-binding, and binding-cessation forms of karma-prakritis are as follows:

**In the state of perfection, there are 100 binding-worthy prakritis and four guna-sthanas.**

| Guna-sthana | Binding | Non-Binding | Binding-Cessation |
|---|---|---|---|
| **Visesha** | Mithyatva | 100 | 4 (Mithyatva, etc.) |
| **Sasadan** | 25 (Mithyatva, etc.) | 30 (25 + 4 + 1 (Manushyayu)) | 29 (30 - 1 (Manushyayu)) |
| **Mishra** | 25 (Mithyatva, etc.) | 30 (25 + 4 + 1 (Manushyayu)) | 29 (30 - 1 (Manushyayu)) |
| **Asanyata** | 25 (Mithyatva, etc.) | 30 (25 + 4 + 1 (Manushyayu)) | 29 (30 - 1 (Manushyayu)) |

**In the seventh naraka, Madhavi, there are 99 binding-worthy prakritis without Manushyayu and four guna-sthanas.**

| Guna-sthana | Binding | Non-Binding | Binding-Cessation |
|---|---|---|---|
| **Mithyatva** | 96 (excluding Uchchagotra and Manushyadvik) | 3 (Uchchagotra, etc.) | 5 (Mithyatva, etc. + 1 Tiryanchayu) |
| **Sasadan** | 91 | 8 | 24 (25 - 1 Tiryanchayu) |
| **Mishra** | 70 (including Uchchagotra and Manushyadvik) | 29 | 0 |
| **Asanyata** | 70 | 29 | 9 (10 - 1 Manushyayu) |

**Seventh Naraka, Madhavi**

In the seventh naraka, Madhavi, which is related to the earth, the binding, non-binding, and binding-cessation forms of karma-prakritis are as follows:

**In the state of perfection, there are 99 binding-worthy prakritis and four guna-sthanas.**

| Guna-sthana | Binding | Non-Binding | Binding-Cessation |
|---|---|---|---|
| **Visesha** | 3 (Uchchagotra, Manushyadvik) | 5 (Mithyatva, etc. + 1 Tiryanchayu) | 24 (25 - 1 Tiryanchayu) |
| **Sasadan** | 29 (24 + 8 - 3 (Uchchagotra, Manushyadvik)) | 9 (10 - 1 Manushyayu) | 0 |
| **Mishra** | 70 | 29 | 0 |
| **Asanyata** | 70 | 29 | 0 | 

Page #99:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda - 61

In the first hell-related state of non-perfection, there are 99 natures that are capable of binding, similar to the mixed-body yogi, without human and animal life, because there is no binding of life in the mixed-body yoga of the Vaikriya. Here, the only two Gunasthanas are Mithyatva and Asanyata, because there is no Sasadan Gunasthana in the state of non-perfection of the hell-being. Here, in the Mithyatva Gunasthana, there are four natures, including Mithyatva, and in the Sasadan Gunasthana, there are 24 natures that are cut off, making a total of 28 natures that are cut off. Binding is of 98 natures without the Tirthankara, and non-binding is of one nature. In the Asanyata Gunasthana, there is a cut-off of 9 natures mentioned in the Gunasthana, without human life, binding is of 71 natures with the Tirthankara, and non-binding is of 28 natures.

In the first hell-related state of non-perfection, the binding-non-binding-binding cut-off is to be understood as follows: In the first hell-related state of non-perfection, there are 99 natures that are capable of binding. There are two Gunasthanas.

**Details**

| Gunasthana | Binding | Non-Binding |
|---|---|---|
| Mithyatva | 98 | 1 (Tirthankara) 28 (4 Mithyatva and 24 Sasadan Gunasthana) |
| Asanyata | 71 | 28 (29-1 Tirthankara) 9 (previously mentioned) |

Starting from the lineage, in the state of non-perfection of the five earths, there are 98 natures that are capable of binding, and only one Gunasthana, Mithyatva, is found. (There is no binding of the Tirthankara nature in the Mithyatva Gunasthana). In the last earth, called Maaghavi, there are also 95 natures that are capable of binding in the state of non-perfection, and one Mithyatva Gunasthana, because here, in the Mithyatva Gunasthana, there is no binding of the high lineage and the human couple. (Verse 107) Further, the binding cut-off, binding-non-binding, related to the animal realm is stated:

```
तिरिये ओघो तित्थाहारूणो अविरिदे छिदी चउरो ।
उवरिम छण्हं च छिदी सासणसम्मे हवे णियमा ॥ १०८ ॥
```

**Meaning:** In the animal realm, binding-non-binding-binding cut-off is to be understood as in the Gunasthana, but the special feature is that here, there is no binding of the Tirthankara and the food-giver couple, therefore, there are 117 natures that are capable of binding, and in the Asanyata Gunasthana, there is a cut-off of only four Kashayas in the form of non-rejection. The cut-off of the remaining six natures, Vajrarṣabha, Naraacha, etc., takes place in the Sasadan Gunasthana, because in the mixed and Asanyata Gunasthana of the animal realm, there is no binding of the natures related to the animal and human realms. 

Page #100:
---------------------------
Gommatasar Karmakanda-62

There are five types of Tiryanchas based on the distinctions of Samanya, Panchendriya, Paryapta, Yonini, and Labdhyaparyapta. In the first four types of Tiryanchas, as mentioned in the previous verse, there is knowledge of Bandhavyuchchitti, etc. However, in the Labdhyaparyapta Tiryanchas, there is no Bandha of the eight: Devayau, Narakayau, and Vaikriyika Shatka (Devagati, DevagatyAnupurvi, Narakagati, NarakagatyAnupurvi, Vaikriyika Sharira, Kriyika Anopaj). This is because these natures are not eligible for उदय (emergence) in the future life, so they do not have Bandha here.

**Special Meaning:**

In the four types of Tiryanchas, Samanya, etc., there are 110 Bandha-worthy Prakritis in the Gunasthanas, etc., and there are five Gunasthanas, etc. Here, in the Mithyatva Gunasthana, there are 16 Prakritis of Vyuchchitti, 117 Bandha Prakritis, and no Abandha. In the Sasadan Gunasthana, there are 25 Vyuchchitti, and in the Asanyata Gunasthana, there are 31 Vyuchchitti of the following Prakritis: Vajrarṣabha Nāracasamhanana, Audārika Śarīra-Audārika Angopanga, Manusyagati ManusyagatyAnupurvi, and Manusyau. Here, there are 101 Bandha Prakritis and 16 Abandha Prakritis. In the Misra Gunasthana, there is no Vyuchchitti, and there are 69 Bandha Prakritis excluding Devayau, and 48 Abandha Prakritis. In the Asanyata Gunasthana, there are 4 Vyuchchitti Prakritis of Apratyakhyana Kshaya, 70 Bandha Prakritis including Devayau, and 47 Abandha Prakritis. In the Desha Samyata, there are 4 Vyuchchitti Prakritis of Pratyakhyana Kshaya, 66 Bandha Prakritis, and 51 Abandha Prakritis.

**Regarding the Bandha, Abandha, and Vyuchchitti related to the remaining four types of Tiryanchas excluding Labdhyaparyapta:**

There are 117 Bandha-worthy Prakritis. There are 5 Gunasthanas, etc.

| Gunasthana | Bandha | Abandha | Bandha Vyuchchitti | Special Description |
|---|---|---|---|---|
| Mithyatva | 31 | 16 (as mentioned in Gunasthana) | 31 [25 + 6 (Vajrarṣabha Nāracasamhanana, Audārika Dvika, Manusya Dvika, Manusyau)] |  |
| Sasadan | 47 (31 + 16 + 1 Devayau) | 47 (48 - 1 Devayau) | 4 (Apratyakhyana Kshaya) |  |
| Misra | 4 (Pratyakhyana Kshaya) |  |  |  |
| Asanyata |  |  |  |  |
| Deshavirata |  |  |  |  | 

Page #101:
---------------------------
Gommatsar Karmakanda - 63

There are 119 nature-bound qualities in the state of non-attainment of the four types of Tiryanchas, because in their state of non-attainment, there is no bondage of four lifetimes and hell-twins. Therefore, subtracting these six from the aforementioned 117, 111 nature-bound qualities remain. There are three Gunasthanas.

Here, in the Mithyatva Gunasthana, out of the 16 nature-bound qualities mentioned in the Gunasthana, 13 nature-bound qualities are without hell-twins and hell-lifetimes. There are 107 nature-bound qualities, because the bondage of Deva-lifetimes, Deva-lifetimes-following, Vikriya-body, Vikriya-limbs-and-parts does not occur for the non-attainment of Mithyatva and Sasadan Gunasthana. There are 4 nature-bound qualities. In the Sasadan Gunasthana, out of the aforementioned 31, there is a separation of 29 without Tiryancha and Manushya-lifetimes. Subtracting the 13 nature-bound qualities of the Mithyatva Gunasthana, there are 94 nature-bound qualities and 17 non-bound qualities. In the Asanyata Gunasthana, there is a separation of 4 Kashayas of non-rejection. Subtracting the aforementioned separated nature-bound qualities and adding the four Sura-qualities, there are 69 nature-bound qualities and 42 non-bound qualities.

The vision of the state of non-attainment related to the remaining four types of Tiryanchas without attainment-attainment.

Nature-bound qualities 199. Gunasthana three.

Mithyatva
Sasadan
Asanyata
Gunasthana Bondage
Non-bondage
Bondage
Nature-bound qualities Nature-bound qualities Separation
Nature-bound qualities
107 4
94
17
69
42
13
29
4
Special
4 (Sura-qualities) 13 (16-3 hell-twins, hell-lifetimes) 29 (31-2 Tiryancha, Manushya-lifetimes)
42 (46-4 Sura-qualities are bound. But this Gunasthana does not occur for Yoni-Tiryanchas) 4 (non-rejection Kashayas)

There is bondage of 109 nature-bound qualities without hell-lifetimes, hell-twins, Deva-lifetimes, Deva-twins, and Vikriya-twins for the attainment-attainment Tiryanchas (1917-8). Here, there is only one Mithyatva Gunasthana.

Now, the nature-bound qualities related to the Manushya-lifetimes, bondage, non-bondage, and separation of bondage are mentioned.

Tiryeva nare navari hu tittha haram ca atthi emeva. Samanna punna manushini nare apunna apunna eva. || 110 || 

Page #102:
---------------------------
Gommatasar Karmakanda-64

**Meaning:**

All statements related to the human realm should be understood as similar to the animal realm, but with the distinction that the bondage of Tirthankaras and Aharakas begins here. Therefore, there are 120 bondable natures here. The structure of bondage, non-bondage, etc., in ordinary humans, sufficient humans, and women is similar to the animal realm, and the structure of the attainable-sufficient human is similar to the attainable-sufficient animal.

**Special Meaning:**

In the human realm, although the detachment in the Asanyata Gunasthan is of the four natures of Apraatyakhyana Kashaya, and the detachment of the remaining six natures, Vajrarashabhanaraachadi, occurs only in the Sasadana Gunasthan, there is this special feature that the bondage of Tirthankaras and Aharakas is found in humans. Understand the structure of ordinary humans, sufficient humans, and women in the same way.

There are 120 bondable natures and 14 Gunasthanas. By subtracting the bondable natures from the detached natures of the previous Gunasthanas and adding them to the non-bondable natures with special mention, bondage and non-bondage occur in the Gunasthanas.

Here, in the Mithyatva Gunasthan, the detachment is of 16 natures, the bondage is of 117 natures excluding Tirthankaras and Aharakas, and the non-bondage is of 3 natures. In the Sasadana Gunasthan, the detachment is of 31 natures, like the animal realm, the bondage is of 101 natures, and the non-bondage is of 19 natures. In the Misra Gunasthan, the detached nature is zero, the bondage is of 69 natures excluding Devayus, and the non-bondage is of 51 natures. In the Asanyata Gunasthan, the detachment is of the four Kashayas of Apraatyakhyana, the bondage is of 71 natures due to the addition of Devayus and Tirthankaras, and the non-bondage is of 49 natures. In the Deshavirata Gunasthan, the detached nature is of the four Kashayas of Praatyakhyana, the bondage is of 67 natures, and the non-bondage is of 53 natures. From the Pramatta Gunasthan onwards to the Ayogi, understand the statement of detachment, bondage, and non-bondage as per the structure of the Gunasthanas.

**Structure of Bondage, Non-Bondage, and Detachment related to Ordinary Humans, Sufficient Humans, and Women:**

Bondable Natures: 120
Gunasthanas: 14

**Special:**

| Gunasthan | Bondage | Non-Bondage | Detachment |
|---|---|---|---|
| Mithyatva | 117 | 3 | 16 |
| Sasadana | 101 | 19 | 31 (25 + 6 Vajrarashabhanaraachadi mentioned earlier) |
| Misra | 69 | 51 (31 + 19 + 1 Devayu) | 51 (31 + 19 + 1 Devayu) |
| Asanyata | 71 | 49 (51 - 2 Tirthankaras, Devayu) | 4 (Apraatyakhyana Kashaya) |
| Deshasanyata | 67 | 53 | 4 (Praatyakhyana Kashaya) |
|  | 3 (Tirthankaras, Aharakas) | 0 | 4 | 

Page #103:
---------------------------
**Pramattasanyata, Apramatta, Apurvakarana, Anivrittikarana | 22 Sukshmasamparaya, Upshantamoha, Kshinamoha, Sayogi, Ayogi**

**Gommatatar Karmakanda-65..................... 66 (Gunasthanokta)**
**61 (63-2 Aharakdvak) 1 (Devayu) 36 (Gunasthanokta) 5 (Gunasthanokta) 16 (Gunasthanokta) 1 (Sataavedaniya) | 1 (Sataavedaniya) | 5 (Vyuchchittirupa Sataavedaniya)**

There are 112 natures that are capable of bondage in the state of Nirvrittiparayapta for both ordinary and perfect humans. These three mixed-body yogis are Nirvrittiparayapta, therefore, the bondage of these eight natures - Chaarayu, Narakdrik, Aharakdvak - does not occur here. The five Gunasthans are Mithyatva, Sasadan, Asanyata, Pramatta, and Sayogi.

Here, in the Mithyatvagunasthan, out of the 16 mentioned in Gunasthanokta, 13 natures are excluded, excluding Narakdvik and Narakayu. There are 107 natures capable of bondage, excluding Devagati, Devagatyānupūrvi, Vaikriyikasharīra, Vaikriyikanopan, and Tirthankara, and 5 natures that are not capable of bondage. In the Sasadangunasthan, out of the aforementioned 31, 29 natures are excluded, excluding Manushya-Tiryanchāyu. There are 94 natures capable of bondage and 18 natures that are not capable of bondage. In the Asanyatagunasthan, there is an exclusion of four-four Kashayas (8 natures) in the form of Apratyakhyan-Pratyakhyan. There are 70 natures capable of bondage, including Surachatushk and Tirthankara, and 42 natures that are not capable of bondage. In the Pramattagunasthan, there is an exclusion of 6 related to Pramatta (Devayu related to Apramatta is also not included in bondage here), 34 related to Apurvakarana excluding Aharakdvak, 5 related to Anivrittikarana, and 16 related to Sukshmasamparaya. There is an exclusion of all these (6+34+5+16) 61 natures. There are 62 natures capable of bondage and 50 natures that are not capable of bondage. In the Sayogigunasthan, there is an exclusion of one Sataavedaniya. There is one Sataavedaniya capable of bondage and 1113 natures that are not capable of bondage. Here, there is a special feature that the fourth and sixth Gunasthans do not occur for Manushyani because there is no birth in Manushyani with Samyaktva. And in the Pramattasanyatagunasthan of the beings who have Bhavastriveda, Aharakdvak does not arise, meaning that the Aharak Riddhi does not arise in those beings. 

Page #104:
---------------------------
Gommatasar Karmakanda-66

In the state of Nivrutti-paryapta for ordinary humans, sufficient humans, and humans, the binding, non-binding, and binding-cessation are as follows:

There are 112 binding-prone natures (120-8) out of the eight: four Ayus, two Narakas, and two Aharakas. There are five Gunasthanas. Gunasthanas are: Binding, Non-binding, Binding.

Specific Natures | Nature Cessation | Mithyatva
5 (Sur-Chatushk, Tirthankara) | 13 (Gunasthan-mentioned 16 - two Narakas, Naraka-Ayu) | 29 (Paryaptavat 31-2, Manushya, Tiryancha-Ayu), but
the cessation for Manushya is 98 natures. Asan-yata
42 (29+18+5, Tirthankara-Sur-Chatushk) | 8 (four each of Pratyakhyana and Apratyakhyana Kshayas) Note - This Gunasthan does not occur for Manushya. 61 (6 of Pramatta + two Aharakas without A-purvakarana | 34 + 5 of Anivrutti-karana + 16 of Sukshma San.)
This Gunasthan also does not occur for Manushya. Sayogi
1 (Sata-vedaniya)
Sasadan
Pramatta

The entire description of a Labdhya-paryapta Manushya is the same as that of a Labdhya-paryapta Tiryancha. Here, the binding-prone natures are 109, excluding Tirthankara, two Aharakas, Deva-Ayu, Bharaka-Ayu, and Vaikriya-Shatka. The only Gunasthan here is Mithyatva. Further, in the Deva-Gati, it is stated:

"Nireva hodi deve aisanoti satta vam chidi.
Sollas cheva abandha bhavanatie nasthi titthayaram." ||111||

Meaning: The entire description of Deva-Gati is to be known as Naraka-Gati, but the special feature here is that in the Mithyatva Gunasthan, only seven natures, up to Isana-Swarga, undergo cessation. The remaining nine natures do not bind here, hence these nine, along with Sur-Chatushk, Deva-Ayu, Aharaka-Sharira, and Aharaka Angopanga, are seven... 

Page #105:
---------------------------
Gommatasar Karmakanda-67: Since all 16 natures are not capable of bondage, only 104 natures are bound here. The Tirthankara nature is not bound in the Bhavanatrik Devas.

Special Meaning: In the Mithyatva Gunasthan related to the Deva-Gati, the following 9 natures are not capable of bondage: Sukshma, Apariyapta, Sadharana, Dvi-Indriya, Tri-Indriya, Chatur-Indriya, Naraka-Dvik, and Naraka-Ayu. Therefore, these 9, along with Deva-Gati, Deva-Gati-Anupurvi, Vaikriyik-Sharira-Vaikriyik-Ango-Upang, Deva-Ayu, Aharak-Sharira-Aharak-Ango-Upang, which together make 16 natures, are not bound in Deva-Gati. Therefore, only the general 104 natures are bound as per Go. 1.14.

According to the verses "Kappitthisu Na Tiththam" (Gatha 112) in all Bhavanatrik, the Tirthankara nature is not bound in the Kalpa-Vasi Deva-Anganas. Therefore, there are 103 natures capable of bondage here, and there are four Gunasthanas. In the Mithyatva Gunasthan, the following are unbound: Vyuchchhinti Mithyatva, Hundak-Sansthan, Napunsak-Ved, Supaatika-Sanhanan, Eka-Indriya, Sthavar, and Atap. There are 103 natures capable of bondage, and zero unbound natures. In the Sasadan Gunasthan, there are 25 unbound natures as mentioned in the Gunasthan, 96 bound natures, and 7 unbound natures. In the Mishra Gunasthan, there are zero unbound natures, 70 bound natures excluding Manusya-Ayu, and 33 unbound natures. In the Asanyata Gunasthan, there are 10 unbound natures, 71 bound natures including Manusya-Ayu, and 32 unbound natures.

The complete view of the Bhavanatrik and the Kalpa-Vasi Deva-Anganas regarding the state of Paryapta:

Bound Natures: 103
Gunasthanas: 4

| Gunasthan | Bound | Unbound | Vyuchchhinti |
|---|---|---|---|
| Mithyatva | 103 | 0 | 7 (Mithyatva, Hundak-Sansthan, Napunsak-Ved, Supaatika-Sanhanan, Eka-Indriya, Sthavar, Atap) |
| Sasadan | 96 | 7 | 25 (As mentioned in Gunasthan) |
| Mishra | 70 | 33 | 0 |
| Asanyata | 71 | 32 | 10 |

In the Saudharma-Ishan Svarga, there are 104 natures capable of bondage. There are four Gunasthanas. Here, in the Mithyatva Gunasthan, there are 7 unbound natures, 103 bound natures excluding Tirthankara, and 1 unbound nature. In the Sasadan Gunasthan, there are 25 unbound natures, 96 bound natures, and 8 unbound natures. In the Mishra Gunasthan, there are zero unbound natures, 70 bound natures excluding Manusya-Ayu, and 34 unbound natures. In the Asanyata Gunasthan, there are 10 unbound natures, 72 bound natures including Manusya-Ayu and Tirthankara, and 32 unbound natures. 

Page #106:
---------------------------
## Gunasthana
## Mithyatva
## Sasadan
## Misra
## Asanyata
## Gommatasar Karmakanda - 68
## Soudharma - Bandha, Abandha, and Vyuchchitti in the Isanaswarga

**Bandha-Yogya Prakriti 104. Gunasthana 4.**

| Bandha | Abandha | Vyuchchitti |
|---|---|---|
| 103 | 96 | 1 |
| 8 | 34 | 72 |
| 32 | 70 | 6 |
| 25 | 0 | 10 |

**Vishesh:**

* 1 (Tirthankara) 7 (Mithyatvaadi Purvokt)
* 34 (25 + 8 + 1 Manushyayu)
* 32 (34 - 2 Tirthankara and Manushyayu)

**Kapitthi na titham sadarasahasaragotti tiriyaduga. Tiriyaau ujjavo aththi tado natthi sadarachou. || 112 ||**

**Meaning:** There is no bandha of the Tirthankara prakriti in the Kalpavasini Devas. The bandha of the four prakritis - Tiriyachgat, Tiriyachgatyaanupurvi, Tiriyachyu, and Udyot - occurs until the eleventh and twelfth (Satara-Sahasara) svargas. These four prakritis are also called "Shatara Chatushk" because their bandha occurs only until the Shataryugal. Their bandha does not occur in the subsequent svargas like Anatadi.

**Vishesharth:** The mention of bandha, abandha, etc. in the Kalpavasini Devas should be understood like the Bhavanatrik. The complete description of this has been given in the previous gatha along with the Bhavanatrik.

The structure of the ten svargas starting from Sanatkumaradi is similar to Narakagati. Here, the bandha-yogya prakriti is 101 and the gunasthana is 4 because the bandha of Ekendriya, Sthavara, and Atap prakritis does not occur in these svargas. (104 - 3 = 101).

In the Isanaswarga, the vyuchchitti of the seven prakritis occurs in the Mithyatva gunasthana. Out of these, only Mithyatva, Hundakasanstana, Napumsakaved, and Sripatikasanhanan have vyuchchitti in the Mithyatva gunasthana.

* Bandha-yogya prakriti is 100 without Tirthankara.
* Abandha is of the Tirthankara prakriti.

**Sasadan Gunasthana:**

* Vyuchchhinna prakriti is 25.
* Bandha prakriti is 96.
* Abandha prakriti is 5.

**Misra Gunasthana:**

* Vyuchchitti is zero.
* Bandha prakriti is 70 without Manushyayu.
* Abandha is 31.

**Asanyata Gunasthana:**

* Vyuchchitti is 10.
* Bandha prakriti is 72 including Manushyayu and Tirthankara.
* Abandha is 29. 

Page #107:
---------------------------
Gommatasar Karmakanda-69: A Detailed Look at Bandha (Bondage) from Sanatkumar to Sahasrar Swarg

Here, in the state of Paryapta (perfection), there are 101 Bandha-yogya (bondable) natures. There are four Gunasthanas (stages of spiritual development).

| Gunasthan | Bandha | Abandha | Vyuchchitti | Special |
|---|---|---|---|---|
| 1 (Tirthankara) | 4 (Mithyatva, Hundakasanstahan, Napumsakaved, and Sripaatika Sanhanan) | 100 | Mithyatva |  |
| 31 (25 + 5 + 1 Manushyayu) | 29 (31 - 2 Tirthankara-Manushyayu) |  | Sasadan |  |
|  |  |  | 21 (25 - 4 Shatar Chatushk) | Mishr |
|  |  |  | 27 (21 + 5 + 1 Manushyayu) | Asanyat |
|  |  |  | 25 (27 - 2 Tirthankara-Manushyayu) |  |

The Shatar Chatushk's bandha only extends to the Shatar-Sahasrar Swarg pair. Therefore, in the four heavens of Anatadi and Navagraiveyak, there are 97 Bandha-yogya natures (101 - 4). There are four Gunasthanas. Here, in the Mithyatva Gunasthan, there are 96 Bandha-natures excluding the Tirthankara, 1 Abandha-nature, and 4 Vyuchchitti (liberation). In the Sasadan Gunasthan, there are 21 Vyuchchitti, 92 Bandha, and 5 Abandha natures excluding the Shatar Chatushk. In the Mishr Gunasthan, there is no Vyuchchitti, 70 Bandha-natures excluding Manushyayu, and 27 Abandha natures. In the Asanyat Gunasthan, there are 10 Vyuchchitti natures, 72 Bandha natures including Tirthankara-Manushyayu, and 25 Abandha natures.

Here, in the state of Paryapta, there are 97 Bandha-yogya natures related to the four heavens of Anatadi and Navagraiveyak. There are four Gunasthanas.

| Gunasthan | Bandha | Abandha | Special |
|---|---|---|---|
| 0 | 4 (Mithyatvadi Purvokt) |  | Mithyatva |
|  |  | 21 (25 - 4 Shatar Chatushk) | Sasadan |
|  |  | 27 (21 + 5 + 1 Manushyayu) | Mishr |
|  |  | 25 (27 - 2 Tirthankara-Manushyayu) | Asanyat |

Anuttara Vimana Vasi Ahamindradev are all Samyagdristi (right-seeing). They have 72 Bandha-yogya natures and only one Gunasthan, Asanyat.

In Sarvabhavan Trik and Kalpa Vasi Devjana, there are 103 Bandha-yogya natures. However, in their state of Nirvritti Paryapta, there is no bandha of Tiryanch-Manushyayu, making the Bandha-yogya natures 101. There are two Gunasthanas because Asanyat Samyagdristi Maranakar (death-causing) does not arise here. 

Page #108:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-70

Here, in the Mithyatva Gunasthan, there are 7 Vyuchchitti, 101 Bandha Prakriti, and no Abandha. In the Sasadan Gunasthan, there are 24 Vyuchchitti, 94 Bandha Prakriti, and 7 Abandha Prakriti. In the Nirvritti Paryapta Avastha of all Bhavan Trika and Kalpa Vasi Devangana, there are 101 Bandha Yogya Prakriti.

| Gunasthan | Bandha | Abandha | Vyuchchitti |
|---|---|---|---|
| Mithyatva | 101 | 0 | 7 |
| Sasadan | 94 | 7 | 24 |

**Special Mithyatva**

* 7 (Mithyatva-Hundak-Sansthanadi Purvokt)
* 24 (25-1 Tiryanchayu)

In the Nirvritti Paryapta Avastha related to Saudharma-Ishana Svarga, there are 102 Bandha Yogya Prakriti, including Tirthankara. The Gunasthan are Mithyatva, Sasadan, and Asanyata.

Here, in the Mithyatva Gunasthan, there are 7 Vyuchchitti, 101 Bandha Prakriti (excluding Tirthankara), and 1 Abandha. In the Sasadan Gunasthan, there are 24 Vyuchchitti (excluding Tiryanchayu), 94 Bandha Prakriti, and 8 Abandha Prakriti. In the Asanyata Gunasthan, there are 9 Vyuchchitti (excluding Manushyayu), 71 Bandha Prakriti, and 31 Abandha Prakriti. In the Nirvritti Paryapta Avastha related to Saudharma-Ishana Svarga, there are 102 Bandha Yogya Prakriti and three Gunasthan.

| Gunasthan | Bandha | Abandha |
|---|---|---|
| Mithyatva | 101 | 1 |
| Sasadan | 94 | 8 |
| Asanyata | 71 | 31 |

**Special Mithyatva**

* 1 (Tirthankara)
* 7 (Mithyatvaadi Purvokt)
* 24 (Purvokt)
* 31 (24 + 8 - 1 Tirthankara)
* 9 (Gunasthanokt 10 - 5 Manushyayu)

In the Nirvritti Paryapta Avastha of the 10 Svargas from Sanatkumar to Sahasrar, there are 99 Bandha Yogya Prakriti. There are three Gunasthan. Here, in the Mithyatva Gunasthan, there are 4 Vyuchchitti (Mithyatvaadi), 98 Bandha Prakriti (excluding Tirthankara), and 1 Abandha Prakriti. In the Sasadan Gunasthan, there are 24 Vyuchchitti, 94 Bandha Prakriti, and 5 Abandha Prakriti. In the Asanyata Gunasthan, there are 9 Vyuchchitti, 71 Bandha Prakriti (including Tirthankara), and 28 Abandha Prakriti.

10

Page #109:
---------------------------
Gommatsar Karmakanda - 71
Sanatkumara etc. 10 in the heavens, the perception of bondage etc. -
Here, in the state of Nirvritti-paryapta, there are 99 bondable natures. Three Gunasthanas.
Abandha Vyuchchitti
1
Special
1 ( Tirthankara) 4 ( Mithyatva, Hundakasanstahan, Napumsaka - Veda, Pattikasanhanan)
24 ( Gunasthanokta 25 - 1 Tiryanchayu)
28 (24+5-1 Tirthankara) 9 ( Gunasthanokta
10- 1 Manushayau)
In the four heavens of Anata etc. and in Navagraiveyak, there are 96 bondable natures without Tiryancha-dvik Udyotara. There are three Gunasthanas. Here, in the Mithyatva Gunasthan, there are 4 natures of Vyuchchitti. 95 natures of Bandha, 1 nature of Abandha. In the Sasadan Gunasthan, there are 21 natures of Vyuchchitti without Shatarachatuska, 91 natures of Bandha, 5 natures of Abandha. In the Asanyata Gunasthan, there are 9 natures of Vyuchchinn, 71 natures of Bandha, and 25 natures of Abandha.
Gunasthan
Bandha
Mithyatva 98
Sasadan
94
5.
Asanyata 71 28
Gunasthan
Mithyatva
Sasadan
Perception of Bandha, Abandha, and Vyuchchitti natures related to Anata-Pranata-Aran-Achyuta heavens and Navagraiveyak
Here, in the state of Nirvritti-paryapta, there are 96 bondable natures. Three Gunasthanas.
Asanyata 71
4
Bandha Abandha Vyuchchitti
95
1
91
S
24
9
25
4
21
9
Special
1 ( Tirthankara) 4 ( Mithyatva etc. mentioned earlier)
21 ( Gunasthanokta 25-4 Tiryanchagati, Tiryanchagaty anupurvi, Tiryanchayu and Udyotara Shatarachatuska)
25 (21+5-1 Tirthankara) 9 ( Gunasthanokta 10-1 Manushayau)
All the gods of Anudish and Anuttaravasi are Asanyata. In their state of Nirvritti-paryapta, there are 71 bondable natures, and one Gunasthan of Asanyata.
|| Iti Gati Margana || 

Page #110:
---------------------------
## Gommatasar Karmakanda 72: Indriyamargna

**Here, the bondage, non-bondage, and liberation from bondage related to Indriyamargna are discussed:**

**Verse 113:**

"Punnidaram vigivigale tatthuppanno hu sasani dehe. Pajjattim navi pavdi idi naratiriyamgam natthi."

**Meaning:**

There are 109 bondable natures in the one-sense and three-sense beings, similar to the sufficient conditions for attainment. Here, the two Gunasthanas are Mithyatva and Sasadan. A being born in the one-sense and three-sense beings cannot fulfill the sufficient conditions in the Sasadan Gunasthana. Therefore, they do not experience bondage in the Tiryancha and Manushya Ayus. Hence, liberation from bondage for these two occurs in the first Gunasthana.

**Detailed Explanation:**

In Indriyamargna, there is no bondage for the 11 natures like Tirthankara, Aharakadvik, Devayus, Narakayus, and Vaikriyika Shatak, similar to the sufficient conditions for attainment in the one-sense and three-sense beings. Therefore, there are 109 bondable natures. There are two Gunasthanas. In the first Gunasthana, out of the 16 natures that are liberated, three are removed (Narakadvik and Narakayus) and two are added (Manushya Ayus and Tiryancha Ayus). Therefore, 15 natures are liberated in the Mithyatva Gunasthana. This is because the time for the Sasadan Gunasthana is short, and the time for the sufficient conditions for liberation is long. Therefore, the body-related sufficient conditions are not fulfilled in the Sasadan Gunasthana, and there is no bondage for Manushya and Tiryancha Ayus. In the Mithyatva Gunasthana, there are 109 bondable natures and zero non-bondable natures. In the Sasadan Gunasthana, there are 29 liberated natures, 94 bondable natures, and 15 non-bondable natures.

**Summary of Bondage, Non-Bondage, and Liberation from Bondage in One-Sense and Three-Sense Beings:**

* Bondable Natures: 109
* Gunasthanas: 2

| Gunasthana | Bondage | Non-Bondage | Liberation |
|---|---|---|---|
| Mithyatva | 109 | 0 | 15 |
| Sasadan | 94 | 29 | 29 |

**Special Note:**

The 15 liberated natures in the Sasadan Gunasthana are the 16 mentioned in the Gunasthanas, minus the three (Narakadvik, Narakayus) and plus the two (Manushya Ayus, Tiryancha Ayus). The 29 liberated natures are the 31 mentioned in the Tiryancha Gati, minus the two (Tiryancha, Manushya Ayus).

**According to the verse "Panchidie Ogham" (Verse 114), the bondage, non-bondage, etc., related to the five-sense beings should be understood in the same way as the Gunasthanas. There is no difference here. Here, there are 120 bondable natures and 14 Gunasthanas. The summary is as follows:** 

Page #111:
---------------------------
Gommatasar Karmakanda-73

The number of vyuchchitti in Mithyatvaadi Gunasthanas are 16-25-0-10-4-6-1-36 and 5-16-00-5- respectively. The number of bandha prakritis in Mithyatvaadi Gunasthanas are 115-101-74-77-67-63-59-5822-17-1-1-1 and the number of abandha prakritis are 3-19-46-43-53 and 57-61-62-98103-119-119-119 and 120 respectively. The sandristi of these should be known as per the sandristi mentioned in Gunasthanas.

There are 112 (120-4 Aayu + Narakdvak + Aaharakdvak) bandha yogya prakritis in Panchendriya Simulyaek. There are five Gunasthanas. The bandha of Tirthankara and Surachaturshka is only in Asanyata Gunasthan, hence all the statements are similar to Nivruttiparayapta manushya, but the speciality is that the vyuchchitti of Audarikdvak, Manushyadvik, Vajrarashbhanaraachasanhanan these five prakritis are mentioned in the second Gunasthan in Manushya Gati, but here it happens in the fourth Gunasthan because all the four Gati Nivruttiparayapta jeevas are possible in Panchendriya Nivruttiparayapta. The bandha vyuchchitti of Audarikdvak, Manushyadvik and Vajrarashbhanaraachasanhanan happens in the fourth Gunasthan of Dev and Naraki. Out of the 520 bandha yogya prakritis, 4 Aayu, Aaharakdvak and Narakdvak these eight prakritis are reduced, hence 112 bandha yogya prakritis are mentioned. The five Gunasthanas are Mithyatva, Saasadan, Asanyata, Prammatta and Sayogi.

Here, the vyuchchitti in Mithyatva Gunasthan is 13, bandha prakriti is 107 and abandha prakriti is 5. In Saasadan Gunasthan, the vyuchchitti is 24, bandha is 94 and abandha is 18. In Asanyata Gunasthan, the vyuchchitti is 13, bandha is 75 and abandha is 37. In Prammatta Gunasthan, the vyuchchitti is 61, bandha is 62 and abandha is 50. In Sayogi Kevali Gunasthan, the vyuchchitti is 1, bandha is 1 and abandha is 111. This statement related to Nivruttiparayapta Panchendriya should be known with respect to all the four Gatis. The sandristi of bandha-abandha-bandha vyuchchitti in Panchendriya Nivruttiparayapta jeeva is:

Bandha Yogya Prakriti: 112
Gunasthan: 5
Gunasthan | | Bandha | Abandha | Bandha
Special
Vyuchchitti
Mithyatva
| 107
5 (Devchaturshka, Tirthankara) 13 (Gunasthanokta 163 Narakdvak, Narakayu) 24 (Gunasthanokta 25-1 Tiryaavayu)
Saasadan
94 | 18 |
24
|

Page #112:
---------------------------
## Gommatasara Karmakanda-74

**Asaya**
**Pramatta**
| 62 | 50 |
61
37 (24+18-5 Devacatuṣka and Tirthankara) 13 (Gunasthanokta 10-1 Manushayau + 4 Pratyakhyanakṣaya) 65 (Pramatta's 6 + Apramatta's 0 + Apurvakarana's 34 + Anivṛttikarana's 5 + Sūkṣmasāmprāya's 16 = 61, because there is no bondage of Devayau and Aharakadvīka) | 1 - Sātavedaniya
**Samyogi**
1
111 |
1
In Pañcendriyalabdhāparyāptak, the bondable nature is 109, because there is no bondage of these 11 natures: Tirthankara, Aharakadvīka, Devayau, Narakāyu, and Vaikriyikaṣaṭka. Gunasthāna is one Mithyātva.
|| Iti Indriyamārgaṇā ||

***

**Atha Kāyamārgaṇā** Now, in comparison to Indriyamārgaṇā, in Pañcendriya, and in comparison to Kāyamārgaṇā, in the five stationary bodies, starting from the Earth body, we will discuss bondage, etc.

**Pañcindriyesu Ogham Eyakkhe Vā Vaṇapphadīyamte.**
**Maṇuvadugam Maṇuvāū Ucca Ṇa Hi Teu Vāumhi ||114||**

**Meaning:** The description of Vyucchitti, etc., related to Pañcendriya, is known as Gunasthāna, and there is no special significance in it. (This has been discussed in Indriyanārgaṇā, so you can learn it from there). In Kāyamārgaṇā, the knowledge of Vyucchitti, etc., is the same for the one-sense body, from the Earth body to the Plant body. The special point is that in the Fire body and Air body, there is no bondage of Manushayati, Manushayatyānupūrvi-Manushayau, and Ucchagotra, these four.

**Special Meaning:** In Kāyamārgaṇā, from the Earth body to the Plant body, there are 109 bondable natures, excluding these 11 natures: Tirthankara, Aharakadvīka, Devayau, Tarakāyu, and Vaikriyikaṣaṭka. Out of these, for the beings born in the Earth body, Water body, and Plant body, the body-fulfillment is not complete while they are in the Sāsādanagunasthāna. Therefore, the bondage of Tiryanchayu and Manushayau happens only in the Mithyātvagunasthāna. Due to this, in the Mithyātvagunasthāna, there are 15 natures of Vyucchitti, 109 natures of bondage, and 0 natures of non-bondage. 

Page #113:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-75: In the Sasadan Gunasthan, there are 29 Vyuchchitti (dispersed) natures, 94 Bandha (binding) natures, and 15 Abandha (non-binding) natures. This section discusses the Bandha, Abandha, etc., in the Prithvikaaya (earth body), Jalakaaya (water body), and Vanaspatikaaya (plant body).

**Bandha-yoga (binding) natures: 109**
**Gunasthan: 2**
**Gunasthan, Bandha, Abandha Vyuchchitti**
**Special: Mithyatva (false belief): 109 | 0 | 15 | 15 (as per Gunasthan 16-3: Naraka-dvik, Naraka-ayu + 2 Manushaya-ayu, Tiryancha-ayu) | 94 | 15**
**29 (as per Tiryancha-gati: 31-2 Tiryancha-ayu and Manushaya-ayu)**
**Sasadan**

In the Teja-kaaya (fire body) and Vayu-kaaya (air body), there are 105 Bandha-yoga natures, excluding Manushaya-dvik (two human births), Manushaya-ayu (human lifespan), and Uchcha-gotra (higher lineage). The Gunasthan is Mithyatva.

The reason for having only one Gunasthan in Teja-kaaya and Vayu-kaaya is explained, and the Bandha, etc., in the Trasa-kaaya (three bodies) is discussed:

"Na hi Sasano apunne saharanasuhumange ya teuduge." (Meaning: There is no Sasadan Gunasthan in those who are Labdhyaparyapta (have attained sufficient merit), have a Saharana-sharira (ordinary body), are Sarvasukshma (all-pervasive), and are Teja-kaaya and Vayu-kaaya beings.)

According to the latter part of the same verse, "Ogham tas," the structure of the Trasa-kaaya should be understood as similar to the Gunasthan.

**Special meaning:** There is no Sasadan Gunasthan in those who are Labdhyaparyapta, have an ordinary body, are all-pervasive, and are Teja-kaaya and Vayu-kaaya beings. They are not born in Naraka (hell) with Sasadan. Therefore, there is no Sasadan Gunasthan in Naraka-gati (hell realm) due to the insufficient state of the Naraki (hell beings).

In Trasa-kaaya beings, there are 120 Bandha-yoga natures and 14 Gunasthan. Their brief description is as follows:

In the Gunasthan of Mithyatva, etc., the Vyuchchhinna (dispersed) natures are 16-25-Shunya-10-4-6-1-36-5-16-Shunya-Shunya-1 and Shunya, respectively. The Bandha natures are 117-101-74-77-67-63-59-58-22-17-1-1-1 and Shunya, respectively, in the Gunasthan of Mithyatva, etc. The Abandha natures are 3-19-46-43-53-57-61-62-98-103-119-119-119 and 120, respectively, in the Gunasthan. For detailed information, refer to the Gunasthan-ukta Sandrishti (references from the Gunasthan). 

Page #114:
---------------------------
Gommatasar Karmakanda-76:  A statement about bondage and non-bondage related to the insufficiency of the destruction of the three poisons, to be understood as similar to the insufficiency of the five senses. The bondable natures are 112 and the Gunasthanas are 1-2-4-6 and 13.
||  Iti Kayamargna ||
***
Atha Yogamargna:  The flow of the three poisons is stopped in the mind and speech.  The destruction of the human path. || 115 ||
Meaning:  To know the statement about Gunasthanas in the body of the three poisons. (This has been fully explained in the Kayamargna).
In the Yogamargna, the mind-yoga and speech-yoga are to be understood as similar to the Gunasthanas in all their structure, and the bondage and non-bondage, etc., in the noble body-yoga are to be understood as similar to the human path.
Special Meaning:  In mind-yoga and speech-yoga, the bondable natures are 120 and the Gunasthanas are 13, from falsehood to the state of being with the liberated.  Their brief structure is as follows:  In the Gunasthanas of falsehood, etc., the natures that are released are 16-25-zero-10-4-6-one-36-5-16-zero-zero and one, respectively.  The bondable natures are 117-101-74-77-67-63-59-58-22-17-1-1 and 1, respectively, from falsehood to the state of being with the liberated.  Here, in the Gunasthanas, there are 3-19-46-43-53-57-61-62-98-103-119-119 and 119 natures, respectively.  To understand their special details, one should see the details mentioned in the Gunasthanas.  The only difference here is that in mind-yoga and speech-yoga, there are only 13 Gunasthanas and they only have the state of sufficiency.
The bondage, non-bondage, and release related to the noble body-yoga are all similar to the human path.  The bondable natures are 120 and the Gunasthanas are 13.  The brief statement is as follows:  Here, from falsehood to the state of being with the liberated, the natures that are released in the Gunasthanas are 16-31-zero-4-4-6-one-36-5-16-zero-zero and one.  The bondable natures are 117-101-69-71-67-63-59-58-22-17-1-1 and 1, respectively, in the Gunasthanas.  The non-bondable natures are 3-19-51-49-53-57-61-62-98-103-119-119 and 119, respectively.  For special details, one should see the details related to the human path.  Now, we will discuss the statement related to the noble mixed body-yoga:
The flow of the three poisons is not stopped in the mixed body, nor is the flow of the five senses.  The path of falsehood is not the path of the gods, nor is it the path of the Tirthankaras.  It is not a path of liberation. || 116 || 

Page #115:
---------------------------


Page #116:
---------------------------
Gommatasar Karmakanda-78

The details of bondage and non-bondage in Audarik-Mishra-Kaya-Yoga are as follows:

Bondable Nature: 114.
Gunasthan: 4.
Gunasthan | Bondage | Non-bondage | Vyuchchitti | Special | Mithyatva
5 (Tirthankara, Dev-Chatushk) 15 (Gunasthan-Ukt 16
Naraka-Dwik and Naraka-Ayu +2 Manushya-Ayu, Tiryancha-Ayu) Sasadan
29 (Tiryancha-Gati in which 35-2 Tiryancha-Ayu
Manushya-Ayu) Asanyata
44 (29+20-5 Tirthankara and Dev-Chatushk) 69
(70-1 Satavedaniya) Sayogi
5 (Satavedaniya) Its Vyuchchitti occurs in Audarik-Kaya-Yoga, not in Audarik-Mishra.

Deve ya Veguvve Missee Naratiriya-Aaugam Natthi.
Chhattagun-Vahhare Tammissee Natthi Deva-au. ||118.||

Meaning: In Vaikriyik-Kaya-Yoga, the nature of bondage is the same as that of Dev-Gati. In Vaikriyik-Mishra-Kaya-Yoga, there is no bondage of Manushya-Ayu and Tiryancha-Ayu. In Aharak-Kaya-Yoga, the structure is similar to the sixth Gunasthan, but in Aharak-Mishra-Kaya-Yoga, there is no bondage of Deva-Ayu.

Special Meaning: In Vaikriyik-Kaya-Yoga, the natures of bondage are the same as those of Dev-Gati, which are 104. There is no bondage of Sukshma-Tray (Sukshma-Sadharan-Aparayapt), Vikal-Tray, Naraka-Dwik, Naraka-Ayu, Sura-Chatushk, Deva-Ayu, and Aharak-Dwik. There are four Gunasthan, etc.

Here, in Mithyatva-Gunasthan, there is Vyuchchitti of 7 without the nine natures of Sukshma-Tray, etc. There are 103 natures of bondage and one nature of non-bondage, which is Tirthankara. In Sasadan-Gunasthan, there is Vyuchchitti of 25, 96 natures of bondage, and 8 natures of non-bondage. In Mishra-Gunasthan, there is no Vyuchchitti, 70 natures of bondage without Manushya-Ayu, and 34 natures of non-bondage. In Asanyata-Gunasthan, there is Vyuchchitti of 10, 72 natures of bondage (including Tirthankara and Manushya-Ayu), and 32 natures of non-bondage (excluding Tirthankara and Manushya-Ayu). 

Page #117:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda - 79
Vairyika Kayayoga: 104 Bandha-yoga-prakritis. Gunasthan 4.
**Details**
Gunasthan Bandha Abandha Vyuchchitti Mithyatva 103 1
Sasadan
Mishra
70
Asanyata 72
96
8
34
32
Sasadan
94
Asanyata 71
6
8
25
x
0
Out of the 104 Vairyika-abhitra-kavayogi-yoga-prakritis mentioned earlier, 102 are without human and animal life. There are three Gunasthanas: 1, 2, and 4. This is the same for all, like the Aparaptadevas of Saudharma Ishanasvarga.
Bandha-yoga-prakriti 102. Gunasthan 3. Gunasthan Bandha Abandha | Vyuchchitti
Mithyatva 101 1
31
10
Here, in Mithyatva Gunasthan, there are 7 Vyuchchhinna prakritis, 101 Bandha-rupa prakritis, and one Tirthankara prakriti. In Sasadan Gunasthan, there are 24 Vyuchchitti prakritis without animal life, 94 Bandha prakritis, and 8 Abandha prakritis. In Asanyata Gunasthan, there are 9 Vyuchchitti prakritis without human life, 71 Bandha-rupa prakritis including Tirthankaras, and 31 Abandha prakritis excluding Tirthankaras.
The Sandristi related to Vairyika-mishra-kayayoga is as follows:
1 (Tirtha) 7 (Gunasthanokta 16-9: Sukshma, Sadharana, Aparapata, Vikalatraya, Narakadvika, Narakayu)
7
8 (7+1) 25 (Gunasthanokta)
34 (25+8+1: Manushyayu)
10 (Gunasthanokta) 32 (34 - 2 Tirthankaras,
Manushyayu)
24
9
**Details**
7 (Mithyatva Hundakasanstahan, Napumsaka Veda, Spatika-Sanhanan, Ekendriya, Sthavara, Atapa) 1 (Tirthankara)
24 (Gunasthanokta 25-1: Tiryanchayu)
31 (Tiryanchati mentioned 32 - 1 Tirthankara) 9 (Gunasthanokta 10-1: Manushyayu) 

Page #118:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-80: All statements related to Aharakakaya Yoga should be known as per the Pramatta Gunasthan. There are 6 Vyuchchittirupa Prakruti, 63 Bandhyogya Prakruti and 57 Abandha Prakruti.

Aharakamisra Kaya Yogi has 6 Vyuchchittirupa Prakruti, 62 Bandhyogya Prakruti, as there is no Bandha of Devayuka here, and 58 Abandha Prakruti. Further, in Karmanakaya Yoga, the statement of Bandha-Abandha etc. is as follows:

"Kamme Uralamisam Va Naaudugampi Nav Chidi Ayada." Meaning: The entire structure of Karmanakaya Yoga is similar to Audarik Misra Kaya Yoga, but due to the absence of Ayuka Bandha in Vigraha Gati, there is no Bandha of Manushyayu and Tiryanchayau. In Asanyata Gunasthan, there is Vyuchchitti of 9 Prakruti related to Asanyata Gunasthan.

Special Meaning: In Karmanakaya Yoga, there is no Ayuka Bandha in Vigraha Gati, therefore, there are 112 Bandhyogya Prakruti without Tiryanchayau and Manushyayau. There are four Gunasthan. In Mithyatva Gunasthan, there are 13 Vyuchchhin Prakruti, 197 Bandha Prakruti and Abandha of Tirthankara and Devachatushk. In Sasadan Gunasthan, there is Vyuchchitti of 24 without Tiryanchayau. Bandha Prakruti is 94 and Abandha Prakruti is 18. In Asanyata Gunasthan, there is Vyuchchhin Prakruti of 9 without Manushyayau of Asanyata Gunasthan, 4 of Deshasanyata, 6 of Pramatta, Devayuka related to Aprammatta is not counted here, 34 of Aapuurvakaran without Aharakadvik, 5 of Anivrittikaran and 16 of Sukshma Samparaya, thus there is Vyuchchitti of 74 Prakruti. Bandhyogya Prakruti is 75 including Surachatushk and Tirthankara and Abandha is 37 Prakruti. In Sayogi Gunasthan, there is 1 Vyuchchhin Prakruti, 1 Bandha Prakruti and 111 Abandha Prakruti.

Note: The Bandha Vyuchchitti of Satavedaniya does not occur in Karmanakaya Yoga, but it occurs in Audarikakaya Yoga. 

Page #119:
---------------------------
## Gommatasara Karmakanda-81: A Glimpse into the Statements Regarding Bandha, Abandha, etc. Related to Karmanakaya Yoga

**Bandha-worthy Nature:** 112. **Gunasthan:** 4. **Gunasthan Bandha:** Abandha Vyuchchitti.

**Specific Mithyatva:**
* 5 (Tirthankara, Devachatushk)
* 13 (Gunasthanokta 16 Naraka Dwik, Narakayu)
* 24 (Gunasthanokta 25-1 Tiryanchayu Asanyata 75. 37. 74)
* 37 (24+18-5 Tirthankara and Devachatushk)
* 74 (Asanyata-related Gunasthanokta 10-1 Manushayau = 9, Deshasanyata 4, Pramatta 6, Apurvakarana 34 (without Aharakadwik), Anivrittikarana 5 and Sukshmasamparaya 16) Sayogi. 1. 111. 1. 1 (Satave Daniya).

Its Bandha Vyuchchitti does not occur in Karmanakaya Yoga, but it does occur in Audarikakaya Yoga.

**Sasan:**
"Iti Yogamargana" Now, they state the Bandha, Abandha, and Vyuchchitti in the 10 Marganas from Vedamargana to Aharamargna -

- Vedadaaharoti Ya Sagunaththanaanamogham Tu ||119||

**Meaning:** From Vedamargana to Aharamargna, one should know the general statement as per Gunasthan. In other words, these 10 Marganas are stated as per their respective Gunasthan.

**Specific Meaning:** Firstly, in the Striveda of Vedamargana, there are 120 Bandha-worthy Natures. There are 9 Gunasthan. In these, there are 16 Natures in the form of Vyuchchitti in Mithyatva Gunasthan, 157 Bandha Natures, and 3 Natures of Abandha. In Sasadan Gunasthan, there are 25 Natures in the form of Vyuchchitti, 101 Natures of Bandha, and 19 Natures of Abandha. In Mishra Gunasthan, Vyuchchitti is zero, there are 74 Natures of Bandha, and 46 Natures of Abandha. In Asanyata Gunasthan, there are 10 Natures of Vyuchchitti, 77 Natures of Bandha, and 43 Natures of Abandha. In Deshasanyata Gunasthan, Vyuchchitti... 

Page #120:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-82, 4 Prakruti, Bandha 67 Prakruti and Abandha 53 Prakruti. In the Pramatta Gunasthan, the Vyuchchitti is 6, Bandha Prakruti 63 and Abandha Prakruti 57. In the Apramatta Gunasthan, the Vyuchchitti is 1 Prakruti, Bandha 59 Prakruti, Abandha 61 Prakruti. In the Apurvakaran Gunasthan, the Vyuchchinn Prakruti is 36, Bandha Prakruti 58 and Abandha Prakruti 62. In the Anivrittikaran Gunasthan, the Vyuchchitti in the Sanvedananga is one Purushavedaki, Bandha. In the Savedhabhag, until the Dvicharam Samaya, the Bandha is 22 Prakruti and the Abandha is 98 Prakruti. In the Anivrittikaran Sambandhi Savedhabhag, at the Charam Samaya, the Bandha is 21 Prakruti and the Abandha is 99 Prakruti.

In the Nirvrittyaparyapta Strivedi, the Bandhayoga Prakruti is 507, excluding the four Ayus, Tirthankara, Aharakdvik and Vaikriyik Shatk. The Gunasthan Mithyatva and Sasadan. In the Mithyatva Gunasthan, the Vyuchchitti is 13 Prakruti, excluding the two Narakas and Narakayu, Bandha Prakruti 107, Abandha Prakruti is zero. In the Sasadan Gunasthan, the Vyuchchitti is 24 Prakruti, excluding the Tiryanchayu, Bandha 94 Prakruti and Abandha 13 Prakruti. The Sandrishti is as follows:

Bandhayoga Prakruti 107. Gunasthan 2. Gunasthan Bandha | Abandha | Vyuchchitti
Vishesh Mithyatva | 107 / 0 | 13 | 13 (Gunasthanokt 16-3 Narakdvik, Narakayu)
| 94 | 13 | 24 | 24 (Gunasthanokt 25-1 Tiryanchayu)
Sasadan

In the Napunsakavedi, the Bandhayoga Prakruti is 120, Gunasthan 1. Know that all the Rachanas are the same as the Strivedi.

In the Napunsakavedi's Nirvrittyaparyapta Avastha, the Bandhayoga is 108 Prakruti. The Gunasthan is 1-2-4. In the Nirvrittyaparyapta Avastha of the Strivedi, the Bandha is 107 Prakruti, adding one Tirthankara Prakruti to the Narak Asanyata, the Bandha becomes 108 Prakruti. The Bandha of Tiryanchayu and Manushayau is only in the Labdhyaparyapta, but here it is mentioned as Nirvrittyaparyapta. In their Mithyatva Gunasthan, the Vyuchchinn Prakruti is 13, Bandha Prakruti 107, excluding the Tirthankara, Abandha is one Tirthankara Prakruti. In the Sasadan, the Vyuchchitti is 24 Prakruti, excluding the Tiryanchayu, Bandha Prakruti 94 and Abandha Prakruti 14. In the Asanyata Gunasthan, the Vyuchchitti is 9, excluding the Manushayau, Bandha is 71 Prakruti, including the Tirthankara, and Abandha is 37 Prakruti. 

Page #121:
---------------------------
## Gammatsar Karmakanda-83: Regarding the State of Attainment of Nirvritti for a Napumsakavedi

**The following is a description of the state of attainment of Nirvritti for a Napumsakavedi:**

**Bandhyoga-prakriti (Bondable Nature):** 108. **Gunasthan (Stages of Merit):** Three. **Gunasthan | Bandha (Bond) | Abandha (Non-Bond) | Vyuchchitti (Separation) | Vishesh (Specific) | Mithyatva (False Belief)**

* **1 (Tirthachar):** 13 (Gunasthanokt 16-3 Narakdvig Narakayu)
* **24 (Gunasthanokt 25-1 Tiryanchayu):** Asanyata
* **37 (24+14-1 Tirthankar):** 9 (Gunasthanokt 101 Manushayau)

**Sasadan**

**For a Purushavedi, the Bandhyoga-prakriti is 120.** The Gunasthan and other aspects are the same as for the previous case (i.e., the Gunasthan from Mithyatva to Apurvakaran). 

**Here, the nature of the Bandhyoga-prakriti from Mithyatva Gunasthan to Apurvakaran Gunasthan is separated from the Bond as follows:** 16-25-Shunya-10-4-6-1-36. At the end of the first part of Kshapak-Anivrittikaran, there is a separation of 1 Purushavedi. 

**The Bond is as follows:** 117-101-74-77-6763-59-58. At the end of the first part of Anivrittikaran, there are 22 Prakriti. 

**The Non-Bond is as follows:** 3-19-46-43-53-57-61-62. At the end of the first part of Anivrittikaran, there are 98 Prakriti. 

**Refer to the description in verses 103-104 for further understanding.**

**In the state of attainment of Nirvritti for a Purushavedi, there are 112 Bandhyoga-prakriti for beings in the three realms (excluding Narakagati),** because there is no bond for the four Ayus (life spans), Narakdvig, and Aharakdvig. 

**The Gunasthan are three:**

* **Mithyatva Gunasthan:** 13 Vyuchchitti Prakriti, 107 Bandhyoga-prakriti (excluding Surachatushk and Tirthankar), 5 Abandha Prakriti.
* **Sasadan Gunasthan:** 24 Vyuchchitti Prakriti, 94 Bandha Prakriti, 18 Abandha Prakriti.
* **Asanyata Gunasthan:** 9 Vyuchchitti Prakriti, 75 Bandha Prakriti (including Surachatushk and Tirthankar), 37 Abandha Prakriti.

**Here, the emergence of Tirthankar and Aharakdvig does not occur for Strivedi and Napumsakavedi, but only for Purushavedi.** However, the bond for all three types of Vedvalis (Strivedi, Napumsakavedi, and Purushavedi) is the same. 

Page #122:
---------------------------
## Mammatsar Kamkand-84:  A View of the Bond, Non-Bond, and Liberation of a Purushavedi Insufficient in Liberation

This is how the view of the bond, non-bond, and liberation of a Purushavedi insufficient in liberation is presented:

**Gunasthan** | **Mithyatva** | **Bandhyogya Prakriti** | **Gunasthan** | **Bond, Non-Bond, Liberation Details**
------- | -------- | -------- | -------- | --------
|  |  | 112 | 3 | 107
|  |  |  | 5 (Tirthankara, Sura Chatushk) | 13 (Gunasthanokt 163, Narakdvig, not Narakayu)
|  |  |  | 24 (Gunasthanokt 25-5, Tirthanchayu) | 37 (24 + 18 - 5, Tirthankara, Dev Chatushk)
|  |  |  | 9 (Gunasthanokt 10-1, Manushayau) |  

**Sasadan** | **Asanyata** | 
------- | -------- | 
|  |  |  || **Iti Ved Margana** ||

**Now, Kashay Margana:** In Kashay Margana, the four Kashayas (anger, pride, deceit, and greed) are found in the following proportions:

* **Anger:**  Up to the second part of Kshapaka Anivrittikaran.
* **Pride:** Up to the third part of Kshapaka Anivrittikaran.
* **Deceit:** Up to the fourth part of Kshapaka Anivrittikaran.
* **Greed:** Up to the fifth part of Kshapaka Anivrittikaran.

**Up to the 8th Gunasthan, the same principles as in Gunasthan apply.**

* **First part of Kshapaka Anivrittikaran:** Bond 22, Non-bond 98, Bond-Liberation 1.
* **Second part of Kshapaka Anivrittikaran:** Bond 21, Non-bond 92, Bond-Liberation 1.
* **Third part of Kshapaka Anivrittikaran:** Bond 20, Non-bond 500, Bond-Liberation 1.
* **Fourth part of Kshapaka Anivrittikaran:** Bond 19, Non-bond 105, Bond-Liberation 1.
* **Fifth part of Kshapaka Anivrittikaran:** Bond 18, Non-bond 102, Bond-Liberation 1.

**In the case of subtle greed (Sookshma Lobha), there is only one Sookshma Samparaya Gunasthan.**

* **Sookshma Samparaya Gunasthan:** Bond 17, Non-bond 103, Bond-Liberation 16.

**|| Iti Kashay Margana ||** 

Page #123:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-8

**Regarding the Knowledge Path**

The three types of knowledge, namely, Kumati-Kushruta and Kuavadhi, have 117 binding natures, as the Tirthankaras and Aharakas do not have any binding. There are two Gunasthanas. In the Mithyatva Gunasthana, there are 16 natures of Vyuchchitti, 115 natures of Bandha, and zero natures of Abandha. In the Sasadan Gunasthana, there are 25 natures of Vyuchchitti, 101 natures of Bandha, and 16 natures of Abandha.

**Doubt:**

Even though both Kumati and Kushruta are ignorance for Mithyadrishti Jivas, because Mithyatva Karma arises there, but Mithyatva does not arise in the Sasadan Gunasthana. Therefore, how can Kumati and Kushruta ignorance be possible in the Sasadan Gunasthana?

**Resolution:**

"The Vidhyatva is called the Svadhan Vidhata Abhinivesha, and it arises from the opposite Abhinivesha, Mithyatva, and Ananta Anubandhi. Since Ananta Anubandhi arises in the Sasadan Gunasthana, these two types of ignorance, Kumati and Kushruta, are found there."

Even Asanjeejis have Kushruta knowledge, because the tendency towards the welfare of plant-bodied Jivas without a mind and the avoidance of harm is seen.

**Regarding the Binding and Non-Binding of Kumati, Kushruta, and Kuavadhi Knowledge**

Binding natures: 117. Gunasthana: 21.

| Gunasthana | Bandha | Abandha | Vyuchchitti | Special Mithyatva |
|---|---|---|---|---|
| Mithyatva | 117 | 0 | 16 | 16 (as per Gunasthana) |
| Sasadan | 101 | 16 | 25 | 25 (as per Gunasthana) |

In Mati Jnana, Shruta Jnana, and Avadhi Jnana, there are 79 binding natures, because the 16 natures of Mithyatva and 25 natures of Sasadan are absent due to their Vyuchchitti.

**Gunasthanas:**

There are 9 Gunasthanas, from Asanyata to Kshina Kshaya.

| Gunasthana | Vyuchchitti | Bandha | Abandha |
|---|---|---|---|
| Asanyata | 10 | 77 | 2 |
| Deshasanyata | 4 | 67 | 12 |
| Pramatta | 6 | 63 | 16 |

1. Dh. Pu. 1, Sutra 116's commentary.
2. Dh. Pu. 1, Sutra 116's commentary. 

Page #124:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-86

In the Apramatta Gunasthan, there are 1 Vyuchchhinna Prakruti, 59 Bandha Prakruti, and 20 Abandha Prakruti. In the Apurvakarana Gunasthan, there are 36 Vyuchchhinti Prakruti, 58 Bandha Prakruti, and 21 Abandha Prakruti. In the Anivrittikarana Gunasthan, there are 5 Vyuchchhinti Prakruti, 22 Bandha Prakruti, and 57 Abandha Prakruti. In the Sukshma Samparaya Gunasthan, there are 16 Vyuchchhinna Prakruti, 17 Bandha Prakruti, and 62 Abandha Prakruti. In the Upashantamoha Gunasthan, there are 0 Vyuchchhinti Prakruti, 1 Bandha Prakruti, and 78 Abandha Prakruti. In the Kshina Moha Gunasthan, there are 0 Vyuchchhinti Prakruti, 1 Bandha Prakruti, and 78 Abandha Prakruti.

The Bandha-Abandha, etc., related to Mati, Bhuraksha, and Avadhijnana, are 79 Bandha-Yogya Prakruti.

| Gunasthan | Bandha | Abandha | Vyuchchhinti | Special |
|---|---|---|---|---|
| 2 (Aharakdvik) | 59 (63-6-57+2 Aharakdvik) |  |  | Desasanayata |
|  |  |  |  | Pramatta |
|  |  |  |  | Apramatta |
|  |  |  |  | Apurvakarana |
|  |  |  |  | Anivrittikarana |
| 22 | 17 |  |  | Sukshma Samparaya |
| 1 |  |  |  | Upashantamoha |
| 1 |  |  |  | Kshina Moha |

In Manahparyaya Jnana, there are 65 Bandha-Yogya Prakruti. The Gunasthan from Pramatta to Kshina Moha are 7. Here, Vyuchchhinti and Bandha are to be understood as in the Gunasthan, but Abandha is 2, 6, 7, 43, 48, 64, and 64 Prakruti respectively. 

Page #125:
---------------------------
## Mind: Knowledge of Paryaya (Categories)

This is the understanding of Paryaya knowledge.

**Gommatasar Karmakanda - 87**

**Bandha-yogya (Bondable) Nature: 65**

**Gunasthan (Stages of Purity): 7**

**Details:**

| **Gunasthan** | **Bandha-yogya** | **Vyuchchitti (Dispersion)** | **Bandha (Bond)** | **Abandha (Non-Bond)** |
|---|---|---|---|---|
| **Pramatta (Confused)** | 65 | 6 | 63 (excluding Aharak-dvik) | 2 |
| **A-pramatta (Unconfused)** | 65 | 1 | 59 | 6 |
| **A-purvakarana (Non-previous Action)** | 65 | 36 | 58 | 7 |
| **A-nivrittikarana (Non-cessation of Action)** | 65 | 5 | 22 | 43 |

**Notes:**

* **Aharak-dvik:** Two types of Aharak (food)
* **Deva-ayu:** Divine lifespan
* **Sukshma-samparaya:** Subtle Samaparaya (a type of meditation)
* **Upshanta-moha:** Subdued delusion
* **Kshina-moha:** Diminished delusion

**In Kevalgyan (Omniscience):**

* There is one Bandha-yogya (bondable) nature, which is the seven Saata-vedaniya (perceptible) natures.
* There are two Gunasthan (stages of purity).
* In the Sayogi (with body) state, there is one Vyuchchitti (dispersion) nature, one Bandha (bond) nature, and no Abandha (non-bond).
* In the A-yogi (without body) state, there is no Vyuchchitti (dispersion) or Bandha (bond), but there is one Abandha (non-bond) nature.

**|| This is the Knowledge Path ||**

## The Path of Restraint

**Samyama-margana (Path of Restraint):**

There are seven types of Samyama-margana, based on the differences between Samyama (restraint), A-samyama (non-restraint), and A-samyama (non-restraint). These are:

* Samayik
* Chhedopasthapana
* Parihar-vishuddhi
* Sukshma-samparaya (as explained)

**In Samayik and Chhedopasthapana Samyama:**

* Bandha-yogya (bondable) nature: 65
* Gunasthan (stages of purity): 4 (Pramatta, A-pramatta, A-purvakarana, A-nivrittikarana)

**Pramatta Gunasthan:**

* Vyuchchitti (dispersion) nature: 6
* Bandha (bond) nature: 63 (excluding Aharak-dvik)
* Abandha (non-bond) nature: 2

**A-pramatta Gunasthan:**

* Vyuchchitti (dispersion) nature: 1
* Bandha (bond) nature: 59
* Abandha (non-bond) nature: 6

**A-purvakarana Gunasthan:**

* Vyuchchitti (dispersion) nature: 36
* Bandha (bond) nature: 58
* Abandha (non-bond) nature: 7

**A-nivrittikarana Gunasthan:**

* Vyuchchitti (dispersion) nature: 5
* Bandha (bond) nature: 22
* Abandha (non-bond) nature: 43 

Page #126:
---------------------------
Gommatasar Karmakanda - 88
Samayik - Chhedopasthapana Samyama in Bandha-Abandha, etc.
Bandha-Yogya Prakriti 65. Gunasthan 4.
Gunasthan Bandha Abandha Vyuchchitti
Pramatta
63
2
6
Aprammatta
59
6
1
Vishesh
2 (Aharakdvak) 6 (Gunasthanokt) 1 (Devayu) 6 (6+2 - 2 Aharakdvak) 36 (Gunasthanokt)
5 (Gunasthanokt)
In Pariharavishuddhi Samyama, Bandha-Yogya Prakriti is 65. There are two Gunasthanas. Here (in Pariharavishuddhi Samyama), the Bandha of Aharakdvak is not opposed, but Uday is definitely opposed. That is, there is no Uday of Aharakdvak with Pariharavishuddhi. In Pramatta Gunasthan, Vyuchchhinna Prakriti is 6, Bandha Prakriti is 63, and Abandha Prakriti is 2. In Aprammatta Gunasthan, Vyuchchhinna Prakriti is 1, Bandha Prakriti is 59, and Abandha Prakriti is 6.
"
Pariharavishuddhi Samyama in Bandha-Abandha and Vyuchchitti
Gunasthan Bandha Abandha | Vyuchchitti
Pramatta
63
2
6
Aprammatta
6
1
Vishesh
6 (Gunasthanokt) 2 (Aharakdvak)
1 (Devayu) 6 (6+2 - 2 Aharakdvak)
The statement of Bandha-Abandha-Vyuchchitti related to Sukshma Samparaya Samyama should be known as the same as Sukshma Samparaya Gunasthan. Bandha is 17, Abandha is 103, and Bandha Vyuchchitti is 16.
In Yathakyata Samyama, Bandha-Yogya Prakriti is 1, which is only Saatavedaniya. Here, Upashantamoha, Kshinamaha, Sayogi, and Ayogi, these four Gunasthanas are found. Vyuchchitti and Bandharoopa Prakriti should be known as Gunasthanavat, but in Ayoga Gunasthan, Abandha Prakriti is 1, while in the remaining three Gunasthanas, there is no Abandha.

Page #127:
---------------------------
## Gommatasar Karmakanda - 89

**Insight into Bandha, Abandha and Vyuchchitti in Yathakyata Samyama**

**Bandha-yoga-prakriti: 1**
**Gunasthan: 4**

**Details**

| Gunasthan | Mithyatva | Sasadan | Mishra | Asanyata | Bandha | Abandha | Vyuchchitti |
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
| Upshanta-moha |  |  |  |  | D | 117 | 101 |
| Kshina-moha |  |  |  |  |  | 101 | 74 |
| Sayogi |  |  |  |  |  | 74 | 77 |
| A-yogi |  |  |  |  |  | 77 |  |

**Note:** In Samyama and Asamyama, Bandha, Abandha and Vyuchchitti should be understood as the same as the Gunasthan of Desha-samyata. Bandha: 67, Abandha: 53, Bandha-Vyuchchitti: 4.

**Asamyama:**

* In Asamyama, there are 118 Bandha-yoga-prakriti without Aharak-dwik.
* There are four Gunasthan.
* Here, in all four Gunasthan, Chchitti and Rupa-prakriti should be understood as per the Gunasthan, but Abandha-rupa-prakriti should be understood as 1, 17, 44 and 41 respectively.
* In Mishra-gunasthan, there is Abandha for Tirthankara, Devayau and Manushayau.

**Asamyama:**

* In Asamyama, Bandha, Abandha and Vyuchchitti are as follows:
    * Bandha-yoga-prakriti: 198
    * Gunasthan: 4
    * Abandha-Vyuchchitti: 16, 25, 44, 41

**Details:**

* All Prakriti here should be understood as 'Sata-vedaniya'.

**Note:**

* 1 (Tirthankara)
* 16 (Gunasthan-ukta)
* 25 (Gunasthan-ukta)
* 44 (25 + 17 + 2 Manushayau and Devayau)
* 41 (44 - 3 Tirthankara, Manushayau, Devayau)

**|| Iti Samyama-marg-na ||** 

Page #128:
---------------------------
## Gommatasara Karmakanda - 90

**On the Path of Perception (Darshanamargna)**

In the Path of Perception, there are 120 natures (prakriti) that are capable of binding, within the categories of perception with eyes (chakshudarshan) and perception without eyes (achakshudarshan). These are the 12 Gunasthanas, from Mithyatva to Kshina Moha. The binding, non-binding, and liberation (vyuchchitti) in these should be understood as in the Gunasthanas.

The liberation and other aspects related to Avadhi Darshan are to be understood as in Avadhi Jnana. There are 9 Gunasthanas from the 79th nature capable of binding to Kshina Kshaya, which is the state of the un-restrained (asanyata). All aspects related to Kevala Darshan are to be understood as in Kevala Jnana. There are two Gunasthanas, the first being the 1st nature capable of binding (sataavedaniya).

**|| Thus ends the section on the Path of Perception ||**

**On the Path of Leshya (Leshyamargna)**

In the Path of Leshya, there are 118 natures capable of binding within the three Leshyas of Krishna, Neel, and Kapoth, because the binding of the two Aharakas does not occur here. There are four Gunasthanas, as in the previous section. The liberation and binding in these four Gunasthanas should be understood as in the Gunasthanas. The binding of the Tirthankara nature can occur in the fourth Gunasthana within these Leshyas. The binding, non-binding, and other aspects related to Krishna, Neel, and Kapoth Leshyas are as follows:

Natures capable of binding: 118
Gunasthanas: 4

| Gunasthana | Binding | Non-Binding | Liberation | Mithyatva |
|---|---|---|---|---|
| 1 (Tirthankara) | 16 (as per Gunasthana) | 25 (as per Gunasthana) | 44 (25 + 17 + 2, human lifespan, divine lifespan) | Asanyata |
| 10 (as per Gunasthana) |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |
Page #129:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-91
Sukke sadarachukkam vamanthimbarasam cha na va aththi.
Kammeva anahare bandhassanto ananto ya. ||121|| Jummam. || Artha - In the path of Samyaktva, there is no bondage of human lifespan and divine lifespan for both types of Upshama Samyaktvi (Prathamopa-shma-Dvitiyopa-shma) beings. In the path of Leshya, the final 9 natures of the Mithyatva Gunasthan of those with Tejo Leshya and the final 12 natures of the Mithyatva Gunasthan of those with Pala Leshya do not bind according to the rule.
The final 12 natures of Mithyatva Gunasthan and Shatarachatuska of those with Shukla Leshya, these 16 natures do not bind. To know the statement of the cessation of bondage and non-bondage, similar to that of the Karmankaya Yogi, in the state of Anaharaka, related to the path of Ahar.
Visheshartha - There are 111 natures that are capable of binding in Tejo Leshya. There are seven of Gunasthan, etc. Out of the 16 natures that cease in Mithyatva Gunasthan, the final 9 natures do not bind, therefore, here, the binding of the initial seven natures leads to their cessation, there are 108 binding natures and 3 non-binding natures. To know the cessation and bondage from Sasadana to Aprammatta Gunasthan as per Gunasthan, but to know the non-binding natures in the respective Sasadana, etc. Gunasthan as 10-37-34-44-48 and 52. The detailed statement is as follows - In Mithyatva Gunasthan, the nature of cessation is 7, the binding nature is 108 and the non-binding nature is 3. In Sasadana Gunasthan, the nature of cessation is 25, the binding nature is 101, the non-binding nature is 10. In Mishra Gunasthan, the cessation is zero, the binding nature is 74, the non-binding nature is 37. In Asanyata Gunasthan, the nature of cessation is 10, the binding nature is 77 and the non-binding nature is 34. In Deshasanyata Gunasthan, the nature of cessation is 4, the binding nature is 67 and the non-binding nature is 44. In Pramatta Gunasthan, the nature of cessation is 6, the binding nature is 63, and the non-binding nature is 48. In Aprammatta Gunasthan, the nature of cessation is 1, the binding nature is 59 and the non-binding nature is 52. The sight of bondage, non-bondage, cessation, etc. related to Tejo (Peet) Leshya.
Binding nature 111. Gunasthan 7. Gunasthan | Bondage | Non-bondage Cessation
Special Mithyatva | 108 3 | 7 | 3 (Tirthankara, Aharakadvik) 7 (Gunasthanokta 16
from Mithyatva to Atap) Sasadana [ 101 | 10 | 25 | 

Page #130:
---------------------------
## Mixed
Asanyata
Desasanayata
Pramat
Apramat
74
77
67
63
wyse w
59
37
34
4.8
Sasadan
Mixed
52
Pramat
Apramat
Gommatasar Karmakanda - 92
0
In Padmaleshya, there are 108 Bandhayogya Prakritis. There are 7 Gunasthanas. Out of the 16 Prakritis starting with Mithyatva, the last 12 are not Bandhayogya. In Mithyatva Gunasthan, there are 4 Vyuchchhinna Prakritis, 105 Bandha Prakritis, and 3 Abandha Prakritis. In Sasadan Gunasthan, there are 25 Vyuchchhinna Prakritis, 101 Bandha Prakritis, and 7 Abandha Prakritis. In Mixed Gunasthan, there are 0 Vyuchchhinna Prakritis, 74 Bandha Prakritis, and 34 Abandha Prakritis. In Asanyata Gunasthan, there are 10 Vyuchchhinna Prakritis, 77 Bandha Prakritis, and 31 Abandha Prakritis. In Desasanayata Gunasthan, there are 4 Vyuchchhinna Prakritis, 67 Bandha Prakritis, and 41 Abandha Prakritis. In Pramat Gunasthan, there are 6 Vyuchchhinna Prakritis, 63 Bandha Prakritis, and 45 Abandha Prakritis. In Apramat Gunasthan, there are 1 Vyuchchhinna Prakritis, 59 Bandha Prakritis, and 49 Abandha Prakritis.
101 7
74
34
77 31
Asanyata Desasanayata 68 41
63
45
59 41
4
6
1
In Padmaleshya, the Bandha, Abandha, and Vyuchchhinna are as follows:
Gunasthan Bandha Abandha Vyuchchhinna
Mithyatva 105
3
Bandhayogya Prakritis 108. Gunasthan 7.
Special
4
37 (25+10+2 Manushyayu, Devayu)
34 (37 - 3 Tirthankara, Manushyayu and Devayu)
4 (Gunasthanokta)
6 (Gunasthanokta)
52 (48+6 - 2 Aharakdvik)
25
10
4
6
1.
-
3 (Tirthankara Aharakdvik) 4 (Mithyatva. Hundakasanstahan, Napumsakaved, Asangramaasrupaatika Sanhanan)
4 (Gunasthanokta)
6 (Gunasthanokta)
49 (45+6-2 Aharakhik)
In Shuklaleshya, there are 104 Bandhayogya Prakritis. Gunasthan from Mithyatva to Sayogi Paryanta 13. Shuklaleshya
34 (25+7+2 Manushyayu and Devayu)
31 (34-3 Tirthankara, Devayu and Manushyayu) 

Page #131:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-93

There is no binding of the Shatar-Chatushk. Here, in the Mithyatva Gunasthan, there are 4 Vyuchchhinna Prakriti, 101 Bandha Prakriti, and 3 Abandha Prakriti. In the Sasadan Gunasthan, there are Vyuchchhittirupa Prakriti (excluding the Shatar-Chatushk, which includes Tiryanch-Gati, Tiryanch-Gati-Anupurvi, Tiryanch-Ayu, and Udyata-rupa), 97 Bandha Prakriti, and 7 Abandha Prakriti. In the Mishra Gunasthan, there are zero Vyuchchhitti, 74 Bandha Prakriti, and 30 Abandha Prakriti. In the Asanyata Gunasthan, there are 10 Vyuchchhittirupa Prakriti, 77 Bandha-rupa Prakriti, and 25 Abandha-rupa Prakriti. In the Deshasanyata Gunasthan, there are 4 Vyuchchhitti Prakriti, 67 Bandha Prakriti, and 37 Abandha Prakriti. In the Pramant Gunasthan, there are 6 Vyuchchhitti-rupa Prakriti, 63 Bandha Prakriti, and 45 Abandha Prakriti. In the Apramant Gunasthan, there is 1 Vyuchchhinna Prakriti, 59 Bandha Prakriti, and 45 Abandha Prakriti. In the Apurvakaran Gunasthan, there are 36 Vyuchchhitti Prakriti, 58 Bandha Prakriti, and 46 Abandha Prakriti. In the Anivrittikaran Gunasthan, there are 5 Vyuchchhinna Prakriti, 22 Bandha Prakriti, and 82 Abandha Prakriti. In the Sukshma Samparaya Gunasthan, there are 16 Vyuchchhinna Prakriti, 17 Bandha Prakriti, and 87 Abandha Prakriti. In the Upashant-Moha Gunasthan, there are zero Vyuchchhitti-rupa Prakriti, 1 Bandha Prakriti, and 103 Abandha Prakriti. In the Kshina-Moha Gunasthan, there are zero Vyuchchhinna Prakriti, 1 Bandha Prakriti, and 103 Abandha Prakriti. In the Sayogi Gunasthan, there is 1 Vyuchchhitti-rupa Prakriti, 1 Bandha-rupa Prakriti, and 103 Abandha-rupa Prakriti.

A summary of Bandha, Abandha, and Vyuchchhitti in Shukla-Leshya:

Bandha-yoga Prakriti: 104
Gunasthan, etc.: 13
Gunasthan | Bandha | Abandha | Vyuchchhitti | Special | Mithyatva
3 (Tirthankara, Ahar-Kattik) | 4 (Mithyatva, Hundak Sansthan, Napunsak-Ved, and Asamprapta-Sripatik-Sahanan) | 21 (Gunasthan-okta 25-4 Shatar-Chatushk) | Mishra
30 (21+7+2, Manusya-Ayu and Deva-Ayu Asanyata) | 27 (30-3 Manusya-Ayu, Deva-Ayu, Tirthankara) | 4 (Gunasthan-okta Pratyakhyana-Avaran's four Kashaya) | Apramant
6 (Gunasthan-okta) | 1 (Deva-Ayu) | 45 (41+6-2, Ahar-Kadvik) | Apurvakaran
36 (Gunasthan-okta) | Anivrittikaran
5 (Gunasthan-okta) | Sukshma Samparaya
| 16 (Gunasthan-okta) |
Sasadan
Deshasanyata
Pramant

Page #132:
---------------------------
Gommatasar Karmakanda-14
103/0
Upashantamoha. 1 Kshina moha sayogi
| 1 (Sataavedaniya)
1 (Sataavedaniya) 1 (Sataavedaniya)
103
In the Bhavya margana, there are 120 Bandhyogya prakriti. Gunasthan 14. Here, one should know the complete description of Bandha, Abandha and Vyuchchitti as in Gunasthan.
In the Abhavya, there are 117 Bandhyogya prakriti, because the Bandha of Aharakdvig and Tirthankara prakriti does not occur. Gunasthan is only Mithyatva.
|| Iti Leshya va Bhavya margana ||
Now, there are 6 types of Samyaktva margana - Upashama (Prathamopaashama-Dvitiyopaashama) Samyaktva, Kshayopaashama Samyaktva, Kshayika Samyaktva, Mithyatva, Sasadan and Misra.
In Prathamopaashama Samyaktva, there are 77 Bandhyogya prakriti, because the 41 prakriti (16+25) which are Vyuchchhinna in Mithyatva and Sasadan Gunasthan, and the Deva and Manushayuk, do not have Bandha here. According to the verse "Navariye sav samme narasur aauun nasthi niyamen" (Gatha 120), the Vyuchchitti of (Manushayuk, Devayuk) had happened earlier. In the Tiryanch and Manushayuk gati of Samyagdristi, there was Bandha of Devayuk, and in the Narak and Devagati, there was Bandha of Manushayuk, but in both Prathamopaashama and Dvitiyopaashama Samyagdristi, there is no Bandha of these two Ayuk. In Prathamopaashama Samyaktva, one should know the Asanyata to Apramatta Paryanta chara Gunasthan.
Here, in Asanyata Gunasthan, there are 9 prakriti which are Vyuchchitti without Manushayuk, 75 prakriti which are Bandha without Aharakdvig, and 2 prakriti which are Anandha. In Deshasanyatta Gunasthan, there are 4 prakriti which are Vyuchchitti, 66 prakriti which are Bandha, and 11 prakriti which are Abandha. In Pramatta Gunasthan, there are 6 prakriti which are Vyuchchhinna, 62 prakriti which are Bandha, and 15 prakriti which are Abandha. In Apramatta Gunasthan, there are zero prakriti which are Vyuchchhinna, 58 prakriti which are Bandha with Aharakdvig, and 
'The Bandha of Tirthankara prakriti does not occur in Upashama Samyagdristi' - some Acharyas believe this, but this is not the intention here. The उदय of Aharakdvig is contradictory with Upashama Samyaktva, but the Bandha is not contradictory. 

Page #133:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-15: A Glimpse into Bandha-Abandha and Vyuchchitti Related to the First and Second Upashama Samyaktvam

**Bandha-Yogya Prakriti (77)**

| **Gunasthan** | **Asanyatadi** | **Vyuchchitti** | **Bandha** | **Abandha** | **Special** |
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
| 2 (Aharakadvik) | 9 (Gunasthanokta 10-1) | 75 | 2 | 9 |  |
| Manushayau | Deshasanyata | 4 | 66 | 11 |  |
|  | Asanyata | 6 | 62 | 15 |  |
|  | Pramatta | 0 | 58 | 19 | Aharakadvik included |
|  | Apramatta | 36 | 58 | 19 |  |
|  | A-purvakaran | 5 | 52 | 55 |  |
|  | Anivrittikaran | 16 | 17 | 60 |  |
|  | Sukshma-Samparaya | 0 | 1 | 76 |  |
|  | Upashanta-Moga |  |  |  |  |

**Explanation:**

In the second Upashama Samyaktvam, there are 77 Bandha-Yogya Prakritis. There are eight Asanyatadi Gunasthans. In the Asanyata Gunasthan, the Vyuchchitti Prakriti is 9, Bandha Prakriti is 75, and Abandha Prakriti is 2. In the Deshasanyata Gunasthan, the Vyuchchitti Prakriti is 4, Bandha Prakriti is 66, and Abandha Prakriti is 11. In the Pramatta Gunasthan, the Vyuchchitti Prakriti is 6, Bandha Prakriti is 62, and Abandha Prakriti is 15. In the Apramatta Gunasthan, the Vyuchchitti Prakriti is 0, Bandha Prakriti is 58 (including Aharakadvik), and Abandha Prakriti is 19. In the Apurvakaran Gunasthan, the Vyuchchitti Prakriti is 36, Bandha Prakriti is 58, and Abandha Prakriti is 19. In the Anivrittikaran Gunasthan, the Vyuchchitti Prakriti is 5, Bandha Prakriti is 52, and Abandha Prakriti is 55. In the Sukshma-Samparaya Gunasthan, the Vyuchchitti Prakriti is 16, Bandha Prakriti is 17, and Abandha Prakriti is 60. In the Upashanta-Moga Gunasthan, the Vyuchchitti Prakriti is 0, Bandha Prakriti is 1, and Abandha Prakriti is 76.

**Regarding Ayuk Bandha:**

In both the first and second Upashama Samyaktvam, there is no Bandha of Ayuk (lifespan).

**Doubt:**

If there is no Bandha of Ayuk in the first and second Upashama Samyaktvam, then why is the statement "While ascending the श्रेणी (Shreni), there is no death in the first part of the Apurvakaran Gunasthan" meaningless?

**Solution:**

For a Sa-Tishya Apramatta Jiva who has already bound Deva-Ayuk (divine lifespan) in the past, ascending the श्रेणी (Shreni) is possible. Here, in the first Upashama Samyaktvam, and in the first part of the Apurvakaran Gunasthan, where the time is only a few moments, there is no death. However, death is possible in other parts of the Upashama श्रेणी (Shreni). The absence of Deva-Ayuk Bandha is present throughout the Upashama श्रेणी (Shreni).

**Clarification:**

1. Even while ascending the Upashama श्रेणी (Shreni), the second Upashama Samyaktvam is attained in the Asanyata Gunasthan. This is not just a matter of descending from the श्रेणी (Shreni).

**References:**

* 5. Pu. 1 Sutra's Tika
* Mulachar A. 12 Gatha 205's Tika
* Kartikeyanupreksha Gatha 484's Tika 

Page #134:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-96

The context regarding the statement of the second Upasama is as follows:

Bandha-yoga-prakriti 77 | Gunasthan 8 | Gunasthan Bandha | Abandha Vyuchchitti Vishesh Asanyata
| 9 | 9 (Gunasthanokta 10-1 Manushayau) Deshasanyata
| 44 (Pratyakhyanakrodha-mana-maya-lobha)
6 (Gunasthanokta) Aprammatta
19 (15+6-2, Aharakdvak) Apurvakarana
36 (Gunasthanokta) Anivritikarana
5 (Gunasthanokta) Sukshmasampray | 17 | 60
16 (Gunasthanokta) Upashantamoha
Pramatta
Kshayopa-sama-samyaktvam in Bandha-yoga-prakriti 79, because Mithyatva and Sasadan Gunasthan (16+25) 41 prakriti's Vyuchchitti happens. Gunasthan Asanyatadi are only four, because in Upasama-shreni, Upasama and Kshayika-samyaktvam and in Kshapaka-shreni, Kshayika-samyaktvam happens. In all four Gunasthan, Vyuchchitti and Bandha's statement is like Gunasthan, but Abandha 2-12-16 and 20 prakriti's four Gunasthan respectively should be known. Kshayopa-sama-samyaktvam related Bandha-Abandha etc. context
Bandha-yoga-prakriti 79 | Gunasthan 4 || Gunasthan | Bandha | Abandha Nyuchchitti Vishesh Asanyata
| 2 (Aharakdvak) Deshasanyata
77
Pramatta
Aprammatta
1
|
20 (16+6-2 Aharakdvak)
Kshayika-samyaktvam in Bandha-yoga-prakriti 79. Gunasthan Asanyata to Ayogi-paryanta and Siddha should also be known. In Asanyata, Vyuchchhinna-prakriti 10, Bandha-prakriti 77 and Abandha-prakriti 2 (Aharakdvak). 

Page #135:
---------------------------
Gommatasar Karmakanda - 97

**Desasanayat** has 4 types of Vyuchchitti, 67 types of Bandha, and 12 types of Abandha.

**Pramattagunasthan** has 6 types of Vyuchchitti, 63 types of Bandha, and 16 types of Abandha.

**Aparamat** has 1 type of Vyuchchitti, 59 types of Bandha (including 2 Aharakdvig), and 20 types of Abandha.

**Apuurvakaranagunasthan** has 36 types of Vyuchchitti, 58 types of Bandha, and 21 types of Abandha.

**Anivrittikaranagunasthan** has 5 types of Vyuchchitti, 22 types of Bandha, and 57 types of Abandha.

**Navagunasthan** has 16 types of Vyuchchitti, 17 types of Bandha, and 62 types of Abandha.

**Upashantakshaya** has 0 types of Vyuchchitti, 1 type of Bandha, and 78 types of Abandha.

**Ksheenakshayagunasthan** has 0 types of Vyuchchitti, 1 type of Bandha, and 78 types of Abandha.

**Ayogigunasthan** has no Bandha or Vyuchchitti, but 79 types of Abandha are known.

**Summary of Bandha, Abandha, and Vyuchchitti related to Kshayik Samyaktv**

* Bandhayogya Prakriti: 79
* Gunasthan: 11

**Details**

| Gunasthan | Bandha | Abandha | Vyuchchitti |
|---|---|---|---|
| Asanyat | 77 | 2 | 10 |
| Desasanayat | 67 | 12 | 4 |
| Pramat | 63 | 16 | 6 |
| Aparamat | 59 | 20 | 1 |
| Purvakaran | 58 | 21 | 36 |
| Anivrittikaran | 22 | 57 | 5 |
| Sukshmasampray | 17 | 62 | 16 |
| Upashantamoha | 1 | 78 | 0 |
| Ksheenamoha | 1 | 78 | 0 |
| Sayogi | 0 | 79 | 0 |
| Ayogi | 0 | 79 | 0 |

**Mithyatva** has 16 types of Vyuchchitti, 117 types of Bandha, and 3 types of Abandha.

**Sasanadan** has 25 types of Vyuchchitti, 101 types of Bandha, and 19 types of Abandha.

**Samyagmithyatva** has 0 types of Vyuchchitti, 74 types of Bandha, and 46 types of Abandha.

**|| Iti Samyaktvamargana ||** 

Page #136:
---------------------------
## Gommatasara Karmakanda-28, 3:

**Regarding the Sangi Margana:**

In the Sangi Margana, there are 120 Bandha-yogya-prakriti. The Gunasthanas are 12, starting from Mithyatva and ending with Kshina-kashaya. Here, one should understand the Bandha, Abandha, and Vyuchchitti related to all the Gunasthanas as mentioned in the text.

For the Asangi, there are 117 Bandha-yogya-prakriti (excluding Tirthankara and Aharaka-dvikas) and 2 Gunasthanas. In the Mithyatva Gunasthan, there are 19 Vyuchchitti-prakriti, 117 Bandha-prakriti, and no Abandha. In the Sasadan Gunasthan, only Asangi-jiva with Misra-kaya-yogi exist, therefore, there is no Bandha for all four Ayus. In the Sasadan Gunasthan, there are 29 Vyuchchitti-prakriti (as in Vikalendriya), 98 Bandha-prakriti, and 19 Abandha-prakriti.

**Regarding the Bandha, Abandha, and Vyuchchitti related to Asangi:**

There are 117 Bandha-yogya-prakriti and 2 Gunasthanas.

| Gunasthan | Bandha | Abandha | Vyuchchitti |
|---|---|---|---|
| Mithyatva | 0 | 19 | 19 (16 + 3 as mentioned in Gunasthan, Manushya-ayu, Deva-ayu, Tiryancha-ayu) |
| Sasadan | 98 | 19 | 29 (25 + 6 as mentioned in Gunasthan, Varshabhanara-chaadi - 2 Manushya-ayu and Tiryancha-ayu) |

**|| Iti Sangi Margana ||**

**Regarding the Aharaka Margana:**

In the Aharaka Margana, there are 120 Bandha-yogya-prakriti for the Aharaka-jiva. The Gunasthanas are 13, starting from Mithyatva and ending with Sayogi. Here, one should understand the Bandha, Abandha, and Vyuchchitti related to all the Gunasthanas as mentioned in the text.

For the Anaharaka, there are 112 Bandha-yogya-prakriti (excluding the four Ayus, Aharaka-dvikas, and Naraka-dvikas), similar to the Karman-kaya-yogi. The Gunasthanas are five: Mithyatva, Sasadan, Asanyata, Sayogi, and Ayogi. Here, the Vyuchchitti, Bandha, and Abandha in Mithyatva, Sasadan, Asanyata, and Sayogi Gunasthanas are similar to the Karman-kaya-yogi. However, there is no Bandha or Vyuchchitti for Ayogi, and there are 112 Abandha-prakriti.

Thus, the Vyuchchitti, Bandha, and Abandha are explained from the Veda Margana to the Aharaka Margana. 

Page #137:
---------------------------
## Gommatasara Karmakanda - 99: A Discussion on Bandha, Abandha, and Vyuchchitti Related to Anaharaka

**Bandha-Yogya Prakriti:** 112 Gunasthanas, 5. Gunasthanas | Bandha, Abandha, Vyuchchitti, Special Mithyatva
5 (Dev Chatushk, Tirthankara) 13 (Gunasthanokta 16
3 Narak Dwik and Narakayu) Sasadan | 94. 18. 24 24 (Gunasthanokta 25-1 Tiryanchayu) Asanyata | 75. 37. 74. 37 (24+18-5 Dev Chatushk, Tirthankara)
74 (Manushyayu bina Asantaki 9 + Desasanyata ki 45 Prammatta ki 6 + Apurvakaranaki Aharakadik bina 34 + Anivrittikaranaki 5 + Sukshma Samparayaki 16) All these 74 Prakritis are Vyuchchhinna in Asanyata Gunasthanas.

**Sayogi:**
1 (Sata Vedaniya) Note - In Anaharaka state, there is no Bandha Vyuchchitti of Sata Vedaniya.

**Ayogi:**
112

Thus, the discussion on Bandha, Abandha, and Bandha Vyuchchitti in the fourteen Marganas is complete. Further, the different types of Bandha of the Mula Prakritis, such as Sadi, Anadi, etc., are explained in detail.

**Sadi, Anadi, Dhruva, Adhuruva Bandha:**
"Sadi, Anadi, Dhruva, Adhuruva yo Bandho du Kammachakass.
Tadio Sadiyaseso Anadi Dhuruvasesago Aau." || 122 ||

**Meaning:** The Bandha of the six Karmas is of four types: Sadi, Anadi, Dhruva, and Adhuruva. However, the Bandha of Vedaniya Karma is of three types, excluding Sadi. The Bandha of Ayu Karma is of two types: Sadi and Adhuruva, excluding Anadi and Dhruva Bandha.

**Special Meaning:** Since there is no Sadi Bandha of Vedaniya, it is of three types. This is because, during the ascent and descent in the Upshama Shreni, there is continuous Bandha of Vedaniya Karma compared to Sata Vedaniya. Therefore, there is no Sadi, only Anadi, Dhruva, and Adhuruva Bandha. In one way, Ayu is divided into three parts, making a total of eight. 

Page #138:
---------------------------
## Gommatasara Karmakanda - 100

- Therefore, the binding of Ayukarma occurs in the first, second, third, etc., up to the eighth tripartite of one's lifespan. If the binding of Ayukarma does not occur even in the eighth tripartite, then it occurs at the end of the remaining lifespan, hence it is Sadibandha and binds only until the end of the Muhurta. The reason for this is Adhruva.

**Note:** Death occurs one Muhurta after the binding of Ayukarma in general, because even the minor obstacle is a Muhurta.

**Special Note:** According to verses 158 and 917, the minor obstacle of Ayukarma is the time measure of Asankshepaddha. This time is measured as a fraction of the Aavali, therefore death can occur after this much time from the binding of Ayukarma. Now, the characteristics of these bindings are described:

**Sadibandhe seḍhi aṇāruḍhage aṇādi hu. Abhav सिद्धम्हि धुवो bhav सिद्धे aduvo bandho. || 123 ||**

**Meaning:** The karma which is bound again after its absence is called Sadibandha. The one which is not ascended on the ladder, i.e., whose binding has not been absent, is Anadibandha. The binding which will never be absent is Dhruvabandh, it is for Abhavya. The binding which has an end is Adhruvabandh, this binding is for Bhavya.

**Special Note:** The binding of the five types of Jnanavarana occurs for the jivas until the Sukshmasamprayagunasthan. Later, when the same jiva attains the Upshantakashayagunasthan, the binding of his Jnanavarana becomes absent. The same jiva, while descending, comes back to the Sukshmasampray, at that time the binding of his Jnanavarana which occurs is Sadibandha. As long as the jiva does not attain the ladder, know it as Anadibandha. For example, the cessation of the binding of Jnanavarana occurs at the end of the Sukshmasampray. After that, the jiva reaches the Upshantakashayagunasthan. Before that, until the end of the Sukshmasampray, there is Anadibandha of Jnanavarana.

Abhavya jivas have Dhruvabandh, because the binding of the Nishpratipaksha-Niranterabandhi karma types is found to be Anadi-Anant for Abhavya jivas. Bhavya jivas have Adhruvabandh, because the end of their binding is found. For example, the cessation of the binding of Jnanavarana Panchak (Mati-Shrutadi) occurs in the tenth Gunasthan. In this way, the characteristics of Sadi-Anadi-Dhruva-Adhruva are described. 

Page #139:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-101 now describes the characteristics of these four bonds in the Uttaraprakritis:

**Verse 124:**
*Ghaaditimiicchakasayaa bhayatejaguruduganimiNavannacho.
Sattettaaladhuvaanam chadudha sesaanayam tu duudhaa.*

**Meaning:**
The 19 prakritis of the three-dhaati karma without mohaniya, Mithyatva, sixteen kshaya, bhaya, jugupsa, taijasa, karman, and aguruladhuyugal, as well as nirmaana, varnaadichar, these 47 prakritis are called dhruvabandi. They have all four types of bandha, saadi, etc., while the remaining have two types of bandha.

**Special Meaning:**
As long as the vyuchchitti of bandha does not occur, these dhruvaprakritis have bandha in every moment, hence they are called dhruvabandi. The remaining 73 prakritis, two of vedaniya, seven of mohaniya, four of ayu, four of gati, five of jati, audarikasharira, audarikangopaanga, vaikriyikasharira, vaikriyikangopaanga, aaharakasharira, aaharakangopaanga, six sansthana, six sanhanan, four anupurvi, parghaat, aatap, udyot, uchchvaas, vihaayogati-yugal, tras, sthavar, baadar, sukshma, paryaapt, aparyaapt, pratyek, sadharan, sthira, asthira, subhag, durbhag, shubh, ashubh, susvar, duhsvar, aadey, anaadey, yashaskirti, ayashaskirti, tirthankara, and gotrakarma, are adhruvabandi. These prakritis have only saadi and adhruvabandh.

**Verse 125:**
*Sese titthahaaramp parghaadachaukka sabvaaauNi.
Apadivakkhaa sese sappaddivakkhaa hu baasatthi.*

**Meaning:**
Out of the 73 adhruvabandi prakritis, tirthankara, aaharadvik, parghaat, etc., four, and chaaraayu, these eleven prakritis are called apradivakshi, while the remaining 62 prakritis are sappradivakshi.

**Doubt:**
Why is Mithyatva not considered dhruvodayi, even though it is considered dhruvabandi? Since this prakriti continuously experiences bandha until bandhavyuchchitti, it is called dhruvabandi. Similarly, since it continuously experiences udya until udya-vyuchchhed, it should also be called dhruvodayi. However, Mithyatva is not called dhruvodayi. So, should it not be included in the 47 dhruvabandi prakritis, or should it also be called dhruvodayi?

**Solution:**
A prakriti that continuously experiences bandha until bandhavyuchchitti is dhruvabandi, but this is not the intention in udya. A prakriti that continuously experiences udya in the samsara (chhadmastha) state is dhruvodayi. According to your opinion, the nityanigodyajiva (Go.Ji, Gaatha 197) would also be dhruvodayi due to the continuous udya of tiryanchigati, ekendriyajati, sthavarakaya, and nauchgotra. If these are not dhruvodayi, then Mithyatva is also not dhruvodayi. 

Page #140:
---------------------------
Gommatsar Karmakanda-102
Special Meaning - 47 Dhruvbandhi Prakṛtis are excluded, from the remaining 73 Prakṛtis, Tirthankara, Aharakdvig, Parghāt, Ucchvās, Ātap, Udyot and Chārāyu, these eleven Prakṛtis are Apratipakṣi, because they have no counter-part. These Prakṛtis bind in the time they bind and do not bind in the time they do not bind. For example - Tirthankara Prakṛti binds in the time it binds. The remaining 62 Prakṛtis are Sapratipakṣi, because they have counter-part Prakṛtis. Only one binds at a time, for example - Sātāvedanīya, Asātāvedanīya, these two are counter-parts to each other. In Mohaniya, Rati-Arati are counter-parts, Hāsya-Śoka are counter-parts; all three Vedas are mutually Prānte-dhash. Only one of them binds at a time. In Nāmakarma, four Gatis are counter-parts, five Jātis are counter-parts to each other. Only one of them binds at a time, both do not bind together.
The soul has results of Sanklesha and Viśuddhi, through these Sanklesha and Viśuddhi results, Sātā-Asātāvedanīyakarma and Purusha, Stri-Napumsaka-veda etc. bind and change. Due to this, sometimes one Prakṛti binds and sometimes another Prakṛti binds.
Further, why are these Adhruv Prakṛtis called Sādi and Adhruvbandha? In response to this, the Gāthā says -
Avaro Bhiṣaṇamuhutto Titthāhārāṇ Savvāūṇam.
Samao Chāvattīṇam Bandho Tamhā Dudhā Sesā. ||126||
Meaning - The time of continuous binding of Tirthankara, Aharakdvig and Chārāyu, these seven Prakṛtis, is from Jghana to Antarmūhūrta, the time of continuous binding of the remaining 66 Prakṛtis is from Jghana to one Samaya. After this, their binding stops. Therefore, Sādi and Adhruvbandha is proven in these 73 Prakṛtis. In this way, understand the nature of Prakṛtibandha.
|| Iti Prakṛtibandha ||
***
Atha Sthitibandha, now the excellent state of the original Prakṛtis is said -
Tisan Kodakodī Tighadītadīyesu Vīs Nāmadūge. Sattari Mohe Suddham Uvahi Āuss Tetisam. ||127|| 

Page #141:
---------------------------
## Gommatasara Karmakanda - 103

**Meaning:** The highest state of bondage for **Jnanavarana**, **Darsanavarana**, **Antaray**, and **Vedaniyakarma** is thirty kodi kodi sagar, and for **Nama** and **Gotra Karma** it is twenty kodi kodi sagar. The highest state of bondage for **Mohaniya Karma** is seventy kodi kodi sagar, and for **Ayukarma** it is only thirty-three sagar.

**Following are six verses describing the state of bondage for different types of karma:**

128. **Dukkhati-ghadi-ino-gham**, **Sadi-chhi-manu-duge**, **Tad-addham tu**, **Sattari-dansana-mohe**, **Charitta-mohe ya chattalam**.

129. **Santhana-samhadi-nam**, **Charimas-so-gham**, **Duhi-nam-aditti**, **Attarasa-kodi-kodi**, **Viyalanam su-humati-nhang cha**.

130. **Ara-di-soge**, **Sandhe**, **Tirik-kha-bhayana-ira-ya-teju-ra-laduge**, **Vegu-vvada-av-duge**, **Nice**, **Tasavanna-aguru-ti chaukke**.

131. **Igi-panch-endriya-thava-nimina**, **Saggaman**, **Athira-chhakkanam**, **Ari kodi kodi sagar**, **Nama-muk-kassam**.

132. **Hassara-di-uchcha-purisa**, **Thira-chhakke**, **Saththa-gaman-deva-duge**, **Tass-addham**, **Anta-kodi-kodi**, **Ahar-tiththa-yare**.

133. **Surana-ira-ya-uno-gham**, **Nara-ti-riya-uno**, **Tinni-palla-ni**, **Uk-kassa-satthi-di-bandho**, **Sanni-pajjatta-ge**, **Jogue**.

**Meaning:** The highest state of bondage for **Asata-vedaniya**, **Jnanavarana**, **Darsanavarana**, and **Antaray** is thirty kodi kodi sagar, similar to the **Mula-prakriti**. The highest state of bondage for **Sata-vedaniya**, **Stri-veda**, **Manushya-gati**, and **Manushya-gati-anupurvi** is fifteen kodi kodi sagar. The highest state of bondage for **Mithyatva** is seventy kodi kodi sagar, and for **Charitra-mohiniya** (sixteen **Kshaya**) is forty kodi kodi sagar. The highest state of bondage for **Hundaka-samsthana** and **Sripatika-samhanana** is twenty kodi kodi sagar, similar to the **Mula-prakriti**. The highest state of bondage for **Vamana-samsthana** and **Kilaka-samhanana** is eighteen kodi kodi sagar, for **Kubjaka-samsthana** and **Ardhanara-cha-samhanana** is sixteen, for **Swati-samsthana** and **Nara-cha-samhanana** is fourteen, for **Nyagrodha-parimandala-samsthana** and **Vajra-nara-cha-samhanana** is twelve, and for **Sama-chaturasra-samsthana** and **Vajra-rshabha-nara-cha-samhanana** is ten kodi kodi sagar. **Dwi-indriya**, ... 

Page #142:
---------------------------
Gommatasar Karmakanda-104: The excellent state of bondage for the three-sensory, four-sensory, subtle, ordinary, and insufficient is 18 Kodakodi Sagara according to the evidence of the Tirthankaras. Arati, sorrow, impotence, animal existence, animal existence in the past, fear, disgust, hell, hell in the past, luminous body, karmic body, and generous body, generous limbs, changing body, changing limbs, heat, light, low stature, S, Badar, Payat, and each, four types of Vana, heavy and light, attack, counter-attack, exhalation, one-sensory, five-sensory, stationary, creation, inappropriate liberation, and unstable, inauspicious, unfortunate, bad voice, unworthy, and bad reputation, thus all these 41 natures have an excellent state of bondage of 20 Kodakodi Sagara. Laughter, pleasure, high lineage, male knowledge, and stable, auspicious, fortunate, good voice, worthy, and good reputation, appropriate liberation, heavenly existence, and heavenly existence in the past, these 13 natures have an excellent state of bondage of 10 Kodakodi Sagara. The excellent state of bondage for the food body, food limbs, and Tirthankara nature is within Kodakodi Sagara (one crore more and less than Kodakodi). The excellent state of bondage for the heavenly lifespan and hell lifespan is 33 Sagara like the original nature, and the excellent state of bondage for the human lifespan and animal lifespan is three Palya. This excellent state of bondage can only happen for the five-sensory being who is fully aware. ||133||

Special Meaning: The excellent state of bondage for auspicious and inauspicious karma happens only for the beings of the four paths who have the appropriate excellent karmic influence. The beings with excellent karmic influence will have bondage of inappropriate natures, not the bondage of the seven, etc. Among these natures, the Tirthankara and food body are not the cause of the three worlds.

"All beings who are liberated are liberated by the excellent karmic influence. The beings who are bound are bound by the appropriate karmic influence." ||134||

Meaning: The excellent state of bondage for the other 117 natures besides the animal, human, and heavenly lifespans happens due to the appropriate excellent karmic influence. And the inferior state of bondage happens due to the appropriate pure influence. The excellent state of bondage for the three lifespans also happens due to the appropriate pure influence, and the inferior state of bondage happens due to the appropriate karmic influence.

Special Meaning: Besides the excellent karmic influence, the path of the being who is bound is also a cause in the state of bondage. For example, a god binds the one-sensory being due to excellent karmic influence, but does not bind the animal lifespan to the inferior state of bondage. Now, the masters of the excellent state of bondage say:

"All beings who are bound are bound by wrong belief. The food body, Tirthankara, or god liberates them." ||135|| 1. Mahabandha Pu. 2 Pg. 256-257 "Tappao Guggukasae Sankilitee Vattamansa" 

Page #143:
---------------------------
## Gommatasara Karmakanda-105

**Meaning:**  The **Mithyadristi** (false-believing) being binds the **utkrushtasthitibandha** (highest state of bondage) of all 116 natures except the **Aharakadvik** (two-fold food-consuming), **Tirthankara** (liberated soul), and **Devayu** (celestial beings). Here, the **artha-pati** (meaning-master) **nyach** (logic) is that the **Samyagdristi** (right-believing) being binds the **utkrushtasthitibandha** of the four natures, **Aharakadi** (food-consuming and others). The special characteristics of the binders of these four natures are:

**Verse 136:**
**Meaning:** The **Devayu** binds in the **utkrushtasthiti** (highest state) with the **pramatta** (distracted) **gunasthan** (state of qualities), the **Aharakadvik** binds in the **utkrushtasthiti** with the **apramatta** (undistracted) **gunasthan**, and the **Tirthankara** binds in the **utkrushtasthiti** as an **asanyata** (uncontrolled) **Samyagdristi** (right-believing) **manushya** (human).

**Special Meaning:** The **pramatta** (distracted) **gunasthan** being binds when facing the **utkrushtasthiti** of the **Devayu**. Although the **Devayu** can be bound even in the **apramatta** (undistracted) **gunasthan**, the **apramatta** has more intense and pure results. Therefore, the **Devayu** is not bound here, but only in the **niratishya** (without excess) **apramatta**, but not in the **utkrushtasthitibandha**. The **apramatta** (undistracted) **gunasthan** being with **sanklesha** (afflictions) binds when facing the **utkrushtasthiti** of the **Aharakadvik**. The **asanyata** (uncontrolled) **Samyagdristi** (right-believing) **manushya** (human) binds when facing the **utkrushtasthiti** of the **Tirthankara** in the second or third **naraka** (hell). Therefore, the **asanyata** (uncontrolled) **Samyagdristi** (right-believing) **manushya** (human) facing **naraka** (hell) has intense **sanklesha** (afflictions) when binding the **Tirthankara**. The **Samyagdristi** (right-believing) **manushya** (human) going towards **mithyatva** (false belief) has **utkrushtasthitibandha** (highest state of bondage) in the final moments.

**Next:** The **utkrushtasthitibandha** (highest state of bondage) of the remaining 116 natures is bound by the **Mithyadristi** (false-believing) being. This is explained in two verses:

**Verse 137:**
**Meaning:** The **manushya** (human) and **tiryanch** (animal) beings bind the **utkrushtasthitibandha** (highest state of bondage) of the remaining three **ayus** (life spans), **vaikriyakashatka** (six types of transformations), **vikalatraya** (three types of imperfections), and the three **sukshma** (subtle) natures.

**Verse 138:**
**Meaning:** The **Devayu** (celestial beings) and **naraki** (hell beings) bind the **utkrushtasthiti** (highest state) of the **audarikadvik** (two-fold generous), **tiryanch** (animal) **gati** (path), **tiryanch** (animal) **gati** (path) **anupurvi** (following), **udyota** (shining), and **asamprapta** (unachieved) **srupaatika** (snake) **sanhannan** (gathering) **kri** (action).

**Jumm** (End) 

Page #144:
---------------------------
... :: ..
. Gommatar Karmakanda-106...
The three natures, Ekendriya, Atap and Sthavar, are bound by the Utkrishta-Sthitibandh by the Mithyadrishti Devas, while the remaining 12 natures are bound by the four types of beings with Utkrishta-Samklesha-Parinam and Eshta-Madhyam-Samklesha-Parinam.
Special Note - Here, the nature of Utkrishta and Eshta-Madhyam-Samklesha-Parinam should be understood as follows:
Due to Sthitibandh, there are countless Lokapramāna Parinam as the cause for Utkrishta-Sthitibandh in the Sthitibandha-Adhyavasaya-Sthanas, which are of the form of Tivra-Manda, etc. The Parinam in the last part of the countless parts of their Paly are called Utkrishta-Samklesha, which are of the form of Tivra-Kashaya. The Parinam in the first part are called Eshta-Samklesha, which are of the form of Alpa-Kashaya. The Parinam found in the parts between these two are called Madhyam-Samklesha-Parinam. Similarly, it should be understood in all the distinctions of Sthiti, from Utkrishta to Jghanya-Sthiti, decreasing one at a time.
The measure of the distinctions of their own Sthiti in all these natures is called Urdhvagachch. The Tirya-Gachch is of the measure of countless parts of Paly, and the Guna-Hani-Ayam is also of the measure of countless parts of Paly. Here, the method of Anukrishti-Rachana should be understood as in Adha-Karanavat.
Anukrishti-Rachana - There are 222 Parinam in Anga-Sandrishti due to Utkrishta-Sthitibandh. Their Anukrishti-Rachana is 54-55-56-57 = 222. Out of these, 57 Parinam are due to Utkrishta-Sthitibandh only, but 54 Parinam (Sthitibandha-Adhyavasaya-Sthan) are the cause of Utkrishta-Sthitibandh as well as the cause of the binding of Sthiti from Utkrishta-Sthitibandh to countless parts of Paly less. And 55 and 56 Parinam are the cause of Utkrishta-Sthitibandh as well as the cause of the lower Sthitibandh. Further, the Jghanya-Sthitibandh of the Mula-Prakriti is called:
Baras Ya Veyaniye Namagode Ya Atta Ya Muhutta.
Bhinnamuhuttam Tu Thidi Jahanayam Sesapanchanham ||139||
Meaning - The Jghanya-Sthitibandh of Vedaniya-Karma is of twelve Muhurta, the Jghanya-Sthitibandh of Nama and Gotra-Karma is of eight Muhurta, and the Jghanya-Sthitibandh of the remaining five Karmas is of one Antarmuhurta each.
Then, the Jghanya-Sthitibandh of the Uttar-Prakritis is called:
Lohassa Suhumasattarasanam Ogham Dugekadalamasam.
Kohatie Purissassa Ya A Ya Vassa Jahanathidi ||140|| 

Page #145:
---------------------------
## Gommatasara Karmakanda - 107

**Meaning:** The lowest state of bondage for the 17 natures that bind in the state of greed and subtle sampraya guna is the same as the original natures. Of these, fame and high lineage have eight muhurtas each. The seven-sense-object has 12 muhurtas, and the remaining five knowledge-obscuration, four vision-obscuration, five obstacles, and burning greed have one antarmuhurta each. Burning anger has two months, burning pride has one month, burning delusion has 15 days, and the lowest state of bondage for the male-sense-object is eight years.

**Verse 141:**

**Meaning:** The lowest state of bondage for the Tirthankara and the two-sense-object is the size of the inner Kodakodi ocean. There are many divisions of the inner Kodakodi ocean, so the lowest state of bondage is also of the same size. This lowest state of bondage occurs for those in the क्षपक श्रेणी (Kshapaka Shreni) at the time of their own liberation, in the sixth part of the eighth guna-sthana, according to the rules.

**Verse 142:**

**Meaning:** The lowest state of bondage for human life and animal life is one antarmuhurta, which is 1/18th of a kshudra bhava or breath, while for divine life and hell life, it is ten thousand years.

**Verse 143:**

**Meaning:** Of the remaining 91 natures, excluding the 29 mentioned in the previous verses (5 knowledge-obscuration, 4 vision-obscuration, 5 obstacles, fame, high lineage, seven-sense-object, four burning passions, male-sense-object, Tirthankara, two-sense-object, and four types of life), the lowest state of bondage for the 84 natures excluding the six vikriya and false belief is held by the Badarekaindriya-paryapta-jiva, who is the holder of the appropriate purity. By participating in their own highest state, the measure of the lowest state is to be known according to the rule of three. 

Page #146:
---------------------------
## Gommatasara Karmakanda-108:  A Comparative View of the Superior and Inferior States of the Root and Resultant Natures

**Root Nature** | **Resultant Nature** | **Superior** | **Inferior**
------- | -------- | -------- | --------
**Sthitibandha** | **Jnanavaraniya** |  |  
| **Matijnanavaranadi Pancha (5)** | 30 Kodakodi Sagaropama | Antarmuhurta Darshanavaraniya | 
| **Nidra-Nidra, 11** | 30 Kodakodi Sagaropama | 3/7 Sagar* | Prachala-Prachala and Styanagridhi Nidra and Prachala | 30 Kodakodi Sagaropama | 3/7 Sagar*
| **Chakshu, Achakshu, -** | 30 Kodakodi Sagaropama | Antarmuhurta | 
| **Avadhi and Kevaldarshan** | 15 Kodakodi Sagaropama | 12 Muhurta | 
| **Asata** | 30 Kodakodi Sagaropama! | 3/7 Sagar* | **Mohaniya (a) Darshanamohaniya** | 70 Kodakodi Sagaropama | 7/7 Sagar" | 
|  | **(a) Charitramohaniya** |  | Anantanubandhi Krodhadi Char | 40 Kodakodi Sagaropama | 4/7 Sagar* | 
|  | **(1) Kashayavedaniya Apratyakhyanakrodhadi Char** | 40 Kodakodi Sagaropama | 4/7 Sagar* | 
|  | **Pratyakhyanakrodhadi Char** | 40 Kodakodi Sagaropama | 4/7 Sagar | 
|  | **Savalan Krodha** | 40 Kodakodi Sagaropama | 2 Maas | 
|  | **Sajwalan Mana** | 40 Kodakodi Sagaropama | 1 Maas | 
|  | **Sajwalan Maya** | 40 Kodakodi Sagaropama | 1 Paksha | 
|  | **Sanchalan Lobha** | 40 Kodakodi Sagaropama |  | 
|  | **(2) Nokashayavedaniya Strived** | 15 Kodakodi Sagaropama | 2/7 Sagar" | 
|  | **Purushaved** | 10 Kodakodi Sagaropama | 8 Varsh | 
|  | **Napunsakaved** | 20 Kodakodi Sagaropama | 2/7 Sagar | 

*Note: Sagar refers to a specific unit of time in Jain cosmology. 

Page #147:
---------------------------
##  Age
## Name
**(Types of Pindaprakriti)**
(1) Motion (Gati)
(2) Species (Jati)
(3) Body 5 (Sharira 5)
(4) Body Bondage 5 (Sharirabandhan 5)
(5) Body Aggregation 5 (Sharirasanghat 5)
## Gommatasar Karmakanda - 109
## Laughter (Hasya)
## Love (Rati)
## Dislike (Arati)
## Sorrow (Shok)
## Fear (Bhay)
## Disgust (Jugupsa)
## Hell Life (Narakayu)
## Animal Life (Tiryancyayu)
## Human Life (Manushyayu)
## God Life (Devayu)
## Hell (Narak)
## Animal (Tiryanch)
## Human (Manushya)
## God (Dev)
## One-Sensed (Ekendiriya)
## Two-Sensed (Dwindriya)
## Three-Sensed (Triindriya)
## Four-Sensed (Chaturindriya)
## Five-Sensed (Panchendriya)
## Generous (Audarik)
## Violent (Vaikriyak)
## Food-Seeking (Aharak)
## Radiant (Taijas)
## 10 Koḍakoḍī Sagaropama
## 10 Koḍakoḍī Sagaropama
## 20 Koḍakoḍī Sagaropama
## . 2) Koḍakoḍī Sagaropama
## 20 Koḍakoḍī Sagaropama
## 20 Koḍakoḍī Sagaropama
## 33 Sagaropama
## 3 Palyopama
## 3 Palyopama
## 33 Sagaropama
## 20 Koḍakoḍī Sagaropama
## 20 Koḍakoḍī Sagaropama
## 15 Koḍakoḍī Sagaropama
## 10 Koḍakoḍī Sagaropama
## 20 Koḍakoḍī Sagaropama
## 18 Koḍakoḍī Sagaropama
## 18 Koḍakoḍī Sagaropama
## 18 Koḍakoḍī Sagaropama
## 20 Koḍakoḍī Sagaropama
## 20 Koḍakoḍī Sagaropama
## 20 Koḍakoḍī Sagaropama
## Antah Koḍakoḍī
## 20 Koḍakoḍī Sagaropama
## 2/7 Sagar *
## 2/7 Sagar
## 2/7 Sagar
## 2/7 Sagar *
## 2 / 7 Sagar **
## 2/7 Sagar *
## 10 Sahasravarsh
## Kshudrabhav
## Kshudrabhav
## 10 Sahasravarsh
## 2000 / 7 Sagar
## 2 / 7 Sagar *
## 2 / 7 Sagar **
## 2000 / 7 Sagar *
## No
## 2/7 Sagar
## 2/7 Sagar *
## 2/7 Sagar
## 2/7 Sagar *
## 2 / 7 Sagar *
## 2/7 Sagar *
## 2000 /7 Sagar * Antah Koḍakoḍī
## 2 / 7 Sagar # 

Page #148:
---------------------------
(6)  **Sharirasansthan**
(7)  **Sharira Anopan**
(8)  **Sharirasanhanan**
(9)  **Varna**
(10) **Gandha**
(11) **Rasa**
(12) **Sparsha**
(13) **Anupurvi**

Gommatasar Karmakanda - 110
Karma
Samachaturasra
Nyagrodhaparimandala
Swati
Kubjak
Vaman
Hundak
Audarik
Vaikriyak
Aharak
Vajrarbha Narach
Vajra Narach
Narach
Ardha Narach
Kilaka
Spatika
Krishnadi 5
Surabhi aur Durabhi
Tiktadi 5
Karkashadi 8
Narakgati Anupurvi
Tiryachgati Anupurvi
Manushya Gati Anupurvi
Devgati Anupurvi
20 Kodakodi Sagaropama
10 Kodakodi Sagaropama
12 Kodakodi Sagaropama
14 Kodakodi Sagaropama
16 Kodakodi Sagaropama
18 Kodakodi Sagaropama
20 Kodakodi Sagaropama
20 Kodakodi Sagaropama
20 Kodakodi Sagaropama
Antah Kodakodi
10 Kodakodi Sagaropama
12 Kodakodi Sagaropama
14 Kodakodi Sagaropama
16 Kodakodi Sagaropama
18 Kodakodi Sagaropama
20 Kodakodi Sagaropama
20 Kodakodi Sagaropama
20 Kodakodi Sagaropama
20 Kodakodi Sagaropama
2/7 Sagar *
20 Kodakodi Sagaropama 2/7 Sagar #
20 Kodakodi Sagaropama
20 Kodakodi Sagaropama
15 Kodakodi Sagaropama 10 Kodakodi Sagaropama
2/7 Sagar *
2/7 Sagar *
2/7 Sagar *
2/7 Sagar *
2/7 Sagar'
2/7 Sagar *
2/7 Sagar *
2/7 Sagar *
2000 / 7 Sagar'
Antakodakodi
2/7 Sagar **
2/7 Sagar *
2/7 Sagar *
2/7 Sagar *
2/7 Sagar * 2/7 Sagar *
2 / 7 Sagar *
2 / 7 Sagar *
.
2000 /7 Sagar *
2 / 7 Sagar *
2/7 Sagar * 2000/7 Sagar # 

Page #149:
---------------------------
(14) Viha Yoga (Apind Prakruti)
Gommatasar Karmakanda - 111

**Prashastha**
**Aprashastha**
**Agurulaghu**
**Upghata**
**Parghata**
**Uchchvasa**
**Atap**
**Udyot**
**Tras**
**Sthavar**
**Badar**
**Sukshma**
**Paryapta**
**Aparyapta**
**Pratiyeka Sharira**
**Sadharan Sharira**
**Sthir**
**Asthir**
**Shubh**
**Ashubh**
**Subhag**
**Dur Bhag**
**Suswar**
**Duhswar**
**Aadeya**

10 Koda Koti Sagaropam
20 Koda Koti Sagaropam
20 Koda Koti Sagaropam
20 Koda Koti Sagaropam
20 Koda Koti Sagaropam
20 Koda Koti Sagaropam
20 Koda Koti Sagaropam
20 Koda Koti Sagaropam
20 Koda Koti Sagaropam
20 Koda Koti Sagaropam
20 Koda Koti Sagaropam
18 Koda Koti Sagaropam
20 Koda Koti Sagaropam
18 Koda Koti Sagaropam
20 Koda Koti Sagaropam
18 Koda Koti Sagaropam
10 Koda Koti Sagaropam
20 Koda Koti Sagaropam
10 Koda Koti Sagaropam
20 Koda Koti Sagaropam
10 Koda Koti Sagaropam
20 Koda Koti Sagaropam
10 Koda Koti Sagaropam
20 Koda Koti Sagaropam
10 Koda Koti Sagaropam
2/7 Sagar
2/7 Nagar *
2/7 Sagar *
2/7 Sagar *
2/7 Sagar *
2/7 Sagar *
2/7 Sagar *
2/7 Sagar *
2/7 Sagar *
2/7 Sagar *
2/7 Sagar *
2/7 Sagar *
2/7 Sagar *
2/7 Sagar *
2/7 Sagar *
2/7 Sagar *
2/7 Sagar *
2/7 Sagar *
2/7 Sagar *
2/7 Sagar *
2/7 Sagar *
2/7 Sagar *
2/7 Sagar *
2/7 Sagar *
2/7 Sagar *
2/7 Sagar *

Page #150:
---------------------------
## Gotra
## Antaray
## Goshatma Karmakanda 1124
## Anadeya
## Yash: Kirti
## Ayashaskirti
## Nirman
## Tirthankar
## Uchch
## Neecha
## Dan - Labhadi 5

## Note - 1. This Sandrishti Dh. Pu.
## 20 Kodakodisaagaropam
## 10 Kodakodisaagaropam
## 20 Kodakodisaagaropam
## 20 Kodakodisaagaropam
## Antah Kodakodisaagar
## 10 Kodakodisaagar
## 20 Kodakodisaagar
## 30 Kodakodisaagar
## M
## 2/7 Sagar
## 8 Muhurt
## 2 / 7 Sagar "
## 2/7 Sagar
## Antah Kodakodisaagar
## 8 Muhurt
## 2/7 Sagar*
## Antarmuhurt
## 6 V Mahabandh Pu. 2 according to.
## 37421 77777
## 2. The above Sandrishti (*) should be taken as less than the innumerable part of the Sagaroop number Palyopama, but should be taken as less than the numbered part of the 2000 / 7 Sagaroop number Palyopama.
## 3. In Sandrishti, 2000 / 7 Sagar * is given, it is given with respect to the Asangni Panchendriya because the Vaikriyik Shatka bandh is not done by the Ekendriya and Vikalatrai Jeevas. The excellent state bandh of the Mithyatva Karma of the Asangni Panchendriya Jeeva is 1000 Sagar, from this, the inferior state bandh of name and Gotra is 2000 / 7 Sagar less than the innumerable part of Palyopama.
## Doubt - The inferior state bandh of the natures like Strived, Hasya, Rati, Sthir, Shubh, Subhag, Suswar etc. does not occur only two-seventh (u) part of Sagaropam less than the innumerable part of Palyopama, because the excellent state bandh of these Strivedadi natures is not 20 Kodakodisaagaropam.
## Solution - Although the excellent state of these Strivedadi natures is not 20 Kodakodisaagaropam, but according to the excellent state of the original nature, there is no contradiction in the inferior state bandh of these natures, which are obtained by Haska, being only two-seventh (u) part of Sagaropam less than the innumerable part of Palyopama.
## Doubt - If the inferior state of the said Uttaraprakritis of the name karma is taken as one, as compared to the general of the original nature, then it is fine, but Strived, Hasya and Rati are the forms of Charitra Mohaniya
## 1. Dh. Pu. 6 p. 190-191. 

Page #151:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda - 113

Because they have kshaya, they should follow kshaya. The highest state of kshaya is 40 kodakodi sagar, therefore the lowest state of no-kshaya is not proven as mentioned above.

Solution - The natures of strived, hasya and rati do not follow the bondage of kshaya because it is against the following of kshaya bondage of no-kshaya.

Now we show the method and proof of the lowest state.

"Evam panakadi pannam sayam sahasam cha micchavarbandho. Igivigalanam avaram pallasan khunsankhunam." || 144 ||

Meaning - The highest state of mithyatva is bound by one-sense being one sagar, two-sense being 25 sagar, three-sense being 50 sagar, four-sense being 100 sagar, non-conscious five-sense being one thousand sagar and conscious five-sense sufficient being 70 kodakodi sagar. The lowest state of mithyatva is bound by one-sense being less than its highest state by an innumerable part of paly, and two-sense, three-sense, four-sense, non-conscious five-sense are bound less than their respective highest states by a countable part of paly.

Further, the ratio of the highest state of conscious five-sense is the proof of the bondage of the highest and lowest state of one-sense being, according to the rule of three.

"Jadi sattariss ettiyamettan kim hodi tisyaadinam. Idi sampaate sesanam igivigalesu ubhayatidi." || 145 ||

Meaning - The highest state of mithyatva karma binds conscious sufficient being 70 kodakodi sagar, but one-sense being binds one sagar of mithyatva, then how much will the bondage of one-sense being be for the karma of 30 kodakodi sagar and above? By doing the rule of three in this way, the proof of the highest and lowest state of one-sense and defective-sense beings comes out.

Special meaning - If the highest state of mithyatva karma, which is 70 kodakodi sagar, binds one-sense being one sagar, then how much will it bind in the highest state of 40, 30 and 20 kodakodi sagar? Here, the proof amount is 70 kodakodi sagar, the result amount is one kodakodi sagar and the desired amount is the highest state of the desired karma, which is 30-40 or 20 kodakodi sagar and above. Multiplying the result amount by the desired amount, the proof that came out is the highest state of the desired karma.

2. Dh. Pu. 6 p. 194-195 

Page #152:
---------------------------
Gommatsar Karmakanda-114

The amount of karma that binds to an Ekendriya (one-sensed) being in its highest state is proportional to the amount of karma that is received. For example, using the rule of three, if 16 Kashayas (passions) bind with a force of 40 Koti Koti Sagars (billions of billions of oceans), then the highest state of an Ekendriya being binds with a force of 4/7th of a Sagar.

Similarly, using the same rule of three, the highest state of an Asata Vedaniya (non-perceivable) being, which binds with a force of 30 Koti Koti Sagars, binds with a force of 3/7th of a Sagar for the Ekendriya being. The three Ghatiyakarma (destructive karmas) - Jnana Avarana (knowledge obscuring), Darsana Avarana (perception obscuring), and Antaraya (hindrance) - with 19 types, bind with a force of 3/7th of a Sagar for the Ekendriya being. The Karma with a force of 20 Koti Koti Sagars binds with a force of 2/7th of a Sagar for the Ekendriya being.

If a Dvi-Indriya (two-sensed) being binds with a force of 25 Sagars for Mithyatva Karma (false belief) in its highest state of 70 Koti Koti Sagars, then how many Sagars will bind for a Karma with a force of 30 Koti Koti Sagars? Using the rule of three, we get 75/7th of a Sagar. Similarly, a Karma with a force of 40 Koti Koti Sagars binds with a force of 100/7th of a Sagar in its highest state. In this way, the binding of all karmas for a Dvi-Indriya being is 25 times that of an Ekendriya being.

The binding of all karmas for a Tri-Indriya (three-sensed) being is 50 times that of an Ekendriya being, for a Chatur-Indriya (four-sensed) being is 100 times, and for an Asanjna Pancha-Indriya (non-conscious five-sensed) being is 1000 times.

Using the rule of three, we can calculate the highest state of binding. Then, by subtracting the Asankhyatava (innumerable) part for an Ekendriya being and the Sankhyatava (countable) part for a Vikalendriya (impaired-sensed) being, we can determine the lowest state of binding.

Now, let's discuss the specific characteristics of Aabaadha (hindrance):

**Sanni Asanni Chaukke Eke Anto Muttama Aabaha.**
**Jette Sankhejguna Avalisankham Asankhabhaghiyam.** ||146||

**Meaning:** The lowest Aabaadha for Sanji (conscious) beings, Asanji Chatushk (non-conscious four-sensed beings), and Ekendriya beings is Antarmuhurt (within a moment). The highest Aabaadha for Sanji beings is Sankhyat (countable) times greater than their lowest Aabaadha, for Asanji Chatushk beings is Avalisankhyat (countable part of an Avalika) times greater than their lowest Aabaadha, and for Ekendriya beings is Asankhyat (innumerable) times greater than their lowest Aabaadha.

**Special Note:** The lowest Aabaadha for Sanji Pancha-Indriya beings is Antarmuhurt, and the lowest state of binding is Antah Koti Koti Sagars. The time period between the binding of karma and its manifestation as Uday (arising) or Udirana (excitation) is called Uday Aabaadha Kal (arising hindrance time) and Udirana Aabaadha Kal (excitation hindrance time). The Uday Aabaadha Kal at the time of binding... 

Page #153:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-115

It is said that the duration of the Udirana Aabada is equal to one Aavali. It is also called Bandhavali or Achalaavali. The number of states from Ekendriya to Dviendriya etc. is multiplied. The Aabada of Asanji Panchendriya, Chaturindriya, Triendriya, Dviendriya and Ekendriya Jivas is less than that of Sanji Panchendriya Jivas in proportion to the number, but the Aabada of all Asanji Jivas is only Antarmuhurt, because there are many types of Antarmuhurt. The Aabada of Dviendriya etc. is 25, 50, 100 and 1000 times greater than the Aabada of Ekendriya, and the Aabada of Sanji Jivas is proportional to the number. Although the Aabada of Asanji Panchendriya and Vikal Tray Jivas is greater than their own Aabada in proportion to the number of Aavali, it should be understood that the Aabada of Asanji Panchendriya to Ekendriya is less than the number of Aavali, and the Aabada of Ekendriya Jivas is greater than their own Aabada in proportion to the number of Aavali.

Here, the number of Aabada types of Ekendriya Jivas is obtained by subtracting the Aabada of the lowest state from the Aabada of the highest state and adding one to the result. Similarly, the number of Aabada types of Dviendriya, Triendriya, Chaturindriya, Asanji and Sanji is obtained by subtracting the Aabada of the lowest state from the Aabada of the highest state and adding one to the result.

The number of places is obtained by subtracting the lowest Aabada from the highest Aabada and dividing the result by the number of increments and adding one. Here, the lowest Aabada is the starting point and the highest Aabada is the ending point. Therefore, the number of places is obtained by subtracting the lowest Aabada from the highest Aabada, dividing the result by the number of increments (which is one in this case) and adding one. Here, the highest state is obtained by increasing the lowest state one step at a time, therefore the number of increments is one. To prove the Aghanya state, the following mathematical formula is used:

Jetthabahouvattiya Jetham Abahakandayam Ten.
Abahaviyapphahadenegunenunajettham Avarathiti. ||147||

Meaning: Divide the highest state of Ekendriya etc. Jivas by the highest Aabada. The result is called Abahakandak. Multiply the number of Aabada types by the Abahakandak of each state. Subtract one from the result. The remaining number is the difference between the highest state and the lowest state. 

Page #154:
---------------------------
## Gommatasara Karmakanda-116

**Special Meaning:** Just as there are countless parts of an Avali (a unit of time) more than the proof of the highest obstruction of Mithyatva (false belief) in a one-sensed being, so too, the proof of the highest state of Mithyatva in one Sagar (a unit of time) should be considered the proof of the Aabandha Kanda (obstruction section). Multiplying this Aabandha Kanda by the proof of the different types of obstructions in a one-sensed being, i.e., by countless parts of an Avali, and subtracting one from the result, the remaining proof should be subtracted from the highest state of Mithyatva in one Sagar. The remaining amount is the proof of the lowest state of Mithyatva in a one-sensed being. Dividing the remaining amount after subtracting the lowest state from the highest state of one Sagar by one, the result remains the same. Adding one to this result gives the proof of the different states of Mithyatva in a one-sensed being. Knowing the different states of Mithyatva in a one-sensed being, starting from the lowest and increasing by one each time, until reaching the highest.

Similarly, the proof of the highest obstruction of Mithyatva in a two-sensed being, although it is 25 Antarmuhurta (a unit of time) more than what is obtained by dividing one Avali by four, should be considered as 25 Antarmuhurta, the same as the obstruction in a one-sensed being. In other words, the obstruction in a two-sensed being is 25 times that of a one-sensed being, and the binding of Karmas (actions) is also 25 times. In this way, it should be understood that there are 25 Antarmuhurta in comparison to a one-sensed being. Dividing this period of obstruction by the highest state of Mithyatva in a two-sensed being, which is 25 Sagars, gives the proof of the Aabandha Kanda. Multiplying this Aabandha Kanda by the different types of Aabandha Kanda related to a two-sensed being, subtracting one from the result, and then subtracting the remaining amount from the highest state of 25 Sagars, the remaining amount is the proof of the binding of the lowest state of Mithyatva in a two-sensed being. Adding one to the remaining amount after subtracting the lowest state from the highest state gives the proof of the different states of Mithyatva in a two-sensed being. Similarly, one should know the same for three-sensed, four-sensed, and non-sentient five-sensed beings, and the different types of obstructions of other Karmas like Jnana Avarana (knowledge obstruction) etc. in beings from one-sensed to non-sentient five-sensed.

**Explanation through numbers:**

The highest state is 64 units of time, and the proof of the middle state is from 63 to 46 units of time. The proof of the lowest state is 45 units of time, and the proof of the highest obstruction is 16 units of time. Dividing this obstruction by the highest state gives 4, which is the proof of the Aabandha Kanda. 64516 - 4 Aabandha Kanda. 64-63-62-61... these are the four different states.

| Time of obstruction for these four different states: 60-59-58-57
| Time of obstruction for these four different states: 56-55-54-53
| Time of obstruction for these four different states: 52-51-50-49
| Time of obstruction for these four different states: 48-47-46-45
| Time of obstruction for these five different types of obstructions: 16-15-14-13-12 

Page #155:
---------------------------
Gommatasar Karmakanda-117

Multiplying the 5 types of Aabhadha in Aabhadhakandak 4 by 4 (544) = 20, resulting in 64 to 45 types of situations. Here, 64 represents the highest state and 45 represents the lowest state. The proof of the state or the proof of Aabhadhakandak is mentioned here. In this way, one should know the state bondage, Aabhadha, Aabhadhakandak, types of Aabhadha, and types of states of all the types of beings starting from Ekendriya.

The states of Ekendriya and other beings are described in this way. There are 14 types of beings based on the difference between the lowest and highest states, including the difference between Badar and Sukshma, Ekendriya, Dwiendriya, Triendriya, Chaturindriya, and Asanji and Sanji Panchendriya, based on the difference between sufficient and insufficient.

The lowest and highest states of the above 14 types of beings are described separately as follows: Basup-Basua-Varhidio Subaa-Subaap-Jahannkalo... Beevivaro Beevijahannkalo Seshamagelan Vashiyame!!1.

Meaning: The highest state of karma for the four types of beings, Badar sufficient and insufficient, Sukshma sufficient and insufficient, and the lowest state of Sukshma and Badar insufficient and Sukshma and Badar sufficient beings, thus resulting in eight types of karma states for Ekendriya beings. The sufficient and insufficient and the lowest and highest states of both, thus resulting in four types of states related to Dwiendriya. Similarly, there are four types of states each from Triendriya to Sanji Panchendriya. All these are 8+4+4+4+4+4=28 types of states, which are based on 14 types of beings.

Special Meaning: The following 28 types of highest and lowest states of 14 types of beings starting from Ekendriya should be known: 1. Highest state of Badar sufficient Ekendriya 8. Lowest state of Badar sufficient Ekendriya 2. Highest state of Sukshma sufficient Ekendriya 9. Highest state of sufficient Dwiendriya 3. Highest state of Badar insufficient Ekendriya 10. Highest state of insufficient Dwiendriya 4. Highest state of Sukshma insufficient Ekendriya 11. Lowest state of insufficient Dwiendriya 5. Lowest state of Sukshma insufficient Ekendriya 12. Lowest state of sufficient Dwiendriya 6. Lowest state of Badar insufficient Ekendriya 13. Highest state of sufficient Triendriya 7. Lowest state of Sukshma sufficient Ekendriya 14. Highest state of insufficient Triendriya.

Page #156:
---------------------------
## Gommatasara Karmakanda-118

**15. Lowest state of a Tri-Indriya (three-sense) being**
**22. Highest state of an Asanji-Panchendriya (non-sentient five-sense) being**
**16. Lowest state of a Tri-Indriya (three-sense) being**
**23. Lowest state of an Asanji-Panchendriya (non-sentient five-sense) being**
**17. Highest state of a Chatur-Indriya (four-sense) being**
**24. Lowest state of an Asanji-Panchendriya (non-sentient five-sense) being**
**18. Highest state of an Aparyapt Chatur-Indriya (insufficient four-sense) being**
**25. Highest state of a Paryapt Sanji-Panchendriya (sufficient sentient five-sense) being**
**19. Lowest state of an Aparyapt Chatur-Indriya (insufficient four-sense) being**
**26. Highest state of an Aparyapt Sanji-Panchendriya (insufficient sentient five-sense) being**
**20. Lowest state of a Paryapt Chatur-Indriya (sufficient four-sense) being**
**27. Lowest state of an Aparyapt Sanji-Panchendriya (insufficient sentient five-sense) being**
**21. Highest state of an Asanji-Panchendriya (non-sentient five-sense) being**
**28. Lowest state of a Paryapt Sanji-Panchendriya (sufficient sentient five-sense) being**

_Out of the above 28 categories, the four categories related to Sanji-Panchendriya (sentient five-sense) beings will be discussed separately later. To understand the extent of the state of the remaining 24 categories, we will use the rule of three (trairaashik) to calculate the intervals. For example:_

The measure of time in a state is called its extent (aayam). Extent means length. Here, the highest state of a one-sense being's (ekendriya) false belief (mithyatva) is as vast as an ocean, and the lowest state is as much time as remains after subtracting an innumerable fraction of a moment from an ocean of time.

_According to the Karan Sutra, "Aadi Ante Suddhe Vahihi De Roov Sanju De Thana", the remaining measure after subtracting the beginning (lowest state) from the end (highest state) is divided by the measure of increase (one unit of time for each state). Adding one to the result gives the number of states of a one-sense being's false belief, which is an innumerable fraction of a moment. In the verses following this one, the number of intervals in the state of a one-sense being is represented by the following sequence: 1-24-14-28-98-196. These numbers are called "shalaaka". The sum of all these shalaaka is 343. Just like there are shares in a joint business, we need to understand these shalaaka. The alternatives in the state of a one-sense being, which is an innumerable fraction of a moment, are divided by 343. The resulting measure is considered one shalaaka. We need to multiply these shalaaka by their respective values to get the measure of their respective states. This is called the rule of three (trairaashik):_

If 343 shalaaka represent all the states of a one-sense being's false belief, which is an innumerable fraction of a moment, then how many states will be represented by 196 shalaaka? Here, the measure (pramaan) is 343 shalaaka, the result (phal) is the measure of the states of a one-sense being's false belief (an innumerable fraction of a moment), and the desired measure (icha) is... 

Page #157:
---------------------------
## Gommatasara Karmakanda-119:  Distinction of States Related to Ekendriya Jivas

**Ba.Pa.3.**
**Su.Pa.3.**
**Ba.A.U. Su.A.U. Su.A.J. Ba.A.J. Su.Pa.J.**
**Ba.Pa.J.**
**T-**
**+**

**196.** To know the distinction of states from the **utkrushtasthiti** of **badaraparyapta** to the **utkrushtasthiti** of **sukshmaparyapta**, multiply the **phalarashi** by the **ichcharashi** and divide by the **pramanarashi**. The quotient obtained will be the number of distinctions of states in this interval. The **praman** of these distinctions of states is equal to the number of distinctions of states in the interval between the **utkrushtasthitibandha** of **badaraparyapta** and the **utkrushtasthitibandha** of **sukshmaparyapta**. This interval should be known as 196 **shalaka**.  Subtracting one from the **praman** of distinctions of states in this interval, the **kalapraman** obtained should be subtracted from **ekasagara** (the **utkrushtasthiti** of **badaraparyapta**) to obtain the **praman** of the **utkrushtasthiti** of **sukshmaparyapta**.

**For example:**
* **Pramanarashi:** 343 **shalaka**
* **Phalarashi:** The **praman** of distinctions of states of **mithyatva** of **ekendriya** (an **asankhyatava** part of **palyaka**)
* **Ichcharashi:** 28 **shalaka**

Multiplying the **phalarashi** by the **ichcharashi** and dividing by the **pramanarashi**, the quotient obtained will be the **praman** of distinctions of states from the **utkrushtasthiti** of **badaraparyapta** to the **utkrushtasthiti** of **sukshmaparyapta**. This interval should be known as 28 **shalaka**. Subtracting the number of distinctions of states from the **utkrushtasthiti** of **sukshmaparyapta**, the **praman** of the **utkrushtasthiti** of **badaraparyapta** is obtained.

**For example:**
* **Pramanarashi:** 343 **shalaka**
* **Phalarashi:** The **praman** of all distinctions of states of **mithyatva** of **ekendriya** (an **asankhyatava** part of **palyaka**)
* **Ichcharashi:** 4 **shalaka**

Multiplying the **phalarashi** by the **ichcharashi** and dividing by the **pramanarashi**, the quotient obtained will be the number of distinctions of states from the **utkrushtasthiti** of **badaraparyapta** to the **utkrushtasthiti** of **sukshmaparyapta**. This interval should be known as 4 **shalaka**. Subtracting the number of distinctions of states from the **utkrushtasthitibandha** of **badaraparyapta**, the **utkrushtasthitibandha** of **sukshmaparyapta** is obtained.

**For example:**
* **Pramanarashi:** 343
* **Phalarashi:** The **praman** of all distinctions of states of **mithyatva** of **ekendriya** (an **asankhyatava** part of **palyaka**)
* **Ichcharashi:** 1 **shalaka**

Multiplying the **phalarashi** by the **ichcharashi** and dividing by the **pramanarashi**, the quotient obtained will be the number of distinctions of states from the **utkrushtasthiti** of **sukshmaparyapta** to the **jghanyasthiti** of **sukshmaparyapta**. This interval should be known as 1 **shalaka**. The number of distinctions of states... 

Page #158:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda - 120

When the number of subtle-inadequate (sookshma-aparyapt) states is reduced by the number of states from the highest state of subtle-inadequate to the lowest state of subtle-inadequate, the proof of the lowest state of subtle-inadequate is obtained.

The proof amount is 343, the fruit amount is the proof of the distinctions of the state of false belief of the one-sense being (the fraction of an asankhyata), the desired amount is 2. Here, multiplying the fruit amount by the desired amount and dividing by the proof amount, the number of states from the lowest state of subtle-inadequate to the lowest state of inadequate after the bond of the lowest state of subtle-inadequate is obtained. There are two divisions in this interval. When the number of distinctions is reduced from the lowest state of subtle-inadequate, the lowest state of inadequate is obtained.

The proof amount and fruit amount are as mentioned above, and the desired amount is 14. Here, multiplying the fruit amount by the desired amount and dividing by the proof amount, the number of states from the bond of the lowest state of inadequate to the lowest state of subtle-inadequate after the bond of the lowest state of inadequate is obtained. There are 14 divisions in this interval. When the number of distinctions is reduced from the lowest state of inadequate, the proof of the lowest state of subtle-inadequate is obtained.

The proof and fruit amount are as mentioned above, and the desired amount is 98. Here, multiplying the fruit amount by the desired amount and dividing by the proof amount, the number of states from the bond of the lowest state of subtle-inadequate to the lowest state of inadequate after the bond of the lowest state of subtle-inadequate is obtained, and there are 98 divisions in this interval. When the number of distinctions is reduced from the lowest state of subtle-inadequate, the lowest state of inadequate is obtained. This lowest state bond, which was mentioned for the one-sense being, is to be known. In this way, there are four types of beings in the fourteen types of being assemblies in the one-sense being, in relation to the subtle-inadequate and adequate of the subtle-inadequate, and there are eight states due to the distinctions of the lowest state bond and the highest state bond. In this way, the proof of the state bond in the eight states is mentioned. To know the proof of the distinctions of the state in the seven intervals between these eight, the statement of seven three-term rules is made.

The proof of the obstacle time should also be obtained in the same way through the three-term rule. Showing this,

The highest obstacle of the false belief of the one-sense being is the fraction of an asankhyata of the highest number of avalis, and the lowest obstacle is only one antarmukhurta. Here, when the lowest is subtracted from the highest, one time increases in each obstacle, therefore, when divided by one, the proof that comes in that, when one is added to it, the proof of all the distinctions of the obstacle of the false belief of the one-sense being is obtained. In the same way as the state bond... 

Page #159:
---------------------------
Gommatsar Karmakanda-121

Just as the seven-term rule was used to determine the eight stages and seven intervals of the eight stages in the statement of the eight stages, the seven-term rule should be used to determine the eight stages and seven intervals of the eight stages in the statement of the obstacles.

Here, the known quantity is the same as in the previously mentioned seven-term rule, which is 343 shalaka, and the result quantity is the number of distinctions in the state of a one-sense being. However, here, the result quantity is the number of distinctions in the obstacle of false belief of a one-sense being from the lowest to the highest, which is an innumerable part of the avli. The desired quantity is 196-28-4-1-2-14-98 shalaka in sequence. Here, the result is multiplied by the desired quantity and divided by the known quantity. The resulting quantity is the number of distinctions in the obstacle in that interval.

In the first three-term rule, the number of distinctions obtained is subtracted from one, and the remainder is subtracted from the highest obstacle of the highest state related to the sufficient bad karma. This gives the number of obstacles related to the bondage of the highest state of the subtle sufficient bad karma.

Again, subtracting the number of distinctions obtained in the second three-term rule from this gives the number of obstacles of the highest state of the insufficient bad karma. Similarly, subtracting the number of distinctions obtained in the third and subsequent three-term rules gives the number of obstacles of that bondage in that state. In this way, the number of distinctions in the bondage and obstacles of a one-sense being, as well as the time, is determined. Similarly, the time of the obstacles from two-sense beings to non-sentient beings should be determined. Now, to know the number of shalaka of the states, the following verse is quoted:

"Maje thovasalaaga hela uvari ch sankhguṇidakama.
Savvajudi sankhguṇā hetuvari sankhguṇamasannitti." ||149||

Meaning: Except for the four distinctions of the state of sentient beings, the number of shalaka of the 24 distinctions of the state of the remaining beings is the least in the middle part. The number of shalaka below the middle part is multiplied by the number, and the number of shalaka above the middle part is also multiplied by the number, whose numerical representation is 4-1-2. Adding these three gives the number of shalaka in the second part below, and multiplying this by the number gives the number of shalaka in the second part above. For example: 

Page #160:
---------------------------
## Gommatasara Karmakanda-122

**Special Meaning:**

Here, "Shalaka" refers to the ratio conceived for dividing into multiple parts. "Madhya" (middle) signifies the distinctions of all states related to one sense, from the superior state of the "Badar Paryaptak" to the inferior state of the "Badar Paryaptak". These distinctions include the states from the superior state of the "Sookshma Aparyaptak" to the inferior state of the "Sookshma Aparyaptak", decreasing one at a time. These states are fewer than those that will be described later, hence, knowing one "Shalaka" is necessary. The meaning of "Trikuta Rachana" is to know the statement of the state where such a perception exists. 

And, "Hettha" (below) signifies knowing the inferior "Shalakas" of the distinctions of states from the inferior state of the "Sookshma Aparyaptak" to the inferior state of the "Badar Aparyaptak", decreasing one at a time. These "Shalakas" are "Sankhyatguna" (multiplied by the number), with a numerical perception of 2. And, above, knowing the superior "Shalakas" of the distinctions of states from the superior state of the "Sookshma Aparyaptak" to the superior state of the "Badar Aparyaptak", increasing one at a time. These are "Sankhyatguna" and their numerical perception is 4. This is how the "Sankhyatguna" sequence is described. The proof of "Sankhyat" is as appropriate, but here, for understanding, knowing the numerical perception of "Sankhyat" as 2 is necessary. Double of one is two, hence, two "Shalakas" below, and double of 2 is four, hence, four "Shalakas" above, knowing 412.

"Sarvayuti" (total) means adding the previously mentioned "Shalakas" and knowing the "Heva" (below) from the inferior state of the "Badar Aparyaptak" to the inferior state of the "Sookshma Aparyaptak", decreasing one at a time, knowing the inferior "Shalakas" of the distinctions of states as "Sankhyatguna", with a numerical perception of 14. And, above, knowing the superior "Shalakas" of the distinctions of states from the superior state of the "Badar Aparyaptak" to the superior state of the "Sookshma Aparyaptak", increasing one at a time, knowing the superior "Shalakas" as "Sankhyatguna", with a numerical perception of 28. Adding the first "Shalakas" 4+1+2, we get 7. Multiplying this by the "Sankhyat" multiplier 2, we get 14 "Shalakas" below. Multiplying this again by the "Sankhyat" multiplier 2, we get 28 superior "Shalakas". A28 AAAA14.

"Chakar" (again) means knowing the "Sarvayuti" (total) from the inferior state of the "Sookshma Aparyaptak" to the inferior state of the "Badar Aparyaptak", decreasing one at a time, knowing the inferior "Shalakas" of the distinctions of states as "Sankhyatguna", with a multiplier of 98. And, above, knowing the superior "Shalakas" of the distinctions of states from the superior state of the "Sookshma Aparyaptak" to the superior state of the "Badar Aparyaptak", increasing one at a time, knowing the superior "Shalakas" as "Sankhyatguna", with a multiplier of 196. The previous "Shalakas" 28+4+1+2+14... 

Page #161:
---------------------------
Gompa Karmakanda - 123

Adding these, we get 49. Multiplying these by the number of sahanani 2, we get 4902 = 98. These are the adhastana shalaakas. Multiplying these by the number of sahanani 2, we get 196, which is the number of uparitana shalaakas. A196284121498196. Similarly, we should know the same for the three types of madhyavartis, namely dwiindriya, triindriya, chaturindriya and asipanceendriyas. Their sahanani is 4-1-2.

Further, the four types of positions of saji jivas show some special characteristics.

Saniss hu hetthado thidithaanam sankhgunidamubaruvarin. Thidiaayamovi taha saghathidithaanam va aabahaa. || 150 ||

Meaning - In the four types of sanjnipanceendriya, from the bottom, i.e., from the lowest position band of sanjipatika to the fourth type, the number of positions (types) should be known in a multiplicative order. The position dimension (time) is also multiplicative, and the time of obstacle should be considered the same as the number of positions.

Special meaning - Just as the number of positions and position dimension is calculated based on the ratio of many parts and one part, the number of obstacles should also be calculated in the same way.

The highest position of mithyatva of a sajiva is 70 koda kodi sagar, i.e., the number obtained by multiplying the number of palyas by the number of sahanani twice. The lowest position is antar koda kodi sagar, i.e., the number obtained by multiplying the number of palyas by the number of sahanani once, in comparison to mithyadristi. From the highest to the lowest, there is an increase of one time in each type. Therefore, the number obtained by dividing by one, plus one, gives the number of all types of positions of mithyatva of sanjnis. Dividing this by the number of sahanani and separating one part, the remaining many parts are the number of positions from the highest position band of sanjiparyaptak to the highest position band of saji aparyaptak. Reducing this by one, the remaining number of times, when subtracted from the highest position of 70 koda kodi sagar of sanjiparyamak, gives the highest position of sanjniaparyaptak. The one part that was separated, when divided by the number of sahanani and one part is separated, the remaining many parts are the number of positions from the highest position of sanjniaparyaptak to the lowest position of sanjniaparyaptak. Subtracting this number from the highest position of sanjniaparyaptak, we get the lowest position of sanjniaparyaptak. The remaining one part is the number of positions from the lowest position of sanjniaparyaptak, one time less, to the lowest position of sanjiparyaptak. Subtracting this number from the lowest position of sanjniaparyaptak, we get the lowest position band of sanjiparyaptak. This number is antar... 

Page #162:
---------------------------
Gommatsar Karmakanda-124 states the proof of Kodakodisaagar in this way.
Now, we state the Aabaadha:
Aabaadha is to be known as per the respective position. The highest Aabaadha related to Sanjeejeeva Mithyatva is 7000 years, i.e., three times the Aavali. The lowest Aabaadha is one moment less than one Muhurta (Antarmuhurta), i.e., twice the Aavali. By subtracting the lowest from the highest, we get the alternatives of Aabaadha. In each division, one moment increases. Therefore, by dividing by one, the proof of all the divisions of Aabaadha is obtained by adding one to it. Just as in the divisions of position, by dividing by the number, we get many divisions; and from many divisions to one division, the divisions are said, similarly, in the divisions of Aabaadha, by dividing by the number, we get many divisions, many divisions, and one division, the proof of Aabaadha is to be known in all three intervals. And just as in the divisions of position, by subtracting, we get the proof of position, similarly, here, in the divisions of Aabaadha, by subtracting, we get the proof of Aabaadha related to position. This is how the special statement has been made regarding Sanjeepaंचेन्द्रिय.
After that, the masters of the lowest position bondage state:
Sattarasapanchatitithaharaanam suhummbadaraapuvo.
Chhabbegubvamasanni jahannhamaaun sanni va. ||151||
Meaning: The lowest position bondage of five Jnana Avarana, four Darsana Avarana, five Antaray, Yash:Kirti, Uchchagotra, and Saataavedaniya is in the subtle Sampraayagunasthanavi Jeeva in the Kshapaka श्रेणी. The lowest position bondage of Purushaved and Sajwalanakshaya Chatushk is in the Jeeva who is in the Kshapaka Anivritikaran Gunasthan. The lowest position bondage of Tirthankara and Aaharaka Dwik is in the Jeeva who is in the Apurvakaran Gunasthan. The lowest position bondage of Devagati, Devagatyanupurvi, Narakagati, Narakagatyanupurvi, Vaikriyik Sharira, Vaikriyik Ajopaan is in the Asanjeepaंचेन्द्रिय Jeeva. The lowest position bondage of the natures of Ayukarma is in the Sanjee or Asanjee Jeeva.
_ Further, in the divisions of position like the lowest, etc., the divisions like Sadi, etc., are called in the original natures:
Ajahannatthidibandho chaubviho sattamoolapaydiinam. Sesatiye duviyappo aauchoukkevi duviyappo. ||152||

Page #163:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-125 Meaning - Without Ayukarma, the seven roots have four types of Ajghanyasthitibandha, etc., Anadi, Dhruva, Adhruva, and with Ayukarma, the remaining seven roots have two types of Utkrushta, Anutkrushta, and Jghanyasthitibandha, etc., and Adhruva. Ayukarma has two types of Sthitibandha, etc., and Adhruva.
Special Meaning - Except for Ayukarma, the remaining seven karmas have Jghanyasthitibandha in the Kshapaka-Shreni and Ajghanyasthitibandha in the Upshama Shreni, but in the eleventh Gunasthan called Upshantamoha, there is no Kshayoday, so there is no Sthitibandha. Upon falling from there, Ajghanyasthitibandha starts again. Thus, Ajghanyasthitibandha, etc., is the same as Vedaniyakarma's Ajghanyasthitibandha, etc.
In the beings of Vyavahararashi, the distinction of Sadi, Anadi, Dhruva, Adhruva in relation to the Sthitibandha of the Mulaprakritis in the form of Bandha -
Jnanavarana Darshanavarana | Vedaniya | Mohaniya | Aayu | Nama | Gotra | Antaraya
Utkrushta | Utkrushta | Utkrushta | Utkrushta | Utkrushta | Utkrushta | Utkrushta | Utkrushta
Anutkrushta
G
Jghanya | Jghanya | Jghanya | Jghanya
Jghanya | Jghanya | Jghanya
Ajghanya
| Ajghanya Ajghanya | Ajghanya | Ajghanya | Ajghanya | Ajghanya | Ajghanya
Note - In the Sandrishti, the number 2 indicates Sadi-Adhruva and the number 4 indicates Sadi, Anadi, Dhruva, Adhruva. Now, the special features in the Uttaraprakritis are mentioned -
Sanjalan Suhamachodas-Ghadinam Chaduvidho Du Ajhanno.
Sesatiya Pun Duviha Sesanam Chaduvidhavi Dudha || 153 || Meaning - The four types of Sanjwalana and the Sukshmasamparaya Gunasthan, which are interrupted, are Ajghanya.
The remaining two types of Sesana are also of four types. 

Page #164:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-126: There are 14 Ghatiyakarma, which are divided into 18 types. These 18 types are further classified into four categories based on their Sadi, Anadi, Dhruva, and Adhruva aspects. The first three categories (Jghanya, etc.) have two sub-categories: Sadi and Adhruva. The remaining 102 types have four categories (Jghanya, etc.) with two sub-categories: Sadi and Adhruva.

The table shows the Sadi, Anadi, Dhruva, and Adhruva aspects of the Uttaraprakriti in relation to their Sthitibandha.

Note: The number 2 in the table represents the Sadi-Ashuda aspect, which includes the Sadi-Anadi-Dhruva-Adhruva aspects.

**Verse 154:** All good and bad Prakruti, except for the Manushya, Tiryancha, and Deva Ayus, are inherently bad. Therefore, beings with many Kashayas bind these Prakruti with a strong Sthitibandha, while beings with few Kashayas and pure souls bind these Prakruti with a weak Sthitibandha.

**Special Meaning:** The Sthitibandha of the remaining 145 Prakruti, excluding the three Ayus, depends on the increase or decrease of the Vridhi, Hani, Sanklesha, and Parinam. Sanklesha is a form of sin or bad karma, therefore, the Sthitibandha is also bad.

**Verse 155:** The period between the emergence of the Karman body (Karma-sarupa) and the actual manifestation of the Karma (Udayarupa) or the stimulation of the Karma (Udiranarupa) is called Aabaadha (Uday-Aabaadha or Udirana-Aabaadha). 

Page #165:
---------------------------
## Gommatasara Karmakanda - 127

**Special Meaning:** The duration of the Udirana Aabada, Bandhavali, and Achalaavali is the same as the Ekavali. The Uday Aabada for a Kodakodi Sagar state of Bandha is 100 years. During the time of Bandha, within this Uday Aabada period, there is no Niseka Rachana. However, after the Achalaavali period, due to Sthiti Apakarashan, Niseka Rachana occurs even within this Uday Aabada period. Therefore, the Aabada of Udirana is only an Ekavali.

Now, this Aabada is described in the Moola Prakrutis as follows:

**Verse 156:**

> "Udayam Padisattanham Aabaha Kodakodi Uvahinam.
> Vasasayam Tappadhibhagena Ya Seshahidinan Cha."

**Meaning:** The Aabada for a Kodakodi Sagar state of Sthiti is known to be 100 years. The Aabada for the remaining Sthitis is calculated proportionally, using the Trairaashik method. This is the duration of Aabada for the seven Karmas, excluding Ayukarma, in relation to Uday.

**Special Meaning:** If the Uday Aabada for a Kodakodi Sagar state of Sthiti is 100 years, then what is the Aabada for a 70 Kodakodi Sagar state of Sthiti? Using the Trairaashik method, the Praman Rashee is one Kodakodi Sagar, the Phal Rashee is 100 years, and the Iccha Rashee is 70 Kodakodi Sagar. Multiplying the Phal Rashee with the Iccha Rashee and dividing by the Praman Rashee, we get the result as 7000 years. This is the duration of the Uday Aabada for the Mithyatva Prakruti, which is the highest.

Similarly, by using the desired Sthiti as the Iccha Rashee, we can calculate the duration of the Uday Aabada for each Sthiti. For Karmas with a Sthiti of 40 Kodakodi Sagar, the Aabada period is 4000 years. For those with a Sthiti of 30 Kodakodi Sagar, the Aabada is 3000 years. Similarly, we can calculate the Aabada period for other Prakrutis.

Furthermore, according to the Sutra "Sanin Asanni Chaukke Ege Antomuttamabaha", the Aabada for the Bandhi Sthiti of Dwiindriyadi, which was mentioned earlier, should be known.

**Verse 157:**

> "Anto Kodakodi Tthidi Sissa Antomuttamabaha.
> Sankhejjaguna Vihinam Savva Jahannatti Disa Have."

**Meaning:** The Uday Aabada for the Anto Kodakodi Sagar state of Sthiti is Antarmuhurta. The Uday Aabada for the Savva Jahanya Sthitis is less than the Sankhejjaguna. 

Page #166:
---------------------------
Gommatsar Karmakanda-128
Special Meaning - The duration of the obstacle for a one-kodi-kodi-sagar-sized being is 100 years, which has 10,80,000 muhurtas. If the obstacle for such a being is equal to 10,80,000 muhurtas, then how many situations would be equal to one muhurta?
Here, the measure is 10,80,000 muhurtas, the result is one-kodi-kodi-sagar, and the desired quantity is one muhurta. Multiplying the result by the desired quantity and dividing by the measure, we get 9,25,92,59215 sagar-sized situations for one muhurta. Similarly, the obstacle for one sagar-sized being is equal to the number of breaths. 
Further, the obstacle for Ayukarma is described as:
"Puvaanam koditibhagaadasankheyadhdhavoti have.
Auss ya abaha na hridipadibhagamauss." ||158||
Meaning - The obstacle for Ayukarma is from one-third of a kotipurva year to the limit of the asankheyadhdha. There is no rule of proportion (trairasik) in the obstacle for Ayukarma.
Special Meaning - The highest obstacle for Ayukarma is one-third of a kotipurva year, and the lowest obstacle is the asankheyadhdha. This time is also a fraction of the number of avalis, therefore, the obstacle for Ayukarma is similar, not like the situation for other karmas.
Doubt - Why is the obstacle not said to be one-third of the asankhyat years for those who have an asankhyat year lifespan?
Solution - For such gods, narakas, and those in the bhogabhumis who have an asankhyat year lifespan, the bond of lifespan occurs when six months of lifespan remain, and for humans and animals in the karmabhumis, the bond of lifespan occurs in the final division of their entire lifespan. The highest lifespan for those in the karmabhumis is a kotipurva year, which is equal to the number of years, therefore, one-third of that is called the highest obstacle time. The bond of lifespan can occur in the eight divisions of the apkarṣa time, if the bond of lifespan does not occur in all eight apkarṣas, then the remaining lifespan is bound to the time of the next birth in the remaining time of the internal muhurta, and they rest until the asankheyadhdha time, after which death occurs. This means that death does not occur without resting after the bond of lifespan. This resting time is one internal muhurta (i.e., asankheyadhdha time) even less than the lowest. Then death can occur. (Dhaval 10/278, 6/167, Mukhtar Granth page 569 last para) 1. The kṣudra bhava is said to be multiplied by the number of asankheyadhdha from the lowest obstacle of Ayukarma. This clearly shows that the asankheyadhdha is not a fraction of the asankhyat avalis, but a fraction of the number of avalis. (Dhaval p. 11 p. 269, 273) 

Page #167:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-129 further states that **ābaadhā** is considered greater than **udīraṇā**:

"**Āvaliyaṁ ābaadhā udīraṇamāsijj sattakammāṇam |
Parabhaviyāugassa ya udīraṇā ṇasthi niyameṇa ||159||**"

**Meaning:** The **ābaadhā** of **sātakarma** is only one **āvali** in comparison to **udīraṇā**. The **udīraṇā** of the **bandhyamāna** lifespan related to the future life does not occur according to the rule.

**Special Meaning:** The karma that binds does not become **udaya** or **udīraṇā** until the duration of one **āvali** (**acalaāvali**). It only becomes **udaya** after the **ābaadhā** period has passed. The karma that becomes **udīraṇā** becomes so after the passage of one **āvali** after binding. Therefore, **ābaadhā** is one **āvali** in comparison to **udīraṇā**. The **udīraṇā** of the lifespan that is being experienced occurs in the lifespan. The **udīraṇā** of the lifespan related to the future life (**bandhyamāna**) does not occur according to the rule; it only undergoes **avalambanakaraṇa**.

Karma remains as it is bound until the duration of one **āvali**. It does not become **udaya**, **utkarṣaṇa**, **apakarṣaṇa**, **saṁkramaṇa**, or **udīraṇā**. Therefore, this **āvali** is called **acalaāvali**. After this **āvali**, the **udaya** of the **udayāvali** brings down many karma particles from the community of karma particles in the higher positions to the **udayāvali**, which become **udaya** and are exhausted in the **āvali** period. This is **udīraṇā**. The karma particles that are in the higher positions are exhausted according to their position. Except for the last **āvali** (**atisthāpanāvali**), all the karma particles are exhausted in all the **niṣeka** in various ways. The way in which the **udīraṇā** substance that has reached the **udayāvali** is exhausted is described as follows:

"**Addhāṇeṇa savvadhaṇe khaṇḍide majjhimadhaṇamāgachchaditam rūṇaddhāṇaddheṇa ūṇeṇa ṇiseya bhāgahāreṇa majjhimadhaṇamavaharade pacayaṁ taṁ do guṇahāṇiṇā guṇide ādiniṣeyam tatto viśeṣahīṇakam...**"

Multiplying the **caya** by two **guṇahāni**, the amount of substance given in the **ādiniseka** is obtained. The amount of substance deposited in the second and subsequent times is one **caya** less than each other. The special nature of all these should be known from the special meaning of verse 162. 1. This verse appears again as verse 918. 2. The **apakarṣaṇa** (falling down from **ābaadhā**) of the substance located in the higher position of the lifespan related to the future life is **avalambanakaraṇa**. (D.P. 10 p. 330-31) 

Page #168:
---------------------------
## Gommatsar Karmakanda-130: A Picture of the Degradation of the Udara-rupa Nature

**Ati-sthapanavali**

**Udayavali**  ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... | **Achala-avali**

**Now, the characteristics of Niseka are stated:**

**Aabaahuuniyakammatthidi nisego du sattakammaanam.**
**Auss nisego pun sagatthidi hodi niyamen.** ||160||

**Meaning:** The measure of the time periods of the seven karmas, excluding the time of obstruction, is the Niseka of the seven karmas. The Niseka of the Ayu karma is in accordance with its own state, this is to be known by rule.

**Special Meaning:** To know the Niseka structure of the seven karmas, excluding the time of obstruction, is to know the state of the karma according to its own state. The group of karma-paramanus that exists at each moment is one Niseka. Thus, to know the measure of the time periods is to know the measure of the Nisekas, after subtracting the time of obstruction from the total state of the desired karma. In this way, one should know the Niseka structure of the seven karmas, and the measure of the Nisekas is the same as the state of the Ayu karma. Here, the obstruction is not subtracted, because the obstruction of the Ayu karma is already complete in the previous birth. In the subsequent Paryaya that is taken, the state of the Ayu karma is present for a certain amount of time. In all these times, from the first moment to the last moment, one Niseka is consumed at each moment. Therefore, the measure of the time periods is the same as the measure of the Nisekas of the Ayu karma.

**Now, the order of the Nisekas is stated:**

**Aabaham bolaaviya padhamani-segammi dey bahugam tu.**
**Tatto viseshiinam vidiyassaadimani-seotti.** ||161||

**Meaning:** The time after the obstruction is the first Niseka of the first Guna-hani. In this, a lot of substance is given. From the second Niseka onwards, the substance is given in a decreasing order of fourfoldness, up to the first Niseka of the second Guna-hani. 

Page #169:
---------------------------
Gommatasar Karmakanda - 131
In the second गुणहानि, the amount of चय is half of the amount of चय in the first गुणहानि. Similarly, in each गुणहानि, the amount of चय decreases by half. || 162 ||
Meaning - In the second निषेक of the second गुणहानि, the amount of चय is half of the amount of चय in the first गुणहानि. Similarly, in each गुणहानि, the amount of चय decreases by half. This is how the amount of द्रव्य decreases in each गुणहानि.
Special Meaning - The verse explains the concept of गुणहानि using numerical examples. The number of परमाणु in the desired कर्म is 6300, the amount of स्थिति (excluding आबाधा) is 48 समय, the amount of one गुणहानिआयाम is 8 समय, the total number of गुणानि is 6, the number of दोगुणहानि is 16, and the अन्योन्याभ्यस्त राशि is 64. Of these, the first गुणहानि has 3200 परमाणु, and the subsequent गुणहानि have half the number of परमाणु. For example, 3200, 1600, 800, 400, 200, and 100. Dividing the total द्रव्य (6300) by the अन्योन्याभ्यस्त राशि (64-1 = 63) gives the number of परमाणु in the last गुणहानि (6300 : 63 = 100). From this, we can calculate the number of परमाणु (द्रव्य) in each गुणहानि by doubling the previous number. For example, the first गुणहानि has 3200 परमाणु, the second गुणहानि has 1600 परमाणु, and so on. Dividing the total द्रव्य (3200) in the first गुणहानि by the गच्छ (8) of the first गुणहानि gives 3200÷8 = 400. This is the middle value. Subtracting half the amount of गच्छ (33) from the निषेकभागहार (16) gives (16-33) 12. Dividing the middle value by this number (400: 12) gives 32. This is the amount of चय. Multiplying this by the number of दोगुणहानि (16) gives 32×16 = 512. This is the amount of द्रव्य in the first निषेक. Subtracting one चय from this value gives the amount of द्रव्य in the subsequent निषेक. 512-480-448-416-384-352-320-288. Subtracting one चय (32) from 288 gives (288-32) 256. This is half the amount of द्रव्य in the first निषेक of the first गुणहानि. This is the amount of द्रव्य in the first निषेक of the second गुणहानि. Here, the amount of चय is half the previous amount (16). This continues until the first निषेक of the third गुणहानि. 256-240-224-208-192-176-160 and 144. Subtracting one चय (16) from 144 gives 128. This is half the amount of द्रव्य in the first निषेक of the second गुणहानि. This is the amount of द्रव्य in the first निषेक of the third गुणहानि. Here, the amount of चय is half the previous amount (8). In this way, we can calculate the amount of द्रव्य in each निषेक for each गुणहानि, as well as the amount of चय. This sequence results in the formation of 6300 परमाणु in the निषेक. This example can be applied to all कर्मनिषेक.
÷
This is an example of the formation of निषेक at the time of बन्ध. Later, due to उत्कर्षण, अपकर्षण, and संक्रमण, the number of परमाणु in the निषेक may increase or decrease. There is no rule that the number of परमाणु in a निषेक at the time of बन्ध is equal to the number of परमगुण. 

Page #170:
---------------------------
## Method of Calculating *Chaya*

By adding one more *guna-hānī-āyāma* to the *niṣeka-hāra* and dividing the sum by two, the result is multiplied by the *guna-hānī-āyāma*. The quotient obtained from dividing this product by the *guna-kala* is the amount of *chaya* for the desired *guna-hānī*. For example:

Adding one more *guna-hānī-āyāma* (9) to the *niṣeka-hāra* (16) gives 25. Half of 25 is 12.5, which when multiplied by the *guna-hānī-āyāma* (8) gives 100. Dividing this 100 by the substance of the desired first *guna-hānī* (3200) gives the amount of *chaya* related to the first *guna-hānī*. Similarly, the amount of *chaya* related to the second *guna-hānī* is 16, the third is 8, the fourth is 4, the fifth is 2, and the last *guna-hānī* is 1.

## Time

**Gommatasara Karmakāṇḍa - 132**

Multiplying the *chaya* by the *niṣeka-hāra* gives the number of atoms in the first *niṣeka*. That is, *chaya* (32) x *niṣeka-hāra* (16) = 512, which is the number of atoms in the first *niṣeka-dravya*. In the second time, the third time, the fourth time, the fifth time, the sixth time, the seventh time, and the eighth time, the number of atoms are 448, 416, 384, 352, 320, 288 respectively. All these together make 3200. A group of atoms in one time is called a *niṣeka*.

## *Niṣeka-racanā* Related Observations

| Time | *Aṣṭama* | *Saptama* | *Ṣaṣṭha* | *Pañcama* | *Caturtha* | *Tṛtīya* | *Dvitīya* | *Prathama* | Total 8 Times |
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
| *Prathama* | 288 | 72 | 18 | 9 | 320 | 80 | 20 | 10 | 200 |
| *Dvitīya* | 100 | 144 | 160 | 176 | 192 | 206 | 224 | 240 | 1600 |
| *Tṛtīya* | 88 | 96 | 104 | 112 | 120 | 128 | 800 |
| *Caturtha* | 36 | 44 | 48 | 52 | 56 | 60 | 64 | 400 |
| *Pañcama* | × | 480 | 512 | 3200 |
| *Ṣaṣṭha* | *Guṇa-hānī* | *Guṇa-hānī* | *Guṇa-hānī* | *Guṇa-hānī* | *Guṇa-hānī* | *Guṇa-hānī* |
| *Saptama* | *Guṇa* | *Guṇa* | *Guṇa* | *Guṇa* | *Guṇa* | *Guṇa* |
| *Aṣṭama* | *Guṇa* | *Guṇa* | *Guṇa* | *Guṇa* | *Guṇa* | *Guṇa* |

|| *iti sthitibandhaprakaraṇa sampūrṇa* ||

Page #171:
---------------------------
Gommatasar Karmakanda - 133
Now, the section on Anubhagabandh is explained in 22 verses.
Suhapaydiin Visohi Tivvo Asuhaan Sankilesena | Vivrideen Jahanano Anubhaago Savvapaydiinan || 163 ||
Meaning - The excellent Anubhagabandh of the seven Saataavedaniya Shubha (auspicious) natures is due to pure results, and the excellent Anubhagabandh of the Asaataavedaniyaadi Ashubha (inauspicious) natures is due to Sanklesha (complex) results. And the inferior Anubhagabandh is due to results opposite to these, i.e., the inferior Anubhagabandh of Shubha natures is due to Sanklesha results, and the inferior Anubhagabandh of Ashubha natures is due to pure results. Thus, know the Anubhagabandh of all natures. The form of Mandakashaya is pure result, and the form of Tivrakashaya is Sanklesha result.
'Doubt - "The Shubha nature is bound by Sanklesha, and the inferior Anubhagabandh of the Papa (sinful) nature is due to pure results," as written in the big commentary of Gommatasar Karmakanda verse 163, page 199. The doubt is that firstly, the Shubha nature is not bound by Sanklesha results, because Sanklesha results are called Papa results, and the Shubha nature is not bound by Papa results. Papa results only bind Papa. Explain with an example.
Solution - It is not an absolute rule that Shubha natures are bound by Shubha results and Papa natures are bound by Ashubha results. Because, among the 47 Dhruvabandhi natures, there are both Puny (virtuous) and Papa (sinful) natures, which are continuously bound by both Shubha and Ashubha results. Those 47 Dhruvabandhi natures are as follows:
Naanataraayadayam Dansan Nav Micch Solas Kasaya |
Bhay Kamma Dugucchha Vi Ya Teja Kammam Cha Vannachadu ||
Aguru Alah-Uvaghaadam Niminan Naamam Cha Honti Sagadal |
Bandho Chauvviyapppo Dhruvabandhinam Paydibandho. (Dhaval Pu. 8 page 17)
Meaning - Ten Gyaanavaran (knowledge obscurations) and Antaray (hindrances), nine Darshanavaran (perception obscurations), Mithyatva (false belief), sixteen Kashayas (passions), fear, disgust, Tejas-sharira (luminous body), Karmanasharira (karmic body), four types of Varna (color) etc., Aguru (heavy), Alah (light), Upaghat (injury) and Nirmans (creation) karmas, these are the forty-seven Dhruvabandhi natures.
Out of these 47 Dhruvabandhi natures, Tejas-sharira, Karmanasharira, Aguru and Alah are four Puny (virtuous) natures, and the remaining 43 are Ashubha (sinful) natures. (Sarvarthasiddhi Chapter 8 Sutras 25 and 26)
Thus, the binding of the above four Shubha natures is definitely possible in Ashubha results. In addition to these, the binding of Audarik or Vaikriyik Sharira (subtle body), Panchendriya Jaati (five sense faculties), Traskaya (three bodies), Badar Paryat (external body), Pratiksha Sharira (individual body) and Tiryaach Ayush (animal life) is also possible as per their respective natures. In these, inferior Anubhagabandh occurs. In Shubha results, the binding of the above 43 Dhruvabandhi Ashubha natures occurs, in which inferior Anubhagabandh occurs. 

Page #172:
---------------------------
Gommatasar Karmakanda-134

Further, the owner of the excellent Anubhagabandh says -

Badalam tu pasattha visohugunamukkadass tivaaao.
Vaasidi appasattha micchhukkad sankiliṭṭhass. ||164 ||

Meaning - The intense Anubhagabandh of the 42 auspicious karmas (mentioned in verses 41-42) is for the jiva with excellent results in the form of purity, and the intense Anubhagabandh of the 82 inauspicious karmas (mentioned in verses 43-44) is for the jiva with the wrong view and intense suffering.

Here, the karmas like Varna etc. are included in both the auspicious and inauspicious karmas. Therefore, the number of karmas that can be bound increases to 120+4 = 124 instead of 120.

Adaao ujjoo manuvatirikkaaugan pasatthasuu.
Micchass hoti tivaa sammaa dihiss sesaaoo. ||165 ||

Meaning - Out of the said 42 karmas, the intense Anubhagabandh of Atap, Hot, Manushyayu and Tiryanchayus is for the jiva with pure wrong view, and the intense Anubhagabandh of the remaining 38 karmas is for the jiva with pure right view.

Manuorala duvajjam visuddhasuraniryaavirade tivaa.
Devaau appamatte khavage avasesabattisaa. ||166 ||

Meaning - Out of the 38 karmas for which the intense (excellent) Anubhagabandh was mentioned for the jiva with right view, the intense Anubhagabandh with binding for the jiva with pure results, unrestrained right view, who is a deva or a naraki, when he performs the three karmas, is for the Manushya-gati, Manushya-gati-anupurvi Audarik-sharira, Audarik-angopang, Vajrarashabhanaraachasanhanan. He performs the last of the three karmas at the end of the time of non-destruction. And the deva-ayu with intense Anubhagabandh is bound for the jiva who is in the state of non-distraction. The remaining 32 karmas are bound for the jiva who has the Kshapak-shreni.

"Shubha-parinaama-nivṛtto yogaḥ śubhaḥ. Aśubha-parinaama-nirvṛttaścāśubhaḥ. Na punaḥ śubhāśubha-karma-kāraṇatvān. Yady evam ucyāte śubhayoga eva na syāt, śubhayogasyāpi jñānāvaraṇādibandha-hetutvābhyupagamāt." (Savarthasiddhi 6/3)

Meaning - The yoga that happens due to auspicious results is auspicious yoga, and the yoga that happens due to inauspicious results is inauspicious yoga. It is not that auspicious and inauspicious yoga happen because they are the cause of auspicious and inauspicious karmas. If it is said this way, then auspicious yoga would not exist, because auspicious yoga is also considered to be the cause of the binding of karmas like jnanaavarana etc. 

Page #173:
---------------------------
Gommatasar Karmakanda - 135
Now the names of those 32 natures are told -
Uvaghatahina tise aputrvakaranassa uccajasasade. Sammeli de havanti hu khavagassa'avasesabatti sa. || 167 ||
Meaning - In the sixth part of A-putrvakarana, there is a separation of 30 natures, out of which 29 are remaining without the Uvaghataprakriti, and the remaining 3 (Ucchagotra, Yasakirti, and Satavedaniya) are a total of 32 natures, which are to be known as being somewhere before the Kshapaka Shrenivale.
-
Micchasantimanavayam naratiriyani vamanaratiriye. Eindiya adavam thavaranam am cha suramicche || 168 ||
Meaning - The 82 Aprashasta and Atap, Udyota, Manushyayu, and Tiryanchayu, these 86 natures are bound with intense Anubhaga by the Mithyadristijiva, out of which the last 9 natures, from Sukshma to the end, are bound with intense Anubhaga by the Mithyadristimanushya and Tiryancha, who have the Sankleshaparinam, in the 16 natures separated in the Mithyatva Gunasthan. And the Manushya and Tiryancha, who have Mandakshaya, bind the intense Anubhaga of Manushyayu and Tiryanchayu. In the last six months of life, the Mithyadristideva binds the intense Anubhaga of Ekendriya and Thavara natures with Sankleshaparinam. In the last six months of life, the Mithyadristideva binds the intense Anubhaga of Ekendriya and Thavara natures with Sankleshaparinam, and binds the intense Anubhaga of Atap nature with Vishuddhaparinam.
Note - In Mahabandha, page 4, page 189, it is said that the Manushya, Tiryancha, and Deva, all three are the owners of the intense Anubhaga of Atap.
Ujjavo tamtamagae suranarayami chchege asampatta.
Tiriyadurga sesa pun cha durgadi micche kilingeya || 169 ||
Meaning - The Vishuddha Mithyadristijiva, who has become Samyakta in the seventh Naraka, called Tamatamanaka, binds the Udyota nature with intense Anubhaga, because in extreme Vishuddhata, the Udyota nature is not bound. The Mithyadristideva, who has intense Sankleshaparinam, binds the Asamprapta Asripatika Sanhanana and Tiryanchagati, Tiryanchagaty Anupurvi with intense Anubhaga, and the remaining 68 natures are bound with intense Anubhaga by the Mithyadristijiva, who has Sankleshaparinam in all four gatis. 

Page #174:
---------------------------
**Gommatasara Karmakanda-136 Special Meaning - Verses 164 to 169**

This section describes the owner of the **utkrista anubhagabandh** (excellent division of the karmic matter) for various karmic categories.

**The owner of the utkrista anubhagabandh for the following karmic categories is an anyatar (other) four-gated being, a panchendriya (five-sensed), sanjee (living) being with mithyadristi (false belief), who is fully endowed with all paryapti (perfections), is fully embodied and awake, has utkrista sanklesha (excellent karmic afflictions) according to the rules, and performs utkrista anubhagabandh:**

* Five **jnana avarana** (knowledge obscurations)
* Nine **darshan avarana** (perception obscurations)
* **Asatavedaniya** (unpleasant)
* **Mithyatva** (falsehood)
* Sixteen **kashaya** (passions)
* Five **nokashaya** (minor passions)
* **Hundak sansthan** (a type of karmic body)
* **Aprashasht varn chatushk** (unfavorable four-fold color)
* **Upghat** (harm)
* **Aprashasht vihayogati** (unfavorable liberation path)
* **Asthir** (unstable)
* **Ashubh** (inauspicious)
* **Durbhg** (unfortunate)
* **Dushwar** (bad voice)
* **Anadeya** (not worthy of respect)
* **Ayashaskirti** (bad reputation)
* **Nichegotra** (low birth)
* Five **antaraya** (internal obstacles)

**The owner of the utkrista anubhagabandh for the following karmic categories is an anyatar being who is kshapak sukshma sampray sanayat (controlled by subtle karmic matter) and performs utkrista anubhagabandh at the end of his life:**

* **Satavedaniya** (pleasant)
* **Yashaskirti** (good reputation)
* **Uchchgotra** (high birth)

**The owner of the utkrista anubhagabandh for the following karmic categories is an anyatar being who is tatprayogya sanklesha parinami (has karmic afflictions that are ready to bear fruit) and is similar to the **mati jnana avarana** (knowledge obscuration of the mind):**

* **Strived** (female knowledge)
* **Purushved** (male knowledge)
* **Hasya** (laughter)
* **Rati** (desire)
* Four **sansthan** (types of karmic bodies)
* Four **sanhanan** (types of karmic bonds)

**The owner of the utkrista anubhagabandh for the following karmic categories is an anyatar being who is fully endowed with all paryapti (perfections), is fully embodied and awake, is tatprayogya sanklesha parinami (has karmic afflictions that are ready to bear fruit), and performs utkrista anubhagabandh:**

* **Narakayu** (hellish body)
* Three **jati** (types of beings)
* **Sukshma** (subtle)
* **Apyapt** (insufficient)
* **Sadharan** (ordinary)

**The owner of the utkrista anubhagabandh for the following karmic categories is an anyatar being who is tatprayogya vishuddha parinami (has pure karmic afflictions that are ready to bear fruit) and performs utkrista anubhagabandh:**

* **Tiryanch** (animal) and **manushyayu** (human life)

**The owner of the utkrista anubhagabandh for the following karmic categories is an anyatar being who is fully embodied and awake, is tatprayogya vishuddha parinami (has pure karmic afflictions that are ready to bear fruit), and performs utkrista anubhagabandh:**

* **Devayu** (divine life)

**The owner of the utkrista anubhagabandh for the following karmic categories is an anyatar being who is a manushya (human) or panchendriya tiryanch (five-sensed animal) and has utkrista sanklesha parinami (excellent karmic afflictions that are ready to bear fruit) and performs utkrista anubhagabandh:**

* **Narakgati** (hellish path)
* **Narakgati anupurvi** (path leading to hell)

**The owner of the utkrista anubhagabandh for the following karmic categories is an anyatar being who is a dev (god) or naraki tiryanch (hellish animal) and has mithyadristi (false belief), is fully embodied and awake, performs utkrista anubhagabandh according to the rules:**

* **Mithyadristi** (false belief)
* **Tiryanch gati** (animal path)
* **Asamprapta sripatik sanshanan** (unobtained karmic bond of the serpent king)
* **Tiryanch gati anupurvi** (path leading to the animal path)

**The owner of the utkrista anubhagabandh for the following karmic categories is an anyatar being who is a dev (god) or naraki (hellish being) and has samyagdristi (right belief), is fully embodied and awake, is fully pure, and performs utkrista anubhagabandh:**

* **Samyagdristi** (right belief)
* **Manushya gati** (human path)
* **Audarik sharir** (generous body)
* **Audarik agopang** (generous limbs)
* **Vajrarashabhanaracha sanhanan** (karmic bond of the Vajrarashabha)
* **Manushya gati anupurvi** (path leading to the human path)

**The owner of the utkrista anubhagabandh for the following karmic categories is an anyatar being who is a kshapak apurva karan (a being who has destroyed the apurva karma) and performs utkrista anubhagabandh at the end of his life, and is related to the parbhav sambhandhi namakarma (karmic matter related to the next life):**

* **Dev gati** (divine path)
* **Panchendriya jati** (five-sensed beings)
* **Vaikriyak sharir** (vaikriyak body)
* **Aharak sharir** (aharak body)
* **Taijas sharir** (taijas body)
* **Karman shar
Page #175:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-137. The owner of the excellent section-binding of the Udyotaprakriti is the Mithyadristi, sufficient in all sufficiencies, concrete-awake, all-pure, who will attain Samyaktva in the future time and who is the owner of the excellent section-binding, is a Naraki being of the seventh earth. Now the owner of the inferior section-binding says -

Vannacaukkamasattham uvaghado khavagadhadi panavinsam.
Tisanam avarabandho sagasagavocchedha thanamhi ||170|| Meaning - The four of the inauspicious color, etc., the twenty-five of the harmful karmas that are destroyed by the upghata and kshaya, i.e., the five of the Jnanaavarana, etc., the five of the Antaray, the four of the Darshanavarana, the four of the Nidra, Prachala, Hasya, Rati, Bhaya, Jugupsa, Purushaveda and Sajvalana, these thirty prakritis, wherever there is bandhavyuccheditti, there is the inferior section-binding of the Kshapaka-shreni.

Anathiinatayam miccham micche ayada hu bidiyakodhadi.
Dese tadiya kasaya sanjamgunapacchhide solan ||171 || Meaning - The four kasayas of the Anantanubandhi, the three of the Styanagridhi, etc., and the Mithyatva, these eight prakritis are in the Mithyatvagunasthan, the four kasayas of the Apratyakhyana are in the Asanyata, the four kasayas of the Pratyakhyana are in the Desasanyata. Thus, these sixteen prakritis are in these gunasthans, in the face of acquiring the Samyaguna. That is, the pure parinami, who will attain Samyaguna in the future time, binds with the inferior section-binding.

Aharam appamatte pamattasuddhe ya aradisoganam.
Naratiriye suhumatiyam viyal veguvvachakkao ||172|| Meaning - The Aharaksharir and the Aharakangopaanga, these two auspicious prakritis, are bound with the inferior section-binding by the Sakleshaparinamavala Apratmatagunasthanavijiva, who is in the face of the Pratmatagunasthan. The Aarti and Shoka, the Tatprayogya-vishuddha Pratmatagunasthanavijiva, binds with the inferior section-binding. The Sukhma, Aparayapta and Sadharan, Dviindriya, Triindriya, Chaturindriya, Devadvik, Narakadvik, Vaikinakaddhik, bind with the inferior section-binding by the man and the Tiryanch.

Note - The binding of the Devayu and Narakayu is done by the man and the Tiryanch, and the binding of the Tiryanch and Manushayau is done by the Labdhyaparayapta.

1. Mahabandha Pu.4 p. 188-189 Para No. 409. 

Page #176:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-138

**Verse 173**
The Udyota and Audarika-dvikas bind the Sanklista-deva and Naraki with the lowest part of their karma. The Udyota-prakriti does not bind the Ati-visuddha-parinama-devas, therefore it binds only the Sanklesha-parinama-devas with the lowest part of their karma. This is why the Udyota-prakriti is considered auspicious. The Tiryancha-gati, Tiryancha-gati-anupurvi, and Nica-gotra-prakriti bind the lowest part of their karma in the seven Narakas, facing Samyaktva. The Sthavara and Ekendriya bind the lowest part of their karma in the remaining three gatis, without Naraka, with the Tivra-visuddha and Sanklesha-rahita, Madhyama-parinama-jiva.

**Verse 174**
The Atapa-prakriti binds the Sanklesha-parinama-devas with the lowest part of their karma, who have the Bhavanatrika and Saudharma-yugal. The Tirthankara-prakriti binds the lowest part of its karma in the second or third Naraka, facing Mithyatva, and in the Asanyata-gunasthanavi-manushya. Fifteen prakritis bind the lowest part of their karma in the Sankleshi-jiva of all four gatis, and two prakritis bind the lowest part of their karma in the Visuddha-parinama-jiva of all four gatis.

**Verse 175**
Now, the names of those fifteen and two prakritis are: Parghata, Ucchvasa, Tejas, Karman, Trasa, Badara, Paryapta, Pratyaka, Shubharupa-varna-chatuष्ka, Nirman, Panchendriya, Agurulaghu, these fifteen auspicious prakritis bind the Sanklista-jiva of all four gatis, and the Striveda and Napumsaka-veda, these two inauspicious prakritis bind the Visuddha-parinama-jiva of all four gatis with the lowest part of their karma.

**Verse 176**
The next verse will discuss the thirty-one prakritis, of which the first eight prakritis are... 

Page #177:
---------------------------
## Gommatasar Karmakanda-139

**A non-changing medium-resultant Samyagdarshi or Mithyadarshi jiva binds with the inferior section, and the remaining 23 natures are bound by a changing medium-resultant Mithyadarshi jiva with the inferior section.**

**Then the names of those 31 natures are stated:**

**Thirasuhajassaddugam ubhaye miccheva ucca santhanam.**
**Sanhadigamanam narasurasubhagad ejjanam jumman cha.** ||177||

**Meaning:**

**Stable-unstable, auspicious-inauspicious, fame-infamy, knowable and unknowable, these eight natures are bound by a changing medium-resultant Mithyadarshi jiva, as well as a Samyagdarshi jiva, along with six high-caste institutions, six tolerances, auspicious-inauspicious types of destiny, human destiny-human destiny-following, divine destiny and divine destiny-following, auspicious-inauspicious, acceptable-unacceptable, these 23 natures are bound by a changing medium-resultant Mithyadarshi jiva with the inferior section.**

**Thus, these 31 natures are bound with the inferior section.**

**Special Meaning:**

**The characteristics of changing medium-resultant and non-changing medium-resultant are stated:**

**Those results which are increasing or decreasing only for a moment, and are results of defilement or purity, are called non-changing. Those results which, after being established, can reach another result and return to the original state, are called changing.**

**There are three types of results based on the distinction of superior, medium, and inferior. Here, the inferior section is not bound by the most excellent pure results, because the section of the inauspicious natures is infinitely greater than the section of the auspicious natures. This is the implication of infinite increase.**

**(The most excellent pure results bind the excellent section of the auspicious natures, but here the binding of the inferior section is stated. Therefore, the most excellent pure results are also changing, which is appropriate. The special statement related to verses 170 to 177 should be seen in Mahabandha, Chapter 4, pages 212-215.)** 

Page #178:
---------------------------
Gommatasar Karmakanda-140

The acceptance of even the most excellent results does not lead to the binding of the lowest segment, because the intense karmic afflictions cause the increase of the segment of the inauspicious natures. Here, the mention of the lowest segment is made. Even the acceptance of the most excellent karmic afflictions does not lead to the binding of the lowest segment. Thus, to eliminate the lowest or the most excellent results, the binding of the lowest segment of the aforementioned natures should be done from the existing medium results.

Further, the distinctions of the Saadi, Anaadi, Dhruva and Adhruva of the segments of the original natures are as follows:

Ghaadiinam Ajahanno Anukkaso Veyaniyanaamam. :. .....: Ajaayana Pukasso, Mo Chadudha Duudha Sesaa. ||178||

Meaning: The binding of the lowest segment of the Ghaatiya Karmas, the binding of the non-excellent segment of the Vedaniya and Naama Karmas, and the binding of the lowest and non-excellent segment of the Gotra Karma are also of the Saadi, Anaadi, Dhruva and Adhruva types. And the excellent, non-excellent and lowest segment of the Ghaatiya Karmas, the excellent, non-excellent and lowest segment of the Vedaniya and Naama Karmas, the excellent and lowest segment of the Gotra Karma, and the excellent, non-excellent, non-lowest and lowest segment of the Aayu Karma are of the Saadi and Adhruva types.

The distinctions of the segments related to the original natures are:

* **Saadi**
* **Anaadi**
* **Dhruva**
* **Adhruva**

The distinctions of the segments related to the original natures are:

* **Jnaanavaran**
* **Darshanavaran**
* **Vedaniya**
* **Mohaneya**
* **Aayu**
* **Naama**
* **Gotra**
* **Antaraaya**

The distinctions of the segments related to the original natures are:

* **Utkrisht** (Excellent)
* **Anutkrisht** (Non-excellent)
* **Ajahanya** (Non-lowest)
* **Jahanya** (Lowest)

The distinctions of the segments related to the Dhruva natures are:

* **Prashasht** (Excellent)
* **Aprshasht** (Non-excellent)
* **Adhuva** (Lowest)

The distinctions of the segments related to the Dhruva natures are:

* **Jahanya** (Lowest)
* **Ajahanya** (Non-lowest)
* **Anutkrisht** (Non-excellent)
* **Utkrisht** (Excellent)

The distinctions of the segments related to the Dhruva natures are:

* **Saadi**
* **Anaadi**
* **Dhruva**
* **Adhruva**

Sattaanam Dhುವियाणमणुकस्समसत्थगाण धुवियाणं. Ajahanno Cha Ya Chadudha Sesaa Sesaaṇayam Cha Duudha. ||179||


Page #179:
---------------------------
Gommatsar Karmakanda - 141

**Meaning:** The division of the auspicious-stable (prashasta-dhruva) and inauspicious-stable (aprashasta-dhruva) natures into sections (anubhagabandh) is of four types, based on the distinction of eternal (anadi), stable (dhruva), and unstable (adhruva). The auspicious-stable natures are divided into four types: excellent (utkrista), mediocre (anutkrista), inferior (ajghannya), and worst (jghannya). The inauspicious-stable natures are divided into four types: worst (jghannya), mediocre (anutkrista), excellent (utkrista), and the unstable natures are divided into four types: worst (jghannya), etc. The division into sections (anubhagabandh) is of two types, based on the distinction of stable (dhruva) and unstable (adhruva).

**Special Meaning:** The four natures of luminous (taijas), karmic (karman), heavy-light (aguru-laghu), and creation (nirman) are auspicious-stable (prashasta-dhruva). The 39 natures of knowledge-obscuration (jnana-avaran), 9 vision-obscuration (darshan-avaran), 5 obstacles (antaraya), false belief (mithyatva), 16 passions (kashaya), fear (bhaya), disgust (jugupsa), and attack (upghat) are inauspicious-stable (aprashasta-dhruva). The remaining 73 natures are unstable (adhruva). Generally, the four natures of color (varna), etc., are stable (dhruva), but in the auspicious and inauspicious forms, the four natures of color (varna), etc., are not stable (dhruva).

Here, the four colors (varna) are counted in both auspicious and inauspicious forms, so 120 + 4 = 124 - 51 (stable) = 73 natures are unstable. Although there are 120 natures that are capable of binding. The vision of the division into sections (anubhagabandh) related to the resultant nature.

**Types of Division into Sections (Anubhagabandh)**

| Type | Auspicious-Stable (Prashasta-Dhruva) |  Inauspicious-Stable (Aprashasta-Dhruva) | Unstable (Adhruva) |
|---|---|---|---|
| Excellent (Utkrista) | 2 | 2 | 2 |
| Mediocre (Anutkrista) | 2 | 2 | 2 |
| Inferior (Ajghannya) | 2 | 4 | 2 |
| Worst (Jghannya) | 2 | 2 | 2 |

The characteristic of the subsequent division into sections (anubhagabandh) is described in the case of destructive karmas (ghatiya-karma).

**Note:** Here, the number 2 indicates the eternal (anadi), stable (dhruva), and unstable (adhruva), and the number 4 indicates the eternal (anadi), stable (dhruva), and unstable (adhruva).

**Verse 180:**

**Meaning:** The power (spardhak) of destructive karmas (ghatiya-karma) is like a vine (lata), wood (daru), bone (haddi), and stone (pashan). The power (spardhak) of the country-destroying (desh-ghati) karmas is up to the infinite part (anant-vag) of the wood part (daru-bhag). The power (spardhak) of the all-destroying (sarva-ghati) karmas is from the remaining large part (bahu-bhag) to the stone part (shail-bhag). 

Page #180:
---------------------------
## Gommatasara Karmakanda-142

**Special Meaning:** The power (competitors) of the obstructing karmas, namely, Jnanavarana, Darshanavarana, Mohaniya, and Antaraya, are of four types, similar to the metaphors of creeper, wood, bone, and rock. Just as the creeper, etc., have increasing hardness in order, similarly, these karma competitors, i.e., the groups of karma-vargana, have increasing power in giving their fruits in order.

The competitors from the creeper part to the infinite parts of the wood part are Desha-ghati, because even when they arise, the qualities of the soul remain manifest in one part. And the competitors from one part of the wood part without the remaining many parts to the rock part are Sarva-ghati, because when they arise, not even a part of the soul's qualities is manifest, or the full qualities are not manifest. For example, where even a part of Avadhi-jnana is not manifest, there the Sarva-ghati competitors of Avadhi-jnana-avarana should be known to have arisen. And where Avadhi-jnana and Avadhi-jnana-avarana are both found, there the Desha-ghati competitors of Avadhi-jnana-avarana should be known to have arisen. Similarly, this statement should be understood in other natures as well. Now, we will explain the special feature in the Mithyatva nature:

**Verse 181:**

> Deso-utti have sammam tatto daru anantime missam.
> Sesha ananta-bhaga attishila-phatya micche.

**Meaning:** All the competitors from the creeper part of Darshan-mohaniya karma to one part of the infinite parts of the wood part are of the Samyak-tva nature. And the competitors from one part of the wood part without the remaining many parts, divided into infinite parts, and the lowest one part of them, are of the Misra nature. And the competitors from one part without the remaining many parts of the wood part to the bone part and the rock part are of the Sarva-ghati Mithyatva nature.

**Special Meaning:** Suppose the competitors of the power of the parts of Darshan-mohaniya karma are 120, and the number of infinite is considered 4. The competitors of the power of the creeper part are 8, the competitors of the wood part are 16, the competitors of the bone part are 32, and the competitors of the rock part are 64. That is, 8 + 16 + 32 + 64 = 120, these are the competitors of the power of the parts of Darshan-mohaniya karma. Out of these, how much will the Mithyatva nature get? How much will the Misra get? How much will the Samyak-tva nature get? The creeper part's 8 + the infinite part of the wood part, i.e., 16 x 4 = 4, thus 8 + 4 = 12 parts will go to the Samyak-tva nature. The Misra nature will get 16 x 4 = 12 parts, which was the remaining part of the wood part, and its infinite part, i.e., 12 x 64 = 3 parts. The Mithyatva nature will get 9 parts remaining from the wood part, and the competitors of the power of the parts of the bone part, 32, and the competitors of the rock part, 64, combined (9 + 32 + 64 = 105) competitors will be obtained. 

Page #181:
---------------------------
Gommatasar Karmakanda - 143: There are 7 types of Deshaghatikarma, 5 types of Antaraya, 4 types of Sanchalan, and 1 type of Purushaved, totaling 17 types of karma. These 17 types of karma manifest in four forms: Shaila, Asthi, Daru, and Lata. The remaining karmas manifest in three forms, excluding Lata.

**Explanation:**

* The 17 types of karma manifest in the form of Shaila, Asthi, Daru, and Lata.
* Where Shaila is absent, the karma manifests in the form of Asthi, Daru, and Lata.
* Where Asthi is also absent, the karma manifests in the form of Daru and Lata.
* Where Daru is also absent, the karma manifests only in the form of Lata.
* The remaining karmas, excluding Samyaktva and Misra (Samyagmithyatva), manifest in three forms.

**Specific Explanation:**

* The 12 Kshayas (Avyakhyan, Pratiakhyan, Krodha, Mana, Maya, and Lobha) are not Deshaghatikarma, but they are the antagonists of all types of karma. Therefore, their antagonists manifest in the form of Shaila, Asthi, and Daru, with many parts.
* There are two types of antagonists without Shaila and one type without Asthi. Therefore, they manifest in three forms.
* The antagonists of Purushaved, excluding the 12 Kshayas, manifest in all four forms: Shaila, Asthi, Daru, and Lata.
* The 17 types of karma manifest in three forms: Shaila, Asthi, Daru, and Lata; Asthi, Daru, and Lata; or Daru and Lata. They do not manifest in the form of Lata alone.

**Further Explanation:**

* The remaining Aghatiya karmas have the same parts as the Ghatiya karmas. Their antagonists also manifest in four forms.
* These Aghatiya karmas are of two types: Puny and Papa.
* The remaining Ghatiya karmas are only of the Papa type.

**Further Explanation:**

* The antagonists of the Aghatiya karmas are also called by other names: Gudkhand, Sakram, Sarisa, Sattha, Nimbak, Kanjira, Vishaal, Ahal, Sarisa, Asattha, and Aghatipadhibhaga.
* There are 42 types of Aghatiya karmas that are considered "good" (Prashasta), and 37 types that are considered "bad" (Aparashasta).
* The antagonists of these karmas are called Nimbak, Kanjira, etc.
Page #182:
---------------------------
## Gommatasara Karmakanda - 144

**Meaning:** The strengths (competitors) in the auspicious natures of the *aghatiya* karmas are like jaggery, sugar candy, sugar (misri), and nectar. They have increasing sweetness in that order. The sections of the inauspicious natures are like neem, bitter gourd, poison, and halahala, with increasing bitterness in that order.

**Special Meaning:** The participants in the auspicious natures of the *aghatiya* karmas, i.e., the strengths, are like jaggery, sugar candy, sugar (misri), and nectar. Just as jaggery, sugar candy, sugar (misri), and nectar are increasingly sweet due to their pleasantness, similarly, the auspicious natures in the form of jaggery-section, sugar candy-section, sugar-section, and nectar-section are increasingly pleasant due to worldly happiness. The participants in the inauspicious natures are like neem, bitter gourd, poison, and halahala. Just as neem, bitter gourd, poison, and halahala are increasingly bitter in comparison to each other, similarly, the inauspicious natures in the form of neem-section, bitter gourd-section, poison-section, and halahala-section are increasingly painful.

Here, there are 42 auspicious natures and 37 inauspicious natures. The natures of *varna* etc. are counted as both auspicious and inauspicious. The auspicious natures are transformed into three forms: jaggery, sugar candy, sugar (misri), and nectar; or jaggery, sugar candy, and sugar; or jaggery and sugar candy. The inauspicious natures are transformed into three forms: neem, bitter gourd, poison, and halahala; or neem, bitter gourd, and poison; or neem and bitter gourd.

**Thus ends the section on *anubhaga* (participation).**

***

**Section on *Pradeshabandha* (Binding to Regions)**

**The section on *Pradeshabandha* is explained in 33 verses:**

**Verse 185:**

**Meaning:** This living being binds to all regions with its own cause, the *pudgala* substance which is situated in a single field, dense, and capable of becoming karma, and which is either beginningless or beginningful or both.

**Special Meaning:** The connection of the *pudgala* substance in the form of karma with the regions of the self is called *Pradeshabandha*. Here, the subtle *nigoda* living being's dense *angula* (finger-breadth) should be understood as a single, minute field. 

Page #183:
---------------------------
Gommatsarakarmakanda-145
The space occupied by one body is called one field, and the space occupied by the rest of the universe is called many fields. The amount of pudgala dravya (matter) in each field should be understood by the rule of three. Here, the word 'one body' generally refers to the smallest body, because there are infinite beings with nigoda bodies. For this reason, it is mainly understood that one field is equal to an infinitesimal part of a ghanaangula (a unit of measurement).

**Special Meaning:** Although the extent of a body ranges from the smallest to the largest, or from the extent of a samudghata (a unit of measurement) to the extent of the universe, here the smallest extent is considered to be an infinitesimal part of a ghanaangula, and the largest extent is considered to be the extent of the universe. By subtracting the smallest extent from the largest extent and adding one to it, we get all the different extents. And many beings have bodies that are as small as an infinitesimal part of a ghanaangula. Therefore, the amount of one field is mainly said to be an infinitesimal part of a ghanaangula. There are many regions of space that are as small as an infinitesimal part of a ghanaangula. Therefore, these are also many fields in comparison to the regions. However, for the sake of clarity, this field is called one field here. Except for this field, the rest of the space of the universe is called many fields. The amount of pudgala dravya in each of these fields should be understood as follows:

If all the pudgala dravya is found in the entire universe, then how much pudgala dravya will be found in one field? This is how the rule of three should be applied. Here, the base amount is the entire universe, the result amount is the amount of pudgala dravya, and the desired amount is the amount of one field. By dividing the product of the result amount and the desired amount by the base amount, we get the amount of pudgala dravya in one field. And by considering the desired amount as many fields and applying the rule of three as before, we get the amount of pudgala dravya in many fields.

The pudgala dravya that is present in one field and many fields, and which is made up of an infinite number of pudgala paramanus (atoms), is capable of becoming karma (action). The rest, which is made up of an infinite number of parts, is incapable of becoming karma. Thus, there are four categories: one field capable, one field incapable, many fields capable, and many fields incapable. Since each of these has saadi (beginning) and anaadi (no beginning) categories, there are eight categories in total.

**Special Meaning:** When we divide the amount of pudgala dravya in one field by infinity, we get one part. 

Page #184:
---------------------------
## Gommatasara Karmakanda - 146

The amount of pudgala dravya that is fit to become karma is limited, while the remaining majority of pudgala dravya is unfit to become karma. When the amount of pudgala dravya related to many fields is divided by infinity, one part of the result is the amount of pudgala dravya fit to become karma, and the remaining majority is the amount of pudgala dravya unfit to become karma. Among these, the pudgala dravya that has been taken by the jiva in the past is called sadi dravya, and the pudgala dravya that has never been taken by the jiva since the beginning of time is called anadi dravya. Now, the amount of sadi and anadi dravya is described as follows:

**Verse 188:**

"Jet samdhanabaddha adikale hadena savvena.
Jivena hade savvam sadi hoditti niddidha."

**Meaning:**

Multiply the amount of pudgala dravya that is bound to the highest time by the number of past times. Then multiply the result by the amount of all jivas. The resulting amount is the amount of sadi dravya of all jivas, i.e., the amount of all sadi dravya.

**Explanation:**

If a jiva takes the amount of pudgala dravya that is bound to the highest time in one time period, then the amount of pudgala dravya taken in the past time periods can be calculated using the rule of three.

The amount of pudgala dravya taken in one time period is the known amount. The amount of pudgala dravya bound to the highest time is the desired amount. The number of past time periods is the unknown amount, which is equal to the number of avlis multiplied by infinity (as one avli is equal to an infinite number of time periods).

Multiply the desired amount by the unknown amount and divide the result by the known amount. The resulting amount is the amount of sadi pudgala dravya of one jiva. Multiply this amount by the amount of all jivas to get the amount of sadi pudgala dravya of all jivas. Subtract this amount from the total amount of pudgala dravya to get the amount of anadi pudgala dravya.

This proves that even all jivas together have not experienced all pudgala dravya in the past.

**Doubt:**

In the texts like Dvadasanupreksha, it is said that one jiva experiences all pudgala dravya an infinite number of times and then leaves it. How is this possible?

**Solution:**

In those verses, the word "sarva" (all) is used for "kuch" (some). For example, when a foot is placed on hot coals, a part of the foot burns, but it is still said that the foot has burned. Similarly, the word "sarva" is used even for a part.

1. "Tido sankhejjavali hada siddhanam pamanam tu." (Gom. Ji. 577) - This means that the amount of past time is obtained by multiplying the number of avlis by the number of siddhas.

2. D. Pu. 4, p. 326. 

Page #185:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda - 147

Further, in the aforementioned distinctions, we find the measure of Sadi-dravya...

"The infinite part of the Pudgala-dravya residing in its own single and multiple fields is the Sadi-dravya fit for Karma, and the remaining infinite parts are the Sadi-dravya unfit for Karma, so says the Jina." (189)

**Meaning:** The Jina has stated that the infinite part of the Pudgala-dravya residing in its own single and multiple fields is the Sadi-dravya fit for Karma, and the remaining infinite parts are the Sadi-dravya unfit for Karma.

**Explanation:** If the measure of Sadi-dravya related to all beings is found in the regions of all the worlds, then how much dravya will be found in a single field, which is the measure of a single being's perception, which is an immeasurable fraction of a ghana-angula? Or, how much dravya will be found in multiple fields, which is the measure of a single field minus the measure of the world? In this way, we need to perform two rules of three. Here, the measure is all the worlds, the result is the measure of Sadi-dravya, and the desired quantity is a single field. Multiplying the result by the desired quantity and dividing by the measure, the quotient obtained is the measure of Sadi-dravya related to a single field.

The measure is all the worlds, the result is the measure of Sadi-dravya, and the desired quantity is multiple fields. Multiplying the result by the desired quantity and dividing by the measure, the quotient obtained is the measure of Sadi-dravya related to multiple fields. Dividing the Sadi-dravya related to a single field by infinity, one part is the measure of Sadi-dravya fit for becoming Karma related to a single field, and the remaining part is the measure of Sadi-dravya unfit for Karma related to a single field. Similarly, dividing the Sadi-dravya related to multiple fields by infinity, one part is the measure of Sadi-dravya fit for Karma related to multiple fields, and the remaining part is the measure of Sadi-dravya unfit for Karma related to multiple fields.

Then, the measure of Anadi-dravya is stated as follows:

"The measure of the fit and unfit dravya residing in a single field and the measure of the fit and unfit dravya residing in multiple fields, minus the measure of their respective Sadi-dravya, is the measure of the fit Anadi-dravya residing in a single field, the unfit Anadi-dravya residing in multiple fields, the fit Anadi-dravya residing in multiple fields, and the fit Anadi-dravya residing in a single field, respectively." (190)

**Meaning:** From the four distinctions mentioned in the verse, the fit Sadi-dravya, the fit Anadi-dravya, and the fit Ubhaydravya, simultaneously become the measure of the Mula-prakriti, the Uttara-prakriti, and the successive Prakriti-like Pradesh-bandha, respectively, at every moment. 

Page #186:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-148.
This being, due to yoga and mithyatva, acquires time-bound, measurable atoms, which are capable of becoming karma, and thus becomes karma. At times, it acquires only the previously acquired sadi-dravya atoms, and at times, it acquires the anadi-dravya atoms that have not been acquired yet, and sometimes it acquires both types of atoms. Now, the measure of the time-bound is said to be:

_Sayalarasaruvgandhehin parinadam charamachaduhin phasehin._
_Siddado'bhavvado'nantimabhagam gunam davvam. ||191||_

Meaning: That time-bound, consisting of five types of rasa, five types of varna, two types of gandha, and the last four of the eight types of sparsa, along with the qualities of rupa, sheeta, ushna, and snigdha (excluding the four sparsa of guru, laghu, mrdu, and kathina), is known as karma-rupa pudgala-dravya, which is an infinite part of the siddha-rasi and an infinite multiple of the abhavya-rasi. In other words, it acquires a group of atoms of this size and becomes karma every moment.

Now, the time-bound acquired at one time is manifested in eight fundamental natures, and the order in which each nature is distributed is as follows:

_Aaugabhago thobo namagode samo tado ahyo._
_Ghaaditiyevi ya tatto mohe tatto tado tadiye. ||192||_

Meaning: In all the fundamental natures, the portion of ayu-karma is small, the portion of nama and gotra-karma is equal, but greater than the portion of ayu-karma. The portion of the three ghatiya karmas - antaraya, jnana-avaran, and darshan-avaran - is equal, but greater than nama and gotra-karma. The portion of mohaniya-karma is greater than that, and the portion of vedaniya-karma is greater than mohaniya-karma.

Special Note: In the mithyatva guna-sthana, there is bondage of all four ayus. In the sasadan guna-sthana, there is bondage of three ayus, excluding naraka. In the asanyata guna-sthana, there is bondage of two ayus, excluding naraka and tiryanch. In the desha-sanyata, pramatta, and aprammatta guna-sthana, there is bondage of only one deva-ayu. There is no further bondage of ayu. Beyond this, until anivritti-karan, there is bondage of only seven karmas, excluding ayu. Above this, in the sukshma-lampara, there is bondage of six karmas, excluding ayu and mohaniya-karma. Further, in the three guna-sthana, there is bondage of only one vedaniya-karma.

1. There are four sparsa: one each from snigdha and ruksha, one each from sheeta and ushna, one each from karkas and mrdu, and one each from guru and laghu. (Dhaval Pu. 14 p. 558. and 559 Sutra 778. and 783 commentary) 

Page #187:
---------------------------
Gommatsarakarmakanda - 149
That too is in the form of udhaya. Where there is bondage of as many karmas, there in the time-bound, know the distribution of that many karmas.
Further, they explain the reason for the greater share of vedaniya karma.
3
Suhdukkha nimittaado bahunijjaragoti veyaniyassa. Savvehinto bahugan davvam hoditti gitti. ||193 ||
Meaning - Vedaniya karma is the cause of happiness and sorrow for the worldly beings, therefore its nirjara is more. For this reason, vedaniya gets a greater share than other mool karmas, thus said Jiro.
Further, they say that the reason for the division of dravya in other karmas is the lack of dravya.
Sesanan paydinan thidipadhibagena hodi davvam tu.
Avali asankhabhago padhibhago hodi niyamen. || 194 ||
Meaning - Without vedaniya karma, the dravya of all mool prakritis is divided according to their position, those who have a higher position get more and those who have a lower position get less. In manasthitivala karma, the dravya is distributed equally and in its division, the share should be understood as the countless part of avali according to the rule of pratibhagahara.
Special Meaning - Here, how much is more? To bring proof of this, know the countless part of avali according to the rule of pratibhagahara. Its sandrishti is the digit 'a', thus, by dividing the share of pratibhagahara, know the amount of one share as one share. Know the amount of all the remaining shares as bahubhaga without the amount of this one share. And the amount of atoms of that karma is the amount of dravya said for that karma.
1. The dravya that is suitable for jnanaavaraneya, due to mithyatva etc. prabhav, they transform into five jnanaavaraneya forms, they do not transform in any other form, because they are unsuitable for others. Similarly, it should be said about all karmas. Doubt - If this is the case, why is it not said that there are eight karma varganas? Solution - Due to the lack of difference, that kind of teaching is not found. The eight varganas are not separate, but they exist in a mixed form. "Augabhago thovo namagode samo tado ahio" from this it is known that all eight varganas exist in a mixed form. (Dhaval Pu. 14 / p. 553-554) 

Page #188:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-150 Now the order of division is stated -
In the multi-part, the equal parts are eight, and the remaining one part is one.
The essence is that in that multi-part, the multi-part is given to the many, and the remaining one part is given to the countless parts of the Avali in the order previously stated.
In that also, the one with much substance is given a multi-part, and in this way, the process of dividing the part into parts continues until the end.
Special meaning - At one time, the time-bound-measure atoms related to karma are taken, the measure of those atoms is the time-bound-substance related to karma.
In this, when the part of the countless part of the Avali is given, one part is kept separate from the measure that came, and the multi-part is divided into eight parts.
One equal part from those is established separately in eight places, that is, one equal part is given to each of the eight fundamental natures, and the one part that was kept separate is given the part of the countless part of the Avali.
And one part is kept separate and the multi-part is given to the Vedaniya karma, which is said to have much substance, and when this measure is added to the measure of one equal part from the previously mentioned eight parts, the number of atoms that become Vedaniya karma in the time-bound substance is that much.
And the one part that remained is given the part of the countless part of the Avali, and one part is kept separate from the obtained amount, and the remaining multi-part is divided into three equal parts, and one part is given to each of the Jnanavarana, Darshanavarana, and Antaraya karma.
And when this one part is added to each part of the eight equal parts that were made, the number of atoms that become Jnanavarana, Darshanavarana, and Antaraya in order is that much.
The substance of these three karmas is to be known as equal to each other, and the one part that was kept separate is given the part of the countless part of the Avali, and from the obtained amount, one part is kept separate, and the remaining multi-part is divided into two equal parts, and one part is given to the Nama karma and one to the Gotra karma.
And when this one part is added to each part of the previously mentioned eight parts, the number of atoms that become Nama and Gotra karma in order is that much.
The substance of both these karmas is to be known as equal to each other, and the one part that remained is given to the Ayu karma, and when this one part is added to the one part measure substance from those eight parts, the number of atoms that become Ayu karma is that much.
In this way, the statement "Aaug Bhago Thovo" etc. that was said in the verse is proven.
In this way, at one time, the time-bound-measure Pudgala substance transforms into eight karmas. 

Page #189:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-151

Assume that a Sampakar's breath is 160 and the number of Asalyatavena parts is 9.  That is, 810029 = 900.  Keep this number separate and the remaining 7200.  Divide these equally among the eight karmas, each receiving 900.  Divide the 900 that was kept separate by 9, resulting in 100.  Keep this separate and the remaining 800 is given to the Vedaniyakarma.  Therefore, the Vedaniyakarma will receive 900 + 800 = 1700 atoms.  Divide the 100 that was kept separate by 9 again.  Keep this separate and subtract it from 100, resulting in 100 - 100 = 0.  This remaining portion is added to the Mohaniyakarma's substance, resulting in 800 + 900 = 9881 atoms.  This much substance is given to the Mohaniyakarma.

The number of divisions kept separate, 100, is divided by 9, resulting in a division of 1.  Keep this separate and subtract it from 100, resulting in 100 - 881.  Divide this into three equal parts and distribute one part each to the Jnanavarana, Darshanavarana, and Antarayakarma.  In this way, each will receive 64 atoms of substance.  And, the initial equal substance of 900 that each karma received, add 929 to it, resulting in 900 + 943 = 90371 atoms for each.  Divide the 38 kept separate by 9, resulting in a division of 4.  Subtract this from 100, resulting in a remaining substance of 100 - 199 = 12.  This much substance is given to the Nama and Gotra karma.  Divide this by 2, resulting in 800/2 = 90 atoms of substance for the Namakarma and the same amount for the Gotra karma.  Add this to the substance that was previously given to the Nama and Gotra karma, which was 900, resulting in 900 + 4 = 9004 atoms of substance for the Namakarma and the same amount for the Gotra karma.  Add the one part of 100 atoms of substance kept separate to the substance previously given to each karma, which is 900 atoms of substance for the Ayukarma, resulting in 900 + 11 = 90011 atoms of substance for the Ayukarma.

Distribution of Karma Atoms:

| Vedaniyakarma | Mohaniyakarma | Jnanavarana | Darshanavarana | Antarayakarma | Nama | Gotra | Ayukarma | Total |
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
| 7200 | 800 | 100 | 900 | 243 | 243 | 243 | 1458 | 1458 |
| 800 | 900 | 800 | 800 | 800 | 800 | 900 | 900 | 900 |
| 1700 | 9886 | 90371 | 90371 | 90371 | 90060 | 90011 | 90011 | 810029 | 

Page #190:
---------------------------
Be - ANN
Gommatsarakarmakanda - 152
Special - The substance that is worthy of Jnanavaraniya, it is the same that transforms into 5 Jnanavaraniya forms, because it is not worthy of others. Similarly, one should know about all karmas, otherwise the substance that is Jnanavaraniya, by taking it, due to Mithyatva etc. reasons, the Jiva transforms into Jnanavaraniya form, this sutra cannot be formed.
There is no difference in the eight types of Karmanavarganas, therefore it is not said that there are eight Karmanavarganas. These eight varganas do not remain separate, but they remain mixed, otherwise it would not have been possible to preach in the way like "the part of Ayukarma is small, the part of Namakarma and Gotrakarma is more than that".
Now the order of division in Uttaraprakritis is said
Uttarpaydi puno mohavarana havanti hinakama. Ahiyaka ma pun namavigdha va na bhanjanam sesa. || 196 ||
Meaning - In Uttaraprakritis, the order of differences in Mohaniya, Jnanavarana and Darshanavarana is the least substance, and the order of differences in Nama and Antarayakarma is the most substance. There is no division in the differences of Vedaniya, Gotra and Ayukarma, because their one nature binds at the same time, therefore they get the same substance as the original nature.
Special meaning - In Jnanavarana, the substance of Shruta Jnanavarana is less than the substance of Mati Jnanavarana, from this the substance of Avadhi Jnanavarana is less, this order should also be known in the differences of other karmas, but in the differences of Nama and Antaraya karma, the substance is more and more in order, like in Antarayakarma, the substance of Labhantaraya is more than the substance of Danantaraya, from this the substance of Bhogantaraya is more. Know this order in this way. There is no division in Vedaniya, Gotra and Ayukarma. Like in Vedaniya karma, whether there will be Sataka bandha or Asataka, both will not bind together at the same time. Know the same in Gotra and Ayukarma also. At the time when the bandha of these three karmas will be, at that time, the substance of the original nature, which is the measure, should also be known as the Uttaraprakriti.
-
Then the division of Sarvaghati and Deshaghati in Ghatiya karmas is said
Savvaranam davvam anant bhago du mulapaydi nam.
Sesa anantbhaga desavaranam have davvam. || 197 ||
2. Dh. Pu. 14 p. 553-54
1. Varganakhanda, Bandhanuyogadwar Chulika, Sutra 758

Page #191:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-153

**Meaning:** The three fundamental substances, Jnanavarana, Darshanavarana, and Mohaniya, have their own essence. When this essence is divided into infinite parts, one part becomes the essence of Sarvaghati, and the remaining infinite parts become the essence of Deshaghati.

**Specific Meaning:** The division of the essence of Sarvadhati into Sarvaghati and Deshaghati will be explained later. The amount of essence of Deshaghati, such as Matijnanavarana, is called the "Pratibhagahara" for the amount of atoms related to Sarvaghati.

**Doubt:** How can Deshaghati substances be competitive with Sarvaghati?

**Solution:** In the previous section, the parts of Matijnanavarana were said to be of four types: Shale, Asthi, Daru, and Lata. Of these, the Daru part is infinite, and the entire Lata part is Deshaghati. Thus, the atoms that hold the Deshaghati part are Deshaghati substances. The Shale part, Asthi part, and the majority of the Daru part are Sarvaghati. The atoms that hold these parts are Sarvaghati substances. This is what we should know. Now, to calculate the amount of Sarvadhati substance, we use the "Pratibhagahara" amount.

**Verse 198:**

> Desavarana-nnonnabhattham tu anantasankhamettan khu.
> Savvavaranadhanatum padibhago hodi ghadinam.

**Meaning:** The combined amount of Deshaghati substances like Jnanavarana, etc., is infinite. This same amount is known as the "Pratibhaga" of the Ghatiya Karmas for calculating the amount of essence of Sarvaghati substances.

**Specific Meaning:** The number of atoms of the four Jnanavarana, three Darshanavarana, five Antaraya, four Sajwalana Kashaya, and Nokashaya is infinite. The amount of Nana-guna-hani (various types of karmic obscurations) is also infinite. To calculate the combined amount of these, we write the number 2 for each Nana-guna-hani and multiply them together. This combined amount is also infinite.

**Example:**

> The number of substances is 3100, the number of locations is 40, the amount of one type of guna-hani is 8, the amount of two types of guna-hani is double (16), and the number of Nana-guna-hani is 5. Therefore, we write the number 2 for each Nana-guna-hani, which is 242424242, and multiply them together. The result is 32. This is the combined amount.

**Note:** This calculation is similar to the example given in verse 162, where the amount of substances is 6300 and the number of locations is 48. This will be explained further in verse 923. In this example, we are talking about the amount of substances, not the parts. 

Page #192:
---------------------------
Gommatsar Karmakanda-154

Know the measure of the atoms of those aforementioned substances to be the same as the substance. Know the measure of the substance related to the section to be as much as the measure obtained by multiplying infinity by itself three times. Know the loss of merit to be as much as the measure obtained by multiplying infinity by itself twice. Know the double loss of merit to be twice that. The measure of the loss of merit of various types is infinity. Write 2 in the column for the loss of merit of various types and multiply it by itself. The product obtained is the mutually reciprocal quantity. The measure of this mutually reciprocal quantity is the share for calculating the measure of the all-destroying substance. This is explained as follows:

The substance of the four, namely, knowledge-obscuring, etc., is the measure of the substance of the country-destroying, along with its all-destroying substance, without the portion of pure knowledge. (That is, these country-destroying substances have their own country-destroying substance, as well as an all-destroying substance. That all-destroying substance is less than the portion of the knowledge-obscuring, not all of it. In this way, the country-destroying and all-destroying substances together constitute the substance of the knowledge-obscuring, etc., which is) the measure of one-eighth of the time that has been established for a long time. Dividing this (substance) by one less than the mutually reciprocal quantity gives the measure of the substance in the final loss of merit of the rock portion. Afterwards, going down, one by one, the loss of merit, the substance becomes double, double, until it reaches the first loss of merit of the wood portion. In the infinite portions of the wood portion, one portion (country-destroying) without the remaining many portions related to the substance, in their first loss of merit, the substance of the extreme loss of merit of the rock portion is multiplied by half of infinity (half of the mutually reciprocal quantity), as appropriate. The measure of the substance obtained is the measure of the substance. In this way, know the number of losses of merit from the extreme loss of merit of the rock portion to the first loss of merit of the many portions of the wood portion as the number of terms. Multiplying the number of terms minus one by two gives the infinite measure of the mutually reciprocal quantity related to the all-destroying. Know half of it as the multiplier here. Adding the measures of the substances of all these losses of merit gives the number of atoms related to the all-destroying. Therefore, the mutually reciprocal quantity is called the share for obtaining the all-destroying substance.

The illustration is as follows:

| Rock portion | Rock portion | Bone portion | Bone portion | Wood portion | Wood portion's extreme loss of merit of the all-destroying | Other loss of merit | Extreme loss of merit | Other loss of merit | Extreme loss of merit | First portion's substance | Substance of the substance | Substance of the substance | Substance of the substance | Substance of the loss of merit |
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
| 36 | 288 | 144 | 160 | 176 | 320 | 352 | 384 | 192 |  |  |  |  |  |  | 

Page #193:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-155
112
208 224 240 256
416 448 480
60
128
Thus, the substance of the *guna-hani* (destruction of merit) is doubled for each subsequent *guna-hani*. The *nana-guna-hani* (multiple destruction of merit) is 6, the *anyonyabhyastaras* (reciprocal product) is 24242424241, half of 64 is 32, multiplying the substance of the *guna-hani* of the *sail* (rock) part, 100, by 32, we get 3200, the substance of the first *guna-hani* of the *sarvaghati* (all-destroying) part.
Now, the substance of the *deshaghati* (country-destroying) part is as follows:
The substance of the last *guna-hani* of one part in the infinite parts of the *daru* (wood) part is double the substance of the first *guna-hani* of the *bahubhag* (many parts) of the *daru* part, and the substance is doubled for each subsequent *guna-hani*, reaching the first *guna-hani* of the *lata* (vine) part. The number of times the number 2 is written, one less than the number of *nana-guna-hani*, and multiplied together, is the *anyonyabhyastaras*. Multiplying the substance of the last *guna-hani* of the *sail* part by half of this number, we get the substance of the first *guna-hani* of the *lata* part. Adding these *guna-hani*s, we get the number of atoms related to the *deshaghati*.
Here, in the context of the numbers, dividing the total substance, 3100, by the *anyonyabhyastaras*, 32, minus one (32-1 = 31), we get (3100/31) 100, which is the substance of the last *guna-hani* of the *sail* part. Then, doubling for each subsequent *guna-hani*, we get 200-400-800, one less than the number of *nana-guna-hani*, 4, writing the number 2 that many times (2424242) and multiplying them together, we get 16. This is half of the *anyonyabhyastaras*, 32. Multiplying this by the substance of the last *guna-hani* of the *sail* part, 100, we get (100x16) 1600, which is the substance of the first *guna-hani* of the *lata* part. Similarly, we can find the substance of the *sarvaghati* and *deshaghati* parts in the substances of *darshanavaran* (veil of perception) etc.
This verse explains the method of knowing the measure of the realms of the *karma* (action) natures, which helps us understand which *karma* nature realms are less and which are more. This is stated in the Sanskrit commentary of this text, but the statement of the less and more in relation to the realm-binding is also found in Mahabandha Pu. 7, page 65. According to that, we write here.
There are two types of less and more: 1. *Swasthana* (own place) less and more, 2. *Parasthana* (other place) less and more. *Swasthana* less and more is of two types: *jghanya* (inferior) and *utkrista* (superior). The case of *utkrista* is as follows: There are two types of instructions: *ogh* (flow) and *aadesh* (command). Only the *jnanavaran* (veil of knowledge) is the most *utkrista* (superior) realm-tip by *ogh*, from that, the mind... 

Page #194:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-156

The **utkṛṣṭa-pradeśāgra** of **paryaya-jñāna-āvaraṇīya** is **ananta-guṇa** (infinitely great). The **utkṛṣṭa-pradeśāgra** of **avadhi-jñāna-āvaraṇīya** is **viśeṣa-adhika** (especially greater) than that. The **utkṛṣṭa-pradeśāgra** of **śruta-jñāna-āvaraṇīya** is **viśeṣa-adhika** (especially greater) than that. The **utkṛṣṭa-pradeśāgra** of **ābhinibodika-jñāna-āvaraṇīya** is **viśeṣa-adhika** (especially greater) than that.

The **utkṛṣṭa-pradeśāgra** of **pracalā** is the **most stoka** (least). The **utkṛṣṭa-pradeśāgra** of **nidrā** is **viśeṣa-adhika** (especially greater) than that. The **utkṛṣṭa-pradeśāgra** of **pracalā-pracalā** is **viśeṣa-adhika** (especially greater) than that. The **utkṛṣṭa-pradeśāgra** of **nidrā-nidrā** is **viśeṣa-adhika** (especially greater) than that. The **utkṛṣṭa-pradeśāgra** of **styāna-gṛddhikā** is **viśeṣa-adhika** (especially greater) than that. The **utkṛṣṭa-pradeśāgra** of **kevala-darśana-āvaraṇa** is **viśeṣa-adhika** (especially greater) than that. The **utkṛṣṭa-pradeśāgra** of **avadhi-dāvālmṛṇa** is **ananta-guṇa** (infinitely great). The **utkṛṣṭa-pradeśāgra** of **achakṣu-darśana-āvaraṇa** is **viśeṣa-adhika** (especially greater) than that. The **utkṛṣṭa-pradeśāgra** of **chakṣu-darśana-āvaraṇa** is **viśeṣa-adhika** (especially greater) than that.

The **utkṛṣṭa-pradeśāgra** of **asāta-vedanīya** is the **most stoka** (least). The **utkṛṣṭa-pradeśāgra** of **sāta-vedanīya** is **viśeṣa-adhika** (especially greater) than that.

The **utkṛṣṭa-pradeśāgra** of **apratyākhȳāna-āvaraṇa-māna** is the **most stoka** (least). The **utkṛṣṭa-pradeśāgra** of **apratyākhȳāna-āvaraṇa-krodha** is **viśeṣa-adhika** (especially greater) than that. The **utkṛṣṭa-pradeśāgra** of **apratyākhȳāna-āvaraṇa-māyā** is **viśeṣa-adhika** (especially greater) than that. The **utkṛṣṭa-pradeśāgra** of **apratyākhȳāna-āvaraṇa-lobha** is **viśeṣa-adhika** (especially greater) than that. The **utkṛṣṭa-pradeśāgra** of **pratyākhȳāna-āvaraṇa-māna** is **viśeṣa-adhika** (especially greater) than that. The **utkṛṣṭa-pradeśāgra** of **pratyākhȳāna-āvaraṇa-krodha** is **viśeṣa-adhika** (especially greater) than that. The **utkṛṣṭa-pradeśāgra** of **pratyākhȳāna-āvaraṇa-māyā** is **viśeṣa-adhika** (especially greater) than that. The **utkṛṣṭa-pradeśāgra** of **pratyākhȳāna-āvaraṇa-lobha** is **viśeṣa-adhika** (especially greater) than that. The **utkṛṣṭa-pradeśāgra** of **ananta-anubandhī-māna** is **viśeṣa-adhika** (especially greater) than that. The **utkṛṣṭa-pradeśāgra** of **ananta-anubandhī-krodha** is **viśeṣa-adhika** (especially greater) than that. The **utkṛṣṭa-pradeśāgra** of **ananta-anubandhī-māyā** is **viśeṣa-adhika** (especially greater) than that. The **utkṛṣṭa-pradeśāgra** of **ananta-anubandhī-lobha** is **viśeṣa-adhika** (especially greater) than that. The **utkṛṣṭa-pradeśāgra** of **mithyātvā** is **viśeṣa-adhika** (especially greater) than that. The **utkṛṣṭa-pradeśāgra** of **jugupsā** is **ananta-guṇa** (infinitely great). The **utkṛṣṭa-pradeśāgra** of **bhaya** is **viśeṣa-adhika** (especially greater) than that. The **utkṛṣṭa-pradeśāgra** of **hāsyā-śoka** is **viśeṣa-adhika** (especially greater) than that. The **utkṛṣṭa-pradeśāgra** of **rati-arati** is **viśeṣa-adhika** (especially greater) than that. The **utkṛṣṭa-pradeśāgra** of **strī-veda-napumsaka-veda** is **viśeṣa-adhika** (especially greater) than that. The **utkṛṣṭa-pradeśāgra** of **krodha-
Page #195:
---------------------------
The **utkṛṣṭa-pradeśāgra** of the **Gommatasāra Karmakāṇḍa-157** is the least. The **utkṛṣṭa-pradeśāgra** of the **vaikriyika-śarīra** is greater than that. The **utkṛṣṭa-pradeśāgra** of the **audārika-śarīra** is greater than that. The **utkṛṣṭa-pradeśāgra** of the **taijas-śarīra** is greater than that. The **utkṛṣṭa-pradeśāgra** of the **kārmaṇa-śarīra** is greater than that. The **utkṛṣṭa-pradeśāgra** of the **āhāraka-taijas-śarīra** is greater than that. The **utkṛṣṭa-pradeśāgra** of the **āhāraka-kārmaṇa-śarīra** is greater than that. The **utkṛṣṭa-pradeśāgra** of the **āhāraka-taijas-kārmaṇa-śarīra** is greater than that. The **utkṛṣṭa-pradeśāgra** of the **vaikriyika-taijas-śarīra** is greater than that. The **utkṛṣṭa-pradeśāgra** of the **vaikriyika-kārmaṇa-śarīra** is greater than that. The **utkṛṣṭa-pradeśāgra** of the **vaikriyika-taijas-kārmaṇa-śarīra** is greater than that. The **utkṛṣṭa-pradeśāgra** of the **audārika-taijas-śarīra** is greater than that. The **utkṛṣṭa-pradeśāgra** of the **audārika-kārmaṇa-śarīra** is greater than that. The **utkṛṣṭa-pradeśāgra** of the **audārika-taijas-kārmaṇa-śarīra** is greater than that. The **utkṛṣṭa-pradeśāgra** of the **taijas-kārmaṇa-śarīra** is greater than that. The **utkṛṣṭa-pradeśāgra** of the **four saṃsthāna** is the least. The **utkṛṣṭa-pradeśāgra** of the **sama-catur-asra saṃsthāna** is greater than that. The **utkṛṣṭa-pradeśāgra** of the **huṇḍa-saṃsthāna** is greater than that. The **utkṛṣṭa-pradeśāgra** of the **āhāraka-śarīra** is the least. The **utkṛṣṭa-pradeśāgra** of the **vaikriyika-śarīra** is greater than that. The **utkṛṣṭa-pradeśāgra** of the **audārika-śarīra** is greater than that. The **utkṛṣṭa-pradeśāgra** of the **five saṃhanana** is the least. The **utkṛṣṭa-pradeśāgra** of the **asamprāpta-sṛpāṭikā saṃhanana** is greater than that. The **utkṛṣṭa-pradeśāgra** of the **nīla nāmakarma** is greater than that. The **utkṛṣṭa-pradeśāgra** of the **kṛṣṇa nāmakarma** is greater than that. The **utkṛṣṭa-pradeśāgra** of the **rudhira-varṇa nāmakarma** is greater than that. The **utkṛṣṭa-pradeśāgra** of the **hāridra-varṇa nāmakarma** is greater than that. The **utkṛṣṭa-pradeśāgra** of the **śukla-varṇa nāmakarma** is greater than that. The **utkṛṣṭa-pradeśāgra** of the **durgandha nāmakarma** is the least. The **utkṛṣṭa-pradeśāgra** of the **sugandha nāmakarma** is greater than that. The **utkṛṣṭa-pradeśāgra** of the **kaṭu-rasa nāmakarma** is the least. The **utkṛṣṭa-pradeśāgra** of the **tikta-rasa nāmakarma** is greater than that. The **utkṛṣṭa-pradeśāgra** of the **kaṣāya-rasa nāmakarma** is greater than that. The **utkṛṣṭa-pradeśāgra** of the **āmla-rasa nāmakarma** is greater than that. The **utkṛṣṭa-pradeśāgra** of the **madhura-rasa nāmakarma** is greater than that. The **utkṛṣṭa-pradeśāgra** of the **mṛdu-laghu sparśa nāmakarma** is the least. The **utkṛṣṭa-pradeśāgra** of the **karkaśa-guru sparśa nāmakarma** is greater than that. The **utkṛṣṭa-pradeśāgra** of the **śīta-uṣṇa sparśa nāmakarma** is greater than that. The **utkṛṣṭa-pradeśāgra** of the **snigdha-rūkṣa nāmakarma** is greater than that. Just as there is a difference in the **alp-bahutva** of **gati**s, so too is there a difference in the **alp-bahutva** of **ānupūrvi**s. The **utkṛṣṭa-pradeśāgra** of **parghāta** and **uccvāsa** is the least. The **utkṛṣṭa-pradeśāgra** of **aguru-laghu** and **upghāta** is greater than that. The **utkṛṣṭa-pradeśāgra** of **ātapa** and **udyota** is equal. The **utkṛṣṭa-pradeśāgra** of the two **vihāyoga-ti**s is equal. The **utkṛṣṭa-pradeśāgra
Page #196:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-158

The **utkṛṣṭa-pradeśāgra** of **ayasa-kīrti** is the most **stoka**. From that, the **utkṛṣṭa-pradeśāgra** of **yaśa-kīrti** is **saṅkhyāta-guṇa** more.

The **utkṛṣṭa-pradeśāgra** of **nīca-gotra** is the most **stoka**. From that, the **utkṛṣṭa-pradeśāgra** of **ucca-gotra** is **viśeṣa-adhika**.

The **utkṛṣṭa-pradeśāgra** of **dāna-antarāya** is the most **stoka**. From that, the **utkṛṣṭa-pradeśāgra** of **lābha-antarāya** is **viśeṣa-adhika**. From that, the **utkṛṣṭa-pradeśāgra** of **bhoga-antarāya** is **viśeṣa-adhika**. From that, the **utkṛṣṭa-pradeśāgra** of **paribhoga-antarāya** is **viśeṣa-adhika**. From that, the **utkṛṣṭa-pradeśāgra** of **vīrya-antarāya** is **viśeṣa-adhika**.

**Parastāna** **alpa-bahutva** is of two types - **jaghanya** and **utkṛṣṭa**. The **utkṛṣṭa** is the subject of discussion. **Nirdeśa** is of two types - **ogha** and **ādeśa**. From **ogha**, the **utkṛṣṭa-pradeśāgra** of **apratyākhȳānāvaraṇa-māna** is the most **stoka**. From that, the **utkṛṣṭa-pradeśāgra** of **apratyākhȳānāvaraṇa-krodha** is **viśeṣa-adhika**. From that, the **utkṛṣṭa-pradeśāgra** of **apratyākhȳānāvaraṇa-māyā** is **viśeṣa-adhika**. From that, the **utkṛṣṭa-pradeśāgra** of **apratyākhȳānāvaraṇa-lobha** is **viśeṣa-adhika**. In the same way, one should know the **alpa-bahutva** of the **utkṛṣṭa-pradeśāgra** of **pratyākhȳānāvaraṇa** and **ananta-anubandhī-caturṣka**. Further, the **utkṛṣṭa-pradeśāgra** of **mithyātva** is **viśeṣa-adhika**. From that, the **utkṛṣṭa-pradeśāgra** of **kevala-jñānāvaraṇa** is **viśeṣa-adhika**. From that, the **utkṛṣṭa-pradeśāgra** of **prachalā** is **viśeṣa-adhika**. From that, the **utkṛṣṭa-pradeśāgra** of **vidā** is **viśeṣa-adhika**. From that, the **utkṛṣṭa-pradeśāgra** of **prachalā-prachalā** is **viśeṣa-adhika**. From that, the **utkṛṣṭa-pradeśāgra** of **nidrā-nidrā** is **viśeṣa-adhika**. From that, the **utkṛṣṭa-pradeśāgra** of **styāna-gṛddhi** is **viśeṣa-adhika**. From that, the **utkṛṣṭa-pradeśāgra** of **kevala-darśanāvaraṇa** is **viśeṣa-adhika**. From that, the **utkṛṣṭa-pradeśāgra** of **āhāra-śarīra** is **ananta-guṇa**. From that, the **utkṛṣṭa-pradeśāgra** of **vaikriya-śarīra** is **viśeṣa-adhika**. From that, the **utkṛṣṭa-pradeśāgra** of **audārika-śarīra** is **viśeṣa-adhika**. From that, the **utkṛṣṭa-pradeśāgra** of **taijas-śarīra** is **viśeṣa-adhika**. From that, the **utkṛṣṭa-pradeśāgra** of **kārmaṇa-śarīra** is **viśeṣa-adhika**. From that, the **utkṛṣṭa-pradeśāgra** of **naraka-gati** is **saṅkhyāta-guṇa**. From that, the **utkṛṣṭa-pradeśāgra** of **deva-gati** is **viśeṣa-adhika**. From that, the **utkṛṣṭa-pradeśāgra** of **manuṣya-gati** is **viśeṣa-adhika**. From that, the **utkṛṣṭa-pradeśāgra** of **tiryanc-gati** is **viśeṣa-adhika**. From that, the **utkṛṣṭa-pradeśāgra** of **ayasa-kīrti** is **viśeṣa-adhika**. From that, the **utkṛṣṭa-pradeśāgra** of **jugupsā** is **saṅkhyāta-guṇa**. From that, the **utkṛṣṭa-pradeśāgra** of **bhaya** is **viśeṣa-adhika**. From that, the **utkṛṣṭa-pradeśāgra** of **hāsa-śoka** is **viśeṣa-adhika**. From that, the **utkṛṣṭa-pradeśāgra** of **rati-arati** is **viśeṣa-adhika**. From that, the **utkṛṣṭa-pradeśāgra** of **strī-veda-napumsaka-veda** is **vi
Page #197:
---------------------------
Gommatasar Karmakanda - 159
The **utkrushtpradeshagra** of **Shrutagyanavaran** is more special than the **utkrushtpradeshagra** of **Abhinibodhikgyanavaran**, which is more special than the **utkrushtpradeshagra** of **Manasjwalan**, which is more special than the **utkrushtpradeshagra** of **Avadhi Darshanavaran**, which is more special than the **utkrushtpradeshagra** of **Achakshudarshanavaran**, which is more special than the **utkrushtpradeshagra** of **Chakshudarshanavaran**, which is more special than the **utkrushtpradeshagra** of **Purushaved**, which is more special than the **utkrushtpradeshagra** of **Mayasanjwalan**, which is more special than the **utkrushtpradeshagra** of **Anyatar Aayu**, which is more special than the **utkrushtpradeshagra** of **Nichegotra**, which is more special than the **utkrushtpradeshagra** of **Lobhasanchalana**, which is more special than the **utkrushtpradeshagra** of **Asatavedaniya**, which is more special than the **utkrushtpradeshagra** of **Yashaskirti** and **Uchchagotra**, and which is more special than the **utkrushtpradeshagra** of **Satavedaniya**.

Now we will show the special division of **Sarvaghati** and **Deshghati** **dravya**:

**Savvavaranam davvam vibhanjanijjam tu ubhayapyadeesu. Desavaranam davvam desavaranes vidare.** || 199 ||

**Meaning:** When the **dravya** of **Ghatiya** karmas are divided into infinite parts, one part is **Sarvaghati** **dravya** and many parts are **Deshghati** **dravya**. **Sarvaghati** **dravya** is given to both **Sarvaghati** and **Deshghati** **prakritis**, while **Deshghati** **dravya** is given only to **Deshghati** **prakriti** and not to **Sarvaghati** **prakritis** like **Kalyanavaran**, etc.

Now we will talk about the division of **Uttara** **prakritis**:

**Bahubhage samabhago bandhanam hodi ekka bhagamhi. Uttakamo tatthavi bahubhago bahugasssa deo du.** || 200 ||

**Meaning:** When **Uttara** **prakritis** are bound at the same time, their **dravya** in the form of **pind** is divided into countless parts. By giving an equal part of these countless parts, the **dravya** is distributed equally among the **Uttara** **prakritis**. In one part, **Mohaniya** - **Gyanaavaran** and **Darshanavaran** **prakritis** are given **dravya** in decreasing order, while **Namakarma** and **Antaraya karma** **prakritis** are given **dravya** in increasing order. This is the order. In this, the one which is given a lot of **dravya** is kept separate and a part of that is given to the other parts.

**Meaning:**

**Ghaditayan sagasagasavvavaranayasavvadavvam tu. Uttakamen cha deyam vivaridam namavigdhanam.** || 209 ||

**Gyanaavaran**, **Darshanavaran**, and **Mohaniya** **Ghatiya** karmas are given **dravya** in order, starting from the beginning... 

Page #198:
---------------------------
## Gommatasara Karmakanda-160:

**Giving the respective *sarvaghati* dravyas in decreasing order until the final *prakriti*, and giving the *nama* and *antaraya* karmas in increasing order or decreasing order from the final to the initial *prakriti*.**

**Specific Meaning:**

* In the *sarvadravy* of *jnanavaraniya* karma, which was previously mentioned, give a portion of infinity, in which one part is the *sarvaghati* dravy. This *sarvaghati* dravy should be divided as follows:
    * Divide it into five equal parts, giving one part to each *prakriti*, after giving a portion of the *asankhyata* part of *avali* and leaving one part remaining.
    * In the remaining one part, give a portion of the *asankhyata* part of *avali*, and give the majority of the resulting portion to *matijnanavarana*.
    * In the remaining one part, give a portion of the same *asankhyata* part of *avali*, and give the majority of the resulting portion to *sruta jnanavarana*.
    * In the remaining one part, give a portion of the same *asankhyata* part of *avali*, and give the majority of the resulting portion to *avadhi jnanavarana*.
    * In the remaining one part, give a portion of the same *asankhyata* part of *avali*, and give the majority of the resulting portion to *manahparyaya jnanavarana*.
    * The remaining one part is the *dravy* of *kevaljnanavarana*.
    * By combining the portions mentioned earlier with the proportions mentioned later, the *sarvaghati* dravy of *matijnanavarana* etc. is obtained.
    * One part, without the remaining majority, of the infinite parts of the *dravy* related to *jnanavarana* is the *deshaghati* dravy. In this, give a portion of the same *asankhyata* part of *avali* in the order mentioned earlier, divide it into four equal parts, leaving one part remaining, and give one part each to the four *prakritis* of *matijnanavarana* etc.
    * In the remaining one part, give a portion of the *asankhyata* part of *avali*, and give the majority of the resulting portion to *matijnanavarana*.
    * In the remaining one part, give a portion of the *asankhyata* part of *avali*, and give the majority of the resulting portion to *sruta jnanavarana*.
    * In the remaining one part, give a portion of the *asankhyata* part of *avali*, and give the majority of the resulting portion to *avadhi jnanavarana*.
    * The remaining one part is given to *manahparyaya jnanavarana*.
    * By combining these portions with the four equal parts mentioned earlier, the proportion of the *deshaghati* dravy of *matijnanavarana* etc. is obtained.
    * By combining the respective *deshaghati* and *sarvaghati* dravyas, the proportion of the *sarvadravy* of the subsequent *prakritis* of *jnanavarana* is obtained.
* It is essential to understand that in the division of *dravy* related to *prakritis*, wherever it is mentioned to give a portion of the *asankhyata* part of *avali*, it should be understood as giving a portion of the *asankhyata* part of *avali*.
* Similarly, in the proportion of the previously mentioned *sarvadravy* of *darshanavaraniya* karma, give a portion of infinity. In the one part that is the *sarvaghati* dravy, give a portion of the *asankhyata* part of *avali*, and divide the resulting portion into nine parts, leaving one part remaining, and give one equal part to each of the nine subsequent *prakritis* of *darshanavarana*.
* In the remaining one part, give a portion of the *asankhyata* part of *avali*, and give the majority of the resulting portion to *styanagrdhi* *prakriti*.
* In the remaining one part, give a portion of the *asankhyata* part of *avali*, and give the majority of the resulting portion to *nidranidra*, leaving one part remaining.
* In the same order, give a portion of the *asankhyata* part of *avali* to the subsequent divisions of *jnanavarana*, and give the majority of the resulting portion to the respective *pramanadravy* of *prachala-prachala*, *nidra*... 

**Note:** This translation preserves the Jain terms and provides a general understanding of the text. For a more detailed and accurate interpretation, it is recommended to consult a knowledgeable Jain scholar. 

Page #199:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda - 161

To distribute the substance of the Jnanavarana karma (knowledge obscuring karma) in a way that reflects its various aspects, we follow a specific procedure.

First, we divide the total substance of Jnanavarana karma into five equal parts, representing the five different types of Jnanavarana karma:

1. **Chakshu** (visual obscuration)
2. **Achakshu** (non-visual obscuration)
3. **Avadhi Darshanavarana** (obscuration of clairvoyance)
4. **Manas** (mental obscuration)
5. **Kayika** (physical obscuration)

Then, we take the total substance of Jnanavarana karma and divide it by the number of infinite parts (Ananta), which is 5. This gives us the substance of the **Sarvaghati** (all-destroying) aspect of Jnanavarana karma.

Next, we subtract the substance of the Sarvaghati from the total substance of Jnanavarana karma. This remaining substance represents the **Deshaghati** (partial-destroying) aspect of Jnanavarana karma.

Now, we take the substance of the Sarvaghati and divide it by the number of infinite parts (Ananta), which is 5. This gives us the substance of the **Bahubhaga** (many parts) aspect of Jnanavarana karma.

We then distribute this Bahubhaga substance equally among the five types of Jnanavarana karma.

The remaining substance, after subtracting the Bahubhaga, represents the **Ekabhaga** (one part) aspect of Jnanavarana karma.

We then divide this Ekabhaga substance by the number of infinite parts (Ananta), which is 5. This gives us the substance of the **Prathibhaga** (part of a part) aspect of Jnanavarana karma.

We then distribute this Prathibhaga substance equally among the five types of Jnanavarana karma.

This process is repeated for each of the five types of Jnanavarana karma, ensuring that the substance of each type is distributed in a way that reflects its specific characteristics.

The same procedure is followed for the other karmas, such as Antarayakarma (hindering karma), with the appropriate number of infinite parts (Ananta) and types of karma.

This method of distributing the substance of karma allows us to understand the different aspects of each karma and their impact on the soul's journey towards liberation.

Page #200:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-162
279

Knowing the amount of the multi-part substance related to Matijnanaavaran in the proportion of 3000 - 3000 - 2000. Similarly, the amount of substance of the other four natures should also be obtained by the aforementioned method of participation. It is only in numbers as follows - _3000; 3 = 3990, 3000 . 3000 - 200° This substance is to be given to Shrutajnanaavaran. 3000 3 3000 3000 - 3000 - 200 amount of substance is of Avadhijnanaavaran and 3000 3 - 3110, 3000 - 3000-2000 amount of substance is of Manahparyaya-jnanaavaran and the remaining one part 3000 i.e. 1000 amount of substance is of Kevalajnanaavaran. In this way, the total substance of 9000 related to Jnanaavaranakarma was divided into its subsequent natures.

The sight of the division of the substance related to Jnanasaramaakapambandhi Samaatiiddhamaake in the subsequent natures. Matijnanaavaran | Shrutajnanaavaran | Avadhijnanaavaran Manahparyaya-jnanaavaran | Kevalajnanaavaran | Total
1200+ 1200 +
27
27
1200+
1200+
1200+
= 6000
2000 |
2000 ।
2000
1000
.9
27
27
3200
| 1866.3 | 1422-2 | 1274-2
1237.28
- 9000

Now, the substance of Deshaghatidravya 36000 is divided into the natures of Mati-Shruta-Avadhi and Manahparyaya-jnanaavaran -
In Deshaghatidravya 36000, dividing by the proportion of participation 3 (Aavlika Asankhyatvaambhag), 360003 = 12000 came. Subtracting this from 36000 (36000-12000), 24000 amount of multi-part substance is there. By dividing this into equal parts, it is to be given to Matijnanaavaran etc., i.e., 24000 4 = 6000 amount of substance will be given equally to all four natures. The remaining one part, which is 12000 amount of substance, is to be given to Matijnanaavaran without the remaining multi-part by dividing it by the proportion of participation, i.e., 12000 3 = 4000, 12000-4000 = 8000 amount of substance was given to Matijnanaavaran. Again, the remaining 4000 amount of one part is to be given to Shrutajnanaavaran without the remaining multi-part by dividing it by the proportion of participation (3), i.e., 40003 = 4000/3, 4000/1- 4000/3 - 8000/3 This substance is to be known as Shrutajnanaavaran. Similarly, in the future, the remaining one part is to be given to the multi-part substance without the remaining one part by dividing it by the proportion of participation. 

Page #201:
---------------------------
Gommatasar Karmakanda-163
The remaining portion of the Avadhijnanaavaran and the final Manahparyaya-Jnanaavaran will be obtained by the remaining portion of the Pramana dravya. The method of participation is as follows -
4000: 3 = 4000, 4000 - 4000 - 8000 Anaanala Avadhijnanaanaanko will be obtained, the remaining 4000 Pramana which is one part is to be known as the dravya of Manahparyayajnaanaavaran.
The division of the Deshaghatidravya is as follows - Matijnanaavaran | Shrutajnanaavaran | Avadhijnanaavaran Manahparyayajnaanaavaran
Total
6000+
6000+
6000+
6000+
= 24000+
8000
8000
8000
4000
= 12000
 = 36000
14000 8666-3 | 6888 9 | 64443
Thus, the division of the assumed 45000 Pramana dravya related to Jnanaavaranakarma into 5 types of Matijnanaavaran etc. has been done in the form of Sarvaghati and Deshaghati. The simultaneous view of the divided dravya in the form of Sarvaghati and Deshaghati related to Matijnanaavaran etc. is as follows, know it.
View of the division in the form of Sarvaghati-Deshayati, Nature. Mati | Shruta | Avadhi | Manahparyaya | Kevala | Total
| Jnanaavaran ! Jnanaavaran | Jnanaavaran | Jnanaavaran | Jnanaavaran Sarvaghatidravya | 3200+ | 18663 + | 14222 + | 127420 12374 = 9000+ Deshaghatidravya | 14000 | 8666 3 | 68881 | 64443 | Total 17200 10533 | 83111 / 771814 | 123730/45000
Similarly, the Darshanavaran will also be divided into 9 types in the form of Sarvaghati and Deshaghati, its order is as follows -
Styanagridhi, Nidranidra, Prachalaprachala, Nidra, Prachala, Chakshudarshanavaran, Achakshudarshanavaran, Avhidarshanavaran and Kevaladarshanavaran. Out of these, 5 Nidra and Kevaladarshanavaran are Sarvaghati and the remaining nature is Deshaghati.
= 36000 

Page #202:
---------------------------
## Gommatasara Karmakanda-164

The five natures of Antarayakarma are Deshaghati. There will be a division of karma-paramanu in them in descending order. The highest number of paramanu will be in the Veerayantarayaprakriti, then less in Upbhogantarayaprakriti, then less in Bhogantarayaprakriti, then less in Labhantarayaprakriti, and the least in Dravya Danantarayaprakriti.

Then, showing the special feature in Mohaniyakarma:

**Mohe Micchhattadi Sattrasanh Tu Dijjade Heenam.**
**Sanjalanaanam Bhagave Hodi Pananokasayanam.** ||202||

**Meaning:** In the 17 natures of Mohaniyakarma, starting from Mithyatva, Dravya is given in descending order. Knowing the distribution of the five Nokashayas, similar to Sanjwalanakashayas.

**Special Meaning:** In Mohaniyakarma, Dravya is given in descending order in the 17 natures of Mithyatva, Anantanubandhi Lobha-Maya-Krodha and Mana, Sanchalana Lobha-Maya-Krodha and Mana, Pratyakhyana Lobha-Maya-Krodha and Mana, Apratyakhyana Avarana Lobha-Maya-Krodha and Mana. The Dravya of the five Nokashayas is similar to Sanjwalana. Out of the nine Nokashayas, five natures bind simultaneously at one time, hence only five Nokashayas are mentioned here. One Veda out of the three Vedas, one out of Rati-Arati, one out of Hasya-Shoka, and Bhaya-Jugupsa, thus five Nokashayas bind simultaneously.

Then, showing the order of their division:

**Sanjwalana Bhaga Bahubhagaddham Akasaya Sangayam Davvam.**
**Igi Bhaga Sahiyabahubhagaddham Sanjwalana Padibandham.** ||203||

**Meaning:** Nokashayas and Sanchalana received a lot of Dravya. Half of this Dravya belongs to Nokashayas, and half of this Dravya, including one part, belongs to Sanjwalana.

**Special Meaning:** The total amount of Dravya in Mohaniyakarma has been explained before. After giving a part to Ananta, one part is Sarvaghati and the majority is Deshaghati. In Deshaghati Dravya, give a part equal to an innumerable part of Avali, and then separate one part from the obtained part, half of the majority part belongs to Nokashayas, and the remaining part, including one part, half of the majority part belongs to Sanjwalanakashayas. This is how three types of Dravya are formed. Now, dividing Sarvaghati Dravya:

In Sarvaghati Dravya, give a part equal to an innumerable part of Avali, separate one part from it, divide the remaining majority part into 17 parts, and give one part to each nature. The remaining one part... 

Page #203:
---------------------------
... core. ... ... ... . Dividing the innumerable parts of the *avali* into many parts, giving the majority to *mithyatva*, dividing the remaining one part into many parts, giving the majority to *anantaanubandhi lobha*, and dividing the remaining one part into many parts, giving the majority to *anantaanubandhi maya*. In the same way, dividing the remaining one part into many parts, giving the majority to *anantaanubandhi krodha*, *anantaanubandhi mana*, *sajwalan lobha*, *sajwalan maya*, *sajwalan krodha*, *sajwalan mana*, *pratyakhyan lobha*, *pratyakhyan maya*, *pratyakhyan krodha*, *pratyakhyan mana*, and *apratyakhyan lobha-maya* and *krodha*, and giving the remaining one part to *apratyakhyan mana*. When these given parts are combined with the 17 parts that were made earlier, they become the proof of the *sarvaghatidravya* of their respective natures.

The proof of the *deshadhatidravya* of *sajwalan* is as follows: dividing the *pratibhaga* into many parts, keeping one part separate, dividing the remaining majority into four equal parts, giving one part each to the four *sajwalan kshayas*, and dividing the remaining one part into many parts, giving the majority to *sajwalan lobha*, and dividing the remaining one part into many parts, giving the majority to *sajwalan maya*, and dividing the remaining one part into many parts, giving the majority to *sajwalan krodha*, and giving the remaining one part to *sajwalan mana*. When the parts given to each nature are combined with the previously divided parts in the same way, they become the *deshadhatidravya* related to that nature. In this way, when the *deshadhatidravya* and *sarvaghatidravya* of the four *kshayas* of *sajwalan* are combined, they become the *sarvadravya*.

The *dravya* of *mithyatva* and the twelve *kshayas* is *sarvaghatirupa* and the *dravya* of the nine *kshayas* is *deshadhatirupa*. Therefore, now we will discuss the division of the *dravya* of these nine *kshayas*.

First, dividing the *pratibhaga* into many parts, giving one part without the majority to the five natures, and dividing the remaining one part into many parts, giving the majority to the *veda* to which it is bound, and dividing the remaining one part into many parts, giving the majority to *rati-arati* to which it is bound, and dividing the remaining one part into many parts, giving the majority to *hasya-shoka* to which it is bound, and dividing the remaining one part into many parts, giving the majority to *bhaya*, and giving the remaining one part to *jugupsa*. When the *dravya* obtained from the above *pratibhaga* method is combined with the previously divided five parts in the same way, it becomes the *dravya* of its respective nature. 

Page #204:
---------------------------
Gommatasar Karmakanda-166
Doubt - The order is as follows: Anantanubandhi, Apratyakhyan, Pratyakhyan and Sajwalan. But why is the order Anantanubandhi, Sajwalan, Pratyakhyan, Apratyakhyan in the division of dravya, not following the above order?
Solution - The root of Dharma, which is Samyagdarshan, is destroyed by Anantanubandhi. Just as more strength is required to cut the root of a tree, similarly, more dravya is given to Anantanubandhi, which destroys the root of Dharma. The most excellent charitra in charitra is 'Yathakyat' charitra, therefore, the destructive Sanchalan Kshaya in this excellent charitra should have more power than other kshayas. Just as more planning is required to kill a president than an ordinary person, similarly, more dravya is given to the destructive Sanchalan Kshaya of 'Yathakyat' samayam than Pratyakhyan and Apratyakhyan kshayas. Pratyakhyan kshaya destroys Mahavrats and Apratyakhyan kshaya destroys Anuvrats. A person who destroys a great person has more intense kshaya than a person who destroys a lowly person. For this reason, Pratyakhyan kshaya is given more dravya than Apratyakhyan. This is the reason why the order of kshayas in the division is Anantanubandhi, Sajwalan, Pratyakhyan and Apratyakhyan. Now, the special feature in the Nokshaya-like prakritis is:
Tannokasaybhago, Sabandhpananokasay payadisoo.
Heenkamoo hodi taha, Dese Desavaranadavvam. ||204||
Meaning - The dravya that has come in the share of Nokshaya should be given to the 5 Nokshaya-like prakritis that bind together, in a decreasing order. Similarly, in the Deshaghati prakritis like Jnanavaran, etc., Deshadhatidravya should be given.
Special Meaning - The dravya related to Nokshaya should be given to the 5 binding Nokshayas in a decreasing order. The binding of Purushaved, Rati, Hasya, Bhaya and Jugupsa happens till the Pramattagunasthan due to Mithyatva. The binding of Strived, Rati, Hasya, Bhaya and Jugupsa or Strived, Arati, Shok, Bhaya and Jugupsa happens in Mithyatva and Sasadan. The binding of Napunsakaved, Rati, Hasya, Bhaya and Jugupsa or Napunsakaved, Arati, Shok, Bhaya and Jugupsa, these five, happens together in Mithyatvagunasthan. The dravya related to Nokshaya should be given to these five binding prakritis in a decreasing order, as mentioned in the previous division.
There is only one binding of Purushaved in Anivrittikaranagunasthan, therefore, till the Savedbhag, the dravya related to Nokshaya is... 
1. Kshayapashad Pu. 9 Pr. 91, 320 and 322. 

Page #205:
---------------------------
## Gommatasara Karmakanda - 167

...

...

2.  All the *dravya* (matter) should be given to the *purushaveda* (male karma). The *deshaghati* (destructive) *kṣaya* (passion) should be given to the *deshaghati* *dravya* (destructive matter) in the same proportion as the number of *prakriti* (nature) it is bound to, in descending order. In this way, the four *kṣaya* (passions) should be divided into four parts, starting from *mithyatva* (false belief) and ending with *krodha* (anger). In the third part, where *krodha* (anger) is not bound, it should be divided into three *prakriti* (natures). In the fourth part, where *mana* (pride) is also not bound, it should be divided into two *prakriti* (natures). In the fifth part, where *maya* (deceit) is also not bound, the *deshaghati* *dravya* (destructive matter) should be given to only one *lobha* (greed) *prakriti* (nature). In this way, the *dravya* (matter) should be known in descending order.

Now, it is said that how long does the binding of the *kṣaya* (passion) continue?

"**Puṁbandhaddhā antomuhuṭṭa iṭhiṁhi hassajugale ya.**
**Aradedurgasaṁkhagụṇā ṇapuṁsakaddhā visesahiyā.**" || 205 ||

**Meaning:** (In the *mithyatva* (false belief) *guṇasthāna* (state of the soul)) the time of continuous binding of the *purushaveda* (male karma) is *antarmuhūrta* (half a *muhūrta*). The time of continuous binding of the *strīveda* (female karma) is *saṁkhyātaguṇā* (numerically multiplied) by that. The time of continuous binding of *hāsa* (laughter) and *rati* (attachment) is also *saṁkhyātaguṇā* (numerically multiplied) by that. The time of continuous binding of *arati* (aversion) and *śoka* (sorrow) is also *saṁkhyātaguṇā* (numerically multiplied) by that. The time of continuous binding of the *napuṁsakavedā* (neuter karma) is slightly more than that. (This total time is also *antarmuhūrta* (half a *muhūrta*) separately).

**Special Meaning:** The time of continuous binding of the *purushaveda* (male karma) of a *mithyādrṣṭi* (false believer) (without the binding of any other karma in between) is *antarmuhūrta* (half a *muhūrta*), which is *saṁkhyātaguṇā* (numerically multiplied) and *saṁkhyātaāvalī* (numerically multiplied series) in measure, and its *sahāmanī* (equivalent) is double *antarmuhūrta* (half a *muhūrta*). The time of continuous binding of the *strīveda* (female karma) is *saṁkhyātaguṇā* (numerically multiplied) by that, and its *sahāmanī* (equivalent) is four times *antarmuhūrta* (half a *muhūrta*). The time of continuous binding of *hāsa* (laughter) and *rati* (attachment) is also *saṁkhyātaguṇā* (numerically multiplied) by that, and its *sahāmanī* (equivalent) is sixteen times *antarmuhūrta* (half a *muhūrta*). The time of continuous binding of *arati* (aversion) and *śoka* (sorrow) is also *saṁkhyātaguṇā* (numerically multiplied) by that, and its *sahāmanī* (equivalent) is thirty-two times *antarmuhūrta* (half a *muhūrta*). The time of continuous binding of the *napuṁsakavedā* (neuter karma) is slightly more than that, and its *sahāmanī* (equivalent) is forty-two times *antarmuhūrta* (half a *muhūrta*). In this way, when the time of all three *veda* (karma) is combined, its *sahāmanī* (equivalent) is forty-eight *antarmuhūrta* (half a *muhūrta*). Similarly, when the time of *hāsa* (laughter), *śoka* (sorrow), *rati* (attachment), and *arati* (aversion) is combined, it is also forty-eight *antarmuhūrta* (half a *muhūrta*). By considering this combined time as the *pramaṇarāśi* (measure), the *piṇḍarūpadravya* (material body) as the *phalarāśi* (result), and the respective time as the *icchārāśi* (desired measure), the measure of the respective *dravya* (matter) can be obtained by the *trairāśika* (rule of three).

Here, by dividing the combined time of the three *veda* (karma) in the *sattā* (existence) by its *sahāmanī* (equivalent) of forty-eight *antarmuhūrta* (half a *muhūrta*), the measure obtained should be multiplied by the *sahāmanī* (equivalent) of two *antarmuhūrta* (half a *muhūrta*) of the time of the *purushaveda* (male karma). This is the measure of the *dravya* (matter) related to the *purushaveda* (male karma). This *dravya* (matter) is the least. By multiplying the *sahāmanī* (equivalent) of four *antarmuhūrta* (half a *muhūrta*) of the time of the *strīveda* (female karma), the measure obtained is the *dravya* (matter) related to the *strīveda* (female karma). This *dravya* (matter) is *saṁkhyātaguṇā* (numerically multiplied) by the *dravya* (matter) related to the *purushaveda* (male karma). By multiplying the *sahāmanī* (equivalent) of forty-two *antarmuhūrta* (half a
Page #206:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-168 states that the substance related to the Nupumsakaved is numerically equal to the substance related to the Strived. To know the substance related to Rati and Arati, divide the substance related to Sandristi by 48 Antarmuhurta. Then multiply the result by 16 Antarmuhurta, which is the time for Rati. This is the substance related to Rati Nokshaya. To know the substance related to Arati Nokshaya, multiply the substance related to Sandristi by 32 Antarmuhurta, which is the time for Arati. This substance is numerically equal to the substance related to Rati. The substance related to Hasy and Shok is obtained by dividing the substance related to Sahani by 48 Antarmuhurta. Then multiply the result by 16 Antarmuhurta, which is the time for Hasy. This is the substance related to Hasy. This substance is numerically less than the substance related to Shok. To know the substance related to Shok, multiply the substance related to Sahani by 32 Antarmuhurta, which is the time for Shok. This substance is numerically equal to the substance related to Hasy.

Thus, the five Nokshayas obtained simultaneously during Bandha are said to have decreasing substances in the aforementioned order. However, the division of the substance occurs in their respective Bandha periods, considering the collection of the substance in different periods in the form of Pind. Here, the three Veds are considered as one Pind, Rati-Arati as one Pind, and Hasy-Shok as one Pind. Thus, the substance of the aforementioned Pind is bound.

The order of the five types of Antarayakarma and the places of Bandha of Namakarma is as follows:

**Panavigdhe Vivaridam Sabandapindadaranamathanevi |
Pindam Davvam Cha Punah, Sabandhasapindapyadise ||206||**

Meaning: The five types of Antarayakarma have an inverse order. Similarly, the places of Bandha of Namakarma, which are obtained simultaneously during Bandha, such as the Pindaprakriti of गति (Gati) etc. and the Apindaprakriti of अगुरुलघु (Agurulghu) etc., also have an inverse order. Thus, the method of Bandha of Pradesh or Paramanu is said to be in inverse order.

**Special Meaning:** The places of Bandha of the 23 types of Namakarma, which are bound simultaneously, are as follows:

* Tiryanchagati
* Ekendriyajati
* Audarik-Tejas-Karmanasharira
* Hundakasanstahan
* Varna-Gandha-Rasa-Sparsha
* Tiryanchagatyānupūrvi
* Agurulghu
* Upghāt
* Sthāvar-Sūkṣma-Aparyāpta
* Sādharan
* Asthir
* Ashubh
* Durbhāg
* Anādeya
* Ayashaskīrti
* Nirman

These 23 types are bound simultaneously by a Mithyadristi human or Tiryancha. This place is suitable for obtaining the Sādharan Sūkṣma Ekendriya Labdhyaparyāpta Bhav. In other words, the one who binds these will be born in the Sādharan Sūkṣma Ekendriya Labdhyaparyāpta Bhav after death. Now, we will show their division. 

Page #207:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda - 169

First, in the division of the original natures, the substance related to name-karma was said to be the part of the countless parts of the avli. By separating one part from it and dividing the remaining parts into 21, one part is given to each nature. The 23 natures were bound, and among them, the Audarik, Tej, and Karman natures were included in the body-named Pindaprakriti, so there is only one type of bondage in the form of Pindaprakriti. Therefore, only 21 parts are made here. The remaining one part is divided into countless parts (pratibhag) of the avli, and the majority of the parts are given to the creation nature mentioned at the end. The remaining one part is divided into parts of the pratibhag, and the majority of the parts are given to Ayashkirti. The remaining one part is divided into parts of the pratibhag, and the majority of the parts of the obtained substance are given to Anadetha. Similarly, the remaining one part is divided into parts of the pratibhag, and the majority of the parts are given to Dur Bhag, Ashubh, Asthir, Sadharan, Apariyapt, Sukshma, Sthavar, Upghāt, Agurulghu, Tiryanchgatyanupurvi, Sparsh-Ras-Gandh-Varn, Hundak-Sansthan, Sharira Pindaprakriti, and Ekendriyajati in order. Finally, the remaining one part is given to Tiryanchgat. The substance of each nature obtained by the pratibhag method is mixed with the 21 parts that were made equally in the beginning, resulting in the substance of that nature. Just as the 23 natures were said to be the place of bondage, similarly, where 25 natures are bound together, the division should be done in the same way for 25 natures. Similarly, the division should be known for the bondage of 26, 28, 29, 30, and 31 natures. Where there is only one bondage of Yashaskirti, the entire substance related to name-karma should be given to that one nature. In these places, where there is a simultaneous bondage, the division of the differences of those Pindaprakritis should be known in the opposite order, more and more, in the substance of one Pindaprakriti. Just as three differences of one Sharira-nama Pindaprakriti are found in the place of 23 natures, the substance that came in the share of Sharira-prakriti should be divided into three parts by dividing the parts of the pratibhag, and one equal part should be given to each of the three. The remaining one part should be divided into parts of the pratibhag, and the majority of the parts should be given to Karman. The remaining one part should be divided into parts of the pratibhag, and the majority of the obtained substance should be given to Tej. The remaining one part should be known as the substance of Audarik Sharira. In this way, the substance obtained by the pratibhag method is mixed with the three parts that were made equally in the beginning, resulting in the substance of that nature. Similarly, it should be known elsewhere. Where there is a bondage of only one nature in Pindaprakriti, the entire substance of Pindaprakriti should be given to that one nature. The places of name-karma in the 41 Jiva-padas are bound as they are. This statement will be mentioned in the place of Samutkirtan Adhikar, and it should be known from there. The division of substance mentioned in the statement of Pradesh-bandh is that the substance that is bound at one time, in the time-bound atoms of that time-bound bondage, the atoms of that nature become transformed into that nature in the same proportion as the substance of that nature is mentioned. This is the meaning to be known. For those who do not understand the subject of parts and sub-parts, an example is given in Sandrishti:

The total substance is 4096. It should be divided into four places. The amount of pratibhag is 8. 

Page #208:
---------------------------
Gommatasar Karmakanda-170

Therefore, 40968 = 512 is obtained as the measure. Dividing the remaining multi-part (4096-512 = 3584) by four, we get 3584/4 = 896, which is the measure of each of the four parts. Dividing the remaining single part (512) by the share (8), we get 512/8 = 64. Keeping this aside, the remaining multi-part (512-64 = 448) is to be given to the one with more substance. Dividing the remaining single part by the share (64/8 = 8), we get 8. Keeping this aside, the remaining multi-part (64-8 = 56) is to be given to the one with less substance (than the one with more substance mentioned earlier). Dividing the remaining single part (8) by the share (8), we get 8/8 = 1. Keeping this aside, the remaining multi-part substance (8-1 = 7) is to be given to the one with even less substance (than the one with less substance mentioned earlier), and the remaining single part is to be given to the one with the least substance. Adding these to the previously obtained 896 measure, in their respective substances, we get 5344, 952, 903, and 897 respectively. In this way, we know the division of the total 4096 measure of time-bound substance into four parts. Similarly, the division of all the aforementioned types will be done. Now, the distinctions of Sadi, etc., in the excellent, etc., regions are mentioned in the original types as:

Chhanhamphi anukkaso, padesbandho du chaduviyappu du.
Sesatiye duviyappu, mohaau nan cha duviyappu. || 207 ||

Meaning: The six karmas, namely, knowledge-obscuring, etc., have four types of distinctions, namely, excellent-region-bound, etc., beginningless, permanent, and impermanent. The remaining three types of region-bound, namely, excellent, etc., have two distinctions, namely, Sadi and impermanent. The mohaniya and ayu karmas have two types of distinctions, namely, excellent-non-excellent-least-worst region-bound, etc., and impermanent.

Special Meaning: In the subtle-samparaya-guna-sthana, the binding of knowledge-obscuring, vision-obscuring, vedaniya, name, gotra, and antaraya karmas occurs, excluding mohaniya and ayu. The total substance of the time-bound is distributed among these six karmas, resulting in the excellent-region-bound of the six karmas, namely, knowledge-obscuring, etc., in the subtle-samparaya-guna-sthana. Those who have not attained the subtle-samparaya-guna-sthana have the non-excellent-region-bound of these six karmas, namely, knowledge-obscuring, etc., which is beginningless. Those who have fallen from the upshama-shreni have the non-excellent-region-bound of these six karmas, which is Sadi, and the binding is impermanent for the bhavya and permanent for the abhavya.

The excellent-region-bound of the mohaniya karma occurs in the sanjeepa-panchendriya-paryapta-mithyadristi-jiva, who can attain it again and again. Therefore, the excellent and non-excellent-region-bound of the mohaniya karma is Sadi and impermanent. The worst-region-bound of these seven karmas occurs in the subtle-ekendriya-aparyapta in the first time. Since it is attained again and again, the worst and least-worst-region-bound of these seven karmas is Sadi and impermanent. The region-bound of the ayu karma is not continuous. Therefore, the excellent, non-excellent, worst, and least-worst-region-bound of the ayu karma is Sadi and impermanent. 1. Mahabandha Pu. 6 P. 13. 

Page #209:
---------------------------
## Gommatasara Karmakanda - 171

**Regarding the Four Types of Bandha Related to Mulaprakriti**

**Sandristi:**

| Type of Bandha | Knowledge Obscuration | Vision Obscuration | Vedaniya | Mohaniya | Ayu |
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
| **Utkrushta** | 2 | 4 | 2 | 2 | X |
| **Anutkrushta** | 2 | 4 | 2 | 2 | 2 |
| **Ajghanya** | 2 | 2 | 2 | 2 | 2 |
| **Jghanya** | 2 | 2 | 2 | 2 | 2 |

**Note:** Where the number 2 is written in the above Sandristi, it means Sadi and Adhruva. Where the number 4 is written, it means Sadi, Anadi, Dhruva and Adhruva.

**Now, we discuss the Uttaraprakriti:**

**Antaray:**

|  |  |  |  |  |
|---|---|---|---|---|
| **30 Prakritis** | 2 | 4 | 2 | 2 |
| **Gotra** | 2 | 4 | 2 |  |

**Tisanhamukkasso, Uttarapyaḍīsu chaduviho bandho. Sesatiye duviyappō, sesechaukkevi duviyappō. || 208 ||**

**Nāṇantarāyadasaṁ, dāṁsaṇchakkam cha mohachoddasaṁ. Tīsahamukkasso, padesabandho chaduviyappō. || 209 ||**

**Meaning:**

* In the Uttaraprakritis, the 30 Prakritis have Anutkrushta Pradeshbandha of four types: Sadi, Anadi, Dhruva and Adhruva. The remaining Utkrushta, Ajghanya and Jghanya Pradeshbandha are of two types: Sadi and Adhruva. The remaining 90 Prakritis have Utkrushta etc. Pradeshbandha of four types, but only two types: Sadi and Adhruva.

* **Five Knowledge Obscurations:** Five Antaray, Nidra, Prachala, Chakshu Achakshu, Avadhi and Kevaldarshanavaran.
* **Five Vision Obscurations:** Apratyakhyanavaran, Pratyakhyanavaran, Sanchalan, Krodha, Mana, Maya and Lobha, Bhaya, Jugupsa.

These 30 Prakritis have Anutkrushta Pradeshbandha of four types: Sadi, Anadi, Dhruva and Adhruva. The nature of Sadi, Anadi, Dhruva and Adhruva was explained earlier. 

Page #210:
---------------------------
Gommatsar Karmakanda - 172

**Special Note:** These 30 types of karma have their **utkrista pradeshabandha** (highest level of binding) in the ** श्रेणी** ( श्रेणी) category. However, the **apratyakhyanavaranakashaya** (non-rejection covering karma) has its **utkrista pradeshabandha** in the **fourth guna sthana** (fourth stage of spiritual development), and the **pratyakhyanavaran** (rejection covering karma) has its **utkrista pradeshabandha** in the **fifth guna sthana** (fifth stage of spiritual development). Therefore, for those who have not attained the ** श्रेणी** ( श्रेणी) or the fourth and fifth **guna sthana**, the **anutkrista pradeshabandha** (lower level of binding) of these 30 types of karma is **anadi** (beginningless). For those who have ascended and then fallen back, it is **sadi** (with a beginning). It is **adhruva** (unstable) in relation to a **bhavya** (being destined for liberation) and **dhruva** (stable) in relation to an **abhavya** (being destined for endless cycles of rebirth).

The **utkrista pradeshabandha** of the remaining karmas can occur repeatedly due to the possibility of **sanjipancheindriya paryapta jivas** (beings with five senses and sufficient knowledge) existing. Therefore, the **anutkrista pradeshabandha** of the remaining types of karma is **sadi** (with a beginning) and **adhruva** (unstable).

Except for **ayu** (life span) karma, the **jghanya pradeshabandha** (lowest level of binding) of all types of karma occurs in the first **bhaava** (state of existence) of a **sukshma ekendriya aparyapta jiva** (being with one sense and insufficient knowledge), which can occur repeatedly. The binding of **ayu** karma only occurs during the **eight apकर्षकाल** (eight periods of decline). Therefore, the **utkrista**, **jghanya**, and **ajghanya pradeshabandha** of the 30 types of karma, and the **utkrista**, **anutkrista**, **jghanya**, and **ajghanya pradeshabandha** of the remaining types of karma, are **kadaachitk** (occasional), making them **sadi** (with a beginning) and **adhruva** (unstable).

**Four Types of Pradeshabandha Related to Uttaraprakriti**

| Type of Pradeshabandha | Sadi | Adhuruva | Anadi | Dhuruva |
|---|---|---|---|---|
| **Utkrista** |  |  |  |  |
| **Anutkrista** |  |  |  |  |
| **Ajghanya** |  |  |  |  |
| **Jghanya** |  |  |  |  |

**Types of Pradeshabandha**

| Type of Pradeshabandha | Number of Types of Karma |
|---|---|
| **Utkrista** | 90 |
| **Anutkrista** | 2 |
| **Ajghanya** | 2 |
| **Jghanya** | 4 |

**Material for the Occurrence of Utkrista Pradeshabandha**

| Type of Pradeshabandha | Number of Types of Karma |
|---|---|
| **Utkrista** | 2 |
| **Anutkrista** | 2 |
| **Ajghanya** | 2 |
| **Jghanya** | 2 |

**Verse 210**

> "**उक्कडजोगो सण्णी पज्जत्तो पयडिबंधमप्पदरो ।**
> **कुणदि पदेसुक्कस्सं जहण्णये जाण विवरीदं ॥ २१० ॥**

**Meaning:** A being who is bound by **utkrista yogas** (highest level of karmic influences), **sanjiparyapta** (with sufficient knowledge), and **alp prakritis** (few types of karma) experiences **utkrista pradeshabandha**. Conversely, a being who is bound by **jghanya yogas** (lowest level of karmic influences), **asanjii** (without sufficient knowledge), **aparyapta** (insufficient knowledge), and **bahu prakritis** (many types of karma) experiences **jghanya pradeshabandha**.

**Verse 211**

> "**आउक्स्स पदेसं, छक्कं मोहस्स णव दु ठाणाणि ।**
> **सेसाणं तणुकसाओ, बंधदि उक्तस्सजोगेण ॥ २११ ॥**

**Meaning:** The **utkrista pradeshabandha** of the **moha** (delusion) karma is in the **sixth guna sthana** (sixth stage of spiritual development) and the **ninth guna sthana** (ninth stage of spiritual development). The **utkrista pradeshabandha** of the remaining karmas occurs due to the **utkrista yogas** (highest level of karmic influences). 

Page #211:
---------------------------
## Gommatasar Karmakanda - 173

**Meaning:**

The **utkṛṣṭapradeśabandh** (highest region binding) of **āyukarma** (life-span karma) is done by beings in the first to seventh **guṇasthāna** (stages of spiritual progress), excluding the third **guṇasthāna**. The **utkṛṣṭapradeśabandh** of **mohaniyakarma** (delusion karma) is done by beings in the ninth **guṇasthāna**. The **utkṛṣṭapradeśabandh** of the remaining karmas - **jñānāvaraṇa** (knowledge obscuring karma), **darśanāvaraṇa** (perception obscuring karma), **vedanīya** (sensory karma), **nāma** (name karma), **gotra** (lineage karma), and **antarāya** (hindrance karma) - is done by beings in the **sūkṣmasāmprāya guṇasthāna** (subtle subtle stage), who possess **utkṛṣṭayoga** (highest yoga). In these three stages, beings with **alpāprākṛtibandha** (lesser nature binding) perform the **utkṛṣṭapradeśabandh** of the above-mentioned **mūlaprākṛti** (root natures).

**Special Meaning:**

Beings in the **sūkṣmasāmprāya guṇasthāna** who possess **utkṛṣṭayoga** and bind **jñānāvaraṇa**, **darśanāvaraṇa**, **antarāya**, **nāma**, **gotra**, and **vedanīya** (six karmas) are the **upaśāmaka** (pacifying) or **kṣapaka** (destroying) **utkṛṣṭapradeśabandhaka** (highest region binder) of these six karmas. Beings in the four **gati** (paths of existence) with five senses, **mithyādṛṣṭi** (false belief) or **samyagdṛṣṭi** (right belief), who possess **utkṛṣṭayoga** and bind seven types of karmas, are the **utkṛṣṭapradeśabandhaka** of **mohaniyakarma**. Beings in the four **gati** with five senses, **mithyādṛṣṭi** or **samyagdṛṣṭi**, who possess **utkṛṣṭayoga** and bind eight types of karmas, are the **utkṛṣṭapradeśabandhaka** of **āyukarma**.

**āyukarma** is not bound in the **samyagmithyātva** (mixed) **guṇasthāna** and its binding is destroyed in the **apramatta** (non-negligent) **guṇasthāna**. Therefore, the **utkṛṣṭapradeśabandh** of **āyukarma** is possible only in the six **guṇasthāna** - **mithyātva** (false belief), **sāsādana** (enjoyment), **asanyata** (uncontrolled), **deśasanyata** (controlled in conduct), **pramatta** (negligent), and **apramatta**.

Further, the ownership of the **utkṛṣṭapradeśa** (highest region) in the **uttaraprakṛti** (higher natures) is described in three verses:

**Verse 212:**

"Seventy **suhumasārāga** (subtle passions), five **aṇiya** (atoms) in the **deśa** (region), three **tidiya** (third). This is the **vidiyaka** (knowledge) **sāya** (group), and it is said to be the **utkṛṣṭapradeśa**."

**Verse 213:**

"Six **sāya** (groups) of **ṇiddāpaya** (sleep), **lātittha** (standing), **sammgo** (right conduct), **yajadī** (sacrifices). **Sammo** (right conduct), **vāmo** (left conduct), thirteen **ṇarasura** (human and celestial beings), **āū** (life), **asāda** (enjoyment)."

**Verse 214:**

"**Deva** (celestial beings), **caukka** (four), **vajja** (strong), **samacaura** (equal four), **saththagamana** (good conduct), **subhagatiya** (good destiny). **Āhāra** (food), **appamatto** (non-negligent), **sesapade** (remaining stages), **ukkaddo** (destruction), **micchho** (false)."

**Explanation:**

The **utkṛṣṭapradeśabandh** of seventeen **prākṛti** (natures) - **jñānāvaraṇa** (5), **darśanāvaraṇa** (4), **antarāya** (5), **yaśa** (fame), **kīrti** (reputation), **ucchgotra** (high lineage), and **sāptāvedanīya** (seven sensory karmas) - occurs in the **sūkṣmasāmprāya guṇasthāna**. The **utkṛṣṭapradeśabandh** of five **prākṛti** - **puruṣaved** (knowledge of the soul) and four **sañcalana** (agitation) **kṣaya** (passions) - occurs in the **anivṛttikaraṇa guṇasthāna**. The **utkṛṣṭapradeśabandh** of four **prākṛti** - **pratyākhyāna** (rejection) **kṣaya** - occurs in the **deśavirata guṇasthāna**. The **utkṛṣṭapradeśabandh** of four **prākṛti** - **apratyākhyāna** (non-rejection) **kṣaya** - occurs in the **asanyata guṇasthāna**. The **utkṛṣṭapradeśabandh** of six **prākṛti** - **hāsyādi** (laughter, etc.) - occurs in the **asanyata guṇasthāna**.

**Note:**

This translation preserves the Jain terms as requested. The text is a commentary on the **Gommatasar** (a Jain scripture), specifically focusing on the **karmakāṇḍa** (section on karma). 

Page #212:
---------------------------
***Gommatasara Karmakanda - 174***

Noksha, Nidra, Prachala, and Tirthankara's Utkrishtapradeshabandha are done by the Samyagdristi or Mithyadristi Jiva. The Utkrishtapradeshabandha of Aharakdvig is done in the Aprammatta Gunasthan. The remaining 66 Prakruti, excluding these 54, are done by the Mithyadristi Jiva. || 212-213-214 ||

**Special Meaning:**

The one who binds the six 'Mulaprakruti' and is endowed with Utkrishta Yoga and is situated in Utkrishtapradeshabandha, is the master of the Utkrishtapradeshabandha of the five Gnanavarana, Chakshu, Achakshu, Avadhi, and Kevala, the four Darshanavarana, the seven Saataavedaniya, Yash, Kirti, Uchchagotra, and the five Antaraya. The one who binds the seven Mulaprakruti with all the Paryapti, is endowed with Utkrishta Yoga and is situated in Utkrishtapradeshabandha, is the master of the Utkrishtapradeshabandha of the three Darshanavarana, Mithyatva, Anantanubandhi Chatushk, Strived, Napumsakaved, and Nichagotra. The one who binds the seven types of Karma with all the Paryapti, is endowed with Utkrishta Yoga and is situated in Utkrishtapradeshabandha, is the master of the Utkrishtapradeshabandha of Nidra, Prachala, Hasya, Rati, Arati, Shoka, Bhaya, and Jugupsa. The one who binds the seven Mulaprakruti with all the Paryapti, is endowed with Utkrishta Yoga and is situated in Utkrishtapradeshabandha, is the master of the Utkrishtapradeshabandha of Asataavedaniya. The one who binds the seven Mulaprakruti with all the Paryapti, is endowed with Utkrishta Yoga and is situated in Utkrishtapradeshabandha, is the master of the Utkrishtapradeshabandha of Pratyakhyanavarana and Kashay Chatushk. The one who binds the seven Mulaprakruti, is endowed with Utkrishta Yoga and is situated in Utkrishtapradeshabandha, is the master of the Utkrishtapradeshabandha of Pratyakhyanavarana and Kashay Chatushk. The one who binds the four Sajjwalana Kashaya and is endowed with Utkrishta Yoga, is the master of the Utkrishtapradeshabandha of Krodha Sajjwalana. The one who binds the three Sajjwalana Kashaya, the two Sajjwalana Kashaya, and the one Sajjwalana Kashaya, is the master of the Utkrishtapradeshabandha of Mana, Maya, and Lobha respectively. Similarly, one should know the Utkrishta Swamitva of Purushaved. The one who binds the five Prakruti of Mohaniya Karma and is endowed with Utkrishta Yoga, is the master of the Utkrishtapradeshabandha of Purushaved. The one who binds the eight Karma with all the Paryapti, is endowed with Utkrishta Yoga, is the master of the Utkrishtapradeshabandha of Narakayu. The one who binds the eight Karma with all the Paryapti, is endowed with Utkrishta Yoga, is the master of the Utkrishtapradeshabandha of Narakayu.

1. Mahabandha Book 6 Page 92 Para No. 172 onwards. 

Page #213:
---------------------------
## Gommatasara Karmakanda - 175

**A Sanjeevi with excellent yoga, belonging to the other four gatis, is the master of the excellent karma-bandha of the Tiryanchayu with a false view.**

**A Sanjeevi with excellent yoga, belonging to the other four gatis, who binds all eight karmas with all the perfections, is the master of the excellent karma-bandha of the Tiryanchayu with a false view.**

**A Sanjeevi with excellent yoga, belonging to the other four gatis, with a false view or right view, is the master of the excellent karma-bandha of the Deva and Naraki Manushyayu.**

**A Sanjeevi with excellent yoga, belonging to the other four gatis, who binds all eight types of karmas with all the perfections, is the master of the excellent karma-bandha of the Tiryancha and Manushya with a false view or right view, and the Devayu.**

**A Sanjeevi with excellent yoga, belonging to the other four gatis, who binds all seven root-karmas along with the 28 types of Naraka-related karmas of the Name karma, is the master of the excellent karma-bandha of the Panchendriya Tiryancha and Manushya with a false view, in the Naraka gati, Naraka gati-anupurvi, Aprashasta Vihayogati, and Duhsvara.**

**A Sanjeevi with excellent yoga, belonging to the other four gatis, who binds all seven root-karmas along with the 23 types of karmas of the Name karma, is the master of the excellent karma-bandha of the Panchendriya Tiryancha or Manushya, in the Tiryancha gati, Ekendriya jati, Audarik sharira, Taijasa sharira, Karman sharira, Hundak sansthan, Varna chatushk, Tiryancha gati-anupurvi, Aguru laghu, Upghāt, Sthāvara, Bādara, Sūkṣma, Aparyāpta, Pratiyaka, Sādharana, Asthira, Ashubha, Durbhaga, Anādeya, Ayashas kirti, and Nirman.**

**A Sanjeevi with excellent yoga, belonging to the other four gatis, who binds all seven root-karmas along with the 25 types of karmas of the Name karma, is the master of the excellent karma-bandha of the Panchendriya Tiryancha or Manushya, in the Manushya gati, 4 jati, Audarik sharira ango-pang, Asamprapta sripatika sanhanan, Manushya gati-anupurvi, and Tras.**

**A Sanjeevi with excellent yoga, belonging to the other four gatis, who binds all seven root-karmas along with the 28 types of karmas of the Name karma related to the Deva gati, is the master of the excellent karma-bandha of the Panchendriya Tiryancha and Manushya with a false view or right view, in the Deva gati, Vaikriyika sharira, Sama chaturasra sansthan, Vaikriyika sharira ango-pang, Deva gati-anupurvi, Prashasta vihayogati, Subhaga, Susvara, and Adeya.**

**A Sanjeevi with excellent yoga, belonging to the other four gatis, who binds all seven root-karmas along with the 30 types of karmas of the Name karma, is the master of the excellent karma-bandha of the Aprammatta Samyata Aharaka sharira and Aharaka sharira ango-pang.**

**A Sanjeevi with excellent yoga, belonging to the other four gatis, who binds all seven root-karmas along with the 29 types of karmas of the Name karma, is the master of the excellent karma-bandha of the Panchendriya Tiryancha with a false view, in the four sansthans and four sanhanans. This same Jeeva is the master of the excellent karma-bandha of the Vajrarṣabhanārāyaṇasanhanan, but instead of a false view, it should be said that it is a right view or a false view.**

**A Sanjeevi with excellent karma-bandha, belonging to the other four gatis, who binds all seven root-karmas along with the 25 types of karmas of the Name karma, is the master of the excellent karma-bandha of the Panchendriya Tiryancha or Manushya, or Deva, in the Parghāt, Uchchhvās, Paryāpta, Sthira, and Shubha.**

**The excellent karma-bandha of the Atapa and Udyota prakruti...** 

Page #214:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-176

The owner of this [karma] is also the same being, but instead of 25 natures, 26 natures should be said. The being who binds the seven root natures with 29 natures of the name karma from all the perfections, and who is endowed with the excellent yoga, is the owner of the excellent region-binding of the Tirthankara nature. Now, in the root nature, ownership related to the binding of the inferior region is said:

**Suhumani-godap-ajjattayassa padhame jahann-aye j-oge.**
**Sattanh-am tu jahann-anam, a-ugabandhevi a-uss.** ||215||

**Meaning:** The subtle-ni-god-obtained-perfection-possessing being binds the seven root natures with the inferior up-pad-yoga in the first time of his existence, without lifespan. Later, when lifespan is bound, the inferior region-binding of the lifespan karma of the same being also takes place.

Then, in the later natures, ownership related to region-binding is said:

**Ghodan-j-ogo asann-i, niray-a-dusurran-araya-a-ug-jahann-am.**
**Apamatto a-haram, ayadam tittham cha dev-acau.** ||216||

**Meaning:** The being who is not a san-ji-jiva, who holds the ghotam-an-yoga, binds the inferior region of the hell-two, hell-lifespan, and deva-lifespan. And the being who is in the state of non-negligence, who is the possessor of the a-har-a-k-two, binds the inferior region of the a-har-a-k-two, because he binds more natures due to the a-purva-karana. The being who is in the state of non-restraint binds the inferior region of the Tirthankara nature and the deva-four (deva-state, deva-state-an-up-urvi, va-kri-ya-k-body, va-kri-ya-k-an-op-ang) - these five natures.

**Special Meaning:** Ghotam-an-yoga - those yoga-sth-anas which increase, decrease, or remain as they are, are called ghotam-an-yoga. The being who is not negligent, who is restrained, who binds eight types of karmas with 31 natures of the name karma, and who is endowed with the inferior ghotam-an-yoga, binds the inferior region of the a-har-a-k-two (a-har-a-k-body and a-har-a-k-body-an-op-aj). The being who is in the first time of existence, who is a tad-bhav-a-sth, who is not restrained, who is a sam-yag-drishti-man-ushya, who binds the seven root karmas with 29 natures of the name karma, and who is endowed with the inferior yoga, binds the inferior region of the deva-state, deva-state-an-up-urvi, va-kri-ya-k-body, va-kri-ya-k-body-an-op-aj. The being who is in the first time of existence, who is a tad-bhav-a-sth, who is a deva or a naraki, who binds seven types of karmas with 30 natures of the name karma, and who is endowed with the inferior up-pad-yoga, binds the inferior region of the Tirthankara nature.

1. Mahabandha Pu. 6 p. 95 ends.
2. Mahabandha Pu. 6 p. 115.
3. Mahanandha Pu. 6 p. 114.
4. Mahabandha Pu. 6 p. 115. 

Page #215:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda - 177

The above verse shows the characteristics of the remaining Uttaraprakritis without the 11 Prakṛitis:

**Charimāpuṇṇabhavatttho, tiviग्गहे paḍhamaviग्गhahmi ṭhio | Sumaniगोdo bandhadi, sesāṇam avarabandham tu || 217 ||**

**Meaning:** The Sūkṣmaṇigodiya Jīva, situated in the last of the 6012 Kṣudra Bhavas and in the first of the three stages of Vigraha Gati, binds the 109 remaining Prakṛitis without the 11 Prakṛitis mentioned in the above verse, in the lowest Pradesh Bandha.

**Special Meaning:** The above Sūkṣmaṇigodiya Jīva has the lowest Upāpadayoga, which becomes Anantānuvṛddhiyoga in the subsequent time and thus attains growth. Therefore, the above Jīva has the lowest Pradesh Bandha in the first time.

Thus, the owners of the lowest and highest Pradesh Bandha are called. Where the maximum number of atoms are bound, it is the highest Pradesh Bandha, and where the minimum number of Karman atoms are bound, it is the lowest Pradesh Bandha. In the four types of Bandha, the first one, called Prakṛiti Bandha, is the original and Uttaraprakṛiti form. Among them, there is a situation of the lowest, etc., differences of the Prakṛitis obtained by a Jīva simultaneously in one time, and Pradesh Bandha in the form of situation section and Pradesh. 

Page #216:
---------------------------
## Gunasthana

**Gommatasara Karmakanda-178**

**A single being's bandhyogya (bondable) natures in a single time period, in relation to Gunasthana, are mohaniya (delusive).**

**Total bondable natures of a single being in a single time period**

| **Name** | **Jnanaavaran** | **Darshanavaran** | **Vedaniya** | **Aayu** | **Gotra** | **Antaray** | **Mithyatva** |
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
| **Sasaadan** | 15 / 67-69-70-72-73-14 | 23-2-26-28-29-30 | 28-29-30 | 71-72-73 | 'Mishra | 63-64 | 28-29 | 28-29-30 |
| **Asanyala** | 64-65-66 | 60-61 | 28-29 |  |  |  |  |  |
| **Deshasanyata** |  |  | 28-29-30 |  |  |  |  |  |
| **Pramatta** | 28-29 | 28-29 | 28-29-30-31 |  |  |  |  |  |
| **Apramatta** | 56-57-58-59 | 55-56-57-58-26 | 28-29-30-31-1 |  |  |  |  |  |
| **Apoovarnakaran** | 22-21-20-19-18 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| **Anivriti** |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| **Karan** |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| **Sukshma** |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| **Samparaya** |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| **Upashantamoha** | 0 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| **Kshipamoha** |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| **Sayogi** |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| **Aayogi** |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| **Kula Yoga** | 5 | 2-61 | 23-25-26-28 | 74-73-72-71-70 | 22-21-17 | 1 | 13-9-5-4 | -29-30-31-1 |
| **Total** |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| **And** | 69-66-65-64-6361.60.52-58-5756-55-26-22-2120-19-18-17 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| **Aur** | 1 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 

Page #217:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-179

Further, the nature, number and owner of the Yoga-sthana due to the cause of nature and the bondage of the region are described in 42 verses.

Yoga-sthana are of three types: Uppapad Yoga-sthana, Ekanta-vridhi Yoga-sthana and Parinama Yoga-sthana. And in these, there are 14-14 divisions of each, with respect to the 14 Jiva-samasa. In these, there are three divisions of each, namely, Jghanya, Utkrushta and Ajghanya-anutkrushta.

**Meaning:** Yoga-sthana are of three types - Uppapad Yoga-sthana, Ekanta-vridhi Yoga-sthana and Parinama Yoga-sthana. And in these, there are 14-14 divisions of each, with respect to the 14 Jiva-samasa. In these, there are three divisions of each, namely, Jghanya, Utkrushta and Ajghanya-anutkrushta.

**Special Meaning:** In the first moment of being born, there is Uppapad Yoga. From the second moment till the last moment of being insufficient, there is Ekanta-vridhi Yoga. The special thing is that in the case of Labdhya-paryapta, Ekanta-vridhi Yoga occurs in one-third of their lifespan, i.e., below the time suitable for Aayu-bandha. After Ekanta-vridhi Yoga, there is Parinama Yoga.

There are three Yoga-sthana, namely, Uppapad Yoga-sthana, Ekanta-vridhi Yoga-sthana and Parinama Yoga-sthana, in the case of seven Labdhya-paryapta Jiva-samasa. There are two Yoga-sthana, namely, Uppapad Yoga-sthana and Ekanta-vridhi Yoga-sthana, in the case of seven Nivrutti-paryapta Jiva-samasa. There is only Parinama Yoga-sthana in the case of seven Nivrutti-paryapta.

Further, the nature of Uppapad Yoga-sthana is described:

Uppapad Yoga-sthana is the state of one moment. In the first moment of the crooked motion of Vigraha-gati, there is Jghanya Uppapad Yoga-sthana. And in the first moment of the straight motion of the Jiva, who goes straight without being crooked and attains the new Paryaya, there is Utkrushta Uppapad Yoga-sthana. These Uppapad Yoga-sthana should be known in the 14 Jiva-samasa.

**Special Meaning:**

**Doubt:** In the first moment of attaining the Paryaya, there is only the state of being insufficient. How can there be Uppapad Yoga-sthana in the Paryapta Jiva-samasa?

**Solution:** The Yoga-sthana that occurs in the first moment of attaining the Paryaya of the Nivrutti-paryapta Jiva should be known as Uppapad Yoga-sthana in the Paryapta Jiva-samasa, because there is the rise of his Paryapta-namakarma.

1. Dhavala Pu. 10 p. 420
2. Dhavala Pu. 10 p. 403

Page #218:
---------------------------
## Gommatasar Karmakanda-180

The yogasthan that occurs in the first moment of the paryay of a labdhyaparyaptak jiva is known as **upadhyayogasthan** in the **aparyaptajivasamas**, because it has the **uday** of the **aparyaptanāmakarma**. 'Uppadiyate' means that which is obtained by the jiva in the first moment of the paryay is **upadhyayogasthan**. The **sarvamanya** of this **upadhyayogasthan**, from the beginning to the end, occurs only in the first moment of the jiva's **navina paryay** dharana. Its **jghanya** and **utkrusht** time is one moment. In **vigraha gati**, the **jghanya upadhyayog** occurs in the first moment of the **tadhva sth** of the present jiva. In **rijugati**, the **utkrusht upadhyayog** occurs in the first moment of the **tadhva sth**.

Now, the nature of **parinam yogasthan** is described:

**Parinam jogthana sarira pajjattagadu charimoti.**
**Laddhi ap pajjattanam charimatibhagamhi bodhava.** ||220||

**Meaning:** From the time of the completion of **sarira paryapti** to the end of **ayu**, there is **parinam yogasthan**. And for those **labdhyaparyaptak jivas** whose **sarira paryapti** is not complete, **parinam yogasthan** occurs from the first moment of the last **tribhaga** of their **ayu** (which is 1/24th of a second) to the end of their **ayu**. In all the **bhedas** of this state, both **utkrusht** and **jghanya** types of **parinam yogasthan** should be known.

**Special Meaning:** From the first moment of **paryapti** to the end, there is **parinam yog**. Although the **gatha** and **Dhaval Pu. 10, pages 420, 422, 427, and 431** state that **parinam yog** occurs when **sarira paryapti** is complete, **Dhaval Pu. 10, page 55** states that **parinam yog** does not occur if even one **paryasika** remains incomplete. To clarify this, the **sutra** states, "**sarva paryaptihi paryaptayado**".

**Parinam yog** occurs in the **tribhaga** of the **ayu bandha** of **labdhyaparyaptakas**. Many **acharyas** say that **parinam yog** occurs only during the **ayu bandha** of **labdhyaparyaptakas**, but this does not happen. Because, if a jiva is in **parinam yog** and has not attained **upadhyayog**, then there is a contradiction with the **parinam** (transformation) due to **ekantanuvridhi yog**.

1. "**Jahannukkasena ek samyo**" (Dhaval Pu. 10, page 420)
2. "**Padhasabhaya tabhva vatthassa viggahagie vattamanas**" (Dhaval Pu. 10, page 421)
3. "**Ekae vi pajjattiae asamattae pajjattaesu parinam jago na hoti tti janavanatta sabbahi pajjattihi pajjattayado tti uttam.**" (Dhaval Pu. 10, page 55)
4. "**Laddhi ap pajjattanama aua bandhakale cheva parinam jago hodi tti ke vi bhanati. Tan na ghaddade, parinam jago tthidasa apattuvavadajogassa eyantanuvadi jogen parinam virodhado.**" (Dhaval Pu. 10, pages 420-21) 

Page #219:
---------------------------
Gommatasar Karmakanda-181

**Verse 221:**

When the body-perfection is complete, from the first moment onwards, in all the times of life, the result-yoga-sthana is both excellent and inferior. In the case of those who have attained perfection, from the first moment of the last division of their breath (eighteenth part) to the last moment, in all the times of their existence, there is both excellent and inferior result-yoga-sthana. Both the perfect and imperfect beings have all these result-yoga-sthana as fluctuating yoga, because they decrease, increase, and remain the same.

**Special Meaning:**

In the case of subtle and gross beings who have attained perfection by cessation, the inferior result-yoga occurs at the very first moment of their attaining perfection. In the case of those who have attained perfection by tradition, i.e., those who have attained perfection by all means, the excellent result-yoga occurs. After that, the subtle and gross beings who have attained perfection by attainment have excellent result-yoga. There are two opinions regarding result-yoga. According to one opinion, result-yoga occurs when one attains perfection by all means. According to the other opinion, result-yoga occurs at the first moment of attaining perfection by body-perfection.

**Verse 222:**

The one-sided growth yoga-sthana occurs between the two sthana, i.e., the support-yoga and the result-yoga, from the second moment of holding the state of existence to the moment before the completion of body-perfection, for a period of one antar-muhurta. The inferior sthana of this one-sided growth occurs at the first moment of its time, and the excellent sthana occurs at the last moment. Therefore, one-sided growth is that which increases in its own time, in its own time, by countless, countless times, in countless, countless divisions. Thus, one should know the special fourteen types of yoga in the aggregates of living beings. Below the last division of the life of those who have attained perfection, there is one-sided growth yoga.

**Notes:**

1. In the case of subtle and gross beings who have attained perfection by cessation, the inferior result-yoga occurs at the very first moment of their attaining perfection. After that, they have excellent result-yoga. In the case of those who have attained perfection by tradition, i.e., those who have attained perfection by all means, the excellent result-yoga occurs. After that, the subtle and gross beings who have attained perfection by attainment have excellent result-yoga. (Dhavala, Vol. 10, p. 422)
2. Dhavala, Vol. 10, p. 55, Sutra 24 commentary.
3. Dhavala, Vol. 10, p. 422. 

Page #220:
---------------------------
Gommatsar Karmakanda - 182
Special - Yoga Sthana Alp Bahutva - The seven Labdha Paryaptaka's Upada Yoga Sthana are the most minimal, from them their Ekanta Anuvrudhi Yoga Sthana are countless times more, from them their own Parinam Yoga Sthana are countless times more. The seven Nirvritti Paryapta Jeeva Samasa's Upada Yoga Sthana are the most minimal, from them their own Ekanta Anuvrudhi Yoga Sthana are countless times more. The seven Nirvritti Paryaptaka's do not have Alp Bahutva because except for the Parinam Yoga Sthana, other Yoga Sthana are absent in them. The Guna Kara is a countless part of the Palya Upam everywhere.
Now the components of Yoga Sthana are said:
ww
A vibhag padi chhedho, vaggo pune vaggana ya fattayagan.
Guna hani vi ya jane, thana padi hodi niyamen. || 223 ||
Meaning - In all the Sthana Sthana, all the Ekanta Anuvrudhi Yoga Sthana and all the Parinam Yoga Sthana, each of these is a countless part of the Jagat Shreni. In them, for each Sthana, there are five divisions: A vibhag prati chhed, Varg, Vargna, Sparthak and Guna Hani. Jagat Shreni means, the countless parts of all the Yoga Sthana are the number of provinces of the seven Raju.
Special Meaning - The group of A vibhag prati chhed is called Varg, the group of Varg is called Vargna, the group of Vargna is called Sparthak or the one in which there is a gradual increase and decrease is called Sparthak, and the group of Sparthak is called Guna Hani, and the group of Guna Hani is called Nana Guna Hani and the group of Nana Guna Hani is Yoga Sthana.
Further, their nature is said:
-
Palla san khejjadima, guna hanisala havanti igithane. Guna hanifayao, asankh bhagan tu sedhiye. || 224 ||
Meaning - In one Yoga Sthana, the number of Guna Hani's Shalaaka (number) is a countless part of the Palya. This is the number of Nana Guna Hani and in one Guna Hani, the Sparthak is a countless part of the Jagat Shreni.
Special Meaning - In comparison to the Anantaropa Nidha, the Sparthak are the least in the inferior Yoga Sthana. From them, the Sparthak are more in the second Yoga Sthana. From them, the Sparthak are more in the third Yoga Sthana. In this way, until the attainment of the superior Yoga Sthana, they become more and more special. Here, the number of special is a countless part of the Angul.
1. Dhaval Pu. 10 Pg. 404 2. Dhaval Pu. 10 Pg. 404 3. Dhaval Pu. 10 Pg. 452

Page #221:
---------------------------
## Gommatasara Karmakanda - 183

In the lowest stage of competition, where there is a competition for the position of the teacher, the number of competitors increases by a factor of two for every stage, reaching an uncountable fraction of the Jagatsreni. This doubling continues until the highest stage is reached. 

One stage is equal to an uncountable fraction of the Jagatsreni, and the number of stages with doubling is equal to an uncountable fraction of the Palya. Therefore, the number of stages with doubling is small, and the number of stages with single doubling is uncountable times greater.

**Verse 225:**

**Meaning:** The number of Varganas in each competitor is equal to an uncountable fraction of the Jagatsreni, and in each Vargana, there are uncountable Jagatpratar-sized squares.

**Explanation:** A Vargana is formed when all the living beings in a particular region are taken together, regardless of their divisions. There are uncountable such Varganas in a single competitor, each equal to an uncountable fraction of the Jagatsreni. Multiplying the Jagatsreni by itself, like 7 Raju x 7 Raju = 49 Varga Raju, is called Jagatpratar. If there are uncountable Jagatpratar-sized squares in one Vargana, how many squares would there be in a Vargana that is an uncountable fraction of the Jagatsreni? (Squares in a Vargana) Uncountable Jagatpratar - श्रेणी / Uncountable (number of Varganas) = Lokapurna, meaning all living beings. Alternatively, if there are Lokapurna living beings in an uncountable fraction of the Jagatsreni, how many living beings would there be in one Vargana? By this method, the desired result is obtained by multiplying the fruit by the measure and dividing by the divisor, resulting in an uncountable number of living beings in each Vargana.

**Verse 226:**

**Meaning:** In each square, there are uncountable Lokapurna A विभाग प्रतिच्छेद (A विभाग प्रतिच्छेद), and the measure of A विभाग प्रतिच्छेद is understood as the lowest increase in power in the regions.

**Explanation:** In each living being, there are uncountable Lokapurna योगा विभाग प्रतिच्छेद (Yoga A विभाग प्रतिच्छेद). A विभाग प्रतिच्छेद refers to a part of power that cannot be further divided. Here, the order is reversed: 1. Mahabandha Pu. 6, page 7, 8; 2. Dh. Pu. 50, page 443; 3. Mahabandha Pu. 6, page 6; 4. Gh. Pu. 10, page 440, Sutra 178; 5. Many Acharyas say this, but it does not happen, because if it were accepted, then the A विभाग प्रतिच्छेद of Karma would be infinite, which is not the case. The measure of Yoga A विभाग प्रतिच्छेद is uncountable Lokapurna, as stated in the previous verse. (Dh. Pu. 10, page 441) 

Page #222:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-184

It is said, therefore, that the straight path is as follows: a group of avibhaga-pratichhedas is a varga, a group of vargas is a vargana, a group of varganas is a spardhaka, a group of spardhakas is a guna-hani, a group of guna-hanis is a nana-guna-hani, and a group of nana-guna-hanis is a sthana. This should be understood.

Thereafter, in the yogasthana, the proof of sarva-spardhaka, etc., is stated as follows:

"Igi-thana-phaddhayao, vaggana-sankhya pade-saguna-hani.
Sedhi asankhejj-adima, asankha-loga hu avibhaga." || 227 ||

Meaning: In one yogasthana, the proof of sarva-spardhaka, the number of sarva-varganas, and the pade-saguna-hani-ayama is only a fraction of the asankhyata of the jagat-shreni. Therefore, the proof of all these is also said to be only a fraction of the asankhyata of the shreni. But in reality, they are mutually less and more. In one yogasthana, there are asankhyata-loka-pramana avibhaga-pratichhedas.

Special Meaning: In one guna-hani, the proof of the spardhaka, when multiplied by the proof of the nana-guna-hani in one sthana, the result is the proof of the spardhakas in one yogasthana. The varganas in one spardhaka, when multiplied by the proof of the spardhakas found in one yogasthana, the result is the proof of the varganas in one yogasthana.

The proof of the vargana in one spardhaka is only a fraction of the asankhyata of the jagat-shreni, when multiplied by the proof of the spardhaka in one guna-hani, the result is the proof of the varganas related to one guna-hani. Here, the proof of the multiplier is asankhyata times less than the proof of the divisor of the jagat-shreni, otherwise, the proof of the fraction of the asankhyata of the shreni cannot be achieved. That said proof is called the guna-hani-ayama, and all these are called the asankhyata fraction of the jagat-shreni, because there are many types of asankhyata. In one yogasthana, all the avibhaga-pratichhedas are only asankhyata-loka-pramana, not infinite like the karma-paramanu or like the avibhaga-pratichhedas of jghana-jnana, because the jivas have loka-pramana pradeshas. Similarly, in one sthana, the nana-guna-hani is the proof that comes when the paly is divided by asankhyata twice. The proof of the other-mutual-reciprocal-quantity is equal to the paly divided by asankhyata once, which is obtained by writing the number two equal to the nana-guna-hani and multiplying them together. The proof of the spardhaka related to one guna-hani is the jagat-shreni-pramana divided by asankhyata twice, and the proof of the varganas in one spardhaka is the result obtained by dividing the jagat-shreni by asankhyata once. The proof of the varganas of one spardhaka multiplied by the proof of the spardhakas related to one guna-hani is the sarva-varganas of one guna-hani. When these varganas are multiplied by the nana-guna-hani in one yogasthana, the proof of all the varganas related to one yogasthana is obtained. In this way, starting from these nana-guna-hanis, one should know them as asankhyata-guna-asankhyata-guna. 

Page #223:
---------------------------
Gommatsar Karmakanda-185: All living beings, when divided by the half-diminished number of the first (guna-hani), the resulting number is the first square of the first competitor of the first guna-hani. Further, by subtracting one special (choice) each time, one square is obtained. And in each guna-hani, the measure of the first niṣeka is to be known as half, and the measure obtained by dividing the first square by the two guna-hanis is to be understood as the measure of the special (choice). Special meaning: The niṣeka-related sandṛṣṭi is as follows: (Dhavala Pu. 10 p. 76)
56 | 112
80 | 40 88 +176 +352 +416 +208 +104 +52 +26 - 1422
In the sandṛṣṭi, the adhvān of guna-hani is 4, the adhvān of yoga-sthāna is 32, the number of nāna-guna-hani śalākā is 8 (3 below and 5 above the yava-madhya), the measure of the mutually multiplied quantity below and above is 8, 32 (Dha. Pu. 10 p. 76). The explanation of the gāthā-ārtha is given in the special meaning of gāthā 229 with the example of the sarva-jīva-pradeśa 3100.
Multiply the lowest square by the number of competitors, and the resulting number is the measure of one square of the first square of that competitor. In the squares of the second and subsequent squares, one indivisible section is added successively. 1. "In the first square, how long do living beings remain in the jīva-padeśa according to the measure of the jīva-padeśa? They remain for a time equal to the half-diminished number of guna-hanis." Dhavala Pu. 10 p. 445-446. 2. "What is the special feature? The half-diminished number of guna-hanis is divided into countless parts, and one part is obtained in the jīva-padeśa of the first square." Dhavala Pu. 10 p. 444. 

Page #224:
---------------------------
The Gommatasara Karmakanda-186 explains the meaning of the verses starting with "A विभागपडिच्छेदो" - It states that there are these distinctions: A विभागप्रतिच्छेद, वर्ग, वर्गणा, स्पर्धक, गुणहानि, नानागुणहानि and स्थान. Here, a group of गुणहानि occurring in one jiva at one time is called नानागुणहानि, and a group of नानागुणहानि is called स्थान. Similarly, a group of स्पर्धक is called गुणहानि, a group of वर्गणा in increasing order of वृद्धिहानि is called स्पर्धक, a group of वर्ग is called वर्गणा, and a group of A विभागप्रतिच्छेदी is called वर्ग. In the jiva प्रदेश, the power to receive a group of कर्मप्रदेश is called A विभागप्रतिच्छेद. Here, योग has the right, so the power in the form of योग is taken.

The प्रदेश of the jiva are लोकप्रमाण. By establishing them, from all these प्रदेश, the प्रदेश in which the lowest power of योग is found should be separated. Then, the amount of योगशक्ति in that प्रदेश should be spread out with your intellect. Then, take another प्रदेश where the power is greater than the lowest power but less than other powers, and spread out the amount of योगशक्ति in that प्रदेश on top of the previously spread out lowest power. The amount of increase in the power established on top of the lowest power is called the A विभाग प्रतिच्छेद of योग. This means that from the प्रदेश with the lowest power, the amount of increase in power from the lowest power to the other प्रदेश with one A विभाग अंश more power is called the A विभाग प्रतिच्छेद of योग. When this A विभाग प्रतिच्छेद प्रमाण of the previously spread out प्रदेश is divided, countless लोकप्रमाण खण्ड are formed. Therefore, a group of countless लोकप्रमाण A विभाग प्रतिच्छेद is called वर्ग.

The संदृष्टि of वर्ग is the letter 'ब'. After that, write down the number of प्रदेश with the lowest power प्रमाण. Thus, the number of प्रदेश of the jiva with the lowest power प्रमाण is countless जगत्प्रतर प्रमाण. For example, when the लोकप्रमाण जीवप्रदेश are divided by डेढगुणहानि, the result is the number of प्रदेश with the lowest power प्रमाण. In this way, the प्रमाण of वर्गणा in one गुणहानि is multiplied by डेढ़, and the प्रमाण of डेढ़गुणहानि is obtained. This is only a fraction of the असंख्यातवेंभाग of the जगत्श्रेणी. When this is divided into the जीवप्रदेश (लोक = जगत्श्रेणी जगत्श्रेणी जगत्श्रेणी + अमात = असंख्यात श्रेणीxश्रेणी), the प्रमाण of countless जगत्प्रतरप्रमाण जीवप्रदेश is obtained. This group of प्रदेश is called the first वर्गणा. The power related to one प्रदेश was called वर्ग. Here, a group of countless जगत्प्रतरप्रमाण आत्मप्रदेश is called वर्गणा. Therefore, there are countless जगत्प्रमाण वर्ग in one वर्गणा.

The number of A विभागप्रतिच्छेद in the वर्ग with the lowest power प्रमाण is one more than the number of A विभागप्रतिच्छेद in the jiva प्रदेश with the power that has that many A विभागप्रतिच्छेद. 

Page #225:
---------------------------
Gommatasar Karmakanda - 187

To write: In the first vargana, there are as many provinces as were mentioned, but with one less **viśeṣa** (choice) in the count. To know the **viśeṣa** (choice) count, divide the number of provinces in the first vargana by two. The **viśeṣa** (choice) count is the count of provinces in one **guṇa-hānī** (loss of merit). Doubling the count of provinces in one **guṇa-hānī** gives the count of provinces in two **guṇa-hānī**. Thus, subtracting the **viśeṣa** (choice) count from the total number of provinces in the first vargana, the remaining count is the number of provinces in the second vargana. Here, the provinces with one more **avibhāga-prati-ccheda** (indivisible intersection) than the previous **jghanya-śakti** (lowest power) are called a **varga** (class), and their group is known as the second vargana. In the **varga** (class) related to the second vargana, the number of **avibhāga-prati-ccheda** (indivisible intersections) is increased by one, and the number of living provinces with that power is written above. Subtracting the **viśeṣa** (choice) count from the number of provinces mentioned in the second vargana, the remaining count is the number of provinces in the second vargana. Here, the provinces with one more **avibhāga-prati-ccheda** (indivisible intersection) than the **avibhāga-prati-ccheda** (indivisible intersection) of the **varga** (class) related to the second vargana are called **hasta** (hand), and their group is known as the third vargana. In this way, with each **avibhāga-prati-ccheda** (indivisible intersection) increase in power, there is a decrease in the **viśeṣa** (choice) count, and each **varga** (class) forms a **vargana** (group). In this way, there are countless **vargana** (groups) in the **jagat-śreṇī** (world series), and at that time, the first **spardhaka** (competitor) arises. Therefore, it is said that there are countless **vargana** (groups) in one **spardhaka** (competitor) in the **jagat-śreṇī** (world series). This is the fourth **sahānī** (companion). This first **spardhaka** (competitor) is also called the **jghanya-spardhaka** (lowest competitor). In the last **vargana** (group) of this first **spardhaka** (competitor), the number of **avibhāga-prati-ccheda** (indivisible intersections) is increased by countless **loka-pramaṇa** (world count), and the number of **avibhāga-prati-ccheda** (indivisible intersections) in the first **vargana** (group) of the first **spardhaka** (competitor) is doubled. The **varga** (class) with that number of **avibhāga-prati-ccheda** (indivisible intersections) is found, and there are no provinces with less power than that. The living provinces that possess the power of twice the **avibhāga-prati-ccheda** (indivisible intersection) of the **jghanya-varga** (lowest class) are known as a **varga** (class), and their group is known as the first **vargana** (group) of the second **spardhaka** (competitor). Subtracting one **viśeṣa** (choice) from the number of **varga** (classes) in the last **vargana** (group) of the first **spardhaka** (competitor) gives the number of **varga** (classes) in the first **vargana** (group) of the second **spardhaka** (competitor). The living provinces with one more **avibhāga-prati-ccheda** (indivisible intersection) than the **varga** (class) of this first **vargana** (group), i.e., the **varga** (class), form a group called the second **vargana** (group). The group of **varga** (classes) with one more **avibhāga-prati-ccheda** (indivisible intersection) and one less **viśeṣa** (choice) than the count of provinces in the first **vargana** (group) of the second **spardhaka** (competitor) is the second **vargana** (group) of the second **spardhaka** (competitor). In this way, in each subsequent **vargana** (group), there are **varga** (classes) with one more **avibhāga-prati-ccheda** (indivisible intersection) and one less **viśeṣa** (choice) in power. The group of countless **vargana** (groups) in the **jagat-śreṇī** (world series) is known as the second **spardhaka** (competitor).

1. Dh. Pu. 10 p. 444 The **viśeṣa** (choice) count is "the first **vargana** (group) divided by countless parts of the **śreṇī** (series)."
2. Dh. Pu. 10 p. 452 "The **spardhaka** (competitor) is that which increases sequentially (by one **avibhāga-prati-ccheda** (indivisible intersection))."
3. Gh. Pu. 10 p. 455 Sutra 184. 

Page #226:
---------------------------
The last division of the second competitor is considered. The number of divisions in the last division of the second competitor is three times the number of divisions in the lowest class of the first division of the first competitor. The number of divisions in the lowest class of the first division of the first competitor is not found in the lower classes. Therefore, the group of classes that have three times the number of divisions of the lowest class of the first division of the first competitor and are one less than the classes of the last division of the second competitor is the first division of the third competitor. Above this, there are countless divisions in the world series. Each division is a group of classes that have one more division and one less class than the previous division. The group of these divisions is the third competitor. In the same way, according to the verse "Faddhayasankhahigunam Jahannavaggam Tu Tattha Tatthaadi" in Sutra 229, multiplying the lowest classes by the number of their respective competitors gives the first division of that competitor. Multiplying the number of divisions in the lowest class of the first division of the first competitor by four gives the number of divisions in the class of the first division of the fourth competitor. Multiplying by five gives the number of divisions in the classes of the first division of the fifth competitor. In this way, multiplying the lowest class by the number of the desired competitor gives the number of divisions in the class of the first division of the desired competitor. Adding one division to the class of the first division gives the number of divisions in the class of the second and subsequent divisions. In this way, one should know the number of classes in each division. The group of countless divisions in the world series should be considered as one competitor. When there are countless competitors in the world series, there is one loss of merit. Therefore, in one loss of merit, the world series is...

Page #227:
---------------------------
Gommatasar Karmakanda-189

The number of Asankhyata parts is determined by the competitor. This is known as the '9' digit. The number of squares in the first square of the first competitor of the second-degree loss is understood to be half the number of squares in the first square of the first competitor of the first-degree loss. The number of indivisible intersections in this square is known to be the product of the number of competitors of the loss multiplied by the number of indivisible intersections of the lowest square, plus one. The order of the indivisible intersections is the same as before. The number of squares in the form of a region is half the number of squares in the first square of the first competitor of the first-degree loss, and the number of squares in the first square of the first competitor of the second-degree loss. Subtracting one special (choice) from this gives the number of the second square. The number of special (choice) in the second-degree loss is known to be half the number of special (choice) in the first-degree loss. Similarly, the number of the third and subsequent squares is known by subtracting one special each time. Likewise, the number of squares and the number of special (choice) in the first square of the third-degree loss are half the number of squares and the number of special (choice) in the first square of the second-degree loss. In this way, the number of Asankhyata parts of the Paly is known to be half the number of losses. When there is one yoga-sthana, there are many losses in the Asankhyata parts of the Paly. Therefore, it is said that there are many losses in one sthana. This is the knowledge of the lowest yoga-sthana. This statement is made based on the dominance of power. Now, the statement of the Dras is based on the dominance of regions.

Let's say that the total number of Jiva-pradesha is 3100, the number of losses is 5, the number of squares in the first-degree loss is 8, and the number of losses is 2. Multiplying these numbers together (2x2x2x2x2) gives the number of reciprocal ratios = 32. Dividing the total number of dravyas (3100) by one less than the reciprocal ratio (31) gives 3100/31 = 100. This is the number of the last loss. From this, the number of Jiva-pradesha for each loss is doubled, starting from the first loss. That is, 100, 200, 400, 800, 1600. Therefore, it is said that the number of dravyas is halved for each loss after the first loss. Here, dividing the total number of dravyas (3100) by a little more than the one-and-a-half loss gives the one-and-a-half times the number of squares (12). Adding a little more than this, we get 1264, which is 7 parts more than 64 parts. Dividing 3100 by 1264 gives 256. This is the number of Jiva-pradesha in the first square of the first competitor of the first-degree loss. Dividing the first square (256) by the number of losses (16) gives 256/16 = 16. This is the number of special (choice). Multiplying the special by the number of losses gives the number of the first square. In this way, the second and subsequent squares are obtained by subtracting one special from the first square. Subtracting this special from the number of squares (7) gives:

1. The first-degree loss is only a part of the Asankhyata part of the Jagat-shreni, because dividing the yoga-sthana by the number of losses gives the number of Adhvana, which is the Asankhyata part of the Jagat-shreni. (D. Pu. 10 p. 74)
2. "The number of Ganaga-guna-hana-shala-ga-o is equal to the number of Asankhyata parts of the Paly." (Dhaval Pu. 10 p. 74)
3. (Dhaval Pu. 10 p. 446-447) 

Page #228:
---------------------------
Gommatsar Karmakanda-190

The final classification of the last competitor of guna-hani (loss of merit) is done, and the number of the first classification of guna-hani and punya-hani (gain of merit) is half-half, and the number of special (choice) is also half-half. By dividing the double loss in the first classification, the number of special (choice) is also obtained. For this reason, double loss is called niseka-har. This is stated by ank-sandristi (numerical understanding) and also by arth-sandristi (meaningful understanding). The number of the realms of all beings is the same as the number of the realms of the universe, the number of various guna-hani is the same as the number of the innumerable parts of the universe, and the dimension of one guna-hani is the same as the number of the innumerable parts of the universe. In this way, one should know the statement as appropriate. The above statement has been made, so it is not mentioned here. The method of obtaining the indivisible part in the classification, classification, competitor, guna-hani, various guna-hani, and the lowest place is mentioned in "Dhaval Pu. 10 Yogachulika, pages 395 to 412."

In the Anubhagbandha, there is also a statement about classification, classification, competitor, guna-hani, and various guna-hani. Similarly, there is a statement in the chapter on yoga. The difference between the two is that in the Anubhagbandha, the power of one classification is the same as the power of that classification. Due to the inferiority and superiority of the realm, there is no loss or gain in that being. But in the yoga chapter, the power of the classification is obtained by multiplying the number of classifications in the power fraction of the classification (in the classification). For example, there are 128 realms of beings in the first classification, and the power fraction of one realm (classification) - indivisible part is 100. So the total indivisible parts of the first classification are 100 x 128 = 12,800. In the second classification, the number of classifications is 126 (choice less). The indivisible part of the classification is 101. The total indivisible parts of the second classification are 101 x 126 = 12,726. Thus, there is a loss of power fraction in the second classification.

Angula-asankhabhag-praman-mett-avar-faddhaya-vaddi.
Antar-chakkam-mucha, avar-ttanad-u-ukkas-sa ||230||

Meaning - In the lowest yoga-sthana (yoga place), there is another yoga-sthana when the competitor increases by the number of innumerable parts of an angula (finger). Leaving six intermediate places, the number of competitors increases by the number of innumerable parts of an angula from the lowest yoga-sthana to the highest yoga-sthana.

Special Meaning - The aforementioned lowest uppapad-yoga-sthana is found in the subtle nigod-ya-labhya-paryapta-jeeva (subtle, attainable, sufficient being). After that, starting from the subsequent yoga-sthana, all the yoga-sthana, including the intermediate and continuous, and the intermediate-continuous (both), have the number of innumerable parts of a finger for each yoga-sthana.

1. Bandhanu-bhag-khand-ya-ghadehi vina uch-nadana-okattan-ahi badhi-hani-yo na hoti tti janavan-ta. Ek paramanu-hi
dvidanu-bhag-assa hanatta-pad-uppayan-hu. Na bhinna paramanu-tti-da anu-bhag-o tthan. (Dha. Pu. 10 p. 16)

2. "Padham-faddaya-ssa adi-vaggana-yame adi-vaggena gunide padham-faddaya adi-vaggana hodi." (Dha. Pu. 10 p. 464) 

Page #229:
---------------------------
Gommatsar Karmakanda-191

When the number of inferior competitors increases simultaneously, there is a higher position. From the first inferior position, an innumerable fraction of the number of inferior competitors is greater in the second position. In the second position, there is no increase in the arrangement of competitors, but the competitors in both positions are the same. Therefore, when it is said that the competitors related to the inferior position are few, it means that when the inferior position is multiplied by the number of inferior competitors, they are fewer than the inferior competitors of the superior position.

By dividing the number of inferior positions, which is an innumerable fraction of the series, by the number of projections, and then dividing the inferior position into equal parts, one obtains the number of projections for each part. Now, taking one projection and adding it to the inferior position as a counter-balance, the second position is obtained. Taking the second projection and adding it to the second position as a counter-balance, the third position is obtained. Subsequently, taking the third projection and adding it to the third position as a counter-balance, the fourth position is obtained. In this way, the division should be continued until all the projections are included, and then a position with double the increase is produced.

The number of projections related to the inferior position, which is an innumerable fraction of the series and a pair of created pairs, when divided by the number of competitors in the inferior position, only an innumerable fraction of an angula is obtained as the number of inferior competitors for one projection. This projection exists because there is no increase or decrease. It is said that in this projection, when the inferior position is added as a counter-balance, the number of indivisible sections related to the competitors in the second position is greater. It is said that from these innumerable fractions of an angula of inferior competitors, no new competitor is produced beyond the ultimate competitor, because the indivisible sections of the ultimate competitor are found to be innumerable times less than the indivisible sections of the projection. Therefore, it should be understood that these projection indivisible sections are divided into the regions of living beings in the world according to their nature.

Now, leaving out six intervals, the positions of living beings from the inferior position to the superior position are said to be:

Sarisayamenavari, Seḍhiasankejjabhag Ṭhāṇāṇi.
Caḍidekkekkamupuvvam, Phaṭṭayamiha Jayade Cayado. ||231||

Meaning: When one climbs up an innumerable fraction of the series of positions above positions of equal size, one new competitor is produced.

1. Dhavala Pu. 10.482
2. Dhavala Pu. 10 p. 489.
3. Dhavala Pu. 2 p. 484-85

Page #230:
---------------------------
Gommatasar Karmakanda-192
::...
The proof of choice has been explained above. Similarly, when the choice increases progressively in the order of the innumerable parts of the category, starting from the second yogasthan, which has the same dimension, another unique competitor arises. In this way, when the number of competitors for one quality loss is equal to the number of unique competitors, the proof of the inferior yogasthan doubles. In this way, the proof of yogasthanas also doubles, and finally, the most excellent yogasthan of the sentient five-sense-equipped sufficient being is produced.
Special Note - Doubt - How many yogasthanas are there before a unique competitor arises due to the increase in projections in this order of existence?
Solution - In response to such a doubt, it is said that it arises only after the innumerable parts of the category, because a unique competitor is not produced without the increase in the ultimate yogasparadhak. The yogaprakshepa in the ultimate sparadhak is equal to the innumerable parts of the category, because dividing the ultimate sparadhak by one yogaprakshepa gives the innumerable part of the category. Therefore, when the number of projections increases to the innumerable parts of the category, the number of living regions in the last competitor of the new competitors is greater than the previous competitors. These living regions are taken from the increased projections of the last (final) inferior competitor and established upwards in order. Then, from these, the living regions of the inferior (first category) squares related to the inferior place are taken, equal to the living regions of the ultimate sparadhak, and combined with them in order. The remaining is divided into innumerable lokas in the same way as before. The desired place is produced by multiplying the obtained result separately with the living regions of the squares of the competitor related to the desired place and then dividing the living regions of the desired category into equal parts. This should be understood. From here onwards, with the increase of each projection, the competitor remains in place, and only the innumerable parts of the category are produced. Then, in this way, a unique competitor is produced. In this way, it should be taken up to the final yogasthan.
Doubt - Now, why is the proof of the inferior competitor's sticks related to the inferior place not explained by establishing the inferior competitor's sticks in order from one to one more, starting from one, and combining them according to the summation formula (S x 15 - 120)?
Solution - This is not a fault, because only the innumerable parts of these competitor sticks 
1. Dhaval Pu. 10 p. 487 

Page #231:
---------------------------
Gommatsar Karmakanda - 193

These despicable competitive marks are found in the despicable place. Therefore, one should assume that only a negligible fraction of the innumerable categories applicable in the despicable place are despicable competitors.
The Acharya promises further specific statements on the same subject.
-
These are the places, the living beings are classified in them according to their inferiority and superiority. We will now speak of the small number of 84 places in relation to the 14 living being classifications and the three types of yogas indicated by the "chakar". || 232 ||
Meaning - In the places mentioned, we will now speak of the small number of 84 places in relation to the 14 living being classifications and the three types of yogas indicated by the "chakar".
-
Special Meaning - First, by mentioning the small places, then gradually mentioning the places of increasing magnitude, is the statement of small number. There are three types of small number in relation to the division of yoga of the fourteen living being classifications: 1. Own place 2. Other place 3. All other places. Among these, the small number of all other places is of three types, according to the difference of despicable, excellent and despicable-excellent. Further, in 8 verses, we will speak of the despicable-excellent small number of all other places in relation to the division of yoga of the fourteen living being classifications.
It is called -
The acquisition of subtle merit, the acquisition of merit in the form of a thread, then. The acquisition of non-merit, the inferior of the acquisition of merit in the form of a cloud. || 233 ||
The subtle merit of the subtle, the inferior of the merit of the subtle in the form of a cloud. The superior of the merit of the cloud, the acquisition of merit in the form of a seed-sense. || 234 ||
The merit of the cloud is superior, the inferior of the merit of the seed-sense. Thus, the four-fold division is repeated four times. || 235 ||
Then, the non-connected, the connected, the connected-non-connected, the connected-non-connected, the connected-non-connected, the connected-non-connected, the connected-non-connected, the connected-non-connected, the connected-non-connected, the connected-non-connected, the connected-non-connected, the connected-non-connected, the connected-non-connected, the connected-non-connected, the connected-non-connected, the connected-non-connected, the connected-non-connected, the connected-non-connected, the connected-non-connected, the connected-non-connected, the connected-non-connected, the connected-non-connected, the connected-non-connected, the connected-non-connected, the connected-non-connected, the connected-non-connected, the connected-non-connected, the connected-non-connected, the connected-non-connected, the connected-non-connected, the connected-non-connected, the connected-non-connected, the connected-non-connected, the connected-non-connected, the connected-non-connected, the connected-non-connected, the connected-non-connected, the connected-non-connected, the connected-non-connected, the connected-non-connected, the connected-non-connected, the connected-non-connected, the connected-non-connected, the connected-non-connected, the connected-non-connected, the connected-non-connected, the connected-non-connected, the connected-non-connected, the connected-non-connected, the connected-non-connected, the connected-non-connected, the connected-non-connected, the connected-non-connected, the connected-non-connected, the connected-non-connected, the connected-non-connected, the connected-non-connected, the connected-non-connected, the connected-non-connected, the connected-non-connected, the connected-non-connected, the connected-non-connected, the connected-non-connected, the connected-non-connected, the connected-non-connected, the connected-non-connected, the connected-non-connected, the connected-non-connected, the connected-non-connected, the connected-non-connected, the connected-non-connected, the connected-non-connected, the connected-non-connected, the connected-non-connected, the connected-non-connected, the connected-non-connected, the connected-non-connected, the connected-non-connected, the connected-non-connected, the connected-non-connected, the connected-non-connected, the connected-non-connected, the connected-non-connected, the connected-non-connected, the connected-non-connected, the connected-non-connected, the connected-non-connected, the connected-non-connected, the connected-non-connected, the connected-non-connected, the connected-non-connected, the connected-non-connected, the connected-non-connected, the connected-non-connected, the connected-non-connected, the connected-non-connected, the connected-non-connected, the connected-non-connected, the connected-non-connected, the connected-non-connected, the connected-non-connected, the connected-non-connected, the connected-non-connected, the connected-non-connected, the connected-non-connected, the connected-non-connected, the connected-non-connected, the connected-non-connected, the connected-non-connected, the connected-non-connected, the connected-non-connected, the connected-non-connected, the connected-non-connected, the connected-non-connected, the connected-non-connected, the connected-non-connected, the connected-non-connected, the connected-non-connected, the connected-non-connected, the connected-non-connected, the connected-non-connected, the connected-non-connected, the connected-non-connected, the connected-non-connected, the connected-non-connected, the connected-non-connected, the connected-non-connected, the connected-non-connected, the connected-non-connected, the connected-non-connected, the connected-non-connected, the connected-non-connected, the connected-non-connected, the connected-non-connected, the connected-non-connected, the connected-non-connected, the connected-non-connected, the connected-non-connected, the connected-non-connected, the connected-non-connected, the connected-non-connected, the connected-non-connected, the connected-non-connected, the connected-non-connected, the connected-non-connected, the connected-non-connected, the connected-non-connected, the connected-non-connected, the connected-non-connected, the connected-non-connected, the connected-non-connected, the connected-non-connected
Page #232:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-194

The *jghanya* (inferior) *upapada* (state of being) of the *sanni-ssuva-vada* (state of being with subtle senses) and *labdhi* (acquisition) is the most inferior. The *jghanya* *upapada* of the *sanni-ssuva-vada* and *nirvritti* (liberation) is countless times superior to it. The *utkrisht* (superior) *upapada* of the *sanni-ssuva-vada* and *labdhi* is countless times superior to that. The *jghanya* *upapada* of the *badara* (gross) senses and *labdhi* is countless times superior to that. ||227||

The *utkrisht* *upapada* of the *sanni-ssuva-vada* and *nirvritti* is countless times superior to the *jghanya* *upapada* of the *badara* senses and *labdhi*. The *jghanya* *upapada* of the *badara* senses and *nirvritti* is countless times superior to that. The *utkrisht* *upapada* of the *badara* senses and *labdhi* is countless times superior to that. The *jghanya* *upapada* of the *dvi-indriya* (two senses) and *labdhi* is countless times superior to that. ||238||

The *jghanya* *upapada* of the *dvi-indriya* and *labdhi* is countless times inferior to the *utkrisht* *upapada* of the *badara* senses and *nirvritti*. The *jghanya* *upapada* of the *dvi-indriya* and *nirvritti* is countless times superior to that. The *utkrisht* *upapada* of the *dvi-indriya* and *labdhi* is countless times superior to that. The *jghanya* *upapada* of the *tri-indriya* (three senses) and *labdhi* is countless times superior to that. The *jghanya* *upapada* of the *tri-indriya* and *nirvritti* is countless times superior to that. The *utkrisht* *upapada* of the *tri-indriya* and *labdhi* is countless times superior to that. The *jghanya* *upapada* of the *chatur-indriya* (four senses) and *labdhi* is countless times superior to that. The *utkrisht* *upapada* of the *tri-indriya* and *nirvritti* is countless times superior to that. The *jghanya* *upapada* of the *chatur-indriya* and *nirvritti* is countless times superior to that. The *utkrisht* *upapada* of the *chatur-indriya* and *labdhi* is countless times superior to that. ||239||

The *labdhi* and *nirvritti* *upapada* are countless times superior to the *jghanya* *upapada* of the *sanni-ssuva-vada*. The *jghanya* *upapada* of the *sanni-ssuva-vada* is countless times superior to the *jghanya* *upapada* of the *badara* senses. ||240||

**Meaning:**

The *jghanya* *upapada* of the *sanni-ssuva-vada* and *labdhi* is the most inferior. The *jghanya* *upapada* of the *sanni-ssuva-vada* and *nirvritti* is countless times superior to it. The *utkrisht* *upapada* of the *sanni-ssuva-vada* and *labdhi* is countless times superior to that. The *jghanya* *upapada* of the *badara* senses and *labdhi* is countless times superior to that. ||233||

The *utkrisht* *upapada* of the *sanni-ssuva-vada* and *nirvritti* is countless times superior to the *jghanya* *upapada* of the *badara* senses and *labdhi*. The *jghanya* *upapada* of the *badara* senses and *nirvritti* is countless times superior to that. The *utkrisht* *upapada* of the *badara* senses and *labdhi* is countless times superior to that. The *jghanya* *upapada* of the *dvi-indriya* and *labdhi* is countless times superior to that. ||234||

The *jghanya* *upapada* of the *dvi-indriya* and *labdhi* is countless times inferior to the *utkrisht* *upapada* of the *badara* senses and *nirvritti*. The *jghanya* *upapada* of the *dvi-indriya* and *nirvritti* is countless times superior to that. The *utkrisht* *upapada* of the *dvi-indriya* and *labdhi* is countless times superior to that. The *jghanya* *upapada* of the *tri-indriya* and *labdhi* is countless times superior to that. The *jghanya* *upapada* of the *tri-indriya* and *nirvritti* is countless times superior to that. The *utkrisht* *upapada* of the *tri-indriya* and *labdhi* is countless times superior to that. The *jghanya* *upapada* of the *chatur-indriya* and *labdhi* is countless times superior to that. The *utkrisht* *upapada* of the *tri-indriya* and *nirvritti* is countless times superior to that. The *jghanya* *upapada* of the *chatur-indriya* and *nirvritti* is countless times superior to that. The *utkrisht* *upapada* of the *chatur-indriya* and *labdhi* is countless times superior to that. ||235||

1. Dhavala Pu. 10 p. 414
2. Dhavala Pu. 10 p. 414
3. Dhavala Pu. 10 p. 415-416

Page #233:
---------------------------
## Gommatasara Karmakanda-195

**Compared to the inferior Upadaya Yoga of the Asanji Panchaindriya Labdhya Paryaptaka, the superior Upadaya Yoga of the Chaturindriya Labdhya Paryaptaka is countless times greater.**  Similarly, the inferior Upadaya Yoga of the Asanji Panchaindriya Nirvritti Paryaptaka is countless times greater than the superior Upadaya Yoga of the Chaturindriya Nirvritti Paryaptaka.  The inferior Upadaya Yoga of the Asanji Panchaindriya Labdhya Paryaptaka is countless times greater than the superior Upadaya Yoga of the Sanji Panchaindriya Labdhya Paryaptaka.  The inferior Upadaya Yoga of the Sanji Panchaindriya Nirvritti Paryaptaka is countless times greater than the inferior Upadaya Yoga of the Sanji Panchaindriya Labdhya Paryaptaka.  The superior Upadaya Yoga of the Asanji Panchaindriya Nirvritti Paryaptaka is countless times greater than the inferior Upadaya Yoga of the Sanji Panchaindriya Nirvritti Paryaptaka.  The superior Upadaya Yoga of the Sanji Panchaindriya Labdhya Paryaptaka is countless times greater than the inferior Ekanta Anuvritti Yoga of the Sukhma Ekendriya Labdhya Paryaptaka.  

**Compared to the inferior Ekanta Anuvritti Yoga of the Sukhma Ekendriya Labdhya Paryaptaka, the superior Upadaya Yoga of the Sanji Panchaindriya Nirvritti Paryaptaka is countless times greater.**  The inferior Ekanta Anuvritti Yoga of the Sukhma Ekendriya Nirvritti Paryaptaka is countless times greater than the inferior Ekanta Anuvritti Yoga of the Badara Ekendriya Labdhya Paryaptaka.  The inferior Ekanta Anuvritti Yoga of the Badara Ekendriya Nirvritti Paryaptaka is countless times greater than the inferior Ekanta Anuvritti Yoga of the Badara Ekendriya Labdhya Paryaptaka.

**Compared to the inferior Ekanta Anuvritti Yoga of the Badara Ekendriya Nirvritti Paryaptaka, the superior Ekanta Anuvritti Yoga of the Sukhma Ekendriya Labdhya Paryaptaka is countless times greater.**  The superior Ekanta Anuvritti Yoga of the Sukhma Ekendriya Nirvritti Paryaptaka is countless times greater than the superior Ekanta Anuvritti Yoga of the Badara Ekendriya Labdhya Paryaptaka.  The superior Ekanta Anuvritti Yoga of the Badara Ekendriya Nirvritti Paryaptaka is countless times greater than the inferior Parinama Yoga of the Sukhma Ekendriya Labdhya Paryaptaka, which is countless times greater than the inferior Parinama Yoga of the Badara Ekendriya Labdhya Paryaptaka.  The superior Parinama Yoga of the Sukhma Ekendriya Labdhya Paryaptaka is countless times greater than the superior Parinama Yoga of the Badara Ekendriya Labdhya Paryaptaka.

**The inferior Parinama Yoga of the Sukhma Ekendriya Nirvritti Paryaptaka is countless times greater than the inferior Parinama Yoga of the Badara Ekendriya Nirvritti Paryaptaka.**  The superior Parinama Yoga of the Sukhma Ekendriya Nirvritti Paryaptaka is countless times greater than the superior Parinama Yoga of the Badara Ekendriya Nirvritti Paryaptaka.  The inferior Ekanta Anuvritti Yoga of the Dviindriya Labdhya Paryaptaka is countless times greater than the inferior Ekanta Anuvritti Yoga of the Triindriya Labdhya Paryaptaka, which is countless times greater than the inferior Ekanta Anuvritti Yoga of the Chaturindriya Labdhya Paryaptaka. 

Page #234:
---------------------------
Gommatasar Karmakanda-196
The number of **Asanji Panchendriya Labdhya Paryaptak** **Ughanya Ekanta Anuvridhi Yog** is innumerable, from that the number of **Sanji Panchendriya Labdhya Paryaptak** **Dhandharakanta Vrishi Yog** is innumerable, from that the number of **Dwiindriya Labdhya Paryaptak** **Utkrisht Ekanta Anuvridhi Yog** is innumerable, from that the number of **Triindriya Labdhya Paryaptak** **Utkrisht Ekanta Anuvridhi Yog** is innumerable, from that the number of **Chaturindriya Labdhya Paryaptak** **Utkrisht Ekanta Anuvridhi Yog** is innumerable, from that the number of **Asanji Panchendriya Labdhya Paryaptak** **Utkrisht Ekanta Anuvridhi Yog** is innumerable, from that the number of **Sanji Panchendriya Labdhya Paryaptak** **Utkrisht Ekanta Anuvridhi Yog** is innumerable. ||239||

Further, by leaving the difference of innumerable parts of the series of **Yogasthanas**, the number of **Dwiindriya Labdhya Paryaptak** **Jghanya Parinam Yog** is innumerable, from that the number of **Triindriya Labdhya Paryaptak** **Jghanya Parinam Yog** is innumerable, from that the number of **Chaturindriya Labdhya Paryaptak** **Jghanya Parinam Yog** is innumerable, from that the number of **Asanji Panchendriya Labdhya Paryaptak** **Jghanya Parinam Yog** is innumerable, from that the number of **Sanji Panchendriya Labdhya Paryaptak** **Jghanya Parinam Yog** is innumerable. From that the number of **Dwiindriya Labdhya Paryaptak** **Utkrisht Parinam Yog** is innumerable, from that the number of **Triindriya Labdhya Paryaptak** **Utkrisht Parinam Yog** is innumerable, from that the number of **Chaturindriya Labdhya Paryaptak** **Utkrisht Parinam Yog** is innumerable, from that the number of **Asanji Panchendriya Labdhya Paryaptak** **Utkrisht Parinam Yog** is innumerable, from that the number of **Sanji Panchendriya Labdhya Paryaptak** **Utkrisht Parinam Yog** is innumerable. Further, by leaving the difference of innumerable parts of the series of **Yogasthanas**, the number of **Dwiindriya Nirvritti Paryaptak** **Jghanya Ekanta Anuvridhi Yog** is innumerable, from that the number of **Triindriya Nirvritti Paryaptak** **Jghanya Ekanta Anuvridhi Yog** is innumerable, from that the number of **Chaturindriya Nirvritti Paryaptak** **Jghanya Ekanta Anuvridhi Yog** is innumerable, from that the number of **Asanji Panchendriya Nirvritti Paryaptak** **Jghanya Ekanta Anuvridhi Yog** is innumerable, from that the number of **Sanji Panchendriya Nirvritti Paryaptak** **Jghanya Ekanta Anuvridhi Yog** is innumerable, from that the number of **Dwiindriya Nirvritti Paryaptak** **Utkrisht Ekanta Anuvridhi Yog** is innumerable, from that the number of **Triindriya Nirvritti Paryaptak** **Utkrisht Ekanta Anuvridhi Yog** is innumerable, from that the number of **Chaturindriya Nirvritti Paryaptak** **Utkrisht Ekanta Anuvridhi Yog** is innumerable, from that the number of **Asanji Panchendriya Nirvritti Paryaptak** **Utkrisht Ekanta Anuvridhi Yog** is innumerable, from that the number of **Sanji Panchendriya Nirvritti Paryaptak** **Utkrisht Ekanta Anuvridhi Yog** is innumerable. Further, by leaving the difference of innumerable parts of the series of **Yogasthanas**, the number of **Dwiindriya Nirvritti Paryaptak** **Jghanya Parinam Yog** is innumerable, from that the number of **Triindriya Nirvritti Paryaptak** **Jghanya Parinam Yog** is innumerable, from that the number of **Chaturindriya Nirvritti Paryaptak** **Jghanya Parinam Yog** is innumerable, from that the number of **Asanji Panchendriya Nirvritti Paryaptak** **Jghanya Parinam Yog** is innumerable, from that the number of **Sanji Panchendriya Nirvritti Paryaptak** **Jghanya Parinam Yog** is innumerable, from that the number of **Dwiindriya Nirvritti Paryaptak** **Utkrisht Parinam Yog** is innumerable, from that the number of **Triindriya Nirvritti Paryaptak** **Utkrisht Parinam Yog** is innumerable, from that the number of **Chaturindriya Nirvritti Paryaptak** **Utkrisht Parinam Yog** is innumerable. 1. Dhaval Pustak 10 Pg. 417 

Page #235:
---------------------------
##  Translation:

**Excellent meditation on the fourfold path in the context of food.**

**The first stage:**

* **Excellent meditation on the fourfold path in the context of food.**  This is the stage of **non-violence** (ahimsa) where one avoids harming any living being through food choices. 
* **The second stage:**

* **Excellent meditation on the fourfold path in the context of food.** This is the stage of **truthfulness** (satya) where one avoids lying or deception in relation to food.
* **The third stage:**

* **Excellent meditation on the fourfold path in the context of food.** This is the stage of **non-stealing** (asteya) where one avoids taking food that is not rightfully theirs.
* **The fourth stage:**

* **Excellent meditation on the fourfold path in the context of food.** This is the stage of **celibacy** (brahmacharya) where one avoids indulging in excessive food consumption or seeking pleasure through food.

**The five senses and their role in the fourfold path:**

* **The subtle sense of touch:** This sense is crucial for understanding the nature of food and its impact on the body.
* **The subtle sense of taste:** This sense helps us to appreciate the flavors of food and to avoid overindulgence.
* **The subtle sense of smell:** This sense helps us to identify the quality of food and to avoid consuming spoiled or contaminated food.
* **The subtle sense of sight:** This sense helps us to choose food that is visually appealing and to avoid consuming food that is unappetizing.
* **The subtle sense of hearing:** This sense helps us to be aware of the sounds of food preparation and to avoid consuming food that is prepared in a noisy or chaotic environment.

**The fourfold path and the five senses:**

* **The first stage:** This stage emphasizes the importance of avoiding harming any living being through food choices. This can be achieved by being mindful of the source of our food and by choosing to consume food that is produced in a humane and ethical manner.
* **The second stage:** This stage emphasizes the importance of being truthful in our relationship with food. This can be achieved by being honest about our food choices and by avoiding deception in relation to food.
* **The third stage:** This stage emphasizes the importance of avoiding stealing food. This can be achieved by being mindful of the source of our food and by choosing to consume food that is produced in a sustainable and ethical manner.
* **The fourth stage:** This stage emphasizes the importance of avoiding excessive food consumption and seeking pleasure through food. This can be achieved by being mindful of our food choices and by choosing to consume food that is nourishing and satisfying without being excessive.

**The five senses and the fourfold path:**

* **The subtle sense of touch:** This sense can help us to be mindful of the texture of food and to avoid consuming food that is too hard or too soft.
* **The subtle sense of taste:** This sense can help us to be mindful of the flavors of food and to avoid consuming food that is too sweet, too salty, too sour, or too bitter.
* **The subtle sense of smell:** This sense can help us to be mindful of the aroma of food and to avoid consuming food that has a foul odor.
* **The subtle sense of sight:** This sense can help us to be mindful of the appearance of food and to avoid consuming food that is unappetizing.
* **The subtle sense of hearing:** This sense can help us to be mindful of the sounds of food preparation and to avoid consuming food that is prepared in a noisy or chaotic environment.

**The fourfold path and the five senses:**

* **The first stage:** This stage emphasizes the importance of avoiding harming any living being through food choices. This can be achieved by being mindful of the source of our food and by choosing to consume food that is produced in a humane and ethical manner.
* **The second stage:** This stage emphasizes the importance of being truthful in our relationship with food. This can be achieved by being honest about our food choices and by avoiding deception in relation to food.
* **The third stage:** This stage emphasizes the importance of avoiding stealing food. This can be achieved by being mindful of the source of our food and by choosing to consume food that is produced in a sustainable and ethical manner.
* **The fourth stage:** This stage emphasizes the importance of avoiding excessive food consumption and seeking pleasure through food. This can be achieved by being mindful of our food choices and by choosing to consume food that is nourishing and satisfying without being excessive.

**The five senses and the fourfold path:**

* **The subtle sense of touch:** This sense can help us to be mindful of the texture of food and to avoid consuming food that is too hard or too soft.
* **The subtle sense of taste:** This sense can help us to be mindful of the flavors of food and to avoid consuming food that is too sweet, too salty, too sour, or too bitter.
* **The subtle sense of smell:** This sense can help us to be mindful of the aroma of food and to avoid consuming food that has a foul odor.
* **The subtle sense of sight:** This sense can help us to be mindful of the appearance of food and to avoid consuming food that is unappetizing.
* **The subtle sense of hearing:** This sense can help us to be mindful of the sounds of food preparation and to avoid consuming food that is prepared in a noisy or chaotic environment.

**The fourfold path and the five senses:**

* **The first stage:** This stage emphasizes the importance of avoiding harming any living being through food choices. This can be achieved by being mindful of the source of our food and by choosing to consume food that is produced in a humane and ethical manner.
* **The second stage:** This stage emphasizes the importance of being truthful in our relationship with food. This can be achieved by being honest about our food choices and by avoiding deception in relation to food.
* **The third stage:** This stage emphasizes the importance of avoiding stealing food. This can be achieved by being mindful of the source of our food and by choosing to consume food that is produced in a sustainable and ethical manner.
* **The fourth stage:** This stage emphasizes the importance of avoiding excessive food consumption and seeking pleasure through food. This can be achieved by being mindful of our food choices and by choosing to consume food that is nourishing and satisfying without being excessive.

**The five senses and the fourfold path:**

* **The subtle sense of touch:** This sense can help us to be mindful of the texture of food and to avoid consuming food that is too hard or too soft.
* **The subtle sense of taste:** This sense can help us to be mindful of the flavors of food and to avoid consuming food that is too sweet, too salty, too sour, or too bitter.
* **The subtle sense of smell:** This sense can help us to be mindful of the aroma of food and to avoid consuming food that has a foul odor.
* **The subtle sense of sight:** This sense can help us to be mindful of the
Page #236:
---------------------------
Gommatsar Karmakanda-197
The utkrishtparinam yog is countless times greater than the asanji panchendriya nirvritti paryaptak, which is countless times greater than the sanji panchendriya nirvritti paryaptak. ||24||
These are the places, multiplied by countless parts of the palya.
The lower qualities are diminished, and the others are multiplied by each other. ||241||
Meaning: In the 84 places mentioned in the above verses, the subsequent place is countless times greater than the previous place, and the amount is determined by the lower quality diminution (nana guna hani) and the mutual multiplication. This is the same as the multiplier scale.
Special Meaning: Here, the multiplier is countless times greater than the palya, but it is still doubled by the lower nana guna hani scale due to its desired yog, and it becomes equal to the mutual multiplication amount.
How long is the time for the initiation of the other yogasthanas between the continuous one yogasthanas of the three places, namely the jghanya, utkrisht, and uppapad, mentioned earlier? It is said -
The time for the initiation of the uppapad yogasthan and the ekanta anuvritti yogasthan is one time, because the uppapad yogasthan occurs at the first time of birth. The ekanta anuvritti yogasthan is different, being of the form of time-to-time increase, and the time for the parinam yogasthan is from one time to eight times. ||242||
The eight-time continuous yogasthan is the least, and the places that initiate from seven to four times are countless times greater, both above and below. However, the places that initiate from three to two times are countless times greater. ||243||
Special Meaning: Considering the time of the shape formation of the 'jau' grain, the continuous yogasthanas, excluding the yogasthanas that are the difference between the jghanya parinam yogasthan of the dwi-indriya paryapta jiva and the utkrisht parinam yogasthan of the sanji panchendriya paryapta jiva, are as follows: 1. Dh.Pu. 10 p. 418-411-420 2. Dh.Pu. 10 p. 420 3. Dh.Pu. 10 p. 420 and 423 or 498 

Page #237:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-198

Write the eight-time yogasthanas in the middle. Write the yogasthanas that are continuous for seven times above and below the eight-time ones. Write the yogasthanas that are continuous for six times below and above the seven-time ones. Write the yogasthanas that are continuous until gaj gashan, below and above the six-time ones. Write the yogasthanas that are continuous for four times above and below the five-time ones. Write the yogasthanas that are continuous for three and two times respectively, above the four and three-time ones. Just as barley (yava) is thick in the middle and thin above and below, similarly write the eight-time ones in the middle and write one less time above and below. Such a yavakara structure is formed.

The yogasthanas in which the jiva, starting from one time, culminates in four times through progress, are called chatuhsamayik, i.e., yogasthanas that remain for four times. Their number is a fraction of an innumerable part of the श्रेणी. Similarly, one should know panchasamayik, shatsamayik, saptasamayik, ashta samayik. However, the saptasamayik, shatsamayik, panchasamayik, chatuhsamayik, and the above trisamayik and dvisamayik yogasthanas above the middle of the yava are also a fraction of an innumerable part of the श्रेणी.

According to alpabahutva, the eight-time yogya yogasthanas are the least, i.e., they are less than the yogasthanas to be mentioned later. The seven-time yogya yogasthanas on both sides are equal and innumerable times more than them. The six-time yogya yogasthanas on both sides are equal and innumerable innumerable times more than them. The five-time yogya yogasthanas on both sides are equal and innumerable times more than them. The four-time yogya yogasthanas on both sides are equal and innumerable times more than them. The above three-time yogya yogasthanas are innumerable times more than them, and the two-time yogya yogasthanas are innumerable times more than them. Here, the multiplier is a fraction of an innumerable part of the panyopama. Its special explanation is given by the yavakara structure, which is as follows:

The yogasthanas with eight-time prayogya shakti are few. The yogasthanas with seven-time prayogya shakti located on both sides are innumerable times more. The yogasthanas with six-time prayogya shakti located on both sides are innumerable times more. The yogasthanas with five-time prayogya shakti located on both sides are innumerable times more. The yogasthanas with four-time prayogya shakti located on both sides are innumerable times more. The above yogasthanas with three-time prayogya shakti are innumerable times more. The above yogasthanas with two-time prayogya shakti are innumerable times more.

1. Dhaval Pu. 10 p. 494-495
2. Dhaval Pu. 10 p. 503-504

Page #238:
---------------------------
## Gommatasara Karmakanda-199

**SHARMAtta**
-EBER 2 E-HE BALFIE SHE只

**Time-based Yogasthanas:**
1. Time-based Yogasthanas with strength
2. Time-based Yogasthanas with strength
3. Time-based Yogasthanas with strength
4. Time-based Yogasthanas with strength
5. Time-based Yogasthanas with strength
6. Time-based Yogasthanas with strength
7. Time-based Yogasthanas with strength
8. Time-based Yogasthanas with strength
9. Time-based Yogasthanas with strength
10. Time-based Yogasthanas with strength
11. Time-based Yogasthanas with strength
12. Time-based Yogasthanas with strength
13. Time-based Yogasthanas with strength
14. Time-based Yogasthanas with strength
15. Time-based Yogasthanas with strength
16. Time-based Yogasthanas with strength
17. Time-based Yogasthanas with strength
18. Time-based Yogasthanas with strength
19. Time-based Yogasthanas with strength
20. Time-based Yogasthanas with strength
21. Time-based Yogasthanas with strength
22. Time-based Yogasthanas with strength
23. Time-based Yogasthanas with strength
24. Time-based Yogasthanas with strength
25. Time-based Yogasthanas with strength
26. Time-based Yogasthanas with strength
27. Time-based Yogasthanas with strength
28. Time-based Yogasthanas with strength
29. Time-based Yogasthanas with strength
30. Time-based Yogasthanas with strength
31. Time-based Yogasthanas with strength
32. Time-based Yogasthanas with strength

"The arrangement of Yogas and Yavas based on time"

**AIRKata**
1. Time-based Yogasthanas with strength
2. Time-based Yogasthanas with strength
3. Time-based Yogasthanas with strength
4. Time-based Yogasthanas with strength
5. Time-based Yogasthanas with strength
6. Time-based Yogasthanas with strength
7. Time-based Yogasthanas with strength
8. Time-based Yogasthanas with strength
9. Time-based Yogasthanas with strength
10. Time-based Yogasthanas with strength
11. Time-based Yogasthanas with strength
12. Time-based Yogasthanas with strength
13. Time-based Yogasthanas with strength
14. Time-based Yogasthanas with strength
15. Time-based Yogasthanas with strength
16. Time-based Yogasthanas with strength
17. Time-based Yogasthanas with strength
18. Time-based Yogasthanas with strength
19. Time-based Yogasthanas with strength
20. Time-based Yogasthanas with strength
21. Time-based Yogasthanas with strength
22. Time-based Yogasthanas with strength
23. Time-based Yogasthanas with strength
24. Time-based Yogasthanas with strength
25. Time-based Yogasthanas with strength
26. Time-based Yogasthanas with strength
27. Time-based Yogasthanas with strength
28. Time-based Yogasthanas with strength
29. Time-based Yogasthanas with strength
30. Time-based Yogasthanas with strength
31. Time-based Yogasthanas with strength
32. Time-based Yogasthanas with strength

**Further, in the results of the Yogasthanas of sufficient living beings, the number of living beings is stated as follows:**

"There are many Jivas in the middle of the Yava arrangement. The number of Jivas with special deficiencies decreases progressively upwards and downwards. The upper Gunahani-Shalaaka is greater than the lower Gunahani-Shalaaka." (244)

"The number of Dravyas doubles progressively upwards and downwards from the middle. The total number of Jivas is 1422, the number of Yogasthanas is 32, and the number of Gunahani-Ayamas is 4. The number of lower Gunahani-Ayamas is 3, the number of upper Gunahani-Ayamas is 5, and the total number of Gunahani-Ayamas is 8. The number of lower Anyonyabhyastarasis is 24242-8, and the number of upper Anyonyabhyastarasis is..." (245, 246)

**Explanation:**

There are three Anuyogin-Dwaras of Dravyas: the number of Jivas, the Yogasthanas-Adhvanas, and the Gunahani-Ayamas. The number of Dravyas doubles progressively upwards and downwards from the middle, but the number of Dravyas on both sides is different. In terms of numbers, the total number of Jivas in the middle of the Yava arrangement is 1422, the number of Yogasthanas-Adhvanas is 32, and the number of Gunahani-Ayamas is 4. The number of lower Gunahani-Ayamas is 3, the number of upper Gunahani-Ayamas is 5, and the total number of Gunahani-Ayamas is 8. The number of lower Anyonyabhyastarasis is 24242-8, and the number of upper Anyonyabhyastarasis is... 

Page #239:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-200 242424242832. When the three-fold guna-hani (117) is divided by the total jiva-dravya, the number of yava-madhya jivas is 128. ||245-246||

**Special Meaning:** Yava is a type of grain that is thick in the middle and gradually decreases in size towards the top and bottom. Similarly, in the yoga-sthana related to the three-fold paryayas, the middle position in the yava-shaped structure has a large number of jivas. This means that there are many jivas residing in the middle position, and the number of jivas gradually decreases in the positions above and below the middle. The jivas residing in those positions also decrease accordingly. This is the yava-shaped structure. In this structure, the number of guna-hani-shalaka above is slightly more than the number of guna-hani-shalaka below.

Here, we first state the number of jivas based on the number of angas:

The number of saparyapta jivas is 1422, the adhyana of the yoga-sthana related to the three-fold paryayas is 32, the number of guna-hani-ayamas is 4, and the total guna-hani is 8. These are called nana-guna-hani. The number of adhastana-guna-hani is 3, and the number of uperitana-guna-hani is 5. Thus, the total number of naga-guna-hani is 8.

By writing the number 2 as many times as the number of nana-guna-hani and multiplying them together, we get the number of anyonya-abhyastara-ashi. The number of adhastana-anyonya-abhyastara-ashi is 8 (2x2x2). Similarly, the number of uperitana-anyonya-abhyastara-ashi is 32 (2x2x2x2x2). When these two anyonya-abhyastara-ashi are added together (32+8), the total number is 40.

Here, when the three-fold guna-hani is divided by the dravya, the number of jivas is the same as the middle of the yava-shaped structure. So, by multiplying the number of guna-hani-ayamas (4) by three, we get 12. The term "kinchit oon" (slightly less) here means that 57 out of 64 parts of one (after subtracting 7 from 64 parts, we get 57). The 64th part of 711 is 713. When this is divided by the total dravya (1422), we get 128. This is the number of jivas in the middle of the yava-shaped structure, because the middle has the most jivas.

From the middle, we need to know the number of jivas in the adhastana and uperitana guna-hani nisekas, based on their respective guna-hani.

To find the number of jivas in each guna-hani, we divide the number of jivas in the first niseka (128) by the number of guna-hani-ayamas in the second guna-hani (2448), which is twice the number of guna-hani-ayamas in the first guna-hani. This gives us 16. Alternatively, we can divide the number of jivas in the last niseka (80) by the number of guna-hani-ayamas in the last guna-hani (5), which is one more than the number of guna-hani-ayamas in the previous guna-hani. This also gives us 16. This is the number of jivas in each guna-hani.

Therefore, we need to know the number of jivas in the adhastana and uperitana guna-hani, as well as the number of jivas in each guna-hani, which is half of the total number of jivas (16, 8, 4, 2, and 1).

This is called:

1. Dhaval Pu. 10 p. 80

Page #240:
---------------------------
## Gommatasara Karmakanda-201

**Knowing the Special (Choice) in the First Gunahani**

In the first nisheka related to the first gunahani, out of the five uparitan gunahani, the special (choice) is known by dividing the proof (128) by the double gunahani (8). This gives 128/8 = 16. 

Therefore, subtract 16 from each nisheka and subtract the special (choice) of the first nisheka, which is one less than the gunahani-ayama proof, to get the final nisheka of 80. 

The initial nisheka is 128, the middle nishekas are 112 and 96, and the final nisheka is 80. Adding all these together (128 + 112 + 96 + 80) gives 416. This is the total amount of the first gunahani.

**Knowing the Substance of the First Gunahani**

To find the substance of the first gunahani, multiply the proof of the yavamdhya (128) by the triple gunahani plus one (12 + 1 = 13) and then divide by the gunahani-ayama. This gives 128 * 13 / 12 = 416. This is the substance of the first gunahani.

**Knowing the Proof of Substance and Special (Choice) in Each Gunahani**

The proof of substance and special (choice) in each gunahani is half of the previous one. 

To find the substance of the final gunahani, write the number 2 as many times as the proof of the one less than the total number of gunahani, multiply them together, and then divide the substance of the first gunahani by the result. 

In this case, there are 5 uparitan gunahani, so we subtract one (5 - 1 = 4). We then write the number 2 four times (2222) and multiply them together, which gives 16. Dividing the substance of the first gunahani (416) by 16 gives 416/16 = 26. This is the substance of the final gunahani.

**Knowing the First Nisheka of the First Adhastan Gunahani**

There are 3 adhastan gunahani. To find the first nisheka of the first adhastan gunahani, subtract the special (choice) from the proof of the yavamdhya (128). This gives 128 - 16 = 112. This is the initial nisheka.

**Knowing the Final Nisheka of the First Adhastan Gunahani**

Subtract the special (choice) from each nisheka, starting with the initial nisheka and subtracting the special (choice) of the first nisheka, which is one less than the gunahani-ayama proof, to get the final nisheka of 64.

**Knowing the Total Substance of the First Adhastan Gunahani**

The mukha (64) and the bhumhi (112) are added together (64 + 112 = 176). Half of this (176/2 = 88) is then multiplied by the number of steps (4) to get 88 * 4 = 352. This is the total substance of the first adhastan gunahani.

**Knowing the Substance of the First Adhastan Gunahani by Another Method**

Multiply the yavamdhya (128) by 11 (128 * 11 = 1408) and then divide by 4 (1408/4 = 352). This is the total substance of the first adhastan gunahani.

**Knowing the Negative Substance**

Double the yavamdhya (128 * 2 = 256) and then divide by 4 (256/4 = 64). This is the negative substance.

**Knowing the Substance of the First Adhastan Gunahani by Subtracting the Negative Substance**

Subtract the negative substance (64) from the substance of the first uparitan gunahani (416) to get the substance of the first adhastan gunahani (416 - 64 = 352).

**Knowing the Negative Special (Choice)**

The negative special (choice) is the special (choice) of the uparitan gunahani subtracted from the nisheka of the adhastan gunahani. For example, the first nisheka of the uparitan gunahani is 128. Subtracting the special (choice) of 16 gives the first nisheka of the adhastan gunahani (128 - 16 = 112). This applies to all nishekas.

**Knowing the Substance of Each Gunahani**

The substance of each gunahani is half of the substance of the previous gunahani.

**Knowing the Substance of the Final Adhastan Gunahani**

Divide the substance of the first adhastan gunahani by the number 2 raised to the power of one less than the total number of adhastan gunahani. This gives the substance of the final adhastan gunahani.

**Knowing the Negative Substance of the Final Adhastan Gunahani**

The negative substance of the final adhastan gunahani is the same as the negative substance of the first adhastan gunahani.

Page #241:
---------------------------
## Gommatasar Karmakanda - 202

This discusses the concept of *guna-hani* (loss of merit). It states that *guna-hani* is halved with each successive stage. For example, (64 | 32/16). The sutra "Antadhanam gunaguniyam adivihinam" (multiply the final amount by 2 and subtract the initial amount) is used to calculate the total *guna-hani*.

In this case, the final amount (64, representing the negative amount in the first *guna-hani*) is multiplied by 2, resulting in 64 x 2 = 128. Subtracting the initial amount (16, representing the negative amount in the last *guna-hani*) gives 128 - 16 = 112. This is the total negative amount in the *guna-hani*.

Alternatively, to calculate the total negative amount, multiply the *guna-hani* dimension (4) by the difference (4) in the last *guna-hani*. This gives 4 x 4 = 16. Subtracting this from the middle amount (128) results in 128 - 16 = 112, which is the total negative amount.

The total amount of the first *guna-hani* is 64 + 32 + 16 = 112.

To calculate the total amount of both lower and upper *guna-hani*, the sutra "Antadhanam gunaguniyam" is used. This involves multiplying the final amount (128) by three times the *guna-hani* dimension (13) plus one, and then dividing by the *guna-hani* dimension. This gives (128 x 13) / 4 = 416. Multiplying this by 2 gives 64 x 13 = 832. Subtracting the initial amount (104, calculated by dividing the first *guna-hani* amount by twice the number of *guna-hani* stages minus one) gives 832 - 104 = 728. This is the total amount of the upper *guna-hani*.

Similarly, the total amount of the upper *guna-hani* is calculated by multiplying the final amount (128) by 13, giving 128 x 13 = 416. Multiplying this by 2 gives 832. Subtracting the initial amount (26, calculated by dividing the first *guna-hani* amount by twice the number of *guna-hani* stages minus one) gives 832 - 26 = 806.

Adding the total amounts of the upper and lower *guna-hani* gives 728 + 806 = 1534. Subtracting the total negative amount (112) from this gives 1534 - 112 = 1422, which is the net amount.

In each *guna-hani* stage, the difference represents the amount subtracted, the number of beings in the corresponding stage, and the total amount of the *guna-hani*. The difference between the upper and lower *guna-hani* represents the negative amount.

For example, the first upper *guna-hani* is 416 and the first lower *guna-hani* is 352. Adding 64 (the negative amount) to the lower *guna-hani* makes it equal to the upper *guna-hani*. Similarly, adding 32 to the second lower *guna-hani* (176) makes it equal to the second upper *guna-hani* (208). Adding 16 to the third lower *guna-hani* (88) makes it equal to the third upper *guna-hani* (104). Therefore, the total negative amount in the lower *guna-hani* is 64 + 32 + 16 = 112. 

Page #242:
---------------------------
## Gommatasar Karmakanda-203

**Upper Position**
**Lower Position**
**Dhar 128**
**MAM**
**76**
**352**

**Note:** The total number of living beings in the yogasthanas, according to the ankasaṃdṛṣṭi, is 1422. Of these, 616 living beings are below the yavamādhyaguṇahāni, 390 living beings are above the yavamādhyaguṇahāni, and 416 are at the yavamādhyaguṇahāni.

**Puṇṇatasaṃyogaṭhānaṃ, chedāsaṃkhasasaṃkhabahubhāge.**
**Dalamiṃgibhāgaṃ ca dalaṃ, davvadugaṃ ubhayadalavārā. ||247||**

**Meaning:** To know the measure of dravya and sthiti, respectively, is to know the measure of the sufficient number of trasajīvas and the measure of the yogasthanas related to the sufficient trasas. And to divide the measure of the innumerable parts of the half-cheda of the paly by the innumerable parts of the innumerable guṇahānis, the measure of the innumerable bahubhāga is obtained. Half of this measure is the measure of the lower guṇahāni, and half of the remaining measure, along with the remaining innumerable one part, is the measure of the upper guṇahāni. Thus, to understand the measure of both the guṇahānis.

**Special Meaning:** Just as the measure of dravya is said to be 1422, so also, when the measure of the number is divided by the pratarāṅgula, the quotient obtained is divided by the jagatpratar, the quotient obtained is the measure of the sufficient trasajīvas. And just as the yogasthānadhvāna is said to be 32, so also, from the lowest parināmayoga of the dvīndriyaparāpta to the highest parināmayoga of the saṃghīparāpta, the number of yogasthanas is the measure of the yogasthānadhvāna. These places are said to be 84. There, the measure of the lowest parināmayoga of the dvīndriyaparāpta is obtained by multiplying the innumerable part of the jagatshrēṇī by the innumerable part of the paly 75 times, and then dividing it. This results in only the innumerable part of the jagatshrēṇī. When only the innumerable part of the sūcyaphula is added to this, the anantarastthāna is obtained. Taking this as the beginning, the highest yogasthāna of the saṃghīparāpta is 32 times the lowest according to the ankasaṃdṛṣṭi, and is multiplied by the innumerable part of the half-cheda of the paly according to the yathārtha. This is what is called the measure of the places here. - 1. Dhavala Pu. 10 p. 76. 2. "Padaraṅgulasasaṃkhejadhibhāgeṇajagapadare bhāge hīde saca yogaṭhānaṇam tasaprajattajīvapamāṇaṃ hodi." (Dhavala Pu. 10 p. 61) 

Page #243:
---------------------------
Gommatsar Karmakanda-204

Knowing the beginning from the place of the lowest result of the two-sense-sufficient and the end from the place of the highest result of the group-sufficient. So, according to the sutra "Aadi Ante Suddhe Vaddihide Ruvamsanjude Thane", subtract the measure of the beginning from the end and in each place, there are countless parts of a finger-width, indivisible, intersecting segments. Therefore, dividing them, the measure that comes is the measure of the place-path. Here, the lowest competitor in the dividend and divisor should be reduced. Now, to differentiate how many beings are found in these places, the rule is stated. Just as it was said in the eight-fold loss of qualities, 3 below and 5 above, similarly, in the countless parts of the half-segments of the Paly, the measure of the all-quality-loss is infinite. Keeping one part separate from it, half of the remaining large part is the measure of the lower quality loss, and half of the large part plus the one part kept separate, the measure that comes is the measure of the upper quality loss.

**248.**
Naanagunhaanisala, Chhedasankezbhagamettaao.
Gunhaani Naddhanam, Savvathavi Hodi Sarisan Tu.

**Meaning:** By combining the upper and lower all-quality losses, the number of quality losses is only a countless part of the half-segments of the Paly. Dividing this quality loss by the aforementioned place-path, the measure that comes is the measure of the dimension of one-quality loss. For example, in the place-path of 32, dividing the all-quality loss of 8, 32/8 = 4 comes, this is the measure of the dimension of one-quality loss. Similarly, know it here. The quality loss dimension is the same in the upper and lower quality losses, and there are so many places in each quality loss. Double the quality loss dimension is the two-quality loss.

**249.**
Annonnugunidaraasi, Pallaasankezbhagamettan Tu.
Hettimaraasido Pun, Uvarilllamasankhasanguunidam.

**Meaning:** The mutually multiplied quantity is a countless part of the Paly, but in it, the upper mutually multiplied quantity is countless times the lower mutually multiplied quantity.

**Special Meaning:** Multiplying the measure of the quality loss by two and multiplying them together gives the measure of the mutually multiplied quantity. For example, the lower mutually multiplied quantity (8) and the upper mutually multiplied quantity (32). Similarly, in general, the mutually multiplied quantity is a countless part of the Paly, but the upper mutually multiplied quantity is countless times the lower mutually multiplied quantity. There, from the lowest result, 1. "Gaanagunhaanisalaagao Palidovamassa Asankhezdibhagamettaao. Paanagunhaanisalagaahi Jogatthanaddhane Ovattide Tavalambhado." (Dhaval Pu. 10, p. 74) 

Page #244:
---------------------------
Gommatasar Karmakanda-205

Know the division of living beings in the yogasthanas, up to the yogastana of utkrishtparinam yogastana, as if it were not seen before!

If a part of the three-fold guna-hani ayam is given in all substances, then it is the measure of yavamdhya. If two parts of guna-hani are given in it, then it is the measure of chaya. If this chaya is multiplied by two guna-hani, then it is yavamdhya, and above that, in the guna-hani, the first niseka is the measure of yavamdhya, and the second and subsequent nisekas are one-one chaya-less, know that. If the measure of the ayam of one-fold guna-hani is subtracted from the chaya yavamdhya, then it is the measure of the last niseka of the first guna-hani. If one special (chaya) is subtracted from it, then it is half the measure from yavamdhya, that is the first niseka of the second guna-hani. If one special is subtracted from above it, then there are second and subsequent nisekas, so if the measure of the ayam of one-fold guna-hani is subtracted from the special, then it is the last niseka. Here, know that half of the measure of chaya in the first guna-hani is the measure of chaya in the second guna-hani, and if one chaya is subtracted from the last niseka of the second guna-hani, then it is half the measure of the first niseka of the second guna-hani, that is the first niseka of the third guna-hani. From this, half the measure of chaya from the chaya of the second guna-hani, which is chaya, if one-one chaya is subtracted, then there are second and subsequent nisekas. Know this way up to the last guna-hani.

Know that the jiva-dravya is half-half for each guna-hani, and in the lower guna-hani, below yavamdhya, from the first niseka of the first guna-hani to the last niseka of the last guna-hani, in all the nisekas for each guna-hani, the measure of the nisekas in the upper guna-hani, subtract the measure of the special (chaya) of each guna-hani, then it is the measure of the niseka. This is called -

The first niseka related to the upper first guna-hani is equal to yavamdhya. If the measure of the special (chaya) in the first guna-hani is subtracted from it, then it is the measure of the first niseka related to the lower first guna-hani, and if the measure of the special (chaya) of the first guna-hani is subtracted from the measure of the second niseka of the upper first guna-hani, then it is the measure of the second niseka related to the lower first guna-hani. Know this way up to the last niseka of the first guna-hani. Know the measure of the first niseka related to the upper second guna-hani by subtracting the measure of the special (chaya) of the second guna-hani from it. If the same chaya is subtracted from the second niseka of the upper second guna-hani, then it is the measure of the second niseka of the lower second guna-hani. Know this way up to the last niseka. Similarly, in the third and subsequent guna-hani, know the measure of the nisekas by subtracting the measure of the special (chaya) of each guna-hani.

Page #245:
---------------------------
## Gommatasara Karmakanda-206: Knowing the Number of Jivas

**Knowing the Number of Jivas:** The number of jivas in each yogasthan is determined by the number of pratyayas (proofs) in each niseka (stage of liberation). The number of pratyayas in each niseka is calculated by multiplying the number of pratyayas in the mukha (final niseka) and the bhumi (initial niseka), dividing by two, and then multiplying by the number of pratyayas in the guna-hani (reduction of qualities) ayam (dimension). This process is repeated for each guna-hani to determine the number of jivas in each guna-hani.

**Calculating the Number of Jivas in Each Guna-hani:** The number of jivas in the second guna-hani is half the number of jivas in the first guna-hani, and so on. To calculate the total number of jivas in all guna-hanis, the following formula is used:

* Multiply the number of jivas in the first guna-hani by two, then subtract the number of jivas in the last guna-hani.
* Divide the result by the product of the numbers 2, 1, and 1.

**Calculating the Number of Jivas in Each Guna-hani:** The number of jivas in each guna-hani is determined by multiplying the number of jivas in each guna-hani by the number of pratyayas in the guna-hani ayam.

**Calculating the Total Number of Jivas in All Guna-hanis:** To calculate the total number of jivas in all guna-hanis, the following formula is used:

* Multiply the number of jivas in the first guna-hani by two, then subtract the number of jivas in the last guna-hani.
* Divide the result by the product of the numbers 2, 1, and 1.
* Subtract the result from the number of jivas in the upper guna-hani or add it to the number of jivas in the lower guna-hani.

**Calculating the Total Number of Jivas in All Guna-hanis:** The total number of jivas in all guna-hanis is determined by adding the number of jivas in the upper and lower guna-hanis.

**Calculating the Number of Jivas in Each Paryapta-Trasa Yogasthan:** The number of jivas in each paryapta-trasa yogasthan is determined by the number of jivas in the corresponding guna-hani.

**The Yavakara Structure:** The number of jivas in each yogasthan decreases as you move away from the first niseka in the upper guna-hani, creating a yavakara (barley-shaped) structure.

**Calculating the Number of Jivas in Each Paryapta-Trasa Yogasthan:** The number of jivas in each paryapta-trasa yogasthan is determined by the number of jivas in the corresponding guna-hani.

**The Number of Jivas in Each Paryapta-Trasa Yogasthan:** The number of jivas in each paryapta-trasa yogasthan is determined by the number of jivas in the corresponding guna-hani.

**The Number of Jivas in Each Paryapta-Trasa Yogasthan:** The number of jivas in each paryapta-trasa yogasthan is determined by the number of jivas in the corresponding guna-hani.

**The Number of Jivas in Each Paryapta-Trasa Yogasthan:** The number of jivas in each paryapta-trasa yogasthan is determined by the number of jivas in the corresponding guna-hani.

**The Number of Jivas in Each Paryapta-Trasa Yogasthan:** The number of jivas in each paryapta-trasa yogasthan is determined by the number of jivas in the corresponding guna-hani.

**The Number of Jivas in Each Paryapta-Trasa Yogasthan:** The number of jivas in each paryapta-trasa yogasthan is determined by the number of jivas in the corresponding guna-hani.

**The Number of Jivas in Each Paryapta-Trasa Yogasthan:** The number of jivas in each paryapta-trasa yogasthan is determined by the number of jivas in the corresponding guna-hani.

**The Number of Jivas in Each Paryapta-Trasa Yogasthan:** The number of jivas in each paryapta-trasa yogasthan is determined by the number of jivas in the corresponding guna-hani.

**The Number of Jivas in Each Paryapta-Trasa Yogasthan:** The number of jivas in each paryapta-trasa yogasthan is determined by the number of jivas in the corresponding guna-hani.

**The Number of Jivas in Each Paryapta-Trasa Yogasthan:** The number of jivas in each paryapta-trasa yogasthan is determined by the number of jivas in the corresponding guna-hani.

**The Number of Jivas in Each Paryapta-Trasa Yogasthan:** The number of jivas in each paryapta-trasa yogasthan is determined by the number of jivas in the corresponding guna-hani.

**The Number of Jivas in Each Paryapta-Trasa Yogasthan:** The number of jivas in each paryapta-trasa yogasthan is determined by the number of jivas in the corresponding guna-hani.

**The Number of Jivas in Each Paryapta-Trasa Yogasthan:** The number of jivas in each paryapta-trasa yogasthan is determined by the number of jivas in the corresponding guna-hani.

**The Number of Jivas in Each Paryapta-Trasa Yogasthan:** The number of jivas in each paryapta-trasa yogasthan is determined by the number of jivas in the corresponding guna-hani.

**The Number of Jivas in Each Paryapta-Trasa Yogasthan:** The number of jivas in each paryapta-trasa yogasthan is determined by the number of jivas in the corresponding guna-hani.

**The Number of Jivas in Each Paryapta-Trasa Yogasthan:** The number of jivas in each paryapta-trasa yogasthan is determined by the number of jivas in the corresponding guna-hani.

**The Number of Jivas in Each Paryapta-Trasa Yogasthan:** The number of jivas in each paryapta-trasa yogasthan is determined by the number of jivas in the corresponding guna-hani.

**The Number of Jivas in Each Paryapta-Trasa Yogasthan:** The number of jivas in each paryapta-trasa yogasthan is determined by the number of jivas in the corresponding guna-hani.

**The Number of Jivas in Each Paryapta-Trasa Yogasthan:** The number of jivas in each paryapta-trasa yogasthan is determined by the number of jivas in the corresponding guna-hani.

**The Number of Jivas in Each Paryapta-Trasa Yogasthan:** The number of jivas in each paryapta-trasa yogasthan is determined by the number of j
Page #246:
---------------------------
Gommatasar Karmakanda-207

**Special Meaning:** In the lowest yoga-sthana, the number of jghanya-spardhakas is equal to an innumerable fraction of the jaga-shreni. The binding of the jghanya-samaya-prabaddha-pradeshas from the lowest yoga-sthana is the result. In each yoga-sthana, the number of jghanya-spardhakas increases by an innumerable fraction of a finger-width. This is the desired quantity. Multiplying the desired quantity by the result and dividing by the number of pradeshas, the quotient obtained is the increase in the number of pradeshas in each of the higher yoga-sthanas. This means that the jghanya-samaya-prabaddha binds from the lowest yoga-sthana, and from the next yoga-sthana, it binds with an increase in the number of pradeshas. In this way, the jghanya-samaya-prabaddha doubles when the lowest yoga-sthana doubles, and quadruples when the lowest yoga-sthana quadruples. In this way, in the highest yoga-sthana of the sanghi-paryapta, the lowest yoga-sthana is equal to an innumerable fraction of half the palyas. Here, the jghanya-samaya-prabaddha is multiplied by an innumerable fraction of half the palyas.

**Further, this is explained in five verses:**

**Verse 251:**
"The jghanya-parinama-yoga-sthana of the dvi-indriya-paryapta jiva increases in a uniform manner from the lowest yoga-sthana to the highest yoga-sthana of the sanghi-paryapta jiva, increasing by one pramana in each yoga-sthana."

**Verse 252:**
"The jghanya-parinama-yoga-sthana of the dvi-indriya-paryapta jiva is equal to an innumerable fraction of the jaga-shreni. After that, the number of jghanya-spardhakas increases by an innumerable fraction of a finger-width in each yoga-sthana. Dividing the number of avibhaga-praticchedhas of the lowest yoga-sthana by an innumerable fraction of the jaga-shreni, we get an innumerable fraction of a finger-width as the number of jghanya-spardhakas for one yoga-prakshepa. Therefore, the number of avibhaga-praticchedhas increases by one yoga-prakshepa in each yoga-sthana."

**Footnotes:**

1. "The jghanya-spardhakas increase by an innumerable fraction of a finger-width in each yoga-sthana, due to the absence of the desire to bind." (Dhavala, 10, p. 484)
2. See Dhavala, 10, p. 484, Sutra 189 commentary. 

Page #247:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-208 Now the order of increase in the Jghanya Yoga-sthana is stated -

Dhuvavadditunto, Duguṇam Duguṇam Kammen Jayate.
Charime Pallchheda Asankhejadimo Guṇo Hodi. ||253||

Meaning: In this way, the Jghanya Yoga-sthana (going to the innumerable part of the series) increases in the form of Dhruva-vṛddhi from place to place, becoming double-double in order, and finally, the multiplier in the Utkrishta-parināma Yoga-sthana of the Sājñī-paryāpta-jīva is the measure of the innumerable part of the half-section of the Pally, i.e., the measure of the Avibhāga-pratichhedas of the Jghanya Yoga-sthana is multiplied by the innumerable part of the half-sections of the Pally, and the resulting measure is the number of Avibhāga-pratichhedas of the Sarvātkrishta Yoga-sthana. Now the measure of the Yoga-sthānas is stated -

Ādi Ante Suddhe, Bahihide Rūvasanjude Thāṇā.
Seḍhi Asankhejadimā, Jogṭṭhāṇā Nirantaragā. ||254||

Meaning: From the total number of Avibhāga-pratichhedas of the final Utkrishta-sthāna, subtract the Avibhāga-pratichhedas of the Jghanya-sthāna, and then divide the resulting measure by the number of Avibhāga-pratichhedas of the Jghanya-spardhaka in each place, which is the measure of the innumerable part of the Sucyangula. The resulting measure is the number of places. Adding one Jghanya Yoga-sthāna to this measure gives the number of Sarvanirantara Yoga-sthānas. These Yoga-sthānas are the measure of the innumerable part of the Jagachchhreṇī. Further, the measure of all the Yoga-sthānas is stated -

Antaragā Tad Asankhejadimā Seḍhi Asankhabhāgā Hu.
Sāntaranirantarāṇivi, Savvāṇivi Jogṭṭhāṇāṇi. ||255||

Meaning: The Antaragata (occurring in the six Antaras) Yoga-sthānas are the measure of the innumerable part of those Nirantara Yoga-sthānas, and these are also the measure of the innumerable part of the Jagachchhreṇī. Similarly, the Nirantara, Sāntara, and Mishrarūpa Yoga-sthānas are the measure of the innumerable part of the Antaragata Yoga-sthānas, and these are also the measure of the innumerable part of the Jagachchhreṇī. Thus, combining all three types of Yoga-sthānas, the Sarvayoga-sthānas are also the measure of the innumerable part of the Jagachchhreṇī, because there are many types of Asankhyāta, so one should know the appropriate part of the Asankhyāta.

1. Dhavala Pu.10 p. 488 Sutra 1931

Page #248:
---------------------------
Gommatasar Karmakanda-209
Now we will explain the beginning and end of these Yogasthanas - ... ... .......:.:. Guhmamayot Apjanngams Padhme Jahanno Jogo.
Pajattasannipanceendriyasss Ukkassao Hodi ||256|| Meaning - In all these Yogasthanas, the first time of the last (6012th) Ksudrabhav, which is born from the three turns of the subtle Nigodaya Labdhyaparyaptak, is the Jghanyoupadayogasthan, that is the beginning. And the Sanjnee Panchendriya Paryaptak Jeevaka, which is the Utkrishtaparinamyogasthan, is the end. Then, due to the four types of Bandhas - Prakriti, etc., it is said -
Joga Payadipedesa, Thidi Anubhaga Kasayado Hoti.
Aparinaduchchinnasu Ya, Bandhatthidikarana Nnathi ||257|| Meaning - Prakriti and Pradeshbandha Yogas are caused by the cause, as there will be auspicious and inauspicious Yogas, so there will be Prakritibandha, and as there will be intense and mild Yogas, so there will be time-bound Bandha, therefore their cause is Yoga. And Sthitibandha and Anubhagabandhas are caused by Kashaya, therefore, as there will be Kashaya, so there will be Sthitibandha accordingly, and so there will be Anubhagabandhas accordingly, because their main cause is Kashaya. The Jghanya is one time and the Utkrishta is the time of the internal moment, whose Kashayasthanas are not in the form of Udaya, such Upshantakashayas and whose Kashayasthanas have been destroyed, such Ksheenakayas and the immediate Sthitibandha of Sayogakevali is not caused by Kashaya. The word 'Cha' means that the cause of the Bandha of A Yogakevali is neither Yoga nor Kashaya.
Special Meaning: In this regard, the opinion of Dhavalakar Veerasenacharya is that in the 11th, 12th, and 13th Gunasthanas, there is Sthiti and Anubhagabandhas for one time of the Satavedaniya.
Now, the Yogasthanas, Prakritisangraha, Sthitibheda, Sthitibandhadhyavasanasthan, Anubhagabandhadhyavayasthan, and Karmapradeshas are explained in three verses -
Sedhi Asankhejadima, Jogatthanani Hoti Savvani.
Tehim Asankhejaguno, Payadiinam Sangho Savvo ||258|| Meaning: The continuous, intermittent, or intermittent-continuous, all Yogasthanas, which are in the form of a series of Japa, are in the form of an innumerable part.
1. "Tenev Karane Na Did-Anubhaghehi Iriyaavah Karmam Appipidi Bhanidam." (Dhaval Pu, 131.49) 

Page #249:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-210

There are proofs and from them there is a community of countless-world-multiplied types of knowledge-obscuring, etc. natures. Multiplying the proof of the all-yoga-place by countless worlds, the proof of all-successive karma-natures is obtained.

**Special Meaning:** There are 5 successive natures of knowledge-obscuring. Among these, the knowledge of subtle-subtle-obtained-sufficient, which is the subtle knowledge of the destruction-less-remaining-in-one-form, is called obtained-syllable. Because there is no increase or decrease in it, only-knowledge is syllable. From the perspective of the substance-meaning-naya, since the knowledge of subtle-subtle-obtained-sufficient is the same as the knowledge-general, this knowledge is also called syllable. Its proof is the infinite-part of only-knowledge, this knowledge is without-obscuring, because the infinite-part of the syllable is always revealed, such is the statement of the scripture, or if it is covered, the implication of the absence of the living being arises. Dividing this obtained-syllable knowledge among all-living-beings, countless-world-multiplied knowledge-division-intersections arise. Dividing this obtained-syllable knowledge among all-living-beings, knowledge-division-intersections arise. In this obtained-syllable knowledge, dividing among all-living-beings, knowledge-division-intersections arise. In this obtained-syllable knowledge, dividing among all-living-beings, knowledge-division-intersections arise. In this obtained-syllable knowledge, dividing among all-living-beings, knowledge-division-intersections arise. In this obtained-syllable knowledge, dividing among all-living-beings, knowledge-division-intersections arise. In this obtained-syllable knowledge, dividing among all-living-beings, knowledge-division-intersections arise. In this obtained-syllable knowledge, dividing among all-living-beings, knowledge-division-intersections arise. In this obtained-syllable knowledge, dividing among all-living-beings, knowledge-division-intersections arise. In this obtained-syllable knowledge, dividing among all-living-beings, knowledge-division-intersections arise. In this obtained-syllable knowledge, dividing among all-living-beings, knowledge-division-intersections arise. In this obtained-syllable knowledge, dividing among all-living-beings, knowledge-division-intersections arise. In this obtained-syllable knowledge, dividing among all-living-beings, knowledge-division-intersections arise. In this obtained-syllable knowledge, dividing among all-living-beings, knowledge-division-intersections arise. In this obtained-syllable knowledge, dividing among all-living-beings, knowledge-division-intersections arise. In this obtained-syllable knowledge, dividing among all-living-beings, knowledge-division-intersections arise. In this obtained-syllable knowledge, dividing among all-living-beings, knowledge-division-intersections arise. In this obtained-syllable knowledge, dividing among all-living-beings, knowledge-division-intersections arise. In this obtained-syllable knowledge, dividing among all-living-beings, knowledge-division-intersections arise. In this obtained-syllable knowledge, dividing among all-living-beings, knowledge-division-intersections arise. In this obtained-syllable knowledge, dividing among all-living-beings, knowledge-division-intersections arise. In this obtained-syllable knowledge, dividing among all-living-beings, knowledge-division-intersections arise. In this obtained-syllable knowledge, dividing among all-living-beings, knowledge-division-intersections arise. In this obtained-syllable knowledge, dividing among all-living-beings, knowledge-division-intersections arise. In this obtained-syllable knowledge, dividing among all-living-beings, knowledge-division-intersections arise. In this obtained-syllable knowledge, dividing among all-living-beings, knowledge-division-intersections arise. In this obtained-syllable knowledge, dividing among all-living-beings, knowledge-division-intersections arise. In this obtained-syllable knowledge, dividing among all-living-beings, knowledge-division-intersections arise. In this obtained-syllable knowledge, dividing among all-living-beings, knowledge-division-intersections arise. In this obtained-syllable knowledge, dividing among all-living-beings, knowledge-division-intersections arise. In this obtained-syllable knowledge, dividing among all-living-beings, knowledge-division-intersections arise. In this obtained-syllable knowledge, dividing among all-living-beings, knowledge-division-intersections arise. In this obtained-syllable knowledge, dividing among all-living-beings, knowledge-division-intersections arise. In this obtained-syllable knowledge, dividing among all-living-beings, knowledge-division-intersections arise. In this obtained-syllable knowledge, dividing among all-living-beings, knowledge-division-intersections arise. In this obtained-syllable knowledge, dividing among all-living-beings, knowledge-division-intersections arise. In this obtained-syllable knowledge, dividing among all-living-beings, knowledge-division-intersections arise. In this obtained-syllable knowledge, dividing among all-living-beings, knowledge-division-intersections arise. In this obtained-syllable knowledge, dividing among all-living-beings, knowledge-division-intersections arise. In this obtained-syllable knowledge, dividing among all-living-beings, knowledge-division-intersections arise. In this obtained-syllable knowledge, dividing among all-living-beings, knowledge-division-intersections arise. In this obtained-syllable knowledge, dividing among all-living-beings, knowledge-division-intersections arise. In this obtained-syllable knowledge, dividing among all-living-beings, knowledge-division-intersections arise. In this obtained-syllable knowledge, dividing among all-living-beings, knowledge-division-intersections arise. In this obtained-syllable knowledge, dividing among all-living-beings, knowledge-division-intersections arise. In this obtained-syllable knowledge, dividing among all-living-beings, knowledge-division-intersections arise. In this obtained-syllable knowledge, dividing among all-living-beings, knowledge-division-intersections arise. In this obtained-syllable knowledge, dividing among all-living-beings, knowledge-division-intersections arise. In this obtained-syllable knowledge, dividing among all-living-beings, knowledge-division-intersections arise. In this obtained-syllable knowledge, dividing among all-living-beings, knowledge-division-intersections arise. In this obtained-syllable knowledge, dividing
Page #250:
---------------------------
## Gommatasara Karmakanda - 211

When a five-sensed Tiryanch or a human being goes to hell, the Narakanupurvi arises. Before that, the form they had in the Tiryanch or human state does not perish. Therefore, the number of five-sensed Tiryanch or humans who enter hell with the most inferior Avagahana is equal to a fraction of a Ghana Angul. Multiplying this number by the area of the previous state gives the first division of Narakanupurvi. The number of those who enter hell with the most superior Avagahana is equal to a Ghana Angul. Multiplying this number by the area of the previous state gives the final division of Narakanupurvi.

According to the sutra "Aadi Ante Suddhe Vahihide Ruvasanjude Thana", the number of divisions of Narakanupurvi is obtained by subtracting the area of the first division from the area of the final division, dividing the remainder by one, and adding one to the result.

There is one alternative for the Narakanupurvi of a Sikthamatysa who goes to hell with the most inferior Avagahana, having a specific shape of the mouth, and whose number is equal to a fraction of a Ghana Angul. There is another alternative for the Narakanupurvi of another Sikthamatysa who goes to hell with the same inferior Avagahana, because the location of the previous living beings is different from the location of the previous celestial regions, due to the difference in the arrangement of the celestial regions. Similarly, there is a third alternative for the Narakanupurvi of another Sikthamatysa who goes to hell with the same inferior Avagahana, because the location of the previous living beings is different from the location of the previous celestial regions, due to the difference in the arrangement of the celestial regions. This reason should be stated everywhere. There is a fourth alternative for the Narakanupurvi of another Sikthamatysa who goes to hell with the same inferior Avagahana, having a shape of the mouth that was not available before, because it has transformed into that shape. There is a fifth alternative for the Narakanupurvi of another Sikthamatysa who goes to hell with the same inferior Avagahana, because it is the cause of the substance that has transformed into a shape of the mouth that was not available before.

In this way, there are alternatives for the Narakanupurvi up to Tiryanch Pratar, which are six, seven, eight, nine, ten, Avali, Ucchvas, Stoka, Lava, Ghatika, Muhurta, Divas, Paksha, Masa, Ritu, Ayan, Varsa, Yuga, Purva, Paly, Sagar, and Rajurup.

Furthermore, in the same order, the alternatives of two, three, etc., Tiryanch Pratar should be increased until the number of alternatives for the Narakanupurvi is equal to the number of celestial regions of Tiryanch Pratar, which is equal to a fraction of an Asankhyat of a Suchi Angul.

It is a special feature that the most inferior Avagahana of the Sikthamatysa born in hell with new and different shapes of the mouth should be considered as fixed. Rajupratar, Rajuvarg, and Tiryanch Pratar are synonyms. Suchi Angul... 

Page #251:
---------------------------
This passage discusses the number of possibilities for experiencing hell (Narka-Gati) based on the severity of the karma (Avagahana) accumulated by a Sikkha-Matsya (a type of fish). 

It states that the number of Narka-Gati possibilities is equal to the number of celestial regions (Akasha-Pradesha) obtained by multiplying the number of Tirya-Pratara (a unit of measurement) by an infinite number (Asankhyata). 

The passage then explains that the number of Narka-Gati possibilities for a Sikkha-Matsya born in hell with the most severe Avagahana is equal to the number of celestial regions obtained by multiplying the number of Tirya-Pratara by an infinite number. 

It further clarifies that the number of Narka-Gati possibilities for a Sikkha-Matsya with a specific Avagahana is equal to the number of celestial regions obtained by multiplying the number of Tirya-Pratara by an infinite number divided by an infinite number (Asankhyata) of the size of a finger (Suchi-Angula). 

The passage then discusses the number of possibilities for experiencing the Tiryancha-Anu-Purvi (a type of karma) based on the severity of the Avagahana. It states that the number of Tiryancha-Anu-Purvi possibilities is equal to the number of celestial regions obtained by multiplying the number of Tirya-Pratara by an infinite number divided by an infinite number (Asankhyata) of the size of a finger (Suchi-Angula). 

Finally, the passage concludes by stating that the number of Tiryancha-Anu-Purvi possibilities is equal to the number of celestial regions obtained by multiplying the number of Tirya-Pratara by an infinite number divided by an infinite number (Asankhyata) of the size of a finger (Suchi-Angula) and then subtracting the number of celestial regions obtained by multiplying the number of Tirya-Pratara by an infinite number divided by an infinite number (Asankhyata) of the size of a finger (Suchi-Angula) and then dividing the result by one and adding one. 

Page #252:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-213

A **vikalpa** (alternative) is obtained because it is the cause of **parinaman** (transformation) in the form of **apuurvamukhakar** (unprecedented face) in relation to an **akashapradesh** (space region). Again, when a **sukshmanigodlabdhyaparyapta** (subtle-bodied, sufficient) being is born in the **tiryanch** (animal) realm with the same **jghanya avagahana** (inferior absorption), an **apuurvamukhakar** is obtained. At that time, there is a second **tiryanchgatprayogyanupurvi vikalpa** (alternative based on the previous experience of animal existence). In this way, taking **jghanya avagahana** as the basis, one should cause birth in the **tiryanch** realm with **apuurva-apuurva mukhakar** (unprecedented faces) until **ghnalokpraman** (as many as the atoms in the earth) **tiryanchgatprayogyanupurvi** (alternatives based on the previous experience of animal existence) are obtained. Taking **jghanya avagahana** as the basis, only so many **vikalpas** are available because it is not possible to obtain more **mukhakar** (faces) here. When **sukshmanigodlabdhyaparyapta** beings are born in the **tiryanch** realm with the most **jghanya avagahana**, if there are many new **mukhakar** (faces) in an excellent way, they are **ghnalokpraman** (as many as the atoms in the earth). This is the meaning of the statement. Again, even with the support of one **pradesh** (region) more **sarvajghanya avagahana** (most inferior absorption), there are **ghnalokpraman** (as many as the atoms in the earth) **vikalpas** of **tiryanchgatprayogyanupurvi** (alternatives based on the previous experience of animal existence) called **namakarma** (karma that determines the name and form). Similarly, from two **pradesh** (regions) more **jghanya avagahana** (most inferior absorption) to the **utkrista avagahana** (excellent absorption) of **mahamatsya** (great fish), one should cause the birth of separate **ghnalokpraman** (as many as the atoms in the earth) **vikalpas** of **tiryanchgatprayogyanupurvi** (alternatives based on the previous experience of animal existence) related to all these **avagahana** (absorptions).

Now, subtracting the most **jghanya avagahana** (most inferior absorption) of the **sukshmanigodlabdhyaparyapta** (subtle-bodied, sufficient) being from the **avagahana** (absorption) of the **mahamatsya** (great fish), adding one to the remainder, and multiplying by **ghnalok** (earth) by the number of **asankhyat** (innumerable) parts of a **gul** (finger), there are as many **tiryanchgatyanupurvi** (alternatives based on the previous experience of animal existence) called **namakarma** (karma that determines the name and form) as there are **akashapradesh** (space regions).

**Manushyatyanupurvi** (alternatives based on the previous experience of human existence) is **manushyakshetravipaki** (results in the human realm). **Manushyakshetra** (human realm) is **trisanaali** (three-naali) in size, multiplied by **raju** (a measure of length) and **pratar** (a measure of width), with a **gol** (spherical) diameter of 45 lakh **yojan** (a measure of distance), due to the **paryapta** (sufficient) and **aparyapta** (insufficient) **panchendriya** (five senses) of humans, making it suitable for their birth. It is not called a **chaukor kshetra** (square region) because humans are not born outside the four corners of the **manushottar** (human realm). The **naraki** (hell beings), **tras** (animals), **sthavar** (stationary beings), **karmabhumia** (earth beings), **tiryanch** (animals), **manushya** (humans), and **devamanushya** (divine humans) are born on the six **prithvi** (earths) of the **adi** (beginning). They do not leave their previous form due to the **udaya** (rise) of **manushyanupurvi** (alternatives based on the previous experience of human existence). Therefore, multiplying the **jghanya avagahana** (most inferior absorption) by the **asankhyat** (innumerable) part of a **gul** (finger) gives the first **bhed** (difference), and multiplying the **utkrista avagahana** (excellent absorption) by the **sankhyat** (countable) **ghanagul** (cubic finger) gives the last **bhed** (difference). Therefore, according to the **sutra** (aphorism) "**adi ante sudde**" (the beginning and end are pure), subtracting the beginning from the end, dividing by one, and adding one, gives the number of **bhed** (differences) of **manushyanupurvi** (alternatives based on the previous experience of human existence).

1. A **sukshmanigodlabdhyaparyapta** (subtle-bodied, sufficient) being is born in the **manushya** (human) realm from the **jghanya avagahana** (most inferior absorption) by the **asankhyat** (innumerable) part of a **gul** (finger) with **vigrahgati** (body movement). Here, one **vikalpa** (alternative) of **manushyatigatprayogyanupurvi** (alternatives based on the previous experience of human existence) is obtained.

1. **Dhaval Pustak** 13, p. 378

Page #253:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-214

**Again, for a subtle-bodied, omniscient being, born as a human with a gross descent, there is a second option for human-life-based-causality. Again, for a third subtle-bodied, omniscient being, born as a human with a gross descent and an unprecedented form, there is a third option for human-life-based-causality, because otherwise there would be a contradiction in the origin of an unprecedented form. If you say that it is not proven to assume a difference in the cause due to a difference in the effect, then that is not correct, because this leads to the implication of the origin of an effect without a cause. Taking the gross descent as the basis, for subtle-bodied, omniscient beings who cause fatal harm to humans with various unprecedented forms, there should be options for human-life-based-causality generated until there are as many options as there are celestial regions in the 45 lakh yojanas external to the terrestrial beings. Here, taking the gross descent as the basis, there are as many options for human-life-based-causality as there are celestial regions. **

**By establishing the causalities obtained from this descent, subtracting the gross descent of the subtle-bodied, omniscient being from the excellent descent of the great fish, and adding one to the remainder, there are as many descent options as there are parts of the infinite number of the universe. Multiplying these descent options by the options for causality related to one descent, we get the total number of options for human-life-based-causality. **

**Deva-based-causality is the result of the celestial realm. All gods are fearful, so their realm is to be known as the product of the fearful region, which is nine hundred yojanas from the end of the desired luminous realm, multiplied by the region of the terrestrial beings. The realm of origin of the remaining gods is small. Therefore, its desire is not discussed here. The statement is mainly about the luminous gods. Only the five-sensed, omniscient terrestrial and human beings are born as gods. While going to the celestial realm, due to the non-destruction of the previous form before the rise of the celestial life and celestial-life-based-causality along with the rise of the celestial life, the first difference is obtained by multiplying the number of gross descents by the said region. The excellent descent is also a number of cubic angulas. Multiplying by that, we get the final difference. So, according to the sutra "Adi Ante Suddhe", subtracting the beginning from the end, dividing by one, and adding one, we get the number of differences in celestial-life-based-causality. **

**By the grossest descent, a single option for celestial-life-based-causality is obtained for the fish that goes to the celestial realm. Again, by the same grossest descent, an option for celestial-life-based-causality is obtained for the fish that goes to the celestial realm with an unprecedented form. **

**1. Dhwala Pustak 13, pp. 383-384** 

Page #254:
---------------------------
## Gommatasara Karmakanda - 215

The second alternative is obtained. The meaning of "mukha" is the body, its form is the institution, this should be accepted here. There is also a verse on this subject -

*Mukhamardha sharirasy sarva va mukhamuchyate.
Tatraapi nasika shreshtha, nasikayaasch chakshushi.*

Meaning: Half of the body is called "mukha", or the whole body is called "mukha". Even in that, the nose is superior, and the eyes are superior to the nose.

Thus, again and again, with the "alabdhapurvamukhaakar" (unobtained previous form of the mouth), the nine hundred yojana "bahalyarup" (extensive form) "tiryakpratar" (transmigratory beings) born in the heavens, as many "akashpradesh" (regions of space) as they have, taking that as the basis of the most inferior "avagahana" (immersion), the "devagatiprayogyanupurvi" (sequential progression of heavenly paths) are obtained, with the progressive "prakritivikalp" (variations of nature). Now, even in the most inferior "avagahana", one "pradesh" more, the same number of "prakritivikalp" are obtained.

Thus, from the "sarvajghanayavagahana" (most inferior immersion) with two "pradesh" more, it should be taken to the "utkrishtmahamatsya" (most excellent great fish) "avagahana". Now, if nine hundred yojana "bahalyarup" "tiryakpratar" "devagatiprayogyanupurvi" "vikalp" are obtained for one "avagahana" alternative, then how many "devagatiprayogyanupurvi" "vikalp" will be obtained for "sankhyatghanagul" (a measure of volume) "avagahana" alternatives? Thus, by multiplying the "tiryakpratar" of nine hundred yojana "bahalyarup" by all the "avagahana" alternatives, the "sarvuttarottar" (all progressive) "prakritivikalp" of the "prakriti" called "devagatiprayogyanupurvi" are obtained.

By combining these progressive divisions of "anupurvi" with the progressive divisions of the aforementioned "jnanavaran" (veil of knowledge), the "prakritisangrah" (collection of natures) is obtained. The progressive divisions of the remaining "prakriti" are not taught. This "prakritisangrah" is done according to the composition. Those who have heard much should purify it.

*Tehin asankhejaguna, thidi avsesa havanti payadinam.
Thidibandhajzhavasaanatthana tatto asankhaguna.* (259)

Meaning: From those "prakritivikalp", the divisions of "sthitibandha" (state of bondage) are "asankhyatguna" (infinitely numerous), and from the divisions of "sthiti" (state), the "sthitibandhaadhyavasayasthan" (place of determination of the state of bondage) are "asankhyatguna". (The results that cause "sthitibandha" are called "sthitibandhaadhyavasaya".)

Special Meaning: The divisions of "sthiti" of each "prakriti", by subtracting the inferior "sthiti" from the superior "sthiti", dividing it by one "samaya" (time), and adding one, the "sthiti" increases by one "samaya" from the inferior "sthiti" ... 

Page #255:
---------------------------
Gommatasar Karmakanda-216

The number of states of a single nature, up to the state of excellence, is the number of states of that nature. How many states are there in relation to the aforementioned states of all the successive natures? Thus, by the rule of three, the number of states is the product of the number of states and the number of variations of nature. And the number of states of bondage is countless times the number of states. The term "state of bondage" refers to the cause of bondage in the states arising from the respective natures. The state of bondage is not the state of passions.

**Numerical Calculation:**

There are 3100 forms of results due to the bondage of a single nature, and there are 40 states of that single nature. Write down 2 for five times (22222) and multiply them together. The product is 32. Multiply this product by the number of states in a single passion, which is 8. This gives us the number of states in a single passion. Divide the number of states (40) by the number of passions (5), which gives us 8. This is the number of states in a single passion. Double this number to get the number of states in a double passion. The number of states of bondage in the lowest state of bondage is 9. According to the formula "Padahtamukhamadi Dhanam," the number of states in a single passion is the product of the number of states (8) and the initial amount (9), which is 72. Divide the initial amount (9) by the number of states in a single passion (8) plus one, which is 9. This is the number of states in a single passion. Add one to the number of states in each state to get the number of states of bondage up to the first passion. According to the formula "Vyekpadarthadhanachaya Gunogachch Uttaradhanam," multiply half the number of states (8) by the number of states in a single passion (1) and then multiply the result by the number of states (8). This gives us the total number of states in a single passion. Half of 8 minus 1 is 3.5. Multiplying this by 1 gives us 3.5. Multiplying this by 8 gives us 28. This is the total number of states in a single passion. Add the initial amount (72) and the final amount (28) to get the total number of states in the first passion. 72 + 28 = 100. This is the total number of states in the first passion. The number of states in each passion is double the number of states in the previous passion. Therefore, the number of states in the first passion is 100, the number of states in the second passion is 200, the number of states in the third passion is 400, the number of states in the fourth passion is 800, and the number of states in the fifth passion is 1600. Multiply the initial amount by half the product of the number of passions (5) minus 1, which is 4, and the number 2 written four times (2222), which is 16. This gives us the number of states in the last passion. 

Page #256:
---------------------------
Gommatasar Karmakanda-257

First, multiply 100 by 100, which equals 100416 = 1600. This is the measure of the substance of the final guna-hānī.

"Antadhanam gunaguniyam adivihinam ruunuttara bhajijam" This is the karana-sutra for adding the same multiplier for each place. Therefore, when calculating, the final measure is multiplied by the multiplier's measure. Then, subtract the initial measure from the product. The result is divided by the one-less-than-the-multiplier (the 'caya') to obtain the total substance. Here, the final measure is 1600. Since it was doubled repeatedly, the multiplier's measure is multiplied by two, resulting in 3200. Subtracting the initial measure of 100 from this gives 3200 - 100 = 3100. Adding the five guna-hānī together, due to the sthiti-bandha of one nature, gives 3100 as the adhyavasaya-sthāna. This is the numerical explanation. Now, the actual explanation: due to the sthiti-bandha of one nature, there are countless-world-measure sthiti-bandha adhyavasaya-sthāna. This is the measure of the substance, of one nature. From the lowest sthiti to the highest sthiti, there are countless-moment-measure sthiti-bheda sthiti-sthāna. The measure of the various guna-hānī is only a countless-part of half of a moment. The measure of the mutually multiplied quantity is also only a countless-part of a moment.

Dividing the measure of the various guna-hānī by the measure of the sthiti of the guna-hānī-śalākā gives the measure of the guna-hānī-āyāma. Doubling this gives two guna-hānī. Here, among all the sthiti-bheda, the sthiti-bandha adhyavasaya-sthāna due to the lowest sthiti-bandha are the fewest, yet they are still countless-world-measure. The initial substance, multiplied by the 'gachcha' from the 'pada-hata-mukha-ādi-dhanam', is called the 'ādi-dhanam'. Dividing the initial sthāna by one more than the guna-hānī-āyāma gives the measure of the 'caya'. "Vyeka-padartha-dhanacaya-gunogachcha-uttaradhanam" Multiplying half of the one-less-than-the-multiplier by the 'caya' gives a measure. Multiplying this again by the 'gachcha' gives the 'caya-dhanam'. Adding the 'ādi-dhanam' and the 'caya-dhanam' gives the total substance of the first guna-hānī. In this way, the guna-hānī are doubled repeatedly, until finally, the measure of the one-less-than-the-multiplier of the various guna-hānī is doubled. Multiplying the 'ādi' by half of the measure of the mutually multiplied quantity gives the substance of the final guna-hānī. Therefore, according to the sutra "Antadhanam gunaguniyam adivihinam ruunuttara bhajijam", the final measure is multiplied by the multiplier (two). Then, the initial measure is subtracted, and the result is divided by the measure of the one-less-than-the-multiplier (21-1). The quotient is the substance of all the guna-hānī. Thus, for one nature, there are countless-world-measure sthiti-bandha adhyavasaya-sthāna for countless-moment-measure sthiti-bheda. How many sthiti-bandha adhyavasaya-sthāna would there be for all the subsequent nature-bheda? Using the trairaśika, the number is multiplied by countless-world-measure due to the sthiti-bheda. Among these sthiti-bandha adhyavasaya-sthāna, there is a system of imitation, like the adhaḥ-pravṛtta-karaṇa. This is explained as follows: 

Page #257:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-218
The composition of Anukrushtividhana according to the difference in situation | Explanation of all the situation-bound-adhya-vasaya-sthana
Vasaya-sthana
222 218 214 210 206 202 198
194
186 182 178 174
43
166 162
Anubhaganam bandhajjavaasanam asankhyalokagunidamado.
Etto anantgunida karmapadeasa munedavva ||260||
Meaning: From these situation-bound-adhya-vasaya-sthana, there are asankhyalokagune anubhaga-bandha-adhya-vasaya-sthana. From this, there are anantgune karma-paramanu.
Special Meaning: Due to the jghanya-sthiti-bandha, the situation-bound-adhya-vasaya-sthana are asankhyalokagune in relation to the anubhaga-bandha-adhya-vasaya-sthana. Asankhyalokagune is asankhyalokagune in number. Here, it is necessary to know the dravya and the situation-bound-adhya-vasaya-sthana due to the jghanya-sthiti-bandha, although they have occurred for the increase of the six-fold-sthana-vriddhi of the avibhaga-praticchedha for asankhyalokabara, they are only asankhyalokamatra. Here, it is necessary to know them as situation-sthana. Nana-guna-hanisha-laaka 

Page #258:
---------------------------
## Gommatasara Karmakanda-219

The number of Avali is equal to twice the number of Asankhyata. This means that the number of Avali is obtained by dividing the number of Avali by twice the number of Asankhyata. To know the dimension of one Guna-hani, divide the number of Nana-guna-hani by the number of positions. Doubling this gives the number of two Guna-hani. The number of Avali is the product of the number of Asankhyata and the number of Anyonyabhyastarasis.

Here, in the Jghanya-sthiti Bandha-adhyavasaya-sthana, the number of Anubhaga-bandha-adhyavasaya-sthana is equal to the number of Asankhyata-lokas, and they are the smallest, called the "Mukha". The "Pada-hata-mukha-adi-dhanam" is the product of the "Mukha" and the "Pada" which is the dimension of Guna-hani. The "Chaya-dhanam" is obtained by multiplying the "Pada" with half the "Chaya" and then multiplying the result by the "Pada" again. The sum of the "Adi-dhanam" and the "Chaya-dhanam" gives the total amount of the first Guna-hani. In this way, by doubling the amount of each Guna-hani, the final Guna-hani is obtained. To get the number of the final Guna-hani, write the number of Nana-guna-hani as two digits and multiply them together. This gives the number of the "Gunakara", which is half the number of Anyonyabhyastarasis. Multiplying this number with the amount of the first Guna-hani gives the total amount of the final Guna-hani. According to the formula "Anta-dhanam Guna-guniyam Adi-vihinam Ruunu-uttar-bhajijam", the total amount of the final Guna-hani is obtained by multiplying the amount of the final Guna-hani by the "Gunakara" (2), subtracting the amount of the first Guna-hani, and then dividing the result by one less than the "Gunakara" (2-1=1). This gives the total amount of all Guna-hani. This is the number of Anubhaga-bandha-adhyavasaya-sthana related to the Jghanya-sthiti Bandha-adhyavasaya-sthana. If there are this many Anubhaga-bandha-adhyavasaya-sthana for one type of position, then how many Anubhaga-bandha-adhyavasaya-sthana will there be for all the types of positions mentioned earlier? By applying the rule of three, the number obtained is the number of Asankhyata multiplied by the number of Bandha-adhyavasaya-sthana. The number of atoms, which are the units of Karma, is infinite times the number of Anubhaga-bandha-adhyavasaya-sthana.

Now, this is called "Anka-sandrishti".

The number of atoms that bind together at one time is called "Samaya-prabaddha". This number is 6300. The number of positions of Karma is 48. The number of Nana-guna-hani is 6. The number of positions in each Guna-hani is called the dimension of one Guna-hani, which is 8. The number of Anyonyabhyastarasis is obtained by writing the number of Nana-guna-hani as two digits and multiplying them together, which is 64. Doubling the dimension of Guna-hani gives the number of two Guna-hani, which is 16. Dividing the total amount (6300) by the number of Anyonyabhyastarasis (63) gives 100, which is the number of the final Guna-hani. By doubling the amount of each Guna-hani, the amount of each Guna-hani from the beginning can be known. Multiplying the number of the final Guna-hani (100) by half the number of Anyonyabhyastarasis (32) gives the amount of the first Guna-hani (100*32 = 3200). This is the amount of the first (Adi) Guna-hani. From this, the amount of the second and subsequent Guna-hani can be... 

Page #259:
---------------------------
## Gammitsar Karmakanda - 220

Knowing the half-half of the substance, 3200-1600-800-400-200-100, and dividing the substance related to the first quality loss by the dimension of quality loss, the middle wealth is obtained. So, dividing 3200 by 8, we get 3200/8 = 400. This is the middle wealth. Subtracting half the amount of the unit quality loss dimension from the two quality losses in the form of a divisor, the amount remaining is divided by the middle wealth. The amount obtained is the amount of choice. One quality loss is 7, half of which is 3.5. Subtracting this from the two quality losses, 16, we get 16-3.5 = 12.5. Dividing this by the middle wealth, we get (400/12.5) = 32. This is the choice in the first quality loss. Multiplying this choice by the two quality losses, the amount obtained is the initial offering, i.e., 32*16 = 512 is the initial offering. Subtracting one choice (32) from this (512-32), we get 480. This is the second offering. In this way, by subtracting one choice related to the first quality loss from the final offering of the first quality loss, we get half the amount from the first offering of the first quality loss. This is to be known as the first offering of the second quality loss. In this way, by subtracting one choice related to the second quality loss, we get the second and subsequent offerings. Here, the amount of choice and the amount of offerings from the first quality loss to the second quality loss are all half-half. Subtracting one choice related to the second quality loss from the final offering, we get the first offering of the third quality loss. By subtracting one choice from this, we get the second and subsequent offerings. Here, the amount of choice and the amount of offerings are half-half from the second quality loss. Similarly, the amount is half-half for each quality loss. Now, we write the instrument of all quality losses:

First Second Third Fourth Fifth Sixth Quality Loss
Quality Loss Quality Loss Quality Loss Quality Loss Quality Loss Quality Loss

15 480 448 384 352 320 288 256 240 224 208 192 144 72

Total substance of all quality losses: 6300

Choice substance: 3200 800 200

Total substance of each quality loss: 

Page #260:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-221

The explanation of the above Sandristi is as follows:

The Kmipa Handhi of 6307 in Samayambaddha and its Avaadhakal of 48 times, the Nisheka creation related to the state of time, does not occur in Avaadhakal. After the Avaadhakal has passed, in the first time, there is the Prathamnisheka of 512 atoms. That is, 512 atoms are consumed in the first time. Afterwards, 32-32 less Pratinisheka dravya is given, that is, 32-32 atoms are consumed in the second and subsequent times. In the time of the first Gunahani, the total number of atoms is 3200, that is, 3200 atoms are consumed. The Prathamnisheka of the second Gunahani is of 256 atoms. After this, each Nisheka is 16-16 less. In the second Gunahani, the total number of atoms is 1600, that is, 1600 atoms are consumed in it. In this way, the dravya is half-half for each Gunahani-Gunahani, that is, half the atoms are consumed in each Gunahani. Here, in Sarvagunahani, the creation of 6300 atoms takes place in the same way, that is, 6300 atoms are consumed in all the Gunahani in this way. So, just as it is stated through Ankasandristi, it should be understood in the same way in terms of meaning. The special thing is that the dravya etc. should be understood as it is.

This statement is said in relation to Mohaniya Karma.

The state of Mohaniya Karma is to know the number of times remaining after subtracting 7000 years of Avaadhakal from 70 kodi sagar praman, as the number of Pratishthanisheka creation. To know the number of Nana Gunahani Shalaaka, subtract the half-sections of Paly from the half-sections of Paly and whatever number remains. Dividing this number by that state, the number that comes is the number of the dimension of Ekagunahani. Doubling this gives the number of two Gunahani. By writing the number 2 for Nana Gunahani praman and multiplying them together, the number that comes is to be known as the number of Anyonyabhyastaras. While doing the creation as stated in Ankasandristi, the number of dravya that comes in Gunahani and Nisheka should be known as the same. After Avaadhakal, in the first time, the number of atoms consumed in the Prathamnisheka of the first Gunahani is the same as the number of dravya.

In the second time, the number of atoms consumed in the second Nisheka is the same as the number of dravya. In this way, in the number of times related to the time of one Gunahani, the number of atoms consumed is the same as the number of dravya in the first Gunahani. Afterwards (further), half the dravya is consumed in each Gunahani in the same order. Therefore, in Sarvagunahani, the atoms are consumed by dividing the entire Samayambaddha in the same order. So, this is the method of division of the Samayambaddha that binds in this way, and each Samayambaddha binds anew in each time, and they have an eternal relationship in the form of progeny. The number of Samayambaddha, binding and depletion in each time. 

Page #261:
---------------------------
Gommatsar Karmakanda - 222

Even though a jiva's karma particles are reduced by a factor of 1.5, the time-bound karma particles remain in existence forever. This means that the number of karma particles that remain is calculated by multiplying the time-bound karma particles by the amount of reduction in karma particles, and then subtracting a small amount from that product. This number represents the number of karma particles that remain in existence for the jiva.

In the present moment, one time-bound karma particle is destroyed every moment, and one new time-bound karma particle is created. How does this happen? The time-bound karma particles are reduced by a factor of 1.5, and one time-bound karma particle is destroyed every moment. This process can be explained using the "trikona yantra" (triangle diagram).

The "trikona yantra" is a diagram that shows the destruction of time-bound karma particles. According to the "asandristi" (non-perception) view, the "trikona yantra" works as follows:

6300 karma particles are bound every moment, except during the "avabadhakal" (period of obstruction). These karma particles are destroyed in 48 moments, as follows:

* **First reduction:** 512, 480, 448, 416, 384, 352, 320, 288
* **Second reduction:** 256, 240, 224, 208, 192, 176, 160, 144
* **Third reduction:** 128, 120, 112, 104, 96, 88, 80, 72
* **Fourth reduction:** 64, 60, 56, 52, 48, 44, 40, 36
* **Fifth reduction:** 32, 30, 28, 26, 24, 22, 20, 18
* **Sixth reduction:** 16, 15, 14, 13, 12, 11, 10, 9

In these six reductions, the 6300 karma particles are divided and destroyed.

When a time-bound karma particle is bound, and the "avabadhakal" has passed 48 moments, none of its "nishekas" (manifestations) remain in existence. Therefore, it has no further purpose.

When a time-bound karma particle is bound, and the "avabadhakal" has passed 47 moments, 47 of its "nishekas" are destroyed, and only one "nisheka" remains. This remaining "nisheka" is represented by the number 9 in the "trikona yantra".

Below this, when a time-bound karma particle is bound, and the "avabadhakal" has passed 46 moments, 46 of its "nishekas" are destroyed, and two "nishekas" remain. These two "nishekas" are represented by the numbers 9 and 10 in the "trikona yantra".

Below this, when a time-bound karma particle is bound, and the "avabadhakal" has passed 45 moments, 45 of its "nishekas" are destroyed, and three "nishekas" remain. These three "nishekas" are represented by the numbers 9, 10, and 11 in the "trikona yantra".

In this way, for each time-bound karma particle that is bound, one "nisheka" is destroyed, and one more "nisheka" remains in existence. These remaining "nishekas" are written below each other in the "trikona yantra".

When a time-bound karma particle is bound, and the "avabadhakal" has passed only one moment, one "nisheka" is destroyed, and 47 "nishekas" remain. These 47 "nishekas" are represented by the numbers 1 to 480 in the "trikona yantra".

Finally, when a time-bound karma particle is bound, and the "avabadhakal" has just passed, and none of its "nishekas" have been destroyed, its 48 "nishekas" remain in existence. These 48 "nishekas" are represented by the numbers 9 to 512 in the "trikona yantra".

In this way, the "trikona yantra" shows the remaining "nishekas" after they have been destroyed. This is the essence of the "trikona yantra". 

Page #262:
---------------------------
## Gommatasara Karmakanda-223

The proof obtained by adding the Trikona Yantra remains the same for the eternal existence of the soul. Now, the method of adding is as follows:

In the extreme loss of merit of the Trikona Yantra, there are 9 extreme Niṣeka. Below them are two double-extreme Niṣeka (9, 10). Similarly, there are three triple-extreme Niṣeka (9, 10, 11). In this way, with an increase of one each, there are Niṣeka with loss of merit bound by various time-bound beings in the first Niṣeka (9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16). Here, to add, all should be made equal to the extreme Niṣeka 9. For this, separate the last loss of merit in the lower Niṣeka and place it next to its corresponding Mala Vik number.

Therefore, write the last Niṣeka 9 of the last loss of merit and then write a row of 9 with one more multiplier each. Write zero at the end of the second row. Then write the proof in the form of a collection. Here are the two rows of the last loss of merit:

942
146
947
1415 1421 1428
948

Here, 941-9 is the first addition, and combining 94218, 141-1, we get 18+1=19, so 9 and 10-19. 943=27, 341-3, combining these two, we get 27+3=30, so the sum of 9+10+11 is 30. In this way, adding, finally, 948-72 and 2841-28, combining these, we get 72+28=100, so the sum of all Niṣeka of the last loss of merit is 100.

In the double-extreme and subsequent loss of merit, the total substance of the extreme and subsequent loss of merit is to know 'Adi', but to know the proof in both rows as double. The two rows of the double-extreme loss of merit are as follows: 

Page #263:
---------------------------
Gommatsar Karmakanda-224
94241 94242 94243 94244 94245 94246 94247 94248
243 246 2410 2415 2421 2428
Here, the final niṣeka of the dvīcarama guna-hānī is double the final niṣeka of the carama guna-hānī. To make the niṣekas below it equal to it, the specialities of the dvīcarama guna-hānī have been removed from them and placed nearby. In the second row, at the end, zero has been written, followed by the proof in the form of double addition.
942-18, i.e., 18x1-18, this is the first niṣeka, and 94218, 1852-36, and 24152, when combined, give 38 and 20. If the car at the end is 942-18 and 1848144 and 2842=56, both of these combined give 200, to know the sum of all the niṣekas in the dvīcarama guna-hānī. In this dvīcarama guna-hānī, the dravya of the carama guna-hānī, when combined everywhere, one by one, results in addition in the triangle construction.
For example, when the dravya of the first guna-hānī is combined with 100, it becomes 118, when combined with 100 in the 38 below it, it becomes 100+38-138, know it in the same way. The reason for this is that everywhere in the guna-hānī āyāma, there are 9/10/11/12/13/14/15/16 niṣekas. In the tricarama guna-hānī, there are two rows like this -
Here, the final niṣeka of the tricarama guna-hānī is four times the final niṣeka of the carama guna-hānī 94441. To make the niṣekas below it equal to it, the specialities of the tricarama guna-hānī 94442 have been removed from those niṣekas and placed nearby. In the second row, 9x444 at the end, zero has been written, followed by the proof in the form of four times addition. 94445 4410
944-36, the first niṣeka, 944-36 and 441-4, then 36+4=40 9x446 4415, the second niṣeka. The sum of both is 36+40-76. At the end, 9x4x7 4421
944-36 and 44832, i.e., 36+3268, the final niṣeka. 9x448 4428
9x448-288, 4428-112, the sum of both is 400. This is to know the sum of all the niṣekas in the tricarama guna-hānī. In this tricarama guna-hānī, the dravya of both the dvīcarama and carama guna-hānī, when combined everywhere, one by one, results in addition in the triangle construction. 

Page #264:
---------------------------
## Gommatasara Karmakanda - 225

In the first row, write the number of **dūna-dana** (double-double) for each **guṇa-hānī** (loss of merit) until the first **guṇa-hānī**. Then, add the numbers in each row and multiply them by the corresponding **guṇa-hānī** to get the total number of **trikoṇa** (triangles) in each row. 

**Example:**

* **Guṇa-hānī:** 9, 19, 30, 42055/691, 84, 100, 118, 138, 160, 184, 250, 238, 268, 300, 336, 376, 420, 468, 5201576, 636, 700, 772, 852, 940, 2036, 1140, 1252, 1372, 1500, 1644, 1804, 19801, 2172, 23801, 2604, 2844, 3100, 3388, 370844060, 4444, 4860, 53085788, 6300.

* **Total number of trikoṇa in each row:** 9, 19, 30, 42055/691, 84, 100, 118, 138, 160, 184, 250, 238, 268, 300, 336, 376, 420, 468, 5201576, 636, 700, 772, 852, 940, 2036, 1140, 1252, 1372, 1500, 1644, 1804, 19801, 2172, 23801, 2604, 2844, 3100, 3388, 370844060, 4444, 4860, 53085788, 6300.

The total number of **trikoṇa** in all rows is the total number of **dravya** (matter) in the **trikoṇa-yantrasambandhi** (triangle-related) system. This total is slightly less than 1.5 times the **guṇa-hānī** multiplied by the **samaya-prabaddha-pramāṇa** (time-bound quantity).

**Example:**

* **Total number of dravya:** 71,304
* **Guṇa-hānī āyāma** (dimension of loss of merit): 8
* **1.5 times guṇa-hānī āyāma:** 12
* **Samaya-prabaddha-pramāṇa:** 6300
* **1.5 times guṇa-hānī āyāma multiplied by samaya-prabaddha-pramāṇa:** 75,600

The total number of **dravya** is less than 75,600 because the **guṇakāra** (multiplier) is slightly less than 1.5.

The total number of **trikoṇa** in the **trikoṇa-racanā** (triangle construction) is the same as the number of **satta-rūpa dravya** (seven types of matter).

The **niṣeka** (seeds) and other **pramāṇa** (quantities) should be understood in the same way as they are described in the **asandṛṣṭi** (non-perception) section. All statements should be understood in the same way as they are described in the **arthasandṛṣṭi** (perception) section.

The **karma-paramaṇu** (karma particles) associated with a **jīva** (soul) are always present in a quantity that is slightly less than 1.5 times the **guṇa-hānī** multiplied by the **samaya-prabaddha-pramāṇa**.

To calculate the number of **karma-paramaṇu**, multiply the **samaya-prabaddha-pramāṇa** by 1.5 times the **guṇa-hānī āyāma** and then subtract the 18th part of the **guṇa-hānī āyāma** multiplied by the square of the number of **palyas** (moments).

**Example:**

* **Guṇa-hānī āyāma:** 8
* **1.5 times guṇa-hānī āyāma:** 12
* **Samaya-prabaddha-pramāṇa:** 6300
* **Number of palyas:** 10
* **Square of the number of palyas:** 100
* **18th part of guṇa-hānī āyāma multiplied by the square of the number of palyas:** 55.55
* **Number of karma-paramaṇu:** (12 * 6300) - 55.55 = 75,594.45

The **karma-pradeśa** (karma region) is said to be infinite because the **anubhāga-bandha** (section-binding) and **adhyavasāya-sthāna** (decision-place) are infinite.

New **samaya-prabaddha** (time-bound quantities) are constantly being bound and unbound, but the total number of **karma-paramaṇu** remains constant.

The **nirjarā** (unbinding) of a **samaya-prabaddha** occurs in the following way:

* If a **samaya-prabaddha** is bound in the current **vivṛṣṭa-samaya** (desired time) and its **ābaḍhā-kāla** (obstruction time) has also passed, then 512
Page #265:
---------------------------
## Gommatasara Karmakanda - 226

The remaining niṣeka arise in the future. Finally, due to the binding of time-bound karma, there are now 47 ābādhā kāla and 47 niṣeka. The 9 forms of the 47 niṣeka that have already passed are now very subtle in the present time and are not being destroyed. Therefore, the sarvaniṣeka of those who were bound by time-bound karma in the past have been destroyed, so they have no purpose.

Thus, in the present time, from 512 to 9, all niṣeka arise simultaneously. Their sum is called the arising of all time-bound karma. As one time-bound karma atom is destroyed, one time-bound karma atom is newly bound, and a slightly more than half-diminished number of time-bound karma atoms remain in existence.

The statement of the meaning is like the statement of the number. Therefore, karma atoms are said to be infinite in number from the places of the abhāvya and the infinite parts of the Siddhas in one time-bound karma.

"Thus ends the section on the binding of karma." In this way, the section on binding is complete in the chapter on the arising, existence, and authority of binding.

## Gommatasara Karmakanda - 261

Now, after describing the four types of binding, we will discuss the rule of arising in the guna-sthānas.

**"The arising of the āhāra-śarīra and āhāra-anopāna occurs only in the pramatta guna-sthāna. The arising of the tīrthaṅkara-prakrti occurs only in the sayogi and ayogi-kevali. The arising of the miśra-mohaniya occurs only in the samyag-mithyātvā guna-sthāna. The arising of the samyaktva-prakrti occurs only in the vedaka-samyag-dṛṣṭi, which is in the four guna-sthānas of asanyata, etc. The arising of the anupūrvi occurs only in the mithyā-dṛṣṭi, sā-sādana, and asanyata guna-sthānas. There is no arising of these elsewhere."**

## Gommatasara Karmakanda - 262

Now, we will discuss some special features related to the arising of anupūrvi karma.

**"The anupūrvi karma does not go to the hell, nor does it go to the tīrthaṅkara. It arises in the mithyā-dṛṣṭi, etc., and it is the last of the last."** 

Page #266:
---------------------------
Gommatasar Karmakanda-227
Meaning- The one with Sasadan Samyagdristi does not go to hell, therefore, there is no rise of NarakagatyAnupurvi in his Sasadan Gunasthan. And the rise of the remaining natures in the Mithyatvaadi Gunasthanas should be known till the end time of their respective rise places.
Special Meaning- Here in the Udya Prakaran, there are three types of statements- Vyuchchitti, Udya and Anudya. The rise of the natures in the Gunasthanas should be known till the end time of their respective rise places. And the rise of the natures in the Gunasthanas should be known till the end time of their respective rise places.
The number of natures that rise in the lower Gunasthanas should be subtracted from the number of natures that are Vyuchchitti in the same Gunasthanas. The remaining number will be the proof of the Udya nature in the Gunasthanas above. Here is a special feature that if a nature is eligible to rise in the future Gunasthanas, but it does not rise in the desired Gunasthanas, then it should be subtracted from the Udya Yogya nature of that Gunasthanas. And if a nature does not rise in the previous Gunasthanas, but it will rise in the desired Gunasthanas, then it should be added. This is the order of the Udya related system. And the remaining natures from the total number of natures that are said to rise in the beginning are Anudya. This is how Vyuchchitti, Udya and Anudya should be known.
Now, the Vyuchchitti in the Gunasthanas will be stated in order according to the opinion of Acharya Pushpadanta-Bhootbali, the author of Shatkhandagama.
Das Chaurigi Sattarsan, Att Ya Tah Panch Chev Chauro Ya.
Chhachhakkaekkadugadug, Chaudas Uguttis Terasudayavidhi ||263||
Meaning- The Udya Vyuchchitti of 10-4-117-8-5-4-6-6-1-2-2-14-29 and 13 natures in the Mithyatvadristi etc. Gunasthanas should be known in order, without any difference in opinion.
Special Meaning- Out of the 148 natures of Karma, 122 natures are eligible to rise, without any difference in opinion. The Udya Vyuchchitti happens in order of the Gunasthanas. For example, there is Udya Vyuchchitti of 10 natures in the Mithyatva Gunasthanas. There are four natures that are Vyuchchitti from Udya in the Sasadan Gunasthanas. According to the opinion of Acharya Pushpadanta-Bhootbali, the Udya Vyuchchitti of these natures- Ekendriya, Sthavar, Dwiindriya, Triindriya and Chaturindriya- happens only in the Mithyatva Gunasthanas. According to the opinion of Acharya Yativrishabha, their Udya is also said to happen in the Sasadan Gunasthanas. There is one Udya Vyuchchitti in the Mishragunasthanas and one in the Asanyat Gunasthanas. Dhwala Pu. 1 Sutra 36 Page 261, Dhwala Pu. 3 Sutra 74-76. 2. Jayadhwala Pu. 2 Page 108 and 122. Dhwala Pu. 4 Page 165 "Je Pun Devasasana Eidiiesupppajati Tti Bhananti." 

Page #267:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-228
17, in the Desasanayatagunasthan there are 8, in the Pramattagunasthan there are 5, in the Apramattagunasthan there are 4, in the Apurvakaranagunasthan there are 6, in the Anivrittikaranagunasthan there are 6, in the Sukshmasamprayagunasthan there is 1, in the Upshantamohagunasthan there are 2, in the Kshinamohagunasthan there are 2 and 14, in the Sayogakevali there are 29. This is the Ekatiki Udayanyuchchitti, because in comparison to various beings, both the Sata and Asata are not the Vyuchchitti of Vedaniya. In the Ayogakevali there are 13, the knowledge of the Udayavyuchchitti of the 13 Prakriti.
In the Mithyatvagunasthan, the Uday is 117, the Tirthankara, Aharaka Dwik, Mishramohaniya and Samyaktva Mohaniya do not have Uday, therefore there is Anudaya of 5 Prakriti. In the Sasadanagunasthan, the Uday is 106 Prakriti, the Vyuchchinn Prakriti of Mithyatvagunasthan is 10 and the Narakgatyanupurvi, in this way, there is no Uday of 11, therefore the Anudaya is 16. In the Mishragunasthan, the Udayarup Prakriti is 100, the Sasadan Sambandhi 4 and the three Anupurvi do not have Uday, and due to the meeting of the Mishraprakriti, the Anudayaprakriti is 22. In the Asanayatagunasthan, the Udayyogya Prakriti is 104, the Anupurvi 4 and the Samyaktva Mohaniya meet, and the Mishramohaniya Gunasthan has Vyuchchitti in the Mishragunasthan itself, therefore there is Anudaya of 18 Prakriti. In the Asanayat, the Vyuchchitti is 17 Prakriti, therefore in the Desasanayatagunasthan, the Udayaprakriti is 87 and the Anudayaprakriti is 35. In the Pramattagunasthan, along with the Aharaka Dwik and the Vyuchchinn Prakriti 8 of the Desasanayatagunasthan, there is no Udayaprakriti 81 and the Anudayaprakriti is 41. In the Pramattagunasthan, without the 5 Prakriti that are Vyuchchinn, in the Apramattagunasthan, the Udayaprakriti is 76 and the Anudaya is 46 Prakriti. In the Apramattagunasthan, the Vyuchchinn Prakriti is 4, therefore without them, in the Apurvakaranagunasthan, the Uday is 72 Prakriti, the Anudaya is 50 Prakriti. In the Apurvakaranagunasthan, the Vyuchchittirup Prakriti is 6, without them, in the Anivrittikaranagunasthan, the Udayarup Prakriti is 66 and the Anudayrup Prakriti is 56. In the Anivrittikaranagunasthan, the Vyuchchinn Prakriti is 6 due to Uday, therefore without them, in the Sukshmasamprayagunasthan, the Udayaprakriti is 60 and the Anudaya is 62 Prakriti. Here, the Vyuchchinnrup Prakriti is said to be 1. Due to this, without the 5 Prakriti, in the Upshantamoha Gunasthan, the Udayaprakriti is 59, the Anudayaprakriti is 63. In this Gunasthan, the Vyuchchinn Prakriti is two, therefore without these two Prakriti, in the Kshinamohagunasthan, the Udayaprakriti is 57, the Anudayaprakriti is 65. In the Kshinamohagunasthan, without the Vyuchchinnrup 16 Prakriti and due to the meeting of the Tirthankaraprakriti, in the Sayogakevali, the Udayaprakriti is 42 and the Anudayaprakriti is 80. In this Gunasthan, the Vyuchchinn 29 Prakriti are said, without them, in the Ayogakevali Gunasthan, the Udayarup Prakriti is 13 and the Anudaya Prakriti is 109. 

Page #268:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-229
Mixed
According to the Acharya 'Pushpadanta-Bhutabali', the author of Shatkhandagama, Udayavyuchchitti is the location of the qualities of Uday and Anuday. Uday | Uday | Anuday
Specific Vyuchchitti Mithyatva
| 5 (Tirthankara, Aharakadvick, Samyagmithyatva, Samyaktava) 10 (Mithyatva, Atap, Sukshma, Apariapt, Sadharan,
Sthavar, Ekendriya and Vikalatraya) Sasadan
16 (10+5+1 Narakgatyanupurvi)
4 (Anantanu bandhikkshaya) 22 (16+4+3 Anupurvi: Narakgatyanupurvi bina... ...1. Sayaniyaat... . .
1 (Samyagmithyatva) Asayat | 17 | 104
18 (22+1-5 Anupurvichar and Samyaktava Prakriti) 17 (Apratyakhyanakshaya 4, Vaikriyakshatka,
Naraka and Devayu, Manushya gatyanupurvi, Tiryancha gatyanupurvi, Durbhaga, Anadeya and
Ayashaskirti) Deshasanyata
(Pratyakhyanakshaya 4, Tiryanchayu,
Tiryanchagati, Nichagotra, Udyot) Pramattasanyata
41 (35+8-2 Aharakadvick) 5 (Aharakadvick, Styanagridhi, Nidranidra,
Prachalaprachala) Apramat
| 4 (Samyaktava and Ardhanaracha-Kilaka and
Sripatikasanhanan) Apurvakaran
6 (Hasya, Rati, Arati, Shoka, Bhaya, Jugupsa) Anivritikaran
6 (Stri-Purush-Napunsakaved and Sanchalanakrodha
Man-Maya) Sukshmasampray| 1
1 (Sukshmalobha) Upashantamoha
(Naracha and Vajranaracha sanhanan) Kshina moha
16 (Jnanavarana 5, Darshanavarana 4, Antaraya 5,
Nidra and Prachala)
6 

Page #269:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-230
Sayogakevali, 29
| 42 | 80
| 80 (65+16-1 Tirthankara) | 29 (Varshabhanaraachasanhanan, Nirman, Sthir
Asthir, Shubh-Ashubh, Suswar-Du:swar, Prashast-Aprashastvihayogati, Audarik Shrir, Audarik Angopaang, Taijas-Karman, Sansthan 6, Varnaadi 4, Agurulaghu, Upghaat,
Parghaat, Uchchwas and each body) | 13 (Saata-Asaatavedaniya, Manushayagati, Manushayau,
Panchendriya, Subhag, Tras, Baadar, Paryapt, Aadey, Yashaskirti, Tirthankara and Uchchgotra)
Ayog
| 13
| 13 | 109
Further, the teachings of the Churnisutra by Yativrishabhacharya are called the second aspect
But 9-70-8-5-4-6-6. This is 16-30-12 in the rising of Ayoganta. ||264||
Yava
Meaning - The manifestation of one's own nature, which is in the form of anubhag, is called uday. By doing one's own work. The name of leaving the karma-rupa is uday. The end of uday is called udayavyuchchitti. Mithyatvagunasthan. From there, the ayogakevali gunasthan, the vyuchchinn prakrti are 5-9-1-17-8-5-4-6-1-16-30 and 12 in order.
Special Meaning - Although this opinion is not explicitly stated in the gatha, it is known from the conclusion.
Jayadhwala Pu.2 page 122 states that the kalaprarupana of sanjeevi is the same as the purushaveda, and on page 115, the purushavedi's anantanubandhi vibhakti kal is said to be one time. The upshamsamyagdristi jeev, who has the existence of 24 prakrtis of mohaniya, after combining with the anantanubandhi, remained sanjee for one time, and in the next time, he died and was born in the asanjeevi. In this way, he is born in the asanjeevi after dying in the sasadan gunasthan. If it is said that he died in the next time and became an asanjeevi after becoming a mithyadristi, it is not possible, because the jghanya kal of mithyatva is antarmuhurt. Death does not occur in the first time of becoming a mithyadristi. 

Page #270:
---------------------------
## Sasadan

According to the author of the Gommatasar Karmakanda-231 Kashayapahuduchurnisutra, the **Udayavyuchchitti**, **Uday** and **Anuday** are the **Sandrishtguna** (characteristics of perception) of the **Uday** (arising), **Anuday** (non-arising) and **Vyuchchitti** (cessation) of **Mithyatva** (false belief).

In the **Purvasandrisht** (previous perception), there are 10 **Udayavyuchchitti** (arising and cessation) of **Prakriti** (nature), but the **Vyuchchitti** of **Sthavar** (stationary), **Ekendiriya** (one-sensed), **Dwindriya** (two-sensed), **Triindriya** (three-sensed) and **Chaturindriya** (four-sensed) does not occur in the **Mithyatva** **Gunasthan** (stage of false belief), but in the **Sasadan** **Gunasthan** (stage of attachment). Therefore, only 5 **Vyuchchitti** are mentioned here.

* **9** (4 **Kashay** (passions) + **Sthavar** and **Ekendiriya** etc. **Charajati** (four types of beings))
* **11** (5 + 5 + 1 **Narakgatya** (hellish path) **Anupurvi** (sequential))

**Purvasandrisht** according to:

* **Asanyata** (uncontrolled)
* **Deshasanyata** (controlled in conduct)
* **Pramattasanyata** (controlled with negligence)
* **Apramattasanyata** (controlled without negligence)
* **Apuurvakaran** (non-creation of new karma)
* **Anivritikaran** (non-destruction of old karma)
* **Sukshmasampray** (subtle perception)
* **Upshantamoha** (subdued delusion)
* **Kshinamoha** (diminished delusion)
* **Sayogakevali** (liberated with karma)

**Purvasandrisht** according to:

* **Sata-Asata Ayogakevali** (liberated without karma) - 13th and 14th **Gunasthan** - 12

The **Uday** of both these **Prakriti** (nature) is considered to be up to the 143rd **Gunasthan** in relation to various **Jiva** (souls), but here only one of them is considered to have **Uday**. Therefore, there is a difference of 1 **Prakriti** in the **Uday-Anuday** **Prakriti** in both **Gunasthan** compared to the previous one. 

Page #271:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda - 232

Now, the names of the natures in the Gunasthanas are said in eight verses:

**Verse 265:**
Mithyatva, Atapa, Sukhma, Apariapta, Sadharana - these five natures have Udayavyuchchitti in the Mithyatvagunastana.
Anantanubandhikashaya four, Ekendriya, Thavara, Dwiindriya, Triindriya, Chaturindriya - these nine natures have Udayavyuchchitti in the Sasadanagunastana.
Misra - only one Samyagmithyatva nature has Udayavyuchchitti in the Misra Gunastana.

**Verse 266:**
Apratyaakhyanavaranakashaya four, Vaikriyakasarira, Vaikriyakangopang, Narakagati, Devagati, NarakagatyAnupurvi, DevagatyAnupurvi, Narakayu, Devayu, ManushyaGatyAnupurvi, TiryanchaGatyAnupurvi, Dubhang, Anadeya, Ayashaskirti - these seventeen natures have Udayavyuchchitti in the Asanyatagunastana.

**Verse 267:**
Tadyakakashaya, Tiryanchaujjovani, Chatiriyagati, Aharadugam - these four natures have Udayavyuchchitti in the Desagunastana.

**Verse 268:**
Apamatte, Sammattam, Antimatiyasanhadee, Y'apuvvamhi, Chachcheva, Nokashaya, Aniyattee, Bhagabhage - these eight natures have Udayavyuchchitti in the Chathagunastana.

**Verse 269:**
Vedatiya, Kohamana, Mayasanjalana, Suhumante, Sumo, Loho, Sante, Vajjam, Narayana, Arayam - these ten natures have Udayavyuchchitti in the Vedatiyagunastana.

**Verse 270:**
Khinakashaya, Charime, Nidda, Payala, Udayavyuchchitti, Nanantara, Ayadasayam, Dansanchatvari, Charimmi - these nine natures have Udayavyuchchitti in the Khinakashaya Gunastana.

**Verse 271:**
Tadyekkavajjaniminim, Thirasuhasaragati, Uraraltejadugam, Santhanam, Vannaguru, Chaukkapatteya, Jogi - these seven natures have Udayavyuchchitti in the Tadyekkavajjaniminim Gunastana.

**Verse 272:**
Tadyekkam, Manuvagati, Panchindriyasubhagata, Satigadejjam, Jasatittham, Manuva, Uccham, Ajogincharimmi - these eight natures have Udayavyuchchitti in the Tadyekkam Gunastana.

**Meaning:**
In the Mithyatvagunastana, the five natures of Mithyatva, Atapa, Sukhma, Apariapta, and Sadharana have Udayavyuchchitti. In the Sasadanagunastana, the four Anantanubandhikashaya and the nine natures of Ekendriya, Thavara, Dwiindriya, Triindriya, and Chaturindriya have Udayavyuchchitti. In the Misra Gunastana, only one Samyagmithyatva nature has Udayavyuchchitti. || 265 ||

In the Asanyatagunastana, the four Apratyaakhyanavaranakashaya and the seventeen natures of Vaikriyakasarira, Vaikriyakangopang, Narakagati, Devagati, NarakagatyAnupurvi, DevagatyAnupurvi, Narakayu, Devayu, ManushyaGatyAnupurvi, TiryanchaGatyAnupurvi, Dubhang, Anadeya, and Ayashaskirti have Udayavyuchchitti. || 266 || 

Page #272:
---------------------------
## Gommatasara Karmakanda - 233

In the Desasanayat Gunasthan, the four kshayas of **pratyakhyana**, **tiryanchayu**, **udyota**, **nichagotra** and **tiryanchagati** are extinguished. In the **Pramattagunasthan**, the **aaharasharir**, **aaharakangopang**, **styanagridhi**, **nidranidra**, **prachala** and **prachala** are extinguished. ||267||

In the **Apramattagunasthan**, **samyaktva mohaniya**, **ardhanaracha-kilita** and **supatikasanhanan** are extinguished. In the **Apuurvakaranagunasthan**, **hasya**, **rati**, **arati**, **shok**, **bhaya** and **jugupsa** are extinguished. In the **Anivrittikaranagunasthan**, the three **vedas** and **sajwalanakrodha** are extinguished in the **savadbhaga** and **avedbhaga** respectively, with the expectation of ascending the **shreni**. ||268||

In the **savadbhaga** of the **Anivrittikaranagunasthan**, the three **vedas** are extinguished. In the **aved-vedarahitbhaga**, **sanchalanakrodha**, **sajwalanmaan**, **sajwalanmaya** are extinguished in that order. This makes a total of 6 **prakritis** extinguished. **Badarlobha** is also extinguished in the **Anivrittikaranagunasthan**. At the end of the **Sukshmasamparayagunasthan**, **sukshmakrushtiko** attained **loba** is extinguished. In the **Upashantmohagunasthan**, **vajranaracha** and **narachasanhanan** are extinguished. ||269||

In the last two times of the **Kshinakshavagunasthan**, **nidra** and **prachala** are extinguished in the **dwicharama** time. In the **charam** time, 5 **jnanavarana**, 4 **darshanavarana** and 5 **antaraya** are extinguished. This makes a total of 16 **prakritis** extinguished. ||270||

In the **Sayogakevaligunasthan**, one of the two **vedaniya**, **vajrarbha narachasanhanan**, **nirman**, **sthira-asthira**, **shubha-ashubha**, **susvara-duhsvara**, **prashasta-aprashasta-vihayogati**, **oudarikashariroudarik anopan**, **taijas-karmanasharir**, 6 **sansthan**, **varnadichaar**, **agurulaghu**, **upghat**, **parghat**, **uchchwas** and each **sharir** are extinguished. This makes a total of 30 **prakritis** extinguished. ||271||

At the end of the **Ayogigunasthan**, one of the **sata-asata vedaniya**, **manushygati**, **panchendriya**, **subhaga**, **tras**, **badar**, **paryapt**, **adeya**, **yashaskirti**, **tirthankar**, **manushyayu** and **uchchagotra** are extinguished. This makes a total of 12 **prakritis** extinguished. ||272||

**Special Note:** According to previous opinions, the **ekendriya**, **sthavar**, **dwindriya**, **triendriya** and **chaturindriya** are said to arise in **mithyatva**. Therefore, their extinction happens at the end of the **mithyatvagunasthan**. However, according to verse 264, the above 5 **prakritis** are said to arise in the **sasadanagunasthan**. Therefore, their extinction happens in the **sasadanagunasthan**. The extinction of one of the **sata-asata vedaniya** mentioned in the **Sayogakevali** and **Ayogikevaligunasthan** is said with respect to one **jiva**. However, with respect to many **jivas**, the extinction of **sata-asata vedaniya** does not happen in these two **gunasthanas**. This is because the **sayogi** and ... 

Page #273:
---------------------------
Gommatasar Karmakanda-234

It is said that in the Aयोगीगुणस्थान, a jiva is liberated from 30 and 12 prakritis in order, and in relation to other jivas, it is said that they are liberated from 29 and 13 prakritis.

Just as there is saata-asaata-vedaniya-janaya sukha-duhkha in other gunasthanas, so too should it be for the Kevali Bhagavan. When there is such doubt, the Acharya resolves it by saying the following gatha:

"Nava ya rayadosa, indiyanaanam cha kevalimhi jado.
Teṇa du saadasada-jasuhaddukkhaṃ natthi indiyajan." ||273||

Meaning: Due to the destruction of the praalikas of the Kevali Bhagavan, the four types of maya that are the cause of raga, the four types of lobha, the three vedas, hasya-rati, and the four types of krodha that are the cause of dvesha, the four types of mana, arati, shoka, bhaya, and jugupsa have been completely destroyed. Therefore, their raga-dvesha has been destroyed, and simultaneously, paroksha mati-jnana and shruti-jnana cannot exist in the knowledge that is the illuminator of all truths. Therefore, indriya-janita jnana has been destroyed. For this reason, the Kevali does not experience sukha-duhkha from the arising of saata and asaata-vedaniya, because sukha-duhkha is indriya-janita, and the mohaniya, which is the cooperating cause of vedaniya, is absent. Therefore, even when vedaniya arises, it is unable to function as the cause of sukha-duhkha.

Why is vedaniya karma not the cause of indriya-janita sukha-duhkha for the Kevali? In response to this, two gathas are said:

"Samayatthidi-go bandho, saadas-sudayappigo jado tassa. Teṇa asadas-sudao, saadas-ruvena parinadi." ||274||

"Edeṇa karaneṇa du, saadas-seva du nirantaro udao.
Teṇasada-nimitta, parishaha jinavare natthi." ||275||

Meaning: The bandha of the saata-vedaniya of the Kevali Bhagavan is of a one-time state, therefore it is only in the form of udaya, and the udaya of the asaata-vedaniya of the Kevali is transformed from the form of saata. ||274||

The udaya of the saata of the Kevali is continuous, therefore the parisahas (hunger, thirst, cold, heat, bites of insects, walking, lying down, sitting, illness, touch of grass, and excrement) that arise from the udaya of the asaata do not exist. ||275|| 

Page #274:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-235

**Special Meaning:** The emergence of Asata, devoid of infinite qualities, with the power of infinite sections, is due to the fact that in the past, the power of sections of Asata Vedaniya has been diminished by numerous section-causing factors, and there is also a lack of support from the Mohaniya. Therefore, there is a subtle, unmanifest emergence of Asata Vedaniya. And the essence of the Satavedaniya is infinite in its sections. The abundance of the state of Satavedaniya arises from afflictions, and the abundance of sections arises from purity. Therefore, due to the special purity in the श्रेणी, there is an excellent section-bond (at the end of the subtle Saṃpārāya). Then, the same unstruck section is also found in the Kevali. (Dhavala 12/16-18) Thus, the section, essence, and emergence of Satavedaniya in the Kevali are infinite. Therefore, the emergence of Asata is also obstructed by the Satavedaniya, which is present in the emergence and has infinite sections.

**Doubt:** Some say that Satavedaniya is transformed into the form of Asata. Why is this not said?

**Solution:** The state-bond of Satava is not of two times, but is of one time, in the form of emergence. Otherwise, it would lead to the implication of the bondage of Asata, which is not possible. Because, the Satava, which binds while having the state of one time in the form of emergence, does not exist in the previous time. Therefore, the state-bond-transition of Satava into the form of Asata is not possible.

Another point is that, according to the sutras "Ekaadasha Jinē" and "Vedaniye Seshaḥ" in the Tattvartha Sutra, the 11 Pariṣaha that occur due to the cause of Vedaniya karma are said to be those of the Kevali. The reason for this is that, although the emergence of Asata Vedaniya is found in the Kevali, the occurrence of its functional Pariṣaha is said only as a remedy. Primarily, the Kevali is devoid of Pariṣaha.

1. Dhavala Pu, 13 p. 53

**Doubt:** It is true that only the emergence of one of Satava and Asata is possible. But when Asata Vedaniya emerges along with Satava in the emergence of Mahatmas who are in the Gunasthana of Upaśāntakaṣāya, etc., then both of them have to be considered as emerging together. The reason for this is that the emergence of Asata is possible for all beings up to the Sayoga Kevali. (Go. Ka, 271) And the newly bound Satava, which has attained the state of Iryāpatha Āsrava, is always emerging by its very nature.

**Solution:** That is correct. In the fourteenth Gunasthana, only one of Satava and Asata emerges. In the eleventh, twelfth, and thirteenth Gunasthana, when the bound Asata of the ancient time emerges, the newly bound Satava, which is of one time state, also emerges. Therefore, in these three Gunasthana, the emergence of both the newly bound Satava and the ancient Asata is possible. 

Page #275:
---------------------------
Gommatasar Karmakanda - 236
Doubt - The time of the rise of the Saata is said to be Antarmuhurta. How can the continuous rise of a Kotipurvatak Kevali Bhagwan be less than that?
Solution - Except for the Sayogakevali, the time of the rise of the Saata is said to be Antarmuhurta. The Saata, which has the state of one time, continuously rises, which is not possible elsewhere.
Now, the rise and non-rise are said in two verses...
...
Sattarsekkarakha Chadusihyasyam Sagigisiidi Chdusadarii. Chaavatti Satti Navasagavananas Dudalbarudaya || 276 ||
Meaning - From Mithyatva to the Aयोगी गुणस्थान, the rise of 117-111-100-104-87-8176-72-66-60-59-57-42 and 12 Prakṛtis is found in order.
Panchekkarasabavisaattarasapanchatiis Igichadalan.
Pannna Chhappanna Bitipanasatti Asiidi Dugunapanavanna || 277 ||
Meaning - In the 14 गुणस्थानs from Mithyatva, 5-11-22-18-35-41-46-50-56-62-63-65-80 and 110 Prakṛtis are in the form of non-rise. That is, they do not rise.
Note - The special statement of verse 277 should be known from the special meaning of verse 263, and the doubts related to this statement (rise - non-rise - rise-cessation) are given in verses 263 and 264, know from there.
Rise - The characteristic of the Prakṛtis in the form of Udirana is said in three verses
Udayasudiranassa Ya Samittatado Na Vijjadi Visesso. Mottuuna Tinnithanam Pamat Jogi Ajogee Ya. || 278 ||
Meaning - There is no special characteristic in the Prakṛtis in the form of rise and Udirana, except for the three गुणस्थानs of Pramat, Sayogi and Aयोगी, because there is a special characteristic in these three गुणस्थानs, there is only similarity in the rest of the गुणस्थानs. (Now the same characteristic is said further.)
1. Dhaval Pu. 13 p. 54. 

Page #276:
---------------------------
## Gommatasara Karmakanda - 237

**Meaning:** Udirana means incomplete digestion, i.e., the process of removing the foremost nisekas (restrictions) from the karma particles that are destined to arise in the future, and transferring them to the lower nisekas with shorter durations, bringing them into the udaya-avali (sequence of arising), experiencing them in the form of udaya (arising), and then releasing them from the form of karma, transforming them into other pudgalas (matter).

**Verse 279:**
**Meaning:** From the 30 and 12 natures of the Sayoga-Ayoga Kevali Gunasthanas, totaling 42 natures, one should subtract the three natures of Sata-Asata and Manushya.

**Verse 280:**
**Meaning:** Due to the udirana of the three natures, Sata etc., that have been subtracted, the vyuchchitti (cessation) occurs in the Prammatta Gunasthana. Therefore, the udirana-vyuchchitti of eight natures occurs here. The udirana and udirana-vyuchchitti of the remaining 39 natures occur only in the Sayoga Kevali. The udirana of the udaya natures is not found in the Ayoga Kevali. This is the special feature here. Now, the description of the natures that have been vyuchchhinna (separated) by udirana is given in the Gunasthanas.

**Verse 281:**
**Meaning:** From Mithyatva to the Sayoga Kevali Gunasthana, the udirana-vyuchchitti of 5-9-1-17-8-8-4-6-6-12-16 and 39 natures occurs in sequence. The next two verses describe the udirana and anudirana (non-udirana) natures.

**Verse 282:**
**Meaning:** In the 13 Gunasthanas from Mithyatva onwards, the natures 117-111-100-104-87-81-73-69-63-57-56-54-39 are udirana in nature, and the natures 5-11-22-18-35-41-49-53-59-65-66-68 and 83 are anudirana in nature.

**Verse 283:**
**Meaning:** The specific description of these should be understood from the following Sandrishti (explanation). 

Page #277:
---------------------------
Gommatasar Karmakanda-238: Udirana Vyuchchitti of Gunasthanas - Udirana and Anudirana Forms of Nature

**Mixed**

Udirana Gunasthan Vyuchchitti | Udirana | Anudirana

**Specific Mithyatva**

According to the interpretation of verse 264: Sasadan 111

According to the interpretation of verse 264:
22 According to the interpretation of verse 264: Asanyata
104 18 According to the interpretation of verse 264: Deshasayata
87
According to the interpretation of verse 264: Pramatta
| 8 (As mentioned in Udayavyuchchitti: 5 natures,
Sata, Asatavedaniya and Manushyayu) Apramatta

Here, 76 natures are mentioned in Uday, but since the Udirana of three natures (Sata, Asatavedaniya and Manushyayu) occurs in the sixth Gunasthan, there is an increase of three natures in Anudirana.
Therefore, there are only 73 Udirana forms of nature. A-purvakarana | 6
According to the interpretation of verse 264: Anivritikarana 6
According to the interpretation of verse 264: Sukshmasampasaya
According to the interpretation of verse 264: Upashantamoha | 2
According to the interpretation of verse 264: Kshinamaha
| According to the interpretation of verse 264: 83 (68+16-1 Tirthankara)
Sayoga

In Gunasthanas, the Tribhanga form of Uday-Udirana is mentioned, and while mentioning the Uday Tribhanga form in the 14 Marganas like Gati, etc., Uday is mentioned first.

**Gadyadisu Jogganam, Payadippahu-di-namoghasiddhanam.**
**Samittam Nedavvam, Kamaso Udayam Samasejj.** ||284||

**Meaning:** The nature, state, anubhaga and pradeshabanda Gunasthanas have been established. Their ownership in relation to Uday should be considered in order in the Marganas like Gati, etc. Further, some special points are mentioned in five verses regarding this topic.

**Gadyanuau-udao, Sapade Bhupunnabadare Tao.**
**Uchchudao Naradeve, Thi-nati-gu-dao Nare Tiriye.** ||285|| 

Page #278:
---------------------------
Gommatsar Karmakanda - 239
Meaning - At the very beginning of any desired birth, the motion, anupurvi and ayuka suitable for that desired birth arise. And by saying 'sapde', the motion, anupurvi and ayuka of a single being arise simultaneously. The Atpanam karma arises only in the Badar Paryapta Prithvikaayik Jeeva. The high gotra arises only in humans and Devas, and the three sleep states of Styanagridhi etc. arise only in humans and Tiryanch, not in others.
Sankhaugana Ratirye, Indiyapjjattgaddu Shreenatiyam. Joggamudedu Vajjiya, Aaharaviguvvvinutthavage || 286 ||
Meaning - Those who have a lifespan of a counted number of years, the humans and Tiryanch who are Karmabhoomi, are eligible for the three sleep states of Styanagridhi etc. after their Indriyaparyapti is complete, but all Karmabhoomi humans, except those who have Aaharakridhi and Vaikriyikridhi, are eligible for its arising.
Ayadaapune N Hi Thi, Sandhovi Y Ghammanarayam Muccha. Shreesandayade Kamaso, Naanuchau Charimatinnaanu || 287 ||
Meaning - In the Asanyata Gunasthan of Nivrittiaparyapta, there is no arising of Strived or Napunsakaved, because Samyagdristi does not arise in a woman who is about to die, but Dharmanamaka Prathamanarak Napunsakaved is an exception, because a person who has bound the Narakayu in the past, dies with Kshayik or Kritakritya Vedak Samyaktva and is born in Dharmanarak, therefore, in the Asanyata Gunasthan, there is no arising of all four Anupurvi of Strivedi, but there is arising of Narakgatya Anupurvi of Napunsakvedi. The remaining three do not arise.
Igivi Galathavarachauu, Tirye Apunno Narevi Sanghadanam. Orala Du Naratirye, Veguvvadu Devanerayie || 288 ||
Meaning - The karma of Ekendriya, Dwiendriya, Triendriya, Chaturindriya jati, which are Sthavar, Sukshma, Aparyapta and Sadharan, are eligible to arise only in Tiryanch, but also eligible to arise in Aparyaptaprakriti humans. The pair of karma of Vajrarashabanaraachadi six Samhanan and Audarikasharira, are eligible to arise in humans and Tiryanch. Vaikriyikasharira Vaikriyikangopaang are eligible to arise only in Devas and Narak.
1. Dhaval Pu. 155. 152 states that even Tiryanch who are Deshasanyami can have a high gotra. 

Page #279:
---------------------------
## Gommatsar Karmakanda - 240

**Verse 289:**
The rise of the *udyotapranati* nature occurs in the *badaraparyaptak* *tiryanch* other than *tej-vayu* and *sadharanavanaspatikayik*. The rise of the remaining natures is to be known in the order of the *gunasthanas*.

**Explanation:**
The rise of the *atapanam karma* is only in the *prithvikaayik*.

Thus, by stating the special rule of *udaya* in five *gatha sutras*, now in the statement related to *gatimargna*, first, the *udayarup* natures in the *narakagati* are mentioned.

**Verse 290:**
The three *sthyanagridhi* etc., *strived* and *purushaved*, these five without *ghatiya karma*, 42 natures and *narakayu*, *nichagotra*, *sata* and *asata vedaniya* and *namakarma*, out of these, 29 natures that occur in the *bhashaparyaptik* place of the *naraki*, in the order of *narakagati*, thus these 76 natures are said to be eligible for *udaya* in *narakagati*.

**Verse 291:**
The names of the 29 natures related to *namakarma* are mentioned:
* *Veguvvatejathirasushaddugdidihundaniminapanchindi*
* *Niravagati*
* *Dubbhagagurutasavannachau*
* *Yavachithan*

**Explanation:**
These 29 natures are *udayarup* in the place of *vachanaparyapti* of the *naraki* - *vaikriyakasharira-vaikriyakajopang*, *taijas-karman*, *sthira-asthira*, *shubha-ashubha*, *aprashasthavihayogati*, *hundakasanstan*, *nirman*, *panchendriyajati*, *narakagati*, *durbbhag*, *duhsvar*, *anaadeya*, *ayashaskirti*, *aguruladhu*, *upadhat*, *paradhat*, *uchchvas*, *tras*, *badar*, *paryaptak*, *pratyekasharira*, *varna-rasgandha-sparsh*.

Now, the *udayavyuchchitti*, *udaya-anudayarup* natures in the first *naraka* called *dharmanamaka* are mentioned.

**Verse 292:**
Here, in the *mithyatvagunasthan*, there is one *mithyatva* *vyuchchitti*. *Sasadanagunasthan*... 

Page #280:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-241

In this, the dissolution of the 4 infinite-binding kṣayās, the dissolution of the samyagmithyātvaprakṛti in the mixed (samyagmithyātv),
and in the asanyata-guṇasthāna, the four kṣayās of apratyākhyāna, durbhaga, anādeya, ayaskīrti, narakāyu, narakagati, narakagatyānupūrvi, vaikriyikaśarīra, vaikriyikaṅgopāṅga, these 12 prakṛtis have their udya-vyuccheddi.

**Special Note:** In the mithyātvaguṇasthāna related to ghanīrakas, there is udya of 74 prakṛtis and anudya of the mixed-mohaniya and samyaktvamohaniya. In the mithyātvaguṇasthāna, the vyuccheddi prakṛti is 1, therefore, it is 2 in the form of anudya of the mithyātvaguṇasthāna and 4 in the form of anudya in sāsadana along with narakagatyānupūrvi, udya prakṛti 72, udya prakṛti 69 in the mixed guṇasthāna, and 7 in the form of anudya due to the udya of the mixed-mohaniya. In the asanyata-guṇasthāna, udya prakṛti is 70 and anudya prakṛti is 6 due to the udya of samyaktv and narakagatyānupūrvi. The udya-vyuccheddi related to gharmanaraka, the udya, and the anudya-rūpa prakṛtis are as follows:

**Udyayoga Prakṛti 76, Guṇasthāna 4.**

**Udyavyuccheddi**
**Mithyātv:** ! ..
**Guṇasthāna**
**Udy** **Anudya** .. 4.. !. ....
**Sāsādana**
**Special** | 2 (samyagmithyātv, samyaktv) 1 (mithyātv) 4 (2+1+narakagatyānupūrvi) vyuc. 4 (ananta-anubandhi) | 7 (4+4-1 samyagmithyātv) 6 (7+1-2 samyaktv, narakagatyānupūrvi) 12 (apratyākhyāna-kṣayā 4, durbhaga, anādeya,
narakāyu, ayaskīrti, narakadvīka, vaikriyikadvīka)
**Mixed**
**Asanyata**

Now, the statement of udya etc. in the six earths starting from the second is as follows:

**Bidīyādisu chasu puḍhivisu evaṁ navari ya asanjadḍṭṭhāṇe.**
**Naṭṭhi nirayāṇupuvī tissē micchēva vocchēdo ||293||**

**Meaning:** In the six earths starting from the lineage, the gharmavatt udyayoga prakṛti is 76, but the special feature here is that in the asanyata-guṇasthāna, there is no udya of narakagatyānupūrvi, because the one whose narakāyu is bound... 

Page #281:
---------------------------
## Gommatasara Karmakanda - 242

A being with right faith (Samyagdrsti) does not take birth in the six realms (Vanshaadi). Therefore, the cessation (Vyuchchitti) of this (Narakagatyanupurvi) occurs only in the Mithyatvagunasthan. In Mithyatvagunasthan, there are two: Vyuchchinnprakriti 2, Udayaprakriti 74, Anudaya (Savyakancha, Sanyammithyatva). In Sasadanagunasthan, there are 4 Vyuchchitti prakritis, 72 Udayaprakritis, and 4 Anudaya prakritis. In Mishragunasthan, due to the arising of Samyagmithyatva, there are 7 Anudaya prakritis, 69 Udayaprakritis, and 1 Vyuchchinnprakriti. In Asanyatagunasthan, due to the attainment of Samyaktvaprakriti, there are 7 Anudaya prakritis, 69 Udayaprakritis, and 11 Vyuchchinnprakritis.

The perception of Udayavyuchchitti, Udaya, and Anudaya related to the six realms (Vanshaadi) is as follows:

| Udayayogya Prakriti | Gunasthan | Udayagunasthan | Vyuchchitti | Anudaya | Special Mithyatva |
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
| 76 | 4 | Mithyatva | 2 (Mithyatva and Narakagatyanupurvi) |  | Sasadan |
|  |  |  |  | 7 (7+1-1 Samyaktv) |  | Mishra (as per previous perception) |
|  |  |  |  | 11 (12 as per previous perception - 1 Narakagatyanupurvi) |  | Asanyata (as per previous perception) |

Now, we will discuss the Udaya, etc., in the realm of animals (Tiryanchgati).

**Verse 294:**

*Tiryie Oghou Suranaranirayaoo Uccha Manudhuharadugam.
Veguvvachchakkattitham, Nasthi Hu Emeva Samannhe.*

**Meaning:**

Know that the realm of animals (Tiryanchgati) is like the Gunasthan in all its aspects. Out of the 122 Udayayogya prakritis, 15 are not Udayayogya here: Devayu, Manushayau, Narakayu, Ucchagotra, Manushayagati, Manushayagatyanupurvi, Aharakasharira, Aharakangopaang, Vaikriyakasharira, Vaikriyakangopaang, Devagati, Devagatyanupurvi, Narakagati, Narakagatyanupurvi, and Tirthankara. Therefore, 107 prakritis experience Udaya.

**Special Meaning:**

Out of the five types of animals, only the common animals (Samanyatiryanch) have 107 Udayayogya prakritis. There are 5 Gunasthanas. Here, in Mithyatvagunasthan, there are 5 Vyuchchinnprakritis, 105 Udayaprakritis, and 2 Anudaya prakritis. In Sasadanagunasthan, there are 7 Anudaya prakritis, 100 Udayaprakritis, and 9 Vyuchchinnprakritis. In Mishragunasthan, due to the absence of Udaya of Tiryanchgatyuanupurvi and the arising of Samyagmithyatva, there are 16 Anudaya prakritis, 91 Udayaprakritis, and 1 Vyuchchinnprakriti. Due to the arising of Samyaktv and Tiryanchgatyuanupurvi... 

Page #282:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-243

In the Asanyata Gunasthan, there are 15 Anudaya Prakriti, 92 Udaya Prakriti, and 8 Vyuchchhinna Prakriti (4 Apratyakhyana Kshaya, Tiryanchagatyanupurvi, Durbhaga, Anadeya, Ayashaskirti). In the Deshasanyata Gunasthan, there are 23 Anudaya Prakriti, 84 Udaya Prakriti, and 8 Vyuchchhinna Prakriti, the same as in the Asanyata Gunasthan. The Sandrishti of Udaya, Vyuchchhinna, and Anudaya related to the general Tiryancha is:

Udaya Yogya Prakriti: 107
Gunasthan: 5
Udaya Gunasthan | Vyuchchhinna | Udaya | Anudaya | Mithyatva
105
Vishesh 2 (Samyagmithyatva and Samyaktava Prakriti): 5 (Mithyatva, Atap, Sukshma, Apariyapta, Sadharan)
Sasadan: 9 - Bhanagun 4, Ajendriyadi Jati 4,
Sthavar) Mishra 1
16 (9+7+1 Tiryanchagatyanupurvi-1
Samyagmithyatva)
1 (Samyagmithyatva) Asanyatta | 8 | 92 | 15 15 (16+1-2 Samyaktava and Tiryanchagatyanupurvi)
8 (Apratyakhyana Kshaya 4, Tiryanchagatyanupurvi,
Durbhaga, Anadeya, and Ayashaskirti) Deshasanyata
8 (Pratyakhyana Kshaya 4, Udyot, Tiryanchagati,
Nichagotra, and Tiryanchayu) Athananta Samanyapanchendriya Tiryancha and Paryapta Panchendriya Tiryancha are called Udaya, etc.

Thavardugasaharanatavigivigaluun tani panchakhe.
Itthiappajjattuna, te punne udayapayadiao ||295||

Meaning: Out of the aforementioned 107 Prakriti related to the general Tiryancha, 99 Prakriti are Udaya Yogya for Panchendriya Tiryancha, excluding the 8 Prakriti of Sthavar, Sukshma, Sadharan, Atap, Ekendriya, and Vikal Tray.

Vishesharth: Here, in the Mithyatva Gunasthan, the Vyuchchhinna is Mithyatva and Apariyapta, these two Prakriti. 

Page #283:
---------------------------
Gommatasar Karmakanda - 244

Uday 97 is the nature of the arising, and Anudaya is the nature of Samyagmithyatva, Samyaktava. In the Sasadan Gunasthan, the Vyuchchitti is 4, the Anantanubandhi Kashaya, the Uday Prakriti is 95, and the Anudaya Prakriti is 4. In the Mishragunasthan, the Vyuchchitti is 1, the Samyagmithyatva Prakriti, the Uday Prakriti is 91, and the Anudaya Prakriti is 8. In the Asanyat Gunasthan, the Vyuchchitti is 8, the Uday is 92, and the Anudaya is 7, the Tiryanchagatyaanupurvi and Samyaktava. In the Deshasanyat Gunasthan, the Vyuchchitti is 8, the Uday Prakriti is 84, and the Anudaya Prakriti is 15.

Sasadan
Mishra
-
Panchendriya Tiryancha Samanya Sambandhi Uday Vyuchchitti Uday Anudaya Sandrishti Uday Yogya Prakriti 99, Gunasthan 5
Gunasthan Mithyatva 2
Asanyat
Uday
Vyuchchitti
Deshasanyat
4
1
8
8
Uday Anudaya
97
2
95
91
92
84
×
8
7
15
Vishesh
Anu. 2 (Samyagmithyatva, Samyaktava) Vyuch. 2 (Mithyatva, Aparyapta)
4 (Anantanubandhi Kashaya)
8 (4+4-1 Samyagmithyatva + Tiryanchagatyaanupurvi)
7 (8+1 2 Samyaktava, Tiryanchagatyaanupurvi) 8 (Purvasandrishti Anusar)
Purvavat

From the Uday Yogya Prakritis of Panchendriya Tiryancha Samanya, excluding Strived and Aparyapta (the Prarupana of Yonin and Aparyapta Jivas is done separately. Therefore, here these two Prakritis are reduced in comparison to Purushaved), there are 97 Uday Yogya Prakritis of Paryapta Panchendriya Tiryancha. Here, in the Mithyatva Gunasthan, the Vyuchchinn Prakriti is 1 (Mithyatva), the Uday Prakriti is 95, and the Anudaya Prakriti is 2 (Samyagmithyatva, Samyaktava). In the Sasadan Gunasthan, the Vyuchchinn Prakriti is 4 (Anantanubandhi Kashaya), the Uday Prakriti is 94, and the Anudaya Prakriti is 3. In the Mishragunasthan, the Vyuchchitti is Samyagmithyatva Prakriti, the Anudaya Prakriti is 7, and the Uday Prakriti is 90. In the Asanyat, the Vyuchchitti is 8, the Uday is 91, and the Anudaya is 6. In the Deshasanyat, the Vyuchchitti is 8, the Uday is 83, and the Anudaya is 14. 

Page #284:
---------------------------
## Gunasthana
## Mithyatva
## Sasadan
## Misra
## Asanyata
## Deshasanyata
## Gommatasar Karmakanda - 245
## Panchendriya Paryapta Tiryancha Sambandhi Udayavyuchchitti - Uday - Anudaya ki Sandrishti Udayyogya Prakriti 97, Gunasthana 5
## Uday
## Vyuchchitti Uday
1
95
4
8
8
94
10
11
83
## Anudaya
2
3
7
6
14
## Vishesh
2 (Misra Prakriti va Samyaktava Prakriti) 1 (Mithyatva)
4 (Anantanu bandhi Kashaya)
1 (Samyagmithyatva) 7 (7+1 Tiryancha - Gaty anupurvi - 1 Misra Mohaniya)
6 (7 + 1 2 Samyaktava, Tiryancha Gaty anupurvi) 8 (4 Apratyakhyana Kashaya + Dur Bhag, Anadeya; Ayashaskirti aur Tiryancha Gaty anupurvi) 8 (Purvokt)
## Ath anantar Yoninni aur Labdhya Paryapta Tiryanchon mein Udayadi kahte hain
## Pusandriniththijuda, joni niye avirade na tirayanu. Punnidare shri shrinati, par ghadadu punnujjiva. || 296 ||
## Sarga didu jasadejam, aadi santhana sanhadeepanagam.
## Subhagam sammam missam, heena te'punna sandhaju da. || 297 || Jummam ||
## Artha - Panchendriya Paryapta Tiryancha ke Udayyogya 97 Prakritiyon mein se Purushaved va Napumsakaved kam karke Strived milaane se Tiryancha Yoninni ke Udayyogya Prakriti 96 hain (Gunasthana panch hain.) Tiryancha Yoninni sambandhi Udayyogya 96 Prakritiyon mein se Strived, Styanagridhi aadi teen Nidra, Par ghat, Uchchvas, Paryapt, Udyot, Susvar, Duhsvar, Prashast Vihayogati, Aprashast Vihayogati, Yashaskirti, Adeya, aadi ke panch Sansthan, aadi ke panch Sanhanan, Subhagam, Samyaktava, Samyagmithyatva in 27 Prakritiyon ko ghatakar tatha Aparayapt va Napumsakaved milaane se Panchendriya Labdhya Paryapta Katiryancha ke Uday Yogya Prakriti 71 hain aur ek Mithyatva Gunasthana hai.
## Visheshartha - Tiyancha Yoninni ke Udayyogya Prakriti 96 tatha Gunasthana 5 hain. Yaha Mithyatva Gunasthana mein Udayavyuchchitti Mithyatva Prakriti ki, Uday Prakriti 14, Anudaya Samyagmithyatva aur Samyaktava Prakriti 

Page #285:
---------------------------
This is from Gommatasara Karmakanda-246. In Sasadanagunasthan, there are 4 Anantanubandhi Kshaya and 5 Tiryanchagatyanupurvi Prakruti, with 93 Udayaprakruti and 3 Anudayaprakruti. In Mishragunasthan, there is the Vyuchchitti of Samyagmithyatva, with 89 Udayarupa Prakruti and 7 Anudayaprakruti. Aviratsamyagdristi does not die and is not born as a Tiryanchi or a woman, therefore in Asanyatagunasthan, there are 7 Prakruti with the Vyuchchitti of the aforementioned 8, excluding Tiryanchagatyanupurvi, with 89 Udayaprakruti, as Samyaktva Prakruti is found here, and 7 Anudayaprakruti. In Deshasanyatagunasthan, there are 8 Prakruti as mentioned in Gunasthan, with 82 Udayaprakruti and 14 Anudayaprakruti. ... The Sandristi of Udayavyuchchitti-Uday-Anuday related to Tiryanchayoni.

| Udayayogyaprakruti | Gunasthan | Vyuchchitti | Anuday |
|---|---|---|---|
| 96 | 5 (Anantanubandhi 4 + Tiryanchagatyanupurvi) | 5 | 4 |
|  | Mishra | 7 (5 + 3 - 1 Samyagmithyatva) | 7 |
|  | Asanyata | 7 (7 + 1 - Samyaktva Prakruti) | 7 |
|  | Vyuchchitti 7 (Aforementioned 8 - 1 Tiryanchagatyanupurvi) |  |  |
|  | Deshasanyata | 82 | 14 | Vyuchchitti 8 (Aforementioned) |  |

Now, we will discuss Udayadi in Athanantar Manushya Gati.

**Munuve Ogho Thavaratiriyadavadugayaviyalindi.**
**Saharani Darautiy, Vegubviyachhak Parihino.** ||298||

**Meaning:** There are four types of humans. Among them, the common human has 122 Udayayogyaprakruti as mentioned in Gunasthan. Out of these, 20 Prakruti are removed:  Sthavar, Sukshma, Tiryanchagati, Tiryanchagatyanupurvi, Atap, Udyot, Ekendriya, Dwiindriya, Triindriya, Chaturindriya, Sadharan, Narak-Tiryanch and Devayu, Vaikriyik Shrir, Vaikriyik Angopang, Devagati, DevagatyAnupurvi, Narakgati, NarakgatyAnupurvi. This leaves 102 Udayayogyaprakruti.

**Michchamapunna Chhedo, Anamissam Michchagaditasu Ayade.**
**Bidiyakasayanaranu, Dubbhag'anadajj Ajasayam.** ||299|| 

Page #286:
---------------------------
Gommatasar Karmakanda - 247

**Verse 300:**
In the Mithyatva Gunasthan, there is the arising and cessation of the four Kshayas of Mithyatva and Aparayapta, in the Sasadan Gunasthan, the four Anantanubandhik Kshayas, in the Mishragunasthan, the Samyagmithyatva, in the Asanyat Gunasthan, the four Pratyakhyan Kshayas, and in the Desasanyat Gunasthan, the four Pratyakhyan Kshayas, along with the eight Prakritis of Durbhaga, Anadeya, Ayashkirti, and the low Gotra.

**Explanation:**
Further, one should know the arising and cessation of the Gunasthanas from the Pramatta to the Ayogi Gunasthan, in the order mentioned in the Gunasthanas. In a Parayapta human, out of the 102 Prakritis of a common human, 100 Prakritis are eligible for arising, after deducting the Strived and Aparayapta Prakritis.

**Specific Explanation:**
In the Mithyatva Gunasthan of a common human, there are 2 Vyuchchhinna Prakritis, 97 Udaya Prakritis, and 5 Anudaya Prakritis, namely Samyagmithyatva, Samyaktva, Aharakdvik, and Tirthankara. In the Sasadan Gunasthan, there are 4 Vyuchchhinna Prakritis, 95 Udaya Prakritis, and 7 Anudaya Prakritis. In the Mishragunasthan, there is 1 Vyuchchhinna Prakriti, 91 Udaya Prakritis, and 11 Anudaya Prakritis due to the absence of arising of the Manushya Gaty Anupurvi and the arising of the Samyagmithyatva Prakriti. In the Asanyat Gunasthan, there are 8 Vyuchchhinna Prakritis, 92 Udaya Prakritis, and 10 Anudaya Prakritis due to the arising of Samyaktva and Manushya Gaty Anupurvi. In the Desasanyat Gunasthan, there are 5 Vyuchchhinna Prakritis, 84 Udaya Prakritis, and 18 Anudaya Prakritis. In the Pramatta Gunasthan, there are 5 Vyuchchhinna Prakritis, 81 Udaya Prakritis, and 21 Anudaya Prakritis due to the presence of Aharakdvik. In the Apramatta Gunasthan, there are 4 Vyuchchhinna Prakritis, 76 Udaya Prakritis, and 26 Anudaya Prakritis. In the Apurvakaran Gunasthan, there are 6 Vyuchchhinna Prakritis, 72 Udaya Prakritis, and 30 Anudaya Prakritis. In the Anivrittikaran Gunasthan, there are 6 Vyuchchhinna Prakritis, 66 Udaya Prakritis, and 36 Anudaya Prakritis. In the Sukshmasamprayay Gunasthan, there is 1 Vyuchchhinna Prakriti, 60 Udaya Prakritis, and 42 Anudaya Prakritis. In the Upashantakshay Gunasthan, there are 2 Vyuchchhinna Prakritis, 59 Udaya Prakritis, and 43 Anudaya Prakritis. In the Kshinakshay Gunasthan, there are 16 Vyuchchhinna Prakritis, 57 Udaya Prakritis, and 45 Anudaya Prakritis. In the Sayogkevali Gunasthan, there are 30 Vyuchchhinna Prakritis, 42 Udaya Prakritis (including Tirthankara), and 60 Anudaya Prakritis.

In the Ayogkevali Gunasthan, there are 12 Vyuchchhinna Prakritis, 12 Udaya Prakritis, and 90 Anudaya Prakritis. 

Page #287:
---------------------------
Gommatasar Karmakanda-248
**General Human-related Udayavyuchchitti-Uday-Anudaya Insight**

**Udayyogya Prakriti 102, Gunasthan 14** | **Uday** | **Anudaya**
**Specific Vyuchchitti** | **Mithyatva**
5 (Samyagmithyatva, Samyaktava, Aharakatik, Tirthankara) | 2 (Mithyatva, Aparayapta) | Sasadan
4 (Anantanubandhik Kshaya) | Mishra | 11 (7+4+1 Manushya Gaty Anupurvi - 1 Samyagmithyatva)
1 (Samyagmithyatva) | Asanyata | 10 (11+1-2, Manushya Gaty Anupurvi and Samyaktava) | 8 (Apratyakhyan Kshaya 4, Durbhaga, Anadeya, Ayashaskirti, Manushya Gaty Anupurvi) | Deshasanyata
18 - 5 (Pratyakhyan Kshaya 4 and Nichgotra) | Pramattasanyata | 21 (18+5-2 Aharakdvik)
5 (Styanagridhi etc. three Nidra and Aharakatik) | Apratmattasanyata | 4 (Ardhanaracha, Kilka, Supatikasanhanan, Samyaktava) | Apurvakaran | 6
6 (Hasya etc. no Kshaya) | Anivrittikaran | 6
6 (Stri-Purush and Napunsakaved, Sajvalan Krodha, Man Maya) | Sukshmasampray | 1 (Sukshmalobha) | Upashantamoha
2 (Kranaracha and Narachasanhanan) | Kshinamoha | 16 (Nidra, Prachala, 5 Gnanavaran, 4 Darshanavaran, 5 Antaraya) | Sayogakevali | 60 (45+16-1 Tirthankara)
30 (According to the insight of Gatha 264) | Ayogakevali | 12 (According to the insight of Gatha 264) 

Page #288:
---------------------------
## Gommatasara Karmakanda - 249

In the same way, out of the 102 **prakritis** (natures) capable of arising in an ordinary human being, when the **soved** (subtle) and **aparayapt** (inadequate) **prakritis** are reduced, there are 100 **prakritis** capable of arising in a **paryapt** (perfect) human being. Here, in the **mithyatvagunasthan** (state of false belief), there is 1 **vyuchchhinna** (discontinuous) **prakriti** of **mithyatva** (false belief), 95 **udaya** (arising) **prakritis**, and 5 **anudaya** (non-arising) **prakritis** of **samyagmithyatva** (right false belief) etc. In the **sasadanagunasthan** (state of attachment), there are 4 **vyuchchhinna** **prakritis**, 94 **udaya** **prakritis**, and 6 **anudaya** **prakritis**. In the **mishragunasthan** (state of mixed qualities), there is 1 **vyuchchhinna** **prakriti**, 90 **udaya** **prakritis**, and 10 **anudaya** **prakritis**. In the **asanyatagunasthan** (state of unrestrained conduct), there are 8 **vyuchchhinna** **prakritis**, 91 **udaya** **prakritis**, and 9 **anudaya** **prakritis** due to the arising of **samyaktva** (right faith) and **manushya gatyanupurvi** (human progression). In the **deshasanyatagunasthan** (state of restrained conduct in a particular place), there are 5 **vyuchchhinna** **prakritis**, 83 **udaya** **prakritis**, and 17 **anudaya** **prakritis**. In the **pramattasanyatagunasthan** (state of restrained conduct with occasional lapses), there are 5 **vyuchchhinna** **prakritis**, 80 **udaya** **prakritis**, and 20 **anudaya** **prakritis**. In the **apramattasanyatagunasthan** (state of restrained conduct without lapses), there are 4 **vyuchchhinna** **prakritis**, 75 **udaya** **prakritis**, and 25 **anudaya** **prakritis**. In the **apurvakaranagunasthan** (state of the creation of new karma), there are 6 **vyuchchhinna** **prakritis**, 71 **udaya** **prakritis**, and 29 **anudaya** **prakritis**. In the **anivrittikaranagunasthan** (state of the cessation of karma), there are 5 **vyuchchhinna** **prakritis**, 65 **udaya** **prakritis**, and 35 **anudaya** **prakritis**. In the **sukshmasamprayagunasthan** (state of subtle attachment), there is 1 **vyuchchhinna** **prakriti**, 60 **udaya** **prakritis**, and 40 **anudaya** **prakritis**. In the **upashantamohagunasthan** (state of subdued delusion), there are 2 **vyuchchhinna** **prakritis**, 59 **udaya** **prakritis**, and 41 **anudaya** **prakritis**. In the **kshinamohagunasthan** (state of diminished delusion), there are 16 **vyuchchhinna** **prakritis**, 57 **udaya** **prakritis**, and 43 **anudaya** **prakritis**. In the **sayogkevaligunasthan** (state of liberated being with attachments), there are 30 **vyuchchhinna** **prakritis**, 42 **udaya** **prakritis**, and 58 **anudaya** **prakritis**. In the **ayogkevaligunasthan** (state of liberated being without attachments), there are 12 **vyuchchhinna** **prakritis**, 12 **udaya** **prakritis**, and 88 **anudaya** **prakritis**.

**A view of the arising, discontinuous, and non-arising prakritis related to the paryapt human being**

**Udaya** (arising) **prakritis**: 100
**Gunasthan** (states): 14

| **Gunasthan** | **Mithyatva** | **Sasadan** | **Mishra** | **Asanyata** | **Deshasanyata** | **Pramattasanyata** | **Apramattasanyata** | **Apurvakaran** | **Anivrittikaran** | **Sukshmasampray** | **Upashantamoha** | **Kshinamoha** | **Sayogkevali** | **Ayogkevali** |
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
| **Udaya** | 95 | 94 | 90 | 91 | 83 | 80 | 75 | 71 | 65 | 60 | 59 | 57 | 42 | 12 |
| **Vyuchchhinna** | 1 | 4 | 1 | 8 | 5 | 5 | 4 | 6 | 5 | 1 | 2 | 16 | 30 | 12 |
| **Anudaya** | 5 | 6 | 10 | 9 | 17 | 20 | 25 | 29 | 35 | 40 | 41 | 43 | 58 | 88 |

**Note:**

* The numbers in the table represent the number of **prakritis** in each category.
* The **anudaya** **prakritis** are calculated based on the previous **sanyukta** (combined) **prakritis**.
* The **vyuchchhinna** **prakritis** are mentioned in the text.
* The **udaya** **prakritis** are calculated by subtracting the **vyuchchhinna** and **anudaya** **prakritis** from the total of 100.
* The **samyagmithyatva**, **samyaktva**, **aaharaka dvik**, and **tirthankara** **prakritis** are considered as
Page #289:
---------------------------
## Anivrittikaran | 5
1. Sukshmasampray Upashantamoha 2
Kshina Moha 16
Sayogakevali 30
Ayogakevali 12
65
60
59
57
42
12
Gommatasar Karmakanda - 250
35
40
41
43
58
88
5 ( Purusha and Napumsakaved, Sanjwalanakrodha - Mana-Maya).
1 ( According to Purvasandristi)
2 ( According to Purvasandristi)
16 ( According to Purvasandristi)
58 (43+16 - 1 Tirthankara) 30 ( According to Purvasandristi)
12 ( According to Purvasandristi)
Manusinieththisahida Titthayarahaarpurissantara. Punnidareva Apunne Sagaanugadiaaugam Neyam || 301 ||
**Meaning:** Out of the 100 eligible for arising in the human realm, the Tirthankara, Aharakadvik, Purushaved and Napumsakaved, these 5 are reduced, and by adding Strived, there are 96 eligible for arising in the human realm. And for the Labdhyaparyaptakamanushya, there are 71 eligible for arising, like the Labdhyaparyaptakatiryanchavat (but excluding the three Tiryancha-related natures: Tiryancha Anupurvi, Tirya-gati and Tiryanchayu, and in their place, knowing the human-related Manushya-gati, Manushya-gati-anupurvi, Manushya-ayu). Gunasthan is one Mithyatva.
**Special Meaning:** The eligible natures for arising in the human realm are 96, and the Gunasthan are 14. Here, in the Mithyatva Gunasthan, there is one Mithyatva for Udayavyuchchitti, 94 for Udayaprakriti, and Samyagmithyatva and Samyaktva for Anudayaprakriti. In the Sasadan Gunasthan, there is Vyuchchitti of the four Charakshaya and Manushya-gati-anupurvi, 93 for Udayaprakriti, and 3 for Anudayaprakriti. In the Mishragunasthan, there is Vyuchchitti of Samyagmithyatva, 89 for Udayaprakriti, and 7 for Anudayaprakriti. In the Asanyata Gunasthan, there is Vyuchchitti of the four Apratyakhyanakshaya, Dubhang, Anadeya, Ayashaskirti, 89 for Udayaprakriti, and 7 for Anudayaprakriti. In the Deshasanyata Gunasthan, there is Vyuchchitti of the four Pratyakhyanakshaya and Nichagotra, 82 for Udayaprakriti, and 14 for Anudayaprakriti. In the Pramatta Gunasthan, there is Vyuchchitti of Styanagridhi and Trinidra, 77 for Udayaprakriti, and 19 for Anudayaprakriti. In the Aprmatta Gunasthan, there is Vyuchchitti of 4 natures, 74 for Udayaprakriti, and 22 for Anudayaprakriti. In the Apurvakaran Gunasthan, there is Vyuchchitti of 6 natures, 70 for Udayaprakriti, and 26 for Anudayaprakriti. In the Anivrittikaran Gunasthan, there is Vyuchchitti of the four natures: Strived, Sanjwalanakrodha, Mana-Maya, in order. 64 for Udayaprakriti, and 32 for Anudayaprakriti. In the Sukshmasampray Gunasthan, there is Vyuchchitti of Sukshmalobha, 60 for Udayaprakriti, and 36 for Anudayaprakriti. In the Upashantamoha Gunasthan, there is Vyuchchitti of Vajranaracha and Naracha-sanhanan, 59 for Udayaprakriti, and 37 for Anudayaprakriti. In the Kshina Moha Gunasthan, there is Vyuchchitti of 16 natures, 57 for Udayaprakriti, and 39 for Anudayaprakriti. 

Page #290:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-251: In the Sayogi Gunasthan, there are 30 Vyuchchitti, 41 Uday and 55 Anuday Prakruti. In the Ayogi Gunasthan, there are 11 Vyuchchitti, 11 Uday and 85 Anuday Prakruti.

The details of Uday, Vyuchchitti and Anuday for humans are as follows:

Udayyogya Prakruti: 96, Gunasthan: 14

| Vyuchchitti | Uday | Anuday | Gunasthan |
|---|---|---|---|
| Mithyatva | 4 | 6 | 1 |
| Sasadan | 4 | 4 | 2 |
| Misra | 1 | 1 | 3 |
| Asanyata | 16 | 16 | 4 |
| Deshasanyata | 30 | 30 | 5 |
| Pramatta-sanyata | 11 | 11 | 6 |
| Apramatta-sanyata | 85 | 85 | 7 |

**Details:**

* **Mithyatva:** 4 (Apuurvakaran), 6 (Anivritikaran)
* **Sasadan:** 4 (Sukshma-samparaya), 1 (Upashanta-moha)
* **Misra:** 1 (Kshina-moha)
* **Asanyata:** 16 (Sayogi-kevali)
* **Deshasanyata:** 30 (Ayogi-kevali)
* **Pramatta-sanyata:** 11 (Special 2 - Samyag-mithyatva, Samyaktava)
* **Apramatta-sanyata:** 85 (Special 1 - Mithyatva, 5 - Ananta-anubandhi 4 + 1 Manushya-gatya-anupurvi, 7 - 3+5-1 Samyag-mithyatva, Anuday 7 - 7+1-1 Samyaktava-prakruti, Vyuchchitti 7 - Purvokt Anyatyahi 5, Purvokt 3 - Styan-girdhi-adi 3 Nidra, 4 - Ardha-naracha-adi 3 Sanhanan and Samyaktava, 6 - Hasya-adi Nok-kshaya, 4 - Stri-ved and Sajvalan-krodha-mana-maya, 1 - Sukshma-lobha, 2 - Vajra-naracha and Naracha-sanhanan)

Now, we will discuss the Uday, etc. of Bhogbhumija humans and Tiryanchas in two verses:

**Verse 302:**

> Manusoghang va bhoge, dubbhag chauni-chasandi-nathiyam.
> Duggadit-tithama-punnam, sanhadisanthan-charim-apanam.

**Meaning:**

> Among Bhogbhumija humans, the Udayyogya Prakruti for a common human is 102, out of which, the Prakruti of Dur-bhag, etc.

**Verse 303:**

> Haraduhina evam, tiraye manuduchcha-godama-nauvam.
> Avaniya pakkhiv nicham, tiriyati-riyaa-ujjovam.

**Meaning:**

> Similarly, in Tiryanchas, the Udayyogya Prakruti for a human is higher than that of a Tiryancha.
> The Prakruti of a bird is lower than that of a human, and the Prakruti of a Tiryancha is lower than that of a bird.

**Jummang** (meaning: "It is so")
Page #291:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-252 Four (Dur Bhag, Duh Svar, Anadeya, Ayashas Kirti)  Niche Gotra Napumsak Veda Styan Guddi Adi Three Nidra. Aprashast Viha Yogati, Tirthankara, Aparyapt Vajra Nara Chadi Antim 5 Sanhanan, Nyagrodha Parimandala Adi 5 Sansthan
And Ahar Kadrik In 24 Prakruti Ke Bina Sesha 78 Prakrutiya Udya Yogya Hain. Tathaiva Bhog Bhoomij Janu Shaya Sambandhi 78 Prakrutiyon Mein Manusya Gati, Manusya Gati Anupurvi, Manusya Ayu Aur Uchch Gotra Kam Karke Niche Gotra, Tiryanch Gati Tiryanch Gati Anupurvi, Tiryanch Ayu Aur Udyot Prakruti Milane Par 79 Prakrutiya Bhog Bhoomij Tiryanch Ke Udya Yogya Janna.
Vishesh Arth - Bhog Bhoomij Manusya Ke Mithyatva Gunasthan Mein Vyuchchhitra Prakruti 1 Mithyatva, Udya Prakruti 76, Anudya Prakruti 2 Samyag Mithyatva Aur Samyaktva Prakruti Ka. Sasadan Gunasthan Mein Vyuchchhitti Ananta Anubandhi Kashaya 4, Udya Prakruti 75, Anudya Prakruti 3. Mishra Gunasthan Mein Vyuchchhitti 1 Mishra Mohaniya Ki, Udya 71 Prakruti Ka Tatha Samyag Mithyatva Prakruti Ka Udya Hone Aur Anupurvi Ka Udya Nahin Hone Se Anudya 7 Prakruti Ka. Asanyat Gunasthan Mein Vyuchchhinna Prakruti Apratyakhyan Kashaya Char Evam Manusya Gati Anupurvi, Udya Prakruti 72, Anudya Prakruti 6, Kyunki Yahan Samyaktva Prakruti Aur Manusya Gati Anupurvi Ka Udya Paye Jata Hai. Bhog Bhoomij Janu Shaya Sambandhi Udya Vyuchchhitti-Udya-Anudya Sambandhi Sandrishti
Udya Yogya Prakruti 78, Gunasthan 4 Udya Gunasthan | Vyuchchhitti Udya Anudya
Vishesh 2 (Gatha 301 Ki Sandrishti Anusar) 1 (Gatha 301 Ki Sandrishti Anusar)
4 (Ananta Anubandhi Kashaya) Mishra
7 (4+3+1 Manusya Gati Anupurvi-1 Samyag Mithyatva) Asanyat
6 (7+1-2 Samyaktva, Manusya Gati Anupurvi) 5 (Apratyakhyan Kashaya 4, Manusya Gati Anupurvi)
Mithyatva
2
Sasadan
Isi Prakar Bhog Bhoomij Tiryanch Sambandhi Mithyatva Gunasthan Mein Vyuchchhitti Rup Prakruti 1 Mithyatva, Udya Prakruti 77, Anudya Rup Samyag Mithyatva Aur Samyaktva Prakruti Ye 2 Hain. Sasadan Gunasthan Mein Vyuchchhitti Ananta Anubandhi Ki Char Kashaya, Udya Prakruti 76, Anudya Prakruti 3. Mishra Gunasthan Mein Vyuchchhitti Ek Samyag Mithyatva Prakruti Ki, Samyag Mithyatva Sahit Udya 72 Prakruti Ka, Anupurvi Ke Udya Ka Abhav Hone Se Anudya Prakruti 7 Hain. Asanyat Gunasthan Mein Vyuchchhinna Prakruti Apratyakhyan Kashaya 4 Aur 

Page #292:
---------------------------
Gommatasar Karmakanda-253
The number of *udaya* (arising) and *anudaya* (not arising) *prakritis* (natures) in relation to *tiryanchagatya* (animal existence) and *tiryanchagatyaanupurvi* (animal existence in the past) is 73 and 6 respectively. The *sandristi* (view) regarding the *udaya* (arising), *vyuchchitti* (cessation), and *anudaya* (not arising) of *bhogabhumijati* (earthly beings) and *tiryancha* (animals).
*Udayayogya* (capable of arising) *prakritis* are 79, *gunasthanas* (stages of qualities) are 4.
| *Udayagunasthan* | *Vyuchchitti* | *Mithyatva* | *Udaya* | *Anudaya* | *Sasadan* | *Mishra* |
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|  | *Mithyatva* | 1 (according to *gatha* 301) | 75 (according to *gatha* 301) | 2 (*samyagmithyatva* and *samyaktava*) | 4 (*anantaanubandhi* *kashaya*) | 7 (4+3+1 *tiryanchagatthanubhava* - 1 *samyagmithyatva*) |
|  | *Apratyaakhyana* *kashaya* | 4 | 74 | 3 |  | 5 (4 *apratyaakhyana* *kashaya* and *tiryanchagatyaanupurvi*) |
|  | *Samyagmithyatva* |  | 70 | 7 |  |  |
|  | *Apratyaakhyana* *kashaya* | 4 | 75 | 6 |  |  |

Now, the *udaya* (arising) etc. related to *devagati* (heavenly existence) is described:
"**Bhogam va sure narachauna raauvajjuna surachau suraau.**
**Khive deve nevitthi, ithimmi na purisavedo ya.**" || 304 ||
Meaning: Out of the 78 *udayayogya* (capable of arising) *prakritis* of *bhogabhumijati* (earthly beings), six *prakritis* - *manushyaagati* (human existence), *manushyaagatyaanupurvi* (human existence in the past), *oudarikasharira* (noble body), *oudarikaupang* (noble limbs), *manushyayu* (human lifespan), and *vajrarashabhanaraachamsahanan* (the strength of a bull) - are reduced, and five *prakritis* - *devagati* (heavenly existence), *devagatyaanupurvi* (heavenly existence in the past), *vaikriyikasharira* (changeable body), *vaikriyikaupang* (changeable limbs), and *devayu* (heavenly lifespan) - are added, resulting in 77 *prakritis* being *udayayogya* (capable of arising) in *devagati* (heavenly existence). However, *strived* (female consciousness) does not arise in *deva* (gods) and *purushaved* (male consciousness) does not arise in *devangana* (goddesses), therefore, there are 76 *udayayogya* (capable of arising) *prakritis* in *deva* (gods) and *devangana* (goddesses).

**Special Meaning:** In *mithyatvagunasthan* (stage of false belief), the *vyuchchinnprakriti* (cessation of nature) is 1 *mithyatva* (false belief), the *udayaprakriti* (arising nature) is 75, and the *anudayaprakriti* (not arising nature) is 2 - *samyagmithyatva* (right false belief) and *samyaktava* (right belief). In *sasadangunasthan* (stage of attachment), the *vyuchchitti* (cessation) is 4 *kashaya* (passions) of *anantaanubandhi* (infinitely connected), the *udayaprakriti* (arising nature) is 74, and the *anudayaprakriti* (not arising nature) is 3. In *mishragunasthan* (stage of mixed qualities), the *vyuchchitti* (cessation) is *samyagmithyatva* (right false belief), the *udayaprakriti* (arising nature) is 70, and the *anudayaprakriti* (not arising nature) is 7 because *devagatyaanupurvi* (heavenly existence in the past) does not arise and the *mishraprakriti* (mixed nature) arises. In *asanyatagunasthan* (stage of unrestrained conduct), the *vyuchchitti* (cessation) is 4 *kashaya* (passions) of *apratyaakhyana* (non-rejection), the *udayaprakriti* (arising nature) is 75 - *devagati* (heavenly existence), *devagatyaanupurvi* (heavenly existence in the past), *vaikriyikasharira* (changeable body), *vaikriyikaupang* (changeable limbs), and *devayu* (heavenly lifespan) - and the *anudayaprakriti* (not arising nature) is 6 because *devagatyaanupurvi* (heavenly existence in the past) and *samyaktava* (right belief) arise. 

Page #293:
---------------------------
## Gommatasara Karmakanda - 254

**Concerning the Arising, Cessation and Non-Arising of the Arising-Capable Natures of Ordinary Devas**

**Arising-Capable Natures: 77, Gunasthanas: 4**

**Cessation of Arising:**

**Arising:**

**Non-Arising:**

**Gunasthanas:** Mithyatva, Sasadan, Misra, Asanyata

**Specifics:** (1) Mithyatva, (2) Samyagmithyatva, Samyaktva, (4) Anantanubandhi Kashaya, (7) (4+3+1 Devagatyanupurvi, 1 Samyagmithyatva), (9) (Apratyakhyan Kashaya 4, Devagati, Devagatyanupurvi, Vaikriyak Shrir, Vaikriyak Ango-pang and Devayu)

From Saudharma heaven to Navagraiveyak heaven, there are 76 arising-capable natures in the devas, excluding Strived. There are four Gunasthanas, etc. Here, the natures that are ceased from arising in the Gunasthanas of Mithyatva, etc., are 1-4-1-9 in order. The natures that are in the form of arising are 74-73-69-70 in order. The natures that are in the form of non-arising are 2-3-7-6 in order.

**Concerning the Arising, Cessation and Non-Arising of the Arising-Capable Natures of Devas from Saudharma Heaven to Navagraiveyak Heaven**

**Arising-Capable Natures: 76, Gunasthanas: 4**

**Cessation of Arising:**

**Arising:**

**Non-Arising:**

**Gunasthanas:** Mithyatva, Sasadan, Misra, Asanyata

**Specifics:** (Same as for Ordinary Devas) (Same as for Ordinary Devas) (Same as for Ordinary Devas) (Same as for Ordinary Devas)

**Now, we will discuss the Vimanas of Anudisha, etc.**

**Avirathaanam Ekka, Anuddisaadisusurodhameva Have.**

**Bhavanatikapiththinam, Asanjade Natthi Devanu.** ||305||

**Meaning:** In the 14 Vimanas of Nava-Anudisha and Pancha-Anuttara, there is only one Asanyata Gunasthana. Therefore, the 70 natures that are in the form of arising in the Asanyata Gunasthana of ordinary devas are also to be known as arising here. In the Bhavanatrik Devas and Devis, and in the Kalpavasini Devangas, there are 76 arising-capable natures, excluding Strived in the devas and Purushaved in the Devangas, out of the 77 arising-capable natures of ordinary devas. 

Page #294:
---------------------------
Gommatasar Karmakanda-255 Special Meaning - In Bhavanatrik and Kalpavasini Devanganas, Samyagdristijiva are not born, therefore, in their Asanyata Gunasthan, Devagatyanupurvi does not arise. The special point is that in Sasadan and Asanyata Gunasthan, knowing the 5 and 8 Prakriti Vyuchchitti respectively, the rest of the statement is easy. For example, in the four Gunasthan of Mithyatva, etc., there are 1-5-1-8 Prakriti Vyuchchitti, '74-73-69-69 Prakriti Uday and 2-3-7-7 Prakriti Anuday.

**Bhavanatrik Dev-Devi and Kalpavasini Devis - Insight into Uday Vyuchchitti-Uday-Anuday**

Udayyogya Prakriti 76, Gunasthan 4.

**Uday Gunasthan | Vyuchchitti | Uday | Anuday**

Mithyatva | Sasadan Misra | 5 (Anantanu bandhik Kshaya 4+1 Devagatyanupurvi) | 7 (5+3-1 Samyagmithyatva) | 1 (Samyagmithyatva) | 7 (7+1-1 Samyaktva)

Asanyata | ||  Iti Gatimargna || 

Page #295:
---------------------------
## Gommatasara Karmakanda - 256: Indriyamargna

**Now, the three stanzas regarding the Indriyamargna, which is related to the arising of the Indriyas, are as follows:**

**306.** The Tirya (non-human) and the Punna (human) are to be combined, with the Parghat (external force), the Chaukkapunna (fourfold Punna), and the Aindriyajati (one-sense being) being removed.

**307.** The Rinamango (negative Anga), the Vangata (attached Anga), the Sanhidi (combination), and the Panchakkama (five senses) are to be combined here. The Avaniya (earthly) and the Thavara (stationary) are to be combined, with the Saharana (associated) and the Yakkha (ghost) being removed.

**308.** The Khiva (empty), the Tasadugga (difficult to overcome), the Didussaramango (difficult to overcome Anga), the Vangata (attached Anga), the Sajati (same species), and the Sevata (servant) are to be combined. The Ogha (stream) is to be combined with the Saharanigivigala (associated with the stream), and the Thavaraduguna (double stationary) is to be removed.

**Explanation:**

1. **Meaning:** In the 71 Prakruti (categories) related to the Panchendriya (five senses), the Parghat (external force), Atap (heat), Udyot (light), Ucchvas (breath), Paryapt (sufficient), Sadharan (ordinary), Ekendriyajati (one-sense being), Yashaskirti (fame), Styanagridhi (laziness), Nidranidra (sleep), Prachalaprachala (movement), Thavara (stationary), and Sukshma (subtle) - these 13 Prakruti are to be combined. And the Angopaanga (limbs), Tras (fear), Supaatika (good conduct), and Sanhanan (combination) - these four Prakruti are to be removed. This results in 80 Prakruti being eligible for arising for the Ekendriya (one-sense being).

In the Vikalatra (three types of defects), from the above 80 Prakruti related to the Ekendriya, the Thavara (stationary), Sukshma (subtle), Sadharan (ordinary), Ekendriya (one-sense being), and Atap (heat) Prakruti are to be removed. And the Tras (fear), Aprashastavihayogati (unsuitable conduct), Duhsvara (bad voice), Angopaanga (limbs), Sripaatika (good conduct), Sanhanan (combination), and the Dwiindriya (two-sense being) and so on, are to be combined with their respective categories. This results in 81 Prakruti being eligible for arising.

In the Sakalendriya (all senses), from the 122 Prakruti mentioned in the Gunasthan (stages of purification), the Sadharan (ordinary), Ekendriya (one-sense being), Vikalatra (three types of defects), Atap (heat), Thavara (stationary), and Sukshma (subtle) - these 8 Prakruti are to be removed. The remaining 114 Prakruti are to be considered eligible for arising.

**Special Meaning:**

The Mithyatva (false belief), Atap (heat), Sukshma (subtle), Aparyapt (insufficient), Sadharan (ordinary), and Sasadan (associated with the body) Gunasthan (stages of purification) do not have the arising of Styanagridhi (laziness) and other three types of sleep, Parghat (external force), Udyot (light), and Ucchvas (breath). This is because the arising of these 6 Prakruti does not occur in the Ekendriy Nirvritti Paryapta Avastha (state of one-sense being, free from attachment, and sufficient). Therefore, the arising and cessation of the above 11 Prakruti occur in the Mithyatva Gunasthan (stage of false belief) related to the Ekendriy Margna (path of one-sense being). Here, the arising of 80 Prakruti occurs, and the non-arising is absent.

In the Sasadan Gunasthan (stage associated with the body), the cessation of the Ananta Anubandhi (infinitely associated) four types of Kshaya (afflictions), Ekendriya (one-sense being), and Thavara (stationary) occurs. Here, the arising of 69 Prakruti occurs, and the non-arising of 11 Prakruti occurs. 

Page #296:
---------------------------
## Uday
**Gunasthan | Vyuchchitti Mithyatva**
**11**
**Saasadan**
**Gommatsar Karmakanda - 257**

**Ekendiya**
Uday Vyuchchitti - Udagra-Anudaya Sambandhi Sandrisht Uday Yogya Prakriti 80, Gunasthan 2
**6**
Uday
Gunasthan Vyuchchitti
Mithyatva
**10**
Saasadan
Uday
**80**
**69**
**5**
Anudaya
Dwiindriya, Triindriya, Chaturindriya Sambandhi Mithyatva Gunasthan mein Vyuchchitti Mithyatva, Apariapt Styanagridhi Aadi Teen Nidra, Parghāt, Ucchvās, Udyot, Aprashast Vihayogati aur Duhstrar in 10 ki, Uday 81 ka, Anudaya ka abhav hai. Saasadan Gunasthan mein Vyuchchinn Prakriti Anant Anubandhi Roop Chaar Kshaya tatha Dwiindriya Aadi apni-apni jati is prakar 5 hain, Uday Prakriti 71 aur Anudaya Prakriti 10 hain.
**D**
Dwiindriya, Triindriya, Chaturindriya Sambandhi Uday Vyuchchitti Uday-Anudaya ki Sandrisht Uday Yogya Prakriti 81, Gunasthan 2
**11**
Uday
**81**
**Vishesh**
**10** {Mithyatva, Apariapt, Styanagridhi Aadi Teen Nidra, Parghāt, Ucchvās, Udyot, Duhswar, Aprashast Vihayogati)
**71**
**5** (Anant Anubandhi Kshaya 4 aur Sw-Sw Jati)
Panchendriya ke Mithyatva Gunasthan mein Vyuchchitti Mithyatva aur Apariapt ki, Uday Prakriti 109, Anudaya Gunasthanokt 5 Prakriti ka. Saasadan Gunasthan mein Anant Anubandhi Chaar Kshaya ki Vyuchchitti, Uday 106 Prakriti ka, Narak Gaty Anupurvi ka Uday nahin hone se Anudaya 8 Prakriti ka. Mishra Gunasthan mein Vyuchchinn Prakriti Gunasthanokt 1, Uday Prakriti 100, Anudaya Prakriti 14. Asanyat Gunasthan mein Vyuchchinn Prakriti 17, Uday Prakriti 104, Anudaya Prakriti 10. Desh Sanayat Gunasthan mein Vyuchchitr Prakriti 8, Uday Prakriti 87, Anudprakriti 27. Prammat Gunasthan mein Vyuchchinn Prakriti 5, Uday Prakriti 81. Anudaya Prakriti 331. Aprammat Gunasthan mein Vyuchchinn Prakriti 4, Uday Prakriti 76, Anudaya Prakriti 38. Apurva Karan Gunasthan mein Vyuchchinn Prakriti 6, Uday Prakriti 72, Anudaya Prakriti 42. Anivritti Karan Gunasthan mein Vyuchchitti 6 Prakriti ki, Uday 66 Prakriti ka, Anudaya 48 Prakriti ka. Sukshma Samparaya Gunasthan mein Vyuchchitti 1 ki, Uday
**Vishesh**
**11** (Mithyatva, Sukshma, Apariapt, Sadharan, Styanagridhi Aadi Teen Nidra, Parghāt, Udyot, Atap, Ucchvās)
**6** (Anant Anubandhi Kshaya 4, Ekendiya, Sthavar)
Anudaya
**a**
**10** 

Page #297:
---------------------------
Gommatasar Karmakanda - 258
60 ka, anudaya 54 ka. In Upashantamoha Gunasthan, the vyuchchittirupa prakriti is 2, the udayaprakriti is 59, and the anudayaprakriti is 55. In Kshinamaha Gunasthan, the vyuchchitti is 16, the udayaprakriti is 57, and the anudayaprakriti is also 54. In Sayogakevali Gunasthan, the vyuchchinnprakriti is 30, the udayaprakriti is 42, and the anudayaprakriti is 7233. In Ayogakevali Gunasthan, the vyuchchittirupa prakriti is 12, the udayarupa prakriti is 12, and the anudayaprakriti is 102. For Panchendriya, the udayavyuchchitti, uday, and anudaya related sandrishtyuudyogya prakriti is 114, Gunasthan 14.

Gunasthan
Mithyatva
Sakhadana
Mishra
Asanyata
Uday
Vyuchchitti
2
4
1
17
Deshasanyata
Pramatta
Apramatta
Apuurvakaran Anivritikaran
6
1
Sukshma Samparaya Upashantamoha 2
16
Kshinamaha Sayogakevali 30
Ayogakevali 12
4
Uday
109
106
100
104
81
76
72
66
60
59
45
20
49
12
Anudaya
5
8
14
10
33
38
42
48
54
55
57
72
Vishesh
5 (Tirthankara Aharakadvik, Samyagmithyatva, Samyaktva)
8 (5+2+1 Narakgatyaanupurvi) 4 (Anantanuabandhikashaya)
14 (8+4+Narakgatyaanupurvibina 3 Aanupurvi - 1 Samyagmithyatva)
(Samyagmithyatva)
1
10 (Tirthankara Aharakadvik, Anantanuabandhi ki 4 Kashaya, Samyagmithyatva, Mithyatva aur Aparyapta)
17 (Gatha 264 ki Sandrisht ke anusar) 8 (Gatha 264 ki Sandrisht ke anusar) 33 (27+8-2 Aharakadvik)
4 (Gatha 264 ki Sandrisht anusar) 6 (Gatha 264 ki Sandrisht anusar) 6 (Gatha 264 ki Sandrisht anusar) 1 (Gatha 264 ki Sandrisht anusar) 2 (Gatha 264 ki Sandrisht anusar) 16 (Gatha 264 ki Sandrisht anusar) 72 (57+16 - 1 Tirthankaraprakriti) 30 (Gatha 264 ki Sandrisht anusar) 12 (Gatha 264 ki Sandrisht anusar)
102
|| Iti Indriyamargna || 

Page #298:
---------------------------
Now, in the context of *kayamargna*, they state about *udaya* etc.
And in the *panakaya*, the *saharana* is not present at the beginning. *Dusu* is the *dugamujjovam*, and *kame* is the *charim* at the beginning. || 309 ||

**Meaning:** In the *indriyamargna*, out of the 80 *prakriti* related to one sense, by reducing the *saharana* *prakriti*, 79 become eligible for *udaya* in the *prithvikaaya*. By reducing the *saharana* and *atappa* *prakriti*, 78 become eligible for *udaya* in the *jalakaya*. By reducing the *saharana*, *atappa*, and *udyota*, 77 *prakriti* become eligible for *udaya* in the *tejakaaya* and *vayukaya*. And by reducing the *atappa* *prakriti*, 79 *prakriti* become eligible for *udaya* in the *vanaspatikaaya*.

**Explanation:**

In the *prithvikaaya*, there are 79 *prakriti* eligible for *udaya* and 2 *gunasthanas*. According to the sutra "**Nahi sasano apune saharanasuhumgeya teuduge**" (verse 115), a *maranakar* is born in the *prithvi*, *jala*, and every *vanaspatikaaya* with the *sasadan* *gunasthan*. Therefore, in these three *kayas*, the five *prakriti* of *mithyatva*, *atappa*, *udyota*, *sukshma*, and *aparayapta* are not eligible for *udaya* for a being born with the *sasadan* *gunasthan*. The *sasadan* *gunasthan* remains only in the state of *nirvrittyaparayapta*. When the three *nidra* of *styanagridhi* etc. are fully *indriyaparyapta*, when the *uchchvasaprakriti* is fully *uchchvasaparyapta*, and when the *parghataprakriti* is fully *sharir* *paryapta*, they become eligible for *udaya*. Therefore, these 5 *prakriti* do not have *udaya* here. In the *mithyatvagunasthan*, there are 10 *vyuchchhinnaprakriti*, 79 *udayaprakriti*, and no *anudayaprakriti*. In the *sasadangunasthan*, there are 6 *vyuchchhinti* *prakriti*, 69 *udaya* *prakriti*, and 10 *anudaya* *prakriti*.

**Summary:**

* **Kayamargna:** The path of the body.
* **Udaya:** The emergence or arising of a new body.
* **Gunasthan:** The state of the soul.
* **Vyuchchhinti:** The state of being cut off or separated.
* **Mithyatva:** False belief.
* **Atappa:** Heat.
* **Udyota:** Light.
* **Sukshma:** Subtle.
* **Aparayapta:** Insufficient.
* **Styanagridhi:** Drowsiness.
* **Uchchvas:** Breathing.
* **Parghat:** Injury.
* **Sasarana:** Common.
* **Panakaya:** The five bodies (earth, water, fire, air, and vegetation).
* **Dusu:** The beginning.
* **Dugamujjovam:** The beginning of the journey.
* **Kame:** The end.
* **Charim:** The end of the journey.
* **Indriyamargna:** The path of the senses.
* **Prakriti:** The qualities or characteristics of the soul.
* **Prithvikaaya:** The earth body.
* **Jalakaya:** The water body.
* **Tejakaaya:** The fire body.
* **Vayukaya:** The air body.
* **Vanaspatikaaya:** The vegetation body.
* **Nirvrittyaparayapta:** The state of being fully satisfied.
* **Sharir Paryapta:** The state of being fully embodied.
* **Anudaya:** The state of not arising.

**Note:** The terms in bold are Jain terms. 

Page #299:
---------------------------
## Gommatasara Karmakanda - 260

There are 78 **udayayogya** (capable of arising) **prakritis** (substances) in the **jalakaya** (water body). There are 2 **gunasthanas** (states of qualities). In the **mithyatvagunasthan** (state of false belief), the **vyuccchinnprakritis** (separated substances) are 9 out of the aforementioned 10, excluding **atapi** (heat), the **udayaprakritis** are 78, and there is no **anudaya** (non-arising). In the **sasadanagunasthan** (state of attachment), the **vyuccchinnprakritis** are 6, the **anudayaprakritis** are 9, and the **udayaprakritis** are 69.

**A Summary of Arising, Separation, and Non-Arising in the Water Body**

**Udayayogya** **prakritis**: 78, **gunasthanas**: 2.

| **Udayagunasthan** | **Vyuchchitti** | **Udaya** | **Anudaya** |
|---|---|---|---|
| **Mithyatva** | 9 (Mithyatva, Udyota, Sukshma, Apariapt, Styanagridhi, etc. three nidras, Ucchvas, Parghāt) | 78 | 0 |
| **Mami** | 63 (Four **anantaanubandhi** kshayas, **ekendriya** and **sthavar**) | 16 | 9 |

In the **tejakaya** (fire body) and **vayukaya** (air body), there are 77 **udayayogya** **prakritis** and only one **gunasthan** - **mithyatva**.

In the **vanaspatikaya** (plant body), there are 79 **udayayogya** **prakritis** and two **gunasthanas** - **mithyatva** and **sasadan**. In the **mithyatvagunasthan**, the **vyuccchitti** **prakritis** are Mithyatva, Sukshma, Apariapt, Sadharan, Styanagridhi, etc. three nidras, Parghāt, Ucchvas, and Udyota - a total of 10. The **udaya** **prakritis** are 79, and there is no **anudaya**. In the **sasadanagunasthan**, the **vyuccchitti** **prakritis** are 6, the **udaya** **prakritis** are 69, and the **anudaya** **prakritis** are 10.

**A Summary of Arising, Separation, and Non-Arising in the Plant Body**

**Udayayogya** **prakritis**: 79, **gunasthanas**: 2.

| **Udayagunasthan** | **Vyuchchitti** | **Udaya** | **Anudaya** |
|---|---|---|---|
| **Mithyatva** | 10 (Mithyatva, Sukshma, Apariapt, Sadharan, Styanagridhi, etc. three nidras, Ucchvas, Parghāt, Udyota) | 79 | 0 |
| **Sasadan** | 6 (Four **anantaanubandhi** kshayas, **ekendriya** and **sthavar**) | 69 | 10 |

The text then mentions **udaya** (arising), etc. in the **trasakaya** (earth body).

**Oghan Tase Na Thavardugasaharaneyataavamath Oghan.**

**Meaning:** The arising, etc. in the **trasakaya** should be understood as per the **gunasthanas**, but with this specific characteristic:

| **Udaya** | **Anudaya** |
|---|---|
| 79 | **Sasadan** | 

Page #300:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda - 261

Here, from the 122 उदययोग्य (udayayogya)  natures mentioned in the गुणस्थान (gunasthan), by subtracting the स्थावर (sthavar), सूक्ष्म (sukshma), साधारण (sadharan), एकेन्द्रिय (ekendriya) and आतप (atappa) natures, there are 117 उदययोग्य (udayayogya) natures.

**Special Note:** In the सकाय (sakaya), there are 117 उदययोग्य (udayayogya) natures and 14 गुणस्थान (gunasthan). Here, in the मिथ्यात्वगुणस्थान (mithyatvagunasthan), the व्युच्छिन्नप्रकृति (vyuchchhinnaprakriti) is मिथ्यात्व (mithyatva) and अपर्याप्त (aparyapta), उदयप्रकृति (udayaprakriti) is 112, and अनुदयप्रकृति (anudayaprakriti) is 5. In the सासादनगुणस्थान (sasadangunasthan), the व्युच्छिन्नप्रकृति (vyuchchhinnaprakriti) is अनन्तानुबन्धीचारकषाय (anantaanubandhicarakshaya) and विकलत्रय (vikalatraya) which are three, उदयप्रकृति (udayaprakriti) is 109, and अनुदयप्रकृति (anudayaprakriti) is 8 due to the absence of उदय (udaya) in the नरकगत्यानुपूर्वी (narakagatyānupūrvi). In the मिश्रगुणस्थान (mishragunasthan), the व्युच्छित्तिरूपप्रकृति (vyuchchhittirūpprakriti) is 1, उदयप्रकृति (udayaprakriti) is 100, and अनुदयप्रकृति (anudayaprakriti) is 17. In the असंयतगुणस्थान (asanyatagunasthan), the व्युच्छिन्नप्रकृति (vyuchchhinnaprakriti) is 17, उदयप्रकृति (udayaprakriti) is 104, and अनुदयप्रकृति (anudayaprakriti) is 13. In the देशसंयतगुणस्थान (deshasanyatagunasthan), the व्युच्छित्ति (vyuchchhitti) is 8 natures, उदय (udaya) is 87 natures, and अनुदय (anudaya) is 30 natures. In the प्रमत्तगुणस्थान (pramattagunasthan), the व्युच्छित्ति (vyuchchhitti) is 5 natures, उदय (udaya) is 81 natures, and अनुदय (anudaya) is 36 natures. In the अप्रमत्तगुणस्थान (apramattagunasthan), the व्युच्छित्ति (vyuchchhitti) is 4 natures, उदय (udaya) is 76 natures, and अनुदय (anudaya) is 41 natures. In the अपूर्वकरणगुणस्थान (apurvakaranagunasthan), the व्युच्छिन्नप्रकृति (vyuchchhinnaprakriti) is 6, उदयप्रकृति (udayaprakriti) is 7. In the प्रकृमिनिवृतिस्थान (prakriminivritistahan), the व्युच्छित्ति (vyuchchhitti) is 6 natures, उदय (udaya) is 66 natures, and अनुदय (anudaya) is 51 natures. In the सूक्ष्मसाम्परायगुणस्थान (sukshmasamparayagunasthan), the व्युच्छित्ति (vyuchchhitti) is 1 nature, उदय (udaya) is 60 natures, and अनुदय (anudaya) is 57 natures. In the उपशान्तमोहगुणस्थान (upashantmohagunasthan), the व्युच्छित्ति (vyuchchhitti) is 2 natures, उदय (udaya) is 59 natures, and अनुदय (anudaya) is 58 natures. In the क्षीणमोहगुणस्थान (kshinamohagunasthan), the व्युच्छिन्नप्रकृति (vyuchchhinnaprakriti) is 16, उदयप्रकृति (udayaprakriti) is 57, and अनुदयप्रकृति (anudayaprakriti) is 60. In the सयोगकेवलीगुणस्थान (sayogakevaligunasthan), the व्युच्छिन्नप्रकृति (vyuchchhinnaprakriti) is 30, उदयप्रकृति (udayaprakriti) is 42, and अनुदयप्रकृति (anudayaprakriti) is 75. In the अयोगकेवलीगुणस्थान (ayogakevaligunasthan), the व्युच्छित्तिरूपप्रकृति (vyuchchhittirūpprakriti) is 12, उदयरूपप्रकृति (udayarupprakriti) is 12, and अनुदयप्रकृति (anudayaprakriti) is 105.

**Udya (Udaya)**

| गुणस्थान (Gunasthan) | व्युच्छित्ति (Vyuchchhitti) |
|---|---|
| मिथ्यात्व (Mithyatva) | 2 |
| सासादन (Sasadan) | 7 |
| मिश्र (Mishra) | 1 |
| असंयत (Asanyata) | 17 |
| देशसंयत (Deshasanyata) | 8 |

**In त्रसकायिकजीव (Trasakayikajiva) the उदयव्युच्छित्ति (Udayavyuchchhitti) - उदय (Udaya) - अनुदय (Anudaya) related सन्दृष्टिउदयोग्यप्रकृति (Sandrishtiudayogyaprakriti) is 197, and the गुणस्थान (Gunasthan) is 14.**

|  | उदय (Udaya) | अनुदय (Anudaya) |
|---|---|---|
|  | 112 | 8 |
|  | 101 | 17 |
|  | 100 | 13 |
|  | 104 | 30 |
|  | 87 |  |

**Special:**

* 5 (according to the स
Page #301:
---------------------------
Gommatasar Karmakanda-262
## Pramatta
81
| 36
| 36 (308-2 Aharakadvik) | 5 (According to the context of verse 264)
72
45
Aparamatta Apurvakaran Anivrittikaran | 6 Sukshmasampray Upashantamoha Kshinamaha Sayogakevali | 30
6 (According to the context of verse 264) 6 (According to the context of verse 264) 1 (According to the context of verse 264) 2 (According to the context of verse 264) 16 (According to the context of verse 264) 75 (60+1676-1 Tirthankara) 30 (According to the context of verse 264) 12 (According to the context of verse 264)
Ayogakevali | 12
|| Iti Kayamargna ||
## Ath Yogamargna
Now in Yogamargna, first we discuss the four manoyogas and the truth, untruth, and both-speech yogas, including their arising and so on.
## Manavayan Sattage Na Hi Tavi Givigalam Cha Thavaranuchao || 310 ||
Meaning - Truth, etc., four manoyogas and truth, untruth, and both-speech yogas, thus in these 7, from the 122 naturally arising prakritis, there are 109 naturally arising prakritis without the following 13 prakritis: Atap, Ekendriya, Dwiendriya, Triendriya, Chaturindriya, Anupurvi Chatushk, and Sthavar Chatushk, and 13 gunasthanas.
## Vishesharth
Here, 13 gunasthanas are mentioned, which are mentioned with respect to truth and both-mind yogas and truth-speech yoga, but in untruth and both-mind yogas and untruth and both-speech yogas, there are only 12 gunasthanas.
Here, in Mithyatvagunasthan, there is Vyuchchitti Mithyatva, arising of 104 prakritis, and non-arising of 5 prakritis. In Sasadanagunasthan, there is Nyuchchitti Anantanubandhi Charakshaya, arising of 103 prakritis, and non-arising of 6. 

Page #302:
---------------------------
Gommatasar Karmakanda - 263

Nature of. In the Mixed-Quality Stage, the severance of Right-Wrongness, the arising is of 100 natures, the non-arising is of 9 natures. In the Uncontrolled-Quality Stage, the severance is of 13 natures, because the arising of the four sequential movements is for the journey to the past life, and the mental and verbal yogas occur after their own fulfillment, i.e., mental fulfillment and verbal fulfillment, therefore, sequentiality is not mentioned here. In the Uncontrolled-Quality Stage, the arising nature is 100 and the non-arising nature is 9. In the Country-Controlled-Quality Stage, the severance of the four rejecting passions, the lifespan of a Tiryancha, the effort, the low lineage, and the Tiryancha movement, the arising is of 87 natures, the non-arising is of 22 natures. In the Distracted-Quality Stage, the severance is of 5 natures, the arising is of 81 natures, the non-arising is of 28 natures. In the Undistracted-Quality Stage, the severed nature is 4, the arising nature is 76, and the non-arising nature is 33. In the Unprepared-Action-Quality Stage, the severed nature is 6, the arising nature is 72, the non-arising nature is 37. In the Unceasing-Action-Quality Stage, the severed nature is 6, the arising nature is 66, the non-arising nature is 43. In the Subtle-Samparaya-Quality Stage, the severed nature is 1, the arising nature is 60, the non-arising nature is 49. In the Subdued-Delusion-Quality Stage, the severed nature is 2, the arising nature is 59, and the non-arising nature is 50. In the Diminished-Delusion-Quality Stage, the severed nature is 16, the arising nature is 57, the non-arising nature is 52. In the Combined-Kevali-Quality Stage, the severed nature is 42, because in the Uncombined-Kevali-Quality Stage, there is an absence of yoga, therefore, the 12 natures that are severed in the Combined-Kevali-Quality Stage also attain severance in the Combined-Kevali-Quality Stage. The arising nature of the Combined-Kevali is also 42, and the non-arising is of 67 natures.

Truth-Falsehood - Both Verbal Yoga Related
Truth, etc., four mental yogas and the arising severance, arising, non-arising, the sight of
Quality Stage
Wrongness
Sasaadana
Mixed
Uncontrolled
Arising
Severance Arising Non-arising
1
104
5
4
1
Arising-Capable Nature 109, Quality Stage 13
13
103
100
100
6
9
9
Special
1 (Wrongness) 5 (According to the sight of verse 264)
4 (Infinitely-Connected Passion Quartet)
9 (6+4 = 10 -1 Right-Wrongness) 1 (Right-Wrongness)
9 (9 + 1 = 101 Rightness) 13
(Non-Rejecting Passion 4, Vikriya Body, Vikriya Limbs, Deva Lifespan, Naraka Lifespan, Deva Movement, Naraka Movement, Broken, Unworthy, Bad Fame) 

Page #303:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-264
Desasanayata
Pramattasanyata
Apramatta
Apuurvakarana Anivritikarana | 6 Sukshmasampray | 1 Upshantamoha | 2 Ksheenamoha Sayogakevali | 42
|... 2..! (Ya: 26 bhi Madristi Anur: 28 | 28(22+8=30 -2 Aharakadvick) 5
(Gatha 264 ke anusar) | 4 (Gatha 264 ki Sandristi anusar) | 6 (Gatha 264 ki Sandristi anusar) 6 (Gatha 264 ki Sandristi anusar) 1 (Gatha 264 ki Sandristi anusar) 2 (Gatha 264 ki Sandristi anusar) 16 (Gatha 264 ki Sandristi anusar) . 67(52+16-68-1 Tirthankara) Note: This is the 13th Gunasthan Satya-Anubhayamano
Yoga and Satya Vachanayoga's expectation.
16
Further Anubhayavachanayoga and Audarikakayayoga are called Udayadi
Anubhayavachi Viyalajuda, Oghamurale Na Hardevaoo.
Veguvvchakkanaratiriyanu Apjattanirayao ||311|| Meaning - In Anubhayavachanayoga, out of the aforementioned 109 Prakruti, by combining the three Vikalatrays, there are 112 Prakruti of Udayayoga, and in Audarikakayayoga, out of the 122 Prakruti mentioned in Gunasthan, by reducing Aharakadvick, Devayu, Vaikriyikasharira, Vaikriyikangopang, Dev-Narakagati, Dev-NarakagatyAnupurvi, Manusya-Tiryanchgatyanupurvi, Aparayapt and Narakayu, there are 109 Prakruti that are Udayayoga.
Special Meaning - In Anubhayavachanayoga, there are 112 Prakruti that are Udayayoga and 13 Gunasthan. Here, from Mithyatva to Sayogi Gunasthan, the order is 1 Mithyatva, 4 Anantanubandhi and Vikalatrays, thus 7,1-138-5-4-6-6-1-2-16 and 42 Prakruti are to be known as Vyuchitti form. In the same way, 107-106-100100-87-81-76-72-66-60-59-57 and 42 Prakruti are Udayayoga in order of Gunasthan and 5-6-12-12-25-31-36-40-46-52-53-55 and 70 Prakruti are to be known as Anuday form in Gunasthan. 

Page #304:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-265: A Perspective on Udaya, Vyuchchitti, and Anudaya in Anubhayavachanayoga

**Udaya-worthy Nature: 109, Gunasthan: 13**

**Sāsādan**
* Vyuchchitti: 4 (Anantānubandhī Kaṣāya)
* Udaya: 97
* Anudaya: 12

**Miśra**
* Vyuchchitti: 1 (Samyagmithyātv)
* Udaya: 94
* Anudaya: 13 (as per Gāthā 310)

**Pramatta**
* Vyuchchitti: 5 (as per Gāthā 264)
* Udaya: 1 (as per Gāthā 264)
* Anudaya: 7 (Anantānubandhī Kaṣāya 4, Vikalatrai)

**Udaya Gunasthan Vyuchchitti**
* 107 (Samyagmithyātv)
* 12 (Samyaktva)
* 13 (as per Gāthā 310)

**Udaya**
* 1 (Samyagmithyātv)
* 12 (Samyaktva)
* 8 (as per Gāthā 264)

**Anudaya**
* 12 (12+1=13-Samyaktva)
* 31 (25+8=33-2 Āhārakadvik)
* 5 (as per Gāthā 264)

**Viśeṣa Mithyātv**
* 5 (as per Gāthā 264)
* 4 (as per Gāthā 264)
* 6 (as per Gāthā 264)

**Aparsaya**
* 6 (as per Gāthā 264)
* 1 (as per Gāthā 264)
* 2 (as per Gāthā 264)

**Anavṛttikaraṇa**
* 6 (as per Gāthā 264)
* 16 (as per Gāthā 264)
* 55 (as per Gāthā 264)

**Sūkṣma Sāmprāya**
* 1 (as per Gāthā 264)
* 16 (as per Gāthā 264)
* 70 (55+56-75-1 Tīrthankara)

**Upaśānta Moha**
* 2 (as per Gāthā 264)
* 42 (as per Gāthā 264)
* 70 (as per Gāthā 264)

**Kṣīṇa Bhog**
* 16 (as per Gāthā 264)
* 56 (as per Gāthā 264)
* 75 (as per Gāthā 264)

**Anavṛttikaraṇa**
* 6 (as per Gāthā 264)
* 16 (as per Gāthā 264)
* 55 (as per Gāthā 264)

**Apramātta**
* 4 (as per Gāthā 264)
* 16 (as per Gāthā 264)
* 55 (as per Gāthā 264)

**Apūrva Karaṇa**
* 6 (as per Gāthā 264)
* 16 (as per Gāthā 264)
* 55 (as per Gāthā 264)

**Desha Samyata**
* 8 (as per Gāthā 264)
* 31 (25+8=33-2 Āhārakadvik)
* 5 (as per Gāthā 264)

**In the Audārika Kāya Yoga, there are 109 Udaya-worthy Natures and 13 Gunasthānas. Here, in the Mithyātv Gunasthan, out of the 5 Vyuchchitti Gunasthan-mentioned Natures, 4 are without Aparyāpta and 1 is Ekendriya, sthāvara, Vikalatrai. Thus, these 9 Natures have 106 Udaya Natures, 3 Anudaya Natures (Samyagmithyātv, Samyaktva Mohaniya, and Tīrthankara). In the Sāsādan Gunasthan, the Vyuchchitti form of Nature is Anantānubandhī Kaṣāya 4, Udaya is 97 Natures, and Anudaya is 12 Natures. In the Miśra Gunasthan, the Vyuchchitti Nature is 1 (Samyagmithyātv), Udaya Nature is 94, and Anudaya Nature is 13 (as per Gāthā 310).** 

Page #305:
---------------------------
Gommatasar Karmakanda - 266
4.
Anudaya Prakriti 15. In Asanyata Gunasthan, Vyuchchitti is 4 (Apratyaakhyana Kshaya) and 7 (Dur Bhag, Anadeya, Ayashas Kirti) Prakritis, Udaya is 94 Prakriti, Anudaya is 15 Prakriti. In Deshasanyata Gunasthan, Vyuchchitti is 8 Prakriti, Udaya Prakriti is 87, Anudaya Prakriti is 22. In Pramatta Gunasthan, Audarik Kayayog's tendency exists, but Aharak Kayayog's tendency does not exist, because two Yogs cannot exist at the same time, therefore here Vyuchchitti is 3 (Styanagridhi etc.), Udaya Prakriti is 79, Anudaya Prakriti is 30. In Aprammatta Gunasthan, Vyuchchitti is 4, Udaya Prakriti is 76, Anudaya Prakriti is 33. In Apurvakaran Gunasthan, Vyuchchitti is 6, Udaya Prakriti is 72, Anudaya Prakriti is 37. In Anivrittikaran Gunasthan, Vyuchchitti is 6, Udaya Prakriti is 66, Anudaya Prakriti is 43. In Sukshma Samparaya Gunasthan, Vyuchchitti is 1, Udaya Prakriti is 60, Anudaya Prakriti is 49. In Upashanta Moh Gunasthan, Vyuchchitti is 2, Udaya Prakriti is 59, Anudaya Prakriti is 50. In Kshina Moh Gunasthan, Vyuchchitti is 16, Udaya Prakriti is 57, Anudaya Prakriti is 52. In Sayogi Gunasthan, Vyuchchitti is 42, Udaya Prakriti is 42 and Anudaya Prakriti is 67.
Gunasthan
Mithyatva
Sarasadan
Mishra
Asanyata
Deshasanyata
Pramatta
Aprammatta
Apurvakaran
Audarik Kayayog in Udaya Vyuchchitti - Udaya-Anudaya Sambandhi Sandrisht Uday Yogya Prakriti 109, Gunasthan 13
Udaya
Vyuchchitti
9
4
1
67
8
3
4
6
Udaya Anudaya
106
3
97
94
94
87
79
76
72
12
15
15
22
30
33
37
Vishesh
3 (Tirthankar, Samyaktva, Samyagmithyatva) 9 (Mithyatva, Atap, Sukshma, Sadharan, Ekendriya, Stavar and Vikal Tray)
4 (Anant Anubandhi Kshaya)
15(12+4=16-1 Samyagmithyatva)
15(15+1=16-1 Samyaktva) 7
(Apratyaakhyana Kshaya 4, Dur Bhag, Anadeya, Ayashas Kirti)
8 (4 Pratyaakhyana Kshaya + Tiryanchagati, Tiryanchay, Nich Gotra and Udyot)
3 (Styanagridhi etc. three Nidra)
4 (According to Sandrisht of Gatha 264)
6 (According to Sandrisht of Gatha 264) 

Page #306:
---------------------------
## Gommatasara Karmakanda - 267

**Anivrittikaran 6, Sukshmasamparaya 1, Upashantamoha, Kshinamaha, Sayogakevali | 42**

**6 (according to the Sandristi of Gatha 264)** **1 (according to the Sandristi of Gatha 264)** **2 (according to the Sandristi of Gatha 264)** **16 (according to the Sandristi of Gatha 264)** **67 (52 + 16868 - 1 Tirthankara)**

The statement of Udaya etc. in Audarikamishrakayayoga is made in two Gathas.

**Tammisse Punnajuda Na Missathiinatayasaravihayadugam. Parghadachao Ayada Nadajadudunbhangam Na Sandhicchhi ||312||**

**Sane Tesim Chhedo Vame Chattari Chodasa Sane. Chaudalan Vochhedo Ayada Jogimhi Chhattisam ||313|| Jumma.**

**Meaning:**

Out of the previously mentioned 109 Prakruti, due to the presence of one insufficient Prakruti, and the reduction of three Prakruti - Samyagmithyatva, Styanagridhi etc., Swaradvik, Prashastha and Aprashastha Vihayogati, Parghat, Atap, Udyot and Ucchvas - there are 98 Prakruti that are eligible for Udaya in Audarikamishrakayayoga.

In Asanyata Gunasthan, Anadeya, Ayashaskirti, Durbhag, Strived and Napunsakaved do not arise, therefore the Vyuchchitti of these Prakruti happens only in Sasadan Gunasthan.

In Mithyatva Gunasthan, the Vyuchchitti of Sukshmatraya and Mithyatva occurs, in Sasadan Gunasthan, the Vyuchchitti of Anantanubandhi etc. 14, in Asanyata Gunasthan, the Vyuchchitti of Apratyakhyan etc. 44, and in Sayogakevali, the Vyuchchitti of 36 Prakruti occurs.

**Special Meaning:**

In Audarikamishrakayayoga, the Prakruti eligible for Udaya are 98; the Gunasthan are four: Mithyatva, Sasadan, Asanyata and Sayogakevali.

**General:**

Out of the 122 Prakruti eligible for Udaya, by reducing 24 Prakruti - Aharakadvik, Devayu, Vaikriyikapatak, Manushya and Tiryanchagatyanupurvi, Narakayu, Samyagmithyatva, Styanagridhi etc. three, Nidra, Suswar-Duhswar, Prashastha-Aaprashastha Vihayogati, Parghat, Atap, Udyot and Ucchvas - there are 98 Prakruti eligible for Udaya in Audarikamishrakayayoga. This is because here, the Prakruti related to Deva-Naraka, sufficient time and Vigrahagati do not arise, and the Atap Prakruti is eligible for Udaya only when it is fully sufficient, therefore its Udaya is not mentioned here.

The 14 Prakruti that are Vyuchchhinna in Sasadan Gunasthan are as follows: 

Page #307:
---------------------------
Gommatasar Karmakanda-268

The four Kashayas of Anantanubandhi are: Ekendriya, Stavar, Vikalatriya, Anadeya, Ayashaskirti, Durbhaga, Napumsakaved and Strived. In Asanyata Gunasthan, there are four Apratyakhyanakashayas and seven remaining without Udyot in Deshasanyata. In Pramatta, there are zero without Aharakadvik-Styanagridhitrik, four in Aprmatta, six in Apurvakaran, four in Anivrittikaran without Stri and Napumsakaved, and one Sukshmalobh in Sukshmasampray. In Upshantakashay, there are Vajranaracha and Narachasanhanan, and sixteen in Kshinakashay. Thus, 4+7+0+4+6+4+1+2+16:44 types are discontinued in Asanyata Gunasthan only, because from Deshasanyata to Kshinakashay Gunasthan, there is no Audarikamisrakaayayog. In Sayogi Gunasthan, there are 36 types of discontinuation, because at the time of Kapatasamudghat, there is no rise of Suswar, Duswar, Prashastaaprashastavihayogati, Parghat and Ucchwas in their Audarikamisrakaayayog.

Therefore, here in Mithyatva Gunasthan, there are four types of discontinuation, 96 types of Uday and Anudaya is of Samyaktva and Tirthankara types. In Sasadan Gunasthan, there are 14 types of discontinuation, 92 types of Uday and six types of Anudaya. In Asanyata Gunasthan, there are 44 types of discontinuation, 79 types of Uday including Samyaktva and 19 types of Anudaya. In Sayogakevali, there are 36 types of discontinuation, 36 types of Uday including Tirthankara and 62 types of Anudaya. In Audarikamisrakaayayog, there is a Sandrishti related to Udayavyuchchitti-Uday-Anudaya.

| Gunasthan | Vyuchchitti | Uday | Anudaya |
|---|---|---|---|
| Mithyatva | 4 | 96 | 2 (Tirthankara, Samyaktva) |
| Sasadan | 14 | 92 | 4 (Mithyatva, Sukshma, Apariapt, Sadharan) |
| Asanyata | 44 | 79 | 19 (14+6-20-1 Samyaktva) |
| Sayogakevali | 36 | 36 | 62 (44+19-63-1 Tirthankara) |

The 16 types of Kshinakashay Gunasthan are also included in the 44 types of Asanyata Gunasthan, as per the Sandrishti of Gatha 264. 

Page #308:
---------------------------
## Gommatasar Karmakanda - 269

**Note:** The term "Audarikamisrakaayayog" is used instead of "Kapatasamudghat" for the Syogakevali, because they possess "Audarikamisrakaayayog" at that time. Now, we discuss the "Udaya" etc. in "Kriyikaayayog".

**Verse 314:**

"Devodham vegubve, na suraanu pakkhivej nirayaau.
Nirayagadihundsandan, duggadi dubbhagachao nicham."

**Meaning:** In "Vaikriyakaayayog", there are 86 "Udayayogya" (capable of arising) "Prakritis" (categories), which are obtained by reducing the 77 "Prakritis" that are "Udayayogya" in "Devagati" (heavenly realm) by the "Devagatyanupurvi" (heavenly realm sequence), and adding "Narakaayu" (hellish body), "Narakagati" (hellish realm), "Hundakasanstahan" (hellish state), "Napumsakaved" (eunuch), "Aprashastavihayogati" (unsuitable liberation realm), "Durbhagchatushk" (four unfortunate states), and "Nichagotra" (low lineage).

**Special Meaning:** In "Vaikriyakaayayog", there are 86 "Udayayogya" "Prakritis" and four "Gunasthanas" (stages of virtue). Here, in "Mithyatvagunasthan" (stage of false belief), there are 54 "Vyuchchhinna Pratali" (separated categories) of "Mithyanna" (false knowledge), 44 "Ladarampakan" (categories of attachment), 2 "Anudar" (categories of non-arising), "Samyagmithyatva" (mixed belief), and "Samyaktva" (right belief). In "Sasadanagunasthan" (stage of attachment), there are infinite "Anubandhi" (categories of attachment) of the four "Kashayas" (passions), 83 "Udayaprakritis" (categories of arising), and 3 "Anudayaprakritis" (categories of non-arising). In "Mishra Gunasthan" (mixed stage), there is 1 "Vyuchchhintirūpa" (separated category) of "Samyagmithyatva", 80 "Udayaprakritis", and 6 "Anudayaprakritis". In "Asanaytagunasthan" (stage of un-restrained conduct), there are 4 "Vyuchchhinna" (separated categories) of "Apratyaakhyan" (unrejected passions), "Vaikriyaka Sharira" (transformed body), "Vaikriyaka Anopaang" (transformed non-body parts), "Narakagati-Devagati" (hellish realm-heavenly realm), "Narakaayu-Devaayu" (hellish body-heavenly body), "Durbhag" (unfortunate state), "Anaadey" (unworthy), and "Ayashaskirti" (bad reputation), totaling 13, 80 "Udayaprakritis" including "Samyaktva", and 6 "Anudayaprakritis".

**Summary of "Udayavyuchchhinti-Udaya-Anudaya" related to "Vaikriyikaayayog":**

| **Udayayogya Prakriti** | **Gunasthan** | **Vyuchchhinti** | **Udaya** | **Anudaya** |
|---|---|---|---|---|
| 86 | 4 | Mithyatva | 2 (Samyagmithyatva, Samyaktva) | 1 (Mithyatva) |
| | Sasadan | 4 (Anantanuabandhi) | 6 (6+1=7-1 Samyagmithyatva) | 13 (4 Kashayas of Apratyaakhyan, Vaikriyaka Dwik, Narakagati, Narakaayu, Devagati, Devaayu, Durbhag, Anaadey, and Ayashaskirti) |
| | Mishra | 1 (Samyagmithyatva) | 6 (6+1=7-1 Samyaktva) | 6 (4+3=7-1 Samyagmithyatva) |
| | Asanayt |  | 80 (including Samyaktva) | 6 | 

Page #309:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-270

Now, the statement of the udyaadi in the Vaikriyakaayayoga, Aahaarakaayayoga and Aahaarakaayayoga is made in 3 verses.

Veguvvaṁ vā misse, ṇa missa parghādasaravihāyadugam. Sammo kā huṇḍaradam, dukāmalā ajah ||315|| ṇirayagadiāuṇīcaṁ, te khittayade'vaṇijja thīvedam. Chaṭṭaguṇaṁ vāhāre, ṇa thīṇatiyasaṁḍhathīvedam ||316|| Duggadi dussaresamhadi, orāladū carimpaṁca saṁṭhāṇam. Te tammisse sussara, parghādadusatthagadi hīṇā ||317||

**Explanation:**

In Vaikriyakaayayoga, out of the 86 udya-yogya prakritis, by reducing the prakritis of Mishramohaniya (Samyagmithyatva), Parghaat, Ucchvaas, Svaradvik, Prashasta and Aprashasta Vihaayogati, there are 79 udya-yogya prakritis in Vaikriyakaayayoga. Even in that, here in the Saasadanagunasthan, there is no udya of Hundakasanasthan, Napumsakaved, Durbhaag, Anaadeya, Ayashaskirti, Narakagati, Narakayu, Neechagotra, because the jeeva with Saasadanagunasthan does not go to hell after death. But, their udya remains in Asanyatagunasthan. In Saasadan, there is vyuchchitti of Strived and An04, these five. (There are no Strivedi in the Asanyatagunasthan of Vaikriyakaayayoga).

In Aahaarakaayayoga, out of the 85 udya-yogya prakritis in the sixth gunasthan from the general, there is udya of 61 prakritis, excluding the three of Styanagridhi, etc., Nidra, Napumsakaved and Viveed, Aprashasta Vihaayogati, Dusvar, 6 Sanhanan, Audarikasharira, Audarikaangopaang, and the remaining five sanasthan excluding Samachaturasra. In Aahaarakaayayoga, out of the above 61 prakritis, by reducing Susvar, Parghaat, Ucchvaas and Prashasta Vihaayogati, there are 57 udya-yogya prakritis. In Aahaarakaayayoga and Aahaarakaayayoga, there is only one Pramatta gunasthan.

**Special Explanation:**

In the Mithyatvagunasthan related to Vaikriyakaayayoga, there is vyuchchitti of one Mithyatva prakriti, udya prakriti 78, anudava prakriti 1 (Samyaktva). In Saasadanagunasthan, there is vyuchchitti of Strived and four Kshaya of Anantaanubandhi, udya 77 prakriti and anudava prakriti 10. In Asanyatagunasthan, there is vyuchchitti of four Kshaya of Apratyakhyan, Vaikriyikasharira, Vaikriyikaangopaang, Dev-Narakagati, Dev-Narakayu, Durbhaag, etc., three, in this way, there is vyuchchitti of these 13 prakritis, udya of Samyaktva, Hundakasanasthan, etc., eight, these 9, so udya prakriti 73 and anudava 6 prakritis. 

Page #310:
---------------------------
Gommatasar Karmakanda - 271
In Vaikriyaka-Mishra-Kaya-Yoga, the Udayavyuchchitti - Uday - Anudaya-related Sandrisht-Uday-Yogya-Prakriti is 79, Gunasthan 3
Uday
Gunasthan Vyuchchitti
Mithyatva 1
Sasadan
5
Asanyata
Uday Anudaya
1
78
69
Vishesh
Anudaya 1 (Samyaktava) Vyuchchitti 1 (Mithyatva) 10 (Hundaka-Sansthan, Napumsaka-Ved, Dubhang, Anadeya, Ayashaskirti, Narakagati, Narakayu, Nicha-Gotra, Samyaktava, Mithyatva)
5 (Ananta-Anubandhi Ki 4 Kashaya and Stri-Ved) 6 (10+5=15-9 Uparyukt Hundaka-Sansthan-adi 8 and Samyaktava)
13 (According to Gatha 314 Sandrisht)
Further, in Karman-Kaya-Yoga, Uday-adi is mentioned in two Gathas:
Oghan Kamme Sargadi-Patteya-Aharuraladu-G-Missan. Uvaghadapanavigu-Vvadudhinati-Santhan-Sanhadi Natthi. || 318 ||
13
73
10
6
Sane Shri-Ved-Chidi, Nirayadunisya-Ugan Nathi-Yadasayan. Igi-Vann-Pan-Vais, Miccha-Disu Chausu Vocchedo || 319 || Jumman ||
Meaning - In Karman-Kaya-Yoga, Uday-Yogya-Prakriti is 89. Out of 122 Prakrit-is mentioned in Gunasthan, Swar-Dwik, Prashast and Aprashast-Viha-Yogati, Pratyek, Sadharan, Aharaka-Dwik, Audarik-Dwik, Samyag-Mithyatva, Upghta, Parghta, Atap, Udyot, Ucchvas, Vaikriyik-Dwik, Styan-Gritt-Trika, 6 Sansthan, 6 Sanhanan, these 33 Prakrit-is are excluded, leaving 89 Uday-Yogya Prakrit-is. In that also, Sasadan-Gunasthan Stri-Ved has Vyuchchitti and Narakagati, Narakagati-Anupurvi and Narakayu, these three do not have Uday. And in Mithyatva-Gunasthan, 3, Sasadan-Gunasthan, 10, Asanyata-Gunasthan, 51 and Sayog-Kevali, 25 Prakrit-is have Uday-Vyuchchitti.
Vishesh-Arth - In Karman-Kaya-Yoga, Uday-Yogya-Prakrit-is are 89.
Shankha - In Anadi-Sansar, in Vigraha-Gati and A-Vigraha-Gati, from Mithyatva to Sayogi, in all Gunasthan, Karman-Sharira has continuous Uday. Vigraha-Gati Karman-Yoga: By this Sutra, why is Karman-Kaya-Yoga said only in Vigraha-Gati? 

Page #311:
---------------------------
Gommatasar Karmakanda-272

**Solution:** Even though the Siddha is established by the rule of the beginning, there is a rule for the beginning again. Therefore, there is a rule here that in the movement of the body, there is only Karma-kaya-yoga, not other yogas. Because in the movement of the body, there are no other classifications except Karma-vargana, in other places, there is yoga due to other classifications, therefore, there is no Karma-kaya-yoga in other places.

**Doubt:** The meaning of the movement of the body is also that the movement that takes place to take on a new body is the movement of the body. Therefore, in Mithyatva, Sasadan, and Asanyata Gunasthanas, there can be a movement of the body, but in Sayogi Gunasthan, there is no movement of the body, then how can there be Karma-kaya-yoga there?

**Solution:** There is no rule that Karma-kaya-yoga should be in the movement of the body only, because in the previous and the Lokapurana Samuddhata, Karma-kaya-yoga is found for three times...

**Regarding Karma-kaya-yoga:** In Mithyatva Gunasthan, there is the elimination of Mithyatva, Sukshma, and Apariyapta, which is of 87 Udya Prakriti, and the elimination of Tirthankara and Samyaktva, which is of 2 Udya Prakriti. In Sasadan Gunasthan, there is the elimination of 4 Kashayas, Ekendriya, Stavara, Vikal-tray, and Stri-veda, which is of 81 Udya Prakriti, and the elimination of Naraka-dvik and Naraka-ayu-sahita, which is of 8 Udya Prakriti. In Asanyata Gunasthan, there is the elimination of 15 without Vaikriyika-dvik, and 7 without Udyota of Desha-sanyata, 0 without Aharaka-dvik and Styan-griddhi of Pramatta, 1 without Tri-samhanana of Aprammatta, 6 of Apurva-karana, 5 of Anivritti-karana related to Stri-veda, because it is eliminated in Sasadan Gunasthan, 1 of Sukshma-samparaya, 0 of Upshanta-moha, 16 of Kshina-moha related, thus all these together are of 51 Udya Prakriti, because there is no Karma-kaya-yoga from Desha-sanyata to Kshina-moha Gunasthan. Here, Samyaktva, Naraka-dvik, Naraka-ayu-sahita are of 75 Udya Prakriti and 14 Udya Prakriti. In Sayogi-kevali, there is the elimination of 25 Udya Prakriti out of 42 Udya Prakriti, which are Vajrarashabha-naracha, Svar-dvik, Prashasta-aprashasta-vihayogati, Audarika-dvik, Sansthan 6, Upghata, Parghata, Uchchvasa, and without each body. Udya Prakriti is of 25 including Tirthankara, and Udya Prakriti is of 64. 

Page #312:
---------------------------
## Gunasthana
## Mithyatva
## Sasadan
## And
## Asanyata
## Sayogakevali
## Gommatasar Karmakanda - 273
## Karmankayogasambandhi Udayavyuchchitti Uday Anudaya Ki Sandrishtoudayyogyaprakriti 89, Gunasthana 4
## Uday
## Vyuchchitti Uday
## a
## 87
## 10
## 51
## 25
## 81
## 75
## 25
## Anudaya
## ..2
## 8
## 14
## Vishesh
## 2. ( Tirthankara, Samyaktava ) 3 ( Mithyatva, Sukshma, Aparyapta)
## 8 (3+2=5+3 Narakagati, Narakagatyānupūrvi
## Narakayu)
## 14 (10+8 = 18-4 Samyaktava, Narakdrik aur Narakayu)
## 51 (Vaikriyakadvikbina Asanyata ki 15+ Udyotbina Deshasanyata ki 7+ Aprammatta ki 1 Samyaktava + Apurvakarana ki 6 Hasyaadi + Anivrittikarana ki Strivedabina 5+ Sukshmasampray ki 1 Lobha + Kshinamohaki 16 ) 64 (51 + 14=65- 1 Tirthankara)
## 64
## || Iti Yogamargana.
## Ath Vedamargana
## Ab Vedamarganasambandhi Udayadi Ka Kathana Karte Hain
## Muloghan Pumvede, Thavarchaunirathjugalatitthyaran. Igivigalan Dhissand, Tavam Nirayaugam Natthi || 320 ||
## Arth - Purushaveda mein samanya se Gunasthanoakt 122 prakritiyon mein se sthavaraadi char, narakdvik, tirthankara, ekendriya, vikalatra, strived, napumsakaved, aatap aur narakayu ye 15 prakritiyan udayyogy nahin hain.
## Vishesharth - Purushaveda mein udayyogy 107 prakriti, gunasthana adi ke 9 hain. Yahan Mithyatvagunasthana 

Page #313:
---------------------------
In Gommatasar Karmakanda-274, the Vyuchchhinnaprakriti of Mithyatva is 1, Udayaprakriti is 103, and Anudayaprakriti is Samyagmithyatva, Samyaktv, and Aharakdvik. In Sasadanagunasthan, the Vyuchchhinnaprakriti of Anantanubandhikashay is 4, Udayaprakriti is 102, and Anudayaprakriti is 5. In Mishwagunasthan, the Vyuchchhitti of Samyagmithyatva, Udayaprakriti is 96, and due to the absence of the Uday of the three Anupurvi, and the Uday of Samyagmithyatva, the Anudayaprakriti is 11. In Asanyatagunasthan, the Vyuchchhinnaprakriti is Apratyakhyanakshaya 4, Vaikriyikdvik, Suradvik, Devayu, Manushya-Tiryanchgatyanupurvi, Dur Bhag, Anadeya, Ayashkirti 14, Udayaprakriti is 99, and due to the Uday of Samyaktv and Tiryanch-Manushyadevgatyanupurvi, the Anudayaprakriti is 8. In Deshasanyatagunasthan, the Vyuchchhinnaprakriti is 8, Udayaprakriti is 85, and Anudayaprakriti is 22. In Pramattagunasthan, the Vyuchchhinnaprakriti is 5, Udayaprakriti is 79 including Aharakdvik, and Anudayaprakriti is 28. In Apratmattagunasthan, the Vyuchchhinnaprakriti is 4, Udayaprakriti is 74, and Anudayaprakriti is 33. In Apurvakaranagunasthan, the Vyuchchhinnaprakriti is 6, Udayaprakriti is 70, and Anudayaprakriti is 37. In Anivrittikaranagunasthan, in the Savedhabhag, the Purushaved and Avedhabhag related Savalanakrodha-Mana-Maya, the 10th's Sukshmalobha, the 11th's Vajranaracha and Naracha Sahanan, the Kshinanakshayagunasthan's 16, and the remaining 41 prakriti related to the Sayogakevali, excluding Tirthankara, thus the Vyuchchhinnaprakriti is 64, because there is no Uday of Ved after the Savedhabhag. The Udayaprakriti is 64 and Anudayaprakriti is 43.

In Purushaved, the Sandrishti related to Udayavyuchchhitti-Uday-Anuday.
Udayyogyaprakriti 107, Gunasthan 9
Udayagunasthan | Vyuchchhitti Mithyatva
Sasadan
Bhisn
Uday | Anuday
Vishesh | 4 (Samyagmithyatva, Samyaktv, Aharakdvik)
1 (Mithyatva) 5 4 (Anantanubandhikashay) 11 | 11 (5+4=9+3 Anupurvi (excluding Narakgatyanupurvi)
and the Uday of Samyagmithyatva is there, therefore it is reduced
by) 99 8 8 (11+1=12-4, three Anupurvi and
Samyaktv) 14 (Apratyakhyanakshaya 4, Vaikriyikdvik, Devayu,
Manushya and Tiryanchgatyanupurvi, Devadrik, Dur Bhag, Anadeya, Ayash)
Asanyat
] 14 

Page #314:
---------------------------
Gommatasar Karmakanda-275
##  
**Promatt**
**Aparamatt**
**Desasanayat**
8 (according to the understanding of verse 264) 28 (22+8=30-2 Aharakdvig) 5 (according to verse 264)
4 (according to the understanding of verse 264) Apurvakaran 6
6 (according to the understanding of verse 264) Anivrittikaran 64
| 64 (Purushaved + Avedbhaagse Sayogi Paryant Saveedbhaag
Kramshah Vyuchchhinna Hone Wali 3+1+2
+16+4164) Ath Anantar Strived and Napumsakaved mein Udayadi ka Kathen Karte Hain
Isthivedi Vi Taha, Haradupurisunamisthisanjuttam.
Ogham Sandhe Na Hi Surharaduthipunsurouttithyaram. ||321|| 
**Meaning:** Out of the 107  Prakritis eligible for Uday (arising) related to Purushaved, after subtracting Aharakdvig and Purushaved and adding Strived, the number of Prakritis eligible for Uday in Strived is 105. And out of the 122 Prakritis mentioned in Gunasthan, after subtracting Devadvig, Aharakdvig, Strived, Purushaved, Devayu and Tirthankar, the number of Prakritis eligible for Uday in Napumsakaved is 114.
**Special Meaning:** In Strived, the number of Prakritis eligible for Uday is 105, and the number of Gunasthan is 9. Here, in Mithyatva Gunasthan, the number of Vyuchchhinna Prakritis is 1 (Mithyatva), the number of Uday Prakritis is 103, and the number of Anuday Prakritis is 2 (Samyagmithyatva and Samyaktva). In Sasadan Gunasthan, the number of Vyuchchhinna Prakritis is 4 (Anantanu bandhi Kashay), the number of Uday Prakritis is 102, and the number of Anuday Prakritis is 3 (Dev-Manushya and Tiryanchgatya anupurvi). In Mishra Gunasthan, the number of Vyuchchhinna Prakritis is 1 (Samyagmithyatva), the number of Uday Prakritis is 96, and the number of Anuday Prakritis is 9. In Asanayat Gunasthan, the number of Vyuchchhinna Prakritis is 4 (Apratyakhyan Kashay), the number of Uday Prakritis is 96, and the number of Anuday Prakritis is 9. In Desasanayat Gunasthan, the number of Vyuchchhinna Prakritis is 8 (as mentioned in Gunasthan), the number of Uday Prakritis is 85, and the number of Anuday Prakritis is 20. In Promatt Sanayat Gunasthan, the number of Vyuchchhinna Prakritis is 3 (Styan, Griddhi, and other three Nidra), because Strivedi are Sankleshi, therefore they do not have Aharakdvig. The number of Uday Prakritis is 77, and the number of Anuday Prakritis is 28. In Aparamatt Gunasthan, the number of Vyuchchhinna Prakritis is 4 (Samyaktva and the last three Sanhanan), the number of Uday Prakritis is 74, and the number of Anuday Prakritis is 31. In Apurvakaran Gunasthan, the number of Vyuchchhinna Prakritis is 6 (Hasyaadi Nokashay), the number of Uday Prakritis is 70, and the number of Anuday Prakritis is 35. In Anivrittikaran Gunasthan, the number of Vyuchchhinna Prakritis in Saveedbhaag is 64 (as mentioned earlier), the number of Uday Prakritis is 64, and the number of Anuday Prakritis is... 

Page #315:
---------------------------
## Sasadan

**Gommatasar Karmakanda-276**

**Strived in the context of Udayavyuchchitti, Uday, and Anuday**

**Udayyogya Prakriti 105, Gunasthan 9**

| Uday Gunasthan | Vyuchchitti | Uday | Anuday |
|---|---|---|---|
| **Vishesh Mithyatva** | 2 (Samyaktava, Samyagmithyatva) | 1 (Mithyatva) | 7 (Anantanubandhi Kashaya 4, Deva-Manushya, and Tiryanchgatya Anupurvi) | Mishra |
| **Samyagmithyatva** | 9 (7+3-10-1 Samyagmithyatva) | 1 (Samyagmithyatva) | Asanyata |
| **Samyaktava** | 2 (9+1=10-1 Samyaktava) | 11 (Apratyakhyan Kashaya 4, Devamati, Devayu, Vaikriyikadvik, Dur Bhag, Anadeya, Ayash) | Deshasanyata |
| **Pramattasanyata** | 8 (According to Gatha 264) | 3 (Styanagridhi, etc. three Nidra) | Apratmatta |
| **Apuurvakaran** | 4 (According to Gatha 264) | 6 (According to Gatha 264) | Anivrittikaran | 64 |
| **Anivrittikaran** | 41 | 64 (According to Gatha 320) |  |

**Napumsakaved in the context of Udayyogya Prakriti 114, Gunasthan 9**

Here, in Mithyatva Gunasthan, Vyuchchinn Prakriti Mithyatva, Atap, Sukshma, Sadharan, and Aparayapt are 5, Uday Prakriti 112, Anuday Prakriti Samyagmithyatva, Samyaktava are 2.

**Sasadan Gunasthan**

In Sasadan Gunasthan, Vyuchchinn Prakriti Anantanubandhi Kashaya 4, Ekendriya, Stavar, Vikal Tray, Manushya, and Tiryanchgatya Anupurvi are 11, Uday Prakriti 106, Anuday Prakriti 8.

**Mishra Gunasthan**

In Mishra Gunasthan, Vyuchchinn Prakriti 1 Samyagmithyatva, Uday Prakriti 96, Anuday Prakriti 18.

**Asanyata Gunasthan**

In Asanyata Gunasthan, Vyuchchinn Prakriti Apratyakhyan Kashaya 4, Vaikriyikadvik, Narakadvik, Narakayu, Dur Bhag, Anadeya, Ayash Kirti are 12, Uday Prakriti 97, Anuday Prakriti 17.

**Deshasanyata Gunasthan**

In Deshasanyata Gunasthan, Vyuchchinn Prakriti Gunasthanokt 8, Uday Prakriti 85, Anuday Prakriti 29.

**Pramatta Gunasthan**

In Pramatta Gunasthan, Vyuchchinn Prakriti Styanagridhi, etc. Nidra three, Uday Prakriti 77, Anuday Prakriti 37.

**Apratmatta Gunasthan**

In Apratmatta Gunasthan, Vyuchchinn Prakriti Samyaktava and the last three Sanhanan are 4, Uday Prakriti 74, Anuday Prakriti 40.

**Apuurvakaran Gunasthan**

In Apuurvakaran Gunasthan, Vyuchchinn Prakriti... 

Page #316:
---------------------------
Gommatsar Karmakanda - 277
There are 6 types of kshaya (passions) like hasya (laughter), 70 types of udaya (arising) prakriti (nature) and 44 types of anudaya (non-arising) prakriti. In the saaveda bhaga (conscious part) of the anivrittikaran gunasthan (stage of non-elimination of karmas), there are 64 types of vyuchchhinna (interrupted) prakriti, 64 types of udaya prakriti and 50 types of anudaya prakriti.

## Gunasthan (Stage)
|  | Mithyatva (False Belief) | Sasadan (Attachment) | Mishra (Mixed) | Asayat (Non-Aversion) | Desasanayat (Self-Control) | Pramattasanayat (Mindfulness) | Napumsakaved (Impotent Knowledge) |
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
| **Udaya (Arising)** | 11 | 1 | 12 | 8 |  |  | 114 |
| **Vyuchchhinna (Interrupted)** |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| **Anudaya (Non-Arising)** | 2 | 8 | 18 | 17 | 29 | 37 | 40 | 44 | 50 |
| **Gunasthan (Stage)** | 9 |  |  |  |  |  |  |

**Udaya-Anudaya (Arising-Non-Arising)**
* **Udaya (Arising)**: 114 (Udaya-Anudaya related to sandrisht (perception) udayayogya (capable of arising) prakriti)
* **Vyuchchhinna (Interrupted)**: 64
* **Anudaya (Non-Arising)**: 50

**Details**
* **2 (Samyagmithyatva, Samyaktva)**: 2 types of mithyatva (false belief) - Samyagmithyatva (right false belief) and Samyaktva (right belief)
* **5 (Mithyatva, Atap, Sukshma, Sadharan, Apariapt)**: 5 types of mithyatva (false belief) - Mithyatva (false belief), Atap (heat), Sukshma (subtle), Sadharan (ordinary), and Apariapt (insufficient)
* **8 (5+2+1 Narakgatyaanupurvi)**: 8 types of mithyatva (false belief) - 5 types of mithyatva (false belief) + 2 types of Samyagmithyatva (right false belief) + 1 type of Narakgatyaanupurvi (sequential hellish rebirth)
* **11 (Anantanu bandhik kshaya 4, Ekendirya, Stavar, Vikal Tray, Manushya, Tiryanchgatyaanupurvi)**: 11 types of mithyatva (false belief) - 4 types of Anantanu bandhik kshaya (infinitely binding passions), Ekendirya (one-sense being), Stavar (stationary being), Vikal Tray (three types of disabled beings), Manushya (human being), and Tiryanchgatyaanupurvi (sequential animal rebirth)
* **18 (19+8=19-1 Samyagmithyatva)**: 18 types of mithyatva (false belief) - 19 types of mithyatva (false belief) - 1 type of Samyagmithyatva (right false belief)
* **1 (Samyagmithyatva)**: 1 type of Samyagmithyatva (right false belief)
* **17 (18+1=19-Samyaktva, Narakgatyaanupurvi)**: 17 types of mithyatva (false belief) - 18 types of mithyatva (false belief) + 1 type of Samyaktva (right belief) - Narakgatyaanupurvi (sequential hellish rebirth)
* **12 (Apratyakhyan kshaya 4, Vaikriyakdvik, Narakdvik, Narakayu, Durbhaga, Anadeya, Ayashaskirti)**: 12 types of mithyatva (false belief) - 4 types of Apratyakhyan kshaya (non-rejected passions), Vaikriyakdvik (two types of Vaikriya karma), Narakdvik (two types of hellish rebirth), Narakayu (hellish body), Durbhaga (misfortune), Anadeya (unworthy), and Ayashaskirti (bad reputation)
* **8 (Gatha 264 ki Sandrisht anusar)**: 8 types of mithyatva (false belief) - according to the perception of Gatha 264
* **3 (Styanagridhi adi tin nidra)**: 3 types of mithyatva (false belief) - Styanagridhi (laziness and greed), etc. three types of nidra (sleep)
* **4 (Gatha 264 ki Sandrisht anusar)**: 4 types of mithyatva (false belief) - according to the perception of Gatha 264
* **6 (Gatha 264 ki Sandrisht anusar)**: 6 types of mithyatva (false belief) - according to the perception of Gatha 264

|| Iti Vedamargna || (Thus is the path of knowledge)

Page #317:
---------------------------
Gommatasar Karmakanda-278
Now, in the section on Kshaya Margana, we discuss the arising (udaya) of Kshayas...
The four types of anger (krodha) are excluded from the 122 types of anger mentioned in the Gunasthanas. The remaining 12 Kshayas related to Mana, Maya, and Lobha Chatushk, along with the Tirthankara, total 13 types. These 13 types, when excluded, leave 109 types of Kshayas that are capable of arising.  Furthermore, the three types of anger related to Mithyatva (false belief) that are devoid of Ananta Anubandhi (infinite consequences) - Ekaindriya, Vikal Tray, Atap, Ananta Anubandhi Krodha, four types of Anupurvi, and four types of Sthavaradi - these 14 types do not arise. Additionally, Samyaktva (right belief), Samyag Mithyatva (right false belief), and Aharak Dwik (two types of food) also do not arise.
According to the verses in "Evam Manaditte" (verse 323), the same principle applies to the three Kshayas of Mana, Maya, and Lobha as it does to Krodha.  Excluding the 13 types (12 Kshayas and Tirthankara), there are 109 types of Kshayas that are capable of arising.
**Specific Explanation:**
In Krodha Kshaya, there are 109 types of Kshayas capable of arising, and 9 Gunasthanas. In the Mithyatva Gunasthan, there are 5 types of Vyuchchhinna (discontinued) Kshayas, 105 types of Udaya (arising) Kshayas, and Samyaktva, Samyag Mithyatva, and Aharak Dwik as Anudaya (non-arising) Kshayas. In the Sasadan Gunasthan, there are 6 types of Vyuchchhinna Kshayas (Ananta Anubandhi Krodha, Ekaindriya, Sthavara, Vikal Tray), 99 types of Udaya Kshayas, and 10 types of Anudaya Kshayas (including Narak Gati Anupurvi). In the Mishra Gunasthan, there is 1 type of Vyuchchhinna Kshaya, 91 types of Udaya Kshayas, and 18 types of Anudaya Kshayas (excluding Narak Gati Anupurvi, the remaining three Anupurvi do not arise). In the Asanyata Gunasthan, there are 14 types of Vyuchchhinna Kshayas (Apratyaakhyan Krodha, Vaikriya Shatk, Manushya and Tiryanch Anupurvi, Devaayu and Narakayu, Dur Bhag, Anadeya, Ayashas Kirti), 95 types of Udaya Kshayas, and 14 types of Anudaya Kshayas (including Samyaktva and the four Anupurvi). In the Desh Sanayata Gunasthan, there are 5 types of Vyuchchhinna Kshayas (Pratyaakhyan Krodha, Tiryanch Ayu, Udyot, Nich Gotra, Tiryanch Gati), 81 types of Udaya Kshayas, and 28 types of Anudaya Kshayas. In the Pramatta Sanayata Gunasthan, there are 5 types of Vyuchchhinna Kshayas (Aharak Dwik, Styan Griddhi, three types of Nidra), 78 types of Udaya Kshayas, and 31 types of Anudaya Kshayas (including Aharak Dwik). In the Apratmatta Gunasthan, there are 4 types of Vyuchchhinna Kshayas (Samyaktva, the last three types of Sanhanan), 73 types of Udaya Kshayas, and 36 types of Anudaya Kshayas. In the Apurva Karan Gunasthan, there are 6 types of Vyuchchhinna Kshayas (Hasya, etc., six types of No Kshaya), 69 types of Udaya Kshayas, and 40 types of Anudaya Kshayas. In the Anivritti Karan Gunasthan, the first part has 3 types of Vyuchchhinna Kshayas (three Vedas), the second part has Sanchalan Krodha and Shunya related to Sukshma Samparaya, and the third part has Upashanta Kshaya related to... 

Page #318:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-279 2, has 63 types of prakritis, 16 related to kṣīṇakṣaya and 41 related to sayogakevali, excluding Tirthankaras. There are 63 prakritis in the second part of the Krodhakṣaya of the Anivṛttikaraṇa Guṇasthāna, which is related to Udayaprakriti. There are 91 prakritis that are eligible for the emergence of Mithyādṛṣṭi in the absence of Anantānubandhi in the Krodha, which is related to Anudayaprakriti. This is because 14 prakritis, namely Ekendriya, Vikalatraya, Ātapa, Anantānubandhi Krodha, Chārānupūrvi, sthāvara, Sūkṣma, Sādharana, and Aparyāpta, do not emerge in the 105 prakritis that are eligible for the emergence of Mithyātva Guṇasthāna related to Krodhakṣaya. Therefore, these 14 prakritis are subtracted from the total. This means that after the disconnection of Anantānubandhi from Mithyātva, Anantānubandhi does not emerge until the end of one Āvali Kāla. There are 91 prakritis that are eligible for its emergence.

**Note:** When a being enters the first Guṇasthāna after disconnecting the four Kṣayas of Anantānubandhi from Mithyātva, only the Anantānubandhis of that being emerge. This is because the Anantānubandhi Chār Kṣaya of this being does not exist, but after entering the first Guṇasthāna, new Anantānubandhis are bound, and their emergence will occur after the end of the Bandhāvali Kāla. The four Kṣayas of Anantānubandhi do not emerge in the Mithyātva Guṇasthāna. At that time, 91 prakritis emerge out of 105, excluding 14.

There are 109 prakritis that are eligible for the emergence of Sandṛṣṭi related to Udayavyucchitti-Udaya-Anudaya in Krodhakṣaya.

**Guṇasthāna** | **Vyucchitti Mithyātva** | **Udaya** | **Anudaya** | **Sāsādana** | **Viśeṣa**
------- | -------- | -------- | -------- | -------- | --------
Udaya Guṇasthāna | 4 (Samyagmithyātva, Samyaktva, Āhārakadvik) | 5 (Mithyātva, Ātapa, Sūkṣma, Aparyāpta, Sādharana) | 10 (5+4=9+1 Narakagatyānupūrvi) | 6 (Anantānubandhi Krodha, Ekendriya, Dwīndriya, Trīndriya, Chaturindriya, and sthāvara) | 18 (10+6=16-1 Samyagmithyātva + 3 Gatyānupūrvi)
Miśra | 1 (Samyagmithyātva) | 14 (18+1= 19- Samyaktva and four Gatyānupūrvi) | 14 Vyucchitti (Apratyākhyāna Krodha Vaikriyakaṣaṭka, Deva-Narakāyu, Manuşya-Tiryacchagatyānupūrvi, Durbhaga, Anādeya, Ayasa) 

Page #319:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-280
Desasanayat
Pramat
Apramat
Apuvarkaran Anivritikaran 63
5 (Pratyakhyanakrodha, Tiryanchagati, Tiryanchayau,
Udyota, Nichagotra) |31(28+5=33-2 Aharakadrik)
5 (According to the Sandristi of Gatha 264) |4 (According to the Sandristi of Gatha 264) 6 (According to the Sandristi of Gatha 264) Vyuch. 63 (The first part of Anivritikaran Gunasthan has 3 Vedas, the second part has Sajwalanakrodha, Sukshmasamparayaki Shunya, Upshantakashay "has 2, Kshinakashay has 16, Sayogakevali has 41 without Tirthankara)
Similarly, one should know the statement of Udaya etc. in Mana-Maya-Lobhakashays, but the special thing is that in the statement related to Sukshmalobha, there will also be a statement of Sukshmasamparay Gunasthan. Here, in 23 Gunasthan, there is a Vyuchchitti of three Vedas, Udayaprakriti 63, Anudayaprakriti 46. In the 10th Gunasthan, there is a Vyuchchitti of 60, Uday of 60 and Anudayaprakriti of 49.
|| Iti Kashayamargna ||
Atha Gnanamargna Evam Manaditaye, Madisudananage Du Sagunogham.
Vehbangevi Na Tavigivigalindi Thavaranuchhau ||323|| Artha - In this way, know in the three Kashays of Manadi. (Its statement has been made in Gatha 322 under Kashayamargna.) Under Gnanamargna, in Kumati and Kushruta Gyan, out of the 122 Prakritis mentioned in Gunasthan, excluding Aharakadhik, Tirthankara, Samyagmithyatva and Samyaktva, the remaining 117 Prakritis are eligible for Udayayoga, and in Vibhang (Kuavadhi) Gyan, out of 117, excluding Atap, Ekendriya, Vikalatrai, Sthavar, Sukshma, Sadharan, Aparayapt, Anupurvi 4, the remaining 104 Prakritis are eligible for Udayayoga. 

Page #320:
---------------------------
Gommatasar Karmakanda - 281
Special Meaning - Under the path of knowledge, in the Mithyatva Gunasthan of Kumati-Kushrutagyan, there are six types of Mithyatva: Vyuchchitti Mithyatva, Atap, Sukshma, Apariyapt, Sadharan, and Narakgatyanupurvi. The Uday Prakriti is 117, and there is no Anudaya. In the Sasadan Gunasthan, there are nine types of Vyuchchitti, as mentioned in the Gunasthan, and the Uday Prakriti is 111, while the Anudaya Prakriti is 6.
Gunasthan
Mithyatva
Sasadan
In Kumati-Kushrutagyan, the Uday Vyuchchitti - Uday and Anudaya related Sandrishti Udayogya Prakriti is 117, Gunasthan 2
Uday
Vyuchchitti
6
Sasadan
Uday
Gunasthan Vyuchchitti
Mithyatva
1
Uday
117
9
111
9 (According to the Sandrishti of verse 264)
In Vibhang (Kuavdhi) knowledge, there are two types of Udayyogya Prakriti: 104 and Gunasthan. Here, in the Mithyatva Gunasthan, the Vyuchchinn Prakriti is 1 Mithyatva, the Uday Prakriti is 104, and there is no Anudaya. In the Sasadan Gunasthan, the Vyuchchinn Prakriti is 4 Anantanubandhi Kashay, the Uday Prakriti is 103, and the Anudaya Prakriti is 1.
X
In Kuavdhigyan, the Uday Vyuchchitti - Uday - Anudaya related Sandrishti Udayogya Prakriti is 104, Gunasthan 2
Uday
Anudaya
0
104
103
Anudaya
(Mithyatva)
(Anantanubandhi Kashay)
Sannaanpanchayadi, Dansanmagganapadoti Sagunogham. Manapjjavparihara, Navari Pan Sandhitthi Haradugam || 324 || Chakkhummi Na Saharanatavigibitijaai Thavaram Suhum.
Special
6 (Mithyatva, Atap, Sukshma, Apariyapt, Sadharan, and Narakgatyanupurvi)
0
5
1
Special
4
Meaning - From the five knowledges to the Darshanmarg, there is a structure according to their respective Gunasthan, but the special feature of Man:paryaygyan and Pariharvishuddhisanyam is that the four Prakritis: Napumsakaved, Strived, and Aharakdvik, are present. 

Page #321:
---------------------------
Gommatasar Karmakanda - 282

The eight natures, namely, those that are not fit for arising, and those that are ordinary in eye-sight, those that are exposed to the sun, those that are one-sensed, two-sensed, and three-sensed, those that are stationary, those that are subtle, and those that are Tirthankaras, are not fit for arising. Therefore, arising is found in 114 natures without these.

Special Meaning - In Matijnana, Shrutajnana, and Avadhijnana, there are 9 Gunasthanas from Asanyata to Kshina-Kashaya. There are 106 natures that are fit for arising. Here, from the 122 natures mentioned in the general Gunasthanas, the first, second, and third Gunasthanas related to Vyuchchhinna-Prakritis are 15, and these 16 natures of Tirthankaras do not arise. The statement of Udayavyuchchhitti, Uday, and Anudaya is as follows:

From Asanyata Gunasthan to Kshina-Kashaya Gunasthan, there are 9 Gunasthanas. The number of Vyuchchhitti-rupa Prakrit in order is 17-85-4-6-6-1-2 and 16. The number of Uday in order is 104-87-81-76-72-66-60-59 and 57. The number of Anudaya Gunasthanas in order is 2-19-25-30-34-40-46-47 and 49.

Gunasthan
Asanyata
Deshasanyata
-
In Mati, Shruta, and Avadhijnana, the Udayavyuchchhitti, Uday, and Anudaya related to Sandrishti - Udayyoga Prakrit is 106, Gunasthan is 9
Pramatta
Uday
Vyuchchhitti
17
8
5
Apramatta
Apuurvakarana 6
Anivritikarana 6
4
Sukshmasampray 1
Upashantamoha
Kshina-moha
16
Uday Anudaya
104
2
87
81
76
72
66
60
51
57
19
25
30
34
42
46
47
49
Special
2 (Aharakdvak) 17 (According to the Sandrishti of Gatha 264)
8 (According to the Sandrishti of Gatha 264)
25619+8 = 27- 2 (Aharakdvak) 5 (According to the Sandrishti of Gatha 264)
4 (According to the Sandrishti of Gatha 264) 6 (According to the Sandrishti of Gatha 264) 6 (According to the Sandrishti of Gatha 264) 1 (According to the Sandrishti of Gatha 264)
2 (According to the Sandrishti of Gatha 264)
16 (According to the Sandrishti of Gatha 264) 

Page #322:
---------------------------
Gommatasar Karmakanda-283

In Manahparyaya Jnana, neither Napumsakaved, Strived, nor Aharakadvik are eligible for arising. Therefore, in the 81 Prakritis related to the Pramatta Gunasthan, as mentioned in the Gunasthan, these four types of knowledge are not present. The Prakriti is 77, and the Gunasthan is seven, from Pramatta to Kshina Kshaya. Here, in the Pramatta Gunasthan, there are three types of Nidra (sleep): Vyuchchitti, Styan, and Griddhi. The eligible Prakriti for arising is 77, and there is no non-arising. In the Apramatta Gunasthan, the Vyuchchitti Prakriti is 4, the eligible Prakriti for arising is 74, and the non-arising Prakriti is 3. In the Apurvakaran Gunasthan, the Vyuchchitti Prakriti is 6, including Hasya (laughter) and other non-Kshaya, the eligible Prakriti for arising is 70, and the non-arising Prakriti is 7. In the Anivrittikaran Gunasthan, the Vyuchchitti Prakriti is Purushaved, Sanjwalan Krodha (intense anger), Man (pride), and Maya (delusion), the eligible Prakriti for arising is 64, and the non-arising Prakriti is 13. In the Sukshma Samparaya Gunasthan, the Vyuchchitti Prakriti is 1, Sanjwalan Lobha (intense greed), the eligible Prakriti for arising is 60, and the non-arising Prakriti is 17. In the Upashanta Moha (calm delusion), the Vyuchchitti Prakriti is Vajranaracha and Naracha Samhanan, the eligible Prakriti for arising is 59, and the non-arising Prakriti is 18. In the Kshina Kshaya Gunasthan, the Vyuchchitti Prakriti is 16, as mentioned in the Gunasthan, the eligible Prakriti for arising is 57, and the non-arising Prakriti is 20.

**A Detailed Look at Arising, Non-Arising, and Vyuchchitti in Manahparyaya Jnana**

* **Eligible Prakriti for Arising:** 77
* **Gunasthan:** 7 (Pramatta)
* **Arising:**
    * **Vyuchchitti:** 74
    * **Gunasthan:** Pramatta
* **Non-Arising:**
    * **Specific:** 3 (Styan, Griddhi, and other three types of Nidra)
    * **Specific:** 4 (According to the understanding of verse 264)
    * **Specific:** 6 (According to the understanding of verse 264)
    * **Specific:** 4 (Purushaved, Sanjwalan Krodha, Man, and Maya)
    * **Specific:** 1 (Sanjwalan Lobha)
    * **Specific:** 2 (Vajranaracha and Naracha Samhanan)
    * **Specific:** 20
    * **Specific:** 16 (According to the understanding of verse 264)

**In Kevala Jnana**

* **Eligible Prakriti for Arising:** 42
* **Gunasthan:** 21 (Sayoga and Ayoga Kevali)
* **Sayoga Kevali:**
    * **Vyuchchitti Prakriti:** 30
    * **Eligible Prakriti for Arising:** 42
    * **Non-Arising:** None
* **Ayoga Kevali:**
    * **Vyuchchitti Prakriti:** 12
    * **Eligible Prakriti for Arising:** 12
    * **Non-Arising Prakriti:** 30 

Page #323:
---------------------------
## Gommatasara Karmakanda-284:  A Detailed Look at Udayavyuchchitti, Uday, and Anuday in Kevalgyan

**Udayyogya Prakriti 42, Gunasthan 2.4 | Uday | Gunasthan Vyuchchitti | Uday | Anuday**

**Vishesh Sayogkevali | 30**

**According to the Sandristi of Gatha 264, Ayogkevali 12 | 12 |**

**According to the Sandristi of Gatha 264 ||  Iti Gyanmarggana ||**

**Ath Sanayamaarggana**

In Sanayamaarggana, within Samayik-Chhedopasthapanasanayam, there are 81 Udayyogya Prakriti and 4 Gunasthan (Pramatta, Aprammatta, Apurvakaran, and Anivrittikaran).

Here, in the Pramatta Gunasthan, there are 5 Vyuchchhinna Prakriti, 81 Uday Prakriti, and no Anuday. In the Aprammatta Gunasthan, there are 4 Vyuchchhinna Prakriti, 76 Uday Prakriti, and 5 Anuday Prakriti. In the Apurvakaran Gunasthan, there are 6 Vyuchchhinna Prakriti, 72 Uday Prakriti, and 9 Anuday Prakriti. In the Anivrittikaran Gunasthan, there are 6 Vyuchchhinna Prakriti, 66 Uday Prakriti, and 15 Anuday Prakriti.

**Samayik Chhedopasthapanasanayam: Sandristi of Udayavyuchchitti, Uday, and Anuday**

| Udayyogya Prakriti | Gunasthan | Pramatta | Uday | Anuday | Vishesh |
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
| 81 | 4 | 5 (According to the Sandristi of Gatha 264) |  |  |  |
|  |  | 4 (According to the Sandristi of Gatha 264) |  |  |  |
|  |  | 6 (According to the Sandristi of Gatha 264) |  |  |  |
|  |  | 6 (According to the Sandristi of Gatha 264) |  |  |  |

**Pariharavishuddhisanayam**

In Pariharavishuddhisanayam, according to the Sanditthi Haraduggan, there are 77 Udayyogya Prakriti and 2 Gunasthan, excluding the four: Napumsak, Strived, and Aharakdvik.

Here, in the Pramatta Gunasthan, there are Vyuchchhinna Prakriti (Styanagridhitrik), 77 Uday Prakriti, and no Anuday. In the Aprammatta Gunasthan, there are 4 Vyuchchhinna Prakriti, 74 Uday Prakriti, and 3 Anuday Prakriti. 

Page #324:
---------------------------
## Uday (Arising)
**Pramat** (Careless)
**Apramat** (Mindful)
**Gommatasar Karmakanda-285**
**Pariharavishuddhi Samyama** (Samyama for Purity of Conduct)
**Udayavyuchchitti-Uday-Anudaya Sambandhi Sandristi** (Perspective on Arising, Cessation of Arising, and Non-Arising)

**Udayyogya Prakriti 77, Gunasthan 2** .................... **Uday Gunasthan Vyuchchitti** (Cessation of Arising)
**Anudaya** (Non-Arising)
**Vishesh** (Specific) 0 | 3 (Styanagridhi, Nidranidra, Prachalaaprachala) 3 | 4 (Samyaktva, Ardhanaraach-Kilita Sripatikasanhanan)
**Sukshma Samparaya Samyama** (Samyama for Subtle Perception) - In Sukshma Samparaya Samyama, one should know the entirety of Udayadi (Arising, etc.) as per the Sukshma Samparaya Gunasthan.
**Udayyogya Prakriti 60, Gunasthan 1** - Sukshma Samparaya

**Yathakyata Samyama** (Samyama as Described) - In Yathakyata Samyama, there are 60 Udayyogya Prakriti (Nature Capable of Arising) in the 59 Uday Prakriti (Nature of Arising) related to Upashanta Kshaya (Subdued Passions) as mentioned in the general Gunasthan, plus one Tirthankara Prakriti (Nature of a Tirthankara). There are four Gunasthan related to Upashanta Kshaya, etc. Here, in the Upashanta Kshaya Gunasthan, there are 2 Vyuchchhinna Prakriti (Cessation of Arising), 59 Uday Prakriti, and 1 Anudaya Prakriti. In Kshina Kshaya (Diminished Passions), there are 16 Vyuchchhinna Prakriti, 57 Uday Prakriti, and 3 Anudaya Prakriti. In Sayogakevali Gunasthan (State of a Liberated Being with Karma), there are 30 Vyuchchhinna Prakriti, 42 Uday Prakriti, and 18 Anudaya Prakriti. In Ayogakevali Gunasthan (State of a Liberated Being without Karma), there are 12 Vyuchchhinna Prakriti, 12 Uday Prakriti, and 48 Anudaya Prakriti.
**Yathakyata Samyama** - Perspective on Udayavyuchchitti-Uday-Anudaya Sambandhi Sandristi
**Udayyogya Prakriti 60, Gunasthan 4**
**Uday** (Arising)
F0
**Gunasthan** (State)
**Anudaya** (Non-Arising)
**Vishesh** (Specific) Upashanta Kshaya 2
| 2 (Vajranaraach and Naraach Sanhanan)
1 (Tirthankara) Kshina Kshaya
16 (As per the perspective of Gatha 264) Sayogakevali
42 | 18 | 18 (16 + 3 = 19 - 1 Tirthankara)
30 (As per Gatha 264) Ayogakevali
12 (As per the perspective of Gatha 264)
**Desha Samyama** (Samyama for Space) - In Desha Samyama, one should know the entirety of Udayadi as per the Desha Samyata Gunasthan.
**Udayyogya Prakriti 87, Gunasthan 1** - Desha Samyata
**Asamyama** (Non-Samyama) - In Asamyama, there are 119 Udayyogya Prakriti, excluding Tirthankara and Aharaka (Food-taker).
**Gunasthan** (State)
48

Page #325:
---------------------------
Gommatasar Karmakanda-286: There are four types of Mithyatva, etc. Here, in the Mithyatva Gunasthan, the Vyuchchhinna Prakriti is 5, the Udaya Prakriti is 117, and the Anudaya Prakriti is 2, excluding Tirthankara and Aharaka from the five mentioned in the Gunasthan. In the Sasadan Gunasthan, the Vyuchchhinna Prakriti is 9, the Udaya Prakriti is 111, and the Anudaya Prakriti is 8. In the Mishra Gunasthan, the Vyuchchhinna Prakriti is 1, the Udaya Prakriti is 100, and the Anudaya Prakriti is 191. In the Asanyata Gunasthan, the Vyuchchhinna Prakriti is 17, the Udaya Prakriti is 104, and the Anudaya Prakriti is 15.

In Asanyama, the Sandrishti related to Udaya Vyuchchhitti, Udaya, and Anudaya:

Udaya Yogya Prakriti: 119, Gunasthan: 4

| Udaya Gunasthan | Vyuchchhitti | Mithyatva | Udaya | Anudaya | Sasadan |
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
| | | | | | 111 |
| | 2 (Samyagmithyatva-Samyaktva) | 5 (Mithyatva, Atap, Sukshma, Apariapt, Sadharan) | 8 (5+2-7+1 Narakgatya Anupurvi) | 19 (8+9=17+3 Narak bina shesh gatya anupurvi) | 20-1 Samyagmithyatva | 15 (19+1=20-4 gatya anupurvi and Samyaktva) |
| | | | | | 17 (according to the Sandrishti of Gatha 263) |
| | | | | | Mishra |
| | | | | | Asanyata |

|| Iti Samyama Margana || 

Page #326:
---------------------------
## Gommatasara Karmakanda - 287

**Regarding the Darshanamargna**

Within the Darshanamargna, there are 114 Udayayogya Prakritis (Potentially Arising Natures) in Chakshudarshan (Clairvoyance). There are 12 Gunasthanas (Stages of Qualities) ranging from Mithyatva (False Belief) to Kshina Kshaya (Subdued Passions).

**Mithyatva Gunasthan**

* **Vyuchchitti (Differentiation):** Mithyatva (False Belief) and Apariapt (Insufficient) - 2
* **Udayaprakriti (Arising Nature):** 110
* **Anudayaprakriti (Non-Arising Nature):** 4 (Samyagmithyatva, Samyaktava, and Aharakdvak)

**Sasadan Gunasthan**

* **Vyuchchitti:** 4 Anantanubandhi Kshaya (Passions with Infinite Consequences) and Chaturindriya Jati (Four-Sensory Beings) - 5
* **Udayaprakriti:** 107
* **Anudayaprakriti:** 7 (4 + 2 + 1 - Narakgatya Anupurvi (Sequential Descent to Hell))

**Mishra Gunasthan**

* **Vyuchchitti:** 1 Samyagmithyatva
* **Udayaprakriti:** 100
* **Anudayaprakriti:** 14 (7 + 5 = 12 + 3 - Narakgatya Anupurvi and Samyaktava)

**Asanyata Gunasthan**

* **Vyuchchitti:** 17
* **Udayaprakriti:** 104
* **Anudayaprakriti:** 10 (14 + 1 = 15 - 4 - Narakgatya Anupurvi and Samyaktava)

**Deshasanyata Gunasthan**

* **Vyuchchitti:** 8 (According to the interpretation of Gatha 263)
* **Udayaprakriti:** 87
* **Anudayaprakriti:** 27 (According to the interpretation of Gatha 263)

**Pramatta Gunasthan**

* **Vyuchchitti:** 5
* **Udayaprakriti:** 81
* **Anudayaprakriti:** 33

**Aparamatta Gunasthan**

* **Vyuchchitti:** 4
* **Udayaprakriti:** 76
* **Anudayaprakriti:** 38

**Apuurvakarana Gunasthan**

* **Vyuchchitti:** 6
* **Udayaprakriti:** 72
* **Anudayaprakriti:** 42

**Anivrittikarana Gunasthan**

* **Vyuchchitti:** 6
* **Udayaprakriti:** 66
* **Anudayaprakriti:** 48

**Sukshma Samparaya Gunasthan**

* **Vyuchchitti:** 1
* **Udayaprakriti:** 60
* **Anudayaprakriti:** 54

**Upshanta Moha Gunasthan**

* **Vyuchchitti:** 2
* **Udayaprakriti:** 59
* **Anudayaprakriti:** 55

**Kshina Moha Gunasthan**

* **Vyuchchitti:** 16
* **Udayaprakriti:** 57
* **Anudayaprakriti:** 57

**Summary of Udayavyuchchitti, Uday, and Anuday in Chakshudarshan**

* **Udayayogya Prakritis:** 114
* **Gunasthanas:** 12

| Gunasthan | Vyuchchitti | Uday | Anuday |
|---|---|---|---|
| Mithyatva | 2 | 110 | 4 |
| Sasadan | 5 | 107 | 7 |
| Mishra | 1 | 100 | 14 |
| Asanyata | 17 | 104 | 10 |
| Deshasanyata | 8 | 87 | 27 |
| Pramatta | 5 | 81 | 33 |
| Aparamatta | 4 | 76 | 38 |
| Apuurvakarana | 6 | 72 | 42 |
| Anivrittikarana | 6 | 66 | 48 |
| Sukshma Samparaya | 1 | 60 | 54 |
| Upshanta Moha | 2 | 59 | 55 |
| Kshina Moha | 16 | 57 | 57 | 

Page #327:
---------------------------
Gommatasar Karmakanda-288
##  
**Pramattasanyata**
| 5 | 76 | 72 |
|---|---|---|
**Apramattasanyata** | 4 | Apurvakaran | Anivrittikaran | Sukshmasamparaya | Upashantamoha | Kshina moha |
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
33 (27+8-35-2 Aharakdvig) | 5 (According to the context of Gatha 263) | 38 | 4 (According to the context of Gatha 263) | 6 (Hasyaadi 6 Nokashaya) |
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
Jwalankrodha-mana-maya) | 1 (Sukshmalobha) | 55 | 2 (Vajanaraach va Naraachsanhanan) |
|---|---|---|---|
| 16 (According to the context of Gatha 263) |
|---|---|
60 |
|---|---|
|
Achakshudarshan has 121 Prakruti's excluding Tirthankara. From Gunasthan Mithyatva to Kshina moha there are 12. Here, the entire creation of Udaya etc. is like the creation of Gunasthan, so it should be known from the following context.
##
**Achakshudarshana Avarana me Udaya Sambandhi Sandristi**
| Udayyogya Prakruti | Gunasthan |
|---|---|
| 121 | 12 |
##
**Udayavyuchchitti**
| Uday | Gunasthan Mithyatva | Sasadan |
|---|---|---|
| Mishra |
|---|---|
**Asanyata** | Anudaya | Vishesh |
|---|---|---|
| 4 (Samyagmithyatva, Samyaktva, Aharakdvig) | 5 (Mithyatva, Atap, Sukshma, Aparayapt, Sadharan) | 10 (4+4=1+1 Narakgatyaanupurvi) |
|---|---|---|
| 9 (According to Gatha 264) | 21 (10+9+3 Shesh Aanupurvi-1 Samyagmithyatva) | 1 (Samyagmithyatva) |
|---|---|---|
| Anudaya | 17 (21+1=22-5, GatyAanupurvi 4 and Samyaktva) | Vyuchchitti |
|---|---|---|
| 17 (Gunasthanokt) | 8 (Gunasthanokt) | 40 (34+8=42.2 Aharakdvig) |
|---|---|---|
| 5 (Gunasthanokt) | 4 (Gunasthanokt) | 6 (Gunasthanokt) |
|---|---|---|
| 6 (Gunasthanokt) | 1 (Gunasthanokt) |
|---|---|---|
| 2 (Gunasthanokt) | 64 |
|---|---|
| 16 (Gunasthanokt) |
|---|---|
**Deshasanyata** | **Pramattasanyata** | **Apramattasanyata** | **Apurvakaran** | **Anivrittikaran** | **Sukshmasamparaya** | **Upashantamoha** | **Kshina moha** |
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
...

Page #328:
---------------------------
## Gommatasara Karmakanda - 289

**Text at a War 31 U**

In **Avadhi Darshan**, there are 106 **Udayyoga** (capable of arising) **Prakriti** (nature) which are similar to **Avadhi Jnana** (clairvoyance). The entire structure of **Udaya** (arising) etc. is also similar to **Avadhi Jnana**. In **Avadhi Darshan**, there are 9 **Gunasthan** (stages of virtue) from **Asanyata** (uncontrolled) to **Kshina Moh** (diminished delusion).

In **Kevala Darshan**, there are 42 **Udayyoga** **Prakriti** and 2 **Gunasthan**. The entire structure of **Udaya** etc. is similar to **Kevala Jnana** (omniscience).

**|| Iti Darshanmarggana ||**

**Atha Leshyamarggana**

Now, in **Leshyamarggana**, the **Udaya** etc. are described as follows:

**Ki ve duge sagunoghan, micche nirayaanuvochchedo || 325 ||**
**Sane surasuragadidevatirikkhanaanuvochchidi evam. Kaode ayadagune, nirayatirikkhanaanuvochchedo. || 326 ||**

**Meaning:** In **Shyamarggana**, with **Krishna** (black) and **Neela** (blue) **Leshya**, there are 119 **Udayyoga** **Prakriti** without the three **Prakriti** of **Tirthankara** etc. The entire description is according to their respective **Gunasthan**, but in the **Mithyatva** (false belief) **Gunasthan**, there is also the elimination of **Naraka** (hell) **GatyAnupurvi** (sequential births).

With **Krishna** and **Neela Leshya** and **Sasaadan** (enjoyment) **Gunasthan**, there is the elimination of 9 **Gunasthan** mentioned and 13 **Prakriti** of **Devagati** (heavenly birth), **DevagatyAnupurvi**, **Devayu** (heavenly lifespan), **TiryanchagatyAnupurvi** (birth as an animal). Similarly, in **Kapootaleshya**, there are also 119 **Udayyoga** **Prakriti**. In the **Asanyata** **Gunasthan** of **Kapootaleshya**, there is also the elimination of **Naraka** and **TiryanchagatyAnupurvi**.

**Special Meaning:** In **Shyamarggana**, with **Krishna** and **Neela Leshya**, there are 119 **Udayyoga** **Prakriti** without **Tirthankara** and **Aharaka** (food-giver). There are four **Gunasthan** - **Mithyatva** etc. The phrase "**Ayadoti Challeassaao**" indicates six **Leshya** up to **Asanyata** **Gunasthan**. Here, in the **Mithyatva** **Gunasthan**, there is the elimination of 5 **Prakriti** mentioned in **Gunasthan** and 6 **Prakriti** of **Naraka** **GatyAnupurvi**, because one with **Sasaadan** **Gunasthan** does not go to **Naraka**. In **Mishra** (mixed) **Gunasthan**, there is no arising of **Anupurvi**, and those with **Asanyata** **Gunasthan** do not take birth in the second and subsequent **Naraka** (hell) **Prithvi** (earth). Therefore, the elimination of **Naraka** **GatyAnupurvi** in the form of **Krishna** and **Neela Leshya** is mentioned here (in **Mithyatva**). 

Page #329:
---------------------------
...
.:.
:Nībhansār Karmakāṇḍa-290
In the Sāsādanaguṇasthāna, there is a dissolution of 13 prakritis: 9 mentioned in the guṇasthāna, and 4 related to the asanyata: devagati, devagatyānupūrvī, devāyu, and tiryāñcagatyānupūrvī. In the Miśraguṇasthāna, there is a dissolution of the samyagmithyātvaprakriti, and in the Asanyataguṇasthāna, there is a dissolution of 12 prakritis: 4 apratyākhyānakṣay, narakagati, narakāyu, vaikriyikadvik, manuṣyagatyānupūrvī, durbhag, anādeya, and ayasaskīrti. Here, "bhog puṇṇagasamme kauss jahaniyam have" refers to the insignificant portion of the kapota leśyā of the samyagdṛṣṭi who has attained nirvṛtyaparyāptak in the bhogabhūmi. According to these statements, tiryāñcagatyānupūrvī is not mentioned here because asanyata devanārkī do not arise in the tiryāñcas. A samyagdṛṣṭijīva who has come from naraka arises among the humans of the karmabhūmi. Here, the leśyā related to the previous birth remains until the end of the moment, therefore the rise of manuṣyagatyānupūrvī is found here in the asanyataguṇasthāna.
Similarly, in the Mithyātvaguṇasthāna, there are 117 udayaprakritis and the anudayaprakritis are samyagmithyātv and samyaktv. In the Sāsādanaguṇasthāna, there are 111 udayaprakritis and 8 anudayaprakritis. In the Miśraguṇasthāna, there are 98 udayaprakritis and 21 anudayaprakritis. In the Asanyataguṇasthāna, there are 99 udayaprakritis and 20 anudayaprakritis.
The dissolution of udayavyucchitti, uday, and anuday related to the kṛṣṇa-nīla leśyā:
Udayayogyaprakriti 119, guṇasthāna 4
Uday | Vyucchitti
Uday
Guṇasthāna Mithyātv
Sāsādan
Anuday
Viśeṣa 2 2 (samyagmithyātv, samyaktv)
| 6 (guṇasthānaukt 5 + 1 narakagatyānupūrvī) 8. 13 (4 anantānubandhīkṣay, ekendiyādi
4 jāti, sthāvar, devadvik, devāyu and
tiryāñcagatyānupūrvī) 21 (13 + 8 + 1 manuṣyagatyānupūrvī
1 samyagmithyātv) 20 (21 + 1 = 22 - samyaktv, manuṣyagatyānupūrvī) 12 (apratyākhyānakṣay 4, vaikriyikadvik, manuṣyagatyānupūrvī, ayasaskīrti, durbhag, anādeya, narakagati, narakāyu)
Miśra
Asanyata 

Page #330:
---------------------------
## Gommatasara Karmakanda - 291

**In Kapotoleśyā, there are 119 Udayayogya (capable of arising) Prakṛtis and 4 Guṇasthāna (stages of qualities).** Here, in Mithyātvaguṇasthāna (stage of false belief), there are 5 Prakṛtis mentioned in the Vyucchitti Guṇasthāna (detailed description of stages of qualities), 117 Udayaprakṛtis (arising Prakṛtis), and 2 Anudayaprakṛtis (non-arising Prakṛtis) - Samyagmithyātv (right false belief) and Samyaktva (right faith).

**In Sāsādanaguṇasthāna (stage of purification),** there are 9 Prakṛtis mentioned in the Vyucchitti Guṇasthāna and 12 Prakṛtis - Devagati (heavenly path), Devagatyānupūrvī (preceding heavenly path), and Devāyu (heavenly lifespan) - making a total of 21 Prakṛtis. Here, 151 are Udayaprakṛtis and 8 are Anudayaprakṛtis.

**In Miśraguṇasthāna (mixed stage),** there is 1 Vyucchinnāprakṛti (separated Prakṛti) - Samyagmithyātv, 98 Udayaprakṛtis, and 21 Anudayaprakṛtis.

**In Asanyataguṇasthāna (stage of non-restraint),** there are 14 Prakṛtis - 4 Apratyākhyānakṣay (non-rejected passions), Narakagati (hellish path), Narakagatyānupūrvī (preceding hellish path), Narakāyu (hellish lifespan), Vaikriyikaśarīra (transformed body), Vaikriyikaṅgopāṅga (transformed limbs), Tiryak (animal) and Manusyagatyānupūrvī (preceding human path), and 3 Durbhaga (misfortune) etc. Here, 101 are Udayaprakṛtis and 18 are Anudayaprakṛtis.

**In the incomplete time of Bhavanavāsī, Vyantar, and Jyotiṣīdeva (types of deities),** only Kṛṣṇa, Nīla, and Kapotoleśyā are present. In the complete time, a small portion of Tejośyā is found.

**The holder of Aśubhaleśyā (unfortunate aura) is not born in the three types of Asanyat Bhavan (abodes of non-restraint).** Therefore, the Udayavyucchitti (arising and detailed description) of Devagati, Devagatyānupūrvī, and Devāyu occurs only in Sāsādanaguṇasthāna.

**In Kapotoleśyā, the following table shows the Udayavyucchitti, Uday (arising), and Anuday (non-arising) related to the Prakṛtis:**

| Udayayogya Prakṛti | Guṇasthāna | Vyucchitti | Uday | Anuday |
|---|---|---|---|---|
| 119 | 4 |  |  |  |
|  |  | Viśeṣa Mithyātv | 2 (Samyagmithyātv, Samyaktva) |  |
|  |  | Sāsādan | 5 (Guṇasthāna-mentioned) | 8 (5 + 2 + 1 Narakagatyānupūrvī) |
|  |  | Miśra | 12 (9 Guṇasthāna-mentioned, Devadvik Devāyu) | 21 (12 + 8 + 2 Manusya and Tiryakgatyānupūrvī - 1 Samyagmithyātv) |
|  |  | Asanyat | 14 (12 Kṛṣṇa and Nīlaleśyā related to Sandṛṣṭi + Narak and Tiryakgatyānupūrvī) | 18 (21 + 1 - 22 - 4, Narakgatyānupūrvī without 3 Anupūrvī and Samyaktva) |

**The following verse describes the Uday (arising) etc. in the three auspicious Leśyā (auras):**

**Teutiye saguṇoghanā dāvigigivigalathāvaracaukkam |**
**Niradadutadāutiriyāṇugam narāṇū ṇ micchaduge || 327 ||**

**Meaning:** In the three auspicious Leśyā - Tejo (radiant), Kṛṣṇa (dark), and Nīla (blue) - there are 122 Prakṛtis in their respective Guṇasthāna. Out of these, 4 are Ātap (sun-like), Ekaindriya (one-sensed), Vikaleindriya (impaired-sensed), and Sthāvara (stationary) etc., 13 are Narakadvik (two hellish paths), Narakāyu (hellish lifespan), and Tiryakgatyānupūrvī (preceding animal path). 

**111**
**Asanyat** 

Page #331:
---------------------------
Gommatasar Karmakanda-292

There are 109  udayayogya (capable of arising)  prakritis (natures) because of the non-arising of prakriti.  Even in these, there is no arising of manushya-gatyānupūrvi (following the human path) in the two gunasthānas (stages of virtue) of mithyādṛṣṭi (false belief) and so on.

**Special Meaning:**

In the seven gunasthānas starting with Pīta (Tejo) and Padmaleśyā, there are 108 udayayogya prakritis excluding the Tīrthaṅkara prakriti. Here, in the mithyātva gunasthāna, there is one vyucchitti (discontinuous) mithyātva prakriti, 103 udayaprakritis, and five anudaya (non-arising) prakritis: samyagmithyātva, samyaktva, āhārakadvika, and manushya-gatyānupūrvi (as per the saying "ṇaraḍū ṇ micchaduge"). In the sāsadana gunasthāna, there are four vyucchinnā (discontinuous) prakritis of anantānubandhi (infinitely connected) kṣayās (passions), 102 udayaprakritis, and six anudaya prakritis. In the miśra gunasthāna, there is one vyucchitti samyagmithyātva prakriti, 98 udayaprakritis, and 10 anudaya prakritis. In the asanyata gunasthāna, there are four vyucchinnā prakritis of apratyākhyāna (non-rejection) kṣayās, 13 udayaprakritis, and eight anudaya prakritis: devagati (divine path), devagatyānupūrvi, vaikriyikaśarīra (changeable body), vaikriyikaṅgopaṅga (changeable limbs), devāyu (divine lifespan), manushya-gatyānupūrvi, durbhag (misfortune), anādeya (unworthy), and ayashaskīrti (bad reputation). In the deśasanyata gunasthāna, there are four vyucchinnā prakritis of pratyākhyāna (rejection) kṣayās, eight udayaprakritis: tiryañcāyu (animal lifespan), tiryañcagati (animal path), udyota (brightness), and nīcagotr (low birth), and 21 anudaya prakritis. In the pramatta gunasthāna, there are three vyucchinnā prakritis: āhārakadvika, styāna (laziness), and gṛddhi (greed), 81 udayaprakritis, and 27 anudaya prakritis. In the apramatta gunasthāna, there are three vyucchinnā prakritis: samyaktva (right belief) and the last three samhananas (aggregations), 76 udayaprakritis, and 32 anudaya prakritis.

**:: : : : Pīta (Tejo) and Padmaleśyā: A Summary of Udayavyucchitti, Udaya, and Anudaya**

**Udayayogya Prakritis: 108, Gunasthānas: 1 to 7**

| Udaya | Gunasthāna | Vyucchitti | Udaya | Anudaya |
|---|---|---|---|---|
| Viśeṣa | 5 (Miśra, Samyaktva, Āhārakadvika, Manushya-gatyānupūrvi) | 1 (Samyagmithyātva) | 4 (Anantānubandhi Krodha-Māna-Māyā) | 10 (6 + 4 + Devagatyānupūrvi - Samyagmithyātva) |
| Sāsādana | 1 (Samyagmithyātva) | 4 (Anantānubandhi Krodha-Māna-Māyā) | 102 | 6 |
| Miśra | 1 (Samyagmithyātva) | 4 (Anantānubandhi Krodha-Māna-Māyā) | 98 | 10 |
| Asanyata | 13 | 100 | 8 | 8 (10 + 1811 - Manushya-Devagatyānupūrvi, Samyavattva) |
| Deśasanyata | 8 | 87 | 21 | 8 (As per the Gunasthāna, Gāthā 264) |
| Pramatta | 3 | 81 | 27 | 8 (As per the Gunasthāna, Gāthā 264) |
| Aparamatta | 3 | 76 | 32 | 8 (As per the Gunasthāna, Gāthā 264) |

**Mithyātva:** 100

**Note:** The text mentions that an asanjnī (non-conscious being) does not have a dravyamāna (material mass), but a kevalī (omniscient being) does. Therefore, they are not asanjnīs. 

Page #332:
---------------------------
## Gommatasara Karmakanda - 293: Pramatta and Apramatta

**Pramatta**

* **27:** 27 (21 + 8 - 29 - 2 Aharaka Dwika)
* **5:** (According to Gatha 264)
* **76:** 32
* **4:** (According to Gunasthanokta, Gatha 264)

**Apramatta**

* In Shukla Leshya, there are 109 Udayayogya Prakritis.
* In Gunasthan, there are 13 Prakritis from Mithyatva to Sayogi Paryanta.
* In Mithyatva Gunasthan, there is one Vyuchchitti of Mithyatvatakati, and 10.3 Udayaprakriti.
* The 6 Prakritis of Anudaya are: Samyagmithyatva, Samyaktava, Aharaka Dwika, Tirthankara, and Manushya Gaty Anupurvi.
* In Sasadan Gunasthan, there are 4 Vyuchchitti of Anantanubandhi Kashaya, and 102 Udayaprakriti (equivalent to Peet and Padma Leshya).
* In Anudaya, there are 7 Prakritis. Since Tirthankara Prakriti is Anudaya in all cases, the Anudaya Prakriti increases by one in each Gunasthan, starting from Apramatta Gunasthan.
* In Mishva Gunasthan, there is one Vyuchchitti Prakriti of Samyagmithyatva, 98 Udayaprakriti, and 11 Anudaya Prakriti.
* In Asanyatta Gunasthan, there are 13 Vyuchchitti Prakritis, 100 Udayaprakriti, and 9 Anudaya Prakritis.
* In Deshasanyata Gunasthan, there are 8 Vyuchchitti Prakritis, 87 Udayaprakriti, and 22 Anudaya Prakritis.
* In Pramatta Sanayata Gunasthan, there are 5 Vyuchchitti Prakritis, 81 Udayaprakriti, and 28 Anudaya Prakritis.
* In Apramatta Gunasthan, there are 4 Vyuchchitti Prakritis, 76 Udayaprakriti, and 33 Anudaya Prakritis.
* In Apurvakarana Gunasthan, there are 6 Vyuchchitti Prakritis as mentioned in Gunasthan, 72 Udayaprakriti, and 13 less Anudaya Prakritis than mentioned in Gunasthan. This is because 53 Udayayogya Prakritis were reduced in the original Shukla Leshya, so there are 37 Anudaya Prakritis here. This reduction of 13 Prakritis should be noted in all subsequent Gunasthanas.
* In Anivrittikarana Gunasthan, there are 6 Vyuchchitti Prakritis, 66 Udayaprakriti, and 43 Anudaya Prakritis.
* In Sukshma Saparay Gunasthan, there is one Vyuchchitti Prakriti, 60 Udayaprakriti, and 49 Anudaya Prakritis.
* In Upashanta Moha Gunasthan, there are 2 Vyuchchitti Prakritis, 59 Udayaprakriti, and 50 Anudaya Prakritis.
* In Kshina Moha Gunasthan, there are 16 Vyuchchitti Prakritis, 57 Udayaprakriti, and 52 Anudaya Prakritis.
* In Sayogi Kevali Gunasthan, there are 42 Vyuchchitti Prakritis, 42 Udayaprakriti, and 67 Anudaya Prakritis.

**Shukla Leshya: Sandrishti related to Uday, Vyuchchitti, and Anudaya**

* Udayayogya Prakritis: 109
* Gunasthan: 13

**Uday Gunasthan Vyuchchitti | Uday Mithyatva | Anudaya**

* **Vishesh:** 16 (Samyagmithyatva, Samyaktava, Aharaka Dwika, Manushya Gaty Anupurvi, and Tirthankara) | 1 (Mithyatva) | 4 (Anantanubandhi Kashaya)
* **Sasadan:** 102 

Page #333:
---------------------------
Gommatasar Karmakanda-294
Mixed Unsteady
Country-Steady Confused
Unconfused Unprecedented Action. 6 Non-Elimination Action 6 Subtle Samparaya | 1 Calm-Mind 2 Diminished-Poha Sa-yog-Kevali | 42
| 11(7+4+1 Deva-Gati-Anu-Purvi-1 Samyag-Mithyatva) | 9 (11+1=12-3 Samyaktva, Deva| Manushya-Gati-Anu-Purvi) | 8 Guna-Sthana-Ukt Gatha 263's Sandrishti According to) 28(22+8=30-2 Aharak-Dwik)
5 (Guna-Sthana-Ukt Gatha 263 According to) | 4 (Guna-Sthana-Ukt Gatha 263 According to) 6 (Guna-Sthana-Ukt Gatha 263 According to) 6 (Guna-Sthana-Ukt Gatha 263 According to) 1 (Guna-Sthana-Ukt Gatha 263 According to) | 2 (Guna-Sthana-Ukt Gatha 263 According to) 16(Guna-Sthana-Ukt Gatha 263 According to)
67(52+16-68-1 Tirthankara) "Thus Leshya-Margna"
Then Bhavy-Samyaktva-Margna
Bhavy-Idaruva-Sama-Vedak-Khayiye Sa-Guna-Uga-Muvasame Khayiye. Na Hi Samma-Muvasame Pun Na-Adi-Tyanu Ya Haradurga. ||328|| Khayiya-Sammo Deso Nara Eva Jado Tahin Na Tiriya-U.
Ujovam Tiriyaga-Di Te-Sim Ayadamhi Vocchedo. ||329|| Meaning- Bhavy-Abhavy, Upasham-Samyaktva, Vedak-Samyaktva and Kshayik-Samyaktva Margna in their own Guna-Sthana-Vat statement to know, but the specialty is that in Upasham and Kshayik-Samyaktva, Samyaktva-Prakriti's Uday is not there and in Upasham-Samyaktva, three (Naraka-Tiriyach-Manushya) Gati-Anu-Purvi and Aharak-Dwik these five Prakriti Uday-Yogya are not and Desha-Samyata-Guna-Sthana-Varti Kshayik-Samyag-Drishti Manushya only is (because Kshayik-Samyag-Drishti Bhog-Bhumij Tiriyachon in is born there on Desha-Samyam is not) therefore Desha-Samyata-Guna-Sthana in Tiriyacha-Yu-Udyot and Tiriyacha-Gati these three's Uday is not. Due to this 

Page #334:
---------------------------
Gommatasar Karmakanda-295
These three (Samyagmithyatva, Sasadan and Mithyatva) have their own उदयादिकी (udayadikee) creation in their respective गुणस्थान (gunasthan) as per the verses of गाथा (gatha) 230.
**Special Meaning:** In the भव्यमार्गणा (bhavyamargna), there are 122 उदययोग्यप्रकृति (udayayogyaprakriti) as per the गुणस्थान (gunasthan), and 14 गुणस्थान (gunasthan) from Mithyatva to अयोगीपर्यन्त (ayogiparyanta).  Understand that the उदयव्युच्छित्ति (udayavyuchchitti) - उदय (udaya) and अनुदय (anudaya) related to all the statements are the same as the गुणस्थान (gunasthan). In the अभव्यमार्गणा (abhyavyamargna), there are 117 उदययोग्यप्रकृति (udayayogyaprakriti) and only one गुणस्थान (gunasthan) - Mithyatva.
In the सम्यक्त्वमार्गणा (samyaktvamargna), there are 104 उदययोग्यप्रकृति (udayayogyaprakriti) for सम्यक्त्वी (samyaktv). However, as per the verse "णादितियाणूयहारदुर्ग" (naditiyaanuyahaaradurg), in उपशमसम्यक्त्व (upasamasamyaktva), there are 100 उदययोग्यप्रकृति (udayayogyaprakriti) for नरक-तिर्यञ्च (narak-tiryanch) and मनुष्यगत्यानुपूर्वी (manushyayatyanupurvi) without सम्यक्त्व (samyaktv). This is because in the प्रथमोपशमसम्यक्त्व (prathamopaasamasamyaktva), there is no उदय (udaya) of नरक-तिर्यञ्च (narak-tiryanch) and मनुष्यगत्यानुपूर्वी (manushyayatyanupurvi) because the one who has already bound देवायु (devayu) will be a देव (dev) in the असंयतगुणस्थान (asanyatgunasthan) if he dies before reaching the अपूर्वगुणस्थान (apurvagunasthan) while descending from the उपशमश्रेणी (upasamasreni). And in the द्वितीयोपशमसम्यक्त्व (dvitiyopaasamasamyaktva), there is no existence of the other three आयु (ayu) without देवायु (devayu) because the जीव (jiv) in the सातिशयअप्रमत्तगुणस्थान (satishyayaprammatgunasthan) is accepted in front of the द्वितीयोपशमसम्यक्त्व (dvitiyopaasamasamyaktva) श्रेणी (shreni). Also, अणुव्रत (anuvrata) and महाव्रत (mahavrata) are not for the जीव (jiv) who bind other आयु (ayu) without देवायु (devayu). Therefore, in the द्वितीयोपशमसम्यक्त्व (dvitiyopaasamasamyaktva), there is no उदय (udaya) of the three आनुपूर्वी (anupurvi) without देवगत्यानुपूर्वी (devgatyanupurvi). In the उपशमसम्यक्त्व (upasamasamyaktva), there are eight गुणस्थान (gunasthan) starting from असंयतादि (asanyataadi). In the असंयतगुणस्थान (asanyatgunasthan), there are four अप्रत्याख्यानावरणकषाय (apratyakhyanavaran kshaya), देव-नरकआयु (dev-narakayu), नरक-देवगति (narak-devagati), देवगत्यानुपूर्वी (devgatyanupurvi), वैक्रियकशरीर (vaikriyaksharira), वैक्रियकअङ्गोपाङ्ग (vaikriyakangopaang), दुर्भग (durbhag), अनादेय (anaadey) and अयशस्कीर्ति (ayashaskirti). These 14 प्रकृति (prakriti) have व्युच्छित्ति (vyuchchitti), 100 उदयप्रकृति (udayaprakriti), and no अनुदय (anudaya). Understand that the उदय (udaya) of नरकगति (narakgati) and नरकायु (narakayu) is only in the प्रथमोपशमसम्यक्त्व (prathamopaasamasamyaktva). In the देशसंयतगुणस्थान (deshasanyatgunasthan), there are four प्रत्याख्यानावरणकषाय (pratyakhyanavaran kshaya), तिर्यञ्चायु (tiryanchayu), 
**1. Doubt:** In Gommatasar Karmakanda गाथा (gatha) 329, it is written that अणुव्रत (anuvrata) and महाव्रत (mahavrata) cannot be practiced without the बंध (bandh) of देवायु (devayu). How is that possible?
**Solution:** The नारकी (naarki) जीव (jiv) have constant अशुभ लेश्या (ashubh leshya), therefore they cannot practice अणुव्रत (anuvrata) or महाव्रत (mahavrata). The देव (dev) and भोगभूमिया मनुष्य (bhogabhumia manushya) have a fixed आहार (aahar), therefore they also cannot practice अणुव्रत (anuvrata) or महाव्रत (mahavrata). Although they are क्षायिक सम्यग्दृष्टि (kshayik samyagdristi) and have immense शक्ति (shakti), they cannot practice संयम (sanyam) or संघमासंयम (sanghamasanyam) because their आहार (aahar) is fixed, and they cannot practice आहार (aahar) related संवम (sanvam).
Therefore, only कर्मभूमिया मनुष्य (karmabhumia manushya) can practice संयम (sanyam). But the मनुष्य (manushya) who have bound नारक (narak), तिर्यञ्च (tiryanch) and मनुष्य (manushya) आयु (ayu) cannot practice संयम (sanyam)
Page #335:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-296

The dissolution of the eight natures of Udyota, Nichagotra, and Tiryanchagati is also to be known here in relation to the four natures of Tiryanchayu, etc., as well as the first and last stages of liberation. There are 86 natures of Udaya and 14 natures of Anudaya. In the Prammatta Gunasthan, there is the dissolution of the three sleep states of Styanagridhi, etc., because the Aharakadvika is not inherently capable of arising in the state of liberation. In the Prammatta Gunasthan, there are 78 natures of Udaya and 22 natures of Anudaya. In the Aprammatta Gunasthan, there is only the dissolution of the last three Samhananas, because the nature of liberation does not inherently arise in the state of liberation. There are 75 natures of Udaya and 25 natures of Anudaya. In the Apurvakarana Gunasthan, there is the dissolution of the six non-virtuous passions of Hasya, etc., with 72 natures of Udaya and 28 natures of Anudaya. In the Anivrittikarana Gunasthan, there are the three Vedas and the fluctuating passions of anger, pride, and delusion. There are 4 natures of Udaya and 34 natures of Anudaya in the dissolution of these natures. In the Sukshma Samparaya Gunasthan, there is the dissolution of the burning greed, with 60 natures of Udaya and 40 natures of Anudaya. In the Upashantamoha Gunasthan, there is the dissolution of the two Samhananas of Vajranaracha and Naracha, with 59 natures of Udaya and 41 natures of Anudaya. In the state of liberation, there is a close relationship between the dissolution of Udaya, Udaya, and Anudaya.

There are 100 natures capable of arising, and 8 Gunasthanas.

| Udaya | Dissolution | Udaya | Gunasthan | Asanyata | Deshasanyata | Prammatta | Aprammatta | Anudaya |
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  
Page #336:
---------------------------
## Gommatasara Karmakanda-297: Vedaka (Kshayopaśamika) Samyaktvam

There are 106 **udayayogya** (capable of arising) **prakriti** (natures) in **Vedaka (Kshayopaśamika) Samyaktvam** because the 16 **prakriti** that do not arise here are: 5, 9, and 1 **prakriti** that are successively **vyuccchinn** (discontinued) in the three **gunasthan** (stages of virtue) of the beginning, and the **tirthankara** **prakriti**. There are 4 **gunasthan**: **asanyata** (uncontrolled), **deshasanyata** (controlled in conduct), **pramatta** (distracted), and **aprammatta** (undistracted).

In the **asanyata** **gunasthan**, there are 17 **vyuccchinn** **prakriti** as stated in the **gunasthan** because the **jiva** (soul) of a **kritakritya** (one who has fulfilled his karma) **vedaka** can move in all four **gati** (paths of existence), so there is a **vyuccchitti** (discontinuation) in all four **gati** in sequence. There are 104 **udayaprakriti** (arising natures) and 2 **anudayaprakriti** (non-arising natures) (**aaharaka** **dvik**).

In the **deshasanyata** **gunasthan**, there are 8 **vyuccchinn** **prakriti** as stated in the **gunasthan**, 87 **udayaprakriti**, and 19 **anudayaprakriti**.

In the **pramatta** **gunasthan**, there are 5 **vyuccchinn** **prakriti** as stated in the **gunasthan**, 81 **udayaprakriti**, and 25 **anudayaprakriti**.

In the **aprammatta** **gunasthan**, there are 4 **vyuccchinn** **prakriti**, and in the higher **gunasthan**, the **prakriti** that are **vyuccchinn** are 6+6+1+2+16+30, and 11 without the **tirthankara**. In this way, there are 76 **prakriti** in total. Here, there are 76 **udayaprakriti** and 30 **anudayaprakriti**.

**Vedaka Samyaktvam: Udayavyuchchitti-Uday-Anuday Sambandhi Sandrishti**

**Udayayogya Prakriti: 106, Gunasthan: 4**

| **Uday** | **Vyuchchitti** | **Uday** | **Anuday** |
|---|---|---|---|
| **Asanyata** | 17 | 17 (stated in gunasthan) | 8 (stated in previous sandrishti) |
| **Deshasanyata** | 25 (19+8=27-2 aaharaka dvik) | 87 | 19 |
| **Pramatta** | 5 | 81 | 25 |
| **Aparammatta** | 4 | 76 | 30 |

**Vyuchchinn** **prakriti** from **aprammatta** **gunasthan** to **ayogi** (incapable) are 4+6+6+1+2+16+30+ (without **tirthankara**).

## Kshayika Samyaktvam

There are also 106 **udayayogya** **prakriti** in **Kshayika Samyaktvam** because the 16 **prakriti** that do not arise here are: 15 that are **vyuccchinn** in the three **gunasthan** of the beginning, and the **samyaktvaprakriti**. There are 11 **gunasthan** from **asanyata** to **ayogi**.

Here, in the **asanyata** **gunasthan**, there is a **vyuccchitti** of 17 **prakriti** as stated in the **gunasthan**, and 20 **prakriti** of **tiryanchayuj**, **udyot**, and **tiryanchagati**. This is because **Kshayika Samyakdarshan** (right faith) in the **deshasanyata** **gunasthan** is only for humans, not for **tiryancha** (animals). Therefore, the **vyuccchitti** of these three **prakriti** (**tiryanchayuj**, **udyot**, and **tiryanchagati**) occurs in the fourth **gunasthan** because they do not arise in the fifth **gunasthan**. In the **asanyata** **gunasthan**, there are 103 **udayaprakriti**, 3 **anudayaprakriti** (**aaharaka** **dvik** and **tirthankara**).

In the **deshasanyata** **gunasthan**, there are 4 **vyuccchinn** **prakriti** (**pratyakhyanavaranakshaya**), 2 **prakriti** (**nichagotra**), 83 **udayaprakriti**, and 23 **anudayaprakriti**.

In the **pramatta** **gunasthan**, there are 5 **vyuccchinn** **prakriti**. 

Page #337:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-298

**Udayaprakriti** with Aharakdvig is 80, **Anudayaprakriti** is 26. In the Apramattagunasthan, the 3 Prakruti mentioned in the Gunasthan, excluding Samyaktva, are: **Udayaprakriti** 75, **Anudayaprakriti** 31. In the Apurvakaranagunasthan, the Prakruti are: **Vyuchchhitta** 6, **Udayaprakriti** 72, **Anudayaprakriti** 34. In the Anivrittikaranagunasthan, the Prakruti are: **Vyuchchhitta** 6, **Udayaprakriti** 66, **Anudayaprakriti** 40. In the Sukshmasamparayagunasthan, the Prakruti are: **Vyuchchhitta** 1 (Sukshmrupa Sajvalnalobha), **Udayaprakriti** 60, **Anudayaprakriti** 46. In the Upashantmohagunasthan, the Prakruti are: **Vyuchchhitta** 2, **Udayaprakriti** 59, **Anudayaprakriti** 47. In the Kshinamohagunasthan, the Prakruti are: **Vyuchchhitta** 16, **Udayaprakriti** 57, **Anudayaprakriti** 49. In the Sayogakevali, the Prakruti are: **Vyuchchhitta** 30, **Udayaprakriti** 42, **Anudayaprakriti** 64 (excluding Tirthankara), because here the Tirthankara Prakruti is found. In the Ayogakevali, the Prakruti are: **Vyuchchhitta** 12, **Udayaprakriti** 12, and **Anudayaprakriti** 94. In Kshayikasamyaktva, the **Udayavyuchchhitti**, **Uday**, and **Anuday** are related to Sandrishti.

**Udyogya Prakruti** 106, **Gunasthan** 11 Gunasthan | **Uday** | **Uday** | **Anuday**
**Vishesh Vyuchchhitti** | **Asayat**
3 (Aharakdvig and Tirthankara) 20 (17 according to the
263rd verse and Tiryanchayuj, Udyot,
Tiryanchagati) Deshasanyat
5 (Pratyakhyanavaranakshaya 4, Nichagotra) 5 (According to the Sandrishti of the 263rd verse)
26 (23 + 5828 - 2 Aharakdik) Apramat
3 (Last three Sanhanan) Apurvakaran
6 (Hasyaadi Nokshaya) Anivrittikaran
6 (Triveed, Sajvalankrodha-mana-maya) Sukshmasamparamy
1 (Sukshmrupa Sajvalnalobha) Upashantmoha
2 (Vajranaracha and Narachasanhanan) Kshinamoha
16 (According to the Sandrishti of the 263rd verse) Sayogakevali
64 (49 + 16865 - 1 Tirthankara) Ayogakevali
30 (According to the Sandrishti of the 263rd verse)
23
Pramat

Page #338:
---------------------------
## Gommatasara Karmakanda-299

**In Samyagmithyatva (mixed), there are 100 Udayayogya Prakritis as in the mixed Gunasthan, and the Gunasthan is one, mixed.**

**In Sasadan Samyaktva, there are 111 Udayayogya Prakritis without Samyagmithyatva, Samyaktva, Aharakdvak, Tirthankara, and NarakagatyAnupurvi, these 6. The Gunasthan is one, Sasadan.**

**In Mithyatva, there are 117 Udayayogya Prakritis without Samyagmithyatva, Samyaktva, Aharakdvak, and Tirthankara, these 5. The Gunasthan is one, Mithyatva.**

"**Thus is the path of Bhavy-Samyaktva**"

**Now, the path of Sanji**

**Now, in the subsequent Sanji path, the statement of Udaya etc. is made:**

**"Sesaanam Sagunogham Sannivisavi Nasthi Tavasharanam. Thavarasuhu Migivi Galam Asanni Novi Ya Na Manuduchvam." (330)**

**Meaning:** In the remaining Samyagmithyatva, Sasadan, and Mithyatva, these three, know the Udaya etc. as in their respective Gunasthan. (This has already been stated in the Samyaktva path.)

**From the general 122 Udayayogya Prakritis, in the Sanji path, there are 113 Udayayogya Prakritis without Atap, Sadharan, Thavar, Sukshma, Ekendriya, Vikalendriyatray, and Tirthankara, these 9 Prakritis.**

**In Asanji, there are 26 Prakritis which are not Udayayogya, namely: ManushyaGati and ManushyaGatyAnupurvi, UchchaGotra, VaikriyikShatka, etc. five Sanhanan, etc. five Sansthan, PrashastaVihayogati, ShubhagAdi three, NarakaAdi three Ayus.**

**Therefore, from the general 117 Prakritis related to the Mithyatva Gunasthan, subtracting the above 26 Prakritis, there are 91 Udayayogya Prakritis.**

**Specific meaning:** In the Sanji path, there are 113 Udayayogya Prakritis, and the Gunasthan is from Mithyatva to KshinaMohaParyanta, 12.

**Sayogakevali and Ayogakevali are also Bhavamana-rahit, therefore they are not Sanji, and Asanji-pana is not found anywhere else except in Tiryanchas. Therefore, Sayog and Ayogakevali are also not Sanji.** 

Page #339:
---------------------------
## Gommatasara Karmakanda - 300

Here, in the Mithyatva Gunasthan, there are four types of natures:

* **Vyuchchhinna Prakriti:** 2 (Mithyatva and Aparyapta)
* **Udaya Prakriti:** 109
* **Anudaya Prakriti:** Samyagmithyatva, Samyaktava, and Aharakdvig

In the Sasadan Gunasthan, there are:

* **Vyuchchhinna Prakriti:** 4 (Anantanu bandhi Kashaya)
* **Udaya Prakriti:** 106
* **Anudaya Prakriti:** 7 (4 + 2 + 1, as there is no Udaya of Narakgatya anupurvi)

In the Misra Gunasthan, there are:

* **Vyuchchhinna Prakriti:** 1 (Samyagmithyatva)
* **Udaya Prakriti:** 100
* **Anudaya Prakriti:** 13 (7 + 4 = 11 + 3, as there is no Udaya of Tiryanch, Manusya, and Devgatya anupurvi, but there is Udaya of Samyagmithyatva Prakriti)

In the Asanyata Gunasthan, there are:

* **Vyuchchhinna Prakriti:** 17 (as per the 264th verse of the Gunasthan)
* **Udaya Prakriti:** 104 (Narakadi all four gatya anupurvi and Samyaktava)
* **Anudaya Prakriti:** 9 (as per the 263rd verse of the Gunasthan)

In the Deshasanyata Gunasthan, there are:

* **Vyuchchhinna Prakriti:** 8 (as per the 263rd verse of the Gunasthan)
* **Udaya Prakriti:** 87
* **Anudaya Prakriti:** 26

In the Pramatta Gunasthan, there are:

* **Vyuchchhinna Prakriti:** 5 (as per the 263rd verse of the Gunasthan)
* **Udaya Prakriti:** 81
* **Anudaya Prakriti:** 32 (26 + 8 = 34 - 2 Aharakdvig)

In the Aprammatta Gunasthan, there are:

* **Vyuchchhinna Prakriti:** 4 (as per the 263rd verse of the Gunasthan)
* **Udaya Prakriti:** 76
* **Anudaya Prakriti:** 37

In the Apurvakarana Gunasthan, there are:

* **Vyuchchhinna Prakriti:** 6
* **Udaya Prakriti:** 72
* **Anudaya Prakriti:** 41

In the Anivrittikarana Gunasthan, there are:

* **Vyuchchhinna Prakriti:** 6
* **Udaya Prakriti:** 66
* **Anudaya Prakriti:** 47

In the Sukshma Samparaya, there is:

* **Vyuchchhinna Prakriti:** Sukshma Rupa Sajvalnalobha
* **Udaya Prakriti:** 60
* **Anudaya Prakriti:** 53

In the Upashantamoha Gunasthan, there are:

* **Vyuchchhinna Prakriti:** 2
* **Udaya Prakriti:** 59
* **Anudaya Prakriti:** 54

In the Kshina Moha Gunasthan, there are:

* **Vyuchchhinna Prakriti:** 57 (16 from Gunasthan and 42 from Sayogi and Aayogi Gunasthan, excluding Tirthankara)
* **Udaya Prakriti:** 57
* **Anudaya Prakriti:** 56

In the Sanjimargna, there is a clear understanding of Udaya, Vyuchchhinna, and Anudaya:

* **Udaya Yogya Prakriti:** 113
* **Gunasthan:** 12

**Udaya Gunasthan | Vyuchchhinna | Udaya Mithyatva | Anudaya**

| Sasadan | 4 (Anantanu bandhi Kashaya) | 106 | 7 (4 + 2 + 1, as there is no Udaya of Narakgatya anupurvi) |
|---|---|---|---|
| Misra | 1 (Samyagmithyatva) | 100 | 13 (7 + 4 = 11 + 3, as there is no Udaya of Tiryanch, Manusya, and Devgatya anupurvi, but there is Udaya of Samyagmithyatva Prakriti) |
| Asanyata | 17 (as per the 264th verse of the Gunasthan) | 104 (Narakadi all four gatya anupurvi and Samyaktava) | 9 (as per the 263rd verse of the Gunasthan) |
| Deshasanyata | 8 (as per the 263rd verse of the Gunasthan) | 87 | 26 |
| Pramatta | 5 (as per the 263rd verse of the Gunasthan) | 81 | 32 (26 + 8 = 34 - 2 Aharakdvig) |
| Aprammatta | 4 (as per the 263rd verse of the Gunasthan) | 76 | 37 |

**Note:** The terms "Mithyatva," "Aparyapta," "Samyagmithyatva," "Samyaktava," "Aharakdvig," "Anantanu bandhi Kashaya," "Narakgatya anupurvi," "Tiryanch," "Manusya," "Devgatya anupurvi," "Sayogi," and "Aayogi" are all Jain terms. 

Page #340:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-301
w9
Apuurvakarana. 6. | 416 (According to verse 263) Anivrittikarana. 6. 66 476 (According to verse 263) Sukshmasampray. 1.
531 (According to verse 263) Upashantamoha. 2.
| 2 (According to verse 263) Kshina moha
Note-Doubt- Are Sayogakevali also Sanji because they have mind?
Solution- Sayogakevali are not Sanji because they are devoid of Jnanavarana and Darshanavarana karma, so they do not perceive external objects through the mind, therefore they cannot be called Sanji.
Doubt- Then are Kevali Asanji?
Solution- Kevali are not Asanji either, because those who have directly perceived all substances, it is contradictory to consider them Asanji.
Doubt- Are Kevali Asanji because they perceive external objects like विकलेन्द्रिय जीवों without the expectation of mind?
Solution- If Asanji-ness is possible by relying only on the origin of knowledge without the expectation of mind, but it is not so.
Doubt- Why is it said about Asanji?
Solution- Asanji-jiva lack mind, so they also lack extraordinary intelligence, but Kevali do not lack extraordinary intelligence due to lack of mind, i.e. Kevali have extraordinary intelligence even though they lack mind, therefore they are not Asanji either.
Kshayopaśamika jnana is certainly produced by mind somewhere (in Sanji beings), therefore lack of mind will prove the lack of special Kshayopaśamika jnana, not the lack of केवलज्ञान, i.e. Kevali have extraordinary केवलज्ञान even though they lack mind.
In Asanjimargna, there are 5 Sanhanan, 5 Sansthan, 3 Prabhav, 26 Prakruti, including Manushyadvik, Uchchagotra, Devagati, Narakagati, Devagatyānupūrvi, Narakagatyānupūrvi, Vaikriyikaśarīra, Vaikriyikaajopāng, etc. By subtracting these from 117 Udayayogya Prakruti related to Mithyatva Gunasthan, the remaining 91 Prakruti are Udayayogya. Gunasthan Mithyatva and Sasadan. Here 

Page #341:
---------------------------
Gommatasar Karmakanda-302

In the Mithyatva Gunasthan, there are 5 Vyuchchhinna Prakriti Gunasthanokt and 3 Nidra, Parghat, Udyot, Ucchvas, Duswar, Aprashastvihayogati, totaling 13 (because the emergence of Prakriti like Styanagridhi etc. occurs in the Paryapta state, but the Sasadan Gunasthan does not occur in the Paryapta state of Asanji, therefore their Vyuchchhitti also occurs in the Mithyatva Gunasthan). In the Mithyatva Gunasthan, there are 91 Uday Prakriti and no Anudaya. In the Sasadan Gunasthan, there is Vyuchchhitti of 9 Gunasthanokt Prakriti, Uday of 78 Prakriti and Anudaya of 13 Prakriti.

The Sandrishti of Asanji Jeevas regarding Uday Vyuchchhitti-Uday-Anudaya:

Udayyogya Prakriti 91, Gunasthan 2
Uday Gunasthan
Vyuchchhitti Mithyatva | 13 |
A
Uday 21
| Anudaya
Vishesh
. |
| 13 (Mithyatva, Atap, Sukshma, Aparayapta,
Sadharan, Styanagridhi etc. 3 Nidra, Parghat, Udyot, Ucchvas, Duswar and
Aprashastvihayogati) | 13 | 9 Gunasthanokt (according to the Sandrishti of Gatha 264) || Iti Sanji Margna ||
Sasadan
| 9
| 58

Ath Aharamargna Now in Aharamargna, they say Uday Vyuchchhitti-Uday-Anudaya
Ahare Sagunoghan Navari Na Savvaanupuvvio ||331|| Kamme Va Anahare Payadinam Udayamevam Aadeshe.
Kahiyamina Balmahavachaandacchianemichande Na ||332||

Meaning- In Aharamargna, in the Aharakavastah, the statement of Udayadi is to be known as the same as the Gunasthan, but the special thing is that here the Uday of all four Anupurvi is not there, therefore the Udayyogya Prakriti are only 118 and in the Anaharakavastah, the Uday of 89 Prakriti is the same as the Karmankayayog. In this way, the statement of the Udayadi of Karma Prakriti in the Margnaasthan is (by his brother) Baldev and Madhavchandra, who are worshipped. 

Page #342:
---------------------------
## Gommatasara Karmakanda-303

(Acharya) Nemichandra (Siddhantchakravarti) has said. (Here, the Sanskrit commentator has also interpreted this verse as referring to Neminath Tirthankara, who is worshipped by Balabhadra and Madhava (Narayana).)

**Special Meaning:** In Aharamargna, there are 118 natures eligible for arising without the four prerequisites. There are 13 in Gunasthan, etc. Here, in Mithyatvagunasthan, there are 5 Vyuchchhinna Prakriti, 113 Udayaprakriti, and 5 Anudayaprakriti. In Sasadanagunasthan, there are 9 Vyuchchhinna Prakriti, 108 Udayaprakriti, and 10 Anudayaprakriti. In Mishragunasthan, there is 1 Vyuchchhinna Prakriti, 100 Upamhan, and 18 Adayakriti. In Asanyatagunasthan, there are 13 Vyuchchhinna Prakriti, 100 Udayaprakriti, and 18 Anudayaprakriti due to the four prerequisites of Jinas. In Deshasanyatagunasthan, there are 8 Vyuchchhinna Prakriti, 87 Udayaprakriti, and 31 Anudayaprakriti. In Pramattagunasthan, there are 5 Vyuchchhinna Prakriti, 81 Udayaprakriti, and 37 Anudayaprakriti. In Apramattagunasthan, there are 4 Vyuchchhinna Prakriti, 76 Udayaprakriti, and 42 Anudayaprakriti. In Apurvakaranagunasthan, there are 6 Vyuchchhinna Prakriti, 72 Udayaprakriti, and 46 Anudayaprakriti. In Anivrittikaranagunasthan, there are 6 Vyuchchhinna Prakriti, 66 Udayaprakriti, and 52 Anudayaprakriti. In Sukshmasamprayagunasthan, there is 1 Vyuchchhinna Prakriti, 60 Udayaprakriti, and 58 Anudayaprakriti. In Upshantamohagunasthan, there are 2 Vyuchchhinna Prakriti, 59 Udayaprakriti, and 59 Anudayaprakriti. In Kshinamohagunasthan, there are 16 Vyuchchhinna Prakriti, 57 Udayaprakriti, and 61 Anudayaprakriti. In Sayogigunasthan, there are 42 Vyuchchhinna Prakriti, 42 Udayaprakriti, and 76 Anudayaprakriti.

**Aharamargna: Understanding the Relationship between Udayavyuchchhinti, Uday, and Anuday**

Udayayogya Prakriti: 118, Gunasthan: 13

| Udayavyuchchhinti | Uday | Anuday |
|---|---|---|
| Gunasthan | Mithyatva | Sasadan | Mishra |
| **Special** | 5 (Samyagmithyatva, Samyaktava, Aharakdvak, Tirthankara) | 9 (According to the understanding of Gatha 264) | 18 (10+9-19-1 Samyagmithyatva) |
| **Anu.** | 5 (According to the understanding of Gatha 264) | 18 (18+1=19-1 Samyaktava) | 13 (17-4 GatyAnupurvi as mentioned in Gunasthan) |
| **Vyuchchhinna** | 9 (According to the understanding of Gatha 264) | 8 (According to the understanding of Gatha 263) | 37 (31+8=39-2 Aharakdvak) |
| **Asanyata** | 18 (10+9-19-1 Samyagmithyatva) | 5 (According to the understanding of Gatha 263) | 5 (According to the understanding of Gatha 263) |
| **Deshasanyata** | 13 (Gunasthanokta 17-4 GatyAnupurvi) | 8 (According to the understanding of Gatha 263) | 31 (31+8=39-2 Aharakdvak) |
| **Pramatta** | 8 (According to the understanding of Gatha 263) | 37 (31+8=39-2 Aharakdvak) | 5 (According to the understanding of Gatha 263) |

Page #343:
---------------------------
Gommatasar Karmakanda-304
Aparamatta
4 (according to the vision of verse 263) Apurvakaran
6 (according to the vision of verse 263) Anivrittikaran
6 (according to the vision of verse 263) Sukshmasamparaya
1 (Sukshmarupa Sajwalan Lobha) Upashantamoha
2 (Vajranaracha and Naracha Samhaman) Kshinamaha
16 (according to the vision of verse 263) Sayogakevali
76. 76 (61+16-77-5 Tirthankara) In Anaharakmarg, the Udayayogya Prakriti is 89, Gunasthan Mithyatva, Sasadan, Asanyata, Sayogi, Ayogi, these are 5. Here in Mithyatvagunasthan, Vyuchchhinnaprakriti is 3, Udayaprakriti is 87, Anudayaprakriti is 2. In Saptaadanagunasthan, Vyuchchhinnaprakriti is 10, Udayaprakriti is 81, Anudayaprakriti is 8. In Asanyatagunasthan, Vyuchchhinnaprakriti is 51, Udayaprakriti is 75, Anudayaprakriti is 14. In Sayogakevaligunasthan, Udayavyuchchhitti is one of the seven-non-seven, creation, stable, unstable, auspicious-inauspicious, luminous-karmic, color etc. four, these 13 prakriti, Udayaprakriti is 25, Anudayaprakriti is 64. In Ayogigunasthan, Vyuchchhinnaprakriti is 12 (according to the vision of verse 263), Udayaprakriti is 12 and Anudayaprakriti is 77.
In Anaharak, the vision related to Udayavyuchchhitti-Uday-Anuday
Udayayogya Prakriti 89, Gunasthan 5
Mithyatva
Udayagunasthan | Vyuchchhitti | Uday Anuday
Special 2 (Samyaktva and Tirthankara)
3 (Mithyatva, Sukshma, Aparayapta) Sasadan
8 (3+2=5+3 Narakadvik-Narakayu) Asanyata
14 (10+8818-4 Samyaktva, Manushya-Tiryanch
and Devgatyanupurvi)
51 (according to the vision of verse 318-319) Sayogi
64 (14+51-65-1 Tirthankara) 13 (one of the seven-non-seven, creation, stable,
unstable, auspicious-inauspicious, luminous, karmic,
agurulaghu and color etc. four) Ayogi. 12. 12
|| Iti Udayaprakarana Samapt. 1. Sayogakevali's Anaharakavastava Kevalisamudhata occurs, but there is no Udayavyuchchhitti of any prakriti
there. 

Page #344:
---------------------------
## Chapter on Sattva

Now, describing the Sattva of the natures, first we describe the Sattva in the Mithyatva Guna-sthana.

**"Tiththaharaa jugavan, savvam tiththam na micchhagaaditiye. Tassattikammiyanam, taggunththanam na sambhavati."** (333)

**Meaning:** In the Mithyatva Guna-sthana, the one who has the Sattva of the Tirthankara nature, does not have the Sattva of the Aharaka-dvik. And the one who has the Sattva of the Aharaka-dvik, does not have the Sattva of the Tirthankara nature. The one who has the Sattva of both the Aharaka-dvik and the Tirthankara nature simultaneously, does not have the Mithyatva Guna-sthana. Therefore, in the Mithyatva Guna-sthana, with respect to one Jiva, there is not the simultaneous Sattva of both the Aharaka-dvik and the Tirthankara nature, but only the Sattva of one. And with respect to many Jivas, the Sattva of both is found. In this way, in the Mithyatva Guna-sthana, the Sattva of 148 natures is found with respect to many Jivas. In the Sasadan Guna-sthana, with respect to one Jiva or many Jivas, the Sattva of the Tirthankara and the Aharaka-dvik, whether sequentially or simultaneously, is not found, therefore 145 natures are eligible for Sattva. In the Misra Guna-sthana, the Sattva of one Tirthankara nature is not found, therefore there is the Sattva of 547 natures, because those natures do not have that Guna-sthana whose Sattva is found in them.

**1. Doubt:** In the second Guna-sthana, there is no Sattva of the Tirthankara nature, the Aharaka body, and the Aharaka limbs. And in the third Misra Guna-sthana, the Sattva of the Aharaka body and the Aharaka limbs is mentioned. With respect to what is this mentioned?

**Solution:** The Tirthankara nature has Bandha-Samyak-drishti. And after the beginning of Bandha of this nature, that Jiva does not attain Mithyatva, meaning it remains Samyak-drishti. If that Jiva has attained the second or third hell before the Tirthankara nature, then such a Jiva, being born in the second or third hell, is Mithyatva-drishti for one Antarmukha-purva and one Antarmukha-pashchat. Only such a Jiva has the Sattva of the Tirthankara nature in the Mithyatva Guna-sthana. The Jiva born in hell does not have death in the second or third Guna-sthana, because the second or third Guna-sthana is not found in hell. Therefore, the Jiva with the Sattva of the Tirthankara nature does not attain the second or third Guna-sthana. This is the reason why the Sattva of the Tirthankara nature is prohibited in the second and third Guna-sthana.

The one who falls from Prathama-upashama Samyak-tva goes to the second Guna-sthana. The Prathama-upashama Samyak-drishti does not have the Bandha of the Aharaka-dvik. The Jiva who has the Sattva of the Aharaka-dvik does not attain Prathama-upashama Samyak-tva, because without the Udvelana of the Aharaka-dvik, the state of Samyak-tva and the Mina nature is not eligible to attain Prathama-upashama Samyak-tva. Among the thirteen Udvelana natures, the Aharaka-dvik is the first to be Udvelana. Therefore, in the second Guna-sthana, there is no Sattva of the Aharaka-dvik. Or, the Jiva with the Sattva of the Aharaka-dvik does not attain the second Guna-sthana by falling from Samyak-tva, this is the nature, and nature is not the subject of logic. Even without the Udvelana of the Aharaka-dvik, the Mithyatva-drishti Jiva with the Sattva of the Aharaka-dvik can go to the Misra Guna-sthana, therefore the Sattva of the Aharaka-dvik is mentioned in the third Guna-sthana. (Pandit Ratanchandra Mukhtar Vyakhya, 116) 

Page #345:
---------------------------
##  Translation:

**Gompatmar Karshmasht, 206:**

**Now, upon the binding of the lifespan, the rules regarding Samyaktva and Anuvrat-Mahavrat are stated:**

**334.**  **Chattarivi Khettai, Augbandhen Hodi Sammattam.**
**Anuvadamhavvadai Na Lahadi Devaaugam Mottu.**

**Meaning:**  Samyaktva occurs when any lifespan is bound in all four realms. However, one cannot observe Anuvrat-Mahavrat with the binding of the other three lifespans without the Devaayu.

**Explanation:** If any lifespan is bound first among the four, there is no obstacle in attaining Samyaktva. However, if the binding of Narak, Tiryanch, or Manushayu occurs first, then Tiryanch cannot observe Anuvrat, and Manusha cannot observe Anuvrat or Mahavrat. If Devaayu is bound first, there is no obstacle in observing Anuvrat-Mahavrat.

**335.** **Niriyattirikhhasarauga-Satte Na Hi Desasayalavadakhavagaa.**
**Ayadachaukkam Tu Anam, Aniyattikarancharimmamhi.**

**336.** **Jugavam Sanjogitta, Punavi Aniyattikaranbahubhagam.**
**Voliy Kamaso Micch, Missam Samm Khavedi Kame.**

**Meaning:** When Narak, Tiryanch, and Devaayu are present, there are no Deshavrat-Mahavrat and Kshapak श्रेणी (categories) respectively.  Those with the four Gunasthana of Asanyata, etc., at the time of the ultimate result of Anivrittikaran, disassociate themselves from the infinite Anubandhis simultaneously.  Again, after three Karana, and the majority of the Anivrittikaran time has passed, the remaining countable portion of time sees the destruction of Mithyatva, Samyagmithyatva, and Samyaktva nature in order. This is the order of the destruction of the seven natures.

**Explanation:** Here, the presence of the natures in the three Gunasthana is to be understood as previously stated. From the Asanyata Gunasthana to the Aprammatta Gunasthana, there is the presence of Upshama Samyagdristi and Kshayopahsama Samyagdristi.  In the Asanyata Gunasthana, there is the presence of Upshama nature of the infinite Anubandhis, etc., resulting in the presence of 148 natures. In the Desasanayata Gunasthana, there is no Narakayu, resulting in the presence of 147 natures. In the Prammatta Gunasthana, there is no presence of Narak or Tiryanchayu, resulting in the presence of only 146 natures. Similarly, in the Aprammatta Gunasthana, there is also the presence of only 146 natures.  The infinite Anubandhis of Kshayik Samyagdristi, the four Kashaya, Mithyatva, Samyagmithyatva, and Samyaktva, these seven natures are not present in the Gunasthana of Asanyata, etc. Therefore, in these Gunasthana of Kshayik Samyagdristi, seven natures are reduced, resulting in the presence of the remaining natures. 

Page #346:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda - 307

The lifespan that is being experienced is called "bhujyaman" and the lifespan that is being bound for the future is called "badhyaman". In relation to these two, a being cannot take the vow of "deshvrat" if it has the essence of a "narakayu" lifespan, and cannot take the "mahavrat" if it has the essence of a "tiryanchayu" lifespan. A being cannot ascend the "kshapka" श्रेणी if it has the essence of a "devayu" lifespan. The destruction of the essence of these 7 natures, including the four "anantaanubandhi" kshayas and the three "darshanamohaniya", occurs in one of the four "gunasthanas" of "asanyata" etc., leading to "kshayik samyagdristi".

Now, the order of their (the above 7 natures) destruction is explained:

While destroying these seven natures, one first performs "trikaran". Among them, in the final moment of the "antarmuhurt" time of "anivrittikaran", one simultaneously disconnects the four "anantaanubandhi" kshayas, i.e., five "kapayarupa" parinamas occur from among the 12 kshayas of "apratyakhyan" etc. and the 9 "nokshayas". After this, one takes rest for an "antarmuhurt" and then makes an effort to destroy "darshanamoha". First, one performs three "karans" - "adhahpravrittikaran", "apuurvakaran", and "anivrittikaran". Here, in the "antarmuhurt" time of "anivrittikaran", one divides it into parts and lets one part pass without multiple parts. From the first moment of that one part, one destroys the three natures in order. In the first moment, one destroys the "mithyatva" nature, then destroys "samyagmithyatva". After that, one destroys the "samyaktva" nature and then attains "kshayik samyaktva". A detailed explanation of this is found in the "Labdhisara Kshapanasara" text and in "Jayadhwala" chapter 13.

Now, Nemichandracharya himself explains the order of the destructible natures in the "kshapkanivrittikaran" gunasthana:

"Solatthekkigichakkan chadusekkan badare ado ekkan. Khine solas jogen, bavantariteruvattamte." || 337 ||

Meaning: In the 9 parts of the "kshapkanivrittikaran" gunasthana, the essence of 16, 8, 9, 1, and 6 natures is destroyed in order, and in the remaining four parts, the essence of one nature is destroyed in each. In the "sukshmasamparaya" gunasthana, the essence of one nature is destroyed, in the "khinakshaya" gunasthana, there is no destruction of essence, and in the "ayogi" gunasthana, in the last two moments, the essence of 72 natures is destroyed in the penultimate moment and the essence of 13 natures is destroyed in the ultimate moment.

Special Note: Here, the "upashmana" and "kshapan" methods are explained in relation to each other, but first, the "upashmana" method is explained. 

Page #347:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-308
5. Any being who resides in the four gunasthanas from Asanyata Samyagdristi to Aprammatta Samyata Gunasthana, with the seven natures of Anantanubandhi Krodha, Mana, Maya, Lobha, Samyakprakriti, Samyagmidhyatva and Mithyatva, is a destroyer. To reside in the form of other natures, abandoning one's own nature, is the destruction of Anantanubandhi, and not to arise is the destruction of the three natures of Darshanamohiya, because the existence of those three natures is found in the attainment and destruction of Utkarshana, Apकर्षण and Paraprakritirupa Sankraman. In the Apurvakarana Gunasthana, not even a single karma is destroyed, but the being in the Apurvakarana Gunasthana, increasing with infinite purity every moment, destroys one Gdhinirapad in each Antarmuhurta, destroys countless thousands of Sthiti Khandas, and binds as many Sthiti Bandha Pasaras. And in the time of each Sthiti Khanda, it destroys countless thousands of Anubhaga Khandas, and every moment it destroys the regions in an infinite series. And it transfers the karma varganas of those unrefined natures that are not bound, to other natures that are bound at that time, in an infinite series. In this way, it transgresses the Apurvakarana Gunasthana and enters the Anivritikarana Gunasthana, and remains in the aforementioned manner for one Antarmuhurta. Thereafter, it destroys the twelve Kashayas and nine Nokashayas by means of one Antarmuhurta. (Destroying the substance of many of the middle Nisekas, leaving out the lower and upper Nisekas, and not having the Mohiya Karma in the middle Nisekas is called Antar Karana.) After the Antar Karana process is completed, it destroys the Napunsakaved from the first moment onwards, going up to the Antarmuhurta, by means of an infinite series.
Doubt - What is destruction called?
Solution - The state of karma remaining in existence without Udaya, Udirana, Utkarshana, Apकर्षण, Paraprakriti Sankraman, Sthiti Kanda Kghata and Anubhaga Kanda Kghata is called destruction.
Thereafter, it destroys the Strived in the same way as the destruction of the Napunsakaved, going up to one Antarmuhurta. Again, after one Antarmuhurta has passed, it destroys the Purushaved (except for the ancient existence of the karma that is bound in the nine Ksamya Prabandha, leaving out one moment less than two Avali) along with the six Nokashayas, in the same way. Further on, it destroys the Navaksamaya Prabandha of the Purushaved by means of a period of one moment less than two Avali. After this, it destroys the ancient karma that exists along with the Apatyakhyana and Pratyakhyana Krodha, simultaneously in one Antarmuhurta, by means of an infinite series every moment, leaving out one moment less than two Avali of the Navaksamaya Prabandha of Sanchalana Krodha. After this, it destroys the Navaksamaya Prabandha of Sanchalana Krodha in one moment less than two Avali. Thereafter, every moment, by means of an infinite series
1. Dh.. 15. 210 

Page #348:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-309

In the ancient state, with the karmas situated in the state, the **A-pratyakhyana** and **Pratyakhyana** **Maya** are pacified in an **antarmuhurta** (a very short period of time), except for the **Navakasamayaprabuddha** (newly awakened) of **Sankalanamana** (the state of being agitated) for a period of two **avali** (a unit of time) less than one **samaya** (a unit of time). After this, the **Navakasamayaprabuddha** of **Sankalanamana** is pacified in a period of two **avali** less than one **samaya**. Subsequently, with the **Sap** (a type of karma) of the **Asankhyarapi** (innumerable) **Shreni** (series) **Samaya** (time), the **A-pratyakhyana** and **Pratyakhyana** **Maya** are pacified in an **antarmuhurta** with the ancient karmas situated in the state, except for the **Navakasamayaprabuddha** of **Sankalanamana**. After this, the **Navakasamayaprabuddha** of **Maya** **Sankalanamana** is pacified in a period of two **avali** less than one **samaya**. Subsequently, in each **samaya**, the **karma** **pradeshas** (regions) are pacified in the form of an **Asankhyataguṇi** (innumerable) **Shreni** (series), becoming **sukshmakrishti** (subtle) in the second division of **Lobha** **Vedaka** (the destroyer of greed), pacifying the **A-pratyakhyana** and **Pratyakhyana** **Lobha** (greed) in an **antarmuhurta** with the ancient karmas situated in the state, except for the **Navakasamayaprabuddha** of **Sankalanamana** **Lobha**. In this way, except for the **sukshmakrishti** **Lobha** and the **Navakasamayaprabuddha** of two **avali** less than one **samaya** and the **Uchchishta** **avali** **matra** (remaining) **Nisekas** (restrictions), the entire **Badara** **Lobha** (gross greed) situated in the **Spardhaka** (competitive) state is pacified at the peak time of **Anivritikaran** (non-obstruction). In this way, from **Nighusaka** **Vedaka** (the destroyer of subtle greed) until the **Badara** **Sankalanamana** **Lobha** remains, the **Anivritikaran** **Gunasthanavala** (the being who has the qualities of non-obstruction) pacifies these aforementioned natures. After this time, the being who experiences the **sukshmakrishti** **Lobha** and who has destroyed the **Anivriti** **Sagna** (the name of non-obstruction) is a **sukshma** **Samparaya** **Gunasthanavarti** (a being who resides in the subtle state of **Samparaya**). Subsequently, at the peak time of his **kala** (time), he pacifies the entire **sukshmakrishti** **Lobha** **Sankalanamana** and becomes a **Upshantakashaya** **Vitara** **Chhadmastha** (a being who is hidden in the state of pacified passions, free from attachment). In this way, the method of pacifying the **Mohaniya** (the state of being deluded) has been described briefly.

**Meaning:**

In other texts like **Labdhisara**, the origin of **Dvitiyopasham** **Samyaktva** (the second stage of liberation) is said to be in the **A-pramattasanyata** **Gunasthan** (the state of being perfectly restrained). However, here, in the description of the method of pacification, its origin is said to be in any one **Gunasthan** from the **Asanyata** **Samyagdristi** (the state of being a right-seeing being who is not perfectly restrained) to the **A-pramattasanyata** **Gunasthan**. And what is called **Visayojana** (the process of removing the **Ananta** **Anubandhi** (the infinite karmas that bind the soul)) in other texts is called **Upsham** (pacification) here. Although this is only a difference in words, and **Vira Sena Swami** himself desires the absence of the **Ananta** **Anubandhi** in **Dvitiyopasham** **Samyaktva**, by using the word **Upsham** instead of **Visanyojana**, he may have intended to say that a **Dvitiyopasham** **Samyagdristi** being may possibly attain the **Mithyatva** **Gunasthan** (the state of being deluded) and again start binding the **Ananta** **Anubandhi**. And the **karma** **pradeshas** that he had pacified in the form of other natures may again be bound in the form of **Ananta** **Anubandhi**. In this way, although the **Ananta** **Anubandhi** does not exist in **Dvitiyopasham** **Samyaktva**, it is possible for it to arise again. Therefore, it seems that the word **Upsham** has been used instead of **Visanyojana** for the pacification of the **Ananta** **Anubandhi** in **Dvitiyopasham** **Samyaktva**. 

Page #349:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-310 now speaks of the method of destruction (kshapanavidhi).

A being with an un-controlled (asanyata) samyagdristi, savatasayata, pramattasanyata or apramattasanyata, destroys these seven natures: anantanubandhi krodha, mana, maya, lobha, and mithyatva, samyagmithyatva, and samyaktvaprakriti.

Doubt: Does it destroy these seven natures simultaneously or in sequence?

Resolution: No, because at the time of the ultimate annihilation (anivrittikaran) by three karmas, first the four anantanubandhi kshayas are destroyed simultaneously. After that, again by three karmas, after the lower karma (adhahkaran) and the previous karma (apurvakaran) are transgressed and the numerical part of the annihilation (anivrittikaran) is passed, mithyatva is destroyed. After that, after an antarmuhurta (a very short time) is passed, samyagmithyatva is destroyed. After that, after an antarmuhurta is passed, samyaktvaprakriti is destroyed.

Thus, the kshayikasamyagdristi being, having attained the ati-sheesha (highest) apramattagunasthan (state of virtue), when he begins the method of destruction (kshapanavidhi), by the lower karma (adhahkaran), he becomes the apurvakaranagunasthan (state of virtue) in an antarmuhurta. He does not destroy a single karma, but at every moment, he destroys countless karma-regions (karma-pradesha). In each antarmuhurta, he destroys one sthitikandika (a unit of time) and within his time, he destroys thousands of sthitikandikas. And he destroys as many sthitibandha (bondage) and from them, he destroys thousands of times more anubhagakandikas (units of experience), because the time of the destruction of one anubhagakandika is thousands of times greater than the time of the destruction of one sthitikandika, as per the sutra (scripture). Thus, by performing the action related to the apurvakaranagunasthan (state of virtue) and entering the anivrittikaranagunasthan (state of virtue), there also, by passing the numerical parts of the anivrittikaran time, by the same method of sthitikandika destruction, etc., as the apurvakaran, when the numerical part of the anivrittikaran time remains, he destroys these sixteen natures: styanagridhi, nidranidra, prachala-prachala, narakagati, tiryanchagati, ekendriyajati, dwiindriyajati, triindriyajati, and chaturindriyajati, narakagati prayogyanupurvi, tiryanchagati prayogyanupurvi, aatap, udyot, sthavar, sukshma, and sadharan. After that, after an antarmuhurta is passed, he destroys these eight natures: pratyakhyanavaran and apratyakhyanavaran related to krodha, mana, maya, and lobha, all at once. This is the teaching of satkarma-prabhrut (the destruction of good karma), but the teaching of kshaya-prabhrut (the destruction of kshayas) is as follows: after the destruction of the eight kshayas, in one antarmuhurta, the aforementioned sixteen karma-natures are destroyed. Both these teachings are true for us, because in the present time, due to the absence of a kevali or shruta-kevali, 
1. Dh. Pu. 15.215 onwards | 

Page #350:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-311

It cannot be determined which teachings can be given in a Ghatet. Subsequently, upon the destruction of the Kshaya and 16 Prakṛtis, an Antarmuhurt goes and performs the Dhar Sajwalan and the destruction of the nine Nokshays. Before performing the Antarakaran, the first position of the two Prakṛtis that arise from the three Vedas related to the four Sajwalans and nine Nokshays is established for only an Antarmuhurt, and the first position of the 11 Prakṛtis in the form of Anudaya is established for one time less than an Avli. Subsequently, after performing the Antarakaran and one Antarmuhurt has passed, the Nupumsakaved is destroyed. Thereafter, after one Antarmuhurt has passed, the Strived is destroyed. Again, after one Antarmuhurt, at the two extreme times of the Savedbhaga, the Purushaved is destroyed along with the ancient Sattarupa Karmas and six Nokshays simultaneously. Thereafter, after the passage of one time less than two Avlimatras, the Purushaved is destroyed. Subsequently, going up one Antarmuhurt, the Krodhasajwalan is destroyed. Afterwards, after one Antarmuhurt has passed, the Manasajwalan is destroyed. After this, going up one Antarmuhurt, the Mayasajwalan is destroyed. Again, going up one Antarmuhurt, it attains the Sukhmasamprayagunasthan. That Sukhmasamprayagunasthanvi Jiva also destroys the Lobhasanchalana at the end of its Gunasthan, and at the same time, attains the Kshinakshayagunasthan and after spending an Antarmuhurt, destroys Nidra and Prachala simultaneously at the two extreme times of its time. Thereafter, at the end (charam) time of its time, it destroys the 5 Gnanavarana, 4 Darshanavarana, and 5 Antaraya, these 14 Prakṛtis. Thus, upon the destruction of these 60 Prakṛtis, this Jiva becomes a Sayogakevalijin. Sayogi Jins do not destroy any karma. Subsequently, after performing Bihar and progressively performing Yoganirodha, they become Ayogakevali. Ayogakevali also destroys, at the two extreme times of their time, one Anudayarupa Vedaniya from the two Prakṛtis of Vedaniya, Devagati, five bodies, five body aggregates, five body bonds, six institutions, three Angopanga, six Sanhanan, five Varna, two Gandha, five Rasa, eight Sparsha, Devagatiprayogyanupurvi, Agurulaghu, Upghāt, Paradhat, Uchchvas, Prashasta-Vihayogati, Aprashasta-Vihayogati, Apyas, Pratyek, Sthir-Asthir, Shubh-Ashubh, Durbhaga, Susvara-Dushvara, Anadeya, Ayashaskirti, Nirman, and Nichgotra, these 72 Prakṛtis. Afterwards, at the end time of their time, they destroy one Udayagata Vedaniya, Manushyayu, Manushygati, Panchendriya jati, Manushygatiprayogyanupurvi, Tras-Badar-Paryapt-Subhaga-Adeya-Yashaskirti, Tirdhar, and Uchchgotra, these 13 Prakṛtis. Or, Ayogakevali, along with Manushygatiprayogyanupurvi, destroys 73 Prakṛtis at their two extreme times and 12 Prakṛtis at their charam time. Thus, upon the severance of the causes of the origin of Sampsara, they become Siddhas, attaining a pure state free from Karma-raja in the subsequent time. Those Jivas who perform the Karma-kshapana-vyapara are called Kshapaka, and those Jivas who perform the business of alleviating Karmas are called Upshamka. 

Page #351:
---------------------------
Gommatasar Karmakanda - 312

The names of the natures that are eligible for decay (separation from sattva) in the Gunasthanas of Kshapaka, Anivrittikaran, etc., are mentioned in two verses.

Nirityarikhadhu Viyalam Srinatigujovataveindi. Saharanasuhumathavar, Solan Majjhimakasayankam. || 338 ||

Sanditthi Chakkasaya, Puriso Koho Ya Man Mayam Cha. Thule Suhume Loho, Udayam Va Hodi Khinamhi. || 339 || Jummam.

Meaning - In the first part of the Anivrittikaran Gunasthan, the following 16 natures are separated from sattva: Narakagati (hellish path) - Narakagatyanupurvi, Tiryanchagati (animal path) - Tiryanchagatyanupurvi, Vikalatraya (three types of विकल), Styanagridhi (three types of sleep), Udyot (brightness), Atap (heat), Ekendriya (one-sense), Sadharan (ordinary), Sukshma (subtle), and Stavar (stationary). In the second part, the four Kashayas of Apratyakhyan (non-rejection) and the four Kashayas of Pratyakhyan (rejection) - a total of eight - are separated from sattva. In the third part, Napumsakaved (eunuch knowledge), in the fourth part, Strived (female knowledge), in the fifth part, six non-Kashayas like Hasya (laughter), in the sixth part, Purushaved (male knowledge), in the seventh part, Sajjwalan Krodha (burning anger), in the eighth part, Na Saknaman (inability to bear), in the ninth part, Sajjwalan Maya (burning delusion). Thus, in the Anivrittikaran Gunasthan, a total of (16+8+1+1+6+1+1+1+1) 36 natures are separated from sattva. In the Sukshma Samparaya Gunasthan, there is separation from sattva of 5 Jnanavarana (knowledge obscurations), 4 Darshanavarana (perception obscurations), 5 Antaraya (hindrances), Nidra (sleep), and Prachala (agitation) - a total of 16 natures, similar to the separation of Sajjwalan Lobha (burning greed) in the Kshina Kashaya Gunasthan and Udayavyuchchitti (separation from arising). There is no separation from sattva for the Sayogakevali.

Now, the names of the natures that are separated from sattva in the Ayogikevali Gunasthan are mentioned:

Dehaadi Fassanta, Thirasuhsarasuravihayadhu Dug Bhagam. Niminajas'anadajjam, Patteya Punna Aguruchau. || 340 ||

Anudayatadayam Nicham - Jogidhucharimhamhi Satavocchhinna. Udayagabar Naranu, Teras Charimhamhi Vocchhinna. || 349 || Jummam.

Meaning - The five bodies, five bonds, five aggregates, six abodes, three limbs and appendages, six consolidations, five colors, two smells, five tastes, eight touches, stable-unstable, auspicious-inauspicious, good voice-bad voice, Devagati (heavenly path) - Devagatyanupurvi, praiseworthy-unpraiseworthy Vihayogati (path of liberation), Durbhaga (unfortunate), Nirman (creation), Ayashaskirti (bad reputation), Anadeya (unworthy), Pratyek (individual), Aparayapt (incomplete), Agurulaghu (heavy-light), Upghāt (self-harm), Parghāt (harm to others), Uchchvas (exhalation), and one of the seven Vedaniya (objects of knowledge) - Asata (non-existent) - and Nichagotra (low birth) - a total of 72 natures are separated from sattva in the Ayogi Gunasthan at the time of the second last stage. 

Page #352:
---------------------------
## Gommatasara Karmakanda - 313

At the culmination of the Aयोगीगुणस्थान, there is a separation of 13 types of nature: one-sense, human-birth, five-sense-being, auspicious, fearful, foolish, sufficient, worthy, glorious-fame, Tirthankara, human-life-span, high-lineage, and human-birth-sequence. These are separated from the seven categories of existence (साता असाता).

##  Aacharya on Gunasthanas

The Aacharya states that the nature of non-existence (असत्त्व) and existence (सत्त्व) are present in the Gunasthanas.

**Verse 342:**

"In the ten, ten, sixteen, and the remaining, there is non-existence.  Existence is present in the same way, as the valiant, without any support."

**Meaning:**

From Mithyatva to Kshapaka-Apoovarnakaran Gunasthanas, there is non-existence of three, one, zero, one, two, two, and ten types of nature respectively. In the first part of the Anivrittikaran Gunasthanas, there are ten types of non-existence, and in the second part, there are sixteen types of non-existence. In the subsequent parts, there are eight and so on types of non-existence. Here, the non-existent types of nature are subtracted from the total 148 types of nature, and the remaining types of nature are the existent types of nature in their respective Gunasthanas. The valiant, without any support, are those who have achieved this, as stated by the Vardhamana Swami.

**Explanation:**

The types of nature that are not found are called non-existent (असत्त्व), and those that are found are called existent (सत्त्व).

In the Mithyatva Gunasthanas, there are zero types of non-existence, 148 types of existence, and zero types of separation. In the Sasadan Gunasthanas, there are three types of non-existence, 145 types of existence, and zero types of separation. In the Mishra Gunasthanas, there is one type of non-existence, 147 types of existence, and zero types of separation. In the Asanyata Gunasthanas, there are zero types of non-existence, 148 types of existence, and one type of separation. In the Deshasanyata Gunasthanas, there is one type of non-existence, 147 types of existence, and one type of separation. In the Pramatta Gunasthanas, there are two types of non-existence, 146 types of existence, and zero types of separation. In the Apramatta Gunasthanas, there are two types of non-existence, 146 types of existence, and eight types of separation. In the Apoovarnakaran Gunasthanas, there are ten types of non-existence, 138 types of existence, and zero types of separation.

In the first part of the Anivrittikaran Gunasthanas, there are ten types of non-existence, 138 types of existence, and sixteen types of separation from existence. In the second part, there are twenty-six types of non-existence, 122 types of existence, and eight types of separation. In the third part, there are thirty-four types of non-existence, 114 types of existence, and one type of separation. In the fourth part, there are thirty-five types of non-existence, 113 types of existence, and one type of separation. In the fifth part, there are thirty-six types of non-existence, 112 types of existence, and six types of separation. In the sixth part, there are forty-two types of non-existence, 106 types of existence, and one type of separation. In the seventh part, there are forty-three types of non-existence, 105 types of existence, and one type of separation. In the eighth part, there are forty-four types of non-existence, 104 types of existence, and one type of separation. In the ninth part, there are... 

Page #353:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-314 45, Sattvaprakriti 103, Vyuchchhinnaprakriti 1. In the Sukshmasamprayaya Gunasthan, Asattvaprakriti 46, Sattvaprakriti 102, Vyuchchhinnaprakriti 1. In the Kshina-kshaya Gunasthan, Asattvaprakriti 47, Sattvaprakriti 101 and Vyuchchhinnaprakriti 16. In the Sayogakevali Gunasthan, Asattvarupa Prakriti 63, Sattvaprakriti 85. There is no Vyuchchhitti. In the Ayogi Gunasthan, until the Dvicharamasamaya, Asattvaprakriti 63, Sattvaprakriti 85, Vyuchchhinnaprakriti 72. In the Charamasamaya, Asattvarupa Prakriti 135, Sattvarupa Prakriti 13, Vyuchchhinnaprakriti 13.

Note- In the 14th Gunasthan, there is no rise of Manushya-gatyanupurvi, therefore, with the remaining 72 Prakritis, through Stibuka-samkran, the Sattvavyuchchhitti of Manushya-gatyanupurvi also takes place in the Dvicharamasamaya. In the Charamasamaya, only 12 Prakritis have Sattvavyuchchhitti.

In comparison to the Kshapaka-shreni, the Asattv-Sattv-Sattvavyuchchhitti in the Gunasthanas is as follows:

Sattvayojana Murs: 148 Atritiyaradhama: :

Sattv | Asattv | Vyuchchhitti | Vishesh
------- | -------- | -------- | --------
148 | 147 | 148 | Gunasthan Mithyatva Sasadan Mishra Asanyata Deshasanyata Pramatta Apramatta
146 | 148 | 1 | Apurvakaran
1 | 3 (Aharakdvig-Tirthankara) | 1 (Tirthankara) | 1 (Narakayu) Asattv 1 (Narakayu) 1 (Tiryanchayu) 2 (Narakayu and Tiryanchayu) 8 (Anantanubandhikshaya 4, Devayu, Darshan _ Mohaniya 3) 10 (Anantanubandhikshaya 4, Darshanmohaniya 3, Narak-Tiryanch and Devayu) 16 (Narakgati, NarakgatyAnupurvi, Tiryanchgati, TiryanchgatyAnupurvi, Vikalatra 3, Styanagridhi
Aadi Nidra 3, Udyot, Atap, Ekendriya,
Sadharan, Sukshma, Sthavar) | 8 (Apratyakhyanaki 4 Kshaya and
Pratyakhyanaki 4 Kshaya) | 1 | 1 (Napumsakaved)
10 | Anivrittikaran | 122 | 8 | Kshapak Prathama Bhag
1 | 1 | 1 | Dvitiya Bhag
1 | 1 | 1 | Tritiya Bhag

Gh.Pu. 6 P. 417

Page #354:
---------------------------
## Gommatasara Karmakanda - Part 4

**104**
**102**

**Part 4**
**1 (Strivad):** ... ... ... ... ... ... ... **Part 5** 112
**6 (Hasyaadi Nokashaya):** **Part 6** 106
**1 (Purushaved):** **Part 7** 107
**1 (Sajwalan Krodha):** **Part 8**
**1 (Sanchalan Mana):** **Part 9**
**1 (Sajwalan Maya):** Sukshma Samparaya
**1 (Sajwalan Lobha):** Kshapak Ksheenamoha
**16 (5 Jnanaavaran, 4 Darshanavaran, 5 Antaraya, Nidra, Prachala):** Sayogakevali | 63.
**63 (Ghatiyakarma ki 47, Naraka-Dev and Tiryanchayu, Narakadvik, Tiryanchadvik, Ekendriyaadi Charajati, Atap, Udyot, Sadharan, Sukshma, Sthavar):** Ayogakevali | 63. 85. 72. 72 (5 Sharira, 5 Bandhan, 5 Sanghat, 6 Sanhanan, ke Dvicharam 3 Angopapang, 6 Sansthan, 5 Varna, 2 Gandha, 5 Rasa, 8 Sparsha, Sthir-Asthir, Shubh-Ashubh, Suswar-Dushwar, Devgati-DevgatyAnupurvi, PrashastPrashast-Vihayogati, Durbhaga, Nirman, Ayashaskirti, Anadeya, Pratiyaka, Apariyapt, Agurulaghu, Upghāt, Paradhat, Ucchvas, Sata ya Asata mein se koi ek, Nichgotra): Ayogakevali 135 13 | 13 Vy. 13 (Sata-Asata Vedaniya mein se ek, Chasm Samay mein Manushaygati, Panchendriya, Subhaga, Tras-Badar Paryapt, Adeya, Yashaskirti, Tirthankara, Manushayau, Ucchgotra, ManushaygatyAnupurvi): Ab Upshamshreniwale ke Charitramohaneya ki shesh 21 prakritiyon ke upsham ka vidhan kahte hain.

**Khavanam va Uvasmane, Navari ya Sanjalan Purisamjjamhi. Majjhimado Udo Koha-Diya Kamasovasanta Hu ||343||** 

Page #355:
---------------------------
Gommatasar Karmakanda-316

Meaning: In the Upashama Vidhana, the order is the same as in the Kshapana Vidhana, but the special point is that the two Krodhaadis related to A-pratyakhyana and Pratyakhyana Kshaya, which are between Sajwalana Kshaya and Purusha Veda, are first pacified in order, and then the Sanchalana Krodhaadis are pacified. (This has been explained in detail in verse 337).

Special Meaning: The six non-Kshayas, namely Napunsaka Veda, Stri Veda, Hasyaadi, are pacified in order, and after pacifying Purusha Veda, the Navakasamaya-Prabaddha form of that Purusha Veda, along with its Bandha, pacifies the Madhyama A-pratyakhyana and Pratyakhyana Krodha. The newly formed Bandha here is called Navakbandha, and the newly formed Bandha of Purusha Veda is not pacified during the time of pacifying Purusha Veda, because the Achalavali is unable to transform the Karma-prakriti otherwise. Therefore, the Madhyama Krodha pair, which is the result of Purusha Veda, is pacified during the time of pacifying them. Similarly, the nature of the Navakbandha of Sajwalana Krodhaadi should be known as it is. After that, Sanchalana Krodha is pacified, and after that, the Madhyama form of A-pratyakhyana and Pratyakhyana, along with the Navakbandha of this Sajwalana Krodha, is pacified. After that, Sanchalana is pacified. After that, the Madhyama A-pratyakhyana, Pratyakhyana Maya pair, along with the Navakbandha of that Sanchalana, is pacified, and after that, Sanchalana Maya is pacified. After that, the Madhyama A-pratyakhyana, Pratyakhyana Lobha, along with the Navakbandha of Sajwalana Maya, is pacified. After that, Badara Sanchalana Lobha is pacified. This special feature should be known only in Mohaniya Karma, because without Mohaniya, there is no Upashama Vidhana for other Karmas. In this way, in the Upashama Shreni, Moha is pacified, its existence is not destroyed, therefore, from A-purvakarana to Upashanta Kshaya Gunasthan, the Narakaayu and Tiryanchayu of those who have the Upashama Shreni should be known as 146 Prakriti, and the one who has disassociated the Ananta Anubandhi Kshaya has 142 Prakriti. The Kshayika Samyagdrishti, who has the Upashama Shreni, should be known as 138 Prakriti from A-purvakarana to Upashanta Kshaya Gunasthan. The one who has not had any Ayu Bandha should be known as 138 Prakriti in the four Gunasthanas of Asanyataadi, but the one who has had Devaayu Bandha should be known as 139 Prakriti.

In Naraka, etc., the existence of Prakriti, Sthiti, Anubhaga, and Pradesh, which are different from each other, should be understood as appropriate.

||344|| 

Page #356:
---------------------------
## Gommatasara Karmakanda-317

Now, to explain the presence of *sattva* (essence) in the paths of motion, etc., the defining sutra says:

**Tiryage na titthasattā, nirayādisu tiya caukka cau tinni. Āuṇi hoti sattā, sesaṁ oghadādu jāṇejjo. ||345||**

**Meaning:** In the *tiryanch* (animal) path, there is no essence of the *tirthankara* nature. In the hell path, there is essence of the suffering hell being, and the bound *tiryanch*, human, and divine beings, but not the divine being. In the *tiryanch* path, there is essence of the suffering *tiryanch* being, and the bound hell, *tiryanch*, human, and divine beings. In the human path, there is essence of the suffering human being, and the bound hell, *tiryanch*, human, and divine beings. In the divine path, there is essence of the suffering divine being, and the bound *tiryanch* and human beings. The essence of the remaining natures is to be known as in the *gunasthanas* (stages of qualities). (The one who is experiencing the *jiva* is called the suffering being, and the one whose bondage is destined to arise in the future is called the bound being.)

Then, the presence of *sattva* in the hell, *tiryanch*, and human paths is explained in two verses:

**Oghaṁ vā jeraie, ṇa surāu titthamasthi tadayothi. Chattititti maṇussāu, tiryie oghaṁ ṇa titthayaraṁ. ||346||**

**Evaṁ pañchatiryakhe, puṇṇidare ṇasthi nirayadevāu. Oghaṁ maṇusatiyesuvi apuṇṇage puṇ apuṇṇeva. ||347||**

**Meaning:** In the hell path, the essence is to be known as in the *gunasthanas*, but there is no essence of the divine being, therefore, there are 147 natures eligible for *sattva*. The essence of the *tirthankara* nature is only up to the third hell, and the essence of the human being is only up to the sixth hell. In the *tiryanch* path, the essence is also to be known as in the *gunasthanas*, but there is no essence of the *tirthankara* nature, therefore, there are 147 natures eligible for *sattva*. ||346||

Similarly, in the five types of *tiryanch*, the essence is to be known generally, but specifically, in the *labdhyaparyāpta* (those who have attained their full potential) *tiryanch*, there is no essence of the hell or divine being. In the three types of humans, the essence is to be understood as in the *gunasthanas*, but in the *labdhyaparyāpta* human, like the *labdhyaparyāpta* *tiryanch*, there is no essence of the hell, divine being, or *tirthankara* nature, therefore, there are 145 natures eligible for *sattva*. ||347||

**Special Meaning:** In the hell path, the natures eligible for *sattva* are 147, excluding the divine being. In the three hells of *dharma*, etc., the natures eligible for *sattva* are 147. There are four *gunasthanas*, etc. In the *mithyātva* *gunasthan* (stage of false belief), there is no absence of *sattva*, there is *sattva* of 147 natures, and there is no *satyavyuchchitti* (separation from truth). In the *sāsādana* *gunasthan* (stage of acquiring), there is absence of *sattva* of the two *āhārakas* (food-givers) and the *tirthankara* nature, and *sattva* of 144 natures, and there is no *vyuchchitti*. In the *miśra* *gunasthan* (stage of mixed), there is absence of *sattva* of 5... 

Page #357:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-318

There is no vyuchchitti of the sattva 146 nature of the Tirthankara nature. In the asanyata gunasthan, there is no asattva, and there is also an absence of sattva vyuchchitti of the sattva 147 nature. In the three earths of Dharma, Vamsa, and Madha, there is a perception of asattva, samva, and sattva vyuchchitti.

Sattva-yogya-prakriti 147, Gunasthan 4
Sattva Vyuchchitti
Asattva
Sattva
Vishesh
Gunasthan Mithyatva Sasadan
Mishra
3 (Tirthankara and Aharakdvak) 1 (Tirthankara)
Asanyata

In the 4th, 5th, and 6th earths of Anjana, Arista, and Maghavi, there are sattva-yogya 146 natures without the Deva-ayu and Tirthankara natures, and the gunasthan is 4. Here, in the mithyatva gunasthan, there is an absence of asattva and sattva vyuchchitti, and the sattva nature is 146. In the sasadan gunasthan, there is asattva of the aharakdvak, and there is no vyuchchitti of the sattva 144 nature. In the mishra and asanyata gunasthan, there is also no asattva and sattva vyuchchitti, and the sattva nature in both these gunasthan is 146-146. In the Anjana, Arista, and Maghavi earths, there is a perception of asattva, sattva, and sattva vyuchchitti.

Sattva-yogya-prakriti 146, Gunasthan 4
Sattva
Asattva
Sattva
Vyuchchitti
Vishesh
0
Gunasthan Mithyatva Sasadan Mishra Avirata
0
| 2 (Aharadak)
146
0
0

In the seventh earth called Madhavi, there are sattva-yogya 145 natures without the Manusya-ayu, Deva-ayu, and Tirthankara natures. The gunasthan, etc., are 4. Here, in the mithyatva, mishra, and asanyata gunasthan, there is an absence of asattva and sattva vyuchchitti, but in the sasadan gunasthan, asattva of the aharakdvak is found. In all four gunasthan, there is no sattva vyuchchitti, and the sattva in the four gunasthan is 145-143-145 and 145 respectively. 

Page #358:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-319
Insight regarding the Asattva-Sattva-Sattva Vyuchchitti in the Mahavipa-Prithvi
Sattva-Yogya Prakriti 145, Gunasthan 4
Sattva Gunasthan Asattva Sattva Vyuchchitti
Vishesh Mithyatva
145 Sasadan
0 2 (Aharakdvik) Mishr
145 Asanvat
145 In the Tiryanch-Gati, the Sattva-Yogya Prakriti is 147, because the Sattva of the Tirthankara Prakriti is not present here.
“In the Tiryanch-Gati, insight regarding the Asattva-Sattva-Sattva Vyuchchitti
Sattva-Yogya Prakriti 147, Gunasthan 5
Asattva
Sattva
Vyuchchitti
Vishesh
Gunasthan Mithyatva
Sasadan
0
2
(Aharakdvik)
Mitra
147
0
147
2
0
Asanyat Deshasanyat
2 (Narakayu and Manushayau) | (Bhujyaman Tirthanchayu Apeksha)
In the Samaanya Tiryanch, Panchendriya Tiryanch, Yoni-mati Tiryanch, Paryapt Tiryanch, and Labdhya-Paryapt Tiryanch, the Sattva is to be known in the same way, but the special feature is that in the Labdhya-Paryapt Tiryanch, the Sattva of Narak-Devayu is not present, therefore the Sattva is of Prakriti 145. From the scriptures like “Na hi Sasano Apunne”, etc., the Labdhya-Paryapt Tiryanch does not have the Sasadan Gunasthan, therefore only the Mithyatva Gunasthan is present. In the remaining four types of Tiryanch, there are 55 Gunasthan.
In the Manusha-Gati, in the Samaanya Manusha, Paryapt Manusha, and Manusha-ni, the Gunasthan is the same, but the special feature in the Kshapak श्रेणी of the Manusha-ni is that the Sattva of the Tirthankara Prakriti is not present in the Kshapak श्रेणी, because a being with the Sattva of the Tirthankara Prakriti, i.e., a Samyagdrishti, is not born in the Manusha-ni. 

Page #359:
---------------------------
Gommatasar Karmakanda-320
And since the nature of the Tirthankara is sattva, there is no ascent in the kshapaka-shreni of the resulting Jina, who is afflicted by the arising of the napumsaka and striveda. (Gatha 354)
In the case of a common human, a sufficient human, and a woman, there is no existence of hell or animal life in the desasanayat-gunasthan, therefore in this gunasthan there are 146 sattva-prakriti and two asattva-prakriti. There is no existence of the Tirthankara-prakriti in the kshapaka-shreni of a woman, therefore in the apurvakaran-gunasthan, sattva is 137 and asattva is 1.24 prakriti. Similarly, from the first part of the anitikaran-gunasthan to the ayogi-gunasthan, sattva should be known as one prakriti less than the sattva-prakriti mentioned in the gunasthan, but asattva is as mentioned in the gunasthan.
In the case of a labdhyaparaptak human, like a labdhyaparaptak animal, there are 545 sattvayogya-prakriti and one mithyatva gunasthan for the Tirthankara, hell, and deva-ayuni. Compared to a common and sufficient human, the sandrishtti related to asattva-sattva-sattva-vyuchchitti is:
Sattvayogya-prakriti 148
Asattva
Sattva
Gunasthan Mithyatva
148
Sattva Vyuchchitti
Special 148 (compared to various beings) 3 (aharadvik-Tirthankara) 1 (Tirthankara) | 2 (hell and animal life)
Sasadan
Bhitra
147
148
Asanvat Desasanayat
Pramatta
Apramatta
| 8 (anantaanubandhi 4 kshaya, darshan-maah 3 deva-ayu)
Apurvakaran
Upashamak
146
Baddhayushk Upashama Samyagdristi's Upashama Shreni compared to Abaddhayushk Kshayik Samyagdristi's Upashama Shreni
Kshapaka
138
Compared to
Anivritikaran 10
138
| (According to the sandrishtti of Gatha 342) 

Page #360:
---------------------------
Gommatasar Karmakanda-321
Kshapaka
113
Part 6
Part 7
101
Part 1
Badghayushka Upshama Samyagdristi ke Upshama श्रेणी Apeksha Upshamaka 138,146
Abaddhayushka Kshayika Samyagdristi ke Upshama श्रेणी 138
Apeksha Part 2 122
(According to the interpretation of Gatha 342) Part 3
(According to the interpretation of Gatha 342) Part 4
(According to the interpretation of Gatha 342) Part 5
(According to the interpretation of Gatha 342) (According to the interpretation of Gatha 342)
(According to the interpretation of Gatha 342) Part 8 104
{According to the interpretation of Gatha 342) . Part 2
(According to the interpretation of Gatha 342) Sukshmasampray
(According to the interpretation of Gatha 342) Kshinakashaya 47
(According to the interpretation of Gatha 342) Sayogkevali
(According to the interpretation of Gatha 342) Ayogkevali | 63
(According to the interpretation of Gatha 342) Dvicharamsamaya Ayogkevali |135
(According to the interpretation of Gatha 342) Charamsamaya further in Devagati, the statement of Sattvadhi is as follows -
Oghan Deve Na Hi Nirayaau, Sarotti Hodi Tiriyaau.
Bhavanatiyakappavasiiyithhisu Na Tiththayarasattam ||348|| Meaning- In Devati, the statement of Sattvadhi is as per the general Gunasthanavath, but since there is no Sattwa in Narakayu, there is Sattwa of 147 Prakriti and the Sattwa of Tiryanchayu is only up to Sahasraraswarga, not beyond. In all the Devas of Bhavanatrik and in Kalpavasini Devis, there is no Sattwa of Tirthankara Prakriti.
Special Meaning- From Soudharma to Sahasraraswarga, there is Sattwa of 14.7 Prakritis in 12 Swarga, because the Sattwa of Tiryanchayu is only up to Sahasraraswarga. There are 4 of Gunasthan etc. Here, in Mithyatvagunasthan, Kinha Dugasuhati Lesssay Vamevinititthayarasattam, i.e. Krishna, Neel and three Shubh Leshya, there is Mithyadristi. 

Page #361:
---------------------------
Gommatasar Karmakanda-322

There is no sattva of the Tirthankara in the Gunasthan. From this statement, there is no sattva-vyuchchitti of the Tirthankara nature without the sattva of 146 natures, asattva 1 of the Tirthankara nature. In the Sasadan Gunasthan, the asattva nature is of the Aharakdvig and Tirthankara sattva nature 144, vyuchchitti is zero. In the Misra Gunasthan, the asattva is 1 of the Tirthashvara nature, sattva is 146 of the nature. In the Asanyata Gunasthan, there is no asattva, so the sattva is 147 of the nature. There is no sattva-vyuchchitti in the Misra and Asanyata Gunasthan. From Saudharma heaven to Sahasrar heaven, the sandrishti related to asattva-sattva-sattva-vyuchchitti is:

Sattva-yogya-prakriti 147, Gunasthan etc. four
Asattva
Sattva
Gunasthan Mithyatva
Vyuchchitti
Special | 1 (Tirthankara)
3 (Aharakdvig and Tirthankara) | 5 (Tirthankara)
Sasadan
Misra
Asanyata
The remaining Anatadi 4 heavens and Navagraiveyak have sattva 146 of the nature, without Narakayu and Tiryanchayu. The Gunasthan Mithyatva etc. are 4. Here, in the Mithyatva Gunasthan, the asattva is one of the Tirthankara nature, sattva is 145 of the nature. In the Sasadan Gunasthan, the asattva is of the Aharakdvig, Tirthankara nature, sattva is 143 of the nature. In the Misra Gunasthan, the asattva is 1 of the Tirthankara nature, sattva is 145 of the nature. In the Asanyata Gunasthan, there is no asattva, sattva-prakriti is 146. Here, in all four Gunasthan, there is no sattva-vyuchchitti. In Anatadi 4 heavens and Navagraiveyak, the sandrishti related to asattva-sattva-sattva-vyuchchitti is:

Sattva-yogya-prakriti 146, Gunasthan 4
Asattva
Sattva
Gunasthan Mithyatva
Sattva Vyuchchitti
Special 0 1 (Tirthankara)
| 3 (Tirthankara and Aharakdvig) 0 1 (Tirthankara)
Sasadan
143
Misra
Asanyata
146

In the Nauanudish, Panchaanuttar Vimanas, there are 146 sattva-yogya-prakritis without Narakayu and Tiryanchayu, and the Gunasthan is only one, Asanyata. 

Page #362:
---------------------------
Gommatasar Karmakanda-323

Since the Tirthankaras, the three types of gods and goddesses, and the Kalpavasini goddesses do not have the essence of a hellish existence, there are 146 sattvayogya (capable of attaining liberation) natures and 4 gunasthanas (stages of spiritual development). In the Mithyatva (false belief), Misra (mixed), and Asanyata (uncontrolled) gunasthanas, there is absolutely no absence of sattva (positive qualities) or sattvavyuccheddi (elimination of negative qualities). However, in the Sasadan (purified) gunasthanas, there is the absence of sattva for the two Aharaka (food-consuming) natures, 144 sattva natures, and also the absence of sattvavyuccheddi. In the three types of gods and goddesses and the Kalpavasini goddesses, the perception related to sattva, asattva, and sattvavyuccheddi is as follows:

Sattvayogya Prakriti (Capable of attaining liberation) 146, Gunasthanas 4

Gunasthanas | Asattva | Sattva | Vishesh | Sattvavyuccheddi
------- | -------- | -------- | -------- | --------
Mithyatva | 146 | 146 | 146 | 146
Misra | 146 | 146 | 146 | 146
Asanyata | 146 | 146 | 146 | 146
Sasadan | 2 (Aharaka) | 144 | 144 | 144

Further, the text discusses sattva and other qualities in the context of the senses and the body:

"Oghan panchakhatase, sesindiyakayage apunna va. Teuduge na naraau savvatthuvellanaavi have." (349)

Meaning: The discussion of sattva and other qualities in the five senses and the three types of bodies is similar to that in the gunasthanas. There are 148 sattvayogya natures. The remaining, from one sense to four senses, and from earth to plant bodies, have 145 natures like the Tirthankaras, hellish beings, and those who have attained liberation. However, in the fire body and air body, there is no sattva of a human existence, therefore, there are 144 sattva natures in these two. There is also an awakening of all the natures in the senses and the body.

Special Meaning: In the senses and the body, there are 148 sattva natures in the five senses and the three types of bodies. There are 14 gunasthanas. One should understand the discussion of sattva and other qualities as similar to that in the gunasthanas. In the remaining, one sense, two senses, three senses, and four senses, and in the earth body, water body, and plant body, there are 145 sattva natures without the Tirthankaras, hellish beings, and those who have attained liberation. There are two gunasthanas. Here, there is no asattva in the Mithyatva gunasthanas, and there are 145 sattva natures. In the Sasadan gunasthanas, there is asattva for the two Aharaka natures, and there are 143 sattva natures. Since there is no sattva of a human existence in the fire body and air body, there are 144 sattva natures. There is one Mithyatva gunasthanas. 

Page #363:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-324
Correlation of Asattva-Sattva-Sattva Vyuchchitti in Panchendriya and Trasakayamaargna
48, Gunasthan 14
Sattva Vyuchchitti
| Asattva
Sattva
Gunasthan Mithyatva
Sasadin
Mishra
147
Asanyata Deshasanvata
Vishesh (According to the correlation of Gatha 342) (According to the correlation of Gatha 342) (According to the correlation of Gatha 342) (According to the correlation of Gatha 342) (According to the correlation of Gatha 342) (According to the correlation of Gatha 342) (According to the correlation of Gatha 342) (According to the correlation of Gatha 342) (According to the correlation of Gatha 342)
147
Pramatta
146
146
138
Apramatta Apoorvakaran Anivrittikaran | 10
Bhag 1 Bhag 2
138
Bhag 3
Bhag 4
Bhag 5
Bhag 6
Bhag 7
Bhag 8
104
(According to the correlation of Gatha 342) (According to the correlation of Gatha 342) (According to the correlation of Gatha 342) (According to the correlation of Gatha 342) (According to the correlation of Gatha 342) (According to the correlation of Gatha 342) (According to the correlation of Gatha 342) (According to the correlation of Gatha 342) (According to the correlation of Gatha 342) (In comparison to the Upshama Shreni with Upshama Samyaktv) (In comparison to the Upshama Shreni with Kshayik Samyaktv without Ayubandha) (According to the correlation of Gatha 342) | (According to the correlation of Gatha 342)
Bhag 9
103
Sookshma Samparaya
102
146
Upshanta Kashaya
138
Ksheenakashay
6
Sayogkevali. 

Page #364:
---------------------------
Gompatasar Karmakanda-325
| (Similar to the context of verse 342)
Ayogakechali | 63. Dvicharam
Samaya Ayogakevali | 135 Charam Samaya
13. 13. (Similar to the context of verse 342)
In Ekendriya-Dviindriya-Triindriya-Chaturindriya and Prithvi-Jal-Vanaspatikaya,
Asattva-Sattva-Sattvavyuccitti related Sandrishtasattvayogya Prakriti 145, Gunasthan etc. 2
Asattva
Sasadan
143
Sattva Gunasthan
| Sattva Vyucchitti Vishesh Mithyatva
| | 2 (Aharakdvak) What is Shankha - Udvelana?
Samadhan - Just as a rope was broken by force, and then the broken part was opened, in the same way, the Prakritis that were bound, are later destroyed by Udvelana Bhagahar, by removing them and making them attain another Prakriti form. This is called Udvelana. Now, the names of the Prakritis that are in the form of Udvelana are:
Haradu Sammi Missan, Suraduga Narayachaukkamnukamaso.
Ucchagodam Manudugamubvellijanti Jivehim ||350|| Meaning - Aharakdvak, Samyagmithyatva, Samyaktva, Devagati, DevagatyAnupurvi, Narakagati, NarakagatyAnupurvi, Vaikriyik Sharira, Vaikriyik Angopang, Ucchagotra, Manushayagati, ManushayagatyAnupurvi, these 13 Prakritis are Udvelana Prakritis.
Athanantar Udvelana Prakritis' owners are: Chadugadmimiche Chauro, Igivigale Chhappi Tini Teuduge. Siya Asthi Natthi Sattam, Sapade Uppanana Thanevi ||351|| 

Page #365:
---------------------------
Gommatasar Karmakanda - 326

Meaning - The four natures of the four-gated Mithyadristi Jivas, the six natures of the one-sensed, two-sensed, three-sensed and four-sensed Jivas, and the three natures of the Tejakaya and Vayukaya are capable of being stirred up, and they have some sattva in their own place and some sattva not in their own place.

Special Meaning - The sattva of a four-gated Mithyadristi Jiva, whose being is not that of a Tirthankara, Narakayu or Devayu, is 145 natures without being stirred up, and 143 natures when the Aharakdvig is stirred up, 142 natures when the Samyaktvaprakriti is stirred up, and 149 natures when the Mishramohaniya (Samyagmithyatva) is stirred up. In this way, the sattva in their own places is known, and in the place of origin, the sattva of the one-sensed, two-sensed, three-sensed, four-sensed, earth, water and plant bodies is 145, 143, 142, 149 respectively, as mentioned earlier. And when the Devagati and DevagatyAnupurvi, these two natures, are stirred up, the sattva of these one-sensed etc. in their own place is 139 natures, and when the NarakdvigVaikriyikdvig, i.e. these four, are stirred up, the sattva in their own place is 135 natures, and in the place of origin, the Tejakaya and Vayukaya do not have the sattva of the human lifespan. Therefore, the sattva without being stirred up is 144 natures, and when the Aharakdvig is stirred up, the sattva is 142, 141, 140 natures respectively, and when the Devagati and DevagatyAnupurvi are stirred up, the sattva is 138 natures. When the Narakchaturshka (NarakgatiNarakgatyAnupurvi, VaikriyikSharira, VaikriyikAnopan) is stirred up, the sattva is 134 natures, and in their own place, when the Tejakaya, Vayukaya of the higher lineage are stirred up, the sattva is 133 natures, and when the Manushyadvig is stirred up, the sattva is 131 natures.

These last two sattvas (133 - 131) should also be known in the place of origin of the one-sensed, two-sensed, three-sensed, four-sensed, earth, water and plant bodies. Here, the sattva that is present in the previous state, whether it is stirred up or not, is added to the sattva that is present in the subsequent state at the time of birth in that subsequent state, which is the place of origin.

1. The Asanyata state, having attained the Sanvata, begins to stir up the Aharakdvig in the interval of a moment. As long as it remains Asanyata, it continues to stir up. (D. Pu. 16 p. 498)

2. Doubt - Gommatasar Karmakanda Gatha 351 Big Commentary has stated that the sattva of Tejakaya Vayukaya in the place of origin is 144, and when stirred up, it is 131. So, can it die with the sattva of 144 there? We have this doubt that the Tejakaya Vayukaya Jiva will stir up the first 10 natures of the stirred up natures, is this correct?

Solution - The Jiva can be born in Tejakaya and Vayukaya with the sattva of 144 natures and die with the sattva of 144 natures after a short time of taking the Ksudra Bhav. If it wanders in Tejakaya Vayukaya for a long time, it can stir up 13 natures and be born in another body with 131 natures. There is no rule that it will leave Tejakaya, Vayukaya only after stirring up 10 natures. 

Page #366:
---------------------------
## Gommatasara Karmakanda-327

**Sattva** is said to be the state that arises after the **vivक्षितपर्याय** (intended state) and is accompanied by **udvelana** (agitation) or without **udvelana**. This **sattva** is called **svasthanasattva**.

**Tejakaaya-Vayuakaaya** beings have **144 sattvayogya** (capable of attaining sattva) **prakritis** (natures).

**A 2 | S 1 | _ 144 | 142 | 141 |**
**Mi 1 | 140 |**
**Su 2 | 138 |**
**Na 4 | 134 |**
**U 1 | 133 |**
**M 2 | 131**

The above table shows the **sattvayogya** **prakritis** for **Tejakaaya-Vayuakaaya** beings. Since **Tejakaaya-Vayuakaaya** beings do not have **sattva** in the **three ayus** (life spans) and **Tirthankara** nature, they have **144** **prakritis** capable of attaining **sattva**.

The first row indicates the absence of **udvelana**. The second row shows the **prakritis** that have experienced **udvelana**. The third row shows how many **prakritis** remain in **sattva** after experiencing **udvelana** out of the **144 sattvayogya** **prakritis**.

The explanation of the second and third rows is as follows:

* **Aharakdvig** (A 2) - When **udvelana** occurs, **142** **prakritis** remain in **sattva**.
* **Samyaktava** (S 1) - When **udvelana** occurs, **141** **prakritis** remain in **sattva**.
* **Mishra** (Mi 1) - When **udvelana** occurs, **140** **prakritis** remain in **sattva**.
* **Devadvig** (Su 2) - When **udvelana** occurs, **138** **prakritis** remain in **sattva**.
* **Narakchaturshka** (Na 4) - When **udvelana** occurs in **Narakagati** (hell), **Narakagatyānupūrvi** (following hell), **Vaikriyika** body, and **Vaikriyika** **adropāṅga** (limbs), **134** **prakritis** remain in **sattva**.
* **Uchchagotra** (U 1) - When **udvelana** occurs, **133** **prakritis** remain in **sattva**.
* **Manushyadvig** (M 2) - When **udvelana** occurs in **Manushya** (human) and **Manushya** **gatyānupūrvi** (following human), **131** **prakritis** remain in **sattva**.

**Vikalatrai** (three types of disabilities) and **Prithvi-Ap-Vanaspatikaaya** (earth, water, and plant bodies) have **145 sattvayogya** **prakritis**.

**A | Dwi | Tri | Cha | Pri | A V | 145 |**
**A 2 | S 1 | Mi 1 | Su 2 | Nar 4 | | 143 | 142 | 141 | 139 | 135 | 133 | 131 |**

The first row shows that **Ekaindriya** (one sense), **Dviindriya** (two senses), **Triindriya** (three senses), **Chaturindriya** (four senses), **Prithvikaaya** (earth body), **Apkaaya** (water body), and **Vanaspatikaaya** (plant body) have **145** **prakritis** capable of attaining **sattva** without **Devayau** (divine life span), **Narakayau** (hell life span), and **Tirthankara** nature.

The second row shows the **prakritis** that have not experienced **udvelana**. The third row shows the **prakritis** that remain in **sattva** after experiencing **udvelana**. 

Page #367:
---------------------------
## Gommatasara Karmakanda - 328

The names of the Udvellana Prakṛtis are mentioned in the third line, and the Sattvayoga Prakṛtis without Udvellana Prakṛtis are mentioned in the fourth line. Its special explanation is as follows:

When there is Udvellana of the Aharakdvīka (145-2), the Sattvayoga Prakṛti is 143. When there is Udvellana of the Samyaktvaprakṛti, the Sattvayoga Prakṛti is 142. When there is Udvellana of the Miśraprakṛti, the Sattvayoga Prakṛti is 141. When there is Udvellana of the Devadvika (Su 2), the Sattvayoga Prakṛti is 139. When there is Udvellana of the Narakacatuṣka, the Sattvayoga Prakṛti is 135. When there is Udvellana of the Uccakottra in the Tejakāya and Vāyukāya, the Sattvayoga Prakṛti is 133 for those born in the Tiryanca with Uccakottra and without Manushayau. When there is Udvellana of the Manusyadvika in the Tejakāya and Vāyukāya, the Sattvayoga Prakṛti is 131 for those born in the Tiryanca.

Now, we discuss Sattvādī in Yogamārgaṇā.

**Meaning:** To know the Sattvādī in the four Manoyoga, four Vacyanayoga, and Audārika-Vaikriyika-Aharak and Aharak Miśrakāyayoga, according to their respective Gunasthāna. Similarly, to know the Sattvādī in Vaikriyika Miśrakāyayoga, according to the Gunasthāna, but with the special feature that there is no Manushayau and Tiryancayau here, therefore, the Sattvayoga Prakṛtis are only 146.

**Special Meaning:** In the four Manoyoga, four Vacyanayoga, and Audārikakāyayoga, the Sattvayoga Prakṛti is 148, and the Gunasthāna is 12 or 13. Here, everything is to be known according to the Gunasthāna, there is no special feature.

**Gunasthāna Mithyātva**

**Punṇekārasajoge, sāhārayamissagevi saguṇoghum | Veguvviyamisssevi ya, ṇavari ṇ māṇusatirikkhāū ||352||**

**Sāsādana**

**Miśra**

**Asanyata**

**Deśasanyata**

In the four Manoyoga, four Vacyanayoga, and Audārikakāyayoga, the Sattvayoga Prakṛti is 148, and the Gunasthāna is 12 or 13, regarding the Asattva-Sattva-Sattvavyucchitti-related Sandṛṣṭi Sattvayoga Prakṛti.

**Asattva**

0

3

1

0

1

**Sattva**

148

145

147

148

147

**Sattva**

**Vyucchitti**

0

0

D

1

1

**Viśeṣa**

3 (according to the Sandṛṣṭi of Gāthā 342)

1 (according to the Sandṛṣṭi of Gāthā 342)

1 (Narakāyu)

As. 1 (Narakāyu) Chy. 1 (Tiryancayau) 

Page #368:
---------------------------
Gommatasar Karmakanda-329
146
146
18
"112
Wom
104
Pramattasanyata. 2
. 2 (Naraka and Tiryanchayu) Apramattasanyata
2 (Naraka and Tiryanchayu)
8 (According to the interpretation of Gatha 342) Apurvakarana
138
• (According to the interpretation of Gatha 342) Anivrittikarana
10 and 16 (According to the interpretation of Gatha 342) Part 1 Part 2.
122. 8 26 and 8 (According to the interpretation of Gatha 342) Part 3
1 (Napumsakaved) Part 4
1 (Strived) Part 5.
6 (Hasyaadi Nokashay) Part 6
1 (Purushaved) Part 7
1 (Sajwalan Krodha) Part 8
1 (Sanchalan Mana) Part 9
5 (Sajwalan Maya) Sukshmasampray
102
1 (Sanchalan Lobha)
2 (Naraka and Tiryanchayu) Upashamasamyaktvakshaya 1
Along with Upashamasreni, Upashanta in comparison
10 (8th Gunasthanavat) Kshayik Samyaktva along with Kshaya 2
Upashamasreni in comparison, Kshina Kshaya
47 and 16 (According to the interpretation of Gatha 342) Sayogakevali
63 (According to the interpretation of Gatha 342) This Gunasthan is in Satya and Anubhaya Manoyog and
Vachanayog. _ Aharak-Aharak Mishrakayayog has the essence of 146 Prakriti without Narakayu and Tiryanchayu. And the Gunasthan is only Pramat.
In Vaikriyikakayayog, there are 148 Satvaprakriti, and 4 Gunasthan. Here, in Mithyatvagunasthan, there are 148 Satvaprakriti, absence of Asattva, and no Satvavyucchetti, because the Tirthankara's existence reaches the third earth, and Mithyatva remains until his Antarmuhurta. Therefore, here, 148 Prakriti is said to be Satva. Knowing the statement of Satva-Asattva etc. in Sasadanamishn and Asanyata Gunasthan, according to Gunasthanavat.
Upashanta
138 

Page #369:
---------------------------
## Gommatasara Karmakanda-330:

In Vaikriyika-Mishra Kayayoga, there are 146 sattva-prakriti without Tiryancha and Manushayau, and 3 Gunasthanas (1-2-4). Here, in Mithyatva and Asanyata Gunasthanas, there is sattva of 146 prakriti, but no asattva. In Sasadan Gunasthan, there is sattva of 142 prakriti, excluding Aharak-Dwik, Tirthankara, and Narakayu, because asattva of these four prakriti is found here. In Audarika-Mishra Kayayoga and Karman Kayayoga, the statement of sattva etc. is as follows:

**Oralamissajoge, Ogham Suraniryayaugam Natthi.**
**Tammassavamage Hi, Titth Kammaati Sangunogham.** ||353||

**Meaning:** In Audarika-Mishra Kayayoga, there are 146 sattva-prakriti as per the general statement of Gunasthanas, excluding Devayau and Narakayu. The four Gunasthanas are 1-2-4-13. Here, in Mithyatva Gunasthan, due to the statement "Sammisse Vameme Na Hi Tittham", there is asattva of one Tirthankara-prakriti and sattva of 145 prakriti. In Sasadan Gunasthan, there is asattva of three prakriti (Tirthankara and Aharak-Dwik) and sattva of 143 prakriti. In Asanyata Gunasthan, there is no asattva, hence sattva of 146 prakriti. In Sayogi Gunasthan, there is asattva of 61 prakriti and sattva of 85 prakriti. Here, there is no vyuchchitti of sattva in all four Gunasthanas.

In Karman Kayayoga, all four Bhujyamanayus are possible, hence there are 548 sattva-yogya prakriti. The four Gunasthanas are 1-2-4-13. Here, in Mithyatva and Asanyata Gunasthanas, there is no asattva, hence sattva of 148 prakriti. However, in Sasadan Gunasthan, there is asattva of Aharak-Dwik, Tirthankara, and Narakayu, hence sattva of 144 prakriti. In Sayogi-Kevali Gunasthan, there is asattva of 63 prakriti and sattva of 85 prakriti. Here also, there is no vyuchchitti of sattva in all four Gunasthanas.

Further, from Vedamargna to Aharamargna, the statement of satya etc. is as follows:

**Vedadaaharoatti Ya, Sagunogham Navari Sandhathikhavage.**
**Kinhaddugasuhu Tilessiyawamevi Na Titthayarasattam.** ||354||

**Meaning:** From Vedamargna to Aharamargna, one should know sattva as per their respective Gunasthanas, but the speciality is that there is no sattva of Tirthankara-prakriti in Napumsak-Vedi and Stri-Vedi of Kshapaka श्रेणी. Similarly, there is no sattva of Tirthankara-prakriti in Mithyadristi with Krishna and Neelaleshya, and in Mithyadristi-jiva with three Shubhaleshhya (Peet-Padma-Shukla).

**Special Meaning:** In Vedamargna, there is sattva of 148 prakriti in Purusha-Vedi, and from Mithyatva... 

Page #370:
---------------------------
## Gommatasara Karmakanda-331

**The number of Gunasthanas until the cessation of the Aanivriti is 9.** Here, one should know the number of Sattvas, etc., as in the Gunasthanas (according to the understanding of verse 342). In the Napumsakaved and Strived, there are 148 Sattvas, and 9 Gunasthanas, etc. However, here, in the words "Navari Sandhathi Khavage", there is no Sattvas of the Tirthankara nature in the Kshapaka श्रेणी, because if there were Sattvas of the Tirthankara nature, then there would be no ascent in the Kshapaka श्रेणी of the Sanklishtaparinaami Jeeva from the arising of the Napumsakaved and Strived. Therefore, in the Kshapakaapuurvakaran, etc., Gunasthanas, one should know the Sattvas as one less than the Sattvas mentioned in the Gunasthanas. The rest should be known as in the Gunasthanas (according to the understanding of verse 342).

**In the Kashayamargna, there are 148 Sattvas.** In the Gunasthanas of Krodha, Mana, and Maya Kashayas, there are 9 Gunasthanas from Mithyatva to Aanivritikaran. However, in the Lobha Kashaya, there are 10 Gunasthanas until the Sukshmasampray. One should know the number of Sattvas, etc., as in the Gunasthanas (according to the understanding of verse 342).

**In the Gyanamargna, there are 148 Sattvas in the Kumati, Kushruta, and Kuavdhi (Vibhang) Gyanas.** There are two Gunasthanas: Mithyatva and Sasadan. Here, there is no Asattva in the Mithyatva Gunasthan, and there are 148 Sattvas. In the Sasadan Gunasthan, there are 3 Asattvas: Aharakadri, etc., and Tirthankara, and 145 Sattvas. In the Mati, Shruta, and Avadhi Gyanas, there are 148 Sattvas, and the Gunasthanas are from Asanyata to Kshinamoha, a total of 9. One should know the number of Sattvas, etc., as in the Gunasthanas (according to the understanding of verse 342).

**In the Manahparyaya Gyan, there are 146 Sattvas without Naraka and Tiryanchayu.** The Gunasthanas are from Pramatta to Kshinakashay, a total of 7. Here, one should know the Sattvas as in the Gunasthanas, but the Asattvas should be known as two less than the Asattvas mentioned in the Gunasthanas. In the Kevalgyan, there are 85 Sattvas, and the Gunasthanas are Sayogi and Aayogi, a total of 2. Here, the Sattvas are as in the Gunasthanas, but there is no Asattva in the Sayogi Gunasthan. In the Aayogi Gunasthan, there is no Asattva until the Dwicharmasamaya, but there are 72 Asattvas in the Charmasamaya.

**In the Samyammargna, there are 146 Sattvas without Naraka and Tiryanchayu in the Samayik, Chhedopasthapanasamyam.** The Gunasthanas are Pramatta, etc., a total of 4. Here, the Sattvas should be known as in the Gunasthanas, but the Asattvas should be known as two less than the Asattvas mentioned in the Gunasthanas. Therefore, in all cases, one should reduce the two Sattvas of Naraka and Tiryanchayu.

**In the Pariharavishuddhisamyam, there are 146 Sattvas.** The Gunasthanas are Pramatta and Apramatta, a total of 2. In the Kshapaka Sukshmasamprayasamyam, there are 102 Sattvas, and one Gunasthan: Sukshmasampray. In the Yathakyatasamyam, there are 146 Sattvas. The Gunasthanas are Upashantakshay, etc., a total of 4. In the Upashantakshay, there are 146 Sattvas with Upashma and Samyaktva, and the Upashma श्रेणी ascends. With Kshayik Samyaktva and the Upashma श्रेणी ascending, there are 139 Sattvas with Devayubandha and 138 Sattvas without Ayubandha. Here, in both cases, there is no Sattvavyucchetti of 2 or 9 or 10 Asattvas. In the Kshinakashay Gunasthan, there are 101 Sattvas. 

Page #371:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-332 Prefire, 357 the non-existence of nature and 56 the separation from the nature of existence. In the Sayogi Gunasthan, there are 85 natures of Sattwa, 63 natures of Asattwa, and zero natures separated from Sattwa. In the Ayogi Gunasthan, up to the Dvicharam Samaya, there are 85 natures of Sattwa, 63 natures of Asattwa, and 72 natures separated from Sattwa. In the Charam Samaya of the Ayogi Gunasthan, there are 13 natures of Sattwa, 135 natures of Asattwa, and 13 natures separated from Sattwa. In the Yathakyata Samyama, the perception related to Asattwa, Sattwa, and Sattwa separation is as follows:

| Asattwa | Sattwa | Sattwa Separation | Gunasthan | Upshanta Kshaya |
|---|---|---|---|---|
| | | | 4 | 2 |
| | | | 9 | Upshanta Kshaya |
| | | | 139 | Ya |
| | | | 146 | (According to the perception of verse 342, there are 146 natures of existence, according to the opinion that does not consider the disassociation of Anantanu bandhi in the second Upshama Samyaktv, which is higher than the Upshama Shreni with Kshayik Samyaktv) |

(According to the perception of verse 342) (According to the perception of verse 342) (According to the perception of verse 342)

| | | | | 135 | Kshina Kshaya Sayogi Kevali Ayogi Dvicharam |
| | | | | 13 | Ayogi Charam Samaya |

(According to the perception of verse 342)

In the Desha Samyama (Samyama Asamyama), there are 147 natures of Sattwa suitable for Narakaayu, and the Gunasthan is only Desha Samyata. In Asamyama, there are 148 natures of Sattwa, and the Gunasthan is Mithyadristi, etc., four. Here, in both Samyamas, one should know the complete description of Sattwa, etc., as in the Gunasthan (according to the perception of verse 342).

In the Darshanmarg, in the Chakshu-Achakshu Darshan, there are 148 natures of Sattwa, and the Gunasthan is from Mithyatva to Kshina Kshaya, 12. Here, one should know the complete description as in the Gunasthan (according to the perception of verse 342). In the Avadhi Darshan, there are 148 natures of Sattwa suitable for Sattwa, and the Gunasthan is from Asamyata to Kshina Kshaya Gunasthan, 9. Here also, one should know the complete description related to Sattwa, etc., as in the Gunasthan. In the Kevala Darshan, one should know the complete structure as in the Kevala Jnana.

In the Leshyamarg, in the Krishna and Neel Leshya, there are 148 natures of Sattwa, and the Gunasthan is Mithyatva, etc., four. Here, according to the statement "Kinhu Duge Bame Na Tiththayarasattam", there is no Sattwa of the Tirthankara nature in the Mithyatva Gunasthan. 

Page #372:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda - 333

Because the bondage of the Tirthankara nature does not begin in the three inauspicious leshyas, and the one whose bondage of hellish life has occurred also travels from the Kapota leshya in the second and third earths, therefore, here, due to the absence of the Tirthankara nature, there is the presence of the 147th nature. Know the Sasadan and other gunasthanas as being similar to the Rachana gunasthana.

In the Kapota leshya, the 148th nature is present, and there are four gunasthanas, etc. Know the complete description of the sattva, etc., as being the same as that mentioned in the gunasthanas. In the Teja (yellow) and Padma leshyas, the 148th nature is present, and the gunasthanas are seven, from Mithyatva to Apramatta. Here, in the Suhati Shleghsiya, the word "Jip Titshyar Sattvam" does not indicate the presence of the Tirthankara nature in the Mithyatva gunasthana, because it would contradict the samyaktvam of the Sattvavala Jeeva who is about to go to hell. In all three auspicious leshyas, there is no contradiction of samyaktvam, therefore, due to the absence of the Tirthankara nature, here, in the Mithyatva gunasthana, the 147th nature is present. Know the Sasadan and other gunasthanas as being the same as that mentioned in the gunasthanas (as per the reference in verse 342). In the Shukla leshya, the 148th nature is present, and the gunasthanas are thirteen, from Mithyatva to Sayogi. Due to the absence of the Tirthankara nature in the Mithyatva gunasthana, the 147th nature is present. Know the rest as being the same as that mentioned in the gunasthanas (as per the reference in verse 342).

In the Bhavya Margana, the 148th nature is present, and there are fourteen gunasthanas. Here, know the complete description of the sattva, etc., as being the same as that mentioned in the gunasthanas (as per the reference in verse 342).

Further, the special characteristic in the Abhavya Margana is stated as follows:

**Abhavva Sidde Natthi Hu, Sattvam Tiththayar Sammi Issanam. Ahar Chaukkas Savi, Asan Nijive Na Tiththayar. || 355 ||**

Meaning: In the Abhavya Margana, the Tirthankara nature, samyaktvam, samyagmithyatva, Aharaka Chatushk, these seven natures are not present. The Tirthankara nature is not present in the Asanji Jeevas.

Special Meaning: In the Abhavya Margana, the Tirthankara, samyagmithyatva, samyaktvam, Aharaka Sharira, Aharaka Angopang, Aharaka Bandhan, and Aharaka Sangata, these seven natures are not present, therefore, the 141st nature is present, and the only gunasthana is Mithyatva, because the Abhavya Jeeva never experiences the manifestation of samyagdarshan.

In the Samyaktvam Margana, in the Upshama Samyaktvam, the 148th nature is present, and the gunasthanas are eight, from Asanyata to Upshanta Kshaya. Here, in the Asanyata gunasthana, the absence of the sattva is not present, the 148th nature is present, and the Deshasanyata gunasthana... 

Page #373:
---------------------------
## Gommatasara Karmakanda-334

In the **Gommatasara Karmakanda-334**, there are **1** **asattva** (non-virtuous) nature for **narakayau** (hell beings) and **147** **sattva** (virtuous) natures for **prakriti** (nature). 

Further, from **pramattagunasthan** (state of heedlessness) to **upashantamohagunasthan** (state of subdued delusion), there are **1** **asattva** nature for **narakayau** and **tiryanchayau** (animal beings) and **146** **sattva** natures for **prakriti**. 

One should understand all other **gunasthanas** (states) in the same way.

In **upashamasamyaktva** (state of perfect knowledge), the **sandristi** (view) regarding **asattva**, **sattva**, and **sattvayucchiti** (elimination of sattva) is:

**Sattvayogya Prakriti 148, Gunasthan 8**

**Asattva**
**Gunasthan** **Asayata**
**Sattva** **Vyuchchitti**
**Vishesh 1** (Narakayau) **15** (Tiryancyau)
**148**
**Deshasanyata** **Pramatta** **Aparamatta** **Apuurvakaran** **Anivritikaran** **Sukshmasampray**

**Upashantakshaya**
**146** **146**

**::**

**0** This statement is in relation to the view that does not accept the rule of **vinsanyojana** (disconnection) in **dvitiyopashamasamyaktva** (second state of perfect knowledge) with **anantaanubandhi** (infinite karmas).
**2** **2**
**146**

In **vedaka** (kshayopashamic) **samyaktva** (state of perfect knowledge), there are **4** **sattvayogya prakriti** (nature suitable for sattva) from **asanyata** (uncontrolled) to **aparamatta** (heedless) **gunasthanas**. One should understand the **sattv** etc. in **gunasthanas** according to the **sandristi** (view) of **gatha 342**.

In **kshayika samyaktva** (state of perfect knowledge with karmas), there are **4** **kshaya** (karmas) for **anantaanubandhi** (infinite karmas) and **3** for **darshanamohaniya** (karmas that obscure knowledge). These **7** **prakriti** (natures) are without **sattvayogya prakriti** (nature suitable for sattva) and are **541**. There are **11** **gunasthanas** from **asanyata** (uncontrolled) to **ayogi** (unworthy). Here, there is no **asattva** (non-virtuous) in **asanyatagunasthan** (state of uncontrolled), therefore **sattvayogya prakriti** (nature suitable for sattva) is **145**. The **vyuchchitti** (elimination) of **narakayau** (hell beings) and **tiryanchayau** (animal beings) also happens here.

**Tiryancya** (animal beings) cannot have **deshasanyatagunasthan** (state of controlled conduct) in **kshayikasamyaktva** (state of perfect knowledge with karmas) because **kshayikasamyagdristi** (perfect knowledge with karmas) is born only in **bhogabhumijati** (animal beings) and **bhogabhumijeeva** (animal beings) have a fixed diet, therefore **vrat** (vow) or **sanyam** (control) is not possible. Therefore, in **deshasanyatagunasthan** (state of controlled conduct), there are **2** **asattva** (non-virtuous) natures and **139** **sattva** (virtuous) natures. In **pramattagunasthan** (state of heedlessness) and **aparamatta** (heedless) **gunasthanas**, there are also **139** **sattva** (virtuous) natures. In **apuurvakaran** (state of non-creation) **gunasthan**, there are **139** and **138** **sattva** (virtuous) natures in relation to both **upashamakshapka** (categories). Further, in **anivritikaran** (state of non-obstruction) etc. **gunasthanas**, the **sarvakathan** (all-inclusive) is the same as in **gunasthanas**. 

Page #374:
---------------------------
## Gunasthana
**Asanyata**
**Desasanyata**
**Gommatasar Karmakanda - 335**
**In Kshayika Samyaktv, Asattva - Satva - Satvavyuccitti Sambandhi Sandristi - Satvayogya Prakriti 141, Gunasthana 11**
**Asattva Satva**
**1.41**
**139**
**From Anivrittikaran to Ayogi Paryanta**
**D**
**2**
**Pramatta**
**2**
**Apramatta**
**2**
**Apuvrakaran 3**
**139**
**139**
**138**
**Satva**
**Vyuccitti**
**2**
**C**
**0**
**1**
**0**
**Vishesh**
**2 (Narakayu - Tiryanchayu)**
**In this cave**
**It**
**may be, but it cannot be Tiryancha.**
**1 (Devayu - Kshapak श्रेणी की अपेक्षा)**  Compared to Kshapak श्रेणी, a Kshayika Samyagdristi Jiva climbing up the Upshama श्रेणी may have Satva of 139 Prakriti if there is bondage, and if there is no bondage, it will have Satva of 138 Prakriti.
**Here, understand everything according to the Sandristi of Gatha 342, as in Gunasthana.**
**In Samyagmithyatva, there is Satva of 147 Prakriti without Tirthankara Prakriti. Gunasthana is one Samyagmithyatva (mixed).**
**In Sasadan Samyaktvamargna, there are Satvayogya Prakriti 145 without Tirthankara and Aharakdvik. Gunasthana is one Sasadan.**
**In Mithyatva, Satvayogya Prakriti is 148, and Gunasthana is one Mithyatva.**
**In Sanjimargna, Satva Prakriti is 148, and Gunasthana is from Mithyatva to Kshina Kshaya Paryanta 12. Understand everything about Satva etc. as in Gunasthana.**
**In Asajimargna, due to the saying "Pa Tiththayar", there is no Satva of Tirthankara Prakriti, so there is Satva of 147 Prakriti. Gunasthana is only Mithyatva and Sasadan.**
**In Mithyatva Gunasthana, there is no Asattva, so Satva Prakriti is 147. In Sasadan Gunasthana, there is no Satva of Aharakdvik, so there is only Satva of 145 Prakriti.**
**In Aharmargna, Satva Prakriti is 148, Gunasthana is from Mithyatva to Sayogi Paryanta 13. Understand everything about Satva etc. as in Gunasthana.**
**In Anaharmargna, by stating Satva etc., they complete the authority of Satva.**
**"Kammevaanahare, Paydiinam Sattamevamadese |**
**Kahiyamina Balmaahvachandacchianemichande |" 356 ||**
**Meaning - In Anaharmargna, understand the statement of Satva etc. as in Karmankayayog. Thus, said Nemichandracharya, who was worshipped by Baldev and Madhavchandra.** 

Page #375:
---------------------------
Gommatasar Karmakanda-336
Special Meaning- In Anaharamargna, there are 148 sattvayogya prakritis, like in Karmankayayoga. The five Gunasthans are 1-24-13-14. Here, in Mithyatva-Sasadan-Asanyata and Sayogi Gunasthans, one should know that all the structures are like Karmankayayoga, but in Ayogi Gunasthans, one should know that it is like Gunasthans (as per the understanding of verse 342). In Anaharamargna, there are 148 Sandrisht Sattavayogya Prakritis related to Asattva-Sattva-Sattvayuchchitti, Gunasthans 5
Sattva Gunasthans Asattva Sattva Vyuchchitti
Special Mithyatva Sasadan
| 4 (Tirthankara, Aharakadrik and Narakayu) Asanyata
63 63 (as per the understanding of verse 342, in the 13th Gunasthans) Sayogi Ayogi Dwicharams
(as per the understanding of verse 342) Time period until Ayogi
53 (as per the understanding of verse 342) In the final time
Note- The Sanskrit commentator, while explaining the meaning of the verse, has said in the meaning of the latter half, "Once, Shri Nemitithankaradev, who was worshipped by Balabhadra, Madhav (Narayan), and the second time, Siddhantachkravarti Shri Nemichandracharya, who was worshipped by his brothers Baldev and Madhavchandravidydev, spoke about the sattva related to karma prakritis in the Margna place." Now, completing the Bandha-Udaya-Sattvaadhikars, the final Mangalacharan is done.
So Me Tihuvan Mahido, Siddho Buddho Nirangano Niccho.
Disadu Varanaanalham, Buhajjan Paripaththanam Paramasuddham ||357|| Meaning- May those who are worshipped by the three worlds, Siddha, Buddha, free from karma-like anjan and eternal, give me the benefit of such pure knowledge (kevalgyan) which is worthy of being prayed for by the wise.
Thus, the second Adhikar named Bandha-Udaya-Sattva in the Hindi commentary named Siddhanta Gyandeepika of Gommatasar Karmakanda, written by Nemichandra Siddhantachkravarti, is complete. 

Page #376:
---------------------------
..
.....: . : .
Masa Kiya 37
Ath Sattvabhangadhikari
Now Nemichandracharya, after offering salutations, vows to speak of the sattva-sthana (states of being) along with the bhang (changes) in the karma-prakriti (karmic matter).
Namiun Badhhamanam, Kanayanhiham Devarayaparipujam.
Payadin Satththanam, Oghe Bhang Saman Voccham. ||358|| Gatha - (I, the author Nemichandracharya) bow to the Vardhamana Tirthankara Deva, who has a body the color of gold, and is worshipped by the Indra, and I will speak of the sattva-sthana along with the bhang in the prakriti within the guna-sthana (states of merit).
Vishesharth - The group of karma-prakriti that a being possesses in a single time period is called a sthana. Thus, the sattva-sthana are the states of being of the karma-prakriti, which are counted in terms of andha (blindness) and anya (other). And when the number of karma-prakriti in a sattva-sthana remains the same, but the prakriti themselves change, that is called bhang. For example, one being may have 146 prakriti, and another may have 145. These are two different sthana. But within a single sthana, such as one with 545 prakriti, one being may have 145 prakriti including manushya-ayu (human lifespan) and deva-ayu (divine lifespan), while another may have 145 prakriti including tiryancha-ayu (animal lifespan) and naraka-ayu (hellish lifespan). In this case, there is only one sthana, because the number is the same, but the change in the prakriti results in two bhang. Understand sthana and bhang in this way everywhere. Now, the method of speaking of the sattva-sthana and bhang within the guna-sthana is explained.
Aaugbandhabandhanabhedamkaun Vannam Padham.
Bhedena Ya Bhangasam Paruvanam Hodi Bidhiyamhi. ||359|| Arth - Here, understand the sattva-sthana and bhang of the prakriti in two ways. The first explanation is without regard to the difference between the bandha (bondage) and abandha (liberation) of ayu (lifespan), and the second explanation is with regard to the difference in the bandha of ayu. Now, we will first explain the sattva-sthana according to the first method, which is more general.
Savvam Tigeg Savvam Chegam Chhasu Donni Chausu Chhaddas Ya Duge. Chhassagadalam Dosu Tishatthi Parihin Padhi Sattam Jane. ||360|| 

Page #377:
---------------------------
Gommatasar Karmakanda - 338

Meaning: From the 14 Gunasthanas (stages of spiritual progress) starting with Mithyatva (false belief), know the number of remaining Prakruti (constituents of karma) as follows: 3 less, 1 less, all, 1 less, then in the next 6 Gunasthanas, 2 less, then in the 4 Gunasthanas of the Upshama श्रेणी (category), 6 less, then in the 2 Gunasthanas of the Kshapaka श्रेणी (category), 10 less, then in the next 2 Gunasthanas, i.e., in the Sukhma Sampray and Kshina Moh Gunasthanas, 46 and 47 less respectively, and 63 less. Know the Prakruti of the Sattva (soul) as 'Ch' (the sound of the letter 'ch') for the Ayogi Kevali (liberated soul without any karmic attachments) with 135 less Prakruti.

Sayogi Kevali (liberated soul with some karmic attachments)
The names of the 63 Prakruti whose Sattva is not present in the Gunasthanas are:

Ghai Tiyaujjivan Thavaravialan Cha Tav Aeindi | Niray-Tirikh Du Suhum Saaharan Hoai Tesatthi || 360k.

Meaning: The 47 Prakruti of the four Ghatiya Karmas (destructive karmas), the remaining three Ayus (life spans) excluding Manushyaayu (human life span), Udyot (radiance), Thavar (immovable), Vikal Tray (the three types of Vikal - Dwiindriya, Triindriya, Chaturindriya), Atap (heat), Ekeindriya Jati (one-sense beings), Narak Gati (hellish existence) - Narak Gati Anupurvi (following the path of hell), Tiryanch Gati (animal existence) - Tiryanch Gati Anupurvi (following the path of animal existence), Sukhma (subtle) and Sadharan (ordinary). These 63 Prakruti are not found in the Sattva of the Kevali Bhagwan (liberated soul).

Special Meaning: In the Mithyatva Gunasthan, there are 148 Prakruti of Sattva, in the Sasadan Gunasthan, there are 145 Prakruti of Sattva excluding the Tirthankara and Aharakdvik, in the Mishra Gunasthan, there are 147 Prakruti of Sattva excluding the Tirthankara Prakruti, in the Asanyata Gunasthan, there are 148 Prakruti of Sattva, in the Desh Sanayata Gunasthan, there are 147 Prakruti of Sattva excluding Narakayu (hellish life span), in the six Gunasthanas of Pramattadi, there are 146 Prakruti of Sattva excluding Narakayu and Tiryanchayu, but in the four Gunasthanas of the Upshama श्रेणी (category) starting with Apurvakaran, there are 142 Prakruti of Sattva excluding the aforementioned Narakayu, Tiryanchayu, and the four Kshayas (passions) of Ananta Anubandhi. In the two Gunasthanas of the Kshapaka श्रेणी (category) starting with Apurvakaran, there are 138 Prakruti of Sattva excluding Narakayu, Tiryanchayu, Devayu (divine life span), the three of Darshan Moh (delusion of perception), and the four of Ananta Anubandhi. In the Anivrittikaran Gunasthan, there are 102 Prakruti of Sattva excluding the 36 Vyuchchhinna Prakruti (16+8+1+1+6+1+1+1+1) and the aforementioned 10 (36+10) of Narakayu etc. In the Kshina Kshaya Gunasthan, there are 101 Prakruti of Sattva excluding the 47 Prakruti with Lobha (greed). In the Sayogi and Ayogi Gunasthanas, there are 85 Prakruti of Sattva excluding the 47 Prakruti of Ghatiya Karma, the 13 of Nama Karma, and the three Ayus excluding Manushyaayu. With the 'Chakar' (the sound of the letter 'ch'), there are 13 Prakruti of Sattva excluding the 135 Prakruti in the Ayogi Gunasthan at the end of time. In this way, know the Prakruti of Sattva in the Gunasthanas. 

Page #378:
---------------------------
**Meaning:** To know the natures of the beings in the different stages of the Gunasthana, as described in the first half of the 360th verse, which states that in the Sasadanagunastana, there are two types of beings: Tirthankara and Aharaka; in the Misra Gunastana, there is only Tirthankara; in the Desasanayat Gunastana, there are beings in Naraka; in the Prammatta and Aprammatta Gunasthanas, there are beings in Naraka and Tiryancha; and in the Upshama श्रेणी, there are beings in Naraka, Tiryancha, and the four Anantanubandhis. In the Kshapaka श्रेणी, there are ten beings, including the two mentioned earlier.

**Gunastana**
**Mithyatva**
Sasadan
Misra
Asanyata
Desasanayat
Prammatta
Aprammatta
1. A-purvakarana
From Samanya to Upshama
 श्रेणी
2. Anantanubandhi's Visanyojaka
Upshama श्रेणी
3. Kshayika Samyagdristi (Upshama श्रेणी
Arohaka)
Asattva
Q
3
1,
D
1
2
2
6
9
Sattva
148
145
147
148
147
146
146
146
142
139
**Special**
3 (Tirthankara Aharaka)
1. (Tirthankara)
1 (Naraka)
2 (Naraka - Tiryancha)
2 (Naraka - Tiryancha)
2 (Naraka - Tiryancha) According to the view that does not accept the rule of Visanyojana of Anantanubandhi in the second Upshama Samyaktva.
6 (Naraka - Tiryancha + 4 Anantanubandhi) The four Anantanubandhi are Visanyojita before ascending the Upshama श्रेणी.
9 (Naraka - Tiryancha, Darshanamohaniya 3, Anantanubandhi 4) 

Page #379:
---------------------------
Gammatsar Karmakanda-340
138. 10 (Naraka-Tiryanch-Devayu, Darshanamohaniya 3, Anantanubandhi 4)
2
| Apurvakaranagunasthanavat
138
4. Kshapaka श्रेणी
Ki apeksha Anivrittikaran 1. Samanya se Upasham |
Shreni ki apeksha 2. Uparukt 8ve gun
Sthanavat 3. Uparukt 8ve gun
Sthanabat 4. Uparukt 8ye gun
Sthanavat Sukshmasamparaya 1. Uparukt 8ve gun
Sthanavat 2. Uparukt 8ve gun
Sthanavat 3. Uparukt 8ve gun
Sthanavat 4. Uparukt 8ve gun- |
Sthanavat
146
142
Yasthanavat
146 142
Apurvakaranagunasthanavat
Upashantakshaya 1. 8ve gunasthanavat 2. 8ve gunasthanavat 3. 8ve gunasthanavat Kshina moha Sayogkevali Ayogakavali 1. Dwidharamasamparayant 2. Paramasamay mein 

Page #380:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda - 341

We will discuss the distinction between the binding and unbinding of lifespan in the Gunasthanas in detail later. Here, we describe the number of Sattvasthanas in two verses.

There are four Vigunanas, forty in each of the four Micchatiyas. There are twenty-four Sattvasthanas in each of the three Upshama श्रेणीवाले Gunasthanas, namely Apurvakarana, etc., and in the Upshantakashaya Gunasthanas. There are four Sattvasthanas in the Kshapaka श्रेणी, thirty-six in the Apurvakarana, four in the Anivrittikarana, eight in the Sukshmasamprayaya, four in the Kshina Kshaya, four in the Sayogakevali, and six in the Ayogikevali Gunasthanas. Thus, the Sattvasthanas are described up to the Ayogi Gunasthanas in relation to the binding and unbinding of the lifespan karma. The places that are destroyed are described in the next verse.

**Special Note:** There are four Sattvasthanas in the Apurvakarana Gunasthanas related to the Kshapaka श्रेणी, thirty-six in the Anivrittikarana, four in the Sukshmasamprayaya, eight in the Kshina Kshaya, four in the Sayogakevali, and six in the Ayogikevali Gunasthanas.

There is one destruction of the lifespan of a human being with the Sattvas of a Tirthankara, bound and with a false view, in the human realm. There is one destruction of the lifespan of a being who is enjoying hell, when it is born after death.

**Special Note:** There are only two possible realms for a being with the Sattvas of a Tirthankara, with a false view, and bound: 1. Human realm 2. Hell realm. A human being who has previously bound the lifespan of hell can have the Sattvas of a Tirthankara in the Micchattva Gunasthanas, because they will become a Micchattva within one Antarmukhurta before being born in the second or third hell. Therefore, only one destruction related to the bound lifespan is possible in the human realm. However, a destruction related to the bound lifespan is not possible in the hell realm. A being in hell remains a Micchattva for one Antarmukhurta after being born, and then becomes a Samyagdristi and starts binding the Sattvas of a Tirthankara. The binding of the lifespan related to the future life in the hell realm occurs six months before death. 

Page #381:
---------------------------
Meaning: In the seven Gunasthana (stages of spiritual progress) starting with Mithyatva (false belief) and ending with Aayogi Kevali (liberated soul), and in the 8th, 9th, and 10th Gunasthana which are combined with the Upashama (subduing) and Kshapaka (destroying) categories, and in the eighteen Sattva-sthana (stages of existence) from Upashanta-Kshaya (subdued passions) to Aayogi-Gunasthana, the number of Bhang (divisions) are respectively 50, 12, 36120, 48, 40, 40, 28, 62, 28, 24, 8, 4, and 8.

Gunasthana
*
Specific Meaning: In the 18 Sattva-sthana of Mithyatva Gunasthana, there are 50 Bhang. In the 4 Sattva-sthana of Sasadan Gunasthana, there are 12 Bhang. In the 3 Sattva-sthana of Misra Gunasthana, there are 120 Bhang. In the 40 Sattva-sthana of Desasan-yata Gunasthana, there are 48 Bhang. In the 40 Sattva-sthana of Pramatta and Apramatta Gunasthana, there are 40 Bhang each. In the 28 Sattva-sthana of Apurva-Karana Gunasthana, which is related to the Upashama and Kshapaka categories, there are 28 Bhang. In the 60 Sattva-sthana of Anivritti-Karana Gunasthana, which is related to the Upashama and Kshapaka categories, there are 62 Bhang. In the 28 Sattva-sthana of Sukshma-Samparaya Gunasthana, which is related to the Upashama and Kshapaka categories, there are 28 Bhang. In the 24 Sattva-sthana of Upashanta-Kshaya Gunasthana, there are 24 Bhang. In the 8 Sattva-sthana of Kshina-Kshaya Gunasthana, there are 8 Bhang. In the 4 Sattva-sthana of Sayoga-Kevali Gunasthana, there are 4 Bhang. In the 6 Sattva-sthana of Aayogi-Kevali Gunasthana, there are 8 Bhang.

Summary of Sattva-sthana and Bhang in Gunasthana
Sattva-sthana
Bhang
Gommatasar Karmakanda - 342
Now, the number of Bhang in the above Sattva-sthana is mentioned:
18
50
20
120
48
40
40
28
62
28
24
8
4
8
Anivritti
Sukshma-Samparaya
Upashama-Kshapaka
Upashama-Kshapaka
Upashama-Kshapaka
Niryati, etc. are in the Bhujaga (snake) form, Bandhu-daga (relative) form, and in the form of water, water, and two. Again, they are devoid of the same, and the incoming Bhang are five. || 364 ||
Niryati, etc. are in the form of an atom, and the Niryati, etc. are in the form of a Tiryancha (animal) and a Manushya (human). The Tiryancha are in the form of a Deva (god), and the Manushya are in the form of a Deva (god). || 364 Kha ||

Page #382:
---------------------------
## Gommatasara Karmakanda-343:

**Meaning:** When there is a bondage of one lifespan and another lifespan from the four lifespans (Naraka, Manushya, Tiryancha, Deva), there are 12 bhangas (Naraka-Manushya, Naraka-Tiryancha, Tiryancha-Naraka, Tiryancha-Tiryancha, Tiryancha-Manushya, Tiryancha-Deva, Manushya-Naraka, Manushya-Tiryancha, Manushya-Manushya, Manushya-Deva, Deva-Tiryancha, and Deva-Manushya). Out of these 12 bhangas, five bhangas (Tiryancha-Naraka, Manushya-Naraka, Manushya-Tiryancha, Deva-Tiryancha, Deva-Manushya) and two samabhangas (Tiryancha-Tiryancha, Manushya-Manushya) are reduced, leaving five bhangas in relation to the lifespan being considered. These are:

1. Naraka-Tiryancha
2. Naraka-Manushya
3. Tiryancha-Manushya
4. Tiryancha-Deva
5. Manushya-Deva

**Meaning:** In relation to the bondage and non-bondage of lifespan, the number of karma-prakritis in the 18 sattvasthanas of Mithyatva-gunasthan are described as follows:

**Dutichassattattanavekkarasam sattarasamunavisa migiviasam. Heena savve satta, micche badhdau gidaramegunam. ||365||**

**Meaning:** From the total number of karma-prakritis in the sattvasthanas of Mithyatva-gunasthan, 2-3-6-7-8-9-11-17-19 and 21 prakritis are reduced for the badhdhayushk, leaving 10 sattvasthanas. For the abadhdhayushk, one prakriti is reduced from each of these sattvasthanas up to the 8th sattvasthan, and the remaining two sattvasthanas are the same as before. Thus, there are also 10 sattvasthanas for the abadhdhayushk. Combining both (badhdhayushk and abadhdhayushk), there are 20 sattvasthanas, but the 9th, 19th, and 20th sattvasthanas are the same, so reducing two sattvasthanas, the remaining 18 sattvasthanas are described as Mithyatva-gunasthan.

**Special Meaning:** One whose future lifespan is bound is called badhdhayushk, and one whose future lifespan is not bound is called abadhdhayushk.

**Meaning:** The names of the prakritis that are reduced in the sattvasthanas related to Mithyatva-gunasthan are:

**Tiriaugadevaaugamannadaranaugadugam taha tittham. Devatiriau sahaia, harachaukkam tu chhacchede. ||366||**

**Audgaharatittham, sammam missam cha taha ya devadurg. Narayachhakam cha taha narauuccham cha manuvadugam. ||367|| Jummam.**

**Meaning:** These prakritis are: Tiriauga, Devaauga, Manna, Darauga, Dugam, Tittham, Devatiriau, Sahaia, Harachaukkam, Audgaharatittham, Sammam, Missam, Devadurg, Narayachhakam, Narauuccham, and Manuvadugam. 

Page #383:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-344

**Meaning:**

In the sattvasthana related to Mithyatva guna, the reduced natures are in order: Tiryanchayu, Devayu. Any two ayus without Bhujyaman-Badyaman ayu, Tirthankara prakriti. Devayu, Tiryanchayu and Aharak Chatushk. Any two ayus, Tirthankara and Aharak Chatushk. Any two ayus, Tirthankara, Aharak Chatushk, Samyaktva prakriti. By adding Samyagmithyatva to these 8 prakritis, it becomes 9. By adding Devadvik to these 9 prakritis, it becomes 11 prakritis. By adding Narakagati-Narakagaty anupurvi, Vaikriyik Sharira-Vaikriyik Anopang, Vaikriyik Sharira Bandhan, Vaikriyik Sharira Sanghat these 6 prakritis to these 11 prakritis, it becomes 17. By adding Manushayau and Uchchagotra to these 17 prakritis, it becomes 19 prakritis and by adding Manushayagati-Manushayagaty anupurvi to these 19 prakritis, it becomes 21 prakritis.

**Special Meaning:**

Here, there is one sattvasthana of a bound ayushk with 146 prakritis, without Tiryancha and Devayu. And there is one sattvasthana with 145 prakritis, without Bhujyaman-Badyaman ayu and Tirthankara prakriti. There is one sattvasthana with 142 prakritis, without Devayu-Tiryanchayu, Aharak Chatushk, these 6 prakritis. There is one sattvasthana with 141 prakritis, without Di Aadh, Aharak Chatushk, and Tirthankara, these seven prakritis. There is one sattvasthana with 140 prakritis, without the aforementioned 7 and one Samyaktva, these 8 prakritis. There is one sattvasthana with 139 prakritis, without the aforementioned 8 and Samyagmithyatva, these 9 prakritis. There is one sattvasthana with 137 prakritis, without the aforementioned 9 and Devagati-Devagaty anupurvi, these 11 prakritis. There is one sattvasthana with 131 prakritis, without the aforementioned 11 and Narakagati-Narakagaty anupurvi, Vaikriyik Sharira-Vaikriyik Angopang, Vaikriyik Bandhan, Vaikriyik Satat, these 17 prakritis. There is one sattvasthana with 129 prakritis, without the aforementioned 17 and Manushayau, Uchchagotra, these 19 prakritis. There is one sattvasthana with 127 prakritis, without the aforementioned 19 and Manushayagati-Manushayagaty anupurvi, these 21 prakritis. Thus, these 10 sattvasthanas should be known for a bound ayushk.

The existence of Bhujyamanayu is found in an unbound ayushk, but the existence of Badyamanayu is not found. Therefore, one should know the 10 sattvasthanas of an unbound ayushk, which are devoid of one Badyamanayu from the aforementioned sattvasthanas. Thus, there are 18 sattvasthanas of Mithyatva gunasthana, devoid of two repeated places, in the (10+10) 20 sattvasthanas related to bound and unbound ayushk.

Here, a Mithyadristi manushya, whose Narakayu has been bound, accepts Vedak Samyaktva and becomes an Asanyat gunasthana varti. He starts the binding of Tirthankara prakriti by worshipping the sixteen-cause contemplation near a Kevali or Shruta Kevali. Thus, at the time of death, when the Mithyadristi has the remaining Antarmuhurta time of Bhujyaman Manushayau with the existence of Tirthankara prakriti, there is an absence of the existence of Tiryanchayu and Devayu in that jiva at that time. Therefore, a sattvasthana with 146 prakritis is found. Here, Bhang is also one... 

Page #384:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-345

It is found that those who have a bound lifespan of a Tiryancha and a human lifespan, and a enjoyed lifespan of a human lifespan, do not have the beginning of bondage of the Tirthankara nature for those who are unrestrained and have right faith. Those who are unrestrained and have four-stage seed-beings with a bound lifespan of a deva and a enjoyed lifespan of a human lifespan, do not become corrupted from right faith and fall into wrong faith. And, a lifespan of a enjoyed hell and a bound human lifespan, this type of single-fold lifespan of hell, when six months remain, there is no occurrence of wrong faith. Therefore, a enjoyed human lifespan and a bound hell lifespan, this type of single-fold lifespan occurs. Other types of changes in natures do not have the existence of 146 natures. And, for those who have an unbound lifespan, the existence of a enjoyed lifespan is not possible without the existence of another lifespan. Therefore, without a deva lifespan, a human lifespan, and a Tiryancha lifespan, there is a place of existence of 145 natures. There, it is known as a single-fold lifespan of a enjoyed hell, because that human with the existence of a bound hell lifespan and a Tirthankara nature, after dying, becomes a hell being, and until the end of (insufficient rest, purity, these three) internal mouths, there is the occurrence of wrong faith. There, because of having an unbound lifespan, there is no other existence without the existence of a enjoyed hell lifespan. That being has a place of existence of 145 natures. Other beings do not have this type of existence.

For those who have a bound lifespan, the second place of existence is to know 145 natures, excluding the two lifespans of enjoyed and bound, and the remaining two lifespans and the Tirthankara nature. Here, the term "fold" is used.

A enjoyed hell lifespan and a bound Tiryancha lifespan, a enjoyed hell lifespan and a bound human lifespan, a enjoyed Tiryancha lifespan and a bound hell lifespan, a enjoyed Tiryancha lifespan and a bound Tiryancha lifespan, a enjoyed Tiryancha lifespan and a bound human lifespan, a enjoyed Tiryancha lifespan and a bound deva lifespan, a enjoyed human lifespan and a bound hell lifespan, a enjoyed human lifespan and a bound Tiryancha lifespan, a enjoyed human lifespan and a bound human lifespan, a enjoyed human lifespan and a bound deva lifespan, a enjoyed deva lifespan and a bound Tiryancha lifespan, a enjoyed deva lifespan and a bound human lifespan, in this way, there are 12 folds. Among these, a enjoyed Tiryancha lifespan and a bound Tiryancha lifespan, and a enjoyed human lifespan and a bound human lifespan, these two folds are repetitive, because in this fold of a enjoyed Tiryancha lifespan and a bound Tiryancha lifespan, there is only the existence of a Tiryancha lifespan, not of any other lifespan. Similarly, in a enjoyed human lifespan and a bound human lifespan, it should be known.

Without the above repetitive folds, the remaining 10 folds remain. Among them, there is similarity between a enjoyed Tiryancha lifespan and a bound hell lifespan, and a enjoyed hell lifespan and a bound Tiryancha lifespan. Therefore, in both folds, because there is only the existence of a hell lifespan and a Tiryancha lifespan, both folds should be counted as one fold. Similarly, in a enjoyed human lifespan and a bound hell lifespan, and a enjoyed hell lifespan and a bound human lifespan, in a enjoyed human lifespan and a bound Tiryancha lifespan, and a enjoyed Tiryancha lifespan and a bound human lifespan, in a enjoyed deva lifespan and a bound Tiryancha lifespan, and a enjoyed Tiryancha lifespan and a bound deva lifespan, in a enjoyed deva lifespan and a bound human lifespan, and a enjoyed human lifespan and a bound deva lifespan, there is similarity. Therefore, one fold each should be counted. In this way, for those who have a bound lifespan with the existence of 145 natures, there are 5 folds to know. 

Page #385:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-346

The second state of Abaddhayushka, with 144 natures, is the state of being bound by one lifespan, minus the lifespan itself. Therefore, there are four types of destruction for the lifespan of beings in all four realms. The state of being bound by Tiryanchayu, with Tiryanchayu, is found in 144 natures. The state of being bound by Narakayu, with Narakayu, is found in 144 natures. In this way, one should know the different types of destruction due to the change in natures, and similarly, one should know it elsewhere as well.

If a Mithyadristi being has previously attained the state of Aprammatta Guna and has not bound the fourfold food there, then it does not have the state of the fourfold food. Or, if a being has bound the fourfold food in the state of Aprammatta Guna, and later becomes Asanyami or Mithyadristi, and by stirring up the fourfold food, becomes devoid of the state of the fourfold food, such a being is born as a human, and after binding Narakayu, attains Vedak Samyaktva, and becomes an Asanyata Guna state dweller. By contemplating the sixteen-fold cause-effect meditation near a Kevali or Shruta Kevali, it binds the Tirthankara nature, and due to the state of the Tirthankara nature, it becomes a Mithyadristi capable of going to the third earth, with the remnants of the consumed aura, which are first Sarjiniya.

The third state of Abaddhayushka, without Tiryanchayu, Devayu, and the fourfold food, is found in 142 natures. There is only one destruction there. Therefore, the state of 142 natures is found in this way, and not in any other way.

The one who has previously bound the human-Tiryanchayu does not bind the Tirthankara nature, and the one who has bound Devayu can have the state of the Tirthankara nature, but not a Mithyadristi.

Doubt: If the beginning of the binding of the Tirthankara nature is said to be in humans, then how is it said that the Asanyata Deva-Naraki bind the Tirthankara nature?

Solution: Although the beginning of the binding of the Tirthankara nature is in humans, if it does not deviate from Samyaktva, then it continues to bind the Tirthankara nature in a time-bound manner, in an excellent way, from the moment of death to the end of the thirty-three Sagaras, two koti years, and eight years more. Therefore, the binding of the Tirthankara nature also occurs in Deva-Naraki.

The third state of Abaddhayushka is also devoid of the state of Manushyayu. Therefore, it is 141 natures without Tiryancha-Manushya-Devayu and the fourfold food. If a being with the state of the Tirthankara nature dies and goes to the second or third Naraka, and remains a Mithyadristi for three moments, due to the state of being insufficient, etc., it does not have the state of any other lifespan, except for the consumed Narakayu. This type of state is found in this being, therefore there is only one destruction, and such a state is not found in any other way. 

Page #386:
---------------------------
## Gommatasara Karmakanda-347

**For a Baddhayushka, the fourth sattvasthana is known as 141 prakriti, excluding the two ayus (Bhujyaman and Baddhyaman), the four Aharak, and the Tirthankara, which are 7 prakritis in total.** Here, out of the previously mentioned 12 bhangas, two are repetitive and five are similar, leaving only 5 bhangas. 

**Similarly, for an Abaddhayushka, the fourth sattvasthana is known as 140 prakriti, excluding the remaining three ayus (excluding Bhujyaman), the four Aharak, and the Tirthankara.** Here, there are four bhangas due to the four different ayus (Bhujyaman).

**For a Baddhayushka, the fifth sattvasthana is known as 140 prakriti, excluding the two ayus (Bhujyaman and Baddhyaman), the four Aharak, the Tirthankara, and the Samyaktava prakriti, which are 8 prakritis in total.** Here, there are 5 bhangas as mentioned earlier. This means, out of the previously mentioned 12 bhangas, two are repetitive and five are similar, leaving only 5 bhangas. 

**For an Abaddhayushka, the fifth sattvasthana is known as 139 prakriti, excluding the Baddhyaman ayu from the previously mentioned 140 prakritis.** Here, there are four bhangas due to the four different ayus.

**For a Baddhayushka, the sixth sattvasthana is known as 139 prakriti, excluding the two ayus (Bhujyaman and Baddhyaman), the Tirthankara prakriti, the four Aharak, the Samyaktava, and the Samyagmithyatva prakriti, which are 8 prakritis in total.** Here, there are 5 bhangas as mentioned earlier. 

**Similarly, for an Abaddhayushka, the sixth sattvasthana is known as 138 prakriti, excluding the Baddhyaman ayu from the previously mentioned 139 prakritis.** Here, there are four bhangas due to the four different gatis.

**For a Baddhayushka, the seventh sattvasthana is known as 137 prakriti, excluding the Bhujyaman Tiryanchayu and Baddhyaman Manushayus, the remaining Devayus and Narakayus, the four Aharak, the Tirthankara, the Samyaktava and Samyagmithyatva prakriti, the Devagati, and the Devagaty anupurvi, which are 51 prakritis in total.** This is for those who have experienced the Udvelana of Devadvika, who are Ekendriya and Vikalatraya jivas. Here, there are two bhangas: Bhujyaman Tiryanchayu-Baddhyaman Tiryanchayu and Bhujyaman Tiryanchayu-Baddhyaman Manushayus. However, Bhujyaman Tiryanchayu and Baddhyaman Tiryanchayu are repetitive bhangas, so they are not counted here, leaving only one bhang. The nature of Udvelana is the same as previously mentioned.

**Now, regarding the bhangas of Miyadristi, which are mentioned in some places, the seventh sattvasthana for an Abaddhayushka is described in two verses with four bhangas:**

**Verse 368:**

* Udvellideva duge, bidiyapde chari bhangaya evam.
* Sapade padhamo bidhiyam, so cheva naresu uppanno.

**Verse 369:**

* Veguvva aṭṭharahide, panchindriyatirijayadisuvavanne.
* Surachabbandhe tadiyo naresu tabbandhane turiyo.

**Jummang** 

Page #387:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-348

Meaning: After the seventh sattva-sthana of the bound-lifespan, there is the 136-nature-form eighth sattva-sthana, which is different from the unbound-lifespan. Here, there are four bhangas (divisions) for the one whose two natures, devagati (heavenly path) etc., have been aroused. They are as follows:

- The first bhang is when a one-sensory or three-defective being, whose devadvik (heavenly pair) has been aroused, attains the 136-nature-form sattva-sthana in its own paryaya (cycle).

- The second bhang is when the same being, after death, is born as a human.

- The third bhang is when the same one-sensory or three-defective being, whose vaikriyaka-ashtak (eight vaikriyaka) has been aroused, is born as a five-sensory tiryanch (animal) after death. Here, even after binding six natures, devagati etc., it attains the 136-nature-form sattva-sthana without the 12, including the aharaka-chaturshka (four aharaka) etc. and the naraka-dvik (two naraka).

- The fourth bhang is when the same being, after death, is born as a human. Here, it binds the six natures, devagati etc., but binds only the 136 natures without the naraka-dvik. Therefore, this is the fourth bhang.

In comparison to the bound-lifespan, the eighth sattva-sthana is 136-nature-form. For a one-sensory or three-defective being with a false-view, whose devadvik has been aroused, the sattva-sthana of 136 natures is attained in the same paryaya without the 12 natures, including the aharaka-chaturshka, tirthankara, samyak-tva (right faith), samyag-mithyatva (right false-view), devagati-devagaty-anupurvi (heavenly path-heavenly path-sequential), and the three remaining ayus (lifespans) without the bhujyaman-tiryanch-ayu (enjoyed animal lifespan). This is the first bhang.

The second bhang is when the same one-sensory or three-defective being with a false-view, whose devadvik has been aroused, is born as a human after death. Due to the false-view in its apariapta-avastya (incomplete state), it does not bind the sura-chaturshka (four sura). Therefore, the sattva-sthana of 136 natures is attained without the 12 natures, including the aforementioned 1 and the three ayus without the bhujyaman-manushya-ayu (enjoyed human lifespan).

The third bhang is when the same one-sensory or three-defective being, whose vaikriyaka-sharira (vaikriyaka body), vaikriyaka-angopaanga (vaikriyaka limbs), devagati-devagaty-anupurvi, naraka-gati-naraka-gaty-anupurvi (hellish path-hellish path-sequential), vaikriyaka-sharira-bandhana (vaikriyaka body-binding), and vaikriyaka-sharira-sanghata-rupa-vaikriyaka-ashtak (vaikriyaka body-aggregate-form-vaikriyaka eight) have been aroused, is born as a five-sensory tiryanch after death. Here, it binds the sura-shatka (six sura), including devagati-devagaty-anupurvi, vaikriyaka-sharira-vaikriyaka-anupaja (vaikriyaka body-vaikriyaka-non-support), vaikriyaka-sanghata (vaikriyaka aggregate), and vaikriyaka-bandhana (vaikriyaka binding), but does not bind naraka-gati-naraka-gaty-anupurvi. Here, the sattva-sthana of 136 natures is attained without the 12 natures, including the aharaka-chaturshka, tirthankara, samyak-tva, samyag-mithyatva, naraka-gati, naraka-gaty-anupurvi, and the three ayus without the bhujyaman-tiryanch-ayu.

The fourth bhang is when the same one-sensory or three-defective being, whose vaikriyaka-ashtak has been aroused, is born as a human after death. Here, due to the binding of the sura-shatka, the sattva-sthana of 136 natures is attained without the 12 natures, including the aforementioned 9 and the three ayus without the bhujyaman-manushya-ayu.

In all these bhangas, there are only 136 natures. Therefore, the sattva-sthana is the same, but there are four ways in which the natures change. Hence, there are four bhangas.

In comparison to the bound-lifespan, the eighth sattva-sthana is attained by a one-sensory or defective-sensory being whose naraka-shatka (six naraka) has been aroused. It is attained without the bhujyaman-tiryanch-ayu and baddhyaman-manushya-ayu (bound human lifespan), but with the deva-naraka-ayu (heavenly-hellish lifespan), aharaka-chaturshka, tirthankara, samyak-tva, samyag-mithyatva, devagati-devagaty-anupurvi, naraka-gati-naraka-gaty-anupurvi, vaikriyaka-sharira, ... 

Page #388:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-349: Knowing the 136 forms of Vaikriyika Angopanga, Vaikriyika Bandhana, Vaikriyika Sanghata in these 17 categories, here there are two bhangas: Bhujyamanatiryanchayu-Badyamanatiryanchayu and Bhujyamanatiryanchayu-Badyamanamanushyayu. However, Bhujyamanatiryanchayu and Badyamanatiryanchayu are considered one bhang because they are repetitive. Further, there are two bhangas compared to Abaddhayusk:

Narakchakkuvelle, Aaugbandhujjhide du bhangaa hu.
Igivigele sigibhangoo, tammi nare vidiumuppanne. ||370||

Meaning: Compared to Abaddhayusk, there are two bhangas in the eighth sattvasthana due to the change in ayubandha. The first bhang is the 130-form sattva of a one-sense or partially-disabled being in its own paryay, which stirs up the six categories of narakagati (hellish existence). The second bhang is the 130-form sattva of the same being after death, when it becomes a human, due to the change in ayu.

Special Meaning: Compared to Abaddhayuk, the eighth sattvasthana has 530 forms, including three ayus and 15 categories like Aharakchatushk, without Bhujyamanayu. Here, there are two bhangas. When the six categories of Narakshaṭk (Narakagati, Narakagatyānupūrvi, Vaikriyika Sharia, Vaikriyika Agopanga, Vaikriyika Bandhana, Vaikriyika Sanghata) are stirred up, a one-sense or partially-disabled being has 130 forms of sattva without three ayus and 15 categories like Aharakchatushk, totaling 18 categories. This is one bhang. The second bhang is when the same one-sense or partially-disabled being dies and is reborn as a human, where it has 130 forms of sattva without three ayus and 15 categories like Aharakchatushk, totaling 18 categories, in an insufficient period of time.

Compared to Baddhayusk, the ninth sattvasthana has 129 forms, which is the sattva of Tejakaya-Vayukaya beings when the higher gotra is stirred up. This is because the higher gotra is absent from the previously mentioned 130 forms. Here, there is only one bhang. The bhang of Bhujyamanatiryanchayu and Badyamanatiryanchayu is repetitive. There are no other types of bhang here, so this one should be accepted. Similarly, the ninth sattvasthana has 129 forms compared to Abaddhayusk. This is the same as the sattva of Baddhayusk, so it should not be accepted because it is repetitive.

Compared to Baddhayusk, the tenth sattvasthana has 127 forms, which is the sattva of Agnigaya-Vayukaya beings when the human dwika is stirred up. This is because the categories of Manushya Gati and Manushya Gatyānupūrvi are absent from the previously mentioned 529 forms. Here, there is only one bhang. Similarly, the tenth sattvasthana has 127 forms compared to Abaddhayusk. Thus, compared to Baddhayusk and Abaddhayusk, this... 

Page #389:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda - 350
There is no special characteristic in the nature and number of the tenth sattva-sthana. Therefore, it should not be considered as a place.
Now, the five types of bound lifespan are mentioned:
Niriyau - Tiriyau Niriy Narau Tiriy - Manuyau. Teranciy - Devaau Manusa - - Devaau Egegan. || 370 k ||
-
Meaning - There are five types of bound lifespan: Narakayu-Tiriyancyayu, Narakayu-Manushyavu, Tiriyancyayu-Manushyavu, Tiriyancyayu-Devaayu, Manushyavu-Devaayu. || 370 k ||
Special Meaning - This refers to the five types of bound lifespan. There are two types of sattva in the ayukarma of the bound lifespan. Due to the change in nature, there are five types of bound lifespan, which are mentioned in the verse.
Further, there are 50 major types of bhangas without repetition and suṅga in the 18 places. We will now mention the number of bhangas in each place.
Vidie Turiye Panage, Chatthe Pancheva Sesage Ekkam. Vigachaupanchassatthayathane Chattari Atthage Doni || 371 ||
Meaning - There are 5-5 bhangas in the second, fourth, fifth, and sixth sattva-sthana, and 1-1 bhangas in the remaining first, third, seventh, eighth, ninth, and tenth places. There are four bhangas in the second, fourth, fifth, sixth, and seventh places for the unbound lifespan. There are two bhangas in the eighth place and one bhang in the remaining first and third places. Thus, there are 18 sattva-sthana and 50 bhangas in the mithyatva-guna-sthana. 

Page #390:
---------------------------
## Gommatasara Karmakanda-351

**Regarding the Mithyatva Gunasthan, Sattvasthan and its Breakage (in comparison to Baddhayushk and Abaddhayushk)**

**Gunasthan** | **Sattva** | **Specific Details** | **Breakage Number** | **Nature Number** | **Location** | **Mithyatva** | **In comparison to Baddhayushk**
------- | -------- | -------- | -------- | -------- | -------- | -------- | --------
| **First Location** | **146** | **146 (148-2, Tiryanch-Devayu)** | **Mithyadristi** | **Human** | **Narakaayu** | **After binding Narakaayu, the person attained Vedak Samyaktva and also bound Tirthankara-Prakriti. At the moment of death, he entered the Mithyatva Gunasthan with 146 Prakruti Sattva.** | **Note: For a Samyagdristi human who has bound human and Tiryanch-ayu, the binding of Tirthankara-Prakriti does not begin.** |
| **First Location** | **145** | **145 (148-3, Manushya-Tiryanch-Devayu)** | **Mithyatva** | **Abaddhayushk** | **Human** | **A human who has bound Devayu in the 4th to 7th Gunasthan cannot enter Mithyatva.** | **In comparison to Baddhayushk** |

**Explanation:**

As mentioned above, a Naraki with Tirthankara-Prakriti Sattva, born in the second and third Naraka, remains Mithyadristi for three Antarmuhurta. During this time, his future life is not bound, as the binding of life in Naraka occurs in the last six months. Therefore, due to the reduced Sattva of the bound life, the Sattvasthan, which is 146 Prakruti for Baddhayushk, is reduced by the bound human life, resulting in a Sattvasthan of 145 Prakruti here. 

Page #391:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-352
Mithyatva
Baddhayushka ki 1 Na.ti.
Apekṣā 1 Na.ma. Dvitiya sthān | 1 Ti.ma.
1 Ti.de. Somadenu
| 145 (148-3, Bhujyaman va Badyaman
Ayubina doayu eva tirthankara) Is sthān mein 12 bhang sambhav hain, kyonki manushya va tiryanchagati mein charon hi ayu ka bandh ho
karan hai. Vigat va devagati mein jivon ke tiryancha va manushya gati ka hi bandh ho sakta
hai.
Badyaman
Bhang
Bhujyaman ayu
Ayu
Sankhya
Naraka
Tiryacha
Bharaka
Manushya
Naraka
Tiryacha Tiryacha Tiryacha
Tirvancha
Manushya
Tiryacha
Deva
Naraka
Manushya Manushya
Tiryacha
Manushya
Tiryacha
Manushya
Upayukta sandristi mein 12 bhangon mein punarukta bhang | mein tatha jahan bhujyaman va badyaman ayu saman
hi hai us bhang ke age shunya diya hai atah 12 | mein se yahan 5 hi bhar gine hain. 

Page #392:
---------------------------
## Mithyatva

**Mithyatva**

**Second place** in comparison to Abaddhayushk

**Third place** in comparison to Badhayushk

**Gommatsar Karmakanda - 353**

**1 N.**
**1 Ti.**
**1 M.**
**1 De.**
**4**
**144**
** * **
**144 (148-4, Bhujyaman Ayu without remaining 3 Ayu, Tirthankara)**

**145** With the existence of 145 sattva prakritis of the aforementioned jiva, the remaining sattva prakritis after reducing the bound ayu are 144, hence there are 4 bhattas in comparison to the speed (8-9-10-11).

**142 (148-6, Tiryancha and Devayu and Aharak Chatushk)**

A mithyadristi man first attained the Agammatta Gunasthan, but there he did not bind the Aharak Chatushk and again attained the Mithyatva Gunasthan. Or, he bound the Aharak Chatushk in the Apsagunaasthan, and later, after attaining the Mithyatva Gunasthan, he was born as a human after countless years by the udvelana of the Aharak Chatushk. There, after binding the Narakayu, he became a Vedak Samyagdristi and, by having the Shodashakarna Bhavana at the feet of the Kevali-Shruta Kevali, he started binding the Tirthaprakriti and, being associated with that karma, he went to the second and third Naraka. The jiva, with the remaining antarmuhurta of Bhujyaman Ayu, died before death and fell into Mithyatva. His 142 prakritis are true. And the man who has bound the Devayu and started binding the Tirthankara prakriti, his Samyaktva does not leave him, and his Tirthankara prakriti will be bound in the Samay Prabaddha for 33 Sagar Parvanta, with 8 years and one antarmuhurta, two koti, in the best way. This is possible only for the jiva who is going to be a Naraki. 

Page #393:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-354
Mithyatva
Third place in comparison to Abaddhayushka
| 141 (148-7, Bhujyamanayu without the rest
3 Ayu and Aharakchatushk)
A Mithyadrishtijiva born in the 2-3 Narakas with the presence of Tirthankara nature will have 141 natures in the Nivrutti Paryapta Avastha, because in this state, the presence of Vadyamanayu does not remain and the presence of 141 natures remains until the last six months of Narakayu, because in the last six months of Narakayu, Ayu Bandha occurs.
Mithyatva
14711144- Bhujyaman-Badyamanayu
Without two Ayus, Tirthankara and Aharakchatushk)
In comparison to Baddhayushka, 1st place:
1st place in 4 Gatis, 1st place in 4 Gatis, 1st place in 4 Gatis, 1st place in 4 Gatis, 1st place in 4 Gatis, 1st place in 4 Gatis, 1st place in 4 Gatis, 1st place in 4 Gatis, 1st place in 4 Gatis, 1st place in 4 Gatis, 1st place in 4 Gatis, 1st place in 4 Gatis, 1st place in 4 Gatis, 1st place in 4 Gatis, 1st place in 4 Gatis, 1st place in 4 Gatis, 1st place in 4 Gatis, 1st place in 4 Gatis, 1st place in 4 Gatis, 1st place in 4 Gatis, 1st place in 4 Gatis, 1st place in 4 Gatis, 1st place in 4 Gatis, 1st place in 4 Gatis, 1st place in 4 Gatis, 1st place in 4 Gatis, 1st place in 4 Gatis, 1st place in 4 Gatis, 1st place in 4 Gatis, 1st place in 4 Gatis, 1st place in 4 Gatis, 1st place in 4 Gatis, 1st place in 4 Gatis, 1st place in 4 Gatis, 1st place in 4 Gatis, 1st place in 4 Gatis, 1st place in 4 Gatis, 1st place in 4 Gatis, 1st place in 4 Gatis, 1st place in 4 Gatis, 1st place in 4 Gatis, 1st place in 4 Gatis, 1st place in 4 Gatis, 1st place in 4 Gatis, 1st place in 4 Gatis, 1st place in 4 Gatis, 1st place in 4 Gatis, 1st place in 4 Gatis, 1st place in 4 Gatis, 1st place in 4 Gatis, 1st place in 4 Gatis, 1st place in 4 Gatis, 1st place in 4 Gatis, 1st place in 4 Gatis, 1st place in 4 Gatis, 1st place in 4 Gatis, 1st place in 4 Gatis, 1st place in 4 Gatis, 1st place in 4 Gatis, 1st place in 4 Gatis, 1st place in 4 Gatis, 1st place in 4 Gatis, 1st place in 4 Gatis, 1st place in 4 Gatis, 1st place in 4 Gatis, 1st place in 4 Gatis, 1st place in 4 Gatis, 1st place in 4 Gatis, 1st place in 4 Gatis, 1st place in 4 Gatis, 1st place in 4 Gatis, 1st place in 4 Gatis, 1st place in 4 Gatis, 1st place in 4 Gatis, 1st place in 4 Gatis, 1st place in 4 Gatis, 1st place in 4 Gatis, 1st place in 4 Gatis, 1st place in 4 Gatis, 1st place in 4 Gatis, 1st place in 4 Gatis, 1st place in 4 Gatis, 1st place in 4 Gatis, 1st place in 4 Gatis, 1st place in 4 Gatis, 1st place in 4 Gatis, 1st place in 4 Gatis, 1st place in 4 Gatis, 1st place in 4 Gatis, 1st place in 4 Gatis, 1st place in 4 Gatis, 1st place in 4 Gatis, 1st place in 4 Gatis, 1st place in 4 Gatis, 1st place in 4 Gatis, 1st place in 4 Gatis, 1st place in 4 Gatis, 1st place in 4 Gatis, 1st place in 4 Gatis, 1st place in 4 Gatis, 1st place in 4 Gatis, 1st place in 4 Gatis, 1st place in 4 Gatis, 1st place in 4 Gatis, 1st place in 4 Gatis, 1st place in 4 Gatis, 1st place in 4 Gatis, 1st place in 4 Gatis, 1st place in 4 Gatis, 1st place in 4 Gatis, 1st place in 4 Gatis, 1st place in 4 Gatis, 1st place in 4 Gatis, 1st place in 4 Gatis, 1st place in 4 Gatis, 1st place in 4 Gatis, 1st place in 4 Gatis, 1st place in 4 Gatis, 1st place in 4 Gatis, 1st place in 4 Gatis, 1st place in 4 Gatis, 1st place in 4 Gatis, 1st place in 4 Gatis, 1st place in 4 Gatis, 1st place in 4 Gatis, 1st place in 4 Gatis, 1st place in 4 Gatis, 1st place in 4 Gatis, 1st place in 4 Gatis, 1st place in 4
Page #394:
---------------------------
## Mithyatva
Mithyatva
Midhyatva
Mithyatva
62
Shraddhayushka's 1 Na. Ti.
Expectation
Panchama Sthana
Abaddhayushka's Expectation
Panchama Sthana
Baddhayushka's
Expectation
Shashtha Sthana
Abaddhayushka's Expectation
Shashtha Sthana
Gommatsar Karmakanda - 355
1 Na. Ma.
9 Ti. Ma.
1 Li. De.
5 Ma. De.
5
1 Na.
1 Ti.
1 Ma.
1. De.
ل
1 Na. Ti.
1 Na. Ma.
1 Ti. Ma.
1 Ti. De.
1 Ma. De.
5
1. Na. 1 Ti.
1 Ma.
1. De.
4
140
139
139
138
140 (148-8, Bhujyaman- Badyaman Ayu bina do Ayu, Tirthankar Aharak-Chatushk and Samyaktava Prakriti)
Baddhayushka's expectation is the same as the previous Sthanas, here also there are 5 bhan, but the difference is that here Samyaktava Prakriti is also less.
(148-9, Bhujyaman Ayu bina Shresh 3 Ayu, Tirthankar, Aharak Chatushk and Samyaktava Prakriti)
Abaddhayushka's expectation is the same as the fourth Sthana, here also there are 4 bhan, but here Samyaktava Prakriti is also less.
139 (148-9, Bhujyaman- Badyaman Ayu bina do Ayu, Tirthankar, Aharak Chatushk, Samyaktava and Samyagmithyatva - Prakriti)
Baddhayushka's
expectation is the same as the Panchama Sthana, here also there are 5 bhan, but here Samyagmithyatva Prakriti is less.
Baddhayushka's expectation in the sixth Sattva Sthana, out of the 139 Prakritis mentioned, by reducing Badyaman Ayu, here 138 Prakriti's existence is found. And Abaddhayushka's expectation is the same as the previous 5th Sthana, here also there are 4 bhang. 

Page #395:
---------------------------
**Guide:** Acharya Sadisagar Ji Maharaj
Gommatasar Karmakanda-356
Mithyatva
1
|Bound-lifespan|
Seventh place in comparison
|137|148-11, Bhujyamanatiryanchayu-Badyaman
Without human lifespan 2 lifespans, Aharak Chatushk, Tirthankar, Samyaktva, Samyagmithyatva, Devagati and
DevagatyAnupurvi. 137 Along with nature, this Sattvasthan can be from Ekendriya to Chaturindriya Tiryanchas. The being who has stirred up the Devadvik can bind Tiryanchayu and Manushyayu, therefore there are two | Bhangs, but considering Bhujyaman-Tiryanchayu and Badyamanatiryanchayu, it is not counted due to repetition. Therefore, there is one Bhang of Tiryanchamanushyayu.
Mithyatva
1
Unbound-lifespan | in comparison Seventh place
|136|136 (In the Seventh place in comparison to Bound-lifespan,
137 nature, Badyamanayu is reduced, leaving 136 nature.)
Mithyatva
Seventh place in comparison to Unbound-lifespan
The Ekendriya to Chaturindriya Mithyadrishti being with the Seventh Sattvasthan in comparison to Bound-lifespan, after death becomes a human, in his Apariapta state, there are 536 natures.
(148-12, Bhujyaman Manushyayu without the remaining three lifespans, Tirthankar, Aharak Chatushk, Samyaktva, Samyagmithyatva and Devadvik)
Mithyatva
Seventh place in comparison to Unbound-lifespan
| The same Ekendriya to Chaturindriya Tiryancha being whose Vaikriyik Ashtak has been stirred up and after death becomes a Panchendriya Tiryancha and in his Pariapta state binds Sur-Shatk (Devadvik, Vaikriyikdrik, Vaikriyikbandhan, Vaikriyik Sanghta), such a being can have 136 natures.
136 (148-12, Bhujyamanatiryanchayu without the three lifespans, Tirthankar, Aharak | Chatushk, Samyaktva, Samyagmithyatva, Narakdvik) 

Page #396:
---------------------------
## Gommatasara Karmakanda-357: Mithyatva

**1**

**| Abaddhayushka |**

**Seventh Place** in comparison to Abaddhayushka.
| 136 | The above mentioned Bhang (state of existence) arises in the Tiryancha (animal) when it dies. There was no bandha (bondage) of Badyamanayush (bound life span) there, but the bond of Surashtak (six types of sense organs) was done. The being may have 136 Prakruti (constituents) there. Here, the 136 Prakruti are the same as above, but instead of Badyaman Tiryanchayu (bound animal life span), there will be Bhujyaman Manushyayu (enjoyed human life span).

**Mithyatva**

**1**

**| 131 |**

**Eighth Place** in comparison to Baddhayushka.
A being with one sense organ to four sense organs, whose Narakshtak (six types of hellish states) have been aroused and whose Manushyayu (human life span) has been bound, may have 131 Prakruti.

**131 (148-17, Dev-Narakayu, Tirthankara, Aharakchatushk, Samyaktva, Samyagmithyatva, Devadvik, Narakdvik, Vaikriyik Drik, Traikriyik Sharirabandhan and Vaikriyik Sharirasanghat)**

Here, there can be two Bhangs (states of existence): Bhujyaman and Badyaman Tiryanchayu and Bhujyaman-Badyaman Manushyayu. But since the first Bhang is repetitive, only one Bhang is to be considered here.

**Mithyatva**

**1**

**| 130 |**

**Eighth Place** in comparison to Abaddhayushka.
In the previously mentioned eighth place, in comparison to Baddhayushka, there are 131 Prakruti mentioned. Here, there is a place with 130 Prakruti when Badyaman Manushyayu (bound human life span) is reduced.

A being with one sense organ or a being with three types of Vikal (imperfections), who is born as a human after death, may have 130 Prakruti in his Nivrutti Paryapta Avastha (state of complete liberation). But in comparison to Abaddhayushka, the previously mentioned eighth place has Bhujyaman Tiryanchayu (enjoyed animal life span), and here there is Bhujyaman Manushyayu (enjoyed human life span). This is the only difference. 

Page #397:
---------------------------
## Mithyatva
Mithyatva
Mithyatva
Mithyatva

In the ninth place, in comparison to the bound-lifespan (Baddhayushk), it is said:

In comparison to the unbound-lifespan (Abaddhayushk), the ninth place.

In comparison to the bound-lifespan (Baddhayushk), the tenth place.

In comparison to the unbound-lifespan (Abaddhayushk), the tenth place.

1
Gommatasar Karmakanda - 358
129
129
+
127
127

This is the place of the swift, air-bodied beings (Vayu-kayajeev) of the high lineage (Uchch-gotra) whose agitation (Udwelna) has occurred.

129 (From the 130 types related to the eighth place in comparison to the unbound-lifespan (Abaddhayushk), the high lineage has been reduced)

Swift, air-bodied beings are transmigratory (Tiryach) and they only bind the lifespan of transmigratory beings (Tiryach-ayu), not any other lifespan.

Even if the binding of the lifespan of transmigratory beings (Baddhyaman-tiryach-ayu) of the above swift, air-bodied beings has not occurred, the 129th nature will still exist and the destruction (Bhang) will also remain the same. The natures will also remain the same. Therefore, since the state of existence (Sattvasthan) and destruction (Bhang) do not change, it has not been accepted.

-

The swift, air-bodied beings (Abaddhayushk-apeksha Navamasthanavale) who have experienced agitation (Udwelna) related to the human state (Manushya-gati) and the human state (Manushya-gati) in the past, have the 127th nature existing. This being has bound the lifespan of transmigratory beings (Tiryach-ayu).

Now, in the place of the subtle (Sasaadan) and mixed qualities (Mishra-gunasthan), the number of states of existence (Sattvasthan) and destructions (Bhang) are in four verses.

The above being did not bind the lifespan of transmigratory beings (Tiryach-ayu) before, but the 127th nature will still exist. Since there is no difference in the state of existence (Sattvasthan) and destruction (Bhang), it has not been accepted.

Sattati-gam Asane, Mis-se Tig-satt-satt-eyara.
Pariheen Savva-satt-am Baddh-ass-ier-ass-ega-unam. || 372 || 

Page #398:
---------------------------
## Gommatasar Karmakanda - 359

**Meaning:** In the Sasadanagunasthan, there are two sattvasthanas with seven or three less prakritis from the total. In the Mishragunasthan, there are four sthans with three, seven, seven, and eleven less prakritis from the total.  However, in comparison to the Badhayushk, there are four more sthans with one less prakriti each, which are similar to the Badhayushk. Therefore, there are four sthans in Sasadanagunasthan and eight in Mishragunasthan. 

**Further, the names of the prakritis that are less in the sattvasthanas of Sasadanagunasthan are:**

**Tiththahaarchaukvam, Annadaraaugadugam cha sattede.
Haarchauk vajiy tini ya kei samuddidhen. ||373||**

**Meaning:** In Sasadanagunasthan, the first sthan has 145 prakritis, which are less by seven prakritis, including the Tirthankar prakriti, Ahaarachautushk, and the remaining two ayus without the Bhujyaman-Badhyamanayu.  The second sthan has 145 prakritis, which are less by three prakritis, excluding the Ahaarachautushk (Ahaarasharira, Ahaarakangopang, Ahaarasharirabandhan, Ahaarasharirasanghat) from the seven less prakritis in the first sthan.  The sattva of Ahaarachautushk in this sattvasthan with 145 prakritis is as per the opinion of other Acharyas.

**The sattvasthanas related to Mishragunasthan are:**

**Tiththannadaraaugadugam, tinnivi anasahiyah tah ya sattam cha.
Haarchaukke sahiya, te cheva ya honti eyara. ||374||**

**Meaning:** In Mishragunasthan, the first sthan has 145 prakritis, which are less by three prakritis, including the Tirthankar, the two ayus without the Bhujyaman-Badhyamanayu. The second sthan has 141 prakritis, which are less by seven prakritis, including the Tirthankar, the two ayus without the Bhujyaman-Badhyamanayu, and the Anantanubandhikashayachautushk or Ahaarachautushk. The third sthan also has 141 prakritis. The fourth sthan has 137 prakritis, which are less by eleven prakritis, including the Tirthankar, the two ayus without the Bhujyaman-Badhyamanayu, the Anantanubandhikashayachautushk, and the Ahaarachautushk. These four sthans should be understood in comparison to the Badhayushk, and four more sthans with one less prakriti each should be understood in comparison to the Abaddhayushk.

**Further, the number of bhangs in the sattvasthanas related to the above-mentioned gunasthans are:**

**Sane pan igi bhangaa, badhhassierassa chari do cheva.
Missee panpan bhangaa, badhhassierassa chau chauneya. ||375||**

**Meaning:** In comparison to the Badhayushk, there are two sattvasthanas related to Sasadanagunasthan, with five and one bhangs respectively. 

Page #399:
---------------------------
Gommatsar Karmakanda - 360

There are 4 and 2 bhangas in two sattvasthanas respectively, compared to abaddhayushk. Thus, know the 12 bhangas related to the four sthans. In the case of mishra gunasthan, there are five bhangas in each of the four sthans compared to baddhayushk, and four bhangas in each of the four sthans compared to abaddhayushk. Thus, there are 36 bhangas in eight sthans.

**Verse 375k**
"By binding the devayu, one attains the state of upshamsamyaktva (seventh gunasthan) and by binding the aharak, one attains the sasadan gunasthan. In this case, there is only one bhang compared to the ayubandha of the previous state."

**Verse 375kh**
"The bhangas in the bhandaughatan are two, one for the bhujjamana and one for the manuva. The devayu, in the case of the devayu, is known as vidyo."

**Meaning:**

When a devayu binds himself and attains upshamsamyaktva (seventh gunasthan), he binds the aharak and attains the sasadan gunasthan. In this case, there is only one bhang compared to the ayubandha of the previous state.

A man who is an upshamsamyagdristi binds the aharak chatushk and attains the sasadan gunasthan. If he then binds the devayu, there are two bhangas in the sasadan gunasthan compared to his bhujjamana ayu. The first bhang is the "manushyayu" in the sasadan gunasthan. The second bhang is the "devayu" when he dies and is reborn as a deva in the sasadan gunasthan.

**Special Meaning:**

In the sasadan gunasthan, there are five bhangas compared to the 141 baddhayushk in the sattvasthan, excluding the samabhang and punaruktabhang. In the 140 abaddhayushk in the sattvasthan, there are four bhangas compared to the bhujjamana four ayus. In the 145 baddhayushk, there is only one bhang compared to the aharak chatushk that binds to the sasadan gunasthan. In the 144 abaddhayushk, there are two bhangas. The first bhang is when an upshamsamyagdristi who has the bhujjamana manushyayu binds the aharak chatushk and attains the sasadan gunasthan. The second bhang is when an upshamsamyagdristi who has the devayu binds the aharak chatushk and attains the sasadan gunasthan, dies, and is reborn as a deva. In this case, the sattva of the bhujjamana devayu is found.

**Doubt:**

Why are the remaining four bhangas of ayubandha not present?

**Solution:**

According to verse 334, a man cannot hold samayam if he binds any other ayu besides the devayu. A samayi man binds the aharak body in the seventh gunasthan. Therefore, the remaining four bhangas are not possible besides the manushyayu and devayu. 

Page #400:
---------------------------
In the Gommatasara Karmakanda-361, in the Mishragunasthan, know that there are five-five bhangs from the aforementioned twelve bhangs, excluding Punarukta and Samabhang, in comparison to the four places of the Baddhayushk. Know that there are four-four bhangs in the four places of the Abaddhayushk, in comparison to the four ayus.

Doubt - Why is the sattva of Anantanubandhi not found in Mishragunasthan?

Solution - In the four gunasthanas of Asanyatadi, the Anantanubandhi kshaya is disintegrated by trikaran, and due to the rise of Mishramohaniya (Samyagmithyatva), it becomes Mishragunasthanvarti, therefore its Anantanubandhi sattva is not found.

Doubt - Why does the jiva not take Charitramohaniya as Anantanubandhi in the third gunasthan called Samyagmithyatva...?

Solution - Because the rise of Mithyatva, which is the cause of Charitramohaniya becoming Anantanubandhi in Mishragunasthan, is not found, or the intense Sanklesha-like parinamas that are found in Sasadanagunasthan are not found in Mishragunasthan, therefore the Samyagmithyadrishti jiva does not take Charitramoha as Anantanubandhi.

1. Jayadhaval Pu.2 p.219. 

Page #401:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-362
Sāsādana
In the Sāsādana and Miśraguna sthānas, the nature of the sattva sthāna and the bhangas and the types found in them are seen in relation to the bound and unbound lifespan. - The lifespan of the Madda. | 1 No. Ti. 141. 141 (148-7, in relation to the Bhujyamāna and Baddhyamāna. 1 No. Ma.
Two lifespans, the Tirthankara and the first sthāna. 1 Ti, Ma.
Āhārakacatuṣka) The Sāsādana guna sthāna can be attained by a being who binds all four lifespans. In the Mithyātva guna sthāna, 12 bhangas are said in relation to the bound lifespan, similarly here also there are 12 bhadras, but excluding the 2 Punaruktabhak and 5 Samabhanga, only 5 bhangas are taken.
Sāsādana
Unbound lifespan. | 1 No, 140 From the above 141 natures, in relation to the Baddhyamāna: ......ti..................! This sthāna, which is in the form of the 140 nature, becomes the first sthāna when the lifespan is reduced. Its four bhangas are in relation to the four gatis.
Sāsādana
1
.
In relation to the bound lifespan, the second sthāna
145 | 145 (148-3, the lifespan of a human being who eats and the lifespan of a bound deva. 2 lifespans and the Tirthankara)
After binding the Āhārakacatuṣka, a human being can come to this guna sthāna. According to some Ācāryas, in this state, the Āhārakacatuṣka does not have sattva, i.e., the sattva of the 141 nature is present.
From the 145 natures of the second sthāna, which is said in relation to the bound lifespan, 144 natures remain when the lifespan of the bound deva is reduced.
Sāsādana
144
The second sthāna in relation to the unbound lifespan. 

Page #402:
---------------------------
Gommatasar Karmakanda-363
**The lifespan of a human being who has consumed food and drink** - After a Samyagdrsti (rightly-seeing) being has bound the four types of food and drink and has entered the Sasadan Gunasthan (the state of being a human being), they will have 144 Prakruti (fundamental principles) remaining.
A Samyagdrsti human being who has previously bound the lifespan of a deva (god) and has entered the seventh Gunasthan (state of being) and has bound the four types of food and drink, and then has become careless and entered the second Gunasthan (state of being) and has died and become a deva, will have 144 Prakruti remaining at that time. Compared to a being with a bound lifespan, the lifespan of a human being who has consumed food and drink is in the first bhang (stage) of the second Gunasthan. Here, the lifespan of a deva is being consumed. In this Gunasthan, there are 11 bhangs, not 12, according to the opinion of some Acharyas (teachers) (see verse 394). And according to them, a Samyagdrsti being with a bound lifespan of a deva does not die in the Sasadan Gunasthan.
**Mixed**
145
Compared to a being with a bound lifespan | 1 N. Ti.
| 1 N. M. First state | 1 Ti. M.
1 Ti. De. 1 M, De.
145 (148-3, lifespan being consumed and lifespan being bound
lifespan without two lifespans and Tirthankara) This Gunasthan is found in all four gatis (types of beings) and all four beings with a bound lifespan attain this Gunasthan. Therefore, in the Mithyatva Gunasthan (state of being in delusion), there are 12 bhangs, just like the 12 bhangs mentioned in the second state of a being with a bound lifespan. However, as before, two double-spoken bhangs and five equal bhangs are reduced, leaving only 5 bhangs. Compared to a being with a bound lifespan, 144 Prakruti remain after reducing the bound lifespan from the 145 Prakruti mentioned in the first state. Compared to the lifespan being consumed in relation to the four gatis, there are four bhangs.
**Mixed**
144
Compared to a being without a bound lifespan | 1 N. compared to the first state 

Page #403:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-364
Mishra Baddhayushka | 1 No. Ti. | 141
| Expectation | 1 No. Ma. unfan Second place hiair at
1 Ti. De. 1 Ma, De.
141 (148-7, Bhujyaman-Badyamanayu
Without two ayus, Tirthankara and KE
Anantanubandhi Kashayachatushk) In any of the four Gunasthanas of Asanyatadi, the disassociation of the Anantanubandhi Kashayachatushk by trikaran, which has been done, and which is not in front of the destruction of Darshanmohaniya, that Jiva comes in the Mishra Gunasthan from the rise of Sabhyagmithyatva from the Sanklishtaparinam, and has the existence of 141 Prakriti.
In this place, there are 12 bhangs like the second place mentioned in the Mithyatva Gunasthan in relation to Naddhayushka, but only 5 bhangs are taken, leaving out two repeated and 5 similar bhangs.
Mishra
140
Second place in relation to Abaddhayushka
Ti.
140 (In the second place in relation to Baddhayushka,
140 Prakriti remains from reducing Badyamanayu from the mentioned 141 Prakriti) 4 bhangs, in relation to the four Bhujyaman ayus
Mishn
Baddhayushka / 1 No, Ti. | In relation to | 1 No. Ma. Third place | 1 Ti. Ma.
1 Ti, De,
141 | 141 (148-7, Bhujyaman-Badyamanayu
Without two ayus, Tirthankara, Aharaka
Chatushk) All four types of Jivas can come in this Gunasthan. In the Mithyatva Gunasthan, in relation to Baddhayushka, the 12 bhangs mentioned in the second place, similarly here also 12 bhangs are to be known, but here also, as before, two repeated and 5 similar bhangs are reduced, and the remaining 5 bhangs are taken. 

Page #404:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-365
Mishn
Third place in comparison to Abaddhayushka
1 No. | 1 Ti. 1. M.
140 | In the third place of Baddhayushka, there are 140
Natures are said, out of which 140 natures remain after reducing the bound age. There are 4 breaks in comparison to the four gatis.
Mishra
...
Baddhayushka | 1 No. Ti. Ki. Amesa .. Ma Chaturth Sthan | 1 Ti.
Eain
137 137 (148-11, Bhujyaman-Badyaman ..... ... .. Aayu-bina two Aayu, Tirthankara,
Anantanubandhi-Kashaya Chatushk,
Aharak Chatushk) The same being is to be understood here as in the second place in comparison to Baddhayushka, but the Aharak Chatushk is not found here. There are 12 breaks here too, but only 5 breaks have been taken without repetition and | Samabhang.
Mishra
Mishra
136
| Abaddhayushka | 1 No.
In comparison | 1 Ti. Chaturth Sthan
| 136 (In the fourth place in comparison to Baddhayushka
There are 136 natures left after reducing the bound age from the 137 natures mentioned. There are 4 breaks in comparison to the four gatis.
Further, in the Asanyata Gunasthan, the number of breaks and natures etc. of those places are mentioned in 6 verses while achieving the 40 places -
Dug Chakk Satt Atu, Navrahiyam Tah Ya Chaupadi Kiccha. Nabhamigi Chaupa Hiinam, Baddhassiyarassa Egunam. ||376|| Titthahare Sahiyam, Titthuna Ah Ya Harachauhiinam. Titthahaarchoukkenuunam Iti Chaupadithanam. ||377|| 

Page #405:
---------------------------
Gommatsar Karmakanda - 366

**Verse 378:**
Those without the two, six, seven, eight, and nine natures are considered to be in the five states. Similarly, the five states should be written in four rows, with five states in each row.

**Verse 379:**
In the first row of five states, subtract zero, meaning the five states remain as they are, without the two, six, seven, eight, and nine natures. In the second row, subtract one nature from each state, meaning the five states are without the three, seven, eight, nine, and ten natures.

**Verse 379k:**
In the case of humans, the five states are without the two, six, seven, eight, and nine natures. In the case of animals, the five states are without the three, seven, eight, nine, and ten natures.

**Verse 380:**
In the second row of five states, subtract one, one, three, three, and four natures from each state, meaning the five states are without the one, one, three, three, and four natures.

**Verse 380k:**
In the case of humans, the five states are without the one, one, three, three, and four natures. In the case of animals, the five states are without the three, three, four, four, and five natures.

**Verse 381:**
In the first two rows of five states, the five states are considered to be with and without the Tirthankara nature, hence one nature is subtracted in the second row. In the third and fourth rows of five states, the five states are considered to be without the four natures of the Aharak body, Aharak Anopaad, Aharak Bandhan, and Aharak Sangata, hence four natures are subtracted in the third row. In the fourth and fifth rows of five states, the five states are considered to be without the four natures of the Aharak body and the Tirthankara nature, hence five natures are subtracted in the fourth row. In this way, the five states are known in four rows. 

Page #406:
---------------------------
Gommatasar Karmakanda-367
These six, consisting of two natures, namely, Tiryanchayu and another Ayu, and two more, namely, Anantanu bandhi Chatushk, when combined with Mithyatva Prakriti, become seven. Again, when combined with Samyagmithyatva Prakriti, they become eight, and when combined with Samyaktva Prakriti, they become nine. ||378||
In the first row, there are ten bhangas due to the two bhangas in each of the five places related to the bound Ayu. Further, in the five places related to the unbound Ayu, there are 3-3-1-3-3 bhangas respectively, excluding Tiryanchayu. Thus, there are thirteen bhangas in the unbound Ayu. ||379||
The Tirthankara Prakriti has two bhangas in relation to the bound Ayu of the Sattval जीव, which are not repeated. (1) Manushya Ayu-Marakayu (2) Manushya Ayu-Devayu. In relation to the unbound Ayu, there are three bhangas for the other three Bhujyaman Ayu, excluding Tiryanchayu. However, in the case of a जीव who has destroyed Mithyatva Prakriti, there will be only one bhang for the Bhujyaman Manushya Ayu, because the destruction of Darshanmoha is done only by a human being. ||379a||
In the five places related to the bound Ayu in the second row, there are 5-5-3-3 and 4 bhangas respectively. Therefore, there are a total of twenty bhangas. And in the five places related to the unbound Ayu, there are 4-4-1-4 and 4 bhangas respectively. Therefore, there are a total of fifty-seven bhangas. ||380||
The five-five bhangas of Ayu in the first and second places of the second row mentioned in verse 380 should be understood according to the verse 364kh mentioned earlier. The three-three bhangas of Ayu in the third and fourth places are due to the three bhangas of the three remaining Ayu (Naraka-Dev-Tiryancha) in relation to the Bhujyaman Manushya Ayu. (The destruction of Darshanmoha is done only by a human being, therefore, only Bhujyaman Manushya Ayu is possible, other Ayu cannot be Bhujyaman, because in other gatis, the destruction of Mithyatva and Samyagmithyatva Prakriti is not possible.) The four bhangas mentioned in the fifth place should be understood as the remaining four bhangas after reducing one bhang of Naraka Ayu-Tiryanchayu from the aforementioned five bhangas. (Because a Kshayik Samyagdristi cannot bind Naraka and Tiryanchayu, only Manushya Ayu can be bound. A Kshayik Samyagdristi cannot bind Naraka Ayu of Tiryancha, only Devagati can be bound.)
The ten places related to the bound and unbound Ayu in the first row, which have the same number of bhangas, should be understood to have the same number of bhangas in the ten places of the third row. ||381||
_In the third row, there are ten bhangas related to the bound Ayu and thirteen bhangas related to the unbound Ayu, similar to the first row. The bhangas in the ten places related to the second and fourth rows are the same.
Special Note - The five places related to the first row of the bound Asanyata Samyagdristi are 

Page #407:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-368

**Tīrthaṅkara** nature is present in **Tīrthaṅkara**, but the **Tīrthaṅkara** nature is absent in the **Tiryāñca**. Therefore, the first place of the first row, **Bhujyamāna-Badyamāna Tiryāñcayu** and another **āyu**, without these two, there are 146 **Prakṛti** forms. Where **Bhujyamāna-Manuṣyāyu**, **Badyamāna-Narakāyu**, **Bhujyamāna Manuṣyāyu-Badyamāna Devāyu**, **Bhujyamāna Narakāyu-Badyamāna Manuṣyāyu**, **Bhujyamāna Devāyu-Badyamāna Manuṣyāyu**, in this way, there are 4 **Bhangas**, there **Bhujyamāna Manuṣyāyu-Badyamāna Narakāyu**, **Bhujyamāna Narakāyu-Badyamāna Manuṣyāyu**, in these two **Bhangas**, the **Prakṛti** is the same, therefore, only one **Bhang** is acceptable and **Bhujyamāna Manuṣyāyu-Badyamāna Devāyu**, **Bhujyamāna Devāyu-Badyamāna Manuṣyāyu**, in these two **Bhangas**, the **Prakṛti** is the same, therefore, only one **Bhang** is acceptable, knowing these two **Bhangas**. In the first row, without the **Vinsayojaka Jīva**'s **Anantānubandhī** 4 **Kaṣāya**, **Tiryāñcayu** and another **āyu**, there are 142 **Prakṛti** forms, the second **Sattva** place. The one whose **Mithyātva Prakṛti** has been destroyed, there are 141 **Prakṛti** forms, the third place, the one who has also destroyed **Samyagmithyātva**, there are 140 **Prakṛti** forms, the fourth place, the one whose **Samyaktva Prakṛti** has also been destroyed, there are 131 **Prakṛti** forms, the fifth **Sattva** place. In these four places, there are two **Bhangas** each, **Bhujyamāna Manuṣyāyu-Badyamāna Narakāyu** and **Bhujyamāna Manuṣyāyu-Badyamāna Devāyu**.

In the five **Sattva** places related to the first row of **Abaddhāyuṣka**, the first place is 145 **Prakṛti** forms and the second place is 141 **Prakṛti** forms when there is **Vinsayojana** of **Anantānubandhī**. In these two, there are 3 **Bhangas** in relation to **Bhujyamāna Narakāyu Manuṣyāyu** and **Devāyu** and when **Mithyātva** is destroyed, the third place is 140 **Prakṛti** forms, here there is only one **Bhang**, **Bhujyamāna Manuṣyāyu**. When **Miśramohaniya** (**Samyagmithyātva**) **Prakṛti** is destroyed, the fourth place is 139 **Prakṛti** forms, here there are three **Bhangas** in relation to **Bhujyamāna Narakāyu Manuṣyāyu** and **Devāyu** because the **Kṛtakṛtya Vedaka Samyagdṛṣṭi Manuṣya** who has the **Tīrthaṅkara Prakṛti** is born in **Naraka** or **Devagati** after death, here such **Sattva** is also found in **Naraka-Devagati**. When there is an absence of **Samyaktva-Prakṛti**, the fifth place is 138 **Prakṛti** forms, here also three **Bhangas** are found in relation to **Bhujyamāna Manuṣya-Deva** and **Narakāyu** and the **Kṣayika Samyagdṛṣṭi Jīva** who has 138 **Prakṛti** forms along with **Manuṣyāyu**, becomes a **Kevalī** in the same **Bhava** by destroying the **Ghātiya Karmas**, then this **Jīva** does not have **Garbha Kalyāṇaka**, **Janma Kalyāṇaka**, but only three **Kalyāṇakas**, **Tapa** etc. and those who destroy the **Ghātiya Karmas** in the third **Bhava**, they bind **Devāyu** according to the rules. Here, **Devāyu** along with 138 **Prakṛti** forms is found in **Deva Paryāya**, when six months of **āyu** are left, **Manuṣyāyu** is bound and there are five **Kalyāṇakas**. The one whose **Narakāyu** is bound in the **Mithyātva** state, later becomes **Samyagdṛṣṭi** and binds **Tīrthaṅkara Prakṛti**, then that **Jīva** is born in **Naraka**, here 138 **Prakṛti** forms along with **Narakāyu** is found, when six months of **āyu** are left, **Manuṣyāyu** is bound and then the **Upaśarga** of this **Nārki** is removed and **Garbha** etc. **Kalyāṇakas** occur. 1. "**Tittthayar Santakkammuvasagam ṇirae ṇivarayati sura. Chhammāsāugasese sagge amalaṇamālam ko ||195||" Tri.Sa. The **Deva** remove the **Upaśarga** of those **Nārki** whose **Tīrthaṅkara Nāmakarma** is present in **Sattva** and when six months are left in their **āyu**, the **Mālā** does not wither in **Svarga**. 

Page #408:
---------------------------
## Gommatasara Karmakanda-369

**Bound-lifespan:**

In the second row, related to the bound-lifespan, there are five sattva-sthana (states of being). The first state is 145-natured, without the lifespan of the bhujyaman (enjoyer) and the badhyaman (undergoer), and without the nature of a Tirthankara. The second state is 141-natured, after the disconnection of the infinite attachments. 

Just as in the sattva-sthana of 145 natures in the mithyatva-guna-sthana (state of false belief), five bhangas (breaks) were taken out of the 12 bhangas related to the four gatis (paths of existence), excluding two repeated bhangas and five samabhangas (equal breaks), similarly, in these two states, five bhangas each should be known.

The third state is 140-natured, after the destruction of the mithyatva-prakriti (nature of false belief). Here, there are four bhangas related to the bhujyaman-manushya-ayu (lifespan of a human being as an enjoyer), the badhyaman-naraka-ayu (lifespan of a hell being as an undergoer), the badhyaman-tiryancha-ayu (lifespan of an animal as an undergoer), and the badhyaman-deva-ayu (lifespan of a god as an undergoer), compared to the lifespan of a human being. In these, the bhangas of bhujyaman-manushya-ayu and badhyaman-manushya-ayu are repeated, and due to the similarity of nature, the remaining three bhangas should be taken without it.

The fourth state is 139-natured, after the destruction of the samyag-mithyatva-prakriti (nature of right and false belief). Here, the aforementioned three bhangas should be known.

The fifth state is 138-natured, after the destruction of the samyaktva-prakriti (nature of right belief). Here, there are seven bhangas: bhujyaman-naraka-ayu-badhyaman-manushya-ayu, bhujyaman-tiryancha-ayu-badhyaman-deva-ayu, bhujyaman-manushya-ayu-badhyaman-naraka-ayu, bhujyaman-manushya-ayu-badhyaman-tiryancha-ayu, bhujyaman-manushya-ayu-badhyaman-manushya-ayu, bhujyaman-manushya-ayu-badhyaman-deva-ayu, bhujyaman-deva-ayu-badhyaman-manushya-ayu. The fifth bhang is repeated because there is only one human lifespan, and the first and third bhangas are the same. The sixth and seventh bhangas are also the same because their natures are similar. Therefore, only four bhangas should be taken here, excluding these three bhangas.

Out of the aforementioned 12 bhangas related to the four gatis, five bhangas do not occur here because the bhang of the tiryancha-ayu (animal lifespan) and naraka-ayu (hell lifespan) is not possible. Therefore, only four bhangas are mentioned out of the above seven bhangas.

**Unbound-lifespan:**

In the second row, related to the unbound-lifespan, there are five states. The first state is 144-natured, without the lifespan of the bhujyaman and three other lifespans, and without the nature of a Tirthankara. The second state is 140-natured, after the disconnection of the infinite attachments.

In both these states, there are four bhangas each related to the bhujyaman and the four lifespans. The third state is 139-natured, after the destruction of the mithyatva-prakriti. Here, there is only one bhang because there is no other bhang except the bhujyaman-manushya-ayu.

The fourth state is 138-natured, after the destruction of the samyag-mithyatva-prakriti. Here, there are four bhangas related to the bhujyaman-naraka-ayu, bhujyaman-tiryancha-ayu, and bhujyaman-deva-ayu, compared to the bhujyaman-manushya-ayu and the kritakritya-vedaka-samyag-drishti (right-seeing who has completed his karma).

The fifth state is 137-natured, after the destruction of the samyaktva-prakriti, related to the kshayika-samyag-drishti (right-seeing who is on the path of destruction of karma). Here, there are four bhangas related to the bhujyaman and the four lifespans.

**Third Row:**

In the third row, related to the bound-lifespan and unbound-lifespan, there are ten states, with four natures of the aharaka-chatuष्ka (fourfold aharaka) subtracted from each. Here, 23 bhangas should be known, similar to the first row, because here also there is the sattva of the Tirthankara-prakriti.

**Fourth Row:**

In the fourth row, related to the bound-lifespan and unbound-lifespan, there are ten states, with five natures of the Tirthankara and the aharaka-chatuष्ka subtracted from each. Here, 37 bhangas should be known, similar to the second row, because here there is no sattva of the Tirthankara-prakriti.

In this way, there are a total of 40 sattva-sthana and 120 bhangas in the asanyata-guna-sthana (state of uncontrolled qualities). 

Page #409:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-370
A concise summary of the 40 Sattva-sthana and 120 Bhangas of the Asanyata-guna-sthana -
First Row | Two and three Ananta-anusandhi | Mithyatva-Samyagmithya- Samyaktva Arama-aditu-shkara-hin. Pahit. Rahit. Din
Add
140
5 Sthana
10 Bha
Tirtharasa-hit Abaddha-Baddha
Yushka | Yushka Three Ayu | Two Ayu Rahit | Rahit
138. 5 Sthana
Second Row
140
139
5 Sthana
20 Bhag
Yushka
Rahit Nirthanga-rahit Abaddha-Baddha Three Ayu, Two Ayu
Yushka | Rahit
138
5 Sthana
17 Bhang
Third Row
135
5 Sthana
10 Bhaj
Tirtharasa-hitava
Aha. Chanu-shkara-rahit Abaddha- Baddha
Yushka | Yushka Three Ayu Two Ayu Rahit | Rahit
136
5 Sthana
13 Bhang
_ Fourth Row
134
5 Sthana
20 Bhan
Tirthakara and Asahara-ka
Chatushkara-thit Abaddha- Baddha
Yushka | Yushka Three Ayu Two Ayu
Rahit | Rahit
135
133
5 Sthana
17 Bhag
The sum of all Sattva-sthana and Bhangas related to Asanyata-guna-sthana
40 Sthana 120 Bhang 

Page #410:
---------------------------
## Gunasthana
## Asanyata
## Asanyata
## Gommatasar Karmakanda - 371
## Detailed Explanation Regarding the Sattvasthana and Bhang of Asanyata Gunasthana -

## Sattvasthana
## Baddhayushka
## Abaddhayushka
## Bhang
## Number
## 2
## 3
## Prakriti
## Number
## 146
## 145
## Detailed Explanation
## 146 (148 - 2, Tiryanchayu and one other
## 2
## Ayu) 146 Prakriti have four different Bhang for beings with Sattvasthana.
## 1. Bhujyamanamanushyayu - BadyamananarKayu 
## 2. Bhujyamanamanushyayu - Badyamandevaayu 
## 3. BhujyamananarKayu - Badyamanamanushyayu 
## 4. Bhujyamandevaayu - Badyamanamanushyayu
## Out of these four Bhang, the first and third Bhang have the same Ayu (NarKayu - Manushyayu), and the second and fourth Bhang have the same Ayu (Manushya - Devaayu). Therefore, two Bhang are reduced, and only 2 Bhang are considered.
## 145 (From the above 146 Prakriti,
## Badyaman Ayu is reduced, leaving 145 Prakriti), because here Ayu bandha has not happened, it is Abaddhayushka. Here, there are 3 Bhang as follows:
## 1. BhujyamananarKayu
## 2. Bhujyamanamanushyayu
## 3. Bhujyamandevaayu 

Page #411:
---------------------------
## Asanyatta

**Asanyata**
**Asanyata**
**Asanyata**
**Asanyata**
**Asanyata**
**Guide**

**Compared to Baddhayushka**
**Second place**
**Compared to Abaddhayushka**
**Second place**
**Compared to Baddhayushka**
**Third place**
**Compared to Avaddhayushka**
**Third place**
**Compared to Baddhayushka**
**Fourth place**

**Acharya Shri Surihara Gommatasar Karmakanda-372**
**2**
**3**
**1**
**2**
**142**
**141**
**141**
**140**
**140**
**142 (148-6 Tiryanchayu, any other Ayu, Anantanubandhikashayachatuska)**

**2** These are as follows:
-
**1.** Bhujyamanamanushyayu- Badyamananarakaayu. **2.** Bhujyamanamanushyayu- Badyamandevaayu.
**Or**
**1.** Bhujyamandevaayu- Badyamanamanushyayu. **2.** Bhujyamananarakaayu- Badyamanamanushyayu.

**141**
**(Above 142-1, Badyaman Ayu)** **3** These are as follows:
**1.** Bhujyamananarakaayu, **2.** Bhujyamandevaayu, **3.** Bhujyamanamanushyayu

**141** (Baddhayushka related second place, mentioned 142-1 Mithyatva)
**2** Know according to the second place compared to Baddhayushka. In this, there is Bhujyaman-manushyayu.

**140** (Above 141-1 Bhujyamanamanushyayu,
because only humans can begin Kshayik Samyaktv, as the beginning of this Kshayik Samyaktv happens only in the human realm. Therefore, there is only one Bhatta.)

**140** (Compared to Baddhayushka, in the third place, mentioned 141 types, Samyagmithyatva type is reduced)
**2** Know according to the second place compared to Baddhayushka here as well. 

Page #412:
---------------------------
**Asanyata**
| **Abaddhayushka** |
**Fourth Place** in comparison to
**Gommatasara Karmakanda-373 ...**
. 3 | 139 | 139 (From the above 140 natures, the bound lifespan is reduced)
3 **Bhang** are as follows - 1. **BhujyamananarKayu**, 2. **Bhujyamanadhanushyayu** 3. **Bhujyamandevayu**
A **Kshayika Samyaktv** which a human has begun | **Kritakritaveadak Samyagdristi Jiva** Deva
or gone to **Naraka** in comparison to this, there are 3 **Bhujyaman** | lifespans. Therefore, there are three **Bhang**.
**Asanyata**
| 139
**Fifth Place** in comparison to **Baddhayushka**
139 (From the 140 natures mentioned in the fourth place in comparison to **Baddhayushka**, 1 **Samyaktv**
nature is reduced) 2 **Bhang**, know it to be the same as the second place in comparison to **Baddhayushka**.
**Asanyata**
**Fifth Place** in comparison to **Abaddhayushka**
From the above 139 natures, 1 **Madhyamanayu** is reduced, leaving 138 natures.
Here there are 3 **Bhang**, they are as follows - 1. **Bhujyamanamanushyayu** 2. **Bhujyamandevayu** 3. **BhujyamananarKayu**.  _ This place is the one with the existence of 135 natures, including the **Tirthankara** nature, of the **Kshayika Samyagdristi Jiva**. If the **Bhujyamanayu** of this **Sattva**-place **Jiva** is a human and he | has bound the **Kshayika Samyaktv** along with the **Tirthankara** nature, then he goes to **Moksha** from that very birth and his **Tap**, **Jnana**, and **Nirvana** are the three **Kalyanak**s. 

Page #413:
---------------------------
## Asanyata
Asanyata
Asanyata
In comparison to Baddhayushka
Sixth place
In comparison to Abaddhayushka
Sixth place
In comparison to Baddhayuka
Seventh place
Gommatasar Karmakanda - 374
5
4
145
144
141

If in the third bhava, the one who is going to attain moksha, binds devayuka, then he goes to devagati. There, his 138 prakruti sattva remains. From there, he dies and comes to manushya gati, and from there he attains moksha. This jiva has five kalyanak. If this manushya has previously bound narakayuka, then he will go to naraka. There, his 138 prakruti sattva will remain. From there, he dies and comes to manushya bhava, and then he will have five kalyanak. And the jiva who is going to become a tirthankara, after coming to manushya paryay from naraka, does not experience upsarga for six months before coming out of naraka. The jiva who comes to manushya bhava from naraka and devagati has 138 prakruti sattva, but when six months of his lifespan remain, manushyayu is bound. Therefore, due to the increase in the bound lifespan, his prakruti sattva becomes 139.

145 (148-3, Bhujyaman - Baddhyaman Ayu without 2 ayu and tirthankara) In comparison to Baddhayushka with 145 prakruti sattva in mithyatvagunasthan, in the second place, out of 12 bhangas, 2 are repeated and 5 are sambhava, the remaining 5 bhangas were said. Similarly, here also, 5 bhangas should be known.

144 (148 - 4, Bhujyaman Ayu without remaining 3 ayu, tirthankara)
In comparison to the four bhujyaman ayu, four bhangas are said.

141 (In comparison to Baddhayushka, in the sixth place, 145 prakruti mentioned, minus anantanubandhi kavaayachatushk) 

Page #414:
---------------------------
## Gommatasara Karmakanda - 375

**5. Bhang are also like the sixth place of the bound-lifespan.** Know this here.

**Asanyata**
**140**
**Compared to the unbound-lifespan**
| 140 (Compared to the unbound-lifespan, in the sixth place,
from the 144 natures mentioned,
the fourfold kshaya of infinite-attachment is reduced)
**Compared to the four lifespans of enjoyment, here also**
**Seventh place**
**There are four bhang.**

**Asanyata**
**3**
**Compared to the bound-lifespan.**
**Eighth place**
| 140 | 140 (Compared to the bound-lifespan, in the seventh place,
from the 141 natures mentioned,
the nature of false-belief is reduced)
**There are 3 bhang in this way:** 1. Enjoyment-human-lifespan-bound-hell-lifespan. 2. Enjoyment-human-lifespan-bound-animal-lifespan. 3. Enjoyment-human-lifespan-bound-human-lifespan. 4. Enjoyment-human-lifespan-bound-god-lifespan.  _From the above 4 bhang, the third bhang | is in the form of enjoyment-human-lifespan-bound-human-lifespan and | because of its repetition, the remaining three bhang without it | should be known here. The reason for repetition here is that both enjoyment-bound are human lifespans.

**Asanyata**
**Compared to the unbound-lifespan.**
**Eighth place**
139 (Compared to the unbound-lifespan, in the seventh place,
from the 140 natures mentioned,
by reducing the nature of false-belief, there are 139 natures)
**5 bhang, related to enjoyment-human-lifespan.**

**Asanyata**
**3**
| 131
**Compared to the bound-lifespan.**
**Ninth place**
(Compared to the bound-lifespan, in the eighth place,
from the 140 natures mentioned,
the nature of right-false-belief is reduced) 

Page #415:
---------------------------
Gommatasar Karmakanda-376
1. Bhujyamanamanushyayu-Badyamananarokayu. 2. Bhujyamanamanushyayu-Badyamanatiryancha. 3. Bhujyamanamanushyayu-Badyamanamanushya. 4. Bhujyamanamanushyayu-Badyamandevayu.
The third bhang in the above 4 is redundant because both Bhujyaman and Badyaman are manushyayu, therefore, the remaining 3 bhangs are taken here without that bhang.
Asanyata
Abaddhayushk | 4 | 138 | Compared to Abaddhayushk, the eighth place | Marg til:.. war for the sake of what kind of Samyagmithyatva' ninth place
After reducing the nature, 138 natures remained. Then he became Kritakrityavedakasamyagdristi.
4 bhang, Bhujyaman are said in comparison to all four ayu, because such a being can be born in all four gatis after death compared to the previous baddhayushk.
Asanyata
4
|
138
Compared to Baddhayushk, the tenth place
Of the 139 natures mentioned in the 9th place of Baddhayushk, there are 138 natures after reducing one Samyaktva nature.
Here are 4 bhangs - 1. Bhujyamanamanushyayu-Badyamananarokayu. 2. Bhujyamanamanushyayu-Badyamaratiyanchayu. 3. Bhujyamanamanushyayu-Badyamandevayu. 4. Bhujyamanatiryanchayu-Badyamandevayu.
Asanyata
Compared to Abaddhayushk | Tenth place
4
| 137
Of the 138 natures mentioned in the 9th place related to Abaddhayushk, there are 137 natures after reducing the Samyaktva nature. 4 bhang, Bhujyaman | are in comparison to all four ayu. 

Page #416:
---------------------------
## Asayata
| Bounded lifespan.
| 11th place in comparison to Bounded lifespan.
| Gommatasara Karmakanda-377 2. 142. 142 (148-6, Tiryanchayu, any other lifespan, Aharakchatushk) There are two bhangas here, just like the two bhangas mentioned in the second place in comparison to Bounded lifespan.
## Asayata
| Unbounded lifespan.
| 11th place in comparison to Unbounded lifespan.
| _ From the above 142 prakritis, when the Bounded lifespan is reduced, the sattva of 141 prakritis is found.
| There are 3 bhangas as follows: 1. Bhujyaman Narakayu, 2. Bhujyaman Manushayau, 3. Bhujyaman Devayu.
## Asayata
| 2.
| Bounded lifespan.
| 12th place in comparison to Bounded lifespan.
| 138 | 138 (138 mentioned in the 11th place of Bounded lifespan, 142-4 Anantanubandhi Kashaya) 2 bhangas, know it to be the same as the second place mentioned in comparison to Bounded lifespan.
## Asayata
| Unbounded lifespan.
| 12th place in comparison to Unbounded lifespan.
| 137 (From the 141 prakritis mentioned in the 11th place in comparison to Unbounded lifespan, 
| Anantanubandhi Kashaya 4 reduced) 3 bhangas are as follows: 1. Bhujyaman Narakayu, 2. Bhujyaman Manushayau, 3. Bhujyaman Devayu.
## Asayata
| 137
| Bounded lifespan.
| 13th place in comparison to Bounded lifespan.
| | 137 (From the 138 prakritis mentioned in the 12th place in comparison to Bounded lifespan, 1 Mithyatva prakriti reduced) 2 bhangas, know it to be the same as the second place in comparison to Bounded lifespan.
## Asayata
| 1
| Unbounded lifespan.
| 13th place in comparison to Unbounded lifespan.
| | 136 | 136 (From the 137 prakritis mentioned in the 12th place in comparison to Unbounded lifespan, 
| Mithyatva prakriti reduced) 

Page #417:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-378
Asanyata
2
Bound-lifespan | 14th place compared to
1 Broken, unbound-lifespan related third place
Knowing the same as. | 136 136 (Said in the 13th place of bound-lifespan
137 From the nature, the Samyagmithyatva nature is reduced)
2 Broken, according to the second place of bound-lifespan.. Here also. Knowing. | 135 135 (From the nature of the 13th place of unbound-lifespan
136 Nature, 1 Samyagmithyatva nature is reduced
Done) 3 Broken, knowing the same as the first place of unbound-lifespan here also.
"...:
Asanyata
3
Unbound-lifespan | 14th place compared to
Asanyata
2
. | 135
Bound-lifespan 15th place compared to
135 (From the nature of the 14th place of bound-lifespan
. Nature, 1 Samyaktva nature is reduced)
2 Broken, knowing the same as the second place compared to bound-lifespan here also.
Asanyata
134
Unbound-lifespan 15th place compared to
| 134 (From the nature of the 14th place of unbound-lifespan
Nature, 1 Samyaktva nature is reduced) 3 Broken, knowing the same as the first place of unbound-lifespan here also.
Asanyata
5
Bound-lifespan 16th place compared to
. | 141 . 141 (148-7, Enjoyable and Bound
Lifespan without 2 lifespan, Tirthankara and
Aharakchatushk) 5 Broken, knowing the same as the sixth place compared to bound-lifespan here also.
Asanyata
140
Unbound-lifespan 16th place compared to
The above 141 nature, 1 bound lifespan is reduced from the nature, there are 140 natures.
4 Broken, knowing compared to the four enjoyable lifespans. 

Page #418:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-379
Asayat
5
| Baddhayushka |
Compared to | 17th place
| 137 | 137 (As stated in the 16th place of Baddhayushka
141 From the nature of Anantanubandhi Kashaya
4 less) 5 Bhang, know it as the 6th place of Baddhayushka.
Asanyat
4
| 136
Compared to Abaddhayushka 17th place
136 (From the nature of 16th place of Abaddhayushka 140
Anantanubandhi 4 Kashaya less)
4 Bhang, know it as compared to the four ages of Bhujyaman.
Asanyat
3
Baddhayushka. Compared to 18th place
| 136 | 136 (From the nature of 17th place of Baddhayushka 137
1 Mithyatva nature less) | 3 Bhang, know it as the same as the 9th place of Baddhayushka.
Asanyat
5
| 135
Compared to Abaddhayushka 18th place
135 (From the nature of 17th place of Abaddhayushka 136 _ 1 Mithyatva nature less) 1 Bhang, know it as the same as the 8th place of Abaddhayushka.
Asanyat
Baddhayushka compared to 19th place
135 | 135 (From the nature of 18th place of Baddhayushka 136
1 Samyagmithyatva nature less) 3 Bhang, know it as the same as the 9th place of Baddhayushka.
Asanyat
4
Abaddhayushka. Compared to 19th place |
| 534 | 134 (From the nature of 183rd place of Abaddhayushka 135
Samyagmithyatva less) 4 Bhang, know it as compared to the four ages of Bhujyaman. 

Page #419:
---------------------------
##  **Chapter 380 of the Karmakanda**

**Asanyata** (4)

**Bound-Lifespan** (134)

* **20th position** compared to Bound-Lifespan (134)
* **193rd position** compared to Bound-Lifespan (134)
* **4** **Bhangas** (breaks), same as the 10th position of Bound-Lifespan.

**Asanyata** (4)

**Unbound-Lifespan** (133)

* **20th position** compared to Unbound-Lifespan (133)
* **19th position** compared to Unbound-Lifespan (133)
* **4** **Bhangas** (breaks), same as the 10th position of Unbound-Lifespan.

**Further, in the three Gunasthanas (states of being) of Desasanayata, Prammatta, and Aprammatta, there are positions and Bhangas:**

**Desatiyesuvi evam, bhangaa ekkekk desagassa puno.**
**Padirasi bidiyaturissaadibidiyammi do bhangaa.** || 382 ||

**Meaning:**

* Know that there are 40 Sattva-sthana (states of being) in each of the three Gunasthanas (states of being) similar to the Asanyata Gunasthana.
* There is one Bhangas (break) in each of all the positions.
* However, in the second and fourth rows of the Desasanayata Gunasthana (Bound-Lifespan and Unbound-Lifespan), there are two Bhangas (breaks) in the first and second positions.

**Special Meaning:**

* In the Desasanayata, Prammatta, and Aprammatta Gunasthanas, write down five positions without the 2nd, 6th, 7th, 8th, and 9th natures, similar to the Asanyata Gunasthana.
* Below these, write four rows for Bound-Lifespan.
* Below that, write four rows for Unbound-Lifespan, decreasing the lifespan by one in each row.
* In these rows, the first row includes the Tirthankara and the four Aharakas, so no nature is reduced here.
* In the second row, reduce the Tirthankara nature.
* In the third row, add the Tirthankara nature and reduce the four Aharakas.
* In the fourth row, reduce the Tirthankara and the four Aharakas (five natures in total).
* In this way, there are 40 positions in the eight rows of Bound-Lifespan and Unbound-Lifespan.
* In the 20 positions of Bound-Lifespan, there is one Bhangas (break) each for the lifespan of a human being and the lifespan of a bound god.
* Without these, the other three lifespans do not lead to Desavrata (minor vows) and Mahavrata (major vows) (verse 334).
* In the 20 positions of Unbound-Lifespan, there is only one Bhangas (break) for the lifespan of a human being.
* However, the special feature is that in the Desasanayata Gunasthana, in the second and fourth rows without the Tirthankara nature, there are two Bhangas (breaks) in the first and second positions out of the ten positions.
* Similarly, in the second and fourth rows of Bound-Lifespan, there are Bhangas (breaks) for the lifespan of a human being and the lifespan of a bound god in the first and second positions. 

Page #420:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-38.5

There are two-two bhangas (breaks) in the form of *bhujyamanamanushyayu* (human lifespan) and *bhujyamanatiryanchayu* (animal lifespan) for both *bhujyamanatiryanchayu* and *baddhyamandevaayu* (divine lifespan). In the first and second places of the second and fourth rows of *abaddhayusk* (lifespan without bondage), there are two-two bhangas in the form of *bhujyamanamanushyayu* and *bhujyamanatiryanchayu*. Thus, there are 48 bhangas in 40 places of *desasanayatgunasthan* (the place of the qualities of self-control), and there are 40-40 bhangas in 40-40 places of *pramattagunasthan* (the place of the qualities of distraction) and *apramattagunasthan* (the place of the qualities of non-distraction), instead of one-one bhangas.

**A glimpse of the 48 bhangas related to the 40 sattvasthanas (places of being) of desasanayatgunasthan**

**First Row**

| **Place** | **Anantaanubandhi** (Infinitely Connected) | **Mithyatva** (False Belief) | **Samyagmi** (Right Faith) | **Samyaktvaayu Rahit** (Lifespan without Right Faith) | **Chatushkarahit Rahit** (Without the Fourfold) |
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
| **First Place** | 140 | Mithyatva Rahit (Without False Belief) | Samyagmi Rahit (Without Right Faith) | Samyaktvaayu Rahit (Lifespan without Right Faith) | Chatushkarahit Rahit (Without the Fourfold) |
| **Second Place** | 140 | Mithyatva Rahit (Without False Belief) | Samyagmi Rahit (Without Right Faith) | Samyaktvaayu Rahit (Lifespan without Right Faith) | Chatushkarahit Rahit (Without the Fourfold) |
| **Third Place** | 140 | Mithyatva Rahit (Without False Belief) | Samyagmi Rahit (Without Right Faith) | Samyaktvaayu Rahit (Lifespan without Right Faith) | Chatushkarahit Rahit (Without the Fourfold) |
| **Fourth Place** | 140 | Mithyatva Rahit (Without False Belief) | Samyagmi Rahit (Without Right Faith) | Samyaktvaayu Rahit (Lifespan without Right Faith) | Chatushkarahit Rahit (Without the Fourfold) |
| **Fifth Place** | 140 | Mithyatva Rahit (Without False Belief) | Samyagmi Rahit (Without Right Faith) | Samyaktvaayu Rahit (Lifespan without Right Faith) | Chatushkarahit Rahit (Without the Fourfold) |

**Second Row (Tirthankara Rahit - Without Tirthankara)**

| **Place** | **Baddha** (Bound) | **Prakriti** (Nature) | **Yusk** (Lifespan) | **Abaddha** (Unbound) | **Prakriti** (Nature) | **Yusk** (Lifespan) |
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
| **First Place** | 138 | Tirthankara (Tirthankara) | 138 | Chatushkasahit (With the Fourfold) | 138 | 138 |
| **Second Place** | 138 | Aharak (Food) | 138 | Chatushkasahit (With the Fourfold) | 138 | 138 |
| **Third Place** | 138 | Aharak (Food) | 138 | Chatushkasahit (With the Fourfold) | 138 | 138 |
| **Fourth Place** | 138 | Aharak (Food) | 138 | Chatushkasahit (With the Fourfold) | 138 | 138 |
| **Fifth Place** | 138 | Aharak (Food) | 138 | Chatushkasahit (With the Fourfold) | 138 | 138 |

**Third Row**

| **Place** | **Baddha** (Bound) | **Prakriti** (Nature) | **Yusk** (Lifespan) | **Abaddha** (Unbound) | **Prakriti** (Nature) | **Yusk** (Lifespan) |
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
| **First Place** | 145 | Tirthankara (Tirthankara) | 145 | Chatushkarahit (Without the Fourfold) | 144 | 144 |
| **Second Place** | 142 | Aharak (Food) | 142 | Chatushkarahit (Without the Fourfold) | 142 | 142 |
| **Third Place** | 136 | Aharak (Food) | 136 | Chatushkarahit (Without the Fourfold) | 136 | 136 |
| **Fourth Place** | 134 | Aharak (Food) | 134 | Chatushkarahit (Without the Fourfold) | 134 | 134 |
| **Fifth Place** | 133 | Aharak (Food) | 133 | Chatushkarahit (Without the Fourfold) | 133 | 133 |

**Fourth Row**

| **Place** | **Baddha** (Bound) | **Prakriti** (Nature) | **Yusk** (Lifespan) | **Abaddha** (Unbound) | **Prakriti** (Nature) | **Yusk** (Lifespan) |
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
| **First Place** | 135 | Tirthankara (Tirthankara) | 135 | Chatushkarahit (Without the Fourfold) | 134 | 134 |
| **Second Place** | 135 | Aharak (Food) | 135 | Chatushkarahit (Without the Fourfold) | 134 | 134 |
| **Third Place** | 135 | Aharak (Food) | 135 | Chatushkarahit (Without the Fourfold) | 134 |
Page #421:
---------------------------
## Gommatasara Karmakanda-382:

**To explain the concept of 'Sattvasthana' and 'Bhang' in the four Gunasthanas of the Upshama category, Acharya first mentions the 'Apuurvakarana' Gunasthan.**

**Verse 383:**

* **Meaning:** In the 'Apuurvakarana' Gunasthan of the Upshama category, there are three 'Sthanas' (positions) that are devoid of 2, 6, and 9 'Prakritis' (elements). These 'Sthanas' are to be understood as having 9 'Prakritis' (3 squared, i.e., 3 x 3 = 9) less than the original. To find the 'Sthanas' of the 'Baddhayushk' (bound lifespan), subtract 0, 1, 4, and 5 'Prakritis' respectively from these three 'Sthanas' in four rows. For the 'Abaddhayushk' (unbound lifespan), subtract one 'Prakriti' from each of the 'Baddhayushk' 'Sthanas'. This results in a total of 24 'Sthanas'.

**Explanation:**

* In the 'Apuurvakarana' Gunasthan of the Upshama category, there are three 'Sthanas' devoid of 2, 6, and 9 'Prakritis'. These three 'Sthanas' are arranged in four rows.
* In the first row, no 'Prakriti' is subtracted.
* In the second row, one 'Tirthankara' 'Prakriti' is subtracted.
* In the third row, four 'Aharak Chatushk' 'Prakritis' are subtracted.
* In the fourth row, five 'Prakritis' (one 'Tirthankara' and four 'Aharak Chatushk') are subtracted.
* This results in 12 'Sthanas' for the 'Baddhayushk'.
* For the 'Abaddhayushk', subtract one 'Baddhamanadevaayu' from each of the four rows, resulting in another 12 'Sthanas'.
* With three 'Sthanas' in each of the eight rows, the total number of 'Sthanas' is 24.

**Verse 384:**

* **Meaning:** The two 'Aayu' (lifespans) of 'Naraka' (hell) and 'Tiryanch' (animal realm), along with the four 'Kashayas' (passions) of the first (Anantanu bandhi) category, total six. Add to this the three 'Darshanmohaniya' (obscurations of knowledge), making a total of nine 'Prakritis'. The three 'Sthanas' devoid of these nine 'Prakritis' have only one 'Bhang' (destruction) each.

**Explanation:**

* Subtracting the two 'Prakritis' of 'Naraka' and 'Tiryanch' 'Aayu' from the original 146 'Prakritis' results in the first 'Sthan'.
* Subtracting the six 'Prakritis' of 'Naraka', 'Tiryanch' 'Aayu', and the four 'Anantanu bandhi' 'Kashayas' from the original 146 'Prakritis' results in the second 'Sthan'.
* Subtracting the nine 'Prakritis' (six mentioned above and three 'Darshanmohaniya') from the original 146 'Prakritis' results in the third 'Sthan'.
* These three 'Sthanas' are arranged in four rows.
* In the first row, no 'Prakriti' is subtracted.
* In the second row, one 'Tirthankara' 'Prakriti' is subtracted.
* In the third row, four 'Aharak Chatushk' 'Prakritis' are subtracted.
* In the fourth row, five 'Prakritis' (one 'Tirthankara' and four 'Aharak Chatushk') are subtracted.
* This results in 12 'Sthanas' for the 'Baddhayushk'.
* The 'Bhang' (destruction) of each of these 'Sthanas' is only one.

**Further Explanation:**

* The text goes on to explain the 'Bhang' (destruction) of each 'Sthan' based on the 'Prakritis' that were subtracted. 
* It also mentions the 'Sattvasthana' (state of being) associated with each 'Sthan'.

**Note:** This is a partial translation of the text. The full translation would require a deeper understanding of Jain philosophy and terminology. 

Page #422:
---------------------------
## Gommatasara Karmakanda-383: Knowing the Number of Natures in the 12 Places of Bounded and Unbounded Lifespans

This section discusses the number of natures in the 12 places of Bounded and Unbounded Lifespans when the Bounded Devaloka lifespan is reduced. In these 24 places, there is only one change (bhang). 

Here, in the places of Bounded Lifespan, we should know that there is one change in the form of Bounded Devaloka lifespan and Bounded Manushya lifespan. And in the places of Unbounded Lifespan, we should know that there is one change in the form of Bounded Manushya lifespan. 

Thus, there are 24 places and 24 changes for the beings in the Gunasthanas of Upaśamaka and Apūrvakaraṇa.

**Detailed Explanation of the Departure, Change, and Number of Natures Related to Upaśamaka and Apūrvakaraṇa:**

| **Sarcha** | **Gunasthan** | **Nature** | **Number of Changes** | **Special** | **Place** | **Number** |
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
| Upaśamaka Apūrvakaraṇa | First place compared to Bounded Lifespan | 146 | 1 change, Bounded Manushya lifespan - Bounded Devaloka lifespan |  | 1 | 146 (148-2, Narakayush - Tiryanchayush) |
| Upaśamaka Apūrvakaraṇa | First place compared to Unbounded Lifespan | 145 | 1 change, Bounded Manushya lifespan |  | 1 | 145 (146 nature minus 1 Bounded lifespan) |
| Upaśamaka Apūrvakaraṇa | Second place compared to Bounded Lifespan | 142 | 1 change, Bounded Manushya lifespan - Bounded Devaloka lifespan |  | 1 | 142 (146 nature minus 4 Kshaya of Ananta Anubandhi) |
| Upaśamaka Apūrvakaraṇa | Second place compared to Unbounded Lifespan | 141 | 1 change, Bounded Manushya lifespan |  | 1 | 141 (142 nature minus 1 Bounded lifespan) | 

Page #423:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-384
Upshamika A-purvakarana
| Baddhayushka | in comparison to the third place
Baddhayushkasambandho second place from 142 types, Darshan Mohaniya three types are reduced.
This being can become Tirthankara nature due to Kshayika Samyagdristi.
5 Bhang, Bhujyamanamanushyayu-Badyamandevaayu.
Upshamika | Abaddhayushka A-purvakarana | | in comparison to
Third place
From the above 139 types, 1 Badyamanayu is reduced.
1 Bhang, Bhujyamanamanushyayu!
1
. 145
Upshamika A-purvakarana
Baddhayushka in comparison to the fourth place
145 (148-3, Aayu 2, Tirthankara)
1 Bhang, Bhujyamanamanushyayu-Badyamandevaayu.
Upshamika A-purvakarana
Abaddhayushka in comparison to the fourth place
_ From the above 145 types, Badyamanayu is reduced, resulting in 144 types.
1. Bhang, Bhujyamanamanushyayu.
Upshamika Baddhayushka A-purvakarana | in comparison to
Fifth place
From the 145 types of the fourth place in comparison to Baddhayushka, 4 Kashadha are reduced, which are Anantanu bandhi.
1 Bhang, Manushyayu (Bhujyaman) Badyamandevaayu.
Upshamika A-purvakarana
Abaddhayushka in comparison to | Fifth place
From the above 141 types, 1 Badyamanayu is reduced. | 1 Bhang, Bhujyamanamanushyayu. 

Page #424:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-385
Upasamaka A-purvakarana
Sixth place in comparison to Baddhayushka
| 141 natures of the fifth place in comparison to Baddhayushka, 3 Darshanamohaniya natures are less.
1 Bhang, Bhujyamanamanushyayu-Badyamandevaayu.
Upasamaka
A-purvakarana
Abaddhayushka | Sixth place in comparison to
The above 138 natures, 1 Badyamanayu is less, there are 137 natures.
1 Bhang, Bhujyamanamanushyayu.
1
. 142
Upasamaka | Baddhayushka A-purvakarana | in comparison to
Seventh place
| 142 (148-6, 2 Aayu, Aharakchatushk)
1 Bhang Bhujyamanamanushyayu-Badyamandevaayu.
Upasamaka A-purvakarana
Abadayu: ! ...... : ...13:... 141: ( 1 less than the above 142 natures
Babadhyamanayu is less) Seventh place
1 Bhang, Bhujyamanamanushyayu.
1
Upasamaka A-purvakarana
Baddhayushka . Eighth place in comparison to
. 138 . 138 (142 natures related to the eighth place of Baddhayushka
4 Kashaya of Anantanubandhi
order) 1 Bhang, Bhujyamanamanushyayu-Badyamandevaayu.
1
Upasamaka A-purvakarana
Abaddhayushka | Eighth place in comparison to
| 137 | 137 (1 less than the above 538 natures
Badyamanayu is less) 1 Bhang, Bhujyamanamanushyayu.
1
. 135
Upasamaka A-purvakarana
Badayushka . Ninth place in comparison to
135 (3 Darshanamohaniya natures are less than the 538 natures of the 8th place of Baddhayushka)
1 Bhang, Bhujyamanamanushyayu-Badyamandevaayu. 

Page #425:
---------------------------
## Upshamka A-purvakarana
Upshamka A-purvakarana
Upshamka A-purvakarana
Upshamka A-purvakarana
Upshamka A-purvakarana
Upshamka A-purvakarana
Upshamka A-purvakarana
Upshamka A-purvakarana
Upshamka A-purvakarana
Upshamka A-purvakarana
Upshamka A-purvakarana
Upshamka A-purvakarana
Upshamka A-purvakarana
**Compared to Abaddhayushk**
| Ninth Place
**Compared to Baddhayushk**
| Tenth Place
**Compared to Abaddhayushk**
| Tenth Place
**Compared to Baddhayushk**
| Eleventh Place
**Compared to Abaddhayushk**
| Eleventh Place
**Compared to Baddhayushk**
| Twelfth Place
**Compared to Abaddhayushk**
| Twelfth Place
1
1
1
1
Gommatsar Karmakanda - 386
134
141
140
137
136
134
133
134 (Out of the above 135 Prakruti, 1 Baddhaman Aayu is reduced)
1 Bhang, Bhujyamanamanushyayu.
141 (148-7, 2 Aayu-Tirthankara and Aharakchatushk)
1 Bhang, Baddhamandevaayu.
140 (Out of the above 141 Prakruti, 1 Baddhaman Aayu is reduced, resulting in the existence of 140 Prakruti) 1 Bhang, Bhujyamanamanushyayu.
137 (Out of the 141 Prakruti related to the 10th place of Baddhayushk, 4 Kashayas related to Anantanu bandhi are reduced)
Bhang,
Bhujyamanamanushyayu
1
Baddhamandevaayu.
Bhujyamanamanushyayu
136 (Out of the above 137 Prakruti, 1 Baddhaman Aayu is reduced)
1. Bhang, Bhujyamanamanushyayu.
134 (Out of the 137 Prakruti related to the 11th place of Baddhayushk, 3 Prakruti of Darshanmohaniya are reduced)
1
Baddhamandevaayu
Bhang,
Bhujyamanamanushyayu
-
133 (Out of the 136 Prakruti related to the 11th place of Abaddhayushk, 3 Prakruti of Darshanmohaniya are reduced)
9 Bhang, Bhujyamanamanushyayu. 

Page #426:
---------------------------
Gommatsar Karmakanda - 387

Regarding the Upashamak, in the Anivrittikaran-Sukshmasamparaya, Upashantakashaya, and Kshapaka-Apuvrakaran, there are 24 Sattva-sthana and 24 Bhang, similar to the 383rd verse. In the Kshapaka-Apuvrakaran Gunasthana, there are 10 Prakriti-less, one Sattva-sthana, with four rows, starting with zero, then subtracting 1, 4, and 5 Prakriti respectively. Thus, there are four Sattva-sthana and four Bhang.

Specifically, in the Kshapaka-Apuvrakaran Gunasthana, there is one Sattva-sthana with 138 Prakriti, excluding the ten Prakriti of Bhujyamanamanushyayu, three Aayu, four Anantanubandhi, and two Darshanamohaniya. This Sattva-sthana has four rows, similar to the previous ones. In the first row, there are zero Prakriti, in the second row, there are Tirthankara, in the third row, there are Aharak Chatushk, and in the fourth row, there are Tirthankara and Aharak Chatushk. By subtracting these, we get four Sattva-sthana with 138, 137, 134, and 133 Prakriti respectively. Each of these has one Bhang, which is Bhujyamanamanushyayu, thus there are four Bhang.

Gunasthana
In these three Upashamak, the Darsharha is diminished in the Khavagapuvrava. All four are diminished, and in the Nabha, one is diminished, and four are diminished. || 385 ||

Kshapatra
Apuvrakaran
Kshapaka
Apuvrakaran
In the Kshapaka-Apuvrakaran Gunasthana, the Sattva-sthana and Bhang are as follows:

Sattva-sthana
1st
2nd
Bhang Number Prakriti Number
1
1
138
137
Specific
138 (148 - 10, excluding Bhujyaman Aayu, 3 Aayu, 4 Anantanubandhi, 2 Darshanamohaniya)
1 Bhang, Bhujyamanamanushyayu.
1 Tirthankara Prakriti is subtracted from the above 138.
1 Bhang, Bhujyamanamanushyayu. 

Page #427:
---------------------------
## Gommatasara Karmakanda-388
## Kshapaka A-purvakarana

### 3rd
|
1
| 134 | 134 (From the 138 natures of the first Sattvasthana, 4 natures are reduced, the Aharakchatushk) 1 Bhang, Bhujyabhanamanushyayu.

### Kshapaka
### 4th
|
1
A-purvakarana
| 133 | 133 (From the 138 natures of the first Sanchasthana, the Aharakchatushk and Tirthankara natures are reduced) 1 Bhang, Bhujyamanamanushyayu.

Now, in Kshapaka-anivrittikarana, Sattvasthana and Bhang are mentioned -

These Sattvasthanas, the smallest, the largest, and the middle, are sixteen in number, six of them are one after another. ||386||

Naraka-dvig, Tiryancha-dvig, Dvi-indriya, Tri-indriya, Chatur-indriya-jati, Styanagridhi-adi, Trinidra, Udyota, Atap, Eka-indriya, Sadharana, Sukhma, Thavara, Madhyakashaya, Napumsakaved, Strived, Hasya-adi, six No-kashaya, Purushaved, Krodha and Mana, these natures are destroyed in the A-nivrittikarana guna-sthana. ||386 k||

**Meaning:** In Kshapaka-anivrittikarana, similar to Kshapaka-a-purvakarana, there are four places, and by reducing 16-8-11-6-1-1 and 1 natures, there are eight other places. These eight also have four lines, and by subtracting from zero onwards in the previous order, there are 32 differences. Thus, 4 and 32 together make 36 places of Kshapaka-anivrittikarana. ||383||

**Special Meaning:** In verse 386, the names of the 16-8-1-1-6-1-1-1 natures that are said to be reduced in the A-nivrittikarana guna-sthana are only mentioned in verse 386 k. In the Kshapaka-anivrittikarana guna-sthana, in sequence, Eka-indriya-adi four jatis, Tiryancha-gati, Tiryancha-gati-anupurvi, 

Page #428:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-389: Hell-bound, Hell-bound Preceding, Heat, Radiance. Stationary, Subtle, Ordinary, Lethargy, etc. three sleep, these 16, and further, Non-rejection Karma 4, Rejection Karma 4, these eight, Eunuch Knowledge, Female Knowledge, 6 (Laughter, etc. Non-Karma), Male Knowledge, Burning Anger, Burning Pride, these natures, when reduced, have 122-554113-112-106-105-104-103 nature forms, eight places. These eight places have four rows, and in the first row, no nature is reduced, in the second row, Tirthankara nature is reduced, in the third row, the four types of food are reduced, and in the fourth row, Tirthankara and the four types of food are reduced. Thus, there are 32 places in four rows, and as per the previous explanation, there are 4 places, these all (32+4) 36 places are in the Destruction-Non-obstruction Karma-stage. Now, the destruction of these places is explained in two verses:

"One destruction each, in nine, in four places.
Two each, in the second and fourth, in the Tirthankara-less." ||387||

Meaning: In the 36 places of the Destruction-Non-obstruction Karma-stage, there is one destruction each, but in the four places where the destruction of Eunuch Knowledge occurs, there are two destructions each in the second and fourth rows, which are devoid of the Tirthankara nature.

"When the Female Knowledge or Male Knowledge arises, the Eunuch Knowledge is destroyed first.
When the Eunuch Knowledge arises, the Female Knowledge is destroyed first, and the Eunuch Knowledge remains." ||388||

Meaning: The beings who ascend the ladder with the arising of Female Knowledge or Male Knowledge, first destroy the Eunuch Knowledge, but the Female Knowledge remains there. The beings who ascend the ladder with the arising of Eunuch Knowledge, first destroy the Female Knowledge, and the Eunuch Knowledge remains in the two places mentioned earlier. Thus, there are two destructions in two places. When this happens, there are 38 destructions in 36 places, and previously, 24 destructions were mentioned for the 24 places of the Subduing-Non-obstruction Karma-stage, so all these (38+24) 62 destructions. According to this view, the four places of the four rows devoid of Maya's existence are not mentioned, and according to the view of the verse "Chadusekke Badare", etc., which will be mentioned later, there are four places devoid of Maya's existence. 

Page #429:
---------------------------
Gommatasar Karmakanda-390
A concise explanation of the 36 Sattva-sthana and their 38 Bhangas in the Kshapaka-anivrittikaran Gunasthana
Sattva Pra.
138 | 122 | 114 | 113 | 112 |
Naraka, Tiryancha and Devayur are absent
Bhan
Sattva Pra.
137 / 121
5
104 103 | 10
Aharaka | Tirthankara Chatushkara are absent | absent
Sattva Pra.
134 | 118
Bhaj
Sattva
Pra.
Tirthankara and
Aharaka Chatushkara are absent
Bhang
Where there is one Bhang, know that Bhang as Bhujyamanamanushyayurup. The explanation of two Bhangas is as follows: If a being whose Tirthankara nature is absent, while ascending the Kshapaka category, experiences the rise of Striveda in the Anivrittikaran Gunasthana, then he will first destroy the Napumsakaved and then destroy the Striveda. But if the rise of Napumsakaved occurs while ascending the category, then he will first destroy the Striveda and then destroy the Napumsakaved. Therefore, there are two Bhangas. That is, know that there are two Bhangas: one with Striveda present and Napumsakaved absent, and the other with Napumsakaved present and Striveda absent. Now, in the Kshapaka-sukshma-samparaya and Kshina-kshaya Gunasthana, Sattva-sthana and Bhang are said to be:
Aniyahi-charimathana, chattarivi ekkahiin suhumassa.
Te igidoonnivihinam, khinasavi hoti thanani. ||389|| Meaning: In the Kshapaka-anivrittikaran Gunasthana, the last place with 103 nature, which was said to be without Sajwalanmana, has four places with 103-102-9998 nature, which are obtained by subtracting zero, one, four, and five nature respectively in its four rows. By subtracting Sajwalanmaya from these four, the places with 102-101-18 and 97 nature become the Kshapaka-sukshma-samparaya Gunasthana. And in all these four places, Sajwalanlobha 

Page #430:
---------------------------


Page #431:
---------------------------
Meaning - In the tradition of Shri Kanaknandisiiddhantachakravarti, it is said that in the four gunasthanas of the upshama श्रेणी, starting with the sattva of 146 prakritis with anantaanubandhi, the eight places mentioned in the four rows of baddhayushk and abaddhayushk are not there, therefore, when eight places are reduced from the 24 places mentioned, there are only 16 places. According to some acharyas, the kshapaka anivrittikaran gunasthanavarthi first performs the acts of apratyakhyana and pratyakhyana, and destroys the adi prakritis.
The description of the eight places that are reduced is as follows:
Gommatasar Karmakanda - 392
Natthi ana uvsamge, khavgapuvvam khavittu atta ya. Paccha soladiinam, khavanam idi ke niddinam || 399 ||
With respect to baddhayushk
First place 146 prakriti-युक्त Second place 145 prakriti-युक्त Third place 142 prakriti-युक्त Fourth place 141 prakriti-युक्त
All
Tirthankara-रहित
Aharaka
Chatushkara-रहित Tirthankara and Aharaka. Chatushkara-रहित
1 bhang
bhang
1 bhang
1. bhang
4 bhang
All
4 bhang
According to other acharyas, the sattva-sthana and their prakriti numbers of the kshapaka anivrittikaran gunasthan are:
137 129 113
134 126
With respect to abaddhayushk
First place 145 prakriti-युक्त Second place 144 prakriti-युक्त
110
Third place 141 prakriti-युक्त Fourth place 140 prakriti-युक्त
138 130 114 113 112 106 105 104 103
112 111 105 104 103 102
109 108 102
101
133 125 109 108 107 101 100
1 bhang
1 bhang
1 bhang
1. bhang
Aniyattigunattane, mayarhiadam cha thanamichchati. Thana bhangapamana, kei evam parooventi || 392 ||
100
19
99
98

Page #432:
---------------------------
Gommatasar 'Karmakanda-393
Meaning- Some Acharyas believe that there are four states in the Anivrittikaran Gunasthan without Maya Kshaya. And some Acharyas consider the states to be equal in number to the proofs of destruction. When such a belief exists, the number of states and destructions is said to be
Aṭṭhāras Chaū Aṭuṁ, Micchatiye Uvari Chāl Chauthāṇe.
Tisu Uvasamge Sante, Solas Solas Have Thāṇā ||393|| Meaning- In the three Gunasthanas of Mithyatva, etc., there are 18-4 and 8 states as mentioned earlier. Further, in the four Gunasthanas of Asanyata, etc., there are 40-40 states. In the four Gunasthanas of Upshamka-Apuvarkaran, Anivrittikaran, Sukshma-Samparaya and Upshanta-Moh, there are 16-16 states.
Special Meaning- In the Mithyatva Gunasthan, there are 18, in the Sasadan Gunasthan, there are 4, in the Mishra Gunasthan, there are 8, in the Asanyata Gunasthan, there are 40, in the Deshasanyata Gunasthan, there are 40, in the Pramatta Gunasthan, there are 40, in the Aprammatta Gunasthan, there are 40 states. In these four Gunasthanas of Upshamka-Apuvarkaran, Anivrittikaran, Sukshma-Samparaya, Upshanta-Moh, there are eight-eight states of four-four rows related to bound-life-unbound-life without the essence of Anantanubandhi, hence there are 16-16 states, therefore, a total of 32 states. In Kshapaka-Apuvarkaran, there are four states as mentioned earlier, in Kshapaka-Anivrittikaran, there are 36 states as mentioned earlier and four states without Sajwalan Maya which were mentioned in the Sukshma-Samparaya Gunasthan, are mentioned here in the Anivrittikaran Gunasthan. Thus, there are 40 states (36+4) as mentioned earlier and four without Maya Kshaya. In Kshapaka-Sukshma-Samparaya, there are four, in Kshina-Kshaya, there are eight, in Sayogi, there are four and in A-yogi, there are six states as mentioned earlier. Now, the number of destructions of these states is said to be
Paṇṇekāram Chakkādi, Bīsasaṁ Aṭṭhadāl Dusū Tālṁ.
Vīsadavaṇṇṁ Vīsaṁ, Solatṭha Ya Chāri Aṭṭeva. ||394|| Meaning- In the Gunasthanas of Mithyatva, etc., in the order mentioned earlier, there are 50-11-36-120-48-40-40 destructions and in the two categories of Upsham-Kshapaka, there are 20-58-20-16-8-4-8 destructions. Here, due to the difference in the tradition of the Gurus, there are many types of statements, which are also worthy of faith, because their certainty cannot be determined without the direct knowledge of Kevali-Shruta-Kevali.
Special Meaning- The destructions of these states are as mentioned earlier, in the Mithyatva Gunasthan, there are 50, in the Sasadan Gunasthan, there are 12, out of these, there are 11 destructions in the bound-life related states by separating the Deva-A-paryapta difference. The death of a second-Upsham-Samyagdristi Jiva in the Sasadan Gunasthan, whose Deva-ayu is bound, does not occur, such a 

Page #433:
---------------------------
##  The Goṃmaṭasāra Karmakāṇḍa - 394

The Ācārya says, there are 11 bhangas in relation to these. In the Miśra Guṇasthāna there are 36, in the Asan̄yata Guṇasthāna there are 120, in the Deśasan̄yata Guṇasthāna there are 48, in the Pramatta and Apramatta Guṇasthāna there are 40-40, in the Upasamaka of the Apūrva-karaṇa Guṇasthāna there are 16 and in the Kṣapaka there are 4, thus 20 places. In the Anivṛtti-karaṇa Guṇasthāna, there are 16 Upasamaka as mentioned before, 36 Kṣapaka and 4 places of Kṣapaṇā-sthāna in the Napuṃsaka-veda. In the second and fourth rows, there are two bhangas due to the change of the Stri-Puṃsaka Veda in the absence of the Tīrthaṅkara, and four bhangas due to the four places without Māyā, totaling 58 bhangas in the Anivṛtti-karaṇa Guṇasthāna. In the Upasamaka of the Sūkṣma-sāṃpārāya Guṇasthāna there are 16, and in the Kṣapaka there are 4, totaling 20 bhangas (16+4). In the Upasānta-moha Guṇasthāna there are 16, and in the Kṣīṇa-kaṣāya there are 8 bhangas due to 8 places. Know that in the Sayogi Guṇasthāna there are 4, and in the Ayogi there are 8 bhangas due to 6 places.

Now, the Ācārya, desiring to complete the authority on the Sattvasthāna, tells the fruit of reading it:

**Evam Sattṭhāṇam, Savittharam Vaṇṇiyam Mae Sammam.**
**Jo Pai Sui Bhāvaḍ, So Pāvai Ṇivvuḍiṃ Sokkhaṃ.** || 395 ||

**Meaning:** Thus, I have described the Sattvasthāna in detail. Whoever reads, hears, or contemplates this in the right way, attains the bliss of liberation.

**Varaiṃḍaṇandi-guruno, Pāse Soūṇ Sabal-siddhantāṃ.**
**Sirikaṇayādi-gurunā, Sattṭhāṇam Samuddihaṃ.** || 396 ||

**Meaning:** This Sattvasthāna was properly formulated by Śrīkanaka-nandi Siddhanta-cakravarti, after hearing the complete Siddhanta from the chief among the Ācāryas, Śrīmad Indra-nandi Bhaṭṭāraka.

Now, the Ācārya, comparing himself to the Cakravarti, concludes the authority on this statement of the Sattvasthāna:

**Jah Cakkreṇa Ya Cakki, Chakkhaṇḍa Sāhiyam A-viggheṇa.**
**Tah Maicakkeṇa Maya, Chakkhaṇḍa Sāhiyam Sammam.** || 397 ||

**Meaning:** Just as the Cakravarti, with the Cakra-ratna, brought the six divisions of the Bharatakṣetra under his control without any obstacle, so also I, with the Cakra of intellect, have properly dived into the ocean of the Śāstra, which is the six divisions of the Agam, namely, the Jīvasthāna, Kṣudra-bandha, Bandha-svāmitva, Vedana-khaṇḍa, Vargaṇa-khaṇḍa, and Mahā-bandha.

Thus, the third authority, which describes the bhangas of the Sattvasthāna, is complete in the Hindi commentary called "Siddhanta-jñāna-dīpikā" on the Goṃmaṭasāra Karmakāṇḍa, composed by Ācārya Śrī Nemicandra Siddhanta-cakravarti. 

Page #434:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda - 395
**Chapter on the Three Chulika**

Salutation and auspiciousness to the great Mahavira, whose power is in the form of knowledge, etc., devoid of the help of the senses, etc.
I (Nemichandracharya) bow my head and say, "Listen to this Chulika, O auspicious beings!"

**Meaning:**
The Chulika is that which contemplates the meaning, whether stated, unstated, or not specifically mentioned.
The Chulika is the special description of the meaning indicated by the sutra.
The Chulika is that which, when the meaning is explained, creates certainty in the minds of the disciples regarding the subject matter previously described.
It is also said elsewhere:
"The Chulika is the illumination of the meaning indicated in the sutra."
The Chulika is the special explanation of the meanings indicated by the Anuyog Dwara.
The Chulika is the special explanation of a subject, the unstated topics in the stated subject, or the statements related to the stated and unstated topics.

Here, the contemplation of the nine questions, the five-part division, and the ten karmas will be done, hence the name of this chapter is "Tri-Chulika" (Three Chulika). 

Page #435:
---------------------------
............
**Mmsar Karmakanda-396**

Further, among those three Chulikaas, the first one is called Navaprashna Chulika.
"Kin bandho udayado, puvvam paccha saman vinassadi so.
Saparobhayodayo va, nirantaro santaro ubhayo." (399)

**Meaning:**

Firstly, which of the existing natures have their bandha-vyuchchitti before their udaya-vyuchchitti? Which of the existing natures have their bandha-vyuchchitti after their udaya-vyuchchitti? Which of the existing natures have their bandha-vyuchchitti simultaneously with their udaya-vyuchchitti? These are the three questions.

Which natures have their bandha when they themselves arise? Which natures have their bandha when other natures arise? Which natures have their bandha when both (self and other natures) arise? These are the three questions.

Which natures have their bandha continuously? Which natures have their bandha intermittently? Which natures have their bandha both continuously and intermittently? These are the three questions.

Thus, there are nine questions in total, which will be discussed in this section.

**Specific Meaning:**

The nine questions of Navaprashna Chulika are as follows:

Which natures have their bandha-vyuchchitti before and their udaya-vyuchchitti after? Which natures have their udaya-vyuchchitti before and their bandha-vyuchchitti after? Which natures have their bandha-udaya-vyuchchitti simultaneously? Which natures have their bandha only when other natures arise? Which natures have their bandha only when they themselves arise? Which natures have their bandha when both self and other natures arise? Which natures have their bandha continuously from the beginning of the moment until the end? Which natures have their bandha intermittently from one moment to less than the end of the moment? Which natures have their bandha sometimes continuously and sometimes intermittently?

**Characteristics of Santara and Nirantara:**

"Padivakkhapayadhibhandhassiduun thakkamanbandhas saantarabandhi tti tam saantarabandhisu padivakkhapayadhibhandhaavinaabhavam dattan yutta. Paramatthado pun egasamayam bandhiduun vidiyasamaye jisse bandhaviramo dissadi sa saantarabandhapyadi. Jisse bandhakalo jahanno vi antomuttametto sa nirantarabandhapyadi tti ghettavvam."

**Translation:**

"When the bandha of the previous moment is destroyed, the bandha of the next moment is called intermittent bandha. It is appropriate to consider the absence of the bandha of the previous moment in intermittent bandha. However, from the ultimate perspective, if the bandha occurs at one moment and ceases at another moment, then it is called intermittent bandha. If the duration of the bandha is continuous and extends until the end of the moment, then it is called continuous bandha."

**References:**

1. Pra. Pan. San. Page 74-71, Verses 65-77, Mataprashna.
2. "Bandho bhuutvaa kshanam yaasaam samaano nivartate. Bandhaapuurte kshanenaita: saantaraa viniveditaa." (19)
"Antarmukhuurtmaatraatvaajghannyasyaapi karmaan. Sarveshaa bandhakalaasya bandhah samaayiko'sti yo." (100)

- Amitagati, Sanskrit Panchasangraha, Chapter 3. 

Page #436:
---------------------------
## Gommatasara Karmakanda-397

The nature that attains the cessation of bondage by taking refuge in the bondage of the opposing nature is called **Santarbandhi**. This is said because the **Santarbandhi** natures are seen to be inseparable from the bondage of the opposing nature. In reality, the nature whose cessation of bondage is seen in the second time after being bound in the first time is the **Santarbandhi** nature. The nature whose bondage period is even as short as an **antarmuhurta** is the **Nirantabandhi** nature, one should understand. It is also said elsewhere:

"Those whose bondage is only for a short period of time, from the beginning of the time to the **antarmuhurta** and not beyond, are **Santarbandhi**. Those whose bondage is within the **antarmuhurta** but with a difference in the characteristics of the interruption are **Santarbandhi**, because of the derivation of the word. Those whose bondage is interrupted after the **antarmuhurta** are **Santarbandhi**, this is the meaning of the word. Those who are bound continuously from the **antarmuhurta** to the **narantar** are **Nirantabandhi**. The bondage of those whose interruption is within the **antarmuhurta** is **Nirantabandhi**, because of the derivation of the word. Those whose bondage is uninterrupted within the **antarmuhurta** are **Nirantabandhi**."

Now, in response to the first three questions out of the above nine questions, the names of the natures are given in two verses:

"Devagati-chatuṣka, āhārakadvika, ayasaskīrti and devāyu, these eight natures have their cessation of bondage after the cessation of their arising. Mithyātva, ātapa, manuşyagatyānupūrvī, sthāvarādi-chatuṣka, sajvalana-lobha, without these fifteen kṣayās, bhaya-jugupsā, hāsya-rati, ekaindriyādi-chatuṣka-jāti and puruṣaved, these thirty-one natures have their cessation of bondage and arising simultaneously. The remaining eighty-one natures, from jñānāvaraṇa onwards, have their cessation of bondage and arising before the cessation of their arising."

**Special Meaning:**

Question 1: Which are the natures whose cessation of arising occurs before the cessation of their bondage?

Answer: Devagati, Devagatyānupūrvī, Vaikriyika-śarīra-Vaikriyika-anopāṅga, Āhārak-śarīra-Āhārak-aṅgopāṅga, Ayasaskīrti and Devāyu, these eight natures have their cessation of arising before the cessation of their bondage.

Question 2: Which are the natures whose cessation of bondage occurs before the cessation of their arising? 

Page #437:
---------------------------
## Gommatasara Karmakanda-398:

**What are the 81 types of karma that are severed from bondage before their arising and cessation?**

**Answer:** The 5 types of **Jnanavarana** (knowledge obscurations), the 9 types of **Darsanavarana** (perception obscurations), the 2 types of **Vedaniya** (karmas that produce feelings), **Sajvalnalobha** (passionate greed), **Strinapumsakaved** (karma that causes birth as a hermaphrodite), **Arati-shoka** (karma that causes aversion and sorrow), **Naraka-tiryanch-manushyayu** (karma that causes birth in hell, animal realm, and human realm), **Naraka-tiryanch-manushya-gati** (karma that causes rebirth in hell, animal realm, and human realm), **Panchendriya-jati** (karma that causes birth as a five-sensed being), **Audarik-tejaskarma-sharira** (karma that causes the formation of the gross, subtle, and karmic bodies), the 6 types of **Sanhanan** (karma that causes the aggregation of matter), **Audarik-anopang** (karma that causes the formation of the gross body and its parts), the 6 types of **Sansthan** (karma that causes the formation of the body), the 4 types of **varna** (caste), **Naraka-tiryanch-gati-anupurvi** (karma that causes rebirth in hell and animal realm in sequence), **Agurulughu-chaturshka** (karma that causes the four types of **agurulughu** - **agurulughu**, **upadhat**, **parghat**, and **shwasochchwas**), **Udyot** (karma that causes the manifestation of the body), **Prashastha-aprashastha-vihayogati** (karma that causes the attainment of good or bad rebirth), **S-chaturshka** (karma that causes the four types of **s** - **s**, **badar**, **paryapt**, and **pratyek**), **Sthir-asthir** (karma that causes the body to be stable or unstable), **Shubh-ashubh** (karma that causes good or bad fortune), **Subhag-durhbag** (karma that causes good or bad luck), **Suswar-duhswar** (karma that causes a good or bad voice), **Adey-anadey** (karma that causes the body to be worthy or unworthy of respect), **Yashaskirti** (karma that causes fame and reputation), **Nirman-tirthankar** (karma that causes the birth of a Tirthankara), **Uchch-gotra-nich-gov** (karma that causes birth in a high or low family), and the 5 types of **antaraya** (karma that causes obstacles). These 81 types of karma are severed from bondage before their arising and cessation.

**Question 3: Which types of karma have simultaneous bondage, arising, and cessation?**

**Answer:** The 15 types of **kashaya** (passions) without **sanchalmalobha** (restless greed), **bhay-jugupsa** (fear and aversion), **hasya-rati** (laughter and attachment), **ekendriya** (karma that causes birth as a one-sensed being), **dwindriya** (karma that causes birth as a two-sensed being), **triendriya** (karma that causes birth as a three-sensed being), **chaturindriya** (karma that causes birth as a four-sensed being), **purushaved** (karma that causes birth as a male), **mithyatva** (false belief), **atap** (karma that causes heat), **manushya-gati-anupurvi** (karma that causes rebirth in the human realm in sequence), **sthavar** (karma that causes birth as a stationary being), **sukshma-aparyapt** (karma that causes the subtle body to be incomplete), **sadharan** (karma that causes the body to be ordinary), and **sanchalmalobha** (restless greed). These 31 types of karma have simultaneous bondage, arising, and cessation.

**Note:** According to **Mahadhavala**, the cessation of **sthavar**, **ekendriya**, and **vikalatraya** (karma that causes the body to be incomplete) occurs in the **mithyatva** **gunasthan** (stage of spiritual development). In the subsequent **gunasthanas**, the absence of arising or bondage is called cessation.

**Further explanation of the three questions is given in two verses:**

**Verse 402:**

> **Suraniryaau tittham, vegumviyachchakkharamidi jesin. Paroudayena ya bandho, miccham suhumass ghadhio.**

**Meaning:** The bondage of the 11 types of karma - **devayu** (karma that causes birth in the heaven realm), **narakayu** (karma that causes birth in the hell realm), **tirthankar** (karma that causes the birth of a Tirthankara), **vaikriyik-sharira** (karma that causes the formation of the subtle body), **vaikriyik-angopang** (karma that causes the formation of the parts of the subtle body), **devagati-devagati-anupurvi** (karma that causes rebirth in the heaven realm in sequence), **narakagati-narakagati-anupurvi** (karma that causes rebirth in the hell realm in sequence), **aharaka-sharira** (karma that causes the formation of the gross body), **aharaka-angopang** (karma that causes the formation of the parts of the gross body) - occurs with the arising of other karma. Their bondage does not occur while they are arising.

**Verse 403:**

> **Tejadugam vannachou, thirasuhajugalagurunimina-dhuvaudaya. Sodaybandha sesa, basida ubhaybandhao.**

**Meaning:** The 15 types of **jnanavarana**, the 4 types of **darsanavarana**, the 5 types of **antaraya**, the 4 types of **tejaskarma-sharira**, the 4 types of **varna**, the 2 types of **sthir-asthir**, the 2 types of **shubh-ashubh**, the 4 types of **agurulughu**, and the 1 type of **nirman** - these 27 types of karma are **svodaya** (self-arising) karma. Their bondage occurs only with their own arising, but their arising can occur even without bondage. In other words
Page #438:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-399
And the remaining 5 Nidra, 2 Vedaniya, 25 Mohaniya, Tiryanchayu, Manushayau, Tiryancha-Manushayagati, 5 Jati, Audarikasharira-Audarikangopang, 6 Sanhanan, 6 Sansthan, Tiryancha-ManushayagatyAnupurvi, Upghāt, Parghāt, Ātap, Udyot, Ucchvās, Prashasht-Aprshashtvihayogati, Bas-Sthāvar, Bādar-Sūkshma, Paryāpt-Aprāpt, Pratiyaka-Sādhāran, Subhag-Dur Bhag, Susvar-Duḥsvar, Ādeya-Anādeya, Yashaskīrti-Ayashaskīrti, Ucchaneechagotra these 82 Prakṛtis are Svaparodayabandhi, that is, they are bound in their own rise or in the rise of other Prakṛtis. Now, the answers to the last three questions out of the aforementioned 9 questions are given in 4 Gāthās.
Sattetāla Dhūvāvi Ya, Titthāhārāuga Nirantaraga. Nirayadujaichāukvam, Sanhadisanṭhāṇapanapanagam. ||404|| Duggamanaadāvadurg, Thāvardasagam Asādsanditthi.
Aradisogam Chede, Sāntaragā Honti Chottisā ||405|| Jummam || Meaning- 47 Dhruvabandhi Prakṛtis like Jñānāvarana, Tirthankara, Āhārakadvik, Āyu these 54 Prakṛtis are Nirantarabandhi and Narakadvik, Ekendriyād four Jati, Prathama Sahman made 5 Sanhanan, Prathama Sansthan without 5 Sansthan, Aprshashtvihayogati, Ātap, Udyot, Sthāvar etc. 10, Asātāvedaniya, Napumsakaved, Strived, Arati and Shoka these 34 Prakṛtis are Sāntarabandhi. Those whose bondage occurs from one time to less than an Antarmūhūrta are Sāntara Prakṛtis.
Special Meaning- Five Jñānāvarana, Nine Darshanāvarana, Five Antarāya, Mithyātva, 16 Kashāya, Bhaya-Jugupsā, Taijas-Kārman, Agurulaghu, Upadhāt, Nirman, Varṇādichatushk these 47 Prakṛtis are always bound until their own Vyuchchitti, therefore they are Dhruvabandhi. Tirthankara, Āhārakasharira-Āhārakangopang, four Āyu these 7 Prakṛtis together with the above 47 Prakṛtis make 54 Prakṛtis Nirantarabandhi. Out of these, 47 Prakṛtis are continuously bound until before their Vyuchchitti and the bondage of Āhārakadvik and Tirthankara Prakṛtis is found in those Gunasthānas where their bondage is found after the beginning, there it is found continuously every time for more than an Antarmūhūrta. Āyu is continuously bound from the time when it is fit to be bound until an Antarmūhūrta, therefore it is called Nirantarabandhi. Narakagati-NarakagatyAnupurvo, Ekendriyād four Jati without Varshabhanārāch five Sanhanan, without Samachaturas five Sansthan, Aprshashtvihayogati, Ātap, Udyot, Sthāvar, Sūkshma, Aprāpt, Sādhāran, Asthir,
1. Dhaval Pu. 8 P. 171
2. Dhaval Pu. 8 P. 16. 

Page #439:
---------------------------
## A Way to Get RED
Gommatasar Karmakanda - 400

**Unsuitable, unfortunate, harsh voice, unworthy, bad reputation, not worthy of respect, female-male-gendered, aversion, and sorrow - these 34 natures are intermittently bound, because the binding of these natures lasts from a moment to less than a moment.** For example, sometimes there is a binding to hell, sometimes to another realm, sometimes to a one-sense being, sometimes to another being. In this way, the natures are intermittently bound.

**Surenaratiriyoraliyavegubviyadugapasatthagadivajjam. Paraghadadusamachauram, panchindriya tasadasam sadam. || 406 ||**

**Hassaradipurisagodaddu, sappadivakkhammhi santara honti. Tte pun padivakkhae, nirantara honti battisa. || 407 || Jummam. ||**

**Meaning:** The two natures of divine, human, animal, noble, changeable, auspicious, Vajrarṣabha, Nārāca, Samhanana, external harm, exhalation, square shape, five-sense beings, fear, respect, laughter, love, male-gendered, and lineage - these 32 natures are intermittently bound while their opposite exists, and become continuously bound when the binding of their opposite is destroyed. In other words, these natures are both intermittently and continuously bound.

**Special Meaning:** Divine realm, human realm, animal realm, noble body, changeable body, auspicious, Vajrarṣabha, Nārāca, Samhanana, external harm, exhalation, square shape, five-sense beings, fear, bad, sufficient, each, stable, auspicious, fortunate, good voice, worthy, good reputation, respect, laughter, love, male-gendered, high lineage, and low lineage - these 32 natures are both intermittently and continuously bound. For example, where there is a binding to another realm, the divine realm is bound with its opposite, because the binding of the divine realm lasts for less than a moment. However, when only the divine realm is bound, it is without its opposite, because the binding of the other realm is destroyed, and there is no binding. Therefore, it is continuously bound. For this reason, the divine realm is called both intermittently and continuously bound. Similarly, one should understand the dual binding of other natures. The explanation of both intermittently and continuously bound natures is as follows:

- Divine, changeable, and high lineage - are intermittently bound until the second stage of qualities, and continuously bound in the later stages of qualities and in the beings of the realms of enjoyment. Human - is intermittently bound until the 12th heaven, and...

**9. Dhaval Pu. 85. 17-18.**

**2. Dhaval Pu. 85. 18.** 

Page #440:
---------------------------


Page #441:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-402
1-8
34-35
36-37
1.
8
38-39
Hasyarati-svaparodayabandhi. Santara-nirantarabandhi arati-shok svaparodayabandhi santarabandhi bhaya-jugupsa svaparodayabandhi nirantarabandhi napumsakaved svaparodayabandhi santarabandhi strived
svaparodayabandhi santarabandhi purushaved
svaparodayabandhi santara-nirantarabandhi narakayu
parodayabandhi nirantarabandhi | tiryanchayu........! svaparodayabandhi ... nirantarabandhi manushyayu
svaparodayabandhi. nirantarabandhi devayu
parodayabandhi nirantarabandhi
parodayabandhi santarabandhi tiryanchagati- svaparodayabandhi santara- nirantarabandhi tiryanchagatyānupūrvi
1,2,4
1,2,4-7
Narakagati
1-4 | 47 1-5 48-49 anupūrvi
svaparodayabandhi | santara-nirantarabandhi.
1-4
| Manushyagati
Manushyagatyānupūrvi
1-14 50-51 anupūrvi 1,2,4
1-4 | 52
Santara-nirantarabandhi santarabandhi santara-nirantarabandhi
1
53-56
1-13 58
Devagati
Parodayabandhi ekendiryadi 4 jati | svaparodayabandhi panchendriyajati. svaparodayasambandhi audarikasharira v | svaparodayasambandhi
audarik angopaang vaikriyakasharira parodayabandhi aharakasharira. parodayabandhi taijasasharira svodayabandhi karmanasharira svodayabandhi vaikriyak angopaang | parodayabandhi
1-8
Santaranirantarabandhi santara-nirantarabandhi nirantarabandhi nirantarabandhi nirantarabandhi santara-nirantarabandhi
1-8
1
-/

Page #442:
---------------------------
## Gommatasara Karmakanda - 403
## Nirantara Bandhi
## 7-8
## |1-13
## Construction of a Square Formation
## Nirantara Bandhi, Santara-Nirantara Bandhi, Santara Bandhi
## 1-8
## 1-13
## -
## |1-13
## Santara Bandhi, Santara Bandhi
## 1-13
## Santara Bandhi
## |1-13 |1-13
## 1-4
## Santara Bandhi, Santara-Nirantara Bandhi, Santara Bandhi, Santara Bandhi, Santara Bandhi, Santara Bandhi, Santara Bandhi
## 1-2
## Aharaka Ango-panga Parodaya Bandhi
## Svodya Bandhi
## Svaparodaya Bandhi, Nyagrodha Parimandala - Svaparodaya Bandhi
## Sansthana, Svati Sansthana, Svaparodaya Bandhi, Kubjaka Sansthana
## Svaparodaya Bandhi, Vamana Sansthana, Svaparodaya Bandhi, Hundaka Sansthana, Svaparodaya Bandhi, Vajrarṣabha Narāca Samhanana, Svaparodaya Bandhi, Vajra Narāca Samhanana, Svaparodaya Bandhi, Narāca Samhanana, Svaparodaya Bandhi, Ardhanarāca Samhanana, Svaparodaya Bandhi, Kilita Samhanana, Svaparodaya Bandhi, Asamprapta Aspaṭika, Svaparodaya Bandhi
## Samhanana, Varṇādi Catuṣka, Svodya Bandhi, Naraka Gatyānupūrvi Parodaya Bandhi, Deva Gatyānupūrvi Parodaya Bandhi, Aguru Laghu, Svodya Bandhi, Upadhāt
## Svaparodaya Bandhi, Paraghāt
## Svaparodaya Bandhi, Ātapa
## Svaparodaya Bandhi, Udyota
## Svaparodaya Bandhi, Ucchvāsa
## Svaparodaya Bandhi, Praśasta Vihāyoga Ti, Svaparodaya Bandhi, Apraśasta Vihāyoga Ti | | Svaparodaya Bandhi
## 1-11
## Nirantara Bandhi
## 1-13
## 79-82
## 1-8
## 1-8
## |1-13
## Santara Bandhi, Santara Nirantara Bandhi, Nirantara Bandhi, Nirantara Bandhi, Santara-Nirantara Bandhi, Santara Bandhi, Santara Bandhi, Santara-Nirantara Bandhi, Santara-Nirantara Bandhi, Santara Bandhi
## 1-13 

Page #443:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-404
Santar-Nirantabandhi
1-8
Every body is a common body
1
Tras
1-8
1
Sthavar
Subhaga Darbhaga
Swaparodayabandhi Swaparodayabandhi Swaparodayabandhi Swaparodayabandhi Swaparodayabandhi Swaparodayabandhi Swaparodayabandhi Swaparodayabandhi Swodayabandhi Swodayabandhi Swaparodayabandhi
1-4
Suswar
Duhswar
Shubha
Sama
Badar
1-14
। 103
Sukshma
1
104
Paryapt Aparayapt
Santarabandhi Santar-Nirantabandhi Santarabandhi Santar-Nirantabandhi Santarabandhi Santar-Nirantabandhi Santarabandhi Santar-Nirantabandhi Santarabandhi Santar-Nirantabandhi Santarabandhi Santar-Nirantabandhi Santarabandhi Santar-Nirantabandhi Santarabandhi Santar-Nirantabandhi Santarabandhi Nirantabandhi Santar-Nirantabandhi Santar-Nirantabandhi Nirantabandhi
106
Sthir
107
1-8
Swaparidiyabandhi Swaparodayabandhi Swaparodayabandhi Swodayabandhi Swodayabandhi Swaparodayabandhi Swaparodayabandhi Swaparodayabandhi Swaparodayabandhi Parodayabandhi Swaparodayabandhi Swaparodayabandhi Swodayabandhi
Asthir Aadey Anaadey Yashaskirti Ayashaskirti Tirthankar Uchchagotra Nichagotra
1-14 1-4
1-4
1-10॥
4-8 | 13-14 113
1-14 1-2
115 1-10] 1.12 116-120
Antaraya 5
"Iti Navaprashnachoolika Prakaran Sampurna" 

Page #444:
---------------------------
Gommatasar Karmakanda-405
.....
Ash Panchbhagahar Chulika*
Where Nemichandra, without any churning, became pure,
That Abhayanandi's pure ocean of scriptures, removes the stain of sin from beings. ||408||
Meaning- The pure Nemichandra became pure without any churning, such Abhayanandi's pure ocean of scriptures, removes the stain of sin from beings.
Meaning- It is a proverb that "The moon appeared after churning the ocean". Similarly, the pure moon, in the form of Nemichandracharya, appeared from the ocean of scriptures taught by Acharya Abhayanandi, without any churning. That is, purity was attained by very little study of that scripture. The ocean of scriptures, which is the cause of such purity, removes the stain of sin from all beings. Thus, here a mangalacharan of blessings is done.
Now the five types of Bhagahar Chulika are said to be
Uvvellan Vijjhado, Adhapavatt-Guno Ya Savvo Ya.
Sankamdi Jehin Kammam, Parinamvaseena Jivaanam. ||409||
Meaning- The beings of the world, by their own results, transfer good and bad karma, that is, the transfer of those results to other nature forms is called transfer. There are five types of transfer, namely, Uvvellan, Vijjhat, Adha-pravritt, Guna and Sarva.
Special Meaning- When the part of the Bhagahar is given in the substance of the Uvvellan nature, the substance that comes, that much substance is transferred by each Uvvellan kandaka to the other nature form.
1. Dh. Pu. 56 p. 408. And Uvvellan Vijjhado, Adhapatrat-Guna Sakamo They | Tah Salvasankamoti Va Panchviho Sankamo Yo || (Jay Dh. Pu. 9 p. 172)
2. Sankamdo Samayavirohena Eyapyadiditipadeesa Anmayadisaruvena Parinamanlagado. That is, as it is said in the scriptures, the transfer of the karma particles of one nature to another similar nature form, according to the situation. (Jayadhaval Pu. '7 p. 238) 

Page #445:
---------------------------
Gommatasar Karmakanda-406

The characteristics of the five types of Udvelanadi (transition) in the Gaathokt Bhagahar (transition) are as follows:

Udvelanasankrama is the transition of Karma-pradeshas (regions of Karma) in the form of Paraprakriti (external nature) similar to the untying of a rope without its Karana-parinaamas (causes and effects). Its Bhagahar (fraction) is equal to an infinitesimal part of an Angul (finger). For example, a Samyagdristi (perfectly enlightened) Jiva (soul) falls into Mithyatva (falsehood) and undergoes Adhapravrittasankrama (downward transition) of Samyaktva (perfection) and Samyagmithyatva (partial perfection) for a moment. After that, it begins Udvelanasankrama and undergoes a transition of regions devoid of special characteristics continuously through Udvelana Bhagahar until the end of the Udvelana period, which is equal to an infinitesimal part of its Paly (duration). Here, the Bhajyaman Dravya (substance being consumed) loses its special characteristics at every moment. This should be called the cause of special loss. However, there is a special feature that in the final Sthitikaandak (stage of existence) of Samyaktva and Samyagmithyatva, Gunasankrama (transition of qualities) and Sarvasankrama (transition of all) occur. Thus, Udvelanasankrama is described. Now, we describe Vidhyatasankrama:

Within the Vedakasamyaktva period (period of perfect knowledge), Vidhyatasankrama of Mithyatva and Samyagmithyatva occurs everywhere until the final moment of the Adhapravrittakaran (downward action) related to the destruction of Darshanamohaniya (obscuration of knowledge). Similarly, after the Gunasankrama period of Upshama Samyagdristi (perfectly enlightened being in the state of cessation), Vidhyatasankrama occurs everywhere. Its Bhagahar is also equal to an infinitesimal part of an Angul. The special feature is that it is countless times smaller than Udvelanabhagahar. Similarly, the subject of Vidhyatasankrama of other Prakritis (natures) should be known as far as possible. Now, we describe the characteristics of Adhapravrittasankrama:

The transition of Bandhaprakritis (binding natures) in their respective possible subjects of bondage is called Adhapravrittasankrama. Its Prabhaga (fraction) is equal to an infinitesimal part of Paly. The 25 Prakritis of Charitramohaniya (obscuration of conduct) undergo Adhapravrittasankrama in the form of Badyaman Prakritipragraha (grasping of the binding nature) in their respective subjects suitable for bondage. Now, we describe the characteristics of Gunasankrama:

The transition of regions in the form of an infinite series multiplied by an infinite number at every moment is called Gunasankrama. It occurs from the first moment of Apoovarakaran (action of the past) until the destruction of Darshanamohaniya, the destruction of Charitramohaniya, in the Upshamasreni (series of cessation), in the disassociation of Anantanubandhi (infinite attachments), in the origin of Samyaktva, and in the final Kaandak of Udvelana of Samyaktva and Samyagmithyatva. Its Bhagahar is also equal to an infinitesimal part of Paly, but it is countless times smaller than the Bhagahar of Adhapravrittasankrama. Now, we describe the nature of Sarvasankrama:

The transition of all regions is called Sarvasankrama. Where does it occur? It occurs at the time of the transition of the final Phali (fruit) of the final Sthitikaandak in Udvelana, Visanyojana (disassociation), and Kshapana (destruction). Its Bhagahar is equal to one Angul.

If there is bondage, there is Sankrama (transition), if there is no bondage, there is no Mulapayadin (root cause). There is no Sankrama in Darshan (knowledge), Charitra (conduct), and Moh (delusion), and in Aauchoukk (external factors). ||410||

1. Jayadhaval Pu. 9 p. 170-171.
2. Jayadhaval Pu. 9 p. 171.
3. Jayadhaval Pu. 9 p. 572. 

Page #446:
---------------------------
Gommatasar Karmakanda-407..
Meaning- Transition is called the transformation of other nature forms. Transition occurs in the same nature in which there is bondage, i.e., other nature becomes the bonded nature and transforms. This is a general statement, and sometimes transition occurs even in the nature where there is no bondage. The meaning of the statement 'no bondage' i.e. 'where there is no bondage, there is no transition' is that even though there is no bondage of the Samyagmithyatva-Samyaktva nature in the Darshanamohaniya, the substance of the Mithyatva nature undergoes transition. Therefore, it is a rule that the remaining natures, except the Darshanamohaniya, undergo transition when they are bound. The original natures do not transition into each other. For example, the Jnanavarana nature does not become the Darshanavarana etc. nature, but transition is found in the subsequent natures. For example, transition is found among the 5 subsequent natures of the Jnanavarana karma. Similarly, it is known in all the subsequent natures, but transition is not found in the Darshanamohaniya and Charitramohaniya, i.e., the natures of the Darshanamohaniya do not transform into the Charitramohaniya form, and the natures of the Charitramohaniya do not transform into the Darshanamohaniya form. There is no transition between the four ages either. In this way, know the nature of transition.
Samm Miccham Missam, Sagunavanammi Nev Sankamdi.
Sasanamaisse Niyama, Dansanatiyasankamo Natthi ||411|| Meaning- The Samyaktva-Mithyatva-Samyagmithyatva nature does not transition into its own Asanyatadi Gunasthanas. The Samyaktva nature does not transition from the fourth Gunasthan to the seventh Gunasthan. The transition of these three natures of the Darshanamohaniya does not occur in the Sasadan and Misra Gunasthanas. The transition from the general to the Darshanamohaniya occurs from the fourth to the seventh Gunasthan.
Micche Sammissanam, Adhapavattto Muhattantotti.
Ubbvelanam Tu Tattho, Ducharimkandoti Niyamen ||412|| Meaning- When the Mithyatva Gunasthan is attained, the Samyaktva and Samyagmithyatva nature undergo downward transition until the end of the moment, and the Udvellana transition occurs until the penultimate (near the end, i.e., Dvicharam) Kandaka, according to the rule.
Special Meaning- Here, the transition remains in the form of a Fali. A group of provinces that undergo transition at one time is called Fali. Transition in a group of time is called Kandaka.
1. Bandhe Sankamo Abandhe Natthe. Kudo? Sabhaviyado. That is, transition is possible when there is bondage, it is not possible in the absence of bondage, because it is the nature. (D.P. 16, p. 340) 

Page #447:
---------------------------
Gommatsar Karmakanda-408
• The quality of the Udvellanapayadin is transferred to the last Kandaka according to the rules.
All of them are transferred to the last Phali. ||413|| Meaning- The Udvellana nature is transferred to the last Kandaka according to the rules and all of them are transferred to the last Phali. Samyaktva and Samyagmithyatva nature is included in the Udvellana nature, therefore these natures are also transferred to the last Kandaka and all of them are transferred to the last Phali. (See verses 612 to 617.)
Further, the names of the eleven natures which are called Tirya-ekadasa, i.e. those whose origin is in the Tiryanchagati, are mentioned in the Sarvansankrama nature.
Tirya-du-adi-chaukna, adavu-jjo-vatha-varam-suhum.
Saharanam cha ede, tiriye-yaram-munedavva. ||414|| Meaning- Tiryanchagati, Tiryanchagati-anupurvi, Ekaindriya etc. four castes, Atap, Udyot, Sthavar, Sukshma and Sadharan are the eleven natures of Karma whose origin is in the Tiryanchagati, therefore they are called Tirya-ekadasa. Now the Udvellana natures are mentioned.
Ahar-du-gam-samm, missam-dev-du-gan-araya-chaukvam.
Uccham-manu-du-gamede, terasa-ubvella-na-paydi. ||415|| Meaning- Aharaksharir-Aharakanopang, Samyaktva, Samyagmithyatva, Devagati-Devagati-anupurvi, Narakagati-Narakagati-anupurvi, Vaikriyik-sharira-Vaikriyik-ango-pang, Uccha-gotra and Manushagati-Manushagati-anupurvi are the thirteen Udvellana natures.
Bandhe-adhap-avatto, vijjhadam-abandh-sattamo-tti-hu-abandhe.
Etto-guno-abandhe, paydinam-appasattanam. ||416|| Meaning- When the natures are bound, there is downward transfer, but not in the case of Mithyatva nature, because it is prohibited by the verse 411, "Samm-michcham-missam" etc.
1. Bandhe-adharamatto-bijjhad-abandh-appamattanto. Gun-sankamo-du-etto-paydinam-appasattanam. Dhaval-pu. 16 p. 409. 

Page #448:
---------------------------
Gommatasar Karmakanda-409

There is a transition of qualities from Mithyatva to the Aprammatta Gunasthan, and from A-purvakarana to the Upshantakashaya Gunasthan, there is a transition of qualities of un-bound, un-refined natures. Therefore, it is known that there is a transition of qualities from the first moment of the acceptance of Samyaktv, etc., to the end of the Antarmukhurta. In the full time of Samyak-Mithyatva and Samyaktv-prakriti, there is a transition of qualities from the A-purvakarana results to the last part of Mithyatva, to the Dvicharama-phali, and in the Charamap-phali, there is a complete transition.

**Special Meaning:**

While explaining "Bandhe Adhapavatto", it is stated that where there is a possibility of binding of natures, there is a downward transition of qualities when those natures are bound and also when they are not bound. This rule is for bound natures, not for unbound natures; because downward transition of qualities is also found in these two natures, Samyaktv and Samyak-Mithyatva. While explaining "Vizzhad Abadhe", it is said that where there is no possibility of binding of natures according to the rule, there is a transition of qualities. This rule is also from Mithyatva to the Aprammatta Gunasthan, with a firm nature. "Gunasanka-mo du Etto" means that from the Aprammatta Gunasthan onwards, there is a transition of qualities of unbound natures and also a complete transition.

**Doubt:**

From where is it known that there is also a complete transition?

**Solution:**

This is known from the word "Tu" used in the above verse. This description is of "Appasatt-hanam", i.e., un-refined natures, not refined natures; because downward transition of qualities of unbound, refined natures is also seen in the Upshama-shreni and Kshapaka-shreni. The natures that are of the form of complete transition are called:

"Tiryeyaru-bvel-lanapaya-di sanjalan-loha-sammi-ssuna.
Moha thi-nati-gam cha ya, bavan-ne savva-sankamanam." ||417||

**Meaning:**

The aforementioned eleven Tiryanch-prakritis, the Udvelan-rupa prakritis (without the three of Sajvalan-lobha, Samyaktv, Samyak-Mithyatva), the 25 of Mohaniya Karma, and the three of Nidra, like Styan-g-ridhi, etc., all these 52 prakritis have a complete transition.

1. Dhaval Pu. 16, p. 409-410. 

Page #449:
---------------------------
Gommatasar Karmakanda-410 ... ... further, the rule of the names of the prakritis is stated:
**Forty-nine prakritis have one, thirty prakritis have four, seven prakritis have two, twenty prakritis have three, one prakriti has three, one prakriti has four, twelve prakritis have five, four prakritis have two, and four prakritis have three types of sankramanas.** ||418||
**Meaning:** In forty-nine prakritis, there is one type of sankramana, in thirty prakritis, there are four types, in seven prakritis, there are two types, in twenty prakritis, there are three types, in one prakriti, there are three types, in one prakriti, there are four types, in twelve prakritis, there are five types, in four prakritis, there are two types, and in four prakritis, there are three types of sankramanas. This is the description of the prakritis and the bhagahara mentioned in this gatha:
**Prakriti:** 2 | 39 | 30 | 7 | 20 | 1 | 1 | 12 | 4 | 4 | 4 |
**Bhagahara:** 1 | 4 | 2 | 3 | 3 | 4 | 5 | 2 | 3 | 3 |
**In which prakritis, which sankramanas occur, this is stated in ten gathas:**
**Suhum, bandha, ghadi, sadan, sanjalan, loha, panchindi, tej, dusamavan, chauu, aguru, ghapar, ghadau, ussasan.** ||419||
**Sath, ghadi, tas, dasayan, niminu, gudale, adhapavatto, du, thian, tibar, kasaya, sandhitthi, aradi, sogo, ya.** ||420||
**Tiriye, yar, tise, uvelan, hiin, chari, sankamana, nidda, payala, asuh, vanna, chaukvam, cha, uvaghade.** ||421||
**Sattanham, gun, sankama, adhapavatto, ya, dukkha, asuh, ghadi, sanhadi, santhan, dasan, nicha, punna, thira, chakkam, cha.** ||422||
**Visanham, vijjhad, adhapavatto, guno, ya, micchatte, vijjhad, gune, savvam, samme, vijjhad, parihina.** ||423||
**Visesayan:** 1. Ugudala, tis, sat, ya, vis, ege, ega, var, tiya, chaukkam. Evam, chadu, du, ga, tiya, tiya, cha, pan, du, ga, ti, ga, du, gam, cha, boddhavya.
2. Dhaval Pu. 16 Pr. 410. 

Page #450:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda - 411

Meaning: There is no Udvelana-Samkramana in the 39 natures of Panchgyanavaran, Chaardarshanavaran, Panchantaray, Satavedaniya, Sanjwalnalobh, Panchendriyajati, Taijas-Karman-Sharira, Samachaturasrasansthan, Varnadichaar, Agurulaghu, Parghaat, Uchchwas, Prashastvihayogati, Tras, Baadar, Paryapt, Pratiyaka, Sthir, Shubh, Subhag, Suswar, Aadey, Yashaskirti, Nirman and Panchantaray. According to the sutra "Vizzhadasattamotti Hu Abandhe", there is no Vidhyat-Samkramana in these as their Bandhavyuchchitti does not happen before the Apramattagunasthan. According to the sutra "Etto Gune Abandhe", there is no Gun-Samkramana in these. These natures are not included in the 52 natures which are called as Sarvasamkramana, hence there is no Sarvasamkramana in these. Thus, there is only one Adhapravritta-Samkramana in the above 39 natures, the other four Samkramanas do not occur. We will discuss the Samkramana in other natures later, understand it from there.

Doubt: Why is Adhapravritta-Samkramana not mentioned for Mithyatva-Prakriti in Mithyatva-Gunasthan?

Solution: According to the gatha 411, "Samman Miccham Misssan Sagunadwanammi Posha Sankamdi", Adhapravritta-Samkramana of Mithyatva-Prakriti is not mentioned in Mithyatva-Gunasthan.

There are four Samkramanas found in the 30 natures of three Nidra (Sthyanagridhi etc.), Barahkashay, Napunsakaved, Strived, Arati, Shok and Tiryaagekadash, without Udvelana-Samkramana. There are Gun-Samkramana and Adhapravritta-Samkramana found in the 7 natures of Nidra, Prachala, Ashubhavarna etc. and Upghaat. There are Vidhyat, Adhapravritta and Gun-Samkramana found in the 20 natures of Asatavedaniya, Aprashastvihayogati, Vajrarbhanaraachasanhanan without 5 Sanhanan, Samachaturasrasansthan without 5 Sansthan, Neechgotra, Aparayapt, Asthir, Ashubh, Durbhaag, Duhswar, Anaadey and Ayashaskirti. There are Vidhyat, Gun and Sarvasamkramana found in Mithyatva-Prakriti and four Samkramanas are found in Samyaktva-Prakriti without Vidhyat-Samkramana. || 419-23 ||

Special Meaning: There is only one Adhapravritta-Samkramana in the 39 natures of Panchgyanavaran, Chaardarshanavaran, Satavedaniya, Sanjwalnalobh, Panchendriyajati, Taijas-Sharira, Karman-Sharira, Samachaturasrasansthan, Prashastvarna-Ras-Gandh-Sparsh, Agurulaghu, Parghaat, Uchchwas, Prashastvihayogati, Tras, Baadar, Paryapt, Pratiyakasharira, Sthir, Shubh, Subhag, Suswar, Aadey, Yashaskirti, Nirman and Panchantaray, because the Bandha of Panchgyanavaran, Chaardarshanavaran and Panchantaray is from Mithyadristi to the end of Sukshmasamprayagunasthan. Therefore, except for Adhapravritta-Samkramana, other Samkramanas do not occur in these natures. Their Samkramana does not occur after Bandhavyuchchitti because there is no presence of Pratigraha (in which the desired natures are Sankrant) natures here.

Doubt: Satavedaniya, Panchendriyajati, Taijas-Sharira, Karman-Sharira, Samachaturasrasansthan, 

Page #451:
---------------------------
Gommatasar Karmakanda-412
Why is there no vidhyat or gunasankrama (transmission of qualities) after the bandhanucched (cessation of bondage) of Prashasthavarna, gandha, rasa, and sparsa, agushlagghu, parghāt, ucchvas, prashasthavihayogati, tras, badar, paryāpt, each body, sthira, and six other creations?

**Solution:** This is not a fault, because they are prashasthaprakriti (noble qualities).

There is only an adhapravrittasankrama (downward transmission) of sanchalanalobha (desire for movement), because their transmission occurs through anupurvisankrama (sequential transmission) - like the transmission of sajvalankrodha (burning anger) to sajvalanmana (burning mind), sajvalanmana to sajvalanmaya (burning matter), and so on - only when there is bondage.

**Doubt:** Why is there not a sarvasankrama (universal transmission) of these prakritis?

**Solution:** No, because their destruction does not occur by being thrown into other prakritis. There are four other types of sankrama besides udvelanasankrama (upward transmission) of the three nidra (sleep) - styanagridhi, etc., twelve kshaya (passions), strived (female karma), napunsakaved (eunuch karma), arati (disgust), shoka (sorrow), tiryanagati (animal rebirth), ekaindriya-dviindriya-triindriya-chaturindriya jati (one-sense, two-sense, three-sense, four-sense beings), tiryanagatiprayogyanupurvi (sequential karma leading to animal rebirth), aatap (heat), udyot (radiance), sthavar (stationary), sukshma (subtle), and sadharana (ordinary) body; a total of thirty prakritis.

These are:

1. **Adhapravrittasankrama:** The three styanagridhi, strived, tiryanagati, tiryanagatiprayogyanupurvi, udyot, and the four anantanubandhi (infinitely connected) from mithyatva (false belief) to sasadan gunasthan (the state of having attained the knowledge of the six substances). This is because their bondage is found there.

2. **Vidhyatsankrama:** From sambhagmithyatva (mixed false belief) to apramattasanyat gunasthan (the state of being perfectly restrained) because there is no bondage of these prakritis there.

3. **Gunasankrama:** From the first time of kshapakapurvakaran gunasthan (the state of having destroyed the karmic matter) to the dwicharampali (the second extreme) of their respective antam sthitikraandak (the final state of existence). The antam pali (final state) has sarvasankrama (universal transmission).

4. **Adhapravrittasankrama:** Napunsakaved, ekaindriya-dviindriya-triindriya-chaturindriya jati, aatap, sthavar, sukshma, and sadharana body from mithyatva gunasthan (the state of false belief) because their bondage is found there.

5. **Vidhyatsankrama:** From sasadan gunasthan (the state of having attained the knowledge of the six substances) to apramattasanyat gunasthan (the state of being perfectly restrained) because there is no bondage there due to their being aprashastha (non-noble).

6. **Vidhyatsankrama:** Ekaindriya-dviindriya-triindriya-chaturindriya, aatap, sthavar, sukshma, and sadharana body in deva (divine) and naraka (hell) mithyadrishti (false views) because there is no bondage of these prakritis there.

**Special Note:** Ekaindriya, aatap, and sthavar prakritis are sankrama (transmissible) through adhapravrittasankrama (downward transmission) up to the ishanakalp (the state of being a god) because their bondage is seen there.

7. **Gunasankrama:** From the first time of apurvakaran (the state of having destroyed the karmic matter) to the dwicharampali (the second extreme) of their respective antam sthitikraandak (the final state of existence) because there is no bondage there due to their being aprashastha (non-noble). The antam pali (final state) has sarvasankrama (universal transmission) because its destruction occurs with nikshepa (throwing away).

8. **Adhapravrittasankrama:** The four apratyakhyanavaran (non-rejectable coverings) from mithyatva (false belief) to asanyat gunasthan (the state of being unrestrained). 

Page #452:
---------------------------


Page #453:
---------------------------
## Gommatasara Karmakanda-414

It happens because their bondage is found there. Further, their *vidhyat sankrama* occurs until the *aprammatasanyata gunasthan*, because their bondage does not occur there. In countless-year-lifespan *tiryanch* and *manushya mithyadrishtis*, their *vidhyat sankrama* also occurs because their bondage of these natures does not occur. From the first time of the *apurvakaran gunasthan* to the last time of the *sukshmasamprayik gunasthan*, their *gunasankrama* occurs because there is an absence of their bondage. Further, their *sankrama* does not occur because there is an absence of *pratigraha* natures.

The four *sthans*, four *sanhanans*, *durbhag*, *duhswar*, *anadeya*, *nichgotra*, and *aprashastivihayogati* have a downward *sankrama* from the *mithyatvagunasthan* to the *sasadanagunasthan*. Further, their *vidhyat sankrama* occurs until the last time of the *aprammatasanyata gunasthan* because their bondage does not occur further. From the first time of the *apurvakaran gunasthan* to the last time of the *sukshmasamprayik gunasthan*, their *gunasankrama* occurs because they are *aprashastha* natures. Further, their *sankrama* does not occur because there is an absence of *pratigraha* natures. Similarly, one should say the same about the *aparyapta* named karma. The special thing is that its downward *sankrama* only occurs in the *mithyatvagunasthan*.

The manifestation of *ayashaskirti* is similar to the *aparyapta* nature. The special thing is that its downward *sankrama* occurs from *mithyatva* to the *aprammatasanyata gunasthan* because its bondage is found in these *gunasthanas*.

There are three *sankramas* of the *mithyatva* nature: *vidhyat sankrama*, *gunasankrama*, and *sarvasankrama*. From the first time to the *antarmuhurt* time, the *mithyatva* of the *upshamsamyagdristi* jiva has *gunasankrama*. In *kshapana* also, from the first time of *apurvakaran* to the last *sthirthikanadak* *dwicharampali*, its *gunasankrama* occurs. And the last *pali* has *sarvasankrama*. The *mithyatva* nature of the *upshamsamyagdristi* also has *vidhyat sankrama*.

There are four *sankramas* of the *vedakasamyaktva* (*samyaktva* nature): downward *sankrama*, *udvelanasankrama*, *gunasankrama*, and *sarvasankrama*. For example, the *samyaktva* nature has a downward *sankrama* until the *antarmuhurt* time of the *samyagdristi* who has attained *mithyatva*. Further, its *udvelanasankrama* occurs for a time equal to an uncountable part of a *palyopam*, with a participation of an uncountable part of a finger. From the first time of the last *kanadak* of *udvelana* to its *dwicharampali*, its *gunasankrama* occurs, and its last *pali* has *sarvasankrama*. 

Page #454:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-415
There are five transitions in the twelve natures without the nature of Right Faith.
There are also three transitions in the three natures of burning anger, etc., and the downward transition and the universal transition in the Purusha Veda. ||424||

**Meaning:** There are five transitions in the twelve natures without the nature of Right Faith, namely: Right Faith, Wrong Faith, Heavenly Path, Heavenly Path with previous experience, Hellish Path, Hellish Path with previous experience, Vikriya Body, Vikriya Body Parts, Human Path, Human Path with previous experience, Food Body, Food Body Parts, Karma and High Lineage.

For example, when a person attains Wrong Faith, there is a downward transition of Wrong Faith in the moment of the internal moment of Right Faith. Then, for a period of time equal to an immeasurable fraction of a moment, there is a transition of Wrong Faith. In the final stage, there is a transition of qualities until the second extreme limit. The extreme limit has a universal transition.

From the first moment of the destruction of the karma of the perception, delusion, and the karma of the non-existent, until the second extreme limit of the final stage, there is a transition of qualities of Wrong Faith. The final limit has a universal transition.

For the subdued Right Faith and the Right Faith with knowledge, there is a transition of knowledge in the immeasurable fraction of a part of a finger.

The Heavenly Path and the Heavenly Path with previous experience have a downward transition from the place of the quality of Wrong Faith to the sixth part of the place of the quality of the non-existent, because there is bondage there. After that, even though there is no bondage, there is still a downward transition because they are auspicious natures. There is a transition of knowledge in the heavenly and hellish beings because they do not have bondage. In the one-sense and the disabled beings, there is a transition of expansion until the final stage of expansion is attained. In the final stage, there is a transition of qualities until the second extreme limit, and the final limit has a universal transition.

The formation of the Vikriya Body and the Vikriya Body Parts is similar to the Heavenly Path. The formation of the Hellish Path and the Hellish Path with previous experience is also similar to the Heavenly Path. The only difference is that there is a downward transition of these in the place of the quality of Wrong Faith. There is a transition of knowledge from the place of the quality of the destruction of the karma of the senses to the place of the quality of the non-negligent restraint. There is also a transition of knowledge in the heavenly and hellish beings because they do not have bondage. From the place of the quality of the non-existent, until the second extreme limit of their final stage, there is a transition of qualities, and the final limit has a universal transition. In the one-sense and the disabled beings, there is a transition of expansion. In the final stage of expansion (until the second extreme limit), there is a transition of qualities, and the final limit has a universal transition.

Thus, there are five transitions in the aforementioned two natures. 

Page #455:
---------------------------
## Gommatasara Karmakanda - 416

**Human existence and the downward transmigration from false belief to the state of unrestrained virtue:**

The downward transmigration from human existence and the state of human existence with its corresponding knowledge, occurs from false belief to the state of unrestrained virtue, because bondage is found there. From the state of restrained conduct to the state of unmindful virtue, their transmigration is upward. Their upward transmigration occurs in countless years of lifespan among the animals and humans, because bondage is not found in them. In the beings with bodies of light and air, their upward transmigration occurs up to the second stage of the upward transmigration cycle. In the final stage of the upward transmigration cycle (up to the second stage of the final stage), there is transmigration of qualities and the final stage of the final stage is the universal transmigration.

**The downward transmigration of the food-body and the food-body organs:**

The downward transmigration of the food-body and the food-body organs, named karma, occurs from the state of unmindful virtue to the state of non-creation, and their upward transmigration occurs in the state of mindful virtue, because bondage is not found there. The food-body, having attained the state of virtuous restraint and unrestraint, begins its upward transmigration within a moment, as long as it remains unrestrained and devoid of virtue, it continues its upward transmigration. The upward transmigration of the karmic matter occurs within the period of upward transmigration. In the final stage of the upward transmigration cycle, there is transmigration of qualities. In that, the final stage of the final stage is the universal transmigration.

**The downward transmigration of the noble lineage:**

The downward transmigration of the noble lineage occurs in the states of false belief and the states of the six senses. This transmigration does not occur further, because there is no potential for rebirth. Its upward transmigration occurs in the hell beings of the seventh earth. Its upward transmigration occurs in the beings with bodies of light and air, because there are results worthy of upward transmigration. In the final stage of the upward transmigration cycle, there is transmigration of qualities. The final stage of the final stage is the universal transmigration.

**The downward transmigration and universal transmigration of the three burning passions and the knowledge of the soul:**

There are two types of transmigration: the downward transmigration and the universal transmigration of the three burning passions and the knowledge of the soul. For example, the downward transmigration of the three burning passions and the knowledge of the soul occurs from false belief to the state of non-destruction. The final stage of the final stage of their final stage is the universal transmigration.

**Ooraladuge Vajje Tithae Vijjhadhapavatto Ya. Hasradibhayajuguñche Adhapavatto Gunno Savvo. ||425||**

**Meaning:**

The generous body, the generous organs, the Vajrarṣabha, the Nārāca, the Samhanana, and the Tīrthankara nature experience both upward and downward transmigration. The upward transmigration mentioned here in the Tīrthankara nature refers to the transmigration of a human being who is about to be reborn in the second or third hell, and the transmigration of a hell being with false belief who is about to die. The four natures of laughter, desire, fear, and disgust experience downward transmigration, transmigration of qualities, and universal transmigration. Thus, the universal transmigration is mentioned in the natures. 

Page #456:
---------------------------
## Gommatasara Karmakanda - 417

**Special Meaning:**  Laughter, love, fear, and disgust have downward-moving karma-flows. They are both quality-flows and all-flows. For example, the downward-moving flow of the Audarikadvik and the Prathamasamhanan occurs from the Mithyatva state to the Asanyata Gunasthan, because their bondage is seen there. Their upward-moving flow occurs in countless years of lifespan in the Tiryancha and humans, because their bondage does not occur there. The downward-moving flow of the Tirthankara nature occurs from the Asanyata Gunasthan to the Apurvakaran Gunasthan. Its upward-moving flow occurs in the Mithyatva Gunasthan, because its bondage does not occur there.

**Verse 426:**

**Meaning:**  Without the Samyaktva nature, there are 12 Udvelan natures, 3 sleep states like Styanagridhi, 12 Kashayas like Anantanubandhi-Apratyakhyan and Pratyakhyan, Stri-Napumsakaved, Arati-Shok, Tiryancha-Dvik, 4 Jatis like Ekendriya, Atap, Udyot, Sthavar, Sukshma, Sadharan, Asata Vedaniya, Aprashasta Vihayogati, 5 Samhanans without Vajrarashabhanaracha Samhanan, 5 Sansthans without Samachaturasra Samhanan, Nichagotra, Aparayapt, Asthir, Ashubh, Durbhg, Duhswar, Anadeya, Ayashaskirti, Vajrarashabhanaracha Samhanan, Audarikasarira, Audarikangopang, Tirthankara, and Mithyatva - these are all 67 natures that have upward-moving flows.

**Now, the names of the natures that have downward-moving flows and quality-flows are mentioned.**

**Verse 427:**

**Meaning:**  Know that 125 natures, excluding the Mithyatva nature, have downward-moving flows. Starting from the 14 natures of the Sukshma Samparaya Gunasthan, which are the karmas that bind, and going up to 39 natures, excluding 47 natures like Audarikadvik, Tirthankara, Vajrarashabhanaracha Samhanan, Purushaved, and Sajvalan Krodha, there are 75 natures that have quality-flows.

**Verse 428:**

**Meaning:**  Know that the total number of natures that have downward-moving flows is 121. And the total number of natures that have quality-flows is 75.

**Special Meaning:**  The natures that have downward-moving flows are 121. And the natures that have quality-flows are 5 Jnanavarana, 4 Darshanavarana, 5 Antaraya, Satavedaniya, Sanchalanalobha, Panchendriya Jati, Taijas Karmaan Sharira, and Samachaturasra Sansthan. 

Page #457:
---------------------------
Gommatasar Karmakanda-418

Knowing the 75 nature-guna-samkramana without the remaining 47 natures, including: Shubhavarnadi 4, Agurulaghu, Paraghata, Uchchvasa, Prashasta Vihayogati, Trasa, Badara, Paryapta, Pratiyaka, Sthira, Shubha, Subhaga, Susvara, Aadeya, Yashaskirti, Nirman, Audarikasharira-Audarikangopanga, Tirthankara, Vajrarashabhanaraachasanhanan, Purushaveda, and Sajwalanakrodha-mana-maya. Thus, the rules regarding samkramana in the natures are stated.

In which natures, which particles will be, their samvrusti:

Natures: Udvelana Samkramana | Vidhyata Samkramana | Adhapravritti | Gunasamkramana | Sarvasamkramana

Samkramana:

Jnanavarana 5: Not there | Not there | Not there | Not there
Darshanavarana 4: Not there | Not there | Not there | Not there
Styanagridhi etc. Nidra 3: Not there | Nidra-Prachala 2: Not there | Satavedaniya 1: Not there | Asatavedaniya 1: Not there | Anantanubandhi 4: Not there
Mait: Not there | Not there | Not there | Not there
Moto: Not there | Not there | Not there | Not there
Otic_cate: Not there | Not there | Not there | Not there
One Oileme_One: Not there | Not there | Not there | Not there
Apratyaakhyanavarana 4: Not there
Pratyaakhyanavarana 4: Not there
Nama: Not there | Not there | Not there | Not there
Sanjwalanakrodhadi 3: Not there
Leela: Not there | Not there | Not there | Not there
TLC: -
Sajwalanlobha 1: Not there | Nokshaya 4: Not there | Arati-Shoka 2: Not there | Napumsakaved 1: Not there | Strived 1: Not there | Purushaved 1: Not there
A: Not there | Not there | Not there | Not there
Stic: Not there | Not there | Not there | Not there 

Page #458:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-419
No
.
Is
. Not is.
Mithyatva 1 Sambhagmithyatva 5
ote_item
Late_of_in_
Samyaktva 1
 _ C
one
of
Not is
o
10
 _
Not is
okcartoon
ce oce
Not
Narakagati-Naraka
Gatyānupūrvi Tiryachgati-Tiryach
Gatyānupūrvi Manushayagati-Manushay
Gatyānupūrvi Devagati-Devagatyānupūrvi Ekendiriya 1 Vikalatraya 3 Panchendriya 1 Audarikadvik 2 Vaikriyikadvik 2 Aharakadvik 2 Taijas-Karman 2 Nirman 1 Samachaturasrasansthan 1 Nyagrodhaparimandala
Sansthan 1 Swatisansthan 1 Kubjakasansthan 1.
Not is
 _ hococcico
Not is
Not is
Not is
Not is
Not is
Not is
Not is
Not is
Not is
Not is
ml
Meen
Not is
ory 

Page #459:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-420
E
the
the
site
meen
not
shc
Hundakasanstahan 1. Vamanasanstahan 1 Vajrarbha Naracha Samhanan 1 Vajra Narachadi Samhanan 4 Asamprapta Sripatika Samhanan Shubha Kadi 44 Ashubhavarnadi 4 Aguru Laghu
not
not
MD
0
not
t
not
not not not not
not
• not
not
Upghat
ch
Parghat 1
not
not not
Uchchvas 1
not
ochotowww chot moot
Atap 1
o
our
Udyot 1 Prashast Vihayogati 1 Aprashast Vihayogati 1 Pratyeka Sharira 1
otvote
not
is
is
not
not
| Narrow Narrow Narrow Narrow Narrow
Tras 1
not
not
to
Subhag 1
not
not
me
not
Suswar 1
not
not
not
Shubh 1
not
not
not
month
Badar 1
not
not
not
Paryapt 1
not
not
not
.
| not 

Page #460:
---------------------------
Gommatsar Karmakanda-421
Not is
Not is
Not is Not is
Not is
. Not is
Not is
our c
Not is
Sthira 1 Adeya 1 Yashaskirti 1 Sadharanasarira 1 Sthavara 1 Durbhaga 1 Duhsvara 1 Ashubha 1 Sukshma 1 Aparayapta 1 Asthira 1 Anadeya 1 Ayashaskirti Tirthankara 1 Ucchagotra 1 Nichagotra 1 Antaraya 5
Not is
me to opehele he
inematome com
Jan
Not is
omic
Not is
Not is
Not is
Is / Not is
atech
0
Not is Not is
Not is
Not is
Thidianubhaganam Pun, Bandho Suhumotti Hodi Niyamen.
Bandhapadesaanam Pun, Sankamanam Suhumaragoti. ||429||
Meaning- The state and the anubhaga bandha are only up to the sukshmasamprayagunasthan, therefore the cause of the state and the anubhaga is kshaya, and the transition of the atoms that have become bandha form is also only up to the sukshmasamprayagunasthan. "Bandhe Adhapavatt"1, according to this sutra, transition is possible only up to the state bandha.
1. Go. K. Gatha 456 

Page #461:
---------------------------
## Gommatasara Karmakanda - 422

**On the relative smallness of the five divisions (bhagaharas) in 6 verses:**

**430.** The **Sarvasamkramana** division is the smallest, its measure is 1. The number of atoms remaining after the **Charmaphali** (final stage of karma), when divided by 1 (the measure of the **Sarvasamkramana** division), the resulting number of atoms will transform into other nature forms. This is known as **Sarvasamkramana**. And the **Gunasamkramana** division is the measure of the **Asankhya**th part of the **Asankhya** halves of the **Pallya**.

**431.** The atoms of the natures where **Gunasamkramana** occurs, when divided by the **Gunasamkramana** division, the resulting number of atoms will transform into other nature forms at different times, in accordance with the time, in multiples of **Asankhya**. This is called **Gunasamkramana**. And the **Utkarshana** and **Apakarshana** divisions are **Asankhya** times greater, yet they are still the measure of the **Asankhya**th part of the **Asankhya** halves of the **Pallya**. Their measure is not mentioned in these five divisions, but when the **Utkarshana** and **Apakarshana** divisions are mentioned, this measure should be understood.

**432.** The **Adhapravritta Samkramana** division is **Asankhya** times greater, yet it is still the measure of the **Asankhya**th part of the **Asankhya** halves of the **Pallya**. The atoms of the **Adhapravritta Samkramana** nature forms, when divided by the **Asankhya**th part of the **Pallya**, the resulting number of atoms will transform into other nature forms. This is called **Adhapravritta Samkramana**.

**433.** The **Gunakara** (multiplier) in the description of **Yogas** is **Asankhya** times greater than the **Anupanan** (the measure of the **Asankhya**th part of the **Pallya**). The **Sankhya** (number) is multiplied by this **Gunakara**, and the result is 60 **Karma** (actions).

**434.** The **Angula** (finger) is **Asankhya** times greater than the **Asankhya**th part of the **Pallya**. The **Vijjada** (the measure of the **Asankhya**th part of the **Pallya**) is **Asankhya** times greater than the **Anubhaga** (the measure of the **Asankhya**th part of the **Pallya**). And the **Anubhaga** is **Asankhya** times greater than the **Gunahani** (the measure of the **Asankhya**th part of the **Pallya**).

**435.** The **Gunahani** is **Asankhya** times greater than the **Ananta** (infinite). The **Niseya** (the measure of the **Asankhya**th part of the **Pallya**) is twice the **Ananta**. The **Ahiyakamana** (the measure of the **Asankhya**th part of the **Pallya**) is **Asankhya** times greater than the **Ananta**. The **Nannabhattha** (the measure of the **Asankhya**th part of the **Pallya**) is **Asankhya** times greater than the **Ananta**.

**Kulaayam** (Conclusion)

Page #462:
---------------------------
## Gomater Karmakanda - 423

It is said that the **paly** is **asankhyata-guna** (infinitely large), yet it is only a **asankhyata** (infinite) part of half the **ardha-chheda** (half-section) of the **paly**. Multiplying the **jghanya-yoga-sthana** (lowest state of yoga) by a **asankhyata** part of half the **ardha-chheda** of the **paly** results in the **utkrista-yoga-sthana** (highest state of yoga). The evidence for the **nana-guna-hanishala-ka** (multiple-merit-loss-indicator) of **karma-sthiti** (state of karma) is **asankhyata-guna**, meaning there are as many **paly** as there are **ardha-chheda** (half-sections) remaining after subtracting the **ardha-chheda** of the **varga-shala-ka** (square-indicator) of the **paly** from the **ardha-chheda** of the **paly**. This means the number of **ardha-chheda** of the **paly** is greater, and the amount of this excess is equal to the **ardha-chheda** of the **varga-shala-ka**. Therefore, the first square root of the **paly** is **asankhyata-guna**. In the **dvirupa-varga-dhara** (two-fold square-stream), the first square root of the **paly** is obtained after passing through **asankhyata** (infinite) **sthana** (places) from the **ardha-chheda-rupa-sthana** (place of half-section form) of the **paly**. This means the number of times **karma-sthiti** experiences a single **guna-hani** (merit-loss) is **asankhyata-guna**. Multiplying 700 by four times a crore (10 million) and then dividing the **paly** multiplied by this result by the number of **nana-guna-hani** (multiple-merit-loss) gives us this number. This means the number of **anyonyabhyastara-shi** (reciprocal-multiplied-quantity) of **karma-sthiti** is **asankhyata-guna**. Therefore, the number of **anyonyabhyastara-shi** is obtained by writing the number two twice and multiplying them together. This means the number of **paly** is **asankhyata-guna**, and multiplying the number of **anyonyabhyastara-shi** by the **varga-shala-ka** of the **paly** gives us the number of **paly**. Therefore, the **utkrista-sthiti** (highest state) of karma is **sankhyata-guna** (finite). In this way, if there are 10 **koda-kodi** (100 million) **paly** in one **sagara** (ocean), then the number of **paly** in 70 **koda-kodi** **sagara** is obtained by multiplying 700 by four times a crore. This means the **vidhyata-samkramana-bhagahara** (vidhyata-transition-divisor) is **asankhyata-guna**, yet it is a **asankhyata** part of a **suchyangula** (finger-width). This means it is a **asankhyata** part of the number of **akasha-pradesa** (regions of space) that fit within a **suchyangula**. In this way, one should understand **vidhyata-samkramana** as the number of atoms of **prakriti** (matter) in the form of **vidhyata-samkramana** that transform into other forms of **prakriti** after dividing them by a **asankhyata** part of a **suchyangula**. This means the **udvelana-bhagahara** (udvelana-transition-divisor) is **asankhyata-guna**, yet it is a **asankhyata** part of a **suchyangula**. The number of atoms of **prakriti** in the form of **udvelana** that transform into other forms of **prakriti** after dividing them by the **udvelana-bhagahara** is called **udvelana-samkramana**. This means the number of **nana-guna-hani-shala-ka** (multiple-merit-loss-indicator) in the statement of **anubhaga-bandha** (division-binding) of karma is infinite. Therefore, the number of **anubhaga** (division) with a single **guna-hani-ayama** (merit-loss-dimension) is infinite. The number of **anubhaga** with one and a half **guna-hani-ayama** is half (1/2) more than the number of **anubhaga** with a single **guna-hani-ayama**. The number of **anubhaga** with two **guna-hani** is half (1/2) more than the number of **anubhaga** with one and a half **guna-hani**. One should understand that the number of **anyonyabhyastara-shi** (reciprocal-multiplied-quantity) of **anubhaga** is infinite. In this way, the **alpa-bahutva** (small-large-ness) of the **pancha-bhagahara** (five-divisors) has been explained, and therefore the **alpa-bahutva** of others has also been explained.

The statement of **alpa-bahutva** (small-large-ness) related to the **pancha-bhagahara** (five-divisors) (transitions):

The **avahara-kala** (time of absorption) of the **pradesagra** (region-tip) that is transitioned by **guna-samkramana** (merit-transition) is **stoka** (very small). The **avahara-kala** of the **pradesagra** that is transitioned by **adha-pravritti-samkrama** (downward-moving-transition) is **asankhyata-guna**. The **pradesagra** that is transitioned by **vidhyata-samkrama** (vidhyata-transition) is... 

Page #463:
---------------------------
The duration of the *pradeshagra* arising from *pradeshagni* is countless times longer for *avahara* (absorption). This is true for the *utkrista pradesha* (excellent region) *samkrama bhagaharas* (absorption factors), not for all *bhagaharas*. This is because the *vidhyata samkrama bhagaharas* are found to be significantly less than the *adhapravritta samkrama bhagaharas*.

**Doubt:** How do we know this?

**Solution:** This is known from the fact that the *jghanya samkrama dravya* (inferior absorption substance) of *pratyakhyana avarana lobha* (rejection, covering, greed) is significantly greater than the *jghanya samkrama dravya* of *kevalgyana avarana* (knowledge covering). This is further explained by the concept of *alp bahutva* (lesser abundance).

Compared to this, the duration of *avahara* for the substance affected by *udvelana samkrama* (agitation absorption) is countless times longer. This *alp bahutva* should be understood here.

In *udvelana samkrama*, the *pradeshagra* is the smallest, because the *bhagahar* (absorption factor) required to bring it about is a fraction of an *anguli* (finger width) countless times over. Therefore, the *pradeshagra* in *vidhyata samkrama* is countless times greater, because even though the *bhagahar* for both is a fraction of an *anguli* countless times over, the *bhagahar* for *vidhyata samkrama* is considered to be countless times less than the previous *bhagahar*. The *pradeshagra* in *adhapravritta samkrama* is countless times greater than that, because the *bhagahar* required to bring it about is a fraction of a *paly* (a measure of time) countless times over. The *pradeshagra* in *guna samkrama* (quality absorption) is countless times greater than that, because this substance is related to a *bhagahar* that is countless times less than the *bhagahar* of the previous substance. The *pradeshagra* in *sarva samkrama* (universal absorption) is countless times greater than the *pradeshagra* in *guna samkrama*, because this substance is related to a *bhagahar* that is equal to one unit.

Thus, the *alp bahutva* (lesser abundance) of the substances also reveals the specific *bhagaharas* of these five types of *samkrama*. Therefore, the *alp bahutva* of the *bhagaharas* created by them should also be understood in reverse order. This reverse order is as follows:

The *sarva samkrama bhagahar* is the smallest, because it is equal to one unit. The *guna samkrama bhagahar* is countless times greater than that, because it is a fraction of a *paly* countless times over. The *adhapravritta samkrama bhagahar* is countless times greater than that, because it is a fraction of a *paly* countless times over, but is also countless times greater than the previous one. The *vidhyata samkrama bhagahar* is countless times greater than that, because it is a fraction of an *anguli* countless times over. The *udvelana samkrama bhagahar* is countless times greater than that, because it is a fraction of an *anguli* countless times over, but is also countless times greater than the previous one.

Thus ends the *pancha bhagahar chulika* (five absorption factor verse).

1. *Dhavala* p. 16, p. 421.
2. *Jayadhavala* p. 9, p. 172-73.

Page #464:
---------------------------
## Gommatasara Karmakanda - 425

**The Ten Karmas**

Nemichandracharya, desiring to explain the ten karmas in fourteen verses, first salutes his Shrutaguru:

**HAJA**
"I, the disciple of Virendranandi Acharya, who have crossed the endless ocean of samsara by the grace of my Shrutaguru, bow to Abhayanandi Acharya." (436)

Now, the names of the ten karmas are given:

"Bandha, Uttarshana, Sankrama, Apakarshana, Udirana, Sattwa, Udaya, Upashama, Nikachita - these are the ten karmas, the nature of karma." (437)

The nature of these ten karmas is explained in three verses:

"The connection of karmas is Bandha, Uttarshana is its increase. Sankrama is the attainment of its purpose, Apakarshana is its decrease." (438)

"Udirana is the increase of its purpose, Sattwa is its full maturity, Udaya is its manifestation." (439)

"Nikachita is the karma that is dormant and not manifested." (440)

**Note:** The text mentions that the four karmas - Udaya, Sankrama, Udirana, and Nikachita - are not manifested in the same order. The karma that is dormant and not manifested is Nikachita. 

Page #465:
---------------------------
Gommatasar Karmakanda-426

**Meaning:**

Bondage is the union of the karma-form of pudgala dravya with the soul's regions. The increase in the state and section of karma that was previously present is called **utkarshana**. The transformation of the nature that was previously bound into another form of nature, i.e., the transformation of those nature atoms into another form of nature, is called **prakriti sankraman**. The reduction (decrease) of the state and section of karma that was previously present is called **apकर्षण**. Bringing the dravya located outside the udavali into the udavali by the force of apकर्षण is called **udirana**. The merging of the atoms of those natures whose fruition period has not arrived, i.e., whose time is more than the udavali, into those whose fruition is in the time of the nisheka avali, so that their fruition occurs simultaneously with them, is udirana. The existence, i.e., the karma-form of pudgalas, is called **sattva**. The attainment of fruition by karma according to its previous bound state is called **udaya**. This is what the Jinadeva has said. The karma atoms that are unable to attain udirana are called **upashantakarana**. The karma atoms that are unable to attain the udavali and transform into another form of nature are called **nidhati**. The karma atoms that are unable to attain the udavali, transform into another form of nature, or undergo utkarshana-apकर्षण are called **nikachita**.

**Characteristics of the Ten Karmas in Various Texts:**

**Bandha:**

1. "Bandho naam du-bhav-pariharaena eyattavatto" - The attainment of oneness by abandoning duality is called bondage.
2. "Eki-bhavo bandha" - Oneness (uniformity of the soul's karma) is called bondage.
3. "Jiva-kammanam micchattasanjamakasayajoghehim eyattaparinama bandho" - The oneness that results from the soul and karma due to falsehood, non-restraint, passions, and yogas is called bondage.
4. "Jammi anuyogaddare kammivagganaaye poggalakkhandhanam kammparinama paoggabhavaenaavattidaanan jivapadeshehim saha micchatt-adipacc-ayavase-na sambandho payadi-hi-di-anubhag-padesabheyabhinno paruv-ijjai tamanuyogaddaram bandhotti bhannade" - The anuyogadvara in which the pudgala skandhas, having attained the ability to transform into the karma-form of the karmanavargna, are connected with the soul's regions due to falsehood, etc., is called 'bandha'.
5. "Sleshalakshana bandha" - Bondage is characterized by union.

**Other Statements:**

1. Dhaval, p. 13, p. 7
2. Dhaval, p. 13, p. 348
3. Dhaval, p. 8, p. 2
4. Jayadhaval, p. 8, p. 2
5. Ratnakarandaka, p. 5/33 Sutra
Page #466:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-427
"Bandham prati bhavaty aikyam anyonyanupaveshatah.
Yugapad dravit svarna raupya vajjivakarmnoḥ."
Artha- Just as when molten gold and silver are combined into a single mass, their respective regions intermingle and appear as one, similarly, with respect to bandha, the regions of the jiva and karma intermingle and appear as one.:::.:...:
Utkarshana- "Kammappadesa hidivattavanamukkaddana" meaning to increase the state of karma-regions is utkarshana. "Ukkaddana nama kammapadesanam pugvillvidido ahinavabandhasambandhen tthidividdavana" meaning to increase the state of karma-atoms from their previous state in relation to new bandha is utkarshana. "Sthityanubhagayoḥ vruddhiḥ utkarshana" meaning an increase in sthiti and anubhaga is called utkarshana.
Apakarshana- "(Kamma) padesanam thiinamovatttana okaddana nama" meaning the name for the reduction of the state of karma-regions is apakarshana. "Sthityanubhagayoḥ hanirapakarshana nama" meaning the loss of sthiti and anubhaga (of karma) is called apakarshana.
Sankraman- "Bandhena laddhappsaruvasa kammassa micchattaadibheyabhinnass samyavirohana sahavantarasankantilakkhano sankamo payadisankamaadibheyabhinno" meaning the characteristic of sankrama is the transition of karma, which has been obtained through bandha, from its state of mithyatva, etc., to another state, and this sankrama is of many types, such as prakritisankrama, etc. "Avatthado avatthantaram sankanti sankamo tti" meaning to transition from one state to another is sankrama. "Ja payadi annapayadin nijjadi eso payadisankamo" meaning that which causes one prakriti to become another prakriti is called prakritisankrama. "Kamma sankamo chaubviho. Tam jaha payadisankamo didisankamo anubhagasankamo padesasankamo chedi. Miichchattaadikajajananakkhamasssa poggalakkhandhasssa kammavavaseso. Tassa sankamo kammaattaparicchaaena sahavantara sankanti. So pun davattiyanayavalambane negattamavanno pajjavattiyanayavalambane na chauppyaaro hoi payadisankamaadibheena. Taththa payadiye payadiantresu sankamo payadisankamo ti bhannai, jaha koha payadiye manadisusankamo tti." meaning karma-sankrama is of four types: prakritisankrama, sthitisankrama, anubhagasankrama, and padesasankrama. The pudgalaskandha, which is capable of producing mithyatva, etc., is the karma-avasesa. Its sankrama is a transition to another state through the knowledge of karma. However, it is not of four types when dependent on davattiyana, but it is of many types when dependent on pajjavattiyana. There, the sankrama between prakritis is called prakritisankrama, such as the sankrama of koha prakriti to manadi prakriti. 

Page #467:
---------------------------
Gommatasar Karmakanda-428

Karma is called karma. Its transition from its own karmarupa state to another nature form without abandoning its karmarupa state is called karmasankrama. Although it is of one kind from the perspective of dravyarthikanaya, it is of four kinds from the perspective of paryayaarthikanaya, namely, prakritisankrama, etc. Among these, the transition of one prakriti into other prakritis is called prakritisankrama. For example, the transition of the prakriti of anger into mana, etc., is prakritisankrama. "Ja hidi okkaddijdi va ukkaddijdi va annapayadin sankamijjai va so vidisankamo" - that which is apkarshit, utkarshit, and transitions into another prakriti form is called sthitisankrama. "Anubhagon okkaddi do vi sankamo, ukkashtdo vi sankamo, annapayadin nido vi sankamo" - the apkarshit anubhaga is also sankrama, the utkarshit anubhaga is also sankrama, and the anubhaga that has attained another prakriti is also sankrama.
_"Ja padesagamannannapayadin nijjade jatto payadido tan padesagan nijjadi tissee payadiye so padesasankamo. Edena parpayadisankatil akkhanno cheva padesasankamo na okkadammaddanalakkhanno tti janavidam, tidi-anubhaganam ra bhokatkalanaati padesasaraaka anna shavaavhiir anuvlambhado."_ - The padesagra which is taken from one prakriti to another prakriti, is called padesasankrama because it is taken from that prakriti. By this statement, it is known that padesasankrama is the characteristic of paraprakritisankrama, not the characteristic of apkarshan-utkarshan, because just as the other form of sthiti and anubhaga is found by apkarshan-utkarshan, the other form of padesagra is not found by them.
When a new bandha is formed, only then does the transition of other prakritis of the same kind occur in the bandha prakriti. It is also said - "Bandhe sankamati tti eso vi nao janaviddo."5 In the prakriti which is not being bound, i.e., in that prakriti form, there is no transition. Sankrama is also a kind of bandha. It is also said - "Kathemeththa sankamassa bandhagavavaseso ti nasankani jam, tassa vi bandhantabbavitttado. Tan jaha- duviho bandho akambbandho kambbandho chedi. Tatthakambbandho nam kammaiyavagganado akammasaru venavahidapadesanam gahanam. Kambbandho nam kammasaruvenavattidapoggalanam annapayadisaruvena parinamanam. Tan jaha- sadatta badhdkammamantarangapacchayavisesavasesanasadattaye jada parinami jai, jada va kasayasaruvena badha kammansa bandhavaliyan volaaviya nokasayasaruvena sankamijanti tada so kambbandho uchai, kammasaruva paricchayegeva kammaantarasaruvana bajjamanattado."6 - How does sankrama get the designation of bandha? It is not right to doubt this, because sankrama is also included in bandha.
1. Jayadhaval Pu.8 p. 14. 4. Jayadha. Pu. 9 p. 169/
2. Jayadhaval Pu.81.2421 5. Jayadha. Pu.8 p. 33.
3. Jayadha. Pu. 91.3. 6. Jayadha. Pu. 8 p. 2. 

Page #468:
---------------------------
:,
.
Mootsaar Karmakaand-429
As there are two types of bondage, namely Akarmabandh and Karmabandh, based on the difference between Akarmabandh and Karmabandh. Of these, the one that receives the atoms situated in the Akarma form from the Karmavargana is Akarmabandh, and the one that transforms the Pudgalas situated in the Karma form into another nature form is Karmabandh. For example, when the Karma that has been bound in the form of Saatarupa, when it transforms into Asaatarupa upon the meeting of the internal cause of Karma, or when the Karma bound in the form of Kshaya, after the Karma bandhavali, transforms into Nokshaya form, then it is called Karmabandh, because these are bound again in the form of Karmaantararupa without giving up the Karma form.
Even in Apकर्षण and उत्कर्षण, Karma is bound again in the form of Sthityantar and Anubhagantara without giving up the Karma form, therefore Apकर्षण-उत्कर्षण is also included in the transition. Thus, along with bondage, transition, Apकर्षण and उत्कर्षण have been mentioned.
Sattva- 'Bandho cheva bandhavidiyasamayaphudi santakamman uchchadi jaav pillevancharimasaoti'- that is, the name Sattva or Satkarma is given to bondage from the second time of binding to the last time of destruction, that is, Kshapan. After Akarmabandh form and Karmabandh form transition, उत्कर्षण and Apकर्षण, there is Sattva of Karma, and until that Karma is experienced and attains Akarma state, the Sattva of that Karma remains. Therefore, only those Karmas that have Sattva are experienced. That experience is through Karmodaya and Udirana. It is also said- "Kadham pun udyaodirananam vedagavavaeso? Na, vedijamanattasaamannavakkhae donhame desin tasvayassiddhiae virohabhavaado." That is, both Udaya and Udirana are experienced from the general point of view, in this regard, there is no contradiction in the proof of the name Vedak of both of them. Therefore, the first Karmodaya is mentioned in the experienced Udaya and Udirana.
Udaya- "Te dhyey phaladaanasamae udayavavaes padivajanti" that is, the Karma skandha associated with the Jiva, at the time of giving the fruit, attains the name 'Udaya'. "So cheva dusamayadhiybandhavaliyae didikkhaeen udhae padamano udayasanniido." That is, the bound Karma, after the lapse of two times of the bandhavali, falls into Udaya from the destruction of the Nishekasthiti, that is, it is called Udaya. '“Taththoyodo naama kammanam jahakalajaniido phalavishaago. Kammodayo udayo tti bhanidam hodi.' That is, the name of the fruit ripening that is born in due time is Karmodaya. The name of Karmodaya is Udaya. This is the meaning of the above statement. "Swaphalsampadanasaamarthya1.dh.pu.6 p. 201.
2. Jayadhaval pu. 10 p. 2. 3. Jayadhabal bhu. 1 p. 295 peragraphanam. 250 (prathamasanskaranapesha) tatha dvitiyavritti ki apesha pu, 265 pan. nan. 7. 4. dh. pu.6 p. 202.
5. Jayadh. pu. 10 p. 25

Page #469:
---------------------------
## Gommatasara Karmakanda - 430

**Uday**

"Karmavasthalakshananyudayasthanani" - This means that the state of karma becoming capable of producing its own fruit is the characteristic of uday. "Svafalasampadan samarth karmavasthalakshanani svafalabhuta sukhduhkhadyaatmaka jeeva vibhav parinamanjananasamarthy sampanna karma parinamaswarupananyudayasthanani." - This means that the state of karma being capable of producing its own fruit, or the result of karma, is the ability to produce vibhavas (results) like happiness, sorrow, etc. in the jiva. The result of karma, along with the power to produce that result, is the characteristic or nature of uday. "Je kammakhandha okaddukk hunadaipogena vina vidikkhyam paviduun appappano phalam deti tesim kammadhanamudao tti sanna." - This means that the karma-skandha which, without being used for upकर्षण or downकर्षण, attains sthitikshaya and gives its own fruit, is called uday. "Karmaanam anubhavanamudayah" - This means that the experience of the fruit of karma is called uday. "Karmaanam phaldanasamarthatayodhbhutirudayah" - This means that the emergence of karma in a form capable of giving its fruit is uday.

**Udirana**

"So cheva bandho badhayadhikaat odu udar ghumani udirana hondi." - After the karma-bandha, when the avli-kal (bandhavali) is over, and the downकर्षण is applied, the uday is agitated (given), this is called udirana. Until the bandhavali-kal, the karma-bandha remains unchanged. After that, the karma-dravya which is given in the udayavali by downकर्षण, up to its own state, is called udirana. "Je kammakhandha mahan tesu hindi - anubhage su avattida okkaddi duurn phaldaino kiranti tesim udirana tti sanna." - This means that the karma-skandha which is situated in the great sthiti and anubhaga, and which is made to give fruit by downकर्षण, is called udirana. "Apakvapachanamudirana. Avliyae bahiradimaadi kaadhuun uvarimanam vidirn bandhavaliya vadikkatapad elagagam sankejjaloga padibhagena palidovamassa asankhejjadhibhagpadibhagena va okattiduun udayavaliyaa e dedi sa udirana." - This means that the ripening of unripe karma is called udirana. To take out the karma from the state outside the avli, and to give it to the udayavali by downकर्षण from the asankhyata loka pratibhaga, or from the asankhyata part of the palyopama, is called udirana. "Udirana pun aparippattakalaanam cheva kammanam uvayavise sena paripachanam, apakka paripachanam udiraneti vachanat." - This means that to ripen the karma which has not yet attained its uday-kal, by a special upaya, is called udirana. Because, it is said that the ripening of the unripe is udirana. 

**Footnotes:**

1. Samyasara Gatha 53 Atmakhyati Tika
2. 
3. Prakrit Panchasangraha page 676 (Bharati Vijnanapiith Prakashan)
4. 
5. Dhavla Pu. 65.214
6. Dhavla Pu. 6 page 202
7. Jayadhavla Pu. 105.2
8. Dhavla Pu. 65.213
9. Panchaastikaya Gatha 56 ki Tika
10. Dhavanna Pu. 15.43 

Page #470:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-431 "Apakchapacanamudiraneti" The digestion (pacha) of unripe karmas for the purpose of udaya is udirana.

Upasamanā- Upasamanā is of two types- prashasta upasamanā and aprashasta upasamanā. The upasamanā of mohaniya karma by means of adhakarana, apurvakarana and anivrittikarana is prashasta upasamanā. At the time of bandha, aprashasta upasamanā occurs in some parts of all karmas. Here is its explanation. "Kamparamanuṇam bajjantarangakaranavaseṇ kettiaṇam pi udiranavaseṇ udayanagampainṇā apyasatthuvāsamanā ti bhaṇṇade" - That is, the non-occurrence of udaya due to udirana of some karma paramanus due to the cause of bahiranga-antaranga is called aprashasta upasamanā. "Appasatthuvāsamanāe jamuvasantan pade saggam tamokaddihuṁ pi sakvam, ukkaddi du pi sark, payaḍiae sanka miduṁ pi sakkaṁ udayavaliyam pave si, ṇo u sak." - That is, the part of the karma that is pacified by aprashasta upasamanā is capable of being apkarṣaṇa, utkarṣaṇa, and also capable of being transferred to another nature. It is not capable of being only entered into the udayavali. "Jam karma mokaḍukkadḍaṇaparapyaḍisanka maṇam pao ggam hoduṇ puno ṇo sakkamudaṣṭidimokaḍatuṁ udiranaviruḍḍasahaveṇ parinaḍattado tam taha viha paiṇṇāe paḍigahyam appasatth uvasamanāe uvasantami di bhaṇṇade. Tassa so pajjao appasatth uvasamanākaraṇ nāma." - That is, the karma that is capable of apkarṣaṇa, utkarṣaṇa, and transfer to another nature, but due to its nature being opposed to udirana, is not capable of being pacified in the state of dapasthiti, is called pacified by aprashasta upasamanā in that way. Its synonym is upasamanākaraṇa.

Nidhatti- "Jam pade sagga ṇo sakkamudae dadam aṇṇapyaḍi vā sanka medam tam nidhattam nāma." - That is, the karma that is not capable of being given in udaya or being transformed into another nature is called nidhatti. "Jam karma mokaḍukkadḍaṇāsu aviruḍḍasancaraṇam hoṭuṇ puno udayaparapyaḍisanka maṇam aṇagamanpaiṇṇāe paḍiggahiyam tassa so avasthavise so nidhattikaraṇami di bhaṇṇade." - That is, the karma that is capable of being transferred to apkarṣaṇa and utkarṣaṇa, but is not capable of being udaya or transfer to another nature, is called nidhattikaraṇa in that state. "Ja pade saggam nivatti kayam uda e daiṁ ṇo sanam, aṇṇapyaḍiṁ sanka midam pi ṇo sark, okaḍḍidumu kaḍḍidun ca sakaevaṁ vihassa pade saggassa nidhattami di saṇṇā." - That is, the karma that is nidhattikrita, that is, not capable of being given in udaya, and also not capable of being transferred to another nature, is called nidhatti in that way. 

Page #471:
---------------------------
## Gommatasar Karmakanda-432

"It is not possible to diminish or enhance it, but it is possible to diminish or enhance it; such a Pradeshgra is called Niti."

**Explanation:**

"Jan pade sagam okkaddihu go sakam, ukkaddi, no savam, annapayadin sankami, no sakam, udaye dadu no sakkam tan pade saggam nikachidam nam." 
**Meaning:** A karma Pradeshgra that cannot be diminished, cannot be enhanced, cannot be transformed into another nature, and cannot be given in the form of an uday, is called Nikachit.

"Jan pade sagam ya saktama okavidumu ukkadvidumu annapayadisankamedu muudaye datum va tan nikachidam nam."
**Meaning:** A Pradeshgra that cannot be diminished or enhanced, cannot be transformed into another nature, and cannot be given in the form of an uday, is called Nikachit.

"Jan pun kammam chadu nnabhedesi udyaadinam appaoggham hodu navahan painnam tassa tahavatthanalakkhanno pajayaviseso nikachanakaranam nam."
**Meaning:** The specific category of the state of a karma that is not eligible for these four (Udirana, Sankraman, Utkarashan, Apkarashan) and is bound by the promise of the state, is called Nikachanakaran.

**Further Explanation:**

The text then goes on to describe the nature of the ten karans (actions) in the context of karma-prakritis (types of karma) and guna-sthans (stages of spiritual progress).

"Sankamanakaranuna, navakaranna hoti savva aounnam. Sesanan dasakaranna, apuvvakarannoti dasakaranna." (441)
**Meaning:** There are nine karans in all four ayus (lifetimes) without Sankramanakaran (transitional action), because the four ayus do not transform into each other. In all other karmas that are capable of binding, there are ten karans, and from Mithyatva (false belief) to the Apurvakaran guna-sthan (stage of spiritual progress), all ten karans are found.

"Aadimasatteva tado, suhamakasaotti sankame na vina. Chhach sajogitti tado, sattam udayam ajogitti." (442)
**Meaning:** From the Apurvakaran guna-sthan onwards, up to the Sukshm Samprayay guna-sthan, the first seven karans are found without Upshant, Nidhatti, and Nikachit karans, because these three karans are broken by the results of the Anivritti karans (actions that do not lead to liberation). Sankraman, Upshant, Nidhatti, and Nikachit karans are not found in the first seven karans. 

Page #472:
---------------------------
## Gommatasar Karmakanda-433

There are six karmas without sa-yoga-kevali guna-sthana, and two karmas, sattva and udya, in the a-yogi guna-sthana. Now, the special feature of the upashanta-kṣaya guna-sthana is called:

**ṇavari viseṣaṁ jāṇe, saṅkamam avi hodi saṁtamohammi. ... micchaśśa ya miśśaśśa ya seṣāṇam natthi saṅkamaṇaṁ ||443||**

**Meaning:** The special feature of the upashanta-kṣaya guna-sthana is that the saṅkamaṇa karma is also found in mithyātva and miśra-prakriti, meaning that their atoms transform into samyaktva-prakriti. The remaining six karmas are found in the other prakritis.

**Special Meaning:** For example, in the apūrva-karaṇa guna-sthana, there is a vyucchitti of the three karmas, upashama, nidhatti, and nikacita, but there is no vyucchitti in the anivṛtti-karaṇa and sūksma-sāmprāya guna-sthana. In the upashanta-kṣaya guna-sthana, there are seven karmas for mithyātva and samyag-mithyātva-prakriti, while the other prakritis have six karmas without saṅkamaṇa, upashanta, nidhatti, and nikacita. There is no vyucchitti in the kṣīṇa-kṣaya guna-sthana, and there is a vyucchitti of the four karmas, bandha, utkarṣaṇa, apankarṣaṇa, and udāraṇa, in the sa-yogi guna-sthana. In the a-yogi guna-sthana, there is a vyucchitti of the two karmas, sattva and udya. The rest of the statement is easy to understand.

**bandhukkaṭṭaṇa-karaṇaṁ, sagasagabandhoti hodi niyameṇa.
saṅkamaṇaṁ karaṇaṁ puṇa, sagasagajāḍīṇ bandhoti ||444||**

**Meaning:** When there is a bandha of a particular prakriti, then the bandha and utkarṣaṇa karmas occur. The saṅkamaṇa karma occurs at the time of bandha of the prakritis of its own kind.

**okkaṭṭaṇa-karaṇaṁ puṇa, ajogisattāṇ jogicarimautti.
khīṇaṁ suhumantāṇam, khayadesaṁ sāvalīyasamayoti ||445||**

**Meaning:** The apankarṣaṇa karma of the 85 sattva-rupa prakritis in the a-yogi guna-sthana lasts until the end of the sa-yogi guna-sthana. The apankarṣaṇa karma of the 16 prakritis that are vyucchinn from sattva in the kṣīṇa-kṣaya guna-sthana and the sūksma-lobha that is vyucchinn from sattva in the sūksma-sāmprāya guna-sthana, these 17 prakritis have an apankarṣaṇa karma that lasts until one avati less than the kṣaya-desa.

**Doubt:** What is kṣaya-desa? 

Page #473:
---------------------------
## Gommatasara Karmakanda - 434

**Solution:** Those natures which arise in the form of other natures and attain destruction, their final stage of destruction is the **Kshayadesha** of the **Antakandaka**. And those which arise in the form of **Swamukhodaya** (self-arising), their **Kshayadesha** is when one **Avali** (period) of time remains for each of them. Therefore, the destruction of these 17 natures occurs when one **Aavati** (period) of time remains.

**Verse 446:**
**Meaning:** The **Uvasanta** (state of subdued passions) is the **Apakarshan** (descent) for the **Devaayu** (divine beings) up to the **Kshayagunasthan** (state of subdued passions). It is to be known that the **Apakarshan** for the 16 natures of **Mithyatva** (false belief), **Samyagmithyatva** (mixed belief), and **Samyaktva** (right belief), and the 16 natures that are destroyed in the **Anivritikaranagunasthan** (state of non-destruction of passions), is up to the final stage of the **Antakandaka**. The **Apakarshan** for the remaining 20 natures is up to their respective **Kshayadesha**.

**Verse 447:**
**Meaning:** The **Apakarshan** for the 16 natures of **Mithyatva**, **Samyagmithyatva**, **Samyaktva**, and **Narakadvika** (hell-born) etc. in the **Uvasamasreni** (series of subdued passions) is up to the **Uvasantakshaya** (state of subdued passions). And the **Apakarshan** for the 8 **Kshayas** (passions) etc. is up to their respective **Uvasamasthan** (state of subdued passions).

**Verse 448:**
**Meaning:** The **Apakarshan** for the **Anantanubandhichatushk** (four infinite attachments) is in the **Asanyata** (uncontrolled), **Deshasanyata** (controlled in the realm), **Pramatta** (distracted), and **Aparamatta** (undistracted) **Gunasthanas** (states of qualities) respectively.

**1. What is called **Avalaambanakaran** (descent)?**
**Solution:** The descent of a substance situated in the upper state of **Parbhavasambandhi** (past life) **Aayu** (life span) due to **Apakarshan** (descent) is called **Avalaambanakaran**.

**Question:** Why is it not called **Apakarshan**?
**Solution:** Because the **Parbhavik** (past life) **Aayu** does not arise, its descent does not occur outside the **Udayavali** (period of arising), therefore, calling it **Apakarshan** would be contradictory. (The meaning is that even when the **Parbhavasambandhi** **Aayu** undergoes **Apakarshan**, its descent does not occur within the **Anadhakal** (period of non-existence) but only in the **Nishka** (state) situated above the **Aabaadha** (obstacle). Therefore, it is distinguished from **Apakarshan**.) (D.P. 10, pp. 333-331)

**2. The 16 natures are:** **Narakadvika**, **Tiryanchdvika**, **Ekendirya** (one-sense) etc. 4 **Jatis** (species), **Sthavar** (stationary), **Sukshma** (subtle), **Sadharan** (common), **Atap** (heat), **Udyot** (light), **Styanagridhi** (laziness) etc. 3 **Nidra** (sleep).

**3. The 4 **Apratyaakhyanakshaya** (passions that are not rejected), 4 **Pratyaakhyanakshaya** (passions that are rejected), 9 **Nokshaya** (passions that are not destroyed), **Sanchalanakrodha** (anger), **Mana** (pride), **Maya** (deceit). 

Page #474:
---------------------------
Gommatasar Karyavah-438: .::
. ..
Where there is dispassion, there is degradation up to that point, and degradation, excitation, sattvization, and udarization occur up to the asanyatguna-sthana of narakayu and up to the desasanayatguna-sthana of tiryanchayu. ||448||
Micchasya ya micchotti ya, udirana uvasamahimuhiyasya.
Samayahiyavalitti ya suhme suhumassa lohasya. ||449|| Meaning- In the mithyatvaguna-sthana, the excitation of the mithyatva-prakriti occurs until the time when the remaining time is more than one avali-pramana for the being who is facing the upasama-samyaktv. The excitation of subtle greed is in the sukshmasamprayaguna-sthana until the time when the remaining time is more than one avali-pramana, because excitation is not possible when the remaining time is less than one avali-pramana.
Udaye sankammudaye, chausuvi dadam kamena no sakkam.
Uvasantam cha nidhattim, nikachidam tam apuvvoti. ||450|| Meaning- The upashantakarana-dravya which is not capable of attaining the udayavali, the nidhattikaranadravya which is not capable of attaining the sankraman or uday, and the nikachittikaranadravya which is not capable of attaining the udayavali, sankraman, utkarshana, and apkarshana. All three types of karana-dravya are found only up to the apurvakaranaguna-sthana, because at the first time of entering the anivrittikaranaguna-sthana, all three karana of all karmas are extinguished simultaneously. The nature of these three karana has been given in detail in the special meaning of Ga. 440.
Thus, the Dashakarana-chulikadhikari is complete. In this way, the commentary named SiddhantagyanadIpika on the Gommatasar Karmakanda, written by Acharya Shri Nemichandra Siddhantachakravarti, has completed the fourth adhikari named "Trikarana-chulik".
1. Uda sakramudaye chadu su vi dadam kamena no sabai. Usantam chanidhattam nikachidam cha avija kamma. || (Dhaval Pu.6 p. 295, Dhaval Pu. 91. 236 and Dh, Pu. 15 p. 256, Go. Ka. Gatha 440)
2. 'Sacchesi krammanamaniyattiananapasapahadamasamaye netra edani tini tri karanaani akkamena bonchhinnaani tti bhanidam hoi.' Jayadhaval Pu. 13 p. 2311

Page #475:
---------------------------
## Gommatasara Karmakanda - 436

**Chapter on the Enumeration of Locations**

After completing the chapter on the Tricholika, I, the Acharya, pay my respects to the revered Ishtadeva and pledge to speak on the chapter on the enumeration of locations.

**Verse 451:**

I bow to Sri Neminatha, whose lotus feet were worshipped by the truthful Yudhishthira, the Pandava, who directly paid his respects. I (Nemichandracharya) will speak about the enumeration of locations, along with the bondage, liberation, and essence of the natures.

**Explanation:**

**Doubt:** What is the purpose of this chapter on the enumeration of locations?

**Resolution:** In the previous chapter on the enumeration of natures, there was a question about whether the natures are bound in order or out of order. This chapter on the enumeration of locations is meant to address this question and explain how it happens.

**Doubt:** What is meant by "location"?

**Resolution:** "Location" refers to the collection of natures, or the place where they reside. There are three types of locations based on the natures: (1) bondage location, (2) liberation location, and (3) essence location. The location refers to the number of natures that can be bound, liberated, or have essence in a single lifetime of a being. This chapter will discuss this.

**Now, we will first discuss the locations of the fundamental natures, along with their bondage, liberation, excitation, and essence, in six verses within the chapter on the qualities.**

**Verse 452:**

There are six types of karma, six types of bondage, and six types of essence. All six are present in one location, and there is only one bondage for all three.

**Footnotes:**

5. "They say that this is the limit." Jayadharmaprabandha, Part 2, Page 199.

2. "These are the locations of bondage, liberation, and essence, and they are of three types." Jaina Prabandha, Part 2, Page 199. 

Page #476:
---------------------------
Gommatasar Karmakanda - 437
Meaning - In the six Gunasthanas up to Aprammatta, the Jiva binds karma in 7 ways without Aayu or in 8 ways with Aayu. In the Misra, Apurvakaran and Anivrittikaran Gunasthanas, only 7 types of karma are bound without Aayu. In the Sukshmasamparaya Gunasthan, only 6 types of karma are bound without Aayu and Moha. In the three (Upshantakashaya, Kshina Kshaya and Sayogkevali) Gunasthanas, only one Vedaniya karma is bound and the Ayogi Gunasthan is devoid of any binding.
"Chattari tini siya, jayaditthanaani mulapayadinam. Avattinidanivi kame honti ||453||
Bhujagara ppadarani ya,
Meaning - The Mula Prakriti Bandhastan, Bhujagara Bandhastan, Alpatar Bandhastan and Avashit Bandhastan are four, three, three and four respectively. ||453||
Special Meaning - Thus, there are four Bandhastanas with eight, seven, six and one Prakriti forms respectively, starting from the general Mula Prakritis. Here, there are three types of Bhujakara Bandha, descending from the Upshama श्रेणी. In the Upshantakashaya Gunasthan, there was binding of one Prakriti, and when it moved to the Sukshmasamparaya Gunasthan, it bound six Prakritis, thus making one Bhujakara Bandha. And, in the Sukshmasamparaya Gunasthan, there was binding of six Prakritis, and when it attained the Anivrittikaran Gunasthan, it bound seven Prakritis, thus making another Bhujakara Bandha. In the Apurvakaran Gunasthan, there was binding of seven Prakritis, and when it moved down to the Prammattadi Gunasthanas, it will bind eight Prakritis, thus making another Bhujakara Bandha. In this way, there are three Bhujakara Bandhas.
Similarly, there are three Alpatar Bandhas - binding of seven karmas after binding of eight karmas is one Alpatar Bandha, binding of six Prakritis after binding of seven Prakritis is the second Alpatar Bandha, and binding of one Prakriti after binding of six Prakritis is another Alpatar Bandha. Thus, know these three types of Alpatar Bandhas.
The binding of the same number of karmas in the subsequent time as the number of karmas bound in the previous time is called Avashit Bandha. It also has four types - binding of eight karmas in the subsequent time after binding of eight karmas in the previous time is the first Avashit Bandha, binding of seven karmas in the subsequent time after binding of seven karmas in the previous time is the second type of Avashit Bandha. Binding of six karmas in the subsequent time after binding of six karmas in the previous time is the third Avashit Bandha, and binding of one karma in the subsequent time after binding of one karma in the previous time is the fourth Avashit Bandha. Thus, know these four types of Avashit Bandha. 

Page #477:
---------------------------
Gommatasar Karmakanda-438
The qualities of the Anivrittikaran etc. Gunasthanas are not attained, except for the Sukshmasamprayagunasthan, while descending from the Upshantakashayagunasthan. Therefore, after the bondage of one nature, the bondages of seven and eight natures, which are the two Bhujakarabandha, do not occur. And, except for the Upshantakashayagunasthan, the Gunasthanas between the Aprammat and Anivrittikaran Gunasthanas are not attained. Therefore, after the bondage of eight and seven natures, the two Alpatarabandha, which are the bondages of one nature, do not occur.
Doubt- If the dying Deva in the Upshantakashayagunasthan is Asanyata, then why are the bondages of seven natures after the bondage of one nature and the bondages of eight natures after the bondage of one nature, which are the two Bhujakarabandha, not said?
Solution- They are not said because the Abaddhayushk does not die. Therefore, there is no Bhujakar bondage of seven natures after the bondage of one nature. And, if the Baddhayushk dies and becomes a Deva residing in the Asanyatagunasthan, then the Bhujakarabandha of seven natures after the bondage of one nature is possible. But, the Bhujakarabandha of eight natures after the bondage of one nature is not possible because the bondage of the lifespan related to the Parbhava occurs only when six months of the Deva's lifespan remain. For this reason, those two Bhujakarabandha are not said. Earlier, there was no bondage of any nature, but later, if there is bondage, then it is Avaktvyabandha. Avaktvyabandha is not possible in the bondage of the original natures because there is no absence of the bondage of all the original natures. Thus, after stating the Bondage-place, now the Udya-place is stated.
Atthadao Suhumotti Ya, Mohena Vina Hu Santakhine Su.
Ghadi Darana Chaukkasu Dao Kevali Duge Niyama ||454|| Meaning- The Udya of eight original natures is up to the Sukshmasamprayagunasthan. In the Upshantakashayakshinakashayagunasthan, the Udya of seven original natures is without the Mohaniyakarma. And, in the Sayogakevali Ayogakevali Gunasthan, the Udya of four Aghatiyakarmas is to be known by the rule; because the four Ghatiyakarmas are destroyed.
Ghadinam Chadumattha Udiraga Ragino Hi Mohassa.
Tadayun Pamatta Joganta Honti Donhamp ||455|| Meaning- The Udirana of three Ghatiyakarmas is done by the Chadmasthajnani up to the Kshinakashayagunasthan. The Sukshmasamprayagunasthanvarti Saragijiva, who do the Udirana of the Mohaniyakarma, are Vedaniya and Ayukarma 

Page #478:
---------------------------
Gommatasar Karmakanda-439
The **udirana** of the **pratikrama** is done by the **pramadi jivas** up to the **pratikrama guna sthana**. The **udirana** of **nama** and **gotra karma** is done by the **jivas** up to the **sayogi guna sthana**.
**Missoonapamattaante, aoussaddha hu suhumkhinaanang.
Aavalisitte kamaso, sag pan do chevuudirana hoti.** ||456||
**Meaning:** In the five **guna sthana** from **misra guna sthana** to **pratikrama guna sthana**, when the remaining lifespan is only the time of an **avali**, the **udirana** of the seven **karmas** occurs without the lifespan. In the **sukshma samprayay guna sthana**, when the remaining lifespan is the same, the **udirana** of the five **karmas** occurs without the **mohaniya** and **vedaniya karmas**. In the **kshinakshaya guna sthana**, when the remaining lifespan is the same, the **udirana** of **nama** and **gotra karma** occurs. In this way, by stating the **udaya-udirana sthana**, the **sattva sthana** is stated.
**Santotti att saatta, khine sattev honti saattaani.
Joggimmi ajoggimmi ya, chattari havati saattaani.** ||457||
**Meaning:** Up to the **upshantakashaya guna sthana**, there are eight **mula prakriti** **sattva**. In the **kshinakshaya guna sthana**, there are seven **karmas** without the **mohaniya karmas**. In the **sayogi-ayogi guna sthana**, there are four **adhatiyaka karmas**. In this way, there are three **sattva sthana** with eight, seven, and four **prakriti**.
By stating the **bandha-udaya-udirana** and **sattva sthana** in the **mula prakriti**, now we state the **udaya** etc. **sthana** related to the **uttaraprakriti**.
**Tinni das att thaanani sanavaran mohanamanang.
Etthav ya bhujagara, seseseeyam have thaanang.** ||458||
**Meaning:** There are 3-10 and 8 **bandha sthana** for **darshanavaran**, **mohaniya**, and **nama karma** respectively. The **bhujakarabandha** of these three **karmas** also occur in these three. The **bandha** of the remaining five **prakriti** of **gyanavaran** and **antaraya karma** is in one **sthana**. The **bandha sthana** of **gotra**, **ayu**, and **vedaniya karma** is one for each **prakriti**.
1. "**Tinni das att haanani dansanavaran-moh-naamanang. Etthav ya bhujayara seseseeyam havei thaanang.**"
(Panchasangrah Gyanapith p. 186 gatha 242)

Page #479:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-440
Nine, six, and four, these are the binding places of the Darshanavarana karma.
You should know that there are four types of binding: Bhujakara, Alpantara, Avasthita, and Avaktāvya. ||459||

**Meaning:** There are three binding places for the Darshanavarana karma: first, nine types of karma, second, six types of karma without Nidra, Sthana, and Grdhi, and third, four types of karma without Nidra and Prachala. These four types of binding are Bhujakara, Alpantara, Avasthita, and Avaktāvya.

**Special Meaning:** When a being descends from the Upshama श्रेणी, it binds four types of Darshanavarana karma in the second part of the A-purvakarana guna-sthana, and then binds six types of karma in the first part of the A-purvakarana guna-sthana. This is called a Bhujakara binding. When a being binds six types of karma in the Pramatta, Desha-samyata, Asamyata, and Misra guna-sthana, and then attains Mithyatva-avastha, and then attains the first Upshama Samyak-drishti Sasadan guna-sthana, it binds nine types of karma. This is another Bhujakara binding. Thus, there are two types of Bhujakara binding. When a being with Sa-tishaya Mithya-drishti, facing the first Upshama Samyak-tva, binds nine types of karma in the final time of the Anivriti-karana parinaama, and then binds six types of karma in the next time, being Asamyata, Desha-samyata, or Apramatta, this is called an Alpantara binding. Similarly, when a being binds six types of karma in the final time of the first part of the Upshama and Kshapaka A-purvakarana guna-sthana, and then binds four types of karma in the first time of the second part, this is another Alpantara binding. Thus, there are two types of Alpantara binding. When a being with Mithya-drishti or Sasadan Samyak-drishti binds nine types of karma, six types of karma from the Misra guna-sthana to the first part of the A-purvakarana guna-sthana, and four types of karma from the second part of the A-purvakarana guna-sthana to the Sukhma-samparaya guna-sthana, and then binds the same number of types of karma in the next time, this is called an Avasthita binding. There are three types of Avasthita binding. A being in the Upshanta-kshaya guna-sthana does not bind Darshanavarana karma, but when it descends from the Upshama श्रेणी, it binds four types of karma in the first time of the Sukhma-samparaya, and a bound-life-span, death-making deva, being Asamyata, binds six types of karma. This is called an Avaktāvya binding. Thus, there are two types of Avaktāvya binding. This is explained further:

Nine is the binding of Sasadan, six is the first part of A-purvakarana,
Four is the final time of Sukhma-samparaya, the binding of Kshaya. ||460||

**Meaning:** The Darshanavarana karma binds nine types of karma up to the Sasadan guna-sthana, six types of karma up to the first part of the A-purvakarana guna-sthana, and four types of karma from the second part of the A-purvakarana guna-sthana to the final time of the Sukhma-samparaya guna-sthana. 

Page #480:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-441: After stating the bondage places of Darshanavarana Karma, the text now describes the places of its arising.

**Verse 461:**
The four types of Darshanavarana Karma, namely Chakshudarshanavarana, etc., arise in a being who is awake, from Mithyatva to the place of Kshina-Kshaya-guna. In a sleeping being, these arise in five types, from the place of Kshina-Kshaya-guna to the second extreme time.

**Explanation:**
From the place of Pramatta-guna to the place of Kshina-Kshaya-guna, there is the arising of one of the five types of sleep. Beyond that, in the state of Nidra-Prachala, there is the arising of one of the five types of sleep.

**Verse 462:**
The nine types of Darshanavarana Karma arise from Mithyatva to the place of Upashanta-Kshaya-guna and from the first part of the place of Anivritika-karan-guna in the Kshapaka-shreni. Beyond that, from the second extreme time of the place of Kshina-Kshaya-guna, there are only six types of Darshanavarana Karma. This is because the three types of Darshanavarana Karma, namely Styana, Grdhi, etc., are destroyed in the first part of the place of Anivritika-karan-guna.

**Explanation:**
From the second extreme time of the place of Kshina-Kshaya-guna, there are six types of Darshanavarana Karma, and at the extreme time, there are four types.

**Verse 463:**
Now, the text describes the bondage places of Mohaniya Karma.

**Explanation:**
There are 22, 21, 17, 13, 9, 5, 4, 3, 2, and 1 types of Mohaniya Karma, making a total of 10 bondage places.

**Source:**
Dhavala, Purva 15, page 81.
Panchasangraha, Gyanapith, page 188, verse 246. 

Page #481:
---------------------------
## Gommatasara Karmakanda - 442

The above mentioned bondage places of mohaniya karma are called, in relation to guna sthana:

**464**
Twenty-two, twenty-one, seventeen, seventeen, thirteen, nine, nine, nine. Five, four, three, two, and one. These are the places of moha.

**Meaning:**
Among the above mentioned bondage places of mohaniya karma, there are 22 prakriti forms in mithyatva guna sthana, 21 prakriti forms in sasadan guna sthana, 17-17 prakriti forms in misra and asanyata guna sthana, 13 prakriti forms in deshasanyata guna sthana, 9-9-9 prakriti forms in the three guna sthana of pramatta, etc., and 5-4-3-2 and 1 prakriti forms in the five places of anivrittikarana guna sthana.

Now, the dhruvabandi prakriti in the above mentioned places are called:

**465**
Nineteen, eighteen, fourteen, fourteen, ten, six, six, six. Four, three, two, and one. These are the dhruvabandi of moha.

**Meaning:**
From mithyatva guna sthana to deshasanyata guna sthana, there are 19-18-14-14 and 10 prakriti forms, and in the three guna sthana of pramatta, etc., there are 6-6-6, and in anivrittikarana guna sthana, there are 4-3-2 and 1. These are the dhruvabandi prakriti of mohaniya karma.

**Special Meaning:**
In mithyatva guna sthana, mithyatva, 16 kshaya, bhaya and jugupsa, these 19 prakriti are dhruvabandi, and one from hasya and shoka, one from rati and arati, and one from the three vedas, these three prakriti are adhruvabandi. In sasadan guna sthana, one mithyatva prakriti is reduced from the above mentioned 19 prakriti, making 18 prakriti dhruvabandi, and the adhruvabandi prakriti are the same three as mentioned before. In misra and asanyata guna sthana, four anantanubandhi kshaya are reduced from the above mentioned 18 prakriti, making 14 prakriti dhruvabandi, and the adhruvabandi prakriti are the same three as mentioned before. In deshasanyata guna sthana, four apratyakhyana kshaya are reduced from the above mentioned 14 prakriti, making 10 prakriti dhruvabandi, and the adhruvabandi prakriti are the same three as mentioned before. In the three guna sthana of pramatta, aprammatta and apurvakarana, four pratyakhyana kshaya are reduced from the above mentioned 10 prakriti, making 6 prakriti dhruvabandi, and the adhruvabandi prakriti are the same three as mentioned before. In the first part of anivrittikarana guna sthana, bhaya and jugupsa prakriti are reduced from the above mentioned 6 prakriti, making 4 prakriti dhruvabandi, and one purushaveda is adhruvabandi. In the second part, sanjwalana, krodha, mana, maya and lobha, these four prakriti are dhruvabandi. In the third part, sanchalana, mana, maya and lobha, these three, in the fourth part, sanjwalana, maya and lobha, these two, and in the fifth part, sanchalana, lobha, this one prakriti is dhruvabandi.

The method of breaking the bondage places of mohaniya karma and their number are mentioned in two verses. 

Page #482:
---------------------------
Gommatasar Karmakanda-443

**Verse 466:**
As much as possible, from their respective aforementioned Dhruva-prakritis, one Veda from the three Vedas, one each from laughter-sorrow, attraction-aversion, are combined to form the locations. And when the qualities of the pair (laughter-sorrow, attraction-aversion, fear-disgust) are multiplied in the evidence of the Vedas, the locations are broken.

**Verse 467:**
In the bondage locations of the mohaniya karma, there are six breaks in the 22-natured location, four breaks in the 21-natured location, and two breaks each until the pramatta-guna location, and after that, one break each in all the bondage locations.

**Explanation:**
In the mithyatva-guna location, there is bondage of 22 prakritis of mohaniya karma. There are six breaks, which are as follows:
1. Mithyatva + Sixteen Kshayas + Purusha Veda + Laughter-Attraction + Fear-Disgust.
2. Mithyatva + Sixteen Kshayas + Stri Veda + Laughter-Attraction + Fear-Disgust.
3. Mithyatva + Sixteen Kshayas + Napumsaka Veda + Laughter-Attraction + Fear-Disgust.
4. Mithyatva + Sixteen Kshayas + Purusha Veda + Aversion-Sorrow + Fear-Disgust.
5. Mithyatva + Sixteen Kshayas + Stri Veda + Aversion-Sorrow + Fear-Disgust.
6. Mithyatva + Sixteen Kshayas + Napumsaka Veda + Aversion-Sorrow + Fear-Disgust.

In the sasadan-guna location, there is bondage of 21 prakritis of mohaniya karma, and there are four breaks:
1. Sixteen Kshayas + Purusha Veda + Laughter-Attraction + Fear-Disgust.
2. Sixteen Kshayas + Stri Veda + Laughter-Attraction + Fear-Disgust.
3. Sixteen Kshayas + Purusha Veda + Aversion-Sorrow + Fear-Disgust.
4. Sixteen Kshayas + Stri Veda + Aversion-Sorrow + Fear-Disgust.

...

...

...

...

...

...

...

1. "Twenty-six, twenty-four, twenty-two, two, two. Even in the nine bondages, one break each. ||251|| Twenty-two have six breaks: 6. Twenty-one have four breaks: 4. Seventeen have two breaks each: 2, 2. In the nine bondages of thirteen, until pramatta, two breaks each: 2, 2. In the end, one break each in all the locations." ||251|| - Pra. Pan. San. p. 191. 

Page #483:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-444

In the Misra-Asanyata Gunasthan, there are 2 types of bhang (breaking) in the binding of 17 types of mohaniya karma:
1.  Twelve Kshaya + Purushaved + Hasya-Rati + Bhaya-Jugupsa.
2.  Twelve Kshaya + Purushaved + Ati-Shok + Bhaya-Jugupsa.

In the Deshasanyata Gunasthan, there are 2 types of bhang in the binding of 13 types of mohaniya karma:
1.  Eight Kshaya + Purushaved + Hasya-Rati + Bhaya-Jugupsa.
2.  Eight Kshaya + Purushaved + Arati-Shok + Bhaya-Jugupsa.

In the Pramanasthan, there are 2 types of bhang in the binding of mohaniya karma:
1.  Four Kshaya + Purushaved + Hasya-Rati + Bhaya-Jugupsa.
2.  Four Kshaya + Purushaved + Arati-Shok + Bhaya-Jugupsa.

In the Apramatta-Apuurvakaran Gunasthan, there is 1 type of bhang in the binding of 9 types of mohaniya karma:
1.  Four Kshaya + Purushaved + Hasya-Rati + Bhaya-Jugupsa.

In the first part of the Anivrittikaran Gunasthan, there is 1 type of bhang in the binding of 5 types of mohaniya karma:
1.  Four Kshaya + Purushaved.

In the second part of the Anivrittikaran Gunasthan, there is 1 type of bhang in the binding of 4 types of mohaniya karma:
1.  Four Kshaya (Sanchalan Krodha-Mana-Maya-Lobha).

In the third part of the Anivrittikaran Gunasthan, there is 1 type of bhang in the binding of 3 types of mohaniya karma:
1.  Three Kshaya (Sanchalan Mana-Maya-Lobha).

In the fourth part of the Anivrittikaran Gunasthan, there is 1 type of bhang in the binding of 2 types of mohaniya karma:
1.  Two Kshaya (Sanchalan Maya-Lobha).

In the fifth part of the Anivrittikaran Gunasthan, there is 1 type of bhang in the binding of 1 type of mohaniya karma:
1.  One Kshaya (Sanchalan Lobha).

Thus, one should know the location and bhang of the types of mohaniya karma that are capable of binding from the Mithyatva Gunasthan to the Anivrittikaran Gunasthan. 

Page #484:
---------------------------
Gommatsar Karmakanda-445 states the number of Bhujakarabandha etc. found in the 10 bandhasthanas of the Mohaniya Karma.
Ten, twenty, eleven, thirty-three are the bandhasthanas of Moha. ... Bhuga-tapa, or, An-madina-ni-vi, ya, Saman-ne. ||468||
Meaning- In the aforementioned 10 bandhasthanas of Mohaniya Karma, generally Bhujakara bandha is 20, Alpatarbandha is 11 and Avasthitbandha is 33. The characteristics of Bhujakara-Alpatar-Avasthitbandha are explained by the Acharya himself in the next stanza.
Appam bandhato, bahu-bandhe bahu-ga-du appam-bandhe-vi.
Ubhayattha same bandhe, bhujaga-radi kame hoti. ||469|| Meaning- When the bandha of Alp-prakritis happens first and then the bandha of Adhik-prakritis happens, it is called Bhujakara bandha. When the bandha of Adhik-prakritis happens first and then the bandha of Alp-prakritis happens, it is called Alpatarbandha. In Bhujakara and Alpatarbandha, the number of prakritis that were bound initially remains the same even later, this is called Avasthit bandha. And, due to the word 'api', there is also Avaktvyabandh in these places.
Note- When there was no bandha of Mohaniya Karma initially, but it gets bound later, this is called Avaktvyabandh. Then, the number of bhangas of Samanya-Avaktvyabandh is stated.
Saman-na-avatt-bvo, odar-man-am-mi ek-kayam bharane.
Ek-kam cha hodi ettha-vi, do cheva avatt-i-da bhang-a. ||470|| Meaning- Generally (without mentioning the number of bhangas), there is one Avaktvyabandh from the Upshama-shreni, and the second Avaktvyabandh happens due to death at that very place. Thus, there are two Avaktvyabandhas, and similarly, in the second and subsequent times, there are only two Avasthitbandhas when the bandha happens in the same way.
1. Bhujakara: twenty (20). Alpatarbandha: eleven (11). Avaktvyau: 2. Thus, all together, in short, the Avasthitbandhas are thirty-three (33). 

Page #485:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda - 446

**Special Meaning?** - In the Upshama श्रेणी, the one who descends, binds a single movable लोभ in the Anivrittikaran गुणस्थान. But descending further from there, he starts binding लोभ and मायाप्रकृति, or the bound-lifespan one dies there and becomes a देव असंयत, binding 17 प्रकृतियों. Thus, in a single प्रकृति-shaped स्थान, two भुजकार बन्ध occur. Binding माया-लोभप्रकृति, he descends further and binds three प्रकृतियों along with मान, or dies and becomes a देव असंयत, binding 17 प्रकृतियों. Thus, in two प्रकृति-shaped स्थान, know two भुजकार बन्ध. Binding लोभ, मान, and मायाप्रकृति, he descends further and binds the four संज्वलनकषाय along with क्रोध, or dies and becomes a देव असंयत, binding 17 प्रकृतियों. Thus, in three प्रकृति-shaped स्थान, two भुजकार बन्ध occur. Binding all four संज्वलनकषाय, he descends further and binds five प्रकृतियों in the सवेदभाग, along with पुरुषवेद, or dies and becomes a देव असंयमी, binding 17 प्रकृतियों there. Thus, in four प्रकृति-shaped स्थान, know two भुजकार बन्ध. Binding five प्रकृतियों, he descends further and binds 9 प्रकृतियों in the अपूर्वकरण गुणस्थान, or dies and becomes a देव असंयमी, binding 17 प्रकृतियों. Thus, in five प्रकृति-shaped स्थान, know these two भुजकार बन्ध.

In the अपूर्वकरण or अप्रमत्त or प्रमत्त गुणस्थान, binding 9 प्रकृतियों, he descends in order and becomes देशस्यती, binding 13 प्रकृतियों there, or becomes असंयमी or dies and becomes a देव असंयमी, binding 17 प्रकृतियों, or becomes प्रथमोपशमसम्यक्त्वी सासादन गुणस्थानवर्ती, binding 21 प्रकृतियों, or becomes प्रथमोपशमसम्यक्त्वी or वेदकसम्यग्दृष्टि, attaining मिथ्यात्व, binding 22 प्रकृतियों. Thus, in 9 प्रकृति-shaped बन्धस्थान, four भुजकार बन्ध occur. Binding 13 प्रकृतियों, he becomes असंयत or देव असंयत, binding 17 प्रकृतियों, or attains the उपशमसम्यग्दृष्टि सासादन गुणस्थान, binding 21 प्रकृतियों, or becomes प्रथमोपशम or क्षयोपशम (वेदक) सम्यग्दृष्टि, attaining मिथ्यात्व, binding 22 प्रकृतियों. Thus, in 13 प्रकृति-shaped बन्धस्थान, know three भुजकार बन्ध. Binding 17 प्रकृतियों, he becomes प्रथमोपशमसम्यग्दृष्टि सासादन गुणस्थानवर्ती, binding 21 प्रकृतियों, or becomes प्रथमोपशमसम्यग्दृष्टि or वेदकसम्यग्दृष्टि or a जीव residing in the मिश्र गुणस्थान, attaining मिथ्यात्व, binding 22 प्रकृतियों. Thus, in 17 प्रकृति-shaped बन्धस्थान, two भुजकार बन्ध occur. And binding 21 प्रकृतियों, he attains मिथ्यात्व, binding 22 प्रकृतियों. Thus, in 21 प्रकृति-shaped बन्धस्थान, one भुजकार बन्ध occurs. Thus, know that in total, 2+2+2+2+2+4+3+2+1 = 20 भुजकार बन्ध occur. Now, they are called अल्पतरबन्ध. A जीव with अनादि or सादिमिथ्यादृष्टि, performing three actions, binds in the अनिवृत्तिकरण...

1. See प्राकृत पंचसंग्रह pages 192 to 195 as well. 

Page #486:
---------------------------
## Gommatasara Karmakanda - 447

At the end of time, a being binds 22 **natures** while attaining **Prathamopaśamasamyaktva** in infinite time, or binds 22 **natures** with **Sadimidhyadristi** and attains **Vedakasamyagdristi** with purity, or binds 17 **natures** in the **Asanyata Gunasthan**, or binds 13 **natures** as a **Desasanayati**, or binds 9 **natures** as a resident of the **Aparamatta Gunasthan**. Thus, there are two **Alpatarabandha** in the binding place of 17 **natures**. Binding 13 **natures**, one becomes **Aparamatta Sanayati** and binds 9 **natures**. Similarly, binding these 9 **natures**, one binds 5 **natures** in the **Apuvrakaran Gunasthan** or the first part of the **Anivrittikaran Gunasthan**. Binding five **natures**, one binds four **natures** in the second part, three **natures** in the third part, two **natures** in the fourth part, and one **nature** in the fifth part. Thus, there is one **Alpatarabandha** in each of these places, making a total of 19 **Alpatarabandha**. They are as follows: 3 in the place of 22 **natures**, 2 in the place of 17 **natures**, 1 in the place of 13 **natures**, 1 in the place of 9 **natures**, 1 in the place of 5 **natures**, 1 in the place of 4 **natures**, 1 in the place of 3 **natures**, and 1 in the place of 2 **natures**, making a total of 11 **Alpatarabandha**. One should know these, as well as the two **Avaktvyabandha**.

The number of **natures** bound in the 20 **Bhujakara**, 2 **Avaktvyabandha**, and 11 **Alpatarabandha** is the same as the number of **natures** bound in the second and subsequent times. This is called **Avasthitabandh**. Therefore, 20 + 2 + 11 = 33. One should know all these **Avasthitabandh**.

## Gommatasara Karmakanda - 471

Now, we will discuss the number of **Bhangas** (liberations) of the **Bhujakara** and other bindings:

**Sattavisahisyam, panadalampanchahattarinihiyasayam. Bhujagarapradadarani ya, avatthidanivi visesena.**

**Meaning:** Specifically, in terms of the change of **natures**, there are 127 **Bhangas** of **Bhujakarabandha**, 45 **Bhangas** of **Alpatarabandha**, and 175 **Bhangas** of **Avasthitabandh**.

## Gommatasara Karmakanda - 472

In the above verse, the **Bhangas** of **Bhujakara** and other bindings are described in detail. First, the **Bhangas** of **Bhujakarabandha** are described specifically:

**Bha chauvvisam baras, visam chauratthavis do do ya. Thule panagadiinam, tiyatiya micchadi bhujagara.**

**Meaning:** In terms of **Bhangas**, there are no specific **Bhujakarabhangas** in the **Mithyatva Gunasthan**. There are 24 in the **Sasadan Gunasthan**, 12 in the **Mishra Gunasthan**, 20 in the **Asanyata Gunasthan**, 24 in the **Desasanayata Gunasthan**, 28 in the **Pramatta Gunasthan**, 2 in the **Aparamatta Gunasthan**, 2 in the **Apuvrakaran Gunasthan**, and 5 in the **Anivrittikaran Gunasthan**, etc. 

Page #487:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda - 448

There are 95 total bhangas (breaks) for the 3-3 bhangas in the places of the bondage forms of nature. Thus, in all the gunasthana (quality places), the number of bhangas of the Bhujakara bandha (arm-like bondage) should be known as 127.

**Special Note:** Here, first, the bhangas of the Bhujakara bandha are mentioned.

A jiva (soul) residing in the Mithyatva gunasthana (false belief quality place) has bondage of only 22 types of Mohaniya karma (delusive karma). There is no place of bondage for more types of Mohaniya karma, therefore, there is no bhang of Bhujakara bandha here.

In the Sasadan gunasthana (body-making quality place), there are 21 types of bondage-worthy karma, which have four bhangas. First, when a jiva comes from the Sasadan to the Mithyatva gunasthana by binding the 22 types of karma, then there are six bhangas related to the place of bondage of 22 types of karma in Mithyadristi (false vision). Multiplying the four bhangas of the 21 types of karma by the six bhangas of the 22 types of karma, there are 24 bhangas of this Bhujakara.

Similarly, in the Misra gunasthana (mixed quality place), there are two bhangas of the 17 types of karma. When a jiva comes from here to the Mithyatva gunasthana, then multiplying the two bhangas of the 17 types of karma by the six bhangas of the 22 types of karma in Mithyadristi, there are 12 bhangas of this Bhujakara.

In the Asanyata gunasthana (uncontrolled quality place), there are two bhangas of the 17 types of karma. When a jiva comes from here to the Sasadan gunasthana and binds 21 types of karma, which have four bhangas. Multiplying these four bhangas by the two bhangas of the 17 types of karma, there are eight bhangas of the Bhujakara bandha. And if it comes to Mithyatva, then it binds 22 types of karma, which have six bhangas. Therefore, multiplying these six bhangas by the two bhangas of the 17 types of karma, there are 12 bhangas of this Bhujakara. Thus, there are 12 + 8 = 20 bhangas of the two Bhujakara bandhas.

In the Deshasanyata gunasthana (controlled quality place), there are two bhangas of the 13 types of karma. When a jiva falls from here to the Misra or Asanyata gunasthana, or dies and goes to the Deva Asanyata, it binds 17 types of karma, which also have two bhangas. Therefore, multiplying the two bhangas of the 13 types of karma by the two bhangas of the 17 types of karma, there are four bhangas of this Bhujakara bandha. And if it comes to the Sasadan gunasthana, it binds 21 types of karma, which have four bhangas. Multiplying these four bhangas by the two bhangas of the 13 types of karma, there are eight bhangas of this Bhujakara. If it comes to Mithyatva, it binds 22 types of karma, which have six bhangas. Multiplying these bhangas by the two bhangas mentioned earlier, there are 12 bhangas of this Bhujakara bandha. Thus, there are 4 + 8 + 12 = 24 bhangas of the three Bhujakara bandhas related to the Deshasanyata gunasthana, which are related to the 17, 21, and 22 types of karma.

In the Pramatta gunasthana (distracted quality place), there are two bhangas of the 9 types of karma. If a jiva goes from here to the Deshasanyata gunasthana, it binds 13 types of karma, which have two bhangas. Therefore, 2 x 2 = 4 bhangas are of this Bhujakara bandha. And if it comes to the Misra or Asanyata gunasthana, it binds 17 types of karma, which have two bhangas. Therefore, 2 x 2 = 4 bhangas are also of this Bhujakara. If it attains the Sasadan gunasthana, it binds 21 types of karma, which have four bhangas. So, 2 x 4 = 8 bhangas are of this Bhujakara bandha. And if it comes to the Mithyatva gunasthana, it binds 22 types of karma, which have... 

Page #488:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda - 449

It has 6 bhangas, therefore 246 = 12 bhangas of this Bhujakarabandha. Thus, there are 28 bhangas of 4 Bhujakarabandhas related to the Prammatta Gunasthan. Similarly, in the Aprammatta Gunasthan, it binds 9 Prakṛtis, so there is one bhang here. From here, if the Mranakara Deva becomes Asanyata, then it binds 17 Prakṛtis, and there are two bhangas. Thus, there are 1 x 2 = 2 bhangas of this Bhujakarabandha.

In the Apurvakarana Gunasthan, there are 2 bhangas of the Bhujakara, as in the Aprammatta Gunasthan. In the first part of the Anivṛttikarana Gunasthan, it binds 5 Prakṛtis, and then falls to the Apurvakarana Gunasthan and binds 9 Prakṛtis, which has 1 bhang. Thus, 101 = 1, there is one bhang. And if the Mranakara Deva becomes Asanyata, then it binds 17 Prakṛtis, which has 2 bhangas. Therefore, there are 102 = 2 bhangas of this Bhujakarabandha. Thus, there are 1 + 2 = 3 bhangas of the two Bhujakarabandhas that occur in the first part of the Anivṛttikarana Gunasthan.

In the second part of the Anivṛttikarana Gunasthan, it binds 4 Prakṛtis, which has one bhang. From there, it comes to the first part and binds Prakṛtis, and there is also one bhang. Therefore, there is only 1 x 1 = 1 bhang of this Bhujakarabandha. And if the Deva becomes Asanyata after death, then it binds 17 Prakṛtis, which has two bhangas. Thus, there are 2 + 1 = 3 bhangas of the two Bhujakaras related to the second part of the Anivṛttikarana Gunasthan.

In the third part of the same Gunasthan, it previously bound 3 Prakṛtis, which has one bhang. If it falls from there to the second part, then it binds 4 Prakṛtis, which has one bhang. Thus, there is only 1 x 1 = 1 bhang of this Bhujakara. And if the Deva becomes Asanyata after death, then it binds 17 Prakṛtis, which has two bhangas. Therefore, there are 1 x 2 = 2 bhangas of this Bhujakara. Thus, there are 1 + 2 = 3 bhangas of the two Bhujakaras related to the third part.

Similarly, in the fourth part, it bound 2 Prakṛtis, which has one bhang. If it falls from there to the third part, then it binds 3 Prakṛtis, which also has one bhang. Therefore, there is 101 = 1 bhang of this Bhujakarabandha. If the Deva becomes Asanyata after death, then it binds 17 Prakṛtis, which has two bhangas. Thus, there are 1 x 2 = 2 bhangas of this Bhujakarabandha. Thus, there are 1 + 2 = 3 bhangas of the two Bhujakaras in the fourth part.

In the fifth part of the Anivṛttikarana Gunasthan, it binds one Prakṛti, which has one bhang. If it falls from there to the fourth part and binds two Prakṛtis, then there is only one bhang. Therefore, there is 101 = 1 bhang of this Bhujakarabandha. If the Deva becomes Asanyata after death, then it binds 17 Prakṛtis, which has two bhangas. Therefore, there are 1 x 2 = 2 bhangas related to this Bhujakarabandha. Thus, there are 1 + 2 = 3 bhangas of the two Bhujakaras related to the fifth part. 

Page #489:
---------------------------
## Gommatasara Karmakanda - 450

**Summary of the Dissolution of Bhujakarabandha as per the Gunasthanas**

**Nature Forms**

* **21st and 22nd Nature Forms:**
    * From the 21st Nature Form of Sasadanagunasthan to the 22nd Nature Form.
    * From the 17th Nature Form of Misra Gunasthan to the 22nd Nature Form.
    * From the 17th Nature Form of Asanyata Gunasthan to the 22nd Nature Form.
    * From the 13th Nature Form of Deshasanyata Gunasthan to the 22nd Nature Form.
    * From the 9th Nature Form of Pramatta Gunasthan to the 22nd Nature Form.
    * From the 9th Nature Form of Aprammatta Gunasthan to the 22nd Nature Form.
    * From the 9th Nature Form of Apurvakarana Gunasthan to the 22nd Nature Form.
* **Anivrittikarana:**
    * First Part: From the 17th Nature Form.
    * Second Part: From the 17th Nature Form.
    * Third Part: From the 17th Nature Form.
    * Fourth Part: From the 2nd Nature Form.
    * Fifth Part: From the 1st Nature Form.

**Bhujakarabandha**

* **1 Bhujakarabandha:**
    * 9th and 17th Nature Forms.
* **2 Bhujakarabandha:**
    * 17th, 21st, and 22nd Nature Forms.
* **3 Bhujakarabandha:**
    * 13th, 17th, 21st, and 22nd Nature Forms.
* **4 Bhujakarabandha:**
    * 5th and 17th Nature Forms.
* **5 Bhujakarabandha:**
    * 4th and 17th Nature Forms.
* **6 Bhujakarabandha:**
    * 3rd and 17th Nature Forms.
* **7 Bhujakarabandha:**
    * 2nd and 17th Nature Forms.
* **8 Bhujakarabandha:**
    * 1st and 17th Nature Forms.

**Alpatarabandha**

* **1 Bhujakarabandha:**
    * 24 Dissolutions.
* **2 Bhujakarabandha:**
    * 20 Dissolutions.
* **2 Bhujakarabandha:**
    * 12 Dissolutions.
* **2 Bhujakarabandha:**
    * 2 Dissolutions.
* **2 Bhujakarabandha:**
    * 2 Dissolutions.
* **2 Bhujakarabandha:**
    * 3 Dissolutions.
* **2 Bhujakarabandha:**
    * 3 Dissolutions.
* **2 Bhujakarabandha:**
    * 3 Dissolutions.
* **2 Bhujakarabandha:**
    * 3 Dissolutions.
* **2 Bhujakarabandha:**
    * 3 Dissolutions.
* **2 Bhujakarabandha:**
    * 3 Dissolutions.
* **2 Bhujakarabandha:**
    * 3 Dissolutions.
* **2 Bhujakarabandha:**
    * 3 Dissolutions.
* **2 Bhujakarabandha:**
    * 3 Dissolutions.
* **2 Bhujakarabandha:**
    * 3 Dissolutions.
* **2 Bhujakarabandha:**
    * 3 Dissolutions.
* **2 Bhujakarabandha:**
    * 3 Dissolutions.
* **2 Bhujakarabandha:**
    * 3 Dissolutions.
* **2 Bhujakarabandha:**
    * 3 Dissolutions.
* **2 Bhujakarabandha:**
    * 3 Dissolutions.
* **2 Bhujakarabandha:**
    * 3 Dissolutions.
* **2 Bhujakarabandha:**
    * 3 Dissolutions.
* **2 Bhujakarabandha:**
    * 3 Dissolutions.
* **2 Bhujakarabandha:**
    * 3 Dissolutions.
* **2 Bhujakarabandha:**
    * 3 Dissolutions.
* **2 Bhujakarabandha:**
    * 3 Dissolutions.
* **2 Bhujakarabandha:**
    * 3 Dissolutions.
* **2 Bhujakarabandha:**
    * 3 Dissolutions.
* **2 Bhujakarabandha:**
    * 3 Dissolutions.
* **2 Bhujakarabandha:**
    * 3 Dissolutions.
* **2 Bhujakarabandha:**
    * 3 Dissolutions.
* **2 Bhujakarabandha:**
    * 3 Dissolutions.
* **2 Bhujakarabandha:**
    * 3 Dissolutions.
* **2 Bhujakarabandha:**
    * 3 Dissolutions.
* **2 Bhujakarabandha:**
    * 3 Dissolutions.
* **2 Bhujakarabandha:**
    * 3 Dissolutions.
* **2 Bhujakarabandha:**
    * 3 Dissolutions.
* **2 Bhujakarabandha:**
    * 3 Dissolutions.
* **2 Bhujakarabandha:**
    * 3 Dissolutions.
* **2 Bhujakarabandha:**
    * 3 Dissolutions.
* **2 Bhujakarabandha:**
    * 3 Dissolutions.
* **2 Bhujakarabandha:**
    * 3 Dissolutions.
* **2 Bhujakarabandha:**
    * 3 Dissolutions.
* **2 Bhujakarabandha:**
    * 3 Dissolutions.
* **2 Bhujakarabandha:**
    * 3 Dissolutions.
* **2 Bhujakarabandha:**
    * 3 Dissolutions.
* **2 Bhujakarabandha:**
    * 3 Dissolutions.
* **2 Bhujakarabandha:**
    * 3 Dissolutions.
* **2 Bhujakarabandha:**
    * 3 Dissolutions.
* **2 Bhujakarabandha:**
    * 3 Dissolutions.
* **2 Bhujakarabandha:**
    * 3 Dissolutions.
* **2 Bhujakarabandha:**
    * 3 Dissolutions.
* **2 Bhujakarabandha:**
    * 3 Dissolutions.
* **2 Bhujakarabandha:**
    * 3 Dissolutions.
* **2 Bhujakarabandha:**
    * 3 Dissolutions.
* **2 Bhujakarabandha:**
    * 3 Dissolutions.
* **2 Bhujakarabandha:**
    * 3 Dissolutions
Page #490:
---------------------------


Page #491:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-452: The breaking of the Avaktvyabandh is to be explained. There are two types of breaking of the Avaktvyabandh: one is when a being, while in the Odaramaṇamma (the state of being in the womb), dies and becomes a Devāsaṃyata (a being who has not attained liberation). The other is when a being, while in the Sukṣmasāmpārāya (the subtle state of existence), breaks free from the bondage of the Mohaniya Karma (the karma that causes delusion) and descends to the Anivṛttikaraṇa (the state of non-return) and binds the karma of Sājwala (intense desire). Thus, there are two types of breaking of the Avaktvyabandh. In total, there are three (1+2) types of breaking of the Avaktvyabandh.

The total number of breaking of the bandhas is 175, which is the sum of the breaking of the Bhujakarabandha (127), the breaking of the Alpatarabandh (45), and the breaking of the Avaktvyabandh (3). This is because the same types of karma are bound in the second and subsequent times, which leads to the formation of the Avasthitabandh (the karma that binds a being to a particular state of existence).

Now, we will discuss the Udayasthāna (the place of origin) of the Mohaniya Karma. There are four types of bandhas of the Mohaniya Karma: the general, the specific, the Bhujakara, and the others.

Gommatasara Karmakanda-475: The Udayasthāna of the Mohaniya Karma are ten, nine, eight, seven, six, five, four, two, and one. There are nine types of Udayasthāna in total, according to the rule.

Gommatasara Karmakanda-476: The Mithyātva (falsehood) and Samyagmithyātva (partially true) types of Mohaniya Karma arise in their respective Gunasthāna (state of qualities). However, the Samyaktva (truth) type of Mohaniya Karma arises in the four Gunasthāna of the Vedaka Samyagdṛṣṭi (the being who has attained perfect knowledge) - Asamyaṃtādi (the state of non-restraint). The four types of Kṣayaja (karma that arises from the passions) - Anantānubandhi (the karma that binds a being to an infinite cycle of births and deaths), etc. - arise in one of the four types of Kṣayaja: Krodha (anger), Māna (pride), Māyā (delusion). The three Vedas arise in one of the three Vedas. The two pairs of Hāsya-Rati (laughter-pleasure) and Arati-Śoka (displeasure-sorrow) arise in one of the two pairs.

Gommatasara Karmakanda-477: The Udayasthāna of the Mithyātva, etc. are four in number, according to the rule: 1) Bhaya (fear), 2) Juguncha (disgust), 3) Juḍa (separation), and 4) the combination of Bhaya and Juguncha.

Gommatasara Karmakanda-475: "One, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight, nine, and ten. There are nine Udayasthāna of the Mohaniya Karma in the stream of delusion." (Prā. Pa. Sa. p. 319, Gāthā 30, and p. 438, Gāthā 303). 

Page #492:
---------------------------
Gommatasar Karmakanda-453

Meaning: In one time period, the arising of the natures with fear of a being, or only with disgust, or with both fear and disgust, or with neither of these two, the forms of the Kutas are four each. These are definitely from Mithyatva to the A-purvakarana Guna-sthana. For this reason, four Kutas are mentioned here. The formation of the forms of the Kutas is as follows:

Kuta of Mithyatva with Ananta-anubandhi:
A-rati-shoka
2 2-2 1 1
| Ati-shoka
2-2
Jugupsa Hasya-rati
1
Bhaya-Jugupsa Hasya-rati
Veda Kashaya Mithyatva
Veda
4 4 4 4
1
Kashaya Mithyatva
Bhaya
A-rati-shoka
... sa
ti
soka 2.
Hasya-rati
4 4 4 4 Kashaya _ 1 Mithyatva
Mithyatva in the first Kuta, knowing 10 nature-like Udaya-sthana, in the second and third Kuta, knowing 9-9 nature-like Udaya-sthana, in the fourth Kuta, knowing 8 nature-like Udaya-sthana. In this way, these four Kutas are knowing the Mithyatva Guna-sthana with Ananta-anubandhi, and in these four Kutas, removing Mithyatva, the four Kutas are knowing the Sasadana Guna-sthana.

Kutas of Sasadana Guna-sthana:
Hasya-rati
Hasya-rati
2 2-2 1 1 1 4 4 4 4
Bhaya-Jugupsa A-rati-shoka
Veda Kashaya
1 2-2 1 1 1 4 4 4 4
Jugupsa A-rati-shoka
Veda Kashaya
Hasya-rati
Hasya-rati
2-2
A-rati-shoka
2-2 1 1 1 4 4 4 4
Bhaya A-rati-shoka
Veda Kashaya
4
4
4
4 

Page #493:
---------------------------
Gommatasar Karmakanda-454
Kashaya

Instead of Mithyatva, write Samyagmithyatva and instead of writing four Kashayas, write only 33, because in one time, the arising of anger in a being is in four forms: Anantanubandhi, etc. In these Kutas, there are only three forms without Anantanubandhi Kashaya. Similarly, know the arising of Mana, etc. These four Kutas are to be known in the Mishragunasthan.

Kutas of Mishragunasthan:
2 Bhaya-Jugupsa | 1 Bhaya | 1 Jugupsa | 0 Rati-Hasya | 2-2 Arati-Shoka | 2-2 | 2-2 Veda | 3333 | 1 Samyagmithyatva |

In the Kutas of Vedakasamyagdristi, instead of Samyagmithyatva, write Samyaktva-Prakriti. These four Kutas are to be known in the Aviragunasthan with Vedakasamyaktva.

Kutas related to Asanyatgunasthan of Vedakasamyaktva:
2 Bhaya-Jugupsa | 1 Bhaya | 1 Jugupsa | Hasya-Rati | 2-2 Arati-Shoka | 2-2 | 2-2 Veda | 1 | 1 | 1 Kashaya | 3333 | Anantanubandhi | 3333 | 3333 | Samyaktva | 1

In the Kutas of Deshasanyatgunasthan, which are present in the Vedakasamyaktvasahita, write two Kashayas in place of Kashaya, because in Deshasanyatgunasthan, there is no arising of Anantanubandhi and Apratyakhyan Kashaya, they are not found.

Kutas of Deshasanyatgunasthan with Vedakasamyaktva:
Bhaya-Jugupsa | 1 Bhaya | 1 Jugupsa | Hasya-Rati | 2-2 Arati-Shoka | Veda | 1 | 1 | 1 Kashaya | 2 | 2 | 2 | 2 | Pratyakhyan and Samyaktva | 1 Sanchalan 

Page #494:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-455
Reducing the Pratikyanakshaya in the Kutas of Vedakasamyaktva-inclusive Pramatta-Apramatta Gunasthanas and writing one Kshaya in place of two Kshayas.
Kutas of Vedakasamyaktva-inclusive Pramatta-Apramatta Gunasthanas
2 Bhaya-Jugupsa 1 Bhaya | 1 Jugupsa Hasya-Rati 2-2 Arati-Shoka 2-2. 2-2
2-2 111 Ved Kshaya 1 1 1 1 Sanchalan
Samyaktva
In the A-purvakaran Gunasthan, reducing the Samyaktva Rishi results in the War Kutas... . . . .
2 Bhaya-Jugupsa 1 Bhaya. 1 Jugupsa Hasya-Rati 2-2 Arati-Shoka . 2-
2 2 -2
2-2 1 1 1
Ved Kshaya 1 1 1 1 Sajwalan
Thus, from Mithyatva to A-purvakaran Gunasthan, there are four Kutas according to the rule of four. Here, the Vyuchchitti of Hasya-adi Kshaya has occurred, therefore, in the first part of the A-nivrittikaran Gunasthan, there is one Kuta of one Kshaya in the four Kshayas of Sajwalan form, one Kuta of one Ved in the three Veds, and reducing the Ved in the second part, there is one Kuta of one Kshaya in the four Sajwalan forms. Reducing the Krodha in the third part, there is one Kuta of one Kshaya in the three Sajwalan Kshayas, and reducing the Mana Kshaya in the fourth part, there is one Kuta of one Kshaya in the two Sanchalan Kshayas. Reducing the Maya Kshaya in the fifth part, there is one Kuta of one Kshaya in the Badar Sanchalan Lobha.
Kutas related to A-nivrittikaran Gunasthan
First Part
Second Part. Third Part | Fourth Part Fifth Part 111 Ved 1111 Kshaya | 1111. 111. 11 

Page #495:
---------------------------
## Gomaṭamā Karmakāṇḍa - 2: 66

... ... ... ... ... In the Sūkṣma-sāmprāya-guṇasthāna, there is only one Kūṭa, which is the arising of Sūkṣma-lobha.

**Kūṭa of Sūkṣma-sāmprāya**

Thus, the arising place of the Mohaniya Karma, which is in the form of Kūṭa, is said to be.

Then, in the Mithyātva, Asanyata, Deśa-sanyata, Pramatta and Apramatta-guṇasthānas, it is specifically stated:

**Aṇasaṁjojidasaṁme, Micchaṁ Patte ṇ Āvalitti Aṇam.
Uvasamakhaīye Samma, ṇ Hi Taththavi Cāri Ṭhāṇāṇi ||478||**

**Meaning:** The Mithyātva-guṇasthāna arises from the arising of Mithyātva-karma of a Vedaka or Upaśama-samyagdṛṣṭi, whose Kṣaya, which is Ananta-anubandhi, has been disjoined. Until the time of its Bandhāvali or Achalāvali, the Ananta-anubandhi does not arise. And although it was Ananta-anubandhi before, now it has been disjoined, therefore, until the time of its Āvali-pramāṇa, the Ananta-anubandhi does not arise. In this regard, know the four Kūṭas of Mithyādṛṣṭi, which are devoid of Ananta-anubandhi.

**Kūṭas of Mithyātva-guṇasthāna devoid of Ananta-anubandhi**

**Bhaya-Jugupṣā Hāsya-Rati 2-2 Arati-Śoka 2-2
2-2
Ved. 111. Kṣaya 3 3 3 3 Anan.bandhi Rahi.**

**1 Mithyātva:** In these, know the arising place of the first Kūṭa as nine Prakriti-rūpa, the second and third as eight Prakriti-rūpa, and the fourth part as seven Prakriti-rūpa. And in Upaśama-samyaktva and Kṣayika-samyaktva, the Samyaktva-prakriti does not arise. The Samyaktva-prakriti arises only in Vedaka-samyaktva. Therefore, know the four-four Kūṭas, which are with Samyaktva-mohaniya, that are before Asanyata, Deśa-sanyata, Pramatta and Apramatta-sanyata, in relation to Vedaka-samyaktva. In all those Kūṭas, when the Samyaktva-prakriti is reduced, there are four-four Kūṭas in Asanyata, Deśa-sanyata, Pramatta, Apramatta-guṇasthāna, in relation to Upaśama and Kṣayika-samyaktva. 

Page #496:
---------------------------
## Hasyarati - Veda - Kashaya

**Hasyarati**
**Veda**
**Kashaya**
**Hasyarati**
**Veda**
**Kashaya**
**Hasyarati**
**Veda**
**Kashaya**
2
2-2
1 1 1
3 3 3 3
2
2-2
1 1 1
2222
Gommatsar Karmakanda - 457
'Kuta of Asanyata Gunasthanas without Veda Samyaktv
2
2-2
1 1 1
1 111
Bhaya - Jugupsa Arati Shoka
1
2-2
1 11
3 3 3 3
Pratyakhyan
Va Sanjwalan
1
2-2
1 11
2222
Bhaya
1 Jugupsa
Anantanu bandhi Kashaya rahit
Kuta of Deshasanyata Gunasthanas without Veda Samyaktv
Bhaya - Jugupsa Arati Shoka
1
2-2
111
Sanjwalan 1111
2-2
111
3 3 3 3
Bhaya 1 Jugupsa'
2-2
Kuta of Prammatta and Aprammatta Gunasthanas without Veda Samyaktv
Bhaya 1 Jugupsa
Bhaya - Jugupsa Arati Shoka
2-2
111
1111
111
2222
Puvvillilesuvi Milide, Ad Chauu Chattari Chadu Su Ahev. Chattari Doni Ekvam, Thana Micchadisumante. || 479 ||
0
2-2
1 11
3 3 3 3
0
2-2
1 11
2222
0
2-2
1 11
1 1 1 1
Artha - (In Gatha 478) The mentioned Kutas are combined with the previously mentioned Kutas (in Gatha 477) resulting in 8 Kutas in Mithyatva Gunasthan, 4 each in Sasadan and Misra Gunasthan, 88 in Asanyatadi four Gunasthanas, 4 in A-purvakaran Gunasthan, 2 in Anivrittikaran Gunasthan and 9 in Sukshma Samparaya Gunasthan. (For detailed explanation, refer to the following Sandristi).
1. Micche Ad Chauu Chauu Dussu Tado Chauss Havanti Ahev. Chattari Appave Vi Ya Udayadvanaani Mohhammi. || 1. Pra. Pan. San. Pu. 444
Gatha 395. 

Page #497:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-458
Gunasthan
Sasadan
Misra | Avirat
Deshavist
Praman | Apraman
Apuvrakaran
Anivrittikaran
Sukshmasampray
- . | Mithyatva
According to Gatha 477, Udayasthan
।९।८।८
8
।८।
6
According to Gatha 478, Udayasthan
|8
0
Jod
Note- Anivrittikaran Gunasthan has 5 parts, its Udayasthan are 2-1-1-1-1, but in the above description, it is written in short as 2-1.
_ Further, the Apunaruksthans are called Dasanavanavadi Chautiyativana Navatthasagasagaadi Chauu. Thana Chaadi Tiyan Cha Ya, Chadubeesgada Apuvvoti. ||480||
Meaning- In Mithyatva Gunasthan, there are Dashaadi Prakriti-shaped Udayasthan, i.e., 10 Prakriti-shaped, 9 Prakriti-shaped, 8 Prakriti-shaped, and 7 Prakriti-shaped. In Sasadan and Misra Gunasthan, there are 9-8 and 7 Prakriti-shaped, in Asanyatta Gunasthan, there are 9-8-7 and 6 Prakriti-shaped. In Deshasanyata, there are 8-7-6 and 5 Prakriti-shaped. In Pramatta
and Apramatta Gunasthan, there are 7-6-5 and 4 Prakriti-shaped, in Apuvrakaran Gunasthan, there are 6-5-4 Prakriti-shaped Udayasthan, all these places are combined with 24-24 Bhangas. In the 5 Gunasthan from Mithyatva onwards, the Apunaruksthans mentioned, even though some of them have the same number, there is Apunarukshtana due to the difference in Prakriti. For example, 9-9 Prakriti-shaped places are many, but the Prakritis found in them are different, hence there is Apunarukshtana, because the places in Mithyatva Gunasthan are with Mithyatva Prakriti, in Sasadan Gunasthan, 

Page #498:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda - 459
Anantanubandhi prakriti are present with the mixed-guna-sthana, samyag-mithyatva prakriti are present with the asanyata-guna-sthana, samyaktva prakriti are present with the desasanayata-guna-sthana and there are apraatyakhyanakshaya-rahita sthana in the desasanayata-guna-sthana. In this way, the difference in prakriti should be known without repetition.
One, six, eleven, nine and three. These twenty-four are with twenty-four bhangas. ||481||
Meaning - In all the guna-sthana, there are one sthana with ten prakriti, six sthana with nine prakriti, eleven-eleven sthana with eight, seven and six prakriti, nine sthana with five prakriti and three sthana with four prakriti. All these sthana are with twenty-four-twenty-four bhangas and there are twenty-four bhangas of one sthana with two prakriti and eleven bhangas of one sthana with one prakriti.
Special Meaning - The above one sthana with ten prakriti is only in the mithyatva-guna-sthana, the six sthana with nine prakriti are three in the mithyatva-guna-sthana (two in the first kutas and one in the last kutas), one-one in the first kutas of the sasadan, misra and asanyata-guna-sthana and one in the last kutas of the sasadan, misra and asanyata-guna-sthana, thus there are six sthana in total. Out of the eleven sthana with eight prakriti, there are three sthana in the mithyatva-guna-sthana (one in the first kutas and two in the last kutas), two-two in the sasadan and misra-guna-sthana, three in the asanyata-guna-sthana (two in the first kutas and one in the last kutas) and one in the first kutas of the desasanayata-guna-sthana, thus there are eleven sthana with eight prakriti. Out of the eleven sthana with seven prakriti, there is one sthana in the last kutas of the mithyatva-guna-sthana, one-one sthana in the sasadan and misra-guna-sthana, three sthana in the asanyata-guna-sthana (one in the first kutas and two in the last kutas), three sthana in the desasanayata-guna-sthana (two in the first kutas and one in the last kutas) and one-one sthana in the pramatta-aprammatta-guna-sthana, thus there are eleven sthana with seven prakriti. Out of the eleven sthana with six prakriti, there is one sthana in the last kutas of the asanyata-guna-sthana, one sthana in the first kutas of the desasanayata-guna-sthana, two sthana in the last kutas of the desasanayata-guna-sthana, thus there are three sthana, two-two sthana in the first kutas of the pramatta-aprammatta-guna-sthana, one-one sthana in the last kutas of the pramatta-aprammatta-guna-sthana, thus there are three-three sthana and one sthana in the apuurvakarana-guna-sthana, thus there are eleven sthana with six prakriti. Out of the nine sthana with five prakriti, there is one sthana in the last kutas of the desasanayata-guna-sthana, one-one sthana in the first kutas of the pramatta-aprammatta-guna-sthana, two-two sthana in the last kutas of the pramatta-aprammatta-guna-sthana, thus there are three-three sthana and two sthana in the apuurvakarana-guna-sthana, thus there are nine sthana with five prakriti. Out of the three sthana with four prakriti, there is one-one sthana in the last kutas of the pramatta-aprammatta-guna-sthana and one sthana in the apuurvakarana-guna-sthana, thus there are three sthana.
+
1.
"One, six, eleven, nine and three. These twenty-four are with twenty-four bhangas, twelve, two, five and one." “Pra.Pan.San.Pri.442.” 

Page #499:
---------------------------
## Gommatasara Karmakanda - 460

There are 24 bhangas in each of the above mentioned places. In the 10 places of the nature-form of the arising place, there are 12 bhangas because the arising of the four kshayas, starting with anger, happens with each of the four vedas. In these 12 bhangas, multiplying by the qualities of laughter-attraction or aversion-sorrow, there are 24 bhangas. Similarly, in other places, there are 24 bhangas each, and there are 24 bhangas in one place of two nature-forms and 11 bhangas in one place of one nature-form. Further, the rules for the bhangas of the places of two and one nature-forms are stated as follows:

**Udayatthanaṁ doṇhaṁ, paṇabandhe hodi doṇhamekasssā.
Catuvihabandhaṭṭhāṇe, seseseṁ haṁve ṭhāṇaṁ. ||482||**

**Meaning:** In the non-annihilation-making guna-sthana, where there is bondage of five natures, in the first part, there is the arising of two natures, namely kshaya and veda. In the second part, where there is bondage of four natures, for a certain time, there is the arising of two natures, namely one veda and one kshaya. Thus, in both of these, there is the arising of one nature each from the three vedas and the four burning kshayas, resulting in a place of two nature-forms. And in the places of bondage of four, three, two, and one nature, and in the place of non-bondage, there is the arising of one kshaya each from the four, three, two, one, and one burning kshayas respectively, resulting in one nature-form arising place each. Therefore, there are 4, 3, 2, 1, and 1 bhangas there. Thus, there are 11 bhangas in one nature-form arising place, 24 bhangas in two nature-form arising place, and a total of 24+11=35 bhangas.

**Special Meaning:** In the non-annihilation-making, due to the arising of two, there is the arising of one each of the three vedas and four burning kshayas in the parts of the non-annihilation-making of five-bondage and four-bondage, resulting in a place of two nature-forms. There, the four burning kshayas, namely anger, pride, deceit, and greed, multiplied by the three vedas, result in 12 bhangas. Two times twelve, twelve, and twelve, i.e., 5, 4. That is, in the non-annihilation-making guna-sthana, there are 12 and 12 bhangas in the place of bondage of two natures and five natures, and 12 bhangas in the place of bondage of four natures, resulting in a total of 24 bhangas. Further, this is explained in detail in four gatha-sutras:

**Aṇiyaṭṭikaraṇapaḍhamā, saṇḍhitthīṇaṁ ca sarisa udayaddhā.
Tatto muhuttaṁte, kamaso purisādiudayaddhā. ||483||**

**Meaning:** From the first time of the first part of the non-annihilation-making guna-sthana to the end time of the veda part, the time of arising of the neuter veda and the female veda is the same. And from that, the time of arising of the male veda and the four burning kshayas, starting with anger, is to be known as more by an inner muhurta, an inner muhurta, respectively.

**21**

**1. Pra. Pa. Sa. Pri. 328.** 

Page #500:
---------------------------
-
-
-
-
Gommatasara Karmakanda-461: When a being ascends the श्रेणी (stages of spiritual progress) with the उदय (arising) of पुरुषवेद (male karma), the बंधव्युच्छित्ति (cessation of binding) and उदयव्युच्छित्ति (cessation of arising) of पुरुषवेद occur simultaneously. Or, as indicated by the चकार (conjunction), the बंधव्युच्छित्ति occurs at the द्विचरमसमय (second extreme point) of उदय. When a being ascends the श्रेणी with the उदय of स्त्रीवेद (female karma) and नपुंसकवेद (neuter karma), the बंधव्युच्छित्ति of पुरुषवेद occurs at the द्विचरमसमय of both (स्त्री-नपुंसक) वेद. Or, पुरुषवेद remains bound until the चरमसमय (extreme point) of the सवेदभाग (portion of karma).

Special Meaning: When a being ascends the क्षपकश्रेणी (stage of spiritual progress) with the उदय of क्रोधसंजलण (agitation of anger) and पुरुषवेद, the पुरुषवेद remains bound for a period of two आवली (units of time) less than one समय (unit of time) at the चरमसमय of the सवेदभाग. This is because the being has destroyed the old karma related to पुरुषवेद, which was present in the सत्ता (existence) of पुरुषवेद, along with the six नोकषाय (types of passions) at the द्विचरमसमय of the सवेदभाग. Therefore, the जघन्य (inferior) and उत्कृष्ट (superior) time of the five प्रकृतिक स्थान (natural states) is two आवली less than one समय. This shows that the बंधव्युच्छित्ति of पुरुषवेद occurs at the द्विचरमसमय of उदय.

The बंध (binding) of the twelve प्रकृति (natural states) in the first part of the अनिवृत्तिकरणगुणस्थान (stage of non-return) is due to two प्रकृति-रूप उदयस्थान (stages of arising). The भंग (destruction) of these twelve प्रकृति is due to four कषाय (passions) and three वेद (karmas). In the second part of the नवम गुणस्थान (ninth stage of spiritual progress), the बंध of four प्रकृति occurs. There, too, the भंग of twelve प्रकृति is due to two प्रकृति-रूप उदयस्थान for one समय. Thus, the भंग of twenty-four प्रकृति is due to two प्रकृति-रूप उदयस्थान in two बधस्थान (stages of binding).

In the मायालोहाणियहिभाग (stage of the subtle body), the भंग of four प्रकृति is due to one तिदुग (threefold) उदय, while the भंग of one प्रकृति is due to one सुहुमे (subtle) उदय.

[1. Jayadhaval, Vol. 2, pp. 234-235] [2. Jayadhaval, Vol. 2, p. 240 and Jayadhaval, 14/117] [3. Jayadhaval, Vol. 2, p. 243] 

Page #501:
---------------------------
## Gommatasara Karmakanda-462

**Meaning:** From the second part of the Anivrittikaran Gunasthan to the Sukshmasamparaya Gunasthan, there are 11 bhangas (breaks) in relation to the kshayas (passions).

**Specific Meaning:** In the four parts of the Anivrittikaran Gunasthan, which are the stages of arising of anger, pride, deceit, and greed, there are four, three, two, and one types of bondage respectively. In these, there are 4, 3, 1, and 1 angas (parts) respectively in relation to the change of kshayas. In the Sarathguga Gunasthan, there is one bhang in the stage of arising of subtle greed, which is free from the bondage of mohaniya karma. Further, the number of all the stages of arising and the types of natures found in them are mentioned.

**Verse 487:**

**Meaning:** In the 1283 stages of arising of mohaniya karma in the Gunasthanas and in the 8507 types of natures of those stages, the animate and inanimate beings of the world are deluded.

**Specific Meaning:** In the Gunasthanas, there are 10 types of natures in one stage, 9 types of natures in six stages, 8-7 and 6 types of natures in 11-11 stages, 5 types of natures in nine stages, 4 types of natures in three stages, and 2 types of natures in one stage. These are all 53 stages of arising. And in each of these stages, there are 24-24 bhangas (53 x 24 = 1272), and there are 11 bhangas in the stage of one type of nature. Thus, (1272 + 11) all 1283 bhangas are the stages of arising. The types of natures found in these stages are as follows:

* One stage with 10 types of natures: 10 types of natures
* Six stages with 9 types of natures: 9 x 6 = 54 types of natures
* Eleven stages with 8 types of natures: 8 x 11 = 88 types of natures
* Eleven stages with 7 types of natures: 7 x 11 = 77 types of natures
* Eleven stages with 6 types of natures: 6 x 11 = 66 types of natures
* Nine stages with 5 types of natures: 5 x 9 = 45 types of natures
* Three stages with 4 types of natures: 4 x 3 = 12 types of natures
* One stage with 2 types of natures: 2 x 1 = 2 types of natures

These all together make 10 + 54 + 88 + 77 + 66 + 45 + 12 + 2 = 354 types of natures. Multiplying these by 24 bhangas, we get 354 x 24 = 8496. Adding the 11 types of natures of the one type of nature stage with 51 bhangas, we get 8496 + 11 = 8507, which is the total number of types of natures.

**Types of Natures:** 10 18 7 6 5 4 2
**Stages:** 1 6 11 11 11 9 3 1 

Page #502:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-463
Further, the number of Apunaruka (non-repetitive) places and the number of natures found in them are stated as follows:
"One, six, eleven, ten, seven, four, and one are Apunaruka."
These are twenty-four bhangas (divisions) for each of these forty places. There are twelve bhangas for the two-nature place and five bhangas for the one-nature place.
Meaning: One place with ten natures, six places with nine natures, eleven places with eight natures, ten places with seven natures, seven places with six natures, four places with five natures, and one place with four natures are Apunaruka.
Special Meaning: The places with ten, nine, and eight natures are the same as before, but there is a special feature in the places with seven natures and below, which is mentioned here.
Previously, eleven places with seven natures were mentioned, but here only ten places with seven natures are mentioned. The reason for this is that in the previously mentioned eleven places, the two places with seven natures related to the Prammatta-Aprammatta Gunasthanas (states of virtue and vice) of the Vedaka Samyagdrishti (perfect seer) with Samyaktva (right faith) in the first Kutas (stages) were the same, so they are considered repetitive and only one is taken here, hence ten places are mentioned.
Similarly, previously eleven places with six natures were mentioned, but here only seven places are mentioned. This is because in the previously mentioned eleven places, the two Kutas related to the Prammatta-Aprammatta Gunasthanas of the Vedaka Samyaktva in the first Kutas with six natures were the same, so two Kutas are taken out of four, and the remaining two Kutas are considered repetitive and reduced. Also, the one Kuta each related to the Prammatta-Aprammatta Gunasthanas of the six-nature place in the previous Kutas without Vedaka Samyaktva are the same as the six-nature Kutas of the Apurvakarana Gunasthanas, so two Kutas are not taken here due to repetition. Thus, by leaving out four repetitive places related to four Kutas, only seven places with six natures are mentioned here.
Similarly, previously nine places with five natures were mentioned, but here only four places are mentioned. This is because in the previously mentioned nine places, one Kuta each related to the Pramatta-Aprammatta Gunasthanas of the Vedaka Samyaktva in the first Kutas was mentioned, but due to repetition, only one is taken here. Also, in the previous Kutas without Vedaka Samyaktva, one Kuta related to the Desasanayata Gunasthanas, two Kutas each related to the Prammatta and Aprammatta Gunasthanas, and two Kutas related to the Apurvakarana Gunasthanas, making a total of seven Kutas. In these seven Kutas, the two Kutas each related to the Prammatta-Aprammatta Gunasthanas are the same as the two Kutas of the Apurvakarana Gunasthanas, so four places related to four Kutas are reduced. Also, one repetitive Kuta is left out from the Kutas with Vedaka Samyaktva, so five places related to five Kutas are reduced. Thus, only four places with five natures remain.
Similarly, previously three places with four natures were mentioned, but...
1. "One, six, eleven, ten, seven, four, and one. There are twelve bhangas for two, and four for one." Jayadhaval Pu. 105. 5radha.pu. 15, p. 82 also see. 

Page #503:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-464 Here only one is taken, the reason for this is that in the past, the four nature forms which were called three places, were all the same, so two repeated places were reduced. In those where the nature forms are the same, the repeated places are reduced, the total of the remaining places is 40, and each place has 24-24 bhangas combined, so multiplying 40 places by 24 bhangas gives 40x24-960, in these, from the aforementioned 24 bhangas of the two nature form place, 12 repeated bhangas are reduced, leaving 12, so combining them, and from the previously mentioned 11 bhangas of one nature form place, six repeated bhangas are reduced, leaving 5 bhangas, combining them gives 960+12+5=977 bhangas. The number of nature forms found in these 977 bhangas is called
Navasayastattarihi, Thanaviyappehi Moheda Jiwa.
Igidalunattarisayapyadiviappehi Nadava. ||489|| Meaning- In this way, all the beings of the three worlds are deluded by the 977 places and the 6941 nature forms found in them.
Special Meaning- The 977 bhangas mentioned in the previous verse are as follows- ten nature forms in one place, 10, nine nature forms in six places, 54, eight nature forms in eleven places, 88, seven nature forms in ten places, 70, six nature forms in seven places, 42, five nature forms in four places, 20, four nature forms in one place, 4, adding these gives 288 nature forms, multiplying these by 24 bhangas gives 288x24-6912 nature forms, and the 12-12 bhangas of the two nature form place are counted as one nature form, so 24 bhangas, and the five bhangas of one nature form place, thus these 29 forms are added, giving 6912+29-6941 forms.
Further, the arising places of the deluding karma and their nature forms are called in the guna places, in relation to their use, etc. -
Udayatthanam Payadin, Sagasagauvajoga Joga Aadihi.
Gunayitta Melavide, Padasanka Payadisankha Ya ||490|| Meaning- 'Pushpillesuviamilide' etc. the number of arising places mentioned in verse 479, and the number of nature forms of those places, are multiplied by their respective guna places, such as possible use and yoga, etc.
1. "Ettha Savva Bhangasamaaso Etiyo Hoi 976." Jayadh. Pu. 10 p. 53. 

Page #504:
---------------------------
Gommatasar Karmakanda - 465

By multiplying the number of Restraints from words, Restraint from place, Leshya and Samyaktva, one should know the number of places of arising and the number of natures of Mohaniya Karma, as much as is possible.

Mithyatva and Sasadan, these two Gunasthanas have three Ajnana and two Darshan, these five Upayoga. 
Mishra, Asanyata and Deshasanyata, these three Gunasthanas have three Jnana and three Darshan, thus six Upayoga. 
Pramatta, Apramatta, Apurvakaran, Anivrittikaran, Sukshmasampray, Upshantakashay and Kshinakashay, these seven Gunasthanas have four Jnana and three Darshan, these seven Upayoga. 
Sayogi and Aayogi Jinas and Siddhas have only Kevaljnana and Kevaldarshan, these two Upayoga.

**Special Meaning:**

In Mithyatva Gunasthan, there are four places: one place with ten natures, two places with nine natures each, and one place with eight natures. The total number of natures in these places is 36. And, one place with nine natures without Anantanubandhi, two places with eight natures each, and one place with seven natures, these four places have 32 natures. Thus, there are a total of eight places and 68 natures. Multiplying these by five Upayoga, we get 40 places and 340 natures.

In Sasadan Gunasthan, there are four places: one place with nine natures, two places with eight natures each, and one place with seven natures. These four places have 32 natures. Multiplying these by five Upayoga, we get 20 places and 160 natures.

In Mishra Gunasthan, there are four places: one place with nine natures, two places with eight natures each, and one place with seven natures. These four places have 32 natures. Multiplying these by six Upayoga, we get 24 places and 192 natures.

In Asanyata Gunasthan, in the first Kut with Vedaksamyaktva, there are four places: one place with nine natures, two places with eight natures each, and one place with seven natures. These four places have 32 natures. In the last Kut without Vedaksamyaktva, there are four places: one place with eight natures, two places with seven natures each, and one place with six natures. These four places have 28 natures. Combining these four places, we get 8 places and 60 natures. Multiplying these by six Upayoga, we get 48 places and 360 natures.

In Deshasanyata Gunasthan, in the first Kut with Vedaksamyaktva, there are four places: one place with eight natures, two places with seven natures each, and one place with six natures. These four places have 28 natures. In the last Kut without Vedaksamyaktva, there are four places: one place with seven natures, two places with six natures each, and one place with five natures. These four places have 24 natures. 

Page #505:
---------------------------
There are 466 Maammatsar Karmakanda and they have 24 natures. Thus, there are eight places by combining the aforementioned four places and these four places. And by combining 24 natures in the aforementioned 28 natures, there are 52 natures. Multiplying these by 6 uses, there are 48 places and 312 natures. In the Prammat and Aprammat Gunasthan, in the first Kूट with Vedak Samyaktv, there is one place with seven natures, two places with six natures, and one place with five natures, thus four places and 24 natures. In the last Kूट without Vedak Samyaktv, there is one place with six natures, two places with five natures, and one place with four natures, thus four places and 20 natures. Combining these, there are 8 places and 44 natures. Multiplying these by seven uses, there are 56-56 places and 308-308 natures in the Prammat and Aprammat Gunasthan. In the Apurvakaran Gunasthan, there is one place with six natures, two places with five natures, and one place with four natures, thus four places and 20 natures. Multiplying these by seven uses, there are 28 places and 140 natures. By adding the number of all the places and natures mentioned above from the Mithyatva Gunasthan to the Apurvakaran Gunasthan (40+2.0 + 24.+48+48+56+56+28= ) 320 places and (340+160+192+360 +312+308+308+140= } 2520 natures are known. Multiplying all these places and natures by 24 bhangas (320424) 7680 are the bhangas of the Udayasthanas and 2120424:50880 natures.
In the Anivrittikaran Gunasthan, one place with two natures is multiplied by five uses, resulting in 7 places and 14 natures. Multiplying these by 12 bhangas, the number of places becomes 84 and the number of natures becomes 168. In the Avedbhaga of the Anivrittikaran Gunasthan, there is one place with one nature. Multiplying these by seven uses, there are 7 places and 7 natures. Multiplying these again by 4 bhangas, there are 28 places and 28 natures. In the Sukshmasaparay Gunasthan, there is one place with one nature. Multiplying these by seven uses, there are 7 places and 7 natures. Here, there is only one bhang, so multiplying by it results in 7 places and 7 natures. Thus, the number of places and natures related to the Anivrittikaran Gunasthan and the Sukshmasampray Gunasthan (84+28+7=159 places) (168+ 28+7=203 natures) are known. These should be added to the places and natures mentioned above up to the Apurvakaran Gunasthan.
5. Pra.Pan.San.Pu. 465-466 Matha 362 ki team.। 2. Pra.Pan.Sa.Pu. 466 Gatha 363 and Tika.

Page #506:
---------------------------
## Gommatasara Karmakanda - 467

This section discusses which types of knowledge (**upayoga**) are found in which **guna sthana** (stages of spiritual development):

**Mithyatva Guna Sthana:**
- **Chakshudarshan**, **Achakshudarshan**, **Kumati**, **Kushruta**, and **Vibhang** knowledge.

**Sasadan Guna Sthana:**
- **Chakshudarshan**, **Achakshudarshan**, **Kumati**, **Kushruta**, and **Vibhang** knowledge.

**Mishra Guna Sthana:**
- **Chakshudarshan**, **Achakshudarshan**, and **Mishrarupa** (mixed) knowledge.

**Asanyata Guna Sthana:**
- **Chakshudarshan**, **Achakshudarshan**, **Avadhi Darshan**, **Mati**, **Shruta**, and **Avadhi** knowledge.

**Deshasanyata Guna Sthana:**
- **Chakshudarshan**, **Achakshudarshan**, **Avadhi Darshan**, **Mati**, **Shruta**, and **Avadhi** knowledge.

**Pramatta Guna Sthana:**
- **Chakshudarshan**, **Achakshudarshan**, **Avadhi Darshan**, **Mati**, **Shruta**, **Avadhi**, and **Man:paryaya** knowledge.

**Apramatta Guna Sthana:**
- **Chakshudarshan**, **Achakshudarshan**, **Avadhi Darshan**, **Mati**, **Shruta**, **Avadhi**, and **Man:paryaya** knowledge.

**Apuvrakaran Guna Sthana:**
- **Chakshudarshan**, **Achakshudarshan**, **Avadhi Darshan**, **Mati**, **Shruta**, **Avadhi**, and **Man:paryaya** knowledge.

**Anivrittikaran Guna Sthana:**
- **Chakshudarshan**, **Achakshudarshan**, **Avadhi Darshan**, **Mati**, **Shruta**, **Avadhi**, and **Man:paryaya** knowledge.

**Sukshmasamparaya Guna Sthana:**
- **Chakshudarshan**, **Achakshudarshan**, **Avadhi Darshan**, **Mati**, **Shruta**, **Avadhi**, and **Man:paryaya** knowledge.

**Upashantakshaya Guna Sthana:**
- **Chakshudarshan**, **Achakshudarshan**, **Avadhi Darshan**, **Mati**, **Shruta**, **Avadhi**, and **Man:paryaya** knowledge.

**Kshina Moh Guna Sthana:**
- **Chakshudarshan**, **Achakshudarshan**, **Avadhi Darshan**, **Mati**, **Shruta**, **Avadhi**, and **Man:paryaya** knowledge.

**Sayogkevali Guna Sthana:**
- **Keval Darshan** and **Keval Jnana** (omniscient perception and knowledge).

**Ayogkevali Guna Sthana:**
- **Keval Darshan** and **Keval Jnana** (omniscient perception and knowledge).

This table shows the number of **guna sthana** and **prakriti** (nature) by multiplying the number of **upayoga** (knowledge) with the number of **mohaniya** (obstacles) in each **guna sthana**. 

Page #507:
---------------------------
##  

**1**
**Gunasthan**
Mithyatva
Sasadan
Mishra
Asanyata
Deshasanyata
Pramatta
Apramatta
Apuvrakaran
Jod
Uday
Sthan San.
8
4
4
8
4
52
Anivrittikaran 1
Pratham Bhag
Anivrittikaran
Shesh Bhag Sukshmasampray 1
1. Pan.San. Pu. 467.
1
Gommatsar Karmakand - 468
Prakriti Sankhya Upayog Sankhya
68-36+32
32
32
32+28=60 Terificatio 28+ 24 =52
24+20= 44
24+20-44
20
352
2
1
5
5
6
6
7
'7
7
49
7
7
Udavasthan x
Upayog
845-40
4×5 = 20
4x6 = 24
1xE=X1
8×6 =48
_847= 56
8×7=56
4x7 = 28
2. Dekho Pra. Pan.San. Pu. 466 Ga. 364.
320
?x=19
1 x 7 = 7
1 × 7 = 7
Prakritix Upayog
68×5 = 340
3245=160
32x6-192
360
52x6= 312
4447= 308
44x7 - 308
2047 140
2120
2x7=14
147 =7
Aage Mohaniyakarma ke Udayasthanon ke Bhedon ki Sarvansankhya ka Praman kahte hain
2NavanUdisagasayahi SattaSahasSappamanamudayass. Thanaviyappe Janasu, Uvajoge Mohaniyass. ||492.||
1×7= 7
Arth - Is prakar gunakara karne par upayog ki apeksha Mohaniyakarma ke Udayasthanon ke sarvbhed 7799 hue, aisa janna chahiye.
Ab upayog ki apeksha Mohaniyakarma ke Udayasthanon mein pai jane wali prakrition ki sankhya kahte hain 

Page #508:
---------------------------
**Meaning:**

One should know the 51,083 (51,083) types of mohaniya karma arising from the use of the support of the use.

**Commentary:**

**Gommatasar Karmakanda - 469**

**493**
Fifty-one thousand and eighty-three, thus arranged in the types, in the use of the mohaniya karma.

**1**
**Gunasthan** | **Use Count** | **Udayapad Count**
------- | -------- | --------
Mithyatva | 68 | 32
Sasadan | 32 | 32
Mishra | 60 | 52
Avirat | 52 | 44
Deshavirat | 44 | 44
Pramattavirat | 20 | 2
Apramattavirat | 2 | 2
Apuurvakaran | 24 | 24
Anivrittikaran | 24 | 24
Anivrittikaran | 24 | 24
Sukshmaparaya | 24 | 24
Sarvapadavrinda | 12 | 4
Gunakara | 24 | 24
Bhang | 8160 | 3840
**Total** | **51083** | **19**

**494**
Thirteen yogas in Mithyatva, Sasadan, and Asanyata Gunasthan, ten in Mishra Gunasthan, nine in Deshasanyata Gunasthan, and seven in Pramatta Gunasthan, without Apramatta, Apuurvakaran, Anivrittikaran, Sukshmasampraya, and seven yogas in Ajoginthan.

**Notes:**

* **Mohaniya Karma:** Karma that binds the soul to the cycle of birth and death.
* **Gunasthan:** Stages of spiritual development.
* **Udayapad:** The place where karma arises.
* **Yoga:** A specific type of karma.
* **Mithyatva:** False belief.
* **Sasadan:** Attachment.
* **Asanyata:** Uncontrolled.
* **Mishra:** Mixed.
* **Deshasanyata:** Controlled in terms of place.
* **Pramatta:** Distracted.
* **Apramatta:** Undistracted.
* **Apuurvakaran:** Karma that has not yet ripened.
* **Anivrittikaran:** Karma that has ripened but is not yet destroyed.
* **Sukshmaparaya:** Subtle karma.
* **Sarvapadavrinda:** All types of karma.
* **Gunakara:** The multiplier of karma.
* **Bhang:** The destruction of karma.
* **Ajoginthan:** The state of being without yoga. 

Page #509:
---------------------------
Gommatasar Karmakanda-470
There are 1-9 Yogas in the seven Gunasthanas of Upshantakashaya and KshinaKashaya, 11 in the Pramatta Gunasthan, 7 Yogas in Sayog Kevali and no Yogas in AYog Kevali.
Special Note- One should know which Yogas are in which Gunasthan from the following table.
Gunasthan
Yoga Number
Special Description
Mithyatva
Sasadan
Mishra
Asanyata Deshasanyata
Pramatta
4 Manoyog, 4 VachanYog, AudarikKayYog, AudarikMishraKayYog, VaikriyaKayYog, VaikriyaMishraKayYog, KarmanKayYog. Above mentioned. 4 Manoyog, 4 VachanYog, AudarikKayYog, . VaikriyaKayYog. As mentioned in Mithyatva Gunasthan. ... 4. Manoyog: 4 VachanYog. And AudarikKayYog. 4 Manoyog, 4 VachanYog, AudarikKayYog, AharakKayYog, AharakMishraKayYog. 4 Manoyog, 4 VachanYog, AudarikKayYog. 4 Manoyog, 4 VachanYog, AudarikKayYog. 4 Manoyog, 4 VachanYog, AudarikKayYog. 4 Manoyog, 4 VachanYog, AudarikKayYog. 4 Manoyog, 4 VachanYog, AudarikKayYog. Satya-AnubhayManoyog, Satya-AnubhayVachanYog, AudarikKayYog, AudarikMishraKayYog and KarmanKayYog.
Aprammatta Apurvakaran Anivritikaran SukshmaSaparay Upshantakashaya KshinaKashaya SayogKevali
AYogKevali
Now we will discuss the Gunasthanas with Yogas related to Athanantar, Aparyapta and Paryapta Avastha.
Micche Sasana Ayada, Pamatta Virada Apunna Jogagada. Punnagada Cha Ya Sese, Punnagade Melida Hodi. ||495|| 

Page #510:
---------------------------
Gommatasar Karmakanda-471

Meaning: In the four Gunasthanas of Mithyatva, Sasadan, Asanyata, and Pramattavirata, the number of places and their natures related to both inadequate and adequate yogas are multiplied by the yogas, resulting in the number of places and natures. In the remaining Gunasthanas, only the places and natures related to adequate yogas are multiplied by the yogas related to adequacy, resulting in the number of places and natures related to adequate yogas in those Gunasthanas.

Specific Meaning: In the Mithyatva Gunastana, there are four places and their 36 natures. Multiplying these by 13 yogas results in 52 places and 468 natures. The Mithyatva Gunastana without Anantanubandhi does not exist in the inadequate state. Therefore, there are 32 natures and 4 places from the previous Kutta. Multiplying these by 10 yogas related to adequacy results in 40 places and 320 natures. Thus, in the Mithyatva Gunastana, the total number of places related to adequacy and inadequacy is 52 + 40 = 92, and the total number of natures is 468 + 320 = 788. In the Sasadan Gunastana, there are four places and 32 natures. Multiplying these by 12 yogas results in 48 places and 384 natures. The reason for multiplying by 12 yogas here is that we will discuss the Vaikriyikamishrakaayayoga separately.

In the Mishra Gunastana, there are four places and 32 natures. Multiplying these by 10 yogas results in 40 places and 320 natures. In the Asanyata Gunastana, there are eight places and 60 natures. Multiplying these by 10 yogas results in 80 places and 600 natures. The reason for multiplying by 10 yogas here is that we will discuss the Audarik-Vaikriyikamishrakaayayoga and Karmankaayayoga separately. In the Deshasanyata Gunastana, there are eight places and 52 natures. Multiplying these by 9 yogas results in 72 places and 468 natures. In the Pramatta and Apramatta Gunasthanas, there are eight places and 44 natures. Therefore, multiplying these places and natures by 9 yogas results in 72 places and 396 natures for both Pramatta and Apramatta Gunasthanas. The reason for multiplying by 9 yogas here is that we will discuss the Aahaarak-Kaayayoga and Aahaarakamishrakaayayoga separately. In the Apurvakarana Gunastana, there are four places and 20 natures. Multiplying these by 9 yogas results in 36 places and 180 natures.

Thus, by multiplying the places and natures by the yogas up to the Apurvakarana Gunastana and adding the total number of places and natures, we get (92 + 48 + 40 + 80 + 72 + 72 + 72 + 36 = ) 512 places and (788 + 384 + 320 + 600 + 468 + 396 + 396 + 180 = ) 3532 natures. Multiplying these places (512) and natures (3532) by 24 bhangas results in 512 x 24 = 12,288 places and 3532 x 24 = 84,768 natures.

1. Pra.Pan.San. Pri. 456 Gatha 344 to Pri. 46: Gatha 354, but there is a difference in the Pramatta Gunastana. 

Page #511:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda - 472

The Avirtti Karan Guna Sthan has one Sthan and two Prakriti in its Saveda Bhag. Multiplying these by 9 Yogas, we get 9 Sthan and 18 Prakriti. Multiplying these by 12 Bhangas, we get 108 Sthan and 216 Prakriti. The Avirtti Karan Guna Sthan has one Sthan and one Prakriti in its Aveda Bhag. Multiplying these by 9 Yogas, we get 9 Sthan and 9 Prakriti. Multiplying these by 4 Bhaktas, we get 36 Sthan and 36 Prakriti. In the Sukshma Samparaya Guna Sthan, one Sthan and one Prakriti are multiplied by 9 Yogas, resulting in 9 Sthan and 9 Prakriti. Multiplying these by 1 Bhang, we get 9 Sthan and 9 Prakriti.

We had previously mentioned that we would discuss these Yogas separately. Now, we will explain the specific details of these Yogas.

Sasan Ayad Pamatte, Veguvviyamiss Tam Cha Kammayiyam. Oralamiss Hare, Adasolladavagg Atthavisasayam. ||496||

Meaning: In the Vaikriya Mishrakaya Yoga of the Sasadan Guna Sthan, there are 64 Sthan, which is the square of eight. In the Vaikriya Mishrakaya Yoga and Karman Kaya Yoga of the Aspat Guna Sthan, there are 256 Sthan, which is the square of sixteen. In the Audarik Mishrakaya Yoga of the Asanyat Guna Sthan, there are 64 Sthan, which is the square of eight. In the Aharak Kaya Yoga and Aharak Mishrakaya Yoga of the Apramat Guna Sthan, there are 128 Sthan.

Specific Meaning: In the Vaikriya Mishrakaya Yoga of the Sasadan Guna Sthan, there are 512 Prakriti in 64 Sthan.

We had previously mentioned four Kutas related to the Sasadan Guna Sthan, and one of them involved the rise of one of the three Vedas. However, here, we need to understand the rise of one of the remaining two Vedas without the Napumsak Veda. Here, there are four Sthan with 32 Prakriti, consisting of one with 9 Prakriti, two with 8 Prakriti, and one with 7 Prakriti. Multiplying these by 16 Bhangas, which are formed by multiplying the four Kashayas, two Vedas, and two pairs of Hasya-Rati and Arati-Shoka, we get 64 Sthan and 512 Prakriti.

In the Vaikriya Mishrakaya and Karman Kaya Yoga related to the Asanyat Guna Sthan, the rise of one of the two Vedas without the Stri Veda is mentioned in the previously mentioned eight Kutas. Therefore, these Kutas have eight Sthan and 60 Prakriti. Multiplying these by 16 Bhangas, which are formed by multiplying the four Kashayas, two Vedas without the Stri Veda, and two pairs of Hasya-Rati and Arati-Shoka, and then multiplying by 2 Yogas, we get 256 Sthan and 1920 Prakriti.

1. Pra. Pan. Sa. Pu. 455, Gatha 342 || 3. Pra. Pan. Sa. Pu. 453, Gatha 339.
2. Pra. Pan. Sa. Pu. 453, Gatha 338. || 4. Pra. Pan. Sa. Pu. 454, Gatha 340. 

Page #512:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-473

There are 64 places and 480 natures. Similarly, in the Audarik Mishra Kaya Yoga related to the Asanyata Guna Sthana, there are three Vedas in each of the eight Kutas, as there are no Stri Veda or Napumsaka Veda. In their place, only one Purusha Veda is to be known. In this way, multiplying the eight places and 60 natures of the eight Kutas by four Kashaya, one Veda, and the aforementioned two pairs, the eight Bhangas formed are multiplied again by one Yoga, resulting in 64 places and 480 natures.

In the Aharaka Kaya Yoga and Aharaka Mishra Kaya Yoga of the Pramatta Sanayata Guna Sthana, multiplying the eight places and 44 natures of the eight Kutas without Stri or Napumsaka Veda by eight Bhangas and then again by two Yogas, namely Aharaka Aharaka Mishra Kaya Yoga, results in 128 places and 704 natures.

**Sasaadan - A concise description of the number of Udaya Sthana and Natures related to Asanyata and Pramatta Guna Sthana in terms of Yoga**

| Yoga | Number | Nature - Yoga | Udaya Sthana x Yoga | Guna Sthana | Udaya Sthana | Nature |
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
| Asanyata | 44 | 32 x 1-32 | 8 x 21660 x 2-127 | 00 | ... | ... |
| Vailiya Mishra | 2 | Vailiya Mishra, Karman 1 | Audarik Mishra 2 | Aharaka Dwik 8 - 2-16 | 44 - 288 | ... |

**Sasaadan**

In these three Guna Sthana, Asanyata, Pramatta, and Sasaavan, the number of Bhangas in relation to Udaya Sthana is as follows:

* **Sasaavan Guna Sthana:** Udaya Sthana 4, Bhangas 16 each, therefore 4 x 4 x 16 = 64
* **Asanyata Guna Sthana:** Udaya Sthana 16, Bhangas 16 each, therefore 16 x 16 = 256
* **Asanyata Guna Sthana:** Udaya Sthana 8, Bhangas 8 each, therefore 8 x 5 x 8 = 64
* **Pramatta Guna Sthana:** Udaya Sthana 16, Bhangas 8 each, therefore 16 x 8 = 128

Total: 512 

Page #513:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-474: Regarding the three Gunasthanas, the number of bhangas in relation to the number of prakritis:

* In the Sasadan Gunasthan, there are 32 prakritis, each with 16 bhangas. Therefore, 32 x 16 = 512.
* In the Asanyata Gunasthan, there are 120 prakritis, each with 16 bhangas. Therefore, 120 x 16 = 1920.
* In the Asanyata Gunasthan, there are 60 prakritis, each with 8 bhangas. Therefore, 60 x 8 = 480.
* In the Pramatta Gunasthan, there are 88 prakritis, each with 8 bhangas. Therefore, 88 x 8 = 704.

The author of the Veda, in the context of the number of prakritis in these Gunasthanas, himself denies the existence of the Napumsaka-Stri Veda:

"Natthi Naunsayavedo, Itthivedo Naunsayitthiduge.
Puvvuttapunnajogagachaduththanesu Janejo." ||497||

Meaning: In the four Gunasthanas that have attained the Aparyapta Yoga, as mentioned earlier, there are no Napumsaka-Stri Vedas. And in the remaining two Gunasthanas, there are also no Napumsaka-Stri Vedas.

Explanation: In the Sasadan Gunasthan, there is no Napumsaka Veda in the Vaikriya-Mishra-Kaya Yoga, because those who are in the Sasadan Gunasthan do not go to hell after death. In the Asanyata Gunasthan, there is no Stri Veda in the Vaikriya-Mishra-Kaya Yoga and the Karman-Kaya Yoga, because those who are in the Asanyata Gunasthan do not become Strivedi after death. In the Asanyata Gunasthan, there are no Stri or Napumsaka Vedas in the Audarika-Mishra-Kaya Yoga, and in the Pramatta Gunasthan, there are no Stri or Napumsaka Vedas in the Aharaka-Aharaka-Mishra-Kaya Yoga, because those who are in the Asanyata Gunasthan are not born as Tiryancha or humans with Napumsaka or Stri Vedas, and those with Stri or Napumsaka Vedas do not have the Aharaka-Aharaka-Mishra-Kaya Yoga. Here, all the Gunasthanas from the Mithyatva Gunasthan to the Apurvakarana Gunasthan should be added together, and then multiplied by 24 bhangas. The result should then be added to the Saveda-Aveda Bhaga of the Anivrittikarana Gunasthan, the 153 Gunasthanas of the Sukshma-Samparaya Gunasthan, and the 552 Gunasthanas of the Sasadan, Asanyata, and Pramatta Gunasthanas.

The number obtained by adding all the Gunasthanas in relation to the Yogas, as described above, is called the Pramana:

"Tevannavasayahibarasahasappamanamudayassa.
Thanaviyappe Janasu Jogam Padi Mohaniyassa." ||498||

Meaning: In this way, the number of Udayasthanas of the Mohaniya Karma, in relation to the Yogas, is 12,953. 

Page #514:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-475 further states the number of distinctions of the natures.
Bidie bigipanmaide. Khatunavaekkam khaattachauro ya.
Chhatte chausunnasa gam, payadiviyappa apunnamhi. ||499|| Meaning- In the Vaikriyaka-Mishra-Kaya-Yoga of the Sasadan-Guna-Sthan, there are 2, 5, 5, i.e., 'Ankanaam Vamato Gati' according to this, 512, in the Vaikriyaka-Mishra and Karman-Kaya-Yoga of the Asanyata-Guna-Sthan, there are 0, 2, 9, 1, i.e., 1920, in the Audarika-Mishra-Kaya-Yoga of the Asanyata-Guna-Sthan, there are zero-eight-four, i.e., 480, and in the Aharaka-Aharaka-Mishra-Kaya-Yoga of the Pramatta-Guna-Sthan, there are four, zero, seven, i.e., 704, distinctions of natures in the form of numbers in the state of incompleteness. These distinctions should be added to the previous distinctions. Now, the number obtained by adding all the distinctions is stated.
Panadalchassayahiyatthasiidosahasamudayassa.
Payadinam parisankha, jogam padi mohaniyassa. ||500|| Meaning- In this way, by adding all the distinctions, the number of natures of the Mohaniya Karma is 88,645 in relation to Yoga, it should be known. Then, the Sthanadis are stated with the support of Samyama.
Terasayaani sattarisatteva ya meli de havantitti.
Thanaviyappe janasu, sanjamalambena mohasssa. ||501|| Meaning- It should be known that in relation to Samyama, there are 1377 distinctions of the Udayasthans of the Mohaniya Karma.
Special Meaning- In relation to the support of Samyama, there are 1377 distinctions of the Udayasthans of the Mohaniya Karma. They are formed in this way- In the Pramatta and Apramatta-Guna-Sthans, there are three Samyamas: Samayika, Chhedopasthapana, and Pariharavishuddhi. Multiplying these by eight-eight Sthans, there are 24-24 Sthans, and multiplying the 44 natures of those Sthans by the three Samyamas, there are 132-132 natures. In the Apurvakarana-Guna-Sthan, there are two Samyamas: Samayika and Chhedopasthapana. Their 4-4 Sthans together make eight Sthans, and 20-20 natures together make 40 natures. Multiplying these and the Sthans and natures of the Pramatta-Apramatta-Guna-Sthans by 24 Bhangas, and multiplying the one Sthan and two natures of the Anavrutti-Karana-Guna-Sthan in the Saveda-Bhaga by two Samyamas, there are two Sthans and four natures. Multiplying these again by 12 Bhangas, and in the Aveda-Bhaga, multiplying the one Sthan and one nature by 

Page #515:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-476
2. There are two places and two natures when multiplied by restraint, these are to be multiplied by four bhangas. In the subtle saṃpārāya, there is one place, one nature, and one restraint, and the bhang is also one. Here, by multiplying the 56 places of the three guna-sthānas of pramatta-apramatta and apūrvakaraṇa by 24, we get 1344, and by adding the 33 places of the saṃved-aved-bhāga of anivṛttikaraṇa and the subtle saṃpārāya guna-sthāna, we get 1377 places. | Guna-sthāna Udayavikalpa | Restraint | Multiplier |
All bhangas Pramatta-saṃyata
576 Apramatta-saṃyata Apūrvakaraṇa Anivṛttikaraṇa Subtle saṃpārāya
All Udayavikalpa
Further, the distinctions of the uday-prakṛtis of mohaniya karma are stated
Tevaṇṇatisadasahiyam', SattaSahassappamāṇamudayassa.
Payadiviyappe jāṇasu, Saṃjamalambheṇa mohass. ||502|| Meaning- One should know that there are 7353 measures of the uday-prakṛtis of mohaniya karma in relation to restraint. (Their detailed description is to be known according to the following sandṛṣṭi) Sandṛṣṭi of the uday-sthānas of mohaniya karma and the prakṛtis found in them in relation to restraint
Prakṛti x Restraint x Bhang 4443 = 1324243168
Pramatta
Guna-sthāna | Uday-sthāna x Restraint - Bhang |
843 - 24424 = 576
843 = 24424 - 576 Apūrvakaraṇa | 442 = 8424 = 192
Apramatta
4443 = 132x24-3168
2042 = 40424 - 960
1. Prā. Paṃ. Saṃ. p. 478.
2. See Prā. Paṃ. Saṃ. p. 480, verse 3901. 

Page #516:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-477
Anivrittikaran | 142 = 2412 = 24. 242 = 4412 = 48 Savedhabhag Avedhabhag 142 = 244 - 8. 142 - 244 = 8 Sukshmasampray | 141 = 145 - 1.
Kulasthan - 1377. Kul Prakrutiya 7353 Ath anantar kis gunasthanmen kaunsi shya hoti hai so kahte hain
Michch Chaukke Chakwam, Desatiye Tinni Honti Suhlessa.
Jogitti Sukkhlessa, Ajogithaanam Alessa Tu ||503|| . Arth - Mithyatva-Sasadan-Mishra and Asanyata Gunasthanmen Chhe Leshya Hoti Hain; Desasanyata, Pramatta and Aprammatta Gunasthan men Tin Shubhleshya Hain Tatha Apurvakaran se Sayogi Gunasthanatak Ek Shukhleshya hi hai evam Ayogi Gunasthanmen Leshya ka Abhav hai.
Uparokt Gathamamen Kathit Leshya ke Ashray se Mohaniyakarma ke Udayasthan aur Prakrutiyon ki Sankhya Do Gathao se Kahte hain
Panchasahassa Besayasattana Udi Havanti Udayass.
Thanaviyappe Janasu, Lessam Padi Mohaniyass. ||504||2 Arth- Leshya ki Apeksha se Mohaniyakarma ke Sthanon ke Bhed 5,297 Hote Hain Aisa He Shishya! Tu Jan.
Attatissahassa, Bennaisaya Honti Sattatisa Ya.
Payadinam Parimanam, Lessam Padi Mohaniyass ||505|| Arth- Leshya ke Ashray se Mohaniyakarma ki Prakrutiyon ka Pariman 38,237 Hota Hai, Aisa Janna Chahiye.
1. Dekho Pra. Pan. San. 1. 470-71. Gatha 372-373. 2. Pra. Pan. San. Pru. 473 Gatha 379 bhi Dekho. 3. Pra. Pan. Sa. Pu. 475 Ga. 386 bhi Dekho. 

Page #517:
---------------------------
## Gommatasara Karmakanda-478:  The Manifestation of Mohaniya Karma's Udayasthanas and Prakritis in Relation to Gunasthanas

**Gunasthanas**

* **Udayasthanas** - Leshya x Bhang
* **Prakritis** - Leshya x Bhang

**Mithyatva**

* 846 - 48424 = 1152 446 = 24424 = 576 446 = 24424 = 576
* Sasadan Mishra Asanyata Deshasanyata
* 846 = 48424 = 1152 843 = 24424 = 576 843 = 24424 = 576 843 = 24424 = 576
* 6846 = 408424 = 9792 3246 - 192424 - 4608 3246 - 192424 - 4608 6046 = 360x24 : 8640 5243 = 156424 = 3744 4443 - 132424 = 3168 4443 = 132424 = . 3168 2041 = 20424

**Pramatta**

* 480
* 141 452 - - 12

**Apramatta**

* Apurvakarana Anivrittikarana Savedhabhaga
* Avedhabhaga Sukshmasamprayaya

**Kulasthanas**

* = 5,297
* **Kul Prakritis** = 38,237

Now, with the support of Samyaktv, the number of Udayasthanas and Prakritis of Mohaniya Karma are described in two verses:

**Verse 506:**

* **Meaning:** Know that with the quality of Samyaktv, there are 1378 types of Udayasthanas of Mohaniya Karma.
* **Note:** In Pra. Pan. Sa. page 481, verse 391, 2530 types are mentioned.

**Verse 507:**

* **Meaning:** With the quality of Samyaktv, the number of Prakritis of Mohaniya Karma is 8026. 

Page #518:
---------------------------
Gommatasar Karmakanda-479
Note- Pra. Pan. San. Pg. 482, Verse 392 mentions the number 15418.
Samyaktvabhang due to the influence of mohaniya karma, the arising place of mohaniya karma and the arising place of the qualities of the prakritis.
Samyaktvabhang due to the nature of samyaktvabhang, asanyata vedakasamyaktva
3241 = 324 x 24 = 768, Aupashamik, Kshayik 442 = 8424 = 192, 28 x 2 = 56424 = 1344, Deshasanyata vedakasamyaktva 441 = 4424 = 16, 28 x 1 = 28424 = 672
Aupamik, Kshayik 442 = 8424 = 592, 2442 = 48424 = 1152, Pramatta vedakasamyaktva 441 = 4424 = 96, 2441 = 24424 = 576
Aupashamik, Kshayik 442 = 8424 = 192, 2042 = 40424 = 960, Apramatta vedakasamyaktva 441 = 4424 = 96, 2445 = 24424 = 576, Aupashamik, Kshayik 442 = 8424 = 192, 2042 = 40424 = 960
Apuurvakaran, Aupashamik, Kshayik 442 = 8424 = 192, 2042 = 40424 = 96, Anivriti, Savedabhag 142 = 2452 = 24, 242 = 4412 = 48, Anivriti, Avedabhag 142 = 244 = 8, 142 = 244, Sukshmasamparaya 142 = 241 = 2, 142 = 245 = 2
Total places = 1378, Total prakritis = 8026, Further, the sattvasthan of mohaniya karma is described in 11 verses.
Atthay sattay chakkay, chadutidugegaadhimani visani.
Teras bareyaram, panadhi egunaayam sattam. ||508||
Meaning- There are 28-27-26-24-23-22-21-13-12-15 and 5 prakriti forms, 11 and 5 prakriti forms, and also one less prakriti from each of the 5 prakriti forms, i.e., 4-3-2 and 1 prakriti forms, 4 places, thus a total of 15 sattvasthan.
Special meaning- 3 prakritis of darshanamohaniya and 25 prakritis of charitramohaniya are the first 
5. Pra. Pan. San. Pg. 320, Verse 33. 

Page #519:
---------------------------
Gommatasar Karmakanda - 480

There are 15 sattva sthana (states of being). 

* **Sattva sthana** is a state of being where the 26th nature (samyagmithyatva) is aroused due to the arousal of the 27th nature (samyaktva mohaniya) out of the 28 natures. This sattva sthana is also characterized by anadi mithyadristi (eternal wrong belief).
* **Sattva sthana** is also a state of being where the 24th nature is present due to the disconnection of the four ananta anubandhi (infinitely connected) out of the 28 natures.
* **Sattva sthana** is also a state of being where the 23rd nature is present due to the destruction of mithyatva (wrong belief) out of the 24 natures.
* **Sattva sthana** is also a state of being where the 22nd nature is present due to the destruction of samyagmithyatva (mixed belief) out of the 23 natures.
* **Sattva sthana** is also a state of being where the 21st nature is present due to the destruction of samyaktva (right belief) out of the 22 natures.
* **Sattva sthana** is also a state of being where the 13th nature is present due to the destruction of the eight madhyama kshaya (intermediate passions) which are apratyakhyana (non-rejection) and pratyakhyana (rejection) out of the 21 natures.
* **Sattva sthana** is also a state of being where the 12th nature is present due to the destruction of one of the two vedas (knowledge) - strived (female) or napumsakaved (neuter) out of the 13 natures.
* **Sattva sthana** is also a state of being where the 11th nature is present due to the destruction of the remaining one of the two vedas (knowledge) - strived (female) or napumsakaved (neuter) out of the 12 natures.
* **Sattva sthana** is also a state of being where the 5th nature is present due to the destruction of the six nokshaya (minor passions) - hasya (laughter), etc. out of the 11 natures.
* **Sattva sthana** is also a state of being where the 4th nature is present due to the destruction of purushaved (male knowledge) out of the 5 natures.
* **Sattva sthana** is also a state of being where the 3rd nature is present due to the destruction of sanjvalan krodha (intense anger) out of the 4 natures.
* **Sattva sthana** is also a state of being where the 2nd nature is present due to the destruction of sanjvalan mana (intense pride) out of the 3 natures.
* **Sattva sthana** is also a state of being where the 1st nature is present due to the destruction of sanjvalan maya (intense delusion) out of the 2 natures.
* **Sattva sthana** is also a state of being where badar lobha (gross greed) is present due to the destruction of sanjvalan maya (intense delusion) out of the 1st nature.
* **Sattva sthana** is also a state of being where sukshma lobha (subtle greed) is present due to the destruction of badar lobha (gross greed).

Badar lobha and sukshma lobha are both forms of the same lobha (greed) nature, therefore they are not counted as separate states. This is why there are only 15 sattva sthana.

Now, we will describe these 15 states in relation to the guna sthana (states of qualities) in three verses:

**Verse 509:**
* Tinege egegam, do misse chadu su pan yittiye.
* Tini ya thuleyaram, suhme chattari tigni uvasante.

**Verse 510:**
* Padha matiyam cha ya padhama, padhama chauveesayam cha misamhi.
* Padhama chauveesachauu, aviradadeshe pamattidare.

**Verse 511:**
* Adachaurekkabisan, uvasamasesidhimhi khavagasedihimhi.
* Ekkabasan satta, atthakasaayanhihitti.

**Meaning:**

* **Mithyatva guna sthana (state of wrong belief):** There are three sattva sthana - 28th, 27th, and 26th nature.
* **Sasaadana guna sthana (state of purification):** There is one sattva sthana - 28th nature.
* **Misra guna sthana (state of mixed qualities):** There are two sattva sthana - 28th and 24th nature.
* **Asanyata, deshasanyata, pramatta, and aprammatta guna sthana (states of un-controlled, controlled, distracted, and non-distracted):** There are five sattva sthana each - 28th, 24th, 23rd, 22nd, and 21st nature.
* **Apuurvakarana guna sthana (state of non-creation):** There are three sattva sthana - 28th, 24th, and 21st nature.
* **Anivrittikarana guna sthana (state of non-obstruction):** There are eleven sattva sthana - 28th, 24th, 21st, 13th, 12th, 11th, 5th, 4th, 3rd, 2nd, and 1st nature.
* **Sukshma saamparaya guna sthana (state of subtle association):** There are four sattva sthana - 28th, 24th, 21st, and 1st nature.
* **Upashanta kshaya guna sthana (state of pacified passions):** There are three sattva sthana - 28th, 24th, and 21st nature.

**Note:**

* प्रा.पं.सं. पू. ४८२ गाथा ३८३ refers to the source of this information. 

Page #520:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda - 481
**The Abundance of Sattva-sthana in Relation to Guna-sthana**
**Details**
28-27 and 26 are of the nature of Prakriti. The 26th Prakriti-sthana is formed by the agitation of Samyak-tva and Samyag-mithyatva Prakriti. And the agitation of both these Prakritis is done by the Mithyatva-drishti Jivas of all the four Gatis. This 26th Prakriti-rupa-sthana is also present in the Anadi-mithyatva-drishti Jivas.
**Guna-sthana**
Mithyatva
Sasaadana
Mishra
Asand.. Desha-samyata
Pramatta
Apramatta
Apuurva-karana
Upashama-shreni
Apuurva Kshapaka Shreni
Anivriti-karana
Upashama Shreni
Ani. Kshapaka Shreni
Sukshma-saaparaaya Upashama Shreni
Sukshma, Kshapaka Shreni
Upashaanta-kshaya
1. Pra.P.S.Pu. 483 |
**Sattva-sthana**
3
1
2
5.
3
4.
3
9
3
1
3
**28 Prakriti-rupa**
28-24 Prakriti-rupa | 2018-24-23-22 and 21 Prakriti-rupa | 28-24-23-22 and 21 Prakriti-rupa 28-24-23-22 and 21 Prakriti-rupa | 28-24-23-22 and 21 Prakriti-rupa | 28- 24-21 Prakriti-rupa |
21 Prakriti-rupa | 28-24-21 Prakriti-rupa |
21-13-12-11-5-4-3-2 1 Prakriti-rupa | 28-24-21 Prakriti-rupa |
1 Sukshma-lobha-rupa |
28-24-21 Prakriti-rupa | 

Page #521:
---------------------------
Gommatasar Karmakanda-482
There are thirteen, twelve, and eleven nature-forms of three sattva-sthana for a being who ascends the ladder with the rise of the Purusha-veda, in the part of the A-nivrttikarana-guna-sthana where the Purusha-veda and the four Sanjvalana-kashaya are bound. There are two nature-forms of two sattva-sthana for a being who ascends the ladder with the rise of the Stri-veda, and there is one nature-form of thirteen sattva-sthana for a being who ascends the ladder with the rise of the Napumsaka-veda.
Special Meaning: From the first time of the A-nivrttikarana-guna-sthana until the cessation of the binding of the Purusha-veda, there are five nature-forms of binding-sthana of the Mohaniya karma, which are the four Sanjvalana-kashaya and the Purusha-veda. For a being who has ascended the ladder with the destruction of the Purusha-veda, there are fifty-three nature-forms of sattva-sthana in the beginning of the A-nivrttikarana-guna-sthana, twelve nature-forms of sattva-sthana after the destruction of the Napumsaka-veda, and eleven nature-forms of sattva-sthana after the destruction of the Stri-veda. In the two extreme times of the Saveda-bhaga, the old karma of the Purusha-veda, which is situated in the existence of the six non-kashaya, is destroyed. Although five nature-forms of sattva-sthana are found in the extreme time of the Saveda-bhaga, four nature-forms of binding-sthana are found because the Purusha-veda is not bound. This is because two nature-forms of the Mohaniya karma (Purusha-veda - one Sanjvalana-kashaya) are found in the five nature-forms of the Udaya-sthana (Purusha-veda and four Sanjvalana-kashaya), and four nature-forms (four Sanjvalana-kashaya) are found in the two binding-sthana, and thirteen, twelve, and eleven nature-forms are found in the three sattva-sthana. Therefore, five nature-forms of sattva-sthana are not possible in the five nature-forms of binding-sthana of the Mohaniya karma.
For a being who has ascended the ladder with the destruction of the Stri-veda, there are thirteen nature-forms of sattva-sthana in the beginning of the A-nivrttikarana-guna-sthana, and twelve nature-forms of sattva-sthana after the destruction of the Napumsaka-veda. For a being who has ascended the ladder with the destruction of the Napumsaka-veda, there are fifty-two nature-forms of sattva-sthana in the extreme time of the Saveda-bhaga after the destruction of the Stri-veda, but five nature-forms of binding-sthana are not found because the Purusha-veda is not bound at that time. Therefore, there is one nature-form of thirteen sattva-sthana for a being with the Napumsaka-veda.
The Purusha-veda rises with the ascent, the Purusha-veda rises in the last part of the last time.
In the Tappani-dhimmi-dara, the Avagada-veda rises.
. Go, K, Gatha 667.
3. Jayadhaval Pu.2 p. 246.
1. Jayadhaval Pu.2 p. 2431 2 4. Go, K, Gatha 484, second half. 

Page #522:
---------------------------
Gommatasar Karmakanda-483
In the initial state of the Udya, there are Kshapana Khandas of Napumsakaved, Strived and Purushaved. Until the end of the last Khand of the Kshapana of Purushaved, the Udya and Bandha of Purushaved are found continuously, but at that time there is no Udya of Napumsak or Strived.
Tahanee Ekkaras, Satta Tinhodyaen Chadidaanam.
Sattanaham Samag Chidi, Purishe Chandaam Cha Navagamasthitti. ||514|| Meaning- In the places of Kshaya of Strived and Napumsakaved, there are 11 Satvasthanas in the form of Prakriti, which are 6 Nokashaya and 4 Sanjwalan Kshaya of Purushaved. In all three Veds, the 6 Nokashaya of a being who ascends the Shreni with the Udya of any Ved and the Vyuchchitti of the Puratanadravya of Purushaved happen at the same time, but the special thing is that the 6 Nokashaya of the one who ascends the Shreni with the Udya of Purushaved are found in the new time-bound form of Purushaved, therefore only the Santravyuchchitti of his 6 Nokashaya happens. .... ... . ...
Special Meaning- In the Anivrittikaran Gunasthan of the one who ascends the Shreni with the Udya of Purushaved, there is no existence of Stri-Napumsakaved in the Khand preceding the last Khand of the Savedbhaga, and in the Avedbhaga of the being who ascends the Shreni from Strived or Napumsakaved, therefore in these places there are 11 Satvasthanas in the form of Prakriti, which are Purushaved, 6 Nokashaya, 4 Kshaya of Sanjwalan, and the 6 Nokashaya of the one who ascends the Shreni with the Udya of any one of the three Veds and the Puratanadravya of Purushaved are destroyed simultaneously in this way, but there are 5 Satvasthanas in the form of Prakriti, which are 9 new time-bound forms, 4 Kshaya of Sanjwalan, and 2 Avali less at the same time, for the being who ascends the Shreni from Purushaved. When the Achala Avali cools down, the 9 new time-bound forms rise one by one on each Phali in the form of Pramukh in the Avali time and are destroyed in the Avali time, and in the time of 2 Avali less, all of them are destroyed with only the Ucchishta Avali Nisekas. Ucchishta Avali- The Avali only Nisekas of the Karmas that have attained Udya, the remaining Nisekas, and the Avali only Nisekas of the Karmas that have not attained Udya, crossing them, are destroyed in the fall of the last Phali of the last Khand of the state, with only the Avali time remaining Nisekas. This means that the Satya of the 9 new time-bound forms of Purushaved that remains in the Kshapana time of the Ved is destroyed by becoming Krodha form in the Krodha Kshapana time. From this, know the Satva of 5 also. Further, the special characteristics of the Satvasthanas are shown in the Kshapakanivrittikaran Gunasthan.
Idi Chadu Bandhak Khavage, Teras Baras Egar Chausatta. Tidui Gibandhe Tidui Gi, Navaguchchittaanam Avivakkha. ||515|| 

Page #523:
---------------------------
Gommatasar Karmakanda - 484

**Meaning:** In the portion of the Anivrittikaran Gunasthan of the living being who ascends the श्रेणी (category) as described earlier, where there is bondage of the four prakritis (nature), there are 13, 12, and 11, and four prakriti-like sattva sthans (states of being). The one who binds three prakritis has three prakriti-like sattva sthans, the one who binds two prakritis has two prakriti-like sattva sthans, and the one who binds one prakriti has one prakriti-like sattva sthans. However, in the last three bondage sthans, there is no intention of Navakasamayaprabaddha (newly bound) and Ucchishtavli (residue).

**Special Meaning:** In the portion of Anivrittikaran of the living being who ascends the श्रेणी with the Napumsak Veda (neuter gender), where the bondage of the Purusha Veda (male gender) has stopped, there is bondage of the four prakritis of the Mohaniya Karma (karma that causes delusion), and there is also 13 prakriti-like sattva. The one who ascends the श्रेणी with the rise of the Stri Veda (female gender) has bondage of four prakritis and 12 prakriti-like sattva, but not 13 prakriti-like sattva. And the one who ascends the श्रेणी with the rise of Napumsak and Stri Cheda (cutting of the female gender) has bondage of four prakritis in the Aveda (without Veda) portion, and there is 11 prakriti-like sattva sthans, and there is also four prakriti-like sattva sthans when the six Nokashaya (six types of karma) and Purusha Veda are destroyed simultaneously. The one who ascends the श्रेणी with the Purusha Veda has five and four prakriti-like sattva sthans in the bondage of four prakritis, and there is four prakriti-like sattva when the Purusha Veda is destroyed. The one who ascends the श्रेणी with all three Vedas has three prakriti-like bondage and sattva when the Sanjwalan Krodha (burning anger) is destroyed, and there is two prakriti-like bondage and sattva when the Sanjwalan Mana (burning mind) is destroyed, and there is one prakriti-like bondage and sattva when the Sanjwalan Maya (burning delusion) is destroyed. However, the special thing is that in the three, two, and one prakriti-like sattva sthans, there is no intention of Navakasamayaprabaddha and Ucchishtavli of Krodha, Mana, and Maya. This is why five prakriti-like sattva sthans are not mentioned.

How the sattva sthans are found in the bondage sthans of Mohaniya Karma is explained in the next two verses.

**Verse 516:**

**Meaning:** In the 22 prakriti-like bondage sthans of Mohaniya Karma, there are three sattva sthans of 28, 27, and 26 prakritis, and there is one sattva sthans of 28 prakritis in the 21 prakriti-like bondage sthans, and there are five sthans in the 17, 13, and 9 prakritis.

**Verse 517:**

**Meaning:** In the five and four prakriti-like bondage sthans, there are four sattva sthans in the six, seven, and the rest. The sattva sthans are Ucchishtavli, Navakasamayaprabaddha, and Avivekkhiya (undiscerning).

**Note:** See Pra. Pan. San. Pu. 330-332, verses 47-50. 

Page #524:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda - 485

There are five sattvasthana of 28-24-23-22 and 21 prakriti in the bandhasthana, six sattvasthana of 28-24-21-13-12 and 11 prakriti in the bandhasthana of five prakriti, seven sattvasthana of 28-24-21-13-12-11 and four prakriti in the bandhasthana of four prakriti. There are four sattvasthana of 28-24-21, 3-2-1 and one prakriti respectively in the remaining bandhasthana of 3-2 and one prakriti. There is no discussion of ucchistavali and navakasamayaprabaddha in these sattvasthana, but according to verse 484, there are also five sattvasthana in the bandhasthana of prakriti in the opinion of those who believe that the bandhanucchiti of purushaveda takes place in the dwicharamsamaya of the saaveda bhaga.

**Special Meaning:** These verses are deshaamarshaka. Although these verses mention the sattvasthana in the bandhasthana of mohaniyakarma, this statement also provides information about the udayasthana in the bandhasthana. The udayasthana in the bandhasthana of mohaniyakarma are as follows:

**Bawisadisupanchasu dasadi-udaya havanti pancheva |
Seshe du donni evam egegamdo param neyam || 37 || Pra. Pan. San. Pu. 322 ||**

**Meaning:** There are four udayasthana of 10-9-8 and 7 prakriti in the bandhasthana of 22 prakriti of mohaniyakarma. There are three udayasthana of 9-8 and 7 prakriti in the bandhasthana of 21 prakriti. Similarly, there are four udayasthana of 9-8-7 and 6 prakriti in the bandhasthana of 17 prakriti, four udayasthana of 8-7-6 and 5 prakriti in the bandhasthana of 13 prakriti, four udayasthana of 7-6-5 and 4 prakriti in the bandhasthana of 9 prakriti. There are two udayasthana of 5 and 4 prakriti in the bandhasthana of five prakriti, and two udayasthana of 5 and 4 prakriti in the bandhasthana of four prakriti. There is one udayasthana of 3-2 and 1 prakriti respectively in the bandhasthana of 3-2 and 1 prakriti.

The relationship between udayasthana and sattvasthana in the bandhasthana is as follows: 

Page #525:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-486
Udayasthan
Satvasthan
Mitra
Pramatta
Gunasthan Bandhasthan Mithyatva 22 Prakruti | 1 | 13-5-8 and 7 Prakruti. 428-27 and 27 Prakruti Sasadan | 21 Prakruti | 5 | 9-8 and 7 Prakruti | 3 | 28 Prakruti
17 Prakruti, 1, 9-8 and 7 Prakruti | 3 | 28 and 24 Prakruti Asanvat | 17 Prakruti | 1 | 9-8-7 and 6 Prakruti ] 428-24-23-22
and 25 Prakruti Deshasanyata 53 Prakruti 7-62 Rishika 5-13-15..
and 21 Prakruti 9 Prakruti 7-6-5 and 4 Prakruti | 4 | 28-24-23-22
and 21 Prakruti Apramatta 9 Prakruti | 1 | 7-6-5 and 4 Prakruti | 4 | 28-24-23-22
and 21 Prakruti
Upshamasreni Kshapaksreni Apurvakaran | 9 Prakruti | 1 | 6-5 and 4 Prakruti | 3 | 28-24 and 21 21 Prakruti
Var.
Upshamasreni Kshapaka Sreni Anivritikaran 5 Prakruti | 1 | 5 and 4 Prakruti 2 | 28-24 and 21 / 21 13 12 11 and 5 3 and, Anivritikaran 4 Prakruti | 534 Prakruti | 28-24 and 21 / 13 12 11 534 3 and 1 Anivritikaran 3 Prakruti 3 Prakruti
(28-24 and 21 / 3 Prakruti Anivritikaran 2 Prakruti 2 Prakruti
28-24 and 21 2 Prakruti Anivritikaran 5 Prakruti | 1 | 1 Prakruti
28-24 and 21 / 1 Prakruti Sukshmasamprab |
1 Prakruti
| 28-24 and 21 1 Prakruti Upshantakashay 0 0 0 Prakruti
28-24 and 21 0 Prakruti Kshinakashay ] • Prakruti
1. Prakruti Dasanavpannarasai Bandhodayasattapayadhitthanaani. '
Bhanidaani Mohanijje, Eto Nam Par Vochcham. || 518 || Arth- This way, the 10 Bandhasthan, 9 Udayasthan and 15 Satvasthan of the Mohaniyakarmaka are mentioned. Further, the Bandha-Udaya and Satvasthan of the Namakarma will be mentioned.
5. Pra. Pan. San. Pri. 335 Ga. 51.
| 1
31
3 and 1 

Page #526:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda - 487

Now, the 41 basic Jiva-padas based on the place of Name-karma are stated in two verses:

"Riya Punna Panham, Badarasuhuma Taheva Patteya. Vilasani Sanni, Manuva Punna Apunna Ya." || 519 ||

"Samannatitthakevali, Uhayasamugdhaadaga Ya Ahara. Devaavi Ya Pajjattha, Idi Jipapada Hu Igidala." || 520 || Jummam.

Meaning: All Naraki Jivas are sufficient. Earth, water, fire, air, and ordinary plants, these five are both Badara and subtle, therefore these are 10. Each plant, two-sense, three-sense, four-sense, non-sentient five-sense, Tiryancha, and human, these are 17, both sufficient and insufficient, therefore there are 34 variations of these. And, Samanya-kevali, Tirthankara-kevali, and those who perform Samudghata, both Samanya and Tirthankara-kevali, Aharakashariri, and Trayana, these 6 are sufficient. Thus, there are 1-34+6=49 variations of Jivas. Therefore, these are called 'Jiva-padas'. These are based on the place of bondage of Name-karma, therefore they are also called Karma-padas.

Then, the place of bondage of Name-karma is stated in the Gunasthanas:

"Tevisan Panavisan, Chavvisan Atthavisamugatisan. Tisekatisamevam, Ekko Bandhi Dusedihimhi." || 521 ||

Meaning: The 23rd, 25th, 26th, 28th, 29th, 30th, and 31st natural places of bondage of Name-karma are found up to the sixth part of A-purvakarana, as much as possible. And, the 1st natural, 8th place of bondage, is bound in the Upshama-Kshapaka series, from the first time of the seventh part of A-purvakarana Gunasthana to the last time of the subtle Samparaya Gunasthana.

Gunasthana
Mithyatva
Sasadan
Mishra
Asanyata

A glimpse of the places of bondage related to Name-karma:

Name-karma
Number of places of bondage
Ę
3
2
3

Number of natural places of bondage
23rd, 25th, 26th, 28th, 29th, and 30th natural
28th, 29th, and 30th natural
28th and 29th natural
28th, 29th, and 30th natural 

Page #527:
---------------------------
**Promatt**
Pere ...
**Gogayer Karmakanda-488 Deshasanyata**
28 and 29 **Prakrutik**
28 and 29 **Prakrutik** Apramatt
28-29-30 and 31 **Prakrutik** Apurvakaran
28-29-30 and 31 Chathebhagatak,
7th Bhagmen 1 Pr. Anivrittikaran Sukshmasampray
Now, the aforementioned **Bandhastan** of **Namakarma**, with which **Karmapad** it binds, is explained in two verses.
**Thanam Punnena Jui, Punnena Ya Uvari Punnage Neva. Tavadu Ganan Nadaren Panadaren Maranira Yanam. ||522||**
**Nira Yen Vina Tinha, Ekadaren Evameva Suragaina. Bandhati Vina Gaina, Jiwa Tajog Parinama. ||523|| Jummam.**
**Meaning:** In the aforementioned eight **Bandhastan** of **Namakarma**, in order, it binds with 23 **Prakruti**-like **asthan** with **Aparayapt** included, 25 **Prakrutik** **asthan** with **Parayapt**, and also with **Aparayapt** included with the word 'ch'. 26 **Prakrutik** **asthan** with **Parayapt** and with one **Prakruti** from **Atap** and **Udyot**, 28 **Prakruti**-like **asthan** with **Dev** or **Narak** **Gati**, 29 and 30 **Prakrutik** **asthan** with **Tiryanch**, **Manushya** or **Dev** **Gati**, 31 **Prakrutik** **asthan** with **Dev** **Gati**, and one **Prakruti**-like **asthan** does not bind with any **Gati**, meaning no **Gati** binds with this **asthan**. In this way, the **Jivas** with the appropriate **Parinama** of these **asthan** bind these **asthan**.
**Atap** and **Udyot**, these two **Prashasth** **Prakruti**, with which **Jiva** **Pad** they bind in the aforementioned 41 **Jiva** **Pad**, is explained.
**Bhuvadar Pajatte Nadavam Bandha Yoggam Ujjovam. Teuti Gunatirikh Pasathanam Eyadaragen. ||524||**
**Meaning:** **Atap** **Prakruti** is said to be **Bandha**-worthy only with **Badar** **Parayapt** **Prithvi** **Kay** included, and **Udyot** **Prakruti** is said to be **Bandha**-worthy with one **Prakruti** from the **Punnya** **Prakruti** related to **Tiryanch** with **Badar** **Parayapt** **Tej**, **Vayu**, and **Sadharan** **Vanaspati**, and all other **Sukshma** **Jivas** excluded. 

Page #528:
---------------------------
Gommatsar Karmakanda - 489

**Statements related to Tirthankaras and Aharakdvikas**

**525.**  The Tirthankara, by nature, binds both the hellish and human realms, while the five-fold-state beings, including the un-restrained, bind both the human and divine realms.  Only the restrained beings bind the Aharakdvikas or the Tirthankaras along with the Aharakdvikas, up to the sixth stage of non-diligence and non-previous-action, not the other realms.

**Now, the fixed natures of the Name Karma are stated:**

**526.**  The nine fixed natures of Name Karma are:  Taijasa, Karman, Aguru, Laghu, Upadhata, Nirman, Sparsa, Rasa, and Varna.  Each of these nine natures binds one of the nine pairs (Tras-Sthavar, Badar-Sukshma, Paryapt-Aparyapt, Pratyek-Sadharan, Sthir-Asthir, Shubh-Ashubh, Subhag-Dur Bhag, Aadey-Anaadey, Yashaskirti-Ayashaskirti) without the voice.  Therefore, these nine natures, along with the four realms, five castes, three bodies (excluding Taijasa and Karman), six establishments, and four previous actions, bind one nature each, making a total of 23 natures (9+9+5) that bind all beings in general.

**527.**  When a human being binds with the animal realm, along with the natures, it binds one nature each from the six consolidations and the limbs and organs.  When it binds with Tras and Paryapt, it binds one nature each from the good voice-bad voice and the praiseworthy-unpraiseworthy types of destiny.

**528.**  All beings who bind with Paryapt are eligible for the binding of exhalation and Upadhata.  The natures of Atapudyot, Tirthankara, and Aharakdvikas are also eligible for binding, as stated in verse 525. 

Page #529:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-490
There is a bond for both the Tirthankara and the Aharakadvika simultaneously. Therefore, by combining the 23 prakritis as much as possible, there are places and the number of prakritis in the aforementioned 23 prakritis. ||529||
Meaning- There is a bond for both the Tirthankara and the Aharakadvika simultaneously. Therefore, by combining the 23 prakritis as much as possible, there are places and the number of prakritis in the aforementioned 23 prakritis.
This is explained by two verses
Ekkhapajjattan, gipajjattabitichpanapajjattan. Eindiyapajjattan, suraniravagaihim sanjuttam. ||530||
Pajjattagavitichpamanusadevagadisamjudani donni puno. Suragadijudu magdijudu bandhatthanani namassa. ||531|| jumma.
Meaning- There is one bond place for 23 prakritis including one-sense-deficient, two bond places for 25 prakritis including one-sense-sufficient, two-sense, three-sense, four-sense, five-sense, and human-deficient, two bond places for 26 prakritis including one-sense-sufficient, atap or udyot, two bond places for 28 prakritis including deva or narakagati, two bond places for 29 prakritis including two-sense, three-sense, four-sense, five-sense, and human-sufficient, and one bond place for 29 prakritis including Tirthankara and deva-gati. Thus, these six places are related to 29 prakritis. There are four places related to 30 prakritis including udyot, two-sense, three-sense, four-sense, five-sense, and tiryanch, and two places related to 30 prakritis including Tirthankara, human-gati, and Aharakadvika, and deva-gati. There is only one place related to 31 prakritis including Aharakadvika, Tirthankara, and deva-gati. And there is only one place related to one prakriti including yasaskirti from the seventh part of the apurvakaranagunasthan to the sukshmasamprayagunasthan. 

Page #530:
---------------------------
**The Binding Places of Karma**

**23** **Prakrutik** **1** **Sthan** **1.** **Ekeindriya Apariaptyut**
**26** **Prakrutik** **2** **Sthan** **1.** **Ekeindriya Paryapt Atap Yut** **2.** **Ekeindriya Paryapt Udyot Yut**
**1** **Prakrutik** **Sthan** **4.** **Yashas Kirti Yut**
**60** **Prakrutik** **6** **Sthan** **1.** **Daya Paryapt Udyot Yut** **2.** **Shree Draya Paryapt Udyot Yut** **3.** **Charindriya Paryapt Udyot Yut** **4.** **Panchendriya Paryapt Udyot Yut** **5.** **Manushya, Tirthankar Yut** **6.** **Dev, Ahar Yut**
**28** **Prakrutik** **2** **Sthan** **1.** **Dev Gati Samyukta** **2.** **Narak Gati Samyukta**
**25** **Prakrutik** **6** **Sthan** **1.** **Ekeindriya Paryapt Samyukta** **2.** **Dwindriya Apariapt Samyukta** **3.** **Triindriya Apariapt Samyukta** **4.** **Chaturindriya Apariapt Samyukta** **5.** **Panchendriya Apariapt Samyukta** **6.** **Manushya Apariapt Samyukta**

**Gommatasar Karmakand - 491**

**31** **Prakrutik** **1** **Sthan** **1.** **Dev, Aharak, Tirthakshar Yut**
**29** **Prakrutik** **6** **Sthan** **1.** **Dwindriya Paryapt Samyukta** **2.** **Triindriya Paryapt Samyukta** **3.** **Chaturindriya Paryapt Samyukta** **4.** **Panchendriya Paryapt Samyukta** **5.** **Manushya Paryapt Samyukta** **6.** **Dev, Tirthankar Samyukta** 

Page #531:
---------------------------
## Gommatasara Karmakanda-492

**The breaking of the bondage places of the Anantaram Karma**

**Verse 532:**
The breaking of the bondage places occurs in the six Santhanas, six Sanhananas, and the pairs of auspicious-inauspicious Vihayogati, stable, auspicious, prosperous, melodious, worthy, and glorious-renowned.

**Meaning:**
There is a bondage of one nature from each of the six Santhanas, six Sanhananas, and the six pairs of auspicious-inauspicious Vihayogati, stable, auspicious, prosperous, melodious, worthy, and glorious-renowned. Therefore, multiplying all of these (646 x 2 x 2 x 2 x 2 x 2 x 2 x 2) together results in 4608 breakings.

**Verse 533:**
Bondage is present in those auspicious and inauspicious natures, including hellish existence and the Hundaka Santhana, inauspicious Vihayogati, etc. There is a bondage of one inauspicious nature.

**Meaning:**
The bondage of one inauspicious nature is present in those auspicious and inauspicious natures, including hellish existence and the Hundaka Santhana, inauspicious Vihayogati, etc. Similarly, there is a bondage of one inauspicious nature in the Vas-Sthavar, Labdhyaparyapta, and the insufficient, including the unfortunate, unworthy, etc. This is because there is no bondage of the opposite nature of the bondable nature in these. Therefore, there is only one breaking in the 28 natures of the bondage places, including hellish existence, in the 41 mentioned categories, and one breaking in the 23 natures of the bondage places related to the 11 categories of the one-sense being's Labdhyaparyapta, and one breaking in the 25 natures of the bondage places related to the 6 categories of the Tras Labdhyaparyapta.

**Verse 534:**
There is a bondage of one inauspicious nature in the 25 natures of the bondage places, including the sufficient, in the 11 categories of the one-sense being, the Badaraparyapta, the common vegetation, and all the sufficient subtle beings.

**Meaning:**
There is a bondage of one inauspicious nature in the 25 natures of the bondage places, including the sufficient, in the 11 categories of the one-sense being, the Badaraparyapta, the common vegetation, and all the sufficient subtle beings. Notably, there are four breakings here because there is a bondage of one auspicious or inauspicious nature from each of the two pairs of stable-unstable and auspicious-inauspicious.

**Verse 535:**
There is a bondage of the inauspicious in the 25-26 natures of the bondage places of the Badaraparyapta, Earth, Water, Fire, Air, and each vegetation, and in the 29-30 natures of the bondage places of the sufficient two-sense, three-sense, four-sense, and the non-sleeping five-sense beings.

**Meaning:**
There is a bondage of the inauspicious, including the unfortunate and unworthy, in the 25-26 natures of the bondage places of the Badaraparyapta, Earth, Water, Fire, Air, and each vegetation, and in the 29-30 natures of the bondage places of the sufficient two-sense, three-sense, four-sense, and the non-sleeping five-sense beings. There are eight breakings because there is a bondage of one auspicious or inauspicious nature from each of the three pairs of stable-unstable, auspicious-inauspicious, and glorious-renowned-inglorious-renowned. 

Page #532:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-493 Now, the author discusses the bhangas (breakdowns) of the gunasthana (virtue-places) in the 29 and 30 natural bandhasthana (bond-places) in the case of the sipanchaindriya (five senses and mind) tiryancha (animals) and the paryapta (perfect) manushya (human).

**Verse 536**

**Meaning:** In the 29 natural bandhasthana, including the sipanchaindriya tiryancha, and in the 30 natural bandhasthana, including the udyota (illumination), as well as in the 29 natural bandhasthana, including the paryapta manushya, there is a possibility of bondage in each of the six sansthana (establishments), six sanhanana (cohesions), and the vihayoga (separation), sthira (stable), shubha (auspicious), subhaga (prosperous), susvara (well-spoken), aadeya (worthy of receiving), and yashaskirti (fame and glory) pairs. Therefore, multiplying these together (64642424242424242) results in 4608 bhangas in the mithyatva gunasthana (falsehood virtue-place). In the sasadana gunasthana (purification virtue-place) of these same bandhasthana, since there is no bondage in the hundaka sansthana (small establishment) and the sripatika sanhanana (small cohesion), only one bondage is possible in each of the five sansthana and five sanhanana. Therefore, multiplying these together (54542x2x2x2x2x2x2) results in 3200 bhangas in the sasadana gunasthana.

**Summary:**

* Mithyadrishti tiryancha (false-sighted animal) with 29 natural places: 4608 bhangas
* Mithyadrishti tiryancha with 30 natural places: 4608 bhangas
* Mithyadrishti manushya (false-sighted human) with 29 natural places: 4608 bhangas
* Sasadana tiryancha (purified animal) with 29 natural places: 3200 bhangas
* Sasadana tiryancha with 30 natural places: 3200 bhangas
* Sasadana manushya (purified human) with 29 natural places: 3200 bhangas

**Verse 537**

**Meaning:** In the 29 natural places of the mithya (false) and asanyata (unrestrained) gunasthana, including the paryapta manushya (perfect human) path of the deva (gods) and naraki (hell beings), and in the 30 natural places of the asanyata deva and naraki, including the manushya path and the tirthankara (liberated soul), there are 8 bhangas for each of the three pairs: sthira-asthira (stable-unstable), shubha-ashubha (auspicious-inauspicious), and yashaskirti-ayashaskirti (fame and glory-infamy and disgrace).

**Note:**

* प्रा.पं.सं. पृ. ३३८ गा. ६२ refers to a specific source in the Jain scriptures. 

Page #533:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-494
Special Meaning: (Only the auspicious natures bind due to the destruction of the bond of the binding in the auspicious place of the qualities of the sustenance, consolidation, etc., due to the improper establishment and consolidation, misfortune, bad voice, non-worthy and improper marriage-related activities. Therefore, there is no destruction in relation to the establishment, consolidation, etc.)
In the quality places of false belief, etc., the auspicious natures bind in the binding places associated with the divine path, but the binding of the unstable, inauspicious and infamous occurs until the distracted quality place, so there are 8 possible destructions in relation to these three pairs (2x2x2). In the non-distracted and non-previous action quality places, there is no binding of the inauspicious natures in the 28-29-30 and 31 nature binding places along with the divine path, so there is only one destruction each. The statement of the movement and arrival of the beings is made in 6 verses.
Neriyaanam Gamanam, Sannipajattakammatiriyanare.
Charamchau Titthune, Tericche Cheva Sattamiya. ||538|| Meaning: The beings with three earths, like dharma, etc., are born in the human realm after dying in hell and experiencing the womb, the five senses, the karma-earth, and the animal realm. The beings of the last four hells are born in the human or animal realm without the aforementioned, but the special thing is that the beings of the seventh hell are born only in the aforementioned animal realm.
Special Meaning: The beings who come out of hell are not Chakra, Narayana-Pratinarayana and Balabhadra. The beings who come out of hell are born in the human beings and Tirthankaras of the two and a half islands, and in the half part of the last self-born Raman island and the animal beings of the self-born Raman sea, and in the four corners outside it, in the aquatic, terrestrial and aerial beings. There are countless islands and seas in the middle of the 30 enjoyment earths and 96 suffering earths, the animal beings and humans, the superhuman and the self-luminous mountain, there is a low enjoyment earth, the beings of hell do not die and are born in those animal beings. The beings who come out of the first, second and third hells can become Tirthankaras. The being who comes out of the fourth hell can attain liberation. The being who comes out of the fifth hell can attain complete restraint and the being who comes out of the sixth hell can attain country restraint. The being who comes out of the seventh hell cannot attain right faith. Here, it is said that the being who comes out of the seventh hell cannot attain right faith, this statement is also confirmed in the Shatkhandagama Sutra and the Tattvarth-Rajavartika, but the opinion of Yativrishabhacharya is that some rare beings who come out of the seventh earth can attain right faith.
1. Shatkhandagama Pu.6 P. 484 Sutra 205. Raj Va.A. 3 Sutra 6. 2. Tiloyapannatti Part 1 A. 2 Verse 29. 

Page #534:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda - 495

**Verse 539**
There, in the seventh earth, the **asamyat-samyagdristi** and **misra-gunasthanavat-jiva** bind themselves according to their own **gunasthanas**, following the rules of the **manushya-gati** and **uchcha-gotra**. Those who are **sasadan**, **misra**, and **asamyat-gunasthanavarti** in the seventh earth, when they die, attain **mithyatva** a moment before their death.

**Verse 540**
In the **tiryancha-gati**, **badar** or **sukshma-paryapta-aparyapta-tej-kaya** and **vayu-kaya-jiva** are born in the **tiryancha-gati** without any **bhoga-bhumij-jati** according to the rules. The remaining **badar-sukshma-paryapta** and **aparyapta-prithvi-jala-kayika**, and **nityanaga-chatur-giti-nigoda-paryapta-aparyapti** and **pratisthita-apratisthita-pratyek-vanaspati**, **dvi-indriya-tri-indriya-chatur-indriya-paryapta-aparyapta-jiva** are born in the **tiryancha** after death, and also in humans without the **treshat-shalaka-purusha**. It is special here that **nitya-itar-nigoda** **sukshma-jiva**, if they become humans after death, can attain **samyaktva** and **desh-samyam**, but cannot attain **sakal-samyam**. And **asanjnee-panchendriya-tiryancha** are born in the **prathamanaraka** and **bhavana-vasi-vyantar-deva**, but not in other **deva** or **naraka**, because the **asanjnee-panchendriya-jiva**'s **utkrista-ayu-bandha** state is only a fraction of a **paly**. **Badar-nitya** and **itar-nigoda** **jiva** can also be born as humans after death and attain **moksha** from that very **bhavana**, just like **Vardhan-kumara**, the son of **Bharat-chakravarti**.

**Verse 541**
**Sanjnee-tiryancha** are born in all **naraka**, in all **sarva-bhoga-bhumij**, and in all **deva** up to the sixteenth heaven. **Karma-bhumij-paryapta-manushya** are born in all the aforementioned **paryaya** and in **kalpa-atita-aham-indra**, and also attain the **siddha-sthana**. **Aparyapta-manushya** are born in **karma-bhumij-tiryancha** and in ordinary humans without **tirthankara** etc. **Tiryancha** and **manushya** of the thirty **bhoga-bhumis**, and **jghanya-bhoga-bhumij-tiryancha** related to countless islands and oceans, who are **samyagdristi**, are born in **Saudharm-ishan-swarga**, and **mithyadristi-sasadan-gunasthanavarti** and **kubhoga-bhumij-manushya** are born in **bhavana-trika-deva**.

1. Dhaval Pu. 10 p. 276. 

Page #535:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda - 496
**Verse 542:**
A being with a gross body and a mind full of negligence is born in the Vaimanika Devas, which are death-causing. The Devas of the Sarvarthasiddhi Vimana are born in the human beings who are the ultimate body in the 15 Karmabhumis, which are death-causing. This is not the case elsewhere. However, the Devas up to the Sahasrarasvarga are born in the human beings of the Karmabhumis, in the Lavana-udadhi, the Kala-udadhi, the Uttarardha of the Swayambhu-raman-dvipa, the Sanji-paryapta-jalachara, the Sthalachara, and the Nabhachara-tiryancha, which are all in the Swayambhu-raman-samudra-varti.

**Verse 543:**
The Devas up to the Isanasvarga are born in the aforementioned human beings and tiryancha, as well as in the Badara-paryapta-prithvi, the Jalakaya, and the Ekendriya in the form of every plant. The statement about the Bhavanatrik-devas should be understood in the same way as the Saudharma-Isana. The only difference is that the Bhavanatrik-devas are not born in the human beings who are the 64 Shalaka-purushas, including the Tirthankaras. This is a brief description of the movement and arrival of beings in the four gatis. For detailed knowledge, one should refer to the Gati-Agatichoolika in the Dhavala Purana, Chapter 6.

**Verse 544:**
Further, the eight stanzas describe the eight Bandha-sthana of the Nama-karma in the 14 Marganas.
**Meaning:**
The Bandha-sthana of the Nama-karma are two in the Naraka-gati, 29 and 30, which are combined with the Tiryancha and the Manushya-gati. In the Tiryancha-gati, there are six Bandha-sthana from the beginning. In the Manushya-gati, there are all the Bandha-sthana. In the Deva-gati, there are four Bandha-sthana, which are 25, 26, 29, and 30, in the form of the four Prakruti.

**Special Meaning:**
In the Naraka-gati, there are two Bandha-sthana of the Nama-karma, which are 29 and 30. The beings of the Pancha-indriya-paryapta-tiryancha-gati and the Manushya-gati, combined with the 29 Prakruti, bind the first Bandha-sthana, which is the Pshthama-Maghavi-prithvitaka. The beings of the Pancha-indriya-paryapta-tiryancha, combined with the 29 Prakruti, or the 30 Prakruti with Udyota, bind the seventh Bandha-sthana, which is the Saptama-Maghava-prithvitaka. The binding of the Bandha-sthana of the Paryapta-Manushya-gati and the Tirthankara, combined with the 30 Prakruti, is as follows:
1. "Nirae Tisu-guti Bandha-dvaani." Pra. Pan. San. Nu. 493, Verse 419.
"Tiryam-ai Tevis Pan-vis Chhabbisam-visaa Va Tisuun Tisa Bandha." Pra. Pan. San. Pu. 494, Verse 421.
In the Manushya-gati, there are eight Bandha-sthana, which are 23, 25, 26, 28, 29, 30, 31, and 1, in the form of the eight Prakruti. In the Deva-gati, there are four Bandha-sthana, which are 25, 26, 29, and 30, in the form of the four Prakruti. Pra. Pan. San. 5.495.

Page #536:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda - 497

These beings bind up to the third Meghaprithvi, but the beings of hell, who are of the 29 natures with human existence, bind up to the sixth hell. And it is easy to understand the location of these places in the context of the Gunasthanas in the Marganas, therefore, they are called special places of motion, sense organs, and attainment, etc. - The hellish beings who are in the Mithyatva-Sāsādanagunasthanas bind the 29 natures with the combined human and animal existence. The beings with the right and wrong views bind only the 29 natures with human existence, because the binding and cessation of the animal existence and the Udyota happens in the Sāsādanagunasthanas. And the unrestrained beings bind the 29 natures with human existence and the first three hells, and the 30 natures with human existence and the Tirthankaras, which are sufficient. In the animal existence, they bind the 13 natures with the stationary, immobile, insufficient, one-sense, or the stationary, subtle, insufficient, one-sense. And they bind the 25 natures with the one-sense, immobile, sufficient, or the one-sense, subtle, sufficient, or the three-sense, insufficient, two-sense, three-sense, four-sense, and five-sense animal existence, or the three-sense, insufficient, human existence. The one-sense beings with the immobile, earth body, bind the 26 natures with the heat and animal existence, or the heat, air body, and the one-sense, immobile, sufficient beings without the ordinary, bind the 26 natures with the Udyota and animal existence. The five-sense beings with the three-sense, sufficient, bind the 28 natures with the hell existence or the god existence. The two-sense, three-sense, four-sense, and five-sense beings with the sufficient, bind the 29 natures with the animal existence or the human existence. The three-sense, immobile, sufficient, one-sense, three-sense, four-sense, or five-sense beings bind the 30 natures with the animal existence and the Udyota. In this way, these are the six places. Similarly, the animal beings with the attainable, sufficient, bind only five places without the 28 natures, they bind all the places in the human existence, and they bind the four places of the god existence, which are the 25th, 26th, 29th, and 30th natures. The god can be born in the sufficient sense organs after death, therefore, it is possible for him to bind the 25 natures, and the 26 natures with the heat or the Udyota, and the 29th and 30th natures with the conscious, sufficient, animal and human existence.

Then, in the Marganas, such as the sense organs, etc., the binding places of the name karma are called:

"From the five senses, all, from the six, such as the earth, water, etc., from the two, such as the smell and taste, from the gods, or from the two, such as the subtle and the gross." || 545 ||

Meaning - In the sense organ Margana, there are all the binding places for the five senses, and in the body Margana, there are all the binding places for the three-sense body. In the remaining four, such as the one-sense, etc., and in the five, such as the earth body, etc., know that there are five binding places each, without the 28 natures, from the six places. In the four manoyogas, the four vachanayogas, and the audarikakayayoga, there are all the binding places, and in the vaikriyak and the vaikriyakamishrakayayoga, there are four places like the god existence. 

Page #537:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-498

**Special Note:**  In one-sensed and multi-sensed beings, there are 5 bondage places, namely 23, 25, 26, 29, and 30 natural karmas.  The same 5 bondage places exist in stationary beings.  In five-sensed and human beings, there are 8 bondage places, namely 23, 25, 26, 28, 29, 30, 31, and 1.  Similarly, in four types of mind-yogis, four types of speech-yogis, and generous-body yogis, these 8 bondage places should be known.  In active and mixed-active body yogis, there are 4 natural bondage places, similar to the heavenly beings, namely 25, 26, 29, and 30. (Pra.Pan.Sa.Pu. 496-500)

**Verse 546:**

**Meaning:**  In food-consuming and mixed-food-consuming body yogis, there are 2 natural places, namely 28 and 29.  In the remaining karmic and mixed-generous body yogis, there are 6 places from the beginning.  In the three Vedas, starting with the male, and in the four passions, starting with anger, all bondage places exist.  In the path of knowledge, there are 6 bondage places from the beginning in the three types of wrong knowledge.

**Special Note:**  In food-consuming and mixed-food-consuming body yogis, there is no place for heavenly beings and food-consuming beings, because their bondage is possible only in the non-negligent and non-previous-action-quality places, but food-consuming beings do not exist in the negligent-quality place.  And in karmic and mixed-generous body yogis, including false-belief, there is no bondage of the 28th natural place in the animal-human beings, because according to the sutra "Karma is the cause of rebirth," there is no existence of the bondage of heavenly beings and hell beings in karmic and mixed-generous body yogis.  In animal-human beings, including the place of the nourishing-quality, which is present in karmic body yogis, there are 2 bondage places, namely 29 and 30, without the remaining places, including the one-sensed, badar, subtle, sufficient, and insufficient, and the animal-five-sensed and human beings, including 23, 25, and 26, and 28, and the three types of multi-sensed, including 29 and 30.  Here, according to the saying "There is no heavenly being in the wrong belief," there is no existence of the 28th natural place, including the heavenly beings.  In uncontrolled human beings, including karmic body yogis, the 29th natural place, including heavenly beings and Tirthankaras, should also be known.

In the three Vedas and in the four passions, all bondage places exist.  The special thing is that in the neuter Veda, the 2nd and 3rd natural places should be known up to the third hell.  In the animal beings, including the neuter Veda, there are 23 natural places, including the one-sensed, badar, subtle, insufficient, 25 natural places, including the one-sensed, badar, subtle, sufficient, 25 natural places, including the sufficient, two-sensed, three-sensed, four-sensed, five-sensed animal-human beings, and 25 natural places, including the one-sensed, badar, sufficient, heat, and 

1. Pra.Pan.Sa.Pu. 501.
2. 23, 25, 26, 28, 29, 30 natural places are these 6 bondage places (Pan.Sa.Pu. 500, 501).
3. 23, 25, 26, 28, 29, 30, 31, and 1 natural places are these 8 bondage places (Pan.Sa.Pu. 502).
4. 23, 25, 26, 28, 29, 30 are these 6 bondage places (Pan.Sa.Pu. 502). 

Page #538:
---------------------------
Gommatasar Karmakanda-499

There are 26 types of karma with udyota, 29 types with udyota and sufficient for the path of animals and humans, 30 types with udyota and sufficient for the path of animals, and 28 types with sufficient for the path of animals and five-sense-related eunuch-ved in hell and heaven. In the female-ved and male-ved of animals, six types of karma should be known, and in the eunuch-ved, five types should be known as equal to the three types of one-sense-disabled in the human with sufficient for the path of liberation. From the point of view of emotion, the eunuch or female or male-ved with sufficient for the path of liberation become male-ved, female-ved, or eunuch-ved from the rise of male-ved, female-ved, or eunuch-ved. From the point of view of substance, the male-ved, and the eunuch-ved, and the female-ved, should know the place of qualities from their respective parts of the ved which are not destroyed. Here, eight types of karma should be known in all three vedas, but the special thing is that the eunuch-ved of the क्षपक श्रेणी (kshapka shreni) does not have 29-31 types of karma with the path of gods and the nature of Tirthankara, because the karma of the nature of Tirthankara is possible in the क्षपक श्रेणी (kshapka shreni) of any extreme-bodied being, but those beings rise in the क्षपक श्रेणी (kshapka shreni) only with the rise of the male-ved, and the beginning of the karma of the nature of Tirthankara is only if it is in the place of qualities of the unrestrained or the restrained in the country. If it is in the place of qualities of the unrestrained or the restrained in the country, then they have only three auspicious events, namely, the auspicious event of penance, the auspicious event of welfare, and the auspicious event of liberation. And if the beginning of the karma of the nature of Tirthankara is in the place of qualities of the careless or the careful, then they have only two auspicious events, namely, the auspicious event of knowledge and the auspicious event of liberation. And if the karma of the nature of Tirthankara is done in the previous birth, then they have five auspicious events, namely, the auspicious event of conception, the auspicious event of birth, the auspicious event of growth, the auspicious event of knowledge, and the auspicious event of liberation. This should be known.

In the path of passions, there are four types of passions based on the difference of the infinite-connected, etc., and the beginning, etc., but only one type should be considered based on the support of birth, because there is no intention to say the difference due to the predominance of power. This is explained as follows: The infinite-connected, etc., twelve passions are all-destroying, not country-destroying, and the wavering passions are both country-destroying and all-destroying. The destroying of right faith is the rise of one of the infinite-connected, anger, pride, deceit, and greed, and the rise of the three, namely, non-rejection, etc., is also there. Similarly, the destroying of restraint in the country is the rise of one of the non-rejection, anger, etc., and the rise of the rejection, etc., is also there. The destroying of all restraint is the rise of one of the rejection, anger, etc., and the rise of the wavering is also there. And the destroying of the restraint of the known is only the rise of the wavering, and the rise of the three, namely, non-rejection, etc., is not there, because the other passions are opposed to the all-restraint, and only the rise of the non-rejection and the wavering does not have the rise of the remaining two passions. The rise of the three, namely, non-rejection, etc., does not have the rise of the infinite-connected. In this way, the rise of the infinite-connected, along with the rise of the non-rejection, etc., has the nature of the attachment to the conduct and delusion, but the destroying of the right faith and the restraint is said in them. The rise of the non-rejection, etc., without the rise of the infinite-connected destroys the restraint in the country, and the rise of the rejection and the wavering without the rise of the non-rejection destroys the all-restraint, and the rise of the country-destroying passions of only the wavering without the rise of the rejection destroys the restraint of the known.
1. "त्रिपु वेदेषु प्रत्येक बंधाष्टकम्" (प्रा.पं.सं.ए. ५०२) ।

Page #539:
---------------------------
In the Ameri amod, Gommatasar Karmakanda - 500, it is stated that due to the desire for general power, only four of the sixteen kshayas, namely anger, etc., are considered. Therefore, it is said that samyaktva, desasanayama, and sakalasanyama are born in the gunasthanas of asanyata, desasanayata, and pramatta, etc.

**Doubt:** How can the power of anantanubandhi and other kshayas be equal?

**Solution:** The seventeen deshghati prakritis, namely four jnanaavaranas, three darshanavaranas, five antarayas, four sanjwalanas, and purushaveda, undergo four types of parinaman in the form of anubhaga. The remaining twenty prakritis, namely all the prakritis except mishramohaniya, such as jnanaavaranas, etc., which are all-destroying, eight nokshayas, and seventy-five prakritis of adhatiya, undergo three types of parinaman in the form of anubhaga. This is described in the statement of anubhagabandh, therefore, equality is possible between anantanubandhi and other kshayas in relation to the power of anubhaga.

Although there is some difference between the twelve kshayas and the deshghati competitors of sanchalan, they perform the same function in relation to destroying general sanayama. Therefore, here the difference between anantanubandhi, etc., is not mentioned, only the four kshayas, namely anger, etc., are mentioned. Here, in anger, there are two prakritis in the form of twenty-nine and thirty in the bandha sthana of naraka due to namakarma. In the tiryanch गति, there are six bandha sthana from the beginning, in humans, there are all bandha sthana, and in the deva गति, there are only four sthana, namely general to deva गतिवत् (twenty-five, twenty-six, twenty-nine, thirty prakritis). Similarly, know this in mana, maya, and lobha.

In the three kujnanas of jnanamargna, there are six sthana from the beginning. In them, there are two sthana, namely twenty-nine prakritis including narakiyas, tiryanch गति, and manushya गति, and thirty prakritis including udyota. In the kumati and kushruta jnana of ekaindriya and vikalatraya, there are five bandha sthana, starting from the bandha sthana of twenty-three prakritis including tiryanch and manushya गति, without the bandha sthana of twenty-eight prakritis combined with naraka गति and deva गति. In the kumati-kushruta including mithyatva gunasthana of panchendriya tiryanch manushya aparayapta, there are also the aforementioned five sthana. In the parayapta panchendriya tiryanch and manushya, including all three kujnanas, mithyatva and sasadan gunasthana, there are six sthana, including four gatis, as appropriate. And in bhavanatrika and saudharmayugal, including kujnana, there are four bandha sthana, namely twenty-five, twenty-six, twenty-nine, and thirty prakritis combined with tiryanch गति, and twenty-nine prakritis combined with manushya गति. In the swargi, from sanatkumar to sahasraraswarga, there are two sthana, namely twenty-nine prakritis combined with panchendriya parayapta tiryanch and manushya गति, and thirty prakritis combined with tiryanch and udyota. From anata, etc., to navagraiveyaka, there is only one bandha sthana, namely twenty-nine prakritis combined with manushya गति. Because, according to the statement "tado natthi sadarachu", there is no sthana combined with tiryanch गति here. In this way, six sthana are mentioned in the three kujnanas in relation to the jivas who have kujnana.

1. Avarana deshghatira sanjalan puris sattarsan. Chauih bhaav parinada tihi bhaava hu sesaanam. || 184 || Gommatasar Karmakanda || 

Page #540:
---------------------------
Gommatasar Karmakanda-501

There are five binding places in the four right knowledges, namely, mati, shruta, avadhi, and manahparyaya. There are no binding places in kevalgyan and yathakyatsamyama. There are five binding places in samyamas like shrutagyan, but there are only four binding places in parihara-vishuddhi-samyama, without the last one.

**Explanation:**

There are five binding places in mati, shruta, avadhi, and manahparyaya knowledge, which are named karma, and they are 28, 29, 30, 31, and 1 in number. The three knowledges, mati, etc., are found in naraki, sanjeevi, manushya, and deva, who are both paryapta and nirvrittyaparyapta. Here, there are two binding places, one with 29 prakritis for naraki beings, including manushya-gati, and the other with 30 prakritis, including manushya-gati and tirthankara, in the three worlds of adi, etc. These two binding places are also found in the devas of Saudharma, etc. In the devas of bhavanatrik, there is only one binding place with 29 prakritis, including manushya-gati, and in the tiryancha-gati, there is one binding place with 28 prakritis, including deva-gati. In humans, there is one binding place with 28 prakritis, including deva-gati, and another with 29 prakritis, including deva-gati and tirthankara. There are also binding places with 30, 31, and 1 prakritis. In this way, the binding places in the three knowledges, mati, etc., are described. In the four knowledges, including manahparyaya, there are two binding places with 28 and 29 prakritis in the pramatta-gunasthan. There are two binding places with 28 and 29 prakritis in the aprmatta and apurvakaran-gunasthan, up to the sixth part, and four binding places with 30 prakritis, including deva-gati and aharak-dvik, and 31 prakritis, including deva-gati, tirthankara, and aharak-dvik. From the seventh part of the apurvakaran-gunasthan to the sukshmasamprayaya-gunasthan, there is one binding place, which is called yashaskirti. There is no binding of karma in kevalgyan. There are five binding places in samayik-chedopasthapanasamyama, like shrutagyan, but there are only four binding places in parihara-vishuddhi-samyama, without the last one.

In samayik-chedopasthapanasamyama, there are two binding places in the pramatta-gunasthan, one with 28 prakritis, including deva-gati, and the other with 29 prakritis, including deva-gati and tirthankara. There are four binding places in the aprmatta and apurvakaran-gunasthan, up to the sixth part, including the two mentioned above, and one with 30 prakritis, including deva-gati and aharak-dvik, and another with 31 prakritis, including tirthankara and aharak-dvik. From the seventh part of the apurvakaran-gunasthan to the anivritti-gunasthan, there is only one binding place with one prakriti. In parihara-vishuddhi-samyama, there are two binding places in the pramatta-gunasthan, like samayik-samyama, and four binding places in the aprmatta-gunasthan. There is no binding place with one prakriti here, because there is no shreni-aroha.

The last binding place is very subtle, like the karma of the desa-viradi. It is like the eye in the jugal, which is the same for all beings.

Page #541:
---------------------------
Gommatasar Karmakanda-502

**Meaning:** In the Sukshmasamprayayagunasthan, there is only one final place. In the Deshasanyatagunasthan, there are two places, the 28th and 29th, which are like the Aharakayayoga. In the Asanyatagunasthan, there are six places, like the Karmankayayoga. In Chakshu-Achakshudarshan, there are all the Bandha places, and in Avadhi-Kevaladarshan, one should know the Bandha places according to their own knowledge.

**Special Meaning:** In the Tiryancha, including Deshasanyama, there is only one place of 28 Prakriti, along with the Devagati. In Asanyama, there are six places, like the Karmankayayoga, with 23-25-26-28-29 and 30 Prakriti. Here, there are two places, one with 29 Prakriti, including the Naraki with Mithyatva and Sasadanagunasthan, and the Panchendriya Paryamatiryancha and Manushya Gati, and the other with 30 Prakriti, including the Tiryancha and Udyota. In the Mishragunasthan, there is only one place with 29 Prakriti, including the Manushya Gati. In the Narakavio, including Dharma, etc., there are two places, one with 29 Prakriti, including the Manushya Gati, and the Naraki with Asanyatagunasthan, and the other with 30 Prakriti, including the Manushya Gati and Tirthankara. In the remaining Prithvi, there is one place with 29 Prakriti, including the Manushya Gati. In the Tiryancha Gati, there are six places with 23-25-26-28-29 and 30 Prakriti. However, the special feature here is that there is no Bandha place with 28 Prakriti, including the Narakagati or Devagati, in the Paryapt-Aparyapt Ekendriya and Vikalatraya, and in the Aparyapt Panchendriya, because according to "Punnidaram Vigidagale", there is no Bandha there. In the Badar-Sukshmayan-Apatatjakadik-Vatkayik, there are no places with 25 Prakriti, including the Manushya Gati Aparyapt, and 29 Prakriti, including the Paryapt Manushya Gati. The Tiryancha, who has attained the Sasadanagunasthan by violating the Prathamopaashama Samyaktva, binds three places: one with 29 Prakriti, including the Tiryancha Gati and Manushya Gati, another with 30 Prakriti, including the Tiryancha and Udyota, and the third with 28 Prakriti, including the Devagati. In other Gatis, except for the Maranakara Naraka, the Sasadanagunasthan is present in the Aparyapt state, from the highest, one time less than six Avali, to the lowest, one time. Therefore, the Tiryancha, who are in the Sasadanagunasthan, are not in the Aparyapt state, according to the saying "Nahi Sasano Apunne Saharan Suhumge Ye Teu Duge". Only the Ekendriya, Vikalendriya, and Sangi-Asangi Panchendriya Jivas are in the Sasadanagunasthan in the Aparyapt state, and they do not bind the place with 28 Prakriti, including the Narakagati or Devagati. They leave the Sasadanapana before the completion of the Sharira Paryapti, and become Mithyadrishti according to the rules. After the Paryapti, they bind the place with 28 Prakriti, including the Narakagati or Devagati. According to the saying "Michchaduge Devachau Tittham Nahi", the Sangi-Asangi also do not bind the place with 28 Prakriti in the Sasadanagunasthan, including the Aparyapt state. The Tiryancha, who are in the Mishragunasthan and Asanyatagunasthan, are Sangi Paryapt. They bind the place with 28 Prakriti, including the Devagati, in the Mishragunasthan, because according to the saying "Uvarim Chhanham Cha Chhidisasanasamme", there is no binding of the Tiryancha-Manushya Gati. In the Asanyatagunasthan, the aforementioned places are also bound, because the Tiryancha Jiva does not have the Bandha of Aharakadvik and Tirthankara Prakriti. In the Manushya Gati, the Labdhya Paryapt Manushya has eight Bandha places: 1. Pra.Pan.San.Pri. 505, verse 449. 2. Pra.Pan.San.Pri. 506, verse 452. 3. Pra.Pan.San.Pri. 506, verse 453. 4. 23-25-26-28-29-30-31-5, these are the eight Bandha places (Pra.Pan.San.Pri. 5.06-507, verses 453-454).

Page #542:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda - 503

The five places of the twenty-third, twenty-fifth, twenty-sixth, twenty-ninth, and thirtieth natures are bound for the Tiryancha and the Manushya with a mind, but for the Paryapta Manushya, all six places, including the four gatis, are found. In the ultimate time of Karanalabdhi, the Jiva, with the material mentioned in the Labdhisara gatha 2, "Chadugatimicchosani," etc., having subdued Darshanamoha, attained Prathamopa-sham-samyaktv, and having become a Deshavrat or a Mahavrati with Prathamopa-sham-samyaktv, in the internal moment of this Upa-sham-samyaktv, from the time of one moment to the time of six Avali Kalpa, in the infinite Anubandhi, which was the unrefined Upa-sham, if the arising of any one of the Krodhadik-shaya, destroys Prathamopa-sham-samyaktv, and becomes a Sasadanaguna-sthana, then the bondage is in the Mithyatva-avastha. Therefore, the twenty-ninth nature, which is the place of the Panchendriya-paryapta Tiryancha-Manushya-gati, the thirtieth nature, which is the place of the Tiryancha-Udyota, and the twenty-eighth nature, which is the place of the Devagati, are bound. Upon death, if the Tiryancha and the Manushya or the Dev are in the Sasadanaguna-sthana in the time of Aparyapta, then they bind the twenty-ninth nature, which is the place of the Tiryancha-Manushya-gati, and the thirtieth nature, which is the place of the Tiryancha-Udyota, but they do not bind the twenty-eighth nature, which is the place of the Narakagati or the Devagati. When the time related to the Sasadanaguna-sthana is complete, and the Mithyadristi is present, the Nirvritti-paryapta-avastha remains for as long as the time, and in that, the four places of the twenty-fifth, twenty-sixth, twenty-ninth, and thirtieth natures are bound. And in the Paryapta-avastha, the six places, including the twenty-eighth nature, are bound. The Manushya who is in the Karmabhumij, mixed, and Asanyata-guna-sthana, and the Sarvam-anushya who is in the Bhogbhumij, bind only the twenty-eighth nature, which is the place of the Devagati, because the Sasadanaguna-sthana of the Narak-Tiryancha-gati is destroyed. The Manushya who is in the Asanyatta-guna-sthana, and has the existence of the Tirthankara-prakriti, binds the twenty-ninth nature, which is the place of the Devagati and the Tirthankara. In the Paryapta-avastha, the Mithyadristi-Dev who has the Bhavanatrik and the Soudharma-yugal, bind the twenty-fifth nature, which is the place of the Ekendriya-paryapta-Tiryancha-gati, the twenty-sixth nature, which is the place of the Atap-Udyota, the twenty-ninth nature, which is the place of the Panchendriya-paryapta-Tiryancha-Manushya-gati, and the thirtieth nature, which is the place of the Tiryancha-Udyota, in this way, they bind four places. The Mithyadristi-Dev who have the ten heavens, like Sanatkumara, etc., bind the twenty-ninth nature, which is the place of the Manushya and the Tiryancha-gati, and the thirtieth nature, which is the place of the Tiryancha-gati and the Udyota, and the Dev who have the four heavens, like Anata, etc., and the Navagraiveyak-vasi-Dev, bind the twenty-ninth nature, which is the place of the Manushya-gati.

The Nirvritti-paryapta-Mithyadristi-Bhavanatrik-Dev and the Kalpavasini-Devi, the Dev who have the Soudharma, Ishana, and Svarga heavens, bind the twenty-fifth nature, which is the place of the Ekendriya-paryapta, and the twenty-sixth nature, which is the place of the Paryapta-Tiryancha with Atap or Udyota, the twenty-ninth nature, which is the place of the Panchendriya-paryapta-Tiryancha-Manushya-gati, and the thirtieth nature, which is the place of the Tiryancha-Udyota, in this way, they bind four places. In the same way, the Dev from the Sanatkumara-Svarga to the Sahasrar-Svarga, bind the twenty-ninth nature, which is the place of the Panchendriya-paryapta-Tiryancha-Manushya-gati, and the thirtieth nature, which is the place of the Tiryancha-Udyota. The Dev from the Anata-Svarga to the upper Graiveyak, bind only the twenty-ninth nature, which is the place of the Manushya-gati, because the twenty-ninth and thirtieth natures, which are the places of the Tiryancha-gati, are not present here. In this way, in brief, the statement of the places of the Namakarma-bandha, in relation to the Devagati, for the Mithyadristi-Jiva with Asanyama, has been made. Here, the Jiva-samasa, Paryapti, Pranadi, etc., have not been stated due to the fear of the expansion of the text, it should be known from the Parmagam, as appropriate. 

Page #543:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-504

The Bhavanatrikdeva, Kalpvasini Devi, and Saudharma Yugalvala Deva residing in the Sasadanagunasthan, bind 29 or 30 karmic fields, including the 29 karmic fields with the Tiryancha and Manushya Gati, or the 30 karmic fields with the Tiryancha Gati and Udyota. When they pass through the time of the Sasadanagunasthan and become Mithyadrishti, they bind 29 or 30 karmic fields in their state of Aparapti, in addition to the aforementioned 29 or 30 karmic fields, along with 25 karmic fields with the Ekendriya Parapti, or 26 karmic fields with the Udyota and Atap. The 10 Deva residing in the heavens from Sanatkumar to Sahasrarasvarga bind both the aforementioned 29 or 30 karmic fields. The Deva residing in the heavens from Anatasvarga to Navagraiveyak bind only the 29 karmic fields with the Manushya Gati. After the time of the Sasadanagunasthan passes, they become Mithyadrishti and bind the karmic fields of the Aparapti Mithyadrishti. The Parapti Bhavanatrik, Kalpvasini Devi, residing in the Mishragunasthan and Asanyatagunasthan from Bhavanatrik to Praiveyak, bind 21 karmic fields with the Manushya Gati. The Vaimanik (Kalpvasini) Deva bind 29 karmic fields without the Tirthankara, and 30 karmic fields with the Tirthankara.

All karmic fields of the Naamakarma are present in both Chakshu and Achakshu Darshan. The Naraki with Chakshu Darshan bind two karmic fields of 29 or 30 karmic fields. The Chaturindriya Jiva bind 23, 25, 26, 29, and 30 karmic fields, a total of 5 karmic fields, without the 28 karmic fields of the Tiryancha and Manushya Gati. The Panchendriya Tiryancha bind six karmic fields of 23, 25, 26, 28, 29, and 30 karmic fields. The Manushya bind all karmic fields. The Deva bind 25, 26, 29, and 30 karmic fields as per their capacity. The Naraki with Achakshu Darshan bind two karmic fields like those with Chakshu Darshan. The Jiva from Ekendriya to Chaturindriya bind 5 karmic fields of 23, 25, 26, 29, and 30 karmic fields, without the 28 karmic fields of the Naraka or Deva Gati. The Panchendriya Tiryancha bind six karmic fields, including the 28 karmic fields. The Manushya bind all karmic fields. The Deva bind four karmic fields of 25, 26, 29, and 30 karmic fields, like those with Chakshu Darshan, as per their capacity. The last 5 karmic fields are present in the Avadhi Darshan, like those with Avadhi Jnana. The Asanyata Deva and Naraki, the Asanyata Desha Sanayata Tiryancha, the Manushya residing in the Asanyatagunasthan to Kshina Kshaya Gunasthan, possess Desha Avadhi Jnana. The Charma Shariri Jiva from Pramatta to Kshina Kshaya Gunasthan possess Paramavadhi and Sarvavadhi Jnana. The holders of Avadhi Darshan, the Tirthankara with three Naraka and the Manushya Gati, bind 30 karmic fields. The Naraki with the Anjanadi Prithvi, without the Sattwa of the Tirthankara, bind 29 karmic fields with the Manushya Gati. The Tiryancha Jiva bind 28 karmic fields with the Deva Gati. The Manushya bind five karmic fields from 28 to 1 (28, 29, 30, 31, 1) with the Deva Gati. The Deva residing in the Saudharma and other heavens bind 30 karmic fields with the Manushya Gati and the Sattwa of the Tirthankara. The Bhavanatrik and other Deva bind 29 karmic fields with the Manushya Gati, without the Tirthankara. There is no binding in the Kevala Darshan, like those with Kevala Jnana. 

Page #544:
---------------------------
Gommatasar Karmakanda - 505
Karmam va kinhatie, panuvisacchakkamattvīsachaū | Kamaso teū jugale, sukkāe ohiṇāṇam vā || 549 ||
Meaning - In the three inauspicious leshyas of Krishna, etc., there are 6 bandha sthānas of 23-25-26-28-29 and 30 prakriti rūpa, respectively. In the Teja (yellow) and Padma leshyas, there are 6 sthānas of 25, 26, 28, 29, 30 and 31 prakriti rūpa, respectively, and 4 sthānas of 28, 29, 30 and 31 prakriti rūpa, respectively. In the Shukla leshya, there are 5 sthānas of 28-29-30-31 and prakriti rūpa, like the knowledge of avadhi.
Special Meaning - The dravya leshya of the color of the body, which is the result of the karma called varnanāma, is not taken here. The fluctuating nature of the leshya, which is the yogarūpa of the youth, along with the rise, subsidence, or destruction, or destruction and subsidence of the mohaniya karma, is taken here. There are 6 types of leshya due to the difference in Krishna, etc. There are only three inauspicious leshyas in the hells.
1. Leshya of the hell beings:
Doubt - Karmakanda handwritten commentary by Pandit Todarmalji, page 822 - "Although the hell is a place of inauspicious leshya according to the rules, yet Tejo leshya is found there, which is the first to be obtained when the leshya rises weakly." Tejo leshya is mentioned here, but how is it possible in hell? This is not understood because all three inauspicious leshyas are found in hell, so please provide a solution.
Solution - According to the opinion of Shri Pushpadanta Bhootbali, Tejo leshya does not exist in hell. The characteristic of leshya is as follows - Ātmapravṛtti sansleshakari leshya or limpatiti leshya. Meaning: The leshya that synthesizes or combines the soul and the tendency (karma) is called leshya, or the leshya that covers (the soul from the karmas) is leshya. (Sha. Khan. Pu. 7 letter 7). The peak time of Krishna, Nāl and Kāpot leshya is said to be 33, 17 and 7 oceans, respectively. Because the hell beings who are born in the Tiryancha or humans with Krishna, Nīl and Kāpot leshya, stay for the longest time in the antarmūhūrta kāla, and then are born in the hells with a lifespan of 33, 17 and 7 oceans, respectively, and stay there for their respective lifespans with Krishna, Nīl and Kāpot leshya, and then leave and spend the antarmūhūrta kāla with the same leshyas, and then go to other non-contradictory leshyas, the said three leshyas of the being are found to be 33, 17 and 7 oceans, respectively, including two antarmūhūrta kālas. Therefore, according to this statement, there is no change in the form of leshya in the hells. Therefore, Tejo leshya is not possible there.
According to Gommatasar Jīvakanda - The leshya is that by which the being becomes attached to virtue and vice (verse 488). In hell, there are three inauspicious leshyas of Kāpot, Nīl and Krishna, which are found in the first, etc., earths. This is the statement of the master's authority in relation to the भावलेश्या (bhāvaleshā). (verse 528). The peak time of Krishna leshya is 33 oceans, Nīl leshya is 17 oceans, and Kāpot leshya is 7 oceans. This peak time is in hell because the seventh hell has a peak lifespan of 33 oceans, the fifth hell has a peak lifespan of 17 oceans, and the third hell has a peak lifespan of 7 oceans (verse 551). This also makes it clear that the leshya remains the same in hell until the lifespan is over. One leshya does not change into another leshya. There are two types of transitions in leshyas - (1) Svasthāna Sankraman (2) Parastthāna Sankraman. Parastthāna Sankraman does not occur in the hells. In Svasthāna Sankraman, there is a loss and increase in the six sthānas. It is possible for the hell beings to have a Svasthāna Sankraman of their own leshyas in the form of six sthānas, which happens after the antarmūhūrta (verse 503-505). This change in the six sthānas has also been written in these words somewhere - भावलेश्यास्तु प्रत्येकमन्तर्मुहूर्त परिवर्तिन्यः (bhāvaleshāstu pratyekamantarmūhūrta parivartinyah). In Gom. Ji. verse 495, there is mention of the Krishna color dravya leshya of all the hell beings, but in Sarvarthasiddhi and Tattvarthrajabārtik, all three dravya leshyas of Krishna, Nīl and Kāpot are mentioned for the hell beings. (Pandit Ratanchandamu. Vy. 321-22)

Page #545:
---------------------------
##  Massar Karmakanda - 6

**29 and 30 Prakruti Sthana are bound by the Saasadan Guna Sthana, and similarly, the Saasadan Guna Sthana also binds both the Tiryanch and Manushya Gati combined (29-30 Prakruti) Sthana. The Mishr and Asanyat Guna Sthana bind the Manushya Gati combined 29 Prakruti Sthana.**

**Ghanprithvi, Nivritti Paryapt, Paryapt Kshayik, and Kritkritya Vedak Samyagdrishti Tirthankar, devoid of Sattwa, bind the 29 Prakruti with Manushya Gati, and the 30 Prakruti Sthana with Manushya Gati and Sattwa of the Tirthankar. In the Vansa-Meghaprithvi, the Jivas with Sattwa of the Tirthankar, upon attaining Paryapti, regularly abandon Mithyatva and attain Samyaktva, binding the 30 Prakruti.**

**In the Tiryanch Gati, the three Paryaptis (Paryapt, Nivritti Paryapt, and Labdhyaparyapt), all the Sarvaekendriya, Dwiindriya, Triindriya, Chaturindriya, and Labdhyaparyapt-Nivritti Paryapt Asanjee Jivas, and the Mithyadrishti and Saasadanvarti Aparayapt Sanjee Jivas who have come from Narakadi, all have three Ashubh Leshyas. The Paryapt Mithyadrishti Asanjee have four Leshyas, Krishnadi. The Paryapt Saasadan and Mishr Guna Sthana, and the Asanyat Sanjee Tiryanch, have all six Leshyas. The Bhogbhumij Nivritti Paryapt Asanyat has only the Jghanya Kapo Taleishya, and in the Paryapt Avastha, there are only three Shubh Leshyas, Mithyadrishti and Samyagdrishti, because the three Shubh Leshyas are mentioned in the Agam as soon as the body Paryapti of the born Jivas is complete.**

**The Mithyatva Yut Badar-Sukshmaprithvi, Ap-Tej-Vayu Kay-Nitya Nigod, Chaturgati Nigod, PratiShthit-ApratiShthit, each Dwiindriya-Triindriya-Chaturindriya, and Asanjee-Sanjee Panchendriya, these 59 types of Labdhyaparyapt and Paryapt Tiryanch, and the Mithyadrishti Paryapt and Aparayapt Karmabhumij Manushya, coming from the Tirthankar with three Ashubh Leshyas, are born in the Tiryanch Jivas, binding five Sthana, 23-25-26-29 and 30 Prakruti, without the remaining 28 Prakruti Sthana. The Tej Kay-Vayu Kay Jivas bind these Sthana only with the Tiryanch Gati. The 19 types of Labdhyaparyapt-Paryapt Tiryanch and Paryapt-Aparayapt Manushya, together 40 types, with three types of Ashubh Leshyas of Mithyadrishti, die and are born again in the aforementioned 19 types of Mithyadrishti Paryapt Tiryanch.**

**The Mithyadrishti Jivas, born in the aforementioned 19 types of Tiryanch, coming from all four Gatis, bind five Sthana, 23-25-26-29 and 30 Prakruti, in the Nivritti Paryapt Avastha. In the Mithyatva Guna Sthana, six Sthana are bound, 23-25-26-28-29-30 Prakruti. In the Saasadan Guna Sthana, three Sthana are bound, 28-29-30 Prakruti. In the Mishr-Asanyat and Desh Sanayt Guna Sthana, only one Sthana is bound, 28 Prakruti.**

**Similarly, the Manushya who, in the previous birth, with the qualities of a Daata, gave Dana to three types of Patras, worthy of Dana, due to the influence of that Dana or by approving it, that Manushya, Anumodana, and Vrti Tiryanch, by giving Dana to the Tiryanch, binds the Tiryanch Ayu in the Mithyatva Avastha, dies with three Ashubh Leshyas, and becomes a Mithyadrishti Tiryanch in the Bhogbhumi. There, in the Aparayapt Avastha, he binds two Sthana, 29-30 Prakruti, with the Tiryanch Gati, and one Sthana, 29 Prakruti, with the Manushya Gati. The Tiryanch or Manushya whose Bhogbhumij Tiryanch Ayu is bound, 
** 

Page #546:
---------------------------
Gommatasar Karmakanda - 50.7

After attaining the first stage of liberation (Prathamopaśama Samyaktv) while on the verge of death, if one's Samyaktv is destroyed by the arising of any one of the infinite karmas (Anantānubandhīkā), then they become a Tiryancha (animal) in the Bhoga Bhumi (realm of experience) with three unfavorable Leshyas (karmic tendencies) and residing in the Sasadan Gunasthan (state of being). They bind 29 and 30 karmic states (Prakriti) along with the Tiryancha Gati (animal realm) and 21 karmic states along with the Manushya Gati (human realm). This is because, according to the saying "Michchaduge Devachauu Tittham Pahi," the binding of 28 karmic states (Prakriti) including the Dev Gati (heavenly realm) does not occur in the state of Apariapta (incomplete liberation).

Those who have previously bound the karma of Tiryanchayuka (animal existence) are born in the Karma Bhumi (realm of action) as Manushya (humans) with the knowledge of their past actions (Kritakritya Vedaka) or with the vision of the क्षायिक (Kshayika) Samyaktv. They are born with three types of Patra Dana (gifts of merit) and have a lifespan of three, two, or one Pitya Praman (a unit of time). They are born in the Bhoga Bhumi with the lesser aspects of the Kapo Taleśya (karmic tendency) and experience either excellent, moderate, or inferior Bhoga (experiences). There, they bind only the 28 karmic states (Prakriti) along with the Dev Gati, while still in the state of Apariapta (incomplete liberation).

In the state of Pariapta (complete liberation), there are three favorable Leshyas (karmic tendencies) associated with the Mithyatva, Sasadan, Mishra, and Asanyata Gunasthan (states of being). Here, those in the Mithyatva and Sasadan Gunasthan bind 28 karmic states (Prakriti) along with the Dev Gati. Similarly, those in the Mishra and Asanyata Gunasthan also bind 28 karmic states (Prakriti).

This is how the binding of karmic states for Tiryanchas with Leshyas is described. Now, we will discuss the binding of karmic states for Manushyas (humans) through the Nama Karma (karma of name and form).

In the Labdhya Pariapta (state of attaining complete liberation) Manushya, there are three unfavorable Leshyas. In the Nirvritti Pariapta (state of complete liberation), there are all six Leshyas. Those with the three unfavorable Leshyas and Mithyatva (false belief) bind 23, 25, 26, 29, and 30 karmic states (Prakriti). Those in the Sasadan Gunasthan bind two karmic states (Prakriti) - 29 and 30. Those in the Asanyata Gunasthan bind 28 karmic states (Prakriti) along with the Dev Gati and two karmic states (Prakriti) - 29 along with the Dev Tirthankara (liberated being).

In the state of Pariabhava (state of complete liberation), all six Leshyas are present. Therefore, in the Mithyatva Gunasthan, there are six karmic states (Prakriti) - 23, 25, 26, 28, 29, and 30. In the Sasadan Gunasthan, there are three karmic states (Prakriti) - 28, 29, and 30. Of these, the 28th karmic state (Prakriti) binds with the Dev Gati, the 29th karmic state (Prakriti) binds with the Tiryancha and Manushya Gati, and the 30th karmic state (Prakriti) binds with the Tiryancha Gati and Udyota (radiance). In the Mishra Gunasthan, there is only one karmic state (Prakriti) - 28 along with the Dev Gati. In the Asanyata Gunasthan, and in the Deshasanyata (state of being restrained in conduct) and Pramatta Gunasthan (state of being heedless) with three favorable Leshyas, there is the binding of 28 karmic states (Prakriti) along with the Dev Gati and 29 karmic states (Prakriti) along with the Dev Tirthankara. In the Apramatta Gunasthan (state of being heedful), there is the binding of four karmic states (Prakriti) - the aforementioned 28 and 29, and 30 and 31 along with the Aharak Dwik (two types of food). In the Apurvakarana Gunasthan (state of being free from the karma of past actions), there is only the Shukla Leshya (favorable karmic tendency). Here, there is the binding of five karmic states (Prakriti) - the aforementioned four and one more at the end. In the Badar, Anivrittikarana, and Sukshma Samparaya Gunasthan, there is only one karmic state (Prakriti) bound. In the subsequent Gunasthan (states of being), there is no binding of karma.

It is important to understand the binding of karmic states for Manushyas (humans) in the Bhoga Bhumi (realm of experience) as it is similar to that of Tiryanchas (animals). Now, we will discuss the binding of karmic states in the Dev Gati (heavenly realm).

The Bhavnatrik (three types of beings) Nirvritti Pariapta (state of complete liberation) Mithyatva Drishti Dev (heavenly beings with false belief) bind 28 karmic states (Prakriti) without binding four karmic states (Prakriti) - 25, 26, 29, and 30. These four karmic states are: 25 along with the Ekendriya Pariapta (state of having one sense organ), 26 along with the Ekendriya Pariapta, Atap (heat), or Udyota (radiance), 29 along with the Tiryancha and Manushya Gati, and 30 along with the Tiryancha and Udyota. 

Page #547:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-508:

The 29 nature-forms with the Tiryancha and human paths, and the 30 nature-forms with the Tiryancha-Udyota, are bound by the beings residing in the Sasadanagunasthan. The Tiryancha, Naga, Sannyasi, etc., and the Dravyajinalingi, etc., with Mithyadristi and Tejo-leshya, are born in the Saudharma-yugal. These beings, in their Nivrutti-paryapta-avastha, bind the 25th, 26th, 29th, and 30th nature-forms. The Devayuka, who have bound karma, are the Asanyata and Deshasanyata-gunasthan-varti Tiryancha. They, in their Prathamo-pashama-samyaktv, and the humans in their Prathamo-pashama and Dvitiyo-pashama-samyaktv, experience Viradhana and are born in the Saudharma-yugal with Tejo-leshya. In their Nivrutti-paryapta-avastha, they bind the 21 nature-forms with the human path, and the 30 nature-forms with the Tiryancha path and Udyota. The Vedak-Kshayik-samyagdristi, who are Sarvabhogabhumij, and the Asanyata-Deshasanyata-gunasthan-varti-karmabhumij-Vedak-samyagdristi-Tiryancha, are born in the Saudharma-yugal with Tejo-leshya, along with the Devayuka, who are bound by karma, until the Aprammatta-gunasthan, with or without the Sattvas of the Tirthankara-prakriti. These beings, in their Asanyata-gunasthan-Nivrutti-paryapta-avastha, bind the 30 nature-forms with the human path and the Sattvas of the Tirthankara-prakriti, and the 29 nature-forms with the human path without the Sattvas of the Tirthankara-prakriti. The Asanyata-bhogabhumij with Padma-Shukla-leshya, the Asanyatadi-karmabhumij with Padma-Shukla-leshya, and the Apurvakaranad-gunasthan-varti with Shukla-leshya, attain Tejo-leshya at the time of death and are born in the Saudharma-yugal. The beings in the Sanatkumara-yugal have Tejo-leshya in the Vimanas, starting from the Chakra-Indraka, but the Bhogabhumij are not born there. These beings, in their Nivrutti-paryapta-avastha, bind the 29 nature-forms with the Tiryancha and human paths, and the 30 nature-forms with the Tiryancha-Udyota, if they are Mithyadristi and Sasadanagunasthan-varti. The Asanyatta-gunasthan-varti bind the 29 nature-forms with the human path, and the 30 nature-forms with the human-Tirthankara. The Karmabhumij humans and Tiryancha, who are born in the eight heavens with the Devayuka bound by karma, have Padma-leshya. These beings, if they are Mithyadristi and Sasadanagunasthan-varti, bind the two nature-forms with the Tiryancha and human paths, and the two nature-forms with the human-Tirthankara, with or without the Tirthankara. The Devas residing in the four heavens, starting from the Amata, and the Navagraiveyaka, have Shukla-leshya. These beings, if they are Mithyadristi and Sasadanagunasthan-varti, bind the 29 nature-forms with the human path, and the 29 nature-forms with the human path and the Tirthankara, or the 30 nature-forms with the human-Tirthankara, if they are Asanyata-Devas residing in the four heavens, starting from the Amata, and the Asanyata-Devas residing in the Anudisha-Anuttaravimana.

**Verse 550:**

Bhavya-margana, all of the Bhavya, have six nature-forms, starting from the Krishna-leshya of the Abhavya. The Samyaktv-margana, with Upashama and Kshayik-samyagdristi, have five nature-forms, starting from the Shukla-leshya, which are the 28th, 29th, 30th, 31st, and the 1st. The Vedak-samyaktv has four nature-forms, starting from the Padma-leshya, which are the 28th, 29th, 30th, and 31st. 

Page #548:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda - 509

**Special Meaning:**

Those who are in hell with the three hells of Dharma, etc., and are non-restrained, possess Right Faith, and are bound to 29 natural stations including the human realm, and those who are in the human realm and are bound to 30 natural stations including the Tirthankara. The remaining hell beings on Earth are bound to 29 natural stations including the human realm.

**Doubt:**

According to the verse 93, "Aviratādi cattāri titthayarabandhaparāmbhayā ṇarā kevalidugaṁte," etc., humans with the four qualities of Avirata, etc., begin to bind the Tirthankara nature near the Kevali and Shruta Kevali, then how is the binding of the Tirthankara nature in hell?

**Solution:**

Those who have previously bound the hell life, such humans begin to bind the Tirthankara nature in the first cessation or in the Vedaka or Kshayika Right Knowledge. The Vedaka Right Faith, at the time of death, becomes wrong faith and is born up to the third Earth. After becoming fully satisfied, they obtain Vedaka Right Knowledge and bind the time-bound Tirthankara nature.

The first cessation Right Faith, non-restrained, and those who are in the country-restrained quality station, are bound to 28 natural stations including the heavenly realm. The first cessation Right Faith humans who are non-restrained, country-restrained, or inattentive quality station, are bound to 28 natural stations including the heavenly realm, and 29 natural stations including the heavenly realm and Tirthankara. But those who are in the attentive quality station, are bound to 30 natural stations including the heavenly realm and the Aharaka, and 31 natural stations including the heavenly realm, Tirthankara, and the Aharaka. In the heavenly realm, the first cessation Right Knowledge is only up to the upper-most Graiveyaka, therefore, they are bound to 29 natural stations including the human realm, but not to 30 natural stations including the Tirthankara. Because those who bind the Tirthankara with the heavenly life, do not lose their Right Knowledge, and without becoming corrupt from Right Knowledge and obtaining wrong faith, they do not obtain the first cessation Right Knowledge. And the Vedaka Right Knowledge, only those who are in the attentive quality station, obtain the second cessation Right Knowledge by ceasing the seven natures with the three karmic results. The time of this Right Knowledge is an inter-moment. In the first moment of the inter-moment, they bind four natural stations including the heavenly realm, 28-29-30-31. From the first moment of the first part of the A-purva Karana quality station to the sixth part, they bind four natural stations including 28-29-30-31. From the seventh part to the subtle Samparaya quality station, they bind only one natural station at a time. And they do not bind the name karma until the end of the Upashanta Kshaya quality station. Descending from the Upashanta Kshaya quality station, they become non-restrained and bind two natural stations including 28 and 29, like those in the inattentive quality station. In this way, there are eight quality stations in the second cessation Right Knowledge. Ascending the series with the heavenly life, in all parts except the first part of the A-purva Karana, and descending, if there is sustenance, then in the Vaimanika Devas, as much as possible,

1. But according to the opinion of Dhavlakar, etc., the second cessation Right Knowledge is also produced in the fourth quality station of those who ascend the cessation series. (D. Pu. 1 p. 211) 

Page #549:
---------------------------
## Gommatasara Karmakanda-550

In the state of incomplete liberation, a human being binds 29 natural places, and a human being who is a Tirthankara binds 30 natural places. Thus, the one who possesses the essence of the 21 and 31 natural places of karma called *namakarma* does not attain the *mithyatva* state from the *pramatta* state. Due to the non-arising of the three states of *asanyata* etc., along with the essence of the Tirthankara and *aaharaka*, the one who possesses the essence of the Tirthankara nature does not go to the *sasadan* state, and due to the non-arising of *samyagmithyatva*, the *misra* state does not arise. Because, it is known that a being does not attain the *mithyatva* state while possessing the essence of the Tirthankara and *aaharaka*, does not attain the *sasadan* state while possessing the essence of the *aaharaka*, and does not attain the *misra* state while possessing the essence of the Tirthankara nature.

The *kshayika* *samyagdrsti* binds 28, 29, 30, 31, and 1 natural places, making a total of 5 places. The *vedaka* and *kritakritya* *samyagdrsti* of the three states of *asanyata* etc., bind two places, namely 28 and 29, while the *vedaka* *samyagdrsti* of the *aprammatta* state binds four places, namely 28, 29, 30, and 31. The *bhogabhumij* *dhetaka* and *kritakritya* *samyagdrsti* bind only 28 natural places, including the *devagati*. The *kritakritya* *samyagdrsti* binds two places, namely 29, including the *devamanushya* state, and 30, including the *manushya* state and the Tirthankara. The *prathamopasham* *samyagdrsti* binds only 29 natural places, including the *devamanushya* state, for those who have attained *vedaka* *samyaktva* in the *deva* and *devaparyaya* states.

The *sadimithyadrsti* beings, from the *naraki* and *bhavanatrika* states up to the *uparimagaveyaka*, leave *mithyatva* and become *vedaka* *samyagdrsti* due to the arising of *samyaktva* nature, without performing the three actions, and bind only 29 natural places, including the *manushya* state.

**Verse 551:**

*Adavi satti dusane, misse micche da kinhalessan va. Sanni aharidare, savvam tevischakkam tu.*

**Meaning:**

In the *sasadan* state, there are three places of binding, namely 28, 29, and 30, starting from the 28th natural place. In the *samyagmithyatva* (mixed) state, there are two places, namely 28 and 29. In the *mithyatva* state, there are six places of binding, namely 23, 25, 26, 28, 29, and 30, starting from the *krishna* state. In the *sanni* path and the *aahar* path, there are all places of binding. In the *asanji* and *anaahar* paths, there are six places of binding, starting from the 23rd natural place, namely 23, 25, 26, 28, 29, and 30.

**Special Note:**

In the *sasadan* state, the binding of 29 and 30 natural places occurs in the *nirvrittyaprapti* state, in the *badara* state, in the *prithvi* body, in the *apkaaya* state, in the *pratyekavanaspatikaaya* state, in the *dviindriya* state, in the *triindriya* state, in the *chaturindriya* state, in the *saini* and *asaini* states, in the *tirthacha* state, in the *manushya* state, in the *paryasanaraki* state, and in the *deva* state from the *paryapta* and *aparyapta* *bhavanatrika* states up to the *sahasrarasvarga*. In the *paryapta* *sanji* state and in the *manushya* state, the binding of 28, 29, and 30 natural places occurs. 

Page #550:
---------------------------
There are three types of locations: 1) Gommatapsar Karmakanda-511 with 28 Prakruti including Devagati, 2) 29 Prakruti including Tiryanch and Manusya Gati, and 3) 30 Prakruti including Tiryanch and Udyota. These three locations are bound by 29 Prakruti, which includes both Dev and Manusya Gati, from Anatadi Svarga to Uparimauveyakaparyanta. However, there are no Sasadanagunasthan in Anudish and Anuttar Vimanas, as only Samyagdristi Dev are born there. There are two Bandhastan with 28-29 Prakruti, which are located in Mishragunasthan. Here, 29 Prakruti, including Manusya, are bound for Paryapta Dev and Naraki, and 28 Prakruti, including Dev, are bound for Tiryanch and Manusya. There is no Mishragunasthan in Anudish and Anuttar Vimanas. There are six locations with 23-25-26-28-29 and 30 Prakruti for Mithyatvagunasthanvarti Jivas, similar to Krishna Leshya. There are two locations with 29-30 Prakruti, including Tiryanch and Manusya Gati, for Nirvrittyaparyapta and Paryaptanarki in the first six Prithvis. In the seventh Prithvi, two locations with 29-30 Prakruti, including Tiryanch Gati, are bound.

In Tiryanch Gati, there are five Bandhastan with 23-25-26-29-30 Prakruti, excluding 28 Prakruti locations for Labdhyaparyapta-Nirvrittyaparyatak Badar-Sukshmaprithvi-Ap-Tej-Vayu-Kay, Sadharan-Pratyek-Vanaspati, Dviindriya, Triindriya, Chaturindriya, Asaini-Saini Tiryanch and Manusya.

Note: There are no Bandhastan with 25 and 29 Prakruti, including Manusya Gati, in Tej-Kay and Vayu-Kay. There are six locations with 23-25-26-28-29 and 30 Prakruti for Paryapta Asanji-Sanji Panchendriya Tiryanch and Manusya. There are five locations with 23-25-26-29 and 30 Prakruti, excluding 28 Prakruti, for Labdhyaparyapta-Nirvrittyaparyapta Manusya. In Devagati, four locations with 25-26-29 and 30 Prakruti are bound for Nirvrittyaparyapta and Paryapta Avastha from Bhavanatrika to Ishansvarga. Two locations with 29-30 Prakruti are bound from Sanatkumarsvarga to Sahasrasvarga. There is only one Bandhastan with 29 Prakruti from Anatadi Svarga to Uparimagnaiveyakaparyanta, as there is no Tiryanch Gati bound here. There is no Mithyadristi in Anudish and Anuttar Vimanas.

There are all Bandhastan for Namakarma in Sanji and Aharmargnam. There are six Bandhastan with 23-25-26-28-29 and 30 Prakruti in Asanji and Anaharakmargnam. There are two locations with 29-30 Prakruti for Sanghinaraki. There are six locations with 23, 25, 26, 28, 29, and 30 Prakruti for Tiryanch, excluding Tirthankar and Aharak Yugal Yuta locations. There are all locations with 23-25-26-28-29-30-31 and 1 Prakruti for Manusya. There are four locations with 25-26-29-30 Prakruti for Dev, excluding 28 Prakruti. There are six locations with 23, 25, 26, 28, 29, and 30 Prakruti for Asanjimargnam, excluding Tirthankar and Aharak Yugal Yuta locations, for Labdhyaparyapta-Nirvrittyaparyapta-Paryapta Badar-Sukshmaprithvi-Ap-Tej-Vayu-Kay-Sadharan-Pratyek-Vanaspatikay-Dviindriya-Triindriya-Chaturindriya and Panchendriya.

There are two locations with 29 and 30 Prakruti for Dev and Narak from Sanatkumarsvarga to Uparimagraiveyakaparyanta for Aharmargnam. 

Page #551:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-512

There are six locations of nature in the Tiryancha (animals) - 23, 25, 26, 28, 29, and 30. There are seven locations of nature in humans - 23, 25, 26, 28, 29, 30, and 31, and one location of nature in the 5th nature. Bhava-vid and Saudharma-pala have four locations of nature - 21, 26, 29, and 30. In the Anaharamargana (path of non-eating), in the state of Vigraha-gati (state of disintegration), there are two locations of nature for Devas (gods) and Narakas (hells) - 29 and 30. In the Tiryancha, there are six locations of nature - 23, 25, 26, 28, 29, and 30. Among these, the location of nature with 28, combined with the Deva-gati, is only for the Asanyata (uncontrolled). In humans, there are six locations of nature - 23, 25, 26, 28, 29, and 30. In this way, the locations of binding of the Karma (action) are described in the Marganas.

In the fourteen Marganas, the details of the locations of binding of Karma are as follows:

| Margana | Location of Binding | Nature |
|---|---|---|
| 1. Naraka-gati (Hell) | 29 and 30 | 2 |
| 2. Tiryancha-gati (Animal) | 23, 25, 26, 28, 29, and 30 | 6 |
| 3. Manusya-gati (Human) | 23, 25, 26, 28, 29, 30, 31, and 5 | 7 |
| 4. Deva-gati (God) | 25, 26, 29, and 30 | 4 |

| Indriya (Sense) and Kaya (Body) | Location of Binding | Nature |
|---|---|---|
| 1. Eka-indriya (One sense) | 23, 25, 26, 29, and 30 | 5 | (5th nature - Stationary body)
| 2. Vikala-tray (Three senses) | 23, 25, 26, 29, and 30 | 5 | (3rd nature - Moving body)
| 3. Panch-indriya (Five senses) | 23, 25, 26, 28, 29, 30, 31, and 1 | 7 | (1st nature - Human body)

| Manoyoga (Mind-application) | Location of Binding | Nature |
|---|---|---|
| 4. Manoyoga (Mind-application) | 23, 25, 26, 28, 29, 30, 31, and 1 | 7 |

| Vachanayoga (Speech-application) | Location of Binding | Nature |
|---|---|---|
| 4. Vachanayoga (Speech-application) | 23, 25, 26, 28, 29, 30, 31, and 1 | 7 |

| Audarikakaya-yoga (Noble body-application) | Location of Binding | Nature |
|---|---|---|
| 6. Audarikakaya-yoga (Noble body-application) | 23, 25, 26, 28, 29, and 30 | 6 |

| Audarikamishrakaya-yoga (Mixed noble body-application) | Location of Binding | Nature |
|---|---|---|
| 6. Audarikamishrakaya-yoga (Mixed noble body-application) | 23, 25, 26, 28, 29, and 30 | 6 |

| Vaikriyikakaya-yoga (Unnoble body-application) | Location of Binding | Nature |
|---|---|---|
| 6. Vaikriyikakaya-yoga (Unnoble body-application) | 25, 26, 29, and 30 | 4 |

| Vaikriyikamishrakaya-yoga (Mixed unnoble body-application) | Location of Binding | Nature |
|---|---|---|
| 6. Vaikriyikamishrakaya-yoga (Mixed unnoble body-application) | 25, 26, 29, and 30 | 4 |

| Aharakakaya-yoga (Eating body-application) | Location of Binding | Nature |
|---|---|---|
| 2. Aharakakaya-yoga (Eating body-application) | 28 and 29 | 2 |

| Aharakamishrakaya-yoga (Mixed eating body-application) | Location of Binding | Nature |
|---|---|---|
| 2. Aharakamishrakaya-yoga (Mixed eating body-application) | 28 and 29 | 2 |

| Karmanakaya-yoga (Action body-application) | Location of Binding | Nature |
|---|---|---|
| 6. Karmanakaya-yoga (Action body-application) | 23, 25, 26, 28, 29, and 30 | 6 |

Page #552:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-513
Veda
8
| 23-25-26-28-29-30-31 and 1 Prakruti.
|  Neuter, Female and Male Veda, Anger-Pride-Deception and Greed | 1.  Kumati-Kushruta and
Kuavadhigyan
Kashaya
8 23-25-26-28-29-30-31 and 1 Prakruti. 6 | 23-25-26-28-29 and 30 Prakruti.
Gyan
| 2. Mati-Shruta-Avadhi and
"Mane Peyyaygyan.
5.
| 28-29-30-31 and 1 Prakruti.
. '
| 3. Kevalgyan
5
| 28-29-30-31 and 1 Prakruti.
Samyama. 1. Samayik and
Chhedopasthapana 2. Pariharvishuddhi
28-29-30 and 31 Prakruti. 1 Prakruti.
3. Sukshmasampray
4. Yathakyat
5. Deshasamyama
28 and 29 Prakruti. 23-25-26-28-29 and 30 Prakruti.
6. Asamyama
Darshan
23-25-26-28-29-30-31 and 1 Prakruti.
Chakshu-Achakshudarshan Avadhidarshan
28-29-30-31 and 1 Prakruti.
Leshya
Kevaldarshan Krishna-Neel-Kapoth Tejo-Leshya Padya-Leshya Shukla-Leshya
23-25-26-28-29 and 30 Prakruti. 25-26-28-29-30 and 31 Prakruti. 28-29-30 and 31 Prakruti. 28-29-30-31 and 1 Prakruti. 

Page #553:
---------------------------
##  **Translation:**

**Bhavy**
**Samyaktv**
**Sangi**
**Ahar**
**Haya**
**Abhavy**
**Upsham v Kshayik**
**Vedasamyaktv**
**Samyagmithyatv**
**Sasadan**
**Mithyatv**
**Sangi**
**Asi**
**Aharak**
**Gommatsar Karmakand-514**
**Fotoark**
**Anaharak**
**8**
**D**
**5**
**4**
**2**
**3**
**6**
**C**
**6**
**8**
**6**
**23-25-26-28-29-30-31 v 1 Prakrutik**
**23-25-26-28-29 v 30 Prakrutik**
**28-29-30-31 ch 1 Prakrutik**
**28-29-30 v 31 Prakrutik**
**28 v 29 Prakrutik**
**28-29 v 30 Prakrutik**
**23-25-26-28-29 v 30 Prakrutik**
**AATRIA**
**23-25-26-28-29-30-31 v 1 Prakrutik**
**23-25-26-28-29 v 30 Prakrutik**
**23-25-26-28 29 30 31 v 1 Prakrutik**
**23-25-26-28-29 v 30 Prakrutik**

**Athanantar namakarmake bandasthanonmen punarukt bhangonko kahte hain Niryaadijudattaane, bhangenappappannammi thanammi. Thavidoonmicchhabhange, sasnabhangahu aththitti. || 552 ||**

**Aviradbhange missayadesapamattaan savvabhanga hu. Aththittitedu avaniy, micchaviradapamaadesu || 553 || Jummam ||**

**Meaning:**

To establish the realms of hell and other destinations along with their respective breaks in their respective Gunasthanas. In these, the breaks of the realms of Mithyadristi are embedded in the breaks of the Sasadan bandasthanas, and the breaks of the Asanyat bandasthanas are embedded in the breaks of the Misra, Deshasanyat, and Pramattagunastana-related bandasthanas. This is because there is similarity between their breaks. Therefore, by subtracting the breaks of the Sasadan Gunastana from the breaks of Mithyadristi and by subtracting the breaks of the Misra, Deshasanyat, and Pramattagunastana from the breaks of Asanyat, the breaks of the bandasthanas in Mithyadristi, Asanyat, and Apramattagunastana are formed.

**Special Meaning:**

Here, in the Mithyatv Gunastana, there is one break in the realm of 28 Prakrutik, which includes hell. In the realm of 23 Prakrutik, which includes the animal realm, there is one break. In the realm of 25 Prakrutik, there are eight breaks. In the realm of 26 Prakrutik, there are eight breaks. In the realm of 29 Prakrutik, there are... 

Page #554:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda - 515

There are 4608 bhangas in the 30th nature-form place, 1 in the 25th nature-form place with humans, 4608 in the 29th nature-form place, and 8 in the 28th nature-form place with devas. There are no bhangas in the hell-bound place in the Sasadanaguna-sthana. There are 3200 bhangas in the 29th nature-form place with the animal realm, and 3200 in the 30th nature-form place. There are 3200 bhangas in the 29th nature-form place with humans, and 8 in the 28th nature-form place with devas. There are no bhangas in the hell-animal realm in the mixed and unrestrained guna-sthana. Therefore, there are 8 bhangas in the 29th nature-form place with humans in the mixed guna-sthana. There are 8 bhangas in the 28th nature-form place with devas. There are 8 bhangas in the 29th and 30th nature-form places with humans, and in the 28th and 29th nature-form places with devas in the unrestrained guna-sthana. There is one bhang in each of the 28th, 29th, 30th, and 31st nature-form places with devas, because their bondage occurs up to the sixth part of the unattentive and un-averse guna-sthana. There are 8 bhangas in the 28th and 29th nature-form places with devas in the restrained and attentive guna-sthana.

Bhang
Special
Guna-sthana
Bondage Place
Animal realm-bound 23rd nature
False belief False belief Animal realm-bound 25th nature False belief Human-bound 25th nature False belief False belief Hell-bound 28th nature False belief
Animal realm-bound 26th nature
Deva-bound 28th nature Five-sense-perfection Animal realm-bound
False belief
29th nature
False belief Human-perfection-bound 29th nature
1.
8
1
8
1
8
4608
Unrestrained Right-view
4608
False belief | Five-sense-perfection Animal realm-bound 4608 30th nature Human-perfection-bound 29th nature
Deva-Tirthankara-bound 29th nature
Human-Tirthankara-bound nature
Deva-bound 28th nature
8
8
8
8
Auspicious-Stable-Glory-Fame-pair
2x2x2 = 8
Auspicious-Stable-:
R-Glory-Fame-pair
2x2x2 = 8
Auspicious-Stable-Glory-Fame-pair 24242 = 8 Consolidation-Establishment-Stable etc. 6 pairs-Separation.
6 x 646x2
Consolidation-Establishment-Stable etc. 6 pairs-Separation.
6*646x2
Consolidation-Establishment-Stable etc. 6 pairs-Separation.
6×6×6x2
Auspicious-Stable-:
2x2x2 = 8
Auspicious-Stable-Glory-Fame-pair
(- Glory-Fame-pair
2x2x2 = 8
Auspicious-Stable-Glory-Fame-pair
2x2x2 = 8
Auspicious-Stable-Glory-Fame-pair
2x2×2 = 8

Page #555:
---------------------------
## Gommatasara Karmakanda - 596

**Verse 554:**

The aforementioned bondage locations are 22 Bhujakaras, 21 Alpataras, 46 Avattis, and 4 types based on the 3 root distinctions of Avaktvyas, as defined by the word "Cha". These should be applied with their respective Bhangas to the bondage locations of Namakarma, along with their own location (Swasthana) and other locations (Parasthanas), or with all other locations (Sarvaparasthanas). Now, the characteristics of these Swasthanas etc. are described.

**Verse 555:**

The bondage locations are considered Swasthanas when the thought is focused on the desired quality location (Vivakshitagunasthan), Parasthanas when the thought is focused on other quality locations (Anyagunasthan), and Sarvaparasthanas when the thought is focused on both other locations (Anyagati and Anyahi Gunasthan). In these three, the bondages of Mithyadristi, Asanyata, and Apatra Le Batashja Sambhaki, which are Bhujakara etc., are respectively called Swasthanabhujakara etc., Parasthanabhujakara etc., and Sarvaparasthanabhujakara etc.

**Verse 556:**

From the Mithyatva Gunasthan to the Apramatta Gunasthan, the beings, leaving their own Gunasthanas, attain four, one, two, five, five, six, and three Gunasthanas respectively. The beings with the three Gunasthanas of Apurvakarana etc., who are in the Upshama श्रेणी, attain three Gunasthanas each, and the beings with the Upshantakashaya Gunasthan attain two Gunasthanas.

**Verse 557:**

The beings residing in which Gunasthanas attain which Gunasthanas? The being in the Mithyatva Gunasthan attains the Sasadan and Pramatta Gunasthanas without the Misra. The Misra attains the second Gunasthan, and the Misra attains the first and fourth Gunasthanas.

**Verse 558:**

The being in the Avirata Sammo Deso attains the Pramatta Parihina Apramatta Gunasthan. The being in the Pramatta Gunasthan attains the sixth Gunasthan, and the being in the Apramatta Gunasthan attains the sixth Gunasthan.

**Verse 559:**

(Jumm) 

Page #556:
---------------------------
Gommatasar Karmakanda - 517

A being in the Asamyata Gunasthan attains the first four Gunasthanas up to the Aprammatta Gunasthan. A being in the Sasadan Gunasthan attains Mithyatva and a being in the Misra Gunasthan attains Mithyatva and Asamyata. A being in the Asamyata and Deshasamyata Gunasthan attains the first five Gunasthanas up to the Aprammatta Gunasthan without the Prammatta Gunasthan. In other words, an Asamyata Samyagdristi Jiva attains the five Gunasthanas of Mithyatva, Sasadan, Misra, Deshasamyata, and Aprammatta. A being in the Deshasamyata Gunasthan attains the four Gunasthanas of Mithyatva, Sasadan, Misra, and Asamyata, and the Aprammatta Gunasthan. A being in the Prammatta Gunasthan attains the six Gunasthanas from Mithyatva to Aprammatta. A being in the Aprammatta Gunasthan attains only the Prammatta Gunasthan. If a being in the Aprammatta Gunasthan ascends to the Upshama and Kshapaka श्रेणी ( श्रेणी ) through the 'Du' word, then it attains the Apurvakarana Gunasthan. It should be understood that an Aprammatta Jiva, upon death, becomes a Deva Asamyata and attains the fourth Gunasthan.

SP
Uvasamga Du Seti, Arohanthi Ya Padanti Ya Kamen. Sasu Parido Devatan Samhiyayi. || 559 ||

Meaning: A being in the Apurvakarana and other Gunasthanas, who is in the Upshama श्रेणी ( श्रेणी ), ascends and descends in the Upshama श्रेणी ( श्रेणी ) in a sequential manner. Therefore, there are two Gunasthanas in the Upshama श्रेणी ( श्रेणी ): one Gunasthan above for ascension and one Gunasthan below for descent. Also, there is the fourth Gunasthan for death in the Upshama श्रेणी ( श्रेणी ), because a Jiva who attains death in the Upshama श्रेणी ( श्रेणी ) becomes a Deva Asamyata. In this way, there are three Gunasthanas for beings in the Apurvakarana, Anivrittikarana, and Sukshma Samparaya Gunasthanas in the Upshama श्रेणी ( श्रेणी ). A being who ascends in the Upshama श्रेणी ( श्रेणी ) does not go beyond the Upshantakashaya Gunasthan. Therefore, there are two Gunasthanas for a being in the Upshantakashaya Gunasthan: the Sukshma Samparaya Gunasthan for descent and the fourth Gunasthan for death, as it becomes a Deva Asamyata.

Special Meaning: In terms of Gati, a Naraki Mithyadristi attains the Misra and Asamyata Gunasthanas. A being in the Sasadan Gunasthan attains Mithyatva, and a being in the Misra Gunasthan attains Mithyatva and Asamyata. A being in the Asamyata Gunasthan attains Mithyatva, Sasadan, and Misra. A Tiryancha Mithyadristi attains the Misra, Asamyata, and Deshasamyata Gunasthanas. A being in the Sasadan Gunasthan attains Mithyatva. A being in the Misra Gunasthan attains Mithyatva and Asamyata. A being in the Asamyata Gunasthan attains the first four Gunasthanas up to the Deshasamyata Gunasthan. A being in the Deshasamyata Gunasthan attains the first four Gunasthanas. A Manushya Mithyadristi attains the first four Gunasthanas up to the Aprammatta Gunasthan without Sasadan and Prammatta. A being in the Sasadan Gunasthan attains Mithyatva. A being in the Misra Gunasthan attains Mithyatva and Asamyata. A being in the Asamyata Gunasthan attains the first five Gunasthanas up to the Aprammatta Gunasthan without Prammatta. A being in the Deshasamyata Gunasthan attains the first five Gunasthanas up to the Aprammatta Gunasthan without Prammatta. A being in the Prammatta Gunasthan attains the first six Gunasthanas up to the Aprammatta Gunasthan. A being in the Aprammatta Gunasthan attains the Prammatta Gunasthan, the Apurvakarana Gunasthan, and the fourth Gunasthan upon death, as it becomes a Deva Asamyata. A being in the Apurvakarana Gunasthan attains the Anivrittikarana Gunasthan upon ascension, the Aprammatta Gunasthan upon descent, and the fourth Gunasthan upon death, as it becomes a Deva Asamyata. 

Page #557:
---------------------------
## Gommatasara Karmakanda-518

**A being in the Anivrittikaran Gunasthan, ascending the Kshapaka श्रेणी, attains the Sukhsamaparaya Gunasthan. A being in the Sukhsamaparaya Gunasthan, ascending the Kshapaka श्रेणी, attains the Kshina Kshaya Gunasthan. A being in the Kshina Kshaya Gunasthan, ascending the Kshapaka श्रेणी, attains the Sayogi Gunasthan. A being in the Sayogi Gunasthan, ascending the Kshapaka श्रेणी, attains the Aayogi Gunasthan. A being in the Aayogi Gunasthan, ascending the Kshapaka श्रेणी, attains the Siddha Pada.**

**A being in the Anivrittikaran Gunasthan, descending the Kshapaka श्रेणी, attains the Sukhsamaparaya Gunasthan. A being in the Sukhsamaparaya Gunasthan, descending the Kshapaka श्रेणी, attains the Anivrittikaran Gunasthan. A being in the Upshanta Kshaya Gunasthan, descending the Kshapaka श्रेणी, attains the Sukhsamaparaya Gunasthan. A being in the Anivrittikaran Gunasthan, descending the Kshapaka श्रेणी, attains the Sukhsamaparaya Gunasthan. A being in the Sukhsamaparaya Gunasthan, descending the Kshapaka श्रेणी, attains the Anivrittikaran Gunasthan. A being in the Upshanta Kshaya Gunasthan, descending the Kshapaka श्रेणी, attains the Sukhsamaparaya Gunasthan. A being in the Anivrittikaran Gunasthan, descending the Kshapaka श्रेणी, attains the Sukhsamaparaya Gunasthan. A being in the Sukhsamaparaya Gunasthan, descending the Kshapaka श्रेणी, attains the Anivrittikaran Gunasthan. A being in the Upshanta Kshaya Gunasthan, descending the Kshapaka श्रेणी, attains the Sukhsamaparaya Gunasthan. A being in the Anivrittikaran Gunasthan, descending the Kshapaka श्रेणी, attains the Sukhsamaparaya Gunasthan. A being in the Sukhsamaparaya Gunasthan, descending the Kshapaka श्रेणी, attains the Anivrittikaran Gunasthan. A being in the Upshanta Kshaya Gunasthan, descending the Kshapaka श्रेणी, attains the Sukhsamaparaya Gunasthan. A being in the Anivrittikaran Gunasthan, descending the Kshapaka श्रेणी, attains the Sukhsamaparaya Gunasthan. A being in the Sukhsamaparaya Gunasthan, descending the Kshapaka श्रेणी, attains the Anivrittikaran Gunasthan. A being in the Upshanta Kshaya Gunasthan, descending the Kshapaka श्रेणी, attains the Sukhsamaparaya Gunasthan. A being in the Anivrittikaran Gunasthan, descending the Kshapaka श्रेणी, attains the Sukhsamaparaya Gunasthan. A being in the Sukhsamaparaya Gunasthan, descending the Kshapaka श्रेणी, attains the Anivrittikaran Gunasthan. A being in the Upshanta Kshaya Gunasthan, descending the Kshapaka श्रेणी, attains the Sukhsamaparaya Gunasthan. A being in the Anivrittikaran Gunasthan, descending the Kshapaka श्रेणी, attains the Sukhsamaparaya Gunasthan. A being in the Sukhsamaparaya Gunasthan, descending the Kshapaka श्रेणी, attains the Anivrittikaran Gunasthan. A being in the Upshanta Kshaya Gunasthan, descending the Kshapaka श्रेणी, attains the Sukhsamaparaya Gunasthan. A being in the Anivrittikaran Gunasthan, descending the Kshapaka श्रेणी, attains the Sukhsamaparaya Gunasthan. A being in the Sukhsamaparaya Gunasthan, descending the Kshapaka श्रेणी, attains the Anivrittikaran Gunasthan. A being in the Upshanta Kshaya Gunasthan, descending the Kshapaka श्रेणी, attains the Sukhsamaparaya Gunasthan. A being in the Anivrittikaran Gunasthan, descending the Kshapaka श्रेणी, attains the Sukhsamaparaya Gunasthan. A being in the Sukhsamaparaya Gunasthan, descending the Kshapaka श्रेणी, attains the Anivrittikaran Gunasthan. A being in the Upshanta Kshaya Gunasthan, descending the Kshapaka श्रेणी, attains the Sukhsamaparaya Gunasthan. A being in the Anivrittikaran Gunasthan, descending the Kshapaka श्रेणी, attains the Sukhsamaparaya Gunasthan. A being in the Sukhsamaparaya Gunasthan, descending the Kshapaka श्रेणी, attains the Anivrittikaran Gunasthan. A being in the Upshanta Kshaya Gunasthan, descending the Kshapaka श्रेणी, attains the Sukhsamaparaya Gunasthan. A being in the Anivrittikaran Gunasthan, descending the Kshapaka श्रेणी, attains the Sukhsamaparaya Gunasthan. A being in the Sukhsamaparaya Gunasthan, descending the Kshapaka श्रेणी, attains the Anivrittikaran Gunasthan. A being in the Upshanta Kshaya Gunasthan, descending the Kshapaka श्रेणी, attains the Sukhsamaparaya Gunasthan. A being in the Anivrittikaran Gunasthan, descending the Kshapaka श्रेणी, attains the Sukhsamaparaya Gunasthan. A being in the Sukhsamaparaya Gunasthan, descending the Kshapaka श्रेणी, attains the Anivrittikaran Gunasthan. A being in the Upshanta Kshaya Gunasthan, descending the Kshapaka श्रेणी, attains the Sukhsamaparaya Gunasthan. A being in the Anivrittikaran Gunasthan, descending the Kshapaka श्रेणी, attains the Sukhsamaparaya Gunasthan. A being in the Sukhsamaparaya Gunasthan, descending the Kshapaka श्रेणी, attains the Anivrittikaran Gunasthan. A being in the Upshanta Kshaya Gunasthan, descending the Kshapaka श्रेणी, attains the Sukhsamaparaya Gunasthan. A being in the Anivrittikaran Gunasthan, descending the Kshapaka श्रेणी, attains the Sukhsamaparaya Gunasthan. A being in the Sukhsamaparaya Gunasthan, descending the Kshapaka श्रेणी, attains the Anivrittikaran Gunasthan. A being in the Upshanta Kshaya Gunasthan, descending the Kshapaka श्रेणी, attains the Sukhsamaparaya Gunasthan. A being in the Anivrittikaran Gunasthan, descending the Kshapaka श्रेणी, attains the Sukhsamaparaya Gunasthan. A being in the Sukhsamaparaya Gunasthan, descending the Kshapaka श्रेणी, attains the Anivrittikaran Gunasthan. A being in the Upshanta Kshaya Gunasthan
Page #558:
---------------------------
Gommatasar Karmakanda-519

A being who dies in the first part of the Antarmuhurta is born among the gods. A being who dies in the second part of the Antarmuhurta is born among the gods or humans. A being who dies in the third part of the Antarmuhurta is born among the gods, humans, or animals. A being who dies in the fourth part of the Antarmuhurta is born in one of the following places: gods, humans, animals, or hell.

**Special Note:**

"How many types of beings are there? A man or a woman, whether they desire good or bad, what kind of beings are they?" (Churnisutra) This is the teaching of Yativrishabhacharya. In this, it is said that a Kritakritavedi being does not die. If this is the case, then how can it be said that humans are the masters of the twenty-two types of beings? Because the Kritakritavedi being dies, this is the teaching of Yativrishabhacharya. How can it be said that this is not the case? "If a Kritakritavedi being dies in the first part of the Kritakritavedi period, then according to the rules, it is born among the gods. If it is born among the hell beings, animals, or humans, then according to the rules, it dies in the Antarmuhurta period." This is known from the Churnisutra, which was spoken by Yativrishabhacharya, that the Kritakritavedi being dies. Now, the binding places of the name karma are called:

**Three types of binding places are described by the sage: Bhujakar, Alpatar, and Avasthit.**

**The first one binds the lesser beings, and later on, it binds the greater beings. This is called Bhujakar binding.**

1. Jayadhaval, Vol. 2, Page 213.
2. Jayadhaval, Vol. 2, Page 255. 

Page #559:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-520

It is called **Alpatarbandha** when a being binds fewer **Prakritis** (categories of karma) later on, after having bound more **Prakritis** earlier. **Avasthabandh** is when the number of **Prakritis** bound in the past is the same as the number of **Pakaliyas** (sub-categories of karma) present. **Bhujakara** and other types of **bandhas** (bindings) arise from specific **bandhasthana** (binding places) and their order of occurrence will be explained in detail in the following verses.

**Verse 565:**

**Meaning:** A being with a **Bhujakarabandha** binds all 23 **Prakritis** of the **Bhadara** (earth-bodied) category and all 25 **Prakritis** of the **Panavinsa** (five-and-twenty) category. Similarly, one should understand that the **bandhas** of the remaining **bandhasthana** related to the **Mithyadristi** (false belief) **namakarma** (karma related to the mind).

**Verse 258:**

**Meaning:** A being with a **Yash** (fame) **kirtika** (reputation) **bandha** binds from the 28th **Prakriti** to the 31st **Prakriti**. Similarly, a being who binds the 23rd **Prakriti** and onwards binds from the 25th **Prakriti** to the 30th **Prakriti**. And a being who binds the 28th **Prakriti** and onwards binds from the 29th **Prakriti** to the 31st **Prakriti**. In this way, there are 22 **Bhujakarabandha** places for **namakarma**.

**The number of **Bhujakarabandha** places for each **Prakriti** is as follows:**

| **Prakriti** | **Bhujakarabandha** |
|---|---|
| 28 | 1 |
| 29 | 2 |
| 30 | 3 |
| 31 | 4 |
| 29 | 3 |
| 30 | 3 |
| 31 | 2 |
| 28 | 1 |
| 29 | 1 |
| 30 | 1 |
| 31 | 1 |
| 26 | 1 |
| 28 | 1 |
| 29 | 1 |
| 30 | 1 |
| 31 | 1 |
| 25 | 1 |
| 26 | 1 |
| 28 | 1 |
| 29 | 1 |
| 30 | 1 |
| 23 | 1 |
| 25 | 1 |
| 26 | 1 |
| 28 | 1 |
| 29 | 1 |
| 25 | 1 |
| 26 | 1 |
| 28 | 1 |
| 29 | 1 |
| 26 | 1 |
| 28 | 1 |
| 29 | 1 |
| 28 | 1 |
| 29 | 1 |
| 28 | 1 |
| 29 | 1 |
| 28 | 1 |
| 29 | 1 |
| 28 | 1 |
| 29 | 1 |
| 28 | 1 |
| 29 | 1 |
| 28 | 1 |
| 29 | 1 |
| 28 | 1 |
| 29 | 1 |
| 28 | 1 |
| 29 | 1 |
| 28 | 1 |
| 29 | 1 |
| 28 | 1 |
| 29 | 1 |
| 28 | 1 |
| 29 | 1 |
| 28 | 1 |
| 29 | 1 |
| 28 | 1 |
| 29 | 1 |
| 28 | 1 |
| 29 | 1 |
| 28 | 1 |
| 29 | 1 |
| 28 | 1 |
| 29 | 1 |
| 28 | 1 |
| 29 | 1 |
| 28 | 1 |
| 29 | 1 |
| 28 | 1 |
| 29 | 1 |
| 28 | 1 |
| 29 | 1 |
| 28 | 1 |
| 29 | 1 |
| 28 | 1 |
| 29 | 1 |
| 28 | 1 |
| 29 | 1 |
| 28 | 1 |
| 29 | 1 |
| 28 | 1 |
| 29 | 1 |
| 28 | 1 |
| 29 | 1 |
| 28 | 1 |
| 29 | 1 |
| 28 | 1 |
| 29 | 1 |
| 28 | 1 |
| 29 | 1 |
| 28 | 1 |
| 29 | 1 |
| 28 | 1 |
| 29 | 1 |
| 28 | 1 |
| 29 | 1 |
| 28 | 1 |
| 29 | 1 |
| 28 | 1 |
| 29 | 1 |
| 28 | 1 |
| 29 | 1 |
| 28 | 1 |
| 29 | 1 |
| 28 | 1 |
| 29 | 1 |
| 28 | 1 |
| 29 | 1 |
| 28 | 1 |
| 29 | 1 |
| 28 | 1 |
| 29 | 1 |
| 28 | 1 |
| 29 | 1 |
| 28 | 1 |
| 29 | 1 |
| 2
Page #560:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda - 521

Thus, there are 22 Bhujakarabandha places for the name karma (4+5+4+3+3+2+1).

**Special Note:** Now, in the 41 steps of Badarpৃথিবীকায় etc. mentioned earlier, we are mentioning the places with their bhangas:

* There are 11 types of places for the 23 types of karmas that bind, including the subtle Badar and each type of plant, along with the 11 varieties of Aparýapta Ekendriya (deficient one-sensed beings). Here, there is only one bhang for each, so there are 11 bhangas for these 11 places.
* In the binding of 25 types of karmas, there are 8 bhangas each for the types of karmas that bind, including the Badar, Paryapta पृथিবীকায়, Apkay, Tejakarya, Vayukay, and each type of plant, with five varieties, due to the movement (change) of the types of karmas in the pairs of Sthira, Shubha, and Yashaskirti. Therefore, there are 40 bhangas in total.
* There are 4 bhangas each for the types of karmas that bind, including the Paryapta Badar, Sadharan, and Sukshma Paryapta पृथিবীকায়, Ap, Teja, Vayu, and Sadharan plant, with six varieties, due to the movement (change) of the types of karmas in the pairs of Sthira and Shubha. Therefore, there are 24 bhangas in total.
* There are only 6 bhangas for the six varieties of Aparýapta Dwīndriya, Trīndriya, Chaturindriya, Asanjnī, Sanjnī, Panchendriya, Tiryanch, and Manushya, as only the Aprashastha types of karmas bind in these.
* Thus, there are a total of 70 bhangas for the 25 types of karmas that bind (40+24+6).
* In the 26 types of karmas that bind, there are 8 bhangas each for the types of karmas that bind in the four places, including the Badarpৃথিবীকায়, Atap and Udyot, Apkay and Vanaspatikay, with Udyot, due to the movement (change) of the types of karmas in the pairs of Sthira, Shubha, and Yashaskirti. Therefore, there are 32 bhangas (8x4).
* In the 28 types of karmas that bind, including the Devagati, there are 8 bhangas each for the types of karmas that bind in the three pairs of Sthira etc. mentioned earlier. And in the same place, including the Narakagati, there is one bhang for the binding of the Aprashastha types of karmas. Thus, there are 9 bhangas for the 28 types of karmas that bind.
* In the 29 types of karmas that bind, there are 8 bhangas each for the types of karmas that bind in the three pairs of Sthira etc. mentioned earlier, including the four varieties of Paryapta Dwīndriya, Trīndriya, Chaturindriya, and Panchendriya. And in the places including the Tiryanch and Manushya gatis, there are 6 places, 6 Sanhanan, and 7 pairs of types of karmas from Sthira to Vihayogati, resulting in 4608+4608=9216 bhangas. Thus, there are 9296 bhangas for the 29 types of karmas that bind, including the 32 bhangas mentioned earlier.
* In the 30 types of karmas that bind, there are 8 bhangas each for the types of karmas that bind in the three pairs of Sthira, Shubha, and Yashaskirti, including the combined varieties of Paryapta Dwīndriya, Trīndriya, Chaturindriya, and Panchendriya, with Udyot. Therefore, there are 8x4=32 bhangas. And in the one place including the Sanjnī Tiryanch with Udyot, there are 6 Sanhanan, 6 Santhan, and 7 pairs of types of karmas from Sthira to Vihayogati, resulting in 4608 bhangas. Thus, there are 32+4608=4640 bhangas for the 30 types of karmas that bind.

These bhangas are related to the Mithyatva Guna Sthana. Now, the Bhujakara etc. bindings related to the above bhangas are called according to the different times:

* Earlier, it bound the 23 types of karmas that bind, and later it started binding the 25, 28, etc. types of karmas. This is the Bhujakara binding. Here, it bound one bhang of the 23 types of karmas that bind, including the Badarpৃথিবীকায়, and later... 

Page #561:
---------------------------
Gommatasar Karmakanda-522

If one binds the 11 bhangas of 23 natural places starting from the first natural place and ending with the last, how many bhangas will be bound in total? Using the rule of three, the known quantity is one bhang of 23 natural places, the result quantity is 70 bhangas of 25 natural places, 32 bhangas of 26 natural places, 9 bhangas of 28 natural places, 9248 bhangas of 29 natural places, and 4640 bhangas of 30 natural places. The desired quantity is 11 bhangas of 23 natural places. Therefore, multiplying the result quantity by the desired quantity and dividing by the known quantity gives the total number of bhangas. In this case, the desired quantity is 11, the result quantity is 70+32+9+9248+4640 = 13,999 bhangas, and the known quantity is 1. So, 13,999 x 11 / 1 = 1,53,989 bhangas. These are the bhangas of 23 natural places. After binding the 25th natural place, the binding of all places from the 26th natural place to the 30th natural place is called Bhujakar Bandha.

If one binds all the bhangas of the 26th natural place onwards after binding the 25th natural place, how many bhangas will be bound while binding the 70 bhangas of the 25th natural place? Using the rule of three, the known quantity is one place of 25 natural places, the result quantity is 32 bhangas of 26 natural places, 9 bhangas of 28 natural places, 9248 bhangas of 29 natural places, and 4640 bhangas of 30 natural places. The desired quantity is 70 bhangas of 25 natural places. So, multiplying the result quantity 32+9+9248+4640 = 13,929 by the desired quantity 70 gives 13,929 x 70 = 9,75,030 bhangas of 25 natural places. The known quantity here is also 1. After binding the 26th natural place, the binding of the 28th natural place onwards is called Bhujakar Bandha.

If one binds all the bhangas of the 28th natural place onwards after binding one bhang of the 26th natural place, how many bhangas will be bound while binding 32 bhangas of the 26th natural place? Using the rule of three, the known quantity is one bhang of 26 natural places, the result quantity is 9 bhangas of 28 natural places, 9248 bhangas of 29 natural places, and 4640 bhangas of 30 natural places. The desired quantity is 32 bhangas of 26 natural places. So, multiplying the result quantity 9+9248+4640 = 13,897 by the desired quantity 32 gives 13,897 x 32 = 4,44,704 bhangas of 26 natural places. After binding the 28th natural place, the binding of the 29th and 30th natural places is called Bhujakar Bandha.

If one binds all the bhangas of the 29th and 30th natural places after binding one bhang of the 28th natural place, how many bhangas will be bound while binding 9 bhangas of the 28th natural place? Using the rule of three, the known quantity is one bhang of 28 natural places, the desired quantity is 9 bhangas of 28 natural places, and the result quantity is 9248 bhangas of 29 natural places and 4640 bhangas of 30 natural places. So, multiplying the result quantity 9248+4640 = 13,888 by the desired quantity 9 gives 13,888 x 9 = 1,24,992 bhangas of 28 natural places. After binding the 29th natural place, the binding of the 30th natural place is called Bhujakar Bandha. If one binds all 4640 bhangas of the 30th natural place after binding one bhang of the 29th natural place, how many bhangas of the 29th natural place will be bound while binding... 

Page #562:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-523
9248 How many bhangas will he bind while binding the bhangas? In this way, in the rule of three, the principal amount is one difference of the twenty-nine natural places, the desired amount is 1248 bhangas of the twenty-nine natural places, the fruit amount is 4640 bhangas of the thirty natural places. Multiplying the fruit amount 4640 by the desired amount 9248 and dividing by the principal amount 1, we get 4640 x 9248 / 1 = 4.29.10.02 bhangas of the twenty-nine natural places. In this regard, one should also see the Prakrit Panchasangraha (Jnanapeeth) from page 337 to 349. It has not been written here due to fear of expansion.
Tevisthanado micchattisoti bandhago miccho. Navari hu attaavisa panchindiyapunnago cheva ||566||
Meaning- The false-sighted being is the one who binds the bhangas of the places from the twenty-third natural place to the thirtieth natural place in the false-sight quality place. Here, the special thing is that he can only bind the twenty-eight natural places with the five senses.
Athanantara bhogabhumij jivonke namakarma sambandhi bandhastan kahate hain
Bhoge suratthavi sammo miccho ya micchgagapunnhe. Tiruyugatisam tisam naraugutisam cha bandhadi hu ||567||
Meaning- In the bhogabhumij, the perfect five-sensed right-sighted or false-sighted and the perfect right-sighted being with the word 'cha' denoting the non-perfect right-sighted being binds only the twenty-eight natural places including the devagati, and the non-perfect false-sighted being binds the twenty-ninth and thirtieth natural places including the tiryanchagati and the twenty-ninth natural place including the manushya gati.
Micchassa thanabhangayaiyaram sadari dugunasol navam. Adadalambanaudidisadan chhadal chatthadhiyam ||568||
Meaning- In the aforementioned binding places of the false-sighted being, there are 11 bhangas of the twenty-third natural place, 70 bhangas of the twenty-fifth natural place, 32 bhangas of the twenty-sixth natural place, 9 bhangas of the twenty-eighth natural place, 9248 bhangas of the twenty-ninth natural place, and 4647 bhangas of the thirtieth natural place. In this way, knowing the place and its bhangas. 

Page #563:
---------------------------
## Gommatasara Karmakanda-524

**Further, the statement of the lesser breaks:**

The breaks are obtained by the rule of three in the reverse order of the rule of three used to obtain the number of breaks in the *bujkarabandhak*. 

**[569]** **Meaning:** By considering the breaks of the previous place as the desired quantity and the breaks of the subsequent places as the fruit quantity, the measure of the lesser breaks is obtained in sequence.

**Special Meaning:**

When 30 natural places are bound starting from the beginning and up to 23 natural places, and when 31 natural places are bound and 29 and one natural place are bound, then the binding of 28 and 29 natural places is a binding of one nature.

**[259]** **Meaning:** When 30 natural places are bound starting from the beginning and up to 23 natural places, and when 31 natural places are bound and 29 and one natural place are bound, then the binding of 28 and 29 natural places is a binding of one nature.

**[260]** **Meaning:** The upper binding is a *hela* (inferior) binding, and in the case of the gods, it is a binding of 30 or 21 natures.

**Numerical Representation of the three *avaktvyabandhas*:** 0

**1. Pra. Pa. Sa. Pru. 198**

**Numerical Representation of the Lesser Breaks:**

| **Lesser Break** | **Number** | **Binding** | **Natural Places** |
|---|---|---|---|
| 5 | 30 | 29 | 28 |
| 4 | 29 | 28 | 26 |
| 3 | 28 | 26 | 25 |
| 2 | 26 | 25 | 23 |
| 1 | 25 | 23 | - |
| 3 | 31 | 30 | 29 |
| 1 | 28 | 1 | 1 |
| 1 | 29 | 1 | 1 |
| 1 | 30 | 1 | 1 |

***Avaktvyabandhas*:**

The *avaktvyabandhas* are the bindings that occur when a being descends from a higher binding to a lower binding of one nature, or when a being dies and is reborn as a god, binding 30 or 21 natures. 

Page #564:
---------------------------
## Gommatasara Karmakanda - 525

If a person binds 30 types of karmas in the past and then binds 29 types of karmas, this is called **alpatarbandha** (lesser binding). Here, if a person binds one **bhang** (fragment) of the 30th type of karma and then binds all **bhangs** of the 29 types of karmas, how many **bhangs** will they bind in total, considering that the 30th type of karma has 4640 **bhangs**?

Using the **trairasika** (rule of three) method, the **pramanarashi** (base quantity) is one **bhang** of the 30th type of karma. The **falarashi** (result quantity) is the sum of **bhangs** of the 29 types of karmas, which are 9248 for the 29th type, 9 for the 28th type, 32 for the 26th type, 70 for the 25th type, and 11 for the 23rd type. Adding these together, we get 9248 + 9 + 32 + 70 + 11 = 9370 as the **falarashi**. The **ichcharashi** (desired quantity) is 4640 **bhangs** of the 30th type.

Multiplying the **falarashi** by the **ichcharashi** and dividing by the **pramanarashi**, we get (9370 x 4640) / 1 = 4,34,76,800 **bhangs** of the 30th type related to **alpatarbandha**.

If a person binds 29 types of karmas in the past and then binds 28 types of karmas, this is called **alpatarbandha**. Here, if a person binds one **bhang** of the 29th type of karma and then binds all **bhangs** of the 28 types of karmas, how many **bhangs** will they bind in total, considering that the 29th type of karma has 9248 **bhangs**?

Using the **trairasika** method, the **pramanarashi** is one **bhang** of the 29th type of karma. The **falarashi** is the sum of **bhangs** of the 28 types of karmas, which are 9 for the 28th type, 32 for the 26th type, 70 for the 25th type, and 11 for the 23rd type. Adding these together, we get 9 + 32 + 70 + 11 = 122 as the **falarashi**. The **ichcharashi** is 9248 **bhangs** of the 29th type.

Multiplying the **falarashi** by the **ichcharashi** and dividing by the **pramanarashi**, we get (122 x 9248) / 1 = 11,28,256 **bhangs** of the 29th type related to **alpatarbandha**.

If a person binds one **bhang** of the 28th type of karma and then binds all **bhangs** of the 26 types of karmas, this is called **alpatarbandha**. Here, if a person binds one **bhang** of the 28th type of karma and then binds all **bhangs** of the 26 types of karmas, how many **bhangs** will they bind in total, considering that the 28th type of karma has 9 **bhangs**?

Using the **trairasika** method, the **pramanarashi** is one **bhang** of the 28th type of karma. The **falarashi** is the sum of **bhangs** of the 26 types of karmas, which are 32 for the 26th type, 70 for the 25th type, and 11 for the 23rd type. Adding these together, we get 32 + 70 + 11 = 113 as the **falarashi**. The **ichcharashi** is 9 **bhangs** of the 28th type.

Multiplying the **falarashi** by the **ichcharashi** and dividing by the **pramanarashi**, we get (113 x 9) / 1 = 1017 **bhangs** of the 28th type related to **alpatarbandha**.

If a person binds 26 types of karmas in the past and then binds 25 and 23 types of karmas, this is called **alpatarbandha**. Here, if a person binds one **bhang** of the 26th type of karma and then binds all **bhangs** of the 25 and 23 types of karmas, how many **bhangs** will they bind in total, considering that the 26th type of karma has 32 **bhangs**?

Using the **trairasika** method, the **pramanarashi** is one **bhang** of the 26th type of karma. The **falarashi** is the sum of **bhangs** of the 25 and 23 types of karmas, which are 70 for the 25th type and 11 for the 23rd type. The **ichcharashi** is 32 **bhangs** of the 26th type. 

Page #565:
---------------------------
Gommatsar Karmakanda - 526
'70+11=81. Multiplying the result of the calculation (81) by the desired amount (32) and dividing by the standard amount (1), we get 81×32÷1=2592. This is the lesser difference of the 26th nature-like place. Again, binding the 25th nature and then binding the 23rd nature is called lesser binding. Binding one destruction of the 25th nature-like place and binding all the destructions of the 23rd nature, how many destructions will be bound while binding 70 destructions of the 25th nature? By applying the rule of three, the standard amount is one destruction of the 25th nature, the result is 11 destructions of the 23rd nature-like place, and the desired amount is 70 destructions of the 25th nature. Here, multiplying the result (11) by the desired amount (70) and dividing by the standard amount (1), we get 1970:1=770. This is the lesser difference of the 25th nature-like place.
Now, the remaining part mentioned earlier is called the method of knowing the Vaipikiriya briefly.
"Lughukaranam ichchhanto eyaraadihi uvarim jogg.
Sangunide bhujagara uvarido honti appadara." || 570 ||
Meaning - The person who wants to know briefly should be told that multiplying the sum of all the differences starting from 11 onwards gives the number of destructions of the Bhujakarannandha, and multiplying the sum of the destructions of the 30th nature-like place onwards with the destructions of the 29th nature-like place onwards gives the number of destructions of the lesser binding.
Special meaning - The understanding of the lesser destructions and the Bhujakar destructions is as follows:
Understanding of the lesser destructions
Nature-like
Place
30
29
28
26
25
Multiplicand
9370
122
113
81
11
Multiplier
4640
9248
9
32
70
Result
4,34,76,800
11,28,256
1017
2592
770

Page #566:
---------------------------
... Gommatasara Karmakanda-527 Bhujakarabhangasandristi
Prakrutirupa Sthan
Gunakar
1,53,989
9,76,030
13,999 13,929 13,897 13,888
4640
4,42,704
1.24.992

9248
4,29,10,720
Now, the number of Avasthitabhanga is said to be:
Bhujagara-ppadaraanam bhangasamaaso samo hu micchass.
Panatisam chauranavadi satthi chodaalamankakame. ||571||
Meaning: In the Mithyadristi Gunasthan, the number of Bhujakar and Alpatar is the same, and it is 4,46,09,435, which is obtained by placing the digits 35, 89, 60, and 44 in the order of "Ankana Vamato Mati". This is the number of Bhujakar, and the number of Alpatar is also the same. By adding these two numbers, the number of Avasthitabhanga is 8,92,18,870. This is because, in Bhujakar and Alpatar bhangas, wherever there is a bond of a particular nature, there is an Avasthitabandh in the second and subsequent times. Here, the purpose of multiplying the bhangas with each other to obtain Bhujakaradi bhangas is to know the Bhujakaradi from other bhangas. Up to this point, the statement is with respect to the Mithyatva Gunasthan. Further, Bhujakaradi bhangas are mentioned in the Asanyata Gunasthan.
Devaththavis nardevugutiss manussatis bandhayde.
Tichhanavanavadugabhangaa titthaviheena hu punarutta. ||572||
Meaning: In the Asanyata Gunasthan, there are 36992 Bhujakarabhangas in 28 natural places with Devagati, 29 natural places with human or Devagati, and 30 natural places with human Gati. The bhangas that are devoid of Tirthankara nature are repeated, because they are included in the bhangas of Mithyadristi. 

Page #567:
---------------------------
## Gommatasara Karmakanda-528

**Verse 573:**

Again, this is clarified:

In the state of *asanyata* (uncontrolled), a human being binds 28 *prakritis* (categories of existence) including *devagati* (heavenly realm) and then binds 29 *prakritis* including *devagati* and *tirthankara* (liberated being). When the 8 *bhangas* (breaks) of each state are multiplied, it results in 64 *bhangas*.

**Verse 574:**

Again, an *asanyata* human being binds 29 *prakritis* including *tirthankara* and *devagati*. After that, becoming an *asanyata* deva (heavenly being) or a *naraki* (hell being), they bind 30 *prakritis* including *tirthankara* and *manushya* (human realm). Even then, there are 64 *bhangas*.

A *naraki* with *mithyadrishti* (false belief) in the second and third hell, desiring the *rasattva* (essence) of a *tirthankara*, binds 29 *prakritis* including *manushya* with 4608 *bhangas*. After attaining *samyaktv* (right faith), they bind 30 *prakritis* including *tirthankara* and *manushya*. Therefore, multiplying 8 *bhangas* with 4608 results in 46084836,864 *bhangas*. Adding the previously mentioned 128 *bhangas* to this, there are 36,992 *bhujakaras* (causes of karma) in the state of *asanyata*.

**Verse 575:**

Now, the lesser *bhangas* in the state of *asanyata* are explained:

An *asanyata* human being who has previously bound the *narakayuga* (hell cycle), starts binding the *tirthankara* *prakriti* and binds 21 *prakritis* including *tirthankara* and *deva* with 8 *bhangas*. They then face the *narakagati* (hell realm) and become *mithyadrishti* for a moment. After that, they bind 28 *prakritis* including *narakagati*. This is one *bhang*. Multiplying these together, we get 8x18 *bhangas*.

Similarly, an *asanyata* deva or *naraki* binds 30 *prakritis* including *tirthankara* and *manushya* with 8 *bhangas*. After death, they are born in the womb of their mother with the *rasattva* of the *tirthankara* *prakriti*. There, they bind 29 *prakritis* including *tirthankara* and *deva* with 8 *bhangas*. Multiplying these together, we get 84864 *bhangas*. Adding the previously mentioned 8 *bhangas* to this, we get 64+8=72 lesser *bhangas* related to *asanyata*.

A human being binds 29 *prakritis* including *manushya* without the *tirthankara*... 

Page #568:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-529 ODE 2 R

If one binds 28 natures including the path to heaven, then there are 64 minor breaks. These repeated breaks are also mentioned along with the breaks related to false belief.

**Vision**
**Unrestrained**
**64**
**8x8**
**64**
**848**
**Heaven. 29 Man. 30**
**8**
**8**
**Heaven. 28**
**8**
**Heaven. 29**
**8**
**36,864**
**8x4608**
**Man. 30**
**8**
**Man. 29**
**4608**
**Unrestrained minor**
**8**
**8 × 1**
**64**
**8x8**
**Hell 28 Heaven. 29**
**1**
**8**
**Heaven. 29 | Man. 30**
**8**
**8**
**Repeated 64**
**8x8**
**Heaven. 28**
**8**
**Man. 29**
**8**

Further, in the qualities of non-negligence, etc., the breaks of the arm are called
The sum of the limbs of the unrestrained
**Arm 36,992**
**Minor 72**
**Existing 37,064**

In the place of the gods, the non-negligent arm is present. But the breaks of both the food and the food-giver are repeated. ||576||

Meaning - A human being dwelling in the quality of non-negligence binds one place, the form of 28 natures, including the path to heaven. Afterwards, he began to bind the place of 30 natures, including the food and the food-giver, with 8 breaks. Similarly, he began to bind the place of 28 to 29 natures, including the Tirthankara, and the place of 29 to 31 natures, including the Tirthankara and the food-giver, and the place of 30 to 31 natures, or the place of 28 to 31 natures. Therefore, when the breaks of all these places are combined, there are 45 arm breaks in the quality of non-negligence.

Now the arrangement of those 45 arm breaks is stated.

Here, 1-8-8-1-8-1-1-1-1 and 1 form breaks, along with 28-28-28-29-29-30-1-1-1-1 nature places, and above, 8-1-1-8-1-1-1-1-1-1 breaks, along with 29-30-31-30-31-31-28-29-30-31, thus know 45 arm breaks.

Special meaning - A person dwelling in the quality of non-negligence binds one break of 28 natures, including the path to heaven. Afterwards, 

Page #569:
---------------------------
## Momamsar Karmakanda-530

Starting with the binding of the Tirthankara nature in the Prammatta Gunasthan, the binding of 29 natures, including Tirthankara and Devagati, takes place in 3 locations with 8 types of binding. Multiplying these two gives 8x18 bindings. 

Then, in the Prammatta Gunasthan, 28 natures, including Devagati, are bound with 8 types of binding. After becoming Aprammatta, 30 natures, including Aharakdvik, are bound with one type of binding. This results in 8x18 bindings. 

Further, in the Aprammatta state, 31 natures, including Tirthankara and Aharakdvik, are bound with one type of binding, resulting in 8x18 bindings. 

In the Aprammatta Gunasthan, 29 natures, including Tirthankara and Devagati, are bound with one type of binding. After death, the Dev becomes Asanyata and binds 30 natures, including Manushya and Tirthankara, with 8 types of binding. This results in 8x18 bindings. 

In the Prammatta Gunasthan, 29 natures, including Devagati and Tirthankara, are bound with 8 types of binding. Then, in the Aprammatta Gunasthan, 31 natures, including Tirthankara and Aharakdvik, are bound with one type of binding. This results in 8x18 bindings. 

Similarly, in the Aprammatta Gunasthan, 30 natures, including Aharakdvik, are bound with one type of binding. Then, in the same Gunasthan, the binding of Tirthankara nature begins, and 31 natures are bound. This results in one type of binding. 

In the seventh part of the A-purvakarana Gunasthan, which is the place of descent from the Upshama Shreni, one type of binding of Yasaskirti nature takes place with one type of binding. Then, in the sixth part of the A-purvakarana, 28 natures, including Devagati, are bound with one type of binding. Similarly, 29 natures, including Dev and Tirthankara, or 30 natures, including Dev and Aharakdvik, or 31 natures, including Dev, Aharakdvik, and Tirthankara, are bound with one type of binding. This results in four types of binding. 

These are all 45 types of Bhujakara binding.

**Sandristi**

| **Prammatta** | **Aprammatta** | **Aprammatta** | **Asanyata** | **Aprammatta** | **Aprammatta** | **A-purvakarana** | **A-purvakarana** | **A-purvakarana** | **A-purvakarana** |
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
| **Dev** | **21** | **30** | **31** | **30** | **31** | **31** | **28** | **29** | **30** | **31** |
| **Aprammatta** | **8** | **1** | **1** | **8** | **1** | **1** | **1** | **1** | **1** | **1** |
| **Gunasthanavartis** | **45 Bhujakara** | **Aprammatta** | **Prammatta** | **Prammatta** | **Aprammatta** | **Prammatta** | **Aprammatta** | **A-purvakarana** | **A-purvakarana** | **A-purvakarana** |
| **28** | **21** | **29** | **28** | **30** | **28** | **148** | **841** | **841** | **148** | **841** |
| **141** | **141** | **141** | **141** | **141** | **8+8+8+8+8+1+1+1+1+1 = 45** | 

Page #570:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-531: The lesser breaks of the Aprammatta Gunasthan are called...:. 10-9-9 and 8 more than 20, i.e. 30, 29, 29 and 28, nature-like places, combined with 8-8 breaks, binding 31-31, 30 and 30 nature-like places, more than one, one, zero, zero, with one break each. And four places combined with Devagati, with one break each. Thus, there are 36 lesser breaks in the Aprammatta Gunasthan.
Meaning: A being in the Aprammatta Gunasthan binds 31 natural places with one break, including Devagati, Aharakdvik and Tirthankara. Again, becoming a Dev-Asanyata, he binds 30 natural places with 8 breaks, including Manushya-Tirthankara. Therefore, 1488 breaks. In the Aprammatta Gunasthan, he binds 31 natural places with one break. After coming to the Prammatta Gunasthan, he binds 29 natural places with 8 breaks, including Dev and Tirthankara. Therefore, 148-8 breaks. In the Aprammatta Gunasthan, he binds 30 natural places with one break, including Dev and Aharakdvik. After becoming a Dev-Asanyata, he binds 29 places with 8 breaks, including Manushya-Gati. Thus, 1488 breaks. In the Aprammatta Gunasthan, he binds 30 natural places with one break, including Aharak and Devagati. After coming to the Prammatta Gunasthan, he binds 28 natural places with 8 breaks, including Devagati. Thus, 1488 breaks. While ascending in the Apurvakarana Gunasthan, in the sixth part, he binds 28 natural places with one break each, including Devagati, and 29 natural places with Devagati-Tirthankara, 30 natural places with Dev and Aharakdvik, and 31 natural places with Dev-Aharakdvik and Tirthankara. In the seventh part, he binds one natural place with one break. Therefore, these are four breaks. Thus, know all the lesser breaks to be 36.
Sandrisht-Asanyata-Dev | Prammatta | Asanyata-Dev Prammatta | Apurva. Apurva. | Apurva. | Apurva. Prakruti 30 | 29
28 | Bhang 8 | Aprammatta Aprammatta | Aprammatta | Aprammatta Apurva. | Apurva, | Apurva. | Apurva. Prakruti 31 | 31
30 | 28 Bhang 1
30 

Page #571:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-532
148= 148= 148= 148= 141= 141= 141 = 1418...

Now, collecting the Bhujakaradi bhangas, it is said:
Savva paratthaneṇa ya ayadapamattidarasavvabhangā ha.
Micchassā bhangamajjhe milide savve have bhangā. ||579||

Meaning: All the Bhujakaradi bhangas of all the parasthanas, including the svasthanas and the svaparasthanas, as well as the asanyata and apramattadi gunasthanas, are to be included in the bhangas of mithyadristi. This is to be known according to the rule of the Bhujakaradi bhangas of the name karma. Further, the method of their Siddhika is explained in two gathas:

Bhujagara appadara havanti puvva varathanasantaane.
Payadisamo'asantaano'apunuruttetti ya samudditto. ||580||

Meaning: In the past, it bound the alpa prakritis, and later it started binding the adhika prakritis. This is called Bhujakara. And in the past, it bound the adhika prakritis, and later it started binding the alpa prakritis. This is called alpatara. Even if the number of prakritis is the same, if the prakriti samudaya is with prakriti bheda, i.e., it is in the form of bhitra prakriti, then it is called apunurut bhang. Just as there is binding of 29 prakriti sthana with sanhanan without tirthankara prakriti, and there is also binding of 29 prakriti sthana without sanhanan with tirthankara, in this way, even though there is equality of 29 prakritis, due to the difference of tirthankara and sanhanan, it is called apunurut.

Now, the avaktvyabhangas are explained:

'Padiya mariyekka mekkunati sam ti sam cha bandhaguvasante.
Bandho du avattavvo avattido bidiyasamyaadi. ||581||

Meaning: In the upshantakashaya gunasthan, it did not bind any prakriti of the name karma, and later...

1. Although this gatha is printed in the printed copies of Gommatasara Karmakanda as gatha no. 582, considering the order of the chapter, it seems appropriate to place this gatha here at no. 581. Therefore, the order has been changed. 

Page #572:
---------------------------
Gommatasar Karmakanda - 533

Coming to the Sukṣmasāmprāyaguṇasthāna, it binds one natural place, hence 1 bhang. And when the Devāsanyata (non-restrained) die, they bind 29 natural places with the human realm and 8 bhangs each, and 30 natural places with the Tirthankara and the human realm and 8 bhangs each. Hence, there are 16 bhangs related to these two places. In this way, one should know that there are 1 + 16 = 17 bhangs in the Avaktāvya bandha. And in the second and subsequent times, the same binding occurs. Therefore, the Avasthitabandhas are the same.

**The Sight of Avaktāvya Bhangas**

Sukṣma Sa. Gu.
Nature 1
Bhang 1
Upaśāntakṣaya
Guṇasthāna
Nature
Aj
}
Devāsanyata Gu.
29
8
Upaśāntakṣaya
Guṇasthāna
Devāsanyata Gu.
30
8
Upaśāntakṣaya
Guṇasthāna

**Bhujagāre Appade'avattavve Ṭhāidūṇ Sambandho.**
**Hodi Avadibandho Tabbhangā Tassa Bhangā Hu.** || 582 ||

**Meaning:** When Bhujakāra, Alpantara, and Avaktāvya bhangas are established, the binding of the natures with the same number of bhangs occurs simultaneously. The same binding of those natures with the same number of bhangs in the second and subsequent times is called Avasthitabandhas. Therefore, the number of bhangs in the Avasthitabandhas is the same as the number of bhangs in the three types of binding, Bhujakāra, etc. 

Page #573:
---------------------------
## Gommatasara Karmakanda - 534

**Description of the Dissolution of all types of Bandhas of Name Karma**

**Bhujaka Bandha**
4,46,09,435
36,992
**Gunasthan**
Mithyatva
Asanyata
Aprammatta
Upshantamoha
Yoga
45
**Heart**
4,46,46,472
**Alpantara Bandha**
4,46,09,435
72
36
o
4,46,09,543
**Avasthita Bandha**
8,12,18,870
37,064
81
17
8,92,56,032

"Thus ends the section on the Bandha-sthana of Name Karma"

"Now, the Udya-sthana of Name Karma is described in 22 verses."

**Viggahakamma Sarira**
**Viggahakamma Sarira**
**Viggahakamma Sarira**
**Viggahakamma Sarira**
**Viggahakamma Sarira**
**Viggahakamma Sarira**
**Viggahakamma Sarira**
**Viggahakamma Sarira**
**Viggahakamma Sarira**
**Viggahakamma Sarira**
**Viggahakamma Sarira**
**Viggahakamma Sarira**
**Viggahakamma Sarira**
**Viggahakamma Sarira**
**Viggahakamma Sarira**
**Viggahakamma Sarira**
**Viggahakamma Sarira**
**Viggahakamma Sarira**
**Viggahakamma Sarira**
**Viggahakamma Sarira**
**Viggahakamma Sarira**
**Viggahakamma Sarira**
**Viggahakamma Sarira**
**Viggahakamma Sarira**
**Viggahakamma Sarira**
**Viggahakamma Sarira**
**Viggahakamma Sarira**
**Viggahakamma Sarira**
**Viggahakamma Sarira**
**Viggahakamma Sarira**
**Viggahakamma Sarira**
**Viggahakamma Sarira**
**Viggahakamma Sarira**
**Viggahakamma Sarira**
**Viggahakamma Sarira**
**Viggahakamma Sarira**
**Viggahakamma Sarira**
**Viggahakamma Sarira**
**Viggahakamma Sarira**
**Viggahakamma Sarira**
**Viggahakamma Sarira**
**Viggahakamma Sarira**
**Viggahakamma Sarira**
**Viggahakamma Sarira**
**Viggahakamma Sarira**
**Viggahakamma Sarira**
**Viggahakamma Sarira**
**Viggahakamma Sarira**
**Viggahakamma Sarira**
**Viggahakamma Sarira**
**Viggahakamma Sarira**
**Viggahakamma Sarira**
**Viggahakamma Sarira**
**Viggahakamma Sarira**
**Viggahakamma Sarira**
**Viggahakamma Sarira**
**Viggahakamma Sarira**
**Viggahakamma Sarira**
**Viggahakamma Sarira**
**Viggahakamma Sarira**
**Viggahakamma Sarira**
**Viggahakamma Sarira**
**Viggahakamma Sarira**
**Viggahakamma Sarira**
**Viggahakamma Sarira**
**Viggahakamma Sarira**
**Viggahakamma Sarira**
**Viggahakamma Sarira**
**Viggahakamma Sarira**
**Viggahakamma Sarira**
**Viggahakamma Sarira**
**Viggahakamma Sarira**
**Viggahakamma Sarira**
**Viggahakamma Sarira**
**Viggahakamma Sarira**
**Viggahakamma Sarira**
**Viggahakamma Sarira**
**Viggahakamma Sarira**
**Viggahakamma Sarira**
**Viggahakamma Sarira**
**Viggahakamma Sarira**
**Viggahakamma Sarira**
**Viggahakamma Sarira**
**Viggahakamma Sarira**
**Viggahakamma Sarira**
**Viggahakamma Sarira**
**Viggahakamma Sarira**
**Viggahakamma Sarira**
**Viggahakamma Sarira**
**Viggahakamma Sarira**
**Viggahakamma Sarira**
**Viggahakamma Sarira**
**Viggahakamma Sarira**
**Viggahakamma Sarira**
**Viggahakamma Sarira**
**Viggahakamma Sarira**
**Viggahakamma Sarira**
**Viggahakamma Sarira**
**Viggahakamma Sarira**
**Viggahakamma Sarira**
**Viggahakamma Sarira**
**Viggahakamma Sarira**
**Viggahakamma Sarira**
**Viggahakamma Sarira**
**Viggahakamma Sarira**
**Viggahakamma Sarira**
**Viggahakamma Sarira**
**Viggahakamma Sarira**
**Viggahakamma Sarira**
**Viggahakamma Sarira**
**Viggahakamma Sarira**
**Viggahakamma Sarira**
**Viggahakamma Sarira**
**Viggahakamma Sarira**
**Viggahakamma Sarira**
**Viggahakamma Sarira**
**Viggahakamma Sarira**
**Viggahakamma Sarira**
**Viggahakamma Sarira**
**Viggahakamma Sarira**
**Viggahakamma Sarira**
**Viggahakamma Sarira**
**Viggahakamma Sarira**
**Viggahakamma Sarira**
**Viggahakamma Sarira**
**Viggahakamma Sarira**
**Viggahakamma Sarira**
**Viggahakamma Sarira**
**Viggahakamma Sarira**
**Viggahakamma Sarira**
**Viggahakamma Sarira**
**Viggahakamma Sarira**
**Viggahakamma Sarira**
**Viggahakamma Sarira**
**Viggahakamma Sarira**
**Viggahakamma Sarira**
**Viggahakamma Sarira**
**Viggahakamma Sarira**
**Viggahakamma Sarira**
**Viggahakamma Sarira**
**Viggahakamma Sarira**
**Viggahakamma Sarira
Page #574:
---------------------------
## Gommatasara Karmakanda-535 Meaning:

These five Udayasthanas (places of arising) have a duration of one, two, or three moments in the Karman-body, which is in the state of Vigraha-Gati (movement of the body). In the mixed body, which is in the state of Apariapta (incomplete), the duration is Antarmuhurta (a very short time) in the state of Sharira-Pariyapti (body completion), Shwaso-chchwas-Pariyapti (breath completion), and Antar-Muhurta in the state of Bhasha-Pariyapti (speech completion). To know the duration of the remaining time, which is the lifespan of all beings, subtract the duration of the aforementioned four moments from the total lifespan. Further, these five Udayasthanas are categorized in the following way:

## Verse 585 Meaning:

In the case of all Labdhy-Apariapta (those who have attained incomplete liberation), there are two moments in the beginning, four moments in the case of Ekendriya (one-sensed beings), five moments in the case of Trasa (those who are in the state of fear), and four moments in the case of Aharak-Sharira (food-body), excluding the first moment.

## Verse 586 Meaning:

The duration of the Karman-Audarik-Mishra-Audarik-Sharira-Pariyapti (completion of the Karman-body, Audarik-body, mixed body, and Audarik-body), Shwaso-chchwas-Pariyapti (breath completion), and Bhasha-Pariyapti (speech completion) for the Samudghata-Kevali (the liberated being who has attained the state of Samudghata) are five moments in order, but only three moments during the time of contraction of their Atma-Pradesha (regions of the soul). Now, we will explain these three moments.

## Verse 587 Meaning:

The duration of the Audarik-Sharira-Pariyapti (completion of the Audarik-body) is two moments, one for the expansion and one for the contraction of the Danda (staff) of the soul. The duration of the Audarik-Mishra-Sharira-Pariyapti (completion of the mixed body) is two moments, one for the expansion and one for the contraction of the Kapat (door) of the soul. The duration of the Karman-Pariyapti (completion of the Karman-body) is one moment, one for the expansion of the soul, and one for the expansion of the Lok-Puran (filling of the world). Thus, there are only three moments during the expansion of the soul, but the Shwaso-chchwas-Pariyapti (breath completion) and Bhasha-Pariyapti (speech completion) occur only during the contraction of the soul. This is because, when the soul enters the Bhul-Sharira (body of delusion), it completes the Pariyapti (completion) in the same order as the Sanji-Panchendriya (five senses of the soul), and therefore all five moments are possible.

## Further Explanation:

The next four verses will explain the origin of the Udayasthanas (places of arising) of the Nam-Karma (name-karma). 

Page #575:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda - 536

**Verse 588**
The Dhruvodayi (constant arising) natures of name karma, such as Tejas (radiance), Varna (color), etc., as mentioned in the 403rd verse, are found in all beings. These include: Tejas, Varna, Sthira (stable), Asthira (unstable), Shubha (auspicious), Ashubha (inauspicious), Aguru (heavy), Laghu (light), and Nirmana (creation).  Furthermore, there are 9 other natures: Charagati (four paths), Panchjati (five castes), Tras (stationary), Badar (subtle), Paryapta (sufficient), Aparyapta (insufficient), Shubha (auspicious), Durbhaga (inauspicious), Aadeya (worthy of receiving), Anaadeya (unworthy of receiving), Yashaskirti (fame), Ayashaskirti (infamy), and Char Anupurvi (four sequential).  The arising of any one of these 21 natures (9 + 12) leads to the destruction of the body (Astaaka Bandha Vigraha).

**Verse 589**
By subtracting Anupurvi from the 21 natures mentioned above, and adding four other natures: Audarik (physical body), etc. (three bodies), one from the six Santhana (constituents), one from each of the ordinary bodies, and Upghata (destruction), we arrive at 24 natures. These 24 natures arise in all stationary beings during the time of the mixed body (Mishra Sharira). However, only one of the three bodies, the Audarik body, and one of the six Santhana, the Hundak Santhana, arise in the other beings.

**Verse 590**
From the above 24 natures, one from the three Ango-Anga (limbs and parts), one from the six Sanhanana (combinations), and the six natures mentioned above, a total of 6 natures are suitable for the arising of beings with a mixed body. However, the Sanhanana nature is only suitable for the arising of humans and animals. The Parghata nature is only suitable for the arising of stationary beings when their body is fully sufficient. The Atap Udyot and Sake Udyot natures are suitable for the arising of stationary beings during their sufficient time, while the Udyot nature is only suitable for the arising of animals. The Ucchvas (exhalation) and Svar (sound) natures are suitable for arising during their respective sufficient times, while the Tirthankara nature is only suitable for the arising of a Kevali (omniscient). 

Page #576:
---------------------------
The Gommatasara Karmakanda-537 further states the places of origin of the name karma for each individual at each time, in relation to various beings.
**Verse 592:**
Twenty, twenty-one, twenty-four, twenty-five, twenty-six, twenty-seven, twenty-eight, twenty-nine, thirty, and thirty-one, as well as eight and nine, are the twelve places of origin of the name karma in its nature.
**Verse 593:**
Now, we will discuss the owners of the above-mentioned places of origin. The owners of the twenty-one places of origin are the beings of all four gatis (states of existence), the owners of the twenty-four places of origin are the one-sensed beings, and the owners of the twenty-five places of origin are the special humans (i.e., humans with the food-eating organ), gods, hell-beings, and one-sensed beings.
**Verse 594:**
The owners of the twenty-six places of origin are the one-sensed, two-sensed, three-sensed, four-sensed, and five-sensed ordinary (without the food-eating organ and the Tirthankara) beings. The owners of the twenty-seven places of origin are the humans (with the food-eating organ), gods, hell-beings, and one-sensed beings. The owners of the twenty-eight and twenty-nine places of origin are the ordinary humans, five-sensed, disabled-sensed, special humans, gods, and hell-beings. The owners of the thirty places of origin are the humans and the three types of animals. The owners of the thirty-one places of origin are the beings with the combined kevali (omniscient) and the five-sensed, two-sensed, three-sensed, and four-sensed animals. The owners of the eight and nine places of origin are the beings with the uncombined kevali.
**Explanation:**
The twenty-one places of origin mentioned in verse 588 arise in the four gatis, along with the karmic body, in the movement of the body, and not elsewhere. The twenty-four places of origin mentioned in verse 589 arise only when the one-sensed being attains the mixed yoga (combination of karma), and not elsewhere, because they do not have the non-supportive and supportive karmas. When the destructive karma is added to these twenty-four karmas, the place of origin of the twenty-five karmas becomes suitable for the one-sensed being to attain the body. Alternatively, when the food-eating organ is added, the place of origin of the twenty-five karmas becomes suitable for the special human to attain the food-eating body during the mixed time.
**Note:**
See also verse 97 of the Pra.Pan.San.Pri. 349. 

Page #577:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda - 538

There are 25 natural places suitable for arising, or 25 natural places suitable for arising in the mixed time of gods and hell beings by combining the limbs and parts of the Vaikriya. Thus, there are three places of 25 natural places. By adding one natural place from Attap and Udyot to the 25 natural places suitable for arising of a one-sensed being, there are 26 natural places suitable for arising in the body-fulfillment of a one-sensed being. By adding Ucchvas to those 25 natural places of a one-sensed being, there are 26 natural places suitable for arising in the breath-fulfillment of a one-sensed being, or by adding the limbs and parts of the Audarika and one Sanhanan to the 24 natural places, there are 26 natural places suitable for arising in the mixed time of the Audarika of the two-sensed, three-sensed, four-sensed, five-sensed, ordinary human, and Niratishaya Kevali's pair of doors. Thus, know the three places of 26 natural places. By adding the limbs and parts of the Aharaka, Parghat, and Prashasta Vihayogati, these three natural places, to the 24 natural places, there are 27 natural places suitable for arising in the body-fulfillment of the Aharaka in the Prammatta Guna-sthana, or by adding the Tirthankara natural place to the aforementioned 26 natural places of the Samudghata Kevali, there is a place of 27 natural places suitable for arising of the Tirthankara Samudghata Kevali, or by adding the limbs and parts of the Vaikriya, Parghat, and the Aprashasta Vihayogati of the hell being and the Prashasta Vihayogati of the god, these three natural places, to the aforementioned 24 natural places, there are 27 natural places suitable for arising in the body-fulfillment of the god and hell being, or by adding Parghat, and one of them, and Ucchvas, these three natural places, to the aforementioned 24 natural places, there are 27 natural places suitable for arising in the breath-fulfillment of a one-sensed being. Thus, there are four places of 27 natural places. By adding the limbs and parts of the Audarika, one Sanhanan, Parghat, and Yathayogya Vihayogati, these four natural places, to the 24 natural places, there are 28 natural places suitable for arising in the body-fulfillment of the ordinary human or the Samudghata Kevali in the form of the original body, or the two-sensed, three-sensed, four-sensed, and five-sensed Tiryancha, entering the original body, or by adding the limbs and parts of the Aharaka, Parghat, Prashasta Vihayogati, and Ucchvas, these four, to the aforementioned 24 natural places, there are 28 natural places suitable for arising in the breath-fulfillment, or by adding the limbs and parts of the Vaikriya, Parghat, Yathasambhava Vihayogati, and Ucchvas natural place, to the 24 natural places, there are 28 natural places suitable for arising in the breath-fulfillment of the god and hell being. Thus, know the three places of 28 natural places.

By adding the Ucchvas natural place to the 28 natural places of the ordinary human or the Samudghata Kevali, there are 29 natural places suitable for arising in the breath-fulfillment of the ordinary human or the Samudghata Kevali entering the original body, or by adding the limbs and parts of the Audarika, one Sanhanan, Parghat, one Vihayogati, and Udyot natural place, to the 24 natural places, there are 29 natural places suitable for arising in the body-fulfillment of the two-sensed, three-sensed, four-sensed, and five-sensed Tiryancha, or by adding one limb and part, one Sanhanan, one Nihayogati, Parghat, and Ucchvas natural place, to the 24 natural places, there are 29 natural places suitable for arising in the breath-fulfillment of the two-sensed, three-sensed, four-sensed, and five-sensed Tiryancha, or by adding the limbs and parts of the Audarika, Sanhanan, Parghat, Prashasta Vihayogati, and Tirthankara natural place, to the 24 natural places, there are 29 natural places suitable for arising in the body-fulfillment of the Samudghata Tirthankara Kevali. 

Page #578:
---------------------------
## Gommatasara Karmakanda-539

There are 29 natural places (prakriti sthana) suitable for the emergence of speech-sufficiency (bhasha paryapti) in the 24 natural places, including the organs and limbs (angopang), the external force (paradhat), the abundant absence of liberation (prashasta vihayogati), the breath (uchchvas), and the good voice (suswar). These 29 natural places are also suitable for the emergence of speech-sufficiency in the 28 natural places of gods and hell beings, by combining the good voice of gods and the bad voice (duswar) of hell beings. Thus, there are six places of 29 natural places.

Similarly, there are 29 natural places by combining the organs and limbs, the consolidation (sanhanan), the external force, the absence of liberation, and the breath in the 24 natural places. By adding the illuminating nature (udyot prakriti) to these, there are 30 natural places suitable for the emergence of breath-sufficiency (uchchvas paryapti) in the two-sensed, three-sensed, four-sensed, and five-sensed beings of the transmigratory realm (tiryanch). Alternatively, by adding one of the two voices to these 29 natural places, there are 30 natural places suitable for the emergence of speech-sufficiency in ordinary humans, five-sensed beings, or the three types of disabled beings (vikalatraya). Alternatively, by adding the noble organs and limbs (oudarik angopang), the consolidation of the thunderbolt and the bull (vajrarbha narach sanhanan), the external force, the abundant absence of liberation, and the breath to the 24 natural places, there are 29 natural places. By adding the nature of a Tirthankara (tirthankara prakriti) to these, there are 30 natural places suitable for the emergence of breath-sufficiency in the liberated soul (kevali) of the liberated Tirthankara (samudghat tirthankara). By adding one of the two voices, the good voice and the bad voice, to these 29 natural places, there are 30 natural places suitable for the emergence of speech-sufficiency in the liberated soul of the ordinary liberated Tirthankara (samany samudghat kevali). Thus, know these four places of 30 natural places.

By adding the nature of a Tirthankara to the 30 natural places related to the speech-sufficiency of the ordinary liberated soul (samany sayog kevali), there are 31 natural places suitable for the emergence of speech-sufficiency in the liberated soul of a Tirthankara. Alternatively, by adding one organ and limb, one consolidation, the external force, the illuminating nature, one absence of liberation, the breath, and one of the good voice or the bad voice, a total of seven natural places, to the 24 natural places, there are 31 natural places suitable for the emergence of speech-sufficiency in the two-sensed, three-sensed, four-sensed, and five-sensed beings of the transmigratory realm. Thus, know these two places of 31 natural places. In this way, the statement of the places of emergence (uday sthana) that occur in one time period of a living being (jiva) has been made.

**Verse 595:** Twenty-one, twenty-four, twenty-five, twenty-six, and twenty-seven are the five places of natural places suitable for the emergence of the one-sensed being (ekendriya). Twenty-one, twenty-six, twenty-eight, twenty-nine, and thirty are the five places of natural places suitable for the emergence of humans.

**Verse 596:** Twenty, twenty-four, twenty-six, twenty-eight, and twenty-nine are the five places of natural places suitable for the emergence of the liberated soul (kevali).

**Verse 597:** Twenty, twenty-four, twenty-six, twenty-eight, twenty-nine, and thirty are the five places of natural places suitable for the emergence of the liberated soul (kevali). Twenty-nine natural places are suitable for the emergence of the liberated soul (kevali) in the time period of the nine-fold path (nav adr).

**Explanation:** In the aforementioned five time periods, there are five places of natural places suitable for the emergence of the one-sensed being, namely 21, 24, 25, 26, and 27. There are five places of natural places suitable for the emergence of humans, namely 21, 26, 28, 29, and 30. 

Page #579:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda - 540

There are six places of the nature of 21-26-28-29-30 and 31, which are fit for the arising of Panchendriya and Vikalendriya Niryanhas. For Dev, Naraki, Aharak and Kevali, including special humans, there are three places of the nature of 21, 25 and 27, which are fit for arising. In the Karmanakala of Samudhata Kevali, there are 20 places of the nature of arising, because here the nature of Tirthankara does not arise, and in the 20 places of the nature of Tirtharasamudhata Kevali, due to the meeting of the nature of Tirthankara, 21 places of the nature of arising, and upon the completion of Bhasha Paryapti, 31 places of the nature of arising are also fit for arising. In the Karmanakala of Vigraha Gati, there are 21 places of the nature of arising, in the Mishrasheera Kala, there are four places of the nature of 24-25-26 and 27, in the Sheera Paryapti Kala, there are five places of the nature of 25-26-27-28 and 29, in the Shwaso Chchwas Paryapti Kala, there are five places of the nature of 26-27-28-29 and 30, in the Bhasha Paryasi Kala, there are three places of the nature of 29, 30 and 31, which are fit for arising. In the Ayogi Gunasthan, there are 9 places of the nature of arising for Tirthankara Kevali and 8 places of the nature of arising for Samanya Kevali.

The places of arising of Namakarma and their owners are as follows:

One place of the nature of 20 - fit for arising in the Karmanakala of Samudhata Kevali.
Two places of the nature of 21 - fit for arising in the Vigraha Gati related to all four Gatis and in the Karmanakala of Tirthankara Kevali.
One place of the nature of 24 - fit for arising in the Mishrasheera Kala of Ekendriya.
Three places of the nature of 25 - fit for arising in the Sheera Paryapti Kala of Ekendriya, in the Mishrasheera Kala of Aharak and also in the Mishrasheera Kala of Dev Naraki.
Three places of the nature of 26 - fit for arising in the Sheera Paryapti Kala of Ekendriya, in the Ucchwas Paryapti Kala of Ekendriya, in the Audarik Mishrasheera Kala of Dwiindriya, Triindriya, Chaturindriya, Panchendriya, Samanya Manushya and Niratishaya Kevali.
Four places of the nature of 27 - fit for arising in the Sheera Paryapti Kala of Aharak, in the Audarik Mishrasheera Kala of Tirthankara Samudhata Kevali, in the Sheera Paryapti Kala of Dev Naraki and in the Ucchwas Paryapti Kala of Ekendriya.
Three places of the nature of 28 - fit for arising in the Sheera Paryapti Kala of Samanya Manushya, Samanya Kevali, Dwiindriya, Triindriya, Chaturindriya and Panchendriya, and in the Ucchwas Paryapti Kala of Dev Naraki and Aharak.
Six places of the nature of 29 - fit for arising in the Ucchwas Paryapti Kala of Samudhata Kevali, in the Sheera Paryapti Kala of Dwiindriya, Triindriya, Chaturindriya and Panchendriya, in the Sheera Paryapti Kala of Dwiindriya, Triindriya, Chaturindriya and Panchendriya. 

Page #580:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-541

These are eligible for arising in the Ucchvasa Paryaptikaal of the Tirthankara Samudghat Kevali, in the Sharira Paryaptikaal of the Tirthankara Samudghat Kevali, in the Bhasha Paryaptikaal of the Aahara Sharira, and also in the Bhasha Paryaptikaal of the Deva-Naraki. 30 Prakruti Chaar Sthan - Dwiindriya-Triindriya-Chaturindriya and Panchendriya are eligible for arising in the Ucchvasa Paryaptikaal,
the common man, Panchendriya and Dwiindriya-Triindriya-Chaturindriya are eligible for arising in the Bhasha Paryaptikaal, the Tirthankara Samudghat Kevali is eligible for arising in the Ucchvasa Paryaptikaal and the common Samudghat Kevali is eligible for arising in the Bhasha Paryaptikaal. 31 Prakruti Dosthan - the Tirthankara Kevali is eligible for arising in the Bhasha Paryaptikaal, Dwiindriya-Triindriya-Chaturindriya and
Panchendriya are eligible for arising in the Bhasha Paryaptikaal. 9 Prakruti Ekasthan - the Aayogi Tirthankara Kevali is eligible for arising. 8 Prakruti Ekasthan - the Aayogi Saamaanya Kevali is eligible for arising.
Time and their owner related to the arising places related to the Naam Karma
Owner
| Ekendriya | Deva | Naraki | Tirthach | Manushya | Saamaanya | Tirthankara Special
Saamaanya Kevali | Kevali | Manushya
Bhasha Paryaptikaal
Shwaso Ucchvas
| 28 | 28
29 | 30
28
Sharira Paryaptikaal
26
25
Sharira Mishra Kaal
|25 | 25 | 26 |
| 26 | 27
25
Karman Kaal 

Page #581:
---------------------------
## Motion

**Creation**
* **Jati** (Caste)
* **Yasha** (Fame) - **Ayasha** (Infamy)
* **Aadeya** (Acceptable) - **Anaadeya** (Unacceptable)
* **Subhaga** (Auspicious) - **Dubhaga** (Inauspicious)
* **Shubha** (Good) - **Ashubha** (Bad)
* **Sthira** (Stable) - **Asthira** (Unstable)
* **Paryapta** (Sufficient) - **Aaparyapta** (Insufficient)
* **Baadar** (Gross) - **Sookshma** (Subtle)
* **Tras** (Stationary) - **Sthavar** (Movable)
* **Aguru** (Heavy) - **Laghoo** (Light)
* **Varna Chatushk** (Four Colors)
* **Taijas** (Luminous) - **Karpan** (Dark)

**Anupoorvi** (Sequential)
* **24 Prakriti** (Natural Elements)
* **Udayasthan** (Place of Origin)
* **21 Prakriti** (Natural Elements)
* **21 Prakriti** (Natural Elements) - **Anupoorvi** (Sequential) - **Audarik** (Generous) - **Sharira** (Body) - **Tak Sansthan** (Place of Residence) - **Upghat** (Obstacle) - **Each** (Individual) - **Common** (General) - **4 Prakriti** (Natural Elements)
* **Dev** (Deities) - **Naraki** (Hell Beings) - **21-1 Anupoorvi** (Sequential) - **20** - **Vaikri** (Change) - **Dwik Sansthan** (Two Places of Residence) - **Upghat** (Obstacle) - **Each Sharira** (Individual Body) - **25 Aaha** (Food) - **Sharira** (Body) - **Pramat** (Careless) - **Sanyat** (Controlled) - **205 Aahar Kattik** (Food Consumption) - **Sansthan** (Place of Residence) - **Upghat** (Obstacle) - **Each Sharira** (Individual Body) - **25 Ekendriya** (One-Sense Being) - **Sharira Paryapti** (Body Completion) - **24** - **Paryat** (Travel) - **25**
* **Note:** This information is based on the **Prakrut Panchasangrah** (Five Collections of Natural Elements).
* **Ekendriya** (One-Sense Being) - **2** - **Unchhvas** (Breath) - **26**
* **24** - **Paradhat** (Other Elements) - **Aatap** (Heat) or **Udyot** (Light) - **26**
* **Manushya** (Human) - **Vasatiryanch** (Animal) - **21** - **Anupoorvi** (Sequential) - **20** - **Audarik** (Generous) - **Sansthan** (Place of Residence) - **Upghat** (Obstacle) - **Sanhanan** (Combination) - **Each Sharira** (Individual Body) - **28**
* **Udayasthan** (Place of Origin) - **21 Prakriti** (Natural Elements) - **24 Prakriti** (Natural Elements) - **25 Prakriti** (Natural Elements) - **26 Prakriti** (Natural Elements)
* **Manushya** (Human) - **24 Prakriti** (Natural Elements) - **Sthana** (Place) - **Without Remainder** - **Sarvasthan** (All Places)
* **Tiryanch** (Animal) - **21-24-25-26-27-28-29-30** - **35 Prakriti** (Natural Elements)
* **Dev** (Deities) - **Naraki** (Hell Beings) - **21-25-27-28** - **29 Prakriti** (Natural Elements)
* **20-21-24-25-26-27-28-29-30-31-9** - **8 Prakriti** (Natural Elements)
* **"Namakarmake Udagrasthan"** (Place of Origin of Name Karma)
* **Gommatsar Karmakand** (Gommatsar on Karma) - **542**
* **Aatap** (Heat) or **Udyot** (Light) - **Ekendriya** (One-Sense Being) - **26** - **Unchhvas** (Breath) - **27**
* **Sharira Paryami** (Body Completion) - **Paryapta** (Sufficient) - **Dev** (Deities) - **Naraki** (Hell Beings) - **Aahar Kashariri** (Food-Eating Body) - **25** - **Vihayogati** (Departure) - **Paraghat** (Other Obstacles) - **27**
* **Dev** (Deities) - **Naraki** (Hell Beings) - **Aahar Kashariri** (Food-Eating Body) - **27** - **Unchhvas** (Breath) - **28**
* **Manushya** (Human) - **Trasatibanch** (Animal) - **26** - **Paryat** (Travel) - **Vihayogati** (Departure) - **28**
* **Sharira** (Body) - **Udyot** (Light) - **Tiryanch** (Animal) - **26** - **Paraghat** (Other Obstacles) - **Vihayogati** (Departure) - **Udyot** (Light) - **29**
* **Manushya** (Human) - **Satith anch** (Animal) - **28** - **Unchhvas** (Breath) - **29**
* **Dev** (Deities) - **Naraki** (Hell Beings) - **Aahar Kashariri** (Food-Eating Body) - **28** - **Swar** (Sound) - **29**
* **Udyot** (Light) - **Tiryanch** (Animal) - **29** - **Unchhvas** (Breath) - **30**
* **Manushya** (Human) - **Trasatiryanch** (Animal) - **29** - **Swar** (
Page #582:
---------------------------
By adding the Tirthankara nature to the aforementioned 20 natures, there are 21 natures. By adding the six natures of Vajrarṣabha, Nārāca, Samhanana, each Audārika, Adhāta, and one of the six institutions to the 20 natures, there are 26 natures of Kapātasamudghāta Kevalo.

By adding the Tirthankara nature to the 26 natures, there are 27 natures, but here only the Samacaturasra institution arises.

By adding Parghāta and one Vihāyogati to the 26 natures, there are 28 natures.

Nāmasya ya nava udaya aṭṭeva ya titthahīṇesu ||598||
Gaya yogassa ya bāre tadiyāugagod idi vihīṇesu. Further, we explain the two udaya sthānas of the nāmakarma related to the ayogi guna sthāna.

Nirmana Bādar
Ādeya Subha Yaśaskīrti Sthirāsthira
Subhāśubha |Agurulaghu Varṇādi Pañcendriyajāti 1 Taijasaśarīra Paryāpta Kārmaṇasārīra 1 Manusyagati
4 1 1
1 Pratar va Lokapūraṇa 21 | 26 | 27 meṁ 20 prakṛutik prakṛ. | prakṛutik prakṛutik prakṛ.| prakṛutik prakṛutik prakṛutik prakṛutik prakṛutik
28 "The vision of the udaya sthānas related to the nāmakarma of the Kevali"
29 | 30 | 31 |
Gommatasāra Karmakāṇḍa-543
By adding Parghāta and Praśasta Vihāyogati to the 27 natures, there are 29 natures of the Tirthankara. By adding Ucchvāsa to the 24 natures, there are also 29 natures of the common Cati. By adding one Svar to the 29 natures of the common Kevali, there are 30 natures. By adding Ucchvāsa to the 29 natures of the Tirthankara Kevali, there are also 30 natures.

By adding Sustvara to the 30 natures of the Tirthankara Kevali, there are 31 natures.

The common Ayoga Kevali has Manusyagati, Pañcendriyajāti, Subhaga, Sa, Bādar, Paryāpta, Ādeya, and Yaśaskīrti:

By adding the Tirthankara nature to the aforementioned eight natures of the Tirthankara Ayogi, there are 31 natures of the udaya sthāna. 

Page #583:
---------------------------
Gommatsar Karmakanda - 544
Meaning - Of the 12 natures eligible for the rise of an Ayogakevali, the three natures of Vedaniya, Ayu and Gotra are reduced, leaving the remaining 9 natures of the Name Karma eligible for rise. And if the Tirthankara nature is also absent, then only 8 natures are eligible for rise.
Further, the places of rise of Name Karma are called Bhang.
Aala
*** AM
Thaane Sanhadane Vihayajumme Ya Charimchadujumme. Aviruddhekkadaraado Udayattane Subhanga Hu. || 599 ||
Meaning - One each of the 6 institutions and 6 consolidations, Vihayogati, Subhaga, Susvara, Aadeya and Yashaskirti, one each of the five pairs, results in the formation of Bhang of Name Karma. Multiplying all these together (6 x 6 x 24242242) results in 1952 Bhang.
Then, from the above Bhang, the Bhang found in the 49 Jiva-pada, starting with Naraka, are described in three stanzas.
Tattasattha Narayasaharansuhumge Apunne Ya. Sesesagavigal'asannijuduthane Jasajuge Bhang. || 600 ||
Meaning - Of those eligible for rise, only Naraki, ordinary Vanaspatikaya, Sarvasukshmajiva and Labdhyaparyaptakarma have the rise of the unrefined nature. Therefore, there is one Bhang in each of the five periods (mentioned in stanza 583) for all the places of rise. In the remaining Ekendriya, Vikalendriya and Asanjnipanchendriya, the rise of the unrefined nature, without Yashaskirti, is present. But, due to the rise of either Yashaskirti or Ayashaskirti, there are two Bhang in the places of rise, i.e., one with Yashaskirti and the other with Ayashaskirti, thus knowing two Bhang.
Sanimmi Manusammi Ya Oghekkadaram Tu Kevale Vajan. Subhagadesajjasani Ya Tithajude Satthamedi. || 601 ||
-
Meaning - In Sanjnjiva and in the six institutions, six consolidations and the aforementioned five pairs of Vihayogati etc. of humans, the rise of one each of the nature is found, therefore, there are 1952 Bhang as usual. In Kevalgyan, only the rise of Vajrarashbhanaraacha consolidation, Subhaga, Aadeya and Yashaskirti occurs, therefore, in the places related to Kevalgyan, there are 24-24 Bhang, knowing the rise of one each of the nature in the six institutions and the two pairs of Swara and Vihayogati. And in the last five institutions of Kevali, including the Tirthankara nature, 

Page #584:
---------------------------
## Gommatasara Karmakanda-545

There is no rise of *aprashasta vihayoga* and *duhsvara*, only the rise of *sarvaprashasta* prakritis, hence there is one *bhang* each in the *udayasthanas* related to them.

**Verse 602:**
*Devahare sattham kalaviyappesu bhangamanajjo.
Vocchinnam janitta gunapandevane su samvesu.*

**Meaning:**
There is a rise of only *prashasta* prakritis in the four types of devas and in the *pramattagunasthan* along with *aahara*. Therefore, there is one *bhang* each in their *udayasthanas* found in all times. The prakritis whose *udayavyuchchitti* has occurred from *sasadan* to *ayogigunasthan* should be considered as reduced, and the *bhang* of the remaining prakritis should be understood as much as possible.

**Verse 603:**
*Visadinam bhangai gigidalapadesu sambhava kamaso.
Ekkan satthi ceva ya sattavisam ca uguvisam.*

**Verse 604:**
*Visuttara chhachasaya baras panattarihim sanjutta.
Ekkarasasayasankha sattarasasayahiya satthi.*

**Verse 605:**
*Unatisasayahiya ekkavisa tadovi ekatthi.
Ekkarasasayasahya ekeka visarisaga bhangai.*

**Meaning:**
Starting from the *bhang* of the 20 prakriti *sthana*, the *bhang* of the *sthana* are, as much as possible, in order, 1-60-27-19-620-12-1175-1760-2921 and 1161, in comparison to the 41 *jivapada* mentioned in verses 519-20. There is one *bhang* for the *tirthankara* *samudghatakevali*, but it is a *punaruktabhang*. Therefore, there is one *bhang* for the *ayogakevali* with the *tirthankara* prakriti, and one *bhang* for the 8 prakritis without the *tirthankara*, making a total of 7758 *bhang*.

**Special Meaning:**
The rise of 20 prakritis occurs in the *karmakal* related to *pratar-lokapuran* for the *samanyasamudghatakevali*, and there is one *bhang* in it. The rise of 21 prakritis is in the *vigrahagati* of the *deva*, and there is only one *bhang* in it. There is only one *bhang* in the *karmakal* related to the *samudghat* of the *tirthankara*. In the *karmakal* of the *manushya*, there are eight *bhang* from the rise of one prakriti each in the three pairs of *subhaga*, *adeya*, and *yashaskirti*. There are also eight *bhang* in the *karmakal* of the *sanjipaancheindriyatiryagnya* in the same way. In the *karmakal* of the *dwiindriya*, *triindriya*, *chaturindriya*, and *asanjipaancheindriya*, there are 8 *bhang* in comparison to the pair of *yashaskirti* (244). In the *karmakal* of *badar*, *prithvi*, *jala*, *teja*, *vayu*, and each *vanaspatikaya*, there are 10 *bhang* in comparison to the pair of *yashaskirti* (245). *Sukshmaprithvijala*... 

Page #585:
---------------------------
## Gommatasara Karmakanda-546:

There are 6 bhangas (changes) in the karmanakala (karma period) related to Agni (fire), Vayu (air), and the subtle-badar-ordinary-plant-body, as opposed to one bhang for each. In the karmanakala of the Naraki (hell-being), there is only one bhang. In contrast, there are 10 bhangas for the earth-water-fire-air-body and the ordinary plant, as opposed to one bhang for the subtle-badar. For the 17 types of beings, including each plant, Vikal-tray (three types of Vikal), Sanjee-asajee-panchendriya-tiryanch (five-sensed non-human beings), and Manu (human), there is one bhang each in their karmanakala, resulting in 17 bhangas. Thus, there are a total of 60 bhangas for all 21 natural उदयस्थान (places of origin) (1+1+8+8+8+10+6+1+17).

The 24 natural उदयस्थान occur during the body-mixture period. Here, there are 10 bhangas for the badar-earth-ap-fire-air and each plant-body, as opposed to the pair of Yasas-Kirti (glory-fame) (542). There are 6 bhangas for the subtle-earth-water-fire-air-body and the badar-subtle-ordinary-body, as opposed to one bhang each. The उदयस्थान also occurs during the body-mixture period for the 11 types of one-sensed, labhya-paryaptak (capable of attaining liberation) beings, resulting in 11 bhangas, as opposed to one bhang each. Thus, there are a total of 27 bhangas for all 24 natural उदयस्थान (10+6+11).

In the 25th natural उदयस्थान, there are three bhangas for the Dev (god), Aharak (eater), and Naraki, as opposed to one bhang each. There are 10 bhangas for the badar-earth-ap-fire-air and each plant-body during the body-sufficient period, as opposed to the pair of Yasas-Kirti (542). There are 6 bhangas for the subtle-earth-ap-fire-air-body and the subtle-badar-ordinary-plant-body, as opposed to one bhang each. Thus, there are a total of 19 bhangas for the 25th natural उदयस्थान (3+10+6).

In the 26th natural उदयस्थान, there are 8 bhangas for the two-sensed, three-sensed, four-sensed, and asajee-panchendriya beings during the body-mixture period, as opposed to the pair of Yasas-Kirti (442). There are 576 bhangas for the Sanjee-tiryanch (five-sensed non-human beings) and Manu (human), as opposed to the pairs of Su-bhaga-adeya (good-worthy) and Yasas-Kirti (646424242). There are 6 bhangas for the change in the 6 संस्थान (states) of the सामान्य-समुद्घात-केवली (ordinary-liberated-being) without the Tirthankara nature. There are 6 bhangas for the labhya-paryaptak (capable of attaining liberation), as opposed to one bhang each. There are 4 bhangas for the badar-earth-body, including the badar-udyo (badar-radiance), during the body-sufficient period, as opposed to the pair of Yasas-Kirti for the two states, including the a-tap (non-radiance) and ud-yo (radiance) (242). There are 4 bhangas for the badar-ap-body and each plant-body, including the ud-yo (radiance), as opposed to the pair of Yasas-Kirti. There are 10 bhangas for the badar-earth-ap-fire-air and each plant-body during the breath-sufficient period, as opposed to the pair of Yasas-Kirti (542). There are 6 bhangas for the subtle-earth-ap-fire-air-body and the subtle-badar-ordinary-plant-body, as opposed to one bhang each. Thus, there are a total of 620 bhangas for the 26th natural उदयस्थान (8+576+6+6+4+4+10+6).

In the 27th natural उदयस्थान, there is one bhang for the Tirthankara-samudghat-kevali (liberated-being with Tirthankara nature) during the body-mixture period. There are three bhangas for the Dev (god), Naraki (hell-being), and Aharak (eater) during the body-sufficient period, as opposed to one bhang each. There are two bhangas for the badar... 

Page #586:
---------------------------
## Gommatasara Karmakanda - 547

In the **Prithvi Kaya** (Earth Body), there are four **Bhang** (breaks) due to two **Bhang** each for **Kasakirti** (fame) and **Sahahi** (companionship), and four **Bhang** due to two **Bhang** each for **Yashaskirti** (glory) in **Badar Apkay** (cloud-like) and **Prachaya Vanaspati Kaya** (every plant body). In this way, there are a total of **12 Bhang** (1+3+4+4) in **27 Prakruti Sthan** (natural states).

In the **28 Prakruti Uday Sthan** (natural arising states), during the **Sharira Paryapti Kal** (body-fulfillment time) of the **Niratishaya Samudghat Kevali** (supremely liberated being), there are **12 Bhang** due to two **Vihayogati** (liberation) and six **Sansthan** (institutions). In **Manushya** (human) and **Sanjeetiryanch** (sentient beings), there are **1152 Bhang** due to four pairs of **Vihayogati**, **Subhag** (auspiciousness), **Adey** (receiving), and **Yashaskirti**, and six **Sansthan** and six **Sanhanan** (congregations). In **Dwiindriya** (two-sense), **Triindriya** (three-sense), **Chaturindriya** (four-sense), and **Asanjee** (non-sentient), there are two **Bhang** each for **Yashaskirti**, resulting in **8 Bhang**. In **Devanarki** (heavenly beings) and **Aharak** (food-eaters), there are **3 Bhang** due to one **Bhang** each during **Shwaso Chwas Paryapti Kal** (breathing-fulfillment time). In this way, there are **1175 Bhang** (12+1152+8+3) in **28 Prakruti Sthan**.

In the **29 Prakruti Uday Sthan**, during the **Sharira Paryapti Kal**, there is one **Bhang** for the **Tirthankara Samudghat Kevali**. In **Sanjeetiryanch** with **Udyot** (radiance), there are **576 Bhang** due to six **Sansthan**, six **Sanhanan**, two **Vihayogati**, two **Subhag**, two **Adey**, and two **Yashaskirti**, as mentioned earlier. In **Dwiindriya**, **Triindriya**, **Chaturindriya**, and **Asanjee** with **Udyot**, there are two **Bhang** each for **Yashaskirti**, resulting in **8 Bhang**. In **Uchchwas Paryapti** (exhalation-fulfillment), there are **12 Bhang** due to six **Sansthan** and two **Vihayogati** for the **Niratishaya Samudghat Kevali**. In **Manushya** and **Sanjee Panchaindriya Tiryanch** (five-sense sentient beings), there are **1152 Bhang** due to six **Sansthan**, six **Sanhanan**, two **Vihayogati**, two **Subhag**, two **Adey**, and two **Yashaskirti**, as mentioned earlier. In **Udyot**-less **Uchchwas Paryapti**, there are two **Bhang** each for **Yashaskirti** in **Dwiindriya**, **Triindriya**, **Chaturindriya**, and **Asanjee**, resulting in **8 Bhang**. In **Bhasha Paryapti Kal** (speech-fulfillment time), there are **3 Bhang** due to one **Bhang** each for **Devanarki** and **Aharak**. In this way, there are **1760 Bhang** (1+576+8+12+1152+8+3) in **29 Prakruti Sthan**.

In the **30 Prakruti Sthan**, during the **Uchchwas Paryapti Kal**, there is one **Bhang** for the **Tirthankara Samudghat Kevali**. In **Sanjeetiryanch** with **Udyot**, there are **576 Bhang** due to six **Sansthan**, six **Sanhanan**, two **Vihayogati**, two **Subhag**, two **Adey**, and two **Yashaskirti**, as mentioned earlier. In **Dwiindriya**, **Triindriya**, **Chaturindriya**, and **Asanjee Panchaindriya** with **Udyot**, there are two **Bhang** each for **Yashaskirti**, resulting in **8 Bhang**. In **Bhasha Paryapti Kal**, there are **24 Bhang** due to six **Sansthan**, two **Vihayogati**, and two **Swar** (sound) for the **Samaanya Kevali** (ordinary liberated being) without **Tirthankara**. In **Manushya**, there are **1152 Bhang** due to six **Sansthan**, six **Sanhanan**, two **Vihayogati**, two **Subhag**, two **Suswar** (good sound), two **Adey**, and two **Yashaskirti**. In **Panchaindriya Tiryanch** without **Udyot**, there are also **1152 Bhang** due to six **Sansthan**, six **Sanhanan**, two **Vihayogati**, two **Subhag**, two **Suswar**, two **Adey**, and two **Yashaskirti**. In **Dwiindriya**, **Triindriya**, **Chaturindriya**, and **Asanjee**, there are two **Bhang** each for **Yashaskirti**, resulting in **8 Bhang**. In this way, there are a total of **Bhang** in **30 Prakruti Sthan**. 

Page #587:
---------------------------
EL & H
Gommatsar Karmakanda - 548
(1+576+8+24+1152+1152+8) = 2921 bhangas are there, and there are 24 bhangas related to the duration of the language proficiency of the Samudghatakevali without a Tirthankara, but they are repetitive, so there is nothing special about them.
There is one bhang for the Tirthankara Kevali in the duration of the language proficiency of the 31 natural places, and there are 1152 bhangas for the six institutions - six sanhananas and the five pairs of Vihayogati, Subhaga, Susvara, Aadeya and Yashaskirti, in the case of the Sanjnipanceendriya Tiryancha with Udyota, and 8 bhangas for the Yashaskirti pair of the Dwiindriya, Triindriya, Chaturindriya and Asanjipanceendriya with Udyota, as there are two bhangas for each. In this way, there are (1+1152+8) 1961 bhangas in the 31 natural places. There is one bhang for the Samudghatakevali with the Tirthankara nature, but it is repetitive, and there is one bhang for the Ayogakevali with the Tirthankara nature in the 9 natural places, and one bhang for the 8 natural places without the Tirthankara nature, so in total (1+60+27+19+620+12+1175+1760+2921+1161+1+1) 7758 bhangas are there.
The repetitive bhangas mentioned in the previous gatha are called
Samannkevalissamuggadgadassatassavachibhanga. Titthassavisagabhanga samedi tatthekkamvanijjo ||606||
Meaning - In the duration of the language proficiency, the 24-24 bhangas are the same in the 30 natural places of the Samanyakevali and the Samanyasamudghatakevali, and the one-one bhangas in the 31 natural places of the Tirthankara Kevali and the Tirthankara Samudghatakevali are also the same, so these 25 bhangas should not be accepted as they are repetitive. Later, the bhangas in the Gunasthanas are called
Narayasanni manussurasuranam uvarimgunananbhanga je.
Punarutta idi avaniya bhaniya micchassabhangesu || 607 ||
Meaning - The bhangas in the higher Gunasthanas like Sasadanadi of the Naraki Sanjnitiryancha, Manushya and Devas are the same as the bhangas related to the Mithyatva Gunasthanas, so they are repetitive, so those repetitive bhangas are subtracted and they are also called only in the bhangas of the Mithyatva Gunasthanas.
Special Meaning - After subtracting one bhang related to the Tirthankara nature from the 60 bhangas of the 21 natural places, the remaining 59 bhangas, the 27 bhangas of the 24 natural places, the 18 bhangas remaining after removing one bhang related to Aharakamisra from the 19 bhangas of the 25 natural places, the 614 bhangas remaining after removing the 6 bhangas related to the institution of the Samanyasamudghatakevali from the 620 bhangas of the 26 natural places, the 12 bhangas of the 27 natural places after removing the Aharak and 

Page #588:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-549: There are 10 types of bhangs related to Tirthankaras, without any exceptions. Out of the 1175 bhangs in 28 natural states, there are 12 bhangs for the general Samudghata Kevali and one for the Aharaka, making a total of 13 bhangs. Excluding these, there are 1162 bhangs. Out of the 1760 bhangs in 29 natural states, there are 12 bhangs for the general Samudghata Kevali, one for the Tirthankara Samudghata Kevali, and one for the Aharaka, making a total of 14 bhangs. Excluding these, there are 1746 bhangs. Out of the 2921 bhangs in 30 natural states, there are 24 bhangs for the general Kevali and one for the Tirthankara Kevali, making a total of 25 bhangs. Excluding these, there are 2896 bhangs. Out of the 1161 bhangs in 31 natural states, there is one bhang for the Tirthankara Kevali. Excluding this, there are 1160 bhangs. Thus, there are a total of (59+27+18+614+10+1162+1746+2896+1160) 7692 bhangs related to Mithyatva Gunasthan.

In Sasadan Gunasthan, there are 6 bhangs for the pair of Yasaskirti in the 21 natural states, after the Badarprithvi-Jal and each type of plant. There are 8 bhangs for the pair of Yasaskirti for the Dwindriya, Triindriya, Chaturindriya, and Asanji, compared to the pair of Yasaskirti for the Sanji Panchendriya Tiryancha. There are 8 bhangs for the three pairs of Durbhaga-Anadeya-Ayaskirti, compared to the Sanji Panchendriya Tiryancha. There are 8 bhangs for the human beings in the same way, and one bhang for the Devas. Thus, there are a total of (8+8+8+6+1) 31 bhangs. In the 24 natural states, there are 6 bhangs for the pair of Yasaskirti for the Badarprithvi-App and each type of plant. In the 25 natural states, there is one bhang for the Devagatika. In the 26 natural states, there are 8 bhangs for the pair of Yasaskirti for the Dwindriya, Triindriya, Chaturindriya, and Asanji. There are (646x2x242) 288 bhangs for the three pairs of Sanhanan, Sansthan, and Shubhagadeya-Yasaskirti, compared to the Sanji Panchendriya Tiryancha. There are 288 bhangs for the human beings in the same way. Thus, there are a total of (8+288+288) 584 bhangs. In this Gunasthan, there is no rise of the 27th and 28th natural states, because there is only Mithyatva for the Ekendriya etc. in the initial periods of Sharir Paryapti. In the 29th natural state, there are two bhangs for the Devas and Narakis. In the 30th natural state, there are (6x65242424242) 1152 bhangs for the five pairs of Sanhanan, Sansthan, Vihayogati, Shubha, Susvara, Adeya, and Yasaskirti, compared to the Sanji Tiryancha in the period of Bhasha Paryapti. There are 1952 bhangs for the human beings in the same way. Thus, there are 2304 bhangs related to the human beings and Tiryancha. In the 31st natural state, there are 1152 bhangs for the Sanji in the period of Bhasha Paryapti, including the Udyota. Thus, there are a total of (31+6+1+584+2+2304+1152) 4080 bhangs in Sasadan Gunasthan.

In Mishra Gunasthan, there are two bhangs in the 29th natural state, because there is one bhang for the Devas and Narakis in the period of Bhasha Paryapti. In the 30th natural state, there are 2304 bhangs for the Sanji Panchendriya Tiryancha and human beings together. In the 31st natural state, there are 5152 bhangs for the Sanji Panchendriya Tiryancha, including the Udyota. Thus, there are a total of (2+2304+1152) 3458 bhangs related to Mishra Gunasthan.

In Asanyata Gunasthan, there are four bhangs in the 21st natural state, because there is one bhang for each of the four gatis. In the 25th natural state, there are two bhangs for the Gharmanaraka and Vaimanika Devas, because there is one bhang for each. In the 26th natural state, there is one bhang, because only the Shubha natural states rise for the Bhogbhumi Tiryancha. 

Page #589:
---------------------------
## Gommatasara Karmakanda-550

**Regarding the 26th natural state:** There are 37 bhangas (destructions) due to the 6 sthana (positions) and 6 sanhanan (combinations) of the Tiryancha (animals) in the Karmabhoomi (realm of karma) (6x6=36).

**Regarding the 27th natural state:** There are two bhangas due to one bhang each for the Dharmanaraka (hell) and Vaimanika Deva (celestial beings).

**Regarding the 28th natural state:** There are three bhangas due to one bhang each for the Tiryancha, Dharmanaraka, and Vaimanika Deva related to the Ucchvasa Paryapti Kala (duration of exhalation), and 72 bhangas due to the 6 sthana, 6 sanhanan, and Vihayogati Yugal (pair of liberation and non-liberation) of the Karmabhoomi Manushya (human beings in the realm of karma) (6x6x2=72). Thus, there are 75 bhangas related to the 28th natural state (72+3).

**Regarding the 29th natural state:** There are two bhangas due to one bhang each for the Tiryancha and Manushya related to the Shwasocchvasa Paryapti Kala (duration of inhalation and exhalation), and two bhangas due to one bhang each for the Deva and Naraka (hell) related to the Bhasha Paryapti Kala (duration of speech). There are 72 bhangas due to the 6 sthana, 6 sanhanan, and Vihayogati Yugal of the Karmabhoomi Manushya (6x6x2=72). Thus, there are 76 bhangas in the 29th natural state (2+2+72).

**Regarding the 30th natural state:** There is one bhang for the Tiryancha with Udyota (radiance) related to the Shwasocchvasa Paryapti Kala, and 2304 bhangas due to the 6 sthana, 6 sanhanan, Vihayogati, Subhaga (prosperity), Susvara (good voice), Aadeya (worthy of respect), and Yash:Kirti (fame and glory) of the Karmabhoomi Tiryancha and Manushya (6x6x2x2x2x2x2=1152+1152=2304). Thus, there are 2305 bhangas in the 30th natural state (1+2304).

**Regarding the 31st natural state:** There are 1152 bhangas due to the 6 sthana, 6 sanhanan, Vihayogati, Subhaga, Susvara, Aadeya, and Yash:Kirti of the Sanjeepa Panchaindriya Tiryancha (five-sensed Tiryancha with life) with Udyota. Thus, there are 3653 bhangas in the Asanyata Guna Sthana (state of unbridled qualities) (4+2+37+2+75+76+2305+1152).

**Regarding the Desh Sanayata Guna Sthana (state of controlled qualities in the country):** There are 288 bhangas in the 30th natural state due to the 6 sthana, 6 sanhanan, Vihayogati, and Susvara Yugal of the Sautiryancha (Tiryancha with a body) and Manushya (6x6x2x2=144+144). There are 144 bhangas in the 31st natural state due to the 6 sthana, 6 sanhanan, Vihayogati, and Susvara Yugal of the Sakshipa Panchaindriya (five-sensed Tiryancha with a body) with Udyota (6x6x2x2=144). Thus, there are 432 bhangas in the Desh Sanayata Guna Sthana (288+144).

**Regarding the Pramatta Guna Sthana (state of distracted qualities):** There is one bhang in the 25th natural state related to the Aharak Mishrakala (time of mixed food), one bhang in the 27th natural state related to the Sharira Paryapti Kala (duration of the body), one bhang in the 28th natural state related to the Shwasocchvasa Paryapti Kala, one bhang in the 21st natural state related to the Bhasha Paryapti Kala, and 144 bhangas in the 30th natural state related to the Bhasha Paryapti Kala of the Audarik Sharira (body with a good disposition) due to the 6 sthana, 6 sanhanan, Vihayogati, and Susvara Yugal (6x6x2x2=144). Thus, there are 148 bhangas related to the Pramatta Guna Sthana (1+1+1+1+144).

**Regarding the Aprammatta Guna Sthana (state of undistracted qualities):** There are 144 bhangas in the 30th natural state due to the 6 sthana, 6 sanhanan, Vihayogati, and Susvara Yugal (6x6x2x2=144).

**Regarding the four Upshamaka Guna Sthana (states of diminishing qualities) in the Upshama श्रेणी (series):** There are 7272 bhangas in each Guna Sthana due to the 6 sthana, 3 sanhanan, and Vihayogati-Susvara Yugal (6x3x2x2=72).

**Regarding the four Guna Sthana in the Kshapaka श्रेणी (series):** There are 6 sthana, 1 sanhanan, and Vihayogati... 

Page #590:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-551

There are 24-24 bhangas in relation to the swarayugal (6 x 1 x 2 x 2). In this way, there are 144 bhangas related to the 14th apramattagunasthan, and 288 bhangas in all four gunasthanas of the upshama category (72 + 72 + 72 + 72). There are 96 bhangas in all four gunasthanas in relation to the kshapaka category (24 + 24 + 24 + 24).

In the samudghatarupkarmaṇakāla of the sayogigunasthan, there is one bhang in the 20th prakṛiti udaysthan. There is one bhang in the 21st prakṛiti, including the Tirthankara. In the mishrasharīrakāla of the audārika, there are 6 bhangas in relation to the 6 institutions of the 26th prakṛiti sthāna. There is one bhang in the 27th prakṛiti sthāna, including the Tirthankara. At the time of entering the mūlasharīra, there are 6 institutions in the 28th prakṛiti sthāna in the sharīraparyāptikāla, and 12 bhangas in relation to the vihāyogatiyugal (6 x 2). There is one bhang in the 29th prakṛiti sthāna, including the Tirthankara. There are 12 bhangas in the shvāsochchhvāsaparyāptikāla of the sāmanya kevali. In this way, there are 13 bhangas in the 29th prakṛiti sthāna. There is one bhang in the 30th prakṛiti sthāna, including the Tirthankara. There are 6 institutions of the sāmanya kevali in the ātaparābhīkāla, and 24 bhangas in relation to the vihāyogati-swarayugal. In this way, there are 25 bhangas in the 30th prakṛiti sthāna (1 + 24). There is one bhang in the 31st prakṛiti sthāna, including the Tirthankara. In the sayogigunasthan, there are 60 bhangas in all (1 + 1 + 6 + 1 + 12 + 13 + 25 + 1). In the ayogigunasthan, there is one bhang in the 9th prakṛiti sthāna, including the Tirthankara, and one bhang in the 8th prakṛiti sthāna, excluding the Tirthankara. Know these two bhangas.

**Sight of bhangas related to the udaysthan of nāmakarma in the gunasthanas**

| Gunasthan | Mithyātva | Sāsādan | Udaysthan | Prakṛitirupa Gunasthanagata | Sthānagata Bhang | Kul Bhang | Special Details |
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
| 1 | 21 | 21 | 21 | 21 | 59 | 7692 | See the special meaning of gāthā 607 |
| 2 | 24 | 24 | 24 | 24 | 27 | 1160 | See the special meaning of gāthā 607 |
| 3 | 25 | 25 | 25 | 25 | 18 | 31 | See the special meaning of gāthā 607 |
| 4 | 26 | 26 | 26 | 26 | 614 | 6 | See the special meaning of gāthā 607 |
| 5 | 27 | 27 | 27 | 27 | 10 | 1 | See the special meaning of gāthā 607 |
| 6 | 28 | 28 | 28 | 28 | 1162 |  | See the special meaning of gāthā 607 |
| 7 | 29 | 29 | 29 | 29 | 1746 |  | See the special meaning of gāthā 607 |
| 8 | 30 | 30 | 30 | 30 | 2896 |  | See the special meaning of gāthā 607 |
| 9 | 31 | 31 | 31 | 31 | 1160 |  | See the special meaning of gāthā 607 |

In this gunasthan, there are no 27th and 28th prakṛiti sthānas. One should know the rest from the special meaning of gāthā 607. 

Page #591:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-552
4080
2304
1152
Mishra
2304
3458
26 Prakrutirupa 29 Prakrutirupa 30 Prakrutirupa 31 Prakrutirupa 29 Prakrutik 30 Prakrutik 31 Prakrutik 21 Prakrutik 25 Prakrutik 26 Prakrutik 27 Prakrutik 14 Prakrutik
To know this Gunasthan according to the special meaning of verse 607. To know this Gunasthan according to the special meaning of verse 607.
Asanyata
Prakrutik
2305 1152 288
Desasanyata
432
To know this Gunasthan according to the special meaning of verse 607.
Pramattasanyata
148
30 Prakrutik 31 Prakrutik 30 Prakrutik 31 Prakrutik 25 Prakrutirupa 27 Prakrutirupa 28 Prakrutirupa 29 Prakrutirupa 30 Prakrutirupa 30 Prakrutik 30 Prakrutik 30 Prakrutik 30 Prakrutik 30 Prakrutik
144
4
Apramattasanyata Upshamak A-purva. Up. Anivriti. Up. Sukshmasamp. Upshantakashaya
To know this Gunasthan according to the special meaning of verse 607. To know this Gunasthan according to the special meaning of verse 607. To know this Gunasthan according to the special meaning of verse 607. The total number of bhangas in the four Gunasthanas of the Kshapaka श्रेणी is 96.
288
Kshapaka A-purvakarana
30 Prakrutirupa 

Page #592:
---------------------------
Kshapaka Anivriti.
Kshapaka Sukshmasamp.
Kshina Kshaya
Sayoga Kevali
Ayoga Kevali
Gomptasar Karmakanda-13
30 Prakrutirupa
30 Prakrutirupa
30 Prakrutirupa
20 Prakrutik
21 Prakrutik
26 Prakrutik
27 Prakrutik
28 Prakrutik
29 Prakrutik
30 Prakrutik
31 Prakrutik
9 Prakrutik
8 Prakrutik
24
24
24
1
1
6
1
12
13
25
1
1
1
60
2
For special statement, see verse 607.
See the special meaning of verse 607.
Know the special statement from the special meaning of verse 607.
20,053 such name karma
Know 20,053 in the bhang of the udaysthana related to the gunasthana.
Now, in the above mentioned verse 607, the bhang mentioned are called apunaruka bhang
Advanna sattasaya sattasahassa ya honti pinde na. Udattane bhang ashayaparakkamuddittha ||608||
Meaning - The valiant Sri Mahaviraswami (Tirthankaradev) without any help has said 7758 apunaruka bhang in the 20 etc. prakrutirupa and the above mentioned 12 udaysthana related to name karma.
Special meaning - 7692 bhang of mithyatvagunasthana, 4 bhang of the muni with aharaksharir in the pramattagunasthana, 60 bhang of sayoga kevali and 2 bhang of ayoga kevali, in this way (7692+4+60+2) total 7758 bhang are apunaruka. Apart from these, the remaining bhang related to the gunasthana should be understood as being included in the bhang of mithyatvagunasthana.
Thus ends the name karma udaysthana prakarana. 

Page #593:
---------------------------
Gommatasar Karmakanda-554
Further, the section on the states of Name Karma, in 19 verses, describes the states of Name Karma.
Tidui-gin-udi-nau-di-ad-chau-do-a-hi-yasi-di-si-di-ya. _Una-asi-dattari-sattattari-das-ya-nav-satta. ||609||
Meaning - There are 13 states of Name Karma, which are of 93, 92, 91, 90, 88, 84, 82, 80, 79, 78, 77, 10 and 9 natures. How these states are formed is described below.
Savvam-tittha-haru-bhau-nam-sura-ni-rayan-ra-du-chari-du-ge.
Ujv-elli-de-ha-de-chau-tere-jogi-ss-dasan-av-yam. ||610|| Meaning - The first state of Name Karma is of 93 natures, out of which, when the nature of the Tirthankara is reduced, the state becomes of 92 natures. When the nature of the Aharak-dvik is reduced, the state becomes of 91 natures. When the natures of Aharak-dvik and Tirthankara are reduced, the state becomes of 90 natures. Out of these 90 natures, the state of the Devagati, which is of the nature of Udvellana,
1. Pra.Pan.San.Pri.385 Ga.208.
2. Doubt - In the states of Name Karma, one state is devoid of the essence of the Aharak-sharira and Aharak-angopaanga. Why is the absence of the essence of Aharak-bandhan and Aharak-sanghat not mentioned there? Can a being who has not bound the Aharak-sharira have Aharak-bandhan and Aharak-sanghat? If so, how?
Solution - There are 93 natures of Name Karma. Out of these, 5 bandhan, 5 sanghat, and 16 natures of Sparsha, Rasa, Gandha, and Varna, totaling 26 natures, are not eligible for binding. 67 natures are eligible for binding. It is also said:
Vanna-rasa-gandha-phasa-chau-chau-igi-satt-samp-mi-chchatt-am.
Hoti-a-bandha-bandhan-pan-pan-sanghaya-samm-att-am. ||6|| (Panchasangraha Gyanapith p. 48) Meaning - Four Varna, four Rasa, one Gandha, seven Sparsha, Samyag-mithyatva, Samyaktva-prakriti, five bandhan, five sanghat, these 28 natures, 26 of Name Karma and 2 of Mohaniya Karma, are not eligible for binding.
Dehe-a-vina-bha-vi-bandhan-sanghad-idi-a-bandhu-daya.
Vanna-chaukke-abhinne-gahide-chattari-bandhu-daye ||34|| (Go.Ka.) Meaning - Bandhan and Sanghat are inseparable from the Sharira Name Karma. Therefore, these ten natures, five bandhan and five sanghat, are not counted separately in the state of binding and arising, as they are implicit in the Sharira Name Karma. The 20 varieties of Sparsha, Rasa, Gandha, and Varna are included in these four. Therefore, from the perspective of inseparability, instead of 20 varieties, only 4 varieties are counted in the state of binding and arising. 

Page #594:
---------------------------
Gommatsar Karmakanda-555

When the two natures, Devagati and Devagati-anupurvi, are reduced, there are 88 Prakruti-sthana. When the four natures, Narakagati, Narakagati-anupurvi, Vaikriyika-sharira, and Vaikriyika-sharira-angopaanga, are reduced from the 88 Prakruti, there are 84 Prakruti-sthana. When the two natures, Manushya-gati and Manushya-gati-anupurvi, are reduced from these 84 Prakruti, there are 82 Prakruti-sthana. And when the 13 Prakruti that are destroyed in the Anivritikaran-guna-sthana, mentioned in the 338th gatha, are reduced from the 93 Prakruti, there are 80 Prakruti-sthana. And when these 13 Prakruti are reduced from the 92 Prakruti, there are 79 Prakruti-sthana. And when these 13 Prakruti are reduced from the 95 Prakruti, there are 79 Prakruti-sthana.

From these two gathas, it is clear that the five-sanhita and the five-vayya, which are types of bandha-udaya-niti, are not included in the bandha-udaya Prakruti, because they are included in the Sharira-namakarma. The five-sanhita and the five-bandha are not included in the Sharira-namakarma because they are not included in the Satva. Therefore, the 93 Prakruti, etc., are mentioned as Satva-sthana. These places are as follows:

Tiduiginu-udinu-udinu-adachaudo-ahiyasi-di-sididi. Unnasidi-tattari-sattattari-das-yanava-satta. ||609|| Savvam-tittha-harum-asuraniryanar-du-chari-duge. Udvellide-hade-chau-tere-jogiss-dasanavayam. ||610|| (Go.K.)

Meaning: The 93, 92, 91, 90, 88, 84, 82, 80, 79, 78, 77, 10, and 9 Prakruti are the Satva-sthana of the Namakarma. The 93 Prakruti is the place of the Namakarma. When the Tirthankara is reduced from it, there are 92 Prakruti. When the Aharaka-yugal is reduced from it, there are 91 Prakruti. When the three Aharaka-dhik and the Tirthankara are reduced from it, there are 90 Prakruti. When the Devagati-drik is reduced from the 90 Prakruti, there are 88 Prakruti. When the Narakagati-drik and the Vaikriyika-drik are reduced from it, there are 84 Prakruti. When the Manushya-drik is reduced from it, there are 82 Prakruti. The remaining Satva-sthana are possible in the Kshapaka-shreni.

Similarly, in the Panchasangraha, published by the Jnanapitha, on pages 385-389, in gathas 208-219, it is stated:

Haradu-samm-missansuradugu-narayachaukramanukamaso. Ucchago-da-manuduganuvvellijjati-jivahim. ||350||

Meaning: The Aharaka-dvik, Samyaktava-Prakruti, Mishra-mohini, Devagati-yugal, Narakagati, etc., 4 (Narakagati-dvik, Vaikriyika-dvik), Uccha-gotra, and Manushya-gati-dvik are the 13 Udvelana-Prakruti.

Here, it is worth considering that the Udvelana of the Aharaka-sharira and the Aharaka-sharira-angopaanga, and the Vaikriyika-sharira and the Vaikriyika-sharira-angopaanga is mentioned, but why is the Udvelana of the Aharaka-sanhita and the Aharaka-sharira-bandha, and the Vaikriyika-sanhita and the Vaikriyika-sharira-bandha not mentioned? The one who has not done the bandha of the Aharaka-sharira does not have the Satva of these four Prakruti: (1) Aharaka-sharira, (2) Aharaka-sharira-anupaja, (3) Aharaka-sharira-sanhita, and (4) Aharaka-sharira-bandha. Therefore, when these four are reduced from the 93, there are 89 Satva-sthana. And when these four are reduced from the 92, there are 88 Satva-sthana. It is also worth considering that instead of reducing these four, only the Aharaka-sharira and the Aharaka-sharira-angopaanga are reduced, and the 91 and 90 Satva-sthana are mentioned.

When the Udvelana of the Narakagati occurs, the Narakagati, Narakagati-anupurvi, Vaikriyika-sharira, Vaikriyika-sharira-angopaanga, Vaikriyika-sanhita, 

Page #595:
---------------------------
Gommatasar Karmakanda - 556

Reducing the number of natures from 78 to 77 natures, and from 90 to 77 natures, results in a state of 77 natures. A-yogakevali has a state of 10 and 1 natures, respectively. This is how to know the state of name karma.

**Special Note:** The two states of 91 and 90 natures mentioned here are formed after the arousal of the Aharak-dwika, because even the asanyata (non-restrained) arouses the Aharak-dwika.

Further, in the A-yogakevali Gunasthan, the natures of the 10 and 9 natures states are mentioned as:

"Gayajogassu Tere Tadijaggodaiidi Vihineesu.
Das Namassu Ya Sattha Nava Cheva Ya Tiththihiineesu." (611)

**Meaning:** In the A-yogakevali, the 13 states of nature mentioned in the "Udayagavaranranu" etc. gathas, when Vedaniya, Manushyayu, and Uchchagotra these three natures are reduced, there are 10 natures of name karma. And from these, when the Tirthankara nature is reduced, there is a state of 1 nature.

**Note:** The six natures of Vaikriyika-sharira bandhan are reduced from 88 natures to 82 natures, but instead of reducing all six, only four are reduced, resulting in 84 natures. This is also worth considering.

Considering all this, it appears that even after the arousal of the Aharak-sharira-dwika, the arousal of the Aharak-sharira-sanghata bandhan, these two natures, does not occur. Similarly, even after the arousal of the Vaikriyika-sharira-dwika, the arousal of the Vaikriyika-sharira-sanghata and Vaikriyika-sharira-bandhan does not occur. The states of 91, 90, 88, 84, 82 are mentioned in relation to arousal. When beings with states of 93 and 92 arouse the Aharak-dwika, they attain states of 91 and 90 respectively. If it is said that the Aharak-sharira of a Samyagdristi does not arouse, therefore the Aharak-sharira of a being with a state of 93 cannot arouse, because due to the state of Tirthankara nature, he cannot remain in Mithyatva for more than an Antarmukhurta, this is completely incorrect. Because when he deviates from restraint and attains asanyata, the arousal of his Aharak-sharira-dwika begins. It is also said:

"Asanjam Gado Aadharkasarirasantkampio- Sanjado Antomuhurttena Uchvellanamaadhavedi Jav Asanjado Jav Asantkamm Cha Aththitav Uvvelladi." (Dhaval Pu. 96 p. 418)

**Meaning:** The Aharak-sharira-satkarmic restrained being, upon attaining asanyata, begins arousal in an Antarmukhurta. As long as he is asanyata and as long as he is devoid of satkarma, he continues to arouse.

Similarly, even after the arousal of the Vaikriyika-sharira, the arousal of the Vaikriyika-sanghata and bandhan, these two natures, does not occur.

In these states of name karma, the states of the Nitya-nigodaya beings are not intended, because the states of those who have never bound the Vaikriyika-sharira-chatuṣka and Aharak-sharira-chatuṣka will be different.

1. Pra. Pan. San. Pu. 385-387 Gatha 209-214.
2. Pra. Pan. San. Pu. 387-388 Gatha 215-216. 

Page #596:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-557
Special Meaning - The 10 natural states of name karma have been mentioned at the time of the final liberation of the Aayogakevali. These 10 states are as follows: ManushyaGati, ManushyaAlanupurvi, PanchendriyaJati, As, Badar, Subhag, Paryapt, Aadey, Yash:Kirti, Tirthankar. Out of these ten states, except ManushyaGatiAnupurvi, the remaining 9 states are of the form of Uday (arising). As it is said in verse 598, according to it, the arising of ManushyaGatiAnupurvi is not for the Aayogakevali, because it is a Kshetravipaki state and its arising is possible only in the state of VigrahaGati. The state which is Anuday (not arising) gets transformed into another state through StuvikSamkran (transition) in the previous time, therefore, along with the 72 states of Anuday, the Sattvavyuchchitti (cessation of existence) of ManushyaGatiAnupurvi should also happen at the time of the final liberation of the Aayogakevali, as it is said in Dh.Pu. 6 page 417 and Dh.Pu. 10 page 326 and Bhagavati Aradhana verse 2117, 2118, 2120 and 2121.
So, with the fifth time, with the final meditation.
The Anudinnas (non-arising states) have all fallen at the time of the final liberation. ||2120|| Bhagavati Aradhana || Or, in this regard, there are two opinions of the Acharyas, due to the absence of ShrutaKevali, it cannot be said which statement is correct, therefore, it is appropriate to collect both statements.
The vision of 13 states related to name karma. State
Description All the states of name karma. 93-1 Tirthankar state. 93-2 Aharakdvik. 93-3 Aharakdvik and Tirthankar | 93-5 Tirthankar, Aharakdvik and Devadvik (when Udvelana (agitation) occurs) 88-4 NarakGati, NarakGatiAnupurvi, VaikriyakSharira,
VaikriyaAgopang 84-2 ManushyaDvik (when Udvelana (agitation) occurs) 93-53 NarakDvik, TiryanchDvik, VikalTray Udyot, Atap,
Ekendriya, Sadharan, Sukshma, Sthavar's destruction happens in the AnivrittikaranGunasthan (state of non-obstruction).
Serial Number
1. Pra.Pan.Sa. page 387 verse 214. 

Page #597:
---------------------------
## 9
## 10
no no no
## 11
## 12
## 13
## 79
## 78
## 77
## 10
Gommatasara Karmakanda - 558
## 92-13  Uparyukta.
## 91-13  Uparyukta.
## 90-13  Uparyukta.
## 10
(Manushyadvik, Panchendriya, Subhaga, Tras, Badar, Paryapta, Aadeya, Yashaskirti and Tirthankara)
## 9 (10 - 1 Tirthankara)
Athanantara udvelanaroopa sthano mein jo visheshta hai usko kahate hain
Gunasanjadappyadim micche bandhudayagandheeNammi. Suvvellappayadin niyamenuvvellade jeevo. ||612||
-
Arth - Mithyatva gunasthan mein jin prakritiyon ke bandh ki athava uday ki vasana (gandh) bhi nahin hai, aisi samyaktva adi gun se utpann hui - samyaktva - samyagmithyatvprakritiki udvelana (aaharakadvik ki bhi udvelana) mithyatvagunasthan mein hoti hai aur shesh prakritiyon ki udvelana vah jeev karta hai jiske un prakritiyon ka bandh athava uday ki vasana bhi nahin hai.
Vishesharth - Asanyatajeev ke aaharakadvik ka bandh va uday nahin hai, vah aaharakadvik ki udvelana karta hai. Ekendriya va vikalatray ke devadvik, narakadvik va vaikriyikadvik ka bandh va uday nahin hai atah ve jeev vaikriyik shatk ki udvelana karte hain. Isi prakar tejakayik vayu kayik jeev ke vishay mein bhi jaanna.
Ab un prakritiyon ka udvelan kram kahate hain
Satyattadaaharam putram ubvellade tado sammam.
Sammmamichham tu tado ego vigaloy sagaloy. ||613||
Arth - Aaharakadvik prashast prakriti hai atah charon gati ke mithyadristi jeev pahle in dono ki udvelana karte hain, tatpashchat samyaktva prakriti ki, uske bad samyagmithyatv prakriti ki udvelana karte hain. Uske pashchat ekendriya, vikalendriya aur sakalendriya jeev shesh devadvik adik ki udvelana karte hain. Note Dhavalakar Veerasen Swami ke matanusar aaharakadvik ki udvelana asanyam mein aate hi hoti hai.
1. Satkarshik sanyat asanyam ko prapt hokar antarmuhurt mein udvelana praarambh karta hai jab tak vah asanyat hai aur jab tak satkarma se rahit hai tab tak udvelana karta hai. (Dh.Pu. 96 pr. 498) 

Page #598:
---------------------------
## Gommatasara Karmakanda-559

**Further, the time suitable for Udvellana is described:**

> **"In the time suitable for Vedak Samyaktv, the Udvellana of Aharakdvig is done, in the time of Upshama, the Udvellana of Samyaktv and Samyagmithyatv Prakriti is done, and the Udvellana of Vaikriyakshatk is done in the Ekendriya and Vikalendriya Paryaya."** (614)

**Meaning:** In the time suitable for Vedak Samyaktv, the Udvellana of Aharakdvig is done, in the time of Upshama, the Udvellana of Samyaktv and Samyagmithyatv Prakriti is done, and the Udvellana of Vaikriyakshatk is done in the Ekendriya and Vikalendriya Paryaya.

**Now, the nature of both these times mentioned in the above verse is described:**

> **"The state of Samyaktv and Samyagmithyatv Prakriti decreases, and when it remains as much as the Prithaktvasagar for the Trasa Jiva, and when it remains as much as one Sagar for the countless parts of the Pallya of Ekendriya, then it is the time suitable for Vedak. And if the state of Sattarup becomes even less than that, then it is the time of Upshama."** (615)

**Meaning:** The state of Samyaktv and Samyagmithyatv Prakriti decreases, and when it remains as much as the Prithaktvasagar for the Trasa Jiva, and when it remains as much as one Sagar for the countless parts of the Pallya of Ekendriya, then it is the time suitable for Vedak. And if the state of Sattarup becomes even less than that, then it is the time of Upshama.

**1.I. Doubt:** Does the Prithaktvasagar state of Samyaktv Prakriti and Misra Prakriti happen due to good results or bad results? What state exists before that? Does the Prithaktvasagar state happen in the Prathama Guppasthan, and if so, is the Bandha of Mithyatv also the same?

**Solution:** There are five Labdhis for the Mithyadristi Jiva who is inclined towards Samyaktv in Prathama Upshama. 1. Kshayopa-shama Labdhi, 2. Vishuddhi Labdhi, 3. Deshana Labdhi, 4. Prayogya Labdhi, 5. Karana Labdhi. Out of these, the Jiva with the fourth Labdhi, Prayogya Labdhi, reduces the state of the remaining seven Karmas without Aayu, and makes it as much as Antahkoda-kodi Sagar. It is also said in the Shri Labdhisar Granth:

> **"Making the state as much as Antahkoda-kodi Sagar and the Anubhag as much as Dvisthanik, this is called Prayogya Labdhi. This can happen for both Bhavy and Abhavy."** (7)

**Meaning:** Making the state as much as Antahkoda-kodi Sagar and the Anubhag as much as Dvisthanik, this is called Prayogya Labdhi. This can happen for both Bhavy and Abhavy.

At the time of the origin of Prathama Upshama Samyaktv, the state of Mithyatv is as much as Antahkoda-kodi Sagar. The same Dravya transitions into Samyaktv and Misra Prakriti, therefore their state is also as much as Antahkoda-kodi Sagar. When the Jiva deviates from Prathama Upshama Samyaktv and enters the Mithyatv Gunasthan, then the Udvellana of these Samyaktv and Misra Prakriti happens there. (Go.K. verse 351). The sequence of the state happening due to Udvellana does not depend on the Vishuddha or Sanklesh results, but the Udvellana happens due to the Mithyatv result, and the Prithaktvasagar state remains. But the state Bandha of Mithyatv happens according to its own speed due to the Teer and Mand results, the state Bandha of Mithyatv does not happen according to the Udvellana.

**II. Vedakkal does not have Upshama Samyaktv, and Upshamakal does not have Vedak Samyaktv.** (For details, see Jainagajata Di. 29.8.66, Jayadhwala 4/148, Dhwala Prasta. page 5 etc.) 

Page #599:
---------------------------
## Gommatasara Karmakanda - 560

**Further, it is said about the nature of the upheaval of Tejakaya and Vayukaya:**

**616.**  "Just as a single grain of sand is insignificant compared to the vastness of the ocean, so too is the time taken for the upheaval of the Manuvaduga, Ucca, and the three natures of Tejakaya and Vayukaya, measured in an infinitesimal fraction of a Palyasankhya."

**Meaning:** The upheaval of the Manuvaduga, Ucca, and the three natures of Tejakaya and Vayukaya occurs in a time that is an infinitesimal fraction of a Palyasankhya. This is the measure of the time taken for the upheaval of all the existing entities.

**Explanation of the above:**

**617.** "If the upheaval of a single entity takes place in a fraction of a Muhurta, then how long will it take for the upheaval of the countless entities of Manuvaduga, etc., which are as vast as the ocean of numbers? By this method, it is proven that the upheaval of all entities takes place in a time that is an infinitesimal fraction of a Palyasankhya."

**Meaning:** If the upheaval of a single entity takes place in a fraction of a Muhurta, then the upheaval of countless entities, as vast as the ocean of numbers, will take place in a time that is an infinitesimal fraction of a Palyasankhya.

**Special Meaning:** The time taken for the upheaval of a single entity is an infinitesimal fraction of a Palyasankhya. This is the measure of the time taken for the upheaval of a single entity. The time taken for the upheaval of all entities is a Muhurta. This is the desired measure. By multiplying the desired measure by the measure of the time taken for the upheaval of a single entity and dividing by the measure of the time taken for the upheaval of all entities, we get an infinitesimal fraction of a Palyasankhya. The number of entities that are upheaved in a Muhurta is called a Kandaka.

**Further, it is said about the number of times Samyaktva, etc., are contradicted:**

**618.** "The living being can repeatedly abandon and then regain the states of Prathamopaśama Samyaktva, Vedaka Samyaktva, Desasanayama, and Anantanubandhi, up to a maximum of an infinitesimal fraction of a Palyasankhya times. After that, it attains the state of Siddhapad by rule."

**Meaning:** The living being can repeatedly abandon and then regain the states of Prathamopaśama Samyaktva, Vedaka Samyaktva, Desasanayama, and Anantanubandhi, up to a maximum of an infinitesimal fraction of a Palyasankhya times. After that, it attains the state of Siddhapad by rule. 

Page #600:
---------------------------
## Gommatasara Karmakanda - 561

**Verse 619:**

The **Kshapaka** श्रेणी ( श्रेणी ) can ascend a maximum of four times in the **Upshama** श्रेणी ( श्रेणी ). After that, it ascends the **Kshapaka** श्रेणी ( श्रेणी ) and attains **Moksha**. The **Sakalasamyama** is held in its most excellent form for only 32 times, after which **Moksha** is attained.

**Explanation:**

In the **Mithyatva** गुणस्थान ( गुणस्थान ), a **Tirthankara** and an **Aharaka** do not have simultaneous **sattva** ( सत्त्व ) like an ordinary being. At one time, there will be the **sattva** ( सत्त्व ) of a **Tirthankara** or an **Aharaka**. However, compared to other beings, they have simultaneous **sattva** ( सत्त्व ) in the **Mithyatva** गुणस्थान ( गुणस्थान ). In the **Sasadana** गुणस्थान ( गुणस्थान ), even compared to other beings, the **Aharaka** and **Tirthankara** do not have **sattva** ( सत्त्व ). In the **Mishra** गुणस्थान ( गुणस्थान ), there is no **sattva** ( सत्त्व ) with the **Tirthankara** nature, but there is **sattva** ( सत्त्व ) with the **Aharaka**. This is because the **Tirthankara** has **sattva** ( सत्त्व ) with the **Jiva** in the **Mishra** गुणस्थान ( गुणस्थान ), the **Tirthankara** and **Aharaka** have simultaneous **sattva** ( सत्त्व ) in the **Mithyatva** गुणस्थान ( गुणस्थान ), and the **sattva** ( सत्त्व ) of either the **Tirthankara** or the **Aharaka** does not lead to the rise of **Mithyatva**-free **Anantanubandhi** ( अनंतानुबंधी ), which is why there is no **Sasadana** गुणस्थान ( गुणस्थान ). However, the **sattva** ( सत्त्व ) of the **Aharaka** leads to the rise of **Samyagmithyatva** nature, which is why there is a **Mishra** गुणस्थान ( गुणस्थान ).

**Verse 620:**

The **sattva** ( सत्त्व ) of **Namakarma** in the **Gunasthanas** is called **Sattvasthan** compared to the four **Gatis**.

**Surasam** ( सुरसम्मे ) to **Paranarayasama** ( णरणारयसम्म ) in the **Mithya** ( मिच्छे ) **Iginaudi** ( इगिणउदी ) occurs.

**Explanation:**

There are 93 **Sattvasthan** ( सत्त्वस्थान ) of **Samyagdristi** ( सम्यग्दृष्टि ) **Deva** ( देव ) and **Manushya** ( मनुष्य ) in the four **Gatis**. There are 12 **Sattvasthan** ( सत्त्वस्थान ) in the other **Gatis** except the **Sasadana** गुणस्थान ( गुणस्थान ). There are 91 **Sattvasthan** ( सत्त्वस्थान ) of **Samyagdristi** ( सम्यग्दृष्टि ) **Deva** ( देव ) and **Samyagdristi** ( सम्यग्दृष्टि ) or **Mithyadristi** ( मिध्यादृष्टि ) **Manushya** ( मनुष्य ) and **Naraki** ( नारकी ).

**Special Explanation:**

The 93 **Sattvasthan** ( सत्त्वस्थान ) are possible from the fourth **Gunasthan** ( गुणस्थान ) to the eleventh **Gunasthan** ( गुणस्थान ) of **Manushya** ( मनुष्य ).

**Verse 621:**

**Udi** ( उदी ) **Chaduggadhimmi** ( चदुग्गदिम्मि ) **Ya** ( य ) **Teras** ( तेरस ) **Khavagoti** ( खवगोत्ति ) **Tiriyanarami** ( तिरियणरमिच्छे ) **Micche** ( मिच्छे ). **Adachausi** ( अडचउसीदी ) **Satta** ( सत्ता ) **Tirikkhami** ( तिरिक्खमिच्छम्मि ) **Basidi** ( बासीदी ).

**Explanation:**

1. **Titdhaharana** ( तित्धाहाराणुभयं ) **Savvam** ( सव्वं ) **Titdhan** ( तित्धंण ) **Micchgaditiye** ( मिच्छ्गादितिये ). **Tassattakammiyanam** ( तस्सत्तकम्मियाणं ) **Taggunthanam** ( तग्गुणठाणं ) **Na** ( ण ) **Sanbhavaee** ( संभवई ).

**Explanation:**

The **Titdhaharana** ( तित्धाहाराणुभयं ) is **Titdhan** ( तित्धंण ) **Micchgaditiye** ( मिच्छ्गादितिये ). The **Sattvakarma** ( सत्तकम्मियाणं ) of this **Gunasthan** ( गुणठाणं ) is not possible.

**Verse 333:**

**Karmakanda** ( कर्मकाण्ड )

**Note:** The translation preserves the Jain terms as requested. However, some terms may require further context or explanation for a complete understanding. 

Page #601:
---------------------------
## Gommatasar Karmakanda - 562

**Meaning:** There are 90 natural sattvasthana in all four gatis, but there is a special feature that in the human gati, 53 natural sattvasthana are destroyed before the destruction of the kshapaka anivrittikaran. Mithyadrishti tiryancha and manushya have 88-84 natural sattvasthana, because according to the gatha "Sapade Uppanathaanevi", such a state is found even where the udvelana of devadvika occurs in ekendriyadi, and such a state is also found in the tiryancha or manushya where the jiva is born after death. Mithyadrishti tiryancha alone has 82 natural sattvasthana, because the udvelana of manushyadvika occurs in tejakaya-vayukaya jivas, and such a state is also found there, because this jiva is not born anywhere else except in tiryancha after death.

**Siddhaadi Chautthaana Teras Khavagadu Anuv Samagesu.**
**Gaya Yogass Ducharim Jam Y Charimmi Dasanavayam.** || 62.2 ||

**Meaning:** The four sattvasthana of 80-79-78 and 77 nature are found from where the destruction of 13 prakruti occurs in the kshapaka anivrittikaran gunasthan, until the dwicharamsamaya of the ayogi gunasthan, and the 10 and 9 natural sattvasthana are found in the charamsamaya of the ayogi kevali.

**Sattvasthana related to namakarma in all four gatis:**

| Sattvasthana | Description | Number of Prakruti |
|---|---|---|
| Asanyata Samyagdristi | In all four gatis, except for the sasadan gunasthan of dev and manushya from the fourth to the eleventh gunasthan. | 90 |
| Samyagdristi Dev | In samyagdristi dev, sabhyagdristi, or mithyadrishti manushya or naraki. | 90 |
| Mithyadrishti Manushya | In the anivrittikaran gunasthan of manushya, where the destruction of 13 prakruti occurs, and in the previous gunasthan, or in all four gatis. | 88 |
| Mithyadrishti Tiryancha | These two sattvasthana are found in mithyadrishti tiryancha or manushya. | 84 |
| Mithyadrishti Tiryancha | In mithyadrishti tiryancha. | 82 | 

Page #602:
---------------------------
##  Translation:

8
9
10
11
12
1.3
79
78
1915
10
Gommatasar Karmakanda-563
BAAL

From the Anivrittikaranagunasthan, where 13 Prakṛtis are destroyed, to the end of the Ayogakevali Gunasthan, these four Sattvasthan are found.
Both these Sattvasthan are found at the end of the Ayogakevali.
Further, in the 41 Jivapadas mentioned in verse 519, the Sattvasthan are described as follows:

**Verse 623:**
**Meaning:** In comparison to a single Jiva, the Sattvasthan of Naraki Jivas are 92, 91, and 90 Prakṛtis.

**Verse 624:**
**Meaning:** In Tiryancha, starting with the Earth body, there are five Sattvasthan each for 92, 90, 88, 84, and 82 Prakṛtis.
In humans, there are 12 Sattvasthan remaining after excluding the 82 Prakṛti Sattvasthan from the aforementioned 13 Sattvasthan. However, there are four Sattvasthan for the Sayogakevali, namely 80, 79, 78, and 77 Prakṛtis, and six Sattvasthan for the Ayogakevali, namely 80, 79, 78, 77, 10, and 1 Prakṛtis.

**Verse 625:**
**Meaning:** In the previous verse, four Sattvasthan for the Sayogakevali and six for the Ayogakevali were mentioned. Among them, there are even-numbered Sattvasthan for both Sayogakevali and Ayogakevali, including the Tirthankara Prakṛti, and odd-numbered Sattvasthan for the general Sayogakevali and Ayogakevali, excluding the Tirthankara Prakṛti. In other words, there are three Sattvasthan for the Sayogakevali with the Tirthankara Prakṛti, namely 80, 78 Prakṛtis, and for the Ayogi, 80, 78, and 10 Prakṛtis. Similarly, there are three Sattvasthan for the general Sayogakevali without the Tirthankara Prakṛti, namely 79, 77 Prakṛtis, and for the Ayogi, 79, 77, and 1 Prakṛtis. There are two Sattvasthan for the Aharak, namely 93, 92 Prakṛtis, and four Sattvasthan for the Vaimanik Devas, namely 93, 92, 91, and 90 Prakṛtis. 

Page #603:
---------------------------
Gommatasar Karmakanda-564: The 92nd and 90th Prakruti Sattva of the Bhavanatiya, Bhogbhumi, and the Narakas of the 4th, 5th, 6th, and 7th Earth, as well as the 90th Prakruti Sattva of all beings in the Sasana, are the same. ||626||

Meaning: The Bhavanatrikdeva, Bhogbhumi humans, and all Tiryanchas, as well as the Narakas of the 4th, 5th, 6th, and 7th Earth, all have the same 92nd and 90th Prakruti Sattva. Similarly, all beings in the Sasana, including those with the Sarasthanadhat, have a 90th Prakruti Sattva.

**A Look at the Sattva of the Four Gatis in Relation to the Name Karma**

| **Naraka Gati** | **Tiryancha Gati** | **Manushya Gati** | **Deva Gati** |
|---|---|---|---|
| **Gunasthan** | **Sattvasthan** | **Gunasthan** | **Sattvasthan** |
| 92, 91, 90, 88, 84 | Mithyatva 92, 92 | Mithyatva 92, 91, 90 | Mithyatva 92, 90, 88 |
| Sasadan 10 | Sasadan | 90 Sasadan | Misra 92, 90 |
| Misra 92, 90 | Asankta | 92, 91, 90 Asanyata | 92, 90 Asanyata |
| Asanyata | Deshasanyata | 92, 90 Deshasanyata | 93, 92, 91, 90 |
| Pramattasanyata | Apramattasanyata | 92, 90 | 80, 79, 78, 77 |
| Apurvakarana | Anivrittikarana | 80, 79, 78, 77 | Sukshmasamparaya |
| Upshamashreni | Kshapakashreni | 80, 79, 78, 77 | Upshantamoha |
| 80, 79, 78, 77 | 80, 79, 78, 77 | Kshinamoha | 80, 79, 78, 77 |
| Sayogakevali | Ayogakevali | 80, 79, 78, 77 | Dvicharama Samaya |
| 80, 79, 78, 77 | 1059 | Charama Samaya | 

Now, we will discuss the breaking of the three-fold bondage of the Bhandodayasattva of the Prakruti. ||627|| 

Page #604:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-565
Meaning - In this way, the bondage, arising, and essence of the original natures, as well as their destruction, have been explained. Now, the destruction of bondage, arising, and essence, which are three-fold, will be explained. The Acharya has made such a promise.
In the eight-fold, seven-fold, and six-fold bondage, there are eight types of arising and essence.
In the eight-fold, there are eight types of arising and essence for each of the eight original natures.
In the seven-fold, there are eight types of arising and essence for each of the seven original natures.
In the six-fold, there are eight types of arising and essence for each of the six original natures.
In the one-fold bondage of the original nature, there are seven types of arising and eight types of essence, or seven types of arising and essence, or four types of arising and essence.
In the absence of bondage of the original nature, there is only one option, which is four types of arising and essence.
A table showing the relationship between the bondage, arising, and essence of the original nature.
Essence
Arising
Eight original natures
Eight original natures
Eight original natures
Eight original natures
Eight original natures
Knowledge-obscuring, etc.
Eight original natures
Eight original natures
Eight original natures
Eight original natures
Life without
Seven original natures
Eight original natures
Eight original natures
Delusionary and life without
Six original natures
10th Gunasthan
Eight original natures
Delusionary without
Seven original natures
One original nature
Seven-fold knowledge
15th Gunasthan
Delusionary without
Seven original natures
One original nature
Seven-fold knowledge
52nd Gunasthan
One original nature
Four original natures
Four original natures
One original nature
Seven-fold knowledge
13th Gunasthan
One original nature
Four original natures
Four original natures
Absence of bondage of the original nature
14th Gunasthan
Further, these three-fold destructions are explained in the Gunasthanas.
1. This verse is verse number 4 on page 296 of the Pra.Pan.San.Pu. 

Page #605:
---------------------------
The second type of *bhang* (breaking) in the three *gunasthanas* (stages of spiritual progress) of *misra* (mixed), *apuurvakaran* (unprepared), and *anivrittikaran* (unreleased), is as follows:

* **Misra Gunasthan:**  Without *apramatta* (non-distraction), the remaining five *gunasthanas* have eight *bandha* (bondage), eight *udaya* (arising), and eight *sattva* (existence) as the first type of *bhang*, and seven *bandha*, eight *udaya*, and eight *sattva* as the second type of *bhang*.
* **Sukshma Samparaya Gunasthan:** The third type of *bhang*.
* **Upashanta Kshaya Gunasthan:** The fourth type of *bhang*.
* **Kshina Kshaya Gunasthan:** The fifth type of *bhang*.
* **Sayogi Gunasthan:** The sixth type of *bhang*.
* **Ayogi Gunasthan:** The seventh type of *bhang*.

**Specific Explanation:**

In terms of *gunasthanas* in relation to the *bhang* of *bandha*, *udaya*, and *sattva*, the *misra gunasthan* has seven *prakritis* (fundamental principles) of *bandha* and eight *prakritis* of *udaya* and *sattva* as the second type of *bhang*. Without *apramatta*, the remaining six *gunasthanas* have eight *bandha*, eight *udaya*, and eight *sattva* as the first type of *bhang*, and seven *bandha*, eight *udaya*, and eight *sattva* as the second type of *bhang*.

* **Sukshma Samparaya Gunasthan:** Six *bandha*, eight *udaya*, and eight *sattva*.
* **Upashanta Kshaya Gunasthan:** One *bandha*, seven *udaya*, and eight *sattva*.
* **Kshina Kshaya Gunasthan:** One *bandha*, seven *udaya*, and seven *sattva*.
* **Sayogi Gunasthan:** One *bandha*, four *udaya*, and four *sattva*.
* **Ayogi Gunasthan:** Zero *bandha*, four *udaya*, and four *sattva*.

**In relation to *gunasthanas*, the *trisanyogi bhang* (three-fold breaking) is as follows:**

| Gunasthan | *Bandha* | *Udaya* | *Sattva* |
|---|---|---|---|
| Misra | 7 | 8 | 8 |
| Sukshma Samparaya | 6 | 8 | 8 |
| Upashanta Kshaya | 1 | 7 | 8 |
| Kshina Kshaya | 1 | 7 | 7 |
| Sayogi | 1 | 4 | 4 |
| Ayogi | 0 | 4 | 4 |

**Note:**

* The number 8 represents *ayu* (life span) with *karma* (action).
* The number 7 represents *ayu* without *karma*.
* The number 6 represents *mohaniya* (delusion) *ayu* without *karma*.
* The number 4 represents *aghatiya* (non-violent) *karma*.
* The number 1 represents the *sattavedaniya* (knowledge-producing) *sthana* (stage). 

Page #606:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-567 Now, in the Uttaraprakritis, the three-fold combination of Bandha, Udaya, and Sattvarupa is called Bhang.
Bandhodayakammamsa Nanavaranantarayie Pancha!
Bandhovarame Vi Taha Udayamsa Honti Pancheva ||630|| Meaning - There are five-five Bandha, Udaya, and Sattvarupa in the form of the five-five prakritis of Jnanavaran and Antarayakarma, up to the subtle Samprayay Gunasthan. And even in the absence of Bandha, there are five-five prakritis of Udaya and Sattvarupa in the Upshantamoha and Kshinamoha Gunasthan. Here, Ansha is a synonym for Sattwa. That is, the word Ansha should be taken as Sattwa.
The Uttaraprakriti of Jnanavaran-Antarayakarma, in relation to the Gunasthan of Bandha-Udaya-Sattwa, is as follows:
Mithyatva
Sasadan
Mishra
Asanthata
Desasayata
EHR
PhKE
Apuvarkaran
-IIhE
Kshaya
- | Anivriti.
Helihat
Bandha 1 Gunasthan
Kshinakshaya
-
Udaya
|
Bidiyavarane Navabandhagesu Chadupanchaudaya Navasatta. Chabbandhagesu Evam Tah Chadubandhe Chadansa Ya ||631 || Uvaradbandhe Chadupanchaudaya Nava Chhaccha Satva Chadu Jugalam.
Tadayam Godam Aum Vibhaj Moham Param Voccham ||632 || Jummam. || Meaning - The 9 prakritis of Darshanavaranakarma, in the Mithyatva and Sasadan Gunasthan, have Udaya of five or four, and Sattwa of nine prakritis. Similarly, for those with six prakritis of Bandha, the Udaya is four or five, and the Sattwa is six, up to the first part of the Apuvarkaran Gunasthan, which is of both categories (Mishra).
1. This gatha is from Pra.Pan.San. p. 299 gatha 8.
2. See also Pra.Pan.San. p. 300-302 gatha 10-14. 

Page #607:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-568
9. For those with four types of karma, the second part of A-purvakarana (A-purvakarana-2) binds from the second part of A-purvakarana to the Upshamaka-Sukshma-Samparaya-Gunasthanas, and for those with 16 types of karma, the Kshapaka-A-nivrittikarana-Gunasthanas, which destroy the 16 types of karma, bind. The binding is of 4 types, the arising is of 4 types, and the sattva is of 5 types. After the destruction of 16 types of karma, the binding and arising are the same until the Sukshma-Samparaya-Gunasthanas, but the sattva is of 6 types. For those whose binding has ceased, the arising is the same, of 4 and 5 types, the sattva is of 9 types in Upshantaka-Kshaya, of 6 types until the second extreme of Kshina-Kshaya, and of 4 types each for arising and sattva at the extreme time of the Kshina-Kshaya-Gunasthanas. The Acharya has promised to explain the divisions of the Vedaniya-Gotra and Ayu-Karma, and their respective bhangas in the Gunasthanas, and then to explain the Mohaniya-Karma. 
The vision of the binding, arising, and sattva of the three-fold bhangas of the Uttar-Prakritis of Darshanavaran-Karma.
Kshina-Kshaya
Poli
Mithyatva
Sasaadana
Mishra
Asanyata
Desha-Sanyata
Pramatta
| A-purvakarana | A-nivritti | Sukshma-Samparaya | 'Up- -Up
A-pramatta
Upshantaka-Kshaya
Dwi
Up-Kshapaka
Shamaka
Kshapaka
Shamaka-Kshapaka/Up
Charma Samaya
Shamaka
Charma
|
।
Udaya
|4.5 | 4/5/45/4.5 | 45 |42 | 4|45 4545/4/5/4/2 | 45.45 45 4
Now, the three-fold bhangas in the Uttar-Bhedas of Vedaniya-Karma are explained.
Saada-Saada-Ek-Kadaram Bandhu-Udaya Honti Sambhav-Sthanee. Dos-Sattvam Jogit-Tiya Charime Udaya-Agadam Sattvam. ||633|| Chattho-Utti Chari Bhangaa Do Bhangaa Hoti Jaav Jogiji-Nee.
Chaubhangaa-A-jogiji-Nee Sthanam Padi Veyaniyass. ||634|| Jummam. || Meaning - The binding or arising of either Saata or A-saata-Vedaniya occurs in the appropriate place. The sattva of two is the sattva that arises at the extreme time of the Yogi. ||633|| The four-fold bhangas become two-fold bhangas until the Yogi.
The four-fold bhangas become two-fold bhangas until the Yogi. The place of the Vedaniya is the place of the four-fold bhangas. ||634|| Jummam. || 
1. Pra. Pan. San..308 Ga.19-20 also see. 

Page #608:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-569
It is both sāta and asāta until the sa-yogi-guṇa-sthāna. At the end of the a-yogi-guṇa-sthāna, the sattva is of the one that arises, therefore, in relation to the guṇa-sthānas, the bhandha and udaya of the vedaniya karma are both sāta until the pramatta guṇa-sthāna, or the bhandha is sāta and the udaya is asāta, or the bhandha is asāta and the udaya is sāta, or both the bhandha and udaya are asāta. In this way, there are four bhangas. Further, until the sa-yogi, only the bhandha is sāta, therefore, there are two bhangas: both the bhandha or udaya and sattva are sāta, or the bhandha is sāta, the udaya is asāta, and the sattva is both. There is no bhandha of the a-yogi-kevali. Until the dvi-charma-samaya, both the udaya and sattva are sāta, or the udaya is asāta and the sattva is both. However, at the charma-samaya, there are four bhangas: the udaya and sattva are both sāta, or the udaya and sattva are both asāta.
A summary of the number of bhangas of the vedaniya karma in relation to the guṇa-sthānas:
Guṇa-sthāna
Mithyatva
Sāsādana
Miśra
Asanyata
Deśa-sanyata
Pramatta
Apramatta
Apūrva-karaṇa
Anivṛtti
Sūkṣma-sāmpa
Upaśānta-kaṣāya
Kṣīṇa-kaṣāya
Sa-yogi-kevali
A-yogi-kevali
Total number of bhangas
Number of bhangas
Further, the bhangas related to the gotra karma are described in four gāthās:
nīcuccāṇega-daraṁ bandhu-dayā honti sambhavaṭṭhāṇe |
dosattā-yogitti ya carime uccaṁ have sattāṁ ||635||
Meaning: The bhandha and udaya of both the nīca-gotra and ucca-gotra occur in their respective places, and the sattva is both in the dvi-charma-samaya of the a-yogi, but only the sattva of the ucca-gotra is found in the charma-samaya of the a-yogi.
uccuvvellida-teū vāummi ya nīcameva sattāṁ tu |
sesi-givi-yale sayale nīcaṁ ca dugaṁ ca sattāṁ tu ||636||
Meaning: The sattva of the nīca-gotra is found in the teja-kāya and vāyu-kāya jīvas who have experienced the udvelanā of the ucca-gotra, and the sattva of the nīca-gotra or both is found in the remaining eka-indriya, vikala-indriya, and saka-indriya.
This is further clarified in the next gāthā. 

Page #609:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda - 570

**Verse 637**
High-caste (Uchchagotra) agitation is present in the Tejakaya and Vayukaya beings. Only low-caste (Nichogotra) sattva is present in them. And when these two are born in the one-sense, defective-sense, or all-sense Tiryanchas, then until the end of the moment of birth, only low-caste sattva is present. Afterwards, by binding the high-caste, both sattvas are obtained.

**Verse 638**
**Explanation:**
In relation to the Gunasthanas, the breaking of the Gotra Karma is as follows:
- In Mithyatva Gunasthana, there are five breaks, and in Sasadan Gunasthana, there are four breaks.
- In the Mixed, Unsymbolized, and Symbolic Yana stages, there are two breaks each.
- In the eight Gunasthanas up to the Syogi, there is one break each.
- In the A-Yogakevali, there are two breaks.

**Detailed Explanation:**
- In Mithyatva Gunasthana, there are five breaks:
    - Binding and arising of low-caste sattva.
    - Binding of low-caste and arising of high-caste sattva.
    - Binding and arising of high-caste sattva.
    - Binding of high-caste and arising of low-caste sattva.
    - Binding and arising of low-caste sattva.

- In Sasadan Gunasthana, there are four breaks, excluding the last break related to Mithyatva Gunasthana, which is the binding, arising, and sattva of the low-caste. This is because Tejakaya and Vayukaya beings do not attain Sasadan Gunasthana. (Sasadan does not arise after death in Tejakaya and Vayukaya, and there is no agitation of the high-caste there.)

- In the Mixed, Unsymbolized, and Symbolic Gunasthanas, there are two breaks each:
    - Binding and arising of high-caste sattva.
    - Binding of high-caste and arising of low-caste sattva.

- In the five Gunasthanas from Pramat to Sukshma Samparaya, there is one break each:
    - Binding and arising of high-caste sattva.

- In the Upshantak, Payakshi, and Kshayik Kshaya Gunasthanas, and the Syogi Kevali Gunasthana, there is one break each:
    - Arising of high-caste sattva.

- In the A-Yogakevali Gunasthana, there are two breaks:
    - Arising of high-caste sattva.
    - Arising of high-caste sattva at the end of time.

**Note:**
See also Pra. Pan. Sa. Pu. 305-306, verses 17-18. 

Page #610:
---------------------------
## Gommatasara Karmakanda - 571

**Regarding the Breaking of Gotra Karma in Relation to Gunasthanas**

**4**

**D**

**2**

**2**

**1 1**

Now, the breaking of Ayukarma is described in 13 verses.

**Kshina Kshaya**

**Sayoga Kevali**

**Ayoga Kevali**

**Total Number of Breakings**

**»**

**1**

**Suranirya Naratiriya Cham-masavasige Sagaussa. Ratiriya Savvaum Tibhagasesammi Uktaassan. || 639 ||**

**Bhorama Devaum Cham-pasavasi Ya Bandhanti. Igivi Gala Panaratiriya Teduga Sataga Tiriya. || 640 || Jummam. ||**

**Meaning:** When a being has a maximum of six months of remaining lifespan, they bind to the Devas, Narakas, or Tiryanchas. When a human being has one-third of their lifespan remaining, they bind to any one of the four lifespans according to their merit. 

Beings in the Bhogabhumij state bind only to the Devas when they have six months of lifespan remaining. One-sense and Vikal-tray beings bind to either the human or Tiryancha lifespan. However, Tejakaya Vayukaya beings and Naraka beings of the seventh earth bind only to the Tiryancha lifespan.

**In this way, by describing the binding of Ayukarma, the manifestation of Udaya and Sattwa is explained.**

**Sagasaggadianamaum Udedi Bandhe Udishnage Na Saman. Do Sattaa Hu Abandhe Evam Udayagadam Sattam. || 641 ||**

**Meaning:** When Naraka beings and others bind to a lifespan related to their own movement, and when they bind to a lifespan related to their future birth, or when they have already bound, they have two Sattwas: one related to the lifespan being bound to and one related to the lifespan being enjoyed. However, until they bind to a lifespan related to their future birth, they only have one Sattwa related to the lifespan being enjoyed. This is what should be understood.

**Ekka Evam Aau Ekka Bhave Bandhame Di Joggapada. Adavaram Va Tatthavi Tibhagasesse Va Savvattha. || 642 ||** 

Page #611:
---------------------------
Gommatasar Karmakanda-572 Meaning - One being in one lifetime binds only one ayu (lifespan) and that too only eight times in the eligible time and even then it binds only when the three-part remainder of the lifespan is present in all places.
Igivaaram vajitta vaddi haani avattidi hodi.
Ovattaanghado pun parinaamavasena jivaanam. ||643||    Meaning - In the previously mentioned eight apkarashas (three-parts), the first time without the first, the second and subsequent times, the ayu that was bound before, its position increases, decreases and becomes stable. The ayu of the human and animal beings in the karmabhoomi, due to the results or external causes, also undergoes a change in the form of apvartana dhatu (kadali ghat).
1. Doubt - In one paryay (lifetime), will there be binding of only one गति (motion) or will there be binding of two, three motions? If in one paryay, there is binding of two, three motions, then how is it possible for the binding to happen in the three parts of the lifespan?  Shrenik Maharaj is considered to have two bindings from one motion. If one binding of hell motion and another of Tirthankara nature happened, then did he bind the human motion or will he bind the human motion only in hell?
Solution - The doubt arises because ayu and गति are considered as one. There are eight types of karma. Out of those eight, one is naamkarma and one is ayukarma. Naamkarma has 93 uttaraprakritis and one prakriti can also transition into another prakriti, but ayukarma has 4 uttaraprakritis and one uttaraprakriti of ayukarma does not transition into another uttaraprakriti.
In the 93 uttaraprakritis of naamkarma, there is also an uttaraprakriti called 'motion' which has four divisions: hell, Tirthankara, human, and deva. When one motion arises, the other three motions come into existence through stibukasankraman (transition through the subtle) and become the motion that has arisen. Therefore, in one paryay of one being, it is possible to bind all four motions in order. One being can bind more than one motion in one paryay, but one being can only bind one ayu in one paryay, not any other ayu. When ayu is bound, the motion will also be bound according to the ayu, meaning that the motion that will be bound will be the one that corresponds to the ayu that is bound. The reason why there is only one ayu bound in one paryay is that 'one ayu does not transition into another ayu'.
After death, the motion that will arise will be the same as the ayu that will arise and the being will be born in that motion. At that time, the other three motions, apart from the desired motion, will come into existence through stibukasankraman and become the desired motion.
In the mithyatva state of King Shrenik, it is possible to bind all four motions according to the results, but when the hell ayu was bound, only the hell motion was bound. In the time of samyaktva or the time of binding of Tirthankara nature, only one deva motion is continuously bound because the other three motions of human or animal are destroyed by the samyagdrishti, so the other three motions are not bound. The samyagdrishti deva and naraki continuously bind only one human motion, not any other motion. Therefore, Shrenik Maharaj is continuously binding the human motion in hell and when 6 months of ayudhosha remain, he will bind only the human ayu.
(Pt. Ratanchand Mukhtar: Vyaktitva aur Krittitva, pp. 423-24) 

Page #612:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-573 Special Meaning - In the past, the state of lifespan was bound, and later, for the second or third time, it is bound with a greater, lesser, or equal state. In these, the one with the greater state bound is to be known as the primary, and if there is a loss, then the one with the greater state in the past is to be known as the primary. It is not an absolute rule that lifespan binding occurs only when there is a three-part remainder of the lifespan being experienced. Although there is the potential for lifespan binding in each divisional period, there is no rule for lifespan binding. That is, it may or may not be bound, and lifespan binding does not occur in other periods, this is the rule.

Thus, bound, unbound, and in the state of upper binding, there are three types of destruction.
One by one, in one lifespan, there are three types of destruction for each lifespan, according to the rule. ||644|| Meaning - In this way, there are three types of destruction for each lifespan, whether it is bound or unbound, or in the state of upper binding, for one being in one lifespan.

Special Meaning - Where lifespan binding related to the future life is happening in the present period, there is binding of the future lifespan, arising, experiencing, and both the lifespan being experienced and the lifespan being bound. Where the future lifespan was not bound in the past and is not being bound in the present period, there is an absence of binding and only the arising and experiencing lifespan is found. And where the future lifespan was bound before and is not being bound in the present period, there is an absence of binding and the arising lifespan being experienced, and both the lifespan bound in the past and the lifespan being experienced are found. This is called upper binding. In this way, there are three types of destruction for each lifespan.

Three types of destruction are possible for each lifespan, so consider them differently.
For beings, there are different types of destruction of existence, according to the increase and decrease of qualities. ||645|| Meaning - The aforementioned three types of destruction for each lifespan are multiplied by the number of future lifespans that are possible to be bound in the intended motion. The number of different beings that are possible for each type of destruction of existence is the same as the number of lifespans that are possible to be bound in the intended motion. In hell and the heavenly realm, only the lifespan of the animal and human is possible to be bound, so multiplying the three types of destruction by two results in six types of destruction. And for humans and animals, all four lifespans are possible to be bound, so multiplying the three types of destruction by four results in twelve types of destruction. And for the destruction that is not repeated, the number of the middle lifespan is multiplied by the number of the middle lifespan, and one is subtracted from it. The number that results is subtracted from the aforementioned types of destruction, and the destruction that is not repeated is found. So, for the heavenly and hellish beings, there are five types of destruction that are not repeated, and for humans and animals, there are nine types of destruction that are not repeated. 

Page #613:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-574: Regarding the bondage, arising, and essence of the lifespan karma in the hellish realm, the lifespan of a human, the lifespan of a beast, and the lifespan of a god.

**Bondage, Non-Bondage, and Cessation of Bondage**

| **Lifespan** | **Bondage** | **Non-Bondage** | **Cessation of Bondage** | **Arising** | **Essence** |
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
| **Hellish** | 1 | 0 | 1 | 1 | 1 |
| **Human** | 1 | 1 | 1 | 1 | 1 |
| **Beast** | 2 | 1 | 2 | 2 | 2 |
| **God** | 1 | 1 | 1 | 1 | 1 |

**Note:** The essence of the original verse is that for each lifespan, there are three types of destruction. Multiply the number of lifespans bound in a particular realm by three to get the total number of destructions.

Subtract one from the number of lifespans bound in a particular realm to get the number of repeated destructions. Alternatively, subtract the number of repeated destructions from the total number of destructions to get the number of non-repeated destructions.

For example, in the realm of the gods, there is bondage of the human and beast lifespans, meaning 243-6 destructions have occurred. In the realm of the gods, there are two lifespans bound, subtracting one leaves one repeated destruction. Subtracting this from six leaves five non-repeated destructions. 

Page #614:
---------------------------
Gommatasar Karmakanda-575

Further, in the Gunasthanas, the apunaruka bhangas of Ayukarma are mentioned. But in Mithyatva, there are 9 bhangas for each of the 4 gatis. In Nirya bandha bhangas, there are 2 bhangas for each of the 4 gatis. ||646||

In Misra, there are 3 bhangas for Naraka, 5 for Manushya, 5 for Tiryancha, and 3 for Deva. In Asanyata, there are 4 bhangas for each of the 4 gatis. In Desha, there are 3 bhangas for Tiryancha and Manushya. In Prammatta and Aprammatta, there are 3 bhangas for each of the 4 gatis. In Upshama, there are 2 bhangas for each of the 4 gatis. In Kshapaka, there is 1 bhangas for each of the 4 gatis. ||647||

In Desha, there are 3 bhangas for Tiryancha and Manushya. In Prammatta and Aprammatta, there are 3 bhangas for each of the 4 gatis. In Upshama, there are 2 bhangas for each of the 4 gatis. In Kshapaka, there is 1 bhangas for each of the 4 gatis. ||648||

Further, in the Gunasthanas, the total number of bhangas of Ayukarma for all gatis are mentioned.

In Mithyatva, there are 28 bhangas. In Sasadan, there are 26 bhangas. In Misra, there are 16 bhangas. In Asanyata, there are 20 bhangas. In Desha, there are 6 bhangas. In Prammatta and Aprammatta, there are 3 bhangas each. In Upshama, there are 2 bhangas each. In Kshapaka, there is 1 bhangas each. ||649|| 

Page #615:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-576 states that there are two-two *apunu-rukta bhang* in the four *guna-sthana* and one-one *apunu-rukta bhang* in the *kshapika-shreni* from *apuurva-karan* to *ayogi-guna-sthana*. The following table shows the *apunu-rukta bhang* in relation to the *guna-sthana*:

| **Four Gatis** | **Guna-sthana** | **Total *Bhang*** | **Details** | **Naraka** | **Tiryanch** | **Manushya** | **Dev** |
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|  | **Mithyatva** | 28 |  |  |  |  |  |
|  | **Sasa-dana** |  | *Manushya-Tiryanch gati* do not have *naraka-ayu* bondage, hence one *bhang* is less in both these gatis. This *guna-sthana* lacks *ayu-bandha*, hence no *bandha* related *bhang* is mentioned. |  |  |  |  |
|  | **Mishra** |  | *Dev-Naraka gati* do not have *tiryanch-ayu* bondage, hence one *bhang* is less in both these gatis. *Manushya-Tiryanch gati* do not have *manushya, tiryanch, naraka-ayu* bondage, hence 3-3 *bhang* are less. *Tiryanch-Manushya gati* has one *dev-ayu* bondage, hence there are 3-3 *bhang* in relation to *bandha-abandh* and *uparat-bandha*. |  |  |  |  |
|  | **Asanyata** |  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  | **Desha-sanyata** |  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  | **Pramatta** |  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  | **Apramatta** |  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  | **Upashamaka** |  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  | **Apuurva-karan** | 2 | (In relation to *dev-adhuka* *abandh* and *uparat-bandha*) |  |  |  |  | 

Page #616:
---------------------------
## Gommatasara Karmakanda - 577
## Kshapaka A-purvakarana

**1 (In relation to Abandha)**  It is like the Upshamaka A-purvakarana.
**Upshamaka**
A-nivrittika, Kshapaka A-nivrittika. 0 Upshamaka
Sukshma Samprayaya Kshapaka Sukshma Samprayaya
Kshapaka A-purvakarana. Aaram Akaan...
**2...**
**Upashantaka Kshaya**
**Kshina Kshaya**
Kshapaka A-purvakarana. Upshamaka A-purvakarana. This destruction is in relation to Abandha. In relation to Abandha. In relation to Abandha.
**Sayoga Kevali** **A-yoga Kevali**
**116**
Now, the number of destructions in all the Gunasthanas, including Mithyatva, etc., of these three - Vedaniya, Gotra, and Ayu - is stated:
**Baadalang Panuvisang Sollasahyam Sayam Cha Veyaniye |
Gode Aarami Have Micchaadiajogiino Bhangaa ||650||**
Meaning: The destructions in the Gunasthanas from Mithyatva to A-yogi, which were mentioned earlier, all together are 42 for Vedaniya Karma, 25 for Gotra Karma, and 516 for Ayu Karma. Further, the number of the aforementioned original destructions of Vedaniya, Gotra, and Ayu Karma in their general form is stated:
**Veyaniye Adabhangaa Gode Satteva Honti Bhangaa Hu |
Pan Nava Nava Pan Bhangaa Aauchoukke Su Visaritta ||651||**
Meaning: Among those aforementioned destructions, the original destructions that are not repeated are 8 for Vedaniya Karma and 7 for Gotra Karma. And for the four Ayus, the destructions are 5, 9, 9, and 5 respectively. Then, the destructions of the Trisangogi of Mohaniya Karma are stated:
**Mohassa Ya Bandhodayasattatthanaana Savvabhangaa Hu | Patteouttam Va Have Tiyasangogavi Savvatha ||652||** 

Page #617:
---------------------------
Gommatasar Karmakanda-578 Meaning - The bondage-arising and attainment-places of the Mohaniya Karma, as mentioned separately earlier, are the same as the bondage-places of the Soddha Disatog.
Now, in relation to the Gunasthanas, the bondage-arising and attainment-places of the Mohaniya Karma are described in 7 verses.
In the eight, one is bondage, in the four, four are arising. Three are in the three, and eleven are in the four. ||653||
The bondage is in the Aṇiyattī, and the arising is in the Paṇadugāekārasūhum. There are four in the four, and three are in the three of Moh. ||654||
Twenty-two, ten, and twenty-four, and twenty-five are the Mithyābandha, etc. Twenty-one, nine, and twenty-eight are in the second Gun. ||655||
Seventy-one, nine, and twenty-four, again seventy-one. Nine, four, twenty-four, and twenty-five are in the fourth. ||656||
Thirteen, four, and nine, and four are in the nine, etc. Then, nine are in the Chāditī, and twenty-four are in the bondage. ||657||
Five, etc., five are bondage, in the ninth Gun, two are arising. Twenty-four, nineteen, thirteen, etc., eight are attainment. ||658||
One is arising in the Lohekkuda, and twenty-four is attainment. Twenty-four are in the Moh's Gunthāna. ||659||
Meaning - In the aforementioned bondage-arising-attainment places of the Mohaniya Karma, as far as possible, the bondage place is in the Mithyātvase, up to the Apūrvakaraṇa, in the eight Gunasthanas, one each, in the Abhivṛttikaraṇa Gunasthāna, the bondage place is 5, and in the Sūkṣmasāmprāya Upaśāntakṣāya Gunasthāna, there is no bondage of the Mohaniya Karma. The arising place is in the Mithyātvagunasthāna, 4, in the Sāsādana and Miśra, 3 each, in the four Gunasthanas from Asanyata to Apramatta, four each, in the Apūrvakaraṇa, 3, in the Anivṛttikaraṇa, 2. In the Sūkṣmasāmprāya, one, and in the Upaśāntakṣāya, there is no arising place. The attainment place is in the Mithyātvagunasthāna, 3, in the Sāsādana, 1, in the Miśra, 2, in the five from Asanyata to Apramatta, five each, in the Apūrvakaraṇa, 3, in the Anivṛttikaraṇa, 11. In the Sūkṣmasāmprāya, four, and in the Upaśāntakṣāya, three. ||653-54|| 

Page #618:
---------------------------
The above statement explains that in the Mithyatva Gunasthan, there are 22 Prakruti Bandhastan, 10-8-9 and 7 Prakruti Udayasthan, and 28-27-26 Prakruti Sattvasthan. In the Sasadan Gunasthan, there are 21 Prakruti Bandhastan, 9-8 and 7 Prakruti Udayasthan, and 28 Prakruti Sattvasthan. In the Misra Gunasthan, there are 17 Prakruti Bandhastan, 9-8 and 7 Prakruti Udayasthan, and 28 and 24 Prakruti Sattvasthan. In the Asanyata Gunasthan, there are 17 Prakruti Bandhastan, 9-8-7 and 6 Prakruti Udayasthan, 28-24-23-22 and 21 Prakruti Sattvasthan. In the Deshasanyata Gunasthan, there are 13 Prakruti Bandhastan, 8-7-6 and 5 Prakruti four Udayasthan, 28-24-23-22 and 21 Prakruti Sattvasthan. In the Pramatta Gunasthan, there are 9 Prakruti Bandhastan, 7-6-5-4 Prakruti four Udayasthan, 28-24-23-22 and 21 Prakruti five Sattvasthan. In the Aprammatta Gunasthan, there is 9 Prakruti one Bandhastan, 7-6-5 and 4 Prakruti four Udayasthan, and 28-24-23-22 and 21 Prakruti five Sattvasthan. In the Apurvakarana Gunasthan, there is 9 Prakruti Bandhastan, 6-5 and 4 Prakruti three Udayasthan, and 28-24 and 21 Prakruti three Sattvasthan. In the Asthion 5-321 Akruti Pad Bandhastan, there are 2 and 1 Prakruti Udayasthan, and 28-24-21-13-12-11-5-4-3-2 and 1 Prakruti 11 Sattvasthan. In the Sukshma Samparaya Gunasthan, there is no Bandhastan, one Prakruti Sukshma Lobha Udayasthan, and 28-24 and 21 Prakruti Sattvasthan. In the Upshanta Kshaya Gunasthan, there is no Bandhastan or Udayasthan, and there are 28-24 and 21 Prakruti three Sattvasthan. ||655-659||

Regarding the Gunasthan, the perspective on the breaking of the three-fold combination of Bandha, Udaya, and Sattvasthan of the Mohaniya Karma.

Gunasthan | Number of Bandhastan | Number of Prakruti in Bandhastan | Number of Udayasthan | Number of Prakruti in Udayasthan | Number of Sattvasthan | Number of Prakruti in Sattvasthan
------- | -------- | -------- | -------- | -------- | -------- | --------
Mithyatva | 1 | 22 Prakruti | 4 | 10-8-9 and 7 | 3 | 28-27 and 26
Sasadan | 1 | 21 Prakruti | 3 | 9-8 and 7 | 1 | 28 Prakruti
Misra | 1 | 17 Prakruti | 3 | 9-8 and 7 | 2 | 28-24 Prakruti
Asanyata | 1 | 17 Prakruti | 4 | 9-8-7 and 6 | 5 | 28-24-23-22 and 21
Deshasanyata | 1 | 13 Prakruti | 4 | 8-7-6-5 | 5 | 28-24-23-22 and 21
Pramatta | 1 | 9 Prakruti | 4 | 7-6-5-4 | 5 | 28-24-23-22 and 21
Aprammatta | 1 | 9 Prakruti | 4 | 7-6-5-4 | 5 | 28-24-23-22 and 21

Page #619:
---------------------------
Gommatasar Karmakanda-580 Aapurvakaran | 1 | 9 Prakruti | 3 | 6-5 cha 4 | 33. 28-24 va 21 (Upashamak) Aapurvaadhaar
: Alif. .. 6-5, 3 4 | 1. 21 Prakruti (Kshapak) Anivrittikaran | 5 5-4-3-2. 2.
28-24 va 21 (Upashamak) va 1.
Prakruti Anivrittikaran | 5 5 -4-3-2 | 2 2 va 1
21-13-12. (Kshapak)
. Prakruti
11-5-4-3-2
va 5 Prakruti Sukshmasampraay
1 Sukshma
28-24 va 21 (Upashamak)
Lobharoop Sukshmasampraay
1 Sukshma- 1. Prakruti (Kshapak)
Lobharoop Upashantakshay
3. 28-24 va 21 Note   The above mentioned Bandha sthana for Gatha 464, Udayasthana for 479 Gatha and Sattvasthana for Gatha 508 to 511 should also be seen. Now the special feature in the Bandha-Udaya-Sattvaroop Trisanyogi bhangas of Mohaniyakarma is called
Bandhapade Udayamsa Udayatthanaevhi Bandha Sattam cha.
Satte Bandhudayapadam Igiadhikaran Dugaadhezham ||660|| Meaning - In Bandhasthana there are Udaya and Sattvasthana, in Udayasthana there are Bandhasthana and Sattvasthana and in Sattvasthana there are Bandha and Udayasthana. In this way, there are two Adheyas in one Adhikaran. Now first of all, Udaya and Sattvasthana in Bandhasthana are called
Bavisayadibandhesuudayamsa Chadutitigichoupancha. Tisuigi Chhaddo Attha Ya Evam Pancheva Titthana ||661.
Dasayachaupadhamatiyam Navatiyamdavisayam Navaadichau. Adachadutiduigivisan Adachadu Puvvam va Sattam tu ||662. 

Page #620:
---------------------------
Gommatsar Karmakanda-585

**Verse 663:**
In the Mithyatva Guna-sthana, there are 22 natural Bandha-sthana, with 4 (17, 9, 8, 7) Udaya-sthana as mentioned earlier, and 3 (28-27-26) Satva-sthana. In the Sasadan Guna-sthana, there are 21 natural Bandha-sthana, with 3 (9, 8, 7) Udaya-sthana and 1 (28) Satva-sthana.

**Verse 664:**
In the Misra Guna-sthana, there are 17 natural Bandha-sthana, with 3 (9, 8, 7) Udaya-sthana and 2 (28-24) Satva-sthana. In the Asanyata Guna-sthana, there are 17 natural Bandha-sthana, in the Desha-sanyata Guna-sthana, there are 13 natural Bandha-sthana, and in the Pramatta-apramatta and Apurvakarana Guna-sthana, there are 9 natural Bandha-sthana. Thus, in these three Bandha-sthana (17-13 and 9), there are four Udaya-sthana (2, 8, 7, 6 and 8, 7, 6, 5 and 7, 6, 5, 4), but in the Apurvakarana, there is only one Udaya-sthana (7) and five Satva-sthana (28-24-23-22-21). However, in the Apurvakarana, there are only three Satva-sthana (28-24-21).

In the Anivrittikarana Guna-sthana, there are 5 natural Bandha-sthana, with one Udaya-sthana (2) and five Satva-sthana (28-24-21-13-12 and 11 natural). In the same Guna-sthana, there are 4 natural Bandha-sthana, with two Udaya-sthana (2, 1) and eight Satva-sthana, which are 28-24 and 21 natural in the Upshama-shreni and 21-13-12-11-5 and 4 natural in the Kshapaka-shreni.

In the Anivrittikarana Guna-sthana, there are 3-2 and 1 natural Bandha-sthana, with one Udaya-sthana in all, but the Satva-sthana are three (28-24 and 21 natural) in the Upshama-shreni and 4 and 3 natural in the 3 natural Bandha-sthana, 3 and 2 natural in the 2 natural Bandha-sthana, and 2 and 1 natural in the 1 natural Bandha-sthana in the Kshapaka-shreni.

**Mohaniya Bandha-sthana: Udaya and Satva-sthana**

| Guna-sthana | Bandha-sthana | Udaya-sthana | Udaya-sthana | Satva-sthana | Satva-sthana |
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
| | Number | Natural | Number | Number | Natural |
| Mithyatva | 22 | 9-8 and 7 | 4 | 3 | 28-27 and 26 |
| Sasadan | 21 | 9-8 and 7 | 3 | 1 | 28 |
| Misra | 17 | 9-8 and 7 | 3 | 2 | 28 and 24 |
| Asanyata | 17 | 5-8-7 and 6 | 4 | 5 | 28-24-23-22 and 21 | 

Page #621:
---------------------------
##  Translation:

**Desasanayatta**
**Pramatta**
**Apramatta**
**Apuurvakaran**
**Upshaya Kshapak**
**Anivritikaran**
**Anivritikaran**
11
11
13
9
9
**Artha**
5.
-
2
X
1
4
4
3
5.
1
**Gommatasar Karmakanda-582**
1
8-7-6 and 5
7-6-5 and 4
7-6-5 and 4
6-5 and 4
**Prakrutik**
28-24-21 4 and 3 **Prakrutik** 28-24-21 3 and 2 **Prakrutik**
28-24-21
2 and 1 **Prakrutik**
Athanantara Udayasthan ko Adhikarana mankar Bandhastan and Saswasthan ke Adheyrupa Bhangon ko kahte hain
2 **Prakrutik**
2 and 1 **Prakrutik**
5
1 **Prakrutik**
1 **Prakrutik**
1 **Prakrutik**
5.
and
3
6
5
4
28-24-23-22 and 29 **Prakrutik**
28-24-23-22 and 21 **Prakrutik** 28-24-23-22 and 21 **Prakrutik** 28-24 and 21 **Prakrutik**
4
28-24-21-13-12 and 11 **Prakrutik**
28-24-21-13-12-11-5 and 4
**Artha** - Das Adi 10-1-8-7-6-5-4-2 and 1 **Prakrutirupa** Udayasthanon mein Bandhastan Kram se 1-3-4-5-3-2-1-2 and 4 tatha Sattwasthan 3-6-7-5-5-5-3-6 and 9 hain.
Aage Uparyukta Kathana ka Vishesh Spashtikaran Teen Gathao se karte hain
Dasyaadisubandhansa Igiitiya Tiyachhak Charisattan Cha.
Pan Pan Tithapan Dugapan Igiitiga Dugachchaunavayam. 665 ||
Padhamam Padhamati Chaupan Sattarati Chadusubandhayam Kamalo. Padhamati Chhassagamdachoutidouigivisasansayam Dosu. 666 ||
Teradu Puvvam Vansana Navamadachourekkavisasattamdo. Panadugamadachourekkavisaans Teraisatiyam Sattam. 667 ||
Charime Chadutidougekkam Ayachaduerekkasanjudam Vison. Ekkaraadisavvam Kamen Te Mohaniyassa. 668.
10 **Prakrutirupa** Pratham Udayasthan mein 22 **Prakrutik** ek Bandhastan evam 28-27 and 26 

Page #622:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-583

There are three **sattvasthana** (states of being) in the **prakriti** (nature). In the **udayasthan** (arising place) of 9 **prakriti**, there are three **bandhasthana** (binding places) of 22, 21, and 17 **prakriti**, and six **sattvasthana** of 28, 27, 26, 24, 23, and 22 **prakriti**. In the **udayasthan** of 8 **prakriti**, there are four **bandhasthana** of 22, 21, 17, and 13 **prakriti**, and **sattvasthana** of 28, 27, 26, 24, 23, 22, and 21 **prakriti**. In the **udayasthan** of 7 **prakriti**, there are five **bandhasthana** of 22, 21, 17, 13, and 9 **prakriti**, and five **sattvasthana** of 28, 24, 23, 22, and 21 **prakriti**. In the **udayasthan** of 6 **prakriti**, there are three **bandhasthana** of 17, 13, and 9 **prakriti**, and five **sattvasthana** of 28, 24, 23, 22, and 21 **prakriti**. In the **udayasthan** of 5 **prakriti**, there are two **bandhasthana** of 13 and 9 **prakriti**, and five **sattvasthana** of 28, 24, 23, 22, and 21 **prakriti**. In the **udayasthan** of 4 **prakriti**, there is one **bandhasthana** of 9 **prakriti**, and three **sattvasthana** of 28, 24, and 21 **prakriti**. In the **udayasthan** of 2 **prakriti**, there are two **bandhasthana** of 5 and 4 **prakriti**, and **sattvasthana** of 28, 24, and 21 **prakriti** in relation to the **upshamshreni** (category of liberation), and **sattvasthana** of 21, 13, 12, and 11 **prakriti** in relation to the **kshapkshreni** (category of destruction), thus there are six **sattvasthana**. In the **udayasthan** of 5 **prakriti**, there are four **bandhasthana** of 4, 3, 2, and 1 **prakriti**, and three **sattvasthana** of 28, 24, and 21 **prakriti** in relation to the **upshamshreni**, and five **sattvasthana** of 11, 5, 4, 3, 2, and 1 **prakriti**, thus there are eight **sattvasthana**.

1. The **udayasthan** of 1 **prakriti** for **samyagdristi** (right faith) is only possible with the **udavas** (arising) of **samyaktva** (right conduct) **prakriti**, and the **sattvasthana** of 21 **prakriti** does not have the **sattvasthana** of **samyaktva** **prakriti**, therefore the **sattvasthana** of 21 **prakriti** is not possible in the **udayasthan** of 9 **prakriti**. 

Page #623:
---------------------------
##  Uday
##  Sthan
##  10
##  9
##  9
##  1
##  9
##  8
##  8
##  8
##  8
##  8
##  8
##  8
##  Mohaniyakarma's Udayasthan in Bandha and Sattvasthan related Sandrishti -
##  Udayasthan gat
##  Prakriti Varnan
##  'Mi. Ka. Ve. Yu. Bha. Ju.
##  1-4-1-2-1-1
##  1-4-1-2-x-x
##  1-3-1-2-1-0
##  4.1.2.10
##  Mishra - 3-1-2-1-0
##  Savy. 3-1-2-1-0
##  x-3-1-2-1-1
##  Bandha
##  Sthan
##  22
##  1-4-12-1-0 1-3-1-2-1-1
##  22
##  x*4-1-2-1-1
##  21
##  Mishra-1-3-1-1-1-1 17
##  Samy.-1-3-1-2-1-1
##  .17
##  Samy. 2-1-2-1-1
##  *
##  22
##  22
##  21
##  17
##  17
##  17
##  Bandha Sthan gat
##  Prakriti Varnan
##  Mi. Ka. Ve. Yu.bha.-Ju.
##  1-16-1-2-1-1
##  1-16-1-2-1-1
##  1-16-1-2-1-1
##  4- 16-1-2-1-1
##  x-12-1-2-1-1
##  x - 12-1-2-1-1
##  Gun
##  Sthan
##  Pratham
##  Pratham
##  Pratham
##  Dvitiya
##  Tritiya Chaturth
##  1-16-1-2-1-1
##  Pratham
##  1-16-1-2-1-1
##  Pratham
##  x.16-1-2-1-1 Dvitiya
##  x-12-1-2-1-1 Triti
##  x-12-1-2-1-1 Chaturth x-12-1-2-1-1 Chaturth
##  x-8-1-2-1-1
##  Pancham
##  Sattvasthan
##  28
##  27
##  26
##  28,27.26
##  28
##  28
##  28-24
##  28-24
##  23-22
##  18,27,26
##  28
##  28
##  28, 24
##  28,24,23,22
##  28,24,21
##  28,24,21
##  Sattvasthan gat Prakriti Varnan
##  Mi. Sa. - Mi.an. Aapra.pra.san.be. No.
##  1-1-1-4-4-4-4-3-6-28
##  1 - 4-1-4-4-4-4. 3-6-27 hai -×- × • 4-4-4-4-3-6-26
##  Uparuyukt
##  Uparuyukt
##  Uparuyukt
##  1-1-1-x-4-4-4-3-6=24 x-1-1-44-4-4-3-6-23
##  x-1-x-x-4-4-4-3-6-22
##  Uparuyukt
##  Uparuyukt
##  Uparuyukt
##  Uparuyukt
##  Uparuyukt
##  * - *-x-x - 4-4-4-3-6-21
##  Uparuyukt
##  Gommatsar Karmakand -584
##  M
##  Aaya IN MAR 

Page #624:
---------------------------
Mr. 3-1-2-4-4
Above
First
P.T.
Above
Above
28
Above
Above
Fourth
Above
Above
Above
Above
IL
-4-1-2-4-x Mixed,-3.1-2-4.4 Polite.3-1-2-x-x 4-3-1-2-1-0 Samyak.2-1-2-1-0 x-2-1-2-1-1 Samyak.1-1-2-1-1 x-3-1-2-5-4 Samyak,2-5-2-x-x x-2-1-2-10 Samyak.1-1-2-1-0 x-1-1-2.1-1  2-1-2-0.0 Samyak.1-1-2-1-0
Above Above Above
Above 5-4-1-2-1-1
Above Above Above Above Above
Above
Above
Second Third 28,24
28,24.23.12 Fourth 28,24,21
Cham 28,24.23,22 Fifth 28.24.21 Vayan 28.24.23,22 Fourth | 28,24,21 Fifth |28,24,23,22
28,24,21 |6-5 |28,24,23,22 6.7-8 28.24,21 Fifth 28,24,21 6-7 28,24,23,22
28,24,23,22 |28,24,21,13 28,24,21,12 28,24,21,11
Mommatsar Karmakanda-585
Fifth
Above
Above
Above
x-8-1-2-1-1
x-4-1-2-1-1
Above Above Above
|4-1-1-2-0-0
x-4-1-2.5-1
2
| 4-1-1-0-0-0
|
4-4-1-x -x
x-x-x-x-x-x-4-3-6-13
x-x-x-x-x-x-4-2-6-12
x-x-x-x-x-x-4-1-6-11

Page #625:
---------------------------
## English Translation:

**1**
**1**
X 0-0-0-0
x - 1 -x -x -x -x
**4**
ど
**4**
**3**
₹
O
X-8-0-0-0-0
0-4-x-x-x - x
x-ɣ-0-0-0-0
0-3-x-x-x-x
X-2-0-0-0-0
x - 1 -x -x - - x
x-x-x-0-0-0
**9th**
**9**
**9th**
**9th**
**9th**
**10th**
28, 24, 21,
11, 5
**5**
**4**
28, 24, 21, 4, 3
28, 24, 21, 3, 2
28, 24, 21, 2, 1

**Above**
**All, all, first, second, two, seventeen, all. Nine-fold, many, all, seventeen, nine, and two.** || 670 ||
**Seventeen, etc., eight, etc., all, but four, two, two, then. Five, four, two, one, four, four, three, thus.** || 671 ||
-0-x-o-x-4-10 **Nine-fold time-bound**
0x0 x x-4-0-0
x x-0-4-0-3-x-x
X-0-0-x-x-0 0-0
x-x-x-x-x

**Now, considering the states of being as the locus, and bondage-arising as the object, we state the destructions.**
**Seven-fold, bondage-arising, ten, nine, etc., two, eight, three, and two. Eight, two, two, two, two, two, three, nine, zero, one.** || 669 ||
.1-4.4
- x -x -x - -1-0-0

**Gommatasara Karmakanda-586** 

Page #626:
---------------------------


Page #627:
---------------------------
## Bandha and Udaya in the Sattva-sthana of Mohaniya Karma: A Detailed Look

**Attributes** | **Bandha** | **Udaya** | **Udaya-sthana-gata** | **Sattva-sthana** | **Sattva-sthana-gata Prakriti Description** | **Bandha-sthana-gata Prakriti Description** | **Sthana** | **Sthana** | **Sthana** | **Prakriti Description** | **Sthana**
---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
Mi.-Sa.-Mishra.-Ka.-Ve.-No | Mi.-Ka.-Ve.-Nok. | Mi.-Sa.-Mishra.-Ka.-Ve.-Yu.-Bha.-Ju. | 28 | 1-1-1-16-3-6 | Prathama | Dvitiya | Chaturtha | Panchama | 5 to 11/ 22.21,17 / 1-16-1-4-22 | x-16-1-4-21 x-12-1-4-17 x-8-1-4-13 4-4-1-49 x-4-1-x=4 5-4-x-x=4 4-3-x-x=3 x-2-x-x=2 4-1-x-x=1 | 10-9-8 1-4-0-4-1-2-1-1-10 7-6-5-4]  _0-0-0-4-1-2-5- 1 21. | x-1-4-3-1-2-1-19 x-1-4-2-1-2-1-138 0-1-0-1-1-2-1-17 0-0-0-1-1-2-1-1-6 x-x-x-1-1-2-1-0-5 4-4-4-1-1-2-0-0-4 0-0-0-1-1-0-0-0-2 | 8th | Gommatasar Karmakanda-588 | Rav | Wa | 10th | 1-0-1-16-3-6 1-0-0-16-3-6 1-1-1.12-3-6 | 10th Prathama Prathap 22 3-4se | 17,53,9 11 tak 5,4,3,2,1 4 se7 17,13 w 1 | 0-0-0-00 1-16-1-422 | Uparyukta | Uparyukta | 10-9-8 10-9-8 9-8-7-65-4-2-1 9-8-7-6] | W5 | 1-4-0-4-1-2-1-1=10 1-4-0-4-1-2-1-09 1-x-0-4-1-2-0-0%3D8 | 3 se 10 | *-1-1-12-3.6 | Upuyukta | 4-1-4-3-1-2-1-1-9 | Chaturtha | 4-1-4-2-1-2-1-1 8 x-1-4-1-1-2-1-13 | Panchama 6-7th 

Page #628:
---------------------------
x-1-4-1-1-2-1-0-6 4-1-4-1-1-2-0-0-5
Above
6-7th 6-7th
|4-1-4-12-3-6
|  x-x-12-3-
6
|4 to 7 | 17,9,13 28 Prakṛtik Sattvasthān | 9-8-7-6
Equal to
v5 4 to 11
| 24 Prakṛtik Sattvasthān | 8-7-6-5 Equal to
4-2 and 1
x-x-x-3-1-2-1-18
Fourth
Fifth 6 to 8 6 to 8
0-0-0-2-1-2-1-1 7
-0-0-1-5-2-1.5-6 0-0-0-1-1-2-1-0-5 *-*-*-5-1-2-0-0-4 x-x-x-1-1-x-x-x=2 x-*-*-1-x -x-x=1 0-0-0-1-1-0-0-0 = 2
|0-0-0-4-3-6
Such
54
x-4-1-4-5 x-4-x-x=4
2 Prakṛtik
Gommatasāra Karmakāṇḍa-589
9th 9th
:
5v4 5v4
2 Prakṛtik
x-x-x-4-1-6
0-0-0-1-1-0-0-02
k. 1 - k.
k. 1-0
:
k. 4.ve.1 k. 4-0 k. 3-0
9th
5th
2
k, 2-0
or
k.1
9th 10 

Page #629:
---------------------------
....-... -

**Gommatsar Karmakanda-590**

In the context of Bandha-Udaya (bondage-liberation) states, we consider two states as the basis (adhar) and one state as the object (adhey).

**Bandhudaye sattapadam bandhamse neyamudayatanam cha.
Udayamse bandhapadam duttanaadharamekamaadhezjam. ||673||**

**Meaning:** In the Bandha-Udaya states, the Sattvasthana (state of being) is the basis for the Bandha-Sattvasthana (state of bondage), the Udayasthana (state of liberation) is the basis for the Udaya-Sattvasthana (state of liberation), and the Bandhasthana (state of bondage) is the basis for the Udaya-Sattvasthana. In this way, we should understand these three types of states by considering two states as the basis and one state as the object.

Now, we will discuss the Sattvasthana in the Bandha-Udaya states in the next six verses.

**Bavisena niruddhe dasachaurudaye dasaditanatiye.
Atthavisaati sattam sattudaye atthavisev. ||674||**

**Meaning:** A being with 22 Prakruti (fundamental principles) of Bandha (bondage) has four Udayasthana (states of liberation) with 10, 9, 8, and 17 Prakruti. In these three states with 10, 9, and 8 Prakruti, the Sattvasthana (state of being) is with 28, 27, and 26 Prakruti respectively. And in the Udayasthana with 7 Prakruti, the Sattvasthana is with 28 Prakruti.

**Igivisen niruddha navayatiye sattam atthavisev.
Sattarase navachadure adachautidugekaavinsasa. ||675||**

**Meaning:** A being with 21 Prakruti of Bandha has one Sattvasthana with 28 Prakruti when the three states with 9, 8, and 7 Prakruti attain liberation. And a being with 17 Prakruti of Bandha has five Sattvasthana with 28, 24, 23, 22, and 21 Prakruti when the four states with 9, 8, 7, and 6 Prakruti attain liberation.

There are some special features that we will discuss in the next two verses.

**Igivinsam na hi padhame charime tiduvisayam na teranave.
Adachausagachaurudaye sattam sattarasayam va have. ||676||**

**Meaning:** When the first 9 Prakruti attain liberation, there is no Sattvasthana with 21 Prakruti. And when the last 6 Prakruti attain liberation, there is no Sattvasthana with 23 or 22 Prakruti. Similarly, when a being with 13 Prakruti of Bandha has four Udayasthana with 8, 7, 6, and 5 Prakruti, and a being with 5 Prakruti of Bandha has four Udayasthana with 7, 6, 5, and 4 Prakruti, the Sattvasthana should be understood in the same way as it was explained for the state with 17 Prakruti. In other words, the Sattvasthana should be understood as 5 Prakruti in the Udayasthana with 5 Prakruti, even though there is Bandha with 13 Prakruti. And when there is Bandha with 9 Prakruti... 

Page #630:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-591

In the four natural उदयस्थान (places of arising), the 22nd and 23rd प्रकृति (nature) do not have सत्त्व (being). And in the 13 natural बन्धस्थान (places of binding), there are 8 natural उदयस्थान, and in the 9 natural बन्धस्थान, there are 7 natural उदयस्थान, so there is no 21st प्रकृति सत्त्वस्थान.

**Verse 677**

Even with 9 प्रकृति बन्ध (binding) in the अपूर्वकरणगुणस्थान (place of the quality of the non-recurring), there are three उदयस्थान with 65, 4, and 4 प्रकृति, yet there is no सत्त्व of the 23rd and 22nd प्रकृति. And with 5 प्रकृति बन्ध, there are two प्रकृति उदय, resulting in six सत्त्वस्थान: 28, 24, 21, 13, 12, and 11. This means that 28, 24, and 21 are सत्त्वस्थान in the उपशमश्रेणी (category of pacification), and 13, 12, and 11 are सत्त्वस्थान in the क्षपकश्रेणी (category of destruction).

**Verse 678**

With 4 प्रकृति बन्ध and two प्रकृति उदय, the सत्त्वस्थान are as previously mentioned: 28, 24, and 21 in the उपशमश्रेणी, and 13, 12, and 15 in the क्षपकश्रेणी. And with 4 प्रकृति बन्ध and one प्रकृति उदय, there are three सत्त्वस्थान in the उपशमश्रेणी: 28, 24, and 21, and three सत्त्वस्थान in the क्षपकश्रेणी: 11, 5, and 4.

**Verse 679**

With one प्रकृति उदय and three, two, or one प्रकृति बन्ध, there are three सत्त्वस्थान in the उपशमश्रेणी: 28, 24, and 21. And in the क्षपकश्रेणी, with one प्रकृति उदय and three प्रकृति बन्ध, there are two सत्त्वस्थान: 4 and 3. With one प्रकृति उदय and two प्रकृति बन्ध, there are three सत्त्वस्थान, and with one प्रकृति उदय and one प्रकृति बन्ध, there are two सत्त्वस्थान. There are also two सत्त्वस्थान with two and one प्रकृति.

**Special Note:**

In the सर्वबन्धप्रकृति (all-binding nature) of मोहनीयकर्म (delusion-causing karma), all four gati (paths) of मिथ्यादृष्टिजीव (false-seeing beings) bind the 22nd प्रकृति. These are called eight कूट (types) with their मिथ्यात्व (falsehood) and अनन्तानुबन्धी (infinitely connected) उदय (arising), with or without. Among them, there are four उदयस्थान with 10, 9, 8, and 7 प्रकृति, which are in sequence with respect to one जीव (being), but in different sequences with respect to many जीव. 

Page #631:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-592

**Regarding the 28th, 27th, and 26th Nature:**

There are three sattva-sthana (states of being) in the 28th, 27th, and 26th nature, respectively, in the case of a single being. However, in the 7 nature-based udaya-sthana (states of arising), there is only one sattva-sthana in the 28th nature. The 27th and 26th nature do not have any sattva-sthana because when a being detaches from the four guna-sthana (states of qualities) of asanyata (non-restraint), etc., through the detachment of ananta-anubandhi (infinitely connected) karma, mithyatva (false belief) arises, leading to mithyadristi (false perception). At that time, 22 natures are bound for the first time. The ananta-anubandhi karma, which is bound for a single moment, cannot be eradicated until the end of the acala-avali (immovable period). The time period for this being, without the arising of ananta-anubandhi karma, is considered vedaka-samyaktvayogya (suitable for the knowledge of right faith) and not upasama-kal (time of pacification), because the samyaktv (right faith) and samyag-mithyatva (right false belief) natures have not been stirred. This is explained in the previous verses 614-615, where the characteristics of vedaka-samyaktvayogya-kal and upasama-samyaktvayogya-kal are described, and it is stated that there is no stirring of samyaktv and samyag-mithyatva natures during the vedaka-samyaktvayogya-kal.

**Regarding the 28th, 27th, and 26th Nature in the Four Gatis:**

In the sasadan guna-sthana (state of qualities of the four gatis), which is related to the four gatis, there are three udaya-sthana in the 21 nature-based bandha-sthana (states of binding), with one being considered sequentially and multiple beings considered simultaneously. These are the 1st, 8th, and 7th natures. There is only one sattva-sthana in the 28th nature, but not in the 27th and 26th natures. This is because a being falls from upasama-samyaktv (pacified right faith) and enters the sasadan guna-sthana. The time period for this is from a single moment to six avali (periods). The upasama-kal, which is the opportunity for the stirring of samyaktv and samyag-mithyatva natures, does not exist here. Also, there is no sattva-sthana in the 24th nature because the detachment of ananta-anubandhi karma occurs only through vedaka-samyagdristi (knowledge of right perception), which does not occur in the sasadan guna-sthana. Without the arising of ananta-anubandhi karma, the sasadan guna-sthana is not possible.

In the misra guna-sthana (state of mixed qualities) related to the four gatis, 17 natures are bound. There are three udaya-sthana in this state, with one being considered sequentially and multiple beings considered simultaneously. These are the 98th, 8th, and 7th natures. There are only two sattva-sthana in the 28th and 24th natures, but not in the 23rd and 22nd natures. This is because the arising of samyag-mithyatva nature does not mark the beginning of the destruction of darshan-mohaniya (perception-obscuring) karma.

In the asanyata guna-sthana (state of unrestrained qualities) related to the four gatis, there are 17 natures of mohaniya karma bound. There are four udaya-sthana in this state, with one being considered sequentially and multiple beings considered simultaneously. These are the 9th, 8th, 7th, and 6th natures. When the 9th nature arises, it is only vedaka-samyagdristi (knowledge of right perception). Before the destruction of darshan-mohaniya karma begins, there is a sattva-sthana in the 28th nature and a sattva-sthana in the 24th nature after the detachment of ananta-anubandhi karma. However, before the destruction of darshan-mohaniya karma, there is a sattva-sthana in the 23rd nature after the destruction of mithyatva, and a sattva-sthana in the 22nd nature after the destruction of samyag-mithyatva. Until then, there is a udaya-sthana in the 9th nature due to the arising of samyaktv nature. In the 21st nature, which is the sattva-sthana of kshayika-samyagdristi (knowledge of right perception that leads to liberation), the 9th nature is not possible because samyaktv nature does not arise.

When the 8th and 7th natures arise, there is a sattva-sthana in the 28th nature in the case of prathama-upasama-samyaktv (first pacified right faith) and a sattva-sthana in the 28th and 24th natures in the case of dvitiya-upasama-samyaktv (second pacified right faith). When the 8th and 7th natures arise in the case of vedaka-samyagdristi, there is a sattva-sthana in the 28th, 24th, 23rd, and 22nd natures, with one being considered sequentially and multiple beings considered simultaneously. In the case of kshayika-samyaktv, there is only a sattva-sthana in the 21st nature. 

Page #632:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-593

It is said that the rise of 8 and 5 natures occurs. In the rise of 6 natures, since the nature of Samyaktva does not arise, there are 21 nature-based sattvasthana in Kshayika Samyaktva. In Upshama Samyaktva, with the rise of 6 natures, there are two sattvasthana of 28 and 24 natures.

In the Desasanayat Gunasthana with the bondage of 13 natures, there is Upshama or Vedaka Samyaktva for both Tiryancha and Manushya. In Desasanayat Gunasthana, Kshayika Samyaktva is only for Manushya. Kshayika Samyaktva is also for Bhogbhumij Tiryancha, but Bhogbhumij beings do not have Desasanayam. With the rise of 8 natures, there are two sattvasthana of 28-24 natures for Vedaka Samyaktvi Tiryancha and four sattvasthana of 28-24-23 and 22 natures for Manushya. With the rise of 7 and 6 natures, there are two sattvasthana of 28 and 24 natures for Upshama Samyaktva for both Tiryancha and Manushya, two sattvasthana of 28 and 24 natures for Vedaka Samyagdristi Tiryancha, and four sattvasthana of 28-24-23 and 22 natures for Vedaka Samyaktvi Manushya. Desasanayat Gunasthana-following Kshayika Samyagdristi are only Manushya, therefore there is only one sattvasthana of 21 natures. With the rise of 5 natures, there are two sattvasthana of 28 and 24 natures for Upshama Samyaktvi Manushya and Tiryancha, but there is only one sattvasthana of 21 natures for Kshayika Samyaktvi Manushya. With the bondage of 9 natures, there are four udaysthana of 7-6-5 and 4 natures for Pramatta-Apramatta. Out of these, with the rise of 7 natures, there is only Vedaka Samyagdristi, therefore there are four sattvasthana of 28-24-23 and 22 natures. With the rise of 6 and 5 natures, there is one sattvasthana of 28 and 24 natures for Upshama Samyagdristi, four sattvasthana of 28-24-23 and 22 natures for Vedaka Samyaktvi, and only one sattvasthana of 21 natures for Kshayika Samyagdristi. With the rise of 4 natures, there is one sattvasthana of 28 and 24 natures for Upshama Samyaktva and one sattvasthana of 21 natures for Kshayika Samyaktva.

With the bondage of 9 natures, in the Apurvakaran Gunasthana, with the rise of 6-5 and 4 natures, there are two sattvasthana of 28 and 24 natures for Upshama Samyagdristi and one sattvasthana of 21 natures for Kshayika Samyaktva. In the 5 and 4 nature bondage, with two nature udaysthana, there are two sattvasthana of 28 and 24 natures for Upshama Samyaktva and four sattvasthana of 21-13-12 and 11 natures for Kshayika Samyaktva. With the bondage of 4 natures and the rise of 1 nature, there are two sattvasthana of 28 and 24 natures for Upshama Samyagdristi and four sattvasthana of 21-11-5 and 4 natures for Kshayika Samyaktva. With the bondage of 3 natures and the rise of 1 nature, there are two sattvasthana of 28 and 24 natures for Upshama Samyaktvi and three sattvasthana of 21-4 and 3 natures for Kshayika Samyaktva. With the bondage of 2 natures and the rise of 1 nature, in the Anivrittikaran Gunasthana related to Upshama Samyaktva, there are two sattvasthana of 28 and 24 natures and three sattvasthana of 21-3 and 2 natures for Kshayika Samyaktva. With the bondage of 1 nature and the rise of 1 nature, there are two sattvasthana of 28 and 24 natures for Upshama Samyaktva and two sattvasthana of 21-2 and 1 natures for Kshayika Samyaktva. Here, for Kshapaka Anivrittikaran, there are 4-3-2 and 1... 

Page #633:
---------------------------
The nature of bondage is in the order of 5-4-4-3-3-2-2 and 1. This nature is the result of the remaining residues of the nine-fold time-bound and the Ucchishtavali-based prohibitions of the Vedas and the Kshayas. Considering the place of bondage and liberation as the locus, the following table shows the number of nature-types related to the state of being, the description of the state of being, the number of nature-types in the place of liberation, and the description of the place of liberation:

| Place of Bondage | Number of Nature-types | Description of the State of Being | Place of Liberation | Number of Nature-types | Description of the Place of Liberation |
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
| 10-9 and 8 | 7 | 28-27 and 26 | 28 | 28 | 28-24-23-22 and 21 |
| 9-8 and 7 | 28 | 28-24-23 and 22 | 28-24 and 21 | 28-24-23 and 22 | 28-24-23-22 and 21 |
| 28-24 and 21 | 28-24-23 and 22 | 28-24-23-22 and 21 | 28-24 and 21 | 28-24-23 and 22 | 28-24-23-22 and 21 |
| 28-24 and 21 | 28-24-23 and 22 | 28-24-23-22 and 21 | 28-24 and 21 | 28-24-23 and 22 | 28-24-23-22 and 21 |
| 28-24 and 21 | 28-24-23 and 22 | 28-24-23-22 and 21 | 28-24 and 21 | 28-24-23 and 22 | 28-24-23-22 and 21 |
| 28-24-21-13-12 and 11 | 28-24-21-13-12 and 11 | 28-24-21-11-5 and 4 | 28-24-21-463 | 28-24-21-3 and 2 | 28-24-21-2 and 1 |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |
|
Page #634:
---------------------------
## Gommatasara Karmakanda-595

**Considering the basis of bondage and sattva, and taking udaya as the object, there are five verses describing bhang.**

**Verse 680:**

* With 22 types of bondage, and 28 types of sattva in the four gatis of beings with mithyatva, there are four udaya sthana of 10, 9, 8, and 7 types of prakriti. This is because here, there is also an udaya sthana without ananta anubandha.
* With 22 types of bondage, and 27 and 26 types of sattva, there are only three udaya sthana of 10, 9, and 8 types of prakriti, because here, there is no absence of ananta anubandha.
* With 21 types of bondage, and 28 types of sattva in the four gatis of beings with sasadan guna sthana, there are three udaya sthana of 9, 8, and 7 types of prakriti, because there is no udaya of mithyatva.

**Verse 681:**

* With 17 types of bondage, and 28 and 24 types of sattva in the four gatis of beings, there are four udaya sthana of 9, 8, 7, and 6 types of prakriti. This is because in the misra guna sthana, there are only three udaya sthana with samyag mithyatva prakriti, and in the asanyata guna sthana, there are four udaya sthana.
* With 17 types of bondage, and 21 types of sattva in the four gatis of beings with asanyata guna sthana, there are three udaya sthana of 8, 7, and 6 types of prakriti, because there is no udaya sthana of 9 types of prakriti for kshayik samyag drishti.
* With 17 types of bondage, and 22 and 23 types of sattva, there are no udaya sthana of 6 types of prakriti, so there are three udaya sthana of 9, 8, and 7 types of prakriti.

**Verse 682:**

* With 13 types of bondage, and 28, 24, 23, and 22 types of sattva in the tiryancha and manushya with desha samyata guna sthana, and 9 types of bondage in the pramatta and aprammatta guna sthana, there are three udaya sthana of 8, 7, and 6 types of prakriti in the desha samyata guna sthana, and three udaya sthana of 7, 6, and 5 types of prakriti in the pramatta and aprammatta guna sthana.

**Verse 683:**

* With 13 types of bondage, and 21 types of sattva, there is one udaya sthana of 7, 6, and 5 types of prakriti, without the udaya sthana of 8 types of prakriti. 

Page #635:
---------------------------
Gommatalara Karmakanda - 596
There are three types of Udyaasthanas for 5 Prakrutis, and there are 9 types of Bandhas for 9 Prakrutis, resulting in 21 types of Sattvasthanas. Due to the absence of 7 types of Udyaasthanas for 7 Prakrutis, there are three types of Udyaasthanas for 6, 5, and 4 Prakrutis. In Upshamka-Apuvarkarana, there are 9 types of Bandhas for 9 Prakrutis, resulting in 28, 24, and 21 types of Sattvasthanas, and there are three types of Udyaasthanas for 6, 5, and 4 Prakrutis. In Kshapaka-Apuvarkarana, there are 21 types of Sattvas for 21 Prakrutis, resulting in three types of Udyaasthanas for 6, 5, and 4 Prakrutis. In Upshamka-Anivritikarana-Gunasthan, there are 28, 24, and 21 types of Sattvas for 28, 24, and 21 Prakrutis, and there are 13, 12, and 11 types of Sattvas for Kshapaka-Anivritikarana. There are two types of Udyaasthanas for 2 Prakrutis with 5 types of Bandhas and for 2 Prakrutis with 4 types of Bandhas, but there is only one type of Udyaasthan for 1 Prakruti with 11, 5, and 4 types of Sattvas.
Meaning - There is one type of Udyaasthan for each Prakruti when there are 28, 24, and 21 types of Sattvas for Upshamka-Anivritikarana with 3, 2, and 1 types of Bandhas, and when there are 4 and 3 types of Sattvas, 3 and 2 types of Sattvas, or 2 and 1 types of Sattvas for Kshapaka-Anivritikarana. Here, two types of Sattvas are mentioned due to the consideration of Navakasamayabaddha.
The relationship between Udyaasthan as Adhey and Bandha-Sattvasthan as Adhikarana
Bandhasthan
Description
Tiduigebhandhe adachaurigivese chadutiean ti dugean. Dugisatten ya sahide kaman ekko have udao. || 684 ||
Mithyadristika
22
22
Adhikarana
Sav
Sattvasthanagata
Prakruti number
Number
2
28 Prakrutis
27 and 26 Prakrutis
Udya
Sattvasthanagata Prakruti number
Number
4
3
Adhey
Description
90, 9 and 8 Prakrutis with Anantanubandhi and 98, 7 Prakrutis without Anantanubandhi.
10, 9, 8 Prakrutis. Here, there is an awakening of Samyaktva and Samyagmithyatva Prakrutis, therefore, the above Udyaasthanas without Anantanubandhi are not present. 

Page #636:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-597

In Sasadan:
28 Prakruti
In Misra:
28 and 24 Prakruti
9-8 and 7 Prakruti. 9-8 and 7 Prakruti Sthan (Samyagmithyatva Prakruti Sahit)
In Asanyata:
17. 3
28 and 24 Prakruti
and 6 (Samyaktva Prakruti Sahit then 9-8-7
and Samyaktva Prakruti Rahit 8-7 and 6)
Kshayik Samyagdristi Asanyatake 17
. 1. 21 Prakruti
8-7 and 6 Prakruti. (Samyaktva-Prakrutike Uday Rahit)
Darshanmohaki Kshapana | 2 | 23 and 22 Prakruti. Karnevale Vedak Samyaktvi | Manusyake Asanyata Gunasthanamen 17
9-8 and 7 (Samyaktva Prakrutike Uday Sahit)
|
28-24 Prakruti
Deshasanyati Tiryanch and Manusyamen 13
8-7-6 and 5 (Samyaktva Sahit then 8-7 and 6 and Samyaktva Rahit 7-6
21 Prakruti
7-6 and 5 (Samyaktva Rahit)
23 and 22 Prakruti
8-7-6 (Samyaktva Sahit)
Kshayik Samyaktva Sahit | 1 Deshasanyatike 13 Darshanmohaniya ki Kshapana Karnevale Deshasanyati Vedak Samyagdristi Manusyake 13 | Pramat-Apramat and 2 | Upashamak Apurvakaranamen 9
28 and 24 Prakruti
.
4.
7-6-5 and 4 (Apurvakaranamen 7 Prakruti Uday Sthan nahi hai) 

Page #637:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-598
9 of Kshapaka-Upshamaka A-purva-Karana
Pramat-Apramat
9
5 of Anivrittikarana.
6 |
4 in Anivrittikarana
6
21 Prakrutik. 36-5 and 4 Prakrutik
(Kshayika Samyagdristike) 7-685 (Pramat-Apramat Vedaka Samyagdristi ke jo ki Darshanmohaki Kshapana!
Karnevala hai.) 28-24 and 21. 1 | 2 Prakrutik (Upshamakake) 13-12-11 (Kshapakake) 28-24 and 21
2 Prakrutik (Upshamakake) 13-12 and 11 (Kshapakake) 28-24 and 21. 1 1 Prakrutik (Upshamakake) 11-5 and 4 (Kshapakake) 28-24 and 21 | 1 | 1 Prakrutik (Upshamakake) 4 and 3 (Kshapakake) 28-24 and 21 | 1 | 1 Prakrutik (Upshamakake) 3 and 2 (Kshapakake) 28-24 and 21. 1. 1 Prakrutik (Upshamakake) 2 and 1 (Kshapakake)
4 in Anivrittikarana
3 in Anivrittikarana (Upshamaka and Kshapaka)
. 5
2 in Anivrittikarana (Upshamaka and Kshapaka)
1 in Anivrittikarana (Upshamaka and Kshapaka)
Further, considering Udaya-Sattva as the base and Bandha as the object, the seven stanzas describe the Bhangas. 

Page #638:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-599

**Verse 685**
With the rise of 10 and 8 Prakṛtis, there are 22 Prakṛti bands in the 28 Prakṛti sattvasthāna. With the rise of 9 and 8 Prakṛtis, there are four bandasthāna of 22, 21, 17, and 13 Prakṛtis in the 28 Prakṛti sattvasthāna. With the rise of 10 and 8 Prakṛtis, there are 22 Prakṛti bands in the 27 and 26 Prakṛti sattvasthāna.

**Verse 686**
In the mixed guna sthāna, there are 22 Prakṛti bands in the 24 Prakṛti sattva. In the asanyata guna sthāna, there are 9, 8, and 7 Prakṛti bands in the 24, 23, and 22 Prakṛti sattvas.

**Verse 687**
With the rise of 7 Prakṛtis, there are 5 bandasthāna of 22, 21, 17, 13, and 9 Prakṛtis in the 28 Prakṛti sattva, which are found in mithyātva, sāsadana, asanyata, deśa-samyata, pramatta, and aprammatta-samyata respectively. With the rise of 7 Prakṛtis, there are 17, 13, and 9 Prakṛti bands in the 24 Prakṛti sattva of asanyata, deśa-samyata, and pramatta-aprammatta respectively. With the rise of 7 Prakṛtis, there are 17 and 13 Prakṛti bands in the 21 Prakṛti sattva of asanyata and deśa-samyata respectively.

**Verse 688**
With the rise of 6 Prakṛtis, there are 17, 13, and 9 Prakṛti bands in the 28, 24, and 21 Prakṛti sattvas of asanyata, deśa-samyata, and pramatta-aprammatta respectively. With the rise of 5 Prakṛtis, there are 13 and 9 Prakṛti bands in the 28, 24, and 21 Prakṛti sattvas of deśa-samyata and pramatta-aprammatta respectively. With the rise of 6 Prakṛtis, there are 13 Prakṛti bands in the 23 and 22 Prakṛti sattvas of deśa-samyata. With the rise of 5 Prakṛtis, there are 9 Prakṛti bands in the 23 and 22 Prakṛti sattvas of pramatta and aprammatta. 

Page #639:
---------------------------
Gommatasar Karmakanda - 600

**Verse 689**
In the case of two series with the rise of four elements, there is one element of bondage when there are 28, 24, and 21 elements of being in the state of the non-creation of the four elements. In the case of the non-creation of the sentient and non-sentient, with the rise of two elements, there are five elements of bondage until the end of the rise of the male consciousness when there are 13, 12, and 11 elements of being. There are also four elements of bondage in the case of the rise of the series with the rise of the neuter and female consciousness. In the case of the destruction of the series, there are eight passions and the destruction of the neuter and female consciousness, and there are five elements of bondage when there are 21, 13, 12, and 11 elements of being in the time of the destruction of the male consciousness. In the case of the rise of the series with the rise of the female and neuter consciousness, there are four elements of bondage when there are 13 and 12 elements of being (see verse 515).

**Verse 690**
In the case of the non-creation of the pacifying, with the rise of one element, there are four, 32, and one elements of bondage when there are 28, 24, and 21 elements of being. In the case of the rise of one element, there are four elements of bondage when there are 19 and five elements of being. In the case of the rise of one element, there are four and three elements of bondage when there are four elements of being.

**Verse 699**
In the case of the non-creation of the destruction, with the rise of one element, there are three and two elements of bondage when there are three elements of being. In the case of the rise of one element, there are two and one elements of bondage when there are two elements of being. In the case of the rise of one element, there is one element of bondage or no bondage when there is one element of being. This is how to know the three-fold destruction of the deluding karma. 

Page #640:
---------------------------
Gommatsar Karmakanda - 601

**Chapter on the Manifestation of the Adhey (Dependent) and the Sandrisht (Conjunction) of the Bandha (Bond) in the Udya (Manifestation) and Satva (Being) Sthana (Place)**

| **Adhikarana (Chapter)** | **Adhey (Dependent)** | **Udya Sthana (Manifestation Place)** | **Bandha Sthana (Bond Place)** |
|---|---|---|---|
| 10 Prakrutik | 9 Prakrutik | 9 Prakrutik | 9 Prakrutik (in Misra and Asanyata) |
|  |  | 8 Prakrutik | 8 Prakrutik |
|  |  | 8 Prakrutik | 8 Prakrutik |
|  |  | 8 Prakrutik | 3 |
|  |  |  | 1 |
|  |  |  | 2 |
|  |  |  | 3 |
|  |  |  | 1 |
|  |  |  | .2 |
|  |  |  | 3 |
|  |  |  | 1 |
|  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |
Page #641:
---------------------------
7 Prakruti
7 Prakruti
7 Prakruti
6 Prakruti
1
3
1
Gommatasar Karmakanda - 602
28 Prakruti
24-23 and 22 Prakruti
| 21 Prakruti
5 | 28-24-23-22 and 21 Prakruti
3
2
3
28-13 8 1 Prakruti. Prakruti Udayasthan Anantanubandhirhit Mithyatva mein Bhay - Jugupsarhit Sasadan mein, Bhayjugupsa se Kisi Ek Sahit Mishram mein, Ved v Upshamsamyagdristi Asanyat mein aur Vedak v Upshamsamyagdristi Deshasanyat mein tatha Vedaksamyakttvi Pramtt Apramttgunasthan mein hota hai.
7
17- 13 and 9 Prakrutiasthan Kramse Asanyat, Deshasanyat aur PramttApramttgunasthan mein.
Prakruti.
17 and 1.3 Kshayik Samyakttvi Jiv ke Asanyatgunasthan mein 17 Prakruti tatha Deshasanyatvarti Kshayik Samyakttvi Manusya ke 13 Prakruti ka Bandh hota hai.
17- 13 and 9 Prakruti. Asanyat se Apurvakaran Gunasthanparyant 6 Prakruti ka Uday hai. Asanyatgunasthan mein Upsham v Kshayik Samyagdristi ke - 6 Prakruti ka Uday hai. Tatha Deshasanyatpramtt Apramtt v Apurvakaran Gunasthan mein Upsham v Kshayik Samyakttvi ke 5 Prakruti ka Uday evam Vedak Samyakttva mein Midhyatva ka Kshay karke 23 Prakruti ki Sattaa hone par aur Samyagmithyatva ka bhi Kshay karke 22 ki Sattaa hone par 6 Prakruti ka Uday hai.
- 

Page #642:
---------------------------
Gommatasar Karmakanda-603
5 Prakruti | 28-24-23-22-21 | 2 | 13-1 Prakruti
| Prakruti A-purvakaranam in 3 | 28-24 and 21 Prakruti 5 | 9 Prakruti 4 Prakruti A-nivrittikaranam | 6 | 28-24-21-13-12 | 2 | 5 and 4 Prakruti. In the Saveda-bhag of Purusha-veda
until the end of time 5 Prakruti and 2 Prakruti
with Napumsaka and Stri-veda, the category
of those who ascend have 4 Prakruti of bondage. A-nivrittikaranam | 3 | 28-24 and 21 Prakruti 4 | 4-3-2 and 5 Prakruti (Upshamka) A-nivrittikaranam | 2 | 11 and 5 Prakruti | 1 | 4 Prakruti (Kshapaka) 1 Prakruti | 1 | 4 Prakruti
2 | 4 and 3 Prakruti 1 Prakruti 3 Prakruti
3 and 2 1 Prakruti 2 Prakruti
| 2 and 1 Prakruti 1 Prakruti
1 Prakruti 1 Prakruti 1 | 1 Prakruti
• | 0 (in Sukshma-samparaya-gunasthanam) the breaking of the three-fold combination of the bondage-arising and sattva-sthana of the A-thanantara-namakarma is called
Namsas ya bandhodaya-sattatthanaana savva-bhangaa hu.
Patte-uttam va have tiya-sanjoga-vi savvattha ||692|| Meaning - The breaking of all the bondage-arising and sattva-sthana of the namakarma, just as they were said separately, in the same way, they are broken in the three-fold combination, everywhere, it is clear to know. Now, those same three-fold combinations are called gunasthana
Chhannav-chhattiya-sagai-gi dugati-gadga tinni-att-chattari. Dug-dug-chad-du dug-pan-chad-du chadur-eya-chad-du pan-eya-chad-du. ||693||
1 Prakruti 

Page #643:
---------------------------
Gommatsar Karmakanda-604
The number of bondage-arising and sattva-sthana for each karma is as follows:
For name karma, the bondage-arising is 6-3-2-3-2-2-4-5-1 and 1, the arising-sthana is 9-7-3-8-2-5-1-1.5 and 1, and the sattva-sthana is 6-1-2-4-8-4-4.8.
Since the knowledge of this is a hindrance, there are only arising-sthana and sattva-sthana. Therefore, for the quiescent passions, the arising-sthana is 1-5-2 and 2, and the sattva-sthana is 4-4-4 and 6.
Now, we will explain the above statement in 9 verses.
The bondage-arising and sattva-sthana for name karma are to be explained in detail.
The bondage-arising is 22, the arising-sthana is 22, and the sattva-sthana is 28.
The arising-sthana is 22, the sattva-sthana is 33, and the bondage-arising is 28.
The arising-sthana is 33, the sattva-sthana is 28, and the bondage-arising is 28.
The arising-sthana is 24, the sattva-sthana is 33, and the bondage-arising is 28.
The bondage-arising is 28, the arising-sthana is 30, and the sattva-sthana is 4.
The bondage-arising is 28, the arising-sthana is 30, and the sattva-sthana is 4.
The bondage-arising is 28, the arising-sthana is 30, and the sattva-sthana is 4.
The bondage-arising is 28, the arising-sthana is 30, and the sattva-sthana is 4.
The bondage-arising is 28, the arising-sthana is 30, and the sattva-sthana is 4.
The bondage-arising is 28, the arising-sthana is 30, and the sattva-sthana is 4.
The bondage-arising is 28, the arising-sthana is 30, and the sattva-sthana is 4.
The bondage-arising is 28, the arising-sthana is 30, and the sattva-sthana is 4.
The bondage-arising is 28, the arising-sthana is 30, and the sattva-sthana is 4.
The bondage-arising is 28, the arising-sthana is 30, and the sattva-sthana is 4.
The bondage-arising is 28, the arising-sthana is 30, and the sattva-sthana is 4.
The bondage-arising is 28, the arising-sthana is 30, and the sattva-sthana is 4.
The bondage-arising is 28, the arising-sthana is 30, and the sattva-sthana is 4.
The bondage-arising is 28, the arising-sthana is 30, and the sattva-sthana is 4.
The bondage-arising is 28, the arising-sthana is 30, and the sattva-sthana is 4.
The bondage-arising is 28, the arising-sthana is 30, and the sattva-sthana is 4.
The bondage-arising is 28, the arising-sthana is 30, and the sattva-sthana is 4.
The bondage-arising is 28, the arising-sthana is 30, and the sattva-sthana is 4.
The bondage-arising is 28, the arising-sthana is 30, and the sattva-sthana is 4.
The bondage-arising is 28, the arising-sthana is 30, and the sattva-sthana is 4.
The bondage-arising is 28, the arising-sthana is 30, and the sattva-sthana is 4.
The bondage-arising is 28, the arising-sthana is 30, and the sattva-sthana is 4.
The bondage-arising is 28, the arising-sthana is 30, and the sattva-sthana is 4.
The bondage-arising is 28, the arising-sthana is 30, and the sattva-sthana is 4.
The bondage-arising is 28, the arising-sthana is 30, and the sattva-sthana is 4.
The bondage-arising is 28, the arising-sthana is 30, and the sattva-sthana is 4.
The bondage-arising is 28, the arising-sthana is 30, and the sattva-sthana is 4.
The bondage-arising is 28, the arising-sthana is 30, and the sattva-sthana is 4.
The bondage-arising is 28, the arising-sthana is 30, and the sattva-sthana is 4.
The bondage-arising is 28, the arising-sthana is 30, and the sattva-sthana is 4.
The bondage-arising is 28, the arising-sthana is 30, and the sattva-sthana is 4.
The bondage-arising is 28, the arising-sthana is 30, and the sattva-sthana is 4.
The bondage-arising is 28, the arising-sthana is 30, and the sattva-sthana is 4.
The bondage-arising is 28, the arising-sthana is 30, and the sattva-sthana is 4.
The bondage-arising is 28, the arising-sthana is 30, and the sattva-sthana is 4.
The bondage-arising is 28, the arising-sthana is 30, and the sattva-sthana is
Page #644:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda - 605

**Verse 702:**
The number of bonds, births, and states of being for the thirty-seventh path is four, four, and four respectively. For the path of the liberated soul, the number of bonds, births, and states of being is four, four, and seven respectively.

**Verse 703:**
For the yogi and the non-yogi, the number of births is thirty-three, nine, and six respectively. The number of bonds, births, and states of being is four, seven, and seven respectively.

**Explanation:**
This section explains the number of bonds, births, and states of being for each of the nine gunasthana (stages of spiritual progress) as described in verses 394-95.

**Mithyatva Gunasthana (Stage of False Belief):**
- Bonds: 6, starting from the 23rd natural state.
- Births: 9, starting from the 21st natural state.
- States of Being: 6, starting from the 92nd natural state.

**Sasanadan Gunasthana (Stage of Hearing the Teachings):**
- Bonds: 3, starting from the 28th natural state.
- Births: 7, excluding the 28th and 27th natural states, starting from the 21st natural state.
- States of Being: 1, starting from the 90th natural state.

**Mitra Gunasthana (Stage of Friendship):**
- Bonds: 2, starting from the 28th natural state.
- Births: 3, starting from the 29th natural state.
- States of Being: 2, starting from the 92nd and 10th natural states.

**Asanyata Gunasthana (Stage of Unrestrained Conduct):**
- Bonds: 3, starting from the 28th natural state.
- Births: 8, excluding the 24th natural state (which corresponds to the birth of a one-sense being), starting from the 21st natural state.
- States of Being: 4, starting from the 93rd natural state.

**Desasanayata Gunasthana (Stage of Restrained Conduct in the World):**
- Bonds: 2, starting from the 28th natural state.
- Births: 2, starting from the 30th natural state.
- States of Being: 4, same as the Asanyata Gunasthana.

**Pramatta Gunasthana (Stage of Distracted Mind):**
- Bonds: 2, same as the Desasanayata Gunasthana.
- Births: 5, including the 25th, 27th, and three other natural states.
- States of Being: 4, same as the Asanyata Gunasthana.

**Aparamatta and Apurvakarana Gunasthana (Stages of Undistracted Mind and Unprecedented Action):**
- Bonds: 4 and 5 respectively, starting from the 28th natural state.
- Births: 1, starting from the 30th natural state for both stages.
- States of Being: 4, same as the Asanyata Gunasthana.

**Anivrittikarana and Sukshmasamprayaya Gunasthana (Stages of Cessation of Action and Subtle Karma):**
- Bonds: 1, called Yasaskirti (fame) karma.
- Births: 1, starting from the 30th natural state.
- States of Being: 8, including 4 starting from the 93rd natural state and 4 starting from the 80th natural state.

**Upashantakshaya and Kshinakshaya Gunasthana (Stages of Subdued Passions and Exhausted Passions):**
- Births: 1, starting from the 30th natural state.
- States of Being: 4, starting from the 93rd natural state for the Upashantakshaya and 4 starting from the 80th natural state for the Kshinakshaya.

**Sayoga Kevali (Liberated Soul with Attachments) and Ayoga Kevali (Liberated Soul without Attachments):**
- Births: 2, starting from the 30th and 31st natural states for the Sayoga Kevali and 2, starting from the 9th and 8th natural states for the Ayoga Kevali.
- States of Being: 4, starting from the 80th natural state for the Sayoga Kevali and 6, including 4 starting from the 80th natural state and 2 starting from the 10th and 9th natural states for the Ayoga Kevali. 

Page #645:
---------------------------
Gommatasar Karmakanda - 606
A close look at the three-fold combination of bondage, arising, and essence of name karma in relation to the Gunasthanas

Gunasthanas
Bondage-arising-essence-nature-number of natures-number of natures-number of places-description-description-description-number

Mithyatva
Sasadan
Mishra
Asanyata
Deshasanyata
Pramatta
Apramatta
Adhasthana
Number
6
3
2
3
2
2
4

Apuurvakarana
Upashamaka-anivrittikarana
Kshapaka-anivritti. Upashamaka-sukshma
Samparaya-kshapka-sukshma-samparaya
Upashanta-kshaya o
5.
1
1
1
1
23-25-2628-29 and 30
28-29 and 30
28 29
28-29 and 30
28 and 29
Nature.
28 and 29
Nature. 28-29-30 and
31. 28-29-30 - 31 and 1
1 Yashaskirtirupa
1 Yashaskirtirupa
1 Yashaskirtirupa
د
Place
Number
1
૩
3
8
2
با
1
1
1
1
1.
1
1
21-24-25- 6 92-91-90-8826-27-2884 and 82
29-30 and 31 21-24-2526-29-30 and
31
29-30 and 31 21-25-2628
30 and 31 (Here
| 24 is not called a nature place,
because
its arising
is found in
the one-sensory)
30 and 31
Nature. 25-27
28 29 30
30 Nature
30 Nature
530 Nature
30 Nature
30 Nature
30 Nature
30 Nature
1
द
4
ど
4
ど |93-92-99 and 10
4
4 |93-92-91 and 90
8
ど
90 Nature
4
92 and 90 Nature
93-92-91 and 10
4
13-92-91 and 90
93-92-91 and 90
93-92-91 3 90
80079-78 and 77
93-92-99 and 90
80-719 78 and 77
93 92 99 and 90

Page #646:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-607
Kshina-kshaya Sayoga-kevali
4 |80-79-78 and 77 4 |83-79-7, 77
Prakriti.
Ayoga-kechali
6
80-79-78-77
Now, in 14 Jivasamas, Bandha-udaya and Sattvasthana are described in 6 Gathas.
Pan-depena Pan-dhyanam Bandhu-udaya-satt Pan-gam cha.
Pan-chakkapan-gach-chakkapan-gamatt-hameyaram. ||704|| Satte-va ap-aj-jatta Sami Suhamo ya Badaro cheva. Viyal-indiya ya ti-viha hoti Asanni kama Sanni. ||705|| Jummam.
Meaning - In the seven Jivasamas related to Apar-yapt, Bandhasthana is 5, Udayasthana is 2 and Sattvasthana is 5. In all the Sukshma-jivas, Bandhasthana is 5, Udayasthana is 4 and Sattvasthana is 5. In all the Ekendriya Badar-jivas, Bandha-udaya and Sattvasthana are five each. In Vikal-tray Jivas, Bandhasthana is 5, Udayasthana is 6 and Sattvasthana is 5. In Asanni Jivas, Bandhasthana is 6, Udayasthana is also 6 and Sattvasthana is 5. In Sanni-jivas, Bandhasthana is 8, Udayasthana is 8 and Sattvasthana is 11.
The above statement is explained in detail.
Bandha tiya-pan-chhan-nav-vis-satti-sam apun-na-ge Udao. Igi-chau-vis-sam Igi-chav-vis-sam Thavar-tat-se kamaso. ||706|| Ban-au-di-nau-di-chau Satt-am eme-va Bandhayam Ansa. Suhu-mi-dare Viyal-tiye Udaya Igi-vis-aya-di-chau-pan-yam. ||707|| Igi-chakkad-an-nav-vis-satti-si-giti-sam cha Viyal-thana-m va. Bandha-tiyam Sanni-dare Bhedo Bandha-di hu Ad-vis-sam. ||708|| Sanni-mmi Savva-bandho Igi-vis-sap-pa-hu-di-ek-kati-sam-ta. Chau-vis-su-na Udao Das-an-nav-pari-hina-savva-yam Satt-am. ||709|| Kula-yam. 

Page #647:
---------------------------
## Gommatasara Karmakanda - 608

**Meaning:**

In the seven *Jivasamas* related to *Apariapta*, the *Bandha* (binding) occurs in five *Prakriti* (nature) locations: 23, 25, 26, 29, and 30. The *Udaya* (arising) occurs in two *Prakriti* locations each for *Sthavaralabdhyaparyapta* (stationary-obtained-sufficient) - 21 and 24, and for *Trasalabdhyaparyapta* (mobile-obtained-sufficient) - 21 and 26. The *Sattva* (state of being) occurs in five *Prakriti* locations: 92, 90, 88, 84, and 82.

For *Sukshma* (subtle) and *Badar* (coarse) *Ekendriya* (one-sense) and *Vikalatrai* (three-defective), the *Bandha* and *Sattva* locations are the same as *Apariapta*. However, the *Udaya* occurs in four *Prakriti* locations for *Sukshma* - 21, 24, 25, and 26, and in five *Prakriti* locations for *Badar* - 21, 24, 25, 26, and 27.

For *Vikalatrai* *Jivas*, the *Bandha* occurs in five *Prakriti* locations: 23, 25, 26, 29, and 30. The *Udaya* occurs in six *Prakriti* locations: 25, 26, 28, 29, 30, and 31. The *Sattva* occurs in five *Prakriti* locations: 92, 90, 88, 84, and 82.

For *Asanji* (non-sentient), the *Bandha*, *Udaya*, and *Sattva* locations are the same as *Vikalatrai*. However, *Asanji* also binds to the 28th *Prakriti* location, making their *Bandha* locations six.

For *Sanji* (sentient) *Panchendriya* (five-sense) *Jivas*, the *Bandha* occurs in eight *Prakriti* locations: 23, 25, 26, 28, 29, 30, 31, and 1. The *Udaya* occurs in eight *Prakriti* locations: 21, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, and 31. The *Sattva* occurs in eleven *Prakriti* locations, excluding the 10th and 1st: 93, 92, 91, 90, 88, 84, 82, 80, 79, 78, and 77.

**Table:**

| Jivasamas | Bandha Locations | Bandha Prakriti Count | Udaya Locations | Udaya Prakriti Count | Sattva Locations | Sattva Prakriti Count |
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
| Apariapta | 21-24 (Sthavaralabdhyaparyapta), 21-26 (Trasalabdhyaparyapta) | 4 | 21-24-25-26 | 5 | 92-90-88-84-82 | 5 |
| Sukshma Ekendriya | 23-25-26-29-30 | 5 | 21-24-25-26 | 4 | 92-90-88-84-82 | 5 |
| Badar Ekendriya | 23-25-26-29-30 | 5 | 21-24-25-26-27 | 5 | 92-90-88-84-82 | 5 |
| Vikalatrai | 23-25-26-29-30 | 5 | 25-26-28-29-30-31 | 6 | 92-90-88-84-82 | 5 |
| Asanji Panchendriya | 23-25-26-28-29-30-31 | 7 | 25-26-28-29-30-31 | 6 | 92-90-88-84-82 | 5 |
| Sanji Panchendriya | 23-25-26-28-29-30-31-1 | 8 | 21-25-26-27-28-29-30-31 | 8 | 93-92-91-90-88-84-82-80-79-78-77 | 11 |

**Note:** The *Udaya* of the 25th and 27th *Prakriti* is dependent on the *Deva* (heavenly) and *Naraki* (hellish) realms. 

Page #648:
---------------------------
Gommatasar Karmakanda - 609
Note - Kevalis are neither vegetables nor unconscious, therefore their उदय and सत्त्वस्थान are not mentioned here.
Now, wishing to describe the places of bondage-arising and essence of name karma in the 14 मार्गणाs, the Acharya first mentions those places in the क्रमप्राप्त गतिमार्गणाs.
Two in hell, six in the animal realm, eight in the human realm and four in the heaven realm are the places of bondage of name karma. Five, nine, eleven and five are the places of arising respectively. Three, five, twelve and four are the places of essence respectively. Now, the above statement is explained in three verses.
Two, the 29th and 30th, are the places of bondage of name karma in hell. All, the 26th, 25th, 24th, 23rd, 22nd, 21st, 20th, 19th, 18th, 17th, 16th, 15th, 14th, 13th, 12th, 11th, 10th, 9th, 8th, 7th, 6th, 5th, 4th, 3rd, 2nd and 1st, are the places of bondage in the animal realm. Five, the 21st, 22nd, 23rd, 24th, 25th, 26th, 27th, 28th, 29th, 30th and 31st, are the places of arising in hell. All, except the 24th, are the places of arising in the animal realm. Five, the 92nd, 90th, 88th, 84th and 82nd, are the places of essence in hell. Twelve, the 93rd, 92nd, 91st, 90th, 88th, 84th, 80th, 79th, 78th, 77th, 10th and 9th, are the places of essence in the human realm. Four, the 25th, 26th, 29th and 30th, are the places of bondage in the heaven realm. Five, the 21st, 25th, 27th, 28th and 29th, are the places of arising in the heaven realm. Four, the 93rd, 92nd, 91st and 90th, are the places of essence in the heaven realm.

Page #649:
---------------------------
Gommatasar Karmakanda-610

**Regarding the Bandha-Udaya and Sattvasthana in the Gatimarggana**

| Gati | Bandhasthana | Bandhasthana-gata Udaya | Udayasthana-gata Sattvasthana | Sattvasthana-gata |
|---|---|---|---|---|
| **Number** | **Nature Number** | **Number** | **Nature Number** | **Number** |
| **Description** | **Description** | **Description** | **Description** | **Description** |
| Naraka | 2 | 29 and 30 | 21-25-27-28 | 92-91 and 90 |
| | | | 23-25-26-28-29 | 9 | 21-24-25-26-27-28-29-30 |
| | | | 27-28-29-30 | 5 | 92-90-88-84 and 82 |
| Manushya | 8 | 23-25-26-28-29 | 11 | 20-21-25-26-27-28-29-30 | 93-12-11-90 |
| | | | 27-28-29-30 | 12 | 88-84-80-79-78-77-10 and 9 |
| | | | 31 | 1 | 31 |
| Deva | 4 | 25-26-29-30 | 5 | 21-25-27-28 | 93-12-91 and 90 |
| | | | 29 | 4 | 29 |

**Further, in the Indriyamarggana, the Bandha-Udaya-Sattvasthana are called by name.**

**Here, all are eight, five, six, and thirteen.**

**The remaining Margganas should be known in the same way.**

**Explanation of the above statement regarding Indriyamarggana in two verses:**

**Ekeindriya has five Bandhasthana of 23-25-26-29 and 30 nature, five Udayasthana of 21-24-25-26 and 27 nature, and five Sattvasthana of 92-90-88-84-82 nature, without 28.**

**Vikaleindriya has six Bandhasthana of 23-25-26-28-29 and 30 nature, eleven Udayasthana of 20-21-25-26-27-28-29-30 and 31 nature, and thirteen Sattvasthana of 93-12-11-90-88-84-80-79-78-77-10 and 9 nature.**

**Panchendriya has eight Bandhasthana of 23-25-26-28-29 and 30 nature, eleven Udayasthana of 20-21-25-26-27-28-29-30 and 31 nature, and thirteen Sattvasthana of 93-12-11-90-88-84-80-79-78-77-10 and 9 nature.**

**All are the same in all.**

**This is the summary.**

Page #650:
---------------------------
## Gommatasara Karmakanda-611

**In the case of Vikalendriya (partially-endowed) beings:**

* **Bandha-sthana (bondage-location):** Five, like those of Ekendriya (single-sense) beings.
* **Udaya-sthana (arising-location):** 21, 26, 28, 29, 30, and 31, six in total.
* **Sattva-sthana (being-location):** Five, like those of Ekendriya beings.

**In the case of Sakalendriya (fully-endowed) beings:**

* **Bandha-sthana:** All.
* **Udaya-sthana:** 20, 21, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 2, and 8, eleven in total.
* **Sattva-sthana:** All.

**Regarding Indriyamargna (sense-path):**

| **Type** | **Bandha-sthana Count** | **Bandha-sthana Details** | **Udaya-sthana Count** | **Udaya-sthana Details** | **Sattva-sthana Count** | **Sattva-sthana Details** |
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
| Ekendriya | 5 | 23, 25, 26, 29, 27 | 5 | 21, 24, 25, 26, 27 | 5 | 92, 10, 88, 84, 82 |
| Vikalendriya | 5 | 23, 25, 26, 29, 30 | 6 | 25, 26, 28, 29, 30, 31 | 5 | 192, 10, 88, 84, 82 |
| Sakalendriya | 8 | 23, 25, 26, 28, 29, 30, 31, 1 | 11 | 20, 21, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 2, 8 | 13 | 93, 12, 91, 90, 88, 84, 82, 80, 79, 78, 77, 10, 9 |

**Now, regarding Kayamargna (body-path), we discuss the Bandha, Udaya, and Sattva-sthana related to Namakarma (name-karma):**

**"Pudhviyaadipanchasu tase kama bandhaudayasattani. Eyan va sayalam va teuduge natthi sagavisaam." (717)**

**Meaning:** In the case of the five stationary bodies (earth, water, fire, air, and vegetation), the Bandha, Udaya, and Sattva-sthana are like those of Ekendriya beings. However, it is important to note that in the case of Teja-kaya (fire-bodied) and Vayu-kaya (air-bodied) beings, the 27th Udaya-sthana is absent. This is because the 27th Udaya-sthana is associated with Atap (heat) and Udyot (light), and these two Prakritis (substances) do not arise in Teja-kaya and Vayu-kaya beings. In the case of Trasa-kaya (vegetation-bodied) beings, the Bandha, Udaya, and Sattva-sthana are similar to those of Panchendriya (five-sense) beings. 

Page #651:
---------------------------
Gommatsar Karmakanda - 612
Bondage in Kayamargna - Description related to Udaya and Sattvasthana
Bondage in Kayamargna
Location
Number
Earth etc.
Five Stationary
Body
Trasakaya
5.
8
Located in Bondage Location
Nature - Number
Description
23-25-26-29 and 30 Natures
23-25-26-28 | 29-30-31 Three and One Natures
Udaya
Location
Number
5
14
Located in Udaya Location
Nature - Number
Description
21-24-25-26
27 Natures in Tejakaya - Vayukaya
25 Natures
There is no Udaya Location.
20-21-2526-27-28
29-30-31-9
and 8 Natures
Now, in Yogamargna, Bondage - Udaya and Sattvasthana are mentioned.
Sattva - Nature located in Sattvasthana
Location Number Description
Number
5
12-90-88-84 and 82 Natures
13 93-92-11-90
| 88-84-82-80
79 78 and 77, 179 Natures
Mani Vach Bandhudayan Sa Vavvam Navavinsati Sigiti San. Dasanavadusi Divvajjida Savvam Oralatammisse. 718 ||
Meaning - In Yogamargna, in every Yoga of Man, Vachan and Kaya, the Bondage Location is all, the Udaya Location is 29, 30 and 31 Natures, three, and the Sattvasthana is all except 10, 9 and 82 Natures.
Further, the above statement is explained in three verses -
Savvam Tivischhakam Panuvisadekkatisaperanta. Chauchhakasattavinsa Dusu Savvam Dasayanavaheenam. 719 ||
Webve Tammisse Bandhansa Suragadiv Udayo Du. Sagavinsatiyam Panajudavinsa Aharatammisse || 720 ||
Bandhatiya Adavisa Vegubvam Va Tinau Dibana Udi. Kamme Visadugu Dao Oraliyamissayam Va Bandhansa. 721 || 

Page #652:
---------------------------
## Gommatasara, Ind-61

**Meaning:**

In the **Audarik Kayayoga**, all 31 Prakruti are **Bandha** (binding) places, 25-26-27-28-29-30 and 31 are **Udaya** (arising) places, and the remaining 10 and 9 Prakruti are **Sattva** (liberation) places. In the **Audarik Mishrakayayoga**, 23-25-26-28-29 and 30 Prakruti are 6 **Bandha** places, 24-26 and 27 Prakruti are 3 **Udaya** places, and the **Sattva** places are the same as in **Audarik Kayayoga**. (The 27th Prakruti **Udaya** place is related to the opening of the doors for a Tirthankara Kevali). In **Vaikriyakayoga** and **Vaikriyak Mishrakayayoga**, the **Bandha** and **Sattva** places are the same as in the **Devagati**, but in **Vaikriyakayoga**, 27-28 and 29 Prakruti are 3 **Udaya** places, and in **Vaikriyak Mishrakayayoga**, only the 25th Prakruti is the **Udaya** place. In **Aharakayayoga** and **Aharak Mishrakayayoga**, 28 and 29 Prakruti are 2 **Bandha** places, 27-28 and 29 Prakruti are 3 **Udaya** places in **Aharakayayoga**, and the 25th Prakruti is the **Udaya** place in **Aharak Mishrakayayoga**. The **Sattva** places are 93 and 92 Prakruti in both. In **Karman Kayayoga**, the **Bandha** and **Sattva** places are the same as in **Audarik Mishrakayayoga**, but the **Udaya** places are 20 and 21 Prakruti.

**Table:**

| Yoga Margana | Bandha | Bandha Prakruti | Udaya | Udaya Prakruti | Sattva | Sattva Prakruti |
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
| Man-Vachan Yoga | 8 | 23-25-26-28-29-30-31 & 1-77-78-79-80-84-88 | 3 | 29-30-31 & 1 | 10 | 93-92-91-90-88-84-80-79-78-77 |
| Audarik Kayayoga | 8 | 23-25-26-28-29-30-31 & 1-77-78-79-80-82-84-88 | 7 | 25-26-27-28-29-30-31 | 15 | 93-92-91-90-88-84-82-80-79-78-77 |
| Audarik Mishrakayayoga | 6 | 23-25-26-28-29-30 | 3 | 24-26-27 | 11 | 29-30 | 93-92-91-90-88-84-82-80-79-78-77 |
| Vaikriyakayayoga | 4 | 25-26-29-30 | 3 | 27-28-29 | 4 | 93-92-91-90 | 
| Vaikriyak Mishrakayayoga | 4 | 25-26-29-30 | 1 | 25 | 4 | 93-92-91-90 |
| Aharakayayoga | 2 | 28-29 | 3 | 27-28-29 | 2 | 93-92 | 
| Aharak Mishrakayayoga | 2 | 28-29 | 1 | 25 | 2 | 93-92 |
| Karman Kayayoga | 6 | 23-25-26-28-29-30 | 2 | 20-21 | 93-92-91-90-88-84-82-80-79-78-77 | 

Page #653:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda - 614

**Regarding the Bond, Arising and Being States in the Veda and Kshaya Margana**

**Stri Veda**

**Meaning:** In the Veda and Kshaya Margana, the Bond State is all 21 natural states, starting from the first, and the Arising State is 9. However, in the Stri and Purusha Veda, there are not 24 natural Arising States, because this state is found only in the one-sense being. The Being State is 93, starting from the first, and there are 11 natural states. However, in the Stri and Napumsaka Veda, there are not 80 and 78 natural Being States, because the Tirthankara natural being ascends the Kshapaka series only with the Purusha Veda.

**Veda Margana Bond**

**State** | **Number** | **Purusha Veda** | **Napumsaka Veda**
------- | -------- | -------- | --------
| Bond State | 8 | 8 | 8
| Arising State | 8 | 8 | 9
| Being State | 9 | 11 | 9

**Description of the Natural States in the Bond State**

| **Purusha Veda** | **Napumsaka Veda** |
| -------- | -------- |
| 23-25-26-28-29-30-31 and 1 | 23-25-26-28-29-30-31 and 1 |

**Description of the Natural States in the Arising State**

| **Purusha Veda** | **Napumsaka Veda** |
| -------- | -------- |
| 21-25-26-27-28-29-30 and 31 | 21-24-25-26-27-28-29-30 and 31 |

**Description of the Natural States in the Being State**

| **Purusha Veda** | **Napumsaka Veda** |
| -------- | -------- |
| 93-92-91-90-88-84-82-79 and 77 | 93-92-91-90-88-84-82-80-79-78-77 |

**Veda Kshaya**

**All 22 are in the Veda Kshaya, one is in the Arising State. In the Purusha, there are 24, but not in the Napumsaka.**

**Verse 722:**

**"All 22 are in the Veda Kshaya, one is in the Arising State. In the Purusha, there are 24, but not in the Napumsaka."** 

Page #654:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-615

**Kashaya Margna**

* **Bandha** (Bondage) - 23, 25, 26, 28, 29, 30 (6 Prakruti)
* **Udaya** (Arising) - 9 (1 Prakruti)
* **Sattva** (State of Being) - 93, 92, 91, 90, 88, 84, 82, 80, 79, 78, 77 (11 Prakruti)

**Jnan Margna**

* **Kumati-Kushruta Jnan** (Ignorance)
    * **Bandha** - 23, 25, 26, 28, 29, 30 (6 Prakruti)
    * **Udaya** - 9 (1 Prakruti)
    * **Sattva** - 92, 91, 90, 88, 84, 82, 80, 79, 78, 77 (10 Prakruti)
* **Vibhang Jnan** (Discernment)
    * **Bandha** - 23, 25, 26, 28, 29, 30 (6 Prakruti)
    * **Udaya** - 29, 30 (2 Prakruti)
    * **Sattva** - 77 (1 Prakruti)
* **Mati-Shruta-Avadhi Jnan** (Knowledge of Mind, Scripture, and Perception)
    * **Bandha** - 28, 29, 30 (3 Prakruti)
    * **Udaya** - 29, 30 (2 Prakruti)
    * **Sattva** - 93, 92, 91, 90, 88, 84, 82, 80 (8 Prakruti)
* **Man:Paryaya Jnan** (Knowledge of Mind's Activities)
    * **Bandha** - 28, 29, 30 (3 Prakruti)
    * **Udaya** - 30 (1 Prakruti)
    * **Sattva** - 93, 92, 91, 90, 88, 84, 82, 80 (8 Prakruti)
* **Kevala Jnan** (Omniscience)
    * **Bandha** - None
    * **Udaya** - 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30 (7 Prakruti)
    * **Sattva** - 80, 79, 78, 77 (4 Prakruti)

**Explanation:**

This table outlines the number of Prakruti (fundamental principles) associated with Bandha, Udaya, and Sattva in different stages of spiritual development according to Jain philosophy. 

* **Bandha** refers to the karmic bonds that bind the soul to the cycle of birth and death.
* **Udaya** refers to the arising of karmic effects.
* **Sattva** refers to the state of being, or the level of spiritual development.

The table shows that as one progresses through the different stages of knowledge, the number of Prakruti associated with Bandha decreases, while the number associated with Udaya and Sattva increases. This reflects the gradual liberation of the soul from karmic bondage and its attainment of higher states of being. 

Page #655:
---------------------------
Gommatasar Karmakanda-616
Bond-Uday-Sattva-Sthana related discussion in the Gnanmarganga
Bond-Sthana-based Uday- | Uday-Sthana-based - | Sattva- | Sattva-Sthana-based Prakriti-Sthana Prakriti-number | Sthana | Prakriti number's Sthana | Number's description Number's description
Description
Gnanmarganga
Bond
Number
Number
6 | 92-91-90-88
84 and 82 Prakriti
Kumati
23-25-26- | 9 | 21-24-25-26- 28-29
27-28-29 Kushruta
and 30 Prakriti | | 30 and 31 Prakriti Vibhang
29-30 and
31 Prakriti Mati- 5 | 28-29-30-31/ 8 | 21-25-26-27- Shruta-Avadhi |
28-29-30 and 31
92-91 and 90 Pr.
8 |
93-12-91-90 80-79-78 and 77 Prakriti
,
Man:Paryaya | 5 Kevalgyan
1
30 Prakriti 8 20-21-26-27- | 6 | 28-29-30-31
978
80-79-78-77 10 and 1 Prakriti
Further, in the Samyammarganga, the discussion related to Bond-Uday and Sattva-Sthana is as follows:
Sudamiv Samayiyaduge Udao Panuvisasattvicasau ||726|| Meaning - In the Samayik-Chhedopasthapanasamyama of the Samyammarganga, the Bond and Sattva-Sthana are like Shrutagyan, and the Uday-Sthana is 25 Prakriti one and 27 etc. Prakriti form four, in this way five.
Parihare Bandhatiyan Advisacau Ya Tismadicau.
Suhume Ekko Bandho Manam Va Udayansthanani ||727|| Meaning - In the Pariharavishuddhisamyama, the Bond-Sthana is 28 etc. Prakriti form four, the Uday-Sthana is 30 Prakriti form one only, and the Sattva-Sthana is 93 etc. Prakriti form four. In the Sukshmasamparayasamyama, the Bond-Sthana is one Prakriti form, and the Uday and Sattva-Sthana are to be known as Man:Paryayagyan. 

Page #656:
---------------------------
Gommatasar Karmakanda-617.  Where bondage and arising are bound, only knowledge is the essence, but the characteristic is that the essence is also found in four forms, beginning with 93. In the restraint of the place, there are two forms, beginning with 28, two forms, beginning with 30, and four essences, beginning with 93.

In unrestraint, bondage and arising are like the knowledge of bad thoughts, and the essence is like the essence of 93.

In the path of restraint, the description of the number of essences, the number of natures, the place, the nature, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number of the place, the number
Page #657:
---------------------------
Gommatasar Karmakanda-618
Now, in Darshanmarggana, the bondage-arising and sattva-sthana are described.
The charitrad of the purusha, the bone, the accumulation of dust, and the four-fold division. ||729||
In this, the bondage of the tanmatras is due to the kilitthalesatti. Meaning - In the chakshu-achakshu darshan of Darshanmarggana, the bondage-sthana, arising-sthana, and sattva-sthana are the same as in the Purushaveda, but the special feature is that in the achakshu darshan, the arising-sthana of the 24 prakritis is also found. In the avadhi darshan and the keval darshan, the bondage-arising-sattva-sthana should be known as per the avadhi and keval jnana. ("Kilitthalesatti" in these words, the statement made about the three leshyas, Krishna etc., is called leshyamarggana.)
In Darshanmarggana, the description of the bondage-arising-sattva-sthana related to the sandrishti darshan - bondage - bondage-sthana-based arising - arising-sthana-based - sattva - sattva-sthana-based prakriti marggana sthana | prakriti - number sthana | prakriti number of | sthana | number of description
Number of description number description number chakshu darshan | 8 | 23-25-26-28-8, 21-25-26-11 93-12-91-90 29-30-31 and 1. 27-28-29
88-84-82-80
71-78 and
77 prakriti achakshu darshan | 8 | 23-25-26-28-9 21-24-25-26-11
27-28-29
30 and 31 avadhi darshan | 5 | 28-29-30-31 / 8 21-25-26-27-8 93-92-91-10
and 1 prakriti | 28-29-30 and 31 || 80-79-78 and 77 keval darshan | . .
| 20-21-26-27-| | 80-71-78 and 77 128-29-30-31
and 10 and 2
9 and 8 prakriti athanantara leshyamarggana, the bondage-arising and sattva-sthana are described.
..kilitthalesatti. Avirmanam va suhujugalu dao punveda yam va have ||730|| 

Page #658:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-619
**Verse 731:**
The binding-arising-essence places are unrestrained in the dark-blue and dove-colored inauspicious leshyas that come from the leshya-path. In the yellow (tejo) leshya, the binding place is 25-26 and 28, etc., four in number, thus six in total. The arising place is like the Purusha-veda, and the essence place is 93, etc., four in number. In the white leshya, the binding place is 28, etc., four in number, the arising place is like the Purusha-veda, and the essence place is 93, etc., four in number. In the variegated leshya, the binding-arising and essence places are like the knowledge of the limit, but the special thing is that here 20 natural arising places are also found.

**Table:**
Leshya | Path | Binding Place | Arising Place | Essence Place
------- | -------- | -------- | -------- | --------
Dark-blue, dove-colored | 6 | 23-25-26-27-28-29-30 | 9 | 21-24-25-26-27-28-29-30 | 7 | 93-92-91-90-88-84-82
Yellow | 4 | 25-26-28-29-30-31 | 8 | 21-25-26-27-28-29-30-31 | 8 | 93-92-91-90
White | 4 | 28-29-30-31 | 8 | 20-21-25-26-27-28-29-30-31 | 9 | 93-92-91-90-80-79-78-77
Variegated | 5 | 28-29-30-31 | 9 | 20-21-25-26-27-28-29-30-31 | 9 | 93-92-91-90-80-79-78-77

Page #659:
---------------------------
##  Margana

**Meaning:** In the Bhavyamargna, Bandha, Udaya, and Sattvasthana are all present. In the Abhavyamargna, Bandha and Udaya are known as Asanyamvat, and Sattvasthana is 90, 88, 84, 82, 80, 79, 78, and 77, but the Abhavyamargna has 30 Prakruti Sthana with Udyota, not 30 Kribisthana. The statement made in the words "Damivuvasame" should be understood through the Samyaktvamargna.

**Bhavyamargna:**
* Bandha-Udaya-Sattvasthana related Sandrishti (perception)

**Bhavy:**
* Gommatsar Karmakanda - 620
* Further, in the Bhavyamargna, Bandha-Udaya-Sattvasthana are mentioned.

**Abhavy:**
* **Bandha:**
    * **Sthana:**
        * **Number:** 8
    * **Description:**
        * **Prakruti-Number:** 23-25-26, 28-29-30, 31 and 1
        * **Prakruti-Number:** 23-25-26, 28-29 and 30
        * **Here, 30 Prakruti Sthana are present with Udyota.**
* **Udaya:**
    * **Sthana:**
        * **Number:** 12
    * **Description:**
        * **Prakruti-Number:** 20-21-24, 25-26-27, 28-29-30-31, 9 and 8
        * **Prakruti-Number:** 21-24-25, 26-27-28, 29-30 and 31
* **Sattvasthana:**
    * **Description:**
        * **Prakruti-Number:** 9392-91-90, 88-84-82-80, 79-78 and 77
        * **Prakruti-Number:** 90-88-84 and 82

**Now, in the Samyaktvamargna, Bandha-Udaya and Sattvasthana are mentioned.**

* **"Sudamivuvasame Bandho" || 732 ||**
* **"Udaya Igipanavinsam Navavinsatiyam Cha Padhamachau Sattam. Uvasam Iva Bandhamsa Vedagasamme Na Igibandho" || 733 ||** 

Page #660:
---------------------------
**Udaya** 21st, 25th, and 29th etc. are three **Prakruti**s, making a total of five, and **Sattva** 93rd etc. are four **Prakruti**s. **Misra** 28th, 29th, and 31st etc. are three **Prakruti**s, making a total of five, and **Bandhu** 21st, 25th, 26th, 27th, 28th, 29th, 30th, and 31st etc. are eight **Prakruti**s.

**Vedaka** **Samyaktvam** has **Bandha** similar to **Upasama** **Samyaktvam**, but the difference is that there is no **Bandha** in the first **Prakruti**. **Udaya** is similar to **Mati** **Jnana** and there are eight **Udaya**s. **Sattva** is similar to **Upasama** **Samyaktvam**.

**Kshayika** **Samyaktvam** has **Bandha**, **Udaya**, and **Sattva** similar to **Shruta** **Jnana**, with 5, 8, and 8 **Prakruti**s respectively. The difference is that the last two **Udaya**s and **Sattva**s have 20 **Prakruti**s in **Udaya**.

**Sasaadan** **Samyaktvam** has **Bandha** with three **Prakruti**s starting from 28th, **Udaya** with seven **Prakruti**s including **Aakruti** and three **Prakruti**s starting from 24th. **Sasaadan** does not occur until the 27th and 28th **Prakruti**s in **Udaya**, hence it is not mentioned. **Sattva** has only one **Prakruti** starting from 90th.

**Samyagmithyatvam** has **Bandha** with two **Prakruti**s starting from 28th, **Udaya** with three **Prakruti**s starting from 29th, and **Sattva** with two **Prakruti**s starting from 92nd and 10th. **Mithyatvam** has **Bandha**, **Udaya**, and **Sattva** similar to **Kumati** **Jnana**.

**Gommatsar Karmakanda - 621**

**Udaya** etc. and **Khadya** are similar to **Bandha** etc. and **Sudamivatti** is the last **Prakruti**. **Udaya** is 20th and **Bandha** is 28th.

**Samyaktvam - Bandha**
**Margna** **Sthana**
**Number**
**Upasama**
**Samyaktvam**
**Vedaka**
**Samyaktvam**
**Bandha** **Sthana** **Prakruti** **Number**
28-29-30-31 and 1 **Prakruti**
28-29-30
and 31
**Udaya**
**Sthana**
**Number**
5
8
**Udaya** **Sthana** **Sattva** **Prakruti** **Number**
21-25-29-30 and 31 **Prakruti**
| 21-25-26-27| 28-29-30 and 31
4
4
**Sattva** **Sthana** **Prakruti** **Number**
93-92-91 and 90
93-92-91 and 10

Page #661:
---------------------------
##  Kṣayika

**Sāsādan**
**Miśra**
**Mithyātva**
**Mārgaṇā**
**Sañjī**
5.
**Asañjī**
3
2
6
**Bandha**
**Sthāna**
**Saṅkhyā**
8
**Yogasāra Karmakāṇḍa - 622**
6
28-29-30
31 and 1
28-29 and 30
28 and 29
23-25-26
28-29 and
30 **Prakṛtik**
**Bandhasthānagat**
**Prakṛti - Saṅkhyā**
**Kā Vivaraṇa**
11
7
23-25-26 28-29 and 30 **Prakṛtik**
3
9
Now in **Sañjī Mārgaṇā**, **Bandha-Udaya** and **Sattva-Sthāna** are mentioned.
"Purisaṁ vā saṇṇīye idare kumadiṁ va ṇatthi igiṇauddī || 736 ||"
Meaning: In **Sañjī Mārgaṇā**, the mention of **Bandha-Udaya** and **Sattva-Sthāna** is similar to the Puruṣavedaka. In **Asañjī**, the three **Sthānas** of **Bandha** etc. are to be known as **Kumati-Jñāna**, but the special feature is that there is no **Sattva-Sthāna** of 91 **Prakṛtik**.
In **Sañjī Mārgaṇā**, the **Sāndṛṣṭi** of **Bandha-Udaya** and **Sattva-Sthānas**
**Udaya**
**Sthāna**
**Saṅkhyā**
23-25-26- 8
28-29-30 31 and 1
| 20-21-25-26- 10
27-28-29
30 and 39 as well as
9 and 8 **Prakṛtik**
21-24-25-26
29-30-31 Note- 27 and 28
When the time of **Udaya** arrives,
**Sāsādan** does not occur.
29-30 and 31.
| 21-24-25-26 27-28-29-30
and 31 **Prakṛtik**
1
21-25-26 27-28-29-30
and 31
2
6
**Udayasthānagat Sattva**
**Prakṛti Saṅkhyā Kā Sthāna**
**Vivaraṇa Saṅkhyā**
21-24-25
26-27-28
29-30 and 31
11
93-92-91-90 80 079-78 77
10 and 9 **Prakṛtik**
5
10 **Prakṛtik**
92 and 90 **Prakṛtik**
| 92-91-90-88 84 and 82 **Prakṛtik**
**Svasthānagat Prakṛti - Saṅkhyā Kā Vivaraṇa**
93-92-11 90-88-84-82 80-79-78 and
77 **Prakṛtik**
92-90-88
84 and 42 **Prakṛtik** 

Page #662:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-623

Further, the text discusses the bondage, arising, and sattva-sthana in the case of Ahar-margana.

**Ahar-margana**

**Meaning:** In Ahar-margana, bondage and arising are like the Na-pumsaka-veda, but the difference is that there are no 21 natural arising-sthana here. The sattva-sthana are like the Purusha-veda.

**A-ahar-margana**

**Meaning:** Bondage, arising, and sattva-sthana in A-ahar-margana are like the Karman-kaya-yoga, but the difference is that there are two natural arising-sthana of 9 and 8, and two sattva-sthana of 10 and 9, in the case of A-yoga-kevali.

Thus, the essence of bondage, arising, and the three-fold combination of all 14 marganas has been clearly explained.

**Ahar-margana: Bondage, Arising, and Sattva-sthana**

**Aharaka** (8)
**A-aharaka**

**Bondage**
**Sthana**
**Number**
**Description of Bondage-sthana-gata Prakriti-number**
**Arising**
**Sthana**
**Number**
**Description of Arising-sthana-gata Sattva-prakriti-number**
**Sattva-sthana**
**Number**
**Description of Sattva-sthana-gata Prakriti-number**
6
23-25-26-28-29-30-31 and 1
23-25-26-28-29 and 30
8
4
24-25-26-27-28-29-30 and 31
20-21-9 and 8
Here 9 and 8 are in relation to A-yoga-kevali.
11
93-92-11-10
88-84-82-80
79-78 and 77
13
93-99-11-10
88-84-82-80-79-78-77
10 and 9
Here 10 and 1 are in relation to A-yoga-kevali.

Page #663:
---------------------------
Gommatsar Karmakanda - 624
This was expounded by the glorious Sudarsana, who is capable of holding the excellent Samyakdarsana and who is capable of satisfying the Kuvalaya, by Madhavachandra, the Neminatha Tirthankara, and by the great Mahavira Tirthankara. ||739||
Meaning - This statement has been elaborated by the glorious Madhavachandra, i.e., Neminatha Tirthankara, and by the great Mahavira Tirthankara, who are capable of holding the excellent Samyakdarsana and who are capable of satisfying the earth. Or, it can also be understood that it was done by Madhavachandra and Viranandi Acharyas.
Further, in the aforementioned Trisanyoga, we will discuss by taking one as the base and two as the object. Here, first, we will discuss Bandha as the base and Udayasattva as the object in two verses:
There are nine Udayasthanas and five Sattvasthanas in the 23rd, 25th, and 26th natural Bandhasthanas. There are eight Udayasthanas and four Sattvasthanas in the 28th natural Bandhasthanas. There are nine Udayasthanas and seven Sattvasthanas in the 29th and 30th natural Bandhasthanas. There is one Udayasthana and one Sattvasthana in the 31st natural Bandhasthana. And there is one Udayasthana and eight Sattvasthanas in one natural Bandhasthana. In the Uparabandhas, i.e., the Bandharahita place, there are ten Udayasthanas and ten Sattvasthanas, as a rule. ||740||
One by one, one by one, there are one Udayasthana and one Sattvasthana. In the Uparabandhas, there are fourteen Udayasthanas and fourteen Sattvasthanas. ||741||
Meaning - In the 23rd, 25th, and 26th natural Bandhasthanas, there are nine Udayasthanas and five Sattvasthanas. In the 28th natural Bandhasthana, there are eight Udayasthanas and four Sattvasthanas. In the 29th and 30th natural Bandhasthanas, there are nine Udayasthanas and seven Sattvasthanas. In the 31st natural Bandhasthana, there is one Udayasthana and one Sattvasthana. And in one natural Bandhasthana, there is one Udayasthana and eight Sattvasthanas. In the Uparabandhas, i.e., the Bandharahita place, there are ten Udayasthanas and ten Sattvasthanas, as a rule.
Now, we will discuss the number of Prakritis in the aforementioned places of Namakarma:
In the 26th Bandha, there are 22 Udayasthanas and 31 Charimudayas. In the 28th Bandha, there are nine Udayasthanas and four Sattvasthanas. In the 29th Bandha, there are four Udayasthanas and seven Sattvasthanas. In the 30th Bandha, there are no Udayasthanas, but there are Satya and Santa. ||742||
Previously, there were no Udayasthanas in the 28th Bandha, but there were four Udayasthanas and seven Sattvasthanas in the 29th Bandha. In the 30th Bandha, there were no Udayasthanas, but there were Satya and Santa. ||743||
1. One by one, one by one, there are one Udayasthana and one Sattvasthana. In the Uparabandhas, there are fourteen Udayasthanas and fourteen Sattvasthanas. ||249|| (Pra. Pa. Sa. Pu. 404) 

Page #664:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda - 625

Thus, there are five sattva-sthana (states of being) in these three. The first sattva-sthana is the four of cidd-adi (consciousness, etc.). || 744 ||

In the upper bandha (bondage),
The sattva-sthana is self-existent,
The first sattva-sthana is also the four of cidd-adi. || 745 ||

Meaning - In the 23rd to 25th and 26th prakruti-bandha-sthana (natural bondage states), there are nine udaya-sthana (states of arising) and 92 prakruti (natural) and 10 adi-prakruti (primary nature) forms, making a total of five sattva-sthana. In the 28th prakruti-bandha-sthana, the udaya-sthana are the remaining eight out of the aforementioned nine, excluding the 24th prakruti-sthana, and the sattva-sthana are the four of 92 adi-prakruti. In the 29th and 30th prakruti-bandha-sthana, the udaya-sthana are the aforementioned nine, and the sattva-sthana are seven of 93 adi-prakruti. In the 31st prakruti-bandha-sthana, the udaya-sthana is the 30th prakruti, and the sattva-sthana is the 93rd prakruti. In the one prakruti-bandha-sthana, the udaya-sthana is the 30th prakruti, and the sattva-sthana are four of 93 adi-prakruti and four of 80 adi-prakruti, making a total of eight. In the bandha-rahita (bondage-free, i.e., upa-rat-bandha), the udaya-sthana are the remaining ten, excluding the 24th and 25th prakruti, and the sattva-sthana are also ten, consisting of four of 93 adi-prakruti and six of 80 adi-prakruti.

Special Meaning - In the three-fold combination of bandha (bondage), udaya (arising), and sattva (being), there are nine udaya-sthana and five sattva-sthana in the 23rd prakruti-bandha-sthana. This is because the 23rd prakruti-bandha is associated with eka-indriya (one sense) and apar-yapt (inadequate). Therefore, this state is bound by mithya-drishti (false belief), tri-s (three), sthavar (stationary), tir-yanch (animal), and manushya (human), excluding deva (divine) and naraki (hellish). The bandha of all tir-yanch, including eka-indriya and apar-yapt, is the 23rd prakruti. Then, the udaya is the 21st, 24th, 25th, 26th, 27th, 28th, 29th, and 30th prakruti, and the sattva is the 92nd, 90th, 88th, 84th, and 82nd prakruti. The bandha of karma-bhumij (earthly) manushya, with eka-indriya and apar-yapt, is the 23rd prakruti. Then, the udaya is the 21st, 26th, 28th, 29th, and 30th prakruti, and the sattva is the 92nd, 90th, 88th, and 84th prakruti. The 25th prakruti-bandha-sthana is associated with eka-indriya-par-yapt (one sense adequate) and tri-s-apar-yapt (three inadequate). It is bound by mithya-drishti, tir-yanch, manushya, and deva. The bandha of all tir-yanch, with eka-indriya-par-yapt and tri-s-apar-yapt, is the 25th prakruti. Then, the udaya is the 21st, 24th, 25th, 26th, 27th, 28th, 29th, and 30th prakruti, and the sattva is the 90th, 88th, 84th, and 82nd prakruti. Similarly, the bandha of manushya in the 25th prakruti is the 21st, 26th, 28th, 29th, and 30th prakruti, and the sattva is the 92nd, 90th, 88th, and 84th prakruti. In the bhava-trik (three realms) and sau-dharma-dvik (two realms of merit) deva, the bandha is the 25th prakruti, with eka-indriya-par-yapt. Then, the udaya is the 21st, 25th, 27th, 28th, and 29th prakruti, and the sattva is the 92nd and 90th prakruti.

The 26th prakruti-bandha-sthana is associated with eka-indriya-par-yapt, udyot (radiance), or a-tap (heat), and is bound by mithya-drishti, deva, manushya, and tir-yanch. In this case, there is no udaya for the 26th prakruti-sthana, which is teja-kay (fire body), vayu-kay (air body), sadharan (ordinary), sukshma (subtle), and apar-yapt (inadequate). The bandha of tir-yanch, with eka-indriya-par-yapt, udyot, and a-tap, is the 26th prakruti. 

Page #665:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-626

When there is a bondage of 26 prakritis, the uday is of 21-24-25-26-27-28-29-30 and 31 prakritis and the sattva is of 92-97-88-84 and 82 prakritis. Similarly, in humans, when there is a bondage of 26 prakritis, the uday is of 21-26-28-29 and 30 prakritis and the sattva is of 92-90-88 and 84 prakritis. In the gods of Bhavatrika and Saudharma, when there is a bondage of 26 prakritis, the uday is of 21-25-27-28 and 29 prakritis and the sattva is of 92 and 90 prakritis. Similarly, when there is a bondage of 28 prakritis, it is either hell or devagati. This bondage is done by the asanjni, sanjni, tiyanch and human mithyadristi in the paryaptakal. In the mithyatva state of the tiyanch, there is a bondage of 28 prakritis, either hell or devagati, then the uday is of 28-29-30 and 31 prakritis and the sattva is of 92-90-88 prakritis. In the sasadan, when there is a bondage of 28 prakritis with devagati, the uday is of 30 and 31 prakritis and the sattva is of 90 prakritis. In the samyagmithyatvagunasthan, when there is a bondage of 28 prakritis, it is only devagati, at that time the uday is of 30 and 31 prakritis and the sattva is of 92 and 90 prakritis. In the asanyatgunasthan, when there is a bondage of 28 prakritis with devagati, the uday is of 21-26-28-29-30 and 31 prakritis and the sattva is of 92-90 prakritis. In the deshasanyatgunasthan, when there is a bondage of 28 prakritis with devagati, the uday is of 30 and 31 prakritis and the sattva is of 92 and 90 prakritis. Those who have a sattva of 82 prakritis and are tejakaya-vayukaya, die and are born as tiyanch. In their vigrahagati or in the aparyaptakala, there is a bondage of 23-25-26-29 and 30 prakritis with tiyanch. When there is a sattva of 82 prakritis, there is no sattva of 82 prakritis when there is a bondage of 25 and 29 prakritis with manushyadvik. When the ekaindriya-vikaleindriya-jiva narakchaturshka are udvelana, they die and are born as panchendriya-paryapta tiyanch. Even in their aparyaptakala, there is a possibility of sattva of 84 prakritis. Therefore, the sattva of 82 and 84 prakritis is not mentioned when there is a bondage of 28 prakritis. In the paryaptakal of the mithyadristi human, there is a bondage of 28 prakritis with hell or devagati, then the uday is of 28-29 and 30 prakritis and the sattva is of 92-91-90 and 88 prakritis. When the sharir-paryapti is complete, there is a bondage of narakchaturshka and devchaturshka, then sattva of 88 prakritis is also found. If someone has already done the bondage of narakayu, such an asanyat is facing the second-third earth, he is mithyadristi and does a bondage of 28 prakritis with narakgati, then the uday is of 30 prakritis and the sattva is of 91 prakritis. In the sasadan gunasthan of the human, there is a bondage of 28 prakritis with devagati, then the uday is of 30 prakritis and the sattva is of 90 prakritis. In the mishra gunasthan, when there is a bondage of 28 prakritis with devagati, the uday is of 30 prakritis and the sattva is of 92 and 90 prakritis. In the asanyat gunasthan, when there is a bondage of 28 prakritis with devagati, the uday is of 21-26-28-29 and 30 prakritis and the sattva is of 90 and 92 prakritis. Here, there is no sattva of 91 prakritis, because if the bondage of narakayu has not happened before, then after the beginning of the bondage of tirthankar prakritis, they cannot be corrupted by samyaktva. The bondage of tirthankar prakritis is continuous, therefore, there is a bondage of 29 prakritis with devagati and tirthankar, not 28 prakritis. In the deshasanyat, when there is a bondage of 28 prakritis, the uday is of 30 prakritis and the sattva is of 92 and 90 prakritis. In the pramattagunasthan, when there is a bondage of 28 prakritis with devagati, the uday is of 25-27-28-29 and 30... 

Page #666:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-627

The nature of the rise and the essence of the 92nd and 90th nature is the same. In the Aprammatta Gunasthan, with the bondage of 28 natures in the Devayut, the rise is of the 30th nature and the essence is of the 92nd and 90th nature. However, in the rise of the 25th, 27th, and 29th nature, the essence is only of the 92nd nature. In the Apurvakarana Gunasthan, with the bondage of 28 natures in the Devayut, the rise and essence are of the 30th and 92nd and 90th nature respectively.

While discussing the rise and essence of the 28th nature, there is an implicit mention of the specific details. However, the author of the Prakrut Pancha Sangraha has mentioned the specific details of the rise and essence of the 28th nature in the bondage state on page 393, from verse 226 to page 377, verse 233. This is as follows:

(1) A Kshayik Samyagdristi human who binds the 28th nature, upon dying, is born in the Bhogbhumi. In the rise of the 21st and 26th nature, the bondage of the 28th nature and the essence of the 92nd or 90th nature is present.

(2) In the sixth Prammatta Samyata Gunasthan, when the rise of the 25th nature occurs during the Aharaksharir Mishrakal, and the rise of the 27th nature occurs during the Aharaksharir Paryaptikal, the bondage of the 28th nature occurs. However, the essence is only of the 92nd nature.

(3) In the rise of the 29th nature for an Asamyata Samyagdristi with the essence of the Aharakprakriti, and in the rise of the 28th nature for a Prammatta Samyata, the bondage is of the 28th nature and the essence is of the 92nd nature.

(4) From the Mithyatva Gunasthan to the Virata Virata, the fifth Gunasthan, the rise of the 30th nature and the bondage of the 28th nature have the essence of the 92nd and 90th nature.

(5) A Karmabhumi human who has already bound the Sarakayu, upon attaining Upshama or Vedak Samyaktva, binds the Tirthankara nature at the feet of the Kevali, and then attains Mithyatva, heading towards the second or third Naraka, binds the 28th nature with the Narakagati. At that time, the rise is of the 30th nature and the essence is of the 91st nature.

(6) A Mithyadristi, upon being agitated by the Devadvik, is born as a Panchendriya Tiryanch or human, and binds the 28th nature with the Narakagati. The rise is of the 30th nature and the essence is of the 88th nature.

(7) A Mithyadristi, from the Virata Virata, the fifth Gunasthan, to the Panchendriya Tiryanch, with the rise of the 31st nature, binds the 28th nature with the Narakagati. The essence is of the 92nd and 90th nature.

(8) A Mithyadristi Panchendriya Tiryanch, with the rise of the 31st nature, binds the 28th nature with the Narakagati. The essence is of the 88th nature, because it is agitated by the Devadvik. 

Page #667:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-628
29. The bondage of the 29 prakritis occurs with the two-sense organs, etc., or with the vasaparapti, or with the tiryanch or human path, or with the deva path, or with the Tirthankara. And this place is bound by the beings of all four paths. Here, in the mithyatva guna sthana of the narakas, the bondage of the 29 prakritis occurs with the five-sense organs, tiryanch, and human beings. Then the udaya is of the 21st, 25th, 27th, 28th, and 29th prakritis, and the sattva is of the 92nd, 91st, and 90th prakritis. The sattva of the 91st prakriti is possible only for the first three antarmukhurta in the three narakas of dharma, etc. In the sasadan guna sthana, the bondage of the 29 prakritis occurs in the aforementioned manner, and the udaya is of the 29th prakriti, and the sattva is of the 90th prakriti. In the mishra guna sthana, the bondage of the 29 prakritis occurs only with the human beings, and then the udaya is also of the 29th prakriti, and the sattva is of the 92nd and 90th prakritis. In the asanyata guna sthana, the bondage of the 29 prakritis also occurs only with the human beings, and then, along with the bondage of the 29th prakriti related to the dharma naraka, the udaya is of the 21st, 25th, 27th, 28th, and 29th prakritis, and the sattva is of the 92nd and 90th prakritis. In the prithvis of vansa, megha, etc., the bondage of the 29th prakriti occurs, and the udaya is of the 29th prakriti, and the sattva is of the 92nd and 90th prakritis. In the mithyadristi tiryanch, the bondage of the 29th prakriti occurs with the two-sense organs, three-sense organs, four-sense organs, and five-sense organs, and with the human beings, and the udaya is of the 21st, 14th, 29th, 26th, 25th, 28th, 29th, 30th, and 31st prakritis, and the sattva is of the 92nd, 90th, 88th, 84th, and 82nd prakritis. In the sasadan guna sthana, the bondage of the 29th prakriti occurs with the five-sense organs, tiryanch, and human beings, and the udaya is of the 21st, 24th, 26th, 30th, and 31st prakritis, and the sattva is of the 90th prakriti. Here, the udaya of the 25th, 27th, 28th, and 29th prakritis is not found. In the mishra, asanyata, and deshasanyata guna sthana, the bondage of the 29th prakriti does not occur, because the vyuchchitti of the bondage of the tiryanch and human paths occurs in the sasadan guna sthana. In the mithyadristi human beings, the bondage of the 29th prakriti occurs with the two-sense organs, three-sense organs, four-sense organs, five-sense organs, tiryanch, or human path, and the udaya is of the 21st, 26th, 28th, 29th, and 30th prakritis, and the sattva is of the 92nd, 90th, 88th, and 84th prakritis. Here, the tejakaya and vayukaya are not born in the human beings, so the sattva of the 82nd is not said. The being who has bound the narakaya in the past, when going to the naraka path with the bondage of the Tirthankara prakriti, in the mithyatva state, with the human path, the bondage of the 29th prakriti occurs, and the udaya is of the 21st, 25th, 27th, 28th, and 29th prakritis, and the sattva is of the 91st prakriti. In the sasadan guna sthana, the bondage of the 29th prakriti occurs with the five-sense organs, tiryanch, or human beings, and the udaya is of the 21st, 26th, and 30th prakritis, and the sattva is of the 90th prakriti. In the mishra guna sthana, the bondage of the 29th prakriti does not occur. In the asanyata guna sthana, the bondage of the 29th prakriti occurs with the deva and Tirthankara, and the udaya is of the 21st, 26th, 28th, 29th, and 30th prakritis, and the sattva is of the 93rd and 91st prakritis. In the deshasanyata guna sthana, the bondage of the 29th prakriti occurs in the same way, and the udaya is of the 30th prakriti, and the sattva is of the 93rd and 91st prakritis. In the pramatta guna sthana, the bondage of the 29th prakriti occurs in the same way, and the udaya is of the 25th, 27th, 28th, 29th, and 30th prakritis, and the sattva is of the 93rd and 91st prakritis. In the aprammatta and apurvakarana guna sthana, the bondage of the 29th prakriti occurs in the aforementioned manner, and the udaya is of the 30th prakriti, and the sattva is of the 93rd and 91st prakritis. In the deva path, from the bhavanatrik to the kalpavasidevas of the sahasrar svarga, in the mithyat
Page #668:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda 629

And 29 nature-form arising with sattva is of 90 natures. In the mixed-quality state, with humans, 29 natures in bondage, 29 natures arising, and sattva of 92 and 90 natures is to be known. In the unbridled-quality state, with humans, 29 natures in bondage, arising is of 29 natures in the Bhavanatridevas, and in other devas, 21-25-27-28 and 29 natures, and sattva is found of all 92 and 90 natures. From the Anatasvarga upwards to the Vaiveyaka, in the devas of the false-belief quality state, with humans, 29 natures in bondage, 21-25-27-28 and 29 natures arising, and sattva of 92 and 90 natures is found. In the Sasadanagunasthan, 21-25 and 29 natures arising with 29 natures in bondage, and sattva of 90 natures. In the mixed-quality state, with 29 natures in the aforementioned bondage, arising of 29 natures, and sattva of 92 and 90 natures. In the unbridled-quality state, with this same 29 nature-form bondage, arising of 21-25-27-28 and 29 natures, and sattva of 92 and 90 natures. In the unbridled-quality state of the Anudish and Anuttaravimanas, with humans, 29 natures in bondage, 21-25-27-28 and 29 natures arising, and sattva of 92 and 90 natures.

The bondage state of 30 natures is with the Trasaparyaptaudyota, Tiryanchagati, or with humans, the Tirthankara, or with the devagati, the Aharakadvika. And its bondage is to all four types of beings. In the hell-gati, in the false-belief and Sasadanagunasthan, with the Panchendriya Tiryancha Udyota, 30 natures in bondage, in the false-belief quality state, arising of 21-25-27-28 and 29 natures, and sattva of 92 and 90 natures, and in the Sasadanagunasthan, arising of 29 natures, and sattva of 90 natures. In the mixed-quality state, there is no bondage of 30 natures. In the unbridled-quality state, with humans, the Tirthankara, 30 natures in bondage, in the Gharmanaraka, arising of 21-25-27-28 and 29 natures, and sattva of 91 natures. In the Vansa-Megha Naraka, arising of 29 natures, and sattva of 91 natures. In the Anjanadi, there is no such bondage. In the Mithyadrishti Tiryanchas, with the Udyota, 30 natures in bondage, arising of 21-24-25-26-27-28-29-30 and 31 natures, and sattva of 92-90-88-84 and 82 natures. In the Sasadanagunasthan, with the Panchendriya Tiryancha Udyota, 30 natures in bondage, arising of 21-24-26-30 and 31 natures, and sattva of 90 natures. Here, in the mixed and other three quality states, there is no such bondage. In the Mithyadrishti humans, with the Dvi-indriya, Tri-indriya, Chatur-indriya, Panchendriya Tiryancha, and Udyota, 30 natures in bondage, arising of 21-26-28-29 and 30 natures, and sattva of 92-90-88 and 84 natures. In the Sasadanagunasthan, with the Tiryancha and Udyota, 30 natures in bondage, arising of 21-26 and 30 natures, and sattva of 10 natures is to be known. From the mixed to the Pramatta, in the four quality states, there is no bondage of 30 natures. In the Aprammatta and Apurvakaranagunasthan, with the devagati and Aharakadvika, 30 natures in bondage, arising of 30 natures, and sattva of 92 natures. From the Bhavanatrika to the Sahasrarasvarga, in the devas, with the Tiryancha Udyota, 30 nature-form bondage, in the false-belief quality state, arising of 21-25-27-28 and 29 natures, and sattva of 90 and 92 natures. In the Sasadanagunasthan, arising of 21-25 and 29 natures, and sattva of 90 natures. In the Bhavanatridevas of the mixed and unbridled-quality states, there is no bondage of 30 natures. 

Page #669:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda - 630

There are 29 Prakṛtis found in the human realm, along with the 29 Prakṛtis of the gods in the Asanyata Gunasthanas, up to the Maharasvarga.  The 30 Prakṛtis of the gods in the Asanyata Gunasthanas, up to the Maharasvarga, have bondage.  The Udya Prakṛtis are 21, 25, 27, 28, and 29, and the Sattvas are 93 and 91.  From the Anatasvarga upwards, to the Graiveyakas, there is no bondage in the three Gunasthanas of Mithyatva, Sasadan, and Misra.  From the Anatasvarga to the Sarvarthasiddhi, the 30 Prakṛtis of the gods in the Asanyata Gunasthanas have bondage.  The Udya Prakṛtis are 21, 25, 27, 28, and 29, and the Sattvas are 93 and 91.

The 31 Prakṛtis of the gods in the Aharaka and Tīrthankara realms, along with the 31 Prakṛtis of the gods in the Aprammatta and Apūrvakaraṇa Gunasthanas, have bondage.  The Udya Prakṛtis are 30, and the Sattvas are 93.  In the seventh part of the Apūrvakaraṇa and the Anivṛttikaraṇa Gunasthanas, the 1 Prakṛti of Yasaskīrti has bondage.  The Udya Prakṛti is 30, and the Sattvas are 93, 92, 91, 90, 80, 71, 78, and 77.  However, in the seventh part of the Apūrvakaraṇa, the Sattvas of the 80 and other Prakṛtis are not present.  In the Sūkṣma Sāmprāya Gunasthanas, the 1 Prakṛti of Yasaskīrti has bondage.  The Udya Prakṛti is 30, and the Sattvas are 93, 92, 91, 90, 80, 79, 78, and 77.  In the Upasānta Kaṣāya Gunasthanas, there is no bondage, but the Udya Prakṛtis are 30, and the Sattvas are 93, 92, 91, and 90.  In the Kṣīṇa Kaṣāya Gunasthanas, the Udya Prakṛtis are 30, and the Sattvas are 80, 79, 78, and 77.  In the Sāyoga Kevali's realm, the Udya Prakṛtis are 30 and 31, and the Sattvas are 80, 79, 78, and 77.  In the Samudghāta Kevali's realm, the Udya Prakṛtis are 20, 21, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, and 31, and the Sattvas are 80, 79, 78, and 77.  In the Ayogi Gunasthanas, the Udya Prakṛtis are 9 and 8, and the Sattvas are 80, 79, 78, 77, 10, and 9.

1. See Gommatasara Karmakanda, verses 271 and 276. 

Page #670:
---------------------------
............................ Gommatasara Karmakanda-631
  Description of the proximity of the three-fold conjunction of the Adhikarana-rupa Bandha-sthana and the Adhey-rupa Udaya-Sattva-sthana, related to the destruction of the three-fold conjunction -
Adhikarana
Adhey
Bandha-sthana
Udaya
Description of the Udaya-sthana-gata Prakriti
Sattva-sthana
Description of the number of Sattva-sthana-gata Prakriti
Number of Sthana
23 Prakriti
21-24-25-26-27
28-29-30 and 31
92-90-88-84 and 82 Prakriti
25 Prakriti
21-24-25-26-27
28-29-30 and 31
26 Prakriti
21-24-25-26-27
28-29-30 and 31
28 Prakriti
|
8
21-25-26-27-28
29-30 and 31
92-90-88-84
and 82 Prakriti 92-90-88-84 and 82 Prakriti 92-91-90 and 88 Prakriti 93-92-91
90-88-84 and 82 Prakriti
29 Prakriti
21-24-25-26-27
28-29-30 and 31
30 Prakriti
21-24-25-26-27
28-29-30 and 31
93-12-91-90
88-84 and 82 Prakriti 93 Prakriti
30 Prakriti 30 Prakriti
93-92-91-90
80-71-78 and 77
Uparata-bandha
20-21-26-27-28- - 29-30-31-9 and 8
93-92-91-90. 80-79-78-77
10 and 9 Prakriti 

Page #671:
---------------------------
## Gommatasara Karmakanda - 632

Further, considering the basis of the उदयस्थान (Udayasthan) and the आधेय (Adhey) of the बन्ध (Bandha) and सत्त्वस्थान (Sattvasthan), it is stated:

**बीसादिसु बंधंसा णभदु छण्णव पणपणं च छसत्तं । छण्णव छड दुसु छहस अट्ठदसं छकछक्क णभति दुसु ||७४६ ||**

**Meaning:** In the उदयस्थान (Udayasthan) of 20 and onwards, the बन्ध (Bandha) and सत्त्वस्थान (Sattvasthan) are as follows:

* In the उदयस्थान (Udayasthan) of 20, the बन्ध (Bandha) is 0 and the सत्त्वस्थान (Sattvasthan) is 2.
* In the उदयस्थान (Udayasthan) of 21, the बन्ध (Bandha) is 6 and the सत्त्वस्थान (Sattvasthan) is 9.
* In the उदयस्थान (Udayasthan) of 24, the बन्ध (Bandha) is 5 and the सत्त्वस्थान (Sattvasthan) is 5.
* In the उदयस्थान (Udayasthan) of 25, the बन्ध (Bandha) is 6 and the सत्त्वस्थान (Sattvasthan) is 7.
* In the उदयस्थान (Udayasthan) of 26, the बन्ध (Bandha) is 6 and the सत्त्वस्थान (Sattvasthan) is 9.
* In the उदयस्थान (Udayasthan) of 27 and 28, the बन्ध (Bandha) is 6 and the सत्त्वस्थान (Sattvasthan) is 8.
* In the उदयस्थान (Udayasthan) of 29, the बन्ध (Bandha) is 6 and the सत्त्वस्थान (Sattvasthan) is 10.
* In the उदयस्थान (Udayasthan) of 30, the बन्ध (Bandha) is 8 and the सत्त्वस्थान (Sattvasthan) is 10.
* In the उदयस्थान (Udayasthan) of 31, the बन्ध (Bandha) is 6 and the सत्त्वस्थान (Sattvasthan) is 6.
* In the उदयस्थान (Udayasthan) of 9 and 8, there is no बन्ध (Bandha) and the सत्त्वस्थान (Sattvasthan) is 3.

Now, the explanation of the above statement is given in 6 verses:

**बीसुदये बंधो ण हि उणसीदीसत्तसत्तरी सत्तं । इगिवीसे तेवीसप्पहुदीती संतया बंधा || ७४७ ।।**

**Meaning:** In the उदयस्थान (Udayasthan) of 20, there is no बन्ध (Bandha), and the सत्त्वस्थान (Sattvasthan) is 2. From 21 to 23, the बन्ध (Bandha) is 6.

**सत्तं तिणउदिपहुदिसीदंता अट्ठसत्तरी य हवे । चवीसे पढमतियं णववीसं तीसयं बंधो ॥ ७४८ ॥**

**Meaning:** The सत्त्वस्थान (Sattvasthan) is 9 in 21, 5 in 22, and 7 in 23. The बन्ध (Bandha) is 5 in 24, 6 in 25, and 8 in 26.

**बाणउदी उदिचऊ सत्तं पणछस्सगट्टणववीसे । बंधा आदिमछकं पढमिल्लं सत्तयं सन्तं ॥ ७४९ ॥**

**Meaning:** The सत्त्वस्थान (Sattvasthan) is 9 in 27, 8 in 28, and 10 in 29. The बन्ध (Bandha) is 6 in 27, 28, and 29.

**ते गवसगसदरिजुदा आदिमछस्सीदिअट्ठसदरीहिं । णवसत्तसत्तरीहिं सीदिचउक्केहिं सहिदाणि ।। ७५० ॥**

**Meaning:** The सत्त्वस्थान (Sattvasthan) is 10 in 30, 6 in 31, and 3 in 9 and 8.

**तीसे अट्ठवि बंधो ऊणतीसं व होदि सत्तं तु । इगितीसे तेवीसप्पहूदीतीसंतयं बंधो ।। ७५१ ।।**

**Meaning:** The बन्ध (Bandha) is 8 in 30, and the सत्त्वस्थान (Sattvasthan) is 10 in 30. The बन्ध (Bandha) is 6 in 31.

**सत्तं दुणउदिणउदीतिय सीदडहत्तरी य णवगडे । बंधो ण सीदिपहुदीसुसमविसमं सत्तमुद्धिं ॥ ७५२ ।।**

**Meaning:** The सत्त्वस्थान (Sattvasthan) is 3 in 9 and 8. The बन्ध (Bandha) is not present in 9 and 8. The सत्त्वस्थान (Sattvasthan) is 2 in 20, 9 in 21, 5 in 22, 7 in 23, 5 in 24, 7 in 25, 9 in 26, 8 in 27, 8 in 28, 10 in 29, 10 in 30, and 6 in 31. 

Page #672:
---------------------------
## Gommatasara Karmakanda-633

**Meaning:**

* There is no bondage in the 20th natural state of arising. The soul (Sattva) is in the 79th and 77th natural states.
* In the 21st natural state of arising, there are 6 bondage states from the 23rd to the 30th natural states, and the soul (Sattva) is in the 93rd to 80th natural states, and also in the 78th natural state, making a total of 9.
* Here, within the 21st natural state of arising, there is also no bondage for the Tirthankara-freed Kevali.
* In the 24th natural state of arising, there are 3 bondage states from the beginning, and 29th and 30th natural states, making a total of 5 bondage states. The soul (Sattva) is in the 92nd natural state and 90th and other natural states, making a total of 5.
* In the 25th, 26th, 27th, 28th, and 29th natural states of arising, there are 6 arising states from the 23rd natural state onwards, and the soul (Sattva) is in the 25th natural state from the beginning, 7 in the 26th natural state from the beginning, and 79th and 77th natural states, making a total of 9, 6 in the 27th natural state from the beginning, and 80th and 78th natural states, making a total of 8, 6 in the 28th natural state from the beginning, and 79th and 77th natural states, making a total of 8, 6 in the 29th natural state from the beginning, and 80th and other natural states, making a total of 10.
* In the 30th natural state of arising, there are 8 bondage states and the soul (Sattva) is in 10 states, the same as the 29th natural state.
* In the 31st natural state of arising, there are 6 bondage states from the 23rd to the 30th natural states, and the soul (Sattva) is in the 92nd natural state, 90th and other natural states, making a total of 3, and 80th, 78th natural states, making a total of 6.
* In the 9th and 8th natural states of arising, there is no bondage. From the 80th and other natural states, 3 states are in the 9th natural state, and 3 states are in the 8th natural state.

**Special Meaning:**

* The 20th natural state of arising occurs in the liberation of a non-Tirthankara Kevali. There is no bondage here, and the soul (Sattva) is in the 79th and 77th natural states.
* The 21st natural state of arising occurs in the liberation and absorption of a Tirthankara, and in the liberation of the world. There is no bondage here, the soul (Sattva) is in the 80th and 78th natural states, and the 21st natural state of arising occurs in the four gatis (states of existence) in the disintegration period, with the order of occurrence.
* In the hell beings of the three earths, Dharma, etc., who are in the Mithyatva-guna-sthana (state of false belief), the 21st natural state of arising has bondage in the 29th natural state with five-sense-endowed Tiryancha (animals) or humans, or in the 30th natural state with Tiryancha-udyota (animal-like beings), and the soul (Sattva) is in the 92nd, 91st, and 90th natural states.
* There is no 21st natural state of arising in the Sasadan and Misra-guna-sthana (states of mixed belief). In the Asanyata-guna-sthana (state of unbridled belief), the 21st natural state of arising occurs only in the Dharma hell. Here, the bondage is in the 29th natural state with humans, and in the 30th natural state with Tirthankaras, and the soul (Sattva) is in the 92nd, 91st, and 90th natural states.
* In the three hells, Anjana, etc., the 21st natural state of arising of the Mithyatva-drishti (false belief) hell beings has bondage in the 29th natural state with five-sense-endowed Tiryancha or humans, or in the 30th natural state with Tiryancha-udyota, and the soul (Sattva) is in the 92nd and 90th natural states.
* There is no 21st natural state of arising in the Sasadan, etc., three guna-sthana (states of belief) of the Anjana, etc., earths.
* In the Mithyatva-guna-sthana of the Tiryancha, the 21st natural state of arising has bondage in the 23rd, 25th, 26th, 29th, and 30th natural states, and the soul (Sattva) is in the 92nd, 90th, 88th, 84th, and 82nd natural states.
* In the Sasadan-guna-sthana, the 21st natural state of arising has bondage in the 29th natural state with five-sense-endowed Tiryancha and humans, or in the 30th natural state with Tiryancha-udyota, and the soul (Sattva) is in the 90th natural state.
* There is no 21st natural state of arising in the Misra and Desa-sanyata-guna-sthana (states of mixed and restrained belief).
* In the Asanyata-guna-sthana, the 21st natural state of arising has bondage in the 28th natural state with Devas (gods), and the soul (Sattva) is in the 92nd and 90th natural states.
* In the Mithyatva-guna-sthana of humans, the 21st natural state of arising has... 

Page #673:
---------------------------
## Gommatasara Karmakanda-634

**Chapter 23-25-26-29 and 30:**

The **sattva** with **bandha** of 92-90-88 and 84 **prakriti** are due to the **prakriti** of 23-25-26-29 and 30. In the **Sāsādanaguṇasthāna**, the **sattva** with **bandha** of 90 **prakriti** is due to the **prakriti** of 29 with **pañcendriya-tiryañc** and **manushya** and 30 with **tiryañc-udyota**. In the **Miśraguṇasthāna**, there is no **udaya** of 21 **prakriti**. In the **Asan̄yata-guṇasthāna**, the **sattva** with **bandha** of 93-92-91 and 90 **prakriti** is due to the **prakriti** of 28 with **deva** and 29 with **deva-tīrthaṅkara** in the **udaya** of 21 **prakriti**. There is no **udaya** of 21 **prakriti** in **Deśasan̄yatā** etc.

In the **Devargāta**, in the **bhavanatrikdeva** and the **kalpavāsini devī** with **mithyātva-guṇasthāna**, the **sattva** with **bandha** of 92 and 90 **prakriti** is due to the **prakriti** of 25-26-29 and 30 in the **udaya** of 21 **prakriti**. In the **Sāsādanaguṇasthāna**, the **sattva** with **bandha** of 90 **prakriti** is due to the **prakriti** of 29 with **manushya** and 30 with **tiryañc-udyota** in the **udaya** of 21 **prakriti**. There is no such **udaya-sthāna** in the **Miśra-bha-san̄yata-guṇasthāna**.

In the **Mithyātva-guṇasthāna** of the **Saudharma-yugal**, the **sattva** with **bandha** of 92 and 90 **prakriti** is due to the **prakriti** of 25-26-29 and 30 in the **udaya** of 21 **prakriti**. In the **Sāsādanaguṇasthāna**, the **sattva** with **bandha** of 90 **prakriti** is due to the **prakriti** of 29 with **tiryañc** and **manushya** and 30 with **tiryañc-udyota** in the **udaya** of 21 **prakriti**. There is no **udaya-sthāna** of 21 **prakriti** in the **Miśraguṇasthāna**.

In the **Asan̄yata-guṇasthāna**, know that the **sattva** with **bandha** of 93-92-91 and 90 **prakriti** is due to the **prakriti** of 29 with **manushya** and 30 with **manushya-tīrthaṅkara** in the **udaya** of 21 **prakriti**.

Further, in the 10 **svargas** up to **Sahasrāra-svarga**, there is **udaya** of the **sthāna** of 21 **prakriti** in the **Mithyātva-guṇasthāna**. Then, the **sattva** of 92 and 90 **prakriti** is found with **bandha** of 29 **prakriti** with **tiryañc** and **manushya** and 30 **prakriti** with **tiryañc-udyota**. Know the statements related to the **Sāsādan** and **Asan̄yata-guṇasthāna** as in the statement of the **Saudharma-yugal** mentioned earlier. There is no **udaya** of 21 **prakriti** in the **Miśraguṇasthāna**.

From **Ānata-svarga** upwards to **Uparimagraiveyak** in the **udaya** of 21 **prakriti**, the **sattva** with **bandha** of 92 and 90 **prakriti** is due to the **prakriti** of 29 with **manushya** in the **Mithyātva-guṇasthāna**. In the **Sāsādanaguṇasthāna**, the **sattva** with **bandha** of 90 **prakriti** is due to the **prakriti** of 29 with **manushya**. There is no **udaya-sthāna** of 21 **prakriti** in the **Miśraguṇasthāna**. In the **Asan̄yata-guṇasthāna**, the **sattva** of 93-92-91 and 90 **prakriti** is found with **bandha** of 29 **prakriti** with **manushya** and 30 **prakriti** with **manushya-tīrthaṅkara**.

In the **Asan̄yata-guṇasthāna** related to **Navānudisa** and the five **Anuttara-vimāna**, there are four **sattva-sthāna** of 93 etc. **prakriti** with **bandha** of 29 **prakriti** with **manushya-gati** and 30 **prakriti** with **manushya-tīrthaṅkara**.

**Chapter 24:**

The **udaya-sthāna** of 24 **prakriti** is only for the **aparyāpta-ekendriya-mithyādṛṣṭi-jīva**. Here, in the **udaya** of 24 **prakriti**, the **sattva** of 92-90-88-84 and 82 **prakriti** is due to the **bandha** of 23-25-26-29 and
Page #674:
---------------------------
## Gommatasara Karmakanda-635

**Knowing:** In the hells of Vansa, Megha, etc., there is no Asanvat Gungalyan in the extreme state, because Samyaktva arises only when the body is complete. There are no other Gunasthanas (Sasan, Misra) in the incomplete time of the Narakis. In the 25 natural upadayas of the Ekendriya beings, the Sattvas are 92, 90, 88, 84, and 82 with the 23rd, 25th, 26th, 29th, and 30th natural bandhas. The 25 natural upadayas do not occur in the Trasatiryancha Jivs, because they only experience the 26th natural upadaya with Anopan and Sanhanan. The human beings in the Pramattagunasthan are not able to perform Sanhanan in the Aharaksharir, therefore they experience the 25th natural upadaya with Angopalan. Their Sattvas are 93 and 92 with the 28th natural bandha with Devas and the 29th natural bandha with Devagati and Tirthankara. The Devas experience the 25th natural upadaya. Just as the bandha and sattva are mentioned in the 21st natural upadaya, similarly, one should know the bandha and sattva here. The 26th natural upadaya occurs in the Trasatiryanchas with Labdhyaparyapti and Nirvrittyaparyapti, along with Sanhanan. Here, in the Mithyatvagunasthan, there are four Sattvas with the 23rd, 25th, 26th, 29th, and 30th natural bandhas in the 26th natural upadaya, which are 92, 90, 88, 84, and 82. In the Ekendriya Mithyadristi, the 26th natural upadaya occurs with Udyot or Atap in the body completion, or with Ucchvas in the Paryaptajiv with Ucchvas (and without Atap and Udyot). The Sattvas are 92, 90, 88, 84, and 82 with the 23rd, 25th, 26th, 29th, and 30th natural bandhas. There is no 26th natural upadaya in the Sasanagunasthan, because the Sasanakala ends in the 24th natural upadaya before the upadaya of this sthana. In the Panchendriya Tiryancha, the 26th natural upadaya occurs in the Sasanagunasthan, and the Sattvas are 90 with the 29th and 30th natural bandhas. The 28th natural bandha does not occur, as per the saying "Michchaduge Devachaun". There is no 26th natural upadaya in the Misragunasthan. In the Asanvatgunasthan, the 26th natural upadaya occurs with the 28th natural bandha with Devagati, and the Sattvas are 92 and 90. There is no 26th natural upadaya in the Deshasanvatgunasthan. The 26th natural upadaya occurs in the human beings. Here, in the Mithyatvagunasthan, the Sattvas are 92, 90, 88, and 84 with the 23rd, 25th, 26th, 29th, and 30th natural bandhas. In the Sasanagunasthan, the Sattvas are 90 with the 29th natural bandha with Tiryancha or Manushya Gati, and the 30th natural bandha with Tiryancha and Udyot. There is no such upadaya in the Misragunasthan. In the Asanvatgunasthan, the 28th natural bandha occurs with Devagati, and the 29th natural bandha occurs with Devagati and Tirthankara. The Sattvas are 93, 92, 99, and 90. This upadaya does not occur in the Deshasanvat, etc., Gunasthanas. In the Kapatsamudghat of the Kevali without Tirthankara, the 26th natural upadaya occurs without bandha, but the Sattvas are 79 and 77.

The 27th natural upadaya occurs in the body completion related to the three gatis, and in the Ekendriya with Ucchvasaparyapti in the Tiryanchagati. Where the 27th natural upadaya occurs, in the Mithyatvagunasthan of the three hells of Gharmad, etc., the bandha is 29 with Tiryancha or Manushya Gati, and 30 with Tiryancha and Udyot. The Sattvas are 92 and 90. Here, the Sattvas with Tirthankara are not possible, because the Naraki Mithyadristi attains Samyaktva with Tirthankara Sattvas after the body completion. In the Sasan, etc., Gunasthanas... 

Page #675:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda - 636

This is not the place of arising, but in the hell of Gharmanarka, the place of the un-controlled qualities is 27 natural arising, with human existence 29 and human existence and Tirthankara 30 natural bondage, with 92, 91 and 90 natural sattva. In the lineage of Megha, the bondage is 30 natural with human existence and Tirthankara, along with others. And in the three hells of Anjanadi, in the state of false belief, the bondage is 27 natural arising, with Tiryancha or human existence 29 and Tiryancha - Udyota 30 natural. And the sattva is 92 and 90 natural. In the earth of Maghavi, know that the sattva is 92 and 90 natural, with Tiryancha existence 29 and Tiryancha Udyota 30 natural bondage. Here, in the places of Sasadanadi qualities, this is not the place of arising. In the case of one-sense beings, with inhalation and exhalation, either heat or Udyota combined, there is an arising of 27 natural. Then, with 23-25-26-29 and 30 natural bondage, the sattva is 92-90-88 and 84 natural. In the case of other one-sense beings, without Tejakaya and Vayukaya, in the time of sufficient breath, there is bondage of human duality. Then, the sattva place of 82 natural is not possible. In the case of those with a food body, in the 27 natural arising, with divine existence 28 and divine existence and Tirthankara 29 natural bondage, the sattva is 93 and 92 natural. In the opening of the doors of the Tirthankara, in the 27 natural arising, there is no bondage, and the sattva is 80 and 78 natural. In the case of the Bhavanatrikdeva and Kalpavasini Devis, in the place of false belief qualities, in the 27 natural arising, with 25-26 and Tiryancha or human existence 29 and Tiryancha - Udyota 30 natural bondage, the sattva is 92 and 90 natural. Here, in the places of Sasadanadi qualities, this is not the place of arising. The absence of the Sasadana quality place is said because, in the time of sufficient body, the state of false belief is attained, leaving the Sasadana quality place. Know that the bondage and sattva in the 27 natural arising in the Saudharma couple, with false belief, is like the Bhavanatrik. Here, in the Sasadana and mixed quality places, this is not the place of arising. In the place of un-controlled qualities, in the 27 natural arising, with human existence 29 and human existence and Tirthankara 30 natural bondage, the sattva is 93, 92, 91 and 10 natural. Further, in the 10 heavens up to the Sahasraraswarga, in the 27 natural arising of the false believer, with Tiryancha or human existence 29 and Tiryancha - Udyota 30 natural bondage, the sattva is 92 and 90 natural. This is not the place of arising in the Sasadana and mixed quality places. In the place of un-controlled qualities, the complete description of bondage and sattva in the 27 natural arising is the same as the Saudharma couple. From the Anataswarga upwards to the Mayaveyakalpa, in the place of false belief qualities, in the 27 natural arising, with human existence 29 natural bondage, the sattva is 92-90 natural. In their place of un-controlled qualities, and in the un-controlled beings of the Navanudish and Anuttaravimana, while there is a 27 natural arising, with human existence 29 and human existence and Tirthankara 30 natural bondage, the sattva is 93, 92, 91 and 90 natural.

The 28 natural arising occurs in the time of sufficient body for Tiryancha and human beings, and in the time of sufficient breath for the gods and hell beings. Where there is a 28 natural arising, in the hell of Gharmanarka for the hell beings, with false belief, the bondage is 29 natural with Tiryancha or human existence, and 30 natural with Tiryancha - Udyota, with 92 and 90 natural sattva. Here, 91 natural sattva is not found, because... 

Page #676:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-637: A being with the nature of a Tirthankara, even when in the hell of Dharmanarka, does not become corrupted from Samyaktva. It does not have an उदयस्थान (place of origin) in the Sasadan and Misra Gunasthanas. In the Asanyata Gunasthanas, it has 28 natural उदयस्थानs, with 29 natural बन्ध (bondage) with human birth, and 30 natural बन्ध with human birth and Tirthankara, resulting in 92, 91, and 90 natural सत्त्व (being).

In the Mithyatva Gunasthanas of the Vansa, Megha, and Prithvi hells, the statement regarding बन्ध and सत्त्व related to the 28 natural उदयस्थानs is similar to that of Dharmanarka, but they also have 91 natural सत्त्व. It does not have an उदयस्थान in the Sasadan and Misra Gunasthanas. In Asanyata, the बन्ध is 30 with human birth and Tirthankara, and the सत्त्व is 91.

Further, in the Mithyatva Gunasthanas of the three hells of Anjana and others, the statement regarding बन्ध and सत्त्व related to the 28 natural उदयस्थानs is similar to that of Dharmanarka, but here, it does not have an उदयस्थान in the three Gunasthanas of Sasadan and others.

In the Mithyatva Gunasthanas of the hell called Maaghavi, while there are 28 natural उदयस्थानs, there is 29 natural बन्ध with Tiryancha birth, and 30 natural बन्ध with Tiryancha birth and Udyota, resulting in 92 and 90 natural सत्त्व. However, it does not have an उदयस्थान in the Sasadan and other Gunasthanas.

In the Mithyatva Gunasthanas, while there are 28 natural उदयस्थानs for Tiryanchas, there is 23, 25, 26, 28, 29, and 30 natural बन्ध, resulting in 92, 90, 88, and 84 natural सत्त्व. It does not have an उदयस्थान in the Sasadan and Misra Gunasthanas.

In the Asanyata Tiryancha of the Bhogabhumij, while there are 28 natural उदयस्थानs, there is 28 natural बन्ध with Deva birth, resulting in 92 and 10 natural सत्त्व. It does not have an उदयस्थान in the Asanyata and Deshasanyata Gunasthanas of the Karmabhumij.

In the Mithyatva Gunasthanas, the statement regarding बन्ध and सत्त्व related to the 28 natural उदयस्थानs for humans is similar to that of Tiryanchas. It does not have an उदयस्थान in the Sasadan and Misra Gunasthanas. In the Asanyata Gunasthanas, while there are 28 natural उदयस्थानs, there is 28 natural बन्ध with Deva birth, and 29 natural बन्ध with Deva birth and Tirthankara, resulting in 93, 92, 91, and 90 natural सत्त्व. It does not have an उदयस्थान in the Deshasanyata Gunasthanas.

In the Ucchvasa Paryapti of the Aharakaya Yoga, while there are 28 natural उदयस्थानs, there is 28 natural बन्ध with Deva birth, and 29 natural बन्ध with Deva birth and Tirthankara, resulting in 93 and 92 natural सत्त्व.

In the Audarikakaya Yoga of the Dandasamudghata without a Tirthankara, while there are 28 natural उदयस्थानs, there is no बन्ध, but there is 79 and 77 natural सत्त्व.

In the 28 natural उदयस्थानs, the बन्ध and सत्त्व positions mentioned for Devas in the 27 natural उदयस्थानs should be understood here as well.

The 29 natural उदयस्थान for Narakas occurs during the Bhasha Paryapti period with a bad voice.

In the Mithyatva Gunasthanas of all Narakas, while there are 29 natural उदयस्थानs, there is 29 natural बन्ध with Tiryancha or human birth, and 30 natural बन्ध with Tiryancha and Udyota, resulting in 92 and 90 natural सत्त्व. A special point here is that there is no बन्ध with human birth in the Maaghavi hell, and in the first Antarmukhurta of the second and third hells, there is also 91 natural सत्त्व.

In the Sasadan Gunasthanas, while there are 29 natural उदयस्थानs, the बन्ध is similar to that of the Mithyatva Gunasthanas, and the सत्त्व is 90 natural. In the Misra Gunasthanas, there is 29 natural बन्ध with human birth, resulting in 92 and 90 natural सत्त्व. In the Asanyata Gunasthanas, in the Dharmanarka, Vansa, and Megha hells, there is 29 natural बन्ध with human birth, and 30 natural बन्ध with human birth and Tirthankara, resulting in 92, 91, and 90 natural सत्त्व. In the remaining four hells of Anjana and others, there are 29 natural उदयस्थानs. 

Page #677:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-638:

While a human being has 29 natural karmic bonds and 92 and 90 natural karmic satvas, a Tiryancha (non-human being) has 29 natural karmic bonds with udyota (effort) and 92, 90, 88, and 84 natural karmic satvas during the time of its body's completion. This udayasthan (state of arising) is not found in the Sasadan and Misra Gunasthanas (states of good and mixed conduct). In the Bhogbhumij Asayata (state of non-restraint in the realm of enjoyment), the karmic bond is 28 natural karmic bonds and the satva is 92 and 90 natural karmic satvas. This udayasthan is not found in the Karmabhumij Asayata and Deshasanyata Gunasthanas (states of non-restraint in the realm of karma and restraint in the realm of conduct).

During the time of a human's breath completion, there is an arising of 29 natural karmic bonds with udyota. The karmic bonds and satvas related to mithyatva (false belief) are the same as those of a Tiryancha. This udayasthan is not found in the Sasadan and Misra Gunasthanas. In the Asanyata Gunasthan (state of non-restraint in conduct), the karmic bond is 28 natural karmic bonds with devagati (divine state) and 29 natural karmic bonds with devagati and Tirthankara (liberated being), and the satva is 93-92-1.5, and 90 natural karmic satvas. This udayasthan is not found in the Devalangatadi Gunasthanas (states of divine conduct).

During the time of the completion of the speech of the aharak (eating) body, there is an arising of 29 natural karmic bonds with susvara (good voice). The karmic bond is 28 natural karmic bonds with devagati and 29 natural karmic bonds with devagati and Tirthankara, and the satva is 93 and 92 natural karmic satvas. In the case of a Tirthankara's dandasamudghata (striking with a staff), there is an arising of 29 natural karmic bonds, but there is no karmic bond and the satva is 80 and 78 natural karmic satvas. In the case of a non-Tirthankara Kevali (liberated being) entering the mulasharira (original body), there is an arising of 29 natural karmic bonds with udyota during the time of breath completion. There is no karmic bond and the satva is 79 and 77 natural karmic satvas.

During the time of the completion of the speech of a deva (divine being), there is an arising of 29 natural karmic bonds with susvara. In the Mithyatva Gunasthan, there are 25-26-29, and 30 natural karmic bonds for the Bhavanatrik and Kalpavasini Devis (divine beings), and 29 natural karmic bonds with Tiryancha or manushya (human) gati (state) and 30 natural karmic bonds with Tiryancha gati and udyota for the Saudharma Yugal and Sahasrasvarga (divine realms) up to the 10th heaven. For the Anatasvarga (divine realm) and above up to the Mauveyaka (divine realm), there are 29 natural karmic bonds with manushya gati. The satva is 92-90 natural karmic satvas everywhere. In the Sasadan Gunasthan, there are 29 natural karmic bonds with Tiryancha or manushya gati and 30 natural karmic bonds with Tiryancha and udyota for the Bhavanatrik up to the 12th heaven. For the Navagreveyaka (divine realm) and above, there are 29 natural karmic bonds with manushya gati. The satva is 90 natural karmic satvas everywhere. In the Misra Gunasthan, there are 29 natural karmic bonds with manushya gati and 92-90 natural karmic satvas everywhere up to the Uparimanaveyaka (divine realm). In the Asanyata Gunasthan, there is an arising of 29 natural karmic bonds for the Bhavanatrik and Kalpavasini Devis. The karmic bond is 29 natural karmic bonds with manushya gati and the satva is 92 and 90 natural karmic satvas. From the Saudharma Svarga to the Anuttaravimana (divine realms), there is an arising of 29 natural karmic bonds. The karmic bond is 29 natural karmic bonds with manushya gati and 30 natural karmic bonds with manushya gati and Tirthankara, and the satva is 93-92-91, and 90 natural karmic satvas.

The arising of 30 natural karmic bonds is only for Tiryanchas and humans, because this state is accompanied by sanhanan (accumulation). During the time of a Tiryancha's breath completion, there is an arising of 30 natural karmic bonds with udyota. In the Mithyatva Gunasthan, there are 23-25-26-28-29, and 30 natural karmic bonds and 92-90-88, and 84 natural karmic satvas. This udayasthan is not found in the Sasadan and Misra Gunasthanas. In the Bhogbhumij Asanyata Tiryanchas, there is an arising of 30 natural karmic bonds. The karmic bond is 28 natural karmic bonds with devagati and the satva is 92 and 90 natural karmic satvas. This udayasthan is not found in the Karmabhumij Asayata and Deshasanyata Gunasthanas. During the time of speech completion, there is an arising of 30 natural karmic bonds without udyota and with either susvara (good voice) or duhsvara (bad voice) for Tiryanchas. In the Mithyatva Gunasthan, there are 23-25-26-28-29, and 30 natural karmic bonds and 

Page #678:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda - 639

The sattva is of 92, 90, 88 and 84 prakritis. Here, 88 and 84 prakriti sattva is mentioned in relation to the vikalatriya, because after the agitation of the surdvig and narakchaturshka of the jivas, there is no bandha. In the sasadanagunasthan, there is sattva of 90 prakritis with bandha of 29 prakritis with tiryanch or manushya gatyu and 30 prakritis with tiryanch-udyota, with 30 prakriti uday. In the mishra, asanyata and deshasanyata gunasthans, there is bandha of 28 prakritis with devagati and sattva of 92 and 90 prakritis. In the tirthankara samudghata avastha of humans, there is uday of 30 prakritis in the ucchvasaparyaptikal at the time of entering the mulasharira, so here there is no bandha and the sattva is of 80 and 78 prakritis. Know that in the tirthaprakriti, without the bhashaparyaptikal, there is uday of 30 prakritis with susvara or duhsvara, then there is no bandha and the sattva is of 79 and 77 prakritis. In the bhashaparyaptikal of a common human, there is uday of 30 prakritis with susvara or duhsvara, while in the mithyatvagunasthan, there is bandha of 23, 25, 26, 28, 29 and 30 prakritis with sattva of 92, 91 and 90 prakritis. Here, the sattva of 91 prakritis is mentioned in relation to a jiva with the sattva of a tirthankara prakriti, who is facing the second and third naraka. In the sasadanagunasthan, there is uday of 30 prakritis with bandha of 29 prakritis with tiryanch and manushya gatyu and 30 prakritis with tiryanch-udyota, with sattva of 90 prakritis. In the mishra, there is bandha of 28 prakritis with devagati and sattva of 92 and 90 prakritis. From the asanyata to the sixth part of the apurvakaranagunasthan, there is bandha of 28 prakritis with devagati and 29 prakritis with devagati and tirthankara, with sattva of 93, 92, 91 and 90 prakritis. From the aprammatta and the sixth part of the apurvakaranagunasthan, there is bandha of 30 prakritis with devagati and aharaka and 31 prakritis with devagati, aharaka and tirthankara. In the seventh part of the apurvakaranagunasthan, there is bandha of 1 prakriti and sattva of 93, 92, 91 and 90 prakritis. Know that in the anivrittikaran and sukshmasamprayagunasthans, there is bandha of 1 prakriti and sattva of 93, 92, 91 and 90 and 80, 79, 78 and 77 prakritis. Further, in the four gunasthans of upashantakshayadi, there is no bandha, therefore, with the uday of 30 prakritis, know that in the four gunasthans, the sattva is of 93, 92, 91 and 90 prakritis in the upashantakshayagunasthan, 80, 79, 78 and 77 prakritis in the kshinakshaya and sayogakevaligunasthans. In the ayogakevaligunasthan, there is no uday of 30 prakritis.

The uday of 31 prakritis is in the bhashaparyaptikal with susvara or duhsvara, with tiras-udyota, for the tiryanchs. Just as the bandha-sattva is mentioned above in the bhashaparyaptikal with the uday of 30 prakritis for the tiryanchs without udyota, know the same here. In humans, there is no uday of 31 prakritis from mithyatva to the kshinakshayagunasthan, but in the sayogigunasthan, there is uday of 31 prakritis for the tirthankara, so here there is no bandha and the sattva is of 80 and 78 prakritis. The uday of 9 prakritis is found in the ayogigunasthan for the tirthankara, here there is no bandha and the sattva is of 80, 78 and 10 prakritis. And in relation to the samanyakevali, there is also uday of 8 prakritis in the ayogigunasthan, then there is no bandha and the sattva is of 79, 77 and 9 prakritis. 

Page #679:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-640
**Adhikarana** (Chapter) **Rupa** (Form) **Udaya** (Arising) **Adheya** (Object) **Bandha** (Bond) **Sattva** (Substance) **Trisamyoga** (Threefold Conjunction) **Sandrishti** (Observation)

**Adhikarana** (Chapter)
**Adheya** (Object)
**Udayasthan** (Place of Arising)
**Bandha** (Bond)
|
..... ! **Sthan** (Place)
**Sankhya** (Number)
**Bandhasthanagata** (Located in the Place of Bond)
**Sattva Prakriti** (Nature of Substance) - **Vivaran** (Description) ..| **Sthan** (Place)
**Sankhya** (Number)
**Sattva Sthanagata Prakriti Vivaran** (Description of Nature Located in the Place of Substance)
79 and 77 Prakritis
20 Prakritis 21 Prakritis
23, 25, 26, 28, 29
and 30, and Shunya (Zero)
93, 92, 91, 90, 88
84, 82, 80, and 78
24 Prakritis
23, 25, 26, 29, and 30
92, 90, 88, 84, and 82 Prakritis
25 Prakritis
23, 25, 26, 28, 29
and 30
93, 92, 91, 90, 88, 84, and 82
26 Prakritis
23, 25, 26, 28, 29, and 30 Prakritis, Bandha Shunya (Bondless)
93, 92, 91, 90, 88, 84, 82, 79, and 77 Prakritis
27 Prakritis
8
23, 25, 26, 28, 29, and 30 Prakritis, Bandha Shunya (Bondless)
93, 92, 91, 90, 88, 84, 80, and 78 Prakritis
28 Prakritis
8
23, 25, 26, 28, 29, and 30 Prakritis, Bandha Shunya (Bondless)
93, 92, 91, 90, 88, 84, 79, and 77 Prakritis
29 Prakritis
|
6
23, 25, 26, 28, 29, and 30 Prakritis, Bandha Shunya (Bondless)
93, 92, 91, 90, 88, 84, 80, 79, 78
and 77 Prakritis
|
1. When the 21 Prakritis arise in the case of a Tirthankara, along with the Udavasa (Emancipation) and the Samudghata Kevali (Fully Emancipated Being), there is no Bandha (Bond). 

Page #680:
---------------------------
Gommatasar Karmakanda-641
30 Prakrutik
| 8
| 23-25-26-28-29. | 10. 30-31 
Bandha Shunya
! 93-92-91-9088-84-80-79-78
and 77 Prakrutik
31 Prakrutik 23-25-26-28
92-97-8829 and 30 Prakrutik,
84-80 and 78 Bandha Shunya 9 Prakrutik
80-78 and
| 79-77 and 9 Prakrutik further, considering Sattvasthana as the base and Bandha-Udayasthana as the object, we describe
8 Prakrutik
Satte Bandhudaya Chadusag Sagnav Chadusagam Cha Sagnavayam. Chhannav Pannav Panchadu Chadusigichhav Nabhekk Sunnegam. ||753||
Meaning – In the 93 etc. Prakrutik Sattvasthanas, the Bandha-Udayasthana are as follows: in the 93rd Prakrutik Sattvasthana, the Bandhasthana and Udayasthana are 4 and 7 respectively. In the 92nd Prakrutik Sattvasthana, the Bandhasthana is 7 and the Udayasthana is 9. In the 91st Prakrutik Sattvasthana, the Bandhasthana is 4 and the Udayasthana is 7. In the 90th Prakrutik Sattvasthana, the Bandhasthana is 7 and the Udayasthana is 9. In the 88th Prakrutik Sattvasthana, the Bandhasthana is 6 and the Udayasthana is 9. In the 84th Prakrutik Sattvasthana, the Bandhasthana is 5 and the Udayasthana is 9. In the 82nd Prakrutik Sattvasthana, the Bandhasthana is 5 and the Udayasthana is 4. In the 80th Prakrutik Sattvasthana, the Bandhasthana is 1 and the Udayasthana is 6. In the 79th Prakrutik Sattvasthana, the Bandhasthana is 1 and the Udayasthana is 6. In the 78th Prakrutik Sattvasthana, the Bandhasthana is 1 and the Udayasthana is 6. In the 77th Prakrutik Sattvasthana, the Bandhasthana and Udayasthana are 1 and 6 respectively. In the 10th Prakrutik Sattvasthana, the Bandhasthana is zero and the Udayasthana is 1. In the 9th Prakrutik Sattvasthana, the Bandhasthana is zero and the Udayasthana is 1.
Further, we explain the above statement in 6 Gathas
Tenoudie Bandho Ugutisaadichoukkamudo Du. Igi Panchassagatthayonavvisam Tisayam Yam. ||754||
Banoudie Bandha Igitisuunani Atthathanaani. Igi Vissaadheematti Samta Udayathanaani. ||755|| 

Page #681:
---------------------------
## Gommatasara Karmakanda - 642

**Verse 756:** In the 93rd *prakriti* *sattvasthana*, the *bandhasthana* is 29, 30, 31, and 1 *prakriti* (four in total), while the *udayasthana* is 21, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, and 30 *prakriti* (seven in total).

**Verse 757:** In the 92nd *prakriti* *sattvasthana*, the *bandhasthana* is 23, 25, 26, 28, 29, 30, and 1 *prakriti* (seven in total) without 31, while the *udayasthana* is 21, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, and 31 *prakriti* (ten in total).

**Verse 758:** In the 91st *prakriti* *sattvasthana*, the *bandhasthana* is 28, 29, 30, and 1 *prakriti* (four in total), while the *udayasthana* is 21, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, and 30 *prakriti* (seven in total).

**Verse 759:** In the 90th *prakriti* *sattvasthana*, the *bandhasthana* is 23, 25, 26, 28, 29, 30, and 1 *prakriti* (seven in total), while the *udayasthana* is the last two *prakriti* and the remaining nine without the 20th *prakriti*.

**Verse 760:** In the 88th *prakriti* *sattvasthana*, the *bandhasthana* is 23, 25, 26, 29, and 30 *prakriti* (five in total), while the *udayasthana* is the same as the 90th *prakriti* *sattvasthana*.

**Verse 761:** In the 84th *prakriti* *sattvasthana*, the *bandhasthana* is 23, 25, 26, 29, and 30 *prakriti* (five in total), while the *udayasthana* is the same as the 90th *prakriti* *sattvasthana*.

**Verse 762:** In the 82nd *prakriti* *sattvasthana*, the *bandhasthana* is 23, 25, 26, 29, and 30 *prakriti* (five in total), while the *udayasthana* is 21, 24, 25, and 26 *prakriti* (four in total).

**Verse 763:** Starting from the 80th *prakriti* *sattvasthana* and continuing for four *sattvasthana*, the *bandhasthana* is only one *prakriti* of *yasaskirti*, while the *udayasthana* is 21, 27, 29, 30, 31, and 9 *prakriti* (six in total) in the 80th and 78th *prakriti* *sattvasthana*, and 20, 26, 28, 29, 30, and 8 *prakriti* (six in total) in the 79th and 77th *prakriti* *sattvasthana*.

**Verse 764:** In the 10th and 9th *prakriti* *sattvasthana*, there is no *bandhasthana*, while the *udayasthana* is 9 and 8 *prakriti* respectively.

**Special Meaning:** The 93rd *prakriti* *sattvasthana* is found in *karmabhu* *bhijaparyapta* and *nirvrittyaparyabham* *manusya* and *vaimanika* *devas*. According to the verse "Tiththahara Jugavam Savvam" (verse 333), the 93rd *prakriti* *sattvasthana* is not found in the three *gunasthanas* of *mithyatva*, etc., but it is found in the *asanyata* *manusya*. In the *asanyata* *gunasthanas*, the *bandha* is 29 *prakriti* for *devagati* and *tirthankara*, and the *udaya* is 21, 26, 28, and 29 *prakriti*. In the *deshasanyata* *gunasthanas*, the *bandha* is 29 *prakriti* for *devagati* and *tirthankara*, and the *udaya* is 30 *prakriti*. 

Page #682:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-14...

In the Pramatta Gunasthan, the bondage is of 29 types including Deva-Gati and Tirthankara, and the arising is of 25-27-28-29 and 30 types. In the Apramatta Gunasthan, the bondage is of 29 types including Deva-Gati and Tirthankara, and of 31 types including Deva-Gati, Aharaka and Tirthankara, and the arising is of 30 types. In the Upshamka A-purvakarana, the bondage and arising are to be known as in the Apramatta. In the Anivritika-karana-Sukshma-Samparaya Gunasthan, the bondage is of one type, and the arising is of 30 types. In the Upshanta, there is no bondage, and the arising is of 30 types. In the Kshina-Kashayadi Gunasthanas, there is no sattva of 93 types, because the sattva of 80 types remains after the destruction of 13 types. In the Asanyata Gunasthan of the Vaimanika Devas, the arising is of 21-25-27-28 and 29 types, with the bondage of 30 types including Manushya and Tirthankara, in the sattva of 93 types. Here, the bondage of 28 types does not occur, because except for the beings who are about to go to hell, all other beings with the sattva of Tirthankara always have the bondage of Tirthankara type, and the bondage of 29 types is possible only with the Tirthankara type.

The sattva of 92 types is found in all four gatis. In the Naraka Gati, the arising is of 21-25-27-28 and 29 types, with the bondage of 21 and 30 types including Tiryancha and Manushya, in the sattva of 12 types, for the Mithyatvadrishti of Gharmanaraka. In the Sasadana Gunasthan, there is no sattva of 92 types. In the Misra Gunasthan, the bondage is of 29 types including Manushya Gati, and the arising is also of 29 types, while the sattva of 92 types remains. In the Asanyata Gunasthan, the bondage is of 29 types including Manushya Gati, and the arising is of 21-25-27-28 and 29 types. From the Vansa to the Maghviprithvi, the bondage and arising in the Mithyatva Gunasthan are to be known as in the Gharmanaraka, while the sattva of 92 types remains. Here, there is no sattva of 92 types in the Sasadana Gunasthan, the bondage and arising are of 29-29 types in the Misra Gunasthan, and the bondage is of 29 types including Manushya Gati, and the arising is also of 29 types in the Asanyata Gunasthan. In the Mithyatva Gunasthan related to the Maghviprithvi, the arising is to be known as in the Gharmanaraka, with the bondage of 29 types including Tiryancha and 30 types including Tiryancha-Udyota, while the sattva of 92 types remains. Here, there is no sattva of 92 types in the Sasadana Gunasthan, the bondage is of 29 types including Manushya Gati, and the arising is also of 29 types in the Misra and Asanyata Gunasthan. In the Tiryanchas, the arising is of 21-24-25-26-27-28-29-30 and 31 types, with the bondage of 23-25-26-28-29 and 30 types, while the sattva of 92 types remains. In the Sasadana, there is no sattva of 92 types. In the Misra Gunasthan, the bondage is of 28 types including Deva Gati, and the arising is of 30-31 types. In the Asanyata Gunasthan, the bondage is of 28 types including Deva Gati, and the arising is of 21-26-28-29-30 and 31 types, but the arising of 25-26-28 and 29 types is in relation to the Bhogabhumis. In the Deshasanyata Gunasthan, the bondage is of 28 types including Deva Gati, and the arising is of 30 and 31 types. In the Manushya, the arising is of 21-26-28-29 and 30 types, with the bondage of 23-25-26-28-29 and 30 types, while the sattva of 92 types remains. In the Sasadana Gunasthan, there is no sattva of 92 types. In the Misra Gunasthan, the bondage is of 28 types including Deva Gati, and the arising is of 30 types. 

Page #683:
---------------------------
## Gommatasara Karmakanda-644

**Argunasthan** has a bond of 21-26-28-29 and 30 types of nature due to the actions of the sons of the gods and their arising. **Desasanayatgunasthan** has a bond of 28 types of nature combined with the path of gods and an arising of 30 types of nature. **Pramattagunasthan** has a bond of 28 types of nature combined with the path of gods and an arising of 25-27-28-29 and 30 types of nature. **Aparamatta-Apuurvakaranagunasthan** has a bond of 28 types of nature combined with the path of gods and an arising of 30 types of nature combined with the path of gods and the path of nourishment. **Anivritikaran and Sukshmasamparayagunasthan** have a bond of one type of nature and an arising of 30 types of nature. **Upshantakashaya-gunasthan** has no bond and an arising of 30 types of nature. In **Kshina-Kashaya** and other gunasthanas, the destruction of 53 types of nature leads to the absence of 92 types of nature in the state of being (sattva) and the presence of 79 types of nature in the state of being.

Among the gods, with 92 types of nature in the state of being, the **Bhavanatrik** and **Soudharmayugal** gods with **Mithyadristi** have a bond of 25-26-29 and 30 types of nature and an arising of 21-25-27-28 and 29 types of nature. **Sasaadangunasthan** does not have 92 types of nature in the state of being. **Mishragunasthan** has a bond of 29 types of nature combined with the path of humans and an arising of 29 types of nature. **Asanayatgunasthan** has a bond of 29 types of nature combined with the path of humans and an arising of 29 types of nature in **Bhavanatrik** and 21-25-27-28 and 29 types of nature in **Soudharmayugal**.

Further, in the 10 heavens up to **Sahasraraswarga**, the **Mithyadristi** have a bond of 29 types of nature combined with the path of animals or humans and an arising of 30 types of nature combined with the path of animals. From **Anatswarga** to **Uparimagnaiveyak** there is a bond of 29 types of nature combined with the path of humans and an arising of 21-25-27-28 and 29 types of nature from **Bhavanatrik** to **Uparimagraiveyak**. Here, **Sasaadangunasthan** does not have 92 types of nature in the state of being. **Mishragunasthan** has a bond of 29 types of nature combined with the path of humans and an arising of 29 types of nature from **Bhavanatrik** to **Uparimauveyak**. **Asanayatgunasthan** has a bond of 29 types of nature combined with the path of humans and an arising of 21-25-27-28 and 29 types of nature from **Sanatkumarswarga** to **Anuttaraviman**.

According to the verse "**Tirye na titthsatam**" etc., 91 types of nature in the state of being are found in gods, hell beings, and humans, excluding animals. Here, in the hell beings of **Dharmanarka**, with 91 types of nature in the state of being, the **Mithyadristi** have a bond of 29 types of nature combined with humans and an arising of 21-25 types of nature. Here, the arising of 27 and other types of nature does not occur because upon attaining the fullness of the body, the **Mithyadristi** with the essence of the **Tirthankara** becomes **Samyagdristi**. **Sasaadamishra** does not have 91 types of nature in the state of being. **Asanayatgunasthan** has a bond of 30 types of nature combined with the path of **Tirthankara** and humans and an arising of 21-25-27-28 and 29 types of nature. In **Vansha-Megha-naraka**, it is also known that all actions are like **Dharma**, but the special thing is that in **Asanayatgunasthan**, an arising of 27-28-29 types of nature is found. In the earths of **Anjana** etc., there are no 91 types of nature in the state of being.

With 91 types of nature in the state of being in humans, **Mithyatvagunasthan** has a bond of 28 types of nature combined with the path of hell beings or 29 types of nature combined with the path of humans and an arising of 30 types of nature. **Sasaadamishra** does not have 91 types of nature in the state of being. **Asanayatgunasthan** has a bond of 29 types of nature combined with the path of gods and **Tirthankara** and an arising of 21-26-28-29 and 30 types of nature. Further, from **Desasanayat** to the sixth part of **Apuurvakaranagunasthan**, the bond is 29 types of nature combined with the path of gods and **Tirthankara**. From the seventh part of **Apuurvakaran** to **Upshama-Sukshmasamparayagunasthan**, the bond is one type of nature. In **Upshantakashaya-gunasthan**, there is no bond. The arising is from **Desasanayatgunasthan** to **Upshantakashaya**. 

Page #684:
---------------------------
## Gommatasara Karmakanda - 645

There are 30 **Prakritis** (categories of karma). In the **Devagati** (heavenly realm), 91 **Prakritis** of **Sattva** (pure consciousness) exist only in the **Asanyata Gunasthan** (state of uncontrolled passions) of the **Vaimanika Devas** (celestial beings who travel in aerial vehicles). There, one should know the **Bandha** (bondage) of 30 **Prakritis** and the **Udaya** (manifestation) of 21, 25, 27, 28, and 29 **Prakritis** associated with the **Manushya Gati** (human realm) and **Tirthankara** (liberated souls). 

The 90 **Prakritis** of **Sattva** are found in all four realms of existence. In the **Naraka Gati** (hell realm), all **Narakiyas** (hell beings) possess 90 **Prakritis** of **Sattva**. While in the **Mithyatva Gunasthan** (state of false belief), they experience **Bandha** of 29 **Prakritis** associated with the **Tiryancha Gati** (animal realm) or **Manushya Gati**, and **Bandha** of 30 **Prakritis** associated with the **Tiryancha Udyota** (animalistic tendencies), along with **Udaya** of 21, 25, 27, 28, and 29 **Prakritis**. However, a notable exception is that the **Maghvi Prithvi** (earth realm) does not have **Bandha** of 29 **Prakritis** associated with the **Manushya Gati** for beings with **Mithyatva Drishti** (false perception).

With 90 **Prakritis** of **Sattva**, in the **Sasaadana Gunasthan** (state of partial control over passions), **Bandha** is similar to the **Mithyatva Gunasthan**, and **Udaya** is of 29 **Prakritis**. In the **Mishra Gunasthan** (state of mixed passions), **Bandha** is of 29 **Prakritis** associated with the **Manushya Gati**, and **Udaya** is also of 29 **Prakritis**. In the **Asanyata Gunasthan**, **Bandha** is of 29 **Prakritis** associated with the **Manushya Gati**, and **Udaya** is of 21, 25, 27, 28, and 29 **Prakritis** in the **Dharmanaraka** (hell realm), and of 29 **Prakritis** in the **Vanshaadi Prithvis** (earth realms).

For **Tiryanchas** (animals), with 90 **Prakritis** of **Sattva**, **Bandha** is of 23, 25, 26, 28, 29, and 30 **Prakritis** in the **Mithyatva Gunasthan**, and **Udaya** is of 21, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, and 31 **Prakritis**. In the **Sasaadana Gunasthan**, **Bandha** is of 28 **Prakritis** associated with the **Devagati**, 29 **Prakritis** associated with the **Tiryancha Gati** or **Manushya Gati**, and 30 **Prakritis** associated with the **Tiryancha Udyota**. **Udaya** is of 21, 24, 26, 30, and 31 **Prakritis**. In the **Mishra Gunasthan**, **Bandha** is of 28 **Prakritis** associated with the **Devagati**, and **Udaya** is of 30 and 31 **Prakritis**. In the **Asanyata Gunasthan**, **Bandha** is of 28 **Prakritis** associated with the **Devagati**, and **Udaya** is of 21, 26, 28, 29, 30, and 31 **Prakritis**. In the **Desha Sanayata** (state of control over external senses), **Bandha** is of 28 **Prakritis** associated with the **Devagati**, and **Udaya** is of 30 and 31 **Prakritis**.

For **Manushyas** (humans), with 90 **Prakritis** of **Sattva**, **Bandha** is of 23, 25, 26, 28, 29, and 30 **Prakritis** in the **Mithyatva Gunasthan**, and **Udaya** is of 21, 26, 28, 29, and 30 **Prakritis**. In the **Sasaadana Gunasthan**, **Bandha** is of 28 **Prakritis** associated with the **Devagati**, 29 **Prakritis** associated with the **Tiryancha Gati** or **Manushya Gati**, and 30 **Prakritis** associated with the **Tiryancha Udyota**. **Udaya** is of 21, 26, and 30 **Prakritis**. In the **Mishra Gunasthan**, **Bandha** is of 28 **Prakritis** associated with the **Devagati**, and **Udaya** is of 30 **Prakritis**. In the **Asanyata Gunasthan**, **Bandha** is of 28 **Prakritis** associated with the **Devagati**, and **Udaya** is of 21, 26, 28, 29, and 30 **Prakritis**. From the **Desha Sanayata** to the sixth part of the **Apuurvakarana Gunasthan** (state of control over subtle senses), **Bandha** is of 28 **Prakritis** associated with the **Devagati**. From the seventh part of the **Apuurvakarana Gunasthan** to the **Sukshma Saamparaya Gunasthan** (state of control over subtle karmic particles), **Bandha** is of 1 **Prakriti**. In the **Upashanta Kshaya Gunasthan** (state of complete control over passions), there is no **Bandha**. **Udaya** is of 30 **Prakritis** from the **Desha Sanayata** to the **Upashanta Kshaya Gunasthan**.

For **Devas** (heavenly beings), with 90 **Prakritis** of **Sattva**, **Bandha** is of 25, 
Page #685:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-646 and Udayabhi 29 are of the same nature. In the Asanyata Gunasthan, from Bhavanatrik to Anuttaravimana, there are 29 Prakruti with Bandha and 29 Prakruti with Manushya Gati. Similarly, Uday is of 29 Prakruti from Bhavananik to Saudharma Dwik and 21-2527-28 and 29 Prakruti from Saudharma Dwik to Anuttaravimana.

88 Prakruti Sattvasthan is found in Devadwik when there is Udvellana. This results in Ekendriya and Vikalatraya. These Jivas, after death, are born as Mithyadristi Tiryancha and Manushya. They have 23-25-26-28-29 and 30 Prakruti with Bandha, 21-24-25-26-27-28-29-30 and 31 Prakruti with Uday in Tiryancha, and 21-2628-29 and 30 Prakruti with Uday in Manushya. Further, in Sasadanadi Gunasthan, there is no 88 Prakruti Sattvasthan. Mithyadristi Panchendriya Tiryancha and Manushya, during their body's lifespan, have 88 Prakruti Sattvasthan until they attain Bandha in Devagati. Alternatively, they can experience Udvellana of Ekendriya and Vikalatraya in Narak Chatushk, die, and be reborn as Panchendriya Tiryancha or Manushya. In this case, they have 88 Prakruti Sattvasthan until they attain Bandha in Devagati during their body's lifespan, as long as they haven't attained Bandha in Narakgati.

84 Prakruti Sattvasthan is found in Ekendriya or Vikalendriya when there is Udvellana in Narak Chatushk. These Jivas, after death, are born as Mithyadristi Tiryancha or Manushya. They have 84 Prakruti Sattvasthan until they attain Bandha in Devagati or Narakgati. The statements regarding Bandha and Uday here are similar to those of 88 Prakruti Sattvasthan, with the exception that there is no 28 Prakruti Bandha.

82 Prakruti Sattvasthan is found in Tejakaya-Vayukaya Jivas when there is Udvellana in Manushyadwik. These Jivas, after death, are born as Mithyadristi Tiryancha. They have 23-25-26-29 and 30 Prakruti with Bandha and 21-24-25 and 26 Prakruti with Uday. In this case, there is no Atap or Udyot Uday in Tejakaya-Vayukaya Jivas. They have 82 Prakruti Sattvasthan until they attain Bandha in Manushya Gati.

80 Prakruti Sattvasthan is found in the Kshapak श्रेणी, from Anivrittikaran to the end of the Aयोगी Gunasthan related to Tirthankara Kevali, until the Dvicharam Samaya. While 80 Prakruti Sattvasthan persists, there is one Prakruti Bandha and 30 Prakruti Uday in Anivrittikaran and Sukshma Samparaya Gunasthan. Further, there is no Bandha in the subsequent Gunasthan. Therefore, Uday is 30 Prakruti in Kshina Kashacha Gunasthan, 31 Prakruti in Sayoga Kevali Gunasthan for Svasthan Kevali, 21-27-29-30 and 31 Prakruti in Samudghat Kevali, and 9 Prakruti in Aयोगी Kevali.

79 Prakruti Sattvasthan is devoid of Tirthankara Prakruti. 78 Prakruti Sattvasthan has Tirthankara Prakruti but lacks Aharak Dwik Prakruti. 77 Prakruti Sattvasthan lacks both Tirthankara and Aharak Dwik. The statements regarding Bandha and Uday in these three Sattvasthan are similar to those of 80 Prakruti Sattvasthan, from Kshapak Anivrittikaran to Kshina Kashaya Gunasthan. In Sayoga Kevali Gunasthan, there is 30 Prakruti Uday in 79 and 77 Prakruti Sattvasthan for Svasthan Kevali, 20-26-28-29 and 30 Prakruti Uday for Samudghat Kevali. In 78 Prakruti Sattvasthan, Uday is similar to 80 Prakruti Sattvasthan. In Aयोगी, there is no Bandha in 79 and 77 Prakruti Sattvasthan, and Uday is 8 Prakruti. In 78 Prakruti Sattvasthan, Uday is 9 Prakruti. 50 and 9 Prakruti Sattvasthan are found at the end of Aयोगी Kevali Gunasthan. 

Page #686:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-647:  Knowing the 9 types of *prakriti* with Tirthankaras and the 8 types of *prakriti* without Tirthankaras, in order, along with the absence of *bandha*. This is how *bandha* and *udaya* are described based on the foundation of *sattvasthana*.

**Adhikarana** (Subject) - *Sattva*
**Adheya** (Object) - *Bandha* and *Udaya* related to *sattvasthana*
**Trisanyoga** (Three-fold combination) - *Adhikarana*, *Adheya*, and *Sattvasthana*

**Description of the number of *prakriti* in *bandhasthana*:**

| **Sthana Number** | **Sthana** | **Number of *prakriti* in *udayasthana*** |
|---|---|---|
| 29-30-31 & 1 | 21-25-26-27-28 | 29 & 30 *prakriti* |
| 29 & 30 *prakriti* | 23-25-26-28 | 29 & 30 & 1 |
| 29-30 & 1 | 21-24-25-26-27 | 28-29-30 & 31 *prakriti* |
| 28-29-30 & 1 *prakriti* | 21-25-26-27 | 28-29 & 30 |
| 28-29 & 30 | 23-25-26-28 | 29-30 & 1 |
| 29-30 & 1 | 21-24-25-26-27-28-29-30 & 31 *prakriti* |
| 23-25-26-28-29 & 30 | 23-25-26-29 & 30 *prakriti* |
| 23-25-26-29 & 30 *prakriti* | 21-24-25-26-27-28-29-30 & 31 *prakriti* |
| 21-24-25-26 *prakriti* | 23-25-26-29 & 30 *prakriti* | 

Page #687:
---------------------------
Gommatsar Karmakanda-648
1 Yashaskirti
21-27-29-30 and 31-9 Prakrutik
1 Yashaskirti
20-26-28-29-30 and 8
1 Yashaskirti
21-27-29-30-31 and 1
1 Yashaskirti
20-26-28-29-30 and 8
9 Prakrutik
8 Prakrutik
Further, considering the basis of bondage and the place of arising, and the sattvasthanas as the object, the following 9 verses are stated:
Tevisbandage Igiviisnavudayesu Aadimachaukke. Baanaudinaudiaachaubaasidi Satththaanani ||760||
Tenuvarimapanchaudaye Te Chevamsa Vivvaj Baasidi. Evam Panchhavviise Adaviise Ekavisuudaye. ||761||
Baanaudinaudisattam Evam Panuviisayaadipanchaudaye. Panasagaviise Naudi Viguvvane Asthi Nahaare ||762||
Ten Nabhigitisuudaye Baanaudichaukkemekatisuudaye. Navari Na Iginaudipadam Navavisiigiviisabandhuudaye ||763|| 

Page #688:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-649:

In the 23rd bandha, there are 9 udayasthanas starting from the 21st sthana. Among these 9 udayasthanas, the first four have 5 sattvasthanas: 92, 90, 88, 84, and 82. The remaining 5 udayasthanas, starting from the 27th, have the remaining four sattvasthanas without the 82nd sattvasthana.

In the 25th and 26th bandhas, the udayasattvasthanas are the same as in the 23rd bandha.

In the 28th bandha, there are 92 and 90 sattvasthanas along with the 21st udayasthana. In this same bandha, there are two sattvasthanas, 92 and 90, in the five udayasthanas starting from the 25th sthana. However, the 90th sattvasthana in the 25th and 27th udayasthanas is not with respect to the aharaka but with respect to the vaikriyaka.

In this same 28th bandha, there are four sattvasthanas starting from the 92nd sthana, along with the 30th and 31st udayasthanas. However, there is no 91st sattvasthana when the 31st udayasthana arises.

In the 29th bandha, there are seven sattvasthanas starting from the 93rd sthana when the 21st udayasthana arises. There are five sattvasthanas when the 24th udayasthana arises: four starting from the 92nd sthana and the 90th sthana. There are seven sattvasthanas starting from the 93rd sthana when the 25th and 26th udayasthanas arise. There are six sattvasthanas starting from the 93rd sthana in the four udayasthanas starting from the 27th sthana. There are four sattvasthanas in the 31st udayasthana, excluding the 93rd and 91st sattvasthanas, from the six sattvasthanas starting from the 93rd sthana.

In the 30th bandha, there are six sattvasthanas starting from the 93rd sthana when the 21st, 25th, 27th, 28th, and 29th udayasthanas arise. However, the 82nd sattvasthana is only present in the 21st and 25th udayasthanas. 

Page #689:
---------------------------
Gommatasar Karmakanda - 650

It is found in other Udayasthanas, but not in the 24th and 26th Prakruti Udayas. When there are 92 Prakruti and 90 Adi Prakruti, there are four such Sattvasthanas, and when there are 30 and 31 Prakruti Udayas, the Satchastana is to be known as in the 24th Prakruti Udayastana, but the difference is that there is no 82nd Prakruti Sattvasthana here, and in the 30th Prakruti Udaya, there is one Sattvasthana with 93 Prakruti. In one Prakruti Bandha, when there are 30 Prakruti Udayas, there are four with 93 Adi Prakruti and four with 80 Adi Prakruti, such eight Sattvasthanas of Namekarma are said.

Special Note: - In verse 762, it is said that in 28 Prakruti Bandha, there are 92 and 10 Prakruti Sattvas and 25 and 27 Prakruti Udayas. It is said that the 25th and 27th Prakruti Udayas and the 90th Prakruti Sattvas should be known in relation to the Vaikriyika body, not in relation to the Aharaka body, because the one who has an Aharaka body will have the 92nd Prakruti Sattvas, the 90th Prakruti Sattvas is not possible. The 90th Prakruti Sattvas is without the Sattvas of the Aharaka body.

S
..
Sha
The 25th and 27th Prakruti Udayas occur in Devas and Narakas, or they can occur in those who have an Aharaka body, because their Sanhanana does not occur, or it occurs in the Kapatasamudghata of Tirthankaras and Kevalis. Devas and Narakas do not have 28 Prakruti Bandha, because the 28th Prakruti Bandhasthana is with Deva and Naraka Gatis. Those who have an Aharaka body can have 28 Prakruti Bandha, but the 90th Prakruti Sattvas is not possible. In the Kapatasamudghata of Tirthankaras and Kevalis, there is neither the 90th Prakruti Sattvas nor the Bandha of Namekarma, so the 25th and 27th Prakruti Udayasthanas are not possible in the 28th Prakruti Bandhasthana with the 90th Prakruti Sattvasthana?

-
Solution: Umaswami Acharya, in the second chapter of Tattvarthasutra, has said in the sutra "Aupapadakam Vaikriyikam" that the Vaikriyika body is of those who are born from Aupapadaka, i.e., Devas and Narakas, but in the sutra "Labdhipratyayam Cha", it is also said that due to the Labdhi of Tapas etc., the Vaikriyika body also becomes of the Audarika bodies. Therefore, in the sutra "Tadadini Bhajyani Yugpadekasminnachaturbhyah", it is said that a being can have four bodies at the same time. Shri Virsenaswami, in the commentary on Varganakhand Sutra 131, while mentioning the beings with four bodies, has said - "Chattari Sarirani Jershi Te Chadu Sarira. Ke Te? Oraliy-Vedavviy-Teja-Kammaiy Sarirehin Oraliy- Ahar - Teja - Kammaray Sarirehin Va Vattammana." (D.P. 14 p. 238) That is, those who have four bodies are beings with four bodies. Who are they? Beings who exist with Audarika, Vaikriyika, Tejas and Karmanika bodies are beings with four bodies (further D.P. 14 p. 402 says) "Na Chedam Viuvvanasariram Oraliyam, Vippadiseshado" "This Vikriyaropa body is also Audarika, it is not right to say so, because the Vikriyaropa body is prohibited from being Audarika." This Vaikriyika body 

Page #690:
---------------------------
Gommatasar Karmakanda - 651

The time of arousal and the time of rise are said to be the same - "Veubviya Sariraanamae Jahanne Ega Samao. Kudo? Tirikkh - Manussesu Egasamayumuttarasariram Viuvviduun Vidiyasamae Mudass Taduvlabhado" (D. Pu. 15 p. 64) i.e. the time of arousal of the karma called Vaikriyika Sharira is the same for the lowest, because the time of the being who has obtained death in the second time after the transformation of the Uttar Sharira in the same time in the Tiryanch or humans is found. In this way, in the case of Tiryanch or humans with Vaikriyika Sharira, 90 Prakruti Sattvas and 28 Prakruti Bandhas are possible in the time of rise of 25 and 27 Prakruti respectively. The same is the opinion of the Prakruti Panchasangrahakar.

Pisaai Panch
Ukhie Gaya.
Santa Padma Chauro Udaya Sattavtees Unatisa || 437 ||

Taking the 25 Prakruti places of Vaikikayogi as the beginning, there are five Bandha places i.e. Bandha of 25-26-28-29 and 30 Prakruti, three Udaya places i.e. 27-28 and 29 Prakruti and four Sattvas (93-92-91 and 90 Prakruti) places from the beginning. Bandha of 28 Prakruti is possible only in the case of humans or Tiryanch who have Vaikriyika Kayayoga. Vaikriyika Kayayoga can happen only in those humans and Tiryanch who have Vaikriyika Sharira.

Adhikarana Roopa Bandha - Udaya and Adhey Roopa Sattvasthan Sambandhi Sandrishti

Adhikarana
Adhey
Bandha Sthan
23 Prakruti
23 Prakruti
25-26 Prakruti
25-26 Prakruti
Udaya
Sthan
Number
4
5
4
 
Udayasthangala
Prakruti Number
Description
21-24-25 and 26 Prakruti
27-28-29-30
and 31 Prakruti
21-24-25 and 26 Prakruti
(Pra. Pan. San. p. 500)
27-28-29-30 and 31 Prakruti
Sattva
Sthan
Number
4
5
4
Sattvasthangata
Prakruti Number
Description
99-90-88-84
82 Prakruti
92-90-88
and 84 Prakruti
92-90-88-84
and 82 Prakruti
92-90-88 and 84 Prakruti

Page #691:
---------------------------
28 Prakruti 28 Prakruti
28 Prakruti
28 Prakruti
29 Prakruti
29 Prakruti
29 Prakruti
29 Prakruti
29 Prakruti 30 Prakruti
30 Prakruti
30 Prakruti
30 Prakruti
31 Prakruti
1 Prakruti
1
5
1
1
2
1
3
2
Gommatsar Karmakanda - 652
21 Prakruti 25-26-27-28 29 Prakruti (25 and 27 Prakruti have 90 Prakruti sattva vaikriyaka sharira, not aharaka sharira.)
30 Prakruti
31 Prakruti
21 Prakruti
neha
25-26 Prakruti
24 Prakruti
27-28- 29 and
30 Prakruti
31 Prakruti 21 and 25 Prakruti
24 and 26
27-28 and 29 Prakruti
30 and 31 Prakruti
30 Prakruti
30 Prakruti
2
2
4
3
7
6
4
6
4
8
92 and 90 Prakruti 92 and 90 Prakruti
12-91-90
and 88 Prakruti
92-90
and 88 Prakruti
93-92-91-90 88 Prakruti 93-92-91-900 88-84 and 82 12-90-88-84 and 82
93-92-91-90 and 88-84
92-90-88 and 84 93-92-91-90 88-84
and 82 Prakruti
92-90-88 84-82
93-92-91-90 88 and 84
92 90 88 and 84
93 Prakruti
93-92-91-90 80-79-78 and 77 Prakruti 

Page #692:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-653

Taking the **Anantaram** **Karma** as the basis for the **Bandha-Sattva-sthana** and the **Udaya-sthana** as the **Adheya**, it is stated in 6 verses:

**Verse 769:**
Twenty-three **Prakruti** **Bandha-sthana** along with 92, 90, 88, and 84 **Prakruti** **Sattva-sthana**, there are 9 **Udaya-sthana** with 21 **Prakruti** as the **Adi**. Twenty-three **Prakruti** **Bandha** along with 82 **Prakruti** **Sattva**, there are 4 **Udaya-sthana** with 21 **Prakruti** as the **Adi**.

**Verse 770:**
Twenty-five and twenty-six **Prakruti** **Bandha** along with 92, 90, 88, and 84 **Prakruti** **Sattva-sthana**, the **Udaya-sthana** are the same as mentioned before. Twenty-eight **Prakruti** **Bandha** along with 92 **Prakruti** **Sattva**, there are 9 **Udaya-sthana** with 21 **Prakruti** as the **Adi**, and 24 **Prakruti** are left out. Twenty-eight **Prakruti** **Bandha** along with 91 **Prakruti** **Sattva**, there are 9 **Prakruti** **Udaya-sthana**.

**Verse 771:**
Ninety **Prakruti** **Sattva** has 21, 26, 28, 29, 30, and 31 **Prakruti** **Udaya-sthana** as mentioned in **Sitiryanch**. Eighty-eight **Prakruti** **Sattva** has 30 and 31 **Prakruti** **Udaya-sthana**.

**Verse 772:**
Twenty-nine **Prakruti** **Bandha** along with 93 **Prakruti** **Sattva**, there are 8 **Udaya-sthana** with 21 **Prakruti** as the **Adi**, and 24 **Prakruti** are left out. There are 7 **Udaya-sthana** with 21 **Prakruti** as the **Adi** (but 31 does not have an **Udaya-sthana**).

**Verse 773:**
Twenty-eight **Prakruti** **Bandha** along with 92 **Prakruti** **Sattva**, there are 30 **Prakruti** **Udaya-sthana** with 21 **Prakruti** as the **Adi**. Twenty-eight **Prakruti** **Bandha** along with 92 **Prakruti** **Sattva**, there are 30 **Prakruti** **Udaya-sthana** with 21 **Prakruti** as the **Adi**.

**Verse 774:**
Twenty-nine **Prakruti** **Bandha-sthana** along with 93 **Prakruti** **Sattva-sthana**, there are 30 **Prakruti** **Udaya-sthana** with 21 **Prakruti** as the **Adi**. Twenty-nine **Prakruti** **Bandha** along with 93 **Prakruti** **Sattva**, there are 30 **Prakruti** **Udaya-sthana** with 21 **Prakruti** as the **Adi**.

**Meaning:**

* Twenty-three **Prakruti** **Bandha-sthana** along with 92, 90, 88, and 84 **Prakruti** **Sattva-sthana**, there are 9 **Udaya-sthana** with 21 **Prakruti** as the **Adi**. Twenty-three **Prakruti** **Bandha** along with 82 **Prakruti** **Sattva**, there are 4 **Udaya-sthana** with 21 **Prakruti** as the **Adi**.
* Twenty-five and twenty-six **Prakruti** **Bandha** along with 92, 90, 88, and 84 **Prakruti** **Sattva-sthana**, the **Udaya-sthana** are the same as mentioned before. Twenty-eight **Prakruti** **Bandha** along with 92 **Prakruti** **Sattva**, there are 9 **Udaya-sthana** with 21 **Prakruti** as the **Adi**, and 24 **Prakruti** are left out. Twenty-eight **Prakruti** **Bandha** along with 91 **Prakruti** **Sattva**, there are 9 **Prakruti** **Udaya-sthana**.
* Ninety **Prakruti** **Sattva** has 21, 26, 28, 29, 30, and 31 **Prakruti** **Udaya-sthana** as mentioned in **Sitiryanch**. Eighty-eight **Prakruti** **Sattva** has 30 and 31 **Prakruti** **Udaya-sthana**.
* Twenty-nine **Prakruti** **Bandha** along with 93 **Prakruti** **Sattva**, there are 8 **Udaya-sthana** with 21 **Prakruti** as the **Adi**, and 24 **Prakruti** are left out. There are 7 **Udaya-sthana** with 21 **Prakruti** as the **Adi** (but 31 does not have an **Udaya-sthana**).
* Twenty-eight **Prakruti** **Bandha** along with 92 **Prakruti** **Sattva**, there are 30 **Prakruti** **Udaya-sthana** with 21 **Prakruti** as the **Adi**. Twenty-eight **Prakruti** **Bandha** along with 92 **Prakruti** **Sattva**, there are 30 **Prakruti** **Udaya-sthana** with 21 **Prakruti** as the **Adi**.
* Twenty-nine **Prakruti** **Bandha-sthana** along with 93 **Prakruti** **Sattva-sthana**, there are 30 **Prakruti** **Udaya-sthana** with 21 **Prakruti** as the **Adi**. Twenty-nine **Prakruti** **Bandha** along with 93 **Prakruti** **Sattva**, there are 30 **Prakruti** **Udaya-sthana** with 21 **Prakruti** as the **Adi**. 

Page #693:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-654: Therefore, there are 7 udayasthanas (as written in Sandristi). 31 prakriti's udaya is in tiryanchas, but there is no sattva of 93 in tiryanchas. In humans, there is udaya of 31 prakriti and sattva of 93 prakriti in the sayogi gunasthan, but there is no bandha there). In three such four sattvasthanas of 92 and 90 etc. prakriti, there are 9 udayasthanas of 21 etc. prakriti. In the sattva of 91 prakriti, there are 21-25-26-27-28-29 and 30 prakriti udayasthanas like narakagati. With the sattva of 82 prakriti, there are 21, 24, 25 and 26 prakriti udayasthanas. With the bandha of 30 prakriti and the sattva of 93 and 91 prakriti, there are 5 udayasthanas as mentioned in devagati. With the bandha of 30 prakriti and four such five sattvasthanas of 92 and 90 etc. prakriti, there are 9 udayasthanas of 21 etc. prakriti like the bandha of 29 prakriti. And with the sattva of 82 prakriti in the bandha of 30 prakriti, there are four udayasthanas like the bandha of 29 prakriti. || 772-73 ||
With the bandha of 31 prakriti and the sattva of 93 prakriti, there is only one udayasthan of 30 prakriti. And with the bandha of 1 prakriti and four sattvasthanas of 93 etc. prakriti and four sattvasthanas of 80 etc. prakriti, there is a udayasthan of 30 prakriti. Further, there is no bandha, therefore, it is not possible to state by considering two places as adhara and one place as adhey. || 774 ||
Sandristi of the trisamyoga of bandha-sattvasthan as adhikarana and udayasthan as adhara
Adhikarana
Adhey
Sattvasthan
Bandhastan
Description of the number of prakriti in sattvasthan
Udayasthan number
Description of the number of prakriti in udayasthan
Number
23 prakriti
92-10-88 and 84 prakriti 82 prakriti
21-24-25-26-27
28-29-30 and 31
23 prakriti
. 4
25-26 prakriti
9
92-90-88 and 84 prakriti 82 prakriti 12 prakriti
. 21-24-25
and 26 prakriti. 21-24-25-26-27-28
29-30 3 31 prakriti . 21-24-25 and 26 prakriti 21-25-26-27-28-29
30 and 31 prakriti
25-26 prakriti 28 prakriti
4 8
1
. 

Page #694:
---------------------------
28 Prakruti
28 Prakruti
28 Prakruti
29 Prakruti
29 Prakruti
29 Prakruti
29 Prakruti
30 Prakruti
30 Prakruti
30 Prakruti
31 Prakruti
1 Prakruti
4
5
2
1
1
8
Gommatsar Karmakanda - 655
91 Prakruti
90 Prakruti
88 Prakruti
93 Prakruti
92-90-88
84 Prakruti
91 Prakruti
82 Prakruti
93 and 91 Prakruti
92-90-88
and 84 Prakruti
82 Prakruti
93 Prakruti
93-92-91-90 80-79 78 and 77
1
6
2
7
9
7
4
9
4
1
1
30 Prakruti
21-26-28-29 and 30-31
30-31 Prakruti
21-25-26-27-28 29 and 30 Prakruti
21-24-25-26-27-28 29-30 and 31 Prakruti
21-25-26-27-28 29
and 30 Prakruti
21-24-25 and 26 Prakruti
.
21-25-27-28 and
29 Prakruti 21-24-25-26-27-28 29-30 and 31
21-24-25 and 26 Prakruti
30 Prakruti
30 Prakruti
Further, considering the Uday and Savasthan as the base and the Bandhastan as the object, the statement is made in 9 verses.
When twenty-two Tattvas arise, three arise, and twenty-nine are bound, then the suffering arises, the first six are the bondage. ||775||
Thus, it is said that twenty-two do not arise again, nor twenty-four. The suffering arises, seven are the previous and the bondage is the last. ||776||
When nineteen arise, thirty-one are bound, and two arise, then the first six are the bondage, and twenty-two are the four-fold. ||777|| 

Page #695:
---------------------------
## Gommatasara Karmakanda - 656

**Verse 778:** With twenty-six *tigiṇau* (stages of development), twenty-nine and thirty *bandha* (bondage) arise due to *duṇau* (demerit). The six *bandha* of the beginning are present, but not the twenty-eighth.

**Verse 779:** With twenty-seven *tigiṇau*, twenty-nine *bandha* arise due to *duṇau*. The six *bandha* of the beginning are present, but not the twenty-eighth.

**Verse 780:** With twenty-eight *tigiṇau*, twenty-nine *bandha* arise due to *dujuduṇau* (demerit). The twenty-eighth *bandha* is present, either with twenty-seven or twenty-nine *tigiṇau*.

**Verse 781:** With twenty-nine *tigiṇau*, thirty *bandha* arise due to *teṇau* (demerit). The twenty-eighth *bandha* is present with twenty-nine *tigiṇau*, but not with twenty-eight *tigiṇau*.

**Verse 782:** With thirty *tigiṇau*, the six *bandha* of the beginning are present due to *duṇau*. The twenty-eighth *bandha* is not present in this case.

**Verse 783:** With thirty-one *tigiṇau*, the seven *bandha* of *sajogga* (attachment) arise due to *baṇau* (demerit). There is no *bandha* in the case of *uvasanta* (cessation) and *caukku* (fourfold).

**Explanation:**

* When there are 93 and 91 *prakrti* (natural tendencies) present with 21 *tigiṇau*, there are two *bandha* of 29 and 30 *prakrti*. When there are 92 and 90 *prakrti* present, there are six *bandha* of the beginning. When there are 88 and other *prakrti* present, there are five *bandha* remaining out of the six *bandha* of the beginning, excluding the 28th *bandha*. Similarly, when there are 24 *tigiṇau* and 92, 90, 88, 84, and 82 *prakrti* present, there are five *bandha* present. (Verses 775-776)

* When there are 93 and 91 *prakrti* present with 25 *tigiṇau*, there are two *bandha* of 29 and 30 *prakrti*. When there are 92 *prakrti* present, there are six *bandha* of the beginning. When there are 90, 88, 84, and 82 *prakrti* present, there are five *bandha* remaining out of the six *bandha* of the beginning, excluding the 28th *bandha*. (Verse 777)

* When there are 93 and 91 *prakrti* present with 26 *tigiṇau* (in the case of human beings), there are two *bandha* of 29 and 30 *prakrti*. When there are 92 and 90 *prakrti* present (in the case of gods and *tirthankara*), there are six *bandha* of the beginning. When there are 88 and other *prakrti* present, there are five *bandha* remaining out of the six *bandha* of the beginning, excluding the 28th *bandha*. (Verse 778)

* When there are 93 and 91 *prakrti* present with 27 *tigiṇau*, there are two *bandha* of 29 and 30 *prakrti*. (In the case of humans, with 27 *tigiṇau*, there is a 29th *prakrti* present due to *āhārakasamuvāta* (food consumption). (Verse 779) 

Page #696:
---------------------------


Page #697:
---------------------------
Gommatasar Karmakanda-658
**Description of the three-fold conjunction of the Bandha-sthana, considering the Udaya-sattva as the Adhikarana (locus) and the Bandha-sthana as the Adheya (object)**

**Adhikarana**
**Adheya**
**5. Ny...**
**Sthana Number**
**Udaya-sthana**
**Description of the number of Prakritis in the Sambilyanagata**
**Bandha-sthana**
**Description of the number of Prakritis in the Bandha-sthana**
**Number**
**29 and 30 Prakritis**
**21 Prakritis**
**21 Prakritis**
**93 and 91 Prakritis | 2 | 92 and 90 Prakritis | 6**
**21 Prakritis**
**24 Prakritis**
**88-84 and 82 | 5**
**Prakritis 92-90-88-84 | 5**
**82 93 and 91 Prakritis | 2 | 92 Prakritis 6**
**23-25-26-28-29**
**and 30 Prakritis**
**23-25-26-29 and 30 Prakritis**
**23-25-26-29 and**
**30 Prakritis**
**29 and 30 Prakritis**
**23-25-26-28-29**
**and 30 Prakritis**
**25 Prakritis**
**25 Prakritis**
**25 Prakritis**
**26 Prakritis**
**26 Prakritis**
**90-88-84 and 82 | 5 |**
**Prakritis | 93 and 91 Prakritis | 92 and 90 Prakritis | 6 |**
**23-25-26-21 and 30 Prakritis**
**29 Prakritis**
**23-25-26-28-29**
**and 30 Prakritis**
**23-25-26-29**
**and 30 Prakritis**
**29 and 30 Prakritis**
**23-25-26-28-29**
**and 30 Prakritis**
**26 Prakritis**
**27 Prakritis**
**27 Prakritis**
**88-84 and 82 | 5**
**Prakritis 93 and 11 Prakritis | 2**
**92 Prakritis**
**1**
**|**

Page #698:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-659
27 Prakruti
3
|
90-88 and 84 | 5.
Prakruti 93 and 11 Prakruti | 2
92 Prakruti 6
23-25-26-29
and 30 Prakruti 29 and 30 Prakruti 23-25-26-28-29
28 Prakruti 28 Prakruti
28 Prakruti
90 Prakruti
28 Prakruti
88 and 84 Prakruti | 5
29 Prakruti 29 Prakruti
93 and 91 Prakruti | 2 92 and 90 Prakruti
29 Prakruti
88 and 84 Prakruti
.
23-25-26-28-29
and 30 Prakruti 23-25-26-29 and
30 Prakruti 29 and 30 Prakruti 23-25-26-28-29
and 30 Prakruti 23-25-26-29
and 30 Prakruti 29 and 31 Prakruti 28 and 29 Prakruti. Out of these, the place of 28 is found in a human being who has the power of the Tirthankara Prakruti in front of hell-going.
23-25-26-28-29
and 30 Prakruti
30 Prakruti 30 Prakruti
93 Prakruti 91 Prakruti
30 Prakruti
92-90 and 88
Prakruti
30 Prakruti
84 Prakruti
23-25-26-29
and 30 Prakruti 23-25-26-28-29
and 30 Prakruti
31 Prakruti
92-90 and 88
|
Prakruti
31 Prakruti
84 Prakruti
23-25-26-29 and 30 Prakruti 

Page #699:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-660
30 Prakruti
30 Prakruti 30-31 Prakruti
| 93-92-91 and 90 0 | 0 Upshantakashaya Gunasthan in
Prakruti 80-79-78 and 777... Kshinashantakashaya Gunasthan in 80-71-7. 75... Gimushtaasthan in ....
Prakruti | 80-79-78-77- 0 0 Ayogi Gunasthan in
10 and 9 Prakruti
9-8 Prakruti
6
Namassya Bandhadisu Dutisamjoga Paruvida Evam.
Sudavanavasanta Gunagan Sayarchande Sammadina. ||784||.  Artha - Those who are like the spring season in making the forest of Jain principles flourish and like the moon in increasing the ocean of the group of qualities, such Samyakgyanadhari Shri Vardhamana Swami has said that there are two-fold and three-fold divisions (bhed) in the bondage-arising and sattva of name karma.
In this way, the fourth chapter named 'Sthanasamutkirtan' in the Hindi commentary 'SiddhantgyanadIpika' of Gommatasara Karmakanda written by Shri Nemichandra Siddhantchakravarti is complete.
卐卐卐 

Page #700:
---------------------------
## Gommatasara Karmakanda-661

**Chapter on the Causes of Bondage**

Saluting my revered teachers, Abhayānanda Muniśvara, Indramandi Guru, who is a master of the scriptures, and the excellent Vīranandisvāmī, I will now speak about the causes of bondage, which are the *pratyayas* of the karmic substances.

**The Different Types of *Pratyayas***

The four primary *āsravas* are: *mithyātva*, *aviramaṇa*, *kaṣāya*, and *yoga*. These are the causes of the karmic *skandhas* acquiring their karmic nature. Their further subdivisions are 5, 12, 25, and 15 respectively. Thus, there are 57 subdivisions of *āsravas*.

**Explanation:**

The word *pratyaya* has many meanings. Sometimes it refers to knowledge, as in the case of *artha*, *śabda*, and *pratyaya* (knowledge). Sometimes it refers to an oath, as in the case of someone taking an oath when accused of stealing another's property. Sometimes it refers to a cause, as in the case of *avidyā* (ignorance) being caused by *saṃskāras* (impressions). Here, the word *pratyaya* is used in the sense of a cause.

*Pratyayas* cannot be the *āsravas* themselves, because the definition of *āsravas* is different. *Āsravas* are defined as the gateways through which karmas, which are characterized by merit and demerit, enter the soul. *Āsravas* are like *āsava* (fermentation). Just as the ocean has many rivers flowing into it, similarly, the soul has many *āsravas* flowing into it. 

Page #701:
---------------------------
Gommatasar Karmakanda-662
"Salilmapagamaukhairharaharapoorayate tatha mithyadarshanaadi dvaaraanu pravishttaih karmabhir anishamaatma samapoorayate iti mithyadarshanaadi dvaara maasravaha." (T. Ra. Va. 1/14/16)  That is, the door through which the karmas in the form of punya and papa enter is called asrava. Just as the ocean is filled with water daily by the rivers, similarly the soul is filled with karmas by the sources of mithyadarshana etc. Just as there are different types of asrava like dravyasrava, bhavasrava, samprayika and iryapatha asrava, similarly there are different types of pratyaya. This pratyaya is of four types due to the difference in mithyatva etc. Its further divisions are five types in order: mithyatva, vinaya, vipreet, sanshaya and agyan. There are 6+6=12 types of aviriti: not controlling the five senses and mind, and not protecting the five sthavara and jaskayika jivas (not cultivating compassion). There are 16 types of kshaya: anantaanubandhi, apratyakhyan, pratyakhyan and sajavalan, and 9 types of nokshaya: hasya, rati, arati, shok, bhaya, jugupsa, strived, napumsakaved and purushaved, making a total of 25 types. There are 5+12+25+15=57 types of pratyaya: 4 types of manoyoga (satya, asatya, ubhaya, anubhaya), 4 types of vachanayoga (satya, asatya, ubhaya, anubhaya), 7 types of kayayoga (oudarik, oudarik mishra, vaikriyak, vaikriyak mishra, aharak, aharak mishra and karman).

Knowing the above, the next step is to understand the root pratyayas in the gunasthana.

"Chadupacchaigo bandho padhame nantaratighe tipacchaigo. Missagibidhiyam uvarimdugam cha desekkade sammi." || 787 ||

"Uvarilpanchaye pun dupachchaya jogapacchayo tiyah. Samannnapacchaya khalu atthanham honti kammanam." || 788 ||

Meaning: In the mithyatvagunasthana, there is bondage due to all four pratyayas. In the next three gunasthana, sasadanamishra, asanyata, there is bondage due to three pratyayas without mithyatva. (Desha means where there is a little asanyama, that is, where there is a little asanyama, that is, where there is a little asanyama, that is, where there is a little asanyama, that is, where there is a little asanyama, that is, where there is a little asanyama, that is, where there is a little asanyama, that is, where there is a little asanyama, that is, where there is a little asanyama, that is, where there is a little asanyama, that is, where there is a little asanyama, that is, where there is a little asanyama, that is, where there is a little asanyama, that is, where there is a little asanyama, that is, where there is a little asanyama, that is, where there is a little asanyama, that is, where there is a little asanyama, that is, where there is a little asanyama, that is, where there is a little asanyama, that is, where there is a little asanyama, that is, where there is a little asanyama, that is, where there is a little asanyama, that is, where there is a little asanyama, that is, where there is a little asanyama, that is, where there is a little asanyama, that is, where there is a little asanyama, that is, where there is a little asanyama, that is, where there is a little asanyama, that is, where there is a little asanyama, that is, where there is a little asanyama, that is, where there is a little asanyama, that is, where there is a little asanyama, that is, where there is a little asanyama, that is, where there is a little asanyama, that is, where there is a little asanyama, that is, where there is a little asanyama, that is, where there is a little asanyama, that is, where there is a little asanyama, that is, where there is a little asanyama, that is, where there is a little asanyama, that is, where there is a little asanyama, that is, where there is a little asanyama, that is, where there is a little asanyama, that is, where there is a little asanyama, that is, where there is a little asanyama, that is, where there is a little asanyama, that is, where there is a little asanyama, that is, where there is a little asanyama, that is, where there is a little asanyama, that is, where there is a little asanyama, that is, where there is a little asanyama, that is, where there is a little asanyama, that is, where there is a little asanyama, that is, where there is a little asanyama, that is, where there is a little asanyama, that is, where there is a little asanyama, that is, where there is a little asanyama, that is, where there is a little asanyama, that is, where there is a little asanyama, that is, where there is a little asanyama, that is, where there is a little asanyama, that is, where there is a little asanyama, that is, where there is a little asanyama, that is, where there is a little asanyama, that is, where there is a little asanyama, that is, where there is a little asanyama, that is, where there is a little asanyama, that is, where there is a little asanyama, that is, where there is a little asanyama, that is, where there is a little asanyama, that is, where there is a little asanyama, that is, where there is a little asanyama, that is, where there is a little asanyama, that is, where there is a little
Page #702:
---------------------------
Gommatasar Karmakanda-663

**Regarding the Four Fundamental Concepts in Relation to Gunasthanas**

| Gunasthana | Number of Pratyayas | Specific Explanation of Pratyayas | Mithyatva |
|---|---|---|---|
| Mithyatva, Aviriti, Kashaya, and Yoga | Saasadan | Mithyatva, Aviriti, Kashaya, and Yoga | Mithyatva |
| Aviriti, Kashaya, and Yoga | Misra | Aviriti, Kashaya, and Yoga |  |
| Aviriti, Kashaya, and Yoga | Asanyata | Aviriti, Kashaya, and Yoga |  |
| Aviriti, Kashaya, and Yoga | Deshasanyata | Aviriti, Kashaya, and Yoga |  |
| Aviriti, Kashaya, and Yoga | (Because there is a mixed form of Aviriti-Viriti here) | Aviriti, Kashaya, and Yoga |  |
| Kashaya and Yoga | Aprammatta | Kashaya and Yoga |  |
| Kashaya and Yoga | Apurvakarana | Kashaya and Yoga |  |
| Kashaya and Yoga | Anivritikarana | Kashaya and Yoga |  |
| Kashaya and Yoga | Sukshmasamparaya | Kashaya and Yoga |  |
| Kashaya and Yoga | Upashantakashay | Kashaya and Yoga |  |
| Yoga | Kshinakashaya | Yoga |  |
| Yoga | Sayogakevali, Ayogakevali | Yoga |  |
|  | Prammatta |  |  |
|  | Yoga |  |  |

Now, the Uttarapratyayas are called in the Gunasthanas:

"Panavanna, Pannaasa, Tidaal, Chadaal, Sattatisa Ya. Chaduvisa, Babisa, Bawisampuvaakarnautti. ||789|| Thule, Sollaspahudi, Egunaam Jaav Hodi Dasthanam. Suhumaadisuu Das, Navayam, Navayam, Jogimmi Sattevaa. ||790||" 1. Pra.Pa.Sa.P. 106, Gatha 80 | 

Page #703:
---------------------------
Gommatasar Karmakanda - 664

**Meaning:** There are 55, 50, 43, 46, 37, 24, 22, and 22  **pratyas** (impressions) in the **Mithyatva** (false belief), **Aharaka** (food), **Aharaka-Mishra** (mixed food), **Saasadan** (purification), **Mishra** (mixed), **Asanyata** (uncontrolled), **Deshasanyata** (controlled), and **Pramatta** (distracted) **gunasthanas** (stages of spiritual development), respectively.  Further, there are 16, 15, 14, 13, 12, 11, and 10 **pratyas** in the **Anivritikaran** (cessation of karma), 10 in the **Sukshma-Samparaya** (subtle state), 9 in the **Upashanta-Kshaya** (calm passions), 9 in the **Kshina-Kshaya** (diminished passions), and 7 in the **Sayoga-Kevali** (liberated with attachments).

**Detailed Meaning:**

* **Mithyatva Gunasthan:** There are 55 **pratyas** because **Aharaka** and **Aharaka-Mishra** **kayayoga** (body-karma) are not present.
* **Saasadan Gunasthan:** 5 **pratyas** are reduced due to the decrease in **Mithyatva** (55 - 5 = 50).
* **Mishra Gunasthan:** 7 **pratyas** are reduced due to the absence of **Audarik-Mishra** (generosity-mixed), **Vaikriya-Mishra** (activity-mixed), **Karman-Kayayoga** (karma-body-karma), and the **Ananta-Anubandhi-Chatushk** (four infinite attachments) (50 - 7 = 43).
* **Asanyata Gunasthan:** 3 **pratyas** are added due to the presence of **Audarik-Mishra**, **Vaikriya-Mishra**, and **Karman** (43 + 3 = 46).
* **Deshasanyata Gunasthan:** 9 **pratyas** are reduced due to the absence of **Audarik-Mishra**, **Vaikriya-Vaikriya-Mishra**, **Karman**, **Apratya-Kshaya-Char** (non-rejection of passions), and **Trasa-Hinsa-Rupa-Avirati** (non-restraint in the form of fear and violence) (46 - 9 = 37).
* **Pramatta Gunasthan:** 15 **pratyas** are reduced due to the absence of **Avirati** (non-restraint) and **Pratya-Kshaya** (rejection of passions) (37 - 15 = 22).
* **A-Pramatta Gunasthan:** 2 **pratyas** are added due to the presence of **Aharaka-Dwik** (two food-related **pratyas**) (22 + 2 = 24).
* **A-Purva-Karan Gunasthan:** 2 **pratyas** are reduced due to the absence of **Aharaka-Dwik** (24 - 2 = 22).
* **Anivritikaran Gunasthan:** 6 **pratyas** are reduced due to the absence of **Hasya** (laughter), etc., **No-Kshaya** (non-passions) (22 - 6 = 16).
* **Napunsaka-Veda:** 1 **pratyay** is reduced due to the absence of **Napunsaka-Veda** (knowledge of the neuter gender) (16 - 1 = 15).
* **Stri-Veda:** 1 **pratyay** is reduced due to the absence of **Stri-Veda** (knowledge of the female gender) (15 - 1 = 14).
* **Purusha-Veda:** 1 **pratyay** is reduced due to the absence of **Purusha-Veda** (knowledge of the male gender) (14 - 1 = 13).
* **Sajjwalan-Krodha:** 1 **pratyay** is reduced due to the absence of **Sajjwalan-Krodha** (intense anger) (13 - 1 = 12).
* **Sajjwalan-Mana:** 1 **pratyay** is reduced due to the absence of **Sajjwalan-Mana** (intense pride) (12 - 1 = 11).
* **Sajjwalan-Maya:** 1 **pratyay** is reduced due to the absence of **Sajjwalan-Maya** (intense delusion) (11 - 1 = 10).
* **Sukshma-Samparaya Gunasthan:** There are 10 **pratyas** because **Sukshma-Lobha** (subtle greed) is still present.
* **Upashanta-Kshaya Gunasthan:** 1 **pratyay** is reduced due to the absence of **Sukshma-Lobha** (10 - 1 = 9).
* **Kshina-Kshaya Gunasthan:** 1 **pratyay** is reduced due to the absence of **Sukshma-Lobha** (10 - 1 = 9).
* **Sayoga-Kevali:** There are 7 **pratyas** because they have **Satya** (truth), **Anubhava-Mana** (experience-mind), **Satya** (truth), **Anubhava-Vachan** (experience-speech), **Audarik-Audarik-Mishra** (generosity-generosity-mixed), and **Karman-Kayayoga** (karma-body-karma). **A-Yoga-Kevali** (liberated without attachments) do not have any **pratyas**.

**Now, to explain the **vyuchchitti** (disappearance) and **anudaya** (emergence) of these **pratyas**, we quote 7 verses from another text. First, we will discuss the **vyuchchitti**:**

**Verse 1:**

**Pan Chadu Sunnam Navayam Pannaaras Dooni Sunna Chakkam Cha. Ekkekam Das Jav Ya Evam Sunnam Cha Chari Sag Sunnam.**

**Meaning:** From **Mithyatva** to **A-Purva-Karan** **gunasthanas**, there is a **vyuchchitti
Page #704:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-665
In the first 13 Gunasthanas, the number of Pratyayas in the Anudaya order should be known as follows: 2-7-14-11-20-33-35-35-41-47-48-48-50.
In Mithyatva Gunasthan, there are 5 Mithyatva Pratyayas. In Sasadan Gunasthan, there are 4 Pratyayas of Ananta Anubandhi Kashaya Chatushkar. In Misra Gunasthan, there is no Pratyayavyuchchitti. In Asanyata Gunasthan, there are 4 Pratyayas of Apratyakhyana Kashaya Chatushkar. In Vaikriyika Kay, Vaikriyika Misra Kay, Audarika Misra Kay, and Karman Kay Yog, Trasahinsa, there are 9 Pratyayas. In Desasanyata Gunasthan, there are 11 Pratyayas of Avirati and Pratyakhyana Avarana Kashaya Chatushkar. In Pramatta Sanayata Gunasthan, there is 1 Pratyay of Aharak Dwik. In Aprmatta Gunasthan, there are 0 Pratyayas. In Apurvakaran, there are 6 Pratyayas of Hasya, etc. In Anivrittikaran Gunasthan, there are 3 Pratyayas of Veda and 3 Pratyayas of Sajwalana Kashaya (Badar, Lobha). In Sukshma Samparaya Gunasthan, there is 1 Pratyay of Sukshma Lobha. In Upashanta Kashaya, there are 0 Pratyayas. In Kshina Kashaya Gunasthan, there are 4 Pratyayas of Asatya, Ubhayavachan Yog, and 2 Manoyog. In Sayog Kevali, there are 7 Pratyayas of Satya, Anubhayavachan Yog, Satya, Anubhay Manoyog, Audarika Audarika Misra Kay Yog, Karman Kay Yog. 

Page #705:
---------------------------
## Gommatasara Karmakanda-666

**With respect to Gunasthanas, 55 Uttarapratyayas are described in relation to the heart, the abdomen, and the body.**

**Gunasthanas**

| **Udayagata** | **Anudayarupa Pratyayas** | **Pratyayas** | **Anutyarupa Pratyayas** | **Vyuchchitti** | **Vyuchchittirupa Pratyayas** | **Vishesh Varna** | **Pratyayas** | **Vishesh Varna** | **Pratyayas** |
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
| **Mithyatva** | Aharaka-Ahamishra Kayayoga | 5 (Mithyatva) | 4 (Anantanu bandhiki Charakshaya) |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| **Sasadan** | Uparyukt 2 Yogas and 5 Mithyatva |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| **Mishra** | Uparyukt 7+4 Anantanu bandhi Kshaya + Audamishra + Vaikri. Mishra + Karmanakayayoga |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| **Asanyata** | 46 | 11 | Purvokt 7+4 Anantanu bandhi Kshaya | 4 Apratyakhyan Kshaya + Vaikriyik Vaikri. Mishra Audamishra + Audamishra Karman + Trasahinsa |  |  |  |  |  |
| **Avirati** | 37 | 20 | 11 Avirati + 4 Pratyakhyara Kshaya | 1+4 Apratyakhyan Kshaya + Audamishra + Vaikri. Kay + Vaikri. Mishra + Karman + Trasahinsa Avirati |  |  |  |  |  |
| **Deshasanyata** |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| **Pramantr** | 24 | 33 | Uparyukt 20 + 11 Avirati + 4 Pratyakhyan Aharaka and Aharaka Mishra Kayayoga |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| **Aharaka Kay** |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| **Aharaka Mishra Kay** |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| **Apratmatta** | 22 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| **Apuurvakaran** |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| **Uparyukt 33 + Aharaka + Aharaka Mishra** |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| **Uparyukt 33 + Aharaka + Aharaka Mishra** |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| **Uparyukt 35 + 6 Hasyaadi** |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| **Hasyaadi Nokshaya** |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| **5 (Napumsakaved)** |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| **Anivrittikaran Bhag 1** |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 

Page #706:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-667
Anivrittikaran | 15 2nd Part
Above 41+1 Napumsakaved.
1
1 Viveed
Above 42+1 Strived
Anivrittikaran 3rd Part
1 Purushaved
Anivrittikaran 4th Part:
Above 43+1 Purushaved
Sanjwalan Krodh
Above 44+1 Sanjwalan Krodh.
1
.
Sanjwalan Man
Anivrittikaran 5th Part Anivrittikaran
6th Part Anivrittikaran 7th Part
Above 45+1 Sanjwalan Man
Sanjwalan Maya
Above 46+1 Sanjwalan Maya
Sthula Lobh (but Sukshma Lobh is still remaining)
Sukshma Lobh's
Sukshma Samparaya Upashantakshaya
Above Above 47+Sukshma Lobh Above 47+Sukshma Lobh
Kshina Kayay
2 (Asaty va Ubhay
Manoyog) + 2 (Asaty va Ubhay
Vachan Yog)
Sayog Kevali. 7
. 50.
Above 48+4 Asaty va | Ubhay Manoyog va Vachan Yog
7 | 7 (Saty va Anubhay Roop 2
Manoyog + Saty va
Anubhay Roop 2 Vachan Yog Audarik + Audarik Mishr + Karman
Kay Yog)
52, 52-2 Audarik Mishr
va Karman
Here, in the fourteen Marganas obtained in this chapter, the Uttar Bhedas of the Bandha Pratyayas are explained by quoting 17 Gathas from the 'Shatak' Adhikar of the Prakrit Panchasangrah.
Firstly, the Bandha Pratyay in the Gati Margana is stated. 

Page #707:
---------------------------
Gommatasar Karmakanda-668:

**Verse 1:**
In the realm of the gods, there are 51 bondage-producing factors, excluding the two types of Audarik (generosity) and Aharak (food). In the realm of the Tiryanchas (animals), there are 53 bondage-producing factors, excluding the two types of Vaikriyik (change) and Aharak.

**Verse 2:**
In the realm of humans, there are 55 bondage-producing factors, excluding the two types of Vaikriyik. In the realm of the Gachchha (moving beings), there are 57 bondage-producing factors, excluding the two types of Vaikriyik and Aharak.

**Verse 3:**
In the realm of the one-sensed beings, there are 38 bondage-producing factors, excluding the 12 Yogas (paths) and the two types of Audarik and Karmanakayayoga (body-action yoga). This excludes the five senses (taste, smell, sight, hearing, and mind) and the two types of Avirati (non-restraint) related to them, as well as the two types of Stri-Purusha Veda (knowledge of women and men).

**Explanation:**
The bondage-producing factors are the causes of bondage. They are classified into 57 categories, which are further divided into different types based on the realm of existence. The number of bondage-producing factors varies depending on the realm and the specific type of factor.

**Special Note:**
**Question:** How can one-sensed beings practice non-violence?
**Answer:** There are examples of trees that harm humans and flowers that harm mosquitoes. Therefore, it is possible for one-sensed beings to practice non-violence.

**Conclusion:**
The text discusses the bondage-producing factors related to Yoga (paths) and Kashaya (passions). 

Page #708:
---------------------------
Gommatasar Karmakanda - 669
## Chapter 669: Karmakanda

**Verse 4:**
There are 43 bandha-pratyaya (binding factors) remaining after excluding the 14 yogas (states of being) from the 57 total, excluding the 13 yogas that are not specific to each individual.

**Verse 5:**
The 12 bandha-pratyaya in the Aharak and Aharak-Mishra-Kaya-Yoga (food-related and food-mixed body-related yogas) are the four Sanchalana-Kashaya (mobile passions), the seven Nokashaya (non-passions), and the Swakiya-Yoga (self-related yoga).

**Verse 6:**
For Purusha-Vedi (male-bodied) beings, there are 55 bandha-pratyaya remaining after excluding the Stri-Ved (female-bodied) and Napumsaka-Ved (neuter-bodied) yogas. For Stri-Ved and Napumsaka-Ved beings, there are 153 bandha-pratyaya remaining after excluding the Aharak and Aharak-Mishra-Kaya-Yoga, and the two opposing Vedas.

**Explanation:**
Excluding the four Kshaya (passions) from the desired Krodha (anger) etc. Kshaya, there are 45 bandha-pratyaya remaining.

**Now, we will discuss the bandha-pratyaya in the path of knowledge:**

**Verse 7:**
For Matyajnani (knowledge-knowing) and Shruta-ajnani (scripture-knowing) beings, there are 55 bandha-pratyaya remaining after excluding the Aharak and Aharak-Mishra-Kaya-Yoga. For Vibhangajnani (knowledge of differentiation) beings, there are 52 bandha-pratyaya remaining after excluding the Audarik-Mishra (generous-mixed), Vaikriyik-Mishra (transformative-mixed), and Karman-Kaya-Yoga (karma-body-related yoga).

**Verse 8:**
For Matyajnani, Shruta-ajnani, Avadhi-ajnani (knowledge of perception), and Avadhi-darshani (perception-seeing) beings, there are 48 bandha-pratyaya remaining after excluding the four Ananta-Anubandhi-Kashaya (infinitely connected passions) and the five Mithyatva (falsehoods). For Mana-Paryaya-ajnani (knowledge of mind-perception) beings, there are 12 bandha-pratyaya remaining after excluding the six Nokashaya (non-passions) including Hasya (laughter), Purusha-Ved, four Sanchalana-Kashaya, four Mano-Yoga (mind-related yoga), four Vachan-Yoga (speech-related yoga), and Audarik-Kaya-Yoga.

**References:**
D.P. 8, pp. 269, 263, 264.

Page #709:
---------------------------
Gommatasar Karmakanda - 670

These are 20 bandhapratyaya and in the case of Kevalgyani and Kevaldarshani jivas, there are 7 bandhapratyaya in the form of yogas: Adi and Antam Manoyog and Vachanayog (Satya-Anubhav Man and Vachanayog), Audarik-Audarikmischra and Karmankayog (2+2+3).

Further, bandhapratyaya related to Sanjammarg are as follows:

Sanjalan Nokasaya Man Vachi Orala Aharadugam || 9 ||

Samaiy Chheasu Aharadugunaya Du Parihare. Man-Vachi-Attaralan Suhume Sanjalan Lohante || 10 || Kammoraladugai Manavachi Chaura Ya Honti Jahkhaae. Asanjammmi Savve Aharadugunaya Neya || 11 ||

Anamiccha Bidhiya Tasavah Veuvvahar Juyalai. Orala Missakamma Tehim Vihina Du Honti Desammi || 12 ||

Meaning: In Samayik-Chhedopasthapana Sanjami jivas, there are 4 Sanjwalan Kshaya, 9 Nokasaya, 4 Manoyog, 4 Vachanayog, Audarik Kayayog, Aharak and Aharakmischra Kayayog (4+1+4+4+3) 24 bandhapratyaya. Excluding Aharak-Aharakmischra Kayayog, the remaining (24-2) 22 pratyaya are present in Pariharvishuddhi Sanjami. In Sukshma Samparaya Sanjam, there are 4 Manoyog, 4 Vachanayog, Sanjwalan Sukshma Lobh, Audarik Kayayog (4+4+1+1) 10 bandhapratyaya. In Yathaayat Sanjam, there are 4 Manoyog, 4 Vachanayog, Audarik-Audarikmischra and Karman Kayayog (4+4+3) 19 bandhapratyaya. In Asanjami jivas, excluding Aharak and Aharakmischra Kayayog (57-2) 55 pratyaya are present. In Desasanjami jivas, excluding (Anantanubandhi Kshaya 4, Mithyatva 5, Tras Aviriti, Vaikriyik-Vaikriyikmischra, Aharak and Aharakmischra, Audarikmischra and Karman Kayayog, Apratyakhyan Kshaya 4) 20, the remaining (57-20) 37 bandhapratyaya are present.

Now, bandhapratyaya in Leshya Bhavy and Darshanmarg are as follows:

Tej-Tiya Chakkhujugale Savve Heuu Havanti Bhavve Ya. Kinhaditya Abhavve Aharadugunaya Neya || 13 ||

Meaning: In Tej Trik (Peet-Padma Shukla) Leshya, all (57) pratyaya are present. In Krishan Adi three Ashubh Leshya (Krishan-Neel-Kapota), excluding Aharak and Aharakmischra Kayayog (57-2) 55 pratyaya are present. 

Page #710:
---------------------------
Gommatapsar Karmakanda-671

All (57)  pratyas are present in both the sighted and the blind beings. The statement of Avadhi Darshan and Kevala Darshan has been made in the Gyanmarg with Avadhi Gyan and Kevala Gyan respectively. In the Bhanajivas, all (57) pratyas are present, while in the Abhavyajivas, there are 55 pratyas without the Aharak-Aharak Mishra (57-2). Further, in the Samyaktva Marg, the Bandha Pratyas are mentioned as follows:

**An-Michchha-Ahar-Duguṇa Savve Uvasame Neya.**
**Ahar-Jugal-Jutta Veday Khaiyammi Te Honti.** ||14||

... **Michchha-Ahar-Numa Pae Michchhammi Ahar-Duguṇa.**
**An-Michchha-Miss-Joga-Ahar-Duguṇa Havanti Missammi.** ||15||

**Meaning:** In the Aupashmik Samyagdrishti beings, there are 46 pratyas remaining after excluding the 11 pratyas which are Anantanubandhi Kashay 4, Mithyatva 5, and Aharak-Aharak Mishra Kayayog (5+4+2). In the Vedak Samyagdrishti and Kshayik Samyagdrishti beings, there is Aharak Dwik (Aharak-Aharak Mishra Kayayog), therefore, by adding 2 to the aforementioned 46, there are 48 pratyas in both. In the Sasadan Jivas, there are 50 Bandha Pratyas without Mithyatva 5 and Aharak-Aharak Mishra Yog (57-5). In the Mithyadrishti Jivas, there are 55 pratyas without Aharak-Aharak Mishra Yog (57-2). In the Samyag-Mithyadrishti Jivas, there are 43 pratyas without Anantanubandhi Kashay 4, Mithyatva 5, Audarik Mishra, Vaikriyik Mishra, Karman, and Aharak-Aharak Mishra Kayayog (57-14). Further, in the Sanji Marg, the Bandha Pratyas are described as follows:

**Michchha-Adi-Chaukkeyar Joga-Una Asanniye Mottu.**
**Bhasantor-Alad-Uan Kamma Sanniimme Svave Vi.** ||16||

**Meaning:** In the Asanji Jivas, out of the 57 varieties of the four fundamental pratyas, there are 45 Bandha Pratyas after excluding 12 yogas (Mano Yog 4, 3 Vachan Yog, Vaikriyik-Vaikriyik Mishra Kayayog, and Aharak-Aharak Mishra Kayayog) and reducing the Man Avirati (57-12). All (57) pratyas are present in the Sanji Jivas. Further, in the Ahar Marg, the Bandha Pratyas are mentioned as follows:

**Ahare Kammuna Iyre Kammuna Joy Rahiya Te.**
**Evam Tu Magganasu Uttarhedu Jinehi Nihittha.** ||17|| 

Page #711:
---------------------------
## Gommatasara Karmakanda-672

**Meaning:** In the case of *Aharakajiwas* (those who consume food), there are 56 *Bandhapratyayas* (binding karmic impressions) remaining after the elimination of *Karmankayayoga* (the combination of karmic matter and the soul). In the case of *Anaharakajiwas* (those who do not consume food), there are 43 *Bandhapratyayas* remaining after the elimination of 14 *Yogas* (stages of karmic bondage) without *Karmankayayoga*. Thus, Shri Jinendra Bhagwan has instructed the *Uttarapratyayas* (later karmic impressions) in the *Marganas* (paths of liberation).

**Next, to explain the characteristics of the *Pratyayas* (karmic impressions) in detail, Nemichandra Acharya himself states the following *Gathasutra* (verse) in this chapter:**

**Verse 791:**

*Avaraadinam Thanam Thanaphayara Payarakuda Va | Kudducharanabhangha Panchviha Honti Igisamaye ||*

**Meaning:** There are five types of *Pratyayas* at one time: *Jghanya* (inferior), *Madhyama* (intermediate), and *Utkrishtasthan* (superior) *Than* (place), *Thanaphayara* (types of place), *Kutaprakar* (types of *Kuta* - karmic matter), *Kutauchcharan* (pronunciation of *Kuta*), and *Bhang* (destruction).

**Further, the *Pratyayasthan* (places of karmic impressions) in the *Gunasthan* (stages of spiritual development) are as follows:**

**Verse 792:**

*Das Attaras Dasayam Sattar Nav Solansam Cha Donham Pi | Attha Ya Chaudas Panayam Sattiye Duiti Dugegamegamdo ||*

**Meaning:** The number of *Pratyayas* that occur in a single *Kala* (time period) for a single *Jiva* (soul) is called a *Than*. These *Than* are as follows in the *Gunasthan* starting with *Mithyadristi* (false belief):

* **Mithyadristi:** *Jghanya* *Than* - 10 *Pratyayas*, *Madhyama* *Than* - 11 to 17 *Pratyayas* (one *Pratyaya* more each time), and *Utkrisht* *Than* - 18 *Pratyayas*. In other words, in the *Mithyatva* *Gunasthan*, a *Jiva* can have a minimum of 10 *Pratyayas* at one time, a maximum of 18 *Pratyayas*, and any number in between.

* **Sasan* *Gunasthan:** *Jghanya* *Than* - 10 *Pratyayas*, *Madhyama* *Than* - 11 to 16 *Pratyayas* (one *Pratyaya* more each time), and *Utkrisht* *Than* - 17 *Pratyayas*.

* **Mishra* *Gunasthan:** *Jghanya* *Than* - 9 *Pratyayas*, *Madhyama* *Than* - 10 to 15 *Pratyayas* (one *Pratyaya* more each time), and *Utkrisht* *Than* - 16 *Pratyayas*.

* **Asanyata* *Gunasthan:** The same as *Mishra* *Gunasthan* due to the phrase " *Dvayorapi Cha* ".

* **Deshasanyata* *Gunasthan:** *Jghanya* *Than* - 8 *Pratyayas*, *Madhyama* *Than* - 9 to 13 *Pratyayas* (one *Pratyaya* more each time), and *Utkrisht* *Than* - 14 *Pratyayas*.

* **Pramatta, Apramatta, and Apurvakaran* *Gunasthan:** Each of these three *Gunasthan* has a *Jghanya* *Than* of 5 *Pratyayas*, a *Madhyama* *Than* of 6 *Pratyayas*, and an *Utkrisht* *Than* of 7 *Pratyayas*.

* **Anivrittikaran* *Gunasthan:** *Jghanya* *Than* - 2 *Pratyayas*, *Madhyama* *Than* - 3 *Pratyayas*, and *Utkrisht* *Than* - 4 *Pratyayas*.

**Notes:**

1. The 17 *Gathas* after *Gatha* 790, which describe the *Marganas* and *Bandhapratyayas*, are from the *Panchasangraha* (Prakrit) text, specifically *Shataka Adhikar* verses 84-100. They are quoted here due to the context of the discussion. This *Gatha* is also found in *Pra.Pan.San.Pu.* 113.
2. ...


Page #712:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-673: There is no middle ground for the bandha-pratyaya, the highest ground is for 3 bandha-pratyaya. In the Sukshma-Samparaya-guna-sthana, there is only one place for 2 bandha-pratyaya without the distinction of jghanya etc., in the Upashanta-kshayadi-guna-sthana, there is only one place for each without the distinction of jghanya etc., and in the Ayogi-guna-sthana, it is zero.

**Comparison of jghanya, madhyama and utkrisht sthana in relation to guna-sthana**

| Guna-sthana | Jghanya | Madhyama | Utkrishta |
|---|---|---|---|
| Mithyatva | ... | 10 to 15 | ... |
| Sasadan | ... | 10 to 15 | ... |
| Mishn | ... | ... | ... |
| Asanyata | ... | ... | ... |
| Deshasanyata | ... | ... | ... |
| Aprammatta | ... | ... | ... |
| Apurvakarana Anivritti | ... | ... | ... |
| Sukshma-Samparaya | ... | ... | ... |
| Kshaya | ... | ... | ... |
| Kshina-kshaya | ... | ... | ... |
| Sayogi-kevali | ... | ... | ... |
| Ayogi-kevali | ... | ... | ... |

**Now we describe the types of bandha-pratyaya-sthana**

**793**

**Meaning:** In the 9 sthana of Mithyatva-guna-sthana, there are 3 lower sthana with 10-11 and 12 bandha-pratyaya, and 3 upper sthana with 18-17 and 16 bandha-pratyaya, with 1-3 and 5 kutas respectively. There are 6-6 kutas in the 3 middle sthana with 13-14 and 15 bandha-pratyaya. From Sasadan to Deshasanyata-guna-sthana, the first and last sthana have 1-1 kutas, the second and second-last sthana have 2-2 kutas, and the middle sthana between the second and second-last have 3-3 kutas. From Prammatta to Sayogi-guna-sthana, all sthana have only 1-1 kutas. 

Page #713:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-674
Regarding the types of Pratyayasthanas -
Ganasthana
Pratyayarupa sthana sankhya gunasthana mein
Kuljoad
Mithyatva
Sthana
Prakar
Kuta Sasadan
Sthana
Prakar
Sthana
Kuta
Prakar
Asanyata
Sthana
Kuta
Prakar
Deshasanyata
Sthana
Prakar
Pramatta
Prakar
Aprammatta
Sthana
Prakar
Apuurvakaran
Kuta Anivrittikaran
Prakar
Sthana
Kuta
Prakar
Sthana
Sukshmasabhpray
Kuta Upashantakashay
Prakar
Sthana
Prakar
Kshinakashay
Prakar
Kuta Sayogkevali
Sthana
Kuta
Prakar 

Page #714:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-675 Note - In the above mentioned Sandristi, 55 places and their 120 Kood types have been mentioned. Now, to know the above mentioned place types, we state the Kood types.
Bhayadugarhiyam Padham Ekka Darajudan Dusahyamidi Tinhan.
Samanna Tiyakuda Miccha Anaheenatinnivi Ya ||794|| Meaning - Fear-Aversion free is the first, with one of fear-aversion is the second or with fear-aversion is the third, in this way 3 Koods are common, and also know 3 more Koods which are the false-view ones that disconnect the infinite-connected, without infinite-connected karmas.
Special Meaning - Out of five false-views, one being has only one false-view in one time, therefore, establish five false-views below, write 1-1 on five places in the form of Sahanaani, and above them, write one-one on six places in the form of Tirya for six senses, because one being has only one subject's inclination in one time, out of these six senses. And, out of six body-violence, one being has one body-violence in one time, or two body-violence, or three body-violence, or four, or five, or six body-violence, therefore, write their Sahanaani in the form of Tirya, with numbers one-two-three-four-five and six respectively. Above them, write numbers four-four in four places in the form of Tirya, for sixteen karmas, because one being has the arising of four types of anger, four types of pride, four types of deceit, or four types of greed, out of these four karmas, in one time. Above them, write number one-one in three places, for three Vedas, because one being has the arising of only one Veda in one time. And, above it, write number two in two places, for humor-pleasure or displeasure-sorrow, because one being has the arising of only one pair in one time. Above it, write number one in thirteen places, for fifteen yogas, because one being has only one yoga in one time, except for Aharakdwik (Aharak-Aharakmishn does not happen in false-view). In this way, three Koods should be made. In these, the first Kood is free from both fear-aversion, therefore, write zero above it. The second Kood is with the arising of one of fear-aversion, therefore, write number one in two places above it. The third Kood is with both fear-aversion, therefore, write number two in one place above it. In this way, these three Koods are made, so these three Koods are the original Koods, and the false-view one that disconnects the infinite-connected, does not have the arising of infinite-connected till the end of life, therefore, make three Koods without infinite-connected, that is, where number four is written in the form of four karmas, write number three in place of four, the one that disconnects the infinite-connected karma is enough, therefore, there is no Audaarikmishn, Vaikriyamishn and Karmankayoga, which are related to insufficient, therefore, in place of thirteen yogas, 

Page #715:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda - 676

10 Yogas should be written, in this way, with and without Anantanubandhi, 3-3 Kutas together make 6 Kutas related to Mithyatva Gunasthan. In Sasadan Gunasthan, in the general form of three Kutas, where the first five Mithyatvas were written, writing zero in their place makes three Kutas. In Mishragunasthan, there is no Anantanubandhi Kashaya, therefore, instead of four Kashayas, 3-3 Kashayas should be written, and due to the absence of Audarikamsra, Vaikriyikamsra, and Karmankayayoga, instead of 13 Yogas, only 10 Yogas should be written, in this way, there are three Kutas in Mishragunasthan. In Asanyat Gunasthan, again, due to the presence of Audarikamsra, Vaikriyikamsra, and Karman, three Yogas, 13 Yogas should be written, in this way, three Kutas will be formed here as well. In Deshasanyat Gunasthan, due to the absence of Apratyakhyan Kashay Chatushk, instead of Kashaya, two-two Kashayas should be written in four places, and there is no Ahimsa, therefore, the number 6 should not be written in the place of Kayabadh, and without Audarikamsra, Vaikriyikamsra, and Karmankayayoga, there are 9 Yogas out of 13, therefore, 9 should be written in the place of Yogas, in this way, there are three Kutas in this Gunasthan as well. In Pramat Gunasthan, there are no 12 Aviratis, therefore, in the place of Indriya and Kayabadh, zero should be written everywhere. There is also an absence of Pratyakhyan Kashaya, therefore, the number one should be written in the place of Kashaya, and in the 9 Yogas related to Deshasanyat Gunasthan, when Aharak-Aharakamsra Kayayoga is added, 11 Yogas are formed, therefore, 11 should be written in the place of Yogas, in this way, three Kutas will be formed here as well. In Apratmat and Apurvakaran Gunasthan, without these two Yogas, Aharak Aharakamsra Kay, there are the aforementioned 9 Yogas, therefore, in both these Gunasthanas, writing the number 9 in the place of Yogas, three-three Kutas will be formed. In Anivrittikaran Gunasthan, in whichever part there is an absence of Ved, Kashaya, and Hasya, etc., six Kashayas, zero should be written in that part, one-one Kuta will be formed, because in all the parts of Anivrittikaran Gunasthan, there is an absence of Bhaya-Jugupsa. In Sukshmasamparaya Gunasthan, in the place of all Kashayas, three zeros and one should be written in one place, in this way, one Kuta will be formed here. In Upshant and Kshina Kashaya Gunasthan, there is no Sukshmalobh, therefore, zero should be written in the place of Kashayas, in this way, one Kuta will be formed, and in Sayogi Gunasthan, there is no Asaty and Ubharyup Manavachan Yoga, therefore, writing seven Yogas in the place of Yogas, one Kuta should be formed.

In the aforementioned Kutas, in Anantanubandhi-free Mithyatva Gunasthan, the first Kuta is one out of five Mithyatvas, and one Indriya and Shatukaya Himsa out of Indriya and Prithvikaaya Himsa, one Trik from the three actions of four Kashayas, Krodh, etc., without Anantanubandhi, one Ved out of Veds, one pair out of Hasya-Rati and Arati Shok, being sufficient, one Yoga out of 10 Yogas, in this way, all together 1+1+1+3-2+1 = 10 Bandhapratyayaropa first Kutas, and out of these, subtracting Prithvikaaya Himsa and adding Prithvi, etc., two Kayas Himsa, makes 11 Pratyayaropa Kutas. Adding three Kayas Himsa in the place of two Kayas Himsa, makes 12 Pratyayaropa Kutas, adding four Kayas Himsa in the place of three Kayas Himsa, makes 13 Pratyayaropa Kutas. Adding five Kayas Himsa in the place of four Kayas Himsa, makes 14 Pratyayaropa Kutas, and adding six Kayas Himsa in the place of five Kayas Himsa, 

Page #716:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-677

There are 15 types of Kutas (categories) when combined. Thus, in the first Kuta without Anantanubandhi (infinite attachments), there are 6 places starting from 10th Pratyayarupa (type of attachment). In the second Kuta, by combining one of fear or disgust, there are 6 places starting from 11th Pratyayarupa. In the third Kuta, by combining both fear and disgust, there are 6 places starting from 12th Pratyayarupa. In the three Kutas with Anantanubandhi, by adding one Anantanubandhi Kashaya (passion), there are 6 places starting from 11th Pratyayarupa in the first Kuta, 6 places starting from 12th Pratyayarupa in the second Kuta, and 6 places starting from 13th Pratyayarupa in the third Kuta. The last place is the 18th Pratyayarupa. Here, there is only one type each in the 10th and 18th places because the Asrava (influx) of the 10th Pratyayarupa is only in the first Kuta without Anantanubandhi, and the Asrava of the 18th Pratyayarupa is only in the last Kuta with Anantanubandhi, not elsewhere. Thus, in the Kutas, 11 and 10 are of the Din-Hin (low-inferior) type in the Malya-rupa Ashala (category of attachment), 52 and 16 have five types each, and 13-14-15 have six types each. Similarly, by considering the Kutas mentioned for the Gunasthanas (categories of qualities) like Sasadanadi, one should understand the places of Bandha Pratyayas (attachments) and the types of those places.

Regarding the structure of Kutas in relation to the Gunasthanas, the types of Pratyayasthanas (places of attachments) and their types are as follows:

**Three Kutas with Anantanubandhi Kashaya for Sandrisht Mithyatva Gunasthan (category of subtle false belief)**

| **First Kuta without fear or disgust** | **Second Kuta with fear or disgust** | **Third Kuta with both fear and disgust** |
|---|---|---|
| 13 Yoga | 13 Yoga | 13 Yoga |
| Any one of 13 | Any one of 13 | Any one of 13 |
| Hasy-Rati-Arati-Shok (laughter-attachment-disattachment-grief) | 2-2 | 2-2 |
| Stri-Purusha-Napumsakaved (female-male-neuter knowledge) | 4 Krodha (anger)-4 Mana (pride)-4 Maya (deceit)-4 Lobha (greed) | 4 Krodha-4 Mana-4 Maya-4 Lobha |
| 3 Stri-Purusha-Napumsakaved | 16 Kashaya (passions) | 4 Krodha-4 Mana-4 Maya-4 Lobha |
| 4 Krodha-4 Mana-4 Maya-4 Lobha | Prithvikaayadi (earth body etc.) 6 | 1-2-3-4-5-6 |
| 1-2-3-4-5-6 | Indriya (sense organs) and Mana (mind) 6 | 1-1-1-1-1-1 |
| 1-1-1-1-1-1 | Mithyatva (false belief) 5 | 1-1-1-1-1 |
| 1-1-1-1-1-1 | 1-1-1-1-1-1 | 1-1-1-1-1-1 |
| 1-1-1-1-1-1 | 1-1-1-1-1-1 | 1-1-1-1-1-1 |
| 1-1-1-1-1-1 | 1-1-1-1-1-1 | 1-1-1-1-1-1 |
| 55 Bandha Pratyayas (attachments) | 12-13-14-15-16-17 | 53-14-15-16-17-18 | 

Page #717:
---------------------------
## Gommatamar

**Of the Mithyatva Gunasthan, there are 3 Kutas without infinite Anubandhis**

**2-2**
**2-2**

* **First Kuta without fear or aversion**
* **Kuta with fear or aversion**
* **Kuta with fear or aversion**
* **One of the 10 Yogas of fear or aversion**
* **One of the 10 Yogas of fear or aversion**
* **One of the 10 Yogas of fear or aversion**
* **Hasyarati - 1**
* **2-2**
* **Arati-Shok**

**Stri-Purusha-Napumsakaved**
**Stri-Purusha-Napumsakaved**
**Stri-Purusha-Napumsakaved**
* **Kashaya 12**
* **3 Krodha, 3 Mana, 3 Maya, 3 Lobha**
* **3 Krodha, 3 Mana, 3 Maya, 3 Lobha**
* **3 Krodha, 3 Mana, 3 Maya, 3 Lobha**
* **Kaya**
* **1-2-3-4-5-6**
* **1-2-3-4-5-6**
* **1-2-3-4-5-6**
* **Indriya and Mana 6**
* **1-1-1-1-1-1**
* **1-1-1-1-1-1**
* **1-1-1-1-1-1**
* **Mithyatva 5**
* **1-1-1-1-1**
* **1-1-1-1-1**
* **1-1-1-1-1**
* **Bandhapratyaya 48**
* **10-11-12-13**
* **11-12-13-14**
* **12-13-14-15**
* **16-17**

**Of the Sasadan Gunasthan, there are 3 Kutas**

* **Without fear or aversion**
* **With fear or aversion**
* **With fear or aversion**
* **2 Yogas of fear or aversion**
* **One of the 13 Yogas**
* **One of the 13 Yogas**
* **One of the 13 Yogas**
* **Hasyarati -**
* **2-2**
* **2-2**
* **2-2**
* **Arati-Shok**

* **1-1-1**
* **4 Krodha, 4 Mana, 4 Maya, 4 Lobha**
* **Ved 3**
* **1-1-1**
* **Kashaya 16**
* **4 Krodha, 4 Mana, 4 Maya, 4 Lobha**
* **Kaya 6**
* **1-2-3-4-5-6**
* **Indriya and Mana 6**
* **1-1-1-1-1-1**
* **Bandhapratyaya 50**
* **10-11-12-13**
* **14-15**

* **1-1-1**
* **4 Krodha, 4 Mana, 4 Maya, 4 Lobha**
* **1-2-3-4-5-6**
* **1-1-1-1-1-1**
* **1-2-3-4-5-6**
* **1-1-1-1-1-1**
* **11-12-13-14**
* **12-13-14-15** 

Page #718:
---------------------------
## Three Kutas related to Mixed Gunas:

**Fear-Aversion Absent**
* **Yoga:** 10
* **Laughter-Attraction:** 
* **Aversion-Grief:** 
* **Veda:** 3
* **Kashaya:** 12
* **Kaya:** 6
* **Indriya and Mana:** 6
* **Bandhapratyaya:** 43

**Fear-Aversion Present**
* **Yoga:** 13
* **Laughter-Attraction:** 
* **Aversion-Grief:** 
* **Veda:** 3
* **Kashaya:** 0

## Gommatasar Karmakanda - 679

**One out of 10**
* **2-2**
* **1-1-1**
* **3-3-3-3**
* **1-2-3-4-5-6**
* **1-1-1-1-1-1**
* **9-10-11-12**
* **13-14**

## Three Kutas related to Uncontrolled Gunas:

**Fear-Aversion Absent**
* **1-1-1**
* **3-3-3-3**
* **1-2-3-4-5-6**
* **1-1-1-1-1-1**
* **9-10-11-12**
* **13-14**

**One out of 13**
* **2-2**
* **1-1-1**
* **Kashaya:** 12
* **3-3-3-3**
* **Kaya:** 6
* **1-2-3-4-5-6**
* **Indriya and Mana:** 6
* **1-1-1-1-1-1**
* **Bandhapratyaya:** 46
* **9-10-11-12**
* **13-14**

**Fear or Aversion Present**
* **1-1**
* **One out of 10**
* **2-2**
* **1-1-1**
* **3-3-3-3**
* **1-2-3-4-5-6**
* **1-1-1-1-1-1**
* **10-11-12-13**
* **14-15**

**Fear or Aversion Present**
* **1-1**
* **One out of 13**
* **2-2**
* **1-1-1**
* **3-3-3-3**
* **1-2-3-4-5-6**
* **1-1-1-1-1-1**
* **10-11-12-13**
* **14-15**

**Fear-Aversion Absent**
* **2**
* **One out of 10**
* **2-2**
* **1-1-1**
* **3-3-3-3**
* **1-2-3-4-5-6**
* **1-1-1-1-1-1**
* **11-12-13-14**
* **15-16**

**Fear-Aversion Absent**
* **2**
* **One out of 13**
* **2-2**
* **1-1-1**
* **3-3-3-3**
* **1-2-3-4-5-6**
* **1-1-1-1-1-1**
* **11-12-13-14**
* **15-16** 

Page #719:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-680: 3 Kutas related to Desasanayat Gunasthan

Fear-Disgust Absent
Fear or Disgust Present
|
Fear-Disgust Present
Fear-Disgust 2. Yoga 9
1-1 9 out of 9
| 9 out of 9
|
9 out of 9
2-2
Laughter-Attachment - Detachment-Grief
Veda 3
1-1-1
1-1-1
Kashaya 8
2-2-2-2
2-2-2.2
1-2-3-4-5
Kaya 5
1-2-3-4.5 1-2-3-4-5 Indriya and Man 6 | 1-1-1-1-1-1 1-1-1-1-1-1 Bandhapratyaya 37 | 8-9-10-11.12. : 9 - 18 . 13.12:61:
|
1-1-1-1-1-1
10-6.1 6.2-13-14
3 Kutas related to Pramattagunasthan
|
Fear-Disgust Present
Fear-Disgust Absent
Fear or Disgust Present Fear-Disgust 2 . Yoga 11 11 out of 11 | 11 out of 11 Laughter-Attachment - 2-2
2-2 Detachment-Grief
| 11 out of 11
2-2
Veda 3
1-1-1
1-1-1 1-1-1-1
1-1-1 1-1-1-1
Kashaya 4
|
1-1-1-1
Bandhapratyaya 24 

Page #720:
---------------------------
## Gommatasara Karmakanda - 681

**Regarding the Gunasthanas of Apramatta and Apurvakarana:**

* **3 Kutas without Fear or Disgust:**  
    * **With Fear or Disgust:**
        * **1 out of 9:** 1 out of 9 Bhog, 1 out of 9 Yog
        * **2 Yogs:** 2 out of 9 Hasy-Rati, 2 out of 9 Arati-Shok
        * **2-2**
        * **2-2**
        * **3 Vedas:** 1-1-1
        * **1-1-1**
        * **1-1-1-1**
        * **4 Kashayas:** 1-1-1-1
        * **1-1-1-1**
        * **1-1-1-1**
        * **22 Bandhapratyayas**

**Regarding the Gunasthanas of Anivrittikarana:**

* **7 Kutas:**
    * **1st Kuta:**
        * **3 Vedas:**
        * **4 Kashayas:**
    * **2nd Kuta:**
        * **2 Vedas:**
        * **3 Kashayas:**
    * **3rd Kuta:**
        * **2 Kashayas:**
    * **4th Kuta:**
        * **1 Badaras:**
    * **5th Kuta:**
        * **Lobha Kashaya:**
    * **6th Kuta:**
        * **Yog:**
    * **7th Kuta:**
        * **1 out of 9 Yog:**
        * **1 out of 9 Yog:**
        * **1 out of 9 Yog:**
        * **1 out of 9 Yog:**
        * **1 out of 9 Yog:**
        * **1 out of 9 Yog:**
        * **1 out of 9 Yog:**
        * **3 Vedas:** 1-1-1
        * **4 Kashayas:** 1-1
        * **1-1-1-1**
        * **1-1-1-1**
        * **1-1-1-1**
        * **1-1-1-1**
        * **1-1-5**
        * **1-1**
        * **16 Bandhapratyayas**

**Regarding the Gunasthanas of Sukshmasamparaya, Upashantakshaya, Kshinakshaya, and Sayogakevali:**

* **Kuta Gunasthanas:**
    * **Sukshmasamparaya:**
        * **1 out of 9 Yog:**
    * **Upashantakshaya:**
        * **1 out of 9 Yog:**
    * **Kshinakshaya:**
        * **1 out of 9 Yog:**
    * **Sayogakevali:**
        * **1 out of 7 Yog:**
        * **1 Kashaya:**
        * **2 Bandhapratyayas:**
        * **1** 

Page #721:
---------------------------
The term "Kutochcharan" is used to describe the method of stating the specific location and type of "Paryaya" (category) as mentioned in the "Gommatsar Karmakanda" (Chapter 682).

**The rule for Kutochcharan is as follows:**

* **One** type of "Mithyatva" (false belief)
* **One** type of "Indriya" (sense organ)
* **One** or **two** types of "Kaya" (body)
* **One** type of "Kasaya" (passion)
* **One** type of "Veda" (knowledge)
* **One** type of "Yugal" (pair) - either "Hasya" (laughter) and "Rati" (attachment) or "Arati" (disgust) and "Shoka" (sorrow)
* **None**, **one**, or **two** types of "Yoga" (spiritual practice)

**Explanation:**

* **Mithyatva:** There are five types of Mithyatva, and one of them should be mentioned.
* **Indriya:** There are six Indriyas (sense organs), and one of them should be mentioned.
* **Kaya:** There are various types of Kayas (bodies), and one or two of them should be mentioned. For example, one could mention "Prithvi Kaya" (earth body) and "Ap Kaya" (water body).
* **Kasaya:** There are four Kasayas (passions), and one of them should be mentioned.
* **Veda:** There are three Vedas (knowledge), and one of them should be mentioned.
* **Yugal:** There are two pairs of Yugals, and one of them should be mentioned.
* **Yoga:** There are ten Yogas (spiritual practices), and one, two, or none of them should be mentioned.

**Example:**

One could say "Ekant Mithyatva" (one type of false belief), "Sparshana Indriya" (sense of touch), "Prithvi Kaya" (earth body), "Krodha" (anger), "Napumsaka Veda" (knowledge of the impotent), "Hasya-Rati Yugal" (laughter and attachment), and "Satyamano Yoga" (yoga of truthfulness).

**Further Explanation:**

* The specific combination of these elements creates a unique "Paryaya" (category).
* There are a total of 63 "Paryayas" for each type of "Mithyatva."
* There are 315 "Paryayas" for each type of "Indriya."
* There are 1890 "Paryayas" for each type of "Kasaya."
* There are 7560 "Paryayas" for each type of "Veda."
* There are 22,680 "Paryayas" for each type of "Yugal."
* There are 45,360 "Paryayas" for each type of "Yoga."

**In total, there are 4,53,600 "Paryayas" that can be created using this method of "Kutochcharan."** 

Page #722:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-683. In the same way, one should know the bhang in the kutas of the Mithyatva Gunasthan and the Sasadan Gunasthan. Now, to obtain the proof of the above bhangs, the vidhan is stated:

Anarahi Dasahid Kude Bavattarisay Sayan Tenaudi.
Satthi Dhuva Hu Micche Bhaydusamjogaja Adhuva. ||796||

Meaning: In the Mithyatva Gunasthan, the proof of bhang in the kutas without anantaanubandhi kshaya is 7200, and in the kutas with anantaanubandhi kshaya, there are 1360 bhang. When these are combined, they become dhruva bhang, and due to the relation of bhaya-jugupsa, they become adhruva bhang.

Special Meaning: When Mithyatva, Indriya, etc. are multiplied together, the proof of bhang is obtained. Therefore, in the kutas without anantaanubandhi kshaya of Mithyadristi, when five Mithyatva, five Indriya and Man, three-three kshaya, four sthana, three Vedas, Hasya-Rati and Arati-Shoka forms of two yugal, and 10 yogas are multiplied together, 546444342410-7200 bhang are obtained. And in the kutas with anantaanubandhi kshaya, when five Mithyatva, five Indriya and Man, four kshaya, three Vedas, Hasya-Rati and Arati-Shoka forms of two yugal, and 13 yogas are multiplied together, 546444342413=9360 are obtained. When the above 7200 bhang are added to these, 7200+9360=16,560, this amount is dhruvagunya, and with bhaya-jugupsa, without bhaya-jugupsa, with bhaya or jugupsa, there are four such bhang avgunakar. There are 63 bhang of kayahinsa, therefore 4 and 63 are adhruvagunakar. So, when the dhruvagunya (16560) is multiplied by 4 and 63, there are 1656046344-4173120 bhang-rupa bandhapratyaya.

In the Sasadan Gunasthan, when six Indriya, four kshaya, three Vedas, Hasya-Rati and Arati-Shoka forms of two yugal, and 12 yogas without Vaikriyikamishrakaayayoga are multiplied together, 6444342412-1728 are obtained. And in Vaikriyikamishrayoga, there is no napunsakveda, therefore when six Indriya, four kshaya, two Vedas, Hasya-Rati and Arati-Shoka forms of two yugal, and one yoga are multiplied together, 6x4424241-96 are obtained. When these are added to the above 1728, 1728+96=1824 dhruva bhang are obtained. So, when multiplied by adhruvagunakar 4 and 63, 182444463-4,59,648 sarva bhang are obtained.

In the Mishra Gunasthan, when six Indriya, four kshaya, three Vedas, Hasya-Rati and Arati-Shoka forms of two yugal, and 10 yogas are multiplied together (6445342410), 1440 dhruva bhang are obtained. When these are multiplied by adhruvagunakar 4 and 63, 1440444638362880 bhang are obtained. In the Asanyatta Gunasthan, when six Indriya, four kshaya, three Vedas, Hasya-Rati and Arati-Shoka forms of two yugal, and 10 yogas related to paryapta (6444342410) are multiplied together, 1440 are obtained. And in Vaikriyikamishra and Karmankaayayoga, there is no striveda, therefore when six Indriya, four kshaya, two Vedas, Hasya-Rati and Arati-Shoka forms of two yugal, and two yogas are multiplied together (6x4424242), 192 bhang are obtained. When these bhang are added to the above 1440, and... 

Page #723:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-684

In Audarika-Mishra-Kaya-Yoga, due to the presence of only one Purusha-Veda, there are 6 Indriyas, 4 Kashyaya, 1 Veda, two pairs of Hasy-Rati and Arati-Shoka, and 1 Yoga. Multiplying these together (6x4x1x4x2x4x1) gives 48 Bhangas. Adding these to the 1440+192+48 = 1680 Dhruva-Gunyas, we get a total of 1680 Dhruva-Gunyas. Multiplying these by the 4 and 63 Adhruva-Gunyakaras, we get 1680x4x63 = 423360 Sarva-Bhangas.

In the Desha-Samyata-Gunasthan, Vaikriya-Kaya-Yoga is not present. Therefore, multiplying the 6 Indriyas, 4 Kashyaya, 3 Vedas, two pairs of Hasy-Rati and Arati-Shoka, and 9 Yogas together (6x4x3x4x2x4x9) gives 1296 Bhangas. Multiplying these by 4 due to the presence of Bhaya-Jugupsa and 31 due to the absence of Trasa-Vada and the presence of Pancha-Sthavara-Kaya-Vada, we get 1296x4x31 = 1,60,704 Bhangas.

In the Pramatta-Gunasthan, there are 4 Kashyaya, 3 Vedas, two pairs of Hasy-Rati and Arati-Shoka, and 9 Yogas. Multiplying these together (4x4x3x4x2x4x9) gives 216 Bhangas. In Aahara-Kaya-Yoga, there are 4 Kashyaya, 1 Veda, two pairs of Hasy-Rati and Arati-Shoka, and 2 Yogas. Multiplying these together (4x1x4x2x4x2) gives 16 Bhangas. Adding these to the previous 216 Bhangas, we get 216+16 = 232 Bhangas. Multiplying these by 4 due to the presence of Bhaya-Jugupsa, we get 232x4 = 928 Sarva-Bhangas.

In the Apramatta-Gunasthan, there are 4 Kashyaya, 3 Vedas, two pairs of Hasy-Rati and Arati-Shoka, and 9 Yogas. Multiplying these together (4x4x3x4x2x4x9) gives 216 Bhangas. Multiplying these by 4 due to the presence of Bhaya-Jugupsa, we get 216x4 = 864 Bhangas. Similarly, in the A-Purva-Karana-Gunasthan, there are 864 Bhangas.

In the Veda-Sahita part of the Anivritti-Karana-Gunasthan, multiplying the 4 Kashyaya, 3 Vedas, and 9 Yogas together (4x4x3x4x9) gives 108 Bhangas. These are not multiplied by the Adhruva-Gunyakara (4 Bhangas due to the presence of Bhaya-Jugupsa) because they are absent here. In the Veda-Sahita part, multiplying the 4 Kashyaya, 2 Vedas, and 9 Yogas together (4x4x2x4x9) gives 872 Bhangas. In the Veda-Rahita part, multiplying the 4 Kashyaya and 9 Yogas together (4x9) gives 36 Bhangas. In the Krodha-Rahita part, multiplying the 3 Kashyaya and 9 Yogas together (9x4x3) gives 27 Bhangas. In the Mana-Rahita part, multiplying the 2 Kashyaya and 9 Yogas together (9x4x2) gives 18 Bhangas. In the Maya-Rahita part, multiplying the 1 Kashyaya and 9 Yogas together (9x4x1) gives 9 Bhangas. Thus, the total number of Bhangas related to the Anivritti-Karana-Gunasthan is 108+72+36+27+18+9 = 270 Bhangas.

In the Sukshma-Samparaya-Gunasthan, multiplying the 1 Kashyaya and 9 Yogas together (9x4x1) gives 9 Bhangas. In the Upashanta-Kashyaya-Gunasthan, there are only 9 Yogas, so there are 9 Bhangas. In the Kshina-Kashyaya-Gunasthan, there are also 9 Yogas, so there are 9 Bhangas. In the Sayoga-Kevali-Gunasthan, there are 7 Yogas, so there are 7 Bhangas.

Note: Although the Sanskrit commentator did not create Bhangas for the Veda-Sahita part of the Anivritti-Karana-Gunasthan, they are necessary. Therefore, multiplying the 1 Veda, 4 Kashyaya, and 9 Yogas together (1x4x4x9) gives 36 Bhangas. Adding these to the previous 270 Bhangas related to the Anivritti-Karana-Gunasthan, we get 270+36 = 306 Bhangas.

1. Sanjalana-Tivedanam Nava Joganam Cha Hoi Eyadaram. Sandhana-Duvedanam Eyadaram Purusha-Vedo Ya. ||201||
Chadu Sanjalana Navanham Joganam Hoi Eyadaram Do Te. Koha-Namana-Vajja Maya-Rahiyan Ega-Dara-Gava. ||202||
(Pra.Pa.Sa.Pu. 165-166 Shataka Adhikar) 

Page #724:
---------------------------
## Gommatasara Karmakanda - 685

**Further, the number of the aforementioned bhangas is stated:**

**797.**  Chavisarasam talam chaudas asiti solasam | Chaudi barasam battisam bisad sol bisadam cha ||

**798.** Solas bisadam kamaso dhuvagunagara apushvakaranotti | Adhbuvagunide bhangha dhuvabhanganam na bhedado || Jummam ||

**Meaning:** From Mithyatva guna sthana to Apurvakarana guna sthana, the number of bhangas are 16560 in Mithyatva guna sthana, 1824 in Sasadan, 1440 in Misra, 1680 in Asanyata guna sthana, 1296 in Desasanayata guna sthana, 232 in Pramatta, 216 in Aprammatta, and 216 in Apurvakarana guna sthana. When these dhuvagunyas are multiplied by their respective adhravagunakaras, the bhangas of that particular sthana are obtained. Beyond this, there is only a difference in dhuvabhangas, because there are no adhravagunakaras due to the absence of bhaya, jugupsa, and aviriti.

**Now, the method of removing the aforementioned dvisanyogi etc. bhangas from kayabandh is stated:**

**799.** Chhappanchadeyatan ruvuttarabhajide kaman hade | Laddham micchachakka dese sanjogagunagara ||

**Meaning:** Write 6-5-4-3-2-1 and below it, write 1-2-3-4-5-6 in each rupa respectively. Multiply and divide these, and the bhangas related to kayahinsa are obtained in the first four guna sthana and the fifth guna sthana.

**Special Meaning:** First, dividing the numerator 6 by the denominator 1, we get 6 as the quotient. So, there are six bhangas. Multiplying the previous 6 by the next 5, we get 65 = 30 as the numerator. Multiplying the previous 1 by the next 2, we get 2 as the denominator. Dividing the numerator 30 by the denominator 2, we get 30 ÷ 2 = 15. These are the dvisanyogi bhangas. Multiplying the numerator 30 by the next 4, we get 30 x 4 = 120. Multiplying the previous 2 by the next 3, we get 6. Dividing the numerator 120 by the denominator 6, we get 20, which is the number of trisanyogi bhangas. Multiplying the numerator 120 by the next 3, we get 360. Multiplying the previous 6 by the next 4, we get 24 as the denominator. Dividing 360 by 24, we get 360 ÷ 24 = 15, which is the number of chatussanyogi bhangas. Multiplying the numerator 360 by the next 2, we get 360 x 2 = 720. Multiplying the previous 24 by the next 5, we get 24 x 5 = 120 as the denominator. Dividing 720 by 120, we get 6, which is the number of panchasanyogi bhangas. 

Page #725:
---------------------------
Gommatasar Karmakanda-686

The 720 fractions are multiplied by 1, resulting in 72041-720. The 120 is multiplied by 6, resulting in 12046-720. Dividing the fraction 720 by this divisor, we get 1. This is the proof of six-fold simultaneous destruction. In this way, all destructions are 6+15+20+15+6+1=63.

In the Dasasanayat Gunasthan, there is no violence towards the three, only violence towards the five stationary beings. Therefore, write 5-4-3-2 and 1 as fractions, and below them write 1-2-3-4 and 5 as divisors. Here, dividing 5 by 1, we get 5. This is the knowledge of each destruction. Multiplying 5 by 4 as the fraction, we get 544-20. Dividing this by the divisor 142-2, we get 2012-10. This is the proof of two-fold simultaneous destruction. Multiplying 20 by 3 as the fraction, we get 2043-60. Multiplying 2 by 3 as the divisor, we get 6. Dividing the fraction 60 by this, we get 60+6=10. This is the knowledge of three-fold simultaneous destruction. Multiplying the fraction 60 by 2, we get 6042=120. Multiplying the divisor 6 by 4, we get 6x4=24. Dividing the fraction 120 by this, we get 120324-5. This is the proof of four-fold simultaneous destruction. Multiplying the fraction 120 by 1, we get 120. Multiplying the divisor 24 by 5, we get 24458120. Dividing the fraction 120 by this, we get 120120=1. This is the proof of five-fold simultaneous destruction.

In this way, in the Desasanayat Gunasthan, there are 5+10+10+5+1=31 destructions related to killing. Similarly, there are 31 destructions in the five places of violence towards the five stationary beings. Or, there are 6 places of violence towards the six living beings. Therefore, writing the number 2 twice six times and multiplying them together (24242424242), we get 64. Subtracting 1 from this (64-1), we get 63 as the number of destructions. Similarly, there are 31 destructions in the five places of violence towards the five stationary beings.

After this, in the arising of the infinite number of consequences, the cause of the bondage of the sections of the knowledge-obscuring and vision-obscuring karmas in the living being's consequences is explained.

"Padinigamantare uvaghado tappadosaninhavane."
"Avaranadurga bhuyo bandhadi accasanaevi." ||800||

Meaning: The living being repeatedly binds the knowledge-obscuring and vision-obscuring karmas through the actions of Pratyanika, Antaraya, Upadhata, Tatpradosha, Nihnava, and Atyanta Asadana.

1. "Tatpradoshanihnavamaatsaryantaravasadanopaghata jnanadarshanavaranyoh." (Tattvasutra A. 6 Sutra 10) (Pan. San. p. 593 Bhatha 19 and p. 167 Gatha 2041) 

Page #726:
---------------------------
Gommatasar Karmakanda-687

**Special Meaning**

Acting in a way that is contrary to the scriptures and the knowledge of the scriptures is called **pratyaneek**.  Obstructing knowledge (hindering self-study) is called **antaraya**.  Faulting perfect knowledge with the mind or speech, or causing minor (hunger, thirst, etc.) obstacles to knowledgeable beings is called **upghat**.  Not having joy in the knowledge of the truth, or not being interested in the teachings of the truth that are the means to liberation, or having aversion to it in the inner self is called **pradosha**.  Even though one knows, saying "this is not so" or "I don't know" for some reason, or obtaining knowledge from unknown gurus and hiding their names while mentioning the names of other famous persons like Tirthankaras, is called **nilava**.  Not approving or rejecting with mind, speech, or body the praiseworthy knowledge, teachings, etc. of someone is called **asadana**.

Through these 6 actions, a being binds **jnanaavaran** and **darshanavaran** karma with an increase in their **anubhaga**.  One should know the same for others as well.  These 6 causes, if they are related to knowledge, are the causes of the increase in **jnanaavaran** anubhaga, and if they are related to perception, they are the causes of the increase in **darshanavaran** anubhaga.  Although there is no rule that **pradosha**, etc. bind all karma types, they are still the causes of definite **anubhaga** binding.  Therefore, **pradosha**, **nihnvada**, etc. have been mentioned separately.

**Paddiniyaahi heuuja anubhaayam padun ta bhaayaa.
Niyamaa pade sambandham paducch vahi chaarinaa savve. ||216||**

**Meaning:**  One should know that the **pratyaneek**, etc. causes of **jnanaavaran**, etc. karma, i.e., the causes of special binding (mentioned in verses 800 to 810), are in relation to **anubhaga** binding, because they are all irregular in relation to **pradesha** binding.  Now, the causes of the binding of **vedaniya** karma are mentioned:

**Bhudanukampavadajog junjido khantidaanaguru bhatto.
Bandhadi bhuyo sadam viwariyo bandhade idaram. ||801||**

**Meaning:**  Compassion for beings (compassion for beings born from the arising of karma in their **gati-gati**), vows (the form of renunciation of violence, etc.), yoga (the form of the result of samadhi), forgiveness (the form of renunciation of anger), charity (four types based on food, etc.), and devotion to the five supreme beings, bind **sata-vedaniya** karma with abundant **anubhaga**, and the opposite causes bind **asata-vedaniya** karma with abundant **anubhaga**.

1. S.Si.A. 6 Su. 27.
2. Pra.Pan.San. p. 174.
3. Pra.Pan.San. p. 168, verse 205. However, there is some variation in the text of the verse. "Bhutavratyanukampaadaan saraga samyaamaadi yogah kshanti: shauchamiti sadvedyasya" (T.Su.A. 6 Su. 12).
4. Duhkhashokataparakrandanavadhararidevananyatmaparobhayasthanyasavedyasya (T.Su.A. 6.11) 

Page #727:
---------------------------
## Gommatasara Karmakanda - 688

**Special Meaning:** Those who are born from the karma of motion are called beings or living entities. To show compassion towards them with a joyful mind, or to tremble at their suffering as if it were one's own, or to feel compassion for another suffering person is called **Anukampa** (compassion).  

**Vrata** (Vow) is the abstinence from violence, falsehood, theft, non-brahma conduct, and attachment, or the control of the senses, or the practice of vows like **Saraag-Samyama** (control of passions). 

**Kshama** (Forgiveness) is the cessation of the passions like anger. 

**Daan** (Charity) is the giving of four types of gifts to worthy recipients: food, medicine, protection, and knowledge. 

**Guru Bhakti** (Devotion to the Guru) is the respectful bowing, seeing, etc., of the five Gurus (Arhant, Siddha, Acharya, Upadhyaya, Sadhu) with a joyful mind through inner transformation. 

**Yoga** (Meditation) is Samadhi (absorption), Dharma Dhyana (meditation on Dharma), and Shukla Dhyana (meditation on purity). 

The binding of **Saata Vedaniya Karma** (karma that produces immediate results) occurs to the being who performs these actions. 

**Paritaap** (Regret) is the pain in the mind due to the results of suffering, separation from loved ones, criticism, etc. 

**Aakrandan** (Lamentation) is the weeping with abundant tears and wailing due to the results of suffering. 

**Paridevan** (Mourning) is the compassionate crying due to the results of suffering, which is the clinging to the results of suffering, and the desire for benefit to oneself and others. 

The binding of **Asaata Vedaniya Karma** (karma that produces results in the future) occurs due to these results of suffering, regret, lamentation, and mourning. 

**Further, the causes of the binding of Darshan Mohaniya Karma (karma that obscures right perception) are stated:**

**Arhant Siddha Chediyatavasu Daguru Dhamma Sangh Padiini Go | Bandhi Di Dansan Moh Anant Sansariyo Jeno || 802 ||**

**Meaning:** The being who is opposed to the Arhant, Siddha, their **Cheitya** (image), the **Nirgrantha Guru** (liberated Guru) who practices austerities, the **Nirdosha Shastra** (faultless scriptures), the **Veet Raag Dev** (passionless God) created Dharma, and the **Sangh** (community of Rishi, Yati, Muni, and Anagaar), i.e., the one who speaks against them, experiences the intense binding of **Darshan Moh** (false perception) and due to its arising, wanders in the endless cycle of births and deaths. 

**Special Meaning:** To accuse the **Arhant** (omniscient) of faults, like saying that the Arhant Bhagwan eats meat. 

To speak against the **Siddhas** (liberated souls) by saying that they have no pleasure, even though they have unparalleled happiness, or by saying that how can they be happy without the pleasures of women, etc. 

To disrespect the **Cheitya** (images of Arhants and Siddhas) by saying that they are inanimate and without qualities, or by saying that what is the benefit of these images, they are useless. 

To disrespect the **Tap** (austerities) by saying that the six types of external austerities like fasting, and the six types of internal austerities like repentance, cause suffering to the soul. 

**1. According to Pra. Panchas. Poo. 168, verse 205 and page 594, verse 20.**

**2. "Kevalishruta Sangh Dharma Deva Avrna Vado Darshan Mohasya" (T.S.A. 6/13)** 

Page #728:
---------------------------
Gommatasar Karmakanda-689
reti
Karma-bandha occurs. Guru, meaning Samyagdarshan, Samyagjnana and Samyakcharitra, are the great Gurus. To say about them that they do not possess these qualities of knowledge etc., that they are unlearned, is a fault. Shruta, meaning the twelve-fold scripture (although the compilation of the twelve-fold scripture is attributed to Ganadhardeva, but in terms of cause, the Arhant Bhagwan is considered the preacher of the twelve-fold scripture, because the compilation of the twelve-fold scripture is based on the divine sound of the Arhant Bhagwan), to criticize this Shruta by saying that "the consumption of bhaans etc. is blameless" is a fault. Dharma, which rescues the being who is caught in the suffering of the four gati and places him in the highest happiness, is Dharma. To say about it that the Dharma preached by the Jinendra Bhagwan is devoid of qualities, and whoever practices it will be an Asura, is a fault. To criticize the Sangha, which is a group of Rishis, Yatis, Munis and Anagaaras, by saying that they have impure bodies, are deformed and devoid of qualities, is a fault. Thus, due to the above-mentioned beliefs, the binding of Darshan-mohaniya karma, which is the cause of the endless cycle of births and deaths, occurs. Now, the reasons for the binding of Charitra-mohaniya karma are explained:
Tivvakasaao bahumohaparinado ragadossasantatto.
Bandhadi charittamohan duviham vi charittagunaghadi. ||803||
Meaning - The being who is intense in his kapaya (and in his nokashya, such as laughter etc.), who undergoes excessive transformation in the form of moha, who is deeply engrossed in raga and dvesha, and who destroys the qualities of charitra, binds the intense portion of Charitra-mohaniya karma, which is divided into kapaya and nokashya.
Special Meaning - To criticize the charitra of holy ascetics, to adopt vows and practices that are conducive to suffering, to mock Dharma, to talk excessively, is intense kapaya. Due to these reasons, the binding of kapayas like krodha etc. occurs. Laughing at others leads to the binding of Hasya karma, engaging in various games and being interested in the nature of attracting the minds of others leads to the binding of Rati karma. The destruction of rati, the company of sinful people etc. leads to the binding of Arati karma. Being afraid oneself and causing fear in others leads to the binding of Bhaya karma. The culmination of unskillful actions leads to the binding of Jugupsa karma. False speech, deceit, trickery, eagerness for deception, intense raga, these lead to the binding of Striveda karma. Mild anger, lack of cunning, contentment in one's own wife etc. lead to the binding of Purushaveda karma, and abundant kapaya, the destruction of the hidden senses, the addiction to sexual games, these lead to the binding of Napumsaka veda karma. Thus, the being who is transformed by various types of mithyatva and who is "ragadosasantatto", meaning who is filled with impure love in the form of raga and hatred in the form of dvesha towards the Ratna-tray, and who has the above-mentioned characteristics along with intense kapaya,
1. According to Pra. Panchasangraha p. 169 Natha 206 and p. 594 gatha 25.
2. "Kashayo dayattibraparinamacharittamohasya" (T.S.A. 6/14)

Page #729:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-690
The two types of conduct, namely, the conduct of the five vows (Panchanuvrata) which is like a journey through the country (Desacharitra) and the conduct of the great vows (Mahavrat) which is like a journey through the whole world (Sakalcharitra), bind the mohaniya karma (karma that obscures knowledge) with its intense section. Therefore, the above-mentioned reasons are a special indication of the binding of mohaniya karma. Then, regarding the binding of the hellish existence (Narakayu), it is said:
"Miccho hu maharambho nissilo tivvalohasanjutto. Nirayaugam nibandhadi pavamdi rudda parinami ||804||"
- A being who is very ambitious (Maharambhi) and has unlimited possessions (Aparimit Parigrahi), is devoid of good conduct (Nissilo), is intensely greedy (Tivvalobi), and delights in sinful actions like violence (Rudda Parinami), whose mind (Buddhi) is only on committing sins, binds the hellish existence with its three sections.
Special meaning - To engage in activities that cause suffering to living beings is ambition (Aarambha), and to have the thought "this is mine" is possession (Parigraha). One who has a lot of ambition and a lot of possessions is called a person with a lot of ambition and possessions, and his state of mind is called "Barambha Parigrahatva". Continuous engagement in actions like violence, stealing the wealth of others, excessive attachment to sense objects, and having black thoughts (Krishna Leshya) and anger (Roudradhyana) at the time of death are special indications of the binding of the hellish existence. Now, regarding the binding of the animal existence (Tiryancyayu), it is said:
"Ummagadesago magganasago guddhiyay madilla. Satasilo ya sasallo tiriyayum bandhade jivo ||805||"
Meaning - A being who preaches the wrong path (Ummagadesago), destroys the right path (Magganasago), is deceitful (Guddhiyay), has a perverse nature (Madilla), and is associated with the three poisons (Mithya, etc.), binds the animal existence with its intense section.
Special meaning - The deceit (Maya) that arises in the soul due to the rise of mohaniya karma is called "Nikriti". This is to be known as an indication of the binding of the animal existence. Its explanation is as follows:
5. Pra.Pan.San.1.594, verse 22. 2. "Badarambha Parigrahatvam Narakasyayusah" (T.Su.A. 6/15) and Pra.Pan.San. p. 208, verse 177 and p. 594, verse 23. 3. Sarvarthasiddhi A. 6, Sutra 15, commentary. 4. "Maya Taiyayonasya" (T.Su.A. 6/16) and Pra.Pan.San. p. 170, verse 208 and p. 594, verse 24. 

Page #730:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-691
Mixing falsehoods in religious teachings, leading a life devoid of virtue, excessive attachment to research, and experiencing blue and pigeon-colored lesions and anxious thoughts at the time of death, etc., are specific causes of bondage in the Tiryanchayu. ....
.... The causes of bondage in the Manushayau are stated as follows:
"Payadiya tanukasaao danaradi silasanjamavihinoo.
Majjhimagunaihin jutto manuvaum bandhade jivo ||806||"
Meaning - A being who is inherently meek, i.e., gentle in nature, delights in giving gifts, is devoid of virtue and restraint, i.e., restraint of senses and non-violence towards living beings, and is endowed with moderate qualities (results), such a being binds the Manushayau with intense experience.
Specific explanation - Being humble in nature, being of noble character, being simple in behavior, being of mild temperament, and not experiencing confusion at the time of death, etc., are specific causes of intense experience-bondage in the Manushayau.
Further, the causes of bondage in the Devayau are stated as follows:
"Anuvadamhavaadehi ya balatavakamanijjaraaye ya!
Devaaugam nibandhadi sammaditthi ya jo jivo. ||807||"
Meaning - A being who has right faith binds the Devayau only through right conduct and directly through the great vows, and a being who has wrong faith binds the Devayau through ignorance-based childish austerities and through the lack of desire-based exhaustion.
Specific explanation - Lack of desire-based exhaustion, childish austerities, mild passions, listening to appropriate dharma, giving gifts, serving gods, gurus, dharma, and their followers, passionate restraint, right conduct, and restraint of the country, all these are causes of bondage in the Devayau.
5. Sarvarthasiddhi A. 6 Sutra 16 commentary.
2. "Alparambhaparigrahatvam manushasyasya" "Svabhavamardavam cha" (T.S.A. 6 Sutra 17-18). Pra.Pa.Sa. p. 175 Gatha 210 and p. 595 Gatha 25. 3. Sarvarthasiddhi A. 6 Sutra 17 commentary!
4. "Saragasanjamasanjamasanjamakanijjaraavallalapasidaivilya" "Samyaktvaam cha" (T.S.A. 6 Sutra 20-21) Pra.Pa.Sa. p. 171 Gatha 251 and p. 595 Gatha 26.
5. Tattvarthasara A. 4 Shloka 42-43. 

Page #731:
---------------------------
Gommatasar Karmakanda-692

Further, regarding the bondage of name karma, it is said:

"Manavayanakayavakko maillo garavehin padibandho.
Asuham bandhadi namam tappadivakkehin suhanam." || 808 ||

Meaning: A being who is crooked in mind, speech, and body, deceitful, and possessed of the three types of pride (arrogance) binds the karma of an unfavorable (unfortunate) name, leading to hell, animal birth, etc. Conversely, a being who is of the opposite nature, i.e., simple in conduct, truthful, and not seeking praise, binds the karma of a favorable (fortunate) name.

Detailed Meaning: "Manavayanakayavakko" refers to crookedness in mind, speech, and body, i.e., acting contrary to the right path. "Maillo" means deceitful, engaging in falsehood, spreading rumors, and using false weights and measures (like scales, meters, etc.) for personal gain. "Garavehin" refers to being attached to wealth (riddhigar), delicious food (rasagar), and comfortable places (sadagar). Being firmly attached to these leads to the bondage of unfavorable name karma. Conversely, "tappadivakkehin" refers to being free from these attachments, having simplicity in conduct, being free from pride, respecting religious individuals, being humble towards the causes of worldly existence, and having faith in non-negligence, etc., which leads to the bondage of favorable name karma.

Further, regarding the bondage of gotra karma, it is said:

"Arahantadisu bhatto suttarud 'padhanumanaguṇapehi. Bandhadi uccaṁ godam vivarido bandhade idaram." || 809 ||

Meaning: A being who is devoted to the five supreme beings (Arhat, Siddha, Acharya, Upadhyaya, Sadhu), is thoughtful in study, and possesses qualities like humility, binds the karma of a high gotra. Conversely, a being who is of the opposite nature binds the karma of a low gotra.

Detailed Meaning:  Extreme devotion to the five gurus (Arhat, Siddha, Acharya, Upadhyaya, Sadhu), as well as the scriptures spoken by the Jinas, leads to the bondage of a high gotra. 

1. "Yogavakravisamvadanam cha ashubhasya namnah" (Pra. Pa. San. Pu. 595, verse 27)
2. "Paratmanindaprashanse sadsadgunamchchadano dbhavane cha nichaigrotrastha" (Ta. Su. A. 6, Sutra 22623)
3. "Tadviparvayoni chaivrityanutseko chottarasva" (Ta. Su. A. 6, Sutra 25-26)
4. "Tadviparitam shubhastha" (Ta. Su. A. 6, Sutra 22623)
5. "Padhanuma" is also found in Pra. Pa. San. Pu. 595, verse 28. 

Page #732:
---------------------------
Gommatasar Karmakanda-693
Interest in internal results, an Agama practitioner (rather than study), or a person of low esteem (rather than study), an observer of qualities, revealing one's own criticism, praising others and their qualities, covering up one's own qualities, humility towards those who are excellent in qualities, not having pride or ego even when having special qualities of knowledge, wealth, and heat, a tendency without arrogance, etc., all these lead to the bondage of a high lineage. On the contrary, i.e., praising oneself and revealing one's own vices, criticizing others and covering up the qualities present in them, not having devotion to Arhanta, etc., all these lead to the bondage of a low lineage.
"Those who are engrossed in killing themselves and others, and who obstruct the path to liberation, which is the attainment of Jina worship and the Ratna Tray, acquire the Antarayakarma, and during its rise, they cannot obtain the desired object."
Meaning - A being who is engrossed in killing himself and others, and who obstructs the path to liberation, which is the attainment of Jina worship and the Ratna Tray, acquires the Antarayakarma, and during its rise, he cannot obtain the desired object.
Special Meaning - A being who is engrossed in killing living beings, etc., and who obstructs Jina worship and the path to liberation, acquires five types of Antarayakarma. One who obstructs the giving of protection to living beings acquires the Dana Antarayakarma, due to which there is no desire to accept Samyaktva, Anuvrata, and Mahavrata, or if there is a desire, it is not stable. Or, by obstructing the giving of gold, etc., one does not obtain gold, etc. Due to Labha Antarayakarma, one does not feel satisfied even after eating continuously, and one does not benefit from clothes, etc., other things to cover the body. Due to Bhoga Antarayakarma, one does not even get enough food to fill one's stomach, or if one does get enough food, one vomits, etc., due to obstruction in the four types of food, i.e., Asana (eating, drinking, licking, and drinking). In the same way, one should know from the Agama about all the objects of enjoyment related to the five senses. Due to Upbhoga Antarayakarma, things like calves (sons), women, palanquins, houses (buildings), fields (fields), and ornaments are lost. Due to Virya Antarayakarma, strength and vigor do not arise easily even after consuming food, and if they do arise, they are quickly lost. The one who is situated between the giver and the receiver of the gift is the Antarayakarma. Thus, due to the general ideas about the five types of Antarayakarma, there is an obstacle in obtaining the desired objects of the mind, therefore, they are called the ideas of Antarayakarma bondage.
1. Based on Pra. Pan. San. Pri. 595, verse 28. 2. "Vighnakaranamaantarayasya" (Ta. Su. A. 6 Sutra 27) 

Page #733:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda - 694
wwwsle ANAR 2

**Conclusion** - The statement of the binding afflictions in the twelve angas was received by Acharya Dharasena in the form of the twelve anga sutras (in the form of a part) from the Acharya tradition. Acharya Dharasena taught those sutras to Acharya Pushpadanta Bhootbali. Acharya Pushpadanta Bhootbali, by his words, wrote down those sutras in the form of a book and named it Shatkhandagama. In the sixth chapter of that Shatkhandagama, called 'Mahabandha', the statement of the afflictions is as follows:

**Five knowledge-obscurations, six vision-obscurations, Asataavedaniya, eight karmas, Purushaveda, Hasya, Rati, Arati, Shoka, Bhaya, Jugupsa, Devayu, Devagati, Panchendriya jati, Vaikriyika Sharira, Tejas Sharira, Karman Sharira, Samachaturasra Sansthan, Vaikriyika Angopanga, Prashastha and Aprashastha Varnaadi 4, Devasthananupurvi, Aguru Laghoo 4, Prashastha Vihayogati, Tras Chatushk, Sthira, Asthira, Shubha, Ashubha, Subhaga, Susvara, Aadeya, Yasaskirti, Ayasaskirti, Nirman, Ucchagotra and five Antaraya** - these 65 types of karmas, each karma has the binding afflictions of Mithyatva, Asanjam, and Kasaya.

**Asataavedaniya** has the binding afflictions of Mithyatva, Asanjam, Kasaya, and Yog.

**Mithyatva, Napumsakaved, Narakayu, Narakagati, Charjati, Hundak Sansthan, Asamprapta Spaatika Sanhanan, Narakagatyanupurvi, Atap and Stavaraadi 4** - these have the binding affliction of Mithyatva.

**Styanagridhi etc. 3, Athakapya, Strived, Tiryanchayu, Manushayau, Tiryanchagati, Manushagati, Audarik Sharira, Char Sansthan, Audarik Apanga, Panch Sanhanan, Do Anupurvi, Udyot, Aprashastha Vihayogati, Durbhaga, Dusvara, Anaadeya and Nichagotra** - these have the binding afflictions of Mithyatva and Asanjam.

**Aharakadvik** has the binding affliction of Sanjam.

**Tirthankara** has the binding affliction of Samyaktva.

This is the special feature that in the twelve angas, in addition to Mithyatva, Asanjam, Kasaya, and Yog, Sanjam and Samyaktva are also included in the binding afflictions. Therefore, Acharya Kundakunda said in the Panchastikaya Granth: 

Page #734:
---------------------------
Gommatasar Karmakanda - 695
Darshan-Jnana-Charitra are the path to liberation, therefore they should be served.
It has been said by the virtuous that both bondage and liberation come from them. || 164 || Panchastikaya

Meaning - The virtuous have said that Darshan-Jnana-Charitra is the path to liberation, therefore they should be served, but bondage and liberation also come from them, i.e. although all the Acharyas have said that Samyag Darshan-Jnana-Charitra is the path to liberation, yet they are also the cause (reason) of bondage and liberation.
If someone has a doubt that how can two opposite actions happen from the same cause, then the Acharyas have given the example of a lamp, saying that there is no contradiction at all in this. Just as the same lamp is the cause of the light of knowledge-charitra and also the cause of the darkness in the form of smoke; in the same way, Samyag Darshan also destroys karma and also causes the bondage of Tirthankara nature and Aharakavika, but this is the cause of liberation, not of the world. Just as a businessman spends on advertising etc. for his business, but that expenditure is the cause of income, not loss. The commentator of Samyatsar, Shri Amritchandracharya, has also said in the fourth chapter of the "Tattvarthasar" that Samyag Darshan is the cause of the bondage of Devayu.
Saragsamyama chaiva samyaktva desasamyama data
Iti devayuṣo hote bhavanti asava hetavaḥ || 43 || Tattvarthasar A.4 ||
Meaning - Saragsamyama, Samyaktva and Desasamyama are the causes of the Asrava of Devayu.
Although there is an eighth chapter called "Vedanapachchaya Vihanani Yogahar" in the fourth chapter called "Vedana" of the Shatkhandagama (D.P. 12 p. 275), but it does not mention the reasons for the later natures and the general reasons for the original natures are mentioned in relation to the Naya, therefore the "Vedanapachchaya Vihanani Yogahar" of the Vedana Khand is not considered here.

Page #735:
---------------------------
Gommatasar Karmakanda-696..
**Chapter on Bhava Chulika**

Now, beginning the chapter on Bhava Chulika, first, we offer our salutations to our beloved deity for the successful completion of this work without any obstacles.

**Salutation to Gommatajinin**

**Gommatajinin Chand Panamiy Gommatprayatthasanjunam!**
**Gommatsangahvisayam Bhavagadam Chuliyam Voccham.** ||811||

**Meaning:** I will speak about the chapter on Bhava (emotions) in the Gommatasar, which is a collection of Gommat (Jain) teachings, with appropriate meaning and words, or with the description of excellent substances.

**Special Note:** In the above mangalacharan (opening verse), the Sanskrit commentator has interpreted the word "Gommatajinin Chand" as "Vardhaman or Neminath Swami." However, in the meaning of the above verse, "Gommatajinin" has been retained, because the Acharya's intention may have been to indicate Gommatesvara (Bahubali) by "Gommatajinin."

**Those who are recognized by the birth of the Upasama (subduing) and other emotions.**
**Those beings are recognized by the qualities, as stated by all-knowing ones.** ||812||

**Meaning:** The beings are recognized by the Upasama (subduing) and other emotions that arise when their opposing karmas are subdued. These emotions are called "qualities" by the all-knowing ones (Sarvagnas).

Further, the names of those emotions and their divisions are stated.

**Upasama, Kshayika, Misra, Odayika, and Parinamik are the five types of emotions.**
**Their divisions are two, nine, eighteen, twenty-one, and three, respectively.** ||813||

**Meaning:** That emotion is of five types: Upasama (subduing), Kshayika (destructive), Misra (mixed, destructive-subduing), Odayika (arising), and Parinamik (consequential). The divisions of these five are two, nine, eighteen, twenty-one, and three, respectively.

**Special Note:** Bhagavan Kundakunda Devacharya has also stated these five emotions in the Panchaastikaya Sangraha, verse 56, in the form of qualities of the soul.

**Panchaastikaya, verse 56:** "Auparikamaathiko Bhavo, Bhisra Cha Jeevasva Swatachamaudayika Parinamikau Cha" (T.S.A. 2 Bhu. 5) "Vinavaashtaadashkaikavimshatitribheta Yathakramam" (T.S.A. 213) 

Page #736:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-697:  Those who are endowed with *udaya*, *upasama*, *kshaya*, a mixture of both (*kshayopasama*), and *parinama* are the *jiva-gunas*. These are expanded in many ways. 1156.

... The Sanskrit commentary by Amritachandracharya on the above verse is as follows:

*Udaya* is the emergence of the ability to bear the fruits of karma, *upasama* is the experience, *kshayopasama* is the destruction and experience, *kshaya* is the complete destruction, and *parinama* is the result due to the attainment of the essence of the substance.  

Thus, one who is endowed with *udaya* is called *audhayika*, one who is endowed with *upasama* is called *aupashamika*, one who is endowed with *kshayopasama* is called *kshayopashamika*, one who is endowed with *kshaya* is called *kshayika*, and one who is endowed with *parinama* is called *parinaamika*. These are the five *jiva-gunas*. Of these, four are due to the fourfold nature of the *upaadhi* (karma), and one is due to the nature itself. These are expanded in many ways due to the difference in the *upaadhi* and the difference in their nature.

_Meaning of the verse:_ Those who are endowed with *udaya*, *upasama*, *kshaya*, a mixture of both (*kshayopasama*), and *parinama* are the *jiva-gunas*. These are expanded in many ways.

_Meaning of the commentary:_ The emergence of the ability to bear the fruits of karma is *udaya*, the experience is *upasama*, the destruction and experience is *kshayopasama*, the complete destruction is *kshaya*, and the result due to the attainment of the essence of the substance is *parinama*. Thus, one who is endowed with *udaya* is called *audhayika*, one who is endowed with *upasama* is called *aupashamika*, one who is endowed with *kshayopasama* is called *kshayopashamika*, one who is endowed with *kshaya* is called *kshayika*, and one who is endowed with *parinama* is called *parinaamika*. These are the five *jiva-gunas*. Of these, four are due to the fourfold nature of the *upaadhi* (karma), and one is due to the nature itself. These are expanded in many ways due to the difference in the *upaadhi* and the difference in their nature.

For example, just as mud settles in water due to the presence of substances like *kataka*, similarly, the non-manifestation of the inherent power of karma in the soul is *upasama*. Just as the mud completely disappears when the water is transferred to another clean vessel, similarly, the complete removal of karma from the soul is *kshaya*. Just as some mud settles and some remains in the same water due to the presence of substances like *kataka*, similarly, the mixed state of both *kshaya* and *upasama* is *kshayopasama*. The attainment of the fruits of karma due to the cause of substances like *dravya* is *udaya*, and the result due to the attainment of the essence of the substance is *parinama*. The state whose purpose or cause is *upasama* is called *aupashamika*. Similarly, the derivation of *kshayika*, *kshayopashamika*, *audhayika*, and *parinaamika* should be understood.

1. Commentary on Sarvarthasiddhi, A. 2, Sutra 5. 

Page #737:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-698

...

"The terms like *aupashamika* etc. are used for the *jiva* because they are not found in any other substance except the *jiva*. However, just because they are *svattva* (inherent qualities), they cannot be considered as characteristics of the *jiva*, because a characteristic is something that is present in all, is praised, is sought after, and is free from the defects of destruction and impossibility. *Aupashamika*, *kshayopashamika*, *kshayika*, and *audyaika* are not found in all *jivas*, only the *parinaamika* (resultant) *bhavas* are found in all *jivas*, including the *parinaamika* *bhavas* called *jivattva* (the quality of being a *jiva*). Now, the method of their origin is explained in two verses:

*Kammuvasammi uvasambhavo khiinammi khaiyabhavo du.*
*Udayo jivassa guno khaovsamio have bhavo.* ||814||

Meaning: The *aupashamika* *bhavas* arise from the pacification of the opposing karma, the *kshayika* *bhavas* arise from the complete destruction of the opposing karma, and the *kshayopashamika* *bhavas* arise when the opposing karma is still present but the *jiva's* qualities are manifested due to the *jiva's* inherent nature.

*Kammudayajakkammiguno odayigo tattha hodi bhavo du.*
*Karananiravekkhabhavo sabhavigo hodi parinaamo.* ||815||

Meaning: The *audyaika* *bhavas* arise from the manifestation of karma, and the *parinaamika* *bhavas* arise from the *jiva's* inherent nature, independent of the pacification, destruction, or manifestation of karma.

Now, the further divisions of these five *bhavas* are explained in four verses:

*Uvasambhavo uvasam-samman charanam cha tarisan khaigo.*
*Khaig naan danasan sammachirittam cha daanaadi.* ||816||

Meaning: The *aupashamika* *bhavas* have two divisions: *upasham* *samyaktva* (pacified right faith) and *upasham* *charitra* (pacified right conduct). Similarly, the *kshayika* *bhavas* have nine divisions: *kshayika* *gnan* (destroyed knowledge), *kshayika* *darshan* (destroyed vision), *kshayika* *samyaktva* (destroyed right faith), *kshayika* *charitra* (destroyed right conduct), *kshayika* *daan* (destroyed giving), *kshayika* *laabh* (destroyed gain), *kshayika* *bhog* (destroyed enjoyment), *kshayika* *upbhog* (destroyed consumption), and *kshayika* *virya* (destroyed strength).

Special Note: Pacified anger, pacified pride, pacified deceit, pacified greed, pacified attachment...

1. Translation of *Tattvarthasara* 2.2.
2. See verse 813.
3. "Samyaktvacharitre" (T.S. 2.23), "Gnanadarshanadaanlaabh bhogopbhogiiryaani cha" (T.S. 2.4).

Page #738:
---------------------------
"Upshantdosha, Upshantmoha, Upshantkashayaveetaragchhamashtha, AupashmikSamyaktv, Aupashbhikcharitra, all these are Aupashmikbhavas. These aforementioned bhavas and others, which are the bhavas of the jiva that arise at every moment in the Apoovarnakaran, Anivrittikaran, Sukshmasamparaya and Upshantkashayagunasthanas, are all Aupashmikjiva bhavas."

"Kshinkrodha, Kshinkmana, Kshinkmaya, Kshinklobha, Kshinkraga, Kshinkdosha, Kshinkmoha, Kshinkkashay - Veetaragchhadmastha KshayikSamyaktv, Kshayikcharitra, Kshayikdan-Kshayiklabha-Kshayikbhog-Kshayikparibhog and Kshayikvirya, these five Kshayiklabdhis, Kevalgyan, Kevaldarshan, Siddha, Buddha, Parinirvritta, Sarvadukhantakrit, similarly other Kshayikbhavas which arise at every moment (in Apoovarnakaranagunasthan, Anivrittikaranagunasthan, Sukshmasamparayagunasthan and Kshinkmohagunasthan) are all Kshayikbhavas."

"Khaovsamigbhavo, Chaunaan Tidasan, Tiannan. . .
Daanadhipanch Vedagasaragcharittadeasajam. . . ||817||  Meaning - Kshayopaashmikbhavas have 4 types of knowledge like matijnana, 3 types of darshan like chakshu, 3 types of ajnana like kumati, Kshayopaashmikdan-labha-bhog-upbhog-vary, Vedakasamyaktva, Saragcharitra and Desasanayam, these 18 types."

"Special meaning - Kshayopaashmikendriyalabdhi, Kshayopaashmikdwiendriyalabdhi, Kshayopaashmiktriendriyalabdhi, Kshayopaashmikchaturindriyalabdhi, Kshayopaashmikpanchendriyalabdhi, Kshayopaashmikmatyajnani, Kshayopaashmikshrutjnan, Kshayopaashmikvibhangjnan, Kshayopaashmikabhinibodhikjnan, Kshayopaashmikshrutjnan, Kshayopaashmikavadhijnan, Kshayopaashmikman:paryayjnan, Kshayopaashmikchakshudarshni, Kshayopaashmikachakshudarshni, Kshayopaashmikavadhidarshni, Kshayopaashmiksamyagmithyatvalabdhi, Kshayopaashmiksamyaktvalabdhi, Kshayopaashmiksanyamasanyamalabdhi, Kshayopaashmikdanalabdhi, Kshayopaashmiklabhalabdhi, Kshayopaashmikbhogalabdhi, Kshayopaashmikparibhogalabdhi, Kshayopaashmikviryalabdhi, Kshayopaashmikachardhar, Kshayopaashmiksutrakriddhar, Kshayopaashmiksthanadhar, Kshayopaashmiksamavayadhar, Kshayopaashmikvyakhyanjnaptdhar, Kshayopaashmiknathadharmadhar, Kshayopaashmikupasakadhyayanadhar, Kshayopaashmikantkriddhar, Kshayopaashmikanuttaroppadikdashadhar, Kshayopaashmikprashnavyakaranadhar, Kshayopaashmikvipaksutradhar, Kshayopaashmikdristivadadhar, Kshayopaashmikgani."

"1. Dh.Pu. 14 p. 14/ 2. Dh.Pu. 14 p. 15. 3. "Jnanajnanadarshanalabdhayashchaturshchipanchbheda: Samyaktvacharitrasanyamasanyamaashcha" (T.Su.A. 2-5)" 

Page #739:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda - 700
Kshayopaśamika vācaka, kshayopaśamika daśapūrvadhara, kshayopaśamika caturdaśapūrvadhara; ye tatha isiprakar ke aur bhi anya kshayopaśamika bhāv hain.
Meaning - There are 21 types of Audayika bhāv: 4 gati, 3 ved, 4 kṣaya, 1 mithyātv, 6 leśyā, 1 asiddhatv, asanyama, ajñāna.
**ins**
Odayiga puṇ bhāva, gadilingakṣaya tah ya micchattam. Leśśāsiddhāsanjama aṇṇāṇam honti igivīsan. || 818 ||
Jīvatam bhavatāyī havanti pariṇāmā.
Idi mūluttara bhāva bhanga viyappe bahū jāṇe. || 819 ||
Meaning - There are three pariṇāmik bhāv: jīvatva, bhavya, abhavya. In this way, there are 5 mūla bhāv and 53 uttar bhāv. And if we consider their combinations, there can be many more.
Special meaning - To sustain life, including āyu and prāṇa, is jīvatva. It is not found beyond the final moment of an ayogi, because Siddhas lack the eight karmas that are the cause of prāṇa. Therefore, Siddhas are not jīvas, at most they can be called jīvitapūrva.
Doubt - Why is jīvatva not accepted for Siddhas?
Solution - No, because jīvatva in Siddhas is due to upacāra, and it is not right to consider upacāra as truth.
1.
2.
3.
The absence of prāṇa in Siddhas cannot be explained otherwise. This shows that jīvatva is not pariṇāmik, but arises from the result of karma, because "what is inseparable from the existence and non-existence of something is its cause" - this is the principle of karma-kāraṇabhāv. Therefore, jīvatva bhāv is audayika, this is proven. In Tattvārthasūtra, jīvatva is called pariṇāmik, but this is not in relation to sustaining prāṇa, but in relation to the quality of chaitanya. Therefore, that statement also does not contradict this.
D.P. 145. 18-11 ||
“Gatikṣayalingamithyādarśanājñānāsanayatāsiddhaleśyāścaturcaturtrye kai kai kaikaikṣadbhēdāḥ" (T.S.A. 2-6)
"Jīvabhavya bhavya tvāni ca" (T.S.A. 2- 7) 

Page #740:
---------------------------
Gommatasar Karmakanda - 701

The state of being imperfect (asiddhabhava) arises from the emergence of four destructive karmas. It is of two types: anadi-ananta (beginningless and endless) and sadi-santa (beginningless and finite). Those whose state of imperfection is anadi-ananta are abhavya jivas (non-liberated beings), and those whose state of imperfection is sadi-santa are bhavya jivas (liberated beings). Therefore, bhavya and abhavya are also vipaka-pratyayika (dependent on the result of karma).

**Doubt:** In the Tattvartha Sutra, these are called parinamika (resultant). How is this statement not in contradiction with that?

**Solution:** No, because the anadi-ananta and sadi-santa nature of asiddhatva is without a cause (nishkarana). It is understood that they are accepted as parinamika there.

"In the ten pranas (life forces), the jiva lives, lived, and will live, by the experience of life in the three times (past, present, and future), through the pranaparyaya (cycle of life forces)." Thus, the jiva is defined. Given this definition, even the siddhas (liberated beings) are jivas, because they lived in the past through the ten pranas. Currently, the siddhas do not live through the ten pranas. Their jivatva (state of being a jiva) is due to the past, according to the aupacharika (conventional) nay (viewpoint). According to the mukhya (principal) nay, the siddhas are also jivas. There is no fault in this, because they are also jivas in the present, due to the experience of the bhava-pranas (life forces of knowledge and perception).

**Doubt:** Aupacharika and other bhava (states) cannot be formed, because the soul is formless (amurta). These aupacharika and other bhava are dependent on karma-bandha (binding of karma), but the binding of karma to the formless soul is not possible.

**Solution:** There is anekanta (many-sidedness) regarding the formlessness of the soul. It is not a one-sided view that the soul is only formless. Due to its association with the paryay (category) of karma-bandha, it is somewhat formful (murta), and due to its pure nature, it is somewhat formless (amurta).

**Doubt:** If this is the case, then when the soul becomes united with karma-bandha, does the soul not become indistinguishable from karma?

**Solution:** This is not a fault. Although there is no distinction due to the binding, the soul is known to be distinct due to the difference in characteristics. It is also said:

1. Dharma Purana 14, pages 13-14.
2. Rajavartika 9-4-7.
3. Sarvarthasiddhi, chapter 2, verse 7.

Page #741:
---------------------------
Gommatapsar Karmakanda-702
**Bond Padhi Ayattam Lakkhanado Hadi Tassa Nanattam.**
**Tamha Amuttibhavo'neyanto Hodi Jivassa.**
**Meaning:** Although the soul and karma-bandha are the same in terms of their essence, they are different in terms of their characteristics. Therefore, the immateriality of the soul is anekanta, meaning it is immaterial from one perspective and not immaterial from another perspective, but rather material.

**Names of the Sandrisht Bhavas related to the five Bhavas of Aupasharmika, etc.**
**Number of Uttar Bhedas**
**Names of Uttar Bhedas**
**Aupasharmika**
* **Kshayika**
* **Kshayopa-sharmika**
* **Upashma Samyaktv and Upashma Charitra**
* **Kshayika Jnana-Darshan-Dana-Labha-Bhoga-Upbhoga-Virya and Kshayika Samyaktv and Kshayika Charitra**
* **Mati-Shruta-Avadhi-Man:paryaya** (4 types of Jnana), **Chakshu-Achakshu-Abadhi** (3 types of Darshan), **Kumati-Kushruta-Kuavadhi** (Vibhang) (3 types of Ajnana), **Kshayopa-sharmika Dana-Labha-Bhoga-Upbhoga and Virya**, **Vedaka Samyaktv**, **Saraga Charitra** and **Desha Samvam**.
* **Naraka-Tiryach-Manushya and Deva** (4 types of Gati), **Stri-Purush and Napumsaka** (3 types of Veda), **Krodha-Mana-Maya and Lobha** (4 types of Kashaya), **Mithyatva**, **Krishna-Neela-Pota-Pota-Padam and Shukla** (6 types of Lashya), **Asiddhatva**, **Asanyama** and **Ajnana**.
* **Jivatva**, **Bhavya-tva** and **Abhavya-tva**.
**Audayika**
**Parinamika**

**The method of obtaining the self-and-other-connected Bhangas of the Bhavas is as follows:**
**Odhadese Sambhavbhavam Muluttaran Thavedun.**
**Patteye Avirudde Parasagajogevi Bhangahu.**
**Meaning:** By establishing the root and subsequent Bhavas in the Gunasthan and Marganama, one should obtain each Bhang and the non-contradictory self-connected and other-connected Bhangas. 

Page #742:
---------------------------
## Gommatasar Karmakanda - 703

**Special Meaning:** A single **bhang** (fragment) and the **bhang** that are found in conjunction with it are called **sanyogi bhang** (conjoined fragments). There are two types of conjunctions (5): **swasanyog** (self-conjunction) and **parasanyog** (other-conjunction). When there is conjunction with one's own **uttarabhed** (sub-category), it is called **swasanyog**, such as the conjunction of **aupashamik samyaktv** (state of partial liberation) with **aupashamik charin** (one who is on the path of partial liberation) or the conjunction of **gati-rupa audayik-bhav** (state of arising in the form of motion) with another **jati-rupa audayik-bhav** (state of arising in the form of birth). When conjunction is said to be with a **bhed** (category) of another **bhav** (state), it is **parasanyogi**, such as the conjunction of a **bhed** of **aupashamik-bhav** with a **bhed** of **audayik-bhav** or the conjunction of **audayik** with **kshayik-bhav** (state of destruction). Now, the number of **bhang** in the **gunasthan** (stages of spiritual progress) in the form of **mula-bhav** (primary states) and **sw-par sanyog** (self and other conjunction) is stated:

**Mithyatve tichukke do suvi siddevi mula-bhaava hu.**
**Tig pan panagam chauro tig donni ya sambhava hoti.** || 821 ||

**Meaning:** In the three **gunasthan** of **mithyatva** (false belief), **sasadan** (attachment), and **misra** (mixed), there are 3-3 **mula-bhav**. In the four **gunasthan** of **asanyata** (non-restraint) and onwards, there are 5-5. In the four **gunasthan** related to the **upasham shreni** (stage of pacification), there are 5-5. In the **kshapka shreni** (stage of destruction) and **kshinak-path-gunasthan** (stage of diminishing karma), there are 4. In the **sanyogi** (conjoined) and **ayogi** (non-conjoined) **gunasthan**, there are 3-3. And in the **siddh** (liberated), there are 2 **mula-bhav**.

**Special Meaning:** In **mithyatva**, **sasadan**, and **misra** **gunasthan**, there are three **mula-bhav** each: **kshayopamik** (state of destruction and pacification), **audayik** (state of arising), and **parinamik** (state of transformation). From **asanyata** to **apramatta gunasthan** (stage of non-distraction) and from **apuurva-karan** (uncreated cause) to **upashanta-kshay-gunasthan** (stage of pacified karma), there are 5 **mula-bhav** in the **upasham shreni**. In the **kshapka shreni** and **kshinak-kshay-gunasthan**, there are four **mula-bhav** without **aupashamik-bhav** (state of partial liberation). In the **sanyogi** and **ayogi** **kevali-gunasthan** (stage of omniscience), there are three **mula-bhav** each: **audayik**, **kshayik**, and **parinamik**. And in the **siddh**, there are two **mula-bhav**: **kshayik** and **parinamik**.

**Perspective of **Mula-bhav** in Relation to **Gunasthan**

| **Gunasthan** | **Number of Mula-bhav** | **Names of Mula-bhav** |
|---|---|---|
| Mithyatva | 3 | Audayik-Misra, Parinamik |
| Sasadan | 3 | Misra |
| Asanyata | 5 | Audayik-Misra, Parinamik, Audayik-Mith, Parinamik, Audayik-Kshayopashamik-Aupamik-Kshayik-Parinamik |
| Deshasanyata | 5 | Audayik-Kshayopashamik, Aupashamik-Kshayik-Parinamik, Audayik-Kshayopashamik-Aupashamik-Kshayik-Parinamik |
| Pramatta | 5 | Audayik-Kshayopashamik-Aupashamik-Kshayik-Parinamik |

Page #743:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-704
Aparamatta
Upashamaka Apurva. Upashamaka Anivriti. | 5 Upashamaka Sukshmasa. | 4
Audayika-Kshayopa-shamika-Aupasha-mika-Kshayika-Parinamika Audayika-Kshayopa-shamika-Aupasha-mika-Kshayika-Parinamika Audayika-Kshayopa-shamika-Aupasha-mika-Sayika-Parinamika
Audayika-Kshayopa-shamika-Aupasha-mika-Kshaathika-Parinaabhika
Upashanta-kshaya
Audayika-Kshayopa-shamika-Aupasha-bhika-Kshayika-Parinamika
Kshapaka Apurvakarana | 4 Audayika-Kshayopa-shamika-Kshayika-Parinamika se Ksheenakashayaparyanta Sayogakevali
Audarthika-Kshayika-Parinamika Ayogakevali
Audayika-Nayika-Parinamika Siddha
Kshaabika-Parinaabhika Prakaranaprapta Uttarbhavo ko Gunasthanon mein kahte hain
Mithyatvagunasthanamen Audayikabhavoke 21, Kshayopa-shamike 3 Agnana, 2 Darshan, Panchlabdhi ye 10 aur Parinamike 3 isprakar (21+10+3) 34 bhaav hain. Sasadanagunasthanamen Mithyatvakebina
Audayikabhavoke 20, Kshayopa-shamikabhavoke 3 Agnana, do Darshan aur Panchlabdhi ye 10 aur Jeevatvabhavya-tvrup do Parinamika isprakar (20+10+2) 32 bhaav hain. Mishragunasthanamen Mithyatvabina
Audayike 20: Kshayopa-shamika uparyukt 10; Parinamike Jeevatv aur Bhavya-tv ye do aise sarv (20+10+2) 32 bhaav hain. Asanyatgunasthanamen Mithyatvabina 20 Audayikabhaav; Matyaadi tinjnana, tindarshan, Panchlabdhi aur Samyaktva ye 12 mishra (Kshayopa-shamika) ke; Aupasha-mika ka Upashamasamyaktva, Kshayika ka Kshayikasamyaktva evam Parinamika bhaavake Jeevatv aur Bhavya-tv isprakar (20+13+1+1+2) 36 bhaav paye jaate hain. Deshasanyatgunasthanamen Manushya-tiryanchagati, chaarkashaya, tinling, tishubhalesh-ya, asiddhatv aur agnana ye 14 Audayikabhaav; tinjnana, tindarshan v 5 labdhi, Vedakasamyaktva evam Deshasanyam ye 13 Kshayopa-shamikrabhaav, Aupasha-mika samyaktva, Kshayikasamyaktva, Jeevatv-Bhavya-tv isprakar sarv (14+13+1+1+2) 31 bhaav hain. In 35. bhaavon se tiryanchagati v Deshasanyam kamkarke Man:paryayajnana v Saragasanayam milaane se Pramatta v Aparamatta-gunasthanamen bhi 31-31 bhaav hain tatha inhi 31 bhaavon se Peet-padmaleshya, Kshayopa-shamikasamyaktva tatha Saragacharitra in chaarko kamkarke Aupasha-mika v Kshayikacharitra milaane se Apurvakarana evam Anivritikaranagunasthanamen 29-29 bhaav hain. In 29 bhaavonmen se Lobina shesh 3 kashaya aur 3 ling ghatakar Sukshmasamparayagunasthanamen 

Page #744:
---------------------------
Gommatasar Karmakanda - 705
23 Bhavas, out of these 23 Bhavas, 21 Bhavas are in the Upshantakashaya Gunasthan by reducing Lobhakashaya and Kshayikcharitra, out of these, by reducing two Bhavas of Aupashmik and adding Kshayikcharitra, 20 Bhavas are in the Ksheenakashaya Gunasthan. ManushyaGati, ShuklaLeshya and Asiddhatva these three Audayik Bhavas, 9 of Kshayik, JeevatvaBhavyaTva these two Parinaamik Bhavas, in this way (9+3+2) 14 Bhavas are found in the Sayogi Gunasthan and by reducing ShuklaLeshya from these 14, 13 Bhavas are in the Aayogi Gunasthan. Samyaktva, Gyan, Darshan, Veerya and Charitra roop 5 Kshayik and Jeevatva roop one Parinaamik, in this way 6 Bhavas are found in Siddhas. This statement is with respect to different times of different beings, now we will state further with respect to how many Bhavas are possible in one time of one being.
**View related to Uttar Bhavas with respect to Gunasthan**
| **Gunasthan** | **Apshamik Bhavas (2)** | **Kshayik Bhavas (9)** | **Mishra (KshayopaSham) Bhavas (98)** |
|---|---|---|---|
| 1 | Mithyatva | 2 | 3 |
| 2 | Rahasadan | 3 | 4 |
| 3 | Mishra | 4 | 5 |
| 4 | Asanyata | 5 | 6 |
| 5 | Deshasanyata | 6 | 7 |
| 6 | Prammatta | 7 | 8 |
| 7 | UpshamSamyaktva | 8 | 9 |
| 8 | UpshamSamyaktva | 9 | 10 |
| 9 | UpshamSamyaktva | 10 | 11 |
| 10 | Kshayik Samyaktva | 11 | 12 |
| 11 | Kshayik Samyaktva | 12 | 13 |
| 12 | Kshayik Samyaktva | 13 | 14 |
| 13 | Kshayik Samyaktva | 14 | 15 |
| 14 | Kshayik Samyaktva | 15 | 16 |
| 15 | Kshayik Samyaktva | 16 | 17 |
| 16 | Kshayik Samyaktva | 17 | 18 |
| 17 | Kshayik Samyaktva | 18 | 19 |
| 18 | Kshayik Samyaktva | 19 | 20 |
| 19 | Kshayik Samyaktva | 20 | 21 |
| 20 | Kshayik Samyaktva | 21 | 22 |
| 21 | Kshayik Samyaktva | 22 | 23 |
| 22 | Kshayik Samyaktva | 23 | 24 |
| 23 | Kshayik Samyaktva | 24 | 25 |
| 24 | Kshayik Samyaktva | 25 | 26 |
| 25 | Kshayik Samyaktva | 26 | 27 |
| 26 | Kshayik Samyaktva | 27 | 28 |
| 27 | Kshayik Samyaktva | 28 | 29 |
| 28 | Kshayik Samyaktva | 29 | 30 |
| 29 | Kshayik Samyaktva | 30 | 31 |
| 30 | Kshayik Samyaktva | 31 | 32 |
| 31 | Kshayik Samyaktva | 32 | 33 |
| 32 | Kshayik Samyaktva | 33 | 34 |
| 33 | Kshayik Samyaktva | 34 | 35 |
| 34 | Kshayik Samyaktva | 35 | 36 |
| 35 | Kshayik Samyaktva | 36 | 37 |
| 36 | Kshayik Samyaktva | 37 | 38 |
| 37 | Kshayik Samyaktva | 38 | 39 |
| 38 | Kshayik Samyaktva | 39 | 40 |
| 39 | Kshayik Samyaktva | 40 | 41 |
| 40 | Kshayik Samyaktva | 41 | 42 |
| 41 | Kshayik Samyaktva | 42 | 43 |
| 42 | Kshayik Samyaktva | 43 | 44 |
| 43 | Kshayik Samyaktva | 44 | 45 |
| 44 | Kshayik Samyaktva | 45 | 46 |
| 45 | Kshayik Samyaktva | 46 | 47 |
| 46 | Kshayik Samyaktva | 47 | 48 |
| 47 | Kshayik Samyaktva | 48 | 49 |
| 48 | Kshayik Samyaktva | 49 | 50 |
| 49 | Kshayik Samyaktva | 50 | 51 |
| 50 | Kshayik Samyaktva | 51 | 52 |
| 51 | Kshayik Samyaktva | 52 | 53 |
| 52 | Kshayik Samyaktva | 53 | 54 |
| 53 | Kshayik Samyaktva | 54 | 55 |
| 54 | K
Page #745:
---------------------------
.......... Gammatsar Karmakanda-206........
Agaman
1 Upshama
1 Kshayik Samyajya
Sanyaktva
Apuurvakaran
Uparam
Samyaktva
Bhaavijsamyak Kshayak Charitra 2 Kshayik Samyaktva Kshayik Charitra
Anivrittik.
Jamshab Charitra 2 Upay Sambakatra Uparam Charitra 2 Upshama Samyaksha Upshama Charitra 2 Upshama Samyaktva Upshama Charitra
| 12 Chaturthgunasthan-[ 13 (Uparyukt 14 men | Uparyukt 3 men
Sambandhi tatha Man:- | se ek Tiryanchgathi se Abhandh Vina Paryaygyan, Sara:- kam karnase) | Shesh 2 Charitra (14) 12 Uparyukt 14 | 11 (Uparyukt 13 me | Uparyukt. 3 men se Vedak Samyaktva se Peet v Padya se Abhavy bina
aur Saragcharitra Leshya Krap ki) Shansh 2 kam kiya) 2 (Uparyukt 14 | 15.
2 || se Vedak Samyakrav
aur Saragvan jis kiya)
8 (Manushya gati Lobh, | Uparyukt 3 men se | 23 Agnyan, Asiddhacha Abhavy Mina aur Shubhleshya. | Shesh 2 4 (Uparyukt 5 se 2. | 1 Lobhko kam kiya) 4 (Uparyukt 5 men se | 2.
Lobhko kam kiya:
Sukshmasar
Upshantakpay
Kshayik Samyaktva
Ksheenakashay
Kshavik Samyakcha Kshayik Charitra 9 (Sabhi)
Sayogi
2.
3 (Manushya gati, Asiddhatva aur Shukta Leshya) 2 (Manushyagati v Asiddhatva
Ayogi
2 (Abhavyatva bina Shansh) 1 Jeevatva
Siddh
5 (Samyaktva Darshan, Gyan Bara Veerya
Tatthev Moolbhanga Das Chhavvisan Kamen Pantisam.
Uguvisan Das Panagan Thanam Padi Uttar Vochham. | 822 || Arth - Purvokt Gathamen Kathith (Mithyatvadhi 3 Gunasthan, Asanyatadi Chargunasthan, Upshama Shreni ke Chargunasthan, Kshapak Shreni ke Chargunasthan, Sayogi-Ayogi Gunasthan aur Siddh in) Chhe Sthanon men Kramse Moolbhanga 10-26-35-19-10 v 5 hain. Iske Anantaran Unar bhavon ko Kahenge. 

Page #746:
---------------------------
Gommatasar Karmakanda - 707

**Special Meaning:** Now, regarding the number of possible states a soul can have in a single moment, it is stated that there are three fundamental states in the three categories of Mithyatva (false belief), etc. Each of these states can be further classified into three distinct types: Audayik (arising), Kshayopa-shamic (subduing), and Parinamik (resultant).

There are also three types of dual-combination states: Audayik-Mishra (Kshayopa-shamic), Audayik-Parinamik, and Kshayopa-shamic-Parinamik. There is only one type of triple-combination state: Audayik-Kshayopa-shamic-Parinamik. There are three types of self-combination states: Audayik, Kshayopa-shamic, and Parinamik.

Therefore, there are a total of 10 states (3 + 3 + 1 + 3). The method for calculating the number of each type of state (single, dual, triple, etc.) is the same as described in Bandha-Pratyay-Adhikar Gatha 799.

To understand the number of states, write down the desired number as the numerator and then write down numbers from one to one less than the desired number as the denominator. For example, if the desired number is 3, the numerator would be 3 and the denominator would be 1, 2.

Then, multiply the first numerator by the next numerator and the first denominator by the next denominator. Divide the resulting numerator by the resulting denominator to get the number of states.

In this case, there are three fundamental states in the three categories of Mithyatva, etc. So, write down 3, 2, 1 and below them write 1, 2, 3. This gives us the numerator and denominator.

Dividing the first three numbers by one gives us (3 + 1) = 3, which is the number of single states. Multiplying 3 by 2 and then dividing by (1 x 2) = 2 gives us (6 + 2) = 3, which is the number of dual states. Multiplying 6 by 1 and then dividing by (2 x 3) = 6 gives us 1, which is the number of triple states.

This method should be used to calculate the number of states for both fundamental and resultant states.

Now, in the four categories of Asanyata (uncontrolled), Desha-sanyata (controlled by place), Pramatta (distracted), and Apramatta (undistracted), there are five fundamental states each.

Using the above method, there are 5 single states and 10 dual states in the category of Par-sanyogi (external combination). However, there is no state called "Kshayik-Kshayopa-shamic" in this category, so there are only 9 dual states. This is because there is no distinction between Kshayik and Kshayopa-shamic in this category.

There are also 10 triple states, but there are no states called "Kshayik-Kshayopa-shamic-Audayik", "Kshayik-Kshayopa-shamic-Kshayopa-shamic", or "Kshayik-Kshayopa-shamic-Parinamik", so there are only 7 triple states.

There are 5 quadruple states, but there are no states called "Kshayik-Kshayopa-shamic-Audayik-Kshayopa-shamic", "Kshayik-Kshayopa-shamic-Kshayopa-shamic-Parinamik", or "Kshayik-Kshayopa-shamic-Audayik-Parinamik", so there are only 2 quadruple states.

There are no quintuple states because Kshayik and Kshayopa-shamic cannot occur together.

In the category of Mishra (mixed), there are three self-combination states: Mishra (Kshayopa-shamic in Kshayopa-shamic), Audayik in Audayik, and Parinamik in Parinamik.

There are no states called "Kshayopa-shamic in Kshayopa-shamic" or "Kshayik in Kshayik" in the categories of Kshayopa-shamic-Samyak-tva (subduing right conduct) and Kshayik-Samyak-tva (destroying right conduct) respectively.

Therefore, there are a total of 26 states (5 + 9 + 7 + 2 + 0 + 1 + 1 + 1). 

Page #747:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-708: Further, in the four Gunasthanas of the Upshama श्रेणी, there are also five मूलभाव each. Among these, in the Parsamyogee bhangas, each bhang is 5, in the Dwisamyogee bhangas 10, in the Trisamyogee bhangas 10, in the Chatuhsamyogee bhangas 5, and in the Panchasamyogee bhangas there is one bhang. Here, upon the occurrence of Kshayik Samyaktv, Upshama Charitra is possible, therefore, it is necessary to know the Samyoga of Upshama and Kshayik bhava, but in Kshayik, there is no Swasamyogee bhang in the form of Kshayik bhava, therefore, here in Kshayik Samyaktv, there is no other distinction of Charitra etc. of Kshayik bhava, in this way, it is necessary to know the remaining four bhangas (5+10+10+5+1+1+1+1+1+0), these all become 35 bhangas. And in the four Gunasthanas of the Kshapaka श्रेणी, there are four bhava each, Kshayik, Kshayopaśamik, Audayik, and Pariṇāmik. Here, in Parsamyogee, each bhang is four, in Dwisamyogee bhangas six, in Trisamyogee bhangas four, and in Yogī, it is Amar, is it not? In Gyaapik Samyaktv, Kshayik Charitra is also possible, therefore, there are four bhangas in relation to the four bhava. In this way, (4+6+4+1+4) all 19 bhangas are to be known. In the Kevali Gunasthan of Samyoga and A Samyoga, there are three bhava, Kshayik, Pariṇāmik, and Audayik. In Parsamyogee, each bhang is three, in Dwisamyogee bhangas three, and in Trisamyogee bhangas one, and in Swasamyogee, there are three bhangas in relation to the above three bhava, in this way, (3+3+1+3) together become ten bhangas. In Siddhas, there are two मूलभाव, Kshayik and Pariṇāmik. Here, each bhang is 2, in Dwisamyogee bhangas one, and in Swasamyogee bhangas two, in this way, all five bhangas are there. (Jivattva-Astitva, Vastutva etc. Pariṇāmik Swasamyogee bhangas are also possible in Siddhas.) 

Page #748:
---------------------------
A comparative view of all the *bhanga*s related to *moolabhava* in relation to *gunasthan* -

**Parsamyogee Bhanga**
**Swasamyogee**
**Vishesh**
**Gunasthan**
**Moolabhava**
**Pratyek Bhanga**
**Sarvbhango ki Kul Sankhya**
**Dwisamyogee Bhanga**
**Trisamyogee Bhanga**
**Chatursamyogee Bhanga**
**Panchasamyogee Bhanga**

1. **Mithya**
*Mishra, Audayik, Parinamik*
*Mishra-Aud, Mishra-Dharina, Aud-Dharina*
*Mishra-Audvik and Parinamik roop*
*Mishra-Mishra*
*Aud-Aud, Pari-Pari*

2. **Sasadan**

3. **Mishra**
*Aupashamik and Kshayik* - No combination of these two is possible.
*Ninos ke sogrupa ma samvadhi me nahi aaye*

*Gommatsar Karmakand-709*

4. **Asanyat**

5.
*Aup-Kshayi, Mishra, Aud, Pari (5)*
*Aup-Mishra, Aup-Pari, Kshayi-Aud, Kshayi-Mishra*
*Aud-Pari, Mishra-Pari*
*Aup-Aud, Kshayi-Pari, Mishra-Aud*
*Aup-Mishra-Aud, Ksha-Mishra-Aud, Mishra-Aud-Pari*
*Ksha-Mishra-Pari, Aup-Mishra-Pari, Aup-Aud-Pari, Ksha-Aud-Pari*
*Aup-Mishra-Aud and Parinamik, Kshayi-Mishra, Aud-Pari*

5. **Deshasanyat**
26

12.

6. **Pramat**

7. **Aparamat** 

Page #749:
---------------------------
## 8. Apurvakaranya (Upashamak)
(35)
Aup.-Mishra | Aup.-Kshavi,-Mishra | Aup.-Ksha. -Mishra | Aup, Aud.-Aud. Aup.-Aud. Aup.-Kshayi.-Aud. and Pariṇāmika | Kshavi. | Mishra Mishra! Aup...dhari. Aup.-Aud.-Pari. Aup.-Ksha.-Mishra | Mishch Aup.-Aup. Kshavi.-Mishra. Aup.-Mishra-Aud.  _ and Audayika Aud. and Pari.-Pari. Shayi.-Aud. Kshayi.-Mishra-Aud. Aup.-Mishra-Aud. | Pari. | (4) Shayi.-Pari, Kshayi,-Mishra-Pari. and Pariṇāmika Mishra-Aud. Kshayi.-Aud,-Pari. |Aup.-Ksha.-Aud. Mishra-Pari. - Mishn-Aud.-Pari. . and Pariṇāmika
Aud-Pari. | Aup.-Mishra-Pari. Ksha.-Mishra.-Aud. Aup-Kshayi. | Aup.-Kshar -Pari. and Pariṇāmika
Kshayika Kshayikarūpa Swasamyogi Bhannah Nahin Hota, Kyunki Upashamasreni Mein Kshayikasamyaktva Ke Atirikt Anya Koi Bhi Kshayikbhav Nahin Hota Hai.

## 9. Anivritti (Upashamak)
Gommatsar Karmakanda-758
10"

## 10. Sukshmasamp. (Upashamak)
## 11. Upashastakatraay |
(5)
..

## 8. Apurvakaranya (Kshapak)
and Pariṇāmika
Kshayika Mishra Audayika Pariṇāmika
Kshayi.-Mishra Mathi.-Aud. Kshayi.-Pari. Mith-Aud. Mishra-Pari. Aud-Pari.
Sayi. -Mishra.-Aut. Kshayi.-Mishra.-Par.
Kshayi. - Aud. -Pari. | Mishra,-Aud.-Pari.
Ksha-Ksha. Mishra-Mishra
Aud-Aud Paripari 

Page #750:
---------------------------
9. Anivritti (Kshapaka)
10. Sukshmasamy (Kshapaka)
12. Kshinakashaya
13. Sayogi
14. Ayogi
Siddh
X ""
4 "
4 "
Kshaajik
Audayik
Parina.
(3)
3 "
Kshayik
Parina.
(2)
4
4
X
3
3
לו
6 "
숙
6 "
Kshayi. Aud Saathi Pari
Aud Pari.
(3)
Ksha. Pari
(1)
4
X
4
++
1
33
Ksha, Aud Pari.
(5)
or
ܘܝܕ ܀
33
33
7
0
J
0
4
X
4.
25
3
C
Ksha. -Ksha.
Aud.-Aud.
Pari Pari
(3)
Ksha.Pari.
Paripari
(2)
19
19
19
10
10
5.
Gommatasar Karmakanda - 711 

Page #751:
---------------------------
## Gommatasara Karmakanda - 712

**Note:** In the case of a single living being, there is only a *parinaamik* (resultant) consciousness, not a *bhavyatva* (potential) consciousness. Therefore, it seems that *parinaamik-parinaamik* (resultant-resultant) *swasanyogi* (self-associated) *bhang* (destruction) does not occur. However, it becomes *swasanyogi* *bhang* along with existence, etc. Now, the types of *uttarbhavas* (subsequent states) are explained in another way.

**823:**
*Uttarbhanga* (destruction of subsequent states) is of two types: *thanagada* (place-based) and *padagada* (word-based).
*Sagogena ya bhanganayanam nasthiti niddi* (The destruction of the group of states that are present in a single time period of a living being, in relation to their place, is *thanagada* *bhang*. And the destruction of the group of states that are present in a single time period of a living being, in relation to their names or individual words, is *padagada* *bhang*.)

**Explanation:** Since a living being cannot have two different places at the same time, there is no *swasanyogi* *bhang* in *thanagada* *bhang*.

Now, the place of states in relation to *gunasthan* (stages of spiritual progress) and the number of states found in them are explained in three verses.

**824:**
*Micchaduge missatiye, pamattasatte ya missthanaani. Tiga duga chauro ekvam, thanam savvatha odayigam.* (In the case of *micchaduga* (wrong conduct), there are three places. In the case of *pamattasatta* (wrong faith), there are two places. In the case of *tiga* (three), *duga* (two), *chauro* (four), and *ekvam* (one), the place is *odayigam* (pervasive) everywhere.)

**Question:** In the *Gommatasara Karmakanda*, it is mentioned that there are five states. How many states can a living being have at one time? Can there be only one *odayik* (pervasive) state? Is it possible that there are no *parinaamik* (resultant) or *kshayopamik* (subduing) states, and only an *odayik* state? What is the meaning of verse 824?

**Answer:** A living being can have a minimum of three states at the same time: 1. *parinaamik*, 2. *kshayopasamik*, 3. *odayik*. A living being can have a maximum of five states at the same time: *aupasamik* (subduing), *kshayik* (destroying), *kshayopasamik*, *odayik*, *parinaamik*.

When a *kshayik* (destroying) *samyagdrsti* (right faith) living being in the *upshantamoha* (subdued delusion) *gunasthan* (stage of spiritual progress) subdues *charitramoha* (delusion of conduct), there is an *aupasamik* state in relation to *charitramoha*. There is a *kshayik* state in relation to *darshanamoha* (delusion of perception). There is a *kshayopasamik* state in relation to *jnana-darshan-virya* (knowledge, perception, and energy). There is an *odayik* state in relation to *gati-jati* (motion and birth), etc. And there is a *parinaamik* state in relation to *jivattva* (living beingness). In this way, a living being can have all five states at the same time.

*Gati-jati*, etc., arise until the end of the fourteenth *gunasthan*. Therefore, the *odayik* state is present in all *gunasthanas*. The *chetana* (conscious) *jivattva* *parinaamik* state is always present in both worldly and liberated living beings. However, the *ashuddha* (impure) *parinaamik* state of *ayu* (life span), etc., *pran* (breath), etc., is present only until the fourteenth *gunasthan*. Liberated living beings do not have *ayu*, etc., *pran*. The *kshayopasamik* state in relation to *jnana* (knowledge), *darshan* (perception), and *virya* (energy) is present until the twelfth *gunasthan* of *kshinamoha* (diminished delusion). Living beings who do not have *upsham* (subduing) or *kshayik* *samyagdarshan* (right faith) have only three states: *odayik*, *kshayopasamik*, and *parinaamik*.

(To be continued on the next page)

Page #752:
---------------------------
## Gommatasar Karmakanda - 713

**Verse 825:**
There are three places for the *kshayopashmik* (destructive-pacifying) state in the *mithyatva* (false belief) and *sasadan* (attachment) *gunasthanas* (stages of spiritual development), two places in the *misra* (mixed) *gunasthanas*, and four places in the *pramatta* (inattentive) *gunasthanas*.  *Vedak* (knowledge-based) *samyaktv* (right faith) is found in the *desasamya* (self-controlled) *gunasthanas*, and *desasamya* (self-control) is found in the *desasamya* (self-controlled) *gunasthanas*.

**Verse 826:**
*Rajam* (royal) is found in the *pramatta* (inattentive) *gunasthanas*, and the *michchadi* (wrong conduct) *gunasthanas* are found in the *bhang* (broken) and *chakkhuvihin* (blind) *michchaduga* (wrong path) *gunasthanas*.

**Verse 827:**
*Aviduga* (unaware) is absent in the *misratiye* (mixed) *gunasthanas*, and *anathaanam* (other place) is found in the *vahiduga* (aware) *gunasthanas*.

**Explanation:**
In the *mithyatva* (false belief) and *sasadan* (attachment) *gunasthanas*, there are three *ajnan* (ignorance) and two *darshan* (perception) *kshayopashmik* states, making a total of five. In the *misra* (mixed) *gunasthanas*, there are three *ajnan* (ignorance) and three *darshan* (perception) *kshayopashmik* states, making a total of six. In the *pramatta* (inattentive) *gunasthanas*, there are four *jnan* (knowledge) and three *darshan* (perception) *kshayopashmik* states, including *man:paryaya* (mind-consciousness). The five *kshayopashmik* *labdhis* (achievements) - *dana* (generosity), etc. - are found from the *mithyatva* (false belief) *gunasthanas* to the *kshinakshaya* (diminished passions) *gunasthanas*.

There is no living being who can have only *audayik* (worldly) states, because the *chetana* (consciousness) *rupa* (form) *jivattva* (being a living being) *parinamik* (resultant) state is present in all living beings, and the *audayik* (worldly) state is present in all *samsari* (worldly) living beings from the first *gunasthanas* to the fourteenth *gunasthanas*.

**Verse 824** states that there are three places for the *kshayopashmik* (destructive-pacifying) state in the *mithyatva* (false belief) and *sasadan* (attachment) *gunasthanas*, two places in the *misra* (mixed) *gunasthanas*, and four places in the *pramatta* (inattentive) *gunasthanas*. However, this verse does not prove that any living being can have only one *audayik* (worldly) state.

**(Commentary by Pandit Ratanchandra Mukhtar: Vyaktitva aur Kritattva, page 523)**

**Note:** The translation preserves the Jain terms as requested. The explanation provides a more detailed understanding of the concepts. 

Page #753:
---------------------------
Gommatasar Karmakanda-714

There are three types of locations in the two Gunasthanas of Mithyatva and others: 9 without Vibhangajnan, 8 without Chakshudarshan, and 10 including the above. In the three Gunasthanas of Misra and others, there are two locations each: one is their own excellent location, and the other is 9 in Misra without Avadhijnan and Darshan, 17 in Asanvat, and 11 in Deshasanyat. In the seven Gunasthanas of Pramatta and others, there is one each for their own excellent location, one each without Manahparyayajnan, one each without Avadhijnan and Avhidarshan, and one each without Avadhi and Manahparyayajnan and Abhidarshan (i.e., 13-12 and 11 in Pramatta-Apramatta, and four each of their own excellent locations). In the five Gunasthanas of Apurvakaran and others, there are 11-10 and 1, and four each of their own excellent locations.

Out of the 21 types of Audayikabhava, one each with respect to a Jiva and a Kal, there are 4 Gatis, 3 Vedas, 4 Kashayas, and 6 Leshyas in the Mithyatvagunastana, and 8 Bhavas in the form of Mithyatva, Asiddhatva, Asanyam, and Ajnan, seven each in the three Gunasthanas of Sasadan and others without Mithyatva, six each in Deshasanyat without Mithyatva and Asanyam until the Savedhabhag of Anivritikaran, five each in the Anivritikaran Gunastana's Avedhabhag and the Sukshmasamparay Gunastana without Mithyatva, Asanyam, and Veda, four each in the Upshantakashay and Kshinakashay Gunasthanas without Mithyatva, Asanyam, Veda, and Kashay, three Bhavas in the Sayogi Gunastana without Mithyatva, Asanyam, Veda, Kashay, and Ajnan, and two Bhavas in the form of Manushya Gati and Asiddhatva in the Ayogi Gunastana without Mithyatva, Asanyam, Vedakashay, Ajnan, and Leshya.

With respect to the Gunasthanas, there are 18 Misra (Kshayopshamic) Bhavas, with the location-based Bhavas related to the Sandrishti Gunastana.

| Location Number | Number of Bhavas | Specific Explanation of Bhavas |
|---|---|---|
| Mithyatva | 3 | 3 Ajnan, 2 Darshan, and 5 Danadi Labdhis |
| | 2 | 2 Ajnan (Kumati-Kushrut), 2 Darshan, 5 Labdhi |
| | 2 | 2 Ajnan (Kumati-Kushrut), 1 Achakshudarshan, 5 Labdhi |
| | 3 | 3 Misrajnan, 3 Darshan, 5 Labdhi |
| | 2 | 2 Misrajnan, 2 Darshan (Chakshu-Achakshu), 5 Labdhi |
| Asanyat | 3 | 3 Gnan, 3 Darshan, 1 Vedakasamyaktva, 5 Labdhi |
| | 2 | 2 Gnan (Mati-Shrut), 2 Darshan (Chakshu-Achakshu), 5 Labdhi, 1 Vedakasamyaktva |
| Sasadan | Misra |  | 

Page #754:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-715
Desasanvat
Pramatta
3 Jnana, 3 Darshan, 1 Vedakasamyaktva, 5 Labdhi, 1 Desasanayam. From the above 13, by reducing Avadhijnana and Avadhidarshan (13-2=11), 4 Jnana, 3 Darshan, 1 Vedakasamyaktva, 1 Saragasanayam, 5 Labdhi. From the above 14, by reducing Manahparyayajnana (14-1=13), from the above 14, by reducing Avadhijnana and Avadhidarshan (14-2=12), Japaik. From the above 14, by reducing Avadhi Manahparyayajnana and Avadhidarshan (14-3=11), Pramatta Gunasthanavat.
Apramatta
14-13
Apuvarkaran
4 Jnana, 3 Darshan and 5 Labdhi. From the above 12-1 (Manahparyayajnana), from the above 12-2 (Avadhijnana-Avadhidarshan), from the above 12-3 (Avadhi-Manahparyayajnana and Avadhidarshan), Apuvarkaran Gunasthanavat.
Anivrittikaran
4
12-11
Sukshmasampray
Apuvarkaran Gunasthanavat.
12-1110 and 9
Upashantakashay
12-1110 and 9
Apuvarkaran Gunasthanavat.
Kshinakashay
12-11
Apuvarkaran Gunasthanavat. 

Page #755:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda - 716
amratapiss N
**Comparison of 21 Audayika Bhavas with Gunasthanas**
**Detailed Explanation of Bhavas**
**Gunasthanas**
Mithyatva
Sasadan
Mishra
Asanyata
Deshasanyata
Pramatta
Apramatta
Apuvrakaran
Anivrittikaran (Svedabhag)
Anivrittikaran (Avedabhag)
Sukshmasampray
Upashantakshaya
Kshinakshaya
Sayogakevali
Ayogakevali
**Position**
**Number**
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
**Bhava**
**Number**
8
7
19
7
6
6
6
4
4
3
2
**Details**
1 from four gatis, 1 from three vedas, 1 from four kshayas, 1 from six leshyas, 1 Mithyatva, 1 Agnana, 1 Asanyama, 1 Asiddhatva.
8-9 Mithyatva from the above.
8-1 Mithyatva from the above.
8-9 Mithyatva from the above.
7-1 Asanyama from the above.
7-1 Asanyama from the above.
7-1 Asanyama from the above.
7-1 Asanyama from the above.
8-2 Mithyatva-Asanyama from the above.
5 from the above 6 without Veda.
5 from the above 6 without Veda.
5-1 Kshaya from the above.
5-1 Kshaya from the above.
4-1 Agnana from the above.
4-2 (Agnana and Leshya) i.e. Manushya Gati and Asiddhatva remain. 

Page #756:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda - 717

The bhangas formed by the change of bhavas in the places of audayikabhava mentioned in the above gatha are called gunasthanas.

Lingakashaya, leshya, sangunida, and chadugadi are all without contradiction. There are 12, 72, 72, and 48 bhangas respectively, when these are multiplied together. || 828 ||

There is a special case in the deva-gati, where there are three shubha-leshyas in the misra and asanyata gunasthanas. This is because the third and fourth gunasthanas are not possible due to the lack of bhavnatrikdeva. Therefore, there are 24 bhangas when the stri-purusha-veda, four kshayas, and three shubha-leshyas are multiplied together. This is what the Ashaya-parakrami (Vardhamana Swami) Jina has said. || 829 || Jumma ||

**Meaning:**

In the four gatis (naraka, tiryancha, manusya, and deva), there are no contradictions. When linga, kshaya, and leshya are multiplied together, there are 12, 72, 72, and 48 bhangas respectively. However, in the deva-gati, there are three shubha-leshyas in the misra and asanyata gunasthanas. This is because the third and fourth gunasthanas are not possible due to the lack of bhavnatrikdeva. Therefore, there are 24 bhangas when the stri-purusha-veda, four kshayas, and three shubha-leshyas are multiplied together. This is what the Ashaya-parakrami (Vardhamana Swami) Jina has said.

**Detailed Meaning:**

In the naraka-gati, there are 12 bhangas when the napumsaka-veda, four kshayas, and three ashubha-leshyas are multiplied together (1 x 4 x 3). In the tiryancha and manusya-gatis, there are 72-72 bhangas when the three vedas, four kshayas, and six leshyas are multiplied together (3 x 4 x 6). In the deva-gati, there are 48 bhangas when the stri and purusha-vedas, four kshayas, and six leshyas are multiplied together (24 x 6). The reason for multiplying by six leshyas in the deva-gati is that there are three ashubha-leshyas due to the lack of bhavnatrikdeva.

In this way, there are a total of 204 bhangas (12 + 72 + 72 + 48) in all four gatis. This is the total number of gunyas (the number that is multiplied) in the mithyatva and sasadan gunasthanas. However, in the misra and asanyata gunasthanas of the deva-gati, there are 24 bhangas when the stri and purusha-vedas, four kshayas, and three shubha-leshyas are multiplied together (2 x 4 x 3). The reason for multiplying by three shubha-leshyas is that the third and fourth gunasthanas are not possible due to the lack of bhavnatrikdeva.

In this way, there are a total of 180 bhangas (12 + 72 + 72 + 24) in the misra and asanyata gunasthanas of all four gatis. In the deshasanyata gunasthanas of the tiryancha and manusya-gatis, there are 36-36 bhangas when the three lingas, four kshayas, and three shubha-leshyas are multiplied together (3 x 4 x 3). This makes a total of 72 bhangas (36 + 36) in the deshasanyata gunasthanas.

In the pramatta and apramatta gunasthanas of the manusya-gati, there are 36 bhangas when the three lingas, four kshayas, and three shubha-leshyas are multiplied together (3 x 4 x 3). In the svedabhaga of the apurvakarana and anivrittikarana, there are 12 bhangas when the three lingas, four kshayas, and one shukla-leshya are multiplied together (3 x 4 x 1). In the avedabhaga, there are four bhangas when the four kshayas and one shukla-leshya are multiplied together. In the manakshayavala bhaga of the anivrittikarana, there are three bhangas when the three kshayas and one shukla-leshya are multiplied together. In the mayavala bhaga, there are two bhangas when the two kshayas and one shukla-leshya are multiplied together. In the lobhakshayavala bhaga, there is only one bhang when the badaraloha and one shukla-leshya are multiplied together. 

Page #757:
---------------------------
Gommatasar Karmakanda-718 states that in the Upashantakshaya, Kshinakshaya and Sayogakevali Gunasthanas, there is only one Bhaga for each Shukla Leshya. Therefore, the number of Bhangas that occur due to the change in Bhavas caused by Aksasanchar is the same as the number of Bhangas that occur when multiplied together. These Bhangas should be established in a multiplicative manner.

**Verse 830:**
Chakkhun Micchasasan Samma Tericchaga Havanti Sada.
Charikasayatileassa Nabbase Tattha Bhangaa Hu.

**Meaning:**
Those who are devoid of eye-sight, have false belief and are Tiryanch are always present. Therefore, in the Tiryanch गति, there are 12 Bhangas when the Napumsakaved, Charakshaya and 3 Ashubha Leshyas are multiplied together (14443).

**Verse 831:**
Khayiyavirudasamme Chadu Sol Bahattari Ya Baram Cha.
Taddeso Manuseva Ya Chhattisa Tabbhava Bhangaa.

**Meaning:**
In the Narak गति of the Asanyatakshayik Samyagdristi, there are only 4 Bhangas when the Napumsakaved, Charakshaya and Kapootaleshya are multiplied together. In the Tiryanch गति, there are 16 Bhangas when the Purushaved, Charakshaya and Charaleshya are multiplied together. In the Manusya गति, there are 72 Bhangas when the Trived, Charakshaya and 6 Leshyas are multiplied together (35446). In the Dev गति, there are 12 Bhangas when the Purushaved, Charakshaya and 3 Shubha Leshyas are multiplied together (54344). Therefore, in total, there are 4+16+72+12 = 104 Bhangas. The Deshasanyati Kshayik Samyagdristi are only humans, therefore, there are 36 Bhangas when the Trived, Charakshaya and 3 Shubha Leshyas are multiplied together.

**Verse 832:**
Parinaamo Duvaano Micche Sesesu Ekkathano Du.
Samme Annam Sammam Charitte Natthi Charittam.

**Meaning:**
In the Mithyatva Gunasthan, there are two places for Parinaamik Bhavas. These are Jivatva-Bhavya or Jivatva-Abhavya, and in the Aveshesh Gunasthanas, there is only one place for Jivatva-Bhavya. In the subsequent Gunasthanas, each is called a Dwisanyogi etc. to differentiate them. It is said that in a place with Samyaktva, there is no other Samyaktva, and in a place with Charitra, there is no other Charitra. This means that where there is Upashama Samyaktva, there is no Vedak or Kshayik Samyaktva. Similarly, this should be understood in other places as well.

**Verse 833:**
Micchadugayadachaukke Atthaththane Na Khayiyathane Na.
Juda Parajogajabhangaa Pudha Aniya Melidavva Hu.

**Meaning:**
In the Mithyatva-Sasadan Gunasthan, there are 8 places for the Bhavas related to Chakkhudarshanarhit Kshayopashamik. 

Page #758:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda - 719
The bhangas (breakdowns) arising from the combination of the previously mentioned audayika bhangas (breakdowns in the audayika state) and the four gunasthana (states of conduct) - asamyata (uncontrolled), etc. - in the kshayika samyaktv (state of perfect knowledge) should be separated and added to their respective totals.
**Explanation:**
- In the mithyatva (false belief) - sasadan gunasthana (state of conduct), there are 204 audayika bhangas (breakdowns in the audayika state) and 24 bhangas (breakdowns) related to acchudarshan (wrong perception) (Gatha 830), making a total of (204 + 24) 228 bhangas.
- In the misra (mixed) and asanvat (unharmonious) gunasthana (states of conduct), there are 180 audayika bhangas (breakdowns in the audayika state) (Gatha 829) and 104 bhangas (breakdowns) related to kshayika samyagdarshan (perfect knowledge) (Gatha 831), making a total of (180 + 104) 284 bhangas.
- In the desasanayat (controlled in conduct) gunasthana (state of conduct), there are 72 audayika bhangas (breakdowns in the audayika state) (Gatha 829) and 36 bhangas (breakdowns) related to kshayika samyagdarshan (perfect knowledge) (Gatha 831), making a total of (72 + 36) 108 bhangas.
- In the pramat (distracted) gunasthana (state of conduct), there are 36 audayika bhangas (breakdowns in the audayika state) and 36 bhangas (breakdowns) related to kshayika samyagdarshan (perfect knowledge), making a total of (36 + 36) 72 bhangas.
- In the apramat (undistracted) gunasthana (state of conduct), there are 36 audayika bhangas (breakdowns in the audayika state) and 36 bhangas (breakdowns) related to kshayika samyagdarshan (perfect knowledge), making a total of (36 + 36) 72 bhangas.

Now, in the following 10 gathas, we will discuss the specific details related to the bhangas (breakdowns) mentioned in the previous gathas.
- When the audayika bhangas (breakdowns in the audayika state) arise, the gunagaras (multipliers) are present everywhere. The remaining bhangas (breakdowns) are spread according to the bhava-thana (state of being). (Gatha 834)
- In the two, two, and three desas (regions), the multipliers are 24, 36, and 48. (Gatha 835)
- In the 12th, the multiplier is 12. (Gatha 835)
- In the 12th, the multiplier is 12. (Gatha 835)
- In the 12th, the multiplier is 12. (Gatha 835)
- In the 12th, the multiplier is 12. (Gatha 835)
- In the 12th, the multiplier is 12. (Gatha 835)
- In the 12th, the multiplier is 12. (Gatha 835)
- In the 12th, the multiplier is 12. (Gatha 835)
- In the 12th, the multiplier is 12. (Gatha 835)
- In the 12th, the multiplier is 12. (Gatha 835)
- In the 12th, the multiplier is 12. (Gatha 835)
- In the 12th, the multiplier is 12. (Gatha 835)
- In the 12th, the multiplier is 12. (Gatha 835)
- In the 12th, the multiplier is 12. (Gatha 835)
- In the 12th, the multiplier is 12. (Gatha 835)
- In the 12th, the multiplier is 12. (Gatha 835)
- In the 12th, the multiplier is 12. (Gatha 835)
- In the 12th, the multiplier is 12. (Gatha 835)
- In the 12th, the multiplier is 12. (Gatha 835)
- In the 12th, the multiplier is 12. (Gatha 835)
- In the 12th, the multiplier is 12. (Gatha 835)
- In the 12th, the multiplier is 12. (Gatha 835)
- In the 12th, the multiplier is 12. (Gatha 835)
- In the 12th, the multiplier is 12. (Gatha 835)
- In the 12th, the multiplier is 12. (Gatha 835)
- In the 12th, the multiplier is 12. (Gatha 835)
- In the 12th, the multiplier is 12. (Gatha 835)
- In the 12th, the multiplier is 12. (Gatha 835)
- In the 12th, the multiplier is 12. (Gatha 835)
- In the 12th, the multiplier is 12. (Gatha 835)
- In the 12th, the multiplier is 12. (Gatha 835)
- In the 12th, the multiplier is 12. (Gatha 835)
- In the 12th, the multiplier is 12. (Gatha 835)
- In the 12th, the multiplier
Page #759:
---------------------------
## Gommatasara Karmakanda - 720

"
There are eighteen types of *bhangas* (breakdowns) in the *mithyatva* (false belief) etc. *sthana* (state), twelve in the *panavanna* (five-colored) *sthana*, and one thousand in the *panasida* (five-pointed) *sthana*. ||840|| Twenty-eight in the *ruvahiya* (having form) *sthana*, nine hundred in the *saganuda* (with aggregates) *sthana*, eleven in the *donha* (two) *sthana*, and as many as there are *khavagas* (birds) in the *bochcha* (sky). ||841|| Ten in the *puvva* (previous) *panchaniya* (five-fold) *atthi* (existence) *suhuma* (subtle) *sthana*, twenty-six in the *daha* (ten) *sthana*, and ten in the *tattiya* (third) *metta* (middle) *dasa* (ten) *adchchchhada* (covered) *duchchhada* (covered) *duchchhada* (covered) *duy* (two) *egunam* (one). ||842|| Double in the *uvasamaga* (final) *sthana*, and seven in the *ruvahiya* (having form) *sthana* for the *jogi* (ascetic). ||843|| Seven in the *ajogi* (non-ascetic) *sthana*, and three in the *siddha* (perfect) *sthana*. ||843||

**Explanation:**

In the *audhayika* (causative) *bhava* (state), the *aksha* (categories) change, and the *bhangas* that occur due to this change are called *kshepa* (throw). The *bhangas* that occur due to the change of *aksha* in the *sthana* of the *sharsha* (subtle) *bhava* (state) in addition to the *gunakara* (multiplier) and *audhayika* (causative) *bhava* (state) are also called *kshepa* (throw).

In the *audhayika* (causative) *bhava* (state), each *bhang* (breakdown) is of the *gunya* (multiplicand) form, and there are 204 *bhangas* in the *mithyatva* (false belief) etc. two *sthana* (states), 180-180 in the *misra* (mixed) and *asanyata* (uncontrolled) *sthana* (states), 72 in the *deshasanyata* (controlled by the region) *sthana* (state), 36-36 in the *pramatta* (distracted) etc. two *sthana* (states), 12 in the *apurvakarana* (unprepared action), 12-4-3-2 and 1 in the five parts of the *anivrittikarana* (non-stopping) *sthana* (state), and one each in the *ayogi* (non-ascetic) *sthana* (state) onwards.

From the *mithyatva* (false belief) without *chakshudarshana* (eye-sight) to the *misra* (mixed) *sthana* (state), there are 12-12 and zero *gunya* (multiplicand) *bhangas* (breakdowns), and 104, 36, and 36 *gunya* (multiplicand) *bhangas* (breakdowns) in the *asanyata* (uncontrolled) and *deshasanyata* (controlled by the region) *sthana* (states) with *kshayika* (destructive) *samyaktv* (right belief).

In the above *gunya* (multiplicand) amount, the *gunakara* (multipliers) are 9 in the *mithyatva* (false belief) *sthana* (state), 6-6 in the *sasadana* (with support) and *misra* (mixed) *sthana* (states), 12-12 in the *asanyata* (uncontrolled) and *deshasanyata* (controlled by the region) *sthana* (states), 30-30 in the *pramatta* (distracted) and *aprammatta* (undistracted) *sthana* (states), 20-20 in the *kshinakshaya* (diminished passions) *sthana* (state), and four each in the *sayogi* (with ascetic) and *ayogi* (non-ascetic) *sthana* (states). However, in the case of *mithyatva* (false belief) without *chakshudarshana* (eye-sight) and *kshayika* (destructive) *samyaktv* (right belief), the *gunakara* (multipliers) are 3-2-zero-6 and 6 from the *mithyatva* (false belief) to the *deshasanyata* (controlled by the region) *sthana* (state).

The *kshepa* (throw) in the above-mentioned *sthana* (states) is 8 in the *mithyatva* (false belief) *sthana* (state), 5-5 in the *saptadana* (with seven supports) etc. two *sthana* (states), 11-11 in the *asanyata* (uncontrolled) etc. two *sthana* (states), 29-29 in the *pramatta* (distracted) etc. two *sthana* (states), 19-19 in the *apurvakarana* (unprepared action) etc. three *sthana* (states), 59 in the *kshinakshaya* (diminished passions) *sthana* (state), 3-3 in the *sayogi* (with ascetic) and *ayogi* (non-ascetic) *sthana* (states), and 3-2-zero-6 and 6 in the *mithyatva* (false belief) etc. five *sthana* (states) in the case of *mithyatva* (false belief) without *chakshudarshana* (eye-sight) and *kshayika* (destructive) *samyaktv* (right belief)
Page #760:
---------------------------
## Gommatasara Karmakanda-721:  Desasanayat (6) Upshama Shreni

In the four Gunasthanas of the Upshama Shreni, namely A-purvakaran, etc., the multiplier is 40 and the addend is one less, i.e., 39.

Multiplying the above multiplicand by the multiplier and adding the addend, the number of bhangas are as follows:

* Mithyatva Gunasthan: 1883
* Sasadan Gunasthan: 1255
* Mishra Gunasthan: 1085
* Asanyata Gunasthan: 28
* Desasangatamaathan: 6-9
* Sampattadi Dvigunasthan: 1109-1109

In the eight Kshapaka Gunasthanas, namely A-purvakaran, Anivrittikaran, five parts of Anivrittikaran, Sukshma Samparaya, and Kshina Kshaya, the number of bhangas are as follows:

* A-purvakaran: 259, 259, 19, 79, 59, 39, 39, and 39 (ten times less than five)
* Sayogi Kevali: 7
* Ayogi: 7
* Siddha: 3

In the four Gunasthanas of the Upshama Shreni, the number of bhangas are double that of the Kshapaka Shreni plus one.

* A-purvakaran and Saveda Anivrittikaran: (25942 + 1) = 519
* Similarly, 199, 159, 119, 79, 79, and 79 bhangas should be known. ||834843||

**Special Note:**

The multiplier is the number by which we multiply, and the addend is the number that is added. The places of the bhavas are distinct and each bhang is separate. Here, the places of the Audayik Bhava are the multiplier, and the places of the remaining bhavas are the addend. Similarly, in the Dvisanyogi, Trisanyogi, etc., bhangas, the bhangas formed by the combination of the Audayik Bhava are the multiplier, and the bhangas formed by the combination of other bhavas without the Audayik Bhava are the addend.

Multiplying the multiplicand by the multiplier (Audayik Bhava, Dvisanyogi, etc.) and adding the addend, the number of bhangas obtained is the same as the number of bhangas that occur due to the change of bhavas.

Here, in the Mithyatva Gunasthan, there are two places of the Kshayopa-shama Bhava (10 and 9), one place of the Audayik Bhava (8), and two places of the Pari-naamik Bhava (Bhavya and Abhavya with Jivatva). Thus, there are a total of (2+1+2) = 5 places. Each of these places has 5 bhangas. Here, the one place of the Audayik Bhava (8) is the multiplier, and the two places of the Kshayopa-shama Bhava (2) and the two places of the Pari-naamik Bhava (2+2) = 4 bhangas are the addend.

In the Dvisanyogi bhangas, the one place of the Audayik Bhava (8) and the two places of the Kshayopa-shama Bhava (10 and 9) and the two places of the Pari-naamik Bhava (Bhavya or Abhavya) are the multiplier (4 bhangas). The two places of the Kshayopa-shama Bhava (10) and the two places of the Pari-naamik Bhava (Bhavya-Abhavya) are the addend (2 bhangas). Similarly, the two places of the Kshayopa-shama Bhava (9) and the two places of the Pari-naamik Bhava (Bhavya-Abhavya) are the addend (2 bhangas). Thus, there are four bhangas as the addend.

Similarly, in the Trisanyogi bhangas, the one place of the Audayik Bhava (8) and the two places of the Kshayopa-shama Bhava (10) and the two places of the Pari-naamik Bhava are the addend (2 bhangas). The two places of the Kshayopa-shama Bhava (9) and the two places of the Pari-naamik Bhava are the addend (2 bhangas). 

Page #761:
---------------------------
## Gommatasara Karmakanda - 722

There are two types of Pariṇāmikabhāva, along with their respective locations. Thus, in total, there are 9 Bhaṅga as multipliers (1 for each Bhaṅga, 4 for the two-fold combination, and 4 for the three-fold combination), and 8 Bhaṅga as additions (4 for each Bhaṅga and 4 for the two-fold combination). 

Previously, we mentioned 204 Bhaṅga as multiplicands in the Mithyātva Guṇasthāna, related to the Audayikabhāva. Multiplying these by the multiplier of 9 (204 x 9) results in 1836. Adding the 8 Bhaṅga as additions (1836 + 8) gives us 1844 Bhaṅga.

In the Mithyātva Guṇasthāna without Chakshudarśana, there are 4 locations: one location for the 8 Bhāva of Kṣayopashamika, one location for the 8 Bhāva of Audayika, and two locations for the Bhavyatva and Abhavyatva of Pariṇāmikabhāva. Each location has 4 Bhaṅga, but we only consider the 8 Bhāva of Kṣayopashamika in one location, as the remaining 3 Bhaṅga are repetitive. The Bhaṅga mentioned earlier in the Mithyātva Guṇasthāna without Chakshudarśana are the same, so we only consider one, which is the addition. 

In the two-fold combination of Bhaṅga, there is one Bhaṅga as a multiplier, which is the combination of the 8 Bhāva of Kṣayopashamika in one location and the 8 Bhāva of Audayika in one location. The two-fold combination of Bhaṅga arising from the combination of the location of Audayika and the location of Bhavyatva and Abhavyatva of Pariṇāmikabhāva are repetitive, so they are not considered. The two Bhaṅga arising from the combination of the 8 Bhāva of Kṣayopashamika in one location and the two locations of Bhavyatva and Abhavyatva of Pariṇāmikabhāva are considered as additions.

In the three-fold combination of Bhaṅga, the two Bhaṅga arising from the combination of the 8 Bhāva of Kṣayopashamika in one location, the 8 Bhāva of Audayika in one location, and the two locations of Bhavyatva and Abhavyatva are considered as multipliers.

Thus, in the Mithyātva Guṇasthāna without Chakshudarśana, there are 3 Bhaṅga as multipliers and 3 Bhaṅga as additions, in addition to the 12 Bhaṅga mentioned earlier as multiplicands. Multiplying the multiplicands by the multipliers and adding the additions (12 x 3 + 3) gives us 39 Bhaṅga.

Therefore, the total number of Bhaṅga in the Mithyātva Guṇasthāna with and without Chakshudarśana is (1844 + 39) 1883 Bhaṅga.

Similarly, in the Sāsādana Guṇasthāna, the number of Bhaṅga is equal to the number of locations of Bhāva. The location of Audayikabhāva is considered as a multiplier, while the locations of other Bhāva are considered as additions. The Bhaṅga arising from the combination of two or three Bhāva are considered as two-fold, three-fold, etc. The two-fold, three-fold, etc. Bhaṅga arising from the combination of Audayikabhāva with any other Bhāva are considered as multipliers, while the two-fold, three-fold, etc. Bhaṅga arising from the combination of other Bhāva without Audayikabhāva are considered as additions.

The Bhaṅga mentioned earlier should not be considered again if they are similar to the ones mentioned later. Thus, in the Sāsādana Guṇasthāna, the total number of Bhaṅga is obtained by adding the multipliers, multiplying the sum by the multiplicands mentioned earlier, and then adding the additions. This rule applies to all Guṇasthāna.

Therefore, in the Sāsādana Guṇasthāna, there are two locations for the 10 and 9 varieties of Kṣayopashamikabhāva, one location for the 7 Bhāva of Audayikabhāva, and one location for the Bhavyatva of Pariṇāmikabhāva. In each of these four locations, there is one multiplier and 3 additions for each Bhaṅga, 3 multipliers and 2 additions for the two-fold combination of Bhaṅga, and 2 multipliers for the three-fold combination of Bhaṅga. 

Page #762:
---------------------------
## Gommatasara Karmakanda-723

Thus, the multiplier is (1+3+2) 6 and the addition (3+2) 5. Therefore, multiplying the aforementioned multiplicand 204 by the multiplier 6 and adding the addition amount 5 (204*6+5) results in 1229 destructions. In the Sasadanagunasthan, which is devoid of eye-sight, there are three places: one place for the 8 aspects of Kshayopaśamika, one place for the 7 aspects of Audayika, and one place for the Bhavyatva aspect of Pariṇāmika. In each destruction of these three places, the addition is one, and all others are repeated. In the two-fold combination destructions, the multiplier is one and the addition is one. In the three-fold combination destructions, the multiplier is one. Thus, here, the total multiplier destructions are 2 and the addition destructions are also 2. Therefore, multiplying the aforementioned multiplicand 12 by the multiplier 2 and adding the addition amount 2 (12*2+2) results in 26 destructions. Adding the destructions with and without eye-sight together, the total destructions related to Sasadanagunasthan are (1229+26) 1255.

In the Mishragunasthan, there are four places: two places for the 51 and 9 aspects of Kshayopaśamika, one place for the 7 aspects of Audayika, and one place for the Bhavyatva aspect of Pariṇāmika. In each destruction of these four places, the multiplier is one and the addition is 3. In the two-fold combination destructions, the multiplier is 3 and the addition is 2. In the three-fold combination destructions, the multiplier is 2. Thus, here, the total multiplier is (1+3+2) 6 and the addition is (3+2) 5. Multiplying the aforementioned multiplicand 180 by the multiplier 6 and adding the addition amount 5, the total destructions are (180*6+5) 1085.

In the Asanyatagunasthan, there are five places: one place for the Upshama Samyaktva aspect of Upshamika, two places for the 12 and 10 aspects of Kshayopaśamika, one place for the 7 aspects of Audayika, and one place for the Bhavyatva aspect of Pariṇāmika. In each destruction of these five places, the multiplier is one and the addition is 4. In the two-fold combination destructions, the multiplier is 4 and the addition is 5. In the three-fold combination destructions, the multiplier is 5 and the addition is 2. In the four-fold combination destructions, the multiplier is 2. Thus, the total multiplier is (1+4+5+2) 12 and the addition is (4+5+2) 11. Therefore, multiplying the aforementioned multiplicand 180 by the multiplier 12 and adding the addition amount 11 (180*12+11) results in 2171 destructions.

In the Kshayikasamyagdristi, there are five places: one place for the Kshayikasamyaktva aspect of Kshayikabhava, two places for the 12 and 10 aspects of Kshayopaśamika, one place for the 7 aspects of Audayika, and one place for the Bhavyatva aspect of Pariṇāmika. In each destruction of these five places, the addition is one. In the two-fold combination destructions, the multiplier is one and the addition is 3. In the three-fold combination destructions, the multiplier is 3 and the addition is 2. In the four-fold combination destructions, the multiplier is 2. The remaining multipliers and additions are repeated. Thus, here, the total multiplier is (1+3+2) 6 and the addition is also (1+3+2) 6. Therefore, multiplying the aforementioned multiplicand 104 by the multiplier 6 and adding the addition amount 6 (104*6+6) results in 630 destructions. Adding these 630 destructions to the aforementioned 2171 destructions, the total destructions related to Asanyatagunasthan are (2171+630) 2801.

In the Deshasanyatagunasthan, there are five places: one place for the Upshama Samyaktva aspect of Upshamabhava, two places for the 13 and 11 aspects of Kshayopaśamika, one place for the 6 aspects of Audayika, and one place for the Bhavyatva aspect of Pariṇāmika. In each destruction of these five places, the multiplier is one and the addition is 4. In the two-fold combination destructions, the multiplier is 4 and the addition is 5. In the three-fold combination destructions, the multiplier is 5 and the addition is 2. In the four-fold combination destructions, the multiplier is 2. Thus, the total multiplier is (1+4+5+2) 12 and the addition is (4+5+2) 

Page #763:
---------------------------
Gommatasar Karmakanda - 724
11. Therefore, multiplying the aforementioned multiplier 72 by the multiplier 12 and adding the addition 11 (72 x 12 + 11), there are 875 bhangas. And in Kshayika Samyaktv, there is no place for Upshama Samyaktv, only Kshayika's place. Know the other statements as before. Here, in each bhang, the addition is one; in the two-fold bhang, the multiplier is one and the addition is three; in the three-fold bhang, the multiplier is three and the addition is two; in the four-fold bhang, the multiplier is two. The remaining multipliers and additions are not taken here because they are repeated. In this way, the total multiplier (1 + 3 + 2) is 6 and the addition (1 + 3 + 2) is also 6. Here, multiplying the aforementioned multiplier 36 by the multiplier 6 and adding the addition 6 (36 x 6 + 6), the total bhangas are 222. Adding the aforementioned 875 bhangas to these (222 + 875), there are 1097 bhangas related to the Desasanayat Gunasthan.
Know.
In the Pramattagunasthan, there are eight places: one Upshama Samyaktv form of Upshama Bhava, one Kshayika Samyaktv form of Kshayika Bhava, four forms of Kshayopakshamika Bhava (14-13-12 and 11), one form of Audayika Bhava (6), and one form of Parinamik Bhava (Bhavya). In each of their bhangas, the multiplier is one and the addition is seven; in the two-fold bhang, the multiplier is seven and the addition is fourteen; in the three-fold bhang, the multiplier is fourteen and the addition is eight; in the four-fold bhang, the multiplier is eight. All these together make the multiplier (1 + 7 + 14 + 8) 30 and the addition (7 + 14 + 8) 29. Here, multiplying the aforementioned multiplier 36 by the multiplier 30 and adding the addition 38 (36 x 30 + 29), the total bhangas are 1109. Similarly, in the Apramattagunasthan, there are eight places, the multiplier is 30, the addition is 29, and the multiplier is 36. Multiplying the aforementioned multiplier 36 by the multiplier 30 and adding the addition (36 x 30 + 29), the total bhangas are 1109.
In the Upshama Shreni, from A-purvakaran to Upshantakashaya Gunasthan, there is one place for Upshama Bhava's Samyaktv and Charitra, one place for Kshayika Bhava's Samyaktv, four places for Kshayopakshamika Bhava (12-11-10 and 9), six forms of Audayika Bhava in A-purvakaran and Saveda Anivrittikaran Gunasthan, one place for five forms of Aveda Bhag from Aveda Bhag to Upshantakashaya Gunasthan, and one place for Parinamik Bhava's Bhavya. In this way, there are 8-8 places (1 + 1 + 4 + 1 + 1). In each of these places, the multiplier is one and the addition is seven; in the two-fold bhang, the multiplier is seven and the addition is fifteen; in the three-fold bhang, the multiplier is fifteen and the addition is thirteen; in the four-fold bhang, the multiplier is thirteen and the addition is four; in the five-fold bhang, the multiplier is four. All these together make the multiplier (1 + 7 + 15 + 13 + 4) 40 and the addition (7 + 15 + 13 + 4) 39. In A-purvakaran, the multiplier is 12. Multiplying it by the multiplier 40 and adding the addition 39 (12 x 40 + 39), there are 519 bhangas. In Saveda Anivrittikaran Gunasthan, the multiplier is also 12, so (12 x 40 + 39) there are 519 bhangas. In Vedarahit Anivrittikaran, the multiplier is 4. Multiplying it by the multiplier 40 and adding the addition 39 (4 x 40 + 39), there are 199 bhangas. In the Krodharahit Bhag, the multiplier is three, so (3 x 40 + 39) there are 159 bhangas. In the Manarahit Bhag, the multiplier is two, so (2 x 40 + 39) there are 119 bhangas. In the Mayarahit Bhag, the multiplier is one, and in the further Sukhsamaparaya and Upshantakashaya Gunasthan, the multiplier is also one, so (1 x 40 + 39) there are 79-79 bhangas in all three Gunasthan. 

Page #764:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-725

In the A-purvakarana Guna-sthana of the Kshapaka category, there are 7 sthana: one sthana for the Kshayika-bhava, with Samyaktva and Charitra as its forms; four sthana for the Kshayo-pashama-bhava, with 12, 11, 10, and 29 bhava as its forms; one sthana for the Audayika-bhava, with 6 bhava as its forms; and one sthana for the Parinamika-bhava, with Bhavyatva-bhava as its form. In each of these sthana, the Gunakara is 1 for the single bhangas, 6 for the double bhangas, 9 for the triple bhangas, and 4 for the quadruple bhangas. Thus, the total Gunakara is (1+6+9+4) 20, and the total Kshepa is (6+9+4) 19. Therefore, multiplying the aforementioned Gunya 12 by the Gunakara 20 and adding the Kshepa, we get a total of (12*20+19) 259 bhangas.

In the Saveda-bhag of the Anivrittikarana Guna-sthana, there are 7 sthana for the four bhava, just like in the A-purvakarana Guna-sthana. The Gunakara is 20, the Kshepa is 19, and the Gunya is the aforementioned 12. Multiplying the Gunya 12 by the Gunakara 20 and adding the Kshepa 19, we get a total of (12*20+19) 259 bhangas. In the Veda-rahita-bhag, there are also 7 sthana for the four bhava, but the difference is that there are 5 bhava for the Audayika. Here, the Gunakara is 20, the Kshepa is 19, and the Gunya is the aforementioned 4. Multiplying the Gunya 4 by the Gunakara 20 and adding the Kshepa, we get a total of (4*20+19) 99 bhangas. In the Krodha-rahita-bhag, the same principles apply as in the Veda-rahita-bhag. Here, the Gunakara is 20, the Kshepa is 19, and the Gunya is the aforementioned 3. Multiplying the Gunya by the Gunakara 20 and adding the Kshepa 19, we get a total of (3*20+19) 79 bhangas. In the Mana-rahita-bhag, there are also 7 sthana, the Gunakara is 20, and the Kshepa is 19. Here, multiplying the Gunya 2 by the Gunakara 20 and adding the Kshepa 19, we get a total of (2*20+19) 59 bhangas. In the Maya-rahita-bhag, there are 7 sthana, the Gunakara is 20, and the Kshepa is 19. Here, multiplying the Gunya 1 by the Gunakara 20 and adding the Kshepa 19, we get a total of (1*20+19) 39 bhangas. Similarly, in the Sukshma-samparaya and Kshina-kashaya Guna-sthana, there are 39 bhangas each.

In the Sayoga-kevali Guna-sthana, there are three sthana: one for the Kshayika-bhava, one for the Audayika-bhava with 3 bhava as its forms, and one for the Parinamika-bhava. In each of these sthana, the Gunakara is 1 for the single bhangas, 2 for the double bhangas, and 1 for the triple bhangas. Thus, the total Gunakara is (1+2+1) 4, and the total Kshepa is (2+1) 3. The Gunya is 1. Multiplying the Gunya 1 by the Gunakara 4 and adding the Kshepa 3, we get a total of (1*4+3) 7 bhangas. In the A-yoga-kevali Guna-sthana, there are three sthana: one for the Kshayika-bhava, one for the Audayika-bhava with 2 bhava as its forms, and one for the Parinamika-bhava. Here, the Gunakara is 4 and the Kshepa is 3, just like in the Sayoga-kevali Guna-sthana. Multiplying the Gunya 1 by the Gunakara 4 and adding the Kshepa 3, we get a total of (1*4+3) 7 bhangas. In the Siddhas, there are two sthana: one for the Kshayika-bhava and one for the Parinamika-bhava with Jivatva as its form. Here, the Kshepa is 2 for the single bhangas and 1 for the double bhangas. Adding these, we get (2+1) 3 bhangas. Thus, we have described the bhangas according to the sthana. Now, we will describe the bhangas according to the pada.

There are two types of pada-bhangas: those that arise from the jati-pada and those that arise from the savva-pada. The jati-pada is like a seed, and the pinda is like the sprout that arises from it. 

Page #765:
---------------------------
## Gommatasara Karmakanda-726 Meaning:

There are two types of **padagata bhang** based on the distinction between **jatipad** and **sarvapad bhang**. When a single jati is grasped, it is understood as **jatipad**, for example, even though there are four types of **kshayopashmik jnana**, only one **jnana jati** is grasped. When separate and complete aspects are grasped, they should be understood as **sarvapad bhang**. In these, **jatipad** forms of **kshayik** and **kshayopashmik** aspects are also found in the **pindapad** form of aspects. There are five types of **labdhi** in **kshayik** aspects, and in **kshayopashmik**, **jnana**, **ajnana**, **darshan**, and **labdhi** are the **pindapad** forms, because they have many types, for example, where profit is gained while giving charity, there is **swasangyogibhang**.

## Gommatasara Karmakanda-845 Meaning:

**Abadhuvasamagachaka** and **two uvasamas** are **jatipad** in **aupashamik** aspects. **Khadgapad** is there; in **khavag** (liberated souls) and **jin** (Jina) **siddhas**, there are two **pad**.

The **jatipad** of **aupashamik** aspects is one, **samyaktv** form, in the four **gunasthanas** of **asanyatadi**. In the four **gunasthanas** related to the **upsham** series, there are two **jatipad**, **samyaktv** and **charitra**. The **jatipad** of **kshayik** aspects is one, **kshayik samyaktv** form, in the four **gunasthanas** of **asanyatadi**, and in the four **gunasthanas** of the **kshapka** series, there are two **jatipad**, **samyaktv** and **charitra**. In the **sanyog** and **ayog** **kevali gunasthanas**, there are five **jatipad**: **samyaktv**, **jnana**, **darshan**, **charitra**, and **labdhi** (in the form of **tirtha**). In **siddhas**, know these five, excluding **charitra**, as four **jatipad**.

**Special Note:** Here, the meaning of the four **jatipad** mentioned in **siddhas**, excluding **charitra**, is that there is no **charitra** from any of the five **charitras** like **samayik**. Or, there is no **kshayik** **charitra** as described.

## Gommatasara Karmakanda-846 Meaning:

In **kshayopashmik** aspects, there are three **jatipad** in the **mithyatva-sasadan gunasthan**: **ajnanadarshan** and **labdhi**. In the **misra gunasthan**, there are three **jatipad**: **misra jnana**, **darshan**, and **labdhi**. In the **asanyata gunasthan**, there are four **jatipad**: **jnana**, **darshan**, **labdhi**, and **samyaktv**. In the three **gunasthanas** of **desasanyata**, **pramatta**, and **apramatta**, there are four **jatipad**: **jnana**, **darshan**, **labdhi**, and **samyaktv**. However, in the **desasanyata gunasthan**, there is one **jatipad** in the form of **desasanyama**, and in **pramatta** and **apramatta**, there is one **jatipad** due to **sarag samyama**, making a total of five **jatipad** in each. Further, from **apurvakarana** to the **khinakshaya gunasthan**, there are three **jatipad**: **jnana**, **darshan**, and **labdhi**.

## Gommatasara Karmakanda-847 Meaning:

In **michcha**, there are eight **jatipad**. In those three, there are seven **jatipad** in **savad** (liberated souls). There are six **jatipad** in **chassuham** (liberated souls). In **khino** (liberated souls) and **jinas**, there are four **jatipad**. 

Page #766:
---------------------------
Gommatasar Karmakanda - 727
**Ignorance**
**Meaning:** In the **Jatipad** of the **Audayikabhava**, there are 8 **Gunasthanas** in the form of **Agyan**, **Kashaya**, **Ling**, **Leshya**, **Mithyatva**, **Asanyam**, and **Asiddhatva**. In the **Sasaadan**, **Mishra**, and **Asanyata** **Gunasthanas**, there are 7 **Gunasthanas** without **Mithyatva**, starting from **Deshasanyata** and ending at **Svedhabhaga** without **Asanyam**. From **Avedhabhaga** to **Sukshmasamprayagunasthan**, there are 5 **Gunasthanas** without **Ved**, starting from **Sreenakashaya Gunasthan** and ending at **Sreenakashaya Gunasthan** without **Kashaya**. In the **Sayogi Gunasthan**, there are 3 **Gunasthanas** without **Agyan**, and in the **Aayogi Gunasthan**, there are 2 **Gunasthanas** without **Leshya**.
**Meaning:** In the **Jatipad** of the **Parinaamikabhava**, there are only two **Gunasthanas** in the form of **Jivattva** and **Bhavya** or **Jivattva** and **Abhavya**. In the remaining **Gunasthanas**, there is only one **Jatipad** in the form of **Jivattva** and **Bhavya**. Further, I will refer to the collection of **Bhangas** instead of **Jatipad**.
**Micche Parinaamapada Donni Ya Sesesu Hodi Ekkam Tu. Jatipadam Padi Voccham Micchaadisuu Bhangapindam Tu. || 848 ||**
**Special Meaning:** There are two **Jatipad** in the **Aupashaamikabhava**, five in the **Kshayikabhava**, seven in the **Kshayopaashaamikabhava**, eight in the **Audayikabhava**, and three in the **Parinaamikabhava**. Here, as far as possible, the **Jatipad** found in the **Audayikabhava** should be known as the **Gunyarupa**. To know the **Gunakar** and **Kshepa** of the **Gunyarashi**, it is necessary to take as many **Bhedas** as there are **Kshayopaashaamikabhava** etc. in each **Bhang** etc., and to take only one **Bhed** as the **Samuhrupa** of the **Jatipad** of the **Audayikabhava**. In this way, the **Bhed** of the **Audayikabhava** in each **Bhang** should be known as the **Gunakar** and the **Bhed** of other **Bhavas** should be known as the **Kshepa**. In **Dwisanyogi** etc. **Bhangas**, the **Bhed** of the **Audayikabhava** and the **Bhangas** with other **Bhavas** including the **Moolabhava** should be known as the **Gunakar**. The **Dwisanyogi** etc. **Bhangas** that occur due to the combination of other **Bhavas** without the **Audayikabhava** should be known as the **Kshepa**. And the **Bhangas** that occur due to the **Swasanyogi** of the same **Jatipad** in the **Bhed** of the **Kshayik** and **Kshayopaashaamik** **Bhavas**, where possible, should be known as the **Kshepa**. Multiplying the **Gunyarupa** by the **Gunakar** and adding the **Kshepa**, the number of **Bhangas** obtained should be known as the **Bhangas** there.
**Sandrishti of Jatipadrupabhavas in relation to Gunasthanas in 53 Uttarbhaashas of Panch Moolabhavas**
| **Aupashaamik** | **Aupashaamik** | **Kshayik** | **Jatipad** | **Number of Jatipad Bhavas** | **Jatipad Bhavas** | **Gunasthan** |
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|  |  |  |  | 1 | Upsham Samyaktava | Asanyata to Aprammatta Gunasthan |
|  |  |  |  | 2 | Upsham Samyaktava and Upshamcharitra | 8th to 11th in Upsham Shreni |
|  |  |  |  | 1 | Kshayik Samyaktava | Asanyata to Aprammatta Gunasthan |

Page #767:
---------------------------
## Gommatasara Karmakanda - 728

**Kshayika**
Kshayika
Kshayika
Kshayopaśamika Kshayopaśamika Sayopaśamika Kshayopaśamika Kshayopaśamika Kshayopaśamika Audayika
|
8
| 2 | Kshayika Samyaktva, Kshayika Charitra. 8-9-10 and 12th Gunasthanas
Kshapaka श्रेणी में Ksha. Samy., Ksha. Jnana. Ksha. Darshan, | 13th and 14th Gunasthanas
| Ksha. Cha. and Kshayika Labdhi. | 4 | From the above 5, Ksha. Cha. is reduced in Siddhas
| Agnana, Darshan and Labdhi in the 1st and 2nd Gunasthanas | Jnana, Darshan and Labdhi
Jnana, Darshan, Labdhi, Samyaktva in the 3rd Gunasthanas | Jnana, Darshan, Labdhi, Samy. Desasanayama in the 5th Gunasthanas. Jnana, Darshan, Labdhi, Samy. Saraga Sanayama in the 6th and 7th Gunasthanas. Jnana, Darshan, Labdhi
from the 8th to the 12th Gunasthanas | Gati, Kashaya, Linga, Mithyatva,
in the Mithyatva Gunasthanas | Agnana, Asanayama, Leshya and Asiddha. | From the above 8, Mithyatva is reduced in the 2nd, 3rd and 4th Gunasthanas | From the above 7, Asanayama is reduced in the 5th, 6th, 7th, 8th and 9th
till the Savedhabhag, from the above 6, Ved is reduced in the 9th till the Avedhabhag, from the above 5, Kashaya is reduced in the 11th and 12th Gunasthanas, from the above 3, Gati, Leshya and Asiddhatva
till the 13th Gunasthanas, from the above 2, Gati and Asiddhatva
till the 14th Gunasthanas, Bhavya-Abhavya
in the 1st Gunasthanas, Bhavya
from the 1st to the 14th Gunasthanas, Jivatva
in Siddhas
Audayika
Audayika
Audayika
Audayika Audayika
Audayika
Parinamika
Parinamika
Parinamika 

Page #768:
---------------------------
Gommatasar Karmakanda-729
Aupaśamika Kṣayika Kṣayopasamika
Sabhvācākaritra ....
Jāhipahapa Jharva Kitane Hain, Jñāna-Darśana-Labdhi-Samya, Aur Cā. | Yah Jānaneke Lie Yah Sandṛṣṭi Jñāna, Ajñāna, Darśana, Labdhi, Banāī Hai, Kintu Guṇasthānomen Samyaktva, Deśasanyama, Sarāgacaritra. Ye Jātipadarūpa Bhāva Kahān-Kahān
Pāye Jāte Hain Ise Uparyukta Sandṛṣṭi
Men Bataya Gaya Hai. Gati, Kaṣāya, Linga, Mithyātva, Ajñāna, Asanyama, Asiddhatva Aur Leśyā.
Audayika
Pāriṇāmika
Bhavyaṭva, Abhavyaṭva Aur Jīvatva Age Guṇya-Guṇakāra Va Kṣepa Tatha In Tīnono Ki Apeksā Honevāle Bhaṅgo Ko 7 Gāthāon Men Kahte Hain
Aṭṭa Guṇijjā Vāme, Tisu Sag Chchchadusu Chhakka Paṇagaṁ Ca. Thūle Suhume Paṇagaṁ, Dusu Cadutiyadgamado Suṇṇaṁ. ||849|| Bārahaṭṭachhaviṁsaṁ Tisu Tisu Battīsayam Ca Caduvīsaṁ. To Tālaṁ Caduvīsaṁ, Guṇagārā Bār Bār ṇabhaṁ. ||850 || Vāme Cadudas Dusu Das, Aḍavīsaṁ Tisu Havanti Cottiṁsaṁ. Tisu Chhabbīsa Dudālaṁ, Khevā Chhabbīsa Bār Bār ṇavaṁ. ||851 || Ekkāraṁ Dasaguṇidaṁ, Dusu Chhāvaṭṭhī Dasāhiyṁ Bisadaṁ. Tisu Chhabbīsa Bisadaṁ, Veduvāsāmotti Dusaya Bāsīdi. ||852 || Bādālaṁ Beṇṇisaya, Tatto Suhumoṭṭi Dusaya Dosahidaṁ. Uvasantammī Ya Bhaṅgā, Khavageśu Jahākam Vochchha. ||853 || Sattarasam Dasaguṇidaṁ, Veditti Sayāhiyṁ Tu Chhādalāṁ. Suhumoṭṭi Khīṇamohe, Bāvīsasaṁ Have Bhaṅgā. ||854 || 

Page #769:
---------------------------
## Gommatasara Karmakanda - 730

**Verse 855:**

There are 36 adadalams (categories) in the 9 bhangas (stages) of Jinas, Siddhas, and others. I will explain all of them, starting with the micchatva (false belief) guna-sthana (stage of qualities).

**Explanation:**

* **Gunya (multiplicand):**
    * Micchatva guna-sthana: 8
    * Sasadana, etc. (3 guna-sthana): 7
    * Desasanayata, etc. (3 guna-sthana): 6 each
    * Upshamka, kshapaka, apurvakarana: 6
    * Anivrittikarana: 6 and 5
    * Sukshmasampraya: 5
    * Upshantakashaya and kshinkashaya: 4
    * Sayoga-kevali: 3
    * Ayoga-kevali: 2
    * Siddhas: 0
* **Gunakara (multiplier):**
    * Micchatva guna-sthana: 12
    * Sasadana and misra: 8 each
    * Asanayata guna-sthana: 26
    * Desasanayata, etc. (3 guna-sthana): 32 each
    * Upshamka, apurvakarana, etc. (4 guna-sthana): 40 each
    * Kshapaka, apurvakarana, etc. (3 guna-sthana): 24 each
    * Kshinkashaya guna-sthana: 24
    * Sayoga and ayoga guna-sthana: 12 each
    * Siddhas: 0
* **Kshepa (addend):**
    * Micchatva guna-sthana: 14
    * Sasadana and misra guna-sthana: 10 each
    * Asanayata guna-sthana: 28
    * Desasanayata: 34
    * Pramatta and apramatta: 34 each
    * Upshamka, apurvakarana, etc. (4 guna-sthana): 42 each
    * Kshapaka, apurvakarana, etc. (3 guna-sthana): 26 each
    * Sringana: 26
    * Sayoga and ayoga: 12 each
    * Siddhas: 9

**Verses 849-50-51:**

By multiplying the gunya with the gunakara and adding the kshepa, the total bhangas are:

* **Micchatva guna-sthana:** 110
* **Sasadana and misra:** 66 each
* **Asanayata:** 210
* **Desasanayata, etc. (3 guna-sthana):** 226 each
* **Upshamka, apurvakarana to anivrittikarana (savad bhaga):** 282 each
* **Upshamka, anivrittikarana (aved bhaga) to sukshmasampraya:** 242 each
* **Upshantakashaya:** 202

**Verses 852-53-54-55:**

* **Kshapaka series:**
    * Apurvakarana and savad anivrittikarana guna-sthana: 170 each
    * Aved anivrittikarana to sukshmasampraya: 146 each
    * Kshinkashaya guna-sthana: 122
    * Sayoga-kevali: 48
    * Ayoga-kevali: 36
    * Siddhas: 9

This is the explanation of jati-pada bhangas (stages of qualities). We will now explain the sarva-pada bhangas (stages of all categories).

**Special Explanation:**

* **Micchatva guna-sthana:**
    * 3 jati-pada: agnana-darshan (ignorance-perception), labdhi (gain), and kshaya-upshamika-bhava (state of destruction of passions)
    * 8 jati-pada: audayika-bhava (state of arising)
    * 2 jati-pada: parinamik-bhava (state of result) - bhavya (worthy) and abhavya (unworthy)
* **Gunya:**
    * 8 audayika-bhava jati-pada
* **Gunakara:**
    * 1 group of 8 audayika-bhava jati-pada for each bhang
    * 5 jati-pada: 3 kshaya-upshamika-bhava and 2 parinamik-bhava
* **Kshepa:**
    * 6 jati-pada: 1 group of 8 audayika-bhava, 3 kshaya-upshamika-bhava, and 2 parinamik-bhava for dvisanyoga-bhang (double combination)
    * 6 jati-pada: 1 group of 8 audayika-bhava, 3 kshaya-upshamika-bhava, and 2 parinamik-bhava (with combination of 3 kshaya-upshamika-bhava) for trisanyoga-bhang (triple combination)

**Note:** This is a partial translation of the text. The full translation would require a deeper understanding of Jain philosophy and terminology. 

Page #770:
---------------------------
Gommatasar Karmakanda - 731

Knowing the six types of bhang (3+3) as the multiplier of the three types of bhang, namely, kshayopaśamika, parināmika, and bhavyaparināmika, with their respective combinations, and knowing that in all combinations of bhang, there is one type of ignorance, and other types of ignorance are found in its presence, for example, in the presence of kumati, kushrutadi is found, and in the presence of ekadarshan, anyadarshan is found, for example, in the presence of chakshudarshan, anyadarshan is found. In the presence of one type of labdhi, other types of labdhi are found. In this way, knowing these three types of bhang as kshepa,

All together, the multiplicand is eight, i.e., the eight types of audayika, the multiplier (one for each bhang, five for dvisangyogi, six for trisangyogi, thus 9+5+6) twelve, and the kshepa (three for kshayopaśamika and two for parināmika in ekasangyogi, six for dvisangyogi, three for kshayopaśamika in swasangyogi, thus 5+6+3) fourteen. Here, by multiplying the multiplicand by the multiplier and adding the kshepa to the product (1208 + 14), there are 110 bhang.

Similarly, in the sasadan gunasthan, there are three types of kshayopaśamika, namely, ignorance, darshan, and labdhi, seven types of audayika, and one jatipad, namely, bhavyatva, which is parināmika. Here, the multiplicand is seven, the multiplier is one for each bhang, and the kshepa is four; in dvisangyogi bhang, the multiplier is four (103 for audayika, 3 for kshayopaśamika, and 1 for parināmika, thus 101=1, and adding these three, 3+1=4), and the kshepa is three (341 for kshayopaśamika and 3 for parināmika); in trisangyogi bhang, the multiplier is three (1 for audayika, 1 for parināmika, and 3 for kshayopaśamika); in swasangyogi, the kshepa is the above-mentioned three. Thus, in the multiplicand of seven, the multiplier is eight (one for each bhang + four for dvisangyogi + three for trisangyogi), and the kshepa is ten (four for each bhang + three for dvisangyogi + three for swasangyogi), therefore, 748 + 10 = 66 bhang. In the mishra gunasthan, there are three types of kshayopaśamika, namely, mishrabhavrupa jnana, darshan, and labdhi, seven types of audayika, and one jatipad, namely, bhavyatva, which is parināmika. Here, the multiplicand is seven, the multiplier is one for each bhang, and the kshepa is four; in dvisangyogi bhang, the multiplier is four, and the kshepa is three; in trisangyogi bhang, the multiplier is three, and in swasangyogi bhang, the kshepa is three. All together, the multiplier is eight, and the kshepa is ten, therefore, by multiplying the multiplicand of seven by the multiplier of eight and adding the kshepa of ten (708+10), there are 66 bhang. Here, the method of obtaining the multiplier and kshepa is the same as in the sasadan gunasthan.

In the asanyat gunasthan, there is one type of upshama samyaktv, one type of kshayika samyaktv, four types of kshayopaśamika, namely, jnana, darshan, labdhi, and vedak samyaktv, seven types of audayika, and one jatipad, namely, bhavyatva, which is parināmika. Here, the multiplicand is seven, the multiplier is one for each bhang, and the kshepa is seven; in dvisangyogi bhang, the multiplier is seven, and the kshepa is twelve; in trisangyogi, the multiplier is twelve, and the kshepa is six; in chatuhsangyogi bhang, the multiplier is six, and there is no panchasangyogi bhang because there is no combination of kshayika samyaktv and upshama samyaktv. In swasangyogi bhang, the kshepa is three. All together, the multiplier is twenty-six, and the kshepa is twenty-eight. Here, by multiplying the multiplicand of seven by the multiplier of twenty-six and adding the kshepa of twenty-eight (726 + 28), there are 290 bhang. Further, in the three gunasthan, namely, deshasanyat, pramat, and apramat,

There is one type of samyaktv for pasamika, one type of samyaktv for kshayika, five types of kshayopaśamika, namely, jnana, darshan, labdhi, samyaktv, and charitra, six types of audayika, and one jatipad, namely, bhavyatva, which is parināmika. Here, the multiplicand is 

Page #771:
---------------------------
## Gommatasara Karmakanda - 732.6

**In each individual bhang (disintegration), the multiplier is 1 and the addition is 8; in the two-fold bhangs, the multiplier is 8 and the addition is 15; in the three-fold bhangs, the multiplier is 15 and the addition is 8; in the four-fold bhangs, the multiplier is 8; in the self-fold bhangs, the addition is 3. All these together make the multiplier (1+8+15+8) 32 and the addition (8+15+8+3) 34. Therefore, multiplying the multiplicand 6 by the multiplier 32 and adding the addition amount 34, we get (6x32+34) 226-226 bhangs.**

**In the Upshama श्रेणी (category) of A-purvakarana (non-initial) and Saveda-anivrittikarana (non-obstruction of perception), there are two (Samyaktvacharita) for the Aupashmika (intermediate), one Samyaktv for the Kshayika (destructive), three for the Kshayo-pashmika (destructive-intermediate) - knowledge, vision, and attainment, six for the Audayika (arising), and one Bhavyatva (state of becoming a Bhavy) as the jati-pada (category) for the Parinamika (resultant). Here, the multiplicand is six, and in each bhang, the multiplier is one, and the addition is 7; in the two-fold bhangs, the multiplier is 7, the addition is 16; in the three-fold bhangs, the multiplier is 16, the addition is 13; in the four-fold bhangs, the multiplier is 13, the addition is 3; in the five-fold bhangs, the multiplier is 3. Here, since there is Kshayika-samyaktv, there is also Upshama-charitra, therefore, there is also a five-fold bhang. In the self-fold bhangs, the addition is 3. All these together make the multiplier (1+7+16+13+3) 40 and the addition (7+16+13+3+3) 42. Therefore, multiplying the multiplicand 6 by the multiplier 40 and adding the addition amount 42, we get (6x40+42) 282-282 bhangs.**

**In the Veda-rahita (without Veda) anivrittikarana (non-obstruction) and Sukshma-samparaya-gunasthan (subtle-concordant-quality-place), there are Samyaktv and Charitra for the Aupashmika, one Samyaktv for the Kshayika, three for the Kshayo-pashmika - knowledge, vision, and attainment, five for the Audayika, and one Bhavyatva as the jati-pada for the Parinamika. Here, the multiplicand is five, and in each bhang, the multiplier is one, and the addition is 7; in the two-fold bhangs, the multiplier is 7, the addition is 16; in the three-fold bhangs, the multiplier is 16, the addition is 13; in the four-fold bhangs, the multiplier is 13, the addition is 3; in the five-fold bhangs, the multiplier is 3; in the self-fold bhangs, the addition is 3. All these together make the multiplier (1+7+16+13+3) 40 and the addition (7+16+13+3+3) 42. Therefore, multiplying the multiplicand 5 by the multiplier 40 and adding the addition amount 42, we get (5x40+42) 242 bhangs.**

**Here, only one jati-pada of Kshaya (passion) is considered, therefore, the specific mention of the parts of Kshaya is not done.**

**In the Upshanta-kshaya-gunasthan (calm-passion-quality-place), there are Samyaktv-charitra for the Aupashmika, one Samyaktv for the Kshayika, three for the Kshayo-pashmika - knowledge, vision, and attainment, four for the Audayika, and one Bhavyatva as the jati-pada for the Parinamika. Here, the multiplicand is 4, and in each bhang, the multiplier is 1, the addition is 7; in the two-fold bhangs, the multiplier is 7, the addition is 16; in the three-fold bhangs, the multiplier is 16, the addition is 13; in the four-fold bhangs, the multiplier is 13, the addition is 3; in the five-fold bhangs, the multiplier is 3; in the self-fold bhangs, the addition is 3. All these together make the multiplier (1+7+16+13+3) 40 and the addition (7+16+13+3+3) 42. Therefore, multiplying the multiplicand 4 by the multiplier 40 and adding the addition amount 42, we get (4x40+42) 202 bhangs.**

**In the Kshapaka-shreni (category) of A-purvakarana and Saveda-anivrittikarana-gunasthan, there are Samyaktv and Charitra for the Kshayika, three for the Kshayo-pashmika - knowledge, vision, and attainment, six for the Audayika, and one Bhavyatva as the jati-pada for the Parinamika. Here, the multiplicand is 6, and in each bhang, the multiplier is 1, the addition is 6; in the two-fold bhangs, the multiplier is 6, the addition is 11; in the three-fold bhangs, the multiplier is 11, the addition is 6; in the four-fold bhangs, the multiplier is 6; there are no five-fold bhangs. In the self-fold bhangs...** 

Page #772:
---------------------------
## Gommatasara Karmakanda - 733

**Chapter 733**

Here, the multiplier (1+6+11+6) is 24 and the kshepa (6+11+6+3) is 26. Multiplying the gunya 6 by the multiplier 24 and adding the kshepa 26, we get (6*24+26) = 170 bhangas.

In the Avedanivrittikaran and Sukshmasamparayagunasthan, the jatipad should be understood as in the Apurvakaranagunasthan, but the difference here is that there are 5 jatipad in the Audayikabhava. The rest should be understood as before. Here, the gunya is 5, the multiplier is 1 for each bhang, the kshepa is 6; in the Dvisanyogi bhang, the multiplier is 6, the kshepa is 11; in the Trisanyogi bhang, the multiplier is 11, the kshepa is 6; in the Chatursanyogi bhang, the multiplier is 6, and in the Swasanyogi bhang, the kshepa is 3. Thus, the total multiplier (1+6+11+6) is 24 and the total kshepa (6+11+6+3) is 26. Multiplying the gunya 5 by the multiplier 24 and adding the kshepa 26, we get (5*24+26) = 146 bhangas.

In the Kshinakshayagunasthan, the jatipad are the same as before, but the difference is that there are only 4 in the Audayik. Therefore, here the gunya is 4, the multiplier is the same as before, 24, and the kshepa is also the same as before, 26. Multiplying the gunya 4 by the multiplier 24 and adding the kshepa 26, we get (4*24+26) = 122 bhangas.

In the Sayogakevali gunasthan, the jatipad are: 5 for the Kshayikabhava (knowledge, darshan, samyaktva, charitra, and labdhi), 3 for the Audayik, and 1 for the Parinamik (bhavya). Here, the gunya is 3, the multiplier is 1 for each bhang, and the kshepa is 6; in the Dvisanyogi bhang, the multiplier is 6, and the kshepa is 5; in the Trisanyogi bhang, the multiplier is 5, and in the Swasanyogi bhang, the kshepa is 1 (because one Kshayikalabdhi is found in another Kshayikalabdhi). Thus, the total multiplier (1+6+5) is 12 and the total kshepa (6+5+1) is 12. Therefore, multiplying the gunya 3 by the multiplier 12 and adding the kshepa 12, we get (3*12+12) = 48 bhangas.

In the Ayogakevali gunasthan, the jatipad are the same as in the Sayogakevali gunasthan, but the difference is that there are only 2 jatipad in the Audayik. Therefore, multiplying the gunya 2 by the multiplier 12 and adding the kshepa 12, we get (2*12+12) = 36 bhangas.

In the Siddhas, the jatipad are 4 for the Kshayikabhava (samyaktva, knowledge, darshan, and labdhi) and 1 for the Parinamikabhava (jivattva). Thus, there are 5 jatipad. Here, the kshepa is 5 for each bhang and 4 for the Dvisanyogi bhang, totaling (5+4) = 9 bhangas.

**Gunasthan** | **Gunya** | **Gunakar** | **Kshepa** | **Bhangasankhya**
---|---|---|---|---|
Mithyatva |  |  |  |  
Sasadan |  |  |  |  
Samyagmithyatva |  |  |  |  
Mishra |  |  |  |  
Asanyata |  |  |  |  

Page #773:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-734
Desasanayat
226
Pramattasanyat
226
Apramattasanyat
226
282
282
242
242
202.
Apuurvakaran (Upshamak) Savedanivrittikaran (Upshamak) Avedanivrittikaran (Upshamak) Sukshmasapparay (Upshamak) Upshantamoha Apuurvakaran (Kshapak) Savedanivritti. (Kshapak) Avedanivritti. (Kshapak) Sukshmasampray (Kshapak) Ksheenamoha
170
146
Sayogakevali
Ayogakevali
Having stated the destruction of the jatipada, now the distinctions of the sarvapada are being stated.
Bhavitaranaannadaram, Gadiin Lingaana Koha Pahudiinam.
Igi Samaye Lessanaam, Sammattaanaam Cha Niyamen. ||856||
Meaning - The sarvapada is of two types, Pindapada and Pratyekapada, due to the distinctions of the Pindapada and Pratyekapada. Here, the group of bhava which is present in a single jiva at a single time, is not present in all. For example, in the four gatis, only one gati is possible for a single jiva at a single time, all four are not found. Similarly, in linga, kapay, leshya, and samyaktva, only one is possible at a time from their respective distinctions. Therefore, these groups of bhava are called Pindapada, and these are found in the gunasthana, according to their suitability, in a single jiva at a single time, according to a rule. (And those bhava which are possible simultaneously in a single jiva at a single time are called Pratyekapada.) 

Page #774:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda - 735

**Verse 857**
Then, each of those individual terms are said to be:
* **Patteya** (individual) terms: 3 **Ajnana** (ignorance) and 2 **Asanyama** (non-restraint) **darshanas** (views) - these 5 **Upayoga** (applications), 5 **Kshaya** (passions) **Upshamik** (pacifying) **Labdhi** (attainments) like **Dana** (charity), **Odayik** (worldly) **Bhava** (state) with **Mithyatva** (falsehood), **Ajnana** (ignorance), and **Asiddhatva** (non-perfection) - these 4, and **Jivatva** (being a living being) - the **Parinamik** (resultant) **Bhava** (state) - thus (5+5+4+1) 15 in total.

**Verse 858**
* **Pinda** (aggregate) terms: 5 in total. **Bhavya** (worthy) - **Abhavya** (unworthy), **Gati** (motion), **Ling** (gender), **Krodha** (anger) etc. 4 **Kshaya** (passions), **Leshya** (subtle karmic matter) - these 5 **Pinda** (aggregate) terms, when added to the above 15 (15+5) make 20 terms in total. These should be established superficially.

**Verse 859**
* **Patteya** (individual) terms: The **Bhavya** (worthy) - **Abhavya** (unworthy) pair, **Gati** (motion), **Ling** (gender), **Krodha** (anger) etc. 4 **Kshaya** (passions), **Leshya** (subtle karmic matter), and **Samyaktva** (right faith) should be established above the individual terms, in the form of a **Tiryancha** (animal) being.

**Verse 860**
* **Ekka** (one) etc. **Dvigunak** (double) etc. **Ekka** (one) **Ekka** (one) **Sandhi** (combination) **Duna** (twice) **Hemp** (thus):
* **Pad** (term) **Sanjoga** (combination) **Bhang** (breakage), **Gachchham** (number of terms) **Padi** (according to) **Honti** (become) **Uvaruvari** (above):
* **Special Meaning:** In the **Mithyatva** (falsehood) **Gunasthan** (state), the lowest term is **Kumati** (wrong understanding), and its **Bhang** (breakage) is one. Above it is **Kushruta** (wrong conduct), and its **Bhang** (breakage) is one. Due to the combination of **Kumati** (wrong understanding) below it, there is one **Dvisanyogi** (double combination) **Bhang** (breakage) - thus two **Bhang** (breakages) in total. Above it is **Vibhavgyan** (potential knowledge), and its **Bhang** (breakage) is one. Due to the combination of **Kushruta** (wrong conduct) and **Kumati** (wrong understanding) below it, there are two **Dvisanyogi** (double combination) **Bhang** (breakages), and due to the combination of all three, there is one **Trisanyogi** (triple combination) **Bhang** (breakage) - thus 4 **Bhang** (breakages) in total. Above **Vibhavgyan** (potential knowledge) is **Chakshudarshan** (eye-sight), and its **Bhang** (breakage) is one. Due to the combination of **Vibhang** (wrong understanding), **Kushruta** (wrong conduct), and **Kumati** (wrong understanding) below it, there are 3 **Dvisanyogi** (double combination) **Bhang** (breakages), and due to the combination of **Chakshudarshan** (eye-sight), **Kumati** (wrong understanding), and **Kushruta** (wrong conduct) or **Chakshudarshan** (eye-sight), **Kumati** (wrong understanding) ... 

Page #775:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-736: There are three types of Trisanyogi-bhang, which are the combinations of Vibhaga, Chakshudarshan, and Kushruta, and one Chatursanyogi-bhang, which is the combination of all four. In total, there are 8 bhangs (1+3+3+1).

In Achakushudarshan, which is established on Chakshudarshan, there is one bhang for each. There are four Dwisanyogi-bhangs, which are the combinations of Achakushudarshan with Chakshudarshan-Vibhaga, Kushruta, and Kumati-jnana. There are six Trisanyogi-bhangs, which are the combinations of Achakushudarshan with Chakshudarshan and Kumati-jnana, or Achakushudarshan, Chakshudarshan, and Kushruta-jnana, or Achakushudarshan, Chakshudarshan, and Vibhaga-jnana, or Achakushudarshan and Kumati-Kushruta-jnana, or Achakushudarshan and Kumati-Vibhaga-jnana, or Achakushudarshan and Kushruta-Vibhaga-jnana. There are four Chatursanyogi-bhangs, which are the combinations of Achakushudarshan, Chakshudarshan, and Kumati-Kushruta-jnana, or Achakushudarshan, Chakshudarshan, and Kumati-Vibhaga-jnana, or Achakushudarshan, Chakshudarshan, and Kushruta-Vibhaga-jnana, or Achakushudarshan, Chakshudarshan, Kumati-Kushruta, and Vibhaga-jnana. There is one Panchasanyogi-bhang, which is the combination of Achakushudarshan, Chakshudarshan, Vibhaga, Kushruta, and Kumati-jnana. In total, there are 16 bhangs (1+4+6+4+1).

In Danalabdhi, which is established on Achakushudarshan, there is one bhang for each. There are five Dwisanyogi-bhangs, ten Trisanyogi-bhangs, ten Chatursanyogi-bhangs, five Panchasanyogi-bhangs, and one Shashasanyogi-bhang. In total, there are 32 bhangs (1+5+10+10+5+1).

In this way, the number of bhangs doubles for each subsequent pad. While each bhang is one, the number of Dwi, Tri, Chatur, etc. bhangs increases with the changing combinations of the underlying bhavas. For example, there are 64 bhangs in Labhalabdhi, 128 in Bhogalabdhi, 256 in Upbhogalabdhi, 512 in Viryalabdhi, 1024 in Mithyatva, 2048 in Ajnana, 4096 in Asanyama, 8192 in Asiddhatva, and 16,384 in Jivatva.

Here's how the 16,384 bhangs occur in the 15th Jiva-pad: there is one bhang for each, 14 Dwisanyogi and 14 Chaudasanyogi bhangs, 91 Trisanyogi and 91 Terasanyogi bhangs (which are the sum of the first 12 numbers), 364 Chatursanyogi and 364 Barasanyogi bhangs (which are the sum of the first 12 numbers twice), 1001 Panchasanyogi and 1001 Ekadasanyogi bhangs (which are the sum of the first 11 numbers thrice), 2002 Shashasanyogi and 2002 Dasasanyogi bhangs (which are the sum of the first 10 numbers four times), 3003 Saptasanyogi and 3003 Navasanyogi bhangs (which are the sum of the first 9 numbers five times), and 3432 Ashasanyogi bhangs (which are the sum of the first 8 numbers six times).

Therefore, there are 16,384 bhangs in the 15th Jiva-pad. This number is one-fourth of "Pannatti," which is 65,536. The method of calculating the bhangs by adding the numbers once, twice, etc., is the same as described in the "Jnanadhikari" section of the Gommatasara Jivakanda, where the letters of Shruta-jnana are described in the "Patteya-bhangamegam" etc. verses.

1. "Patteya-bhangamegam besanyogam viruvapadamettan. Tiyasanyogadhipya ruvahiyawar hiinapad sankalid."
(Gom.Ji.Ga. 354, Big Commentary, p. 752)

Page #776:
---------------------------
Gommatsar Karmakanda-737

Here, the jiva-pada is the 15th, therefore, we need to know the gaccha-praman, which is 15. To calculate the gaccha-praman for 2 less, we need to multiply the 13th and 14th parvokt satranasar and then divide the result by the product of 2, 1, and 1. This gives us 13414 = 1.82241-91, which is the gaccha-praman for 2 less. Similarly, for 3 less, we multiply the 12th, 13th, and 14th parvokt satranasar and then divide the result by the product of 3, 2, and 1. This gives us (12413414321.84534241) 364. For 4 less, we multiply the 11th, 12th, 13th, and 14th parvokt satranasar and then divide the result by the product of 4, 3, 2, and 1. This gives us (114124134143240244434241) 1001. For 5 less, we multiply the 10th, 11th, 12th, 13th, and 14th parvokt satranasar and then divide the result by the product of 5, 4, 3, 2, and 1. This gives us (10x11412413414-2,40,240544434241) 2002. For 6 less, we multiply the 9th, 10th, 11th, 12th, 13th, and 14th parvokt satranasar and then divide the result by the product of 6, 5, 4, 3, 2, and 1. This gives us (9410411412413414-21,62,160720) 3703. For 7 less, we multiply the 8th, 9th, 10th, 11th, 12th, 13th, and 14th parvokt satranasar and then divide the result by the product of 7, 6, 5, 4, 3, 2, and 1. This gives us (849x10411412413414-1,72, 97,280.7464544434241(5040)-3432. This is the method to calculate the bhang in the 15th jiva-pada.

To combine the bhang, we use the following gatha-sutra:

**Iṭṭhapade rūṇe, duga-samvaggammi hodi iṭṭhadhanaṁ.**
**Asarittāṇanta-dhanaṁ dugune-gūṇe sagīya-savvadhanaṁ.** || 861 ||

**Meaning:**

Subtract one from the desired pada (jiva-pada). Write the number of remaining pada as twos and multiply them together. This is the ista-dhana, which represents the number of bhang in the desired pada. Double the ista-dhana and subtract 5 from it. This is the sarva-dhana, which represents the sum of bhang from the first pada to the desired pada.

**Special Meaning:**

Subtract one from the desired pada. Write the number of remaining pada as twos and multiply them together. This is the ista-dhana, which represents the number of bhang in the desired pada. For example, the desired pada is the 15th jiva-pada. Subtracting one from it gives us (15-1) 14. Writing 14 twos and multiplying them together gives us 16,384. This is the number of bhang in the 1st jiva-pada. 

Page #777:
---------------------------
Gommatsar Karmakanda - 738

By doubling and subtracting one from it, the number of bhangas of all the words from the first word to the desired word, which is the proof, is the total wealth.
Now we will tell the number of bhangas of each word and the number of bhangas of all the words by adding the bhangas of each word and the bhangas of all the words.

Tericcha hu sarittha, avirad desaan khayiyasammattam. Mottuun sambhavan padi, khayi gassavi aanaae bhangae. || 862 ||
Uddatiricchpadaan, davva samaasena hodi savvadhanam. Savvapaan bhangae, micchaadigune su niyamen. || 863 ||
Micchaadiin duti dusu, aputra aniyakhivagasamgaesu. Suhumuvasamgae sante, sesae patteya padasanka. || 864 ||
Panpar solattar, biguviisan cha viisamu guviisan. Igiviis viisachadudasaterasapanagam jahakamaso. || 865 ||
Micchaaditittipahudim, kheenakasaaoti savvapadabhangaa. Pannaathi cha sahasaa, panchasayaa honti chhattisaa. || 866 ||
Taggunagara kamaso, pan naudeyat tarisayaa an dalam. Uunattharasayaa an, dalam tu sattahiyasollasayam. || 867 ||
Tevattaaram sayaai, sattavaatti ya avira samme. Solasa cheva sayaai, chausatti khayiyasammass. || 868 ||
Uunattissayaai, ekkaanaaudi ya desaviradammi. Chaavattari panchasaya, khadayanare natthi tiriyammi. || 869 ||
Igadaanam cha sayaai, chaudaalam cha ya pamatta idare ya. Puvyuvasamgae vedaaniyatatti bhage sahasamadruunam. || 870 || 

Page #778:
---------------------------
Gommatasar Karmakanda-739
Sixty-four hundred, in the Kshaya-bhag, are subtle. Twenty-four, in the Khavagas, as it is said. ||871|| Four hundred and four, in the Aniyatti-veda-bhag, are also. ... In the Sidi Kshaya-bhag, thirty-two and sixteen are there. ||872|| In the Yogi and the Ajogi, sixty-six, with the Gunagaras, sixty-four and thirty-two, multiplied by one, all. ||873|| In the Siddhas, in the Suddha-bhang, thirty-one are there, by rule.
All-pada, with the Bhang, are unsupported, with the Parakkamudditta. ||874|| 
Meaning - The Pindapada-rupa Bhavas, in the Tiryaak (equal) creation, in the Asanyata and the Deshasanyata Gunasthanas, leaving out the Kshayika-samvara, should be known as Bhang, as much as possible, with the Mugapanosa twenty-five. Here, the Kshayika-samyaktv is left out, because its statement will be separate, and to know the Bhang of all the Padas, in the Mithyatvadi Gunasthanas, the Bhang-rupa Dhan of each Pada, with the upward creation, and the Pindapada, with the Tiryaak creation, should be added, and by rule, the Bhang-rupa Sarvadhan of each Gunasthan will be obtained. 862
Each Pada, in order, in the Mithyatvadi two Gunasthanas, fifteen, in the Misraadi three Gunasthanas, sixteen, in the Pramattadi two Gunasthanas, eighteen, in both (Upshamka-Kshapaka) श्रेणियों, in the Apurvakarana and the Anivrittikarana Gunasthanas, twenty-nineteen, in the Upshamka-sukshma-samparaya, twenty, in the Upshanta-kshaya-Gunasthan, nineteen, in the Kshapaka-sukshma-samparaya, twenty-one, in the Kshina-kshaya, twenty, in the Sayoga-kevali, fourteen, in the Ayoga-kevali, thirteen, and in the Siddhas, five, should be known. ||864||
65||
To obtain the measure of the Sarvapada-bhang, from the Mithyatva to the Kshina-kshaya Gunasthan, here, the Panna-satthi (65536) should be considered as the Gunya, and this Gunya should be multiplied by the Gunakaras, which are mentioned ahead, and by subtracting one from it, the measure of the Sarvapada-bhang of that-that place will be obtained. ||866||
The Gunakaras of the above Gunya, in order, in the Mithyatva Gunasthan, are half the measure of 7195, in the Saptaadan Gunasthan, half the measure of 1800, minus one, in the Misra Gunasthan, 1607. In the Asanyata Gunasthan, 7367, and in the same Gunasthan, the Gunakara of the Kshayika-samyaktv, 1664, in the Deshasanyata Gunasthan, 2991, and in the same Gunasthan, the Gunakara of the Kshayika-samyaktv, in the Manushya, 576, these are not of the Tiryancha, because 

Page #779:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-740: A क्षायिकसम्यक्त्वी is not a तिर्यञ्च देशव्रती. In the प्रमत्त and अप्रमत्तगुणस्थान, there are 4144 गुणकार. In the अपूर्वकरण of the उपशमश्रेणी and the सवेदअनिवृत्तिकरण, there are 8 less than one thousand, i.e., 992. In the portion with कषाय and अवेदअनिवृत्तिकरण, there are 168 गुणकार, in सूक्ष्मसाम्पराय there are 48, and in उपशान्तकषाय there are 24 गुणकार. In the सवेदभाग of क्षपक अपूर्वकरण and अनिवृत्तिकरण, there are 448, in the कषायसहित and वेदरहितभाग of अनिवृत्तिकरण there are 80, further in सूक्ष्मसाम्पराय there are 32, and in क्षीणकषाय there are 16 गुणकार. ||867 to 872||

Further, there are 256 गुण्य and गुणकार in the सयोगी and अयोगोगुणस्थान. In the सयोगी गुणस्थान there are 64, and in the अयोगीगुणस्थान there are 32. In this way, when the गुण्य is multiplied by the गुणकार, the resulting number is the प्रमाण. By subtracting one from each of these numbers, we get the प्रमाण of सर्वपदभंग. In सिद्धs, there are 31 सर्वपदरूप भंग, which are pure and without any distinction between गुण्य and गुणकार. In this way, the valiant श्रीवर्धमानतीर्थकर, without any assistance, has said so.

Special Note: Here, the desired number of भंग in the 15th जीवपद, which is the इष्टधन, is 16,384. This is one-fourth of 'पण्णट्टी'. By doubling this number and subtracting one, we get the total number of भंग from the first पद to the 15th पद, which is 32,767. The desired जीवपद has an इष्टधन of 32,768, which is half of 'पण्णट्टी'. These are the भंग of भव्यत्वरूप भाव, and there are an equal number of भंग of अभव्यभाव. Together, the भंग of भव्यत्व and अभव्यभाव are equal to 'पण्णट्ठी'. By doubling this number, we get two पण्णट्ठीप्रमाण भंग for each गति, i.e., two पण्णट्ठीप्रमाण भंग each for नरक, तिर्यञ्च, मनुष्य, and देवगति. In this way, the भंग related to the four गति (two पण्णट्ठी - 4) are eight times पण्णी. The भंग related to one लिंग are twice the भंग related to one गति, i.e., four पण्णट्ठी. Here, the number of लिंग found in the four गति (1 in नरकगति, 3 in तिर्यञ्चगति, 3 in मनुष्यगति, and 2 in देवगति) is 9. Therefore, there are 36 times पण्णठ्ठीप्रमाण लिंगसम्बन्धी सर्वभंग (9 x 4 = 36 पण्णट्ठी). By doubling the भंग related to one लिंग, which are four times पण्णट्ठी, we get the भंग related to one कषाय, which are eight times पण्णट्ठी. Multiply this by 4 in नरकगति (one लिंग and four कषाय - 144), by 12 in तिर्यञ्चगति (three लिंग and four कषाय - 344), by 12 in मनुष्यगति (three लिंग and four कषाय - 344), and by 8 in देवगति (two लिंग and four कषाय - 244) to get the number of भंग. In this way, the total number of भंग in all four गति, considering the combination of लिंग and कषाय, is eight times 36 पण्णट्ठी, which is 288 times पण्णट्ठी. By doubling the भंग related to one कषाय, which are eight times पण्णट्ठी, we get the भंग related to one लेश्या, which are 16 times पण्णवी. Multiply this by 52 in नरकगति (one लिंग, four कषाय, and three लेश्या - 14443), by 72 in तिर्यञ्चगति (3 लिंग, four कषाय, and six लेश्या - 34446), and similarly by 72 in मनुष्यगति (3 लिंग, four कषाय, and six लेश्या - 34446). 

Page #780:
---------------------------
## Gommatasara Karmakanda-741:

Multiply the six leshyas with four kshayas, i.e., 6 x 4 = 24, and then multiply this by 72 to get the number of bhangas in the Tiryancha Gati. Similarly, multiply the six leshyas with four kshayas and two lingas, i.e., 6 x 4 x 2 = 48, to get the number of bhangas in the Dev Gati. The total number of bhangas for all four gatis is (12 + 72 + 72 + 48) = 204, which is 3264 times the Pannatti.

In this way, the number of bhangas for all the pinda-pad in all the gatis is 3597 times the Pannatti (1 + 8 + 36 + 288 + 3264 = 3597). To get the total number of bhangas in the Mithyatva Gunasthan, add the number of bhangas for each pinda-pad (which is half the Pannatti for each pinda-pad) to the number of bhangas for all the pinda-pad. This gives us (3597 + 3) = 7195/2, which is half the Pannatti multiplied by 7195 and then reduced by one.

The arrangement of these bhangas is as follows:

* **Kumati** and other pinda-pad are written downwards.
* **Bhavya** and **Abhavya** are written horizontally above them.
* **Four Gatis** are written above them.
* **Lingas** are written above them in equal numbers.
* **Four Kshayas** are written above them.
* **Leshyas** are written horizontally above them.

This is how the bhangas in the Mithyatva Gunasthan are arranged and written.

In the Sasadan Gunasthan, there is no Mithyatva pinda-pad. The pinda-pad in this Gunasthan are Bhavya and Abhavya, but Abhavya is also absent here. Therefore, due to the absence of the opposite, Bhavya becomes the only pinda-pad. There are 15 pinda-pad and 4 pinda-pad in this Gunasthan.

The number of bhangas for each pinda-pad is as follows:

* **Kumati:** 1
* **Kushruta:** 2
* **Vibhang:** 4
* **Chakshudarshan:** 8
* **Achakshudarshan:** 16
* **Dan:** 32
* **Labh:** 64
* **Bhog:** 128
* **Upbhog:** 256
* **Veerya:** 512
* **Agnan:** 1024
* **Asanayam:** 2048
* **Asiddhasv:** 4096
* **Jivattva:** 8192
* **Bhavya:** 16,384

The number of bhangas for Bhavya is equal to one-fourth of the Pannatti. Doubling the number of bhangas for Bhavya gives us the number of bhangas for one Gati, which is half the Pannatti. Quadrupling the number of bhangas for Bhavya gives us the number of bhangas for all four Gatis, which is double the Pannatti.

Doubling the number of bhangas for one Gati gives us the number of bhangas for one Linga, which is equal to the Pannatti. Multiplying this by the number of Lingas (1 for Narak Gati, 3 for Tiryancha Gati, 3 for Manusya Gati, and 2 for Dev Gati) gives us the number of bhangas for all nine Lingas, which is nine times the Pannatti.

Doubling the number of bhangas for one Linga gives us the number of bhangas for one Kshaya, which is double the Pannatti. Multiplying this by the number of Kshayas in each Gati (4 for Narak Gati with one Veda, 4 for Tiryancha Gati with three Vedas, 4 for Manusya Gati with three Vedas, and 4 for Dev Gati with two Vedas) gives us the number of bhangas for all four Gatis, which is 36 times double the Pannatti.

Doubling the number of bhangas for one Kshaya gives us the number of bhangas for one Leshya, which is four times the Pannatti. Multiplying this by the number of Leshyas in each Gati (3 for Narak Gati with one Linga and four Kshayas, 6 for Tiryancha Gati with three Lingas and four Kshayas, 6 for Manusya Gati with three Lingas and four Kshayas, and 6 for Dev Gati with two Lingas and four Kshayas) gives us the number of bhangas for all four Gatis, which is 204,416 times the Pannatti. 

Page #781:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-742 states that the number of Pannatti is half the sum of all the individual and collective categories (856+72+1+2+11719 = 1799) multiplied by half the Pannatti number, minus one. This gives the total number of bhangs in the Sasadanagunasthan.

In the Mishragunasthan, each category has a specific number of Pannatti: 1 for Matijnana, 2 for Shrutajnana, 4 for Avadhijnana, 8 for Chakshudarshan, 16 for Achakshudarshan, 32 for Avhidarshan, 64 for Dana, 128 for Labha, 256 for Bhoga, 512 for Upbhoga, 1024 for Veeryalabdhi, 2048 for Ajnana, 4096 for Asanyama, 8192 for Asiddhatva, 16384 for Jeevatva, and 32768 for Bhavya. There are four collective categories: Gati, Linga, Kashaya, and Leshya.

For Bhavya, the number of bhangs is half the Pannatti number. Doubling this number gives the total number of bhangs for all four Gatis. For example, if there is one Pannatti for one Gati, then there are four Pannatti for all four Gatis.

Doubling the number of bhangs for one Gati gives the number of bhangs for one Linga. Multiplying this number by the number of Lingas (1 for Narakagati, 3 for Tiryanchagati, 3 for Manushya, and 2 for Devapati, totaling 9) gives the total number of bhangs for the Linga category.

Doubling the number of bhangs for one Linga gives the number of bhangs for one Kashaya. Multiplying this number by the number of Kashayas in each Gati (1 for Narakagati, 3 for Tiryanchagati, 3 for Manushya, and 2 for Devapati) gives the total number of bhangs for the Kashaya category.

Doubling the number of bhangs for one Kashaya gives the number of bhangs for one Leshya. Multiplying this number by the number of Leshyas in each Gati (3 for Narakagati, 6 for Tiryanchagati, 6 for Manushya, and 3 for Devapati) gives the total number of bhangs for the Leshya category.

Adding the number of bhangs for each individual and collective category (1+4+18+144+1440 = 1607) and subtracting one gives the total number of bhangs in the Mishragunasthan.

In the Asanyatagunasthan, each category has a specific number of Pannatti: 16 for each category, 1 for Matijnana, 2 for Shrutajnana, 4 for Avadhijnana, 8 for Chakshudarshan, 16 for Achakshudarshan, 32 for Avhidarshan, 64 for Danalabdhi, 128 for Labha, 256 for Bhoga, 512 for Upbhoga, 1024 for Veerya, 2048 for Ajnana, 4096 for Asanyama, 8192 for Asiddhatva, 16384 for Jeevatva, and 32768 for Bhavya. There are five collective categories: Gati, Linga, Kashaya, Leshya, and Samyaktva. 

Page #782:
---------------------------
Gommatasar Karmakanda-743

These are the Pindapada. Here, the evidence of the destruction of the Bhavyatva-bhava is half the Pannatti-pramana. Doubling it, the Pannatti-pramana destruction is related to one motion, then the destruction of all four motions is four times the Pannatti-pramana. Know that the destruction related to one motion is half the destruction related to two motions, i.e., the Dipati-pramana destruction is related to one linga. So, multiplying these by the nine lingas related to all four motions (one for Naraka-gati, three for Tiryancha-gati, three for Manusya-gati, and two for Deva-gati), we get (249) 18 times the Pannatti-pramana destruction. The destruction related to one linga is doubled to get the destruction related to one Kashaya, which is 4 Pannatti-pramana. So, multiply these by four in Naraka-gati with one linga and four Kashayas, i.e., (441) 4, by twelve in Tiryancha-gati with three lingas and four Kashayas, i.e., (443) 12, by twelve in Manusya-gati with three lingas and four Kashayas, i.e., (443) 12, and by eight in Deva-gati with two lingas and four Kashayas, i.e., (442) 8. In this way, multiplying the Pannatti-pramana by (4+12+12+8) 36 related to all four motions and then multiplying the result by four, we get the number of destructions. The destruction related to one Kashaya is doubled to get the destruction related to one Leshya, which is 8 times the Pannatti-pramana. Multiply these by twelve in Naraka-gati with one linga, four Kashayas, and three Leshyas, i.e., (14443) 12, by seventy-two in Tiryancha-gati with three lingas, four Kashayas, and six Leshyas, i.e., (34446) 72, by seventy-two in Manusya-gati with three lingas, four Kashayas, and six Leshyas, i.e., (34446) 72, and by twenty-four in Deva-gati with two lingas, four Kashayas, and three Shubha-Leshyas, i.e., (24443) 24. Then, the destruction related to all four motions is (12+72+72+24) 18048:1440 times the Pannatti-pramana. Further, the destruction related to one Leshya is doubled to get the destruction related to one Samyak-tva, which is 16 times the Pannatti-pramana. Multiply these by twelve in Naraka-gati with one linga, four Kashayas, and three Leshyas, i.e., (14443) 12, by seventy-two in Tiryancha-gati with three lingas, four Kashayas, and six Leshyas, i.e., (34446) 72, by seventy-two in Manusya-gati with three lingas, four Kashayas, and six Leshyas, i.e., (34446) 72, and by twenty-four in Deva-gati with two lingas, four Kashayas, and three Leshyas, i.e., (24443) 24. In this way, the destruction related to all four motions is (12+72+72+24) 180416-2880 times the Pannatti-pramana. Know that these are the destructions related to Upshama-Samyak-tva. The same number (2880) of destructions are related to Kshaya-Upshama-Samyak-tva. In this way, the total number of destructions related to both Samyak-tvas is (2880+2880) 5760. The statement related to Kshayika-Samyak-tva is made separately.

The destruction related to one Leshya is doubled to get the destruction related to Kshayika-Samyak-tva, which is 16 times the Pannatti-pramana. Multiply these by four in Naraka-gati with one linga, four Kashayas, and one Leshya, i.e., (14441) 4, by sixteen in Tiryancha-gati with one linga, four Kashayas, and four Leshyas, i.e., (14444) 16, by seventy-two in Manusya-gati with three lingas, four Kashayas, and six Leshyas, i.e., (34446) 72, and by twelve in Deva-gati with one linga, four Kashayas, and three Leshyas, i.e., (14443) 12. In this way, the destruction related to all four motions is (4+16+72+12) 104416-1664 times the Pannatti-pramana. In this way, adding the destructions of the two Samyak-tvas, the aforementioned each Pada and Pindapada, we get (1+4+18+144+1440+5760) 7367 times the Pannatti-pramana. Subtracting one from this, the destructions of all Pada and the 1664 times the Pannatti-pramana destruction of Kshayika-Samyak-tva are in the Asanyata-guna-sthana. 

Page #783:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-744

In the Desasanayat Gunasthan, in the place of Asanyam, there is Desasanayam and the absence of Deva and Naraka Gati. Here, each Pada is 16, Matijnana is 1, Shrutajnana is 2, Avadhijnana is 4, Chakshudarshan is 8, Achakshudarshan is 16, Avhidarshan is 32, Dana is 64, Labha is 128, Bhoga is 256, Upbhoga is 512, Virya is 1024, Ajnana is 2048, Desasanayam is 4496, Asiddhatva is 192, Jeevatva is 16,384 and Bhavya is 32,768. Here, the 32,768 Bhangas of Bhavya are half the amount of Pannaatti. Double these, or the amount of Panni, are the Bhangas related to one Gati. Multiplying these by the two Gatis, Tiryanch and Manusya, gives the amount of two-Gati related Bhangas, which is equal to two times the amount of Panni. Double the Bhangas related to one Gati, or 2 times the amount of Pannaatti, are the Bhangas related to one Linga. Multiplying these by the three Lingas of Tiryanch and the three Lingas of Manusya, or 6 Lingas, gives 6 x 2 = 12 times the amount of Pannaatti Bhangas. Double the Bhangas related to one Linga, or 4 times the amount of Panni, are the Bhangas related to one Kashaya. Multiplying these by the four Kashayas, including three Lingas, in the Tiryanch Gati, or (3 x 4) 12, and by the four Kashayas, including three Lingas, in the Manusya Gati, or (3 x 4) 12, gives (12 + 12) 24 times the amount of Pannaatti, or 96 times the amount of Panni Bhangas. Double the Bhangas related to one Kashaya, or 8 times the amount of Pannaatti, are the Bhangas related to one Leshya. Multiplying these by the three Leshyas, including three Lingas and four Kashayas, in the Tiryanch Gati, and by the three Leshyas, including three Vedas and four Kashayas, in the Manusya Gati, or (3 x 6 + 3 x 6) 72, gives 72 x 8 times the amount of Pannaatti, or 576 times the amount of Panni Bhangas. Further, double the Bhangas related to one Leshya, or 16 times the amount of Pannaatti, are the Bhangas related to one Samyaktava. Multiplying these by the three Leshyas, including three Lingas and four Kashayas, in the Tiryanch Gati, or (3 x 4 x 3) 36, and by the three Leshyas, including three Lingas and four Kashayas, in the Manusya Gati, gives (36 + 36) 72 x 16 = 1152 times the amount of Panni Bhangas related to Upshama Samyaktava, and the same amount (1152) is also known to be related to Kshayopapshama Samyaktava. In Kshayika Samyaktava, the Bhangas related to one Leshya, mentioned above, are doubled, or 16 times the amount of Panni Bhangas. Multiplying these by the three Leshyas, including three Lingas and four Kashayas, in the Manusya Gati, or (3 x 4 x 3) 36, gives 36 x 16 x Pannaatti = 576 times the amount of Panni Bhangas. Thus, in the Desasanayat Gunasthan, the total Bhangas related to the two Samyaktavas are (1 + 2 + 12 + 16 + 576 + 1152 + 1152) 2991 times the amount of Pannaatti, and adding the 576 times the amount of Pannaatti related to Kshayika Samyaktava, gives (2991 + 576) 3567 times the amount of Pannaatti. Subtracting one from this amount gives the total number of Bhangas.

In the Pramattagunasthan, each Pada is in the form of Manoparyayajnana, and in the place of Desasanayam, there is Saragasanayam. Due to the absence of other Gatis, each Pada is also in the form of one Manusya Gati. The remaining Padas are the same as mentioned before. Thus, there are 18 Padas, Matijnana is 1, Shrutajnana is 2, Avadhijnana is 4, Manoparyayajnana is 8, Chakshudarshan is 16, Achakshudarshan is 32, Avhidarshan is 64, Danalabdhi is 128, Labhalabdhi is 256, Bhogalabdhi is 512, Upbhogalabdhi is 1024, Viryalabdhi is 2048, Ajnana is 4096, Asiddhatva is 8192, Sakalasanyam is 16384, Jeevatva is 32768, Bhavya is the amount of Panni, and Manusya Gati is 2 x the amount of Panni Bhangas. 

Page #784:
---------------------------
## Gommatasara Karmakanda - 745

Here, the Pindapada are in the form of Linga, Kshaya, Leshya, and Samyaktv. There are 2 Pannatti-pramana bhangas related to the human realm, which are double the number of bhangas related to one Linga, meaning there are 4 Pannatti-pramana bhangas related to one Linga. Multiplying these by the 3 Vedas related to the human realm, we get 443-12 Pannatti-pramana bhangas. There are 8 Pannatti-pramana bhangas related to one Kshaya, which are double the number of bhangas related to one Linga. Multiplying these by the 3 Vedas and 4 Kshayas, we get (344) 12 Pannatti-pramana bhangas. There are 16 Pannatti-pramana bhangas related to one Leshya, which are double the number of bhangas related to one Kshaya. Multiplying these by the 3 Lingas, 4 Kshayas, and 3 Leshyas, we get (34443-36416) 576 Pannatti-pramana bhangas. There are 32 Pannatti-pramana bhangas related to Samyaktv, which are double the number of bhangas related to one Leshya. Multiplying these by the 3 Lingas (Vedas), 4 Kshayas, 3 Leshyas, and 3 Samyaktv, we get (3444343= 1084324 Pannatti) 3456 Pannatti-pramana bhangas. In this way, in the Prammatta Gunasthan, there are a total of (4+12+96+576+3456) 4144 Pannatti-pramana bhangas. Subtracting one from this number, we get the total number of bhangas for all the Padas. In the Aprammatta Gunasthan, there are also 4144 Pannatti-pramana bhangas, just like in the Prammatta Gunasthan.

In the A-purvakarana Gunasthan of the Upshama श्रेणी, there is only one Shuklaleshya, as there are no other Leshyas. All other Padas are the same as before. Here, there are 1 Matijnana, 2 Shrutajnana, 4 Avadhijnana, 8 Manahparyayajnana, 16 Chakshudarshana, 32 Achakshudarshana, 64 Avhidarshana, 128 Danalabdhi, 256 Labhalabdhi, 512 Bhogalabdhi, 1024 Upbhogalabdhi, 2048 Viryalabdhi, 4096 Ajnana, 8192 Asiddhatva, 16384 Upshamacharitra, 32768 Jivatva, Pannatti-pramana Bhavyatva, double the Pannatti-pramana for the human realm, and four times the Pannatti-pramana for Shuklaleshya. The Pindapada are in the form of Linga, Kshaya, and Samyaktv. The bhangas related to Shuklaleshya are four times the Pannatti-pramana. The bhangas related to one Linga are double the number of bhangas related to Shuklaleshya, meaning they are eight times the Pannatti-pramana. Multiplying these by the three Lingas, we get 24 times the Pannatti-pramana, meaning there are 24 Pannatti-pramana bhangas. The bhangas related to one Kshaya are double the number of bhangas related to one Linga, meaning they are 16 times the Pannatti-pramana. Multiplying these by the three Vedas and four Kshayas, we get (344=12416) 192 times the Pannatti-pramana bhangas. The bhangas related to one Samyaktv are double the number of bhangas related to one Kshaya, meaning they are 32 times the Pannatti-pramana. Multiplying these by the three Vedas, four Kshayas, and two Samyaktv, we get (34442=24) 4324 Pannatti-pramana bhangas. In this way, there are a total of (8+24+192+768) 992 Pannatti-pramana bhangas. Subtracting one from this number, we get the total number of bhangas for all the Padas in the Upshama A-purvakarana Gunasthan. Similarly, in the Saveda A-nivrittikarana Gunasthan, there are 992 Pannatti-pramana bhangas, just like in the A-purvakarana Gunasthan.

In the A-nivrittikarana Gunasthan without Vedas, each Pada is 19. There are 1 Matijnana, 2 Shrutajnana, 4 Avadhijnana, 8 Manahparyayajnana, 16 Chakshudarshana, 32 Achakshudarshana, 64 Avhidarshana, 128 Danalabdhi, 

Page #785:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-746

**Avedanivrittikaran**

* **Each Pad:**
    * Labha: 256
    * Bhogalabdhi: 512
    * Upbhogalabdhi: 1024
    * Virya: 2048
    * Agyan: 4096
    * Asiddhatva: 8192
    * Upshamcharitra: 16384
    * Jivatva: 32768
    * Bhavya: 1 Pannatti
* **Manushya:** 2 Pannatti
* **Shuklaleshya:** 4 Pannatti
* **Pindapad:**
    * Shuklaleshya: 8 Pannatti
* **Total for Each Pad:** 8 Pannatti
* **Total for Pindapad:** 32 Pannatti
* **Total for Avedanivrittikaran:** 168 Pannatti - 1 = 167 Pannatti

**Sukshmasamparayagunasthan**

* **Each Pad:**
    * Matijnana: 1
    * Shrutijnan: 2
    * Avadhijnana: 4
    * Manahparyayajnana: 8
    * Chakshudarshan: 16
    * Achakshudarshan: 32
    * Avhidarshan: 64
    * Danalabdhi: 128
    * Labha: 256
    * Bhogalabdhi: 512
    * Upbhogalabdhi: 1024
    * Viryalabdhi: 2048
    * Agyan: 4096
    * Asiddhatva: 8192
    * Upshamcharitra: 16384
    * Jivatva: 32768
    * Bhavya: 1 Pannatti
    * Manushya: 2 Pannatti
    * Shuklaleshya: 4 Pannatti
    * Sukshmalobha: 8 Pannatti
* **Pindapad:**
    * Sukshmalobha: 16 Pannatti
* **Total for Each Pad:** 16 Pannatti
* **Total for Pindapad:** 32 Pannatti
* **Total for Sukshmasamparayagunasthan:** 48 Pannatti - 1 = 47 Pannatti

**Upshantakashayagunasthan**

* **Each Pad:**
    * Matijnana: 1
    * Shrutijnan: 2
    * Avadhijnana: 4
    * Manahparyayajnana: 8
    * Chakshudarshan: 16
    * Achakshudarshan: 32
    * Avhidarshan: 64
    * Danalabdhi: 128
    * Labha: 256
    * Bhogalabdhi: 512
    * Upbhogalabdhi: 1024
    * Viryalabdhi: 2048
    * Agyan: 4096
    * Asiddhatva: 8192
    * Upshamcharitra: 16384
    * Jivatva: 32768
    * Bhavya: 1 Pannatti
    * Manushya: 2 Pannatti
    * Shuklaleshya: 4 Pannatti
* **Pindapad:**
    * Shuklaleshya: 8 Pannatti
* **Total for Each Pad:** 8 Pannatti
* **Total for Pindapad:** 16 Pannatti
* **Total for Upshantakashayagunasthan:** 24 Pannatti - 1 = 23 Pannatti

**Kshapakshreni's Apurvakaranagunasthan**

* **Each Pad:**
    * Matijnana: 1
    * Shrutijnan: 2
    * Avadhijnana: 4
    * Manahparyayajnana: 8
    * Chakshudarshan: 16
    * Achakshudarshan: 32
    * Avhidarshan: 64
    * Danalabdhi: 128
    * Labhalabdhi: 256
    * Bhogalabdhi: 512
    * Upbhogalabdhi: 1024
    * Viryalabdhi: 2048
    * Agyan: 4096

Page #786:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-747
4096 for Ajnana, 8192 for Asiddhatva, 16384 for Kshayika Charitra, 32768 for Jeevatva, one Pannatti for Bhavya, two Pannatti for Manusya Gati, four Pannatti for Shukla Leshya, and eight Pannatti for Kshayika Samyaktv are the number of bhangas. 
Eight Pannatti for Kshayika Samyaktv, minus eight Pannatti, equals sixteen Pannatti for Ekalinga related bhangas. Multiplying these by three Vedas (1643) results in 48 Pannatti bhangas. 
Twice the number of Ekalinga related bhangas, or 32 Pannatti, are the bhangas for one Kashaya. Multiplying these by four Kashayas, including three Vedas (344-12), results in 4324 Pannatti, 384 Guņi Pannatti bhangas. 
Therefore, knowing that each pad has 16 bhangas and the Pindapad has 432 bhangas, the total number of bhangas for all pads is one less than 448 Guņi Pannatti in the Apaurvakarana Gunasthan. 
In the Saveda Anivrittikarana Gunasthan, the number of bhangas is also one less than 448 Pannatti, as in the Apaurvakarana Gunasthan. 
In the Aveda Anivrittikarana Gunasthan, each pad has 20 bhangas. 
There are one bhangas for Matijnana, two for Shrutajnana, four for Avadhijnana, eight for Manahparyaya Jnana, sixteen for Chakshudarshana, thirty-two for Achakshudarshana, sixty-four for Avhidarshana, 128 for Danalabdhi, 256 for Labhalabdhi, 512 for Bhogalabdhi, 1024 for Upbhogalabdhi, 2048 for Veeryalabdhi, 4096 for Ajnana, 8192 for Asiddhatva, 16384 for Kshayika Charitra, 32768 for Jeevatva, one Pannatti for Bhavya, two Pannatti for Manusya Gati, four Pannatti for Shukla Leshya, and eight Pannatti for Kshayika Samyaktv. 
In the Pindapads, the number of bhangas for one Kashaya is twice the number of bhangas for Kshayika Samyaktv, or 16 Guņi Pannatti. Multiplying this by four Kashayas (16x4) results in 64 Pannatti bhangas. 
Therefore, knowing that each pad has 16 bhangas and the Pindapad has 64 bhangas, the total number of bhangas for all pads is one less than 80 Guņi Pannatti. 
In the Sukshma Saparay Gunasthan, there are only individual pads, no Pindapads. Here, there are one bhangas for Matijnana, two for Shrutajnana, four for Avadhijnana, eight for Manahparyaya Jnana, sixteen for Chakshudarshana, thirty-two for Achakshudarshana, sixty-four for Avhidarshana, 128 for Danalabdhi, 256 for Labhalabdhi, 512 for Bhogalabdhi, 1024 for Upbhogalabdhi, 2048 for Veeryalabdhi, 4096 for Ajnana, 8192 for Asiddhatva, 16384 for Kshayika Samyama, 32768 for Jeevatva, one Pannatti for Bhavya, two Pannatti for Manusya Gati, four Pannatti for Shukla Leshya, eight Pannatti for Kshayika Samyaktv, and sixteen Pannatti for Sukshma Lobha. The total number of bhangas for all pads is one less than 32 Pannatti. 
In the Kshina Kashaya Gunasthan, there are only individual pads, no Pindapads. Here, there are one bhangas for Matijnana, two for Shrutajnana, four for Avadhijnana, eight for Manahparyaya Jnana, sixteen for Chakshudarshana, thirty-two for Achakshudarshana, sixty-four for Avhidarshana, 128 for Danalabdhi, 256 for Labhalabdhi, 512 for Bhogalabdhi, 1024 for Upbhogalabdhi, 2048 for Veeryalabdhi, 4096 for Ajnana, 8192 for Asiddhatva, 16384 for Samyama, 32768 for Jeevatva, one Pannatti for Bhavya, two Pannatti for Manusya Gati, four Pannatti for Shukla Leshya, and eight Pannatti for Kshayika Samyaktv. The number of bhangas for each pad is double the number of bhangas for the previous pad, starting with one bhangas for Matijnana, then two for Shrutajnana, four for Avadhijnana, eight for Manahparyaya Jnana, and so on. 

Page #787:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda - 748
1024-2048-4096-8192-16384-32768, ekpannatti, 2 pannatti, 4 pannatti and 8 pramanas are there. These together make one less than 16 gunni panni, which are the bhangas of sarvapada sambhandhi.
In the sa yog kevali gunasthan, there are 1 bhangas of kevalgyan, 2 of kevaldarshan, 4 of kshayik samyaktv, 8 of yathakyat charitra, 16 of kshayik danalabdhi, 32 of labalabdhi, 64 of bhogalabdhi, 128 of upabhogalabdhi, 256 of veeryalabdhi, 512 of asiddhatva, 1024 of jivatva, 2048 of bhavyaatva, 4096 of manushya gati, 8192 of shuklaleshya. Thus, all together, one less than 64 pramanas multiplied by 256, is the number of bhangas of sarvapada.
In the a yog kevali gunasthan, there are 8 bhangas of kevalgyan, kevaldarshan, kshayik samyaktv, yathakyat charitra, 16 of danalabdhi, 32 of labalabdhi, 64 of bhog, 128 of upabhog, 256 of veery, 512 of asiddhatva, 1024 of jivatva, 2048 of bhavyaatva, 4096 of manushya gati. All these together make one less than 32 multiplied by 256 (256032 - 1) pramanas, which are the bhangas of sarvapada sambhandhi. In Siddhas, there are 1 bhangas of kevalgyan, 2 of kevaldarshan, 4 of kshayik samyaktv, 8 of anant veery, and 96 of jivatva. All these together make 31 bhangas.
Thus, the bhangas are described by each pada and pindapada. Here, each pada is also called asadrishpada, because it does not have similarity with its opposite, and pindapada is also called sadrishpada, because it has similarity with its opposite. 

Page #788:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-749: With respect to the Gunasthanas, the product of the multiplier and multiplicand related to the upward and transverse paths, after subtracting the negative from the positive, the number of destructions of all paths is as follows:

| Gunasthanas | Transverse | Multiplicand | Multiplier | Negative | Number of destructions of all paths | Positive | Mithyatva |
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
| 2 | 7195/2 | 1 | (65536 x 7195) - 1 = 18471531519 (Pannatti) | 65536 | 65536 | 65536 | 2 |
| 2 | 65536 x 41799 - 1 = 517899263 (Panni) | 1 | (65536 x 41799) - 1 = 517899263 (Panni) | 65536 | 65536 | 65536 | 2 |
| 2 | 65536 x 41606 - 1 = 105216351 (Pannatti) | 1 | (65536 x 41606) - 1 = 105216351 (Pannatti) | 65536 | 65536 | 65536 | 2 |
| 2 | 65536 x 47367 - 1 = 18482793751 (Pannatti) | 1 | (65536 x 47367) - 1 = 18482793751 (Pannatti) | 65536 | 65536 | 65536 | 2 |
| 2 | 65536 x 41664 - 1 = 108941903 (Pannatti) | 1 | (65536 x 41664) - 1 = 108941903 (Pannatti) | 65536 | 65536 | 65536 | 2 |
| 2 | 65536 x 41991 - 1 = 196018175 (Pannatti) | 1 | (65536 x 41991) - 1 = 196018175 (Pannatti) | 65536 | 65536 | 65536 | 2 |
| 2 | 65536 x 4576 - 1 = 1837747735 (Pannatti) | 1 | (65536 x 4576) - 1 = 1837747735 (Pannatti) | 65536 | 65536 | 65536 | 2 |
| 2 | 65536 x 4144 - 1 = 18271581183 (Pannatti) | 1 | (65536 x 4144) - 1 = 18271581183 (Pannatti) | 65536 | 65536 | 65536 | 2 |
| 2 | 65536 x 4144 - 1 = 271581183 | 1 | (65536 x 4144) - 1 = 271581183 | 65536 | 65536 | 65536 | 2 |
| 2 | 65536 x 4992 - 1 = 1865011715 | 1 | (65536 x 4992) - 1 = 1865011715 | 65536 | 65536 | 65536 | 2 |
| 16 | 65536 x 448 | 1 | (65536 x 448) - 5 = 29360127 | 65536 | 65536 | 65536 | 2 |
| 16 | 65536 x 992 | 1 | (65536 x 992) - 1 = 65011711 | 65536 | 65536 | 65536 | 2 |
| 16 | 65536 x 168 | 1 | (65536 x 168) - 1 = 11000047 | 65536 | 65536 | 65536 | 2 |
| 16 | 65536 x 448 | 1 | (65536 x 448) - 1 = 29360127 | 65536 | 65536 | 65536 | 2 |
| 16 | 65536 x 88 | 1 | (65536 x 88) - 1 = 5242879 | 65536 | 65536 | 65536 | 2 |

**Note:**

* **Gunasthanas:** Stages of spiritual progress in Jainism.
* **Transverse:** Refers to the path of liberation.
* **Multiplicand:** The number being multiplied.
* **Multiplier:** The number by which the multiplicand is multiplied.
* **Negative:** The negative karma that is being destroyed.
* **Positive:** The positive karma that is being accumulated.
* **Mithyatva:** The state of false belief.
* **Pannatti:** A type
Page #789:
---------------------------
## Subtle Samparaya
(Upashamaka)
Kshapaka
Upashantakshaya
Kshina-kshaya
Sayoga-kevali
Ayoga-kevali
Siddha
20
21
19
20
14
13
1
0
1
C
a
0
Om
Gommatsar Karmakanda - 750
65536
65536
65536
65536
256
256
0
48
32
24
16
64
32
0
1
1
1
1
1
0
(65536 x 48) - 1 = 3145727
(65536 x 32) - 1 = 2017151 (65536 x 24) - 1 = 1572863 (65536 x 16) - 1 = 101048576
First, the fundamental divisions of the Kriyavadins are called
(256 x 64) - 1 = 16383 (256 x 32) - 1 = 8191
Pure division 31
Now, in the Marganas, as in the Gunasthanas, the divisions of the states and forms of the emotions are called
Aadesevhi y evam sambhavabhaavehi y thanabhangani.
Padabhangani y kamaso, avvamohena anejjo ||| 875 |||
Meaning: In the Aadesha (in the Marganas), as in the Gunasthanas, the divisions of the states and forms of the emotions, as they are possible, should be known in order, without delusion.
Further, the divisions of the Ekantmatas are called, in whom only one Nay is accepted
Asidisedam kiriyanam, akkiriyanam cha ahu chulaseedhi. Satattananiyanam, venayiyana tu battisam || 876 |||
1
Meaning: There are 180 divisions of the Kriyavadins, 84 of the Akriyavadins, 67 of the Agnanavadins, and 32 of the Vainayikavadins. Thus, the divisions of the Ekantmatas should be known.
Atthi sado paradovi y, niccanicchattene y navattha. Kalisarappaniyadisahavehi y te hi bhangahu || 877 |||
Meaning: First, write the word 'Asti'. Above it, write the four words 'Svasese, Parase, Nityapaneese, Anityapaneese'. Above them, write the nine words: Jiva, Ajiva, Punnya, Papa, Asrava, Bandha, Sanvara, Nirjara, and Moksha.
1. Pra. Pan. San. Pu. 545, Gatha 22. 

Page #790:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-751

To write the five terms: substance and above them time, God, soul, destiny and nature. In this way, there are 1444945 = 180 divisions of the actionists.

Special meaning - The living being is made to exist by time itself, the living being is made to exist by others, the living being is made to exist by eternity, the living being is made to exist by impermanence, in this way there are four divisions and in place of the living being, four divisions each in respect of non-living beings etc., so there are 36 divisions from time in the change of 9 substances (9x4). In place of time, there are 3636 divisions when we say God etc. in order. In this way, there are 180 divisions in total (3645) when soul, destiny and nature change. Time, God, soul, destiny, nature, living being, non-living being, merit, demerit, bondage, liberation, destruction, liberation.

But eternal, impermanent, existence, present, future, both, by eternal and impermanent, nine states.

These meanings are easy, I will explain the meaning of time etc. ||878||

Meaning - The meaning of 'is' is 'is', so the actionists consider the object to be in the form of existence and establish action. They consider existence from their own fourfold nature and also consider existence from the fourfold nature of others, they consider existence to be eternal from eternity, they consider existence to be momentary from impermanence. In this way, they consider these nine substances: living being, non-living being, merit, demerit, bondage, liberation, destruction, liberation and moksha. So the meaning of these 14 is easy, therefore, their special explanation is not given. The meaning of time etc. is explained in order.

Time creates everything, time destroys everything, time awakens sleeping beings, so who can deceive such time? In this way, believing that all actions are from time is called timeism.

1. Pra. Pan. San. Pri. 545.
2. Pra. Panchasangraha Pri. 5.47 verse 25

Page #791:
---------------------------
Gommatasar Karmakanda-752

The soul is ignorant, devoid of knowledge, and helpless, unable to do anything. Its happiness, sorrow, going to heaven or hell, all are created by God. This belief in God as the doer of all actions is called theism.

There is only one great soul in the world, who is the man, the God, and the pervader of all. He is incomprehensible, conscious, without qualities, and supreme. This belief in the self as the source of all is called Asava.

Whatever happens to whom, whenever, in whatever way, and by what rule, is the same for him at that time. This belief in the rule of destiny for all things is called determinism.

Who makes the thorns, the sharp things, the birds, and the animals? Who makes the diversity in them? The answer is that it is their nature. This belief in nature as the cause of all is called naturalism.

This belief in the external factors like time, etc., is called actionism. The refutation of actionism is given in the next two verses.

There is no creator, no destroyer, no self-effort, and no merit or demerit. The refutation of time, etc., is the refutation of the four-fold origination. 

Page #792:
---------------------------
Gommatsar Karmakanda-753

There are no seven substances, the time of destiny is three-fold. There are fourteen, and there are no substances, and there are eighty-four for the non-actionists. ||885||

**Meaning:** First, write the word "nasti" (not). Above it, write the two words "svase" (self) and "parase" (other). Above them, write the seven substances without merit and demerit. Above them, write the five words beginning with "kala" (time). In this way, multiplying the four lines together, there are 1424755-70 bhangas. And once again, write the word "nasti" (not). Above it, write the seven substances. Above them, write the two words "niyati" (destiny) and "kala" (time). In this way, multiplying the three lines together, there are (14742) 14 bhangas. Adding these to the above 70 bhangas (70+14), there are 84 bhangas for the non-actionists.

The 70 bhangas are created by nature, destiny, time, God, self-creation, living being, non-living being, inflow, restraint, outflow, bondage, and liberation.
Self, other.
Not.

The 14 bhangas are created by destiny, living being, non-living being, inflow, restraint, outflow, bondage, and liberation.
Not.

**Special meaning:** The living being is made "nasti" (not) by time itself, the living being is made "nasti" (not) by time from the other. In the same way, when "ajiwa" (non-living being) etc. are said in place of the living being, there are 14 bhangas in one time. And when "ishwara" (God) etc. are said in place of time, there are 70 bhangas. And the living being is made "nasti" (not) by destiny, the living being is made "nasti" (not) by time. And when "ajiwa" (non-living being) etc. are said in place of the living being, there are 14 differences. In this way, all together (70+14), there are 84 bhangas for the non-actionists. The non-actionist does not establish action by considering the object as "nasti" (not).

Next, the bhangas of the ignorance-view are said.

Who knows the nine states, the existence and non-existence, the two-fold, the three-fold, the four-fold, the five-fold, the six-fold, the seven-fold, the eight-fold, and the nine-fold? There are sixty bhangas for those who know. ||886||

Who knows the seven substances, the pure state, the two-fold, the three-fold, the four-fold? There are sixty-four bhangas for the ignorant. ||887|| 

Page #793:
---------------------------
Gommatasar Karmakanda - 754
Meaning - From the nine substances, including the soul, who knows that each one is 'asti' (existent) in its own nature? Who knows that the soul is 'nasti' (non-existent) in its own nature? Who knows that the soul is 'astinasti' (both existent and non-existent) in its own nature? Or who knows that it is 'avaktvy' (indescribable)? And who knows that the soul is in these seven 'bhang' (aspects) due to the combination of the remaining three 'bhang'? When multiplied by seven (7x9), there are 63 'bhang'. And first, write 'shuddhapadarth' (pure substance), then write 'asti', 'nasti', 'astinasti', and 'avaktvy' above it.
From these two lines, four 'bhang' arise, such as: Who knows that the pure substance is 'asti' (existent)? Who knows that the pure substance is 'nasti' (non-existent)? Who knows that the pure substance is 'astinasti' (both existent and non-existent)? Who knows that the pure substance is 'avaktvy' (indescribable)? In this way, by combining these with the above 63 'bhang' (63+4), there are 67 'bhang' for the ignorant. Ignorant people believe that they do not know the object.
"Formation of 63 'bhang'"
Jiva (soul) - Ajiv (non-soul) - Asrav (inflow) - Bandh (bondage) - Sanvar (stoppage) - Nirjara (destruction) - Moksha (liberation) - Puny (merit) - Pap (demerit) - Sat (true) - Asat (false) - Sad-asat (both true and false) - Avachya (indescribable) - Sad-vachya (describable as true) - Asad-vachya (describable as false) - Sad-asad-vachya (describable as both true and false)
"Formation of 4 'bhang'"
Sat (true) - Asat (false) - Sad-asat (both true and false) - Avachya (indescribable)
Shuddhapadarth (pure substance)
Then, the fundamental 'bhang' of the Vainayikvada are called:
-
-
-
Man-vayan-kayada-an-gavina-bi-suran-ivadana-an-ji-divu-he. Bale-madu-pidu-mmi-ya, kadavvo-chedi-ad-acha-u. || 888 ||
Meaning - One should show respect to the gods, kings, wise men, ascetics, elders, children, mothers, and fathers, with their mind, speech, and body, and by giving charity. In this way, there are 8x4=32 aspects of Vainayikvada. (Vainayikvadis believe that one attains liberation only through respect without examining the qualities and defects of the object of respect.)
"Formation of 32 'bhang'"
Sur (gods) - Nripati (kings) - Yati (ascetics) - Gnani (wise men) - Vridh (elders) - Bal (children) - Mata (mothers) - Pita (fathers)
Man (mind) - Vachan (speech) - Kay (body) - Dan (charity)
19
Sach-chanda-ditthi-him-vi-yappiya-ani, tes-atthita-ani-sa-vani-ti-ni. Pakhandi-nam-vau-la-karana-ani, an-na-ani-chitta-ani-haram-ti-ta-ni. || 889 ||
1. Pra. Pan. Sa. Pu. 546 Shlok 23 | 

Page #794:
---------------------------
Gommatsar Karmakanda-755
Meaning- In this way, men who have free will, that is, their own arbitrary faith, have conceived these 363 distinctions, which are designed to cause confusion among the hypocritical beings and to steal the minds of ignorant beings. Further, they state the views of other solitaryists.
Aalasado Nirucchāho, Phalaṃ Kiṃciṃ ṇa Bhuñjade.
Thaṇakkhīrādipaṇāṃ vā, Pauruseṇa Viṇā ṇa hi. ||890|| Meaning- One who is lazy and without enthusiasm or effort cannot enjoy any fruit. Just as drinking milk from the breast cannot be done without effort, in the same way, all work is accomplished only through effort, this is the belief of the Pauraushavadis. . . .
Daivaṃ Eve Paraṃ Maṇṇe, Dhippāuruṣamaṇāthayaṃ.
Eso Sālasamuttungo, Kaṇṇo Haṇṇadi Sangare. ||891|| Meaning- I consider only fate (destiny) to be supreme, and I despise useless effort. Look, Karna, the king who was as high as a fort, was killed in battle. In this way, one who believes in the attainment of success through fate alone is a Daivawadi.
Saṃjogaṃ Eveti Vadanti Taṇṇā, ṇeveka Cakkeṇa Raho Payādi. Andho Ya Paṅgū Ya Vaṇāṃ Pavitthā, Te Saṃpajuttā ṇayaraṃ Pavitthā. ||892||
Meaning- Those who are truly knowledgeable believe that success is achieved only through the combination of two things, because just as a chariot cannot move with only one wheel, and a blind man and a lame man entered the forest, and when a fire broke out in the forest, the blind man and the lame man both came together, that is, the lame man climbed on the blind man's shoulders and they entered their city. In this way, one who believes in the attainment of success through combination alone is a Saṃyogavadi.
Saiuṭṭhiyā Pasiddhi, Duvvārā Melidehiṃ Vi Surehi.
Majjhimapaṇḍavakhitta, Mālā Pañcasuvi Khitteva. ||893|| Meaning- Once established, fame cannot be removed even by the gods, let alone others. Just as Draupadi only put a garland on the middle Pandava, that is, Arjuna, but "Pañ"
2. Prā.paṃ.saṃ.pṛ. 547 Śloka 30.
1. Prā.paṃ.saṃ.pṛ. 547 Śloka 30. 3. Prā.paṃ.saṃ.pṛ. 547 Śloka 321 

Page #795:
---------------------------
Gommatasar Karmakanda-756
The Pandavas were known for their generosity. In this way, people consider the popular opinion as the ultimate truth.
Now, Nemichandracharya explains the method to resolve the dispute of all the above opinions.  Javadya Vaynavha, Tavdiya Chev Hoti Nayvada. Javadya Nayvada, Tavdiya Chev Honti Parasamaya ||894|| Meaning - As many are the paths of speech, so many are the Nayvadas, and as many are the Nayvadas, so many are the Parasamayas.
Special Meaning - Whatever words are spoken, they are spoken with respect to some expectation. Therefore, wherever there is an expectation, that is the Nay. But, whoever accepts it without any other expectation, becomes a Mithyamati. Therefore, as many are the types of speech, so many are the Nayas, and as many are the Nayas, so many are the Mithyamatis.
"Ete Sarve'pi Nayah Ekantavधारणगर्भा Mithyadṛṣṭayaḥ; Etaire Adhyavasitavastvabhāvāṭ. (J.D.Pu.1 P. 245). Micchaditthi Savve Vi Naya Sapkkha Padibbaddha| Meaning - All these Nayas are false views, which are based on the absolute determination of the object, because there is no object determined by them. If all these Nayas determine the object independently of each other, then they are false, because the object is not like that, as it is determined by these Nayas without the expectation of other Nayas. Therefore, in the first part of the J.G. verse 102, it is said - "Micchaditthi Sabche Vi Naya Sapkkha Padibbaddha" - all these Nayas are false, which are bound by their own side. Further, the reason is given for how the Mithyamati words of the Parasamaya are false.
Parasamayanam Vaynam, Miccham Khalu Hodi Savvaha Vayna.
Jenaanam Pun Vaynam, Samm Khu Kahanchivayanado ||895||2 Meaning - The words of the Parasamaya are false by nature, because they are spoken in the form of 'Sarvtha'. And the words of the Jainmata are true, because they are spoken in the form of 'Kahanchit'.
Special Meaning - The Jainmata is in the form of Syadvada. It speaks about the object, which is infinite in its qualities, in the form of 'Kahanchit' words. Therefore, it is true, because only one quality of the object is spoken by one word. If someone says 'Sarvtha' that this is the nature of the object, then it will be called false, because it will lead to the absence of other qualities. Other than the Jainmata, people speak about the nature of the object in the form of 'Sarvtha' words, taking one quality of the object, and saying that this is it. They are false due to the above reason. For example, the object is eternal with respect to the substance, and impermanent with respect to the modification. Therefore, the Jainmata is true. 1. Pravachansar Parisishta; Jayadhaval Pu. 1 P. 245. 2. Pravachansar Parisishta, J.D.Pu. 1 P. 245. 

Page #796:
---------------------------
Gommatasar Karmakanda-757
There are as many Nayas as there are paths of words. To accept them in isolation, without regard to their opposites, is Mithyatva, and to accept them with regard to their opposites, in the form of Syadvada, is Samyakp. Thus, one should understand that the dispute of other opinions can be resolved only by Syadvada.
Thus ends the chapter of the Hindi commentary 'Siddhantgyan Deepika' on the Gommatasar Karmakanda, written by Shri Nemichandracharya.
Now, the chapter on Trikaranchulika
Now, wishing to speak about Trikaranchulika, the Acharya Guru, while saluting the listeners, also wishes to make them aware, and thus gives this advice:
Namaha Gunarayanabhusana, Siddhantamamimahaddhibhavabhava.
Varviranandichanda, Nimmalagunamindanandigurum. ||896||
Meaning - O Chamundaraya, who is adorned with the jewel of qualities! Salute the excellent Birananda, who is like the moon, born in the ocean of nectar, which is the Siddhanta Shastra. And salute the Guru named Indrananda, who has pure qualities.
Although the detailed explanation of Adhakarana, Apurvakarana, and Anivrittikarana is given in the Upshamsamyaktva Prakarana of the Labdhisar Granth, which is published in this series of books, one should refer to it there. However, the Acharya here states the nature of the three karanas:
Igivi Samohkhavanuvasamananimittani Trikaranani Tahin.
Padhama Adhapavattam, Karanam Tu Karedi Appamatto. ||897||
Meaning - To destroy or subdue the 21 types of Charitramohaniya:
1. Micchaditti Sabche Vinaya Sapakhpadinaddha. Anno-onna Nissiya Una Lahanti Sammatta Sambhava. ||102|| (J.D.P. 1 p. 249) 

Page #797:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-758: Adhapravrtta, Apurvakarana and Anivrttikarana are the three karana (causes) which are in the form of purification. Of these, the first Adhapravrttakarana is done by the Jiva (soul) who is in the Satishya Aprammatta Gunasthan (state of being). Here, the name Karana is the result. Further, the definition of Adhapravrttakarana is explained by the following verse:

"Jamha Uvarimbhaava, Hetthimbhaavehin Sarisaga Hoti.
Tamha Padham Karana, Adhapavatttoti Nidditum." ||898||

Meaning: Because in this first Karana, the Uvarimbhaava (result) of the present time is similar to the Hetthimbhaava (result) of the past time, therefore, the first Karana is called Adhapravrttakarana.

"Antomuttametto, Takkalo Hodi Tattha Parinama.
Loganamasankapama, Uvaruvari Sarisavahigya." ||899||

Meaning: The time of this Adhapravrttakarana is Antarmuhurta (a very short period of time). In that time, there are countless results for the Jiva, and these results increase progressively from the first time to the last time, in the form of Samavridhi (accumulation).

Special Meaning: By establishing a line of Antarmuhurta-length times in an upward direction, and by presenting the form of the results that are suitable for those times, we can see that in Adhapravrttakarana, the results suitable for the Jivas of the first time are countless. The results suitable for the Jivas of the second time are also countless. In this way, the measure of the results related to Adhapravrttakarana should be presented until the last time of the Adhapravrttakarana period. The results suitable for the second time of Adhapravrttakarana are significantly more than the results suitable for the first time. This difference is equal to the Antarmuhurta-portion, meaning that the difference is equal to the amount obtained by dividing the measure of the results of the first time by the Antarmuhurta. The results suitable for the third time of Adhapravrttakarana are significantly more than the results suitable for the second time. In this way, this sequence should be continued until the last time of the Adhapravrttakarana period.

1. "Asi-Vaasina Va Sahayatambhava Vivakhae Parinaaman Karana Ttu Valabhado." (Dhavala Pu. 6 p. 217) The meaning of the most effective cause is found in the results, like a sword and a collector.
2. Labdhisara Gatha 25, Dhavala Pu. 61.217; Jayadhavala Pu. 12 p. 233.
3. Dhavala Pu. 6 p. 214-215; Jayadhavala Pu. 12 p. 235. 

Page #798:
---------------------------
## Gommatasara Karmakanda - 759

**Here, to explain the number of results of Adhopravrttakarana, we state it using numerical notation:**

**Bavattirtisahas, solas chau chari ekkaayam cheva.**
**Dhanaaddhana visese, tiyasanka hodi sankheje.** || 900 ||

**Meaning:** Here, in the numerical notation, the total amount (Sarvadhana) is 3072, the measure of Adhopravrttakarana time is 16, the Tiryanchch (Anukrishtikhanda) is 4, the measure of increase in the upward form (Urdhvarupa) is 4, the measure of increase in the Tiryanch form (Anukrishti) is 1, and the number of सहनानी (Sahanaani) for proving the increase (Chaya) is 3.

**Special Meaning:** Here, the group of results related to the total time of Karana is the total amount (Sarvadhana) (3072), and writing the number of times of Karana time one above the other is the number of times of that time, which is the Urdhvagachch or Pada. And how many results are obtained by a living being in one time, how many results are obtained by another living being? In this way, the number of Khandas in one time is equal to the creation of the desired time, and the number of those Khandas is the measure of the Tiryanchch or Pada of Anukrishti. And the number of results that increase sequentially in each time is the Urdhva Chaya (Prachaya-Uttara or Vishesh). The increase in each Khanda is the Vishesh-Chaya-Prachaya or Vishesh of Tiryanch form Anukrishti, and the number of Sahanaani in the numerical notation is 3, which is divided to know the measure of Chaya.

**Aadi dhanaado savvam, pachay dhanam sankha bhaga parimanam.**
**Karane athaapavatte, hoditi jinhehim nidditta.** || 901 ||

**Meaning:** In Adhopravrttakarana, the total Prachaya Dhana is equal to the measure of the division of the Aadi Dhana by the Sankhata, as said by the Jineendra Deva.

**Special Meaning:** The amount obtained by adding the Chaya related to the total time is the Prachaya Dhana, which is also called Uttara Dhana. And the Chaya-free total time-related Dhana is the Aadi Dhana. So, "Padakritya Sankhyaten Sarvadhane Bhakta Urdhva Chaya Pramanam Syat" - meaning, the square of the Pada (Gachch) and the division by the Sankhata in the Sarvadhana gives the measure of Urdhva Chaya. Therefore, the square of the Pada (Gachch) 16 is 16416-256, and the Sahanaani of the Sankhata is 3. So, dividing this by the Sarvadhana 3072, we get 3072/25643-4, which is the measure of Urdhva Prachaya. And according to the Karana Sutra "Vyeka Padardhaghna Chaya Guno Gachch Uttara Dhanam", multiplying half of the Ekakam Pada by the Chaya and the Gachch gives the Prachaya Dhana. Therefore, half of the Ekakam Gachch (15) is 7.5, multiplying this by the Chaya (4) gives (15/244) 30. Again, the Gachch (16) ... 

Page #799:
---------------------------
Gommatsar Karmakanda - 760
By multiplying (30x16) we get 480, which is the answer. Subtracting this answer from the total amount (3072) (3072-480) we get 2592, which is the principal amount. The principal amount is 2592, the rate is 480, the desired amount is one salaka and the fruit amount is 2592. Here, multiplying the fruit amount by the desired amount and dividing by the rate (2592x1/480) we get 27/5 salakas. Again, the rate is 27/5 salakas, the fruit amount is 2592 (principal amount) and the desired amount is one salaka. Multiplying the fruit amount by the desired amount and dividing by the rate (2592x1/1x5/27) we get 480, which is the interest amount and is equal to the principal amount divided by the number of terms. This is also called the answer.
The sum of the principal and interest is the total amount.
The total amount is obtained by multiplying the square of the number of terms by the number of terms and then multiplying by the interest.
The total amount is obtained by dividing the total amount by the square of the number of terms and the number of terms.
The principal amount is obtained by subtracting the interest amount from the total amount.
The principal amount is obtained by dividing the principal amount by the number of terms.
The interest amount is obtained by multiplying the principal amount by the number of terms.
The interest amount is obtained by dividing the interest amount by the number of terms.
The interest amount is obtained by multiplying the interest amount by the number of terms.
The interest amount is obtained by dividing the interest amount by the number of terms.
The interest amount is obtained by multiplying the interest amount by the number of terms.
The interest amount is obtained by dividing the interest amount by the number of terms.
The interest amount is obtained by multiplying the interest amount by the number of terms.
The interest amount is obtained by dividing the interest amount by the number of terms.
The interest amount is obtained by multiplying the interest amount by the number of terms.
The interest amount is obtained by dividing the interest amount by the number of terms.
The interest amount is obtained by multiplying the interest amount by the number of terms.
The interest amount is obtained by dividing the interest amount by the number of terms.
The interest amount is obtained by multiplying the interest amount by the number of terms.
The interest amount is obtained by dividing the interest amount by the number of terms.
The interest amount is obtained by multiplying the interest amount by the number of terms.
The interest amount is obtained by dividing the interest amount by the number of terms.
The interest amount is obtained by multiplying the interest amount by the number of terms.
The interest amount is obtained by dividing the interest amount by the number of terms.
The interest amount is obtained by multiplying the interest amount by the number of terms.
The interest amount is obtained by dividing the interest amount by the number of terms.
The interest amount is obtained by multiplying the interest amount by the number of terms.
The interest amount is obtained by dividing the interest amount by the number of terms.
The interest amount is obtained by multiplying the interest amount by the number of terms.
The interest amount is obtained by dividing the interest amount by the number of terms.
The interest amount is obtained by multiplying the interest amount by the number of terms.
The interest amount is obtained by dividing the interest amount by the number of terms.
The interest amount is obtained by multiplying the interest amount by the number of terms.
The interest amount is obtained by dividing the interest amount by the number of terms.
The interest amount is obtained by multiplying the interest amount by the number of terms.
The interest amount is obtained by dividing the interest amount by the number of terms.
The interest amount is obtained by multiplying the interest amount by the number of terms.
The interest amount is obtained by dividing the interest amount by the number of terms.
The interest amount is obtained by multiplying the interest amount by the number of terms.
The interest amount is obtained by dividing the interest amount by the number of terms.
The interest amount is obtained by multiplying the interest amount by the number of terms.
The interest amount is obtained by dividing the interest amount by the number of terms.
The interest amount is obtained by multiplying the interest amount by the number of terms.
The interest amount is obtained by dividing the interest amount by the number of terms.
The interest amount is obtained by multiplying the interest amount by the number of terms.
The interest amount is obtained by dividing the interest amount by the number of terms.
The interest amount is obtained by multiplying the interest amount by the number of terms.
The interest amount is obtained by dividing the interest amount by the number of terms.
The interest amount is obtained by multiplying the interest amount by the number of terms.
The interest amount is obtained by dividing the interest amount by the number of terms.
The interest amount is obtained by multiplying the interest amount by the number of terms.
The interest amount is obtained by dividing the interest amount by the number of terms.
The interest amount is obtained by multiplying the interest amount by the number of terms.
The interest amount is obtained by dividing the interest amount by the number of terms.
The interest amount is obtained by multiplying the interest amount by the number of terms.
The interest amount is obtained by dividing the interest amount by the number of terms.
The interest amount is obtained by multiplying the interest amount by the number of terms.
The interest amount is obtained by dividing the interest amount by the number of terms.
The interest amount is obtained by multiplying the interest amount by the number of terms.
The interest amount is obtained by dividing the interest amount by the number of terms.
The interest amount is obtained by multiplying the interest amount by the number of terms.
The interest amount is obtained by dividing the interest amount by the number of terms.
The interest amount is obtained by multiplying the interest amount by the number of terms.
The interest amount is obtained by dividing the interest amount by the number of terms.
The interest amount is obtained by multiplying the interest amount by the number of terms.
The interest amount is obtained by dividing the interest amount by the number of terms.
The interest amount is obtained by multiplying the interest amount by the number of terms.
The interest amount is obtained by dividing the interest amount by the number of terms.
The interest amount is obtained by multiplying the interest amount by the number of terms.
The interest amount is obtained by dividing the interest amount by the number of terms.
The interest amount is obtained by multiplying the interest amount by the number of terms.
The interest amount is obtained by dividing the interest amount by the number of terms.
The interest amount is obtained by multiplying the interest amount by the number of terms.
The interest amount is obtained by dividing the interest amount by the number of terms.
The interest amount
Page #800:
---------------------------
Gommatsar Karmakanda-761:

**Verse 104:**

In obtaining the accumulated wealth (prachay dhana), the increase is called prachay, and what is at the beginning is called prabhava, which is the same as prachay. The term "ekkam pada" (gachchha) here refers to the measure of the pada. The increase in the initial measure is called chay.

**Explanation:**

In the first position, there is no chay. Therefore, the measure of the gachchha here is to be understood as one less than the measure of the desired object (16-1). In the upward construction, the measure of the chay is four. Therefore, the initial measure is 4, the subsequent measure is 4, and subtracting one from the measure of the gachchha (16), the gachchha is 15. Here,

**Verse 164:**

"The pada, minus one, divided by two, multiplied by the chay, and added to the initial value, multiplied by the pada, is the total value in all cases."

Using this formula, we obtain the accumulated wealth (prachay dhana). For example, dividing the ekkam pada by 2, multiplying by the chay, adding the initial value, and multiplying by the gachchha, we get the total accumulated wealth. In this case, subtracting one from the gachchha (15-1), we get the pada (14). Dividing the pada by 2 (14/2), we get 7. Multiplying this by the chay (4), we get 28 (7x4). Adding the initial value (4) to this, we get 32 (28+4). Multiplying this by the measure of the gachchha (15), we get 480 (32x15). This is the measure of the accumulated wealth. Now, we will discuss the measure of the first part of the anukrushti.

**Verse 905:**

In the wealth of each period, the gachchha, chay, and prabhava of the anukrushti are all constructed in a diagonal manner. The gachchha of the anukrushti is determined by the number of parts of the total path (urdhava gachchha).

**Explanation:**

The investigation of the repeated and non-repeated nature of these results, arranged in a sequential manner, is called anukrushti. Alternatively, "anukarshanam anukrushti" refers to the consideration of the mutual similarity of the results. The time of the anukrushti is only a fraction of a moment, because this time is:

1. Trilokasar.
2. J.D.P. 12, p. 235. 

Page #801:
---------------------------
Gommatsar Karmakanda-762 explains the method of calculating the number of parts in the downward progression.

**Verse 906:**

The number of parts in the downward progression is obtained by dividing the number of parts in the upward progression by 4. For example, if the number of parts in the upward progression is 16, then the number of parts in the downward progression is 4 (16/4 = 4).

The number of parts in the downward progression is also equal to the number of parts in the upward progression minus the number of parts in the downward progression. For example, if the number of parts in the upward progression is 16, then the number of parts in the downward progression is 4 (16-4 = 12).

**Verse 907:**

The number of parts in the downward progression is also equal to the number of parts in the upward progression minus the number of parts in the downward progression. For example, if the number of parts in the upward progression is 16, then the number of parts in the downward progression is 4 (16-4 = 12).

The number of parts in the downward progression is also equal to the number of parts in the upward progression minus the number of parts in the downward progression. For example, if the number of parts in the upward progression is 16, then the number of parts in the downward progression is 4 (16-4 = 12).

**Explanation:**

The number of parts in the downward progression is obtained by dividing the number of parts in the upward progression by 4. For example, if the number of parts in the upward progression is 16, then the number of parts in the downward progression is 4 (16/4 = 4).

The number of parts in the downward progression is also equal to the number of parts in the upward progression minus the number of parts in the downward progression. For example, if the number of parts in the upward progression is 16, then the number of parts in the downward progression is 4 (16-4 = 12).

The number of parts in the downward progression is also equal to the number of parts in the upward progression minus the number of parts in the downward progression. For example, if the number of parts in the upward progression is 16, then the number of parts in the downward progression is 4 (16-4 = 12).

The number of parts in the downward progression is also equal to the number of parts in the upward progression minus the number of parts in the downward progression. For example, if the number of parts in the upward progression is 16, then the number of parts in the downward progression is 4 (16-4 = 12).

The number of parts in the downward progression is also equal to the number of parts in the upward progression minus the number of parts in the downward progression. For example, if the number of parts in the upward progression is 16, then the number of parts in the downward progression is 4 (16-4 = 12).

The number of parts in the downward progression is also equal to the number of parts in the upward progression minus the number of parts in the downward progression. For example, if the number of parts in the upward progression is 16, then the number of parts in the downward progression is 4 (16-4 = 12).

The number of parts in the downward progression is also equal to the number of parts in the upward progression minus the number of parts in the downward progression. For example, if the number of parts in the upward progression is 16, then the number of parts in the downward progression is 4 (16-4 = 12).

The number of parts in the downward progression is also equal to the number of parts in the upward progression minus the number of parts in the downward progression. For example, if the number of parts in the upward progression is 16, then the number of parts in the downward progression is 4 (16-4 = 12).

The number of parts in the downward progression is also equal to the number of parts in the upward progression minus the number of parts in the downward progression. For example, if the number of parts in the upward progression is 16, then the number of parts in the downward progression is 4 (16-4 = 12).

The number of parts in the downward progression is also equal to the number of parts in the upward progression minus the number of parts in the downward progression. For example, if the number of parts in the upward progression is 16, then the number of parts in the downward progression is 4 (16-4 = 12).

The number of parts in the downward progression is also equal to the number of parts in the upward progression minus the number of parts in the downward progression. For example, if the number of parts in the upward progression is 16, then the number of parts in the downward progression is 4 (16-4 = 12).

The number of parts in the downward progression is also equal to the number of parts in the upward progression minus the number of parts in the downward progression. For example, if the number of parts in the upward progression is 16, then the number of parts in the downward progression is 4 (16-4 = 12).

The number of parts in the downward progression is also equal to the number of parts in the upward progression minus the number of parts in the downward progression. For example, if the number of parts in the upward progression is 16, then the number of parts in the downward progression is 4 (16-4 = 12).

The number of parts in the downward progression is also equal to the number of parts in the upward progression minus the number of parts in the downward progression. For example, if the number of parts in the upward progression is 16, then the number of parts in the downward progression is 4 (16-4 = 12).

The number of parts in the downward progression is also equal to the number of parts in the upward progression minus the number of parts in the downward progression. For example, if the number of parts in the upward progression is 16, then the number of parts in the downward progression is 4 (16-4 = 12).

The number of parts in the downward progression is also equal to the number of parts in the upward progression minus the number of parts in the downward progression. For example, if the number of parts in the upward progression is 16, then the number of parts in the downward progression is 4 (16-4 = 12).

The number of parts in the downward progression is also equal to the number of parts in the upward progression minus the number of parts in the downward progression. For example, if the number of parts in the upward progression is 16, then the number of parts in the downward progression is 4 (16-4 = 12).
Page #802:
---------------------------
##  Translation:

**170 166**
Fourth Nirvargana-kandaka | Third Nirvargana-kandaka | Second Nirvargana-kandaka | First Nirvargana-kandaka 16 Samaya-varti | 222 | 218 214 | 210 | 206 / 202 | 198 1194 190 | 186 | 182 | 178 | 174 1170 | 162 Result No.

**First Section**
48 47 46

**Second Section**
10. 49 48

**Third Section**
57
56 | 55 / 54 53 |
46 | 45 | 14 | 43

**Gommatasar Karmakanda-763**

The number of sections in a Nirvargana-kandaka should be equal to the number of Antarmuhurta (sub-moments) in the first Samaya (time period) of Adha-pravrtta-karan (descent of karma). These sections should be created in a sequential order, starting from the first Samaya and increasing the Vishesha-adhika (specific increase) progressively. The Nirvargana-kandaka is the number of places the Anu-krustika (replication) of the results of the desired Samaya is shifted upwards. The sections related to the first Samaya are not similar to each other; they are dissimilar because they are arranged in a sequence of increasing Vishesha-adhika. The quotient obtained by dividing the Antarmuhurta by the results of the first Samaya is the measure of Vishesha-adhika. 

After the first section, these result sections should be placed in the second Samaya, violating the tradition, but with this special feature: in this second Samaya, there are also countless results that are unique and special, such as the 43 mentioned above, which should be placed as the final section here. By placing them in this way, result sections equal to the number of Antarmuhurta are obtained in the second Samaya as well. Similarly, the result sections should be created sequentially in the third and subsequent Samayas until the final Samaya of Adha-pravrtta-karan. 

These are also described as follows:
1. J.D.P. 12 p. 254; 1141 

Page #803:
---------------------------
## Gova Karmaka

10,000,000,000, 100,000,000,000,
10,000,000,000
100,000,000,000,
1,000,000,000,
10,000,000,000,
100,000,000,
1,000,000,000,
10,000,000,
100,000,000,
1,000,000
10,000,000,
100,000,
1,000,000.
10,000,
4,00000,
100,000,000,000,000, 100,000,000,000,000
1,000,000,000,000,000, %0000000000000
100,000,000,000,
10,000,000,000,
1,000,000,000,
100,000,000,
10,000,000,
1,000,000,

According to Sandristi, the pattern of Anukrishtiki is as follows: The results of the first section of the first time period of Adhapravrittikaran are not equal to any of the results of the upper time periods, while the results of the second section (40) are equal to the results of the first section (40) of the second time period. Similarly, the results of the third and subsequent sections of the first time period should be known to be repeated with the results of the first section of the third and subsequent time periods respectively until the results of the last section of the first time period (43) are repeated with the first section of the last time period of the first Nirvargana Kandaka and end.

50,000,000,000,000
10,000,000,000
1,000,000,000
100,000,000
10,000,000
1,000,000

Similarly, the results of the sections of the second and subsequent time periods of Adhapravrittikaran should be considered separately and the repetition of the results of the second and subsequent sections with the results of the first section of the time series of the Nirvargana Kandaka, which is one time period above the considered time, should be stated, but with the special feature that the results related to the first section remain unrepeated everywhere, i.e., the results related to the first section of each time period are not similar to the results of any section of the subsequent time periods. Similarly, the repetition of the results of the sections of the second Nirvargana Kandaka with the results of the sections of the third Nirvargana Kandaka should be known, but there too the results of the first section remain unrepeated. In this sequence, the repetition of the third, fourth, fifth, etc. Nirvargana Kandakas with the subsequent upper Nirvargana Kandakas should be taken up to the point where all the result sections of the first and subsequent time periods of the Dvicharama Nirvargana Kandaka, except the first section, are repeated with the results of the last Nirvargana Kandaka and end. The investigation of repetition and non-repetition in the place of the last Nirvargana Kandaka should be done without contradicting the Parmagam.

Or, here, one should approximate in this way: The first section (39) in the first time period is... 

Page #804:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-765

The first and second sections of the first time period (40) are similar to each other. Similarly, the third section of the first time period (41) and the second section of the second time period (41) are also similar. In the same way, the last section of the first time period and the penultimate section of the second time period are similar. Similarly, the final sections of the second time period should be compared with the final sections of the third time period. In the same way, the above should be compared with the previous (past) sections.

The statement of the relative abundance and scarcity of the parasthanas is as follows: In the first time period of the downward progression, the lowest purity (1) is the most scarce, because there is no other parastana less than this in the downward progression. In the second time period, the lowest purity (40) is infinitely greater, because the lowest purity parastana of the second time period is located after crossing an infinite number of purity parasthanas through six-place order from the lowest purity parastana of the first time period. In this way, the lowest purity should be stated as infinitely multiplied in each time period until the end of the first nirvargana kandaka (first moment). From that (first nirvargana kandaka), the highest purity (162) in the first time period is infinitely greater, because the previous sequence of lowest purities that is obtained is the initial purity of the last section of the purity parasthanas of the first time period of the downward progression, and the highest purity of that last section is located after crossing an infinite number of parasthanas of the size of an infinite number of lokas through six-place order from the said initial purity. The highest purity (162) of the first time period of the first nirvargana kandaka is infinitely greater than the lowest purity (163) of the first section of the second nirvargana kandaka, because the highest purity of the first time period is located in the form of a fertile seed, being similar to the last parinama of the penultimate section of the second time period, and the lowest purity of the second nirvargana kandaka is located in the form of an eight-fold order, therefore it is infinitely greater. From this, the highest purity (205) of the second time period is infinitely greater, because the previous lowest purity (163) is in the form of the last parinama of the last section of the second time period of the downward progression, and this highest purity of the last section of the second time period is located after crossing an infinite number of lokas through six places from that, therefore it is infinitely greater than that. In this way, one nirvargana kandaka should be located in the amount of time equal to the duration of an antarmukhurta, and the relative abundance and scarcity of the lowest and highest parinamas above and below should be determined. All this relative abundance and scarcity should be determined by crossing the nirvargana kandakas in sequence, and again, the highest purity (690) of the last time period of the penultimate nirvargana kandaka is infinitely greater than the lowest purity (691) of the last time period of the downward progression; from that, the highest purity (744) of the first time period of the last nirvargana kandaka is infinitely greater. The relative abundance and scarcity of the above should be determined in this way until the last time period of the downward progression. Its visualization is as follows: 

Page #805:
---------------------------
40 80
121
163
206
250
295
586 68691
341 388436485 535
12(4),13
162 U.
205 U.
249 U.
294 U.
340 P.
387 U.
438:484 3... .
534 .
585 U
637 U
610 U
744 U
U
799 .
85 U.
112 U.
536-2net Hizmet

In the above table, the numbers from 1 to 16 indicate the times of downward progression.
The number within the brackets indicates the number of the Nirvargana Kanda. Each Nirvargana Kanda consists of four times. The numbers 1-40 etc. indicate the number of pure consciousness of the lowest result of that time. The numbers 162-205 etc. indicate the number of pure consciousness of the highest result of that time. From the lowest to the lowest, from the lowest to the highest, from the highest to the lowest and from the highest to the highest, each is increased by infinite-fold pure consciousness.

In downward progression, one is purified only by infinite-fold pure consciousness at each time, but they do not have the ability to perform the actions of the Sthiti Kanda, the Anubhaga Kanda, the Guna Shreni and the Guna Sankrama. The karmic natures that are bound are bound with the power of the two-fold infinite-foldless power at each time, and the karmic natures that are bound are bound with the power of the four-fold infinite-fold Anubhaga power at each time. Upon the completion of each Sthiti Bandha, it begins to bind other Sthiti Bandhas that are less than the number of Palyopama. In the first time of downward progression, it begins to bind other Sthiti Bandhas that are less than the number of Palyopama from the Sthiti Bandha that is appropriate to the Antah Kodakodi Pramana Sthiti Bandha that occurs in the previous lower time. Again, the binding time of the one that binds this Sthiti Bandha in the form of existence until the time of Antarmuhurta is diminished. Again, it begins to bind another Sthiti Bandha that is less than the number of Palyopama, and binds it in the form of existence until the time of Antarmuhurta. In this way, upon the repeated completion of the Sthiti Bandha, it binds less than the number of Palyopama, and spreads the number of thousands of Sthiti Bandhas within the time of downward progression. 

Page #806:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-767
The one who has attained the state of Anantgani-Vishuddhi, continuously increases the downward karmas (Adhapavattakarana) until the end of the Antomuhurta period. After that, he attains the state of A-puvva-karana (Apuvvakarana). 
The number of A-puvva-karana is 4096, the number of Gachchha is 8, the number of Pariṇāma-viśeṣa is 16, and the number of Sankhyāta is 4.
The time of A-puvva-karana is only Antomuhurta. In this period, there are countless births and deaths, and the rate of increase is the same from the beginning to the end. There is no Anukrushti (reduction) in this period.
The results of A-puvva-karana are not the same for all beings. Some beings may have a higher result in the first period, while others may have a lower result in the second period. However, the results of the beings in the second period are always greater than the results of the beings in the first period. Therefore, there is both similarity and dissimilarity in the results of the beings who have attained A-puvva-karana in the first period. However, there is no similarity in the results of the beings who have attained A-puvva-karana in the second or subsequent periods. Therefore, the results of the beings who have attained A-puvva-karana in the second or subsequent periods are always dissimilar to each other and to the results of the beings in the previous periods. This is why it is called A-puvva-karana.
Here, the number of Sarvadhana is 4096, the number of Gachchha is 8, the square of Gachchha is 64, and the number of Sankhyāta is 4. According to the sutra "Padakadisankhena Bhajide Pachayam" (verse 902), the square of the Gachchha (64) is... 

Page #807:
---------------------------
## Gommatasara Karmakanda - 768
149

Multiplying the number (4) by itself and dividing the total wealth by the resulting amount (4096/6444) gives 56, which is the measure of the *chay*. This can be understood using the sutra "Vyekapadardhanachayaguno gaccha uttaradhanam". Multiplying half of the *gaccha* minus one (3 1/2) by the *chay* (16) gives (7/2416), which equals 56. Multiplying this by the *gaccha* (8) gives 448, which is the *prachayadhan*. Using the sutra "Chayadhanahinam dhavvam padajide hodi adithdhanam", subtracting the *chayadhan* (448) from the total wealth (4096) leaves a remainder of (4096-448) 3648. Dividing this by the *gaccha* (8) gives (3648/8) 456, which is the measure of the *bhavas* related to the first time period. Using the sutra "Adammi chaye udde padisamayadhanam tu bhavanam", adding the measure of each *chay* (16) sequentially to the measure of the *adithan* gives the measure of the *bhavas* related to each time period. Adding one *chay* to the measure of the *bhavas* related to the first time period (456) gives (456+16) 472, which is the measure of the *bhavas* related to the second time period. Adding another *chay* to this (472+16) gives 488, which is the measure of the *bhavas* related to the third time period. In this way, the measure of the *bhavas* (results) until the final time period can be understood.

In terms of numerical representation, this example can be understood as follows: The results of downward movement are equal to the measure of countless *lokas*. Multiplying these by countless *lokas* gives the *manadhan* related to the *apuurvakaran*. The measure of the cases related to the *apuurvakaran* time period is called the *gaccha* (568 552). Dividing the total wealth by the square of the *gaccha* multiplied by the number (4) gives the measure of the *chay*. 520

Here, it also means that the result in the first time period of the *apuurvakaran* is equal to the measure of 488 countless *lokas*. The results in the second and subsequent time periods are also equal to the measure of countless *lokas*. 4172 However, the measure of the *chay* keeps increasing. Here, the *jghanyavishuddhiparinam* related to the first time period is infinitely pure compared to the *vishuddhiparinam* of the final *anukrushtikhand* at the end of the downward movement. The total sum of all the results over eight time periods is infinitely pure compared to the *utkrushtparinam* related to the first time period. Therefore, even here, a six-place increase in the measure of countless *lokas* is possible. This makes the *jghanyaparinam* related to the second time period infinitely pure. In this way, it can be understood until the final time period. The results related to the higher time periods are never equal to the results related to the lower time periods. Therefore, it is called *apuurvakaran*.

In the first time period of the *apuurvakaran*, the *jghanyasthitikanadakhat* has a dimension equal to the measure of the number (4) of the *palyopam*. This is because the *jghanyasthitikanadakhat* of a living being that has come with the *sattkarma* of the most *jghanya* *antarakodakodi* measure of *sthiti*. However, the *sthitikanadakhat* of the first time period has a dimension equal to the measure of the *sagaropama* *prithaktva*. 

Page #808:
---------------------------
## Gommatasara Karmakanda - 769

**The destruction of the *sthitikaandaka* occurs because, when a being enters *apuurvakarana* with *sattkarma* of the *jghanyasthiti* multiplied by the number of *sattkarma* of the *utkrishtasthiti*, the *sthitikaandaka* is destroyed in the first time period.**

**The *apuurvasthitibandha* of the *palyopam* with a number of parts that is not multiplied by the number, which is bound by the *sthitibandha* at the end of the *adhapravrittikarana*, begins in the first time period of *apuurvakarana*.**

**The destruction of the *anubhaagakaandaka* is only of *aprashastakarma*, because due to purity, the *prashastakarma* cannot be destroyed, only its *anubhaagavriddhi* can be destroyed.**

**The proof of the *anubhaagakaandaka* is the infinite number of parts of the *anubhaagasattkarma* that is the immediate future *dvisthaaniy* *anubhaagasattkarma*, because it is impossible for other alternatives of the *anubhaagakaandaka* to be destroyed by the *karanaparinam*.**

**The *ekapradeshagunahani* *sthanaantar* is within the *anubhaagasambandhi* *spardhak* *abhavya* with an infinite number of parts and is also the proof of the infinite parts of the *siddha*, but it is less than the terms that will be mentioned later.**

**The *anubhaagasambandhi* *spardhak* that are higher up, are rejected, and the *anubhaagaspardhak* that are replaced by the *jghanyaroopa* are established as *niksheparoopa* from the *adhastana* *spardhak*.**

**The *spardhak* that are the subject of the *jghanyatiस्थापना* are an infinite number of times greater than the *spardhak* of the *ekapradeshagunahani* *sthanaantar*, and the *nikshepasplanthi* *spardhak* are twice the infinite number, and the *spardhak* that are taken by the *kaandakaap* are an infinite number of times greater, because in every *anubhaagakaandaka* destruction, the remaining infinite number of parts are taken by the *kaandakaap*, except for the infinite number of parts of the *anubhaagasattkarma*.**

**In the first time period of *apuurvakarana*, the *gunashreenikshepa* of all the *karma* except for the *ayukarma* occurs.**

**Its time is more than the number of parts of the *anivrittikarana* time, from the combined time of *anivrittikarana* and *apuurvakarana* (internal moment).**

**The order of the creation of the *gunashreni* is as follows: In the first time period of *apuurvakarana*, the *samathprabaddha* with the proof of one and a half times the loss, are divided by the *apकर्षण-उत्कर्षण* *bhaagahaar*, and the *dravya* obtained from the quotient is rejected, and then the *dravya* is divided into an infinite number of *loka*, and one part of the *dravya* is deposited in the *udayavali* in the form of a *gopuccha*, and then the remaining *dravya* with the proof of many parts is deposited outside the *udayavali*, and then the *dravya* with the proof of an infinite number of *samayaprabaddha* is deposited in the infinite position outside the *udayavali*.**

**Then, the *dravya* with an infinite number of times greater is given in the higher position. In this way, the *dravya* is deposited in a series that is multiplied by an infinite number, progressively, until the *gunashreeni* is obtained in a time that is more than the time of *apuurvakarana* and *anivrittikarana*.**

**The *dravya* that is not multiplied by an infinite number is given in the infinite position above the *gunashreeni*, and then the *dravya* is given in the form of a *gopuccha* above it.**

**In the same way, the *gunashreenikshepa* also occurs in the second and subsequent time periods of *apuurvakarana*.**

**The time of the *sthitikaandaka* and the time of the *sthitibandha* are equal, but the difference is that the time of the first *sthitikaandaka* and the first *sthitibandha* is not special, but the time of the second and subsequent *sthitikaandaka* and the second and subsequent *sthitibandha* is not special.**

**There are thousands of *anubhaagakaandaka* in one *sthitikaandaka*. In this way, the time of *apuurvakarana* ends after the passage of many thousands of *sthitikaandaka*.**

**The *sattkarma* of the last time period is less than the number of *sattkarma* of the first time period of *apuurvakarana*.** 

Page #809:
---------------------------
## Gommatasara Karmakanda - 770

**The nature of Anivrittikaran is described as follows:**

Just as a being becomes differentiated by its body's form, color, etc., during the intended time of Anivrittikaran, it does not become differentiated by its results. In this case, the results are the same for all beings at every moment. These results are like a flame of extremely pure meditation, burning away the forest of karma, which is in the form of Anivritti.

**Explanation:**

In this case, the results of beings existing at the same time are all the same, and there is no other form. Similarly, one should understand the sameness of beings existing at the second and subsequent times. According to the measure of the Anivrittikaran time, there are four forms in the perspective of numbers, and the same time is the measure of an Antarmuhurta in the perspective of meaning.

From the first moment of entering Anivrittikaran, the last stage of A-purvakaran begins, excluding the special stage-section. From the previous stage-bond, another stage-bond begins, excluding the number of parts equal to the measure of a Pala-Upam. And from the destruction, the stage-section of the remaining part begins, equal to the infinite number of parts of the remaining part, but the quality-series-deposit remains the same as before. In this way, thousands of stage-sections are created, dividing the intended time of Anivrittikaran into a countable number of parts.

The destruction of the middle stage-sections, equal to the measure of an Antarmuhurta, excluding the lower and upper stages of the intended karmas, is called Antarakaran due to the special reason for their absence. At that time, the destruction takes place for the duration of the stage-bond time or the stage-section-arising time. That is, the destruction (absence) of the stage-destructions equal to the number of parts of the quality-series-extent, from the beginning (quality-series-top) of the quality-series-deposit, takes place.

From the destruction downwards, the karma-stage, i.e., from the first stage, and from the second stage (karma-stage above the destruction), there is continuous coming and going until the coming and going remain in the first stage. The coming of the karma-atoms of the second stage into the first stage due to downward attraction is called Aagal. The going of the karma-atoms of the first stage into the second stage due to upward attraction is called Pratyaagal.

When the coming and going remain in the first stage, the quality-series of the intended karmas does not come and go, but arises from the Pratyaavali itself. The remaining part of the first stage, equal to the coming, 

Page #810:
---------------------------
Gommatasar Karmakanda-771
Even when residing, there is no stimulation, but until the end of the first state, there is a possibility of sthitikantakghāt and anubhāgakantakghāt, because their termination is seen along with the final state bondage. In this way, with the end of the first state, the anivṛttikaraṇakāla ends.
Note - The detailed explanation of adhaḥkaraṇa, apūrva karaṇa, and anivṛttikaraṇa is given in the Upaśama Samyaktvā chapter of the Labdhisāra text. Therefore, to know the specific nature of these three karmas, one should refer to the Labdhisāra text, which has been published by the Acharya Shiv Sagar Granthamala.
Thus, the eighth chapter named 'Trikarana Chulika' of the Hindi commentary 'Siddhantgyan Deepika' on the Gommatasar Karmakanda, written by Acharya Nemichandra Siddhantchakravarti, is complete.
Now, bowing to the Siddhas, I pledge to speak about the harmony of the structure of karma-sthiti.
Siddhe Visuddhanilaaye, Paṇṭṭakamme Viṇṭṭhasansāre.
Paṇamiya Siraasā Boccham, Kammatṭidiraayaṇasambhāvam ||913|| - Meaning - I bow my head to the Siddhas, whose karmic-aghatikarma is completely destroyed, who have specially destroyed the world in the form of the four gatis, and whose abode is in the Atma-pradeshas. I bow my head to them and speak about the truth of the structure of karma-sthiti. This statement has been made in the Yoga-adhikāra of the Gommatasar Jivakanda and earlier in the Bandha-Udaya-Sattva-adhikāra of the Karma-kanda.
Kammasarūveṇāgadadvaṁ, ṇ ya edi udayarūveṇa.
Rūveṇudiraṇassā ya, ābāhā jāva tāva have ||914|| - Meaning - The time until the karmic substance, which has been transformed by the nature of karma, becomes the form of udaya or udirana, is called ābādhā. 

Page #811:
---------------------------
## Gommatasara Karmakanda - 772

**Special:** After the binding of karma, the period until the time of its manifestation and activation is called **Aabaadhakal**. This Aabaadhakal is of two types: 1. **Uday Aabaadhakal** 2. **Udeerna Aabaadhakal**.

**Verse 915:**
**Meaning:** The Aabaadha for the seven root karmas, excluding Ayukarma, in the state of one Koda Kodii Sagar is 100 years. The Aabaadha for the remaining states should be understood in the same proportion.

**Explanation:** If the Aabaadha for one Koda Kodii Sagar state is 100 years, then what would be the Aabaadha for 30 Koda Kodii Sagar states related to Jnanavarana, Darshanavarana, Vedaniya and Antaray karma? Here, the base quantity is one Koda Kodii Sagar, the result quantity is 100 years, and the desired quantity is 30 Koda Kodii Sagar. Multiplying the desired quantity by the result quantity and dividing by the base quantity, we get 30 Koda Kodii Sagar x 100 years / 1 Koda Kodii Sagar = 3000 years of Aabaadha. Similarly, the Aabaadha for 70 Koda Kodii Sagar state related to Mohaniya karma is 7000 years. The Aabaadha for 20 Koda Kodii Sagar state related to Naam and Gotra karma is 2000 years.

**Verse 916:**
**Meaning:** The Aabaadha for the state of one Koda Kodii Sagar is only one Antarmuhurta, and the Aabaadha for the state of Jadhnya is a fraction of one Antarmuhurta. Further, the Aabaadha related to Ayukarma is explained below.

**Verse 917:**
**Meaning:** The Aabaadha for Ayukarma should be understood from one-third of a Koti Purva year to half of it. The Aabaadha for Ayukarma is not proportional to the lifespan.

**Explanation:** If the Aabaadha for a Koti Purva year is one-third, then what would be the Aabaadha for a state of three Palyas? This way, the Aabaadha for Ayukarma cannot be determined by the proportion of the state. Therefore, the Aabaadha for the bound lifespan is equal to the remaining lifespan of the current birth when the lifespan of the next birth is bound. 

Page #812:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-773
It is proven. When one-third of the lifespan remains in the Karmabhoomi, and six months remain in the Bhogbhoomi and the Deva-Naraka, then one becomes eligible for Ayubandha. Therefore, the knowledge of one-third of the Utkrishta Aabaadha Purvakoti वर्ष is the same as the knowledge of the Jghannya Aabaadha Asankshepaddha (the numerical part of the Ksudra Bhav), which means that there is no one for a short time. (The Ksudra Bhav, who has a short lifespan, binds his lifespan in the final decline of his lifespan, his Aabaadha is equal to the numerical part of the Ksudra Bhav). In this way, Aabaadha is said in relation to Uday.
Further, they say about Aabaadha in relation to Udirana:
Aavaliyam Aabaha, Udiranamaasij Sattakammaanam. Parabhaviya.aatt Ya, Udihana Pani Niyamen. ||918||
1. Although it is written in Karmakanda that when nine months of lifespan remain in the Bhogbhoomi, one becomes eligible for Ayubandha, but according to the words "Asankhejjavassaau Tirikkh-Manusa Adhitti Chen, Tasim Devaneriyaanam Va Jamanauae Chhammaaso Ahie Sante Parabhavi Aouss Bandhaabhaava" Dhap. 6 p. 170, here it is said that one becomes eligible for Ayubandha only when six months of lifespan remain in the Bhogbhoomi. Therefore, in this chapter of Karmakanda, six months have been given above as well.
2. When does the eligibility for Ayubandha arise in the Bhogbhoomi? (Two opinions)
Doubt - It has been stated that when nine months of the current lifespan remain for humans and animals in the Bhogbhoomi, then the eligibility for Ayubandha of the next birth arises. In Maatha 158, Maatha 917, the big commentary states that the eligibility for Ayubandha arises when six months remain, how is that?
Solution - Both statements are found in the big commentary of Gommatasara-Karmakanda, that the eligibility for Parabhav Ayubandha arises when nine months and six months of the current lifespan remain for humans and animals in the Bhogbhoomi. It is possible that in these two statements, the intention is to refer to the three-time Sukhamadi of Bharat-Airavat and the eternal Bhogbhoomi of the Haimvat etc. regions. There is no eternal Bhogbhoomi in the Bharat and Airavat regions, therefore, here the eligibility for Parabhav Ayubandha arises when nine months of the current lifespan remain, and in the eternal Bhogbhoomi, the eligibility for Parabhav Ayubandha arises when six months of lifespan remain. However, in the Shridhval text, the eligibility for Parabhav Ayubandha is stated when six months remain.
"Niruvakkamaauaaapuun Chhammaasavase Se Aouabandha-Paogga Hoti." (Dhaval Pu. 10 p. 234) Meaning - Those who are Nirupkramaayupk beings become eligible for Ayubandha when six months of their current lifespan remain. "Aupapadhik Charamottamadehaa'sankhyeYavarshaayushO'napavaayush." 53 || (Mo. Shastra A. 2)
Meaning - Aupapadhik (Deva and Naraki), Charamottamadehaa (Tadbhavmokshagami) and those who have a lifespan of countless years (Bhogbhoomi), these beings are Nirupkramaayushk (those who have an unchangeable lifespan).
According to the Shridhval-Granthraj, all Bhogbhoomi beings become eligible for Parabhadhik Ayubandha when six months of their current lifespan remain.
3. In this context, Dha.Pu. 11 p. 275 should also be seen. 4. This chapter is also given on Dha.Pu. 10 p. 237. 

Page #813:
---------------------------
## Gommatasara Karmakanda - 774

**Meaning:** The obstruction of the seven karmas is only in the form of an avli (a specific period of time) without the support of the lifespan karma. The lifespan karma related to the future births does not undergo udirana (a process of karmic ripening).

**Special Meaning:** After bondage, the udirana of the remaining karmas (excluding lifespan karma) occurs only after the avli period has passed. However, the lifespan karma that has been bound does not undergo udirana. This means that the current lifespan can undergo udirana, but the bound future lifespan cannot.

It should not be interpreted that the lifespan of Devas, Narakas, Charmasariri, and Bhogbhumis does not undergo udirana. Because even these beings experience udirana of their lifespan karma, but it does not lead to premature death (kadali ghat). This is because during udirana, only an infinitesimal fraction (an infinitesimal part of a loka or a palya) of the niseka (karmic particles) is attracted and released in the udaya avli (period of karmic fruition). The entire niseka is not released (Dhawala 15/43). Therefore, udirana alone does not cause premature death.

On the other hand, in premature death (kadali ghat), the entire niseka is exhausted within a fixed period. Therefore, it is not correct to consider udirana as premature death. For example, the udirana of the Naraka lifespan occurs in all Narakas. However, it is important to note that the udirana does not occur for a Naraka whose remaining lifespan is only an avli period in their Naraka bhava (Naraka existence). The same applies to Deva lifespan and others (Dhawala 15/56-57 and Jayadhawala 14/34).

Similarly, in Bhogbhumis, the udirana of the human and animal lifespans continues for a minimum of three palyas. Only in the final avli does the udirana of the human and animal lifespans not occur (Dhawala 15/63, 120, 127, 57, 178 etc. and S.Si. p. 346, Gyanapith Second Edition). In the same way, Devas and Charmasariri also experience udirana of their lifespan karma, but not premature death. Gom.K. 441 mentions the udirana of all four lifespans. Udirana does not mean premature death (Jain Gajjat 25.7.66 E. p. 9, Br. Ratanchand Mukhtar's article).

**919:**

**Meaning:** The creation of niseka (karmic particles) for the seven karmas occurs at the time of bondage, with the amount of niseka created being proportional to the state of bondage, minus the period of obstruction. However, the creation of niseka for lifespan karma occurs in proportion to the state of bondage.

**Special Meaning:** The amount of niseka created for the seven karmas, excluding lifespan karma, is determined by subtracting the period of obstruction from the total time remaining after bondage. The obstruction of lifespan karma is already exhausted in the previous birth. Therefore, the creation of niseka for lifespan karma occurs in proportion to its state of bondage. 

Page #814:
---------------------------
Gommatasar Karmakanda-775
In the state of bondage due to knowledge-obscuring karma, after the time of the disease, in the first consecration of the first quality-loss, the bath is given with much water. From that, the substance is given less and less in the form of one-fourth, until the first consecration of the second quality-loss. In the second consecration of the second quality-loss, the substance is known to be one-fourth less than the first consecration of the second quality-loss. So, in the first quality-loss, the measure of the decrease in the consecration-consecration is one-fourth. From that, the measure of the decrease in the second quality-loss should be known to be half-half. In the same way, above also, in each quality-loss, the measure of the decrease is half-half.
The substance, the measure of the quality-loss, the half of that, the dal-shalaka, the consecration-cutting, the double quality-loss, and the mutually multiplied quantity, these six quantities should be known.
Special meaning: The measure of the pudgala-paramanu transformed by karma is the substance-quantity. The measure of the times of the karma-state as mentioned before is the state-quantity. As long as the substance is not given less and less by two, there is one quality-loss. The measure of the times in such quality-losses is the quality-loss-measure-quantity. The measure of all the quality-losses found in all the states is the various-quality-loss-quantity. The measure of the quality-loss-measure-quantity, when doubled, is the double quality-loss-quantity. And, the measure of the various-quality-loss-quantity, when multiplied by two, is the mutually multiplied quantity.
Consecration First Second Third Fourth Fifth
Quality-loss | Quality-loss | Quality-loss | Quality-loss | Quality-loss | Quality-loss 288
'72 Seventh 320 160 80
20 Sixth | 352
Sixth
Eighth
18
1. Gathas 914 to 921 are repeated. These eight gathas are the same as those from gathas 155 to 162. They have been written here again to match the chapter. 

Page #815:
---------------------------
Gommatsar Karmakanda-776
120
100
Pancham Chaturth 416
208 104 Tritiya 448 224 Dvitiya 480
240 Pratham
128 Gunahani | 3200
400 200 Dravya
Kuldravya 6300, Ekagunahaniayam 8, Nanagunahani 6, Prathamagunahanimen Chaya 32, Dogunahani 842=16, Anyonyabhyastapish 2241.34.242864! Now the Acharya himself states the above statement by means of numerical representation - .
Tevastuiṁ cha sayaī, adadala aṭṭa chakka solasaṁ.
Chausatuṁ cha vijāṇe, davvadīṇam cha sandiṭṭhā. ||923|| Meaning - In numerical representation, Dravya 6300, Sthiti 48, Gunahaniayam 8, Nana-Gunahani 6, Dogunahani 16 and Anyonyabhyastaras 64 are to be known.
Davvaṁ samayapabadḍhaṁ, uttapamāṇaṁ tu hodi tasseva.
Jīvasahatthaṇakālo, ṭhiḍiaddhā saṁkhapallamida. ||924 || Meaning - In the context of meaning, the true statement is to be known as Dravya according to the aforementioned measure, time-bound. The number of atoms that bind in one time is mentioned in the previous section on Pradeshbandha Adhikar, so their measure is the Dravya quantity, and the time-bound bound, as long as it remains in the form of an abode with the Jiva, is the measure of Sthiti (time), the number of Sthiti is the measure of time.
Micche vaggasalāyappahadi pallassa paḍhamaṁlotti.
Vagghaḍī charimo tacchidi saṁkalidaṁ chauttho ya. ||925 || Meaning - In the Mithyatva karma, taking the square of the Pally as the beginning, the measure of the last quantity, i.e., the Anyonyabhyastaras, is obtained by multiplying those squares with each other, and the measure of the fourth quantity, i.e., Nanagunahani, is obtained by adding their half-cut quantities. 

Page #816:
---------------------------
Gommatasar Karmakanda-777

Special Meaning - In the seven karmas, the substance, state, quality loss, dimension, and the two quality loss types are the same. Here, the substance state is Mahapi, which is greater, but due to the Paramaap, the substance is time-bound in terms of quantity, and the state is called Sankhyatpalya, which makes them appear similar. However, the various quality losses and the reciprocal product are not the same, hence they are mentioned separately.

The first statement about the Mithyatva karma with the state of 70 Koda-Kodi Sagar is as follows:

Using the square root of Palya, create three rows by placing the positions of the two-fold square stream from the first root to the Palya, their half-sections, and their square roots. In the first row, write the quantity of the square root of Palya at the bottom and its square above it. Continue this way until the first root. In the second row, write from the half-sections of the square root of Palya to the half-sections of the first square root of twice the Palya. In the third row, write from the square root of Palya (square) to the square root of the first root of Palya, taking one more quantity each time. Here, multiplying the quantities of the first row and dividing the product by the square root of Palya gives the quantity of the reciprocal product. Adding the second row gives the quantity obtained by subtracting the quantity of the half-sections of the square root of Palya from the quantity of the half-sections of Palya.

In the two-fold square stream, the half-sections of each position were said to be doubled. According to the formula "Antadhanam Gunagunayam Adivihinam Ruunuttara Padabhajii," multiplying the half-sections of Palya by two, the multiplier two, gives the quantity of the half-sections of Palya. Subtracting the quantity of the half-sections of the square root of Palya from this quantity gives the quantity of the half-sections of Palya minus the half-sections of the square root of Palya. Dividing this by the multiplier two (one less than the multiplier two, which is one) gives the same quantity. This is the quantity of the various quality losses. Now, this statement is explained in a non-abstract way:

Let 70 Koda-Kodi Sagar be one Palya and Palya be 65536. Then, by performing the same calculations as before, the quantity of the various quality losses and the reciprocal product will be obtained.

Square Root - The number of times the square root of a specific number can be extracted is called the square root. Here, the square root of 65536 is 4.

Half-Section - Multiplying the digit of R by 2 gives the specific number (4). The number of digits of R that are written is called the half-section. For example, the half-sections of 4 are 2, and the half-sections of 16 are 4. 

Page #817:
---------------------------
## First Row
Second Row -
Third Row -
Gommatasar Karmakanda - 778
Palyaka Praman Pannatti (65536) square root of square root
Square root of 65536
Half of square root
Half of 16 (square of square root) is half of 256
Square root of upper square root 4
Square root of upper square root 16, square root of upper square root 256
4
16
256
2
4
8
1
2
3

Multiplying the numbers in the first row (416256) together gives 16,384, which is the reciprocal ratio. Dividing the number of palyakas by the square root of the palyaka also gives the reciprocal ratio. Here, the palyaka praman is considered to be 65536. Its square root is 4, therefore 65536 ÷ 4 = 16384 (reciprocal ratio).

Adding the numbers in the second row gives the number of Nana Gunahani (2+4+8) = 14, which will be the Nana Gunahani number, such as:

Half of palyaka 16
Half of palyaka square root 4 = 94 Nana Gunahani

In this way, if the highest state of Mithyatva Karma is considered to be one palyaka and the number of palyakas is considered to be 65536, then the Nana Gunahani will be 14 and the reciprocal ratio will be 16384. The numbers in the third row have no use here.

Bagg slayena vahi d pallan anno onna gunid rasi hu.
Naanagun haani sala vagg salachhedanu un pall chidi. || 126 ||

Meaning - Dividing the palyaka by the square root of the palyaka gives the reciprocal ratio, and the number of Nana Gunahani should be known by subtracting the half of the square root of the palyaka from the half of the palyaka.

Now we will discuss the measure of Nana Gunahani Aayam. 

Page #818:
---------------------------
## Mommatsar Karmakanda - 779

**Verse 927:**

If all the *naana-guna-haani-shalaaka* (marks of multiple-fold destruction) are subject to *nisheka* (purification) as per the previous statement, then how many *nisheka* would be required for one *guna-haani-shalaaka* (mark of single-fold destruction)?  By dividing the number of *shalaaka* by the number of *nisheka* according to the rule of three, the resulting value is the measure of the *guna-haani-aayaam* (extent of destruction).

**Explanation:**

Here, the *pramaan-raashi* (measure) is the measure of *naana-guna-haani* (multiple-fold destruction), which is the number of half-sections of the *palyaka* (half-section of the *paly* - a unit of measurement) minus the number of half-sections of the *palyaka-varga-shalaaka* (square mark of the *palyaka*). The *phal-raashi* (result) is the number of *nisheka* for all the states, which is the number of *paly* units. The *ichcha-raashi* (desired value) is 1 *shalaaka* (mark). By multiplying the *phal-raashi* by the *ichcha-raashi* and dividing by the *pramaan-raashi*, the resulting value is the measure of the *guna-haani-aayaam*. For example, if the *pramaan-raashi* (multiple-fold destruction) is 6, the *phal-raashi* (state) is 48, and the *ichcha-raashi* (single-fold destruction) is 5, then the result is 8. This means that 8 *nisheka* are required for one *guna-haani* (single-fold destruction).

**Verse 928:**

By doubling the measure of the *guna-haani-aayaam* (extent of destruction), we get the *dwi-guna-haani* (double-fold destruction). This is also known as *nisheka-haar* (divisor of purification). The purpose of this is that by dividing the *nisheka-haar* by the initial *nisheka* for the desired *guna-haani* (destruction), the resulting value is the measure of the *vishesh* (difference) in that *guna-haani*. In each *nisheka* (purification), from the initial to the final, the difference in the number of *nisheka* is called the *vishesh* (difference).

**Verse 929:**

By dividing the product of the *anyonyabhyastaraashi* (reciprocal of the difference) minus one by the total number of *dravya* (substances), the resulting value is the *charim-guna-dravya* (substance of the final destruction). By doubling this value repeatedly, we can find the *dravya* (substance) for the initial *guna-haani* (destruction).

**Explanation:**

For example, if the total number of *dravya* (substances) is 6300 and the *anyonyabhyastaraashi* (reciprocal of the difference) is 63, then dividing 6300 by 63 gives us 100. This is the *charim-guna-dravya* (substance of the final destruction). By doubling this value repeatedly, we can find the *dravya* (substance) for the initial *guna-haani* (destruction). 

Page #819:
---------------------------
Gommatsar Karmakanda - 780
Know the amount of substance for each guna-hani (loss of merit) from the fifth guna-hani onwards, doubling the amount for each preceding guna-hani, up to the first guna-hani.
100 1200 | 400 1800 41600 13200 |
Now, what to do with the amount of substance for each guna-hani, it is said:
Rūṇaddhāṇaddheṇūṇeṇ ṇisegabhāgahāreṇ | Hadaguṇahāṇivibhajide, sagasagadavve visesā hu || 930 ||
-
Meaning: By subtracting half the amount of the guna-hani-āyāma (extent of loss of merit) from the niṣeka-bhāgahāra (divisor for niṣeka), and multiplying the result by the guna-hani-āyāma, the quotient obtained by dividing this product by the respective substance is the amount of (caya) (accumulation).
For example:
Specific meaning: In asandṛṣṭi (non-perception), the amount of guna-hani-āyāma is 8. Subtracting one from it (8-1) leaves 7. Half of this (7/2 = 3.5) is subtracted from the niṣeka-bhāgahāra (16), resulting in (16-3.5) = 12.5. Multiplying this by the number of guna-hani-āyāma (8), we get (12.5 x 8) = 100. Dividing the substance of the first guna-hani (3200) by this (3200 ÷ 100) gives 32. This is the caya of the first guna-hani. Similarly, the substance of the second guna-hani is 1600. Dividing this by 100 (1600 ÷ 100) gives 16. This is the caya of the second guna-hani. Similarly, dividing the substance of the third and subsequent guna-hani by 100, we get 8, 4, 2, and 1 respectively, which are the amounts of caya for the third and subsequent guna-hani.
Now, the method of obtaining the first niṣeka is stated:
Pacyass ya sankalaṇam, sagasagaguṇahāṇidavvam ajjhamhi | Avarṇiya guṇahāṇihide, ādipamaṇam tu savvatha || 931 ||
Meaning: The amount obtained by subtracting the sum of all the caya from the respective substance of each guna-hani, and dividing the result by the guna-hani-āyāma, is the amount of the first niṣeka, which is the same for all. By adding one caya at a time, the amount of the second and subsequent niṣeka is obtained.
2
Specific meaning: From the perspective of angka-sandṛṣṭi (perception of numbers), in the first guna-hani, using the karana-sūtra (formula) "vyekapadārddhaghnacayaguṇo gaccha uttaradhanam", half of the gaccha (8-1) = 7, which is 3.5, is multiplied by the amount of caya (32), resulting in 112. Multiplying this again by the gaccha (8), we get 19248 = 896. This is the amount of pracaya-dhana (accumulated caya) for the first guna-hani. Subtracting this from the total substance (3200), we get 3200 - 896 = 2304. Dividing this by the guna-hani-āyāma (8), we get 2304 ÷ 8 = 288. This is the amount of the first niṣeka. By adding one caya (32) at a time, 

Page #820:
---------------------------
## Gommatasara Karmakanda - 781

There is evidence for the **niseka** of **dvi-chara** and others. Similarly, the evidence for the **guna-hanika** of the second and other **guna** is half-half. Therefore, the **pracaya-dhana** is also half-half. And their **sarva-dhana** is also half-half. In this way, the statement of the **Anga** is to be known as true. But the special point is that here the evidence is to be known as it is said. Here, 288 is said as the **adi-niseka** from this point of view that above it, the **caya** increases and further **niseka** are formed. But in reality, this is the final **niseka**. The first **niseka** is 512. In this way, it is to be known in the further **guna-hanika**.

**Savassi payadiinam, niseya-haro ya eyaguṇa-haani.**
**Sarisaa havanti naanaguna-haani-salaau vocchaami.** || 932 ||

**Meaning:** The **niseka-hara** of all the original **prakrti** (nature), the **dvaiguṇa-haani** and the **ekaguṇa-haani** are both equal. And the **naana-guna-haani** are according to the **sthiti** (position), therefore they are not equal. So, those **naana-guna-haani** are further explained.

**Micchattassa ya uttaa, uvariido tini tini sammilidaa.**
**Agunena-unaka-maa, sattasu raidaa tiricchhena.** || 933 ||

**Meaning:** The **palyaki** square **salaaka** related to the **mithyatva-prakrti**, taking the half-section of the **palyaki** as the **adi** (beginning), the half-sections from the first **mula** (root) of the **palyaki** to the half-section of the **palyaki** are said to be two-two in each square. By establishing them, from the first **mula** of the upper **palyaki**, by joining the half-sections of three-three square places, they become 8-8 **guna** less in sequence. And their arrangement is separate in seven places in a **tiryak** (diagonal) form.

**Special Meaning:** The half-section of the first square root (256) of the **palyaki** (65536) is 8, the half-section of the second square root (16) of the **palyaki** is 4, and the half-section of the third square root of the **palyaki** is 2. By adding these three, the measure of the half-sections is 14. By the formula "**Antadhanam gunaguniyam adivihinam ruunuttara-bhajijam**", the **anta-dhana** which is half of the first square root's half-section from the half-sections of the **palyaki**, when multiplied by the multiplier 2, becomes the measure of the half-section of the **palyaki**. By subtracting the **adi-dhana** which is the half-section of the third square root of the **palyaki**, i.e., the eighth part of the half-sections of the **palyaki**, we get the eighth part of the seven times the half-sections of the **palyaki**. By dividing it by the multiplier 2, i.e., 1, the same result is obtained. This is the sum of the above three quantities. 14 = half-sections of the **palyaki** 167, i.e., = 14. In the same way, the half-sections of the fourth, fifth, and sixth square roots are said.

8
Half-section of the fourth square root of the **palyaki**
=
8
6
16


Page #821:
---------------------------
## Gommatasara Karmakanda - 782
**5.2 Proof**

The half-cut of the fifth square root of the Palyaka is 31, the half-cut of the sixth square root of the Palyaka is 6. Adding these three quantities, we get the 64th part of the seven times the half-cuts of the Palyaka (6 6 6 cut). This is 8 times less than the sum of the aforementioned three quantities. Similarly, by adding the half-cuts of the seventh, eighth, and ninth square roots of the Palyaka, which are half of the previous ones, we get the proof. For example:

The half-cut related to the seventh square root of the Palyaka is 128, the half-cut related to the eighth square root of the Palyaka is 0, the half-cut related to the ninth square root of the Palyaka is 6. Adding these three quantities, we get the 512th part of the seven times the half-cuts of the Palyaka, which is the aforementioned proof. This proof is 8 times less than the sum of the three square roots from the fourth onwards. In this way, by adding the half-cuts of three consecutive square places, the result becomes 8 times less each time.

Similarly, the half-cuts of the eighth, seventh, and sixth squares of the Palyaka's square rod are 256, 128, and 64 times the half-cuts of the Palyaka's square rod respectively. Adding these three quantities (256+128+64), we get 448 times the half-cuts. And the half-cuts of the fifth, fourth, and third squares of the Palyaka's square rod are 32, 16, and 8 times the half-cuts of the Palyaka's square rod respectively. Adding these three quantities (32+16+8), we get 56 times the half-cuts. This quantity is 56 times the half-cuts of the Palyaka's square rod, but it is 8 times less than the previous quantity. And the half-cuts of the second, first square, and the square rod of the Palyaka's square rod are 4, 2, and 1 times the half-cuts of the Palyaka's square rod respectively. Adding these three quantities (4+2+1), we get 7 times the half-cuts of the Palyaka's square rod, but this is also 8 times less than the previous quantity. In this way, the quantity becomes 8 times less each time.

Here, the square root of the Palyaka is the first root, the square root of the first root is the second root, the square root of the second root is the third root. Similarly, we can know the fourth and subsequent roots. And by squaring the Palyaka's square rod, we get the first square, by squaring the first square, we get the second square, by squaring the second square, we get the third square. Similarly, we can know the fourth and subsequent squares.

In this way, by adding the half-cuts of the first, second, and third roots of the Palyaka, we get a quantity. Starting from this quantity, we add the half-cuts of three consecutive places, and continue this process until we reach the sum of the half-cuts of the second, first square, and the Palyaka's square rod. All the sums obtained in this process are to be arranged separately in seven places, one after the other, in the form of a structure. In this way, the half-cuts of three consecutive square roots of the Palyaka become 8 times less each time. 

Page #822:
---------------------------
Gommatasar Karmakanda-783 Note - 'Che' is the symbol for half of the Paly.
The square root of Paly (65536) is 4. Its 83 squares are half of the square root of Paly (2) multiplied by 256, therefore 24256. The half of the seventh square of the square root of Paly is 24128 and the half of the sixth square of the square root of Paly is 2464. Adding these three together gives a sum of 24448. Similarly, the half of the fifth square of the square root of Paly is 2432, the half of the fourth square is 2416, and the half of the third square is 248. Here too, adding the three quantities gives a sum of 2456. Likewise, the half of the second square of the square root of Paly is 244, the half of the first square is 242, and the half of the square root of Paly is 241. Adding these three together gives a sum of 247. Thus, the above statement is an example of how the three quantities of the half of the square root of Paly are multiplied by eight in succession.
The last one is the eighth part of the half of the square root of Paly.
The initial amount is 10 Kodakodi Sagar. ||934|| Meaning - In the state of 10 Kodakodi Sagar, the final amount related to the various multiplication and destruction of the square root is the eighth part of the half of the Paly, and the initial amount is the half of the square root of Paly.
Special Meaning - In the above seven lines, the sum of the three quantities (the first, second, and third square roots of Paly) is P. Che. - All of them are considered as separate fruit amounts, and 10 Kodakodi Sagar is considered as the desired amount and 70 Kodakodi Sagar is considered as the standard amount. In this way, by multiplying the fruit amount by the desired amount and dividing by the standard amount using the rule of three, the standard amount obtained separately is added together to get the P. Che. standard amount. This is the knowledge of the various multiplication and destruction of the square root related to the state of 10 Kodakodi Sagar. For example,
"Antadhanam Gunaguniyam Adivihinam Ruunuttara Bhajiya" - According to this formula (the half of the first, second, and third square roots of Paly together are seven times the eighth part of the half of Paly. Multiplying them by 10 Kodakodi Sagar and dividing by 70 Kodakodi Sagar gives the amount of the eighth part of the half of Paly. This is the knowledge of the final amount). Multiplying the final amount by the multiplier 8 for each addition gives the amount of the half of Paly. Subtracting the initial amount from this (the half of the second and first squares of the square root of Paly and the half of the square root of Paly together are seven times the half of the square root of Paly. Multiplying them by 10 Kodakodi Sagar and dividing by 70 Kodakodi Sagar gives the initial amount of the half of the square root of Paly). The remainder after subtracting the initial amount is multiplied by 

Page #823:
---------------------------
## Gommatasar Karmakanda - 784

**Determining the measure of the Nana Guna Hani Shalaaka related to the Dasha Koda Kodi Sagar position.**

One-seventh of the half-cuts of the Palyaka, minus the half-cuts of the Palyaki Varga Shalaaka, is the measure (Palyaka holes - Palyaki Varga Shalaaka holes).  

**Knowing the measure of the Nana Guna Hani Shalaaka:**

The measure of the Nana Guna Hani is obtained by writing down two digits and multiplying them together. This results in the measure of the Anyonya Abhyastra Rasika. The method for obtaining the Anyonya Abhyastra Rasika is as follows:

In the above Nana Guna Hani, the one-seventh of the half-cuts of the Palyaki Varga Shalaaka, which is negative, is kept separate. The remaining one-seventh of the half-cuts of the Palyaka is then multiplied by eight and divided by eight. Here, one is subtracted from the multiplier (8-1) leaving 7 as the multiplier. The original divisor was also 7. Considering both to be equal, we perform reduction, leaving one-eighth of the half-cuts of the Palyaka. Therefore, by writing down two digits of this measure and multiplying them together, we obtain the third square root. 

In this way, the measure is obtained by moving down the number of square places from the dividend equal to the number of half-cuts of the divisor. Here, the divisor is eight, so there are three half-cuts. Therefore, the third square place below the Palyaka is the third root of the Palyaka. The one that was kept separate from the first multiplier was the 56th part of the half-cuts of the Palyaka, which was the multiplier. Therefore, the 56th part of the half-cuts of the Palyaka...

**Knowing the measure of the fifth square root of the Palyaka with infinite multiplications:**

By subtracting the one-seventh of the half-cuts of the Palyaki Varga Shalaaka from the remaining measure, the measure obtained by writing down two digits of this remaining measure and multiplying them together is the fifth square root of the Palyaka with infinite multiplications.

**Virali Darasi Do Pun Jettima Ettaani Ahieruvani.**
**Tesim Annonnahdi Gunagaro Laddharasisssa.** (110) Tri.Sa.

According to this sutra, the measure obtained by multiplying the excess measures together is the multiplier. Therefore, by multiplying the third square root of the Palyaka by this infinite measure, we obtain the measure of the Anyonya Abhyastra Rasika related to the Dasha Koda Kodi Sagar position.

**Determining the relationship between the final wealth, initial wealth, and Dasha Koda Kodi Sagar using the rule of three:**

| Measure | Result | Desired | Obtained |
|---|---|---|---|
| P.Che. | Final Wealth | Sagar | Sagar |
| 70 Koda Kodi | Sum of half-cuts of the first, second, and third square roots of the Palyaka | 10 Koda Kodi | 50 Koda Kodi Sagar |
| P.Che. | Sum of half-cuts of the fourth, fifth, and sixth square roots of the Palyaka | Sagar | P.Che. | 

Page #824:
---------------------------
## Gommatasara Karmakanda - 785

**Proof Amount**
**Result Amount**
**Desired Amount**
**Obtained**
**Ocean**

70 Kodakodi - | 7th, 8th, 9th of the Palyaka, 10 Kodakodi - | Ocean of half-sections | | Sum of half-sections Ocean | 8848 70 Kodakodi - | 6th, 7th, 8th square of the Palyaka, 10 Kodakodi - | Sum of half-sections of the square ocean of the Palyaka
Ocean of the square rod, half-section. 84847
half-section. 14848 30 Kodakodi - | 3rd of the Palyaka Kasala, width of the Palyaka Ocean 5th of the box, sum of half-sections
half-section of the square rod. 758
half-section. 148 70 Kodakodi - | Square rod and square rod of the Palyaka, 10 Kodakodi - | Square of the Palyaka, initial wealth, Ocean of the first square and second square
half-section of the square rod, sum of half-sections. 47
= half-section.  Then 20 Kodakodi onwards, various loss of merit related to the position and other mutually reciprocal amounts are called.

**Igi-pan-ti-gadam pu-dha pu-dha, ap-pi-te-na ya ha-de ha-ve ni-ya-ma.**
**Ap-pi-t-th-as-sa ya pan-ti, na-na-gu-na-ha-ni-pa-di-ba-ddha.** || 935 ||

**Meaning:** In the remaining six rows, by giving a portion of one's desired amount to each row separately, according to the rule, there are rows of the loss of merit of the desired amount, which is 20 Kodakodi Ocean onwards.

**Ocean**

**Special Meaning:** In the previous verse (934), just as the first row of 10 Kodakodi Ocean was considered as the result amount for all three places separately, similarly, the result amount should be considered in the remaining six rows as well. And just as 10 Kodakodi Ocean was considered as the desired amount in the first row, similarly, here, in all six rows, the desired amount should be considered as 20 Kodakodi Ocean onwards, i.e., in the first row of these six, 20, in the second row 30, in the third row 40, in the fourth row 50, in the fifth row 60, and in the sixth row 70 Kodakodi Ocean should be considered as the desired amount. Multiplying the result amount by the desired amount and dividing by the proof amount, the proof amount becomes 70 Kodakodi Ocean everywhere (in all six rows). In this way, whatever proof is obtained by the rule of three, that is the row of loss of merit related to the position of 20-30-40 Kodakodi Ocean onwards. 

Page #825:
---------------------------
## Gommatasara Karmakanda - 786

**Verse 936:**
The last of the *appitapanthi* is determined by the sum of half-segments of the square roots of the number of *antasthanas* in each desired *panthi*. The remaining is added to this sum to determine the various *guna-hani* (loss of merit) related to the desired karma.

**Verse 937:**
The *anuyonabhyastarasika* (mutually multiplied) value is determined by multiplying the *nana-guna-hani* (loss of merit) values of each *panthi* by two.

**Explanation:**

As per the sutra "Antadhanam Gunaguniyam Adivihinam Ruunuttara Bhajiya", the *panthi* related to 10 *kodakodisaagara* is determined in the same way as explained earlier. However, the difference is that the *ant* and *adi* values are doubled, tripled, quadrupled, quintupled, sextupled, and septupled respectively in these six *panthis*. Therefore, the entire *panthi* is doubled, tripled, etc., based on the desired value.

For example, in the *panthi* of 20 *kodakodisaagara*, the *ant* value is determined by multiplying the fourth part of the half-segments of *paly* by 8. This results in a value twice the half-segments of *paly*. From this, the *adi* value is subtracted, which is 14 times less than the half-segments of the square root of *paly*. This value is then reduced slightly and divided by 7 (8-1). This results in a value that is slightly less than twice the half-segments of *paly* divided by 7. This value represents the *nana-guna-hani*.

To determine the *anuyonabhyastarasika* value, this *nana-guna-hani* value is multiplied by 8 and then divided by 8. Since one is separated from the multiplier, the remaining multiplier is 7, which is the same as the previous divisor. This allows for simplification.

The final value is slightly less than twice the half-segments of *paly*, which is slightly less than 47. This value is then multiplied by 2 and divided by 8, resulting in a value slightly less than one-fourth of the half-segments of *paly*.

This process is repeated for each *panthi*, resulting in a value slightly less than the second square root of *paly*. The separated multiplier represents a value slightly less than twice the half-segments of *paly* divided by 56.

Finally, multiplying this value by the *anuyonabhyastarasika* value results in the final *anuyonabhyastarasika* value for the *panthi*.

**Note:** The terms *appitapanthi*, *antasthanas*, *panthi*, *guna-hani*, *anuyonabhyastarasika*, *kodakodisaagara*, *paly*, *ant*, and *adi* are all Jain terms. 

Page #826:
---------------------------
Gommatsar Karmakanda-787
Adding the aforementioned type in the row of 30 Kodakodi Sagars, the seventh part of the half-sections of the slightly less than triple Paly is obtained. This is the measure of the Nana Guna Hani Rashi. To find its Sahanaani, multiply by eight and divide by eight, and keep one separate from the multiplier, then the remaining multiplier is 7.
And the first divisor was also said to be seven. Dividing these two, the eighth part of the slightly less than triple Paly's half-sections is obtained. In this, the measure of the eighth part of the Paly's half-sections, i.e., one multiplied by the triple measure of two, is written down and multiplied together, this is the third square root of the Paly. And the remaining double measure of two is written down and multiplied together, this is the second square root of the Paly. Multiplying these together, the second square root of the Paly multiplied by the third square root of the Paly is obtained. In this, something less is to be done, and the one multiplier that was kept separate was the measure of the 56th part of the slightly less than triple Paly's half-sections. Therefore, writing down the number two as many times as necessary and multiplying them together, the appropriate Asankhyata is obtained. Multiplying by this, the Asankhyata multiplied by the second square root of the Paly multiplied by the third square root of the Paly is obtained. So, this measure is the Sonyabhyastra Rashi in the 30 Kodakodi Sagar position. In the same way, the measure of the Anyonyabhyastra Rashi in the 40 Kodakodi and other positions should be known. And
"Virali Darasi Do Pun Jettiyamettani Heenaruvani.
Tesin Anno-nna Hadi Haro Uppanna Rasiss."
According to this sutra, the amount obtained by multiplying the number of Heenarupa (negative forms) together is the divisor of the Uttpanna Rashi. Therefore, the square of the Paly is obtained by writing down the number two as many times as the half-sections of the Paly's square rod and multiplying them together. Then, the Paly measure obtained from this Paly's square rod is the Aponpa Parat Rashi. Thus, the Nana Guna Hani and Anyonyabhyastra Rashi are said to be relative to the position. So, one should know the Anyonyabhyastra Rashi related to the position of the Karma.
Further, the Acharya himself explains the Anyonyabhyastra Rashi of the original Karma types like Jnana Avarana, etc.
"Avarana Vedaniye, Vigghe Pallass Bidayatadya Padam. Nama Gode Bidayam, Sankhati Idam Havantiti." ||938||
"Auss Ya Sankheja, Tappadi Bhaga Havanti Niyamen. Idi Aththapad Jamani, Ithidissane Madhim." ||939||
1. Trilokasar Gatha. 115. 

Page #827:
---------------------------
Gommatsar Karmakanda-788
Meaning - The excellent state of Jnanavaran, Darshanavaran, Vedaniya and Antaraya karma is 30 Kodakodi Sagar, therefore their reciprocal ratio is the square root of the second power of Asankhyatpalya multiplied by the cube root of the third power. And the excellent state of name and gotra karma is 20 Kodakodi Sagar, therefore their reciprocal ratio is the square root of the second power of Asankhyatpalya. In Ayukarma, the number of participants is according to the rule, therefore a wise person should know the various losses of the desired state by knowing the desired Rashans.
Special Meaning - The state of Ayukarma is unique, therefore its various loss indicators are according to the distribution of the state. If the various loss indicator of the state of 70 Kodakodi Sagar is the half-section of the square indicator of Palya minus the half-section of Palya, then what will be the various loss indicator of the state of 33 Sagar? In this way, by knowing through the method of Trairashik, a wise being will obtain the measure of the various loss indicator of the desired state of Ayukarma. In this way, knowing the one-loss dimension and the various loss indicator or the Nisheka divisor and the reciprocal ratio. This is called
Ukkassatthidibandhe, Sayalabaha Hu Savvathidirayana.
Takale Disadi Todhodho Bandhattidiinam Cha. ||1940|| Meaning - When the excellent state of the desired nature is bound, then at the time of the end, the excellent obstacle and the creation of all state Nishekas also happen. Due to this, there is a state-bound form of Nidhi from the last Nisheka to the first Nisheka, one at a time.
A Last Nisheka
One time
State/ 512
_ Obstacle |3000
Now we will tell the method of the passage of the time of the obstacle
Abadhanam Bidio, Tidio Kamaso Hi Charamasamyo Du. Padhamo Bidio Tidio, Kamaso Charimo Niseo Du. ||941|| 

Page #828:
---------------------------
## Gommatasara Karmakanda - 789

**Meaning:** After bondage, there is a second time of the obstruction period. In this way, as each time passes, the final time of the obstruction period is reached. After the obstruction period ends, the purifications from the first, second, third, etc., to the ultimate purification are gradually eliminated.

**Special Meaning:** In the first time, the first purification occurs, in the second time, the second purification, in the third time, the third purification, and so on. In the final time of the state, the final purification occurs. It should be understood that after that time of emergence, those atoms abandon their karmic nature. In this way, the state of the second purification is one time more than the first purification, the state of the third purification is one time more than the second purification. This state of one time more should be known up to the ultimate purification.

The substance that is bound by one time is bound, and it is eliminated in the same one time. This is further explained as:

**942:**
**Meaning:** In the present time, the entire time-bound substance, which is in the form of a Tiryancha, from the first purification to the ultimate purification, arises in the form of the excellent state of the desired karma without obstruction, which is only the melted residue. And in each time, one time-bound substance is bound.

**Special Meaning:** In the triangular structure, in the desired present time, the desired karma without obstruction, in the measure of time, the purifications that have been eliminated in each time, from the last purification of the first time-bound to the first purification of the last time-bound, are combined together to form the entire one time-bound substance in the form of a Tiryancha. In each time, one time-bound arises, and in each time, one time-bound is bound.

Now, the measure of the substance of the karma of the form of being is called:

**943:**
**Meaning:** The substance of the form of being is a little less than one and a half times the multiplied time-bound measure, and by adding all the substances in the triangular structure, the same measure is obtained by rule.

**Special Meaning:** In each time, one time-bound substance arises, and it is also a little less than one and a half times the multiplied time-bound measure. 

Page #829:
---------------------------
## Gommatasara Karmakanda - 790

This verse explains how the time-bound merit (samayabaddha pramaan) remains in the soul. It should be understood along with the attached triangular diagram.

**The method of joining this triangular diagram is explained below:**

**raftमगुणहाणीणं, धणमंतिमहीणपढमदलमेत्तं । पढमे समयपबद्धं, ऊणकमेणट्टिया तिरिया ।। ९४४ ।।**

**Meaning:** In the triangular diagram, the sum of the prohibitions written in the first row of the first ganik yamanik is the time-bound merit. The sum of the second and subsequent prohibitions, starting from the second prohibition to the last prohibition, is the sum of the second and subsequent prohibitions, which is subtracted from the sum of the last prohibition. Half of this difference is the time-bound merit (gunahani samayabaddha) multiplied by the sum of the first prohibition.

**Special Meaning:** In this triangular diagram, the first prohibition of the first gunahani is written in the first row. The prohibitions written in the rows above are the second and subsequent prohibitions of the first gunahani. After the rows of the gunahani are complete, the row above is the first prohibition of the second gunahani, and the row above that is the second prohibition. In this way, after the rows of the gunahani are complete, the row above is called the first prohibition of the third gunahani. This sequence should be understood until the last gunahani. This half is clearly explained with the previous verse and the triangular diagram.

**Now, the different types of states are explained:**

**अंतोकोडाकोडीदित्ति सव्वे निरंतरङ्गाणा ।
उक्कस्ट्टाणादो, सपिणस्स य होंति णियमेण ।। ९४५ ।।**

**Meaning:** The different types of states, from the highest state of the seven stages of the soul with the five senses (sanjeevi panchendriya jeeva) to the lowest state of the Antah Koda Koti Sagar, are in a continuous sequence, each with a different time-bound merit.

**Special Meaning:** If the lowest state of the karma with the highest state of 20 Koda Koti Sagar is Antah Koda Koti Sagar, then what would be the lowest state of the karma with the highest state of 30 Koda Koti Sagar? By using the rule of three, it would be one and a half Antah Koda Koti. 

Page #830:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-791 states that in the divisions of sthiti, they call nirantar sthiti and then describe santar sthiti.

**Verse 946:**
"Sankejasahassanivi, sedhirudhammi santara hoti.
Sagasagavaroti have, ukkasado du sesanam."

**Meaning:**
There are countless thousands of divisions of sthiti (because of the rule of one-by-one occurrence not being applicable, due to the destruction of sthiti and the binding of alpa sthiti by sthiti kanda and bandha pasaran).  And for the remaining beings, there are divisions of nirantar sthiti in a one-by-one sequence, from their respective highest sthiti to their lowest sthiti.

**Special Meaning:**
In adha pravritta karan, from the first moment to the end of the antarmuhurt, the natural qualities of jnana avarana, etc., bind their respective quota of countless koti sthiti. After the antarmuhurt, it binds an uncountable fraction of the palyaka. After the antarmuhurt, it binds an even smaller uncountable fraction of the palyaka. In this way, it binds countless thousands of times (sthiti bandha pasaran) and completes that karan. It also binds its own sthiti bandha in the apurva karan, anivritti karan, and sukshma samparaya, reducing it by the same amount each time. It binds 12 muhurts of vedaniya karma, 8 muhurts of name and gotra, and 1 muhurt of the remaining karmas. In this way, one should know the countless thousands of divisions of santar sthiti. And without any remaining doubt, one should know the divisions of nirantar sthiti in a one-by-one sequence from the highest sthiti to the lowest sthiti, based on the 144th matha sutra "Eyan pan kadi papana" to the 148th gatha sutra "Basup" in the previous description of sthiti bandha.

**Verse 947:**
"Autthidibandhajzhavasanattana asankhalogamida. Namagode sarisan, avarana du tadiya vigdhe ya."

**Verse 948:**
"Savvuri mohaniye, asankhgunidakkama hu gunagaro. Pallasankejazdimo, payadisamaharamasaje."

**Meaning:**
The sthiti bandha adhyavasaya sthana of ayu karma, even though it is the most minimal, binds according to its capacity. The sthiti bandha adhyavasaya sthana of name and gotra is similar. The sthiti bandha adhyavasaya sthana of avarana is also similar. All of these are mohaniya (delusive) and bind countless times. The sthiti bandha adhyavasaya sthana of palyaka is countless times greater than the sthiti bandha adhyavasaya sthana of name and gotra. The sthiti bandha adhyavasaya sthana of payadi is a collection of all of these. 

Page #831:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-792 states that there are countless Lokas. From these, there are countless parts multiplied by the name and gotra karma. From these, there are countless parts multiplied by the four karmas: Jnanavarana, Darshanavarana, Vedaniya, and Antaray. And from these, there are countless parts multiplied by the most binding karma, the Mohaniya karma, which has the status of sthitibandha and adhyavasaya. Thus, in respect of the differences in the prakritis, one should know that there are countless sthitibandha and adhyavasaya in all three places. ||947-48||

Here, the principle is stated as follows:

The acceptance of the kshaya-udaya-sthana, which are not equal to all the root prakritis, is because without the kshaya-udaya-sthana, there would be no binding of the malaprakritis, and all the prakritis would have the same sthitibandha and adhyavasaya-sthana. Therefore, the acceptance of the differences in the sthitibandha and adhyavasaya-sthana of all the root prakritis is due to the fact that the results of the atma, which are produced by their respective udayas, are caused by their respective sthitibandha.

The acceptance of the differences in the sthitibandha and adhyavasaya-sthana of all the prakritis is due to the fact that the results of the atma, which are produced by their respective udayas, are caused by their respective sthitibandha. The acceptance of the differences in the sthitibandha and adhyavasaya-sthana of all the prakritis is due to the fact that the results of the atma, which are produced by their respective udayas, are caused by their respective sthitibandha. The acceptance of the differences in the sthitibandha and adhyavasaya-sthana of all the prakritis is due to the fact that the results of the atma, which are produced by their respective udayas, are caused by their respective sthitibandha. The acceptance of the differences in the sthitibandha and adhyavasaya-sthana of all the prakritis is due to the fact that the results of the atma, which are produced by their respective udayas, are caused by their respective sthitibandha. The acceptance of the differences in the sthitibandha and adhyavasaya-sthana of all the prakritis is due to the fact that the results of the atma, which are produced by their respective udayas, are caused by their respective sthitibandha. The acceptance of the differences in the sthitibandha and adhyavasaya-sthana of all the prakritis is due to the fact that the results of the atma, which are produced by their respective udayas, are caused by their respective sthitibandha. The acceptance of the differences in the sthitibandha and adhyavasaya-sthana of all the prakritis is due to the fact that the results of the atma, which are produced by their respective udayas, are caused by their respective sthitibandha. The acceptance of the differences in the sthitibandha and adhyavasaya-sthana of all the prakritis is due to the fact that the results of the atma, which are produced by their respective udayas, are caused by their respective sthitibandha. The acceptance of the differences in the sthitibandha and adhyavasaya-sthana of all the prakritis is due to the fact that the results of the atma, which are produced by their respective udayas, are caused by their respective sthitibandha. The acceptance of the differences in the sthitibandha and adhyavasaya-sthana of all the prakritis is due to the fact that the results of the atma, which are produced by their respective udayas, are caused by their respective sthitibandha. The acceptance of the differences in the sthitibandha and adhyavasaya-sthana of all the prakritis is due to the fact that the results of the atma, which are produced by their respective udayas, are caused by their respective sthitibandha. The acceptance of the differences in the sthitibandha and adhyavasaya-sthana of all the prakritis is due to the fact that the results of the atma, which are produced by their respective udayas, are caused by their respective sthitibandha. The acceptance of the differences in the sthitibandha and adhyavasaya-sthana of all the prakritis is due to the fact that the results of the atma, which are produced by their respective udayas, are caused by their respective sthitibandha. The acceptance of the differences in the sthitibandha and adhyavasaya-sthana of all the prakritis is due to the fact that the results of the atma, which are produced by their respective udayas, are caused by their respective sthitibandha. The acceptance of the differences in the sthitibandha and adhyavasaya-sthana of all the prakritis is due to the fact that the results of the atma, which are produced by their respective udayas, are caused by their respective sthitibandha. The acceptance of the differences in the sthitibandha and adhyavasaya-sthana of all the prakritis is due to the fact that the results of the atma, which are produced by their respective udayas, are caused by their respective sthitibandha. The acceptance of the differences in the sthitibandha and adhyavasaya-sthana of all the prakritis is due to the fact that the results of the atma, which are produced by their respective udayas, are caused by their respective sthitibandha. The acceptance of the differences in the sthitibandha and adhyavasaya-sthana of all the prakritis is due to the fact that the results of the atma, which are produced by their respective udayas, are caused by their respective sthitibandha. The acceptance of the differences in the sthitibandha and adhyavasaya-sthana of all the prakritis is due to the fact that the results of the atma, which are produced by their respective udayas, are caused by their respective sthitibandha. The acceptance of the differences in the sthitibandha and adhyavasaya-sthana of all the prakritis is due to the fact that the results of the atma, which are produced by their respective udayas, are caused by their respective sthitibandha. The acceptance of the differences in the sthitibandha and adhyavasaya-sthana of all the prakritis is due to the fact that the results of the atma, which are produced by their respective udayas,
Page #832:
---------------------------
## Gommatasara Karmakanda - 793

**Doubt:** Why are the situation-bond-determination-places of the karmas mentioned earlier, like lifespan, etc., countless times greater than the situation-bond-determination-places of the karmas mentioned later?

**Solution:** They are countless times greater by nature.

**Doubt:**  Since all karmas are the same due to false belief, non-restraint, and passions, their determination-places are not countless times greater. Also, it is not proven that the situation-bond-places of the karmas mentioned later are greater than the situation-bond-places of the karmas like lifespan, etc., mentioned earlier. This is because the countless times greater nature is not possible due to the absence of dissimilar passions arising in the determination-places of the higher karmas, which are suitable for the situation-bond-places of the lower karmas.

**Solution:** This is not a fault, because the determination-places of the higher karmas are much greater than the determination-places of the lower karmas, and this does not contradict the countless times greater nature.

**Summary:** The name situation-bond-determination-place refers to the results of the soul arising from its own arising. So, the arising-places of the karmas like name, etc., are much greater than the arising-places of the karmas like lifespan, etc., and hence they are said to be countless times greater. Further, the proof of the situation-bond-determination-places is given in relation to the inferior, etc., states.

**Verse 949:**

The situation-bond-determination-places of the inferior state are countless times the measure of the world, which progressively increase up to the superior state.

**Explanation:**

The situation of the desired mohaniya karma of the five-sense being is countless times the ocean of kotis (billions) in the lowest state, and it is 70 kotis of kotis in the superior state. The superior state is countless times greater than the inferior state. The difference in states is the number obtained by adding one to the remainder after subtracting the inferior state from the superior state. The determination-places (places of results) due to the bond of the lowest state are countless times the measure of the world. From this, one should know progressively, one by one, up to the superior state, according to the rule.

**Verse 950:**

In the desired loss of merit, to obtain the measure of the greater increase, the final consecration should be doubled. The loss of merit should be doubled progressively. 

Page #833:
---------------------------
## Gommatasara Karmakanda - 794

**The proportion of choice is known in each guna-hānī (loss of merit) and it is doubled in each guna-hānī.**

**Explanation:**

* The proportion of the last adhyavasaya-sthāna (state of determination) in the last guna-hānī is 56. Dividing this by the proportion of the double guna-hānī, which is 16, we get 1. Similarly, dividing the proportion of the first adhyavasaya-sthāna, which is 9, by the proportion of the first guna-hānī, which is also 9, we get 1. This is the proportion of choice in that guna-hānī.
* The proportion of choice doubles in each guna-hānī because the proportion of the initial and final niṣeka (bond) doubles in each guna-hānī.

**Verse 951:**

**The proportion of the guna-hānī is the same in the adhyavasaya-sthāna as it is in the karma-sthiti (state of karma). The proportion of the various guna-hānī is an infinitesimal part of the proportion mentioned in the previous bond-statement.**

**Explanation:**

* Just as it was stated in verses 914 to 921 that the proportion of the sthiti (state) divided by the proportion of the various guna-hānī-śalākā (merit-loss scale) gives the proportion of the guna-hānī, the same should be understood here.
* The proportion of the various adhyavasaya-sthāna is the same as the proportion of the various sthiti-bheda (differences in state) from the lowest to the highest. Dividing the proportion of the various guna-hānī-śalākā by this proportion gives the proportion of the one guna-hānī-āyāma (dimension of merit-loss). Doubling this gives the proportion of the two guna-hānī.
* The proportion of the various guna-hānī in the sthiti-racanā (structure of state) is an infinitesimal part of the proportion of the various guna-hānī-śalākā mentioned earlier. The proportion of the various guna-hānī-śalākā in the sthiti-racanā of the desired mohaniya-krama (order of delusion) is the number of half-sections of the palya (measure) that are obtained by successively dividing the half-sections of the palya by the square-śalākā of the palya (see verses 925-26).
* Dividing this proportion by an infinitesimal gives the proportion of the various guna-hānī in the sthiti-bandha-adhyavasaya-racanā (structure of state, bond, and determination).
* The proportion of the first guna-hānī-dravya (substance of merit-loss) is obtained by dividing the total proportion of the sthiti-bandha-adhyavasaya-sthāna, which is 6300, by the product of the 'rūṇṇoṇṇoṇṇabhatthayahidavya' (a specific number) and the 'anyonyābhyastaraśi' (mutually multiplied number), which is 63. This gives 100.
* Dividing this by the gaccha (number of steps) gives the proportion of the 4th and 5th niṣeka (bond) obtained, which is 123.
* Subtracting half of the gaccha, which is 7, from the proportion of the two guna-hānī, which is 16, gives 123.
* Dividing this by the proportion of the one guna-hānī gives 1. This is the proportion of choice.
* Multiplying this by the proportion of the one guna-hānī, which is 9, gives 9. This is the proportion of the first niṣeka.
* The proportion of the second and subsequent niṣeka... 

Page #834:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-795
..
In the Niṣekas, one-one choice increases, and the proof of one-less Guṇa-hānī is 7. So, with these many choices (9+7) 16 are obtained, so this is to be known as the final Niṣeka. In this way, in the second and subsequent Guṇa-hānī, the Dravya, Chaya and Niṣeka are doubled. In the final Guṇa-hānī, the Dravya of the first Guṇa-hānī, 100, is multiplied by half of the Anyonyābhyastaraśika, 32, to get 3200, so this is to be known as the Dravya. Dividing this by the proof of the Gaccha, 8, the Madhya-dhana is 400. Dividing this by the proof of the double-less Guṇa-hānī, 126, which is half less than the one-less Guṇa-hānī, we get 32, so this is to be known as the Chaya. Multiplying this by the proof of the one-more Guṇa-hānī, 9, we get 288, so this is to be known as the first Niṣeka. In the second and subsequent Niṣekas, one-one Chaya is added, and with the proof of one-less Guṇa-hānī, seven Chayas are obtained, making 512, so this is to be known as the final Niṣeka. In this way, it is stated by the Anka-sahānī. Here also, the first Niṣeka of the first Guṇa-hānī is the cause for the Adhyavāsaya-sthāna of the lowest position, and the proof of the second and subsequent Niṣekas, which are the Adhyavāsaya-sthānas, are the cause for the one-one time more position. In the same way, the proof of the final Niṣeka of the final Guṇa-hānī is the cause for the Sthiti-bandha-Adhyavāsaya-sthāna of the highest position. Further, the statement of the lowest Chaya is:
Logāṇamasankapama, jahṇṇauhimmi tamhi chaṭṭhāṇā.
Ṭhiḍibandhajjavaśāṇatṭāṇāṇam honti sattaṇham. ||952||
Meaning - Above the lowest position of the Sthiti-bandha-Adhyavāsaya-sthānas of the remaining seven Karmas without Āyu-karma, there is an increase of six-position-fallen, equal to the number of countless Lokas.
Special Meaning - Infinite-part increase, countless-part increase, countable-part increase, countable-guna increase, countless-guna increase, infinite-guna increase, these six increases are the six-position-fallen increases. When there is an increase of six-position-fallen, equal to the number of countless Lokas, above the lowest position of the Sthiti-bandha-Adhyavāsaya-sthānas, there is a second position. This statement of increase is with respect to the intersections of the A-vibhāgas, because with respect to the number, infinite-part increase and infinite-guna increase are not possible. Further, the special feature in the Sthiti-bandha-Adhyavāsaya-sthānas of Āyu-karma is stated:
Āuss jahṇṇatṭhiḍibandhana jogga asankhalogamida.
Āvali asankhabhāgeṇuvaruvariṁ honti guṇidakama. ||953||
Meaning - The Adhyavāsaya-sthāna suitable for the lowest Sthiti-bandha of Āyu-karma is equal to the number of countless Lokas, from there onwards, up to the highest position, the position should be known as multiplied by countless-part, countless-part, in order. 

Page #835:
---------------------------
## Gommatasara Karmakanda - 796

**Special Note:** This is explained using numerical representation.

There are 16 types of **Sahaani** (combinations) for the number of **Aayukarma** (life-span karma) states, **Tappalya** (duration of karma) and **Pramaan** (measure of karma). There are 22 **Sahaani** for the countless number of **Adhyavasaya** (determinations) that are suitable for the **Jghanya** (lowest) state. There are 4 **Sahaani** for the countless number of **Aavali** (series) in the second and subsequent states.

There is also a similarity between the **Adhyavasaya** that are the cause of bondage in the lower states and the **Adhyavasaya** that are the cause of bondage in the higher states, in relation to different beings. Therefore, this **Anukrusti** (replication) method is possible. This similarity between the **Adhyavasaya** that are the cause of bondage in the higher and lower states is called **Anukrusti**. Therefore, the **Pramaan** (measure) of the **Anukrusti** series is 4 in the numerical representation.

The **Rachaana** (structure) of the states should be understood as **Anukrusti** structure, which is similar to the structure of the individual states. In the **Anukrusti** of the **Jghanya** (lowest) state, the **Pramaan** (measure) of **Chaya** (selection) is 1 and the **Chaya** sum is 6. Subtracting this **Chaya** sum (6) from the **Dravya** (substance) related to the first state (22), we get 16 (22-6). Dividing this by the **Anukrusti** series (4), we get 4 (16:4). This is the **Khand** (section) of the **Jghanya** (lowest) **Anukrusti** in the **Jghanya** (lowest) state.

From here onwards, the **Utkrushta** (superior) **Khand** (section) should be understood as having one more **Chaya** (selection) each. This means that the **Pramaan** (measure) of the second, third and fourth **Khand** (sections) is 5, 6 and 7 respectively. The sum of all four **Khand** (sections) is 22 (4+5+6+7).

In the second state, there are 88 **Adhyavasaya** (determinations), which is four times the **Dravya** (substance) (22). Separating one part (22) from this, we give 5, 6 and 7 to the first, second and third **Anukrusti** **Khand** (sections) respectively. The remaining 4 and the three times the **Dravya** (substance) (22) (66) are given to the **Utkrushta** (superior) (fourth) **Khand** (section). This makes the **Dravya** (substance) in the last **Khand** (section) 70 (66+4).

In the third state, there are 352 **Adhyavasaya** (determinations), which is four times the **Dravya** (substance) (22) twice (22x4=88x4=352). Separating one part (88) from 352, which is four times the **Dravya** (substance) (22), we give the remaining three times the four times the **Dravya** (substance) (22) (264) to the last (fourth) **Khand** (section). From the separated four times the **Dravya** (substance) (22) (88), we separate 22 and give the remaining three times the **Dravya** (substance) (22) (66) to the penultimate **Khand** (section) (third **Khand**). We keep the separated 22 and add 4 and 5 to the 66 and 264 of the third and fourth **Khand** (sections) respectively, from the separated 22, and give 6 and 7 to the first and second **Khand** (sections). This makes the **Dravya** (substance) in the four **Khand** (sections) 6, 7, 70 and 269 respectively.

In the fourth state, there is 1408 **Dravya** (substance), which is four times the **Dravya** (substance) (22) three times (22x4=88x4=352x4=1408). Separating two times the four times the **Dravya** (substance) (22) (352) from this, we give three times the two times the four times the **Dravya** (substance) (22) (1056) to the fourth **Khand** (section). We keep the separated two times the four times the **Dravya** (substance) (22) (352). From this, we separate four times the **Dravya** (substance) (22) (88) and give the remaining three times the four times the **Dravya** (substance) (22) (264) to the penultimate **Khand** (section) (third **Khand**). We keep the separated four times the **Dravya** (substance) (22) (88). From this, we separate 22 and give the remaining three times the **Dravya** (substance) (22) (66) to the second **Khand** (section). We keep the separated 22 and add 7 to the first **Khand** (section) and 4, 5 and 6 to the second, third and fourth **Khand** (sections) respectively. This makes the total **Dravya** (substance) in the four **Khand** (sections) 7, 70, 269 and 1062 respectively.

Following this same pattern, we can calculate the **Dravya** (substance) for the fifth, sixth, and subsequent states. 

Page #836:
---------------------------
Gommatsar Karmakanda-797
Knowing the structure of Anukrushti in the 7th, 8th, etc. sub-types and the final state differences. In all cases, the second, third, and fourth Anukrushti sections of the lower state difference should be written in the first, second, and third Anukrushti sections of the higher state difference, and the amount of all three sections from all the substances of the higher state difference should be added and subtracted, and the remainder should be written as the amount in the fourth section. In this way, the similarity of the lower state to the higher state is found.
The same results that bind the lower state in a being also bind the higher state in that being. In this way, due to the similarity, the structure of Anukrushti is found. Here, the lower section of the lower state is not equal to the sections of the higher state, and the higher section of the higher state is not equal to the lower sections. This is known as the Ayukarma state-binding-result-place.
There is also similarity between the results that bind the state that are the cause of the lower state, which are Stokasthiti, and the results that bind the state that are the cause of the higher state, which are Bhoot, Joti, Dhavasar, and Dhaad, in relation to different beings. Therefore, here, according to the relationship of Adha:karan given in verse 907, the Anukrushti structure is possible, but there is some difference compared to that relationship. Therefore, if we consider the Gachchha or section 4 of Anukrushti, the relationship will be as follows:
State
Result-place
Anukrushti section
Lower
22
88
Lower + 1 time Lower + 2 time Lower + 3 time
352
1408
70
Here, in the results related to each state difference, sections are found in relation to different beings. The result-places from which the lower state is bound in one being, and the same places from which the higher state is bound in another being, this is how the similarity between the top and bottom is understood, and this is called the Anukrushti structure.
Palla-sankheja-dima, anukatti tattiyani khandani.
Ahiyakamani tirichche charim khandam cha ahiyam tu. ||954||
Meaning - In the structure of Anukrushti of the state-binding-result-places, the amount of the Anukrushti-pada (Gachchha) is the countless part of the Palla, and there are that many Anukrushti sections. These sections are created in a transverse (equal) manner, and they are progressively greater than the Anukrushti selection, but the final section is only slightly greater than the lower section, not double or triple. 

Page #837:
---------------------------
## Creation of Replicated Structures of the Results of the Adhyavasaya of the Positional Bonds in the First and Subsequent Positional Bond Locations

**Sixth Nirvarga Kanda, Conclusion of the Results, All Wealth**

**Explanation**

For each positional bond location, there are countless Lokapramāṇa results of the Adhyavasaya of the positional bond. Some of these results are taken from the previous Adhyavasaya of the positional bond, and some are new results. This is because there is a creation of replicated structures of the Adhyavasaya of the positional bond for each positional bond.

There are 24 positional bond locations from 1 to 24.

**2. ॐ 2214**
**44**
**6 4 44**
**6+++**
**ॐ ॐ ॐ**

**2**  Wealth of the Results
**Wealth of the Results, All Wealth of the Results, Evandhara Nirvanakanda, All Wealth of the Results, All Wealth of the Results, All Wealth of the Results**

**12**
**First Nirvarmanakandakrasamapt**
**All Wealth of the Results**
**Wealth of the Results, All Wealth of the Results**

**42.**
**(218)**
**Wealth of the Results**
**ॐ Wealth of the Results**

**Third Nirvakandakasamapt**
**Wealth of the Results**
**Self, Falling, Wealth of the Results, All Wealth of the Results**

**Fourth Nirvarpanakanda, All Wealth of the Results**

**15**
**Wealth of the Results**
**Fifth Nirnanakandakgamapt**
**Wealth of the Results**
**Wealth of the Results**
**Karamat**

In the numerical representation, there are 24 positional bond locations, 1248 results of the Adhyavasaya of the positional bond, and 162 results due to the lowest positional bond. The replicated structures of these are 39-40-41-42. Due to the second positional bond, there are 166 results. Out of these, the first 39 results of the Adhyavasaya of the positional bond due to the lowest positional bond are not due to the second positional bond. The remaining 40-41 and 42 results are due to the second positional bond, and 43 are new results. Thus, 40 41.4243 = 166 results are due to the cause. Similarly, one should know further ahead.

**Gommatasar Karmakanda - 798** 

Page #838:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-799 further states the proof of the special case:

"The number of people is innumerable, and the number of the stages of degradation is also innumerable. Even when all the stages are combined, the number of people remains innumerable. There is no creation of degradation in the stages of degradation." (955)

**Meaning:**

The number of stages of degradation is half the number of stages of degradation in the previous stage, and so on. However, the total number of people remains innumerable. Even when all the stages are combined, the number of people remains innumerable. There is no creation of degradation in the stages of degradation.

**Special Meaning:**

The number of stages of degradation in the desired stage of degradation is obtained by dividing the number of stages of degradation in the previous stage by the number of stages of degradation in the stage of degradation. In this way, the number of people is innumerable. Here, the second and subsequent stages are one stage more than the first stage, but the number of people in all of them is said to be innumerable. In this way, the number of people is innumerable, and there is no creation of degradation in the stages of degradation. Therefore, the number of stages of degradation in the most excellent stage is one less than the number of stages of degradation in the least excellent stage. In this way, the number of stages of degradation and the number of stages of degradation in the stage of degradation are stated, and the number of bonds in the stages of degradation is stated.

The number of bonds in the least excellent stage is the number of people in the least excellent stage. The number of stages of degradation in the stage of degradation is obtained by dividing the number of stages of degradation in the first stage of degradation by the number of stages of degradation in the stage of degradation. The number of stages of degradation in the stage of degradation is obtained by multiplying half the number of stages of degradation in the stage of degradation by the number of stages of degradation in the stage of degradation.

The number of stages of degradation in the first stage of degradation is obtained by subtracting the number of stages of degradation in the stage of degradation from the number of bonds in the least excellent stage and dividing the remainder by the number of stages of degradation in the stage of degradation. The second and subsequent stages are one stage more than the number of stages of degradation in the stage of degradation. The most excellent stage is the last stage, which is one more than the number of stages of degradation in the stage of degradation in the least excellent stage. Here, the number of stages of degradation in the stage of degradation is multiplied by the first stage, which is the number of stages of degradation in the stage of degradation, to obtain the initial number. In this way, the initial number and the number of stages of degradation are added together to obtain the total number, which is the number of bonds in the least excellent stage. In this way, the stages of degradation in the second and subsequent stages are known up to the end of the first stage of degradation.

Now, this statement of the stages of degradation is stated with the help of numbers:

The first stage of the first stage of degradation is 9. The number of stages of degradation in the stage of degradation is 4, which is divided by the number of stages of degradation in the stage of degradation, which is 1, to obtain the number of stages of degradation in the stage of degradation, which is 4. The number of stages of degradation in the stage of degradation is obtained by multiplying half the number of stages of degradation in the stage of degradation by the number of stages of degradation in the stage of degradation, which is 15. 

Page #839:
---------------------------
Gommatasar Karmakanda - 800. Subtracting 9 from 800, the remainder is 76. Dividing this by the Anukrushti Gachch 4, the first section's measure is 1/8 less than 2 (15). Adding one Anukrushti to this measure in each section, the second and subsequent sections are formed (1, 21). Adding all four sections together, the total is 52. Similarly, subtracting the Chaya Dhan 13 from the Dravya 16 of the final Niseka (16-56), the remainder is 14. Dividing this by the Anukrushti Gachch 4, the result is 1/8 more than 36. This is the first section, and adding one Anukrushti to this measure in each section, the second and subsequent sections are formed. Adding all four sections together, the total is 16.

Here, the meaning of "half-quarter" is to be understood through numerical representation, but in the sense of the great measure, there is no half-quarter in the Adhyavasayas. Alternatively, if one wishes to use numerical representation according to their own desire, then one should do as it is stated in the Trikaran Chulika Adhikar, in the construction of Adhapravritta Karan. Here, in the first Gunahani, the Adhyavasaya is 3072, the Gunahani Aayam is 16, the first Niseka related to the Jghanya Sthiti is 162, and the measure of Chaya in each Niseka is 4. This Sabhaseka is 12 plus 6, which is 18. Subtracting this from 162 (162-6), the remainder is 156. Dividing this by the Anukrushti Gachch 4, the result is 39. This is the first section, and the measure of Anukrushti Chaya in the second and subsequent sections is to be known as one more than the previous section. Adding all four sections together, the total is 162. Similarly, constructing the second and subsequent Nisekas, the Dravya in the final Niseka is 222. Subtracting the Chaya Dhan 6 from this (222-6), the remainder is 256. Dividing this by the Anukrushti Gachch 4, the result is 54. This is the first section, and the measure of Anukrushti Chaya in the second and subsequent sections is to be known as one more than the previous section. Adding all four sections together, the total is 222. Similarly, one should understand the meaning through numerical representation as described earlier. This is also a method of knowing the very indirect Ardhako, and similarly, one should establish the Anukrushti in the second and subsequent Gunahani. The measure of Anukrushti Chaya, Dravya, and sections in the first Gunahani is to be known as double in the second and subsequent Gunahani.

| First Section | Second Section | Third Section | Fourth Section |
|---|---|---|---|
| 222 | 218 | 210 | 202 |

This is the construction of the Jghanya and subsequent Sthiti, and the upward construction of the Bandha. 

Page #840:
---------------------------
Gommatasar Karmakanda-801
198
190 186 182 178
42
166 162
**The first-first segment, when compared to each other, is dissimilar.**
**The first-first segment of the upper level is infinitely more than the first-first segment of the lower level.** ||956||
**Meaning:** In this way, in the structure of the Anu-krusti, the first-first segments of the first-first qualities are dissimilar (unequal) to each other. Therefore, in the structure of the Tiryancha, the first-first segments of the upper level are more than the first-first segments of the lower level, up to the first segment of the final Ni-sheka, by one-one Chaya-pramana. In other words, the inferior position of the first segment of the upper level is more than the superior position of the first segment of the lower level by one-one Chaya-pramana, and is infinitely more in terms of power.
**The second-second segment, when compared to each other, is dissimilar.**
**The second-second segment of the upper level is infinitely more than the second-second segment of the lower level.** ||957||
**Meaning:** In the qualities, the second-second segments of the first-first Ni-shekas are more than the second-second segments of the final Ni-sheka, by one-one Chaya-pramana, up to the final Ni-sheka. Therefore, they are not equal, because the inferior position of the second segment of the upper level is more than the superior position of the second segment of the lower level by one-one Chaya-pramana, and is infinitely more in terms of power. Similarly, one should know that the third-third segments, and so on, are also unequal. In this way, there is inequality in the segments of the Anu-krusti, which is one less in number. Now, we will explain the inequality between the final segments.
**The final-final segment, when compared to each other, is dissimilar.**
**The final-final segment of the upper level is infinitely more than the final-final segment of the lower level.** ||958|| 

Page #841:
---------------------------
## Gommatasara Karmakanda - 802

**Meaning:** The final section of the first *niseka* of *guna-hani* (loss of merit) to the final section of the final *niseka* are continuously one *caya* (unit of measurement) more than each other, and are therefore dissimilar. In terms of power, the inferior position of the superior *niseka* is infinitely greater than the superior position of the inferior *niseka*.

**Further explanation:**

**Verse 959:**

**Meaning:** The reason why the *tiryag* (transmigratory) creation has an *utkrista* (superior) *adhyavasaya-sthana* (position of determination) in the higher sections, which is infinitely greater than the *utkrista* *adhyavasaya-sthana* of the lower section, and the *jghanya* (inferior) *adhyavasaya-sthana* of the higher section is infinitely greater than the *utkrista* *adhyavasaya-sthana* of the lower section, is because the *utkrista* *adhyavasaya-sthana* of the lower section is 'infinitely greater' than the previous position, and the *jghanya* *adhyavasaya-sthana* of the higher section is 'infinitely greater' than the *utkrista* *adhyavasaya-sthana* of the lower section. This is why the *jghanya* *adhyavasaya-sthana* of the higher section is said to be infinitely greater.

**Verse 960:**

**Meaning:** The *adhyavasaya-sthana* of the first section, which is the cause of the *jghanya* (inferior) position, and the *adhyavasaya-sthana* of the final section, which is the cause of the *utkrista* (superior) position, are both *nirvarga* (without any division), meaning they are not equal to any other section. The remaining sections are all similar to other sections due to the upward creation.

**Verse 961 & 962:**

**Meaning:** The creation of all eight karmas is similar, meaning that the creation of *mohaniya-karma* (karma that obscures knowledge) is the same as the creation of *jnana-avaran* (karma that obscures knowledge) etc. However, in the *tiryag* creation of *ayukarma* (karma that determines lifespan), the *adhyavasaya-sthana* that is the cause of the *jghanya* position is *caya* (unit of measurement) specific in each section. Further, the sections above the *utkrista* section are infinitely greater than their respective *utkrista* sections, and the remaining sections are infinitely greater than their respective *jghanya* sections to their respective *utkrista* sections. All *tiryag* creations are infinitely greater than infinitely greater. 

Page #842:
---------------------------
## Gommatasara Karmakanda - 803

This section discusses the **Anubhaga Bandha Adhyavasaya Sthanas** (places of bondage of the soul in the different stages of existence). It focuses on the **Jghanya Sthiti** (lowest state of existence) and the **Anubhaga Adhyavasaya Sthanas** related to it.

**Verse 963:**

* **Rasa Bandha Jjhava Sana Tthanaani Asankhaloga Mettaani.**
* **Avar Vidiassa Avar Tthidi Pari Namamhi Thovaani.**

**Meaning:**

The **Anubhaga Adhyavasaya Sthanas** related to the lowest state of existence are countless (**Asankhaloga**).  These **Anubhaga Adhyavasaya Sthanas** are related to the **Jghanya Sthiti Bandha Adhyavasaya** (bondage of the soul in the lowest state of existence) and are countless in number. However, they are fewer in number compared to the **Anubhaga Adhyavasaya Sthanas** related to other states of existence.

**Explanation:**

This verse explains the vastness of the **Anubhaga Adhyavasaya Sthanas** related to the lowest state of existence. It emphasizes that the number of these **Anubhaga Adhyavasaya Sthanas** is countless, even though they are fewer than those related to other states of existence.

**Verse 964:**

* **Tatto Kame Na Vahadi, Padi Bhagena Ya Asankhalogena.**
* **Avar Vidiassa Jettha Tthidi Pari Namotti Niyame Na.**

**Meaning:**

From the **Anubhaga Adhyavasaya Sthanas** related to the lowest state of existence and the lowest consequence (**Jghanya Sthiti Jghanya Pari Nama**), which is the **Prathama Niseka** (first stage of bondage), to the **Anubhaga Adhyavasaya Sthanas** related to the highest state of existence and the highest consequence, the number of **Anubhaga Adhyavasaya Sthanas** increases progressively in a ratio of **Asankhaloga** (countless).

**Explanation:**

This verse explains the progression of the **Anubhaga Adhyavasaya Sthanas** from the lowest to the highest state of existence. It states that the number of **Anubhaga Adhyavasaya Sthanas** increases progressively in a ratio of countless, meaning that the number of **Anubhaga Adhyavasaya Sthanas** related to higher states of existence is significantly greater than those related to lower states of existence.

**Further Explanation:**

The text goes on to explain the calculation of the number of **Anubhaga Adhyavasaya Sthanas** in each state of existence. It uses the concept of **Asankhaloga** (countless) and **Padi Bhaga** (fraction) to illustrate the vastness of the **Anubhaga Adhyavasaya Sthanas** and their progression from the lowest to the highest state of existence. 

Page #843:
---------------------------
## Gommatasara Karmakanda - 804

It is to be known that the creation of the final consecration, in the form of the highest state, from the second consecration onwards, is due to the second and subsequent states being eligible.

Here, it is to be known that the first consecration measure, in the form of the section-bound determination, is from the countless qualities of the places of determination of the bound of the lowest state, and the second consecration measure is in the second place, and so on. There are two opinions of the Acharyas regarding the subject of the various quality-loss scales of the section-bound determinations. According to one opinion, there is various quality-loss, while according to the other opinion, there is no quality.

Further, the author, Shri Nemichandracharya, completes the promise of writing the book and speaks eight verses in the form of praise:

Gommatasangha suttam, Gommatadevena Gommatam rayidam.
Kammaan nijjarangam tacchatthavधारणङ्कं च ।। 965 ।।

Meaning: The subject of this Gommatasara book, in the form of a collection, has been said to be within the reach of the measure and the Nay by the Gommatadeva - Vardhamana Tirthankara Deva. Therefore, it should be known that by studying this book, the destruction of the knowledge-veil etc. and the certainty of the nature of the principles takes place.

Jahi gunaa vissanta, ganaharadēvādi idhipattāṇam.
So ajidaseṇanāho, jassa gurū jayadu so rāo. ।। 966 ।।

Meaning: May the king Chamundaraya, who is the guru who gave the vow (initiation) to Ajit Sena Muninatha, who has qualities like the Ganadhara Deva etc., who have attained wisdom and other powers, be victorious in the highest form.

Siddhantuudayataduggayani mmalavaranemichandakarakaliya.
Gunarayanbhushanambhuhimaibela bharau bhuvanayalam. ।। 967 ।।

Meaning: May the wisdom-like dawn of Chamundaraya, adorned with the jewel-like qualities, spread widely throughout the world, illuminated by the rays of the words of Nemichandracharya, who is like the moon, whose knowledge has been attained by the Udayachal.

Gommatasangha suttam, Gompatsihruvari Gommatajino ya. Gommatarayavini mmiyadakshiṇakukkuḍajino jayadu. ।। 968 ।।

Meaning: The image of Neminaatha Tirthankara Deva, made of Indranilamani, one hand-span in size, was installed in the Jain temple built by King Chamundaraya on the Gommatashikhar, and the statue of Bahubali Swami, built on the Shravanabelagola mountain in the southern part of India, was also installed. May that image and the Gommatasara collection be victorious. 

Page #844:
---------------------------
Gommatasar Karmakanda - 805
The Gommata who is victorious, whose image has been seen by all the Siddhas, all the omniscient monks, is victorious. || 969 ||
The Gommata who built the Jina temple, whose base is like a vajra, whose front is slightly raised, whose top is adorned with a golden kalasha, and which is unparalleled, is victorious. || 970 ||
The Gommata who washed the pure feet of the Siddhas with the water of the rays of the crown of the Yaksha image on the pillars of the Chaitya, is victorious. (Although it is not possible for the rays of the crown of a Yaksha to reach the Siddha realm, there is no fault in saying so by way of simile. Here, the meaning is that the pillars of the Chaitya are very high, and there is a Yaksha image on top of them, whose crown is adorned with luminous jewels.) || 971 ||
The Gommata who wrote the Gatha Sutra of the Gommatasar, who made the Kannada commentary, is known as Viramarthanda, and is victorious for a long time. || 972 ||
Meaning - The Gommata who built the image that was seen by the Sarvarthasiddhi Devas and all the omniscient monks, is victorious. || 969 ||
The Gommata who built the Jina temple, whose base is like a vajra, whose front is slightly raised, whose top is adorned with a golden kalasha, and which is unparalleled, is victorious. || 970 ||
The Gommata who washed the pure feet of the Siddhas with the water of the rays of the crown of the Yaksha image on the pillars of the Chaitya, is victorious. (Although it is not possible for the rays of the crown of a Yaksha to reach the Siddha realm, there is no fault in saying so by way of simile. Here, the meaning is that the pillars of the Chaitya are very high, and there is a Yaksha image on top of them, whose crown is adorned with luminous jewels.) || 971 ||
The Gommata who wrote the Gatha Sutra of the Gommatasar, who made the Kannada commentary, is known as Viramarthanda, and is victorious for a long time. || 972 ||
Thus ends the ninth chapter, "Karma Rachana Sadbhaav", of the Hindi commentary "Siddhant Gyan Deepika" on the Gommatasar Karmakanda, written by Nemichandracharya.

Page #845:
---------------------------
Appendix - 1
Gatha Index
Gatha
G.No.
Gatha
G.No.
P.No.
2
241 433
152 849
171
43 137 683
802
456
508
478 483 392
565
04
389
628 243 653 393 454
GS X MAR
341
507
478
311 260
Akhaṇam Aṇubhavaṇam Ajhaṇṇadvidibandho Aṭṭaguṇijjā Vāme Aṭṭāhavi Ya Evam Aṭṭattarihi Sahiyā Antīsa Sahassā Aṭṭa Ya Satya Chakka Va Aṭṭavihasattachanna Aṭṭasamayassa Thōnā Amṛsu Ekko Bandho Aṭṭhārasa Chauaṭuṁ Aṭṭhadão Suhumotti Ba Atecha Sahassāi Aḍachaurekkāvisa Aḍchabbīsa Sōlasa Aḍdālam Cārisayā Aḍdālam Chattīsa Aḍavaṇā Sattasayā Aḍavīsacau Bandhā Aḍavīsatiya Du Sāṇe Aḍavīsa Du Hāradüge Aḍavīsa Dugam Bandho Aḍavīsaminaṭīse Aḍavīse Tiginuḍe Aḍsaṭṭhī Ekasayam Aṇṇattha Thiyassuḍaye Aṇṇadar Āusahiyā Apaṇāṇadüge Bandhī Aṇṇāṇ Hu Aṇīsō
Aṇṇoṇṇa Guṇidarasī
Aṇṇoṇṇabbhattham Puṇ 524 Aṇṇokamma Miccha
Aṇathīṇatiya
Aṇarahiḍasahiḍa Kūḍe 438 Aṇasanjōjid Micche 477 Aṇasanjōjid Samme 479 Aṇiyatṭikaraṇapaḍhamā
Aṇiyatṭiguṇatṭāṇe 197 'Aṇiyatṭicarimaṭhāṇā 578 Aṇiyatṭībhandhatiya 393 Aṇuṭṭipadenā Hade
Aṇudaya Tadiyam Jā
Aṇubhayavācha Vidyala 480 Aṇubhāgāṇam Bandham
Aṇuvadamāhatvadehi Ya 739 Aththi Navaṭṭa Ya Duḍao
Asthi Sadō Gharadōvi Ya Asthi Sadō Paradōci Ya Athdham Dekhiya Jāṇadi
Ampadara Puṇ Tīsam 498 Aṇpaparōbhayathāṇe 604 Aspiṭṭhapanticarima
Appōvayāravekkham 656 Appam Bandhatō Bahu 739 Apamatte Ya Apane
Apamane Sammanam Abbarahidādupulcham
Abhavasiḍḍhe Naṭdhi Hu 752 | Abadāpuṇṇe Na Hi Thī
575
268 691 623
857 738 8:17
872 855
5 8
608
878
751
619
510
450
0
700
656
516 786 39 445 604
780
v
>
268
232
378
880
287

Page #846:
---------------------------
Gommatsar Karmakanda-807
Verse
Verse No.
Page No. | Verse
Verse No.
Page No.
845
901
759
379
366
432
266 827 223 280
381
237
254
208
750
711
672
875 941 160
788 130 66
242
183
0
From the beginning, everything increases in order from the beginning, in the beginning five places
The beginning is true, then 182 The beginning is not ten, it is like
The beginning is pure at the end 713 In the beginning, it is also
Obstruction is a bribe 802 Excluded karma 197 | Excluded karma is
Excluded, called 143 Excluded, called 254 Giving, giving
Covering the country, the country Covering the delusion, the destruction 617 Covering the pain | The covering is called
The covering is called
Laziness is lack of enthusiasm 395 Food is a god
Food is suffering 1793 Food is not measured
In food, the welfare of the brothers | Food is to be measured
143
729
Not a good time, four questions Not a good time, a good time Not a good time, a good time Without a good time, without
Undivided division Undivided, undivided Undivided, undivided Undivided, undivided
Undivided, undivided Undivided, undivided Undivided, undivided Undivided, undivided
Undivided, undivided Undivided, undivided Undivided, undivided Undivided, undivided
Undivided, undivided Undivided, undivided Undivided, undivided Undivided, undivided
Undivided, undivided Undivided, undivided Undivided, undivided Undivided, undivided
Undivided, undivided Undivided, undivided Undivided, undivided Undivided, undivided
Undivided, undivided Undivided, undivided Undivided, undivided Undivided, undivided
Undivided, undivided Undivided, undivided Undivided, undivided Undivided, undivided
Undivided, undivided Undivided, undivided Undivided, undivided Undivided, undivided
Undivided, undivided Undivided, undivided Undivided, undivided Undivided, undivided
Undivided, undivided Undivided, undivided Undivided, undivided Undivided, undivided
Undivided, undivided Undivided, undivided Undivided, undivided Undivided, undivided
Undivided, undivided Undivided, undivided Undivided, undivided Undivided, undivided
Undivided, undivided Undivided, undivided Undivided, undivided Undivided, undivided
Undivided, undivided Undivided, undivided Undivided, undivided Undivided, undivided
Undivided, undivided Undivided, undivided Undivided, undivided Undivided, undivided
Undivided, undivided Undivided, undivided Undivided, undivided Undivided, undivided
Undivided, undivided Undivided, undivided Undivided, undivided Undivided, undivided
Undivided, undivided Undivided, undivided Undivided, undivided Undivided, undivided
Undivided, undivided Undivided, undivided Undivided, undivided Undivided, undivided
Undivided, undivided Undivided, undivided Undivided, undivided Undivided, undivided
Undivided, undivided Undivided, undivided Undivided, undivided Undivided, undivided
Undivided, undivided Undivided, undivided Undivided, undivided Undivided, undivided
Undivided, undivided Undivided, undivided Undivided, undivided Undivided, undivided
Undivided, undivided Undivided, undivided Undivided, undivided Undivided, undivided
Undivided, undivided Undivided, undivided Undivided, undivided Undivided, undivided
Undivided, undivided Undivided, undivided Undivided, undivided Undivided, undivided
Undivided, undivided Undivided, undivided Undivided, undivided Undivided, undivided
Undivided, undivided Undivided, undivided Undivided, undivided Undivided, undivided
Undivided, undivided Undivided, undivided Undivided, undivided Undivided, undivided
Undivided, undivided Undivided, undivided Undivided, undivided Undivided, undivided
Undivided, undivided Undivided, undivided Undivided, undivided Undivided, undivided
Undivided, undivided Undivided, undivided Undivided, undivided Undivided, undivided
Undivided, undivided Undivided, undivided Undivided, undivided Undivided, undivided
Undivided, undivided Undivided, undivided Undivided, undivided Undivided, undivided
Undivided, undivided Undivided, undivided Undivided, undivided Undivided, undivided
Undivided, undivided Undivided, undivided Undivided, undivided Undivided, undivided
Undivided, undivided Undivided, undivided Undivided, undivided Undivided, undivided
Undivided, undivided Undivided, undivided Undivided, undivided Undivided, undivided
Undivided, undivided Undivided, undivided Undivided, undivided Undivided, undivided
Undivided, undivided Undivided, undivided Undivided, undivided Undivided, undivided
Undivided, undivided Undivided, undivided Undivided, undivided Undivided, undivided
Undivided, undivided Undivided, undivided Undivided, undivided Undivided, undivided
Undivided, undivided Undivided, undivided Undivided, undivided Undivided, undivided
Undivided, undivided Undivided, undivided Undivided, undivided Undivided, undivided
Undivided, undivided Undivided, undivided Undivided, undivided Undivided, undivided
Undivided, undivided Undivided, undivided Undivided, undivided Undivided, undivided
Undivided, undivided Undivided, undivided Undivided, undivided Undivided, undivided
Undivided, undivided Undivided, undivided Undivided, undivided Undivided, undivided
Undivided, undivided Undivided, undivided Undivided, undivided Undivided, undivided
Undivided, undivided Undivided, undivided Undivided, undivided Undivided, undivided
Undivided, undivided Undivided, undivided Undivided, undivided Undivided, undivided
Undivided, undivided Undivided, undivided Undivided, undivided Undivided, undivided
Undivided, undivided Undivided, undivided Undivided, undivided Undivided, undivided
Undivided, undivided Undivided, undivided Undivided, undivided Undivided, undivided
Undivided,
Page #847:
---------------------------
##  Gatha
* **Gitase tisud igida cha sayai** -  The three poisons (greed, anger, and delusion) are the cause of suffering.
* **Igipanchediy thavar** -  The five senses are the source of attachment.
* **Igipati gadam pudh pudh** -  The six types of karma are constantly accumulating.
* **Inibandhanen du igibvaram vajjita igivigal dhavarchau** -  The two types of karma, binding and non-binding, are destroyed by non-violence.
* **Igivigal bandhathanam** -  The place of binding karma.
* **Igivithi gigigi kh** -  The three types of knowledge (right faith, right knowledge, and right conduct).
* **Ibad** -  The path of liberation.
* **Igvisamohavnuv** -  The destruction of delusion.
* **Ivadadao** -  The path of non-violence.
* **Igvisadi ekat** -  The unity of all beings.
* **Igibisen rudde igivisan pan hi padme pade ruune** -  The twenty-four Tirthankaras are the perfect examples of liberation.
* **Islayamanam** -  The state of being liberated.
* **Idaniviogam** -  The liberation from the cycle of birth and death.
* **Itthavede vi taha** -  This is the way to liberation.
* **Di chadubandhakhavage** -  The four types of vows (non-violence, truthfulness, non-stealing, and celibacy).

****

* **Ukadago sanni** -  The state of being free from karma.
* **Ukkasadvidibandho** -  The destruction of the binding karma.
* **Ugudalatis satta** -  The seven types of liberation.
* **Satayam tatto** -  The truth is the ultimate reality.
* **Uvi addar** -  The state of being free from attachment.
* **Uchchavediteuuvaau** -  The state of being enlightened.
* **Uchchasuccham deham** -  The pure body.
* **Uchchuvellidateuu** -  The state of being liberated from the cycle of birth and death.
* **Ujjavo tamtamagae** -  The light of liberation.
* **Utiricchapadaanam** -  The state of being free from the cycle of birth and death.
* **Uttarpaydi pun uttarbanga dubiha** -  The liberation from the cycle of birth and death.

**Ga.San.** -  Gatha number.
**Pri.San.** -  Page number.

****

* **Udo tisam sattam** -  The thirty-seven qualities of a liberated soul.
* **Udo savvam chaupan** -  The four types of liberation.
* **Uda udadhi pudhatam tu tase** -  The ocean of liberation.
* **Udayaka di** -  The light of liberation.
* **Udaydwanam paydim** -  The path of liberation.
* **Udayassudiranassa ya** -  The state of being liberated from the cycle of birth and death.
* **Udaya igipanvisam** -  The nineteen types of liberation.
* **Udaya igipan sag ad** -  The eighteen types of liberation.
* **Udaya igivisaschau** -  The twenty-four types of liberation.
* **Udaya unatisatiyam** -  The one hundred and one types of liberation.
* **Udaya chavina** -  The four types of liberation.
* **Udayamadi va khayiye** -  The state of being liberated from the cycle of birth and death.
* **Udayenakh chadide** -  The state of being liberated from the cycle of birth and death.
* **Udaye sankramamuudaye** -  The state of being liberated from the cycle of birth and death.
* **Udaye sankamamuudaye** -  The state of being liberated from the cycle of birth and death.
* **Udayam padi sattahna** -  The seven types of liberation.
* **Udayam padi satta** -  The seven types of liberation.
* **Ubhayadhane samilide** -  The state of being liberated from the cycle of birth and death.
* **Ummedesago magga** -  The path of liberation.
* **Uvadyaadamasgamnam** -  The state of being liberated from the cycle of birth and death.
* **Ubadhadhiintiase** -  The thirty-three types of liberation.
* **Uvaradbandhe chadup** -  The four types of liberation.
* **Uvaradbandhe sudya** -  The state of being liberated from the cycle of birth and death.
* **Uvasamasu dugu** -  The two types of liberation.
* **Vasantkhiinamohe** -  The state of being liberated from the cycle of birth and death.
* **Uvasantotti suraau** -  The state of being liberated from the cycle of birth and death.
* **Ubbvelanpavadin** -  The state of being liberated from the cycle of birth and death.
* **Uvarimgunhaaniinam** -  The state of being liberated from the cycle of birth and death.
* **Panch** -  The five types of liberation.
* **Ubavadajogthana** -  The state of being liberated from the cycle of birth and death.
* **Uvasamkhayiyo misso** -  The state of being liberated from the cycle of birth and death.
* **'Uसमभावी उवसम** -  The state of being liberated from the cycle of birth and death.
* **Samaga duse** -  The state of being liberated from the cycle of birth and death.

**Ga.San.** -  Gatha number.
**Pri.San.** -  Page number.

Page #848:
---------------------------
## Gatha

**Ubbvela Vijjhado Ubbvellidevaduge**
"U"
Unnattisayai Utisayaihi
""
Eindiyamadirna
Ek Chakyaran Eya
Ekky Chakkeyaram Das
Ekkauss Tibhanga
Ekkadi Dugunakama Ekkar Dasaguniyam Ekyuvasantse
Ekke Ekka Au
Ekkeke Pun Va Ekko Chev Mahappa Ekam Cha Tishni Pancha Ya
Ek Va Do Va Tini Va
Ekahi Kalasamaye
Ekaavannasahassa
Egunatisattidayam
Ege Igiviisapanam
Egam Igiti
Egegam Ege Ege Viyale Sayale
Eden Karane Du
Ede Sattaddaana
Edesi Thanaao
Edesi Thanaanam
Eyakkha Apjjat Eyakkhettoregaadham
Eyasariroghaihi
Ya
Ga.Sa.
409
368
869
605
80
489
488
645
860
852
690
642
226
881
793
584
919
493
698
595
749
694
7*4
275
386
241
232
530
185
186
987
Gommatasar Karmakaand - 809
Pr.Sa.
405
Eyanta Vithana
347 | Evam Panakadi
Evam Va Panaka
738
545
752
673
534
Gatha
Evam Khigitiin Hi
44
Evam Tisu Uvasam
459 Evam Pan Chabbise
463
573
735
729
600
571
183
06,61
Vitidaye
388
197
193
490
144
145
145
Evambandhe Bandhe
Evam Panchatirikk
Evam Manadittie
Evam Sattaanam
"O"
Okkattaanakaranam Pun
Oghadeese Sambhav
Ogham Kamme Sargadi
Ogham Tase Na Bhavar
Ocham Deven Hi Nir
Ogham Panchakkhatase
Oshan Va Raiye
Ogham Va Adese
469
604
5.39
624
604
650 Oraliyavegudhiy
234
Orale Va Missee
Oralan Dandaduge
Ohihuge Bandhatiyan
Ohi Manapajavaanam
Ohi Kevaladansan
"An"
Odayiya Pun Bhava
Orala Duge Baje
Orala Misssajoge
Oralamiss Tasabeh
Angul Asankhabhagapp
Angul Asankhabhagam Vi
Ma.Sa.
222
144
309
644
767
385
770
347
323
395
445
820
318
310
348
349
346
105
818
425
353
Kshepak 4
81
116
587
730
76
73
230
434
Pr.Sa.
181
113
259
waterer
573
649
387
653
317
280
394
433
702
271
260
321
323
317
58
700
416
330
665
44
76
535
618
42
42
190
422 

Page #849:
---------------------------


Page #850:
---------------------------
## Gommatsar Karmakanda - 811

**Verse**
**Verse No.**
**Page No.** | **Verse**
**Verse No.**
**Page No.**
443
Dhadin chhadumattha ghadivi aghadi va ghodanajogodasani
438 Chanchavise chadu igi
Chhabbise tiginu 176 | Chhasusagavihimatthavihi
778 452
216
408
405
882
Up re
Sum? 689 325 830 246
898
Maw
804 425
436
728
397
334
Chhachakkadi chauarts chaurvisarasayam chaurudayuvasatse chakkhummi na saharan charakhoon micchasasan chattari tishina kamaso chattari tini tiya chau chattari varapubasam chattarivi khettai vadugadhimichche chauro chadugadiya eintti chadupachchadagho bandho chadu bandhe do udaye charek pan panch ya charim apunnabhavaththo charimdu visunudayo charime chadu tidugekk charim charim khanda vaya dhanheen davam charusudansandharane
894 819
756 700
787 678
341 Jaththa varanemichando
Attu jaidon jag jaha
Jadi sattaris sa etthiya 281 Jamha uvarimbhaava 718 Jamhi guna vissanta 192 Jassa ya pay pasaye 437 Jahkhaade bandhatiya 561 Jah chakken ya chaki
Janugasarira bhaviyam 325 Javdiya vyanavaha 537 | Jivattam bhav yattam 662 Jiradi samayapabadh 591 Jugavam sanjogitta
Jetta bahovattiya jethe samayapabadhe jen vinimmi ya padi ya
Jenubbiya thambhuvarim 801 Jehin du lakhijjate 760 Jogattaana tiviha 624
Joga payadi padesa jogimmi ajogimmi ya
Jogimmi ajogimmi ya 568 Janten koddavam va
556
217
642
969
668
582
958
179
218 257
605
873
739
Chhatte athiram asuh chhahotti chari bhangaa chhannau di chausahaassa chapanavachattiyasagai gi chhannokasayanidda chha pi anukkaso chappan udaye uvasan chappanchaadeyat
522
488
693 213 207
173
48
Thanam apunnen judam thidi anubhagapadesa thidi anubhagaanan pun thidi gunhaani paman
170
429
688
599

Page #851:
---------------------------
Gommatapsar Karmakanda-812
Gatha
Ga..
Ga.Sa.
588
621
273
489 496
660
391 497 885
784 692 695
884
35
342
607
548 193 270
785
364k 338
342
312
358
335
Pr.Sa. | Gatha
Namadhuvodayabarasa 561 Namass Nabadhuvani Ya 234 Namass Bandhathana
Namass Ya Bandhadisu 474 Namass Ya Bandhoday
Namass Ya Bandhoday Gu. 752 | Nama Thavana Dabiyam 447 , Narakchakubvelle 313 | Narayasanimanussa 757 Kinvati Sahaja 661 | Nirayagadi Auni Cham
47 | Nishyatirayanunerai 436 | Niravatirikkhaduviyalam 337 / Nishyatirikhhasura
Nirayatiriyaaou Doshnvi
Nirayaau Tiriyaaou 468 | Nirayadugam Tiriyadurg 624 | Nirayadi Judattaane 591 ] Nirayadi Pambandha
90 | Nirayaadisuu Payadittidi 433 / Nirayaadisuu Bhujega 717 | Nirayadiin Gadiin 464 Nirayapunna Panham 440 | Nirayayussa Anitta
Niraye Va Igi Naudi
Nirayena Vina Tiha 58 Nirayev Hodi Deve 75 / Niray Saasan Sammaa
| Nicucchaanekada
| Nerayiyaan Gamanam 204 | Goaagamabhavo Pun
30 | Noagamabhavo Pun Saga 171
384 370k 386k
382 350
Naudi Chaduggadhimmi Ya Nama Ya Rayadosa Nathi Anam Uvasamge Nasthi Nausayavedo Natthi Ya Sattapaddatha Nathi Sado Paradoviya Nabha Chauveesam Barasa Pabha Tigi Pyabha Igi Namah Gunarayanabhusana Namiun Abhayanandi Namiun Nemichanda Namiun Neminaha Namiun Vakamanam Navagevijjanauddisa Nav Chacha Chadukla Cha Ya Navanaudi Sagasayahi Ya Navpanchodaya Sattaa Navari Ya Apulvanavage Navari Ya Sabbuvasame Navari Visesa Jane Navari Visensan Jane Navasaya Sattattarihim Nav Saasanotti Bandho Naragainamaragana Garatiriya Sesau Galaya Bahu Ya Taha Nam Hi Saasanu Apunne Nanassa Desanasssa Ya Nanassa Padhidamidi Nanagunahanisala Nanavaranachara Nanatarayadasayam
388
552
514 609
492 740 677 120 443 829 489 460
344 364k
342
487
78
525
488
28
635 538

Page #852:
---------------------------
Gommatsar Karmakanda-813
Verse
Ga.No.
Ga.No.
Page No.
305 107
867
514
377
204 962 964 672 432
609
34 554 596
679 104
56
825
600
803
689
563
306
534 822 934
414
408
108
271
Page No. Verse
Titthaahara Jugavan 738 | Titthahaaranaato 483 | Titthahaare Sahiyam
Titthenaaharadurg 802 | Titthayaram Ussaas 803 | Tidu Igi Naudee Naudee 587 | Tidu Igi Bandhe Adachaou 422 | Tidu Igi Bandhekkudaye
Tiyaunavinsam Chhattiy 713 Tiya Panchhavisbandhe 544 | Tivvakasaao Bahumo 412 Tiviho Du Thaanbandho 492 Tiriy Apunnnam Vege 706 Tiriy Du Jaadi Chaukk 783 Tiriye Ogho Tittha 232
Tiriye Ogho Suranar 232 Tiriyaaoug Devaaug
Tiriyen Titthasattam 267 Tiriye Yaarubvellan
Tiriye yaaram Tise Tiriye V Nare Navari Hu Tisu Ekkekkan Udo Tisu Ter Das Missee
Tisarahamanukkaso 194 Tisudayam Vigitise 439 Tise Angavi Bandho 480 Tis Kodaakodi Tighaadi 484 Tisam Baras Udayu 278 Teutiguunatirikke
Teutiye Sugunogham 528 || | Teudge Manuvataugam
Teudugam Tericche Te Chaudas Pariheena
Tagunagara Kamaso Tahaane Ekaras Tapanokasaya Bhago Tattho Urimakhanda Tattho Kamen Vaddi Tattho Tiyadugamekk Tattho Pallasalaya Tatthatanaviradasammo Tatthaavaranjabhava Tatthaasattha Naaray Tatthaasattho Naaray Tatyaasatya Edi Hu Tattheva Mulabhang Tatthamtimchhi Dissay Tadiyeekvajanimin Tadiyeek Manuvagadi Tadio Sanamasiddho Tammisse Punnajuda Tavvadiritam Duviha Tasseva V Bandhaaug Tas Bandhen Hi Sanhadi Tasamisse Taani Puno Tah Ya Asanni Sanni Tah Suhup Suhum Jettha Tinni Das Atthathana Tipaenenenge Egegam Tinneva Du Baavise Titthayaramanamaya Titthapanadarauduurg Titthayarasattanaray Titthasame Nidhimichche Titthahaarachauk
242
272 564
345
352
317 409 410
425
360 Lis
110
375kh 527
581
AUm .
236 238
.
494 208 783 751 127
469 171 656
458
632
279
509 516 322 374 574 363k 373
102 237 240 211
359
289 327 616 540
495
341 359

Page #853:
---------------------------
Ganda
Tejadugam Vannachou Teja Duharasamchhou Tejakamme Hi Tithae
Udichhakasattam
Tenoudie Bandha
Ten Bhani Tosud Tettietidubandhe Te Du Naude Ude
Tenvadi Sattakhsayam
Lenavasagasadarizuda Tenuvarimpanchadaye
Tenevam Teratiye
Terva Cha Sayaee
Vanavasayee
Tekshan Tisadasahiy
Teteri Sathaee
Tevis Haranado
Tevisabandh Igi
Tevisabandhathane
Tevisadibandha
Tam
Tevisam Panavisam
Teradachou Desae
Teranave Puvvanse
Teradu Puvvan Vansa
Teras Bareyaram
Ter Sayaani Sattari
Terichha Ha Sarittha
Tehi Asankhejjaguna
Pun Aviva
"Tha"
Dhavaradug Lahaaran
Thirajummas Thirathir
Thiranuhjasasad Dugam
Ga.San.
403
100
27
766
754
763
691
.582
764
750
761
683
923
494f2f=
ܕܘ
868
566
760
769
696
525
65-7
682
667
512
ܘܝ
862
259
'S
Gommatsar Karmakanda - 814
Pr.San.
215
83
કલ
398
53
16
649
644
648
600
656
487
578
595
582
482
475
738
255
5
Gatha
Sronati Thopurina
Shrideyenuhvid
Thopurisotay Chadide
Shripunsahsasirram
Dhule Mol Sapahudi
"Da"
Davmev Param Mane
649
632
648
595
Das Angaras Dasayam
776 Dasgudeye Adavisati
4'74 Hasuriginastambha
476
Das Nava Attay Saaty
738
Is Na Navadi Chautiv
5.23
૬૪૮
65 3 Dasayaadisubandhamsa
૬ ૩૪
Dasavisam Ekkaras
243
45
139
Tiyam Vari
Davve Kammam Dubih
Davvam Thidigunhani
Davvam Samayabaddham
Das Yappanarasai
Das Chaou Padmatiyam
Dukkhatighhadoonochan
Durgad Dusssarasamhadi
Dugamannadada Dugam
Dugchhakktinnam Bage
Dug Chhakka Sattha Aththe Dutichaassanawemaar Duviha Pun Padhabhanga
Dukha Dusudease Dosuvi
Devachaukkaharad
Devachaukam Vajjam
Dev Judeva
Devbis Paradae
Devbisabandhe
Ga. San.
290
23
૨૮૮
76
390
891
245
54
922
924
.792
685
475
480
5.18
662
두두수
468
૮
317
405
283
3.76
365
844
835
400
214
576
572
573
Pr.San.
240
12
389
43
663
755
199
36
1554
776
671
599
227
452
458
486
580
582
445
103
250
399
382
365
૩૪૩
725
719
397
1.73
529
527
528 

Page #854:
---------------------------
Gommatsar Karmakanda-815
Verse
Verse No.
Page No. | Verse
Verse No.
Page No.
510
0
138
956
.
666
* 314 648 382 598 300
582 397 738
ma.
Deva-anga pamatto deva pun einda-iya deva-ahare sattham deve va vegubbe devesu devamanuve deva-odha begu-bve desanare tiriye desatiye suvi evam desavaranan-non-na dese tadiya-kasaya nicam dese tadiya-kasaya desoti have samm deha-adi phassanta deha-adi phasanta dehe a-vina-bhavi deho-dayena sa-hio do-gun-ha-gopanan do-chakk-tarka doni ya satta ya chauddas
865 117 364
ANAN
267
393 664
Kshepaka 1
181
230
340
237
281 646
3
هوا با
475 607
928
Padha-matiyam cha ya padhama 105 | Padhama-diya kasaya 545 | Pada-bhuva-sam-iye samme 78 padhama padhama khande
Pahana pamati cha-upana 269 | Panna-rakasa-yabhaya-duga
Pan-naras-ola-rasa 380 panna-rasa-nu-pati-sa
Panna-sa bara chakka 247
Panna-ekara chakka-di 232 pan-chad susna navayam 142 pan nava igi satta-rasa
Pan nava igi satta
Pan nava pan banga 28 pan-dal chassaya-hi-ya
Pan-do pan-gam pan-chadu 779 pan bandham-mi barasa
Pan-mi-ya sirasa ne-bhi 664 pan-van-ya panna-sa
Pan-bidhe vi-variyam 208 pan-vise ti-gin-aude
Patte-ya-pada miccha
Patte-vanam udhara 780 paya-di-hi-di anu-bhag 490 paya-di-e-panu-kasao
Paya-di sila sa-hava
Payala-payatu-dayey 42 | Palu-dayena ya jivo 686 | Para-dha-dadu-gam teja du
Para-gha-da-mang-punno 761 | Para-sama-yanam vayana
Parina-ma-jaga-thana 615 | Parina-mo du-tthano
704 485
461
Kshepaka
'789
168 655
777 857
904
931
-
Dhuva-va-vi bavato " " pacaya-dhanassana-yan-e pacaya-ssa ya sankalana pajjatta-gabi-ti-cha-pa-manu pad-pa-di-hara sima-jja pad-pa-di. A-hara deha pad-dha-bi-saya pa-hu-di davva pad-ini-gama-ntara-e padi-ya mari-yen-ame padi-samaya-dhan-e-vi pada padhama-kasaya-nan cha tri pada-ma-cha-usi-dina-u
M
138
800 585
175 511
895
448 725
756 180 718

Page #855:
---------------------------
## Gommatasara Karmakanda - 816

**Verse**
**Verse No.**
**Verse No.**
**Page No.**
**Page No.** | **Verse 616** | **Panchecarasabavisa 182 Pusahuniththijuda 797** | **Pumbandhaddha Anto**
277
224 954
245 167
205
693 | **Faddayage Ekeke**
225
583
858
717
200 626
150 159 564 648 621 641
762
528
838
، با
707
632
**Parihare Bandhatiyan Pallasankahejjadya Pallasankahejjadhima Pallasankahejjadhim Panavadadi Su Rado Pindapada Pancheva Ya Pudhavi Aau Teu Pudhaviyaadi Panchasu Punnatasajogthana Punnidaram Vigivigale Punnekarasajoge Punnen Samam Sabve Punaravi Desotti Guno Punvana Koditbhagha Puvana Koditbhaghada Puville Suvi Milide Pulve Panchaniyahi Punvuttapana Panaga Pugchha Na Chavis Purisodayena Chadide Anti Purisodayena Chadide Bam. Purisan Chadusanjalanam Panchakhatase Savvam Panchanha Nihanam Panchanava Doni Attha Panchanava Udayapgaridio Panchanavadonni Chabbi Panchanava Sattayapgaridio Panchividha Chadu Vidhesu Ya Panchasahassa Besaya Panchadi Panchbandho Pachidiesu Ogham Panchekarasa Iginavadal**
917 479 842 380k 743
193 134
366
650
وای با
492
| **Bahubhage Samabhagho 203**
**Bahubhage Sama. Bandha**
**Banaudi Naudi Sattha 328** | **Banaudi Naudi Sattha 489 Banaudi Naudi Sattam**
**Banaudiye Bandha 128 Banaudi Naudichau 772 Banaudi Naudichau**
**Badaranivvattivaram 720 Badalam Tu Pasattha**
**Badalam Panuvisa 624 Nadalam Bennisa 482 Bavantar Appa Dara 461 Bavatari Tisahassa**
54 **Bavisa Bandha Chadutidu 497 Bavisa Menavisa 42 Babisa Mekkavisa**
**Bavisa Yadi Bandhe 29 Bavise Adavise 29 Bavisen Piruddha**
**Bavisan Dayacha 484 Baracha U Ti Dugameka 473 Barichhavis 438 Baras Ya Vedaniye 74 Baras Say Tesidi**
**Bisidi Bajjita**
729 528
484
759
575 900 686 464
101
442
661
680
580 515 590
674
578
655 836 850
504
719 729 106
658
462
487 624
563

Page #856:
---------------------------
## Verse
* **Basī Igichapana** (Basī Igichapana)
* **Bāsū Bāsū Vardhvidīo** (Bāsū Bāsū Vardhvidīo)
* **Bigūna Nava Cāri Aṭṭhe** (Bigūna Nava Cāri Aṭṭhe)
* **Bidiyaguṇe Aṇathīpati** (Bidiyaguṇe Aṇathīpati)
* **Bindīyassavi Paṇṭhāṇe** (Bindīyassavi Paṇṭhāṇe)
* **Bidiyādisu Chasu Puḍha Vidīyāvaraṇe Nava Bandha** (Bidiyādisu Chasu Puḍha Vidīyāvaraṇe Nava Bandha)
* **Bindīye Turiye Paṇage** (Bindīye Turiye Paṇage)
* **Bidiye Bidiya Ṇige** (Bidiye Bidiya Ṇige)
* **Bidiye Vidīya Ṇisege** (Bidiye Vidīya Ṇisege)
* **Bidiye Bigapana Gayade** (Bidiye Bigapana Gayade)
* **Vidīvam Bidiya Khaṇḍa** (Vidīvam Bidiya Khaṇḍa)
* **Boindīyapjjan** (Boindīyapjjan)
* **Bandhatiyaṁ Aḍavīta Du** (Bandhatiyaṁ Aḍavīta Du)
* **Bandhapade Udayamsa** (Bandhapade Udayamsa)
* **Padi Samavi** (Padi Samavi)
* **Bandhātiya Paṇ Chaṇṇava** (Bandhātiya Paṇ Chaṇṇava)
* **Bandhukaraṇakaraṇam** (Bandhukaraṇakaraṇam)
* **Bandhukaraṇakaraṇam Bandhu Sattapadaṁ** (Bandhukaraṇakaraṇam Bandhu Sattapadaṁ)
* **Bandhe Adhāpavato** (Bandhe Adhāpavato)
* **Bandhe Saṁkāminadī** (Bandhe Saṁkāminadī)
* **Bandhāyāsa** (Bandhāyāsa)
* **Devāsa** (Devāsa)

**Gommatasāra Karmakāṇḍa - 817**

* **Madhe, Aurigārmare 4 Ele** (Madhe, Aurigārmare 4 Ele)
* **Bhavatiyāṇam Evam** (Bhavatiyāṇam Evam)
* **Bhaveyanti Bhaveyakāle** (Bhaveyanti Bhaveyakāle)
* **Bhiṇṇa Muhuno Ra** (Bhiṇṇa Muhuno Ra)
* **Bhujagārappadaraṇam** (Bhujagārappadaraṇam)
* **"Bha"** ("Bha")
* **Bhattapaīṇṇāivihī** (Bhattapaīṇṇāivihī)
* **Bhattapaīṇṇā Iṅgiṇī** (Bhattapaīṇṇā Iṅgiṇī)
* **Bhayadugarahīyaṁ Paḍha** (Bhayadugarahīyaṁ Paḍha)
* **Bhayasāhaba Ya Jugucchā Bhavvīdarāṇanaṇṇadar** (Bhayasāhaba Ya Jugucchā Bhavvīdarāṇanaṇṇadar)
* **Bhabbīndaruvam Avandaga** (Bhabbīndaruvam Avandaga)
* **Bhavvāi Savtram Abhan** (Bhavvāi Savtram Abhan)
* **Bhavvāi Savvam Abhavvam** (Bhavvāi Savvam Abhavvam)

**773**
**48**
**362**
**96**
**380**
**293**
**639**
**371**
**162**
**921**
**499**
**15.7**
**255**
**725**
**660**
**82**
**506**
**444**
**437**
**6.53**
**416**
**6.30**
**375kr**
**60**
**52**
**794**
**477**
**856**
**328**
**550**
**732**
**653**
**117**
**341**
**52**
**366**
**241**
**567**
**350**
**4.39**
* **Bhūbādaratevīsaṁ** (Bhūbādaratevīsaṁ)
* **Bhauk** (Bhauk)
* **Bhūnnāṭarapjatte** (Bhūnnāṭarapjatte)
* **Bhūtam Tu Cudam Chaidaṁ** (Bhūtam Tu Cudam Chaidaṁ)
* **Bhede Chchādālamayam** (Bhede Chchādālamayam)
* **Bhedaraṇ Ava** (Bhedaraṇ Ava)
* **612 Bhāṅgabhumā Devāu** (612 Bhāṅgabhumā Devāu)
* **580** (580)
* **'Bhoga Suravas** ('Bhoga Suravas)
* **Bhoga Va Sureṇaraca** (Bhoga Va Sureṇaraca)
* **Bhaṅga Ke Puṇa** (Bhaṅga Ke Puṇa)
* **"Ma"** ("Ma")
* **435** (435)
* **805** (805)
* **44** (44)
* **627** (627)
* **433** (433)
* **425** (425)
* **590** (590)
* **Bhujagārā Appadara** (Bhujagārā Appadara)
* **Bhujagārā Appadara** (Bhujagārā Appadara)
* **Bhujagār Appadare** (Bhujagār Appadare)
* **38** (38)
* **38** (38)
* **675**
Page #857:
---------------------------
## Gatha

**Mischa**

* Mischa-tana-na-daram
* Mischa-ti-yasola-sanam
* Mischa-ti-ye-tich-aukke
* Mischa-ti-ye-missa-pada
* Mischa-ttam-a-virama-nam
* Mischa-du-gaya-dach-aukke
* Mischa-du-ge-missa-ti-ye
* Mischa-du-ge-missa-ti-ye
* Mischa-mana-tam-missam
* Mischa-ma-punnam-chedho
* Mischa-santha-na-bhangaa
* Mischa-ssa-ya-missa-tti-ya
* Mischa-san-ti-mana-vayam
* Mischa-itta-ppi
* Mischa-adi-goda-bhangaa
* Mischa-adi-thana-bhangaa
* Mischa-tana-du-ti-du-su
* Mischa-du-vasanta-utti-ya
* Mischa-rni-gi-vi-sas-ayam
* Mischa-e-ad-bhu-daya-pada
* Mischa-e-pana-missa-tam
* Mischa-e-pari-nama-pada
* Mischa-e-vasala-ya
* Mischa-e-missa-da-va
* Bhiccha-e-sam-missa-nam
* Mischa-e-sasan-a-ya-de
* Mischa-o-ha-maha-rambho
* Mischa-m-missam-sa-gune
* Missam-mi-vi-anga-nam

**Miss**

* Missa-a-bira-dam-anu-sada
* Missa-a-vira-de-uchcha
* Missa-a-hara-ssa-ya-kshepaka
* Missu-na-pa-mata-ntte

**G.S.**

* 795
* 447
* 821
* 846
* 786
* 833
* 824
* 491
* 292
* 199
* 568
* 449
* 168
* 866
* 638
* 840
* 864
* 462
* 427
* 847
* Kshepaka 3
* 848
* 925
* 265
* 412
* 495
* 804
* 476
* 589
* 537
* 107
* 560
* 456
* Gommatasar Karmakanda - 818

**P.S.**

* 682
* 434
* 703
* 726
* 661
* 718
* 712
* 465
* 240
* 246
* 523
* 435
* 135
* 738
* 570
* 720
* 738
* 441
* 417
* 726
* 665
* 727
* 776
* 232
* 407
* 470
* 690
* 452

## Gatha

**Miss**

* Miss-e-avva-jugale
* Mula-ttara-paya-dinam
* Mula-uttar-na-ma-adi-chau
* Mula-uttar-paya-dinam-badho
* Mula-ogham-pum-vede
* Mula-unha-paha-aggi
* Moha-ssa-ya-bandho-daya
* Mohe-missa-tta-adi

**"V"**

* Sala-ye-na-vahi-da
* Vajja-yana-jina-bhavana-m
* Vajra-m-pumsan-jala-nam-ti
* Ana-na-chau-kka-ma-sattham
* Vara-inda-nana-di-guru-no
* Vame-chau-das-du-su-das-vasu-du-khu-du-su-ti-su
* Vigga-ha-kam-ma-sarire
* Vidi-yam-tera-s-bara-s-thana-m
* Vivari-ye-na-m-pada-ra
* Viri-yals-ya-shoka-mmam
* Visave-yana-rata-kkhaya
* Biso-m-igi-chad-vi-sam
* Viso-ha-vi-jja-ad
* Viso-du-chau-vi-sach-au
* Sa-di-sa-bandham-sa
* Biso-adi-nam-bhangaa
* Visu-uttar-chhach-cha-saya
* Visu-udaye-bandho-na-hi
* Viso-m-chhad-na-vi-sam

* 536
* 493
* 58
* 518
* 439
* 629
* 67
* 68
* 627
* 320
* 33
* 652
* 202
* 926
* 970
* 428
* 170
* 396
* 851
* 837
* 583
* 390k
* 569
* 85
* 57
* 592
* 423
* 597
* 746
* 603
* 604
* 747
* 759
* 369
* 331
* 291
* 720

**P.S.**

* 566
* 41
* 41
* 564
* 273
* 20
* 577
* 164
* 
Page #858:
---------------------------
## Gatha

**Vama**
Vedāsāye san
Gajoge kāle
Veyaniye adabhanga
Vedaniyagodhaghādi
Vedatiya kohamā
Vedādahāroti ya
""
Rasabandhajhavāsāna
Rājamantu pamatte
Riṇamangovangatasan
Rūuṇaddhāṇaddhe
Rūuṇṇoṇṇabbha
Rūhiyadvīsasaya
""
Laghukaraṇam icchanto
Ladvīṇivvattīṇam
Lingakasāya lessa
Logaṇamasankhapamā
Logaṇasankaśidā
Lohaśśa suhamasattarastā lohekuḍao suhu
"Sa"
Saiḍiyā pasiddhi
Sagpajjatti puṇṇe
Vīsac uda
Sagvīse tiginuḍe
Sagasagatayasya
Sagasaggaḍīṇamāuṁ
Sagasagasādvihiṇe
Sagasambhavadhūvabandhe
963
826
metals of
Mā.Sa.
315
722
614
651
49
269
354
Sacchāṇubhayam vayaṇam sacchhadīḍī hiviyappiyāṇi
930
.929
841
570
240
828
952
955
140
659
893
221
765
779
189
649
190
466
Kṣepaka7
889
Gommatasāra karmakāṇḍa- 819
Pṛ.Sa.
270
614
559
577
34
232
330
803
713
780
779
720
526
194
717
795
799
106
578
755
181
649
656
147
571
47
443
665
754
Gāthā
Sagchauppuvasa saṇṇāṇapancayādī
Saṇāṇe carimapanaṁ
Saṇi asanṇi caukke
Saṇimmi maṇusammy
Saṇimmi savvabandho
Saṇissadu
Sassimasya
Saṇṇissuvavādavaraṁ
Saṇī chassanhḍo
Lattanh guṇasank
Sattatigam āsāṇe
Sattapāde bandhudaya
Sattaras pancatitthā
Sattarasādī aḍādī
Sattarasuhu masarāge sattara aḍachadūv
Sattarasēkāsayaṁ
Sattarasēkārakhachadū
Sattaralekārakha
Sattarasannvayatiyaṁ
Sattara daguṇi sattābāṇaudītiyaṁ
Sattāvīsahiyas
Satty ya ladā dārū
Sadaye aḍvīse
Sattetāla dhūvāvi ya
Sattev apattā
Sattebandhudayāchadū
Sataṁ tiṇaudī pahūdī
Sattam du ṇaudī ṇaudī
Sattam samayapabadhdham
Gā.Sa.
663
324
547
146
601
709
150
536
237
31
541
422
372
669
151
671
212
681
103
276
282
656
854
713
471
180
6687
404
705
753
748
1752
943
Pṛ.Sa.
581
281
501
114
544
607
123
493
194
19
495
410
358
586
124
586
173
595
56
236
237
578
729
609
447
141
599
399
607
641
632
632
789

Page #859:
---------------------------
Gommatsar Karmakanda-820
Verse
Verse No.
Page No. | Verse
Verse No.
Page No.
420
231
613
Saththagadeetasadasayam Saththattaadhaaramsaththaanam dhuviyaanag sammattoonubvelan sammattam desajam sammaviheenabelle
319
179 426 618 424
267 271 359 289
375
326
633
568
122
411
42 274 625
3
470
445
548.
187
5.58 496
579
410 | Sarisaayamaenuvaar 558 Sarisasaarisade dabbve 140 Saane tesi chedo 417 Saane thiveed chidi 560 Saane pan igibhanga
Saane suraau suragdi
Saadaasaadekkadaram 138 Saadi anaadi dhuv. 427 Saadi anaadi dhuv,
Sadi adbandhe 234 Saad tinnavaau 563 Samann avattako
Sapaann kavaliss 148 Samagn tityakaal
Samann tiriyaa paanch Samann sayal biyalaach Saasan athadapanate
Saasan pamanavaj 779 Saman missa dase 575 Siddhatudayataagay
Sidvaanatiim bhaag 535 Sidde visudd pillaye
Siddesu suddha bhangaa
Sidaadi chadaana 781 | Sidaadi chausubandha
Sukke sadarachoukk sunnam pamaadarhide
Suranaratiriyooraaliy 337 Suranarassamme padhamo
Suranirya biseeshanar 652 Suraniryaauunogh
Suranirvaaoo tit, Suraniryaanaratiriyaa
472
967
Sammo va miccho va samm miccham missa samachauravarasaha samaryadigo sabhi samavisamattaanapi va samayapaldhapamaa sayalarasakhvagandhe sayalangogaeka sabdidonamukkassao sambaparattaaneen ya sabbasseeruvam sabchamalayaanam sanchaaubandhabhangae sanchaaod thitiyo savyaapjazzattaanam savaraanan davyam savvaavaranam da samvati payheen sabbukasssathideen sachuvarimohaanaye sache jijapadesae saccham tigesh savvam savvam titthahaaroobhaoon sanch tivais savvam sayalam padam saragdi du jasadenam
804
617 .54
126
197 199 932
559
874 622 758
642
948
228 360
Kshepak. 5 406 620
561
554
.
xua.
103
D
398
650 227

Page #860:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-821
Verse
Verse No.
Page No. | Verse
Verse No.
9.
S.
Page No.
441 286 946 203
791 164
755
121
532
544
Suranireya Ujjovo Suhumgaladdhijahannang 233 Suhamanigoada Appajjata 215 Suhamanigoada Ap. Pajjata 256 Suhadukkhanimittaa . 123. Suhapayadin Visohi Suhamassa Bandhavadi
419 Suhume Suhamo Loho Kshepaka 6 Sevadena Ya Gamai
29 Sedhi Asankhejadimaa 258 Sedhiyan Sankhejadimaa 252 Sese Titthahaaram
125 Sesanan Pajjatto Sesanan Payadinang
194 Sesana Sagunogham So Me Tivanamhiyo 357 Solatekkigichchakka Solasapanbisan,
94 Solas Bisadam Kamaso
798 Sohammoti Ya Tavang
। 138 । Sankamanakaranuna
Sankhauganaratiriye 176 Sankhejasahassaniva 209 Sanjalan Bhaga Bahubhaga
Jalpa Suhubhavas
Sanjogamevetivadanti 410 Santhan Sanhadinan 665 Santhane Sanhadane
Santhane Sanhadane 209 Sanhitthi Chakkasaya 207 Santoti Attasana 101 Santanakamenagaya 107
Hassaradi Ucchapurisa 299 Hassaradi Purisagodadu 336 Haradu Samma Missa 307 Haradhinna Evam
Haram Adhapavana
Hettimkhandukkassa 138 | Hoti Anittiyo Te
457
439
ANG
142
532 47
12
685
425 1.9 912
570
卐卐卐 

Page #861:
---------------------------
Appendix - 2
Page No.
670
671
671
524
520
669
697
668
670
520
668
670
695
687
659
761
3
427
485
669
669
669
Index of Gathas Quoted in the Commentary
Serial No. of Gatha
Aṇamiccha Vidiya
Aṇamicchāhārad Dugūṇā
Āhāre Kammūṇā
'Ikkam Baḍhaḍ Niyamā
Igitīsantā Baṇḍhaḍ
Itthi Pauṁsayavede
Udayeṇa Uvasameṇa
Orāliya Āhāradugūṇ
Kammorāl Dugāi
Jas Kitti Baṇdhantō
Tas Pañcakkhe Savve
Tejatīya Cakkhujugale
Daṁsaṇṇāṇa Caritāṇi
Paḍiṇāyāi Heū
Paṇuvīsāi Pañcaya
Padamegeṇa Vihīṇaṁ
Baṇḍha Paḍi Eya
Baṇḍhaṁ Prati Bhavatyai̇kyam
Bāvīsādisu Pañcasu Dassaādi
Maṇaje Kevala Duve
Mad-Sua- Aṇṇāṇe
Madī Sua-Ohi
-
Where else it is found
Prā. Paṁ. Saṁ. Śataka Gā. 95 Pṛ. 110 97 Pṛ. 112 100 Pṛ. 192
Prā. Paṁ. Sa. Pū. 198
Prā. Paṁ. Saṁ. Pū. 196
Prā. Paṁ. Saṁ. Śataka Gā. 89 Pṛ. 109 Pañcāstikāya Gā. 56
Prā. Paṁ. Saṁ. Śataka Gā. 84 Pṛ. 108
Prā. Paṁ. Saṁ. Śataka Gā. 94 Pṛ. 110
Prā. Paṁ. Saṁ. Pṛ. 196
Prā. Paṁ. Saṁ. Śataka Gā. 87 Pṛ. 109
Prā. Paṁ. Saṁ. Śataka Gā. 96 Pṛ. 199 Pañcāstikāya Gā. 164
Prā. Paṁ. Saṁ. Gā. 216 Pṛ. 174
Prā. Paṁ. Saṁ. Gā 437 Pṛ. 500
Trilokasāra Gā. 164 Sarvārthasiddhi A. 2 Sū. 7 Ṭīkā Tattvārthasāra A. 5 Śloka 18
Prā. Paṁ. Saṁ. Pū. 322
Prā. Paṁ. Saṁ. Śataka Gā. 92 Pṛ. 110 Prā. Paṁ. Saṁ. Śataka Gā. 90 Pṛ. 110 Prā. Paṁ. Saṁ. Śataka Gā. 91 Pṛ. 110

Page #862:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-823
P.S.
Gathanukrama
Where else is it
668
671
Pra.Pan.Sa. Shataka Ga, 86 p. 109 Pra.Pan.Sa. Shataka Ga, 99 p. 112 Pra.Pan.Sa. Shataka Ga, 28 p. 112
671
Dhavala Pu. 6 p. 63
27
Micchatai Chautthaya Micchadi Chaukeyar Micchaharaduguna Mukhamarddhashareerasya Rasadraktan Tato Mansam Bataha Pisan Tatha Shleeshma Biralidasio Viralidarasi Dopoona Veuvvyajuyalaheena Manue Shuro'si Kritadhyo Saragasanayama Schiva Samaaiya Chheesu So Tena Panchmattakalena Sanjalananoksaya
787
Silokasara Ga. 110 Trilokasara Ga. 111 Pra.Pan.Sa. Ga, 85 p. 108
668
670
Sattvarthasara A 4 Ga, 43 Pra.Pan.Sa. Ga. 83 p. 110 Bhagavatiaradhana Ga. 2120 Pra.Pan.Sa. Ga. 88 p. 109
557 

Page #863:
---------------------------
Appendix - 3
Characteristics
Technical Terms
Characteristics
Aghatiya
Adhuvavandha
Adhapravrttakarana
Adhapravrtta-samkramana Bhagahar
Anantanubandhi
Karmas that do not harm the divine qualities of the jiva are Aghatiya. (J.D.P.1 p. 67) (Gatha 9 Tika) The bandha that will be absent is Adhruvabandh. (Gatha 90, 103 Tika) The upper time-related state (parinam) is similar to the lower time-related states, therefore the name Adhapravrttakarana is appropriate. (Gatha 898 Tika) The transition of bandha-prakritis in their potential subject of bandha is called Adhapravrtta-samkramana. Its part is an innumerable part of the palya. (Gatha 401 Tika) Because it is the cause of infinite samsara, mithyatva is infinite, and the chirasangini (anubandhini) of that mithyatva is Anantanubandhi kshaya. (Gatha 33 Tika) The bandha that has not been absent since the beginning of time, is Anadibandh. (Gatha 90, 123 Tika) 'Anukarshanamanushti' considers the mutual similarity of parinamas, this is one meaning of Anukrusti. (Gatha 905 Tika) This is the subject of Paryayarthikanaya. Where there is no being, there is absence. When bhavakri is achieved, there is opposition to absence, because absence cannot occur without the negation of sadbhaav. (Gatha 94 Tika) The parinamas that increase or decrease with each moment due to sanklesha or vishuddhi, and do not return to their previous state, are called Aparivartaman-madhyama parinamas. (Gatha 177 Tika)
Anadibandh
Anukrusti
Anutpadanuchheda
Aparivartaman-madhyama parinam 

Page #864:
---------------------------
## Gommatasara Karmakanda - 825
### Glossary of Terms
#### Definitions
**Asaktvyabandh:**  A bond that was not intended in the past but arises later. For example, in the Gunasthan of subdued delusion, there is no bond of mohaniya karma, but when one falls from that state, the bond of mohaniya karma arises, which is asaktvyabandh. (Gatha 470 Tika)
**Avalambanakaran:** The fall of a substance from a higher position in the lifespan of the next birth, due to its decline, outside the period of obstruction. (D.P. 10, p. 330-31) (Gatha 159 Tika)
**Avalambanakaran:**  Even though there is a decline in the lifespan of the next birth, the fall does not occur within the period of obstruction but in the state-inhibitors located above the obstruction. Therefore, it is different from decline and is called avalambanakaran. (Gatha 446 Tika)
**Avashitabandh:**  When a bond of a lesser nature occurs, the same number of natures are bound afterwards. (Gatha 469, 564)
**Alpatarabandh:**  When a bond of a greater nature occurs, a bond of a lesser nature occurs afterwards. (Gatha 469, 563)
**Atap:**  Only that which has heat in its rays. (Gatha 33)
**Abadha:**  The period of obstruction for pudgaladravya karma until it becomes manifest. (Gatha 155)
**Abadhakala:**  The period of obstruction for karma-transformed kamanadravya until it becomes manifest or active. (Gatha 914)
**Ayu:**  The karma that determines the lifespan of a jiva. (Gatha 51)
**Inginimaran:**  At the time of sannyasmaran, one should take care of their own body, not have others do it. (Gatha 61) 

Page #865:
---------------------------
## Gommatasara Karmakanda - 826

**Glossary of Terms**

**Lakshana (Definition)**

* **Utpadanuccheda (Annihilation of Production):** This is a subject of the Dravyarthic Nay (Principle of Substance). Where there is existence, there is annihilation. Where there is no existence, it cannot even come to mind, because there is no such thing as "non-existence." Proof only recognizes the existing object. Proof does not operate on the non-existent. If proof were to operate on the non-existent, then it would be like believing in the horns of a donkey, which is not true. (Gatha 94)
* **Utpannasthanasattva (Existence at the Place of Origin):** In the previous state, the existence that is present with or without agitation, is called "Utpannasthanasattva" in the subsequent state when it arises. (Gatha 351)
* **Udyota (Radiance):** That which has no heat in its radiance (rays). (Gatha 33)
* **Udvellana Sankraman (Agitation-Transition):** Like untying a rope without the effects of the instrument, the transition of karma-regions in the form of other natures is called "Udvellana Sankraman." Its division is as small as an immeasurable part of a finger. (J.D.P. 9, p. 170-171) (Gatha 409 Commentary)
* **Bhagahara (Division):** Just as a rope that was tied is untied by force, similarly, the karmas that were bound are destroyed by removing them with the "Udvellana Bhagahara" and making them attain another form of nature. (Gatha 349)
* **Upshama (Sublimation):** The state of karmas remaining in existence without "Uday" (arising), "Udirana" (agitation), "Utkarshana" (elevation), "Apakarshana" (detraction), "Paraprakriti Sankraman" (transition to other nature), "Sthitikanadakghata" (destruction of the state-section), and "Anubhagakanadakghata" (destruction of the experience-section). (Gatha 337)
* **Uday Aabada (Arising Obstruction):** Without the "Ayukarma" (life-karma), the obstruction for the remaining seven fundamental natures at the time of binding is 100 years for the "Ekakodakodi Sagar" (one hundred crore oceans), but for the "Antar-kodakodi" (inner hundred crore), it is only a moment. (Gatha 915-916)
* **Udirana Aabada (Agitation Obstruction):** Without the "Ayukarma," the agitation of the remaining karmas occurs after the "Bandhavali" (binding period) is over. Therefore, the agitation obstruction period is equal to one "Aavali" (binding period). (Gatha 918)

**Udvellana (Agitation)**

**Upshama (Sublimation)**

**Uday Aabada (Arising Obstruction)**

**Udirana Aabada (Agitation Obstruction)** 

Page #866:
---------------------------
## Gommatasara Karmakanda - 827

**Glossary of Terms**

**Lakshana (Definition)**

* **Audayikabhava:** The state of a being arising from the fruition of karma. (Gatha 815)
* **Aupashamikabhava:** The state of a being arising from the cessation of opposing karma. (Gatha 814)
* **Kadalipaatamarana/Akaalamarana:** Death caused by poison, blood loss, weapon injury, distress, suffocation, lack of food, or by elements like ice, fire, and water. (Gatha)
* **Karmapad:** The distinctions between beings arising from the intention of the binding places of name karma. (Gatha 519-20)
* **Kaandaka:** The transition occurring in multiple time groups. (Gatha 412)
* **Gatinamkarma:** The karma that causes the soul to attain a different state or that causes actions and feelings related to that state. (Gatha 33)
* **Gunasanakrama:** The transition of space occurring in an infinite series in every moment. Its divisor is also an infinite part of a moment, but it is infinitely less than the divisor of downward-moving transition. (Jayadhaval Pu. 9 p. 172) (Gatha 409)
* **Gotrakarma:** The conduct of a being that has come down through lineage. The lineage of those who have established a connection with virtuous beings, who are worthy of initiation, and who are 'Arya' due to their knowledge and conduct is called a high lineage. The opposite of this is a low lineage. (Dhaval Pu. 13 p. 389) (Gatha 13)
* **Ghatiya:** Karma that destroys the divine qualities of a being. (Jayadhaval Pu. 1 p. 67) (Gatha 9) 

Page #867:
---------------------------
## Gommatasara Karmakanda - 828

**Glossary of Terms**

**Definition**

**Charitramohaniya:**  That which attracts or causes attachment to conduct (charitra). (Gatha 33)

**Chulika:**  A statement that implies an unstated meaning, either explicitly or implicitly. It is a detailed explanation of the meaning conveyed by a sutra. It clarifies the meaning of a statement, leading to a definite understanding of the subject matter. (Dhavala, Vol. 11, p. 140; Dhavala, Vol. 10, p. 395; Dhavala, Vol. 7, p. 575; Brihad Dravya Sangraha Tika, p. 68; Gatha 398)

**Jati Namakarma:**  The classification of beings based on their inherent similarities. (Gatha 33)

**Jati Pada:**  A term that refers to a specific category or class. For example, although there are four types of knowledge (kshayopashbhik jnana), they are all considered to belong to the same category of knowledge. (Gatha 844)

**Jiva Pada:**  The term for the 41 categories of living beings. (Gatha 519-20)

**Dravyakarma:**  The karma that affects the pudgala (matter) body. (Gatha 6)

**Dhruvabandh:**  The permanent bond that cannot be eliminated. (Gatha 90, 123 Tika)

**Dharmakatha (Vastu):**  A religious story or discourse.

**Navakabandh:**  The newly formed bond. (Gatha 343 Tika)

**Namakarma:**  The karma that determines the various aspects of a being, such as its destiny, body, and qualities. (Gatha 12 Tika) 

Page #868:
---------------------------
## Gommatasara Karmakanda - 829

**Technical Terms**

**Definition**

* **Nidranidra:**  Sleep-sleep
* **Nidra:** Sleep
* **Nivritti Gunasthan:**  State of non-return (or return)
* **Nirantabandhi Prakriti:**  Continuously bound nature
* **Parivartaman Madhyam Parinam:**  Intermediate result that changes
* **Anekaprakarse Savadhan Kiya Hua Bhi Aankhen Nahin Khol Sakta:**  Even though made aware in many ways, cannot open eyes. (Verse 22)
* **Nidra Karmodayse Gaman Karta Hua Khada Ho Jata Hai, Baith Jata Hai, Gir Jata Hai Ityadi Kriyaen Hoti Hain:**  While going through the arising of sleep karma, actions like standing, sitting, falling, etc. occur. (Verse 24)
* **Ek Hi Samay Mein Sthit Nana Jeevo Ke Bhin-Bhin Parinam Hon, Vah Nivritti (Anivritti) Gunasthan Hai:**  Different results for different beings in the same state, that is the state of non-return (or return). (Verse 100)
* **Jiska Bandhkal Jghanya Bhi Antarmuhurt Matra Hai, Vah Nirantabandhi Prakriti Hai:**  Whose bondage period is even as short as a moment, that is continuously bound nature. (Dhaval Pu. 8 p. 100)
* **Jghanya Se Bhi Antarmuhurt Tak Bandhti Rahe Arthat Antarmuhurt Ke Madhy Mein Bandh Ho Kar Jis Prakriti Mein Antar Nahin Padta, Vah Nirantabandhi Prakriti Hai:**  Even from the shortest period to a moment, it remains bound, meaning that the nature in which there is no difference in being bound within a moment, that is continuously bound nature. (Karma Prakriti p. 14-15) (Verse 399 Commentary)
* **Jo Parinam Ek Avastha Se Dusri Avastha Ko Prapt Ho Kar Punah Purva Avastha Ko Prapt Ho Saken, Ve Parivartaman Parinam Hain:**  Results that can be obtained from one state to another and then return to the previous state, those are changing results. (Verse 177)
* **Karma Ke Upsham-Kshay-Kshayopsham Aur Uday Ki Apeksha Bina Jeev Ka Jo Bhav, Vah Parinabhik Bhav Hai:**  The state of a being without the expectation of the subsidence, destruction, destruction-subsidence, and arising of karma, that is the result-based state. (Verse 815)
* **Shol Ya Swabhav:**  Heat or nature. (Verse 2)
* **Jiske Uday Se Mukh Se Lar Bahti Hai Aur Hath Adi Ang Chalte Hain, Kintu Savadhan Nahin Rahta, Vah Prachala-Prachala Nidra Hai:**  Whose arising causes saliva to flow from the mouth and limbs to move, but is not aware, that is the sleep of moving-moving. (Verse 24)
* **Jiske Uday Mein Yah Jeev Aankhon Ko Kuch-Kuch Ugadh Kar Sata Hai Aur Sota Hua Bhi Thoda-Thoda Janta Hai, Bar-Bar Mandashyan Karta Hai, Vah Prachala Nidra Hai:**  Whose arising causes this being to open its eyes slightly and be aware, even while sleeping, and repeatedly falls into a light sleep, that is the sleep of moving. (Verse 25)
* **Pratyay Shabd Ke Anek Arth Hain - Gyan, Shapath, Hetu. Yahan Par Hetu Arth Vivakshit Hai:**  The word "Pratyay" has many meanings - knowledge, oath, reason. Here, the meaning of reason is intended. (Verse 786)
* **Sannyas Bharanaka Samay Apne Sharir Ki Sanwa Dusron Se Na Karave Aur Swayam Bhi Na Kare:**  During the time of renunciation, one should not have sexual intercourse with others, nor should one do it oneself. (Verse 61)

**Result-based State**

**Nature**

* **Prachala-Prachala:**  Moving-moving
* **Prachala:**  Moving
* **Pratyay:**  Reason
* **Prayopgamanamaran:**  Approaching death
Page #869:
---------------------------
## Technical Terms

**Fali:** A group of provinces that are infected at the same time. (Gatha 412 Commentary)

**Bhaktapratyakhyana:** 

**Bhavakarma:** 

**Bhujakarabandha:** 

**Mithyatvaprakriti:** The nature of falsehood, which makes the being turn away from the path taught by the omniscient, disinterested in the truth, and devoid of thoughts about the welfare of the self. (Gatha 33 Commentary)

**Vyuchchitti:** The absence of arising or binding in the higher stages of the soul. (Gatha 401 Commentary)

**Vidhyatsankraman - Bhagahar:** The transition from falsehood to right belief, which occurs throughout the period of the knowledge of right belief, until the final moment of the downward movement related to the destruction of the obscurations of perception. Its division is also an immeasurable part of an inch, but it is immeasurable times less than the division of the upheaval. (J.D.P. 9 p. 179) (Gatha 409 Commentary)

**Visanayana:** The simultaneous disconnection of the four passions of the infinite. It means giving rise to five passions, including non-rejection, etc., out of the 12 passions and 9 non-passions. (Gatha 336 Commentary)

**Vishuddhaparinam:** Pure result in the form of mild passions. (Gatha 163 Commentary)

**Vedaniya Karma:** The karmas that cause the experience of pleasure and pain. The karmas that are experienced as sensations are called vedaniya karmas. (D.P. 6 p. 10) (Gatha 14)

**Gommatasar Karmakanda - 830:** 

**Styanagridhi:** The sleep in which one remains asleep even when lifted, performs many actions in that sleep, and speaks but is not aware. (Gatha 22)

**Lakshan:** 

**The time period for the renunciation that occurs by taking a vow to abstain from food is from the shortest, an instant, to the longest, 12 years. (Gatha 60) The power of the karmas to bear fruit is called bhavakarma. (Gatha 6) The binding of lesser natures followed by the binding of greater natures is called bhujakarabandha. (Gatha 469-563) **

Page #870:
---------------------------
## Glossary of Terms

**Technical Terms**
* **Stava:** Praise
* **Stuti:** Praise
* **Sthāna-sthāna:** Place-place
* **Svasthāna-sattva:** Self-place-being
* **Saṁkleśa-pariṇāma:** Affliction-transformation
* **Samyaktva-prakriti:** Rightness-nature
* **Samyag-mithyātva-prakriti:** Right-falsehood-nature
* **Saṁkramaṇa:** Transition
* **Samaya-prabaddha kārmaṇa-vargaṇā kārmaṇa-śarīra:** Time-bound karma-classification karma-body
* **Gommatasāra karmakāṇḍa - 831:** Gommatasāra karmakāṇḍa - 831

**Definitions**
* **Lakṣaṇa:** A treatise that describes all the parts of a subject, either in detail or in summary. (Verse 88)
* **Lakṣaṇa:** A treatise that describes a single part of a subject, either in detail or in summary. (Verse 88)
* **Sthāna-sthāna:** The places where the karmic natures reside, i.e., the community of natures. These places are of three types: the nature-place, the bondage-place, the arising-place, and the being-place. (J.D.P. 2, p. 199) (Verse 451 Commentary)
* **Svasthāna-sattva:** The being that arises after the intended synonym has been produced, and which becomes newly bound either with or without being stirred up. (Verse 351 Commentary)
* **Saṁkleśa-pariṇāma:** The transformation of intense passions. (Verse 163 Commentary)
* **Samyaktva-prakriti:** That which does not hinder the soul's faith, but rather harms the purity and stability of right vision. (J.D.P. 5, p. 130) (Verse 33 Commentary)
* **Samyag-mithyātva-prakriti:** The karmic nature in which the power of the false view is somewhat weakened and somewhat remains. (Verse 33 Commentary)
* **Saṁkramaṇa:** The transformation of the atoms of one nature into another nature of the same kind, as described in the Agamas. (J.D.P. 7, p. 238) Transition is possible when there is bondage, but not in the absence of bondage. (D.P. 16, p. 340) (Verse 409 Note, 410 Commentary)
* **Samaya-prabaddha kārmaṇa-vargaṇā kārmaṇa-śarīra:** The time-bound karma-classification karma-body is composed of five types of taste, five types of color, two types of smell, and four of the eight types of touch (one each from the four pairs of smooth-rough, cold-hot, harsh-soft, heavy-light). It is a collection of an infinite number of pudgala atoms, equal to an infinite multiple of the infinite part of the Siddha's body and the non-existent beings. (Verse 191) 

Page #871:
---------------------------
Gommatasara Karmakanda-832 Paribhashik Shabd Sarvapadbhanga Sarvasankramabhagahar Sadibandh Santarabandhprakriti Siddhantachkravarti where separate complete states are grasped, those are Sarvapadbhanga. (Gatha 844) The simultaneous transition of all is Sarvasankrama. Its Bhagahar is one Akta. (Gatha 409 Tika) The bond that is released and then bound again is Sadibandh. (Gatha 90, 123 Tika) The binding in one time and the release of the bond seen in the second time is Santarabandhprakriti. (D.P. 8 p. 100) (Gatha 399 Tika) The nature of the bond that binds from the lowest to the highest time, starting from the beginning and until before the Antarmuhurta, is Santarabandhi, or the nature that is released in the middle of the Antarmuhurta and then bound again with an interval is Santarabandhprakriti. (K.P. p. 14-15) The one who understands the six divisions of the Agamas, namely, Jiva-sthana, Ksudrabandha, Bandhaswamitva, Vedanakhanda, Varganakhanda, and Mahabandha, through the wheel of Buddhi. (Gatha 397) The four natures, namely, Tiryanch-gati, Tiryanch-gati-anupurvi, Tiryanch-ayu, and Udyat, are called Sattarachatuska or Shatarachatuska. The nature that arises in the form of another nature and attains destruction, their final destination is Kshayadesha, and the ones that arise from their own nature, their Kshayadesha is after the remaining time of one Avali. (Gatha 512, 445 Tika) The complete destruction of the opposing karma leads to Kshayik-bhava. (Gatha 854) The manifestation of the qualities of the Jiva even when the opposing karmas, the enemies of the country, arise, is called Misra (Kshayo-pashamik) bhava. (Gatha 814) Shatarachatuska (Satarachatuska) Kshayadesha Kshayik Kshayo-pashamik 卐卐 

