Catalog link: https://jainqq.org/explore/001822/1

Page #1:
---------------------------
Padmapurana
Acharya Ravishena
[First Part]

|| The entire secret of the path of knowledge and liberation is revealed. The divine Kanya (Goddess) Vasu, the destroyer of the enemy, is worshipped. || 73 || Thus ends the twelve names of the Acharya Vishnu. || 12 ||

Then, crossing over, the highly respected ones, distressed by the sweet and bitter experiences, preceded by thousands of followers, approached the abode of Prabhavana. They stayed there as per their liking. || 2 ||

(There) the thousands of weeping ones, whose faces were not anointed, showed their inability. But the mother (Goddess) did not accept it. Quickly she became pleased. || 4 ||

On being told this by the mouths of the Lokapalas (guardians of the world), they were amazed! The Lokapalas laughed heartily and said, "We shall release you from this bondage. || 

For whom the lord of the gods, the pure one, free from thorns, has come from the city of the gods, how can this worldly lord obstruct him? Filled with reverence, they said, "We shall release you from this, for there is no other way." || 11 ||

Seeing this, the Lokpala did not do anything. || 12 ||

Then, being humble, he said to the cycle of transmigration, "Here the imperishable, nectar-like letters are not more than that. How can the violation of the command be?" || 14 ||

"If the gurus are not in the ultimate truth, then the one who is worthy of worship gives me a seat. The ninefold vows are not to be abandoned. || 16 ||

My mind is distressed. Who is my fourth born now? The best among the brothers, the best among the brothers, the best among the brothers." || 20 ||

The Lokapalas were just as they were before. "Is there anything more than this in your discernment?" || 21 ||

"Let this one be tired in Varanasi, where the land is made sacred." Then the sweet words came out. "Certainly, the birth is new. The best among the devotees, may your desire be fulfilled. Not at all, there is no defect in you. Equal to the capable one. The one who creates fame, the two faults, the two faults, what is your choice?" || 22 ||

But the birth on the earth cannot be abandoned with pride. A

Page #2:
---------------------------
In the Jain tradition, Maryadapurushotam Ram is considered one of the 63 Shalaka Purushas. One of his names was also Padma. This name is more prevalent in Jain Puranas and Charitakavyas. Jain poets have presented Ram's character in various languages like Prakrit, Sanskrit, Apabhramsha, etc., under names like Paumachariyam, Paumachariyu, Padma Purana, Padmacharit, etc. Acharya Ravishena's (7th century) present work, Padma Purana, is considered one of the most excellent character-based epics in Sanskrit. Even though it is a Purana, this work is so extraordinary in terms of poetic art, psychoanalysis, character portrayal, etc., that it cannot be compared to any other Purana Kavya. The poetic beauty in it is so profound that this poetic stream, emanating from the mental snow-capped mountains as the poet's inner voice, seems to be the Mandakini itself. From the perspective of subject matter, the poet has depicted the Vidhyadharaloka, Anjana-Pavananjay, Hanuman, Sukoshal, etc., along with the main plot, which has increased the interest of the work so much that one does not feel like stopping after starting to read it once. Edited by Purana-paragami Dr. (Pan.) Pannalal Jain Sahityacharya with a preface, appendix, etc., and translated into Hindi, this work has been published in three volumes by Bharatiya Gyanpith. This is another new edition of the work, keeping in mind the expectation and need of scholars, researchers, and self-study enthusiasts.

Page #3:
---------------------------
Murtidevi Jain Granyamala: Sanskrit Granyanka-1
-
Srimad Ravishenaacharya Pranitam
Padma Puranam
[Padmacharitam]
Prathamo Bhaga
Hindi Anuvaad, Prastavana Tatha Shlokanukramanika Sahit
Sampadan-Anuvaad Dr. Pannalal Jain, Sahityacharya
BLMERO
STRILIATig
THosie
Bharatiya Gyanapith
Aathvaan Sankaran: 2000  Muly: 180 Ru.

Page #4:
---------------------------
ISBN 81-263-0507-X (Set)
81-263-0508-8
Bharatiya Jnanpith
(Established: Falgun Krishna 9; Veer Ni. San. 2470; Vikram San. 2000; 18 February 1944)
Established in memory of Punyashloka Mata Murtidevi
by Sahu Shantiprasad Jain
and
supported by his wife Smt. Rama Jain
Murtidevi Jain Granthamala
This Granthamala publishes research-based editions and translations of Jain literature in various subjects like Agamic, philosophical, mythological, literary, historical, etc. available in ancient languages like Prakrit, Sanskrit, Apabhramsha, Hindi, Kannada, Tamil, etc. along with their original texts and translations wherever possible. Bibliographies of Jain libraries, collections of inscriptions, studies on art and architecture by eminent scholars and public-welfare Jain literature are also being published in this Granthamala.

Granthamala Editor (First Edition) Dr. Hiralal Jain and Dr. A. N. Upadhye
Publisher
Bharatiya Jnanpith
18, Institutional Area, Lodi Road, New Delhi-110003
Printer: Nagari Printers, Naveen Shahdara, Delhi-110 032
© All rights reserved by Bharatiya Jnanpith

Page #5:
---------------------------
Moortidevi Jain Granthamala: Sanskrit Series-21

RAVISENĀCĀRYA'S
PADMA PURĀṆA
[PADMACARITA ]
Vol. I
Edited and Translated by Dr. Pannalal Jain Sahityacharya
BHARATIYA JNANPITH
Eighth Edition: 2000 Price: Rs. 180

Page #6:
---------------------------
ISBN 81-263-0507-X (Set)
81-263-0508-8
BHARATIYA JNANPITH (Founded on Phalguna Krishna 9; Vira N. Sam. 2470; Vikrama Sam. 2000; 18th Feb. 1944)
MOORTIDEVI JAIN GRANTHAMALA
FOUNDED BY
Sahu Shanti Prasad Jain In memory of his illustrious mother Smt. Moortidevi
and promoted by his benevolent wife
Smt. Rama Jain
In this Granthamala critically edited Jain agamic, philosophical, puranic, literary, historical and other original texts in Prakrit,
Sanskrit, Apabhramsha, Hindi, Kannada, Tamil etc. are being published in original form with their
translations in modern languages. Also being published are catalogues of Jain bhandaras, inscriptions, studies on art and architecture by competent scholars and also popular
Jain literature.
General Editors : (First edition) Dr. Hiralal Jain & Dr. A.N. Upadhye
Published by
Bharatiya Jnanpith 18, Institutional Area, Lodi Road, New Delhi-110 003
Printed at : Nagri Printers, Naveen Shahdara, Delhi-110 032
© All Rights Reserved by Bharatiya Jnanpith

Page #7:
---------------------------
## Editorial [First Edition]

The Ramayana has been the most ancient, extensive, revered, and interesting subject in Indian literature. If we measure ancient Sanskrit and Prakrit literature from this perspective, then perhaps more than half of it will be found to be connected, originated, or inspired by this story in some form. In the Vedic tradition, the Valmiki Ramayana is considered the oldest epic. The most excellent epic of that tradition is Kalidasa's 'Raghuvamsa', whose subject is the same Rama story. And the two excellent plays of the great poet Bhavabhuti, 'Mahavira Charita' and 'Uttara-Ramacharita', are also entirely based on the Ramayana. Although this story is not found to be as extensive in the Buddhist tradition, it is narrated in the famous 'Jataka' section of Pali literature, called 'Dasaratha Jataka'. And in it, Lord Buddha himself is considered to be Rama Pandit in a previous birth. This story is concise and unique in its own way in some aspects. Its greatest peculiarity is considering both Rama and Sita as brother and sister, and their marriage after returning from exile. In the Shakya dynasty, from which Lord Buddha was born, there are mentions of the practice of brother-sister marriage. This story was also very popular among the mixed Semitic races. According to Jain Puranas, the marriage of brother and sister in the Bhoga-bhumis has been a stable system.

In the Jain tradition, Rama is counted among the sixty-three Shalaka-purushas as Vasudeva, and great Puranas have been written about his life story. Rama's name was also Padma, and this name is more commonly used for him in Jain Puranas.

The oldest Jain Purana related to the Ramayana is the Padma Purana written in Sanskrit by Ravishena, the Pauma-Chariya written in Prakrit by Vimalsuri, and the 'Pauma-Chariu' written in Apabhramsha by Swayambhu. This character is also found in the Sanskrit Mahapurana by Jinasena Gunabhadra, the Apabhramsha Mahapurana by Pushpadanta, and the Sanskrit Trishatishataka Shalaka Purusha Charita by Hemachandra. From the perspective of the similarity and dissimilarity of the story, we can divide this literature into two categories. One category includes the works of Vimalsuri, Ravishena, Swayambhu, and Hemachandra, and the other category includes the works of Gunabhadra and Pushpadanta. The biggest peculiarity of the works of this second category compared to the first is that they consider Rama's father Dasharatha to be the king of Banaras and describe Sita as born from the womb of Mandodari, the queen of Ravana. Why this difference in belief arose is a subject of study.

Regarding the two oldest and greatest works related to the Ramayana, the Padma Purana written in Sanskrit by Ravishenacharya and the Paumachariyam written in Prakrit by Vimalsuri, many thought-provoking points arise. The plot of both is entirely the same. Not only this, but by looking at both together, there is no doubt that they are merely linguistic adaptations of each other. Who translated whose work could be known from their chronological order of composition. But a difficulty has arisen in this matter. Ravishena completed his work in 733 CE. This is mentioned in the text itself, and no one doubts it. But the date of completion of his work, 60 CE, mentioned by Vimalsuri, has been accepted by Dr. Winternitz, but many other scholars are not willing to accept it. German scholar Dr. Hermann Jacobi, who first edited this text, expressed his doubt that the form of Prakrit language that appears in this text and the use of certain special words in it, suggests that this work is not from the first century CE but from the third or fourth century CE. According to Dr. Wulner, this text indicates the Apabhramsha period due to its word formation. Pandit Keshalal Dhruva has studied the various meters used in this text, which also supports Dr. Wulner's opinion.

Page #8:
---------------------------
##  English Translation:

6
Padma Purana
bows to the opinion. The implication is that there is doubt and controversy regarding the time of composition of the Prakrit Paumachari. It is only certain that Udyotan Suri, in his work called Kuvalayamala, which he completed in Saka Samvat 700, Vikrama Samvat 835, mentions both Ravishena's work and Paumachari. Therefore, it can be said with certainty that Paumachari was composed before Vikrama Samvat 835.

This chronological information leaves the precedence of the Padma Purana and Paumachari undecided. Therefore, it cannot be said with certainty who translated whose work. Pandit Nathuramji Premi had some thoughts on this in an article titled "Padmacharit and Paumachari" published in 1942 in Anekant, year 5, Kiran 1-2, and later in his "Jain Literature and History" [First Edition 1942, Second Edition 1956]. The editor of the present work has mentioned the important points that Premiji has made on this subject in his introduction. But the important discussion that Premiji has made in his article, which sheds some light on the precedence of the two works, has been completely forgotten here. In short, Premiji has pointed out three things. One is that there are many examples in ancient Jain literature of translations from Prakrit to Sanskrit, but there are no examples of translations from Sanskrit to Prakrit on such a large scale. Secondly, the Paumachari is concise, while the Padma Purana is detailed. And thirdly, the story of the origin of the 'Man' [Brahmin] found in Ravishena's Padma Purana [4, 122] suggests its Prakrit source, because the word 'Mahan' is Prakrit and its etymology can only be understood from the Prakrit expression 'Mahan' mat marose, as found in the Prakrit Paumachari. The word 'Mahan' is not accepted in Sanskrit, nor is there any use of this word in the Ravishena sect or tradition. On the contrary, this word is used extensively in Prakrit Jain Agam texts. This leads us to believe that Ravishenacharya has retained it as it is in Sanskrit based on the Paumachari. This subject is not to be overlooked, but deserves special attention and further study.

1
One aspect of the comparative study of the two works is that while Ravishena's work is entirely Digambara tradition, what is the sectarian arrangement of Vimalsuri's Paumachari? Some scholars have studied the Paumachari from this perspective. As a result, there are some things in the text that are in line with the Digambara tradition, some with the Svetambara tradition, and some that are contrary to both, possibly pointing to a third tradition. These have been mentioned in the introduction.

In addition to these, the new points that have come to our attention are as follows:

1. In Paumachari 2,22, Lord Mahavira is said to have come from the womb of Trisaladevi. As follows:

Tassa ya bahugunakaliya bhajja tisallatti ruva-sampanna. Tie gabbhammi jino ayaao charim-samayami. || 2,22

This is completely in line with the Digambara tradition, but only partially agrees with the Svetambara tradition, as there is also mention of the Lord coming from the womb of Devananda.

2. In Paumachari 2,36-37, it is said that after Lord Mahavira attained Kevalgyan, he preached and wandered to the Vipulachal mountain. As follows:

Evam so muni-vasaho atta-maha-padihere parierio. Viharai jinid bhanu bohinto bhavia-kamalai. || Aya-vihui sahio gana ganaharasyala-sangha parierio. Viharanto cichay patto viul-giridam mahaviro. || 2,36-37

Page #9:
---------------------------
## Editorial

This point is in accordance with the Svetambara belief and against the Digambara belief, because here it is believed that only after the knowledge arose, the Lord came to Mount Vipulachal after staying silent for sixty-six days and it was here that his first sermon took place.

In Paumachari 3,62, there is a mention of the dreams of Rishabhdev's mother, Marudevi, before his birth. Here, the number of dreams has been counted as fifteen by Premji and the editor of the present book, which they have said is different from both the Svetambara and Digambara beliefs. But in reality, this is not the case. The incident of the dreams of the mother of Jin Bhagwan is mentioned in another place in the book where the birth of Tirthankara Muni Suvrata Nath is described. Ram is considered to have been in his Tirthankal. The mention of these dreams is as follows:

"Ahasa Suhan Patta Rayanie Pachchhimmammi Jamasmi. Pechchai Chaudas Sumine Pasath-Jogen Kallani." (21, 12)

"Gay-Vasaha Siha - Abhisheya-Dam-Sasi Dinayaram Jhayam Kumbham. Pauma-Sar-Sagar - Viman Bhavan Rayanuchchay- Simhin Cha." (21, 13)

Here, the author himself has said that the mother had fourteen dreams, which he has also counted. If there is any difference between these and Marudevi's dreams, it is only that what is called 'Abhisheka Dam' here is mentioned as 'Varshiri-Dam' there. The aforementioned scholars have considered this as two separate dreams, Lakshmi and a garland of flowers, and thus counted the number of dreams as fifteen. But from the mention of the dreams at the time of the birth of Muni Suvrata Nath, it becomes clear that 'Varshri-Dam' and 'Abhisheka-Dam' are both indicative of the same beautiful or auspicious garland, thus proving the number of dreams to be fourteen. The verse in Paumachari 21, 13, which counts the dreams, is exactly the same as the one found in 'Chhathe Shrutaang Naya-Dhammakhao' (1, 1). When we compare these dreams with the dreams mentioned in the Padma Purana (3,124-139), the order of the dreams is exactly the same, and the places where there is a difference in number and names are, firstly, the one with 'Varshri-Dam', where Sri Lakshmi and garlands of flowers are considered as two separate dreams. Secondly, where 'Jhayam' (flag) is mentioned, 'Matsya' (fish) is found, which indicates a difference in reading or error in 'Jhas' (fish) and 'Jhay' (flag). And 'Simhasan' (throne) has been added between 'Sagar' (ocean) and 'Viman' (aircraft). It seems to us that the difference in the names and number of dreams is similar to the difference in the number of heavens, 12 and 16, which was once considered to be indicative of sectarian differences, but now, since both are mentioned together in Tiloayapanatti, it is not considered to be indicative of sectarian differences. This matter needs to be considered.

Regarding the sect of the author of Paumachari, Premji's point is also worth noting that an ancient commentator called the Apabhramsha poet Svayambhu, who followed this story, as belonging to the Yapuliya (Yapaniya) sect. It is not surprising that Vimalsuri belongs to the same tradition. It should be kept in mind that the Yapaniya sect was almost completely merged into the Digambara sect, and this is proven by inscriptions. The effort made by Pandit Pannalalji Sahityacharya in preparing this edition of the Padma Purana with translation is commendable. We especially congratulate the President of Gyanpeeth, Smt. Rmaraniji, for the rapid pace at which this ancient literature is being published in a beautiful manner by Gyanpeeth. We also thank the Minister, Director, and other workers of Gyanpeeth from the bottom of our hearts for their dedication.

Heeralal Jain A. Ne, Upadhye
Granthamala Editor

Page #10:
---------------------------
## Editorial
[Second Edition]

The first part of the 'Padma Purana' was published eighteen years ago in 1958. At that time, its editorial was written by Dr. Hiralal Jain and Dr. A.N. Upadhye. Both of them have now passed away. Therefore, I have had to bear their burden.

The thought-provoking points they raised in their editorial regarding the Sanskrit 'Padma Purana' and the Prakrit 'Paumachariy' are still relevant today. At that time, we had aligned the first two Parvas of the 'Padma Purana' with the Prakrit 'Paumachariy', marking the verse numbers of the 'Paumachariy' in our copy of the 'Padma Purana'. That is still before us. The verses from number 32 to 89 of the first Parva of the 'Paumachariy' are present in the first Parva of the 'Padma Purana' from verse numbers 43 to 101. There is only a difference of two. The transformation of verses 44 and 47 of the 'Padma Purana' is not present in the 'Paumachariy'. Such uniformity cannot happen without following. Some minor changes are also seen. In the 'Paumachariy', verse number 51 has the word 'Munivarena'. In the 'Padma Purana', in its place, it is "Digambarena".

In the second Parva, during the description of Lord Mahavira's birth ceremony, it is mentioned that at the time of the ceremony on Mount Meru, the child shook Meru with his big toe. Such a description is not found elsewhere in the Digambar tradition's literature. In the Svetambar literature, twenty reasons for the bondage of the Tirthankara nature are considered. Accordingly, twenty numbers are also specified in the 'Paumachariy', but in the 'Padma Purana', sixteen reasons are mentioned according to the Digambar belief. A comparative study of both reveals other such points that are thought-provoking.

The influence of Samantabhadra's works is also sometimes visible. For example, when reading verse 92 in the 14th Parva, the verse of Samantabhadra's 'Swayambhustotra', 'Doshaya Nallam Kanika Vishaya', etc., comes to mind, and the 60th verse of this same Parva reminds one of 'Ratnakaranda Shravakachar's 'Kshitigatamiva Vatabijam'. In this fourteenth Parva, the Muni Raj gives Dharma Upadesh to Ravana when he asks, and in it, so much emphasis is given on the abandonment of alcohol, meat, honey, and night meals that such emphasis is not seen elsewhere. Perhaps the reason for this is that elsewhere, demons are called nocturnal. However,

The story of Rama is found everywhere in an interesting form. The moral teachings that the storyteller has given to the people in this interesting form are invaluable for humanity.

Today, there is a discussion among scholars about whether the Ramayana is a true event? And there are various speculations on this. Scholars are entangled in discussions, but ordinary men and women, all inspired by the pure life of Rama and Sita, make their lives meaningful. Rama, a son and husband like him, and Sita, a devoted wife like her, are symbols of India's bright ideals. As long as the spotless ideal of Rama and Sita lives in India, Ravanas, the slayers of women, cannot be respected in this country.

The President of the Bharatiya Gyanapith, Smt. Ramarani, was a daughter of that same Sati Sita - a shining symbol of Indian womanhood. The effect of the cycle of time, that she too, like Sita, became a resident of heaven and left her husband, Sah Shanti Prasadji, like Rama, alone. We remember her with great respect. Her dedication to the upliftment of Indian literature is unforgettable. Now, Sahuji has taken on her burden, so there is hope and faith that the publication work of the Mootidevi Granthamala will continue to flourish. The Minister of the Gyanapith, Ba. Lakshmichandraji, is constantly striving for it as before.

- Kailashchandra Shastri

Page #11:
---------------------------
## Editorial
(Second Edition)

Sri Ravishenacharya, by composing the Padma Purana, has greatly benefited all beings. The eighth Balabhadra, Sri Ramachandraji, was known as Padma. This text is known as Padmacharit or Padma Purana after him. Ramachandraji's brother Lakshmana, the ruler of the three divisions of Bharat Kshetra, was the eighth Narayana. The love between Narayana and Balabhadra is world-renowned. These great souls, born in Ayodhya, adorned the land of India in the Tirtha of Bhagwan Manisuvratnath. Even after a long time, they are worthy of reverence for every Indian.

Ramachandraji's life is filled with extraordinary events. He is worshipped as Maryadapurushotam. He was completely obedient to his father, King Dasharatha. Upon receiving the order of fourteen years of exile, he went to the forest without any protest. He considered exile to be the best course of action, believing that Bharat's kingdom would not prosper while he was alive. The devoted wife Sita and Lakshmana, filled with brotherly love, were his companions in exile. The Padma Purana clearly shows how many destitute kings he protected during his exile. Lakshmana was the embodiment of brotherly love, while Sita was the epitome of the natural adornment of the Indian woman, the virtue of Pativrata Dharma.

Ravana, the king of Lanka, abducted Sita from Dandaka Van. To retrieve her, Ramachandraji waged a righteous war against Ravana. In this righteous war, Ravana's younger brother Vibhishana, the prominent Sugriva of the Vanarvansha, Hanuman, and the Vidhyadharas like Viradhit, all provided full support. The victory achieved by Rama-Lakshmana, who were earthbound, over the celestial Vidhyadharas, is a testament to their extraordinary inner strength.

After Ravana's death, Ramachandraji treated his family with affection. He declared that he had to fight Ravana only to oppose injustice. After the war ended, the comfort he provided to Ravana's widowed queens and Vibhishana, who was overwhelmed by the loss of his brother, reveals his noble nature.

He was a staunch advocate of the happiness of the people and the protection of justice. This is why, when some people presented the argument of Avarnavada, he had the pregnant Sita abandoned in a terrifying forest. One should understand that Sita's Panyoday means that even in that desolate forest, she was provided with means of protection. He did not hesitate even for a moment to abandon the same Sita for whom he had fought a terrible war against Ravana, driven by the sentiment of the people's happiness.

Among the Purana texts, the Padma Purana, composed by Ravishenacharya, holds a prominent place. It is read with great devotion by people of all ages. The Hindu society also has a natural reverence for the Ramakatha. There is hardly any temple where a copy of the Padma Purana is not found.

The first edition of the Padma Purana, edited by me, was published by the Bharatiya Gyanpeeth in 1958.
[2]

Page #12:
---------------------------
10
Padma Purana
It was cold. But now this second edition is being published because the copies are unavailable. This should be understood as the religious devotion or literary devotion of the founder of Jnanapith, Shri Shanti Prasadji Sahu, and its director, Shri Lakshmichandraji Adika, that they are engaged in the publication of Jinvani with great zeal and dedication. In a short time, Jnanapith has published such a vast amount of literature while protecting the standard of publication, which many other institutions together could not do. The contribution of the late Shri Ramaji, the chairperson of Jnanapith, to this publishing institution will be remembered forever. Not only did she contribute to the publication of Jinvani, but she also spent thousands of rupees with proper arrangements for the renovation of ancient pilgrimage sites like Papoura, Ahar, etc. She had the capacity to build many more Jain temples, but instead of building new ones, she considered it better to renovate the pre-existing temples.
I hope that this second edition will also end like the first edition, increasing the faith of the people. I wished that this edition would also be adorned with appendices like the second editions of Adipurana and Uttarapurana, but due to the urgency of publication and my own busyness, I could not prepare the appendices. I regret this.
Varnibhavan, Sagar 1-8-1606


Vinit Pannalal Sahityacharya

Page #13:
---------------------------
## Introduction

The editing of the Padmacarita was done based on the following manuscripts [1]

**Introduction of Manuscript 'K'**

This manuscript belongs to the Digambar Jain Saraswati Bhandar, Dharmpura, Delhi. It was obtained through the kind efforts of Shri Pandit Parmanandji Shastri. It contains 246 leaves of 1246 inches in size. Initially, there are 15-16 lines per leaf and 40 characters per line, but later there are 24 lines per leaf and 57-58 characters per line. The numbers of most of the verses are given in red ink, but only black ink is used in the later part. This book was completed on the 7th Wednesday of Paushvadi Samvat 1775 by Sukhananda, son of Man Singh, resident of Bhusawar. The scribe of the book does not seem to be knowledgeable in Sanskrit language, therefore many errors have occurred in the writing. The following inscription is found at the end of this book:

_“Thus, the Shri Padmapuran is complete. Written by Sukhananda, son of Man Singh, resident of Suyan, Bhusawar, in the Motr Vainda script, written on the 7th Wednesday of Paushvadi Samvat 1775. May it give auspiciousness and prosperity. Whoever sees this book, I have written it. Whether it is correct or incorrect, my fault is not to be given. [1] The qualities of a gentleman are to be taken. [2] This is truly done by him, which is a giver of liberation and happiness.”_

The code name of this manuscript is 'K'.

**Introduction of Manuscript 'Kh'**

This manuscript belongs to the Shri Digambar Jain Saraswati Bhavan Panchayati Mandir Masjid Khajur, Delhi. It was obtained through the courtesy of Shri Pandit Parmanandji Shastri. It contains 510 leaves of 1145 inches in size. There are 14 lines per leaf and 40-41 characters per line. There is no mention of the year of copying or the scribe at the end of the book. In the middle of this manuscript, several leaves have become worn out, due to which they have been re-written by another writer. The ancient script is mostly correct, but the newly added leaves have more errors. At the beginning of this manuscript, there is also a Sanskrit commentary on 1-2 verses. The code name of this manuscript is 'Kh'.

**Introduction of Manuscript 'J'**

This manuscript belongs to the Shri Atishaya Kshetra Mahaveerji. It was obtained through the courtesy of Shri Pandit Chainsukhdasji. It contains 554 leaves of 1245 size. Looking at the paper of the manuscript, it is clear that this manuscript is very...

Page #14:
---------------------------
##  English Translation:

**12**
**Padma Purana**

This manuscript is ancient, but it does not contain any information about the scribe or the date of writing. It seems that a page is missing from the end of this manuscript, otherwise, the date and scribe's information would have been available. Due to the age of the book, 44 new pages have been added at the beginning. These 44 pages have 13 lines per page and 40 to 45 characters per line. The original pages have 12 lines and 35 to 38 characters per line. Most of the script has been corrected. This manuscript also contains a Sanskrit commentary on the first 1-2 verses, similar to the 'Kha' manuscript. The code name of this manuscript is 'J'.

**[4] Introduction to the 'B' Manuscript**

This book belongs to Pandit Dhannalal Rishabhchandra Ramchandra of Bombay. This book has 265 pages, each measuring 13x6 inches. Each page has 19 lines and 55 to 60 characters per line. The date of writing and the scribe's name are not available. However, it seems that the scribe was knowledgeable in Sanskrit, as there are very few errors in the script. Almost all the text has been written correctly. There are also annotations on difficult passages in between. This manuscript has been of great help in editing this edition. Its code name is 'B'.

**[5] Introduction to the Commentary Manuscript**

This manuscript belongs to the Shri Di. Jain Saraswati Bhandar, Dharmpura, Delhi. It was obtained through the courtesy of Shri Pandit Parmanandji. This is a commentary manuscript. It has 58 pages, each measuring 10.5 inches. Very brief commentaries are given on the difficult passages of the Padmacharit. The script of this book was completed on Sunday, the 5th of Paush, Vikram Samvat 1894. It was written in Lashkar. The name of the scribe is not mentioned. Regarding its creation, it is written at the end:

"Laat Wagad Shri Pravachan Sen Panditan Padmacharitam Samakarnnya Balatkaragan Shreenandyaacharya SatvashiShyena Shrichandramunin Shrimadvikramditya Samvatsare Saptaashityadhikasahastra (Parimitam Shrimadharaayam Shrimato Rajye Bhojadevasya Padmacharite)."

This means that this commentary was composed by Shri Chandramuni, a disciple of Shri Nandi Acharya, in the year 1087 Vikram Samvat, in Dharanagari, during the reign of King Bhoj. Due to the scribe's carelessness, there are many errors in the script.

**[6] Introduction to the 'M' Manuscript**

This manuscript was published in three volumes in Vikram Samvat 1985 by Shri Sahityaratna Pandit Darbarilalji Nyayatirith (Swami 'Satyabhakta' Vardha) from the Shri Danveer Seth Manikchand Granthamala, Bombay. It is not known which manuscripts were used by the said Panditji for editing this manuscript, but there are many errors. Its code name is 'M'.

While taking and comparing the readings of these manuscripts, wherever doubts remained, Pandit K. Bhujabali Shastri had it compared with the palm leaf manuscript located in Moodbidri. In this way, this edition has been edited by comparing it with many handwritten manuscripts.

**Sanskrit Literature - Ocean**

Sanskrit literature is as vast as an endless ocean. Just as there are many gems within the ocean, similarly, there are Puranas, Kavya, Nyaya, Dharma, Vyakaran, Natak, etc. within the ocean of Sanskrit literature.

Page #15:
---------------------------
## Introduction

There are many gems like Ayurveda, Astrology, etc. in existence. You will not find a subject in ancient Sanskrit on which someone has not written. The Sanskrit literature is vast, but even though Jain Sanskrit literature is comparatively small in quantity, it is of a high quality. The main characteristic of Jain literature is that the description of the subject matter is heart-touching, it presents the facts of the subject matter, and it is beneficial to all living beings.

## Ramayana Literature

Maryadapurushotam Ramachandra has been such a popular figure that he has been described not only in the literature of India but also outside India with respect. He is not only mentioned in Jain literature but also in Vedic and Buddhist literature. High-quality texts have been written on this subject in ancient languages like Sanskrit, Prakrit, Apabhramsha, etc., and in various regional languages of India. Not only Puranas but also Kavya, Mahakavya, Natak, Upanatak, etc., have been written in good numbers on this subject. Any writer who has taken recourse to the Ramayana has infused life into his dull words. The example of Bhatti Kavya is present.

## Different Streams of Ramayana

This story has been written in its own way by the followers of Hinduism, Buddhism, and Jainism, and all three religions consider Rama as their ideal, great man. The general opinion of most scholars is that the first basis of the Ramayana is Valmiki Ramayana. After that, this story has been briefly recorded in the Mahabharata, Brahma Purana, Padma Purana, Agni Purana, Vayu Purana, and all other Puranas with some changes. Apart from this, many Ramayana texts have been written under the names Adhyatma Ramayana, Anand Ramayana, Adbhut Ramayana. Based on these, the Tibetan and Khothani Ramayana, the oldest work of Hindesh 'Ramayana Kaka Vin', the modern 'Serat Ram' of Java, and the Ramayana stories of Indochina, Siam, Burma, and Sri Lanka have also been written. The Ramayana story of Valmiki Ramayana is famous everywhere. Therefore, it is inappropriate to mention it. Yes, the story of Sita's birth written in Adbhut Ramayana is unique, so I am presenting it here. It is written that there was a sage named Gritsamad in Dandakaranya. His wife prayed to him that Lakshmi be born from our womb. Hearing the wife's prayer, the sage started keeping milk in a pot every day. At that time, Ravana arrived there one day. To conquer the sage, he pierced the sage's body with the tips of his arrows, extracting drop by drop of blood from his body and filling it in the same pot. Ravana took the pot with him and gave it to Mandodari, saying, "This blood is more potent than poison." After some time, Mandodari felt that her husband did not love her truly, so in despair of life, she drank that blood. But due to its effect, she did not die but became pregnant. Mandodari was frightened by the conception in the absence of her husband and tried to hide it. Finally, one day she went to Kurukshetra by plane and buried that womb in the ground. Later, while plowing, that womb-born girl was found by King Janak, and he raised her. This is Sita. In fact, this story of Adbhut Ramayana is amazing. There are many other stories about Sita's birth, which I will mention in a separate chapter. Among the Buddhists, the Pali language 'Jataka Kathavanna' has a brief account of the Ramayana in the Dasaratha Jataka -

Page #16:
---------------------------
In the Padma Purana, King Dasharatha ruled righteously in Varanasi. His eldest queen had three children: two sons [Rampandit and Lakshman] and a daughter [Sita Devi]. After the queen's death, the king appointed another woman as his chief queen. She gave birth to a son [Bharat Kumar]. On this occasion, the king granted her a boon. When Bharat was seven years old, the queen requested the kingdom for her son. The king flatly refused. But when the queen continued to plead for it day after day, the king, fearing her schemes, called his two sons and said, "Staying here might bring you harm, so go to another kingdom or forest and live there. After my death, return and claim the kingdom." At that time, the king summoned astrologers and asked them about his death. Upon receiving the answer of twelve years, he said, "My sons, return after twelve years and claim the throne." After paying their respects to their father, the two brothers were about to leave when Sita Devi also bid farewell to her father and joined them. Many others accompanied them. They returned and reached the Himalayas, where they built an ashram and resided. After nine years, Dasharatha died due to grief over his sons. The queen failed to make Bharat king as the ministers and Bharat himself opposed it. Then, Bharat, with his four-armed army, went to the forest to bring Ram. At that time, Ram was alone. Bharat told him the whole story of his father's death and began to weep, but Rampandit neither grieved nor cried. 

In the evening, Lakshman and Sita returned. Hearing of their father's death, both were deeply saddened. To console them, Rampandit preached the Dharma of impermanence. Hearing this, everyone was relieved of their sorrow. Later, despite Bharat's repeated requests, Rampandit decided to stay in the forest, saying, "My father ordered me to rule after twelve years, so I cannot return and fulfill his command now. I will return after three years."

When Bharat also refused to accept the throne, Rampandit gave him his Tridanda-Tridanda and said, "These will rule until my return." Taking the Tridanda, Bharat returned to Varanasi with Lakshman, Sita, and others. The ministers performed their duties in the presence of these Tridanda. Whenever injustice occurred, the Tridanda would strike each other, and when a just decision was made, they would become silent.

After three years, Rampandit returned and married his sister Sita. After ruling for sixteen thousand years, he ascended to heaven. At the end of the Jataka, the Buddha explains the connection of the Jataka as follows: At that time, King Shuddhodana was King Dasharatha. Mahamaya [Buddha's mother] was Ram's mother, Yashodhara [Rahul's mother] was Sita, Anand was Bharat, and I was Rampandit.

Similarly, in the "Anamakam Jataka," the story is told without mentioning any specific character, but it is related to Ram's life. The special feature of this Jataka is that Ram is not exiled by his father due to his stepmother. He leaves the kingdom himself after hearing about his maternal uncle's preparations for an attack.

Similarly, within the Chinese Tripitaka, there is a collection of 121 Avadanas called "Tsa-Pau-Tsang-King." This collection was translated into Chinese in 472 AD. It also contains a "Dasharathakatha." It also mentions the Ramayana, with the special feature that it does not mention Sita or any other princess. 

Three...
1. In the third century AD, "Anamakam Jataka" was translated into Chinese by Kang-Seng-Hui. Although the original Indian text is unavailable, the Chinese translation is preserved in the book "Lielu-Si King." [See the Taisho edition of the Chinese Tripitaka No. 152]

Page #17:
---------------------------
## Introduction

It has not been done. The description of Dasharatha's four queens comes - among them, Rama was born to the chief queen, Raman [Roman-Lakshman] to the second queen, Bharata to the third queen, and Shatrughna to the fourth. Due to the fear of the length of the writing, I am not giving the story of 'Anamka Jataka' and 'Dasharathakatha'.
_ In this way, we see three forms of the Ramayana in Hindu and Buddhist literature - one of Valmiki Ramayana, the second of Adbhut Ramayana, and the third of Buddhist Jataka.

## Two Forms of Jain Ramayana

_ Similarly, two streams of Ramayana are available in Jain literature - one of Vimalsuri's 'Paumachariya' and Ravishena's 'Padmacharit', and the other of Gunabhadra's 'Uttarapurana'.
_ In the Shwetambar tradition, some facts related to the lives of Tirthankaras and other Shalaka Purushas are found in the 'Sthananga Sutra', which was taken as the basis for the creation of 'Trishatti Mahapurana' etc. by Shwetambar Acharya Hemchandra etc. In the Digambar tradition, we find an ancient collection of the characters of Tirthankaras etc. in the form of a list in the Prakrit language 'Tiloyapannatti' text. This text also contains the main facts of the lives of 9 Narayana, 9 Pratinarayana, 9 Balabhadra, and 11 Rudras. Based on these and the stories heard from their Guru Parampara, various Puranakaras have created many Puranas. Vimalsuri has written in the introduction of 'Paumachariya' that "I, who is bound in the list and has come from the Acharya Parampara, tell the entire Padmacharit briefly according to the chronological order." It is clear from his mention that he created 'Paumachariya' taking 'Namavali' as the main basis. The character of Tirthankaras and other Shalaka Purushas, which is mentioned in the form of a list in 'Tiloyapannatti', has also been given a place in their respective texts by later Puranakaras. Ravishena has assimilated that Bhava in the twentieth chapter of 'Padmacharit'. The mention of the subject of the creation of this text at the end of this text proves that it was written in Veer Nirvana Samvat 530, Vikram Samvat 60, but Western experts like Dr. Herman Jacobi, Dr. Keith, Dr. Buhler etc., looking at its language style and use of words, consider it to be written in the third-fourth century AD. After this, Acharya Ravishena created the Sanskrit 'Padmacharit' in Veer Nirvana Samvat 1204 and Vikram Samvat 734. The stream of the story presented in these two texts can be divided into the following six parts: [1] Description of the Vidhyadhar Kand, Rakshas and Vanar lineage, [2] Birth and marriage of Rama and Sita, [3] Forest wandering, [4] Sita's abduction and search, [5] War, [6] Uttar Charit. Their brief story summary is as follows:

## [1] Vidhyadhar Kand

First, King Shrenik expresses his desire to know the true form of the Ramayana from Gautam Swami, the first Ganadhar of Bhagwan Mahavira. In response, Gautam Swami tells the Ramayana. In the beginning, the description of the Vidhyadhar Lok, Rakshas lineage, Vanar lineage, and Ravana's lineage is given.
The Rakshas lineage king Ratnashrava and Keksi have four children - Ravana, Kumbhakarna, Chandranakha, and Vibhishan. When Ratnashrava first saw his son Ravana, he saw ten heads in the infant who was wearing a garland, so he was named Dashanan or Dashग्रीव. His maternal uncle's
1. णामावलिय णिबद्ध आयरिय परम्परागर्म सव्वं ।
वोच्छामि पउमचरियं अहाणुपुब्बि समासेण ॥८॥
-'Paumachariya-' Uddesh 1

Page #18:
---------------------------
## Chapter 16

The Padma Purana describes how Ravana and his brothers went to learn various sciences. Ravana acquired many sciences and returned. He then married Mandodari and 6000 other women and conquered many kings in his Digvijaya. In this account, Indra, Yama, Varuna, etc. are not gods but ordinary Vidyaadhar kings. During this conquest, Ravana rejected the love proposal of a woman named Nalakuvar, claiming to be superior. He heard the teachings of a Kevali and vowed not to enjoy any woman who did not desire him. Ravana shattered Indra's pride. The arrogance of Bali, a king, turned into detachment due to Ravana's attack. Bali renounced the world and took the Daigambari initiation, making Sugriva the king. Hanuman's true birth and his childhood antics amazed everyone. Hanuman fought against Varuna on Ravana's behalf and married Anangakusuma, the daughter of Chandra Nakha. Khara Dushan married Ravana's sister, Chandranakha. Later, they had a son named Shambhuka.

## [2] Birth and Marriage of Rama and Sita

This chapter begins with the lineage of Janaka and Dasharatha, followed by the mention of Dasharatha's three wives: 1. Kaushalya, 2. Sumitra, and 3. Suprabha. One day, Ravana learned that his death would be caused by the descendants of King Janaka and Dasharatha. Ravana sent his brother Vibhishan to kill them. However, before Vibhishan arrived, Narada warned both kings, who left their palaces, leaving behind statues resembling their bodies. Vibhishan, mistaking the statues for the real kings, killed them and threw their heads into the salt sea, feeling secure. During his travels, King Dasharatha reached Kekayi's Swayamvara. Kekayi placed a garland around Dasharatha's neck, which angered other kings. This led to a war between them and Dasharatha. Kekayi was a valiant woman and drove Dasharatha's chariot herself. King Dasharatha, with his prowess and cunning, won the war and returned to Ayodhya to rule. Dasharatha, cleverly pleasing Kekayi, asked her to ask for a boon, which he promised to grant. He kept the boon safe in the royal treasury. Dasharatha had four queens, including Kekayi, and they gave birth to four sons: Rama from Kaushalya, Lakshmana from Sumitra, Bharata from Kekayi, and Shatrughna from Suprabha.

King Janaka's wife, the queen of Videha, gave birth to a daughter, Sita, and a son, Bhamandal. At birth, Bhamandal was abducted by an enemy from his previous life. Bhamandal was found by a Vidyaadhar, who raised him. Seeing Sita's portrait through Narada's grace, Bhamandal developed a strong affection for her. He tricked Janaka into coming to the Vidyaadhar realm. Despite Bhamandal's father's request, Janaka refused to give him his daughter, as he had already promised her to Rama, the son of King Dasharatha. Finally, the Vidyaadhar proposed a condition: if Rama could string the Vajraavarta bow, he would get Sita; otherwise, they would forcefully take her for their son. Janaka reluctantly agreed to this condition. The Swayamvara took place, and Rama strung the bow. He married Sita. Dasharatha decided to give the kingdom to Rama. Then, Kekayi, using the boon she had saved in the royal treasury, demanded that Bharata be made the king. Hearing this, Rama, Lakshmana, and Sita left for the south. They helped many troubled kings along the way. Kekayi and Bharata went to the forest and requested Rama to return, but their efforts were in vain.

Page #19:
---------------------------
## Introduction
[3] Forest Journey
This section describes numerous battles fought by Rama and Lakshmana. In one instance, they save Vajrakarn from Chandrase, the son of Singhodara, and in another, they free Balakhilya from the prison of a Mlechchha king. They also disguise themselves as dancers and humiliate Raja Ativirya, who opposed Bharata. Meanwhile, Lakshmana marries several princesses along the way. They reside in Dandaka forest, provide food to the sages, and establish contact with Jatayu.
17
[4] The Abduction and the Search
Shambuka, the son of Chandranala and Saradushan, performs penance for twelve years in a bamboo grove to attain the Suryahaas sword. As a result of his penance, the sword appears. Lakshmana, by chance, arrives there and, before Shambuka can take the sword, tests it by striking the same bamboo grove where Shambuka is seated. This results in Shambuka's death. Chandranakha, upon arriving to offer food, witnesses his death and grieves deeply. She becomes infatuated with Rama and Lakshmana and proposes love, but when she fails, she returns to her husband and informs him of her son's death. Lakshmana engages in battle with Khara and Dushan. At Khara's call, Ravana arrives to assist. In the midst of this, Ravana is captivated by Sita and devises a plan to abduct her. Using his knowledge of magic, he learns that Lakshmana has established a signal of a lion's roar to call Rama for help. Ravana, through a deceptive lion's roar, sends Rama to Lakshmana's side and abducts Sita.
Seeing Sita alone,
After Sita's abduction, Rama is deeply distressed. He befriends Sugriva. A Vidyaadhar named Saahasagati, assuming Sugriva's form through magic, attempts to seize Sugriva's wife and kingdom. Rama kills him, allowing Sugriva to reclaim his wife and kingdom, becoming Rama's devotee. Following Sugriva's orders, they search for Sita. The Vidyaadhar Ratnajaati informs them that Ravana has abducted Sita. At that time, Ravana was very powerful, so Sugriva and other Vidyaadhars retreat from battle. However, they recall the words of the Kevali Anantvirya, who said that whoever lifts the stone will be the one to kill Ravana. Lakshmana lifts the stone, proving his strength. Sugriva and others are convinced. All the Vanarvanshi Vidyaadhars stand with Rama against Ravana. Hanuman, carrying Rama's message, reaches Sita and brings her message back to Rama.

[5] The War
With the help of Sugriva and other Vidyaadhars, the entire army reaches Lanka through the sky. Ravana demonstrates his mastery of the Bahurupini Vidya (the art of assuming multiple forms). Hanuman and others try to hinder his mastery, but Ravana remains steadfast and completes the Vidya. He then engages in a conflict with Vibhishan, who ultimately abandons Ravana and joins Rama. Rama vows to make Vibhishan the king of Lanka. A fierce battle ensues on both sides. Lakshmana is struck by a weapon, but recovers with the water from Vishalya's bath. Lakshmana's affection for Vishalya deepens. Finally, Ravana throws the Lakshmanpur Chakra, but it circles around and lands in Lakshmana's hand. Lakshmana uses the same Chakra to end Ravana's life. Lakshmana, after killing Prati Narayan, manifests as Narayan.
[3]

Page #20:
---------------------------
## Chapter 18

[6] Uttara Charit

In Ayodhya, Ram and Lakshman return and begin ruling. Bharat, renouncing the world, takes initiation. Ram, troubled by public opinion, abandons pregnant Sita in the forest. Sita takes shelter with King Vajrangh. There, she gives birth to two sons, Lavana and Ankush. When they grow up, Lavana and Ankush fight with Ram and Lakshman. Finally, at Narada's request, father and sons reconcile. At the urging of Hanuman, Sugreev, Vibhishan, etc., Ram calls Sita. Sita undergoes the fire ordeal and then becomes an Arhatika. Through tapasya, she attains the sixteenth heaven and becomes Prati-Indra. One day, two Devas, Narayana and Balabhadra, come to test the love of Ram and Lakshman. They falsely tell Lakshman that Ram has died. Hearing this, Lakshman dies. Overwhelmed by grief for his brother, Ram wanders for six months carrying Lakshman's body. Finally, through the efforts of the Deva who was the commander of the army of Krtaantavaktra, the truth is revealed, and Lakshman is cremated. Ram, renouncing the world, performs tapasya and attains liberation.

**From the Padma Purana**

This narrative has widespread circulation in the Jain community. The Jain Ramayana by Hemchandracharya, which is a part of the Trishatisalaaka Purusha Charit, is developed along the lines of this narrative. The Rama Purana by Jindas, the Rama Charit by Padmadev Vijay Gani, and the Ramakatha found in various Kathas are all influenced by this narrative. The Paumachariu in Apabhramsha language by Svayambhu Deva and the Karnataka Padma Ramayana by Nagachand are also in line with this narrative.

**The second narrative is from the Uttara Purana by Gunabhadracharya.** Gunabhadra was a disciple of Jinasena. The mention "Kavi Parameshvara Nigadit Gadyakatha Matrukam Purocharitam" in Jinasena's work clarifies that he composed the Adi Purana based on the prose "Vagartha Sangrah" Purana by Kavi Parameshvara. Jinasena passed away before completing the Adi Purana, so the remaining Adi Purana and the Uttara Purana were composed by his enlightened disciple Gunabhadra. It is highly likely that Gunabhadra also used Kavi Parameshvara's "Vagartha Sangrah Purana" as the basis for composing the Uttara Purana, but this work is currently unavailable. Therefore, Gunabhadra's name comes first as the originator of this second narrative of the Ramakatha. In the 67th and 69th chapters of the Uttara Purana, in 1167 verses, Ram and Lakshman are described as the eighth Balabhadra and Narayana. This description differs from the descriptions in the Paumachariu and Padma Charit. A notable point is that Sita is not considered the daughter of Janaka but the daughter of Ravana and Mandodari. We will discuss Sita's birth in a separate section later. It will be clear that "Sita was the daughter of Ravana" was not only Gunabhadra's opinion but is also mentioned in the Tibetan Ramayana and other texts. Therefore, it is likely that this second version of the Ramakatha had gained significant popularity during Gunabhadra's time, and he received this opinion from his Guru Parampara. Therefore, he has mentioned it according to the Acharya Parampara. Although reading this narrative after reading the first narrative of the Padma Charit might seem strange, this narrative does not seem entirely baseless. In the Apabhramsha language Mahapurana, the great poet Pushpadanta, in the Kannada language Trishatisalaaka Purusha Purana, Chamunda Raya, and in the Punyasrava Kathasar, Nagaraj, have all written their works following Gunabhadra's narrative.

**The brief plot of the Uttara Purana is as follows:**

King Dasharatha of Varanasi has four sons: Ram from the womb of Kausalya, Lakshman from the womb of Sumitra, and later, when Dasharatha establishes his capital in Saketa, Bharat and Shatrughna are also born from some queen. 

1. Although Ravishena has written about Lakshman as the son of Sumitra, he sometimes mentions him as the son of Kaikeyi, for example, in this verse:

"Sumitra's son, but sometimes when he refers to him as the son of Kaikeyi..."

Page #21:
---------------------------
## English Translation:

19
They are born from the womb. Here, the names of Bharat and Shatrughna's mother are not given. Dashanan, the destroyer of ten, is the son of Pulatsya from the Vidhyadhar lineage. One day, he sees Manimati, the daughter of Amitvega, performing austerities and, becoming attached to her, tries to obstruct her practice. Manimati resolves, "I will be born as his daughter and kill him." After death, she enters the womb of Mandodari, Ravana's queen. After her birth, astrologers tell Ravana that this daughter will destroy him. Therefore, fearing this, Ravana orders Maricha to abandon her somewhere. Placing the girl in a casket, Maricha buries it in the Mithila country. Due to the tip of a plow getting entangled, the casket is revealed and brought to the king by the people. Janak opens the casket, sees the girl, names her Sita, and raises her as his daughter. After a long time, Janak invites Rama and Lakshmana to protect his yagna. After the yagna is completed, Rama and Sita are married. After this, Rama marries seven other maidens, and Lakshmana marries sixteen royal princesses, including Prithvi Devi. Both, following Dasharatha's order, reside in Varanasi.

**Introduction**

Hearing the description of Sita's beauty from Narada, Ravana resolves to abduct her. To test Sita's mind, Shurpnakha is sent, but seeing Sita's chastity, she returns to Ravana, saying that it is impossible to sway Sita's mind. When Rama and Sita are strolling in the Chitrakoot garden near Varanasi, Maricha, assuming the form of a golden deer, lures Rama away. Meanwhile, Ravana, taking Rama's form, tells Sita that he has sent a golden chariot and orders her to board it. This chariot is actually the Pushpak Vimana, which takes Sita to Lanka. Ravana does not touch Sita because the touch of a chaste woman destroys his celestial flying ability.

Dasharatha learns through a dream that Ravana has abducted Sita and sends this news to Rama. Meanwhile, Sugriva and Hanuman arrive to seek help against the demon. Hanuman goes to Lanka, consoles Sita, and returns. [There is no mention of the burning of Lanka.] After this, Lakshmana kills the demon, and Sugriva gains control of his kingdom. Now, the army of monkeys sets out towards Lanka with Rama's army. At the end of the detailed description of the war, Lakshmana beheads Ravana with his chakra. After this, Lakshmana conquers the world, becomes a semi-universal emperor [Narayana], and returns to Ayodhya. Lakshmana has sixteen thousand wives, and Rama has eight thousand. Sita has eight sons. [There is no mention of Sita's abandonment.] Lakshmana dies of an incurable disease and goes to hell due to the killing of Ravana. Rama, after crowning his son, Prithvisundar, on the throne and Sita's son, Ajitangaya, as the crown prince, takes initiation and attains liberation. Sita, along with many queens, also takes initiation and goes to the heaven of Achyuta.

This Ramayana of the Uttarapurana is not prevalent in the Shvetambar sect. The Ramayana in Acharya Hemchandra's Trishatishalaka Purushacharita is completely in line with the story of the 'Paumachariya' or Padmacharita. It seems that both 'Paumachariya' and 'Padmacharita' were available to Hemchandracharya. Gunabhadracharya

It is said that Ravana, with his excellent arrows, stopped the son of Kekaya, who was like a mountain cloud. [Verse 94, Chapter 74] The son of Kekaya, who was seated in the sky, released the Mahendra weapon. [Verse 100, Chapter 4]

An investigation of the text reveals that Ravishaena has written the name of Bharat's mother as 'Kekaya' and has referred to Lakshmana's mother with both the names 'Sumitra' and 'Kekaya'.

Page #22:
---------------------------
The *Padma Purana* predates Hemachandracharya, so it is likely that he would have encountered the *Paumachariyu* and *Padmacharit* before him. However, it remains a mystery why he did not incorporate them into his own narrative.

The *Paumachariyu* and *Padmacharit* Ramakatha largely follows the Valmiki Ramayana, as both texts clearly indicate that King Shrenik encouraged Gautam Swami to tell the true story of Rama. This suggests that a Ramakatha was prevalent in society at the time, which depicted Ravana, Kumbhakarna, etc. as carnivorous demons, and Sugriva, Hanuman, etc. as monkeys. Furthermore, historians have placed the Valmiki Ramayana in the pre-Christian era, making it possible for the authors of the *Paumachariyu* and *Padmacharit* to have encountered it. The description of Sita's birth in the *Uttara Purana* resembles the style of the *Vishnu Purana*. The fact that Dasharatha was the king of Banaras aligns with the Buddhist Jataka. However, unlike the *Uttara Purana*, the Buddhist Jataka does not include Sita's abandonment or the birth of Lava and Kusha. In essence, the three prevalent streams of the Ramakatha in India have existed in the Jain community since ancient times.

**Various Accounts of Sita's Birth**

These streams exhibit significant variations regarding Sita's birth, making it appropriate to compile these differences in this column.

The following beliefs regarding Sita's birth are available:

[1] Sita is the daughter of Janaka.

This is mentioned in the Ramakatha of the *Mahabharata* and *Harivansha*, the *Paumachariyu*, *Padmacharit*, and the *Adi Ramayana*.

[2] Sita is the daughter of the Earth.

This is mentioned in the Valmiki Ramayana and other Ramakatha based on it. The northern text of the Valmiki Ramayana also mentions her as the mental daughter of Janaka and Menaka, but the origin of a human being from the Earth seems completely incongruous.

[3] Sita is the daughter of Ravana.

This is mentioned in the *Uttara Purana*, *Vishnu Purana*, *Maha Bhagavata Purana*, *Kashmiri Ramayana*, *Tibetan Ramayana*, and *Khotanese Ramayana*.

[4] Sita was born from a lotus.

This is mentioned in the *Adbhuta Ramayana*, and its detailed story has been previously discussed.

[5] Sita was born from the womb of Mandodari, who received the blood of a sage.

This is mentioned in the *Dashavatar Charit*.

[6] Sita was born from fire.

This is mentioned in the *Anand Ramayana*.

Page #23:
---------------------------
## Introduction
[7] Sita is the daughter of Dasharatha.
This Dasharatha Jataka is written in Java's Ramkeling, Malay's Seriram, and the Hikayat Maharaja Ravana.
The story of Dasharatha Jataka has already been given. I am not giving other stories due to the fear of writing extensively.

## The Padmacharita and Acharya Ravishena
The Sanskrit Padmacharita is a very ancient text in Digambar Katha literature. The protagonists of the text are the eighth Balabhadra Padma (Rama) and the eighth Narayan Lakshmana. Both these individuals are revered by the people, so whatever the poet has written about them is like a Mandakini flowing from the mental Himalayas, as if it were the inner voice of the poet. Acharya Ravishena, taking the opportunity, has depicted the characters of Vidhyadharaloka, Anjana-Pavananjay, Hanuman, and Sukoshal, etc., which has increased the interest of the text so much that one does not feel like leaving it once they start reading it.

Its author is Acharya Ravishena. He has not mentioned any of his sangha or ganagachchha, nor has he discussed the place, etc., but from the name Senant, it seems that he might have belonged to the Sen sangha. It seems that the full names of his guru parampara would be Indrasen, Divakarasen, Arhatsen, and Lakshmanasen. He has mentioned his guru parampara in the latter half of the 167th shloka of the 123rd parva of this Padmacharita as follows:
'Aasi Dindragurodiwakarayati: Shishyo'sya chahanmuni
Tasmal Lakshmanasenasanmuniradah Shishyo Ravistu Smritam'.
Meaning: Divakar Yati was the guru of Indraguru, Arhatmuni was the disciple of Divakar Yati, Lakshmanasen was the disciple of Arhatmuni, and Ravishena was the disciple of Lakshmanasen.

Who were all these people from which province? Who were their parents, etc.? And what was their domestic life like? We do not know any of this. When was the Padmacharita completed? He has mentioned this in the 181st shloka of the 123rd parva as follows:
"Dwishataabhyadhike sama sahasra samatite'ardhachaturythavarshayukte.
Jinbhaaskara Vardhamanasiddhe Charitam Padmamuneridaam Nibaddham ||181||
Meaning: This charita of Padmamuni was written after 1203 years and 6 months had passed since the nirvana of Jin Surya Bhagwan Mahavira. Thus, its composition was completed in 734 Vikram Samvat. Udyotan Suri, who came after him, has mentioned Ravishena, the author of Padmacharita, and Jatilmuni, the author of Varangacharita, in his Kuvalayamala, which was written in 835 VS. Similarly, Jinsen, the author of Harivansh Purana, has also mentioned Ravishena well in his Harivansh Purana, which was written in 840 VS.
1. Jehi Kae Ramanijje Varang Paumaanachariya Vitthare.
Kahav Na Salaahanijje Te Kaino Jadieravishene ||41||
2. Kritpadmodayodyota Pratyahm Parivartita.
Murti: Kavya Bhava Loke Raveriv Rave: Priya ||34||

Page #24:
---------------------------
## Chapter 22: The Basis of the Padmacharita

This chapter discusses the basis of the Padmacharita. Ravishena himself, in the 41st and 42nd verses of the first chapter, mentions this as follows:

"This meaning, spoken by Vardhamana Jinendra, was received by Indrabhuiti, the Gautama Ganadhara. Then it was received by Sudharma, the son of Dharini, then by Prabhava, and then by the best speaker, the Anuttarvagmi, the great orator,  Kitidhara Acharya. After that, Ravishena Acharya, having obtained their writings, made this effort manifest." (41-42)

In the 166th verse of the 123rd chapter, he also mentions this in the same way:

"The truth that was spoken by the revered Vardhamana Jinendra, who is worshipped by all the worlds, was spoken by Indrabhuiti, the Gautama Ganadhara, for Sudharma and Jambuswami. This was later revealed by his disciple, the Anuttarvagmi, the great orator, Kitidhara Muni. This account of the Padma Muni is a cause for welfare, for the growth of the meditation of the virtuous, and is the best auspiciousness." (166)

Here, one should understand that Kitidhara is referred to by the epithet Anuttarvagmi.

The self-born poet, in his Apabhramsha language 'Paumachariu', composed his work based on Ravishena's Padmacharita. Ravishena, while mentioning the basis of the literary tradition in the Padmacharita, wrote the 41st and 42nd verses in the first chapter. Keeping these verses in mind, the self-born poet also wrote the following verse:

"From the mouth of Vardhamana, this story of Rama has come."

1. While translating the 41st and 42nd verses of the first chapter, the reading 'tato'anuttarvagminam' was imagined for the sake of the meaning of the word Anuttarvagmi in the 167th verse of the 123rd chapter. However, all the manuscripts have the reading 'tato'anuttarvagminam'. Therefore, it seems appropriate to consider 'Anuttarvagminam' as an epithet of Kiti. 'Anuttarvagminam' means the best speaker. In the 167th verse of the 123rd chapter, one should understand that Kitidhara is referred to by this epithet Anuttarvagmi, because Kiti is not mentioned separately there. The self-born poet, in his Apabhramsha 'Paumachariu', also considered 'Anuttarvaae' as an epithet of Kitidhara in the phrase 'Kittinarena Anuttarvaae'. According to this correction, the reader should correct the translation of the 41st and 42nd verses of the first chapter. I am grateful to the honorable Dr. A.N. Upadhyaya for bringing this to my attention.

Page #25:
---------------------------
## Introduction

This is a stream of the Ramayana story, which originated from the cave of the mouth of Vardhamana Jina. It then reached Indrabhuti Acharya, then Gunalankrita Sudharma Acharya, then Prabhava, then the eloquent and supreme speaker Koti Dhar. After that, it was immersed in the same Ramayana stream by the grace of Ravishena Acharya.

This way, the mention of Ravishena, who is supported by the self-existent, indicates that the basis of his Padmacarita is the Ramayana story narrated by Acharya Koti Dhar. But who is this Kirti Dhar? His mention is not found in the Acharya tradition. And where did his Ramayana go? Nothing is known about it. It is possible that it was lost like the 'Vagarth Sangrah Parana' of the poet Parameshwar.

## Paumachariya and Padmacarita

On the one hand, we know that the basis of Ravishena's Padmacarita, which he presented, is the Ramayana story presented by Muni Kirti Dhar. On the other hand, when we see the same story, the same style of presentation, the same purpose, the same name, and the same meaning of the verses in many places in the Prakrit 'Paumachariya' of Vimal Suri, a kind of doubt arises. The time of the creation of the Paumachariya, as given by Vimal Suri, indicates that it was written in Vikram Samvat 60, and Ravishena's Padmacarita appears 674 years later. If Ravishena used the Paumachariya as a basis for his Padmacarita, then he should have mentioned the name of the Jain Acharya with gratitude. But he has mentioned someone else's name... This is a matter of consideration.

I don't want to believe that the Paumachariya was created at the time mentioned by Vimal Suri. In the Anekant Varsh 5 Kiran 10-11, a significant article titled 'Paumachariya ka Antah Parikshan' was published by Shri Pan. Paramanandji Shastri Sarsawa. With the permission of Shastriji, I am presenting that article here in his own words, so that readers can get the right material for consideration.

## Internal Examination of Paumachariya

'Paumachariya' is a biography written in Prakrit language, which depicts the story of Ramachandra well. The author of this book is Vimal Suri. The author has not given any special introduction of himself in this book, but has only stated that - "Vijay was the disciple of Acharya 'Rah', who accepted the harmony of his own time and the time of others, and I, 'Vimal', the disciple of Vijay, the descendant of Nail-Kul-Nandikara, have composed this book." Although many story books have been written by different poets about this story, but all the available ones are considered to be later than the composition of Paumachariya. Because this book mentions the time of creation of the book as 530 years after the Nirvana of Veer, i.e. Vikram Samvat 60. The author has stated that in this book, he has narrated the same Ramayana story in Prakrit language with sutras and verses, which was told by Lord Mahavira in ancient times, which later...

1. Rah namayario sasamaya parasamaya gahiya sabbhavo.
Vijay yo tassa siso nailkul vansa nandiyaroo. ||117|| Sisen tassa raiyan rahavchariyam tu suri vimalena. - Paumachariya, Uddes 103

Page #26:
---------------------------
## The Padma Purana

**Chapter 24**

This was spoken by Indra-bhuiti, the chief Ganadhara, to the disciples from the Dharma-shaya, and it remained in the world through the Sadhu-parampara until that time.

**Time of Composition**

**3**

There is a great difference of opinion among scholars regarding the time of composition of this text. Some scholars, like Dr. Winternitz, consider the time specified in the text to be correct. However, Western scholars like Dr. Herman Jacobi, etc., based on the style of composition, language, literature, etc., consider its time of composition to be the 3rd-4th century CE. Some scholars, like Dr. Keith, etc., point to the presence of words like "Dinar" and some Greek words related to astrology in the text, and therefore consider it to be from 300 CE or later. And the expert in prosody, Shri Diwan Bahadur Keshav Lal Dhruva, expresses strong doubts about the said time of composition, considering it to be a much later composition. In his writing, he has stated that the use of the Gahini, Sharabha, etc., meters at the end of each chapter, the Yamaka in the Giti, and the word "Vimala" at the end of the chapters, are all indicative of its modern nature. Apart from these, many other scholars are doubtful about its time of composition - they hesitate to accept the time specified in the text, and thus its time of composition remains in the realm of doubt. In such a situation, the time mentioned in the text cannot be readily accepted.

**4**

After examining the available opinions of scholars regarding the time of the text, I have examined the internal literature of the text, and based on that, I have reached the conclusion that the said time of composition of the text is not correct - it is definitely the result of some mistake or error by the author or scribe. And it is also possible that the incorrect propagation of the number of years of Vira Nirvana, like the Saka era, is the reason for this. But whatever it may be, the internal examination of the text has revealed to me other specific reasons for the incorrectness of the said time, which are divided into three parts:

**(1)** The Paumachariya was not composed before the Digambara-Svetambara sect split.

**(2)** The text adopts the beliefs of the Digambara Acharya Kundakunda.

**(3)** The text follows the Tattvartha Sutra of Umashvatik very closely.

Now I will explain these three types of reasons in order.

**(1)** According to the Digambara belief, the Digambara-Svetambara sect split occurred in Vikram Samvat 136, and according to the Svetambara belief, it occurred in Samvat 139. Before this split, in the Jain literature, for the Jain Sadhus:

1. "Panchaiva ya vasasaya dusamae tis varis sanjutta. Vire siddhimupgae tao nibaddham imam chariyam || 103 || Eyam virajinena ramchariyam siddham mahattham pura,
Pacchakhandalabhuina u kahiyam sisas dhammasayam. Bhuo sahuparamparae sayalam loe tie payadam
Etta he vimalena suttasahyam gahanibaddham kayam || 102 ||"

2. See, "Encyclopedia of Religion and Ethics", December 1914.

3. See, Keith's "History of Sanskrit Literature", page 34, 59.

4. "Introduction to Prakrit".

- Paumachariya, Uddesa 103
Part 7, page 437 and "Modern Review"

Page #27:
---------------------------
## Introduction
25
The terms 'Digambar' and 'Svetambar' are not explicitly used anywhere. If the word 'Svetambar' (Siyambar) is found in this text for a Jain monk, it indicates that this text was not written before Vikram Samvat 136, the time when the Digambar and Svetambar sects were not yet established. There is a clear example of such usage in the 22nd chapter of the text. For example:
> Pechchha paribhamantō dāhiṇadesē siyamvaram paṇao |
> Tassa sagāsē dhammam suṇīūṇ tao samāḍhatto ||78||
> Aha bhai muni varadō śiśuṇ sudhammam jiṇehi parikahyam | Jeṭho ya samaṇadhammo sāvayadhammo ya aṇujeṭho || 79 ||

This passage describes a Jain monk who was encountered by the dethroned king Saudās while traveling in the south, and from whom he took the vows of a lay follower. This monk is referred to as a Svetambar monk. Therefore, this text cannot be a composition from before Vikram Samvat 136.

Here, I would like to point out that the Svetambar scholar Muni Kalyanvijayji, in his book 'Shraman Bhagwan Mahavira', writes that before the 7th century Vikram era, neither the Digambar nor the Svetambar traditions used the terms 'Digambar' and 'Svetambar' for each other. This is evident from his following statement:
> "It was from this time (from the beginning of the 7th century Vikram era to the end of the 10th century) that the practice of calling each other Digambar and Svetambar began." || Page 307

If Muni Kalyanvijayji's research is accurate, then the composition of the Paumachariy cannot be before the 7th century Vikram era, not just Vikram Samvat 136. The oldest mention of this text so far is found in the text 'Kuvalayamala', which was written in Shaka Samvat 700, equivalent to Vikram Samvat 835.

(2) Shri Kundakunda is the chief Acharya of the Digambar sect. In his 'Charitpahuḍ', while describing the Sagara Dharma, he mentions Sallekhana as the fourth Shikshavrata. This belief is not mentioned in any text before him, and therefore it is considered to be his unique belief. This belief of his has been adopted by Vimalsuri, the author of 'Paumachariy'. This belief is not mentioned anywhere in the Svetambar Agam Sutras. The following statement from a letter received by Mukhtar Sahib from Muni Punyavijayji also reveals the same:
> "Sallekhana is not included as a Shikshavrata in the twelve vows in any of the Svetambar Agams."

There is a lot of similarity between the verses of 'Charitpahuḍ' related to Sagara Dharma and those found in 'Paumachariy', as evident from the comparison below:
―
[4]

> Pancheṇuvvayā guṇavvayāī havanti tah tiṣṇi | Sikkhavay cattāriy sanjamacaraṇam ca sāyaram ||23||
> Tasakāya hē thūlē mōsē adattalē ya | Parihāro para mahilā pariggahārambha parimāṇam || 24 ||
> Disavidisamaṇapaḍhamaṁ aṇatya iṇḍassa vajjaṇam vidiyam | Bhogopabhoga parimā iyameva guṇavvayā tiṣṇi || 25 ||

Page #28:
---------------------------
26
Padmapurana
Samaiya, the first, Vidiya, the second, and Posaha, the third, are said. The fourth is Sallekhana at the end. ||26||
-Charittrapahuḍ
Five are the Anuvvaya, three are the Gunavvaya, it is said. Four are the Sikkhavaani, the Jina's wishes. ||112||
Thullayaram, Panivahan, Musavaayam, Adattadaan, and Parajuvaai's Nivatti, Santoshavayam, the fifth. ||113||
Disivi-disa's Niyamo, Anaththadandas's Vajjan, and Uvabhog-parimaanam, these three are the Gunavvaya. ||114||
Samaiya, Uvvaas-Posaha, Atihisanvibhaago, and Samahimaran at the end, these four are the Sikkhaasuvaya. ||115||
-Paumcharia U.14
Apart from this, the following verse from Acharya Kundakunda's Pravachnasara is also available in Paumcharia with some word changes.
The karma that the ignorant one eats, with thousands of crores of births, that karma the wise one eats with a single breath. ||38||
-Pravachnasara A. 3
The karma that the ignorant tapaswi eats, with thousands of crores of births, that karma the wise one eats with a single breath, the great one. ||177||
-Paumcharia U. 102
In such a situation, the composition of Paumcharia cannot be before Kundakunda. The time of Kundakunda is found to be approximately the latter half of the first century and the early half of the second century of the Vikram era. It cannot be said to be after the third century in any way. In such a situation, the time of the creation of Paumcharia, which is said to be 6 CE, does not seem to be consistent. Muni Kalyanvijayji has stated the time of Kundakunda to be the sixth century CE. According to his belief, he will either have to state Paumcharia to be a text after the sixth century CE or show Sallekhana (Samadhimaran) as the fourth Sikkhaavrat in some Shvetambara text written before 60 CE. Otherwise, the time of Kundakunda will have to be accepted as before 60 CE.
[3] Comparing the sutras of the Tattvarth Sutra written by Umashvati with some places in Paumcharia, a great similarity in words and a good understanding of the style of the statement sequence is found. And this similarity of words, etc., does not have as much connection with the Shvetambara commentary-accepted text as it seems to have with the Digambara Sutra text. Not only this, but also the sutras which have not been given a place in the commentary-accepted text and about which the commentators of the commentary, Haribhadra and Siddhasena Gani, state in their commentary that here some other scholars put many new sutras on their own for the sake of expansion, many of these sutras are found in this text according to the Digambara tradition-accepted Sutra text. Here, for the information of the readers, some comparisons of the sutras of Tattvarth Sutra and the verses of Paumcharia are given below. 1. See, Anekanta Varsh 2 Kiran 1 First Article, 'Who is the predecessor in Shri Kundakunda and Yativrisham?' and
The English introduction of Pravachnasara by Prof. A.N. Upadhyay. 2. Apere Punarvidvanso'ti Bahuni Swayam Virchayasmin Prastave Sutraanyadhiyate Vistardarshanabhipraayena
Siddhasena Gani, Tattva. Bha. T. 3, 11 Page 261.

Page #29:
---------------------------
## Introduction
27
**The characteristics of use.** || 8 || It is of two types, eight and four divisions. || 9 || - Tattvarth Sutra A. 2
The use of the soul is knowledge and perception, and the destruction of karma. Knowledge is eightfold and perception is fourfold. || 96 || - Paumachariy Uddeśa 102
Earth, water, fire, air, and plants are stationary. || 13 || - Tattvarth Sutra A. 2
Earth, water, fire, air, and plants are stationary. If there is one body, then there are five types of objects. || 13 || - Paumachariy Uddeśa 102
The womb of oviparous, viviparous, and born from sweat. || 33 || The birth of gods and hell beings. || 34 || The fainting of the rest. || 35 || - Tattvarth Sutra A. 2
Oviparous, viviparous, and born from sweat are called womb-born. These are the gods, hell beings, and the souls who faint. || 17 || - Paumachariy Uddeśa 102
The bodies of the generous, the deceitful, the food, the fiery, and the karmic. || 36 || Very, very subtle. || 37 || - Tattvarth Sutra A. 2
The generous, the deceitful, the food, the fiery, and the karmic. The body is formed by the qualities of the subtle, in succession. || 298 || - Paumachariy Uddeśa 102
The earth of jewels, sugar, sand, mud, smoke, darkness, great darkness, and light, dense water, wind, and space are the seven below. || 1 || - Tattvarth Sutra A. 3
The earth of jewels, sugar, sand, mud, smoke, darkness, great darkness, and light. These seven are the terrible hells. || 66 || - Paumachariy Uddeśa 102
In them, thirty, twenty-five, fifteen, ten, and three, less than one hundred thousand hells, and five, in order. || 2 || - Tattvarth Sutra A. 3
Thirty, twenty-five, fifteen, and ten are the hells. Three, five, and five are the supreme hells. || 36 || - Paumachariy Uddeśa 102
In them, one, three, seven, seventeen, seventeen, twenty-two, three, thirty, and the ocean-like beings have their supreme state. || 6 || - Tattvarth Sutra A. 3
One, three, seven, seventeen, seventeen, twenty-two, thirty-three, and the names of the hells in the earth of jewels. || 83 || - Paumachariy Uddeśa 102
The Jambudvipa, the salt ocean, and the others are the islands and oceans of auspicious names. || 7 || They are twice the size, and the previous ones are surrounded by the later ones, in the form of rings. || 8 || - Tattvarth Sutra A. 3
The Jambudvipa, the salt ocean, and the others are the islands and oceans of salt water. They are twice the size, and countless. || 101 || - Paumachariy Uddeśa 102
In the middle of them is the Meru, which is a hundred thousand yojanas in diameter, and the Jambudvipa. || 9 || - Tattvarth Sutra A. 3
In the middle of it is the Nahagir, the Mandara, which is a hundred thousand yojanas in diameter. It is spread out in all directions, ten thousand yojanas. || 103 || - Paumachariy Uddeśa 102

Page #30:
---------------------------
The Padma Purana describes the following regions: Bharat, Hemvaya, Harivasa, Mahavideha, Rammaya, Herannava, and Eravaya.

- **Tattvarth. A. 3.106:** Bharat, Hemvaya, Harivasa, Mahavideha, Rammaya, Herannava, and Eravaya are the regions.

- **Paumachariy U. 102:** The regions are divided into the following: Purva, Apara, Himavan, Mahahimavan, Nishadha, Nila, Rukmi, and Shikharin.

- **Tattvarth. A. 3.105:** Himavan, Mahahimavan, Nishadha, Nila, Rukmi, and Shikharin are the seven mountains.

- **Paumachariy U. 102:** The rivers are Ganga, Sindhu, Rohini, Hariddhari, Kanta, Sita, Sitoda, Nari, Narakanta, Suvarna, Rupya, Kula, Rakta, and Raktoda.

- **Tattvarth. A. 3.107-108:** Ganga, Sindhu, Rohini, Hariddhari, Kanta, Sita, Sitoda, Nari, Narakanta, Suvarna, Rupya, Kula, Rakta, and Raktoda are the rivers.

- **Paumachariy U. 102:** The regions of Bharat and Eravaya experience growth and decline due to the six types of time cycles: Utsarpini and Avasarpini.

- **Tattvarth. A. 3.41:** The regions of Bharat and Eravaya experience growth and decline due to the six types of time cycles: Utsarpini and Avasarpini.

- **Paumachariy U. 3:** The regions of Bharat, Eravaya, and Videha are the realms of karma, while the regions of Devakuru, Uttarakuru, and other regions are the realms of enjoyment.

- **Tattvarth. A. 3.111-112:** The regions of Bharat, Eravaya, and Videha are the realms of karma, while the regions of Devakuru, Uttarakuru, and other regions are the realms of enjoyment.

- **Paumachariy U. 102:** The inhabitants of the world are Asuras, Nagas, Vidyuts, Suparnas, Agnis, Vatas, Tanitas, Udadhis, Dvipas, Dikkumara, Kinnaras, Kimpurushas, Mahoragas, Gandharvas, Yakshas, Rakshasas, Bhutas, and Pishachas.

- **Tattvarth. A. 4.32:** The inhabitants of the world are Asuras, Nagas, Suvannas, Divas, Samuddas, Disakumaras, Vayaggis, Vidyuthaniyas, Bhavananiwasis, and Dasaviyappas.

- **Paumachariy U. 75:** The inhabitants of the world are Kinnaras, Kimpurushas, Mahoragas, Gandharvas, Yakshas, Rakshasas, Bhutas, and Pishachas.

- **Tattvarth. A. 4.32:** The inhabitants of the world are Kinnaras, Kimpurushas, Mahoragas, Gandharvas, Yakshas, Rakshasas, Bhutas, and Pishachas.

- **Paumachariy U. 75:** The celestial bodies are Surya, Chandra, Grahas, Nakshatras, and Tarikayas.

- **Tattvarth. A. 4.14:** The celestial bodies are Surya, Chandra, Grahas, Nakshatras, and Tarikayas.

- **Paumachariy U. 102:** The five types of actions are Irya, Bhasha, Eshan, Adana, Nikshepa, Utsarga, and Samiti.

- **Tattvarth. A. 9:** The five types of actions are Irya, Bhasha, Eshan, Adana, Nikshepa, Utsarga, and Samiti.

Page #31:
---------------------------
## Introduction

The language of the Iriya is the same as that of the Aayana. The pronunciation is the same as the Panchamiya, which is 71.

- Paumachariy U. 14:  "External austerities are:  abstinence from food, beauty, occupation, counting, taste, renunciation, secluded bed and seat, and bodily afflictions.  ||19||  Penance, humility, conduct, self-study, renunciation, meditation, and higher austerities are the internal ones. ||20||"

Tattvarth. A. 9: "Anasana means bodily affliction, which is the same as the twenty-two kinds of bodily afflictions. Renunciation of taste is the same as secluded bed and seat. ||74|| Penance, humility, conduct, self-study, renunciation, meditation, and higher austerities are the internal ones. ||75||"

- Paumachariy U. 14:  It is clear from this comparison that many of the verses of the Paumachariy are based on the sutras of the Tattvarth Sutra. At the end of the book, the author has also stated in the sentence "Ettahe Vimaleṇa Sutta Sahiyam Gaahanivaddham Kayam" that he has compiled the sutras into verses. In such a situation, it is certain that this book was written after the Tattvarth Sutra. The author of the Tattvarth Sutra, Acharya Umasvati, was also a follower of Shri Kundakunda Acharya - he was in the lineage of Kundakunda, as is evident from many inscriptions in Shravanabelagola, etc. And therefore, the time of its composition given in the Paumachariy becomes even more objectionable and certainly appears to be the result of some mistake or error.

Some special features of the book:

On examining the Paumachariy, it appears that some of the points are specifically related to the beliefs of the Digambara sect, some are specifically related to the beliefs of the Svetambara sect, and some are different from the beliefs of both. Here I would like to present all of them for the consideration of scholars, so that they can be helped in deciding which sect this book actually belongs to; because it has not yet been fully decided whether the author of this book was a Digambara, Svetambara, or Yapaniya Acharya. Some scholars consider this book to be Svetambara, some Digambara, and some Yapaniya.

[A]  Digambara sect related:

[1]  In the first chapter of the book, a verse describing the origin of the story is found as follows:

"Vīrasas Pavaṛṭhāṇam Vipulagirimatthae Maṇabhirāme.
Tāha Indabhūi Kahiyam Seṇiya Raṇassa Nīsesam. ||34||"

This states that when the Samavasaran of the Veer Bhagwan was situated on the Vipulachal mountain, then Indra-bhuiti, the Gautam Ganadhar, told all this to King Shrenik. This method of introducing the story is specifically related to the Digambara sect. Almost all the books of the Digambara sect, in which the origin of the story is mentioned, 1. See, Shravanabelagola inscriptions no. 40, 105, 108. 2. This has also been accepted by the Svetambara historical scholar Shri Mohanlal Dalichandraji Desai, Advocate Bombay, in his article "Kumarapalanā Samyanē Ek Apbhraṃśa Kāvya" and has also been given as a reason for considering the author of the said poetic work "Pradyumna Charit" to be a Digambara. See, "Jainacharya Shri Atmanand-Janma Shatabdi-Smārak Granth" Gujarati article, p. 260.

Page #32:
---------------------------
##  Translation:

**30**

The Padma Purana mentions the event of the Veer Bhagwan's Samavasaran on the Vipulachal mountain and the narration of the story by Indrabhuiti-Gautam to King Shrenik in response to his question. However, the tradition of the Svetambara scriptures differs from this. They mention the story's origin as being told by Sudharma Swami to Jambu Swami, as evident in the following verse from the Vasudeva Hindi of Sanghadas Gani:

"Tath tatra Suhammasamina Jambu namas padhamanuyogay titthayarachchakkavatti dasaravansaparuvangayam Vasudevachariyam kahiyam tti tasseva........tti."

The Svetambaras claim that the original Agam scriptures were composed by Sudharma Swami, while the Digambara tradition attributes their creation to Gautam Ganadhar-Indrabhuiti.

**[2]** In the second chapter of the text, while describing the Shikshavrata, the Samadhimaran Sallekhana Vrata is mentioned as the fourth Shikshavrata. As stated:

"Samadhyam cha upavasaposaho atihisanvibhago ya.
Ante samahimaran sikkha suvayai chattari || 115 ||"

This belief of considering Samadhimaran Sallekhana Vrata as a Shikshavrata is specific to the Digambara sect. Clear evidence of this is found in the Charitpahuḍ of Acharya Kundakunda, the Adipurana of Jinsen, the Ratnamala of Shivkotika, the Bhavasangrah of Devasen, and the Shravakachar of Vasunandi. This is also mentioned in the Varang Charit of Jayasimhanandi. The Svetambara Agam Sutras do not mention this as a Shikshavrata anywhere, as evident in the following statement from a letter written by Muni Shri Punyavijayaji to Mukhtar Shri Jugalkishor:

"The Svetambara Agam does not include Sallekhana as a Shikshavrata among the 12 Vratas anywhere." Therefore, this belief is specifically associated with the Digambara sect.

**[b] Svetambara Sect Related**

**[1]** The 82nd verse of the second chapter of this text mentions 20 reasons for the bondage of the Tirthankara nature. Although their names are not mentioned in the text, this belief of 20 reasons is associated with the Svetambara sect because their knowledgeable scriptures like Dharmakatha, etc., list 20 reasons. The Digambara sect's Shatkhandadi scriptures universally mention 16 reasons.

**[2]** The 58th verse of the fourth chapter of the text mentions 64,000 queens of Bharat Chakravarti. This number of queens is also associated with the Svetambara sect. The Digambara sect mentions 96,000 queens.

**[3]** The 34th verse of the 73rd chapter of the text mentions the death of Ravana on Jyeshtha Krishna Ekadashi. This belief seems to be in accordance with the Svetambara sect, as Hemchandra Acharya also mentions this in his "Trishashtisalakapurushacharitra."

1. See, Mukhtar Shri Jugalkishor's book "Jainacharyon ka Shasan Bhed" chapter "Gunavrata and Shikshavrata."
2. "Vinsam Jin Karanahan Bhaveo."
3. "Chausatthi Sahasssai Juwainam Paramruvadharinam."
4. "Jettsass Bahulpakkhe Divassass Chauthbhagammi. Egarisi Divase Ravanamaaranam Viyanahhi."

Page #33:
---------------------------
## Introduction

[31] The *Parushcharitra* mentions this date. It is also possible that Hemachandracharya followed this text in his own work. Whatever the case may be, there is no mention of this date in the Digambara sect, nor is it found in the Valmiki Ramayana.

[4] In the 22nd chapter of the text (previously quoted verses no. 77-78), the meat-eating king Soudasa is described as a Shvetambara while he receives the Dharma-upadesha from the Jina Muni Maharaj while traveling in the south.

In addition to these points, the text also mentions the 12 Kalpas (Swagas) as a belief. Some scholars have pointed out this as a Shvetambara belief; however, ancient texts like *Tiloyapannatti* and *Varangacharitra* of the Digambara sect also mention 12 Swargas. The Digambara sect accepts both the beliefs of 12 and 16 Swargas, along with their respective Indras and their territories. This is clearly explained in the three verses no. 452, 453, 454 of *Triloksar*.

[5] In the 102nd chapter of this text, after mentioning the Kalpas and Navagraha, the mention of Aditya and other Anudishas is found as follows:

> *Kappanam pun uri navagevejjai manabhiramai.
> Tan vi anuddhisai pureo aiccha pamuhai.* ||145||

This belief of Anudishas is also specifically related to the Digambara sect. All the texts of the Digambara sect like *Patkhandagam*, *Dhavla*, *Tiloyapannatti*, *Lokavibhag*, and *Triloksar* have the provision of Anudishas, while there is no mention of them in the Shvetambara Agamas. Upadhyaya Muni Shri Atmaramji, in his book *Tattvarthsutra Jainagam Samanvay*, published with Hindi translation, has clearly accepted on page 119 that "the existence of nine Anudishas is not accepted in the Agam texts."

[6] In the second chapter of this text, while narrating the birth story of Veer Bhagwan, there is no mention of his being married. Instead, it clearly states that when he left his childhood and turned thirty years old, he attained *Vairagya* (dispassion) and took *Deeksha* (renunciation).

Furthermore, in the twentieth chapter, he is counted among the Kumar Shramanas - the Jain Tirthankaras who were celibate - along with Vasupujya, Malli, Arishtanemi, and Parshva, who left their homes and became monks during their childhood. This belief of Veer Prabhu not being married is also specifically related to the Digambara sect, as there is no provision of his marriage in any Digambara text. They unanimously declare him as unmarried, while the Shvetambara texts generally describe him as married. In *Kalpasutra*:

> *Trishathi. Pu. Ch. 7-376
> 1. Tada cha jyeshtha krishna kadashiyamhna shcha paschime.
> Yame mato dashgreeva shchatutham narakam yayau. ||2||
> See, Anekant Varsh 4, Kiran 11-12 p. 624.
> 3. Ummaka balabhava tisai variso jino jao. ||28||
> Ah annayaya kayai sanvegadaro jino muniyadoso.
> Logantiya parikinnho panvajjamuvaago viro. ||29||
> 4. Malli ariththanemi paso viro ya vasupujjo ya. ||57||
> Eae kumara siha gehao niggaya jinavarina. Sesha vi hu raayano puhai bhottuun nikkhanta. ||58||*

Page #34:
---------------------------
## English Translation:

32
Padmapurana

The text mentions the names of their wives, daughters, and granddaughters. This is another point that the necessary appointment [Verse No. 221-222], whose time of creation is not before the sixth century, also mentions. Veer Bhagwan has been included in the Kumar Shramanas, but this seems to be an acceptance of the Digambar belief.
[7] In this text, in the 83rd chapter, while describing the initiation of King Bharat, a verse is given as follows:
```
Aṇṇao gurūṇam bharhao kāuṇ tatth'alaṁkāram. Nisśesasanga rahi'o luñcai dhīro ṇipayakese || 5 ||
```
This actually mentions Bharat Maharaj renouncing all possessions and cutting his hair, giving up clothes and ornaments, but the reading "kāuṇ tatth'alaṁkāra" here seems to be the result of some mistake or change, otherwise, it would be incongruous to talk about being free from all attachments while wearing ornaments and adorning oneself. Also, the word "tatth" seems redundant. Therefore, this mention points towards the Digambar belief.

Some different types:
[1] This text mentions 15 dreams that Marudevi, the mother of Bhagwan Rishabhdev, had, while the Svetambar sect mentions 14 and the Digambar sect mentions 16. According to the Digambar belief, there is a lack of a dream called "Simhasan" and according to the Svetambar belief, there should be either "Viman" or "Bhawan".
[2] In the following verse of the 105th chapter of the text, the time difference between the Mahabharata and the Ramayana is mentioned as 64,000 years. As follows:
```
C'ausatthi sahas'sāiṁ varisa'ṇam antaraṁ samakkhāyam. Titth'ayare hi mahāyas'a bharatarāmāyaṇātu || 16 ||
```
This time difference is not supported by either tradition, and it contradicts the time difference between the Tirthankaras described by the author himself, because the Ramayana originated in the time of the 20th Tirthankara Muni Suvrat, and the Mahabharata originated in the time of the 22nd Tirthankara Neminath, and the author himself has mentioned the time difference between the two Tirthankaras as 11 lakhs in the 20th, as follows:
```
Ch'ac'ceva samasaha'ss'a vīs'aiyam antaraṁ samuddiṭṭhaṁ. Pañceva hava'i lak'khā jiṇantaraṁ ega vīs'aimam || 81 ||
```
[3] In the following verse of the second chapter, the origin of Kevalgyan from the destruction of Ashtakarma is mentioned by Bhagwan Mahavira, as is evident from the following verse:
```
Aha aṭṭha karma rahi'assa tassa jhāṇovajogajutta'ssa. Sayaljagajjoyakaram kevalaṇāṇam samuppanaṁ || 30 ||
```
This statement is contradicted by both sects, because both sects believe that Kevalgyan originates from the destruction of four ghatiyas karmas, while moksha occurs from the destruction of Ashtakarma.

It is hoped that scholars will consider all these points and be inclined to make a special decision regarding the time of creation of the text and the relationship of the author.

Page #35:
---------------------------
## Introduction
## Main Characters of Padmacharit

Although the main protagonist of Padmacharit is the eighth Balabhadra Padma (Rama), the interaction with him brings forth the beautiful character portrayals of many characters in the story, which are extremely helpful for humans to achieve humanity. In this column, I am introducing ten such characters briefly.

[1] **Ravana**

After losing to Indra, the Vidhyadhar, he starts living in Mali Alankarpur (Patal Lanka). There, he has a son named Ratna Shrava, who gets married to Kekasi when he grows up. This couple, Ratna Shrava and Kekasi, are the parents of Ravana. Ravana was a brave warrior from childhood. Kumbhakarna and Vibhishan were his younger brothers, and Chandranakha was his younger sister. One day, Ravana was sitting in Kekasi's lap when Vaishravana Vidhyadhar's chariot passed by in the sky. Seeing its grandeur, Ravana asked his mother, "Mother! Who is this influential man going by?" His mother, while introducing him, said, "He is your maternal uncle, very powerful. He killed your father's brother and took Lanka from him. We are forced to spend our days in this Patal Lanka." The vision of past glory starts dancing before Kekasi's eyes, and thinking about the present situation, tears start flowing from her eyes. Seeing his mother's sorrowful state, Ravana and Kumbhakarna console her. Ravana goes to the dense forest to master various skills. The unclothed Yaksha of Jambu Dwip tests him rigorously. He presents various obstacles, troubles, and terrifying scenes. Sometimes, he tries to weaken his resolve by showing him the miserable state of his mother and father, and sometimes, he tries to frighten him by showing him the terrifying forms of lions, tigers, snakes, etc. But, blessed is Ravana! He endures all the troubles and does not deviate from his goal even for a moment. He returns after mastering many skills. He was handsome, so he had relationships with many princesses. He marries a pure and thoughtful girl like Mandodari. Ravana takes a vow from Anantvirya Kevali that he will not touch any woman who does not want him. Ravana's wisdom attracts the reader when he rejects the love proposal of Nalakuvar's wife and gives her a beautiful lesson. Hearing the news of Narada's plight in King Marutvak's violent Yagna, Ravana rushes to protect him and destroys his hypocritical Yagna, promoting true Dharma. In the war with Varuna, Kumbhakarna brings the women and children of Varuna's city as prisoners before Ravana. Ravana reprimands Kumbhakarna, and his words are very touching. He says, "Good man! You had a fight with Varuna, but why did you put innocent citizens' women in such trouble? Why did you insult them? If you want your well-being, return them to their homes with respect." After defeating many kings in his conquest, Ravana captures Indra. The next day, Indra's father comes to his residence. Ravana treats him with such humility as if he is the embodiment of humility. The way Acharya Ravishena portrays his humility at that time touches the heart. In this way, we see that Ravana eliminates the arrogant rival Vidhyadharas and establishes his rule over the three parts of the southern region of Bharat Kshetra and the Vijayadhar mountain. He was not a Rakshasa, but a descendant of the Rakshasa clan. Valmiki has declared him a Rakshasa, stating the facts.

According to the principle of "Bhavitavyaata Baliyasi", Ravana sees Rama's wife Sita and becomes infatuated with her. He abducts her by deceit. He keeps Sita in the Ashoka Vatika of Lanka and tries to win her over in every way possible...

Page #36:
---------------------------
## English Translation:

**34**
**Padma Purana**

He remains steadfast in the vow he took before the Kevali even at that time and does not even touch his body against Sita's wishes. With the rise of sin, Ravana's power of discernment is lost, he becomes intoxicated with pride, rejects the wise counsel of Mandodari, and scorns his brother Vibhishana, a wise and righteous man, forcing him to leave Lanka. The army of Rama and the Vidyadharas surround Lanka from all sides. Ravana demonstrates the Bahurupini Vidya in the temple of Shantinath. Inspired by Lakshmana, many Vidyadharas create havoc in Lanka, but Ravana remains steadfast like a mountain and demonstrates the Bahurupini Vidya. In the end, his merit does not stand by him. The Sudarshan Chakra of Vishnu reaches Lakshmana, and he kills Ravana. With Ravana's death, the first chapter of Rama's life ends.

**[2] Mandodari**

In the city of Asurasangeet, located on the southern range of Vijay Parvat, King May, also known as Hemavati, resides. Mandodari is his daughter. When King May, after consulting with his ministers, decides to marry Mandodari to Ravana, Ravana was staying in the Bhima forest. May takes Mandodari with him to meet Ravana. Mandodari's beauty captivates Ravana's heart. Their marriage takes place according to the rituals. Mandodari becomes Ravana's queen due to her virtues. We see that Mandodari is a very intelligent and wise woman. She repeatedly guides Ravana towards the right path by giving him wise counsel. Just as a single offering of water calms the rising milk, Mandodari's advice has calmed Ravana's anger on many occasions. While Ravana was away from Lanka, Khara and Dushana abducted Ravana's sister, Chandranakha. Upon returning to Lanka, Ravana, upon hearing this news, becomes enraged and prepares to attack Khara and Dushana. At that time, Mandodari's gentle and wise counsel calms Ravana's anger in an instant. Acharya Ravishena's depiction of Mandodari's foresight and wisdom is truly remarkable, as the reader will see for themselves by reading this chapter. When Ravana returns to Lanka after abducting Sita, Mandodari tries in various ways to bring her misguided husband back to the right path, which is truly astonishing. Indrajit and Meghvahan are her sons. After Ravana's death, when her two sons take initiation from the great sage Anantvirya, she is deeply saddened, but the Arya named Shashikanta consoles her with her peaceful words, leading her to become an Aryika along with many other women. Now, the queen of the three-world-ruling Ravana adorns herself with only a white saree. In the end, she performs penance and ascends to heaven.

**[3] King Dasharatha**

King Dasharatha is the son of King Anaranya of Ayodhya. He is known for his simple nature, handsome physique, and courageous spirit. He has four wives: Kaushalya (Aparajita), Kekaya, Sumitra, and Suprabha, and they give birth to four sons: Rama, Bharata, Lakshmana, and Shatrughna. He is a true friend, a veritable ocean of friendship. The Mlechchas attack King Janaka. Upon hearing the news of his friend's plight, King Dasharatha, with full preparation, rushes to Janaka's aid, and the Mlechchas, defeated and destroyed, flee their country. Inspired by King Dasharatha's support and friendship, King Janaka decides to give his daughter Sita to Dasharatha's son, Rama. Due to the Narad's Lila, Janaka has to face many struggles with the Vidyadharas in this matter.

Page #37:
---------------------------
## Introduction
35 However, according to destiny, everything happens as it should. Rama, after stringing the bow, marries Sita. King Dasharatha is very pleased with Kekaya's skill in warfare and grants her her desired boon. This leads to her detachment. The opportunity to give Rama the kingdom arises. Kekaya's rebellious spirit surges, and she demands that her son Bharata be given the kingdom. Dasharatha, bound by his promise to grant her a boon, agrees to Kekaya's request. Rama, Lakshmana, and Sita leave for the forest. The lamentations of Rama and Lakshmana's mothers and the bitter criticisms of the people do not deter King Dasharatha from his truth. After Rama's departure, he takes initiation and seeks self-liberation. In this episode, Valmiki criticizes King Dasharatha for his lust for Kekaya, but Ravishena, in his portrayal of Rama's father, does not allow anything to be said that would make him fall from the pinnacle of glory.

[4] Kekaya
Kekaya is a woman skilled in all arts. Acharya Ravishena has dedicated an entire chapter to describing her skills. Her son's name is Bharata. She is a complete scholar of psychology. When Rama and Lakshmana are married with great pomp and ceremony in Mithila, she understands Bharata's state of mind and tells King Dasharatha in private to arrange Bharata's marriage to the daughter of Kanak, Janak's brother. King Dasharatha does as Kekaya commands. Although Kekaya's heart is filled with jealousy towards her co-wife, she later regrets her actions. She goes to the forest with Bharata and many other vassals to bring Rama and Lakshmana back. She pleads and begs, but Rama does not budge. Instead, he explains the situation and reinstates Bharata as king. Kekaya, repenting her actions, returns.

[5] King Janak
Janak, the king of Mithila, is Sita's father. He is very wise and protective of his self-respect. Due to Narada's playfulness, Bhamandala, a Vidyadhara who was Janak's son born from a previous life, saw Sita's portrait and was captivated by her. A Vidyadhara, taking the form of a magical horse, enters Janak's court. The Vidyadhara says, "You should marry off your daughter." But Janak, with courage, says, "I have already promised Sita to Dasharatha's son." In this episode, Janak's self-respect is evident as he criticizes the earth-bound beings and the Vidyadharas. In the presence of the Vidyadharas, he scolds them, saying, "If the Vidyadharas are proud of their ability to fly in the sky, then even crows fly in the sky. If the Vidyadharas are superior, then why don't they take birth as Tirthankaras?" Acharya Ravishena's immediate outburst is very intriguing. Finally, Janak accepts the condition of stringing the Vajravart bow and returns to Mithila. The Swayamvara takes place, Rama strings the bow, and he marries Sita. The Vidyadharas return with their faces downcast. Bhamandala, angered by his father's silence, decides to abduct Sita and comes with his army. But remembering his lineage, his heart changes. He hears about his past life from a sage. In Ayodhya, Bhamandala meets his sister Sita. King Dasharatha summons Janak. Who can describe the joy that King Janak and Queen Videha experience at the reunion with their son born from a previous life after a long separation? Yet, the stream of affection that Acharya Ravishena pours out at that time is...

Page #38:
---------------------------
36  
In the Padma Purana  
The heart-wrenching nature of the story is extraordinary. After this, King Janaka of Mithila sets out for conquest with Kanaka, along with Bhamaṇḍala.  
[6] Rāma  
Rāma is the rightful son of Queen Kausalya, the undefeated wife of King Daśaratha. He is the protagonist of this text. By nature, he is simple and valiant. King Daśaratha, desiring to renounce worldly life, prepares to take initiation, but Bharata wishes to renounce before him. Father Daśaratha and Rāma try to explain to him, and Rāma, with the affection and tenderness befitting his importance, persuades Bharata. Somehow, Bharata calms down.  
Preparations for Rāma's coronation are made. Kekaya wishes to crown her son Bharata. Due to his promise, Daśaratha feels compelled. When Rāma learns of this, he immediately departs for the forest with equanimity. "Our father is the rightful king; we must obey his command," reflects Rāma, and there is no turmoil in his heart. Although a seed of rebellion arises in Lakṣmaṇa's heart, thinking their father is unjustly swayed by a woman, he remains silent after witnessing Rāma's calmness.  
When Rāma is called for the coronation, no signs of joy appear on his face, and when he receives the order to go to the forest, no mark of sorrow shows. Rāma departs for the forest with Sītā and Lakṣmaṇa, yet his heart harbors not even a trace of resentment toward Bharata. King Amitavīrya, campaigning against Bharata, becomes known. When Rāma learns this, he secretly attempts to protect Bharata. At that time, he openly speaks to Lakṣmaṇa, Sītā, and Lakṣmaṇa's brothers, delivering a long discourse that reveals there is none like those who, like clouds in the night, conceal themselves yet do good for others. Consequently, he enters Amitavīrya's court disguised as a dancer, first enchanting him with his art, then defeating him. In the yajnashālā of Kapila the Brahmin, weary Rāma wishes to rest but is met with such hostility by the Brahmin that he sets off straight for the forest. Although Lakṣmaṇa, enraged, wishes to overpower Kapila, there is no sign of diminishment in Rāma's seriousness. He explains to Lakṣmaṇa beautifully.  
Rāma's stay in the city created by the Yākṣas and his rescue of the same Kapila Brahmin reminds one of Sudāma's story. After Sītā's abduction, despite some agitation within Rāma, there arises a time during the Rāma-Rāvaṇa war when some people request Rāma's command to obstruct Rāvaṇa; Rāma disapproves, considering such an act abhorrent. Victory is attained in battle. Rāma says, "Brother! Enmity toward Rāvaṇa was only until death, now what is the reason for hostility?" Saying this, he performs the last rites and advises everyone. By saying, "This is how it is meant to be," he pacifies them all. He assumes the throne. Due to fear of public opinion, Sītā is abandoned. Rāma remains sorrowful within like a covered pot, while outwardly everything continues as usual. Thus we see that Rāma, despite suffering, desires to uphold societal norms, earning him the name of Maryādā Puruṣottama in the world. He orders Sītā for the Agni Parīkṣā, yet upon seeing the towering flames, he becomes overwhelmed with compassion and says to Lakṣmaṇa, "Lakṣmaṇa! May Sītā not get burned!" After the death of Lakṣmaṇa, his love makes him almost mad for six months. Afterward, he becomes alert and assumes initiation. In the meantime, Sītā completes her penance and takes birth in the celestial realm of Acyuta. She is seen to be very composed in her efforts to distract him with her changeable nature, in the mastery of the disguise arts.  
Upon the return of Vibhīṣaṇa, Maṇḍodarī, and others to Ayodhya...

Page #39:
---------------------------
The introduction tries but all is in vain. After all, only those who attain **Keval Jnana** become consumers of the path of liberation. Every event in Rama's life and each of his actions are meant to elevate humanity. This is why even after such a long interval, Rama remains the object of faith for everyone. [7] Sita
Sita, the daughter of Janaka, is the ideal wife of Rama. If Rama is an ocean of seriousness, then Sita is a river of compassion. Sita is famous for her character. When Sita sees Lakshmana and his brothers agitated against King Amitaviry, she delivers a profound discourse. Rama supports her and tells Lakshmana that what Sita has said is heart-touching, full of foresight, and worthy of consideration. Lakshmana tightly binds the enemy of Vajrakarma, Singhordar, and throws him before Rama and Sita. Seeing his condition, the tenderness of a woman bursts forth through her words, making Singhordar tremble.
37
Indeed
This is
In the Dandaka forest, on the banks of the Karnarava river, Sita prepares food. Seeing the arrival of the **Charan** and **Riddhi-dhari** sages, her joy knows no bounds. She shows Rama the sages and, with devotion, offers them food. The machinations of Chandranakha become the cause of Sita's abduction. Ravana, through deceit, abducts Sita. In Ravana's Ashoka Vatika, various temptations are presented before Sita, but she rejects them all. With the vow, "Until Rama's message arrives, I will abstain from food and water," she sits like a goddess. Hanuman arrives with Rama's message. His joy knows no bounds. War ensues, Ravana is killed, Sita is reunited with Rama, and upon returning to Ayodhya, Sita becomes pregnant after some time. Fearing public opinion, Rama sends her away to a dense forest. Even then, not a single word against Rama escapes her lips. She says, "It is the fault of my destiny." She sends a message through Lakshmana, "Just as you have abandoned me due to people's words, do not abandon the **Lokottara Dharma**. **Samyagdrishti** men do not struggle with external causes but with their inner causes." This is why Sita, even in the face of this great humiliation, saw her own fault, not Rama's. What would she do alone in a deserted forest? Rama did not even consider this. He takes Sita home as his sister, and there, Sita, through her valiant sons, reveals the identity of Rama and Lakshmana to her valiant father. Sita undergoes the fire ordeal.
Lakshmana returns. The pregnant woman is alone. Hearing Sita's lament, King Vajranjangh arrives there. She gives birth to twin sons. The sons are raised with great love.
| They introduce themselves by fighting their father and defeating him. Narada arrives, and this reunion of father and sons fills the heart with emotion. Due to Sita's **Sati** character, the fire pit becomes a pool of water. This divine miracle spreads the glory of Sita's character everywhere. Rama says, "Beloved, let's go home," but Sita says, "I have seen home, now I will see the forest." She goes to the forest and becomes an **Aryika**. Sita's pure soul, through the influence of **Tap**, becomes **Prati-Indra** in the **Achyut** heaven. In this way, we find Sita as an ideal woman.
[8] Lakshmana
Lakshmana is the son of Queen Sumitra, wife of King Dasharatha. He has a natural love for Rama. Behind this love, we find Lakshmana sacrificing all his happiness. Seeing Rama ready for exile, Lakshmana follows him. Although initially, he feels some resentment towards his father, he later finds satisfaction in thinking, "My elder brother understands what is right and wrong. My duty is to go with him."

Page #40:
---------------------------
## English Translation:

**38**
In the forest exile, Lakshmana takes utmost care of Rama and Sita's well-being. He arranges for their food and other necessities. He is an embodiment of valor, with no trace of fear in his heart. He is completely devoted to Rama's commands. If there is any talk of marriage or other such matters at any king's court during the exile, he clearly states, "Ask my elder brother." During the war in Lanka, when Lakshmana is injured, Rama is deeply distressed and weeps in sorrow. However, his grief is alleviated by bathing in the waters of the Vishalya river. He obtains Ravana's chakra and uses it to destroy Ravana. Through his conquests, he establishes his dominion over the three divisions of Bharat. He is so devoted to Rama that he leaves his body only upon hearing the false news of Rama's death. Although he has a fiery nature, his fierceness is considered admirable in the presence of his elder brother, who is an ocean of composure.

**[9] Bharat**
King Bharat is the son of Dasharatha and Kaikeyi. He is far removed from his mother's deceit and pettiness. Kaikeyi did everything to make him king, but he refused to accept the throne. He is always seen with a melancholic expression, longing for home. During Rama's exile, he diligently ruled the kingdom. He is a protector of social conduct and decorum. After Rama's return from exile, he renounced worldly life and embraced asceticism.

**[10] Hanuman**
Hanuman's association with Rama's story is like a jewel-studded ornament. Valmiki's description of Hanuman is incongruous and an inadequate portrayal of a great soul. He is the crown jewel of the Vanara lineage, a Tadbhava-Moksha-gami (one who is destined for liberation) Vidhyadhara (celestial being). Describing him as a mere monkey is an unwise and unappealing choice. His father is Pavananjay (the wind god) and his mother is Anjana. Anjana endured immense suffering for 22 years due to her husband's absence, and later faced the harsh treatment of her mother-in-law, Ketumati, in the forest. Reading about her hardships would move any compassionate person to tears. Acharya Ravishena's portrayal of Anjana's character evokes a powerful stream of pathos, significantly enhancing the grandeur of the original text. After Sita's abduction, Hanuman comes into contact with Rama and serves him with utmost dedication until Rama's return to Ayodhya. Hanuman is a great soul with a long lifespan.

**[11] Vibhishana**
Vibhishana is Ravana's younger brother. He is an embodiment of righteousness and ethics. Having learned from a seer that "Ravana's death will be at the hands of Dasharatha and Janaka's descendants," he comes to Bharat to destroy them. However, Narada's grace ensures that Dasharatha and Janaka are informed beforehand, so they leave their palaces and install effigies of themselves. Vibhishana, mistaking the effigies for the real Dasharatha and Janaka, cuts off their heads with his sword, feeling satisfied. But when his conscience awakens, he deeply regrets his actions. When Ravana abducts Sita and takes her to Lanka, Vibhishana tries to reason with him, urging him to release her. But Ravana refuses to listen and even insults Vibhishana. This leads Vibhishana to leave Ravana and join Rama. Rama is deeply impressed by Vibhishana's morality. Thus, we see Ravana and Vibhishana, born from the same mother, as contrasting figures, representing darkness and light respectively.

Page #41:
---------------------------
## Introduction

**The Literary Form of Padmacarita**

The language of Padmacarita is imbued with grace and is extremely captivating. After seeing the Padmacarita published in the Manikchand Granthamala, I initially believed that it had a greater looseness in language compared to Valmiki Ramayana. However, when I compared it with the manuscripts, the pure text came to light, and my belief was eradicated. The poet has done a remarkable job in describing the forest, river, army, and war. The description of Chitrakoot mountain, Ganga river, and seasons like spring, as done by Acharya Ravishena, is not seen even in epics. The introduction is getting lengthy, otherwise, I would have presented all those verses before the readers where the poet's pen has done wonders. After reading Vimal Suri's 'Paumchariy', when we read Ravishena's Padmacarita, it becomes clear how he has made his work so elegant and suitable for poetry.

**This Translation and Acknowledgement**

In the introduction of Mahapurana, I wrote that in the Digambar Jain sect, Mahapurana, Padmapurana, and Harivanshpurana, all three are the crown jewels of Purana literature. While experiencing joy in editing and translating Mahapurana, I had drawn the attention of society towards the editing and publication of the remaining two Puranas. It is a matter of joy that the organizers of the Bharatiya Gyanpeeth liked my point, and they agreed to publish these two Puranas from Gyanpeeth. Pandit Foolchandji, a connoisseur of Jain principles and a compassionate scholar, also drew the attention of the organizers of Gyanpeeth towards this. Therefore, I am very grateful to all these great souls. The editing of the book cannot be done without manuscripts, so I wrote to my fellow scholar friend Pandit Parmanandji Delhi for manuscripts. He brought two manuscripts from the Delhi repositories, one with Shri Chandra's annotations and one from his personal library, 'Paumchariy', and came to Sagar himself. The remaining two manuscripts were also obtained from Bombay and Jaipur, so I am very grateful to those great souls who provided this resource material. I have taken textual variations based on four manuscripts and one printed copy. This time, I had to work alone in taking textual variations, so it took a lot of time and effort. From the beginning to the 28th chapter, I prepared the manuscript of the original verses myself, but due to the strict demand of the authorities of the 'B' manuscript to send it quickly, I had to mark the textual variations of other books on the printed original copy from Manikchand Granthamala. Book editing is a practice of literary service. Scholars can do it according to their convenience, and then someone like me, who has to be constantly involved in many other tasks, takes a little longer. In the meantime, the repeated demand to send it quickly from the authorities of the manuscripts starts to bother. I consider it better if their manuscript is used in the creation of a book rather than being kept in the shelves of Saraswati Bhavan. Thus, I have made full use of the manuscript for the time it was received, and I express my sincere gratitude to the senders and protectors of those manuscripts. The eleventh chapter of Padmacarita is full of philosophical ideas. I did not understand the meaning of three or four verses, which Pandit Foolchandji has explained, so I am grateful to him.

Writing an introduction requires historical knowledge, and I consider myself completely ignorant in this subject. Whatever has been written in the introduction is based on the knowledge of the learned scholar Shri Nathuramji Premi, Bombay.

Page #42:
---------------------------
Padma Purana,
This work is based on the Ramayana story written by Mित्रवर वं. परमानन्दजी शास्त्री and Dr. Reverend Father Kamil Bulke M.J.M.A., D.Phil., Head of the Hindi Department, St. Xavier's College Ranchi. In many places, we have adopted their words, so I express my gratitude to these scholars. The Hindi translation by the poet Daulatramji is widely circulated in the Jain community. There is hardly any Jain temple where this commentary on the Padma Purana is not found. Although this commentary is not perfect, it is written with a simple approach, but it has provided significant help in translation and connecting the story. Therefore, I express my deep gratitude to the late poet Daulatramji. I am a very ignorant and insignificant human being, so it is possible that there are errors in the editing and translation. Therefore, I apologize to the scholars for this.
40
Sagar
Phalguna Shukla 3. Veer Nirvana 2284

}

Vinit
- Pannalal Jain

Page #43:
---------------------------
## Table of Contents

**First Part**
Topics: Salutations, Author's Pledge, Praise of Good Stories, Praise of Good People, Criticism of Bad People, Introduction of the Book, Summary of Topics Covered in the Book

**Second Part**
The story takes place in the Bharat Kshetra of Jambudvipa, in the city of Rajgriha, ruled by King Shrenik. Description of his kingdom. Arrival of Lord Mahavira near Rajgriha. Description of Mahavira's greatness, creation of the Samvasarana, etc. King Shrenik goes to pay respects to Lord Mahavira, hears the divine sound, etc. King Shrenik enters his city, description of the night, King Shrenik lying on his bed contemplates the false beliefs prevalent in the Ramayana.

**Third Part**
King Shrenik goes back to the Samvasarana in the morning and expresses his desire to hear the Ramayana from Gautam Swami. Gautam Swami assures him that he will tell the story. Gautam Swami describes the region, time period, and the fourteen Kulkaras. Description of the fourteenth Kulkara, Nabhiray, and his wife, Marudevi. Description of the service rendered to Marudevi by the goddesses. Description of Marudevi's dream. Description of Lord Rishabhdev's conception, birth, and initiation ceremonies. Description of Nami-Vinamika coming to Lord Adinath while he was in meditation, and Dharanendra giving him the kingdom of the north and south rows of Vijayardha.

**Fourth Part**
Lord Rishabhdev takes food at the homes of King Soma Prabha and Shreyans. The origin of Kevalgyan and the creation of the Samvasarana, description of the divine sound. Description of Bharat Bahubali, and the creation of the Brahmin caste by Bharat.

Page #44:
---------------------------
## The Padma Purana: A Summary of Chapters 5-8

**Chapter 5**

This chapter briefly describes the four great lineages: 1) Ikshvaku, 2) Rishi or Chandra, 3) Vidyaadhara, and 4) Hari. It focuses on the Vidyaadhara lineage, specifically mentioning the sages Vidyudh and Sanjayant. It also includes descriptions of Ajitanatha Bhagwan, Sagar Chakravarti, Purnadhan, Sulochana, Sahasranayan, and Meghvahan. The chapter details the animosity between Meghvahan and Sahasranayan in their previous lives. It concludes with the story of how the demons Bheem and Subheem helped Meghvahan acquire the Rakshas Dweep (Demon Island) and the expansion of the Rakshas lineage.

**Chapter 6**

This chapter provides a detailed account of the Vanar (monkey) lineage.

**Chapter 7**

This chapter narrates the birth of Indra Vidyaadhara in the city of Rathnapura, the capital of King Sahasrar. It describes his influence, power, and achievements.

**Chapter 8**

This chapter focuses on the demon king Mali, ruler of Lanka, and his conflict with Indra. It describes their battle, Mali's death, the emergence of the Lokapalas (Guardians of the World), and Vaishravana's residence in Lanka. It also recounts how Sumali, defeated by Indra, settled in Alankarpur and fathered a son named Ratna Shrava. Ratna Shrava's wife, Caikasi, gave birth to Dasanan, Kumbhakarna, Chandranakha, and Vibhishan. The chapter further details how Vaishravana, witnessing their aerial journey, helped them acquire various skills. It also describes how the Anavrit Yaksha (Uncovered Yaksha) caused trouble, but Dasanan and his siblings remained steadfast and mastered many skills. The chapter concludes with the rise of Dasanan's influence within the Rakshas lineage.

**Chapter 8 (Continued)**

This chapter continues with the story of King May, ruler of Asursangeetnagar, and his daughter Mandodari. It describes Mandodari's marriage to Dasanan. The chapter then narrates Dasanan's water-play with six thousand maidens in the Vapi (pond) built on the Meghrav mountain and his subsequent marriage to them. It also describes the marriages of Kumbhakarna and Vibhishan. The chapter concludes with Kumbhakarna's destruction of Vaishravana's cities, Vaishravana's complaint to Sumali, Dasanan's harsh reply to Vaishravana's messenger, the ensuing battle between them, and Vaishravana's defeat. It also mentions Vaishravana's initiation and his journey on the Pushpak Vimana (flying chariot) to conquer the southern direction with his family. The chapter ends with Sumali's description of Harishen Chakravarti, Dasanan's subjugation of the Trilokmandan elephant, his victory over the Yama Lokapala (Lord of Death), and his entry into the city of Lanka.

Page #45:
---------------------------
## Table of Contents

**Ninth Chapter:** Description of the birth of Bali, Sugriva, Nal, Neel, etc. The abduction of Ravana's sister Chandranakha by Kharadushan, the birth of Viradhika, the struggle with the infant Dasanan, the infant's initiation, the marriage of Sugriva's sister with Dasanan, the stopping of Dasanan's plane on Mount Kailash due to the influence of the infant, Ravana lifting Mount Kailash, Bali's protection of it, Ravana's praise of the Jina, and the Nagraj's donation of the invincible power of victory.

**Tenth Chapter:** Sugriva's marriage with Sutara, the birth of his sons Ang and Angad from her. The desire to obtain Sutara, the attainment of knowledge by the courageous Vidyaadhar in the inaccessible cave of the Himalayas, Ravana's departure for his conquest, Indra's departure to attack the Vidyaadhar, meeting Kharadushan on the way, description of Ravana's vast army, the sight of the Narmada on the way, description of King Sahasrarashmi of Mahishmati's water sports in the Narmada, obstruction in Dasanan's worship, Dasanan's war with Sahasrarashmi, Sahasrarashmi's capture, his release by his father Shatabahu Muni after his advice, Sahasrarashmi and Ayodhya's King Anaranya's initiation.

**Eleventh Chapter:** Ravana's advance towards the north, his anger towards the arrogant king of Rajpur, the beginning of the story of the sacrifice, the story of Ayodhya's Kshirakadambak Guru, his wife Swastimati, King Vasu, and the dispute over the meaning of the word 'Ajairayastavyam' on Mount Narada. Vasu's false judgment and his downfall, Dasanan's arrival in Rajpur city, description of King Marutvan's sacrifice, the story of Narada's birth, Narada's arrival in King Marutvan's sacrificial hall, and his long debate with the priest, the defeat of the Brahmins and their beating of Narada, Ravana's knowledge of this incident through his messenger, Ravana's protection of Narada, suppression of the Brahmins, and destruction of Marutvan's sacrifice, King Marutvan's apology and giving his daughter Kanakaprabha to Ravana, Ravana's travels to many countries.

**Twelfth Chapter:** Ravana's daughter Kritachitra's marriage with Madhu, the son of King Harivahan of Mathura, Madhu's acquisition of the Shul Ratna from Chamendra, Ravana's war with Nalakuvara, description of his wife Uparambha's love for Ravana, etc., Ravana's arrival at the point of victory, Indra's consultation with his father Sahasrar, Sahasrar's appropriate advice, Indra's reply to his father, Indra's preparation for war, the fierce battle, and Ravana's defeat of Indra.

Page #46:
---------------------------
## The Padma Purana:

**Chapter Thirteen:** Indra, bound by Ravana, is freed by his father Sahasraraka in Ravana's court. Indra shows humility towards Sahasraraka. Indra sits in a Jain temple, where he encounters the Nirvanasangama Muni. Indra inquires about his past lives, receives initiation, and attains Nirvana.

**Chapter Fourteen:** Ravana returns from Mount Meru with his entourage. On the way, on the Suvarnagiri mountain, Anantbal Muni attains Kevalgyan. He describes the Dharma, stating, "I will not force a woman who does not desire me." Ravana accepts this vow.

**Chapter Fifteen:** The story of Hanuman. In Aditya-pur, King Prahlad and his wife Ketumati have a son, Pavananjay. The chapter describes King Mahendra on Mount Dantagiri (also known as Mahendra-giri). Due to a heart-wrenching incident, Mahendra's queen gives birth to Anjana. The chapter details the marriage of Pavananjay and Anjana, including the incident where Mishrakeshi, a messenger, sows discord between Pavananjay and Anjana.

**Chapter Sixteen:** Anjana's suffering due to separation from Pavananjay. Ravana fights with Varuna, and Pavananjay joins the battle. On the way, he sees a Chakwai bird mourning for its mate at Manasarovar, reminding him of Anjana's plight. He secretly goes to her. A friend informs Anjana of Pavananjay's arrival. Pavananjay apologizes and they reunite. The chapter describes their love and intimacy.

**Chapter Seventeen:** Anjana's pregnancy becomes evident, and Ketumati accuses her of disgrace and throws her out. Anjana goes to her father's house, but he refuses to shelter her after learning about her pregnancy. Anjana, accompanied by her friend Vasantmalini, goes to a forest and reaches a mountain. They encounter a Muni who tells them about their past lives. The Muni consoles them and leaves. Anjana and her friend stay in a cave. A lion approaches, but a Gandharva protects them. The Gandharva plays music. Anjana gives birth to a son. A Vidhyadhara named Prati-Surya arrives and they meet. An astrologer predicts the future of Hanuman based on his birth chart. They all travel in a flying chariot with Prati-Surya. Hanuman falls from the chariot, shattering a rock.

Page #47:
---------------------------
## Table of Contents

**Eighteenth Chapter**  Pavananjay returns home from the war with Varuna, but doesn't find Anjana. He leaves home in search of her. Pavananjay decides to die in the forest called Bhutarav.  The Vidyaadharas search for him and his reunion with Anjana is described.
**401**

**Nineteenth Chapter**  Ravana summons all the kings to fight against Varuna. Hanuman goes to Ravana. Ravana praises Hanuman greatly. Hanuman and others fight with Varuna and defeat him. Varuna is captured.  Kumbhakarna captures the women of Varuna's city. Ravana scolds Kumbhakarna when he learns about it. Ravana explains things to Varuna.  He gives the daughter of Chandranakha to Hanuman.  Ravana's empire is described.
**411**
**417**

**Twentieth Chapter**  Description of the twenty-four Tirthankaras and other Shalaka Purushas.
**424**
**444**

**Twenty-first Chapter**  Description of Bhagwan Munisuvratnath and his lineage.  Description of the beginning of the Ikshvaku dynasty.  Description of King Vajrabah and Udayasundar's state of attachment and detachment.  Description of King Kirtidhar.  Sukoshal's birth and Kirtidhar's initiation.
**448**

**Twenty-second Chapter**  Kirtidhar Muni is expelled from the city by his wife.  Sukoshal learns the truth through the cries of the wounded.  Sukoshal takes initiation.  His mother dies and becomes a tigress.  Sukoshal is in the state of Varshayog and is eaten by the tigress.  Kirtidhar Muni addresses the tigress and describes her liberation.  Kirtidhar Muni attains Nirvana.  Description of King Hiranyagarbha, Nahusha, and Soudas.  King Soudas develops a habit of eating human flesh.  Later, the birth of Dasharatha, son of King Anaranya, is described in the same lineage.
**472**

**Twenty-third Chapter**  Narada informs King Dasharatha and King Janaka about Ravana's evil intentions and warns them to be cautious.  King Janaka and Dasharatha leave their homes and spend time outside.  Vibhishana cuts off the heads of their effigies.

Page #48:
---------------------------
46
Padma Purana
Twenty-fourth Parva: Detailed description of Kekaya's skills, Dasaratha being chosen in the Swayamvara, Dasaratha's war with other kings, Dasaratha's victory with Kekaya's help. King Dasaratha's boon to Kekaya in happiness.
478
485
Twenty-fifth Parva: Description of the birth of Rama and his three brothers to King Dasaratha.
489
Index of Shlokas, Authors, etc.
494

Page #49:
---------------------------
Padma Purana
Part One

Page #50:
---------------------------
Please provide the text you would like translated. I need the text to translate it into English.

Page #51:
---------------------------
## The Padma Purana, Composed by Acharya Shrimad Ravishena

**First Chapter**

**Perfect, Complete, and Meaningful, the Cause of Perfection is Supreme. It is a treatise on Right Faith, Right Knowledge, and Right Conduct.** ||1||

I bow to the Great Hero, Mahavira, whose saffron-colored hair, like rays of light, adorn the crowns of the Indra, and who is the source of auspiciousness in all three worlds. ||2||

I bow to the first Tirthankara of the descending time cycle, Rishabha Jinendra, the best among the Jinas, the Yogi, the creator of all knowledge, and the self-existent. ||3||

I bow to Ajitanatha, the victor over all internal and external enemies, and to Sambhavanatha, who bears the meaningful name, from whom peace (sham) is attained. ||4||

I bow to Abhinandan, who brings joy to the entire world, and to Sumatinatha Jinendra, the holder of Right Knowledge, who refutes other doctrines. ||5||

I bow to Padma Prabha, whose radiance is like the lotus blossoms bathed in the rays of the rising sun, and to Supaashva, the omniscient, whose ribs were very beautiful. ||6||

I bow to the supreme Chandra Prabha, whose body shone like the full moon of the autumn season, and to Pushpadanta, whose teeth were radiant like blooming white lotus flowers. ||7||

I bow to Sheetalanatha Jinendra, who was cool, the giver of peaceful meditation, and to Shreyans, the auspicious one, the teacher of Dharma. ||8||

**The essence of the Padma Purana is according to the Shruti, which is the eternal knowledge, and it is the repository of infinite virtues of knowledge, bliss, and consciousness.** - Daulatramji

**Those who are self-fulfilled, whose grace fulfills the desires of the noble souls, who expound Right Faith, Right Knowledge, and Right Conduct, whose saffron-colored hair, like rays of light, adorn the crowns of the Indras, and who are the source of auspiciousness in all three worlds, to such Mahavira, I bow.** ||1-2||

**Those who were Yogis, the creators of all knowledge, and self-existent, to such Rishabha Jinendra, the first Tirthankara of the descending time cycle, I bow.** ||3||

**Those who have conquered all internal and external enemies, to such Ajitanatha, and those who bear the meaningful name, from whom peace (sham) is attained, to such Sambhavanatha, I bow.** ||4||

**Those who bring joy to the entire world, to such Abhinandan, and those who are the holders of Right Knowledge, and who refute other doctrines, to such Sumatinatha Jinendra, I bow.** ||5||

**Those whose radiance is like the lotus blossoms bathed in the rays of the rising sun, to such Padma Prabha, and those whose ribs were very beautiful, to such Supaashva, the omniscient, I bow.** ||6||

**Those whose body shone like the full moon of the autumn season, to such supreme Chandra Prabha, and those whose teeth were radiant like blooming white lotus flowers, to such Pushpadanta, I bow.** ||7||

**Those who were cool, the givers of peaceful meditation, to such Sheetalanatha Jinendra, and those who were auspicious, the teachers of Dharma, to such Shreyans, I bow.** ||8||

Page #52:
---------------------------
I bow to the glorious Shreyansanath Bhagwan, who taught the Dharma. ||8||

I bow to Vasupujya Bhagwan, who was the lord of the righteous and was worshipped by Kubera, and to Vimala Nath Bhagwan, who was free from the impurities of the root of birth, such as false beliefs and other defilements. ||9||

I bow to Anantnath Jinendra, who possessed infinite knowledge and whose vision was extremely beautiful, to Dharmanath Swami, who was the permanent foundation of Dharma, and to Shanti Nath Tirthankara, who conquered his enemies through peace. ||10||

I bow to Kunthunath Bhagwan, who revealed the benefit for all beings, including Kunthu, and to Aranath Jinendra, who attained infinite bliss after being liberated from all suffering. ||11||

I bow to Mallinath Bhagwan, who was the unparalleled wrestler to destroy the world, and to Naminath Swami, who was free from impurities and was worshipped by all beings, and was the guru of both gods and demons. ||12||

I bow to the twenty-second Tirthankara, Arishtanemi, who was like a wheel (nemi) to destroy the heavy burden of suffering (arisht), and who possessed extraordinary radiance, and to Parshvanath Bhagwan, who was the lord of all beings and near whom the king of snakes (Dharanendra) sat. ||13||

I bow to Muni Suvratnath Bhagwan, who taught the highest vows, who destroyed the defects of hunger, thirst, etc., and whose tirtha (pilgrimage site) gave rise to the auspicious story of Padma (Ramachandra). ||14||

I bow again and again with my mind, speech, and body to all other great beings, including the Ganadharas and other Muni Rajas. ||15||

Thus, I will narrate the story of Ramachandra, whose chest was embraced by Padma (Lakshmi or the lotus symbol), whose face was like a blooming lotus, who possessed vast merit, who was wise, who was the embodiment of infinite virtues, and who had noble and excellent actions. Although only a Shruta Kevali is capable of narrating his story, even a small person like me is narrating this excellent story, which has come down through the teachings of the Acharya tradition. The reason for this is clear. ||16-18||

Even deer walk on the path traversed by intoxicated elephants, and ordinary warriors enter battle when led by great warriors. ||19||

Just as objects illuminated by the sun are easily seen by people, and a gem emerges from the mouth of a needle and enters a thread,

Page #53:
---------------------------
## First Chapter

The biography of Ramagochara, which is in the order of the planets, is ready to be asked by my mind, which is inspired by devotion. ||21||

The great merit that is obtained from the contemplation of distinguished men, by that very merit, my speech has attained beauty. ||22||

Speech that is adorned with vowels like 'a' etc., but which does not convey the stories of virtuous men, is useless for that person and only leads to the accumulation of sin. ||23||

By chanting the glories of great men, knowledge increases, pure fame spreads, and evil goes away. ||24||

This body of living beings is filled with diseases and is only temporary, but the fame that arises from the stories of virtuous men lasts as long as the sun, moon, and stars. ||25||

Therefore, a self-knowing man should make every effort to make his body permanent, that is, to attain fame, by chanting the glories of great men. ||26||

The person who narrates a delightful story that brings joy to the virtuous, obtains the fruits of both worlds. ||27||

I consider those ears to be ears that listen to the stories of virtuous men, the others are like the ears of a jester, only having the shape of ears. ||28||

The letters that revolve in the head where the description of the actions of virtuous men is narrated, that is the real head, the others are like the hard outer shell of a coconut. ||29||

The tongue that is engrossed in savoring the nectar of the chanting of virtuous men, I consider that to be the tongue, the others are like the blade of a knife that speaks harsh words. ||30||

The best lips are those that are engaged in chanting the glories of virtuous men, the others are like the back of a leech that has been eaten from the mouth of a creature called Shambuka. ||31||

The teeth that are always stained with the association of the stories of peaceful men, those are the real teeth, the others are like coverings that only serve to block the exit of phlegm. ||32||

The mouth that is the main cause of attaining good fortune and is always engaged in telling the stories of great men, that is the real mouth, the others are filled with dirt and infested with tooth-like insects. ||33||

Page #54:
---------------------------
*
In the Padma Purana,
The man who speaks or listens to words of merit is truly a man, the rest are like puppets made by a sculptor. ||34||
Just as a swan in a mixture of milk and water drinks only the milk, so do the virtuous take only the good from a mixture of good and bad. ||35||
And just as crows take only the meat from the temples of elephants, leaving the pearls, so do the wicked take only the bad from a mixture of good and bad. ||36||
Just as owls see the form of the sun as black as a tamala leaf, so do wicked men see even blameless creations as flawed. ||37||
Just as a net at the entrance of a lake does not stop the water but only the debris, so do wicked men not stop the good but only hold onto the bad, like debris. ||38||
Considering the nature of the virtuous and the wicked, the virtuous engage in the creation of stories with the purpose of their own benefit. ||39||
The happiness that arises in men from listening to good stories is the self-interest of the wise, and it is the cause of earning merit. ||40||
This meaning, spoken by the Jina Vardhamana, was received by the Gautama Ganadhara named Indra-bhuuti. Then it was received by Sudharma-acharya, the son of Dharini. Then it was received by Prabhava, then by Kirti-dhara Acharya. After them, it was received by the Uttara-vagmi Muni. After that, this effort of Ravishena Acharya was revealed, having obtained his writing. ||41-42||
In this Purana, there are seven chapters: (1) Lokasthiti, (2) Origin of lineages, (3) Departure for the forest, (4) War, (5) Origin of Lavana-ankusha, (6) Description of Bhavan-tara, and (7) Nirvana of Ramachandra. All seven chapters are accompanied by many beautiful and wonderful sections. ||43-44||
To explain the connection of the story of Ramachandra, I will also tell the brief story of Bhagavan Mahavira, which is as follows.
1
1. Doshoktam ma. 2. Charayanti ka. 3. Swartha ka. 4. Granthanta api 123 tamaparvanah 166 tamashloke granthakartra granthanupurvimuddisya nimnankita shloko dattah - "Nirdishtam sakalairnatena bhuvanaih Shrivardhamanena yattatvam vasavabhuutina nigaditam jambo: prashiṣyasya cha. Shishyenottaravagmina prakatitam padmasya vruttam munēh shreyah sadhusamadhibruddhikaranaṁ sarvottamaṁ mangalam." 5. Dharini ma. 6. Tavadatrakha, ma. 7. Yatnam ma. 8. Kulkarinim ma.

Page #55:
---------------------------
## First Chapter

**Verse 48:** The birth of Rishabha, his coronation on Mount Meru, and his diverse teachings to eradicate the suffering of the world.

**Verse 49:** His renunciation, the attainment of Kevala Jnana, his extraordinary power, the arrival of all the Indras, and his attainment of liberation.

**Verse 50:** The great battle between Bharata and Bahubali, the birth of the Brahmanas, and the emergence of the Kutithiks who spread false doctrines.

**Verse 51:** The lineage of Ikshvaku and others, their praise, the birth of the Vidyadharas, and the affliction of Sanjayanta Muni by the Vidyadhara named Vidyudamstra.

**Verse 52:** Sanjayanta Muni, despite the affliction, attained Kevala Jnana and liberation. This caused great anger in Dharanendra, who took away Vidyudamstra's knowledge and subjected him to severe punishment.

**Verse 53:** The birth of Ajitanatha, the happiness of Purna Megha and his daughter, the Vidyadhara Kumar's seeking refuge in Ajitanatha, the arrival of Vyantara, the ruler of the Rakshasa Island, and his granting the island to Purna Megha.

**Verse 54:** The birth of Sagar Chakravarti, his grief at the death of his sons, his renunciation, and his attainment of liberation.

**Verse 55:** The birth of Maharaksha in the lineage of Purna Megha, and a detailed account of the birth of the Vidyadharas of the monkey lineage.

**Verse 56:** The story of Vidyutkesha, followed by the stories of Uddhava Vikrama and Amar Vikrama, the birth of Kishkindha and Andhraka among the monkey lineage, and the union of Sri Mala Vidyadhari.

**Verse 57:** The anger of Asani Vega at the death of Vijay Singh, the killing of Andhraka, and the monkey lineage settling in the city of Kishkindha on the peak of Madhu Parvat.

**Verse 58:** The arrival of the sons of Sukeshi in Lanka.

**Verse 59:** The great wealth acquired by Mali due to the death of Nirghata, the birth of Indra, the ruler of all Vidyadharas, in the city of Rathnapur in the southern part of Vijayadha Parvat.

**Verse 60:** The death of Mali and the birth of Vaishravana.

Page #56:
---------------------------
The birth of Ravana and his pursuit of knowledge, the disturbance of the deity Anavrita, and the arrival of Sumali. ||62|| Ravana's union with Mandodari, the observation of other maidens, and the anger of Vaishravana due to the actions of Bhanukarna. ||63|| The battle between the Yakshas and Rakshasas, the penance of Dhanada, Ravana's arrival in Lanka, and his observation of the great Chaityas. ||64|| The greatness of the virtuous Harishena, a destroyer of sins, and the sight of the Triloka-mandana elephant. ||65|| The expulsion of Yama from his abode, the meeting of Suryaraja, the king of the Vanaras, with Kishkindha, the abduction of Surpanakha by Khara and Dushana, and their marriage. ||66|| The death of Chandrodara in battle, the great sorrow of his queen Anuradha, the downfall of Viradhit's city, and the attainment of the kingdom by Sugriva. ||67|| The initiation of the young girl, Ravana's lifting of Mount Kailasa, Sugriva's acquisition of Sutara, the distress of the Sahasagati Vidyadhara due to the non-acquisition of Sutara, and Ravana's journey to Mount Vijaya. ||68-69|| The renunciation of King Anaranya and Sahasrarashmi, the account of Ravana's destruction of the Yajna, the explanation of Madhu's previous births, and the conversation between Ravana's daughter Uparambha and Madhu. ||70|| Ravana's acquisition of knowledge, the decline of Indra's kingdom, Ravana's journey to Mount Sumeru, and his return. ||71|| The attainment of Kevalgyan by the Muni Anantavirya, Ravana's acceptance of the rule before him, "I will not desire a woman who does not desire me," and the account of the birth of the great Vanara, Hanuman. ||72|| On Mount Kailasa, the conversation between King Mahendra, the father of Anjana, and King Prahlada, the father of Pavananjay, regarding the union of their children, the marriage of Anjana with Pavananjay, the anger of Pavananjay, his happiness upon seeing the separation of Chakwachakvi, Anjana's pregnancy, and her expulsion from her home by her mother-in-law. ||73|| The Muni's account of Hanuman's previous birth, Hanuman's birth in a cave, 1. Prajanam M. 2. Bhikhyam M. 3. Charanam M. 4. Kaikeyaasch M. 5. Chandrodya M. 6. Jannaashanam K. 7. Niyamgraham M. 8. Sajjaya Kh. 9. 'Sutistanurahapraapti pratisuryena karitam' M.

Page #57:
---------------------------
## First Chapter

**75.** The entry of Vayu into the Bhutatavi forest, his encounter with the elephant, the arrival of the Vidyadhara Prati-Surya, and Vayu's immense joy upon seeing Anjana.

**76.** Hanuman's assistance to Ravana, and his fierce battle with Varuna. A description of Ravana's vast kingdom, and the height and intervals of the Tirthankaras.

**77.** The activities of Balabhadra, Narayana, and their enemies, Prati-Narayana, etc., in six sections. The birth of King Dasharatha, and the boon granted to Kaikeyi.

**78.** The birth of Rama, Lakshmana, Shatrughna, and Bharata to King Dasharatha. The birth of Sita to King Janaka, and the grief of her mother due to the theft of the Bhamandala.

**79.** The infatuation of Bhamandala upon seeing Sita depicted in a painting by Narada. The account of Sita's Swayamvara, and the appearance of the Dhanush-ratna (bow-jewel) at the Swayamvara.

**80.** King Dasharatha's initiation by the Muni-raja, Sarvabhutasharanaya. Bhamandala's knowledge of other births upon seeing Sita.

**81.** Bharata's acquisition of the kingdom due to Kaikeyi's boon. Sita, Rama, and Lakshmana's journey towards the south.

**82.** The story of Vajrakarna, Lakshmana's acquisition of the Kalyanamaala woman, the subjugation of Rudrabhuti, and the release of the Balakhilya.

**83.** Rama's arrival in the Arun village, his residence in the city of Rampuri established by the gods, Lakshmana's union with Vanamala, and the advancement of Ativirya.

**84.** Lakshmana's acquisition of Jitapadama, the story of the Kulabhushana and Devabhushana Munis, and the description of the Jain temples built by Rama on the Vanshasthal mountain.

**85.** The attainment of the vow by the bird Jatayu, the glory of the fruits of giving alms, Rama, Lakshmana, etc., riding on chariots drawn by large elephants, and the killing of Shambuka.

**86.** The story of Shurpankha, the battle of Rama with Khara and Dushana, and Rama's immense grief due to the separation from Sita.

**87.** The arrival of the Vidyadhara Viradhit, the death of Khara and Dushana, and Ravana's destruction of the knowledge of the Ratna-jati Vidyadhara.

Page #58:
---------------------------
## Padma Purana:

**Chapter 88:**

The death of Sahasagata, leaving behind his son Sitodanta. The arrival of Vibhishana's chariot, the acquisition of the Vidya of Haripadma.

**Chapter 89:**

Indrajit, Kumbhakarna, and Meghanada bound by the Naga-pasha. Lakshmana struck by the Shakti, and the removal of the arrow by Vishalya.

**Chapter 90:**

The entry of Ravana into the Jineshvara temple and his praise. The attack on Lanka by the Vidhyadhara Kumaras of Kटक. The return of the Vidhyadhara Kumaras to Kटक due to the influence of the Devas.

**Chapter 91:**

The acquisition of the Chakra-ratna by Lakshmana. The death of Ravana. The lamentations of his wives. The arrival of the Kevali.

**Chapter 92:**

The initiation of Indrajit and others. The reunion of Rama and Sita. The arrival of Narada. The return of Rama to Ayodhya.

**Chapter 93:**

The description of the previous birth of Bharata and the elephant Trilokamandana. The renunciation of Bharata. The expansion of the kingdom of Rama and Lakshmana.

**Chapter 94:**

The acquisition of Manorama by Lakshmana, whose chest was embraced by Rajalakshmi. The death of Madhu and Lavana in the battle.

**Chapter 95:**

The outbreak of the disease Mariroga in Mathura and other countries due to the wrath of Dharanendra. The removal of the disease by the influence of the Saptarshis. The expulsion of Sita from her home and her lamentations.

**Chapter 96:**

The protection of Sita by King Vajrajangha. The birth of Lavanakusha. The conquest of other kings by Lavanakusha upon growing up, leading to the expansion of Vajrajangha's kingdom. Finally, their battle with their father, Ramachandraji.

**Chapter 97:**

The arrival of the Devas to celebrate the attainment of Kevalgyan by the Sarvabhusana Muni. The removal of the accusation against Sita through the Agnipariksha. The description of the future births of Vibhishana.

**Chapter 98:**

The penance of the army commander, Krtaantavakra. The anger of Rama and Lakshmana's sons during the Swayamvara. The initiation of Lakshmana's sons. The death of Bhamandala due to lightning.

**Chapter 99:**

The initiation of Hanuman. The death of Lakshmana. The penance of Rama's sons. The immense grief of Rama due to the separation from his brother.

**Chapter 100:**

The initiation of Rama due to the enlightenment provided by his friend, the Deva of his previous birth. The attainment of Kevalgyan. The attainment of Nirvana.

Page #59:
---------------------------
## First Chapter

**This entire [text] is a ladder to the attainment of the state of a Siddha, and is full of bliss. Therefore, O noble ones, with your minds fixed, listen.** (101)

**[This is a] Shārdūlavikrīḍita [verse]**

**Those who remember the great sages like Padma, etc., and with their minds free from worldly attachments, experience supreme joy. The sins accumulated for a long time, are shattered into thousands of pieces. What to say of those who listen to the completely pure and bright character of [these sages]?** (102)

**This [character] was performed by those [sages] and this [sinful] karma was destroyed by them. Therefore, O wise and intelligent people, serve this supremely pure character, which was served by the ancient sages, to the best of your ability. When the right path is revealed by the sun, who with good vision will stumble?** (103)

**Thus ends the first chapter of the Padma-charita, composed by the Acharya Ravishena, which is known as the Ārṣa [tradition] and which outlines the topics to be discussed.**

**Footnotes:**

1. Moksha (liberation)
2. This (text)
3. Everywhere
4. The right path revealed by the sun

**[End of Chapter]**

Page #60:
---------------------------
## Second Chapter

In the Jambudvipa, in the Bharat Kshetra, there is a very bright country known as Magadha. || 1 || It is the abode of those who are full of merit, resembling the abode of Indra, and it maintains the order of the world through its generous conduct. || 2 || In this country, the fields, plowed by the tips of plows, hold the roots of the earth-lotuses, as if the earth itself were holding the best qualities. || 3 || The nearby land is always covered with forests of trees and sugarcane, which seem to have sprung from the watering of milk and whose leaves are swaying in the gentle breeze. || 4 || The surrounding areas of this country are always filled with large piles of grain, like mountains, which are arranged in a beautiful way, and are different from each other. || 5 || The earth of this country, watered by the drops of time, is adorned with very green cumin and jute, as if it were wearing a garland of hair. || 6 || The land is very fertile, adorned with the best paddy fields, and its regions are yellow with the pods of mung and moth. || 7 || The regions are constantly covered with the seeds of lentil or vati, whose pods have turned red due to the heat, and it seems as if the sprouts of grass will not grow there. || 8 || This country is endowed with fields that produce the best wheat, and it is full of other excellent grains, free from obstacles. || 9 || The roads are followed by herons, who raise their necks due to the greed of insects, and the roads are guarded by cowherds who sing while sitting on the backs of large buffaloes. || 10 || The roads are adorned with bells tied with colorful threads, which sound very pleasant, and the cows, whose udders are overflowing with milk, seem to be discarding the milk they have already drunk, fearing indigestion. || 11 || The land is covered with grass, which is full of sweet juice and so delicate that it breaks with just the breath of the mouth.

Page #61:
---------------------------
## Second Chapter

The land is white with the dust of the Ketaki flower, its elevated regions resembling the banks of the Ganga, frequented by people.  || 14 ||

In some places, the land is adorned with the verdant beauty of fields of vegetables, while in others, it is graced by coconut trees, savored by the forest guardians. || 15 ||

The land is filled with pomegranate groves, their flowers resembling the beaks of parrots and the faces of monkeys, creating an illusion. || 16 ||

The land is adorned with arbors of grapes, their leaves smeared with the juice of the Bijaura fruit, crushed by the hands of the forest guardians, and embellished with clusters of saffron flowers.  Here, travelers find solace, sleeping peacefully after enjoying the taste of fruits and the coolness of water. These arbors resemble the resting places of the forest goddess. || 17-18 ||

The land is abundant with date palm trees, their fruits plucked and consumed by travelers, and with banana trees, their fruits scattered by monkeys. || 19 ||

The land is adorned with lakes, their banks covered with dense forests of Arjuna trees. The lakes resound with the cries of herds of cows, their waters teeming with leaping fish, their eyes wide open, resembling blooming white lotuses. The lakes are adorned with waves, their movements resembling a dance, and with swans, their melodious calls echoing like a song. The banks of these lakes are frequented by joyous crowds, and the lakes themselves are adorned with lotuses, their beauty enhanced by the presence of cranes. || 20-23 ||

The entire land is filled with flocks of sheep, camels, and calves, their beautiful bodies engaged in playful activities, protected by benevolent guardians. || 24 ||

Their backs are smeared with saffron paste, as if to attract the horses of the sun god's chariot, and their faces, with their playful movements, seem to be blowing the wind. || 25 ||

Page #62:
---------------------------
The land is filled with groups of mares, as if they are teaching their foals the speed of motion.  [26]  The land is sometimes very white, with flocks of swans that seem like a great mass of human virtues, and whose voices attract the minds of people. [27]  The sky is always filled with the sound of drums, mixed with the sounds of music and peacocks. [28]  The land is always adorned with virtuous people, who are as pure as the white circle of the autumn moon, like pearls, and clever at giving joy. [29]  The land is always accessible to people, because it is filled with great householders who have satisfied groups of travelers with food and other provisions, and who are like the best trees because of their fruits. [30]  The land is inhabited by great people who are like the peaks of the Himalayas, covered with musk and other fragrant substances, and various kinds of clothes. [31]  In that land, the defects of false vision are removed by the collyrium of Jain teachings, and the forest of sin is burned by the fire of the great sages' austerities. [32]  In that Magadha country, there is a city called Rajagriha, beautiful in all directions, and fragrant with flowers, as if it were the youth of the world. [33]  That city of Rajagriha always attracts the mind, like the inner palace of Dharma, the god of justice, because just as the inner palace of Dharma is filled with thousands of queens, whose bodies are adorned with saffron, so too is the city of Rajagriha adorned with thousands of queens, whose bodies are adorned with saffron.  [34]  The outskirts of that city are adorned with small fans, and the wind makes the yak-tails tremble, so the city is like the splendor of Indra, because the outskirts of Indra's palace are also adorned with small fans, and the wind makes the yak-tails tremble there. [35]

Page #63:
---------------------------
## The Second Chapter

**36.** The city, as if desiring to conquer the city of Tripura, was not afflicted by the pain inflicted by the arrows of Shiva, but by the pleas of the wealthy. The people of this city were all prosperous and enjoyed great happiness.

**37.** The city seemed to be adorned with rows of white palaces, gleaming with lime, as if it were built with moonstones set in silver.

**38.** The city was always filled with the sound of the ornaments of intoxicated women, making it seem like a second Alka Puri, the city of Kubera.

**39.** The best of the sages considered it a place of penance, the courtesans a temple of love, the dancers a dance hall, and the enemies a city of Yama, the god of death.

**40.** The warriors considered it a home for heroes, the beggars a place of wish-fulfilling gems, the students a house of their teacher, and the prisoners a city of rogues.

**41.** The learned in music and the arts considered it the city of Gandharva, and those eager to learn science considered it the abode of Vishwakarma, the divine architect.

**42.** The righteous considered it a place of good company, the merchants a land of profit, and those seeking refuge a safe haven built of diamond wood.

**43.** The news-bearers considered it a mysterious place like the lair of the Asuras, the clever considered it a gathering of fools, and those who followed the right path considered it the fruit of a good deed.

**44.** The bards considered it a place of festivals, the lustful a city of Apsaras, and the happy a realm of Siddhas.

**45.** The women of this city, though they were called Matangagamini, meaning they walked with the Chandals, were still considered virtuous. They were beautiful like elephants, and adorned with the virtue of chastity. Though they were dark-skinned, they were radiant like rubies. They were also fair-skinned, and possessed great wealth.

**46.** Their bodies were made of moonstones, and they were as delicate as the Sirisha tree. They were inaccessible to snakes, and their bodies were not made of false fabric.

**35.** The doors and fly whisks kept shaking.

Page #64:
---------------------------
## Chapter 14

**47.** The women were endowed with great beauty, and were eager to speak sweetly. Their faces were radiant and cheerful, and their movements were free from any frivolity.

**48.** Though poor, they possessed the wealth of a husband, and though round in form, they were tall and graceful. They were beautiful, well-behaved, and possessed a bright future.

**49.** The city had a rampart like the mountain at the end of the world, and a moat like the ocean, surrounding it.

**50.** In that city lived a renowned king named Shrenik, who, like Indra, bore a bow that could control all the castes (or, who wore a bow of all colors).

**51.** He was of a benevolent nature, like Mount Sumeru, and his mind was always fearful of transgressing the limits of righteousness, like the ocean.

**52.** King Shrenik was like the moon in his mastery of the arts, like the earth in his ability to sustain the world, like the sun in his brilliance, and like Kubera in his wealth.

**53.** He protected all the worlds with his valor, yet his mind was always guided by righteousness. He was united with Lakshmi, but never tainted by the vice of pride.

**54.** Though he had conquered all his enemies, he never neglected his military training. He remained calm in times of adversity, and honored those who bowed before him.

**55.** He considered only the virtuous, free from faults, as jewels, and regarded stones as mere transformations of the earth.

Page #65:
---------------------------
The second chapter deals with the great means of attaining liberation, which are actions involving charity. He considered a large insect to be equal to an elephant in its pride. ||56|| He had great love for fame, which was the foremost of all things. He considered perishable life to be like withered grass. ||57|| He always considered the directions that brought wealth to be his adornment. He was always averse to women. ||58|| He considered the bow bent by the string of virtue to be his helper. He never considered a group of servants who were satisfied with food alone and were harmful to be helpful. ||59|| In his kingdom, even the wind did not take anything from anyone, let alone others. Similarly, even a group of wicked animals did not engage in violence, let alone humans. ||60|| The actions of Hari, i.e., Vishnu, were to destroy the bull-killer, i.e., Vrishaasura, but his actions were not to destroy the bull-killer, i.e., Dharma. Similarly, the glory of Mahadeva, i.e., Shiva, was to cause suffering to the family of King Daksha, but his glory was not to cause suffering to the group of clever people. ||61|| Just as Indra's actions were to destroy the lineage, i.e., mountains, his actions were not to destroy the lineage, i.e., family. And just as the king of the south, Yama, had a great love for punishment, he did not have a great love for punishment. ||62|| Just as Varuna's wealth was free from crocodiles and other wicked aquatic creatures, his wealth was not protected from wicked people, i.e., everyone could enjoy it. And just as it is futile to obtain the proximity of Kubera, i.e., the best treasure, it was not futile to obtain his proximity, i.e., the treasure of virtuous people. ||63|| Just as the Buddha's vision, i.e., the philosophy of reality, was devoid of wealth, his vision, i.e., realization, was not devoid of wealth. And just as the moon is also affected and destroyed by the dark fortnight, his was not affected and destroyed by great faults. ||64|| The beggars could not attain the fullness of his virtue of charity, i.e., there were not enough beggars to receive all the charity he wanted to give. The scriptures could not attain the fullness of his intellect, i.e., his intellect was very great and the scriptures were few. Similarly, Saraswati could not attain the fullness of his poetic power. ||65||

Page #66:
---------------------------
## The Padma Purana:

**Verse 66:** His valorous deeds could not exhaust his glory, his efforts could not reach the limit of his enthusiasm, the directions could not contain his fame, and numbers could not encompass his wealth of virtues.

**Verse 67:** The hearts of all beings on earth could not contain their love for him, the arts could not exhaust his skill, and his enemies could not fathom his power and brilliance.

**Verse 68:** How can we, who are so insignificant, describe the virtues of King Shrenik, whose perfect knowledge is discussed in the assembly of Indra?

**Verse 69:** He was like a thunderbolt to the arrogant enemies, but he treated the virtuous, who were rich in penance, with the gentleness of a cane.

**Verse 70:** He protected the entire earth with his strong arm. The fortifications and moats around the city were merely for show.

**Verse 71:** His wife's name was Chelna. She was adorned with the ornaments of virtue, pure in her right faith, and a devotee of the teachings of the Shravakas.

**Verse 72:** Once, the great Mahavira, who was blessed with infinite wealth and whose feet were worshipped by gods and demons, arrived near the city of Rajagriha.

**Verse 73:** Even in his mother's womb, he possessed the three knowledges - Mati, Shruta, and Avadhi, and enjoyed a pleasure equal to that of Indra.

**Verse 74:** Before and after his birth, at the command of Indra, Kubera filled his father's house with a shower of jewels.

**Verse 75:** At his birth ceremony, the gods, along with Indra, celebrated with great pomp on the peak of Mount Meru.

**Verse 76:** He shook Mount Meru effortlessly with his toes and received the name "Mahavira" from Indra.

**Verse 77:** Even as a child, he performed deeds beyond his age. His body was sustained by the nectar that Indra had poured on his toe.

Page #67:
---------------------------
The second chapter was served by beautiful celestial princes, sent by Indra, who were like young boys, with charming humility.  ||7||  With them, the parents, the family, and the three worlds attained supreme happiness. ||79||  At his birth, all the powerful kings who were his father's long-time enemies became submissive, bowing their heads. ||80||  The courtyard of his father's palace was always filled with chariots, intoxicated elephants, horses swift as the wind, caravans of camels laden with gifts, and many kings, lords of their realms, eager to see the king of kings, abandoning their umbrellas, fly whisks, and vehicles. ||81-83||  Just as a lotus is not attached to water, so his mind was not attached to pleasurable objects, being free from the taint of karma. ||84||  Knowing that all wealth is fleeting like lightning, he renounced the world, becoming self-enlightened, and his initiation was attended by the gods of the heavens. ||85||  He worshipped the three jewels - right faith, right knowledge, and right conduct - and destroyed the four destructive karmas. ||86||  Having attained omniscience, illuminating both the world and the beyond, he established the Dharma-tirtha for the benefit of the world, and he himself became fulfilled. ||87||  Having attained all that was attainable and accomplished all that was to be done, his every effort, like the sun, was solely for the benefit of others. ||88||  He possessed a body that was naturally free from impurities and sweat, white as milk, with blood like red sandalwood, with a perfect form, a pleasant fragrance, and a strong constitution, endowed with infinite strength, adorned with beautiful marks, speaking words that were beneficial and appropriate, and a treasure house of immeasurable virtues. ||89-90||  Within two hundred yojanas of his dwelling, there could be no famine, no suffering of others, no excessive rain, no drought, or any other calamity. ||91||

Page #68:
---------------------------
18
Padmapurana
He who attained the supreme state of all knowledge, whose body, like pure crystal, did not cast a shadow. ||12|| Whose eyes were serene, free from the flicker of eyelids, whose nails, hair, and body were all of a uniform, deep blue, and lustrous hue. ||13|| Whose heart was filled with universal compassion, whose gentle breeze brought joy to all beings, whose very presence was the cause of happiness in the world. ||94|| Whose presence caused all trees to bear fruits and flowers of every season, and the earth to become like a mirror. ||15|| Whose fragrant wind, extending for a yojana, cleansed the earth of dust, stones, thorns, and other impurities. ||96|| Whose presence was adorned by lightning-like flashes, accompanied by thunderous roars, and showered with fragrant water by enthusiastic and respectful clouds. ||97|| Whose footsteps caused lotus flowers to bloom on the earth, as he moved through the sky. ||98|| Whose presence caused the earth to be adorned with abundant fruits, humble rice, and other crops, and to become the source of all sustenance. ||19|| Whose presence caused the sky to become clear like a autumnal lake, and the directions to be free from smoke and other impurities, appearing beautiful and serene. ||100|| Whose presence was adorned by a radiant Dharmachakra, shining with a thousand rays, and having conquered the sun. ||101||
He, the Lord Vardhamana Jina, resided on the vast and magnificent Vipulachala mountain, near Rajagriha, where the sweet sound of numerous waterfalls filled the air, where every place was adorned with flowers, where trees were embraced by creepers, where lions, tigers, and other animals were absent, allowing for peaceful meditation, where the swaying trees seemed to bow in reverence, and where the leaping waterfalls sparkled with purity. ||102-104||
There is no end to his glory. ||91||

Page #69:
---------------------------
The second chapter

The birds' chirping seemed like a sweet conversation, the buzzing of the bees seemed like a song of intoxication, the fragrant breeze seemed like an embrace. The mountain peaks were adorned with a multitude of shining metals, the mouths of lions were visible in the caves, the elephants were seated beneath the dense trees, and the mountain covered the entire sky with its glory. Just as Lord Vrishabhadeva was seated on the beautiful Mount Kailasa, in the same way, Lord Vardhamana Jineendra was seated on the vast mountain. ||102-108||

On that vast mountain, there was a land called Samavasarana, which was one yojana in extent. ||109||

When the victorious Vardhamana Jineendra, the conqueror of the enemy called the world, ascended the throne in that Samavasarana land, Indra's throne trembled. ||110||

Indra thought at that time, "By whose power has my throne trembled?" As he thought, he knew everything through his knowledge of the past, present, and future. ||111||

Indra remembered his commander, and the commander immediately stood with folded hands. Indra ordered him, "Inform all the gods that Lord Vardhamana Jineendra is seated on the vast mountain, so all of you should gather and go to pay your respects to him." ||112-113||

Then Indra himself mounted his elephant, Airavata, which looked like a large group of autumn clouds, whose tusks were yellowed by the impact of golden shores, which was adorned with golden garlands, and which was surrounded by a river whose water seemed to be yellowed by the pollen of lotuses, like Mount Kailasa itself. The elephant was adorned with the cheeks of intoxicated bees, its fragrance filled the entire world with the pollen of Kadamba flowers, it had a conch shell ornament near its ears, and it seemed to be spitting out forests of lotuses with its red tongue. ||114-117||

Page #70:
---------------------------
He appeared to be breathing, like a mirror reflecting, and his valor was like a sigh. He seemed to be fainting from pride, and his youth was like a secret. ||118|| His nail beds were smooth, but his hair was rough. He seemed like a worthy disciple, acquiring humility, and his face was that of a supreme guru. ||119|| His head was soft, but he was very firm in grasping knowledge. He was long-lived, but his shoulders were short. ||120|| He was poor in his belly, but always engaged in giving. He was like Narada in his love for strife, and like Garuda in his destruction of snakes. ||121|| He appeared like the evening, adorned with a beautiful constellation of stars. He was loud like a great bell, and adorned with red fly whisks. ||122|| His head was adorned with a beautiful, red, towering mound of hair. He mounted Airavata and set out. ||123|| He arrived, accompanied by the gods, riding their own vehicles. Their faces were radiant with the enthusiasm of seeing the Jina. ||124|| The chief of the celestial beings, Kamalayudha and others, arrived with their consorts, adorned with various ornaments. ||125|| Then Indra praised him with words that were full of wonder. He said, "Your divine qualities are true and pure." ||126|| "O Lord, you have awakened this entire world, which was asleep in the night of great delusion, with the sun of knowledge, the orb of your great brilliance." ||127|| "Salutations to you, O Lord, who are free from attachment, omniscient, and great. You have reached the inaccessible shore of the ocean of existence." ||128|| "With you as the merchant, the merchants of the noble mind will reach the abode of liberation, and they will not be robbed by the thieves of vices along the way." ||129|| "You have opened the pure path for the Siddhas. The web of karma has been burnt by the fire of your blazing meditation." ||130||

Page #71:
---------------------------
## Second Chapter

For those who are bound and without a protector, who are burning in the fire of sorrow, you are the kin, you are the protector, and you are the ultimate liberation. ||131||

How can we praise you, whose qualities are infinite, beyond comparison, and accessible only to the liberated ones? ||132||

Thus, praising and bowing down, Indra touched the earth with his head, knees, and lotus-like hands. ||133||

Seeing that assembly, he was filled with wonder. Here is a brief description of it. ||134||

Indra's obedient men created three tiers of the assembly, adorned with various colored precious stones and gold. ||135||

These tiers had four towering gateways in each direction, adorned with large pools and covered with curtains of light from precious stones. ||136||

That assembly, surrounded by the gateways, was adorned with eight auspicious substances and possessed an indescribable beauty beyond words. ||137||

There were twelve chambers within the assembly, with walls of crystal, arranged in a clockwise manner. ||138||

In the first chamber, the liberated ones, presided over by the Ganadharas, were seated. In the second, the Indraṇīs and the celestial women of the Kalpavasis were present. In the third, the Aryikas, along with the Ganapālīs, were seated. In the fourth, the celestial women of the Jyotiṣas were present. In the fifth, the celestial women of the Vyantaras were present. In the sixth, the celestial women of the Bhavanavāsīs were present. In the seventh, the Jyotiṣa Devas were present. In the eighth, the Vyantara Devas were present. In the ninth, the Bhavanavāsīs were present. In the tenth, the Kalpavasis were present. In the eleventh, humans were present. And in the twelfth, the Tiryanchas, free from animosity and hatred, were seated comfortably. ||139-142||

Then, King Śreṇika, the mighty, with his heart filled with wonder at the assembly of gods, emerged from his city. ||143||

Page #72:
---------------------------
22
Padmapurana
Having abandoned his vehicle and other royal paraphernalia from afar, he bowed to the Jina with reverence and entered his own place. || 144 || The compassionate Varisena, the fearless Kumar, Vijayavahana, and other princes, having bowed with folded hands and touched their foreheads, paid homage to the Lord. Then, with great humility, they all sat down in their respective places. || 145-146 || The Lord Vardhamana was seated on a throne beneath an Ashoka tree in the Samavasarana. Its branches were made of vaidurya (blue) gems, and it was adorned with delicate leaves. Its flowers, radiant with brilliance, filled all directions. It was extremely beautiful, as pleasing as a Kalpa tree, and it dispelled the sorrows of mankind. Its leaves were green and dense, and it resembled a mountain made of various gems. His throne also produced a rainbow from the light of various gems. It was covered with divine garments, pleasing to the mind with its soft touch, and it obstructed the spread of the brilliance of the gems on Indra's head. It was adorned with three umbrellas, signifying his sovereignty over the three worlds, and it was filled with flowers showered by the gods. It stood on the surface of the earth, adorned with fluttering chowries held by the Yaksha king, and the sound of the Dundubhi drums echoed peacefully from it. || 147-152 || The divine sound that emanated from the Lord transformed into the language of beings of the three realms, and its loud voice was like the dense roar of clouds. || 153 || In the midst of a halo that eclipsed the sun's light, the Lord was seated. When questioned by the Ganadhara, he preached the Dharma to the people as follows: || 154 ||
He said that first and foremost, there is one reality, and then, with the distinction between Jiva and Ajiva, there are two types of reality. Among them, too, there are two distinctions: Siddha and Samsari. || 155 ||
Besides these, there are two more distinctions among Jivas: Bhavy and Abhavy. Just as there are some grains like urad, etc., that ripen and mature, and some that do not ripen or mature even with effort, so too, there are two types of Jivas: 2. Pranamam cha ma. 3. Janitendrayudhodgame ma. 4. Parichchhanne
1. Vijayavahananama cha tatha anyanripasunanavaha ma. ma. 5. Sapim ma. 6. Jivaasca ma.


.

Page #73:
---------------------------
## Second Chapter
23

**156.**  Just as beans are divided into edible and inedible, so too are living beings divided into two categories: **Bhavyas** (those who can attain liberation) and **Abhavyas** (those who cannot attain liberation).

**157.**  The second division of living beings is based on the differences in Dharma (righteousness), Adharma (unrighteousness), etc.  **Bhavyas** are those who are destined to attain liberation, while **Abhavyas** are not.

**158.**  The characteristic of **Bhavyas** is their faith in the principles taught by the Jinas, while the characteristic of **Abhavyas** is their lack of faith.  Further divisions of **Bhavyas** and **Abhavyas** are based on the number of senses they possess: one-sensed, two-sensed, three-sensed, four-sensed, and five-sensed.

**159.**  Living beings are further divided based on their:
* **Gati** (type of birth)
* **Kaya** (body)
* **Yoga** (type of karma)
* **Veda** (knowledge)
* **Leshya** (mental disposition)
* **Kasaya** (passions)
* **Jnana** (knowledge)
* **Darshan** (right view)
* **Charitra** (conduct)
* **Gunasthan** (stages of spiritual progress)
* **Nisarga** (natural) and **Adhigata** (acquired) **Samyag Darshan** (right view)
* **Namadi Nikshepa** (deposits of karma)

**160.**  Living beings are also divided based on the eight **Anuyoga** (principles):
* **Sat** (existence)
* **Sankhya** (number)
* **Kshetra** (space)
* **Sparshan** (touch)
* **Kala** (time)
* **Antar** (interior)
* **Bhaava** (state of being)
* **Alp** (few) and **Bahutva** (many)

**161.**  Of these two types of living beings, **Siddhas** (liberated souls) and **Samsaris** (bound souls), only **Samsaris** experience suffering.  **Samsaris** mistakenly perceive the pleasures derived from the five senses as true happiness.

**162.**  Even for a moment as short as the blink of an eye, **Narakas** (hell beings) do not experience happiness.

**163.**  **Tiryachas** (animals) constantly experience suffering due to:
* **Daman** (suppression)
* **Tadan** (punishment)
* **Dovan** (exploitation)
* **Vahan** (being used as a vehicle)
* **Sheeta** (cold)
* **Atapa** (heat)
* **Varsha** (rain)

**164.**  **Manushyas** (humans) experience great suffering due to:
* **Priyanam ViprYogena** (separation from loved ones)
* **Anishta Samagamaat** (association with undesirable things)
* **Ipsitanam Alaabhaat** (failure to obtain desired things)

**165.**  **Devas** (gods) experience suffering due to:
* **Utkrisht Suraanam Cha Drishta Bhagam Mahagunam** (seeing the great pleasures of superior gods)
* **Chyavanaat Cha Param Duhkham** (falling from their heavenly abode)

**166.**  When living beings in all four **Gatis** (types of birth) are bound by great suffering, it is best to attain the **Karmabhoomi** (human birth) and strive for **Dharma** (righteousness).

**167.**  Those who attain the human birth but do not practice **Dharma** are like those who have lost the nectar that has come into their hands.

**168.**  In this world filled with countless births, it is very difficult to attain the human birth after wandering through many births.

Page #74:
---------------------------
In the Padma Purana, it is said: "Among those who are greedy and sinful, like the Sabaras, one is born. Even if one attains Aryadesha, one is born in a low family. (16) Even if one is born in a good family, one may have a deformed body, like a one-eyed or lame person. Even if one has a complete body, it is very difficult to be free from disease. (17) Even if one attains all the good things, like the company of virtuous people, it is difficult to have devotion to Dharma because of the desire to enjoy worldly pleasures. (171) In this world, there are many people who work for others and earn a living with great difficulty. They are far from attaining wealth. (172) Some people, controlled by their tongue and sexual desires, enter into battles that are filled with blood and the rain of weapons. (173) Some people, burdened with the responsibility of supporting their families, engage in the difficult task of tilling the land, causing harm to many creatures, and are constantly oppressed by kings. (174) Thus, those who desire happiness, whatever they do, they experience great suffering. (175) Even if one somehow acquires wealth, one suffers greatly protecting it from thieves, fire, water, and kings, and is always anxious. (176) Even if one has acquired and protected wealth, one does not find peace in enjoying it, because the fire of greed keeps burning within. (177) Even if one somehow attains devotion to Dharma due to the influence of past good deeds, one is led back to the path of Samsara by other wicked people. (178) Those who have been destroyed by others, destroy others in turn, leading them astray, and follow only tradition in the name of Dharma. (179) How can the minds of those who are attached to possessions be purified? And how can they have a firm foundation in Dharma, which is rooted in the purity of the mind? (180) This being, after a long time, is born as a human being with great difficulty. (168) In that human birth, this being is mostly born among greedy and sinful people, like the Sabaras, and other low-born people. If by chance, it attains Aryadesha, it is born in a low family. (169) If by chance, it is born in a good family, it may have a deformed body, like a one-eyed or lame person. If by chance, it has a complete body, it is very difficult to be free from disease. (170) In this way, even if one attains all the good things, like the company of virtuous people, it is difficult to have devotion to Dharma because of the desire to enjoy worldly pleasures. (171)

Page #75:
---------------------------
## The Second Chapter

**180.** As long as there is attachment to possessions, there will be the oppression of living beings. Violence is the root cause of the cycle of birth and death, and suffering is known as the cycle of birth and death.

**181.** From the embrace of possessions, hatred and attachment arise. Attachment and hatred are the strongest causes of suffering in the cycle of birth and death.

**182.** Even though many beings attain Right Faith, they are still veiled by the obscurations of conduct and cannot attain Right Conduct.

**183.** Even those who have attained Right Conduct and perform great austerities are corrupted by the hardships and are led astray by the suffering.

**184.** Some, corrupted by hardships, practice the minor vows. Others are content with Right Faith alone and do not observe any vows.

**185.** Some, clinging to the well of the deep cycle of birth and death, abandon Right Faith and embrace false beliefs.

**186.** Such beings, bound by false beliefs, wander continuously in the cycle of birth and death, consumed by the fire of suffering.

**187.** Some, however, are great heroes with virtuous deeds who uphold Right Conduct throughout their lives.

**188.** They attain Samadhi and, upon shedding their bodies, attain the state of Narayana and other such states due to the karmic residue.

**189.** Those who become Narayana are eager to inflict suffering on others and their minds are cruel. Therefore, they experience great suffering in the hells after death, which is difficult to overcome.

**190.** Some, through great austerities, attain the state of Indra. Others attain the state of Balarama, and others reside in the higher celestial realms.

**191.** Some, with great fortitude, contemplate the sixteen causes of existence and attain the state of a Tirthankara, which causes upheaval in the three realms.

**192.** Others, constantly engaged in the worship of Right Faith, Right Knowledge, and Right Conduct, are liberated from the eight karmic stains within two or three lifetimes.

**193.** They then attain the supreme state, the incomparable abode of the liberated, and enjoy infinite, unhindered, supreme bliss.

Page #76:
---------------------------
26
Padmapurana
Then, from the lotus-like face of the Jina, Dharma emerged. Hearing this, the humans, the animals, and the gods were filled with supreme joy. || 195 || Some attained Anuvrata, some became Nir-ambara. With minds troubled by the cycle of birth and death, they began to practice austerities. || 196 || Some attained Right Faith, some, by their own strength, renounced the actions that lead to evil. || 197 || Having heard Dharma, praised the Jina, and prostrated themselves as per the rules, with minds established in Dharma, they went to their respective places. || 198 || The great king Shrenika, adorned with royal splendor, his heart filled with joy at hearing the Dharma, entered his city. || 199 || Then, seeing the glorious radiance of the Tirthankara, the sun, as if ashamed, wished to hide himself in the ocean. || 200 || As the sun approached the setting point, it appeared as if it was covered with the rays of Padmaraga gems, and it became extremely red. || 201 || The rays that always followed the sun became dim. It is only right, for whose radiance can increase when the master is in distress? || 202 || Then, the female chakavas looked at the sun with tear-filled eyes. As if out of compassion, the sun slowly became invisible. || 203 || The attachment that living beings had given up by hearing Dharma, as if by the trickery of twilight, covered the circle of directions. || 204 || Just as a friend, without being asked, is inclined to help people, so too, the sun, without being asked, is inclined to help us. Therefore, the setting sun is like a friend setting. || 205 || At that time, the lotuses were contracting, as if they were swallowing the setting sun's dying red glow. || 206 || It had made the vastness and height into one, and it could not be described. Darkness appeared, as if the evil deeds of the wicked were being manifested. || 207 ||

Page #77:
---------------------------
27
The second part of the night was enveloped in deep darkness. The veil of smoke was extinguishing the fire-like glow. The cluster of Champaka and Kshara flowers, agitated by the gentle breeze, appeared to be the ear-ornaments of the night. The swans, satiated with the nectar of lotuses and having their wings cleansed by the stalks, indulged in scratching and sleep. The evening breeze, which was the holder of the garland of Dhammilla and Mallika flowers, blew gently, resembling the exhalation of the night. In the thickets of Kusa grass, the assemblage of six-legged creatures took shelter. The sky, adorned with the extremely pure disc of the moon, appeared like the collection of sublime utterances of the Jina Lord, paying obeisance to the three worlds. The darkness was dispelled by the moonbeams, just as the words of the ascetics are refuted by the principles enunciated by the Jina. The moon, welcomed by the people, arose, bearing a body that trembled as if to ward off the darkness, like the ocean of milk. In the moonlight, the world became easily graspable, as if it had begun to sink, weary of the darkness, into the ocean of milk. The lotuses, as if suddenly awakened, seemed to be carrying the supreme fragrance brought by the hands of the moon. Thus, the auspicious twilight, which enhanced the joy of the loving couple and delighted the people, arrived.

Page #78:
---------------------------
In the Padma Purana,
The fragrance of the best flowers emanating from the windows. The courtesans, seated nearby, were captivating with their melodious songs. ||220|| A lamp, covered with crystal, was burning very close. The guards, without any negligence, were protecting it. ||221|| The ground was adorned with a collection of flowers. A soft pillow was placed on it. ||222|| The head of the bed was facing the direction sanctified by the feet of the Jina. A fine, but wide, sheet was spread over each foot. ||223|| Having completed his royal duties, the king, who was devoted to the Jain faith, lay down comfortably on the bed. ||224|| The king, Shrenik, saw the Jina in his dreams again and again. He asked him about his doubts and learned the truth from him. ||225|| Then, the king, Shrenik, was awakened by the sound of the trumpet, which dispelled the sleep of the intoxicated elephant, echoed in the cave-like chambers of the palace, and overpowered the thunderous roar of the mighty clouds. ||226-227|| Upon waking, he contemplated with a focused mind the virtuous deeds of the Chakravarti and other valiant men, as spoken by the Lord Mahavira. ||228|| Then, his mind turned to the story of Balabhadra, the bearer of the Padma, and he began to doubt about the demons and monkeys. ||229|| He thought, "Oh! Those who were the best of men, born in noble families, learned, and whose minds were illuminated by knowledge, were influenced by the Jain faith. But in the worldly scriptures, demons like Ravana are described as drinkers and eaters of fat, blood, and flesh." ||230-231|| Ravana's brother, Kumbhakarna, was very strong and slept continuously for six months, being overcome by deep sleep. ||232|| Even if he was trampled by intoxicated elephants, his ears were filled with cauldrons of hot oil, and the sound of drums and conch shells was made, he would not wake up until the time was complete. ||233-234|| When he woke up, he was tormented by hunger and thirst, and with his huge belly, he would eat even elephants and other difficult-to-digest things. ||235||

Page #79:
---------------------------
## Second Chapter

The one who holds the vow, Kumbhakarna, when he woke up, was so overwhelmed by hunger and thirst that he would eat whatever he saw, including elephants. Thus, he was very formidable. || 235 ||

Having been satiated by the animals, humans, and gods, he would fall asleep again, and no other man could stay near him. || 236 ||

Oh! How strange it is that the foolish poets, who create wicked and flawed texts, have depicted the character of the Vidyaadhara prince in such a repulsive way. || 237 ||

This kind of text, which narrates all this, is known as the Ramayana. It is said that listening to it destroys all the sins of the listener instantly. || 238 ||

For one whose mind is eager to renounce suffering, this Ramayana is like the union with fire. And for one who desires to remove coldness, it is like the union with cold wind mixed with snow. || 239 ||

Just as churning water is useless for one who desires ghee, and grinding sand is futile for one who wants oil, so too, relying on the Ramayana is useless for one who desires to renounce sin. || 240 ||

Even in the scriptures that depict the characters of great men, wicked people have created the concept of Dharma Shastra. || 241 ||

The Ramayana also states that Ravana defeated Indra, the king of the gods, by shooting arrows that pierced his heart and dragged him by his ears. || 242 ||

Oh! Where is the lord of the gods, Indra, and where is that insignificant human who could be reduced to ashes by merely thinking about Indra? || 243 ||

He who had Airavata as his elephant, and a great weapon like the thunderbolt, and who could effortlessly lift the earth adorned with Mount Meru and the oceans. || 244 ||

How could such an Indra be defeated by a Vidyaadhara, who was a mere human with little strength, and who possessed knowledge? || 245 ||

It is also written that the king of the Rakshasas, Ravana, captured Indra and kept him in his prison. He remained bound and confined in the prison of Lanka for a long time. || 246 ||

To say such things is like saying that a lion is killed by deer, stones are ground by sesame seeds, a serpent is killed by a snake, and an elephant is subdued by a dog. || 247 ||

The one who holds the vow...

Page #80:
---------------------------
30
Padmapurana
Rama, who had obtained the vow, was killed by the golden monkey, and Sugriva's elder brother, who was like his father, was killed by Janaka for the sake of his wife. ||248|| All this is unbelievable, devoid of any logic. I will ask the Lord Gautama, the head of the Ganadharas, tomorrow. ||249|| As the wise king was thinking this, a great shout of victory was raised by the prisoners as the sound of the trumpets ceased. ||250|| At that time, the long-lived son of the family, who was near the king, woke up and, by nature, recited this verse to the old man: "One should always ask the gurus, even if one knows the meaning oneself, for the knowledge obtained through their confirmation gives supreme happiness." ||251-252|| Filled with joy at this auspicious occasion, and with his wives having performed auspicious rites, King Shrenik rose from his bed. ||253||
Then - the king Shrenik emerged from his beautiful abode, which was adorned with a canopy of flowers, and where the sweet humming of bees that had emerged from their sleep filled one part of the palace, and where the pale lamps were swaying in the cool breeze of the morning. ||254|| As he emerged, he heard the victorious sound emanating from the excellent lips of the Vārāṅganās, whose radiance was like that of Lakshmi, and whose hands, adorned with lotus-like ornaments, were adorned with the beauty of lotuses. ||255|| Thus, the king Shrenik, who had attained calmness through the influence of extremely auspicious thoughts, and who had acquired all the auspicious feelings of the moment, emerged from his abode, which was as radiant as a white lotus, and shone like the sun emerging from a cluster of autumn clouds. ||256||
Thus ends the second chapter of the Padmacharita, composed by the Acharya Ravishena, known as the Ārṣa, which describes the anxieties of King Shrenik. ||2||
1. From one part of the interior of the sound. M. | 2. The sound of victory. M. |

Page #81:
---------------------------
## The Third Chapter

There, in the assembly hall, he stood, his body perfectly composed, adorned with all ornaments, and entered the grand hall. ||1|| He was accompanied by his ministers, who had been ushered in by the doorkeepers, their fine garments torn by the clash of their armlets, their heads adorned with garlands that were being buzzed over by bees, their feet touching the ground, covered by the rays of their anklets, their bodies enveloped in the radiance of their swaying necklaces, their minds captivated by the multitude of the king's virtues. ||2-4|| 

Then, followed by those ministers, mounted on their noble steeds, the king, Śreṇika, ascended the grand elephant, whose back was adorned with a beautiful howdah, and proceeded towards the assembly of the Jina, Śrī Vardhamāna. ||5|| 

A group of attendants, with swords in their hands, daggers at their waists, and golden bracelets on their left arms, leaped far into the sky, following the wind like a herd of deer, and shouted, "Go, go, clear the path, move aside, why are you standing there?" ||6-8|| 

The king, listening intently to the auspicious words recited by the people who were bowing before him, with a calm mind, proceeded forward. ||9|| 

He reached the place where the venerable Gautama was seated, surrounded by many monks, his consciousness purified by bathing in the waters of all scriptures, absorbed in pure meditation, devoted to the exposition of the truth, seated on a peacock-shaped seat, comfortable and endowed with powers, his radiance like that of the moon, his brilliance like that of the sun, his hands and feet like the leaves of the Ashoka tree. ||10-12||

Page #82:
---------------------------
32
Padmapurana
He who pacifies the world with his peaceful body, the Lord of the ascetics, Gautama, resides there. ||13||
He descended from afar, and walked on foot. His eyes were filled with joy, and he was humble in his gait. ||14||
Then, bowing to him with folded hands, the Tri-patya (three-fold) one, was given a seat on the earth by the Lord of the Ganadharas. ||15||
Then, the king, with the earth made white by the brilliance of his teeth, asked this question, first inquiring about his well-being. ||16||
"O Bhagavan, I wish to hear the true story of Padma. For, the fame of this has been generated by those who follow evil ways. ||17||
"For, was the Lord of Lanka, Ravana, a Rakshasa, or a human being? How was he, a creature of the lower realms, defeated by the small monkeys? ||18||
"How could he, with his extremely foul-smelling human body, eat human flesh? How was Vali, by deceit, killed by Ramadeva? ||19||
"And, going to the abode of the gods, and destroying their excellent grove, how was Indra, the king of the gods, brought to Ravana's prison? ||20||
"And, how could his younger brother, Kumbhakarna, who was skilled in all the scriptures, and had a disease-free body, sleep for six months? ||21||
"And, how was the bridge, which was so high that it was difficult even for the gods to cross, built by the monkeys, with such heavy mountains? ||22||
"O Bhagavan, be pleased to tell me all this. By rescuing many beings from the mire of doubt, you will be doing a great service. ||23||
Thus addressed, Ganesha, with his rays of teachings emanating, as if washing away the dirt of the world with flowers, ||24||
dancing the peacocks in the midst of the groves of creepers, with a deep, joyful roar, spoke these words. ||25||
"Hear, O Ayushman, O King, beloved of the gods, with care. My words are taught by the Jina, and are dedicated to revealing the true nature of things. ||26||
"Ravana was not a Rakshasa, nor was he a man-eater. All that they say is false, for they are the speakers of falsehood. ||27||

Page #83:
---------------------------
The third chapter cannot be written without a foundation. A speech without a beginning is like a rootless tree. ||28|| Therefore, first listen to the description of the field and time. Then listen to the stories of great men, which destroy sins. ||29|| In the midst of the infinite space of the universe, there are three realms, each surrounded by three rings of wind. This elevated realm appears as if a large, heavy palm tree is standing in the middle of a mortar. ||30|| The middle part of this realm, known as the Tiryanch Lok, is surrounded by countless island-shaped continents and oceans. ||31|| This Jambudvipa is like a potter's wheel. It is the best of all islands, situated in the middle of the salt ocean, and extends for one hundred thousand yojanas in all directions. ||32|| In the middle of this Jambudvipa is Mount Meru. This mountain is indestructible, its base is made of diamonds, and its upper part is made of gold, jewels, and gems. ||33|| Its high peak appears like a group of clouds that are red due to the evening. There is only a space the size of the tip of a hair between the earth of the Saudharma heaven and the peak of this mountain. ||34|| It rises ninety-nine thousand yojanas above the earth and extends one thousand yojanas below the earth. This mountain is made of diamonds within the earth. ||35|| This mountain is ten thousand yojanas wide on the earth and one thousand yojanas wide on its peak. It appears as if a rod has been erected to measure the sky of the middle realm. ||36|| This Jambudvipa is comprised of seven regions: Bharat, Himavat, Hari, Videha, Ramyak, Hairanyavat, and Airavat. There are also two Kuru regions in the Videha region, known as Devakuru and Uttarakuru. Six Kulachala mountains adorn this Jambudvipa, dividing these seven regions. ||37|| Jambudvipa and Salmali are two great trees. There are thirty-four Vijayadhara mountains in Jambudvipa, and each Vijayadhara mountain has one hundred and ten cities of the Vidyadharas. ||38||

Page #84:
---------------------------
In the Padma Purana, thirty-four capitals are mentioned. There are fourteen great rivers, and a Jain temple on the Jambū tree. ||39|| Six Bhoga-Kshetras are mentioned, and eight Jinagṛhas. Eighty-six caves and the same number of buildings are also mentioned. ||40|| There are four thrones and thirty chariots. Two silver Vijayardha mountains are also mentioned. ||41|| In all the mountains with Vaksara mountains, the temples of the Jinas are adorned with a wealth of jewels. ||42|| In the Jambūmeru-Kshetra, in the southern direction, there is a large Rakshasa island adorned with Jain images. ||43|| In the Mahavideha-Kshetra, in the western direction, there is a large and auspicious Kinnara island, shining with Jain images. ||44|| In the Airavata-Kshetra, in the northern direction, there is an island called Gandharva, adorned with excellent Chaityalayas. ||45|| In the Videha-Kshetra, east of Mount Meru, in the eastern direction, the Dharana island shines. This Dharana island is also filled with Jain temples. ||46|| The Bharat and Airavata Kshetras are both subject to increase and decrease. The other Kshetras are stable, meaning that the cycle of time does not change in them. ||47|| In the building on top of the Jambū tree, there lives a god named Anavṛta. He is surrounded by many hundreds of gods of the Kilviṣa caste. ||48|| In this Bharat Kshetra, when the first time period, called Suṣamā, existed, it was filled with Kalpa trees, like the Uttarakuru. This means that there was a perfect Bhoga-bhūmi here. ||49|| At that time, the people here were radiant like the midday sun, two kosas tall, and perfectly adorned with all auspicious marks. ||50|| Here, couples were born together, and they lived for three

Page #85:
---------------------------
The third section of the text describes a land of unimaginable luxury and abundance. The ground was paved with gold and precious gems, and it was said to grant all desires. The land was covered in soft, fragrant grass, and the trees bore fruit and flowers throughout the year. Animals like cows, buffaloes, and sheep roamed freely, enjoying their lives. 

Lions and other animals were gentle and peaceful, feeding on the fruits of the Kalpavriksha trees, which granted any wish. The lakes were filled with lotus flowers and adorned with gold and jewels, overflowing with honey, milk, and ghee. 

The mountains were majestic, adorned with five colors and studded with precious stones, bringing joy to all creatures. The rivers were free of crocodiles and other dangerous animals, their waters tasting like milk, ghee, and honey. The climate was perfect, with no extreme heat or cold, and no strong winds. The land was free from fear and filled with constant celebrations. 

The sun and moon were hidden behind the radiant glow of the Kalpavriksha trees, which provided all sensory pleasures. The land was filled with magnificent palaces, gardens, and comfortable beds, as well as delicious food, drinks, clothes, perfumes, and music. All these things were provided by the Kalpavriksha trees. 

The couples in this land lived happily, enjoying the beauty of the ten types of Kalpavriksha trees, just like the couples in the heavens. 

King Shrenik asked Ganadhara about the reason for the existence of this land of pleasure. Ganadhara explained that those who are simple-hearted and give food and other things to the monks are reborn in this land of pleasure.

Page #86:
---------------------------
36
In the Papouraana, it is said that one who gives charity out of desire for enjoyment, even though he may be considered virtuous, will still experience the fruits of his actions, like an elephant or other animal.  ||66||

Just as a seed sown in a soft, well-tilled field yields abundant crops, or as water poured on sugarcane becomes sweet, and milk drunk by a cow turns into milk, so too, charity given to a sage who is a repository of austerities, adorned with vows, and free from all attachments, bears great fruit. ||67-69||

Just as a seed sown in barren land yields little fruit, or as water poured on a neem tree becomes bitter, and milk drunk by a snake turns into poison, so too, charity given to an unworthy recipient yields bad fruit. ||70-71||

Gautama Swami says, "O King! Just as a mirror reflects whatever is placed before it, so too, the fruits of charity are proportionate to the giver's intentions." ||72||

Just as the white and black fortnights follow each other in succession, so too, the Utsarpini and Avasarpini cycles follow each other in succession. ||73||

When the third cycle came to an end, and the groups of Kalpa trees began to perish in succession, fourteen Kulakaras (founders of dynasties) arose. Listen, O Shrenik, to the account of their reign. ||74||

The first Kulakara was named Pratiśruti. His words brought joy to all the people. ||75||

He remembered his three previous births, was devoted to good deeds, and guided all aspects of life. ||76||

After countless millions of years, the second Kulakara, named Sanmati, arose. ||77||

He was followed by Kshemabhrit, Kshemandhara, Simabhrit, and Simadhara. ||78||

Then came Chakshusman. During his reign, the people saw the sun and moon in the sky and were afraid. They asked, "O Lord! What are these two objects that we see in the ocean of the sky?" ||79||

Hearing their question, Chakshusman remembered his past lives.

Page #87:
---------------------------
The third age is nearing its end, and the radiance of the Kalpa trees is fading. The two celestial deities, Chandra and Aditya, are now clearly visible. They are known as Chandra and Aditya. 

There are four types of deities: Jyotishi, Bhavanavasi, Vyantara, and Kalpavasis. Beings are born into these realms based on their karmic merit. 

Chandra, the cool one, and Surya, the intense one, are visible in the sky due to the nature of time. When Surya sets, Chandra's brilliance increases. The constellations also become visible in the sky. 

Knowing this is the nature of time, let go of fear. When Chakshusman, the ruler, spoke these words, the people, relieved of their fear, returned to their usual lives. 

After Chakshusman ascended to heaven, Yashavi became the ruler. He was followed by Vipul, Abhichandra, Chandraabha, Marudeva, Prasenajit, and finally, Nabhi. 

These fourteen rulers are considered like fathers to the people. They were born from virtuous deeds and are all equal in wisdom. 

After the fourteenth ruler, Nabhi, all the Kalpa trees perished except for one. This remaining Kalpa tree stood in the middle of Nabhi's realm, resembling a magnificent palace. 

The palace was adorned with pearl garlands, had walls made of gold and jewels, and was embellished with a beautiful garden and a pond. It was truly unique. 

Nabhi's heart was captured by Marudevi, a beautiful queen. Just as Rohini, the wife of Chandra, is known as Prachalattaraka (the moving star), Marudevi also had sparkling eyes. 

Just as Ganga, the wife of the ocean, is born from the great mountain Himagiri, Marudevi was also...

Page #88:
---------------------------
Here is the translation of the given Sanskrit text into English, while retaining the Sanskrit words:

---

38  
In the Padma Purana  
Arundhati, the ever-faithful companion of the Lord, is like a swan in her gait and like a cuckoo in her sweet speech, akin to the well-nourished beloved of the husband. || 93 || The reference to the love of the husband (of the Chakravarti) conveys that by approaching her, she attains a status beyond comparison, devoid of any inferiority. || 94 || She, who is revered by all the worlds, is well-known as Marudevi, just like the divine entity of Dharma is honored in all three worlds. || 95 || She seemingly was created from the moon's rays, having no trace of hotness, like a mirror seeking beauty in its reflection. || 96 || Understanding the sentiments of others, she appeared as if her essence is of the self; her actions are free from bondage and her nature spreads across the three worlds like that of a liberated soul. || 97 || Her disposition was one of virtuous conduct, seemingly creating her identity from the Jain scriptures. She is like a rain of wealth for those suffering from thirst, appearing as if she embodies the essence of immortality. || 98 || She was capable of bringing satisfaction to her friends, appearing as if she is comparable to liberation (nirvriti). Her form, with gestures and playfulness, made her appear like the very essence of wine (madira). || 99 || The decoration of her forehead was fulfilled solely by her eyes; the garlands of blue lotuses were merely an additional adornment. || 100 || The hair, resembling a bumblebee, was the ornament for her forehead, while the buds of tamala flowers were merely burdens. || 101 || The tales of the beloved of life were the true ornaments of her ears; the wearing of gems and golden earrings was merely ostentation. || 102 || Her cheeks were the cause of constant clarity of light.

---

If you have any more text or need further assistance, feel free to ask!

Page #89:
---------------------------
## Third Chapter

**104.**  Laughter itself was the fragrant powder, white in hue, and the camphor particles were only for destroying the luster.

**105.**  Her voice itself was the sweet vina, the curiosity of the sound of the instrument was only the striking of the strings by the ensemble.

**106.**  The luster that appeared on her lips was the radiant glow of her body. The unguent of saffron and the like was devoid of virtue and only a blemish on her beauty.

**107.**  Her delicate arms were sufficient to strike her husband in jest, the pieces of straw were useless.

**108.**  The drops of sweat born from the heat of youth were the ornaments of her breasts, the burden of the necklace was only placed on them in vain.

**109.**  Her hips, wide like a stone slab, were the cause of wonder, the platform of jewels made in the palace was made without reason.

**110.**  The bees, mistaking her feet for lotuses, were her ornaments, the anklets of Indra-blue gems were useless.

**111.**  To describe the glory of the Marudevi, who enjoyed the pleasures born from the Kalpataru, along with her navel-jewel, is impossible even with hundreds of thousands of books.

**112.**  When the time for the birth of Lord Rishabhadeva arrived, the Dikkumari Devis, pleased by the command of Indra, began to serve Marudevi with great respect.

**113.**  Lakshmi, Shri, Dhriti, Kirti, and other Devis, uttering the words "May you prosper," "Give your command," "May you live long," with great excitement, awaited her command.

**114.**  At that time, some Devis praised her with heart-stealing qualities, and some Devis, endowed with excellent knowledge, sang her praises by playing the vina.

**115.**  Some sang a wonderful song, like nectar to the ears, and some, with soft hands, stroked her feet.

**116.**  Some offered betel nut, some offered a seat, and some, with swords in hand, were always ready to protect her.

**117.**  Some stood at the inner door, and some at the outer door, holding spears, golden staffs, clubs, and swords.

Page #90:
---------------------------
In the Padma Purana,
Some were waving chamaras, some were holding the edge of a cloth, some were blind, some were bringing ornaments. ||118||
Some were engaged in preparing the bed, some were busy cleaning, some were scattering flowers, some were applying fragrant substances. ||119||
Some were engaged in serving food and drink, some were busy with the task of calling. Thus, all the goddesses were performing her duties. ||120||
The beloved of the king of the Nagas, Marudevi, did not experience any distress even in her thoughts. One day, she was sleeping on a very soft bed, covered with a fine cloth, with pillows on either side. She was experiencing the pleasure of her own virtuous deeds. ||121-122||
She was being served by goddesses with pure weapons. She saw sixteen dreams, which were auspicious. ||123||
In the first dream, she saw an elephant, white like the moon, with a deep roar, whose trunk was dripping with the scent of intoxicating nectar, and on which bees were buzzing. ||124||
In the second dream, she saw a bull, whose shoulder was like a Dundubhi drum, who was wearing a beautiful garland, who was roaring, and whose form was like a mass of autumn clouds. ||125||
In the third dream, she saw a lion, adorned with a mane as white as the rays of the moon, and with two fangs like the lines of the moon. ||126||
In the fourth dream, she saw Lakshmi, being bathed by elephants with golden and silver pitchers, and who was sitting motionless on a blooming lotus. ||127||
In the fifth dream, she saw two very large garlands, made of Punnaga, Malati, Kunda, and Champa flowers, and which attracted bees with their fragrance. ||128||
In the sixth dream, she saw the sun, situated on the peak of the eastern mountain, destroying the darkness, and giving fearless vision, free from the troubles of clouds. ||129||
In the seventh dream, she saw the moon, who was the friend of the lotuses, who caused them to bloom, who was like an ornament of the night, who made all directions white with his rays, and who was the lord of the stars. ||130||
In the eighth dream, she saw a pair of fish, who were connected by mutual love, swimming in clear water, and whose form was like a thunderbolt. ||131||
Who was taking care of her? ||117||
Some were waving chamaras, some were bringing clothes, and some were bringing ornaments. ||118||
Some were engaged in preparing the bed, some were busy cleaning, some were scattering flowers, and some were applying fragrant substances. ||119||
Some were engaged in serving food and drink, and some were busy with the task of calling. Thus, all the goddesses were performing her duties. ||120||
Thus, Marudevi, the beloved of the king of the Nagas, did not have to worry about anything. All her tasks were completed without any worry. One day, she was sleeping on a very soft bed, covered with a fine cloth, with pillows on either side. She was experiencing the pleasure of her own virtuous deeds. ||121-122||
Goddesses with pure weapons were serving her. At that time, she saw sixteen auspicious dreams. ||123||
In the first dream, she saw an elephant, white like the moon, with a deep roar, whose trunk was dripping with the scent of intoxicating nectar, and on which bees were buzzing. ||124||
In the second dream, she saw a bull, whose shoulder was like a Dundubhi drum, who was wearing a beautiful garland, who was roaring, and whose form was like a mass of autumn clouds. ||125||
In the third dream, she saw a lion, adorned with a mane as white as the rays of the moon, and with two fangs like the lines of the moon. ||126||
In the fourth dream, she saw Lakshmi, being bathed by elephants with golden and silver pitchers, and who was sitting motionless on a blooming lotus. ||127||
In the fifth dream, she saw two very large garlands, made of Punnaga, Malati, Kunda, and Champa flowers, and which attracted bees with their fragrance. ||128||
In the sixth dream, she saw the sun, situated on the peak of the eastern mountain, destroying the darkness, and giving fearless vision, free from the troubles of clouds. ||129||
In the seventh dream, she saw the moon, who was the friend of the lotuses, who caused them to bloom, who was like an ornament of the night, who made all directions white with his rays, and who was the lord of the stars. ||130||
In the eighth dream, she saw a pair of fish, who were connected by mutual love, swimming in clear water, and whose form was like a thunderbolt. ||131||

Page #91:
---------------------------
## The Third Canto

**132.** A radiant pot, adorned with a garland of flowers, its neck embellished with a necklace, filled with five-colored gems.

**133.** A vast lake, covered with lotuses and blue lotuses, filled with pure water, teeming with various birds, and adorned with beautiful steps.

**134.** An ocean, with waves rising high from the movement of fish and large crocodiles, adorned with clouds, and appearing like the sky itself.

**135.** A magnificent throne, adorned with lions, shining with various gems, made of gold, and towering high.

**136.** A celestial chariot, shaped like the peak of Mount Meru, vast in size, adorned with gems, and embellished with bubbles, mirrors, and fly whisks.

**137.** A palace, shaped like a Kalpavriksha tree, with many floors, adorned with pearl garlands, and covered with a sheet of gems.

**138.** A very high pile of five-colored precious stones, generating a rainbow from the intermingling of their rays.

**139.** A fire, blazing with flames, devoid of smoke, revolving clockwise, and without fuel.

**140.** After seeing these dreams, the beautiful Marudevi awoke to the auspicious sounds of victory cries.

**141.** The attendants said, "O Goddess! This moon has become devoid of light, due to the shame arising from the radiance of your face."

**142.** "This sun, on the peak of the rising mountain, appears like a pot anointed with vermilion, for auspiciousness."

**143.** "Your smile will now dispel the darkness, and the lamps have become dim, as if realizing their own uselessness."

**144.** "This group of birds, dwelling happily in their nests, is making a delightful noise, as if celebrating your auspiciousness."

**145.** "These trees in the house, united with the cool and gentle morning breeze, appear as if they are still..."

Page #92:
---------------------------
42
Padmapurana
I
This one, entering your house, is looking at the sun's orb. The Chakravaki, with sweet sounds, calls out to her beloved. ||146|| These swans, seeing your gait, are now filled with anticipation. They make their cooing sounds, a reason to banish sleep. ||147|| The great sound, like that produced by a carved bronze, is a beautiful display of the Sarasa birds' cries. ||148|| It is clear that the night has ended, O pure-deeds one, Goddess, now give up sleep. Thus, the one who was praised, the Marudevi, left her bed, which was like a wave rising from a contraction of the sheet, and was filled with flowers, making it like the sky filled with clouds and stars. ||149-150|| Leaving her dwelling, she, who had completed all her tasks, went near the navel-king, like the Lakshmi of the day goes to the sun. ||151|| There, sitting on a lower seat, she, with folded hands, gradually narrated her dreams to her beloved, who was seated on a magnificent throne. ||152|| Thus, the king, overwhelmed with joy at hearing the queen's dreams, said, "O auspicious one, the Lord of the three worlds has taken birth in your womb." ||153|| Hearing this, the lotus-eyed Marudevi was filled with supreme joy, and she appeared like the beautiful form of the moon, possessing a collection of radiance. ||154|| When six months were left for the birth of the Jina, by the order of Indra, Kubera, with great respect, began to shower down jewels. ||155|| Since the earth became golden while the Lord was in the womb, Indra praised him with the name "Hiranyagarbha." ||156|| The Lord, even in the womb, was endowed with the three knowledges: Mati, Shruta, and Avadhi. And, with the thought that his movements should not cause any discomfort to his mother, he did not move or stir in the womb. ||157|| Just as fire, reflected in a mirror, does not cause any change, similarly, the Lord, while residing in the womb, did not cause any change in the body of his mother, Marudevi. ||158||

Page #93:
---------------------------
43
The Supreme Jina, free from the touch of impurities, emerged from the womb like a crystal, when the time was ripe. ||159||
Then, a great festival was celebrated by the name of the son's birth, with all the people rejoicing as prescribed. ||160||
The three worlds were shaken, Indra's throne trembled, and all the gods and demons exclaimed, "What is this?" ||161||
Then, without being blown, the conch shell sounded in the abodes of the celestial beings. The drums roared spontaneously in the houses of the Vyantaras. In the abode of the celestial astrologers, the roar of lions was heard suddenly, and in the houses of the Kalpa-dwelling gods, the sound of bells echoed. ||162-163||
With such auspicious omens and the bowing of the crowns, the Indras, using their knowledge of the future, came to know about the birth of the Tirthankara. ||164||
Then, the Indras, filled with great enthusiasm and adorned with ornaments, mounted their elephant king, Airavata, and set out for the house of Nabhiraj. ||165||
At that time, some of the gods were dancing with love, some were clapping their hands, some were raising their armies, some were roaring like lions, spreading their sound throughout the world, some were making various costumes with skill, and some were singing beautifully. ||166-167||
At that time, this world, filled with great sounds, seemed to be falling apart due to the gods going up and down. ||168||
Then, Kubera created the city of Ayodhya. That city of Ayodhya was surrounded by a huge fort, the size of Mount Vijaya. ||169||
A deep moat, reaching down to the netherworld, encircled it on all sides, and the tops of the tall towers extended far into the sky. ||170||
The Indras, filled with great blessings, reached the house of Nabhiraj in an instant, which was covered with a garment of light from various jewels. ||171||
Indra, along with the gods, circumambulated the city three times and then entered the delivery room, bringing the Jina from the abode of the Pauloma. ||172||

Page #94:
---------------------------
44
In the Padma Purana, I bow down to the mother of the Jina, who, having made the illusory child, took the real child in her arms. The mother, having given the child to Indra's wife, Shachi, in her hands, bowed down.  ||173|| Seeing the form of the Jina, even Indra, with his thousand eyes, did not attain satisfaction, for the Jina's form was beyond the limits of the three worlds. ||174|| Then, placing the Jina on his lap, Indra mounted the elephant king, Airavata. The other gods, with great devotion, held the fly whisk, umbrella, etc. ||175|| Thus, accompanied by all the gods, Indra reached the peak of Mount Meru, which was resplendent with the brilliance of the collection of gems like vaidurya, etc. ||176|| There, on a rock called Pandukambala, where a natural throne was situated, Indra placed the Jina and stood behind him. ||177|| Then, the gods sounded the conch shells, which made a sound like the agitated ocean, and they also made the loud sound of the mridanga and conch. ||178|| The Yakshas, Kinnaras, Gandharvas, Tumburu, Narada, and Visvavasu, along with their wives, sang beautiful songs that captivated the mind and ears, while performing excellent fainting spells. Lakshmi also played the vina with great respect. ||179-180|| The Apsaras, adorned with ornaments and filled with gestures, performed excellent dances, performing the Angahara as it should be. ||181|| Thus, when there was singing, playing, and dancing by the best of the gods, Indra took a auspicious pot in his hand for the abhisheka. ||182|| Then, Indra performed the abhisheka of the Jina with a thousand and eight pots, which were filled with the water of the ocean of milk, which were very heavy to carry, which were made of gold, whose mouths were covered with lotuses, and whose beauty was enhanced by red leaves. Indra, by the power of his karma, created many forms of himself. ||183-184|| Yama, Vaishravana, Soma, Varuna, and other gods, as well as all the remaining Indras, performed the abhisheka of the Jina with devotion. ||185|| Indra's wife and other goddesses, with their hands as soft as leaves, anointed the Jina with fragrant unguents. ||186||

Page #95:
---------------------------
## The Third Chapter

**187.** Just as a mountain is consecrated by clouds, so too was the Lord consecrated by large pitchers, and the gods were eager to adorn him.

**188.** At that moment, Indra adorned his ears with earrings like the moon and the sun, fashioned from a vajra needle.

**189.** A pure padmaraga gem was placed on his crown, making his head appear adorned with matted hair due to its rays.

**190.** A crescent-shaped mark was made on his forehead with sandalwood, and his arms were adorned with golden armlets.

**191.** His chest, adorned with the Srivatsa mark, was decorated with a necklace made of large pearls like stars, radiating with brilliance.

**192.** He was adorned with a large garland of green gems and padmaraga gems, whose large rays seemed to sprout like leaves.

**193.** His two full wrists, adorned with auspicious ornaments, were adorned with beautiful bracelets studded with gems, adding to their splendor.

**194.** His hips, adorned with a silken waist-band, appeared like the shore of a mountain adorned with the red line of twilight.

**195.** His fingers were adorned with excellent rings, made of gold and studded with various gems.

**196.** All this adornment was done by the gods out of devotion. For him, who was the ornament of the three worlds, what other adornment could be superior?

**197.** His body was smeared with sandalwood, and yellow spots of saffron were applied, making him appear as if golden lotuses were placed on a crystal surface.

**198.** A shawl, embroidered with flowers, was placed on his body, shining like a clear sky adorned with stars.

**199.** A large crown, made of the flowers of the Parijata and Santanaka trees, was placed on his head, attracting swarms of bees.

**200.** The middle of his eyebrows was adorned with fragrant sandalwood paste. He, who was the tilak of the three worlds, was adorned with beautiful gestures.

Page #96:
---------------------------
46
In the Padma Purana, the Lord, adorned with ornaments, the embellishment of the three worlds, was thus praised by the gods, led by Indra. ||201||
In this world devoid of Dharma, enveloped in the darkness of ignorance, you have risen like the sun for the noble beings who wander about. ||202||
With the pure rays of your words, like the moon of the Jinas, the noble beings, like the lotus, will now attain enlightenment. ||203||
O Lord, you are the great lamp that burns in this house of the world, born from the fire of perfect knowledge, for the purpose of the noble beings seeing the true nature of the soul and non-soul. ||204||
You are the sharp arrow born to destroy the enemy of sin. You are the one who will burn the forest of existence with the fire of meditation. ||205||
O Lord, you have risen like Garuda to subdue the great serpents of evil passions, and you are like the mighty wind that disperses the clouds of doubt. ||206||
The noble beings, like the chatakas, thirsty for the drops of the water of Dharma, look up to you, the Lord, the great treasure of nectar. ||207||
Salutations to you, whose pure fame is sung by the three worlds. Salutations to you, the tree adorned with the flowers of virtues, the giver of desired fruits. ||208||
Salutations to you, the sharp axe that cleaves the wood of karma. Salutations to you, who are always the thunderbolt that shatters the mountain of delusion. ||209||
Salutations to you, the water that quenches the fire of suffering, the sky that is free from the dust of attachment. ||210||
Thus, praising the Lord with proper rites and bowing down again and again, the gods, with joyful faces, placed him on the elephant and set out for Ayodhya. ||211||
Then, Indra, having placed the Jina child in the lap of his mother, the queen, performed the great celebration of joy and then went to his own abode with the other gods. ||212||
Then, the Lord was adorned with divine ornaments and anointed with fragrant perfumes that filled the air with delight. ||213||

Page #97:
---------------------------
Here is the translation of the provided text while retaining the Sanskrit words:

---

7  
In the third section, seeing her son sitting in her lap, the mother, Marudevi, was very pleased at that time. With her own shadow embraced and decorated by brilliance, she had covered the directions. (21) Embracing him, her heart overflowing with gentle touch and curiosity, she descended into the ocean of happiness. (215) Due to having obtained her son, she glowed like the newly risen sun illuminating the eastern direction. (216) Seeing her son adorned with divine ornaments and endowed with excellent beauty, she thought of him as her own supreme radiance connected with the wealth of the three worlds. (217) The mind of Rajanabhi, who had experienced the manifestation of happiness associated with the body of his son, melted, as the third part of his eyes closed in bliss. (218) The Jinendra, having attained prominence due to the worship performed by Indra, was given the name 'Rishabha' by his parents. (219) The mutual love between the parents, which had grown towards the child, Rishabha Deva, was concentrated at that time. (220) While drinking the nectar placed on the thumb of the Lord by Indra, he gradually attained physical growth. (221) Thereafter, together with the divine boys, similarly approved by Indra, the Lord began to play a flawless game that brought happiness to his parents. (222) Everything he owned, whether it be a seat, bed, vehicle, food, clothing, or the retinue of others, was received from Indra. (223) In a short time, he attained supreme growth. His chest became as broad and elevated as the Meru mountain. (224) His arms, resembling the wish-fulfilling trees for the entire world, took the form of pillars to confine the giants of hope. (225) His two shoulders held the application of beauty bestowed by himself, appearing as if two pillars had been erected to support the house of the three worlds. (226)

--- 

Please note that the translation is a compact rendition of the original Sanskrit, aimed at retaining the essence and structure of the text while presenting it in English.

Page #98:
---------------------------
In the Padma Purana,
He bore two things in his mouth, which were mutually opposed. He had conquered the moon by his radiance and the sun by his brilliance. ||227|| His hands, though soft as tender leaves, were of a reddish hue. They were capable of pulverizing all the mountains and defeating all the kings. ||228|| His hair was thick and glossy, and it looked as if a blue sapphire was placed on the peak of Mount Meru. ||229|| Though he was a righteous soul, he had stolen the eyes of all beings with his incomparable beauty. ||230|| At that time, all the Kalpa trees had perished, and the whole earth was adorned with spontaneously grown grains, without being sown or cultivated. ||231|| The people of that time were devoid of trade, commerce, and crafts. They had no concept of religion and were free from hypocrisy. ||232|| The food of the people was sugarcane juice, which was full of six flavors. It was self-cut and fell from the stalk, and it was capable of providing strength, vigor, and other qualities. ||233|| But due to the influence of time, it stopped flowing on its own. People did not know how to extract juice from sugarcane using machines. ||234|| Even though they saw the grains, they were ignorant of the method of processing them. They were tormented by hunger and were in great distress. ||235|| Then, they came together in great pain and sought refuge in the Lord of the Navel. They bowed down and praised him, saying: ||236|| "O Lord! The Kalpa trees, which sustained us, have all perished. We are tormented by hunger and have come to you for refuge. Please protect us." ||237|| "We see something growing on the earth, which is full of fruits. It may be fit for eating after being processed, but we do not know the method." ||238|| "This substance is coming out from the breasts of cows that roam freely. Is it edible or inedible? How should we consume it? Please tell us, O Lord." ||239||

Page #99:
---------------------------
The Third Chapter
49
Lions, tigers, and other animals were once suitable for embracing during play, but now they are intent on strife and terrify the people. ||24||
We see many beautiful and divine things in the sky, on land, and in water, but we do not know how we can be happy with them. ||241||
Therefore, O God, tell us the means to reform them, so that we may live happily, protected by your grace. ||242||
Thus addressed, Sannabhi, the king, whose heart was filled with compassion, spoke words that revealed the cause of the situation. ||243||
At the time of his birth, there was a shower of jewels for a long time, and the arrival of the gods caused turmoil in the world. ||244||
Let us go to the great and extraordinary Rishabhadeva and ask him the cause of life-giving sustenance. ||245||
There is no human being in this world like him. His soul is beyond all darkness of ignorance. ||246||
Thus spoken to, Sannabhi, along with his people, went to the presence of Rishabhadeva. Seeing his father, the god performed the appropriate rites. ||247||
Then, Sannabhi and Rishabhadeva sat on their respective seats. Then, the people, with prostrations, began to praise the god. ||248||
O Lord, your body, filled with all auspicious marks, is shining brightly, overwhelming the entire world with its brilliance. ||249||
Your extremely pure qualities, like the rays of the moon, bring joy and pervade the entire world. ||250||
We came to your father, carrying our tasks, but these are the qualities born of your knowledge that he speaks of. ||251||
You are a great being, a great soul, endowed with extraordinary qualities. Even a wise king like Sannabhi comes to you to seek certainty. ||252||
Therefore, you, being such, protect us who are afflicted by hunger, and tell us the means to overcome the fear of lions and other evil animals. ||253||
1. Sannabhi, K., M. | 2. -sten saakm te M. | 3. tatra M. |

Page #100:
---------------------------
50
Padmapurana
Then, Nabhinandan, whose heart was filled with compassion, ruled over his subjects, who, with folded hands, had fallen at his feet. ||254|| He taught his people hundreds of crafts, the planning of cities, the establishment of villages and settlements, and the construction of houses and other buildings. ||255|| Those men whom he appointed to protect the land were known in the world as Kshatriyas, because of their virtues. ||256|| Those who were engaged in trade, agriculture, cattle-raising, and other occupations were known in the world as Vaishyas. ||257|| Those who were engaged in low-caste work and who were far from the scriptures were called Shudras. They had many divisions, such as servants, slaves, etc. ||258|| This era, which brought happiness to all, was established by Lord Rishabhadeva. It was an era of prosperity, and so the people called it the Krita Yuga. ||259|| Lord Rishabhadeva had two wives, Sunanda and Nanda. From them were born his mighty sons, Bharat and others. ||260|| His hundred sons were all beautiful in their virtues and relationships. They adorned the earth, which was constantly filled with festivals. ||261|| As the Lord of the world, Nabhinandan, enjoyed his unparalleled wealth, a great deal of time passed. ||262|| Then, one day, while the celestial maiden, Neelanjana, was dancing, a thought arose in his mind, which was the cause of his detachment. ||263|| He thought, "Alas! These people of the world are striving to please others, and they are getting nothing but ridicule in return. Their actions are like the antics of madmen, and they are only causing themselves pain." ||264|| "What a strange world this is! Some are forced to become servants, while others, with arrogant words, give orders to them." ||265|| "Curse this world, where deluded beings create only suffering, and mistake it for happiness!" ||266|| "Therefore, I will abandon this perishable and artificial happiness, and strive to attain the happiness of the Siddhas." ||267|| As these thoughts were passing through his mind, the celestial beings came to him and spoke. ||268||

Page #101:
---------------------------
The third chapter, the virtuous Lord, is enlightened, the cause of the welfare of the three worlds. The path to liberation, which had been interrupted, is now open. ||269|| These beings are revolving in the great ocean of worldly suffering. They are not being reformed without a teacher. ||270|| Let the beings now walk the path shown by you. They will attain the position of the liberated beings, which is filled with eternal happiness and is at the forefront of the world. ||271|| Thus, the words spoken by the gods were repeated before the self-enlightened Lord, the great soul, Adi Nath. ||272|| As soon as the Lord decided to leave his home, the gods, led by Indra, arrived as before. ||273|| Arriving, all the gods praised the Lord with salutations and repeatedly said, "O Lord, you have made a very good decision." ||274|| 
Then, the Lord, mounted on a palanquin, which was adorned with a canopy of jewels that filled the directions, with beautiful fly whisks on either side, like the rays of the moon, shining with the reflection of a full moon, adorned with jeweled bells, half-moon shaped, decorated with banners of cloth, fragrant with divine garlands, adorned with pearl necklaces, beautiful to behold, resembling a celestial chariot, with small bells ringing, and on which Indra had placed his shoulder, made by divine sculptors, left his home. ||275-278|| Then, the space between the three worlds was filled with the sound of the instruments and the dancing gods. ||279|| Accompanied by the gods, filled with great splendor and devotion, the Lord reached the garden called Tilaka. ||280|| The Lord Vrishabhadeva went to that garden called Tilaka, away from the people, so that place became known as "Prajag." Or, the Lord performed a great sacrifice, or renunciation, at that place, so it became known as "Prayag." ||281|| Arriving there, the Lord asked permission from his parents and relatives to take initiation, and then said, "Namaha Siddhebhyah" - salutations to the Siddhas. ||282|| 
Here, the Lord's mind was engaged in good thoughts, when at that very moment, the celestial gods arrived and began to make the following request. ||268|| They said, "O Lord, the thought you have had to benefit the beings of the three worlds is very good. The path to liberation has been closed for a long time." ||269|| These beings are diving into the ocean of worldly suffering without a teacher. ||270|| At this time, the beings will walk the path shown by you and attain the position of the liberated beings, which is filled with eternal happiness and is at the forefront of the world. ||271||

Page #102:
---------------------------
Certainly! Here is the translation of the provided text into English while keeping the Sanskrit words intact:

---

In the Padma Purana,
The great sage, having given up his adornments and garments, uprooted his hair with five fingers.  (283)  
Then, King Indra placed those hair into a treasure chest and afterward cast them on his head in the ocean of milk. (284)  
Having established his glory for the purpose of Jain initiation, the divine beings and thoughtful humans departed as they had arrived. (285)  
Thousands of kings, who could not comprehend the Lord's intent, attained the state of nakedness driven solely by their devotion to their masters. (286)  
Then, after half a year, the Lord Vṛṣabhadeva remained steadfast in the practice of fasting like the Sumeru mountain. (287)  
His disheveled hair, blown by the wind, appeared like the smokey formations of karmic bondage burning in the fire of meditation. (288)  
Then, before six months had passed, the group of kings who had taken initiation together was defeated by the great warriors known as Parīṣhads. (289)  
Some of those kings fell to the ground, struck by the wind of suffering, while some, due to their strong vitality, sat on the earth. (290)  
Some, tormented by hunger, abandoned their fasting to eat fruits. Others, tortured by their bodies, entered cool water. (291)  
Some, breaking the bonds of righteousness, began to enter the caves of the mountains like maddened elephants, while others, regaining their senses, prepared to see Lord Jinendra. (292)  
Among all those kings, the son of Bharata, Mārīchi, was quite arrogant, and so he donned saffron robes and became an ascetic, along with many others wearing the bark garments. (293)  
When those kings, in the form of naked individuals, were about to collect fruits and other things, the invisible gods pronounced the following words in the sky: "O kings! Do not perform this action while being naked, for it will indeed become a source of great suffering for you." (294-295)  
Hearing the words of the deities, many individuals donned leaves of trees.  

---

This translation maintains the original structure and includes explanations where necessary for clarity.

Page #103:
---------------------------
Many people took to wearing tree bark, some covered themselves in leather, and some even put back on the clothes they had previously discarded. ||296||

Feeling ashamed of their nakedness, many people took to wearing kusha grass garments. Having thus donned leaves and such, they were all satiated by fruits and cool water. ||297||

Thereafter, all the kings who had fallen into bad ways gathered together and, without fear, began to consult with each other, having gone far away. ||298||

One of them addressed the other kings, saying, "Did the Lord say anything to any of you?" ||299||

The other kings replied, "He did not say anything to any of us." Hearing this, a king who desired pleasures said, "Then what is the point of staying here? Let us rise and go to our respective countries, and enjoy the happiness that comes from seeing the faces of our sons and wives." ||300-301||

Another one of them said, "Since we are in sorrow, we are ready to go. There is no task that we cannot do because of our sorrow. But we must remember that when Bharat sees us returning alone, without our master, he will be angry and will surely take our countries away from us." ||302-303||

"Or, when the Lord Rishabhadeva regains his kingdom and returns to rule after leaving the forest, how will we, without shame, look him in the face?" ||304||

"Therefore, let us stay here, eating fruits and such, and serving him, wandering about in happiness." ||305||

Now, the Lord Rishabhadeva was seated in a posture of meditation, when Nami and Vinami, eager to beg for boons, bowed down at his feet and stood there. ||306||

At that time, the king of the Naga serpents, Dharanendra, realized that Nami and Vinami were begging the Lord for boons, because he felt the seat tremble. Knowing this, he quickly arrived there. ||307||

Dharanendra, assuming the form of the Lord, gave Nami and Vinami two excellent vidyas. Having received those vidyas, they both immediately went to the Vijayardha mountain. ||308||

Ascending ten yojanas, they found there vidya-filled abodes, filled with various kinds of boons, equal to those of the Mogakshita, scattered throughout different countries and cities. ||309||

Page #104:
---------------------------
In the Padma Purana, ten yojanas above the Vijayadhar mountain, there are the abodes of the Vidyadharas. These abodes are filled with various countries and cities, and they appear like a land of enjoyment.  

Ten yojanas above the Vidyadharas' abodes, there are thousands of cities of the Gandharvas and Kinnaras. 

Five yojanas above that, the mountain is covered with the temples of the Arhats, and it appears like the mountain of Nandishvara. 

In those temples of the Arhats, there are always present the Muni Rajas, who are devoted to study, possess the wealth of the Charanas, and are supremely radiant. 

On the southern slope of the Vijayadhar mountain, there are fifty cities, starting with Rathanupura and ending with Sandhyabhra. On the northern slope, there are sixty cities, starting with Gaganavallabha. 

Each of these cities is superior to the next, filled with various countries and villages, crowded with monasteries, adorned with wide open spaces and courtyards, decorated with large gateways and balconies, embellished with golden walls and arches, filled with ponds and gardens, offering the enjoyment of heaven, filled with trees bearing all kinds of fruits that grow without being sown, filled with all kinds of medicinal herbs, and fulfilling the desires of all. 

Their earth always shines like a land of enjoyment. The springs there always flow with honey, milk, ghee, and other juices. The lakes there are filled with lotuses and adorned with swans and other birds. The steps of the ponds there are made of jewels and gold, and they are filled with water as clear and sweet as honey. They are covered with the pollen of lotuses. In the sheds there, there are herds and herds of Kamadhenu cows, whose radiance is like that of the full moon, whose hooves and horns are yellow like gold, and who are pleasing to the eyes. 

There are cows there whose dung and urine are fragrant and have the power to increase radiance and vitality like a tonic. What can be compared to their milk? 

In those cities, there are groups of queens with their sons, all of whom are dark like blue lotuses and radiant like lotuses.

Page #105:
---------------------------
## The Third Chapter

**32.** Rows of buffaloes with their calves, adorned with a reddish hue, roam freely. Mountains of grain, inexhaustible stores in granaries, palaces radiating brilliance, surrounded by pools and gardens.

**325.** Roads free of dust and thorns, offering comfort, shaded by great trees, and watering places filled with all kinds of flavors.

**326.** For four months, clouds with melodious voices, pleasing to the ears, shower nectar-like rain upon the land at the right time.

**327.** The winter season, devoid of icy winds, brings joy to those who enjoy its pleasantness. People are well-dressed, fulfilling their desires.

**328.** Even in the summer, the sun, as if hesitant, radiates a gentle warmth. It illuminates the lotus blooms, adorned with the brilliance of various gems.

**329.** All other seasons are also conducive to obtaining desired objects. The clear directions are free from mist and other impurities, shining brightly.

**330.** There is not a single place that lacks happiness. People constantly revel in their enjoyment, as if in a land of pleasure.

**331.** The women are delicate, adorned with all kinds of ornaments, skilled in understanding gestures, and possessors of fame, fortune, modesty, patience, and radiance.

**332.** Some have the radiance of a lotus bud, some the dark glow of a blue lotus, some the soft green of a shirisha flower, and some the yellow brilliance of lightning.

**333.** They are fragrant, as if created by the wind of Nandana, and adorned with beautiful flowers, as if born from the spring season.

**334.** Others, with bodies like moonstone, constantly fill the lakes with their radiant moonlight.

**335.** Their eyes are adorned with three colors - red, black, and white. They walk gracefully like swans, their breasts are full, their waists slender, and their movements resemble those of celestial beings.

Page #106:
---------------------------
In the Padma Purana, the men have faces like the moon, are valiant, have chests like lions, and long arms. They are capable of flying in the sky and possess excellent qualities, virtues, and actions. ||336|| They are always content with righteous conduct, have radiance like the gods, are beautiful like desire, and roam freely with women as they please. ||337|| Thus, these earth-dwelling gods, the Vidyadharas, with their minds attached to Vidya (knowledge) personified as women, enjoy their desired pleasures in the two beautiful ranges of the Vijayadha mountain, free from obstacles, as a result of their Dharma. ||338|| In this way, all beings attain their pleasures and possessions through Dharma. Therefore, O noble beings! Just as the sun destroys darkness in the sky, so too should you strive to attain one Dharma, destroying the darkness of ignorance within yourselves. ||339||

Thus ends the third chapter of the Padma Charita, known as the Vidyadhara Loka, narrated by the Acharya Ravishena. ||3||

Page #107:
---------------------------
## The Fourth Chapter

Thus, the Lord, the Dhyani, Shatakumbha Prabhu, the Master, was ready to perform the act of charity for the benefit of the world. ||1||

Free from all defects, he had embraced the vow of silence and, after completing the image-yoga for six months, the valiant Lord began to wander the earth. ||2||

The people saw the Lord wandering, his form towering, his body radiating light, as if a second sun were moving. ||3||

Wherever the Lord placed his feet, it seemed as if lotuses were blooming on the earth. ||4||

His shoulders were as high as Mount Meru, radiant, adorned with long, flowing locks of hair, and the Lord, with great care, looked down as he walked. ||5||

One day, while wandering, the Lord, who seemed like Mount Meru himself in his splendor, entered Hastinapur at midday. ||6||

Seeing the Lord, who shone like the midday sun, all the men and women of Hastinapur were struck with wonder and lost consciousness. ||7||

People brought him various colored clothes, different kinds of jewels, elephants, horses, chariots, and other vehicles. ||8||

Some men brought beautiful maidens, with faces like the full moon, eyes like lotuses, and adorned with graceful attire. ||9||

But these virtuous maidens were not pleasing to the Lord, and they, feeling rejected, cast away their ornaments and stood there, meditating on the Lord. ||10||

Then, the king, Shreyans, standing on the top of his palace, looked at the Lord with affection and remembered his past life. ||11||

Page #108:
---------------------------
In the Padma Purana, Nrisimha, surrounded by his inner palace friends, stood with folded hands, a lotus of praise and hymns. ||12|| The king, circumambulating him, shone like the sun revolving around the Meru mountain. ||13|| Then, with his hair, he cleansed the Lord's feet, washing them with tears of joy. ||14|| Offering a golden vessel, he performed the foot-washing ceremony, placing him in a pure place, according to the highest ritual. ||15|| Taking a cool drink of sugarcane juice from a pitcher, he performed the supreme Parana, his mind drawn to the Lord's virtues. ||16|| Then, the delighted gods, with a chorus of "Sadhu" and "Dhannya," filled the sky with the sound of drums. ||17|| The lords of the Pramathas, showering down five-colored flowers, exclaimed with joy, "Oh, what a gift! Oh, what a gift!" ||18|| The wind, fragrant and sweet, blew through the directions, while a stream of jewels poured down, filling the sky. ||19|| Thus, King Shreyans received divine honors that astonished the three worlds, while Emperor Bharat, filled with great joy, worshipped him. ||20|| Then, initiating the practice of the Panipatra Vrata, he, the conqueror of the senses, immersed himself in auspicious meditation. ||21|| From that pure meditation, his delusion vanished, and he attained Kevala Jnana, the knowledge that illuminates both the world and the beyond. ||22|| With this, a great halo of light arose, dispelling the distinction between night and day, its radiance illuminating all. ||23|| In that place, a magnificent Ashoka tree appeared, its trunk thick, adorned with jeweled flowers, and its leaves a vibrant red. ||24||

Page #109:
---------------------------
The sky was filled with fragrant flowers, attracting swarms of bees, falling in various forms.  Salutations to the one who traverses the realms of existence, adorned with the forms of the steadfast immortals. ||25||  Great drums resounded, their sound like the roar of a churning ocean, struck by the palm leaves of invisible gods. ||26||  Two Yakshas, their eyes like lotus buds, adorned with all ornaments, waved their white, moon-bright fly whisks at will. ||27||  A throne arose, resembling the peak of Mount Meru, a crown for the earth-goddess, eclipsing the sun with its radiance. ||28||  A triple umbrella emerged, a symbol of dominion over the three realms, adorned with strings of pearls, its brilliance like the pure glory of the Lord. ||29||  Only the Kevali, the Perfect One, can describe the beauty of the Lord seated on the throne amidst the assembly.  We, mere mortals, are incapable of such a task. ||30||  
*
Then, knowing of the Lord's attainment of Kevala Jnana, all the Indras, accompanied by their families, arrived swiftly to pay their respects. ||31||  First among them was the renowned Ganadhara, the Muni Raja, Vrishabhasena.  After him, other Muni Rajas, adorned with great dispassion, became Ganadharas. ||32||  When the Munis, Shravakas, and Devas were all seated in their respective places in the assembly, the Ganadhara urged the Lord to preach. ||33||  The Lord, silencing the sound of the divine drums with his own voice, spoke the following words, revealing the essence of truth. ||34||  He said, "In this entire three-world universe, for those seeking the welfare of all beings, Dharma is the ultimate refuge, and from it comes the highest happiness." ||35||  "All actions are undertaken for happiness, and happiness arises from Dharma.  Knowing this, O noble ones, strive to accumulate Dharma." ||36||  "Without clouds, how can there be rain?  Without seeds, how can there be crops?  Similarly, without Dharma, how can there be happiness for beings?" ||37||  "Just as a lame man desires to walk, a mute man desires to speak, and a blind man desires to see, so too, without Dharma, there is no happiness." ||38||

Page #110:
---------------------------
In the Padma Purana, it is said that there is nothing smaller than an atom and nothing bigger than the sky. Similarly, there is no friend greater than Dharma for embodied beings. (39)

When Dharma alone brings about worldly enjoyments, heaven, and the bliss of the liberated, what is the use of engaging in other activities? (40)

Those wise ones who serve Dharma, purified by non-violence, attain liberation. Others, however, go to the animal realm or lower realms. (41)

Even if those who have renounced the world, like swans, great swans, and wandering ascetics, attain higher realms through the power of their austerities, they still serve other gods as servants. (42)

Even after attaining the status of gods, they suffer the misery of hell due to their karmas and fall from heaven, returning to the animal realm in sorrow. (43)

Those who are endowed with right faith and have diligently studied the teachings of the Jinas, attain heaven and, upon falling from there, attain the supreme liberation by obtaining the three jewels. (44)

This Dharma is of two types: for householders and for monks. Those who believe in a third type of Dharma are burnt by the fire of delusion. (45)

Five Anuvratas, three Gunavratas, and four Shikshavrata constitute the Dharma for householders. (46)

Those householders who, at the time of death, renounce all beginnings, become detached from their bodies, and die with equanimity, attain a glorious destiny. (47)

Five Mahavratas, five Samitis, and three Guptis constitute the Dharma for monks. (48)

Those who are united with Dharma and are devoted to auspicious meditation, abandon this foul-smelling, repulsive body and attain heaven or liberation. (49)

Those who praise the great Brahmachari Digambara monks with devotion also attain Dharma. (50)

By the influence of that Dharma, they do not fall into evil destinies, but attain the three jewels, which liberate them from the bondage of karma. (51)

Thus, having heard this supreme Dharma spoken by the Lord of Gods, Lord Rishabhadeva, both gods and humans were filled with supreme joy. (52)

Just as a blind person desires to see, so too, it is to seek happiness without Dharma. (38)

Page #111:
---------------------------
## Fourth Chapter

Some attained Right Faith and embraced the householder's dharma, while others, following their own strength, adopted the life of an ascetic. ||53||

Then, ready to depart, the gods and demons bowed to the Jina, praised him, and adorned with dharma, went to their respective abodes. ||54||

Wherever the Omniscient went, by virtue of his power of movement, a hundred yojanas around became like heaven. ||55||

Wandering through many lands, the Jina, with the gift of the Three Jewels, liberated countless beings from the ocean of samsara. ||56||

He had eighty-four Ganadharas and eighty-four thousand virtuous, tapasvi Sadhus. ||57||

These Sadhus were of the purest mind, radiant like the sun and moon. Surrounded by them, the Jina wandered the earth. ||58||

The king, Bharat, son of Rishabhadeva, attained the fortune of a Chakravarti, and this land became known as Bharat Kshetra in the world. ||59||

Rishabhadeva had a hundred sons, each more radiant and brilliant than the last, who, embracing the ascetic vow, attained the supreme state. ||60||

Among them, Bharat Chakravarti was the firstborn, residing in the beautiful city of Ayodhya, served by a multitude of virtuous people. ||61||

He possessed nine inexhaustible treasures filled with precious gems, ninety thousand mines, three crore cows, one crore ploughs, eighty-four lakh noble elephants, eighteen crore horses swift as the wind, thirty-two thousand mighty kings, thirty-two thousand lands adorned with cities, fourteen jewels eternally protected by the gods, and ninety-six thousand women. It is impossible to describe his complete wealth. ||62-66||

In the city of Podanpur, Bharat's half-brother, King Bahubali, resided. He was immensely powerful and, driven by the ego, "Bharat and I are two sons of the same father," always opposed Bharat. ||67||

Page #112:
---------------------------
## Chapter 62 of the Padma Purana

62
Padma Purana
1

The first battle, filled with the din of elephants, chariots, and weapons, arose, causing great destruction. || 69 ||

Then, laughing, the mighty Bahubali said to Bharata, "What purpose is served by killing these innocent creatures? What do we gain from this?" || 70 ||

"If you have defeated me with your unwavering gaze, then I consider myself defeated. Let us engage in a battle of vision." || 71 ||

Bharata was defeated in the battle of vision, and then in the water battle and the battle of arms. Finally, Bharata hurled the Chakra Ratna to kill his brother. || 72 ||

But Bahubali was in his final body, and the Chakra Ratna was unable to kill him. It returned to Bharata, its mission unsuccessful. || 73 ||

Understanding the root of their conflict, the magnanimous Bahubali renounced all worldly desires. || 74 ||

He abandoned all possessions, stripped himself of his ornaments, and stood motionless like Mount Meru for a year, practicing the image yoga. || 75 ||

He was surrounded by many snakes that emerged from the burrows of the creepers, and by the vines of the Shyama plant. In this state, he attained Kevala Jnana. || 76 ||

When his lifespan ended, he attained the state of Shiva. He was the first to purify the path to liberation in this descending age. || 77 ||

Bharata ruled his kingdom, free from thorns, dividing the entire land of Bharata into six parts. || 78 ||

All the villages in his kingdom were like the cities of the Vidyadharas, filled with all kinds of pleasures. All the cities were like the heavenly realms, filled with the finest treasures. || 79 ||

The people in his kingdom were like the gods, always adorned, and they received whatever they desired in their minds. || 80 ||

The lands were like pleasure gardens, the kings were like the guardians of the world, and the women were like Apsaras, the abode of love. || 81 ||

Thus, the king of the earth, like Aakhandala in heaven, enjoyed the fruits of his good karma. || 82 ||

Page #113:
---------------------------
The fourth, Subhadra, a jewel of all sensual pleasures, shone brightly, protected by a thousand Yakshas with great effort. ||83||  Five hundred sons of his, by whom this land called Bharata was enjoyed by division, given by his father, free from thorns. ||84||  Then, thus spoken by the great Gautama, the Shrenika, curious, again spoke these words. ||85||  "O Bhagavan, you have told me the origin of the three varnas (Kshatriya, Vaishya, Shudra). Now I wish to know the origin of the Sutrakantas (Brahmanas). ||86||  They, desiring good karma, perform acts like killing of animals, etc., and carry a great pride, for the sake of attaining Dharma. ||87||  Therefore, you are worthy to speak of the origin of those of opposite tendencies. And also tell me how the people of these household Brahmanas become devotees." ||88||  Thus questioned, Ganesha, whose heart was embraced by the grace of women, and who had destroyed envy, spoke these words. ||89||  "O Shrenika, listen to this, how the origin of those of opposite tendencies, whose minds are bound by delusion, came about. ||90||  In the region near the city of Saketa, the first Jina, surrounded by gods, humans, and animals, once resided. ||91||  Knowing him, Bharata was pleased, and having prepared excellent food for the sake of the ascetics, he went to the Jina. ||92||  Prostrating to the Jina with devotion, and to all the Digambaras, placing both hands on the ground, he spoke these words. ||93||  "O Bhagavans, I request you to be pleased with me, and accept this excellent alms prepared by me." ||94||  On hearing this, the Bhagavan said, "O Bharata, this is not suitable. Such alms, prepared for the sake of the ascetics, are not suitable for them." ||95||

Page #114:
---------------------------
64
Padmapurana
These are free from greed, having conquered their senses, enemies. They are great in virtue, having observed fasts for many months. ||96|| They stand in silence, free from fault. They eat for the sake of preserving life, for life is the cause of Dharma. ||97|| They practice Dharma for the sake of liberation, where there is no suffering for any beings. They desire the well-being of all beings. ||98|| Hearing these words, the king pondered for a long time. "Oh, what a great hardship this vow of the Jains is!" ||99|| The sages dwell there, free from desire even in their own bodies. They are steadfast, wearing the form of the sky, compassionate to all beings. ||100|| Now I will feed these who have taken refuge in the vow of the house-holder. I will mark them with a golden thread, with great devotion. ||101|| I will give them other gifts as well, out of devotion. The Dharma that they have embraced is a younger brother of the Dharma of the monks. ||102|| Then he sent his trusted men with great speed to invite all the right-seeing people on earth. ||103|| A great commotion arose throughout the land. People said, "Oh, people! King Bharata is eager to make a great gift." ||104|| "Therefore, rise up, let us go, bring clothes, jewels, and other wealth. See, these servants have been sent by him with respect." ||105|| Hearing this, some of them said, "This Bharata only honors his own right-seeing people, so it is useless for us to go there." ||106|| Hearing this, the right-seeing people, filled with great joy, went to Bharata with their wives and children, and stood with humility. ||107|| The wrong-seeing people also came, driven by greed for wealth, pretending to be right-seeing, to the palace of King Bharata, which resembled the palace of Indra. ||108|| King Bharata had the courtyard of his palace decorated with sprouts of rice, green gram, black gram, etc., and honored all the right-seeing people with these decorations. ||109||

Page #115:
---------------------------
### Fourth Chapter

Chaturtha Parva

The house was entered by that one marked with the beautiful golden thread, adorned with countless gems. Those afflicted with delusion and desire, agitated by contemplation, were speaking pitiable words and were plunged into the ocean of suffering. 

Then, as desired, the king Bharat gave donations to those Śrāvakas. In the hearts of those who received the honor, a sense of ego arose, and they began to think, "We are indeed great purifiers and the benefactors of the world; that is why the king of kings Bharat worships us with great reverence." 

Consequently, filled with this pride, they spread across the entire surface of the earth and began to beg when they saw some wealthy individuals. Later, on a certain day, the minister Matismudra said to king Bharat, "Today I have heard the following words in the assembly of the Lord." 

It was said that what Bharat had created for these Brāhmaṇas would become hypocritical and very audacious in the impending age of Kali following the rise of the flourishing Tīrthankara. 

Those deluded by the essence of Dharma would kill living beings, filled with great passion and ever eager to commit sins. They would proclaim the false scriptures, the Vedas, as devoid of their creators, misleading all beings. 

Engaged in great endeavours, they would accept donations and would always slander the teachings of Lord Jinendra. 

Seeing the naked Munis ahead, the sinners would become filled with anger and would be like the seedlings of a poisonous tree, harmful to the world, constantly producing misfortune. 

Hearing the words of Minister Matismudra, Bharat, angered, prepared to kill all those Brāhmaṇas. Subsequently, they, frightened, sought refuge with Lord Ṛṣabhadeva. 

Lord Ṛṣabhadeva, saying, "O son! Do not harm them (ma hananam kār̥ṣīḥ)," protected them, and henceforth they became known by the title 'Māhana.' 

Since these Brāhmaṇas, who had taken refuge in Lord Jinendra, were protected by him, the gods and the wise revered the Lord.

Page #116:
---------------------------
The kings who followed the path of the Lord, having fallen from their kingdom, established different vows according to their own intellect. ||12|| Their disciples and grand-disciples, intoxicated with pride, misled the world with false arguments and created many false scriptures. ||125|| Bhrigu, Angishiras, Agni, Kapila, Atri, and Vid, along with many others, became ascetics, wearing bark due to ignorance. ||126|| Seeing women, their minds became polluted, and they saw lust in their genitals. Therefore, those low, deluded beings covered their genitals with a loincloth. ||127|| The Brahmanas, who were created by the Chakravarti Bharat like seeds, with the sacred thread (Yajnopaveet) around their necks, have now spread throughout the earth like progeny. ||128|| Gautama Ganadhar says to King Shrenik, "O King! I have told you about the creation of the Brahmanas as per the context. Now listen attentively as I tell you the main point." ||129|| Lord Rishabhdev, having liberated countless beings from the ocean of existence, attained liberation on the peak of Mount Kailash. ||130|| After that, Chakravarti Bharat, abandoning his kingdom, which was a cause of wonder for the world, like a blade of grass, also attained initiation. ||131|| O Shrenik! I have briefly explained to you the authority of the state. Now, listen respectfully as I tell you about the authority of the lineage, O noble man. ||132|| Thus ends the fourth chapter of the Padmacharita, composed by Acharya Ravishena, known as the Arsha-nama, which describes the greatness of Rishabhdev. ||4||
1. Naradhipas: Kh. | 2. -Muttir: K. |

Page #117:
---------------------------
## The Fifth Chapter

In this world, four great dynasties are renowned. These dynasties have many branches, all intertwined with secrets. ||1||

The first of these is the Ikshvaku dynasty, the most exalted and an ornament to the world. The second is the Rishi dynasty, or the Chandra dynasty, as pure as the rays of the moon. ||2||

The third is the dynasty of the Vidyaadharas, extremely beautiful. The fourth is the Hari dynasty, known throughout the world. ||3||

In the Ikshvaku dynasty, Lord Rishabhadeva was born. His son was Bharata, and his son was Alankirti, a great and powerful king. Since the sun is called Arka, this dynasty came to be known as the Surya dynasty. Alankirti had a son named Sitayasha, who had a son named Balank. Balank had a son named Subal, Subal had a son named Mahabal, Mahabal had a son named Atibal, Atibal had a son named Amrita, Amrita had a son named Subhadra, Subhadra had a son named Sagar, Sagar had a son named Bhadra, Bhadra had a son named Raviteja, Raviteja had a son named Shashi, Shashi had a son named Prabhutateja, Prabhutateja had a son named Tejasvi, Tejasvi had a son named Tapana, Tapana had a son named Ativirya, Ativirya had a son named Suvirya, Suvirya had a son named Uditparakrama, Uditparakrama had a son named Mahendravikrama, Mahendravikrama had a son named Surya, Surya had a son named Indradhyumna, Indradhyumna had a son named Mahendrajit, Mahendrajit had a son named Prabhu, Prabhu had a son named Vibhu, Vibhu had a son named Avidhwansa, Avidhwansa had a son named Vitabhi, Vitabhi had a son named Vrishabhadhwaja, Vrishabhadhwaja had a son named Garudanka, and Garudanka had a son named Mriganka. In this way, many other kings were born in this dynasty. All of them were afraid of the world, so they entrusted their kingdoms to their sons and renounced their bodies, becoming free from attachment and embracing the Nirgrantha vow. ||4-9||

O King! I have described the Surya dynasty to you in detail. Now, the origin of the Soma dynasty, or the Chandra dynasty, is being told. ||10||

Lord Rishabhadeva had a son named Bahubali from his second queen. Bahubali had a beautiful son named Somayesha. Since Soma is the name of the moon, the lineage of Somayesha came to be known as the Soma dynasty, or the Chandra dynasty. Somayesha had a son named Mahabal, Mahabal had a son named Subal, and Subal had a son named Bhujabali. These were the first kings of this dynasty. ||11-12||

Those born in the Shashi dynasty, following the path of the white-clad ones, experienced renunciation and quickly attained the highest state. ||13||

Page #118:
---------------------------
## The Padma Purana

**Chapter 14:**

Some, with little karma remaining, enjoy the fruits of their austerities, becoming gods in heaven, and from there, soon attain liberation.

**Chapter 15:**

O King! I have told you about the Soma dynasty. Now, I will briefly describe the dynasty of the Vidyadharas.

**Chapter 16-21:**

Nami, the king of the Vidyadharas, had a son named Ratnamali. Ratnamali had a son named Ratnavajra, Ratnavajra had a son named Ratnaratha, Ratnaratha had a son named Ratnacitra, Ratnacitra had a son named Chandraratha, Chandraratha had a son named Vajrajangha, Vajrajangha had a son named Vajrasena, Vajrasena had a son named Vajradamstra, Vajradamstra had a son named Vajradhvaja, Vajradhvaja had a son named Vajrayudha, Vajrayudha had a son named Vajra, Vajra had a son named Suvajra, Suvajra had a son named Vajrabhrit, Vajrabhrit had a son named Vajrabha, Vajrabha had a son named Vajraबाहु, Vajraबाहु had a son named Vajrasanjna, Vajrasanjna had a son named Vajrasya, Vajrasya had a son named Vajrapani, Vajrapani had a son named Vajrajatu, Vajrajatu had a son named Vajravan, Vajravan had a son named Vidyumukha, Vidyumukha had a son named Suvaktra, Suvaktra had a son named Vidyudamstra, Vidyudamstra had a son named Vidyutvan, Vidyutvan had a son named Vidyudabha, Vidyudabha had a son named Vidyudvega, and Vidyudvega had a son named Vaidjuta.

These, and many other valiant kings of the Vidyadharas, ruled for a long time, each attaining a place according to their deeds.

**Chapter 22-24:**

Some of them, after handing over their kingdoms to their sons, embraced the Jain initiation, renounced hatred and attachment, and attained liberation. Some, unable to destroy all karmic bonds, enjoyed the pleasures of the gods, who appear by mere thought. Some, bound by the heavy chains of attachment, perished in the same karmic snare, like deer caught in a net.

**Chapter 25-27:**

Then, in this dynasty of Vidyadharas, there was a king named Vidyudrdha, who was the master of both categories (of Vidyadharas), endowed with great knowledge and immense power. Once, while flying in his aerial chariot, he saw Sanjaya, the liberated sage, in the Videha region. Sanjaya was absorbed in meditation, his body as motionless as a mountain. Vidyudrdha brought the sage to the mountain called Panchagiri and said to his learned followers, "Kill him!"

Page #119:
---------------------------
## The Fifth Chapter

The yogi, being struck by the Vidyaadharas with stones and other things, remained equanimous, his mind not even slightly disturbed. ||28||

Then, while enduring this unbearable torment, the great sage Sanjayanta attained the supreme knowledge, illuminating all things. ||29||

At that time, Dharanendra, the sage's brother from a previous life, arrived. He took away all the Vidyaadharas' knowledge, leaving them devoid of it and attaining complete peace. ||30||

Then, filled with sorrow at the loss of their knowledge, they humbly folded their hands and asked Dharanendra, "How can we regain our knowledge?" Dharanendra replied, "You can regain your knowledge by enduring the hardships of penance at the feet of Sanjayanta Muni. However, if you commit any wrong deeds, even if you attain knowledge, it will be lost again. If you go above the temple of the Arhat's image and the saints, even by mistake, your knowledge will be lost instantly." ||31-33||

Following Dharanendra's instructions, the Vidyaadharas performed penance at the feet of Sanjayanta Muni and regained their knowledge. ||31-33||

After all this, Dharanendra, out of curiosity, asked Sanjayanta Muni, "O Bhagavan! Why did the Vidyaadharas behave in such a way towards you? Why did they take you away and why did they torment you?" ||34||

Hearing Dharanendra's question, Bhagavan Sanjayanta Kevali said, "While wandering in this world of four gatis, I was once a merchant named Hitakar in a village called Shakat. I was very sweet-spoken, compassionate, honest in nature, and devoted to the service of the saints." ||35-36||

"Later, I became King Shrivardhan in the city of Kumudavati, dedicated to upholding righteousness." ||37||

"In the same village, there lived a Brahmin who practiced wrong penance and became a Kudev. He was expelled from there and became my, Shrivardhan's, minister named Vahnishik. Although he was known as a truth-speaker, he was very wicked and secretly engaged in wrong deeds." ||38-39||

"Once, this minister..." ||40||

Page #120:
---------------------------
In the Padma Purana, that merchant, by giving him knowledge, went to his house as a slave. He brought the jewels to the merchant, who was suffering. ||4|| Then, taking all his possessions, the wicked Brahmin was expelled from the city. He was poor and performed great austerities. ||42|| After dying, he became a god in the Maheindra heaven, and from there he was cast down. He is the king of the Vidyadharas, named Vidyudridha, with a strong voice. ||43|| My soul, Srivardhana, also died after performing austerities and became a god in heaven. From there, I was cast down to the Videha region and became Sanjayanta. ||44|| Due to the influence of that previous sin, this Vidyadhara, seeing me, became enraged and fainted. He has done this transgression, being under the control of his karma. ||45|| That merchant named Niyamadutta, after performing austerities, was born as you, the king of the Nagakumaras, with a noble mind. ||46|| Then, Vidyudridha had a son named Dridharatha. Vidyudridha left his kingdom to him and went to heaven after performing austerities. ||47|| From Dridharatha came Ashvadharma, from Ashvadharma came Ashvayur, from Ashvayur came Ashvadhwaja, from Ashvadhwaja came Padmanibha, from Padmanibha came Padmamali, from Padmamali came Padmaratha, from Padmaratha came Singhaayana, from Singhaayana came Mrigodharma, from Mrigodharma came Singhasaprabhu, from Singhasaprabhu came Singhketu, from Singhketu came Shashankamukha, from Shashankamukha came Chandra, from Chandra came Chandrashekhara, from Chandrashekhara came Indra, from Indra came Chandraratha, from Chandraratha came Chakradharma, from Chakradharma came Chakraayudha, from Chakraayudha came Chakradhwaja, from Chakradhwaja came Manigriva, from Manigriva came Manyanka, from Manyanka came Manibhasura, from Manibhasura came Manisyandana, from Manisyandana came Manyasyau, from Manyasyau came Bimbostha, from Bimbostha came Lambitadhara, from Lambitadhara came Raktosta, from Raktosta came Harichandra, from Harichandra came Puschandra, from Puschandra came Purnachandra, from Purnachandra came Balendu, from Balendu came Chandrachuda, from Chandrachuda came Vyomeendu, from Vyomeendu came Udupalana, from Udupalana came Ekachuda, from Ekachuda came Dwichuda, from Dwichuda came Trichuda, from Trichuda came Vajrachuda, from Vajrachuda came Bhurichuda, from Bhurichuda came Arkachuda, from Arkachuda came Vahnijati, from Vahnijati came Vahniteja. In this way, many others also perished in time. ||54|| The merchant named Niyamadutta hid his wealth and then won the queen's ring by gambling with her. ||40|| The queen's maid took the ring to the priest's house and showed it to his wife, who gave her jewels in exchange. The queen returned those jewels to the merchant Niyamadutta, who was very sad. Then, I took away all the wealth of that wicked Brahmin and expelled him from the city. That poor Brahmin became wise and performed excellent austerities. ||41-42|| Finally, after dying, he became a god in the Maheindra heaven, and from there he was cast down. He is the king of the Vidyadharas, named Vidyudridha. ||43|| My soul, Srivardhana, also died after performing austerities and became a god in heaven. From there, I was cast down to the Videha region and became Sanjayanta. ||44|| Due to the influence of that previous sin, this Vidyadhara, seeing me, became enraged and fainted. He has done this transgression, being under the control of his karma. ||45|| That merchant named Niyamadutta, after performing austerities, was born as you, the king of the Nagakumaras, with a noble mind. ||46|| Then, Vidyudridha had a son named Dridharatha. Vidyudridha left his kingdom to him and went to heaven after performing austerities. ||47|| From Dridharatha came Ashvadharma, from Ashvadharma came Ashvayur, from Ashvayur came Ashvadhwaja, from Ashvadhwaja came Padmanibha, from Padmanibha came Padmamali, from Padmamali came Padmaratha, from Padmaratha came Singhaayana, from Singhaayana came Mrigodharma, from Mrigodharma came Singhasaprabhu, from Singhasaprabhu came Singhketu, from Singhketu came Shashankamukha, from Shashankamukha came Chandra, from Chandra came Chandrashekhara, from Chandrashekhara came Indra, from Indra came Chandraratha, from Chandraratha came Chakradharma, from Chakradharma came Chakraayudha, from Chakraayudha came Chakradhwaja, from Chakradhwaja came Manigriva, from Manigriva came Manyanka, from Manyanka came Manibhasura, from Manibhasura came Manisyandana, from Manisyandana came Manyasyau, from Manyasyau came Bimbostha, from Bimbostha came Lambitadhara, from Lambitadhara came Raktosta, from Raktosta came Harichandra, from Harichandra came Puschandra, from Puschandra came Purnachandra, from Purnachandra came Balendu, from Balendu came Chandrachuda, from Chandrachuda came Vyomeendu, from Vyomeendu came Udupalana, from Udupalana came Ekachuda, from Ekachuda came Dwichuda, from Dwichuda came Trichuda, from Trichuda came Vajrachuda, from Vajrachuda came Bhurichuda, from Bhurichuda came Arkachuda, from Arkachuda came Vahnijati, from Vahnijati came Vahniteja. In this way, many others also perished in time. ||54||

Page #121:
---------------------------
The fifth festival was celebrated, and some of them, having bestowed their wealth on their sons, attained the state of liberation after having destroyed their karmas. ||55|| Thus, O King, this lineage of the Vidyadharas has been described. Now, the avatar of the second Yuga is being described. ||56|| At the end of the Yuga of the Lord Rishabhadeva, the ancient noble qualities on this earth became degraded, the people's interest in the activities of the other world became slack, and their supreme intellect became engrossed in the pursuit of pleasure and wealth. ||57-58|| Then, when the kings born in the Ikshvaku dynasty had passed away in due course, a king named Dharanidhara was born in the city of Ayodhya. He had a son named Tridashanjay, who was a renowned holder of Lakshmi, born to his queen, Sri Devi. His wife's name was Indurekha, and they had a son named Jitashatru. ||59-60|| In the city of Podanpur, there lived a king named Vyananda, who had a daughter named Vijaya, born to his queen, Ambhojamala. King Tridashanjay arranged the marriage of Jitashatru with Vijaya, and then he renounced the world and attained liberation on Mount Kailasa through penance. ||61-62|| Then, according to the previous decree, Lord Ajitanatha was born to them. Indra and the other gods performed the abhisheka and other ceremonies just as they had done for Lord Rishabhadeva. ||63|| Since his father had conquered all his enemies at the time of his birth, he became known as 'Ajita' on earth. ||64|| Lord Ajitanatha had many queens, including Sunayana, Nanda, and others. All of them were so beautiful that even Indrani could not match their beauty. ||65|| Once, Lord Ajita went to a beautiful garden with his inner court. In the morning, he saw a large forest of blooming lotuses. ||66|| When he saw the same forest shrinking as the sun was about to set, he realized the impermanence of Lakshmi and attained supreme detachment. ||67|| Then, after asking his father, mother, and brothers, he renounced the world according to the previous decree. ||68||

Page #122:
---------------------------
In the Padma Purana, ten thousand Kshatriyas, along with their kingdoms, families, and possessions, renounced the world and took the vows. ||69|| Brahmadatta, the king of Ayodhya, offered a **Parana** (a meal after a fast) to the Lord, who had observed a three-day fast. ||70|| After fourteen years, he attained **Kevalgyan** (omniscience) and became an **Arhant** (a liberated soul), revered by the entire world. ||71|| Just as Lord Rishabhdeva had manifested thirty-four **Atishayas** (miraculous powers) and eight **Pratiharayas** (miracles), so too did this Lord. ||72|| Ninety **Ganadharas** (disciples) resided at his feet, and one hundred thousand **Sadhus** (ascetics) shone like the sun. ||73|| Jitashatru had a younger brother named Vijay Sagar, whose wife was Sumangala. They had a son named Sagar. ||74|| This Sagar, with his auspicious form, became the second **Chakravarti** (universal monarch) and gained immense fame throughout the world due to the nine **Nidhanas** (treasures). ||75|| O Shrenik, listen to the story that unfolded during his reign. In the southern region of the Bharat Kshetra, there was a city called Chakravala. ||76|| In this city, there lived a king of the **Vidyadharas** (celestial beings) named Purnnaghana. He was endowed with great power and excelled in knowledge. He requested the hand of the daughter of Vihayastilka, the king of the city of Vihayastilka. However, Vihayastilka, following the advice of a **Nimittgyani** (a wise person who interprets omens), gave his daughter to Sagar Chakravarti instead. ||77-78|| Meanwhile, a fierce battle raged between King Vihayastilka and Purnnaghana. During this time, Vihayastilka's son, Sahasranayan, fled with his sister. ||79|| After defeating Vihayastilka, Purnnaghana entered the city but could not find the princess. He then returned to his own city. ||80|| Upon hearing of his father's death, Sahasranayan, filled with rage, was unable to do anything due to his weakness. He lived in a forest infested with ferocious animals like Ashtapada, constantly watching for Purnnaghana. ||81|| A magical horse carried Sagar Chakravarti to the same forest where Sahasranayan resided. By chance, Sahasranayan's sister, Utpalmati, saw the Chakravarti and informed her brother. ||82|| Sahasranayan was overjoyed to hear this news and, with his sister's help, was brought before the Chakravarti. ||83||

Page #123:
---------------------------
The Pkarma Parva

The king Sagara, the ruler of six continents, was greatly pleased after obtaining the woman (Sthrirathna).  He was obeyed by all the kings. ||8||  After obtaining the Vidyaadharas, Sahasranayan surrounded the city of Poornadhan with a fortress like wall. ||45||  Then a great war broke out, resulting in the destruction of many people. Sahasranayan killed Poornamegh. ||86||  The son of Poornadhan, named Toyadavaahan, was exiled from the city of Chakravaala by his enemies and wandered in the sky. ||7||  He was pursued by many angry Kshecharas.  He was very distressed and sought refuge in Ajitanath, the cause of happiness for the three worlds. ||48||  Then Vajradhara asked him the reason for his fear.  Sagara reached the ocean and said that his relatives had been killed. ||89||  There was a feud between our fathers, which resulted in the destruction of many lives.  Due to the influence of that karma, Sahasranayan, with a cruel heart, ||10||  has been harassing me with the power of Sagara Chakravarti.  I have quickly come here from the palace, flying with the swans. ||11||  Then the kings who were pursuing Meghavaahan told Sahasranayan that he was near Ajitanath and they could not capture him.  Hearing this, Sahasranayan, filled with anger, went himself and thought to himself, "Who else is stronger than me who can protect him?"  Thinking this, he reached the Samavasaran of the Jina. ||12-13||  As soon as he saw the halo of the Jina from afar, all his pride was shattered.  He abandoned all his arrogance and bowed to the great Ajitanath. ||14||  Both Sahasranayan and Meghavaahan, abandoning their enmity, stood near the feet of the Jina.  Then the Ganadhara asked the Jina about the history of their fathers.  The Jina said, ||15||
"In the Jambudvipa, in the Bharat Kshetra, there was a city called Sadrutu.  There lived a merchant named Bhavan.  He had a wife named Aataki and a son named Haridas.  Although Bhavan was very wealthy, he was very troubled. ||16||

Page #124:
---------------------------
74
Padma Purana
Bhakiityaṅganā tasya haridāsaśca tatsutāḥ | Catur koṭīśvaro bhūtvā yātrodyuktaḥ sa bhāvanaḥ || 97 || Putrāya sakalaṁ dravyaṁ nyāsatvena samarpayan | Dyūtādivarjanārthaṁ ca śikṣām asmai dadau param || 98 || Sahetu sarvadoṣebhya upadīśya nivartanam | Putrāya vāṇijo yātaḥ potena dhanatṛṣṇayā || 99 || Upacāreṇa veśyāyāṁ āsaktyā dyūtamaṇḍale | Surāyāṁ abhimānena catur koṭyo 'pi nāśitāḥ || 100 || Yadasau nirjito ca te tadā rājño gṛhaṁ gataḥ | Haridāso durācāro draviṇārthaṁ surangayā || 101 || Ānīyāsa u tato dravyaṁ kriyāḥ sarvāśca kāra saḥ | Sa bhāvano 'nyadā gehabhāyāto ne kṣate sutam || 102 || Haridāso gataḥ kveti tena pṛṣṭā kuṭumbinī | Sāvocad anayā yātaś caurȳāthaṁ ca suranganyā || 103 || Tato 'sau tasya maraṇaṁ śaṅkamānaḥ surangayā | Prasthitaś cauryaśāntyārthaṁ gṛhābhyantara dattayā || 104 || Āgacchatā ca putrēṇa ko 'pi vairī mamety asau | Maṇḍalāgreṇa pāpena varāko vinipātitaḥ || 105 || Vijñāto 'sau tatas tena nakhaśmaśrusatādi bhiḥ | Spṛṣṭvā mama pitety eṣa prāpto duḥkhaṁ ca duḥsaham || 106 || Janakasyato mṛtyuṁ kṛtvāsa u bhayavidrutaḥ | Paryatan duḥkhato deśān yātaḥ kālena pañcatām || 107 || Atment śṛgālāu ca vṛṣadaṁśau vṛṣau tathā | Nakulāu mahiṣāvetāu jātau ca vṛṣabhau punaḥ || 108 || Anyo 'nyasya tato ghātaṁ kṛtvā tau bhavasaṅkaṭe | Videhe puṣkalāvasyāṁ manuşyatvam upāgatau || 109 || Ugraṁ kṛtvā tapas tasmin nuttarānuttara āhvayau | Gatvā satārām āyātau janakau bhavator imau || 110 || Aisi bhāvananāmāsi jāto 'sau pūrṇatoyadaḥ | Āsīt tasya tu yaḥ putraḥ saṁjātaḥ sa sulocaṇaḥ || 111 ||

Page #125:
---------------------------
The Fifth Chapter

Knowing thus the suffering of their fathers, they (Sahastra-nayan and Meghavahan) abandoned the enmity, the cause of worldly existence, which had been aroused in them. ||112||

Then the Chakravarti asked them about the cause of their enmity in their previous birth. The Lord, the master of the Dharmachakra, explained the cause of their enmity as follows. ||113||

He said that in the city of Padmaka, in the Bharat Kshetra of Jambudvipa, there lived a famous man named Rambha, who was a scholar of Sankhya Shastra and very wealthy. ||114||

He had two disciples, Chandra and Avalli, who were both very famous, wealthy, and virtuous, and were united in friendship. ||115||

Rambha, who was skilled in the science of politics, thought that if these two remained united, his position would be threatened, so he created a rift between them. ||116||

One day, Chandra wanted to buy a cow and went to the Gopalaka to negotiate the price. He was on his way home when, by chance, he met Avalli, who was also coming from the village after buying the same cow. In a fit of anger, Chandra killed him. Avalli died and became a Mlechchha. ||117-118||

Chandra died and became a bull, and the Mlechchha, due to the bond of enmity, killed him and ate him. ||119||

The Mlechchha, being a Tiryanchnaraka, was born as a rat. Chandra, who had become a bull, was reborn as a cat, and the cat killed and ate the rat. ||120||

Due to their evil deeds, both were born in hell, where they suffered great pain in the ocean of existence. ||121||

After being released from hell, they were born in Kashi as the sons of a slave woman named Sambhramadevi. Their names were Kutta and Karpatika. They were both slaves and worked as servants. Sambhramadevi appointed them to the Jina temple. After their death, due to their good deeds, they were reborn as Vyantara Devas named Rupananada and Surupa. ||122-123||

Rupananada was the soul of Chandra and Surupa was the soul of Avalli. Rupananada was born as a son of a noble family named Kulandhara in the city of Rajoavali, and Surupa was born as the son of a priest named Pushpabhuti. ||124||

Page #126:
---------------------------
76
Padmapurana
Although Kulandhara and Pushpabhuti were both friends, they became enemies because of a cart driver. As a result, Kulandhara was determined to kill Pushpabhuti. || 125 || On the way, he met a Muni Raja seated under a tree and became peaceful after listening to Dharma from him. The king tested him and made him a Mandaleshwar due to the influence of punya. || 126 || Pushpabhuti saw that Kulandhara had attained wealth through the influence of Dharma, so he also became a Jain and died, becoming a deva in the third heaven. || 127 || Kulandhara also became a deva in the same third heaven. Both of them fell and were born as sons of Arija and Jayavati in the Dhaatki Khand island, in the western Videha region. One was named Kruramara and the other Dhanshrusti. Both these brothers were very brave and famous servants, trusted by the king Sahasrashirsha. || 128 - 129 || One day, King Sahasrashirsha went to the forest with both his servants to catch an elephant. There, he saw lions and deer, who were naturally enemies, loving each other. || 130 || "Why are these violent creatures peaceful?" Wondering this, as soon as King Sahasrashirsha entered the great forest, his eyes fell upon the great Muni Kevali Bhagwan. || 131 || After that, King Sahasrashirsha, along with both his servants, took initiation from Kevali Bhagwan. As a result, the king attained moksha, and Kruramara and Dhanshrusti went to the Shatar heaven. || 132 || Of these, the Chandra jiva Kruramara became Meghavahana after falling from heaven, and the Avali jiva Dhanshrusti became Sahasranayana. Thus, there is enmity between them due to their previous birth. || 133 ||
After that, Sagar Chakravarti asked Bhagwan, "O Prabhu! Why do I have more affection for Sahasranayana?" In reply, Bhagwan said, "The one named Rambha, who was a scholar of Ganit Shastra, became an Arya in the deva kul due to feeding the Munis. Then he went to the Saudharma heaven, and from there, he fell and was born as a beloved son named Vratakirtan of King Hari and Queen Dhara in the Chandrapur city. He attained the Muni pad and went to heaven, and from there, he fell and was born as a son named Payobal of King Mahaghoosha and Queen Chandrini in the Ratna Sanchay city of the western Videha region. He became a Muni
1. Sthiti M., Sthita K. 2. Jayavati M, Jayavati K. 3. Shuchishruti K. 4. Anyadesha M., Anyada + Isha iti padchheda.

Page #127:
---------------------------
## The Fifth Chapter

Having fallen from the fourteenth heaven called Pranata, he was born as Jayakirtana, the son of King Yashodhara and Queen Jaya in the city of Prithvipura in the Bharat Kshetra. || 138 ||

He took initiation from his father and was born in the Vijay Vimana, and from there he fell and became the Chakravarti Sagra. || 139 ||

When you were Rambha, you had great affection for Avali. Now Avali has become Sahasranayan. Therefore, due to past karma, you still have a strong affection for him. || 140 ||

Thus, both Meghavahana and Sahasraksha, having learned about their past lives from the mouth of the Jina, developed a great interest in Dharma. || 141 ||

Due to that religious interest, both of them remembered their past lives. Then, filled with faith, Meghavahana and Sahasranayan began to praise the Jina, Ajitanatha, in this way: || 142 ||

"O Bhagavan! You, without any reason, do good to those worldly beings who are devoid of intelligence and have no protector. What greater wonder can there be than this?" || 143 ||

"Your form is beyond comparison, and you are the possessor of immeasurable strength. O Lord! In these three worlds, who is there who has been satisfied by seeing you?" || 144 ||

"O Bhagavan! Although you have attained all that is attainable, are accomplished, all-seeing, blissful, inconceivable, and have known all that is knowable, yet you are still engaged in the welfare of the world." || 145 ||

"O Supreme Jina! You are the giver of the hand of support to the beings who are falling into the abyss of existence, in the form of the teachings of the essence of Dharma." || 146 ||

Thus, Meghavahana and Sahasranayan, whose speech was choked with emotion and whose eyes were filled with tears, having attained supreme joy, bowed down and sat in their respective places. || 147 ||

The Munis like Simhaviriya, the Devas like Indra, and the Kings like Sagra, all attained supreme wonder. || 148 ||

Then, in the Samavasarana of the Jina, the Indra of the Rakshasas, Bhima and Subhima, happily said to Meghavahana: "O child of the Vidyadharas! You are blessed to have come to the refuge of the all-knowing Ajita Jina. We are both pleased with you. Therefore, we will tell you what will ensure your well-being in all ways. Listen carefully. You are worthy of our protection." || 149 - 151 ||

Page #128:
---------------------------
In the salt ocean, filled with fearsome crocodiles, there are thousands of extremely inaccessible and beautiful continents. || 152 || In some of these continents, Gandharvas play, in some, groups of Kinnaras, in some, hordes of Yakshas, and in some, Kimpurusha Devas. || 153 || Among these continents, there is a continent called Rakshasa Dweep, which is a place of auspicious play for Rakshasas. It is said to be seven hundred yojanas long and wide. || 154 || In the middle of this Rakshasa Dweep, there is a huge mountain called Trikutachal, similar to Mount Meru. This mountain is extremely difficult to enter and provides refuge to all with its excellent cave-like houses. || 155 || Its peak is as beautiful as the top of Mount Sumeru, nine yojanas high and fifty yojanas wide. || 156 || Its golden shores are always covered with a multitude of various gems, and Kalpavriksha trees, embraced by various creepers, stand there in abundance. || 157 || Below this Trikutachal, there is a city called Lanka, thirty yojanas wide, inhabited by the Rakshasa lineage. Its palaces are made of various gems and gold. || 158 || With its captivating gardens, lotus-filled lakes, and large Jain temples, this city seems like Indrapuri. || 159 || This Lanka city is like an ornament of the southern direction. O Vidyadhar! Go to that city with your relatives and be happy. || 160 || Saying this, the king of the Rakshasas, Bheem, gave him a garland adorned by Devas. This garland was emitting moonlight with its millions of rays. || 161 || He gave him this garland out of love for his son from a previous birth and said, "O Vidyadhar! You are the last-bodied and the best person of this age, therefore, this garland is given to you." || 162 || Besides this garland, he also gave him a natural city hidden within the earth, six yojanas deep and one hundred and thirty-five yojanas and one and a half kalas wide. || 163 || It was impossible for enemies to enter this city, even with their minds. It had large palaces, its name was Alankaroday, and its beauty was like heaven. || 164 || If you are ever attacked by the Parachakra, take refuge in this city and stay safe. This is a secret safe place for your lineage. || 165 || Thus, the king of the Rakshasas, Bheem, 1. Mahee Dweepa: M. 2. Sharan: M. 3. Laya: M. 4. Rasi M., K. 
78

Page #129:
---------------------------
## Fifth Chapter

Thus addressed by the Rakshasa chiefs, the son of Purnghana attained supreme joy. He bowed down to the Lord Ajita.  ||166||

Having obtained the Rakshasa knowledge and mounting the swift, desired-going chariot named Kamaga, he set out for that city. ||167||

Knowing that this boon had been granted to him by the Rakshasas, all his relatives were filled with joy, like a cluster of lotuses blooming at dawn. ||168||

Vimala, Amala, Kanta, and others, with their wealth of knowledge, arrived quickly, filled with joy, and greeted him with sweet words. ||169||

Surrounded by his joyful relatives, he set out for Lanka. Some of the Vidyadharas walked beside him, some behind, some ahead, some riding on elephants, some on horses. Some chanted victory cries, some played melodious drums, some provided shade with white umbrellas, and some were adorned with flags and garlands. ||170-171||

The assembly of Vidyadharas, showering blessings and paying respects, accompanied him. As he traveled through the sky, he saw the salty ocean, vast like the sky, deep like the netherworld, dark like a Tamala forest, and filled with waves. ||172-173||

Those traveling with him said, "Look, there is a mountain in the water, there is a great crocodile leaping, and there is a huge fish swimming nearby." ||174||

Gazing at the beauty of the ocean, Meghavahana entered Lanka, situated below the peak of Trikuta mountain. Lanka was adorned with massive ramparts and towers, its red hue staining the sky like twilight, adorned with white flags like Kunda flowers, and decorated with Jain temples, complete with walls and arches. ||175-176||

Entering Lanka, he first went to the Jain temple and paid homage to the Jina. Then, he resided in his own suitable palace, filled with auspiciousness. ||177||

His other relatives also stayed in their respective palaces, their eyes and rows of eyes captivated by the splendor of jewels. ||178||

Page #130:
---------------------------
In the Purana, known as the Kinnara Gita, there was a princess named Suprabha, born to King Ratimuyukha and Queen Anumati.  She was a thief of hearts and eyes, a dweller in the abode of love, a moon-like being who blossomed like a Kumudini, a lake of beauty, an ornament of ornaments, and a bringer of joy to all beings.  King Meghavahana married her with great pomp and splendor.  [179-181]

After that, Meghavahana, the king whose command was obeyed by all the celestial beings, resided in Lanka for a long time, just as Indra resides in heaven.  [182]

Some time later, King Meghavahana, who desired a son, was blessed with a son.  This son, following the family tradition, was named Maharaks.  [183]

One day, King Meghavahana went to the Samavasarana of Ajitanatha Bhagwan to pay his respects.  After offering his salutations, he sat down in his designated place with great humility.  [184]

When the other stories had come to an end, Emperor Sagar, with his hands folded in respect, asked Ajitanatha Jinendra, [185]

"O Bhagwan! In this Avasarpini, how many more Tirthankaras will there be, like you, who are the masters of the Dharmachakra?"  [186]

"And how many Tirthankaras have already passed, who brought happiness to the three worlds?  Indeed, the birth of beings like you is a wonder in the three worlds."  [187]

"How many Chakravartis will there be, adorned with fourteen jewels and the Sudarshan Chakra, the holders of Lakshmi?  Similarly, how many Balabhadra, Narayana, and Pratinarayana will there be?"  [188]

Thus, when Emperor Sagar asked these questions, Bhagwan Ajitanatha replied with the following words.  His words were like the deep sound of a divine drum, rejecting the great path and bringing joy to the ears.  [189]

The language of the Bhagwan was Ardhamagadhi, and his lips did not move while he spoke.  This was a great wonder.  [190]

He said, "O Sagar! In every Utsarpini and Avasarpini, there are twenty-four Tirthankaras, each of whom establishes the Dharma Tirtha."  [191]

At the time when this entire world was enveloped in the dense darkness of delusion, devoid of the awareness of Dharma, a home for all hypocrisy, and without a king, [192]

Page #131:
---------------------------
The Fifth Chapter

When, at that time, the great Jina, Nābheya, arose, O King, by him was established the "former time," the Kṛtayuga. ||193|| Three castes were conceived by him, according to the difference in actions. The origin of grains arose from the rain of the Kalpa. ||194|| In his time were created the great ones, the Sūtradhāras, by his son, Bharata, of equal brilliance to him. ||195|| The āśrama also arose, distinguished as sāgara and anāgara. Knowledge and arts were taught by Nābheya himself. ||196|| Embracing initiation, by him, those who were destined for liberation, were freed from the fire of birth-suffering, and led to happiness by the water of peace. ||197|| Even if the three worlds were to gather together, they would not be able to comprehend the incomparable qualities of Nābheya, who was adorned with the brilliance of his own self. ||198|| He who ascended the eight-stepped mountain for the shedding of his body, was seen by the gods and demons, with wonder, like a golden peak. ||199|| Taking refuge in that Lord, the sages, Bharata and others, attained the state of liberation, having embraced the great vows. ||200|| Some, having acquired merit, attained the happiness of heaven. Others, endowed with natural simplicity, attained the highest human state. ||201|| Others, though his doctrine was most brilliant, did not see it, being bound by the delusion of attachment, like owls who cannot see the sun. ||202|| They, embracing evil conduct, becoming evil gods, wander in the hells, again as animals, with evil deeds. ||203|| After a long time had passed, when the ocean-like profound Nābheya's yuga-tirtha was broken, and the religious festival was destroyed, I, the second Jina, Ajitanātha, arose, to establish the Kṛtayuga, for the benefit of all beings. ||204-205|| When the proper Dharma becomes weak, due to the violation of the rules of conduct and the prosperity of the deluded, the Jinas arise and revive it. ||206|| Having attained him, again, the beings, the best of friends, embrace him again, and become destined for the state of liberation. ||207||

Page #132:
---------------------------
In the Padma Purana, after my departure, twenty-two Jinas will arise, illuminating the three worlds in succession.  ||20|| They will all be adorned with brilliance, valor, and other qualities, like me. They will be worshipped by the beings of the three worlds, serving as an example. ||209|| After enjoying the wealth of a Chakravartin, the Jinas among them will attain the kingdom of knowledge, the cause of infinite happiness. ||210|| I will now speak of the names of all these great souls, names that are auspicious in the three worlds and, O King Sagar, will purify your mind. ||211||  Rishabha, the best among men, was the first Jina, who has already passed. I am Ajita, the present Jina, and the remaining twenty-two are the future Jinas. ||212|| Sambhava, the cause of liberation, Abhinandana, the delight of the worthy beings,  Sumati, Padma Prabha,  Suparshva, Chandra Prabha, Pushpadanta, the destroyer of the eight karmas,  Shitala, the ocean of good conduct, Shreyans, the benefactor through excellent deeds, Vasupujya, worshipped by the virtuous,  Vimala, Ananta, Dharma, Shanti, Kuntha, Ara, Mallinatha, Suvrata, Naminatha,  Neminatha, Parshvanatha, and Vira, the upholder of the Jina path. These are the twenty-four Tirthankaras of this Avasarpini Yuga. They will all be the lords of the gods and the benefactors of beings. ||213-216|| The birth and descent of all of them will be celebrated with a shower of jewels, and the gods will anoint them with the water of the ocean of milk on Mount Meru. ||217|| Their brilliance, form, happiness, and strength will be beyond comparison, and all of them will destroy the enemy of birth in this world, that is, they will attain liberation. ||218|| When the sun in the form of Lord Mahavira sets, many fireflies of hypocrisy will appear in this world. ||219|| These hypocrites will fall into the well of the four gatis of this world, and they will also cause other ignorant beings to fall. ||220|| One Chakravartin, like you, with the mark of the wheel, the lord of wealth, will arise. One Mahavira, with great strength, will be born in the ten future kalpas. ||221||

Page #133:
---------------------------
## Fifth Chapter

**The First Chakravarti, Bharata, has passed away, and you, Sagara, are the second. There will be ten more Chakravartis, all marked by the wheel.** (222)

**The Chakravartis are:** 1. Sanatkumara, 2. Maghava, 3. Shanti, 4. Kunthu, 5. Ara, 6. Subhumi, 7. Mahapadma, 8. Harishena, 9. Jayasena, and 10. Brahmadatta. (223)

**There will be nine Vasudevas, accompanied by nine Pratishwaras. There will also be nine Balabhadra, all with minds devoted to Dharma.** (224-225)

**O King! Just as we have described the Tirthankaras, Chakravartis, etc. in the Avasarpini Kala, so too will there be Tirthankaras, etc. in the Utsarpini Kala, in the realms of Bharata and Airavata.** (226)

**Hearing about the cycle of birth and death due to karma, the rise of great souls, and the transformation of time, the wise Meghavahana pondered in his mind:** (227-228)

**Alas! It is a great sorrow that this living being, intoxicated by the intoxicating wine of delusion, is driven by the very karmas that cause him suffering.** (229)

**What is the point of loving things that appear pleasant at first but are like poison in the end, or whose very nature is to cause suffering?** (230)

**Even after spending a long time attached to wealth, women, and relatives, one must journey through the world alone.** (231)

**Just as a puppy follows its master as long as it receives food, so too do all beings in this world remain attached to those who give them something.** (232)

**So much time has passed, yet who has gone to the other world with their relatives, spouses, friends, or loved ones?** (233)

**The pleasures of the five senses are like the body of a snake, terrifying and leading to hell. What sentient being would be attached to such things?** (234)

**Oh, what a great wonder it is that Lakshmi, when she is approached with devotion, deceives those who rely on her. What could be more wicked than this?** (235)

Page #134:
---------------------------
In the Padma Purana,
The gathering of relatives is like a dream, fleeting like a rainbow. The happiness derived from it is like a fleeting moment, like the arc of Indra. ||236||
The body is like a water bubble, devoid of essence, and life is like a flash of lightning, fleeting. ||237||
Therefore, abandoning all this, the cause of worldly existence, I embrace Dharma, the unwavering companion. ||238||
Leaving behind the kingdom for his son, Maharaksasa, the wise Meghavahana, adorned with the armor of detachment, went to the presence of Ajitanatha. ||239||
Along with him, one hundred and ten other celestial beings, having attained detachment, left their homes, the prison of worldly life. ||240||
This Maharaksasa, like the moon, illuminated the celestial court with the rays of his generosity, stirring the ocean of relatives. ||241||
Such was his influence that even in dreams, the lords of the great celestial beings received his commands, waking up in a state of awe, joining their hands and touching their foreheads. ||242||
His beloved, Vimalaabha, was like a shadow, always by his side. ||243||
He had three sons, Amararaks, Uddharaks, and Bhanuraks, all of whom were perfect in every way. ||244||
They were filled with diverse deeds, noble in character, and expansive in their wealth and possessions, making them seem like the three worlds themselves. ||245||
Ajitanatha, the Lord, having guided the liberated souls towards liberation, reached the summit of Sammed Shikhar, where he attained his true nature, the state of Siddha. ||246||
Like the queen of Indra, Sagar Chakravarti had ninety-six thousand wives, all possessing radiant brilliance, and sixty thousand sons, all endowed with supreme power and shining like jeweled pillars. These sons also had numerous offspring. ||247-248||
Once, all these sons went to Kailasa to pay their respects, their footsteps shaking the earth like mountains. ||249||

Page #135:
---------------------------
## Fifth Chapter

Having paid homage to the Siddha images with great reverence, they began to dig a trench around the mountain with their Danda-ratna. || 250 || Seeing the earth dug down to the roots of the earth, the Naga-indra, inflamed with anger, looked at them. || 251 || The sons of the Chakravarti, whose bodies were consumed by the flames of the Naga-indra's anger, were reduced to ashes. || 252 || Just as there is a life-giving power amidst the deadly power of poison, which sometimes acts as a medicine and becomes the cause of life, so also in the anger of the Naga-indra, where there was the power to burn, there was also a compassionate outcome. Due to this compassionate outcome, two sons, Bhima and Bhagiratha, were somehow not burnt to ashes. || 253 || Seeing this sudden death of the sons of the Chakravarti Sagar, both of them were grieved and went to Sagar. || 254 || Fearing that the Chakravarti might suddenly lose his life upon hearing this news, the learned men forbade Bhima and Bhagiratha from telling the Chakravarti this news. || 255 || Then the king, the hereditary ministers, the learned men who were experts in various scriptures, and the wise men who were connoisseurs of entertainment, gathered together and went to the Chakravarti. At that time, there was no difference in the radiance of their faces, and their attire was also the same as before. All of them went to the Chakravarti Sagar with reverence, just as before. || 256-257 || After paying their respects and sitting in their respective places, an elder, prompted by their gestures, began to speak these words. || 258 || 
O King Sagar! You see the impermanence of the world, seeing which the mind does not turn towards the world. || 259 || Before you, there was a king named Bharat, who was equal to you in prowess, who had subdued this six-part earth, making it like a slave. || 260 || He had a son named Arka-kirti, who was a great warrior, and whose name this solar dynasty is still known by. || 261 || Arka-kirti also had a son, and his son also had a son, but now all of them have gone beyond the reach of sight. || 262 ||

Page #136:
---------------------------
## 86

**Verse 263:** Even if they are the lords of the celestial realms, adorned with splendor, they are reduced to ashes by sorrow in an instant.

**Verse 264:** Even the Tirthankaras, the ones who bring joy to the three worlds, abandon their bodies when their lifespan ends.

**Verse 265-266:** Just as birds, after spending the night on a large tree, fly in all directions at dawn, similarly, many beings, after gathering together in a family, go their separate ways according to their karma.

**Verse 267:** Some have witnessed the actions and beautiful bodies of those ancient beings with their own eyes, but we only know them through stories.

**Verse 268:** Death is stronger than all the powerful beings, for it has conquered all the powerful.

**Verse 269:** Oh, what a wonder! Our chests don't burst when we remember the destruction of great souls like Bharata and others.

**Verse 270:** The wealth, loved ones, and bodies of beings are like foam, waves, rainbows, dreams, lightning, and acacia blossoms.

**Verse 271:** There is no human in the world who can be compared to this, that just as this is immortal, so are we.

**Verse 272-273:** Those who are capable of drying up the ocean filled with crocodiles, or grinding Mount Meru to dust with their hands, or lifting the earth and swallowing the moon and sun, even they have entered the mouth of Yama, the god of death, in due time.

**Verse 274:** All beings in the three worlds are subject to this insurmountable death. Only the Siddhas, born from the Jain Dharma, are free from it.

**Verse 275:** Just as many kings have met their end due to time, so shall we also meet our end. This is the common law of the world.

**Verse 276:** When this common thing, death, comes to all beings in the three worlds, who, with a wise mind, will grieve for the cause of existence?

**Verse 277:** As this discussion was going on, the wise Chakravarti, skilled in observing actions, saw only two sons in front of him. Seeing them, he began to think in his mind.

**Note:** The term "Tirthankara" is a Jain term referring to a spiritual teacher who has attained liberation and guides others to do the same. The term "Siddha" refers to a liberated soul who has attained perfect knowledge and is free from the cycle of birth and death.

Page #137:
---------------------------
The fifth festival, all the sons always used to salute me together. Today, only two sons are seen, and even their faces are very humble. It seems that the remaining sons have attained destruction. ||278|| These arrived kings are not able to speak this great sorrow directly, so they are speaking through other means. ||279|| After that, even though Sagara Chakravarti was bitten by the snake of sorrow, he did not give up his life, receiving comfort from the words of the assembly members. ||280|| Knowing the world's happiness to be as empty as the core of a banana, he gave the kingdom's wealth to Bhagiratha and took initiation himself. ||281|| When this great-souled king was leaving this earth, this earth adorned with various cities and mines of gold, etc., seemed as insignificant as dry grass to his mind. ||282|| After that, Sagara Chakravarti, along with his son Bhimratha, took refuge in Ajitanatha Bhagwan. There, he took initiation, attained omniscience, and then took refuge in the Siddha-pad, i.e., he became liberated. ||283|| Sagara Chakravarti's son Jahnu's son Bhagiratha became the king. One day, he asked Shruta Sagar Muni Raja. ||284|| "Why did all my grandfather Sagara's sons attain death together due to the rise of what karma, and why am I saved from that karma even though I was among them?" ||285|| Bhagwan Ajitanatha said, "Once, the four-fold assembly was going to pay homage to Sammed Shikhar, and on the way, they reached a village called Antik." ||286|| Seeing the assembly, all the people of that Antik village started laughing at the assembly, speaking abusive words. But there was a potter in that village, who stopped all the villagers and praised the assembly. ||287|| A man living in that village had committed theft, so the unwise king thought that this village itself is committing many crimes, so he surrounded it and burnt the whole village. ||288|| On the day that village was burnt, the potter, who was the holder of the middle results, was invited somewhere and had gone out. ||289|| When the potter died, he became a very wealthy merchant, and all the villagers died and became cowries. The merchant bought all those cowries. ||290|| After that, the potter's soul died and became a king, and the souls of the villagers died and became 1. Ath M. ||291||

Page #138:
---------------------------
In the Padma Purana,
The king, having become a Shraman, was cast down from the position of a deity. He was born as Bhagiratha, and the villagers became the sons of Sagara. ||292||
By slandering the Sangha, one meets death in every birth. Therefore, that entire village was destroyed at once, while you, by praising the Sangha, have become prosperous and long-lived. ||293||
Having heard this account of his past life from the Lord, Bhagiratha became calm and, becoming the chief of the sages, attained a position suitable for penance. ||294||
Gautama Swami says to King Shrenik, "O King! Having obtained the opportunity, I have told you this story of Sagara. Now, I will tell you the present story, so listen." ||295||
There was a great Rakshasa named Maharaksha, who ruled Lanka without any obstacles. He was endowed with great knowledge and power. One day, he went to a pleasure garden with his wives, adorned with lotus-covered ponds, a play-mountain towering with the brilliance of various gems, adorned with groups of trees bearing blooming flowers, filled with groups of birds flitting about with indistinct sweet sounds, surrounded by a gem-studded earth, where various kinds of radiance were blooming, and adorned with arbors of creepers with the appropriate shade of dense foliage. ||296-300||
King Maharaksha began to play in that pleasure garden with his wives. Sometimes the women would tease him with flowers, and sometimes he would tease the women with fruits. ||301||
If any woman became angry due to jealousy because of another woman going near him, he would appease her by bowing at her feet. Similarly, if he himself became angry, a woman full of playfulness would appease him. ||302||
Sometimes he would inspire a woman with his chest, which was as beautiful as the shore of Trikuta Mountain, and another woman would inspire him with the embrace of her full breasts. ||303||
Seeing the hidden bodies of the women immersed in play, he was like the king of the gods in Nandana, in the midst of the ocean of love. ||304||
The king, having become a Jain, was reduced to dust by the elephant, and all those Jains wandered in the cycle of births and deaths. ||291||
The potter's soul, having become a sage, attained the position of a deity, and from there, having been cast down, you became Bhagiratha, and all the villagers, having died, became the sons of Sagara. ||292||
By slandering the Sangha, one meets death in every birth. Therefore, that entire village was destroyed at once, while you, by praising the Sangha, have become prosperous and long-lived. ||293||
Having heard this account of his past life from the Lord, Bhagiratha became calm and, becoming the chief of the sages, attained a position suitable for penance. ||294||
Gautama Swami says to King Shrenik, "O King! Having obtained the opportunity, I have told you this story of Sagara. Now, I will tell you the present story, so listen." ||295||
There was a great Rakshasa named Maharaksha, who ruled Lanka without any obstacles. He was endowed with great knowledge and power. One day, he went to a pleasure garden with his wives, adorned with lotus-covered ponds, a play-mountain towering with the brilliance of various gems, adorned with groups of trees bearing blooming flowers, filled with groups of birds flitting about with indistinct sweet sounds, surrounded by a gem-studded earth, where various kinds of radiance were blooming, and adorned with arbors of creepers with the appropriate shade of dense foliage. ||296-300||
King Maharaksha began to play in that pleasure garden with his wives. Sometimes the women would tease him with flowers, and sometimes he would tease the women with fruits. ||301||
If any woman became angry due to jealousy because of another woman going near him, he would appease her by bowing at her feet. Similarly, if he himself became angry, a woman full of playfulness would appease him. ||302||
Sometimes he would inspire a woman with his chest, which was as beautiful as the shore of Trikuta Mountain, and another woman would inspire him with the embrace of her full breasts. ||303||
Seeing the hidden bodies of the women immersed in play, he was like the king of the gods in Nandana, in the midst of the ocean of love. ||304||

Page #139:
---------------------------
## The Fifth Chapter

Then, as the lotus buds began to close their petals, the king saw a dead bee trapped within a lotus bud.  

Seeing this, a thought arose in his heart, a thought that would destroy his worldly attachments.  He thought, "This foolish bee, intoxicated by the nectar, did not find satisfaction and thus met its death.  The Acharya says, "May this endless desire be cursed!"

Just as this bee, attached to the lotus, met its death, so too shall we, attached to the lotus-like faces of women, meet our death.

If this bee died due to its sense of smell and taste, then what of us, who are enslaved by all five senses?

Or perhaps this bee, being a member of the lower species, is ignorant, and so its actions are understandable.  But we, who are endowed with knowledge, why are we still attached to these objects?

What pleasure is there in licking the blade of a honey-coated sword, which, upon contact, shatters the tongue into a hundred pieces?

What kind of happiness can arise from objects that, far from offering pleasure, only bring forth a continuous stream of suffering?

I bow down to those great souls who have turned away from objects like the fruit of the *kipaak* tree, with their body, speech, and mind.

Alas, how unfortunate! I have been deceived, cheated for a long time by these wicked objects, whose attachments are extremely harmful and deadly like poison.

At that moment, a great sage named Shruta Sagar, bearing a meaningful name, arrived in that garden.

Shruta Sagar Muni was endowed with a most beautiful form, his radiance put the moon to shame, his brilliance scorned the sun, and his steadfastness defeated Mount Meru.

His soul was always absorbed in meditation on Dharma, free from attachment and aversion.  He was a devotee of the *kshaayas* (passions), and his association was like a broken staff.

Page #140:
---------------------------
90
Padmapurana
1
He was a subduer of the senses, affectionate towards all beings of the six categories, free from the seven fears and eight intoxications. || 318 || It seemed as if Dharma itself had come into union with his body. He was accompanied by a large and beautiful assembly of monks. || 319 || He was seated on the vast, pure, and animal-free earth, his body casting a shadow that covered the entire direction. || 320 || When the king, the great protector, learned of his presence from the mouths of the forest guards, he went to him with a troubled mind. || 321 || Then, the king, the great protector, washed the feet of the Muni with the water of his radiant face, which was filled with joy. || 322 || He bowed to the assembly of monks, inquired about their well-being and Dharma, and then, after staying for a moment, asked about the nature of Dharma with devotion. || 323 || Then, the Muni, whose heart was like a calm moon, spoke, his words shining like the rays of a thousand suns. || 324 || "O King! The Jina has declared non-violence and its virtues to be Dharma. Truthfulness and other qualities are its family." || 325 || "Beings, due to the influence of their karmas, go to different states of existence, and, being deluded by life, they develop attachment to them." || 326 || "These beings, fearing death, abandon the gains of the three worlds and desire life. Nothing is dearer to them than life." || 327 || "What is the use of saying much? This can be known only through one's own experience. Just as we cherish our own life, so do all beings cherish their own lives." || 328 || "Therefore, those foolish beings who destroy the precious lives of others through cruel actions, what sin have they not committed?" || 329 || "Having taken the lives of beings, they become burdened with the weight of their karmas and fall into hell, like iron balls in water." || 330 ||

The three dandas, which are the forms of useless activity of mind, speech, and body, were broken. They were always eager to pacify the passions. || 317 || They were masters of their senses, affectionate towards beings of the six categories, free from the seven fears and eight intoxications. || 318 || It seemed as if Dharma itself had come into union with their body. They were accompanied by a large and beautiful assembly of monks. || 319 || They were seated on the vast, pure, and animal-free earth, their bodies casting a shadow that covered the entire direction. || 320 || When the king, the great protector, learned of their presence from the mouths of the forest guards, he went to them with a troubled mind. || 321 || Then, the king, the great protector, washed the feet of the Muni with the water of his radiant face, which was filled with joy. || 322 || He bowed to the assembly of monks, inquired about their well-being and Dharma, and then, after staying for a moment, asked about the nature of Dharma with devotion. || 323 || Then, the Muni, whose heart was like a calm moon, spoke, his words shining like the rays of a thousand suns. || 324 || "O King! The Jina has declared non-violence and its virtues to be Dharma. Truthfulness and other qualities are its family." || 325 || "Beings, due to the influence of their karmas, go to different states of existence, and, being deluded by life, they develop attachment to them." || 326 || "These beings, fearing death, abandon the gains of the three worlds and desire life. Nothing is dearer to them than life." || 327 || "What is the use of saying much? This can be known only through one's own experience. Just as we cherish our own life, so do all beings cherish their own lives." || 328 || "Therefore, those foolish beings who destroy the precious lives of others through cruel actions, what sin have they not committed?" || 329 || "Having taken the lives of beings, they become burdened with the weight of their karmas and fall into hell, like iron balls in water." || 330 ||

Page #141:
---------------------------
## The Western Chapter

Those whose words are like honey but whose hearts are filled with poison, who are controlled by their senses and whose minds are immersed in the three periods of the day, are like cows that are milked three times a day. (331)

Those who are devoid of proper conduct and act according to their desires, these wicked beings wander in the cycle of animal births. (332)

It is rare for a being to obtain human birth, even rarer to be born beautiful, even rarer to be wealthy, even rarer to be born into a noble family, even rarer to acquire knowledge, even rarer to understand the nature of things, and even rarer to attain the path of Dharma. (333-334)

Some, after practicing Dharma, attain happiness in heaven, enjoying the company of gods and goddesses. (335)

But after falling from heaven, they are born in a womb, covered in excrement and urine, filled with wriggling worms, foul-smelling and unbearable. (336)

In the womb, these beings are covered in a membrane, surrounded by bile, phlegm, etc., and they lick the fluids of the mother's food that leak out through the umbilical cord. (337)

Their entire body is compressed, and they are constantly tormented by the weight of suffering. After living there, they are born again as humans. (338)

From birth, these cruel beings are devoid of discipline, conduct, and right vision. They are filled with sin and indulge in worldly pleasures. (339)

Those who are enslaved by lust and have abandoned right conduct, experience great suffering and wander in the ocean of existence. (340)

Words that cause pain to others should be avoided with all effort, for such words lead to violence, and violence is the cause of rebirth. (341)

Similarly, stealing, adultery, and the desire for great wealth should all be abandoned, for they are the causes of suffering. (342)

Hearing the teachings of Dharma from the mouth of the sage, the king of the Vidyadharas, Maharaks, attained dispassion. He then bowed to the sage and asked:

"How do some people directly fall into hell?" (330)

Page #142:
---------------------------
The Shruta Sagar Muni, adorned with the four knowledges, sat humbly before the Maharaksha Vidyadhara and said briefly:

"O King! In the city of Podanpur in the Bharat Kshetra, there lived a man named Hit. His wife's name was Madhavi, and you were their son, named Priti.

"In the same city of Podanpur, there reigned a king named Hemarath, born to King Udayachala and Queen Arhacchee.

"One day, he performed a grand puja in the Jain temple with great devotion, astonishing everyone.

"Hearing the loud chants of 'Jai' during the puja, you too, filled with joy, exclaimed 'Jai'.

"Overwhelmed with joy, you couldn't stay inside the house and went out to dance in the courtyard, like a cloud dances at the sound of thunder.

"As a result of the merit you accumulated from this act, you died and became a Yaksha, bringing joy to the eyes of the Yakshas.

"Later, in the city of Kanchanpur in the western Videha Kshetra, enemies began to harass the monks.

"You separated those enemies and protected the monks engaged in their religious practices. By doing so, you accumulated a vast amount of merit.

"From there, you transmigrated to the Vidyadhara mountain, Taddidangad, and were born as the son of the Vidyadhara, Udit, and Vidyadhari, Shri Prabha.

"Once, the king of the Vidyadharas, named Amaravikram, came to pay homage to the monks. Seeing him, you wished for such grandeur for yourself.

"After performing severe austerities, you became a god in the Aishana heaven. From there, you transmigrated and became the son of Meghavahana, the Maharaksha.

"Just as the wheel of the sun's chariot constantly rotates, you too, under the influence of your senses, the tongue and the female, have wandered through the world.

"If all the bodies you have acquired and abandoned in other births were to be gathered together, they would never fit in the three worlds.

"You were not satisfied with the pleasures of the gods, which are enjoyed for millions of kalpas, nor with the pleasures of the Vidyadharas, who can create their own desires.

"Tell me about your previous birth."

Page #143:
---------------------------
The Fifth Chapter

How will you be satisfied with pleasures that are like a dream or a magic show, lasting only eight days? Therefore, abandon the desire for pleasures and embrace peace. ||359||

The Muni did not feel sorrow at the approaching end of his life, but he did feel some regret, knowing that he would have to take many more births in this cycle of existence. ||360||

He then established his eldest son, Amarraksha, on the throne and made his younger son, Bhanuraksha, the crown prince. ||361||

Renouncing all possessions, he became devoted to the ultimate truth, becoming as steadfast as a pillar, free from greed. ||362||

He abandoned all food and drink, maintaining his body only through the power of his mind, remaining equanimous towards both friend and foe, his mind unwavering. ||363||

He took the vow of silence and sat in the middle of the Jina temple, performing a grand puja, a magnificent abhisheka. ||364||

His consciousness purified by the contemplation of the Arhat's feet, he became a supreme deva, entering samadhi. ||365||

Later, Amarraksha married Rati, the daughter of King Shridhara and Queen Vidya, in the city of Kinnarageeta. ||366||

Bhanuraksha married Gandharva, the daughter of King Surasannibha and Queen Gandhari, in the city of Gandharvageeta. ||367||

Amarraksha had ten beautiful sons and six daughters, adorned with virtues and beauty, like celestial nymphs. ||368||

Similarly, Bhanuraksha had ten sons and six daughters, whose fame spread throughout the world. ||369||

O Shrenika, these victorious princes established great and beautiful cities, each named after themselves. ||370||

Listen to the names of these cities: Sandhyakara, Suvela, Manohlada, Manohara, Hansadwipa, Hari, Yodha, Samudra, Kanchana, and Ardhaswargotakrishta. These ten cities, resembling heaven, were established by the sons of Amarraksha, who possessed great intelligence and valor. ||371-372||

Page #144:
---------------------------
In the Padma Purana, ten cities were established by the sons of Bhanurakshaka: 1. Avarta, 2. Vighata, 3. Ambhoda, 4. Utkat, 5. Sphuta, 6. Durgraha, 7. Tat, 8. Toya, 9. Avali, and 10. Ratnadvipa. ||373|| These cities were adorned with various jewels and shone with the brilliance of golden walls, serving as the abodes of the Rakshasas who desired amusement. ||374|| In those very islands, the celestial beings residing in other islands constructed numerous cities with great enthusiasm. ||375|| Subsequently, both Amararakska and Bhanurakshaka, after bestowing their kingdom upon their sons, embraced the path of initiation and, becoming possessors of the wealth of great austerities, attained the eternal, liberated state. ||376|| Thus, the lineage of King Meghavahana, characterized by great men who first ruled their kingdoms and then embraced initiation, continued in an orderly manner. ||377|| In that lineage, a powerful son named Rakshasa was born to a Rakshasa named Manovega, and from his name, the lineage came to be known as the Rakshasa lineage. ||378|| King Rakshasa had a queen named Suprabha, and from her, he had two sons: Adityagati and Brihatkirti. Both these sons possessed a radiance like that of the sun and the moon. ||379|| King Rakshasa, like a bull bearing the burden of the chariot of the kingdom, entrusted his two sons with the responsibility of ruling and then, embracing austerity, attained heaven. ||380|| The elder brother was Adityagati, the king, and the younger brother was Brihatkirti, the crown prince. Adityagati's wife was named Sadanpadma, and Brihatkirti's wife was known as Pushpanakha. ||381|| Adityagati had a son named Bhimaprbha, who had a thousand wives, all possessing a radiance like that of celestial nymphs. ||382|| From these wives, he had one hundred and eight powerful sons, who, like pillars, supported their kingdom from all sides. ||383|| Subsequently, King Bhimaprbha, after bestowing his kingdom upon his eldest son, embraced initiation and, through continuous austerity, attained the supreme state. ||384|| Thus, numerous celestial beings of the lineage of Meghavahana, upon whom the Rakshasa Indra, Bhima-Subhima, had bestowed his grace, resided happily in the Rakshasadvipa. ||385|| These Rakshasa-born celestial beings, protected by the merit of their deeds, guarded the Rakshasadvipa, which became known as such. ||386||

Page #145:
---------------------------
## The Lineage of the Rakshasas

This is the origin of the Rakshasa lineage. I will now describe the prominent men of this lineage. 

Bhima Prabha's first son was known as Pujarha. He renounced the world and gave the kingdom to his son, Jitbhaaskar. 

Jitbhaaskar, in turn, gave the kingdom to his son, Samparikīrti, and became a monk. Samparikīrti then gave the kingdom to Sugrīva and received initiation. 

Sugrīva, placing Harigrīva on his throne, performed intense austerities and became a great god. 

Harigrīva, giving the kingdom to Śrīgrīva, embraced the life of a monk and went into the forest. 

Śrīgrīva, giving the kingdom to Sumukha, followed the path chosen by his father. The powerful Sumukha then gave the kingdom to Savyakta and received initiation. 

Savyakta gave the Rakshasa wealth to Amritvega, who then gave it to Bhanugati, and Bhanugati gave it to Chintaagati, all of them embracing the path of a monk. 

Thus, Indra, Indra Prabha, Megha, Mrigari Daman, Pavi, Indrajit, Bhanuvarma, Bhanu, Bhanu Prabha, Surari, Trijata, Bhima, Mohan, Uddharaka, Ravi, Chakara, Vajramadhya, Pramoda, Singha Vikrama, Chamund, Marana, Mishma, Dwipavaha, Ari Mardana, Nirvanabhakti, Ugrashri, Arhad Bhakti, Anuttar, Gatabhram, Anil, Chanda, Lankashoka, Mayuravan, Mahabahu, Manorama, Bhaskarabha, Brihadgati, Brihatkanta, Arisantraas, Chandraavarta, Maharava, Meghadhvana, Grihakshobha, and Nakshatra Daman, and countless other Vidyaadharas, were born in this lineage. All these Vidyaadharas were endowed with magic and prowess, and possessed knowledge, strength, and great brilliance. 

All of them were skilled in the application of knowledge, their chests adorned with Lakshmi, beautiful, and mostly born in Lanka after falling from heaven. 

These Rakshasa kings, fearing the world, gave the wealth inherited from their lineage to their sons and embraced the life of a monk. 

Some, due to the residue of their karma, went to the peak of the three worlds. Others, due to the ripening of their good deeds, ascended to heaven.

Page #146:
---------------------------
## The Padma Purana

**Chapter 5: The Lineage of the Rakshasas**

**Verse 403:** Thus, many kings passed by. Among them, a king named Dhanaprabha ruled Lanka. His son, Kirtidhavala, renowned and born from his wife Padma, was born.

**Verse 404:** He was born from the Padma Agama, ruled by the Kshecharas, and enjoyed supreme sovereignty in Lanka, just as Indra enjoys it in heaven.

**Verse 405:** Thus, by the power of their past tapas, men attain enjoyment in the human and divine realms. Those adorned with excellent qualities and possessing bodies adorned with various virtues, having burnt away the karmic stains, become Siddhas.

**Verse 406:** Those whose minds are attached to evil deeds receive great condemnation in this world and after death fall into hell, experiencing various kinds of suffering. Knowing this, O noble beings!  Embrace the sun-like path to destroy the darkness of sin.

**Conclusion:** Thus ends the fifth chapter of the Padma Charita, composed by the Acharya Ravishena, known as the Arsha, which describes the lineage of the Rakshasas.

Page #147:
---------------------------
## Sixth Chapter

The lineage of the Rakshonas and Bhogas has been narrated by me to you. Now, O King, listen to the lineage of the Vanaras. ||1||

In the southern range of the Vijaya mountain, resembling heaven, there is a city named Meghapur, adorned with lofty palaces. ||2||

In that city, there lived a renowned king of the Vidyadharas named Ateeindra, who, by his wealth and possessions, surpassed even Indra. ||3||

His wife, named Shrimati, was beautiful and graceful, her face always radiant like the moon. ||4||

They had a son named Shreekant, well-versed in scriptures. The wise rejoiced at the mere mention of his name. ||5||

He had a younger sister, beautiful and named Devi. Her eyes were like the arrows of Kamadeva. ||6||

There was a beautiful city named Ratnapura, where resided a powerful Vidyadhara king named Pushpottara. ||7||

He had a son named Padmottara, whose beauty captivated everyone, making them forget everything else. ||8||

Pushpottara requested Shreekant for his daughter Devi for his son Padmottara many times, but Shreekant, due to his karma, did not give her to him. ||9||

Instead, he gave her to Kirtidhaval, the king of Lanka, following the advice of his relatives, and performed her marriage with great pomp and ceremony. ||10||

Pushpottara was enraged. He thought, "There is no fault in our lineage, no poverty in me, no ugliness in my son, and no enmity between us. Still, Shreekant did not give his sister to my son." ||11-12||

Page #148:
---------------------------
In the Padma Purana, Shrikantha, to pay homage to the idols, went to Mount Sumeru in a beautiful, swift, wind-like chariot. ||13|| Returning from there, he heard a beautiful song, a melody that stole the minds and ears, like the buzzing of bees. ||14|| The song, mixed with the sweet sound of the veena, made his body still, as if bound by a straight rope. ||15|| Then, looking around, he saw Padmaabha, the daughter of Pushpottara, sitting in the courtyard of the music house, with her guru. ||16|| Seeing her, Shrikantha's mind quickly sank into the ocean of Padmaabha's beauty, unable to extricate itself. Just as one cannot catch elephants, he could not steady his mind. ||17|| Shrikantha stood in the sky near the maiden. Shrikantha, with his handsome body and broad shoulders, was attracted by Padmaabha's captivating blue eyes. ||18|| Then, the mutual, sweet gaze of the two, signified their acceptance of each other, their love for each other. ||19|| Then, knowing her intentions, Shrikantha took Padmaabha, who was standing in the middle of his arms, and flew away. At that time, Padmaabha's touch made his eyes close slightly. ||20|| The people, shouting and crying, informed King Pushpottara that Shrikantha had abducted his daughter. ||21|| Hearing this, Pushpottara became very angry. In his anger, he bit his lips and, fully prepared, went after Shrikantha. ||22|| Shrikantha was going ahead, and Pushpottara was running after him, making Shrikantha look beautiful in the middle of the sky, like the moon behind a cloud. ||23|| Seeing Pushpottara, the mighty, coming after him, Shrikantha, the expert in the science of politics, quickly went towards Lanka. ||24|| There, he sought refuge with his brother-in-law, Koti Dhaval. It is right, because those who practice the right conduct at the right time, achieve success. ||25|| Knowing that he was the brother of his wife, Koti Dhaval embraced him with great affection and welcomed him. ||26||

Page #149:
---------------------------
The Sixth Chapter

While the exchange of pleasantries between the two continued, Pushpottar arrived with a massive army. ||27||  Kirti-Shukla then looked up at the sky, which was filled with a multitude of Vidyadharas, radiating a brilliant light. ||28||  The army, with its fearsome weapons like swords and spears, and the thunderous roar, seemed to be shaking the very ground, as if it were being displaced by the gathering of celestial beings. ||29||  Seeing the northern direction filled with horses as swift as the wind, elephants like clouds, magnificent flying chariots, and lions with their manes flowing, Kirti-Shukla, with a mixture of laughter and anger, gave the order for battle to his ministers. ||30-31||

Then, overwhelmed with shame for his own wrongdoings, Srikantha, with a sense of urgency, spoke to Kirti-Shukla: ||32|| "Protect my beloved while I defeat the enemy with your support." ||33||  Hearing this, Kirti-Shukla, with a sense of righteousness, replied: "It is not appropriate for you to say this, having found refuge in me, the one who dispels fear." ||34||  "If this wicked man does not seek peace through diplomacy, then you will surely see him enter the jaws of Yama, guided by me." ||35||  Having reassured his sister's husband, the king sent his most valiant and wise messengers to Pushpottar. ||36||  These messengers, highly intelligent and skilled in eloquent speech, approached Pushpottar and spoke to him in turn: ||37||  "Pushpottar, Kirti-Shukla, with words placed on our lips with respect, says to you: ||38||  You are born of a noble lineage, a man of pure actions, renowned throughout the world, and a master of the scriptures. ||39||  O great intellect, what is there that we haven't already conveyed to your ears, that we should now bring to your attention?" ||40||  "Srikantha too is born of a pure lineage, like the rays of the moon, wealthy, humble, handsome, and endowed with all virtues." ||41||

Page #150:
---------------------------
In the Padma Purana, it is ordained that a union should be made between two individuals who are equal in terms of their virtues, lineage, and the girl's beauty. ||42|| There is no reason for the destruction of the armies of both sides, as it is the nature of girls to serve their husbands. ||43|| While the messenger was speaking thus, a messenger sent by Padma arrived and spoke to Pushpottar. ||44|| She said, "O Lord, Padma prostrates before your feet and says that she is unable to come to you herself due to shyness." ||45|| "Father, there is no fault of Shrikant in this matter. I myself was motivated by the influence of my past actions." ||46|| "For women born in noble families, this is the path. It is my rule to renounce any other man." ||47|| Thus, informed by the messenger, Pushpottar was filled with anxiety. He was bewildered and distressed, wondering what to do. ||48|| He thought, "The most important virtue for a groom is to be born in a pure lineage. Shrikant possesses this virtue, and he has also sought refuge in a powerful faction." ||49|| "Although I have the power to overcome his pride, what can be done when the girl herself desires him?" ||50|| Knowing Pushpottar's intentions, the messengers, filled with joy, returned with the messenger and reported everything to King Kirti Dhaval as it was. ||51|| Pushpottar, who had shed the burden of anger due to his daughter's words, was proud and a knower of the ultimate truth. He returned to his own place. ||52|| On the first day of the bright fortnight of Margashirsha, in an auspicious hour, the wedding ceremony of the two took place according to the scriptures. ||53|| One day, Kirti Dhaval, motivated by great love, spoke to Shrikant with certainty. ||54|| "You have many enemies on Mount Vijaya. How long can you remain vigilant?" ||55|| "Therefore, stay here in this beautiful palace filled with jewels, in a place of your choice, and act as you please." ||56|| "You will never be abandoned by me. How can you leave, having broken the promise of my love?" ||57||

Page #151:
---------------------------
The Sixth Chapter
101
Having said this to Shrikanth, Kotidhavala called his minister, Anand, who was wise and had come from the lineage of his forefathers. 
He said, "You have known the essence and non-essence of my cities for a long time. Therefore, tell me which city is the most essential for Shrikanth."
The minister, with his heart filled with devotion, replied, his white beard swaying like a fly whisk, as if he were fanning his lord.
"O King, there is not a single city in your kingdom that is not beautiful. However, let Shrikanth choose whichever city he finds pleasing."
"In the middle of this ocean, there are many islands, some of which are as large as Kalpa trees, with trees that extend in all directions."
"These islands have mountains that are adorned with various jewels, with high peaks, and are very bright. These are the places where the gods play."
"The demons Bhima, Atibhima, and all the other gods have given these islands and mountains to your lineage, as we have heard from ancient tradition."
"In these islands, there are many beautiful cities, adorned with golden palaces, filled with great jewels, and so bright that they eclipse the sun."
"The names of these cities are Sandhyakar, Manohlad, Suvel, Kanchan, Hari, Yodhan, Jaladhidhvan, Hansadvip, Bharakshama, Ardhasvargotkat, Avarta, Vighat, Rodhan, Amal, Kant, Sphutatat, Ratnadvip, Toyavali, Sar, Alanghan, Nabhobhanu, and Kshema, and many other beautiful places. Even the gods cannot cause trouble in these places."
"These cities, which are filled with great merit and whose earth is adorned with various jewels, are now under your control."
"In the northwest direction, there is a large island called Vanaradvip, which is three hundred yojanas in extent. This island is famous in all three worlds, and it has thousands of beautiful Avantaar islands."
"This island, in some places, shines with the red light of Pushparaga gems, and in other places, it is covered with vegetation, like a green jewel."

Page #152:
---------------------------
In the Padma Purana,

72. The water is sometimes covered with green gems, making it look like it's covered with lush paddy plants.

73. Sometimes, it appears as if it's enveloped in darkness due to the brilliance of Indranila gems, and sometimes, it seems to be adorned with the splendor of the Kamalakar due to the radiance of Padma raga gems.

74. Where fragrant winds roam in the sky, birds, carried away, don't realize they are falling.

75. In ponds where clusters of lotuses bloom, their movement is recognized by their brilliance, which is like that of Padma raga gems set amidst crystal.

76. The islands, where intoxicated birds, filled with the taste of nectar-like wine, make melodious sounds, seem to be engaged in conversation with nearby islands.

77. Where the darkness is banished by the brilliance of medicinal plants, night finds no place, even in the darkest fortnight.

78. Where trees are shaped like umbrellas, adorned with fruits and flowers, their trunks are massive, and birds perched on them make sweet sounds.

79. Where the earth, covered with paddy plants, naturally endowed with vigor and radiance, is gently swayed by the soft breeze, appears to be wearing a green garment.

80. Where blue lotuses, adorned with swarms of bees, bloom in the ponds, they seem to be gazing with eyes adorned with the movement of eyebrows.

81. Where regions are devoid of wind due to the vast groves of reeds and ponds, their sounds, produced by the movement of the wind, are pleasing to the ears.

82. In the middle of that monkey island, there is a huge mountain called Kishku, adorned with a vast expanse of gems and gold.

83. Like the Trikuta mountain, this Kishku mountain, with its long arms like peaks, embraces the directions, which are like beautiful women, bestowing upon them supreme beauty.

84. Hearing such words of joy from the Minister of Joy, Shrikantha, filled with supreme joy, said to his brother-in-law, Kirti Dhaval, "I accept what you say."

85. Then, on the auspicious first day of the month of Chaitra, Shrikantha, along with his family, went to the monkey island.

Page #153:
---------------------------
The Sixth Chapter
103
Seeing the sea, which was like a blue gem, spread over the earth, he was filled with wonder. The sea was trembling due to the movement of huge crocodiles. ||86||
Then he reached the monkey island, which was like another heaven. The sound of waterfalls was like a welcome address. ||87||
The waterfalls were so large that their spray reached the sky. The island seemed to be laughing with joy at the arrival of Shrikantha. ||88||
The island was adorned with beautiful groups of various gems, which looked like tall arches. ||89||
Then Shrikantha descended on the island, which was full of wonders. He looked in all directions with his blue lotus-like eyes. ||90||
The island was adorned with date palms, gooseberry trees, neem trees, kitha trees, agarwood trees, sandalwood trees, banyan trees, koha trees, kadamba trees, mango trees, achar trees, banana trees, pomegranate trees, betel nut trees, kankol trees, clove trees, and many other beautiful trees. ||91-92||
The trees were so beautiful that they looked like gem-studded trees that had emerged from the earth. They did not allow their gaze to wander away from themselves. ||93||
The trunks of the trees were straight, and their branches were very thick. The dense foliage above looked like umbrellas. The branches were bright and slightly drooping, and they were adorned with clusters of flowers and sweet fruits. They seemed to have attained the best lineage. ||94-95||
The trees were not very tall, nor were they very short. They were just the right height for women to easily reach their flowers, fruits, and leaves. ||96||
The creeper-like women, who were beautiful with their cluster-like breasts, whose eyes were like bees, and whose hands were like fluttering leaves, were embracing the trees with great affection. ||97||
The trees seemed to be talking to each other with the sweet sound of birds, and they were adorned with the sweet humming of bees, as if they were singing. ||98||
Some trees were white like conch shells, some were yellow like gold, some were pink like lotuses, and some were blue like lapis lazuli. ||99||
1. प्राप्तस्वर्ग- म. । 2. इच्छिता म. । 3. चिक्षिपन् म. । 4. समालापं ख. ।

Page #154:
---------------------------
104.
In that Padma Purana, the land was adorned with various kinds of trees, so beautiful that even heaven would seem inferior. 10. The conversation of the male and female chakora birds, as clear as human speech, with the mynas, was a wonder in that land. 101.
Then, seated on the jeweled and golden platforms, under the shade of various trees, fragrant with flowers, Srikantha, along with his army, enjoyed the pleasures of the body. 102-103.
Then, amidst the garlands of various flowers, the swans and sarasa birds singing, the clear water filled with fish, the trees showering flowers, the majestic trees with their loud cries of victory, and the beautiful land adorned with various jewels, Srikantha wandered happily. 104-106.
Then, wandering in that forest, resembling the Nandana forest, Srikantha saw many monkeys playing at will. 107.
Seeing this extraordinary creation, he wondered, "These monkeys are born in the animal realm, yet why are they so similar to humans?" 108.
They have a face, hands, feet, and other limbs like humans, and their actions are also similar to humans. 109.
Then, a great desire to play with them arose in Srikantha. Although he was a steady king, he became very eager. 110.
With a surprised mind, he said to the men standing nearby, looking at his face, "Bring these monkeys here quickly." 111.
As soon as he said this, the Vidyadharas brought hundreds of monkeys and stood them near him. All the monkeys were making joyful sounds. 112.
The king, Srikantha, with his good nature, began to play with those monkeys. Sometimes he would dance them by clapping his hands, sometimes he would touch them with his arms, and sometimes... 1. Chakora yugalam. 2. Mahatvisham. 3. -Mivoddatam. 4. Manushakaran. 5. Samutthita. 6. Vadanekshan.

Page #155:
---------------------------
The Sixth Chapter
109
He saw their white teeth, red like pomegranate blossoms, in their mouths, which were adorned with shining golden earrings. || 114 || He saw the monkeys removing lice from each other with courtesy, and engaging in a delightful playful quarrel with love, making a sound of laughter. || 115 || Their hair, like the husk of rice, was soft, very delicate, and moved gently in the soft breeze, adorned with a parting. || 116 || Their ears, shaped like the ears of a jester, were extremely soft and smooth, and their bodies were motionless. || 117 || He straightened the disordered hairs on their bellies, which were as large as a fist, and raised their eyebrows and the lines on their faces. || 118 || Then he entrusted many of them to the servants, to be nourished with sweet food and drink, for the sake of pleasure. || 119 || Having taken them, he, whose mind was filled with the sight of the young ones, ascended Mount Kishku, with its peaks, vines, waterfalls, and trees. || 120 || There he saw a vast, level land, protected by great mountains on the outskirts, adorned with tall trees. || 121 || In that land, he established a city known as Kishkupura, which was inaccessible even to the mind, let alone the bodies of enemies. || 122 || This city was fourteen yojanas long and wide, and its circumference was forty-two yojanas, a little more. || 123 || The Vidhyadharas had built magnificent palaces with high entrances, walls made of jewels and gold, adorned with beautiful balconies, and supported by pillars of jewels. || 124 || The part near the pigeon-houses was made of large lapis lazuli gems, and it seemed as if the darkness had been driven away by the brilliance of the jewels, as if it had been given a place there out of compassion. || 125 || The doorways of the palaces were made of ruby gems, which made them appear red, as if they were wearing lips whose redness had been enhanced by chewing betel. Above the doors were hung garlands of many pearls.

Page #156:
---------------------------
In the Padma Purana, it is said that the Dehli Pindaka was made of Panarag, and it was adorned with a Tambula-like shade, like a Radachhada.  The doors were adorned with a string of pearls, and the beauty of the buildings was such that it seemed to mock the beauty of other buildings. The peaks were adorned with jewels that resembled the moon, and they caused doubt in the minds of people at night, as to which was the real moon. The buildings were illuminated by the light of Chandrakanta gems, and the ornate doorways were adorned with various jewels, which made them seem like they were made of gold. The floors of the buildings were made of jewels, and the ceilings were adorned with paintings of lotus flowers. The roads were made of jewels and gold, and they were as wide as a dry ocean. The city was surrounded by a wall made of jewels, and the towers were so high that they seemed to touch the heavens. The gates were adorned with jewels, and they were so high that they seemed to touch the clouds. The city was so beautiful that it was like the city of Indra. The king, Shrikant, lived in this city with his beloved Padmaabha, and they enjoyed themselves like Indra and Indrani. There was nothing in the Bhadrasala forest, the Saumanasa forest, or the Nandana forest that was not available to him. One day, Shrikant was sitting on the roof of his palace when he saw Indra going to the Nandishvara island to worship. Indra was adorned with a crown that made the sky look yellow, and he was playing music that made everyone deaf. He was riding on an elephant, a horse, a swan, a ram, a camel, a wolf, and a deer, and he was surrounded by a divine fragrance. Shrikant had heard about the Nandishvara island from the sages, and he remembered that it was a place of joy for the gods. He decided to go to the Nandishvara island with the gods, and he boarded a chariot that was made of jewels and had a bird made of jewels on it. He was stopped by a mountain that was made of jewels, and he was unable to proceed.

Page #157:
---------------------------
## Sixth Chapter
### 107

Seeing the celestial beings crossing the Manushottara mountain, Srikantha was filled with immense sorrow.  He lamented, "Alas, what a pity! The progress of humans with their limited powers is deplorable!"  He had a vision of worshipping the magnificent images of the Jinas in Nandishvara, with pure devotion, offering them various flowers, incense, and garlands, and bowing down with his head touching the ground.  He wondered, "How could my beautiful aspirations, made with such a simple heart, be shattered by the evil karmas accumulated in my past lives?"  He had heard many times that humans cannot cross the Manushottara mountain, but his faith, which had grown immensely, had made him forget this.  He was eager to go, despite his limited powers.  Therefore, he decided to perform actions that would ensure his journey to Nandishvara in his next life, without any obstacles.  With this firm resolve, he entrusted his kingdom to his son and became a great sage, renouncing all possessions.

### 152-155

His son, Vajrakantha, was enjoying the exquisite wealth of Kishkupura with his beloved Charunya, when he heard the story of his father's past life from the elders.  This ignited his dispassion, and he renounced his kingdom and embraced Jain initiation.  King Shrenik, hearing this, asked Gautam Ganadhar about the story of Srikantha's past life, which had made Vajrakantha renounce the world.  Ganadhar replied, "In their previous life, there were two brothers who were merchants.  They were very close, but their wives separated them.  The younger brother was poor, while the elder was wealthy.  The elder brother was obedient to a wealthy merchant, and through his association, he attained the status of a Shravaka.  However, the younger brother was addicted to hunting and other vices.  The elder brother was always saddened by his younger brother's condition."

Page #158:
---------------------------
In the Padma Purana,
'When the Alokasvahat Swami Purusha was released, after testing his brother's affection, he gave him great wealth. || 156 ||
Then, abandoning his wicked wife, he took initiation after instructing his younger brother. The elder brother became Indra, while the younger brother died in peace. || 157 ||
The younger brother's soul, having fallen from heaven, became Shrikant. To guide him, the elder brother's soul, who had become the glorious Indra, went to Nandishwar Dweep, revealing himself. || 158 ||
Seeing Indra, your father Shrikant regained his memory of his past life. The elders told this story to Vajrakant. || 159 ||
Hearing this story, Vajrakant became a muni, giving his kingdom to his son Vajra Prabha. Vajra Prabha also became a muni, giving his kingdom to his son Indramat. || 160 ||
Then, Indramat had a son named Meru, Meru had a son named Mandar, Mandar had a son named Samiranagati, Samiranagati had a son named Raviprabha, and Raviprabha had a son named Amaraprabha. Amaraprabha brought Gunavati, the daughter of the king of Lanka, to his city for marriage. || 161 - 162 ||
The ground where the wedding altar was built was as clear as a mirror. The wives of the Vidyadharas had created many wondrous paintings with jewels. In one place, there was a forest of lotuses embraced by bees, in another, a forest of blue lotuses, in another, a forest of half red and half blue lotuses, in another, pairs of swans with lotus stalks in their beaks, and in another, pairs of cranes, sarasa birds, and other birds. The Vidyadharas had also created images of monkeys with very smooth, five-colored, jeweled powder. Seeing these, the king of the Vidyadharas, Amaraprabha, was filled with great joy. It is right, for beautiful forms often captivate the hearts of even brave and noble men. || 163 - 167 ||
While King Amaraprabha was overjoyed, the bride Gunavati was terrified at the sight of the monkeys with their distorted faces. Her whole body trembled, and all her ornaments shook. || 168 ||

Page #159:
---------------------------
The Sixth Chapter

109. Her eyes, filled with fear, wandered about, unable to focus on anything. Her body trembled, as if she were showing the fear of a mortal. 169. The tilak on her forehead, smeared by drops of sweat, spread out. Though she was afraid, her actions were still graceful. Finally, she was so terrified that she clung to King Amaraprabha. 170. King Amaraprabha, who had been delighted by the monkeys earlier, was now filled with anger towards them. This is understandable, because even a beautiful object becomes distasteful when one sees the intention behind it. 171. Then he said, "Who painted these monkeys, with their various forms and fear-inducing appearances, for our wedding?" 172. "Surely, there is someone who envies me and is behind this. I will find him quickly and kill him myself." 173. Seeing the king consumed by anger, the wise old ministers spoke to him in soothing words. 174. "My lord, there is no one who hates you. How could anyone who hates you possibly live?" 175. "Be happy, and listen to the reason why the rows of monkeys were painted for the wedding celebration." 176. "In your lineage, there was a famous king named Shrikhantha, who created this beautiful city of Kishkupura, which is like heaven." 177. "Just as the root cause of actions is the cycle of desires and attachments, so too, this country, with its diverse forms, was created by King Shrikhantha." 178. "Even today, the Kinnaras, dwelling in the groves of the forests, sing the praises of that king, having attained the highest position." 179. "That king, with his steady nature and strength like Indra, removed the disgrace brought upon Lakshmi by her fickleness." 180. "It is said that he was amazed when he first saw these monkeys in this city, with their beautiful forms and human-like appearances." 181. "He played joyfully with these monkeys, who had various ways of behaving, and he made them comfortable by providing them with delicious food and drink." 182.

Page #160:
---------------------------
##  English Translation:

110
In the Padma Purana, it is said that from that time onwards, all those who were born in the lineage of that great one, the best of men, developed devotion and love for those monkeys. ||183|| 
Since your ancestors had established these monkeys as auspicious objects, they are now present in this auspicious event. ||184||
In any lineage where a particular object is worshipped as auspicious by the ancestors, if it is disregarded, then obstacles and hindrances arise. ||185||
However, if the same action is performed with devotion, it brings good fortune. Therefore, O King, you, who are wise and have a noble heart, should also worship these monkeys. ||186||
Upon hearing this from his ministers, Amaraprabha, the king, replied with great comfort. He discarded the anger that had arisen on his face while speaking. ||187||
He said, "If our ancestors worshipped these monkeys as auspicious, then why are they depicted on the earth where the feet and other parts of the body are placed?" ||188||
Out of respect for the elders, I will bow to them and wear them on my head. Make their images with jewels and other materials and place them on the crowns, flags, peaks of palaces, arches, and on the tops of umbrellas. Do this quickly." ||189||
The ministers, upon receiving this order, said "So be it" and carried out everything according to the king's wishes. Wherever you looked, there were monkeys everywhere. ||190-191||
Then, after enjoying great happiness with his queen, the desire to conquer Vijayaditya mountain arose in the heart of King Amaraprabha. So, he set out with his four-armed army. At that time, his flags bore the mark of the monkeys, and all the monkey-descendants praised him. ||192-193||
In the battle, which was a crushing defeat for the enemies, he conquered both armies, but he did not take their wealth. ||194||
This is right, because it is the vow of proud men to subdue their enemies, not to desire their wealth. ||195||
Then, King Amaraprabha, accompanied by the leading men of Vijayaditya mountain, returned to Kishku city after conquering the world. ||196||

Page #161:
---------------------------
The Sixth Chapter

111. Having attained the sovereignty of all the Vidyadharas, he enjoyed Lakshmi for a long time. Lakshmi was fickle, so he bound her with chains as if to make her steady. ||197||

Then a son was born to him named Kapiket. His queen was Sri-Prabha, who was the embodiment of virtues. ||198||

Seeing his son's prowess, Amaraprabha entrusted him with the kingdom and left the confines of his home. ||199||

Kapiket also left home, giving the kingdom to his son, Pratibala. This is quite common, as the former kings often saw the kingdom as a poisonous vine. ||200||

Those who have earned merit in their previous lives do not have a great attachment to the kingdom gained through their efforts. ||201||

Since virtuous men obtain Lakshmi effortlessly with little effort, they do not suffer when they abandon it. ||202||

Even if virtuous men somehow enjoy worldly pleasures, they soon become detached from them and desire the supreme state of liberation. ||203||

That happiness which is not achieved through means, but is dependent on the soul, is continuous, great, and without end - who would not desire such happiness? ||204||

Pratibala had a son named Gagan-ananda. Gagan-ananda had a son named Kshechar-ananda, and Kshechar-ananda had a son named Giri-nanda. ||205||

Thus, in the lineage of the Vanara-ketus, there were countless kings. Some of them attained heaven according to their karma, while others attained liberation. ||206||

Gautama Swami said to King Srenika, "O King! This is merely a description of the shadow of those born in the lineage. Who is capable of mentioning the names of all these men?" ||207||

In the world, one is known by one's characteristics. For example, a servant is known for his service, a farmer for his farming, an archer for his archery, a righteous person for his righteousness, a warrior for his protection of the suffering, and a Brahmin for his celibacy. ||208||

Just as those born in the Ikshvaku lineage are called Ikshvaku, and those born in the Nami-Vinamika lineage are called Vidyadharas because they possess knowledge, so too... ||209||

Page #162:
---------------------------
In the Padma Purana,
A king who abandons his kingdom and becomes a Shraman is considered great. He attains connection with tapasya, which is called shram. ||211|| This word is clearly distinct and has other uses. Just as one who holds a staff is called a "yashti" and one who holds a spear is called a "kunta," similarly, those who sit on a platform are called "mancha." ||212|| In the same way, those who have the mark of a monkey on their umbrellas and other things are known as "vanara" in the world. ||214|| The great Shreyansnath and Vasupujya, in their time, had the mark of a monkey on their crowns, and those who came after them in their lineage also followed this tradition. Indeed, following the practices of one's ancestors brings great joy. ||215-216|| Thus, the origin of the monkey lineage has been briefly explained. Now, I will tell you another story. ||217|| In the excellent city of Kishkun, there was a king of the vanara lineage named Mahodadhi. His wife was named Vidyutprakasha, who was a treasure trove of feminine qualities. She captivated her husband's heart with her actions. She was the crown jewel of hundreds of beautiful women, due to her good fortune, beauty, knowledge, and other actions. ||218-220|| This king, Mahodadhi, had one hundred and eight valiant sons. He entrusted the burden of the kingdom to them and enjoyed his pleasures. ||221|| In the tirtha of Muni Suvratnath, Mahodadhi was a famous vidyadhara. He always kept the vidyadharas captivated with his wondrous deeds. ||222|| At that time, in Lanka, there was a famous king named Vidyutkesha, who was like the moon in the sky of the Rakshasa lineage and was very dear to the people. ||223|| Mahodadhi and Vidyutkesha had great affection for each other, which grew due to their frequent visits to each other's places. Their minds were one, only their bodies were separate. ||224|| Knowing the greatness of Shramanhood, Vidyutkesha, who was like the sound of the ocean, embraced Shramanhood and became a master of the ultimate truth. ||225||

Page #163:
---------------------------
## Sixth Chapter

**113**  The श्रेणिक asked the गणनायक, "Why did Tadditkesha take such a difficult vow?" 

**226** The गणनायक replied, "Once, Tadditkesha went to play in the beautiful forest called Pramda, which had many places for recreation."

**227** "He would play in the lovely lakes filled with clear water, adorned with lotuses and blue lotuses, where large waves rose and boats moved gracefully."

**228** "He would swing on the magnificent swings, with comfortable seats, tied to tall trees, that soared high."

**229** "He would climb the golden mountains, with steps leading to their peaks, adorned with jewels, and surrounded by groves of trees."

**230** "He would play among the groves of trees, beautiful with fruits and flowers, adorned with swaying leaves, and embraced by vines."

**231** "He would play among women whose graceful movements and playful gestures could even disturb the minds of the munis. Their hands, like blooming buds, were busy plucking flowers. Their bodies, bearing heavy hips, were marked with drops of sweat. Their large pearl necklaces bounced with the movement of their breasts, adding to their beauty. Their waists, adorned with delicate lines, sometimes disappeared and sometimes reappeared. Their minds were distracted, trying to shoo away the intoxicated bees attracted by their breath. They held their loose garments with their hands, and their eyes darted about."

**232-235** "Thus, the king of the Rakshasas, Tadditkesha, was enjoying himself among many women."

**236** "Then, while Tadditkesha's queen, Shrichandra, was engrossed in play, a monkey came and tore her breasts with his sharp claws."

**237** "The monkey, naturally disrespectful, was filled with extreme remorse and his eyes were distorted with anger."

**238** "Tadditkesha, seeing his beloved bleeding, comforted her and then, drawing his bow, killed the monkey."

**225**  Upon hearing this news, the महाओदधि, a seeker of the ultimate truth, took the muni-diksha.

Page #164:
---------------------------
114
Padma Purana
!

He quickly went there and fell to the ground. Where the sages, the aerial beings, reside. ||239|| Seeing the monkey trembling and wounded, the sages, who knew the state of the world, felt compassion. ||240|| They taught him the five prostrations, along with the renunciation of all possessions, and the wealth of austerities, which are accompanied by righteous giving. ||241|| Then, abandoning his deformed monkey form, he became the Mahoudadhi Kumar, a celestial being with a magnificent form, in an instant. ||242|| Then, as the celestial being was about to kill the other monkeys, the Mahoudadhi Kumar, knowing his past life, arrived there. He worshipped his former body. ||243|| Seeing the group of monkeys being killed by cruel men, he, with the power of his karma, created a great army of monkeys. ||244|| Their mouths were terrible with sharp fangs, their brows were furrowed, their color was like red ochre, and they made fearsome sounds. ||245|| Some were lifting mountains in their hands, some were uprooting trees, some were pounding the earth with their hands, and others were shaking the earth. ||246|| Their bodies were filled with the weight of anger, making them appear like the great Rudra, and they were leaping far and wide. These magical monkeys, filled with rage, spoke to the monkey king, the celestial being, Vidhyutkesh, who was filled with delusion. ||247|| "Stop, stop, you wicked one! You are now in the grip of death. O sinner! Having killed the monkey, where will you go for refuge now?" ||248|| Saying this, they filled the entire sky with their hands, which held mountains, so much so that even a needle could not be seen. ||249|| Then, filled with wonder, Vidhyutkesh thought, "This is not the power of the monkeys, it must be something else." ||250|| Then, abandoning hope for his body, Vidhyutkesh, the wise in the science of ethics, spoke to the monkeys with sweet words and humility. ||251|| "O virtuous ones! Tell me, who are you? Your bodies are shining brightly. This power of yours does not seem to be the natural power of monkeys." ||252||

Page #165:
---------------------------
## Sixth Chapter

115. Seeing the celestial leader adorned with humility, the great ocean prince spoke these words:

253. You, being of the nature of the animal species, are extremely fickle. The monkey who was killed by you for offending his wife, was I.

254. By the grace of the virtuous, I have attained this divine state, endowed with great power and possessing all desired wealth.

255. Seeing my glory, you should know this, and saying so, he revealed his supreme fortune to him.

256. Then, overcome with fear, he trembled throughout his body. His heart was shattered, his hair stood on end, and his eyes rolled.

257. The great ocean prince said to him, "Do not be afraid."  Distressed, he spoke in a choked voice, "What should I do?"

258. Then, that celestial being took him to the venerable one who had given him the five prostrations mantra. After circumambulating him, they both prostrated at his feet.

259. The monkey, by virtue of his good deeds, has attained this divine state. By attaining you, the compassionate one, as my guru, I have attained this divine state.

260. Addressing him as "Devendra," he praised him again and again. He was also worshipped with great offerings and prostrated at his feet.

261. Seeing this wonder, the celestial being, the repository of austerities, asked, "What should I do?" He spoke words of benefit.

262. "My guru, who is endowed with the four knowledges, is near here. Let us go to him, for this is the eternal Dharma."

263. "He who, while dwelling near the Acharya, does not go to him and instead acts as the Acharya himself, is a foolish disciple who abandons discipleship from afar.

264. He is neither a disciple nor an Acharya, he is devoid of Dharma, he is a follower of the wrong path, he is corrupted in all his conduct, and he is condemned by the virtuous."

265. Hearing this, the celestial being and the Vidyadhara were filled with wonder. They both, along with their families, thought this.

Page #166:
---------------------------
## Chapter 116

**116**

Oh, the supreme greatness of the Papuraana, surpassing even the merit of austerities! Even for a sage like this, there exists another Guru. ||267||

Then, in the outskirts of his hermitage, there were those who were guided by the virtuous, and also gods and celestial beings, whose minds were filled with a longing for Dharma. ||268||

Going there, they circumambulated the sage with reverence and prostrated themselves before him. They did not stand too far away, nor too close. ||269||

Then, seeing the supreme form of the sage, blazing with the brilliance born of his austerities, the gods and celestial beings were filled with a certain anxiety arising from their devotion to Dharma. Their lotus-like eyes were filled with joy and wonder, and they were all imbued with great humility. ||270-271||

Then, the gods and celestial beings, with folded hands, asked the sage about Dharma and its appropriate fruits. ||272||

Then, the sage, whose mind was always engaged in the welfare of beings, and whose actions were always far removed from the causes of worldly existence, spoke in a voice as deep as the roar of a rain-laden cloud, explaining the supreme Dharma that brings about the welfare of the world. ||273-274||

As he spoke, the groups of peacocks, dwelling in the arbors, danced in joy, their cries echoing like thunder. ||275||

The sage said, "O gods and celestial beings! Listen attentively, with your minds fixed on Dharma, as I explain its nature as revealed by the Jinas, the bringers of joy to the world." ||276||

"Many lowly beings, whose minds are dull and incapable of reflection, in the name of Dharma, actually indulge in Adharma." ||277||

"A deluded person, who, without knowing the direction, thinks, 'This is the way,' and goes in the opposite direction, will not reach his desired destination, even after a long time." ||278||

"Those who are attached to worldly pleasures, with minds devoid of reflection, indulge in Adharma, which is called Dharma in stories and myths, born of acts like killing beings." ||279||

"Those who, with such intentions, indulge in Adharma, contaminated by false beliefs, become destined for the suffering of the animal and hell realms." ||280||

"Deluded by the meaning of scriptures filled with a web of false arguments and the punishments of their gurus, they strike their foreheads in the hope of attaining Dharma." ||281||

**Commentary:**

This passage highlights the importance of true Dharma and the dangers of false beliefs and actions. It emphasizes the need for reflection, understanding, and guidance from a true Guru. The passage also describes the joy and wonder that arises from witnessing the supreme form of a sage who has attained liberation through austerities.

Page #167:
---------------------------
## Sixth Chapter

117. Even if there is a little bit of Dharma in some false teachings, which are devoid of violence and other sins, and which preach bodily labor, it is still rootless because of the absence of Right Faith. Such beings have a small, ignorant character, which is not a means of liberation.

282-283. A lump of clay is also earthly, and a Vaidurya gem is also earthly. But, due to the commonality of being earthly, their qualities are not equal.

284. Dharma as described by the wrong-sighted is like a lump of clay, while Dharma as described by the Jina is like a Vaidurya gem, even though the name "Dharma" is the same for both.

285. The root of Dharma is compassion, and the root of compassion is non-violence. For those who are attached to possessions, violence is constantly arising.

286. Besides compassion, truthful speech is also Dharma, but truthful speech is that which does not cause suffering to others.

287. Renunciation of taking what is not given, avoidance of another's wife, contentment in acquiring wealth, restraint of the senses, thinning of the passions, and humility of the wise, are the vows of the Right-Faithful householders. Listen to the Dharma of those who are without homes.

288-289. Those who ride on the elevated back of the elephant of the five great vows, whose bodies are covered with the strong, impenetrable armor of the three guptas, who are accompanied by the five groups of foot soldiers, and who are equipped with a multitude of sharp weapons of various austerities, are the great kings, the Digambaras, who are surrounded by ministers of passions and ride on the elephant of delusion, and who destroy the enemy of the world.

290-292. When all beginnings are renounced and Right Faith is embraced, then the Dharma of the monks is attained. This is the essence of Dharma.

293. This Dharma is the cause of attaining the wealth of the three worlds. The best of men have declared this Dharma to be the supreme auspiciousness.

294. What other quality of Dharma can be spoken of that is greater than this, by which the peak of the three worlds is attained, along with great happiness?

295. Beings, desiring to attain Dharma, strike the sky with great punishments, meaning they consider actions that have no trace of Dharma to be Dharma.

Page #168:
---------------------------
##  English Translation:

**118**

**296.** In the Padma Purana, it is said that a person enjoys great merits in heaven by the virtue of the householder's path. These merits are accumulated by the mind, while residing amidst the group of deities.

**297.** However, through the path of renunciation (Jain monasticism), a human being attains liberation, which is unparalleled, free from suffering, and eternal bliss.

**298.** Those who are excellent beings, even after falling from heaven, attain the path of Jain monasticism and achieve the supreme state (liberation) within two or three lifetimes.

**299.** Even though those who are sinful and have wrong views may attain heaven by chance, they fall from there and wander in lower births.

**300.** The teachings of the Jinas are the best words, the austerities prescribed by them are the best, the religion they preach is the supreme religion, and the philosophy they teach is the ultimate philosophy.

**301.** Just as a person going to a city finds the confluence of tree roots, etc., effortlessly, similarly, a person who sets out on the path of liberation guided by the teachings of the Jinas, effortlessly obtains the blessings of deities, celestial beings, etc.

**302.** It is not surprising that the Jain religion is the cause of the enjoyments of Indra and others, because even ordinary merit can lead to such enjoyments.

**304.** Any conduct or knowledge that is contrary to the householder's path and the path of renunciation is called "adharma" (unrighteousness).

**305.** Due to this unrighteousness, a being wanders in various hellish realms, where it experiences various kinds of suffering caused by vehicles, beatings, cutting, piercing, and exposure to cold and heat.

**306.** Due to this unrighteousness, a being wanders in numerous hells filled with perpetual darkness. Some of these hells are characterized by constant shivering due to icy winds, while others are engulfed in flames of fire that appear terrifying due to sparks.

**307.** Some hells are filled with various kinds of machines that make loud noises, while others are filled with lions, tigers, wolves, jackals, and vultures created by karma.

**308.** Some hells are filled with trees that rain down discs, axes, spears, swords, etc.

**295.** What other excellent quality can be attributed to a religion that leads to liberation (moksha)? This is the supreme quality of religion: it leads to liberation.

**296-297.** Through the householder's path, a human being resides amidst a group of deities in heaven and enjoys the best of pleasures simply by willing them. However, through the path of renunciation, he attains liberation, which is unparalleled, free from suffering, and eternal bliss.

**298.** Excellent beings who fall from heaven, upon taking the path of Jain monasticism, attain the supreme state (liberation) within two or three lifetimes.

**299.** However, sinful beings with wrong views, even if they attain heaven by chance, fall from there and wander in lower births.

**300.** The teachings of the Jinas are the best words, the austerities prescribed by them are the best, the religion they preach is the supreme religion, and the philosophy they teach is the ultimate philosophy.

**301-302.** Just as a person going to a city finds the confluence of tree roots, etc., effortlessly, similarly, a person who sets out on the path of liberation guided by the teachings of the Jinas, effortlessly obtains the blessings of deities, celestial beings, etc.

**303.** It is not surprising that the Jain religion is the cause of the enjoyments of Indra and others, because even ordinary merit can lead to such enjoyments.

**304.** Any conduct or knowledge that is contrary to the householder's path and the path of renunciation is called "adharma" (unrighteousness).

**305.** Due to this unrighteousness, a being wanders in various hellish realms, where it experiences various kinds of suffering caused by vehicles, beatings, cutting, piercing, and exposure to cold and heat.

**306.** Due to this unrighteousness, a being wanders in numerous hells filled with perpetual darkness. Some of these hells are characterized by constant shivering due to icy winds, while others are engulfed in flames of fire that appear terrifying due to sparks.

**307.** Some hells are filled with various kinds of machines that make loud noises, while others are filled with lions, tigers, wolves, jackals, and vultures created by karma.

**308.** Some hells are filled with trees that rain down discs, axes, spears, swords, etc.

Page #169:
---------------------------
The Sixth Chapter
119
Some are given molten lead, tin, etc. to drink. Some are tormented by sharp-beaked flies, etc. Some are filled with worms and blood-soaked mud. Some are tormented by each other.  ||309-310||
In such ways, the suffering that living beings experience in hell is impossible to describe. ||311||
Just as you both wandered through many painful births in the past, so too will you wander again if you remain devoid of Dharma. ||312||
Thus questioned by the Dev and the Vidyadhara, the supreme Shraman said, "Tell me, how did you both wander through these miserable births?" ||313||
Then, adorned with the ornament of restraint, the Shraman spoke these sweet words, "My dear ones, calm your minds." ||314||
You both wandered in this world of suffering, driven by delusion, killing each other. ||315||
You both attained human birth through karma, but it is very difficult to find Dharma in this world. ||316||
One of you became a minister named Suyashodata in the city of Sravasti in the land of Kashi. Suyashodata was very handsome, and he took initiation and wandered the earth, engaged in great austerities. ||317||
While wandering, Suyashodata Muni arrived in Kashi and sat in a secluded place. Many women of the right faith came to worship him. Seeing the Muni surrounded by women, the wicked hunter, wielding weapons of sharp words, began to frighten him. ||318-320||
"This shameless, naked, and unbathed man, covered in filth, is a great misfortune for me, who is out hunting." ||321||
As the hunter, wielding a fearsome bow, spoke these words, the Muni's meditation became clouded with sorrow. ||322||
Thinking, "I will crush this sinful hunter to dust with a single blow of my fist," he became filled with anger. ||323||

Page #170:
---------------------------
## English Translation:

120
The merit that Kapishtha had earned, which would have enabled him to attain heaven, was lost in a moment due to his anger. ||32||  After that, he became a Jyotish-deva (celestial being associated with light) due to some equanimity. From there, you became a Vidyutkesha (lightning-haired) Vidyadhara. ||325|| And the Vyadha (hunter) wandered for a long time in the forest of Samsara (cycle of birth and death) and became a monkey in the pleasure garden of Lanka. ||326|| Due to his fickleness, he killed him with an arrow for a woman. Finally, he attained the Panchanamaskaara mantra and became a deva named Mahodadhi. ||327||  Knowing this, O Deva Vidyadharas! Abandon your mutual enmity so that you may not have to wander in Samsara again. ||328|| O Bhadra-purushas (noble beings)! You are devoted to Bhadra-achara (noble conduct), therefore aspire for the happiness of the Siddhas (perfected beings), which cannot be praised by any human. ||329||  Salute Munisuvrata Bhagavan, who is worshipped by Indra and other Devas, with utmost devotion. ||330||  Having attained refuge in him, who has completed his own welfare and is engaged in the welfare of others, you will attain supreme happiness. ||331||  Then, Vidyutkesha, like a lotus, was awakened by the rays of the sun, which emerged from the mouth of the Muni (sage). ||332||  He, the valiant, transferred his position to his son, Sukesha, and became a disciple of the Muni, who is adorned with the fourfold virtues. ||333||  Then, he worshipped the three jewels - Samyagdarshan (right faith), Samyagjnana (right knowledge), and Samyakcharitra (right conduct) - and became a supreme deva due to the power of Samadhi (meditation). ||334||
Meanwhile, Mahodadhi, the lord of Kishkupura, was sitting on the peak of a magnificent palace, adorned with beautiful women who shone like lightning, and bathed in the rays of the moon, enjoying the nectar of a beautiful gathering, like Indra. ||335-336||  At that time, a Vidyadhara, wearing white clothes, arrived with great speed, stood before him, and respectfully bowed. Then, he informed Vidyutkesha about his desire to take Diksha (initiation). Hearing this, Mahodadhi, being detached from worldly pleasures, decided to take Diksha. ||337-338|| 
1. क्षणाद्भस्ममुपागतम् म० । 2. वांछितं खः । 3. -द्वीरो म० ।

Page #171:
---------------------------
When he said, "I am taking the vows," a great wail arose from the inner palace. The echo of that lament reverberated throughout the entire palace. ||339|| The lament of the women, a mixture of the sounds of the veena, flute, and mridanga, was so powerful that it even moved the mind of the muni, causing him to be filled with compassion. ||340|| At that time, the Yuvaraja also arrived there. With tears that could not be contained flowing in torrents, he said respectfully, "Vidutkesa, your son, Sukesa, has been entrusted to you out of great love. He has ascended the new throne and is now worthy of your protection." ||341-342|| The wise ministers, whose hearts were filled with sorrow, also encouraged him by citing many examples from the scriptures, saying, "Enjoy this magnificent, unhindered kingdom like Indra, and make your youth successful with excellent pleasures." ||343-344|| The women, whose heads were bowed at his feet, who were expressing their intense love through their virtues, and whose eyes were streaming with tears, tried to please him by saying, "O Lord! You are leaving us all as orphans, like a tree leaving its vines behind. Where are you going?" ||345-346|| "O Lord! This beautiful kingdom, like a devoted wife, has been bound to you for a long time by your excellent virtues. Where are you going, leaving her behind?" The Samantas, whose cheeks were wet with tears, also pleaded together, but even all of them together could not change his mind. ||347-348|| Finally, he severed the bonds of affection, renounced all possessions, and entrusted the kingdom to his son, Pratichandra. He then embraced the difficult Daigambari Lakshmi, the monastic vows, with a detached mind. He was a man of great intellect, extremely serious, and his gentleness made him seem like the moon, eternally fixed on the surface of the earth. ||349-350|| Then, mounted on the elephant of meditation, the Muni Maharaj, with the sharp arrow of the ocean of knowledge, severed the head of the enemy, the world, and entered the Siddhavana, the realm of liberation. ||351|| After that, Pratichandra also gave the kingdom to his elder son, Kishkindha, and the Yuvaraja position to his younger son, Andhrakarudi. ||352||

Page #172:
---------------------------
In the Padma Purana, 
One day, having taken the Jain path, he became steadfast. He went to the place frequented by the Siddhas, pure in his yoga. ||353||
Then, both brothers, eager to perform their duty, roamed the earth. They were both radiant, like the sun and the moon, their brilliance clashing. ||354||
Meanwhile, in the southern part of the mountain range, in the sky, there was a city named Rathanupura, resembling a city of the gods. ||355||
There, the lord of both the clans was a mighty warrior, named Asanivega, who instilled fear in his enemies. ||356||
His son was Vijayasimha. He desired to marry the daughter of the king of Aditya-pura, named Srimalā, who was born to the Vidya-dhara king Vidya-mandara and his queen Vegavati. She was so beautiful that she eclipsed the sky with her radiance. Seeing his daughter in her youth, Vidya-mandara, with the consent of his relatives, arranged a Swayamvara. Vijayasimha, the son of Asanivega, desired Srimalā, and thus, driven by his love for her beauty, he went to the Swayamvara. ||357-359||
All the other celestial beings, adorned with their bodies, filled the sky with their jeweled chariots, quickly arriving to pay their respects. ||360||
Then, on beautiful platforms, supported by pillars of jewels, adorned with lofty seats, and radiating with the brilliance of embedded gems, the chief celestial beings sat in their respective places. They were accompanied by a limited retinue, useful for their bodily needs. ||361-362||
Then, in the midst of all the celestial beings, the eyes of all, like blue lotuses, fell upon Srimalā, who was seated in the center. ||363||
Then, the celestial beings, whose hopes were set on the Swayamvara, and whose minds were captivated by desire, displayed beautiful gestures. ||364||
One celestial being, though his crown on his head was steady, was making it steady with his hand, covered in the radiance of jewels. ||365||
Another, placing his elbow near his waist, was twisting his body, yawning. His action made the joints of his body crackle. ||366||
Another, with his hand, was pushing away a bright, sword-like ray of light, which was standing in his path, and looking at it with a sidelong glance. ||367||

Page #173:
---------------------------
**Sixth Chapter**  
123
A certain man on the side was moving a chāmara, casting occasional sidelong glances at it. The chāvara, with its soft, silky appearance, revolved gently in the hands of the performer. (368) Covering his face with his left hand, one man with an elevated arm drew back his right arm and released a fist. (369) Gradually lifting a foot from the seated position, another one placed it gently on the left thigh, engaging in the pleasure of the right side. (370) A certain youth, who was observed by a young woman with his toe directed at her, was scratching his foot resting on the palm of his hand. (371) Someone managed the tightly bound waist string, resembling a cluster of jewels like the serpent Śeṣa, releasing it firmly and once again binding it slowly. (372) One particular youth was intertwining his fingers, tilting them upward, while puffing up his chest to raise an arch of his arms. (373) Another youth, with eyes wandering towards the young woman, was smiling as he took the hand of a friend beside him, engaging in light-hearted conversation. (374) A young man, upon whose chest was smeared sandalwood paste and on whom saffron was applied, was gazing down at that expansive chest. (375) Another vidyādhar was entangling the curly hair hanging down on his forehead with the fingers of his left hand. (376) One young man, with red lips from chewing clean betel, was slowly pulling them with his left hand, raising his eyebrows. (377) Another young one was spreading the pollen of grains with his right hand while twirling a lotus upon which bees were hovering. (378) At that time, within the assembly of svayamvara, a great sound was being generated by the veenas, flutes, conches, mridangas, and the musical instruments known as kahala, bheri, and mardaka. (379) Observing the actions of great individuals, who were inwardly pleased and had formed separate groups, the musical offerings were being recited. (380) After that, as the great clamor subsided, the auspicious woman named Sumangalā, holding a golden staff in her right hand, spoke the following words to the bride. At that time: 1. śaṇḍaṣṭaḥ. 2. mūrdhni kha. 3. maṇḍalaiḥ ma., muḍḍukaiḥ ka. 4. vṛddha-m.

Page #174:
---------------------------
124
In the Padma Purana, the words of the girls with bowed heads and adorned with jewels, resembling the wish-fulfilling tree, were spoken. 
[382]
Their friendship, with soft hands like lotus flowers, was abandoned. They were standing on a palanquin, adorned with the color of the Makara flag. 
[383]
The king of this city, named Nabhastilaka, was born to the queen Vimala, the daughter of the king Chandra Kundala. 
[384]
His name is Martanda Kundala, he conquers the sun with his brilliance, he is endowed with qualities like peace, war, etc., and for all these reasons, he has attained supreme prominence in his circle. 
[385]
When the qualities of kings are discussed in assemblies, wise men first mention his name, and due to excessive joy, their bodies become filled with thorns of goosebumps. 
[386]
Daughter, if you have a desire to enjoy with him, then accept this Martanda Kundala, who has seen the essence of all scriptures. 
[387]
Then, the king of the Vidyadharas, whose youth had somewhat faded, was rejected by Sri Mala simply by lowering her face. 
[388]
Then, Sumangala, the nurse, said to her daughter, "Look at this prince, who is the lord of all men, with his brilliance, radiance, and glory." 
[389]
He is the lord of Ratnapura, the son of King Vidyanga and Queen Lakshmi, his name is Vidyasamudhata, and he is the lord of all Vidyadharas. 
[390]
When his name is heard, enemies tremble like the leaves of a peepal tree shaken by the wind, fearing his prowess. 
[391]
Lakshmi, who was tired of wandering among many petty kings, has found rest, as it were, on his broad chest, adorned with a necklace as a pillow. 
[392]
Daughter, if you have a desire to sit in his lap, then accept him. May lightning unite with Mount Meru. 
[393]
Then, Sri Mala looked at him with simple eyes, and he was rejected. This is right, because a girl's gaze becomes unsteady when she looks at the one she desires as her husband. 
[394]
Then, Sumangala, knowing her intention, told her that she would see the king again. 
[395]
The girl, with her humility and adorned with jewels, appeared like a wish-fulfilling tree. 
[381-382]
Although her soft lotus-like hands were resting on her friend's shoulder, they were slipping down. She was seated on a palanquin and was ready to reveal her choice. 
[383]
Sumangala, the nurse, introducing the arriving princes, said, "Daughter, this is the king of Nabhastilaka, born to Queen Vimala, the daughter of King Chandra Kundala." 
[384]
His name is Martanda Kundala, he conquers the sun with his brilliance, he is endowed with qualities like peace, war, etc., and for all these reasons, he has attained supreme prominence in his circle. 
[385]
When the qualities of kings are discussed in assemblies, wise men first mention his name, and due to excessive joy, their bodies become filled with thorns of goosebumps. 
[386]
Daughter, if you have a desire to enjoy with him, then accept this Martanda Kundala, who has seen the essence of all scriptures. 
[387]
Then, the king of the Vidyadharas, whose youth had somewhat faded, was rejected by Sri Mala simply by lowering her face. 
[388]
Then, Sumangala, the nurse, said to her daughter, "Look at this prince, who is the lord of all men, with his brilliance, radiance, and glory." 
[389]
He is the lord of Ratnapura, the son of King Vidyanga and Queen Lakshmi, his name is Vidyasamudhata, and he is the lord of all Vidyadharas. 
[390]
When his name is heard, enemies tremble like the leaves of a peepal tree shaken by the wind, fearing his prowess. 
[391]
Lakshmi, who was tired of wandering among many petty kings, has found rest, as it were, on his broad chest, adorned with a necklace as a pillow. 
[392]
Daughter, if you have a desire to sit in his lap, then accept him. May lightning unite with Mount Meru. 
[393]
Then, Sri Mala looked at him with simple eyes, and he was rejected. This is right, because a girl's gaze becomes unsteady when she looks at the one she desires as her husband. 
[394]
Then, Sumangala, knowing her intention, told her that she would see the king again. 
[395]

Page #175:
---------------------------
## Sixth Chapter

This is the son of Vajrayudha, born of Vajrashila. He is the king of the city named Vajrapanjara. || 396 || 

On both his arms, Lakshmi, shining like the sun, resides, though fickle by nature, she remains steadfast. || 397 ||

There are others who are called Khecharas, but they are merely in name. This one, however, shines like the sun, surpassing those who are like fireflies. || 398 ||

His head, naturally tall, has attained the highest height. The crown adorned with sparkling gems, is only for further enhancement. || 399 ||

Beautiful one, accept this lord of the Vidya-bhrutas, if you desire all the pleasures like Shachi. || 400 ||

Seeing the Khechara-bhanu, the sun-like Khechara, the maiden Kumudvati felt extreme shyness. Seeing this, the nurse spoke again. || 401 ||

This is the son of Chitramvara and Padma-shri, born from her womb. He is the eternal king of Chandra-pura, known as Chandra-nana. || 402 ||

See, his chest is broad, adorned with beautiful sandalwood. It is embraced by the rays of the moon, resembling the banks of Kailasa. || 403 ||

His chest is adorned with a necklace of leaping pearls, like a waterfall cascading from Kailasa. || 404 ||

The letters of his name, like rays, embrace the mind of even an enemy, bringing supreme joy, free from sorrow and pain. || 405 ||

If your heart finds joy in his beautiful form, then like the night with the moon, you should unite with him. || 406 ||

But her mind did not find joy in him, just as the lotus does not find joy in the moon, which brings delight to the eyes. || 407 ||

Then the nurse said, "Daughter, look at this Purandara. He has descended to earth, desiring your union. He is indeed Purandara, Indra himself." || 408 ||

This is the son of Merukanta and Shrir-ambha, born from her womb. He is the lord of Mandara-kunja, his voice like thunder. || 409 ||

Taking her to the king, she said, || 395 ||

"This king, Khechara-bhanu, the son of Vajrayudha and Vajrashila, resides in the city named Vajrapanjara." || 396 ||

Page #176:
---------------------------
126
Padma Purana
Those who are afflicted with fear in battle are unable to bear the sight of him who has come face to face. How then can they withstand the arrows of those who are skilled in warfare? || 410 || I believe that even Indra, the lord of the gods, would be afraid of him. Indeed, his unbroken prowess roams the entire earth. || 411 || O beautiful one with shapely hips, during the time of loving conflict, strike his exalted head with your foot. || 412 || Even Purandara, the king, could not find a place in his heart. This is because the minds of people are diverse due to their own actions. || 413 || Just as a wave in a lake carries a lotus to another lotus, so too did the nurse take the girl to another Vidyadhara in the lake of all virtues, saying, "O daughter, look at this king, Mahabala. This king was born to the queen named Vegini by the power of Manojava. His speed is like that of the wind." || 414 - 415 || He is the lord of the city of Naka, his pure qualities are beyond calculation. || 416 || By the wind generated by the speed of his own body, he makes the entire earth revolve, causing mountains to fall. || 417 || By the power of his knowledge, he can make the earth ascend to the sky and show all the planets to those who dwell on the earth. || 418 || Or he can create a fourth world besides the three worlds, make the sun as cool as the moon, pulverize Mount Meru, make the wind still, dry up the ocean, and give form to the sky. Or what more to say? Whatever he desires, it happens. || 419-420 || The nurse said all this correctly, but the girl's mind did not find a place in him. The girl knew all the scriptures, so she understood that the nurse was exaggerating - there was no truth in her words. || 421 || Thus, the girl abandoned many Vidyadharas who were endowed with the power of knowledge, whose wealth had been described by the nurse. || 422 || Thereafter, just as the moonbeam leaves the mountains and they become dark, so too did the girl leave the Vidyadharas, and they became filled with sorrow. || 423 ||

Page #177:
---------------------------
**Sixth Chapter**

Seeing the unique *khecharas* [sky-dwellers] and their mutual gaze, the intention was to enter the earth, as if the earth itself were cracked and about to swallow them (*strēpāvatām*). ||424|| Then, the *Dhātrī* [nurturer], adorned with the light of the *khecharas*, was heard, and her gaze fell upon *Kishkindha-kumāra* [the prince of Kishkindha] with great respect. ||425|| Then, the ornament of wreaths appeared in the sight of those present, and affectionate conversations were exchanged through this wreath. ||426|| Thereafter, the glances of *Vijaya-Siṃha* [Victorious Lion] fell upon *Kishkindha* and *Andhaka*, filled with pride due to their mastery of knowledge (*vidyā-vīrye*). ||427|| "What is this *vidyādhara* society here? Where have you two *khecharas* come?" said the prideful *Vijaya-Siṃha*, observing their deformed appearance: "You are insignificant, monkeys, devoid of humility." ||428|| "Here there is no lovely forest filled with fruits, nor are there beautiful mountains with waterfalls." ||429|| "The groups of *vanarīs* [monkey-like beings] with faces red like flesh do not engage in ill deeds as desired." ||430|| "Who has called these monstrous *vanar* [monkey-shaped beings]? Today, I shall destroy that wretched messenger!" ||431|| "Let us eradicate these wicked beings from this place, and drive away their faith in achieving the *vidyādhari*." ||432|| Angered by this harsh speech from *Vijaya-Siṃha*, both *Kishkindha* and *Andhaka* became highly disturbed, like elephants disturbed by a lion. ||433|| Then, the *śakti* (energy/power) of the remarks made about their lord caused the *vidyādhara* army to engage in fierce actions, as if acting madly aloud. ||434|| Some *sāmanta* (chief) began to strike the left shoulder with his right hand, causing those around to be splattered with blood. ||435|| Another chief, his mind deeply disturbed, cast a fierce gaze upon the enemies with anger, his eyes reddened like the fire of destruction. ||436|| A soldier, trembling with rage, touched his chest with his right hand, while...

Page #178:
---------------------------
128
In the Padma Purana, someone struck another's hand with a smile, so much so that the traveler became deaf for a long time. ||438|| Someone uprooted a branch of a great tree whose roots were firmly bound to the earth, and which was bearing tender leaves. ||439|| A monkey took the pillar of a stage and broke it on his shoulder, so that the sky was filled with its scattered fragments. ||440|| Someone twisted his body so violently that his healed wounds burst open again, and his body, drenched in copious streams of blood, resembled the havoc of a deluge. ||441|| Someone laughed with a wide open mouth, as if he wanted to fill the entire universe with sound. ||442|| Someone shook his matted hair so violently that it filled all directions, and it seemed as if night had fallen for a long time. ||443|| Someone struck his left arm with his right hand, clenched tight, making a terrible, thunderous sound. ||444|| "O wicked Vidyadharas! Suffer this destruction as the fruit of your harsh words!" Thus, someone's mouth was filled with sound, that is, someone was shouting these words. ||445|| Then, because of that unprecedented insult, the monkey-race came forward to destroy the army of the Vidyadharas. ||446|| Then, elephants fought with elephants, charioteers with charioteers, and foot soldiers with foot soldiers, engaging in a terrible battle. ||447|| Thus, a great battle took place between the two armies, a battle so great that it filled the group of gods standing afar with wonder. ||448|| Hearing the news of the battle, the king of the Rakshasas, named Sukesha, a friend of Kishkindha and Andhraka, arrived there immediately, like a wish fulfilled. ||449|| Just as there was a great battle before for the sake of Akompana's daughter, Sulochana, so too is this battle happening now, for women are the cause of war. ||450||
1. संकोचिते म.। 2. साम्प्रतम् म.। 3. दुष्टविद्याधराः । 4. मुखराननाः मः। 5. सहनात् म.।

Page #179:
---------------------------
## Sixth Chapter

129. While the fierce battle raged between the Vidyadharas and Rakshasas, Kishkindha, having abducted the maiden, fled the battlefield. ||451||

Upon seeing the Vidyadhara king, Vijayasimha, approach, Andhrakabhu, with a mocking laugh, struck down his head with his sword. ||452||

Just as a body without a soul becomes a mere collection of senses, so too did the Vidyadhara army become scattered without Vijayasimha. ||453||

Hearing of his son's death, Asanivega was struck with grief, like a man struck by lightning. He was enveloped in the darkness of unconsciousness. ||454||

After a while, his chest soaked with the tears of his wives, Asanivega regained consciousness, his face contorted with rage. ||455||

His retinue could not bear to look upon his form, which resembled the blazing sun at the time of the apocalypse. ||456||

Surrounded by Vidyadharas, their weapons gleaming, he marched towards Kishkupura, like a towering mountain. ||457||

Knowing the city was besieged, the two brothers, Kishkindha and Sukeśa, accompanied by Taḍikeśi, marched out, eager for battle. ||458||

The Vanara and Rakshasa armies, armed with maces, javelins, arrows, nooses, spears, and swords, destroyed the Vidyadhara forces. ||459||

Wherever Andhrak, Kishkindha, or Sukeśa went, the path was littered with the corpses of slain Vanaras. ||460||

Fueled by the fire of his son's death, Asanivega, with a thunderous roar, charged towards Andhrak. ||461||

Seeing the young and wicked Andhrak, and the arrogant Asanivega, Kishkindha, the embodiment of thunder, rose to meet them. ||462||

Asanivega's son, Vidyudvahana, stood before him, and a fierce battle ensued. For it is said that all defeat in the world is caused by women. ||463||

While the terrible battle between Kishkindha and Vidyudvahana raged, Asanivega slew Andhrak. ||464||

Page #180:
---------------------------
130
In the Padma Purana, the young Andhrak fell to the earth, devoid of radiance. He lay lifeless, resembling the pale light of the morning moon. ||465||  
Kishkindha, struck by a stone thrown at his chest by the lightning-chariot, fainted. But regaining consciousness, he hurled the same stone at Kishkindha's chest, causing him to fall unconscious. ||466-467||
Then, filled with love, the king of Lanka, Lakenndra, took him to Kishkupur, neglecting his own safety. After a long time, Kishkindha regained consciousness. ||468||
When he opened his eyes and did not see Andhrak, he asked those standing nearby, "Where is my brother?" ||469||
At that moment, like the ocean churned by the winds of destruction, he heard the cries of the inner palace, caused by Andhrak's demise. ||470||
Overwhelmed by grief, Kishkindha lamented for a long time, his heart filled with waves of sorrow born from the contemplation of his brother's virtues. ||471||
"Oh brother! How could you die while I am alive? Your death has broken my right arm." ||472||
"How could that wicked, evil man strike you, a mere child, with a weapon? A curse upon that unjust villain!" ||473||
"I, who would become anxious even if I didn't see you for a moment, how can I bear to live now?" ||474||
"Or perhaps my heart is made of iron, for even knowing your death, it refuses to leave my body." ||475||
"Remembering your gentle smile, born from gatherings of valiant men, your radiant joy, I am consumed by unbearable sorrow." ||476||
"Every playful act, every joy we shared, was like a shower of nectar upon my entire being." ||477||
"But now, the memory of those moments, instead of bringing joy, feels like a deadly poison, piercing my heart." ||478||
Mar dala ||464||

Page #181:
---------------------------
## Sixth Chapter

131. Then, overwhelmed with grief for his brother, Kishkindha lamented greatly. He was consoled by Sukeśa and others, who explained to him the nature of true wisdom. ||479||

It is not fitting for the wise to engage in petty actions like grieving. Indeed, the wise have recognized grief as a demon with a different name. ||480||

When separation from loved ones occurs due to the workings of karma, grief only brings further suffering. ||481||

A being who acts with deliberation should always engage in activities that have a purpose. Grief is purposeless and therefore not worthy of a wise person. ||482||

If grief could bring back the deceased, then it would be appropriate to gather others and grieve. ||483||

Grief, however, only serves to deplete the body. It is a catalyst for sin and leads to deep delusion. ||484||

Therefore, abandon this enemy, grief, and clear your mind. Focus your attention on what needs to be done, for the enemy never abandons its nature. ||485||

Fools, immersed in the mire of grief, destroy even their remaining actions. Their grief intensifies when those who depend on them look at them with pity. ||486||

The force of destruction, like the thunderbolt, is powerful and always present. We must consider how to counter it now. ||487||

If the enemy is stronger, a wise person should find a place to hide and wait for the opportune moment. This will prevent defeat at the hands of the enemy. ||488||

When the time is right, even a foe twice as powerful can be subdued. After all, prosperity does not always favor the same person. ||489||

Therefore, the ancestral home of our lineage, Alankārapura (Pātāla Laṅkā), has come to my mind. ||490||

The elders of our clan praise it highly, and even our enemies are unaware of its existence. It is so beautiful that even after attaining heaven, one would not desire to leave it. ||491||

Why have you become sorrowful? ||478||

Page #182:
---------------------------
132
From that, arise, let us go to that city, the enemy's fort. For it is a great injustice to not spend time in this situation. ||492|| Thus, searching, "There is no sorrow when it is intense, it subsides. From the sight of Sri Mala, that sorrow of his, then, subsides." ||493|| Then, the two, with their entire entourage, set out. They reached the sight of the enemy, the hater of the electric chariot. ||494|| Then, he, being asked to go, set out, running after the two. Enraged by the fratricide, he was determined to root out the enemy. ||495|| "Broken ones should not be pursued, enemies should not be pursued," it is said. A man, knowledgeable in the body of the science of polity, with pure intellect, ||496|| "He who killed your brother, the wicked enemy, I have made him attain great sleep with arrows, the Andhrak." ||497|| "Therefore, son, return, these are not our wrongdoers. Compassion should be shown to a greatly distressed person." ||498|| "What should a wise man do to one who, by showing his back, caused the sight of his own death? He is like a living dead." ||499|| While thus, the son was being instructed by Vajravega, the monkey and the demon reached Alankarpur. ||500|| There, in the city situated in the netherworld, illuminated by jewels, they stayed, bearing both sorrow and joy, free from fear. ||501|| Then, one day, Ashanivega, seeing the cloud of autumn, dissolving in an instant, became detached from worldly possessions. ||502|| The happiness that comes from the association of objects is fleeting, and it is very rare to obtain human birth in the midst of the eighty-four lakh births. ||503|| Knowing this, he gave the kingdom to his son, Sahasrar, according to the rules, and himself, along with Vidhyutkumar, became a great Shraman, a renunciate. ||504|| In the meantime, a celestial being named Nirghat, appointed by Ashanivega, ruled Lanka. He was endowed with great knowledge and prowess. ||505||

Page #183:
---------------------------
## The Sixty-Fourth Chapter

133

Seeing the earth-sphere slowly from the depths of the underworld, like a sacrifice to the One,
He saw the earth adorned with forests and mountains. ||506||

Knowing that his enemies had attained peace, free from fear,
Srimal went to Mount Meru to worship the Jina. ||507||

Returning from there, he saw on the banks of the southern ocean,
A forest called Prithvi-Karna-Tata, beautiful like the Devas. ||508||

He spoke to Srimal, whose voice was as sweet as a vina,
Who was seated close to his chest and held by his left arm. ||509||

"My dear, see this beautiful forest, with trees adorned with flowers,
Whose waters flow gently, like a woman with a parting in her hair." ||510||

"This mountain, called Dharani-Mauli, stands tall,
Like a cloud in the autumn sky, with its high peaks." ||511||

"It is adorned with waterfalls, shining with laughter,
With foam like the white petals of the kunda flower." ||512||

"This forest of trees, swaying in the wind,
Seems to offer us a flower garland with its branches, as if in welcome." ||513||

"The wind, rich with the fragrance of flowers, fills our nostrils,
And the bowing trees seem to greet us." ||514||

"This mountain, with its virtues, has bound me fast,
I cannot cross it and go further." ||515||

"I will build a palace here, inaccessible to earth-dwellers,
My happy mind indicates that this is auspicious." ||516||

"My heart, which was saddened by dwelling in Alankarpur, in the depths of the underworld,
Will find joy here." ||517||

Having said this, he was encouraged by his beloved, filled with wonder,
And descended upon the mountain, scattering the dense clouds. ||518||

The Mahavidya and Mahaparakrama-bearer, the Vidyadhara named Nirghata, ruled Lanka. ||505||

One day, the Vidyadhara Nirghata, who was like a sacrifice to the One, emerged from the underworld city of Alankarpur, which was like the city of Bali, and slowly surveyed the earth-sphere, adorned with forests and mountains. At that time, he learned that his enemies had attained peace. Knowing this, he became fearless and, with his queen Srimal, went to Mount Meru to worship the Jina. ||506-507||

After worshipping, while returning, he saw a forest called Prithvi-Karna-Tata on the banks of the southern ocean. This forest was as beautiful as the Devas. ||508||

Kishkindha, whose voice was as sweet as a vina, who was seated close to his chest and held by his left arm, said to his queen Srimal, ||509||

"My dear, see this beautiful forest, with trees adorned with flowers, and whose waters flow gently, like a woman with a parting in her hair." ||510||

"This mountain, called Dharani-Mauli, stands tall, like a cloud in the autumn sky, with its high peaks." ||511||

"It is adorned with waterfalls, shining with laughter, with foam like the white petals of the kunda flower." ||512||

"This forest of trees, swaying in the wind, seems to offer us a flower garland with its branches, as if in welcome." ||513||

"The wind, rich with the fragrance of flowers, fills our nostrils, and the bowing trees seem to greet us." ||514||

"It seems that this mountain, with its virtues, has bound me fast, and I cannot cross it and go further." ||515||

"I will build a palace here, inaccessible to earth-dwellers. My happy mind indicates that this is auspicious." ||516||

"My heart, which was saddened by dwelling in Alankarpur, in the depths of the underworld, will find joy here." ||517||

Having said this, he was encouraged by his beloved, filled with wonder, and descended upon the mountain, scattering the dense clouds. ||518||

Page #184:
---------------------------
134
The king, adorned with all his kinsmen, built a city on the peak of the mountain, a city like heaven, in a moment, with great joy. ||519|| He named it after himself, the glorious one. That is why it is still called Kishkindhapur on earth. ||520|| The mountain itself is also known as Kishkindha, from its association with the city. Earlier, its name was Madhu, known throughout the world. ||521|| The king, endowed with right vision and devoted to the worship of the Jinas, enjoyed the highest pleasures and lived happily for a long time. ||522|| From him, two sons were born to Queen Srimalā. The elder was named Suryaraja, and the younger was known as Yajñaraja. ||523|| And a daughter, Suryakamala, was born, with a body as soft as a lotus. She, with her beauty, made all the Vidyadharas restless. ||524|| Now, in the city of Meghapur, there reigned a Vidyadhara king named Meru. To him, a son named Mrigāridaman was born by his queen, Maghonī. ||525|| While wandering, he saw Suryakamala, the daughter of Kishkindha. He was so smitten by her that he found no peace, neither by day nor by night. ||526|| His friends, with respect, pleaded for her hand. The king of Kishkindha, after consulting with Queen Srimalā, agreed to give her to him. ||527|| In the beautiful city of Kishkindha, adorned with flags and other decorations, the auspicious marriage of Mrigāridaman and Suryakamala was performed according to the rites. ||528|| Returning with her, he stayed on the mountain called Karna. There, he built a city called Karnakundala. ||529|| To the king of Alankarapur, Sukeśa, three mighty sons were born by his queen, Indrāṇī. ||530|| The eldest was named Māli, the middle one was called Sumāli, and the youngest was known as Mālyavān. All three sons were highly knowledgeable and adorned with virtues. ||531||

Page #185:
---------------------------
The Sixth Chapter

The play of the princes was as wonderful as that of the gods, and it captivated the minds of their parents, relatives, and enemies alike.  ||532||  Their actions, born of the power emanating from their perfected knowledge, were extremely bold. Their parents repeatedly tried to restrain them.  ||533||  "O sons, if you go to the Kishkindha mountain for play due to your youthful exuberance, never go near the southern ocean."  ||534||  Driven by their youthful exuberance and the abundance of their curiosity, the princes bowed and asked their parents the reason.  ||535||  "This is not something to be spoken of, O sons," their parents replied.  ||536||  The princes, with their sweet words, repeatedly pressed them.  ||536||  Then Sukesha told them, "Listen, O sons. If you absolutely need to know the reason, then listen.  ||537||  Long ago, in Lanka, a powerful and cruel Vidhyadhara named Nirghata was appointed to rule by the force of lightning.  ||538||  That Lanka city, our auspicious city, came to us through lineage.  ||539||  Though it was dear to us as our own lives, we abandoned it out of fear of that powerful enemy.  ||539||  That wicked one has appointed spies in every land, who are constantly vigilant in searching for our weaknesses.  ||540||  He has set up devices in every place that kill those who play in the sky.  ||541||  Those devices lure people in with their beauty and then destroy them, just as the distractions that arise during meditation destroy an incapable yogi.  ||542||  Hearing this, Mali sighed deeply, his eyes filled with tears, thinking of his parents' sorrow.  ||543||  His mind filled with anger, he smiled proudly for a long time.  ||544||  Looking at his strong arms, he spoke, "Father, why did you not tell us this for so long?  ||545||  It is amazing that you deceived us with such great affection.  ||545||  Those who do not act but only roar uselessly, even if they are powerful, are considered very weak in the world."  ||546||

Page #186:
---------------------------
136
Even though they are powerful in the world, they receive great disrespect. ||546|| Or let it be, what is the point of saying all this? O father! You will attain peace by seeing the results. Until this task is completed, I will keep my hair loose. ||547|| Then, the parents, frightened by the inauspicious omen, did not dissuade them with words. They only looked at them with affectionate eyes and said, "O sons! Go." ||548|| Then, the three brothers, like the dwellers of the celestial abodes, emerged from the netherworld and marched towards the enemy. At that time, the three brothers were filled with enthusiasm and were ablaze with weapons. ||549|| Then, a river of demons, a host of demons, with a torrent of moving weapons, spread across the sky, following them. ||550|| The three sons marched on, and their hearts were filled with affection, and their parents watched them with auspicious blessings as long as they were visible to their eyes. ||551|| Then, from the peak of Trikuta mountain, they saw Lanka, and with their mature vision, they thought, "We have already taken it." ||552|| As they went, they killed many demons, subdued many, and displaced many from their positions. ||553|| The vassals of the enemy side, humbled, joined the army, and the three princes, who were the bearers of great strength, became endowed with a large army. ||554|| Hearing of the arrival of the enemy, Nirghata, who was skilled in warfare and whose shadow, cast by his moving umbrella, covered the sun, emerged from Lanka. ||555|| Then, there was a great battle between the two armies. Their great battle was a destroyer of beings, with horses, maddened elephants, and countless chariots. ||556|| The sky seemed to be made of earth, with the multitude of elephants, the water flowing from their cheeks seemed to be made of water, the wind generated by their ear-shaped fans seemed to be made of wind, and the fire generated by their mutual blows seemed to be made of fire. ||557-558|| What is the use of killing other, insignificant Vidyadharas in the battle? Where is that wicked Nirghata? Where is he? Thus, he urged.
1. प्रौढ्या म.।

Page #187:
---------------------------
## Sixth Chapter

Seeing Nirghāta without his chariot, Māli struck him with sharp arrows and then finished him off with a sword strike.  ||560|| Knowing Nirghāta was killed, the Dānavas with their minds corrupted went to their respective abodes on Vijayārddha mountain. ||561|| Many Dānavas, fearful of battle, hung swords around their necks and quickly sought refuge with Māli. ||562|| Then the three brothers, Māli and the others, entered Lankā, adorned with auspicious things. They met with their parents and other loved ones. ||563|| Then Māli, according to the proper rites, married Candravati, a beautiful daughter born to Hemā, the queen of Hemāpura, and Hemāvidyādhara. Candravati brought joy to Māli's heart and was naturally fickle-minded, like a net to capture deer-like senses. ||564-565|| Sumāli obtained Prīti, the daughter of Prītikānta, the king of Prītikūṭapura, and Prītimati. ||566|| Mālyavān married Kanakāvalī, the daughter of Kanaka, the king of Kanakābha, and Kanaknī. ||567|| These were their first wives, always dwelling in their hearts. Each of them had a thousand other wives. ||568|| Then the two ranges of Vijayārddha mountain, subdued by their prowess, bowed their heads in submission, like the remaining grains of rice. ||569|| Finally, having established their sons firmly in their positions and entrusted their wealth to them, Sukeśa and Kiṣkiṇdhā, with peaceful minds, became liberated sages. ||570||

Thus, many great kings of the Rākṣasa and Vānara lineages, having enjoyed worldly pleasures, finally attained the path of liberation, taught by the Jinas, which destroys the hundreds of faults of the world. They were freed from the bonds of affection born from the qualities of their loved ones. ||571||

Page #188:
---------------------------
1388
In the Padma Purana, even though many had committed great sins in the householder stage, they had burnt them all through the yoga of meditation, and had fixed their minds on liberation. Knowing the effect of right conduct, O devotees, attain peace, destroy delusion, attain the sun of victory, and finally attain the kingdom of knowledge. ||572||
Thus ends the sixth chapter of the Padma Charita, known as the Vanaravansha, spoken by Acharya Ravishena. ||6||
Far away, incomparable, blissful, and liberated, the place of liberation has been attained. ||571|| How many people, even though they had committed great sins in the householder stage, had burnt them all through the yoga of meditation, and had fixed their minds on liberation. Knowing the effect of right conduct, O devotees, attain peace, destroy delusion, attain the sun of victory, and finally attain the kingdom of knowledge. ||572||
Thus ends the sixth chapter of the Padma Charita, known as the Vanaravansha, spoken by Acharya Ravishena, famous as the Arsha. ||6||
1. Vidhadhitapadam M. (?) 2. Shanta M.

Page #189:
---------------------------
**The Seventh Chapter**

In the city, there was a king named Rathanūpur, renowned as Sahasrāra, who was exceedingly valorous. ||1|| His beloved wife was referred to as Mānasa-Sundarī. Mānasa-Sundarī was beautiful in both mind and body and endowed with numerous excellent qualities. ||2|| She became pregnant. Due to her pregnancy, her entire body became emaciated, and all her ornaments loosened. Seeing her with great respect, the king Sahasrāra asked, "O beloved, why do your limbs exhibit such extreme thinness? What is your desire that is rare in my kingdom?" ||3-4|| 

"O dear one, who is more precious than life! Tell me, what is your desire? Today, I shall fulfill it completely." ||5|| "O darling! I am capable of commanding even the queen of the divine, Indrāṇī, so that she may massage your feet with her hands." ||6|| Upon hearing this, Mānasa-Sundarī, who was seated in his beautiful lap, spoke playfully and humbly: ||7|| "O lord! Since someone has entered my womb, my wish is to enjoy the wealth of Indra." ||8|| "O master! Out of great helplessness, I have revealed these desires to you without shame." ||9|| 

As soon as the beloved spoke this, Sahasrāra, enriched with the power of knowledge, immediately prepared the wealth of enjoyment like that of Indra for her. ||10|| Thus, upon the completion of her pregnancy, her entire body became robust, and she began to embody a radiance and beauty that was beyond description. ||11|| Her brilliance increased to such an extent that she grew displeased even with the sun as it rose in the sky, and she felt the urge to command all directions. ||12|| When the time came, she gave birth to a son, who possessed all auspicious signs and was the best cause of joy and wealth for her relatives. ||13|| 

Thereafter, the joyful Sahasrāra celebrated the grand festival of the son's birth. At that time, the sounds of conch shells and trumpets filled all the directions. ||14|| The women of the city danced,

Page #190:
---------------------------
140
In the Padma Purana, wealth was given freely, without any thought. Even the elephants danced with their swaying trunks. ||16||
Disasters occurred in the homes of enemies, signifying sorrow. In the homes of relatives, auspicious omens arose, indicating great wealth. ||17||
Because the mother desired to enjoy the pleasures of Indra while the child was still in her womb, the father named him Indra. ||18||
Even as a child, his games were those of a powerful young man, conquering his enemies, humbling their pride, and engaging in noble deeds. ||19||
Gradually, he attained youth, surpassing the sun in brilliance, the moon in radiance, and the mountains in steadfastness. ||20||
His chest was as broad as an elephant's trunk, his arms round, and his vast chest seemed to encompass all directions. ||21||
His thighs, strong as pillars, were round and with hidden knees, achieving ultimate stability by supporting the edifice of his chest. ||22||
Through his victory, all the Vidhyadhara kings on Mount Vijayadhagi were subdued, their pride humbled, and they became obedient to him, thanks to his immense power and wealth. ||23||
He built a palace as magnificent as Indra's, with forty-eight thousand wives. Twenty-six thousand dancers performed, and there was an endless procession of elephants and horses that flew through the sky. ||24-25||
There was a king of elephants, white as the moon, tall, traversing the celestial courtyard, invincible, mighty, adorned with eight tusks, with a large, round trunk that seemed to sweep through the directions, renowned for his qualities on earth. He was named Airavata. ||26-27||
He appointed four Lokapalas, each possessing supreme power in their respective directions, his queen was named Sachi, and his assembly was called Sudharma. ||28||
He had a weapon called Vajra, three assemblies, groups of Apsaras, a commander named Harinakeshi, 
1. Shaktā M. I Shaktā Kh. 2. Satvarī M. 3. Nirahasām M. 4. Khyātā Ramyā tatha Sabhā K. 5. Vakra K.

Page #191:
---------------------------
The seventh festival is in Ashwin, the eight Vasus, the four types of gods, Narada, Tumburu, Visvavasu and other singers, Urvashi, Menaka, Manjuswani and other Apsaras, and Brihaspati the minister, all these glories he had established like Indra. ||29-31|| After that, he became the lord of all the Vidyadharas, possessing the glory of Indra, obtained through the auspicious rise of Nami the Vidyadhara. ||32|| At that time, Mali, the lord of Lanka, was a great and powerful king, and he ruled over all the Vidyadharas as before. ||33|| Residing in Lanka, Mali, proud of his brothers' strength, ruled over all the cities on Mount Vijayad. ||34|| Whatever excellent things were reported by the spies in both categories, such as courtesans, vehicles, airplanes, girls, clothes, and ornaments, the brave and powerful Mali immediately brought them to his place. He considered himself the best because of his strength, knowledge, and glory. ||35-36|| Now, having taken refuge in Indra, the Vidyadharas began to disobey Mali's orders. Hearing this news, the mighty Mali, along with his brothers and the sons of Kishkindha, set out for Mount Vijayad. ||37|| Some were riding on airplanes of various hues, as high as the evening clouds, some were riding in golden chariots resembling large palaces, some were riding on black elephants like clouds, some were riding on horses that moved as fast as beads, some were riding on tigers, some on cheetahs, some on bulls, some on lions, some on camels, some on donkeys, some on buffaloes, some on swans, some on wolves, and some on other vehicles. Thus, Mali, with his radiant body, covered the entire sky with his various vehicles and approached Mount Vijayad. ||38-40|| Then, Sumali, full of brotherly affection, said to Mali, "Brother, let us stay here today, let us not go further, or let us return to Lanka. The reason is that we have seen bad omens on the way again and again. ||41-42|| Look, there, a crow is sitting on the top of a dry tree, with one leg contracted, flapping its wings repeatedly. Its mind seems very disturbed, it is holding a dry stick in its beak, looking towards the sun, and making a harsh sound.

Page #192:
---------------------------
142
In the Padma Purana, the dry wood and curd, seeing the sun, are preventing our movement. ||44|| This jackal, with a face like a blazing fire, is roaring terribly, with her hair standing on end, on our right side. ||45|| Look, in the orb of the sun, surrounded by its rays, that terrible Kabantha is visible, and a mass of blood drops is raining from him. ||46|| On the other side, terrible forests are falling, shaking all the mountains, while on this side, all the women with their hair loose are visible in the sky. ||47|| Look, on the right side, that donkey is raising its head upwards, making the sky resound with its loud voice, and digging the earth with its forelegs, making a terrible sound. ||48|| Then, the gardener, pressing his arms firmly with his armlets, smiled and answered Sumali clearly, saying, "How can he who has set out to kill the enemy, mounted on a victorious elephant, and bearing the mark of valor, return?" ||49-50|| He who is shaking the tusks of the intoxicated elephant, who has terrified the enemies with his eyes alone, who is filled with sharp arrows, who has bitten his lower lip, whose face is distorted with furrowed brows, and whom the gods are watching in amazement, does such a warrior return? ||51-52|| I have roamed in the caves of Mount Meru and in the beautiful Nandana forest, and have built sky-touching Jain temples. ||53|| I have given whatever gifts were desired, enjoyed the best of pleasures, and earned fame that illuminates the entire world. ||54|| I have fulfilled the purpose of my birth, so what if I have to give up my life in battle? I have no need for anything else. ||55|| "He ran away from the battle in fear," how can a brave man listen to such words from the people? ||56|| Saying this, the gardener, whose face was blazing with anger, went to the peak of the victory mountain in an instant, without anyone knowing. ||57||

Page #193:
---------------------------
The Seventh Chapter
143. The king of the aerial beings, enraged, destroyed those cities with his fierce followers, which had insulted his rule. ||50||
Just as intoxicated elephants destroy lotus groves, so did those angry aerial beings destroy the gardens. ||59||
Then, oppressed by the aerial beings, the people, trembling with fear, went to the shelter of the Sahasrar. ||60||
Prostrating at his feet, they spoke these humble words: "O Lord, protect us, for the sons of Sukeśa have destroyed all our people." ||61||
Then the Sahasrar said to the aerial beings: "Go to my son Indra and tell him your plight." ||62||
Just as Indra, the protector of the heavens, protects his strong rule, so does my son, the destroyer of evil, protect this world. ||63||
Thus, having received the answer of the Sahasrar, the aerial beings went to Indra, and, joining their hands in salutation, narrated the whole story. ||64||
Then Indra, with a proud smile and a face shining white, looked at the thunderbolt held in his hand, his eyes red with anger, and said: ||65||
"I am eager to find and destroy those thorns of the world, and now you have come to me yourselves, and I am called the protector of the world." ||66||
Then, to announce the battle, he sounded a terrible trumpet, the sound of which made even the maddened elephants break their chains. ||67||
Hearing this, the aerial beings, adorned with armor, weapons in their hands, and filled with the joy of battle, came out of their homes. ||68||
They rode on magical chariots, horses, elephants, camels, lions, tigers, wolves, deer, swans, goats, bulls, rams, airplanes, peacocks, and donkeys. ||69||
Besides these, the Lokapalas, adorned with the brilliance of various weapons, and with their faces distorted by the frown of their brows, came out with their retinues. ||70||
Indra, whose body was covered with armor, and over whom a white umbrella was held, mounted his elephant Airavata and went forth with the gods. ||71||
1. शासयामास क., ख. । 2. रक्षस्यूजित म. । 3. वृत्तसूदनः म., क. । पापहारकः । 4. निरगच्छत् ।

Page #194:
---------------------------
In the Padma Purana, a terrible battle erupted between the gods and demons, a sight of cruelty and horror. Horses fell upon horses, chariots crushed chariots, elephants trampled elephants, and foot soldiers destroyed foot soldiers. The sky was covered with weapons: spears, maces, discs, swords, muskets, maces, arrows, clubs, gold, and nooses. The gods, led by the valiant Vidyaadharas, formed an army filled with great enthusiasm, skilled in advancing, generous, and capable of disrupting the enemy's efforts. The gods' army, led by Vidyuutvaan, Charudaan, Chandra, Nityagati, and Chalajyoti Prabhaadhya, devastated the demon army. Then, the valiant Rishyaraj and Suryaraj, leaders of the monkey clan, prepared to fight, seeing the demons being destroyed. These two heroes possessed such speed that they appeared in different places every moment. They struck the gods so hard that they turned their backs. The demons, emboldened by the strength of these two, prepared to fight, filling the sky with darkness with their weapons. Seeing the god's army being destroyed by the demons and monkey clan, Indra, filled with rage, rose to fight himself. Then, the monkey and demon clouds, raining weapons and roaring loudly, surrounded the mountain-like Indra. Protecting the guardians of the world, Indra roared loudly and began to destroy the monkeys and demons with arrows shot from all sides. Seeing his army in disarray, Mali rose himself, his anger-born radiance illuminating the entire sky. Then, a fierce battle ensued between Mali and Indra, watched with awe by both armies, whose minds were filled with wonder. Then, Indra shot an arrow, pulled back to the ear and marked with his name, into Mali's forehead. Mali, suppressing the pain, struck Indra on the forehead with a swiftly released weapon.

Page #195:
---------------------------
## Seventh Chapter

The enraged Mali, whose body was reddened with blood, rushed towards Indra, just as the sun approaches the setting horizon.  || 87 ||

As Mali approached, Indra severed his head with his chakra, which shone like the sun. || 88 ||

Seeing his brother slain, Sumali was deeply distressed.  He pondered that Indra, the chakra-wielding king of the Vidyadharas, was immensely powerful, and it was impossible to stand against him.  Thus, the wise and skillful Sumali, along with his entire family, fled the battlefield immediately. || 89-90 ||

As Indra was about to slay Sumali, Soma, devoted to his master, bowed and said, "My Lord, why do you exert yourself when a servant like me is present to kill the enemy?  Please allow me to do it." || 91-92 ||

Indra replied, "So be it."  Soma then followed the enemy, showering him with a volley of arrows, like a swarm of bees attacking their target. || 93 ||

The army of the monkey-demons, struck by the arrows, was thrown into disarray, like a herd of cows caught in a downpour. || 94 ||

"You are surrounded by fools and ignorant of the rules of war, you wicked one!"  Mali, blazing with anger, turned to Soma and, with his weapon called Bhindimala, struck him deeply in the chest, rendering him unconscious. || 95-96 ||

While Soma lay unconscious, his eyes closed, the demons and monkeys vanished. || 97 ||

They returned to their abode, Alankarodayapur (Patal Lanka), safe from Soma's wrath, as if they had been reborn. || 98 ||

When Soma regained consciousness, he saw the battlefield empty of enemies.  He was praised for his victory and returned to Indra. || 99 ||

Indra, pleased with his chakra-wielding warrior, praised Soma, who had vanquished his enemies.  He was also honored by the Lokapalas. || 100 ||

Page #196:
---------------------------
146
Indra, mounted on Airavata, with chamaras waving, shaded by a white umbrella, with dancing gods in front, entered the city of Rathnapur. The city was adorned with banners of jewels, and high arches, and the streets were strewn with flowers up to the ankles, and sprinkled with saffron water. The women in the windows looked on with their eyes. He entered the city with great prosperity. He bowed to his parents with folded hands, and they touched his body with trembling hands. Having conquered his enemies, he came to great joy, enjoying the highest pleasures, and devoted to the protection of his subjects. He became famous in the world, and the mountain of Vijay was called heaven.

I will now tell you the origin of the Lokapalas. Listen with your mind focused, O Shrenika.

Soma, the Lokapala, was born from the womb of Aditi, the wife of Makaradhwaja, a Vidyadhara, who had fallen from heaven. He was very radiant. Indra placed him in the east of the city of Dyotisanga, and he enjoyed his time with great prosperity.

Varuna, the Lokapala, was born from the womb of Varuna, the wife of Megha-ratha, a Vidyadhara. Indra placed him in the west of the city of Meghapur. His weapon was the noose, and his enemies were afraid of it from afar.

Kubera, the Lokapala, was born from the womb of Kanakavali, the wife of the great Kisury, a Vidyadhara. He was endowed with great prosperity. Indra placed him in the north of the city of Kanchanapur. He was famous in the world for his wealth, and enjoyed the highest pleasures.

Yama, the Lokapala, was born from the womb of Shri-prabha, the wife of Kala-agni, a Vidyadhara. He was a fierce Rudra-karma, and very powerful. Indra placed him in the south of the city of Kishkun, on the island of Dakshina-udanta. He enjoyed the fruits of his good deeds.

Page #197:
---------------------------
## Seventh Chapter

**147**

The city whose name was renowned on earth, the king of the city was known by the same name. ||116||

Those who reside in the city of Asura, the celestial beings, are known as Asuras throughout the earth. ||117||

The Yakshas in the city of Yaksha-geet are called Yakshas, the Kinnaras in the city of Kinnara are called Kinnaras, and those in the city of Gandharva are known as Gandharvas. ||118||

Ashwini, Vasu, Vishwe, and Vaishvanara, along with their followers, engage in divine play, endowed with knowledge and strength. ||119||

Having attained a human birth, and obtaining vast wealth on earth, he considered himself the king of the gods, worshipped by all beings. ||120||

Indra, heaven, and other gods were all forgotten by him. He was delighted with his wealth and constantly celebrated festivals. ||121||

He considered himself Indra, Mount Meru as heaven, the celestial beings as guardians of the realms, and all his subjects as gods, filled with pride. ||122||

There is no one greater than me in the three worlds. I am the creator of this universe, the knower of all things. ||123||

Having attained the position of a Chakravarti, he was filled with pride, experiencing the fruits of his good deeds from past lives. ||124||

Listen to the story of how Dhanada came to be, the one who transgressed in this chapter, as it is known to the Shreniks. ||125||

In the city of Kautukamangal, there lived a celestial being named Vyombinda. His wife, Nandavati, gave birth to two daughters. ||126||

The elder was named Kaushiki, and the younger was Kekasi. The elder daughter was given to Vishrava, the wealthy Yaksha of Yakshapur. ||127||

From her was born Vaishravana, with auspicious features. He had a hundred eyes, was wealthy, and a delight to the eyes of women. ||128||

Thus, Indra called Vaishravana and honored him, saying, "Go to Lanka and rule over my celestial beings. You are dear to me." ||129||

From today onwards, you shall be the fifth guardian of the four realms, endowed with great strength by my grace. ||130||

The city of Kishku was situated in the southern direction of the island in the ocean. Thus, he spent his time enjoying the powerful fruits of his good deeds. ||115||

Page #198:
---------------------------
148
Having said, "I will do as you command," and having paid obeisance, Vaishravana asked his parents' permission and, after paying them obeisance, departed from his city with auspicious rites. ||131|| Vaishravana, whose command the assembly of Vidyadharas held in high regard, resided in Lanka with great joy, free from doubt. ||132||
Sumali, having been defeated by Indra, resided in the city of Alankarapur (Patala Lanka). There, a son named Ratnaśrava was born to him by his beloved queen. He was very valiant, renounced, and benevolent to the world. ||133|| The life of that noble-hearted one was for the benefit of his friends, and the brilliance of that radiant one was for the benefit of his servants. ||134|| The cleverness of that Ratnaśrava, who destroyed the wicked, was for the benefit of the learned, and he protected Lakshmi for the benefit of his relatives. ||135|| His elevated wealth was for the benefit of the poor. The wealth of that Ratnaśrava, who protected all, was for the benefit of the virtuous. ||136|| The mind of that self-respecting one was for remembering virtuous deeds. His lifespan was for the benefit of dharma, and his body was for the benefit of valor. ||137|| He was compassionate to the assembly of beings like a father. Like a past prosperous time, he is still remembered by beings. ||138|| For that Ratnaśrava, who wore the ornament of good character, another woman was like a mother, another's wealth was like grass, and another man was like his own body. Just as he protected his own body, so too did he protect another man. ||139|| When the count of virtuous people began, wise people counted him first, and when the discussion of faults arose, beings did not even remember him. ||140|| His body was made of other great elements, as if in addition to earth, etc. Otherwise, how could his unique beauty have been? ||141|| When he spoke, it was as if he were watering with nectar. He was so noble in character that he seemed to always be giving great gifts. ||142|| In the midst of dharma, artha, and kama, the great-minded one's greatest effort was dharma, which had been his goal in past lives. ||143||
Except for the four Lokapalas, there was a fifth Lokapala. ||130||
1.  nirgatāsi m.

Page #199:
---------------------------
The Seventh Chapter
149
Fame is the ornament of ornaments, the best of all ornaments. Virtues reside in him like family members along with fame. ||144||
Desiring the highest prosperity, he came from his lineage. He was displaced from his position by Indra, the king of the gods. ||145||
Abandoning fear, the brave one was capable of achieving knowledge. He went to the forest of flowers, where ghosts, goblins, and other such beings were roaring. ||146||
While he was learning knowledge, Vyombindu sent his daughter, who was already knowledgeable about knowledge and who was destined to become Ratnashrava's wife, to serve him during his penance. ||147||
She stood respectfully near the yogi, her hands folded, waiting for his command. ||148||
Then, when Ratnashrava's penance was completed, he bowed to the perfected Lord. At that time, his eyes fell upon Kekasi, who was standing alone. Simplicity was dripping from her eyes. ||149||
Her eyes were like blue lotuses, her face like a lotus, her teeth like buds of jasmine, her arms like garlands of shirisha flowers, and her lower lip like a rose. ||150||
The fragrance of jasmine flowers emanated from her breath, her complexion was like that of a champak flower, and her entire body seemed to be made of flowers. ||151||
Kekasi, standing near Ratnashrava, seemed as if Lakshmi, captivated by his form, had left her lotus-shaped home and come to him with great longing, her eyes fixed on his feet. ||152||
Her body was bending downwards due to the shame caused by seeing the extraordinary man, and her breasts were trembling with the fear-filled breaths she was taking. ||153||
She was touching the nearby leaves with her beauty, and the fragrance of her breath was attracting a swarm of intoxicated bees, making the forest restless. ||154||
She was bending so low due to her extreme delicacy that youth was embracing her with fear. Kekasi was like the ultimate creation. ||155||
To gather all the wonders of the world, as if... 
1. Pushpantakam ma. 
2. Madyodnabhavini k. kh. j. (Mandodyotodbhavini) 
3. Sutam ma. 
4. Vasasam ma. 
5. Vilpanti ma. 
6. Nantikigatan ma.

Page #200:
---------------------------
150
In the Padma Purana, she appeared as if Vidya herself had taken a physical form, subdued by the great austerity of Ratnaśrava, and radiant with brilliance. ||157||
With loving words, Ratnaśrava, compassionate by nature, and especially kind to women, and even more so to young girls, asked, "O child, whose daughter are you? And why are you standing alone in this great forest, like a deer separated from its herd?" ||158-159||
"O one with virtuous aspirations, what are the letters of your name?" Ratnaśrava asked Kekasi. This was appropriate, for even among the virtuous, there is partiality towards the noble. ||160||
With a voice choked with emotion, and possessing infinite sweetness, capable of stealing hearts, Kekasi replied, "I am the daughter of King Vyomābindhu, born from the body of Mandavati. My name is Kekasi, and I have come to serve you, as instructed by my father." ||161-162||
At that very moment, the Vidya named Manasastambhini, possessing great power, became manifest to Ratnaśrava. ||163||
Then, by the power of that Vidya, in that very forest, Ratnaśrava instantly established a city named Pushpāntaka. ||164||
Taking Kekasi as his wife according to the proper rites, he enjoyed the pleasures of the city, fulfilling all his desires. ||164-165||
Between them, there arose an unparalleled love, such that they could not bear even a moment's separation. ||166||
If Kekasi was out of sight of Ratnaśrava's eyes, even for a moment, he would think she was dead. And if Kekasi did not see him for a moment, she would become pale, her facial radiance fading. Such was her tender heart. ||167||
Ratnaśrava's eyes were always fixed on Kekasi's moon-like face, or rather, Kekasi was like a bond for all of Ratnaśrava's senses. ||168||
Their bond was based on unparalleled beauty, youth, wealth, the power of knowledge, and the virtue they had accumulated in the past. ||169||
When she walked, she walked with him; when she stood, she stood with him. Like a shadow, she followed her husband everywhere. ||170||
Karma had created her beauty, gathering the beauty of all women in the three worlds. ||156||
She, Kekasi, seemed as if Vidya herself had taken a physical form, adorned with the brilliance of a gem, subdued by the great austerity of Ratnaśrava. ||157||

Page #201:
---------------------------
Seventh Chapter

Then the queen Kekasī lay on a magnificent bed that was expansive, beautiful, and as white as the ocean of milk, illuminated by the light of jewel lamps, soft as silken fabric. (171) Upon it was a comfortable mattress laid out, adorned with colorful pillows, surrounded by humming bees awakened by the fragrance of her breath. (172) Around her were women standing guard, viewing her with sleepless eyes; by her side was a small pedestal made of ivory, such was the grandeur of the bed on which Kekasī, while contemplating the qualities of her husband who binds the mind, and desiring the birth of a son, joyfully lay sleeping. (173-174)

At that time, while being still and meditative, the attentive friends of hers, scrutinizing her body, saw distinct and wondrous dreams produced by Kekasī. (175) Then, following the sound of conch-like morning horns and the soothing voices of the bards, Kekasī awoke to consciousness. (176) After engaging in auspicious activities and adopting a favorable and superior demeanor, captivating her mind, she approached her husband with her friends. (177) There, with folded hands, displaying gestures, she sat next to her husband on an elegantly draped seat and recounted her dreams. (178)

She said, "O Lord! Last night during the last watch of the night, I beheld three dreams; please rejoice upon hearing them." (179) In the first dream, I saw a lion, radiant with great splendor, descending from the sky and entering my body through the mouth. (180) In the second dream, I beheld the sun in the mid-sky, removing the dark gloom, resembling a herd of elephants with its rays. (181) In the third dream, I saw a charming moonlight dispeller standing before us, milking darkness with its rays. (182) Upon seeing these dreams, my mind was captivated.

(Note: The translation retains the original structure and boldness of the Sanskrit words for context, while adapting the prose for clarity in English.)

Page #202:
---------------------------
152
"O Lord, what is this? You are the one who should know this now. For in matters concerning women, the husband's mind is the authority." (184)
Then, Ratnaśrava, skilled in the eightfold auspicious signs and proficient in the Jina's teachings, explained the meaning of the dream in detail with joy. (185)
"O Devi, you will have three sons whose fame will spread throughout the three worlds. They will be great heroes and bring prosperity to your lineage." (186)
"Due to their good deeds accumulated in past lives, they will perform noble actions, be equal to the gods, and even be beloved by them." (187)
"Their radiance will eclipse the moon, their brilliance will outshine the sun, their depth will surpass the oceans, and their steadfastness will rival the mountains." (188)
"After enjoying the fruits of their virtuous deeds in heaven, they will experience the ripening of the remaining karma. They will be invincible, even to the gods." (189)
"They will be like clouds that fulfill desires through their generosity, they will be as wealthy as emperors, and they will captivate the hearts and eyes of the most beautiful women." (190)
"Their chests will be adorned with the auspicious Śrīvatsa mark, and the mere mention of their names will destroy powerful enemies." (191)
"The first of these sons will be a great benefactor to the world. He will be deeply devoted to acts of courage and will be like the moon, closing the lotus of his enemies." (192)
"He will be so passionate about war that when he goes to battle, his entire body will be covered in standing hairs, like thorns." (193)
"He will be a storehouse of terrible deeds, and once he has set his mind on something, even Indra cannot stop him." (194)
Hearing these words, Keksi, filled with immense joy, smiled softly and, looking at her husband's face, spoke with humility: "O Lord, our minds are purified by the taste of the nectar of the Jina's teachings. How then can this son, born to us, be a cruel doer?" (195-196)
"Surely, our marrow has been refined by the words of the Jina. How can a son of ours be born who is like poison? Does poison ever sprout from the vine of nectar?" (197)
Ratnaśrava replied: "My dear, O beautiful-faced one, listen. Karma is the cause of this, not us. We are not the agents of the action." (198)

Page #203:
---------------------------
The Seventh Chapter
153
Karma is the root cause of the nature of karma, while parents are merely the instruments in the plan of the world. ||199||
His two younger brothers will be experts in the path of the Jinas, filled with a multitude of virtues, possessors of excellent conduct, and oceans of good character. ||200||
Fearing a fall in the world, they will be firmly attached to virtuous deeds, devoted to truthful speech, and compassionate to all beings. ||201||
O gentle-voiced and compassionate one! The good karma accumulated by those two sons is the cause of their nature, for the fruit is always equal to the cause. ||202||
Having said this, the parents, ever vigilant, performed the worship of the Jina with a joyful heart. ||203||
Then, when the first child was in the womb, the mother's conduct became extremely cruel. She desired to conquer the group of men by force. She wished to place her foot on the heads of her enemies, who were smeared with blood and mud and were writhing in pain. ||204-205||
She even intended to command the king of the gods, Indra. Her mouth roared without any reason. ||206||
Her body became hard, she toiled excessively in conquering her enemies, her voice was harsh and grating, and her glances were sharp and silent. ||207||
Even though a mirror was present, she looked at the sword, and even in bowing to her teachers, her head bent with great difficulty. ||208||
Then, when the time was full, the child emerged from the mother's womb, shaking the seats of his enemies. What creature was as cruel as he in that entire time? ||209||
The radiance of the child, difficult to look at like the sun, caused the eyes of the people working in the delivery room to become as if covered by a dense forest. ||210||
Because of the beating by the spirits, a very loud sound arose from the drums, and headless bodies danced in the houses of the enemies, signifying destruction. ||211||
Then, the father held a grand birth celebration for his son. It was such a celebration that the people were like madmen, doing whatever they pleased. ||212||

Page #204:
---------------------------
## Chapter 154 of the Padma Purana

**Verse 213:** In the womb-like Meru cave, the child lay smiling, his red feet twitching, his gaze directed upwards.

**Verse 214:** He playfully shook the ground near his bed, shining like the rising sun.

**Verse 215:** The necklace, given by the Rakshasa king to the cloud-chariot rider, guarded by a thousand Naga princes, radiating brilliance, was never worn by anyone else due to fear of the Rakshasas.

**Verse 216:** The child, without any effort, pulled the necklace with his hand, out of sheer affection.

**Verse 217:** Seeing the necklace in the child's fist, the mother was alarmed. She embraced him with great love and kissed his head.

**Verse 218:** The father, seeing the child with the necklace, was filled with wonder. He thought, "This must be a great man."

**Verse 219:** Who else could play with this necklace, guarded by Naga kings, unless he possessed extraordinary power?

**Verse 220:** The words spoken by the Charana sage in the past were true, for the words of the sages never fail.

**Verse 221:** Seeing this wonder, the mother, free from fear, adorned the child with the necklace. The necklace, with its cluster of rays, illuminated the ten directions.

**Verse 222:** The child was named Dashaanan (Ten-faced) because the large, clear gems in the necklace reflected nine additional faces, besides the real one.

**Verse 223:** After Dashaanan, Bhanukarna was born. His cheeks were so beautiful that it seemed as if the sun itself was adorned on his ears.

**Verse 224:** Then, Chandranakha, whose face was like the full moon, was born. Her nails, shining like the rising half-moon, illuminated all directions.

**Verse 225:** After Chandranakha, Vibhishana was born. He was gentle and virtuous, and his very birth instilled fear in the wicked.

**Verse 226:** Vibhishana seemed like the embodiment of Dharma itself, and his fame, born of his virtues, remains pure in the world.

Page #205:
---------------------------
The Seventh Chapter

Even the playful activities of the young Dashagriva were terrifying, while the playful activities of his two younger brothers brought joy even to his enemies. || 227 || Among her brothers, the beautiful Chandra-nakha shone like the evening twilight, adorned with excellent deeds, amidst the sun and moon. || 228 || Then, the young Dashagriva, adorned with a tuft of hair, sat in his mother's lap, spreading moonlight with the rays of his teeth, as it were, in all ten directions. At that time, Vaishravana was going somewhere in the sky. He was illuminating the directions with his brilliance, adorned with a group of Vidyadharas, endowed with glory and power, and surrounded by those elephant-like clouds that were shining with lightning-like garlands, releasing streams of intoxicating water, and whose ears seemed like conch shells hanging from the sky. Vaishravana was making the group of directions resound with the great sound of his trumpet, which deafened the ears. He was the bearer of great power, and with his huge army, he seemed to be swallowing and releasing the sky in front of him. Dashagriva looked at him with a serious gaze. || 229 - 233 || Dashagriva, being playful due to his childhood, saw the glory of Vaishravana and, laughing, asked his mother, "O Mother! Who is this, going from here, considering the whole world as grass, surrounded by a huge army?" || 234 - 235 || Then his mother said to him, "This is your maternal uncle's son. He has mastered many arts, is endowed with great wealth, is famous in the world, is endowed with great wealth, and, like a second sun, makes enemies tremble as he wanders the world." || 236 - 237 || Indra, the Vidyadhara, killed your grandfather's brother, Mali, in battle, and gave Lanka, which had been taken away from your father, to him, so he protects Lanka. || 238 || For the sake of this Lanka, your father thinks of hundreds of desires, and neither finds peace in the day nor sleep at night. || 239 || O son! I am also consumed by this thought, and for a man, death is better than the loss of his home. || 240 ||

Page #206:
---------------------------
156
In the Padma Purana, O son, when will you attain the Lakshmi befitting your lineage? Seeing whom, our minds will be free from sorrow, like a wound that has been healed. ||241|| When will I see these two brothers of yours, adorned with prosperity, roaming freely in the world, free from thorns? ||242|| Hearing his mother's sorrowful words, Vibhishana, with the sprouts of anger like poison rising within him, smiled proudly and said, ||243|| "O Mother! Whether he is a Dhanada or a Deva, what power have you seen in him that makes you lament like this? ||244|| You are a mother of heroes, yourself a hero, and knower of all human endeavors. Why then, being such, do you speak like other women? ||245|| Just consider, whose chest is marked with the Srivatsa symbol, who bears a vast body, whose daily actions are always filled with wonder, who is mighty, and who, like fire covered with ashes, is capable of burning the entire universe. Has this Dasananan never entered your mind? ||246-247|| This one, by the power of his speed born of disrespect, can conquer the mind and shatter the peaks of Sumeru with the clap of his hands. ||248|| You do not know that his arms are the paved roads of his prowess, the pillars of the house of the universe, and the sprouts of the tree of pride. ||249|| Thus praised by his brother Vibhishana, a knower of virtues and arts, Ravana attained great power, like fire from ghee. ||250|| He said, "Mother, what is the benefit of praising yourself so much? But I will tell you the truth, listen. ||251|| Even if all the Vidhyadharas, puffed up with pride in their knowledge, come together in the battlefield, they will not be enough for even one of my arms. ||252|| Still, the worship of knowledge is befitting our lineage, therefore, we should not be ashamed to do it. ||253|| Just as the virtuous diligently worship penance, so too, the descendants of the Vidhyadharas should diligently worship knowledge.

Page #207:
---------------------------
The Seventh Chapter
157
Having said this, Ravana, holding his pride, went out with his two younger brothers. He was kissed on the head by his parents and offered salutations to the Siddhas.  ||255|| He received the auspicious rites, his mind firm in his resolve.  He left the house joyfully, his steps light and his head bowed in reverence. ||256|| In a moment, he reached and entered the great forest called Bhima, filled with the roars of cruel creatures with fearsome fangs. ||257|| The great trees were shaken by the breaths of sleeping serpents, and the earth trembled under the steps of dancing Vyantaras. ||258|| The dense darkness, impenetrable even to a needle, filled the great caves of that land.  Time itself seemed to dwell in that fearsome forest. ||259|| Even the gods, afraid, did not go above it, and it was famous throughout the three worlds for its terror. ||260|| The mountains there were inaccessible, their caves filled with darkness, and the strong trees seemed ready to swallow the world. ||261|| With unwavering minds, they took up the supreme peace, their souls free from greed, clad in white garments. ||262|| Their faces were as beautiful as the full moon, adorned with jeweled tiaras.  The three brothers began their great penance. ||263|| They mastered the eight-syllabled Vidya called Sarva-Kama-Annada, completing a lakh of repetitions in half a day. ||264|| This Vidya brought them whatever food they desired, so they were free from the suffering of hunger. ||265|| Then, with pure hearts, they began to chant the sixteen-syllabled mantra, whose ten thousand crore repetitions are mentioned in the scriptures. ||266|| Then, the king of Jambudvipa, the Yaksha called Anaavrita, surrounded by his wives, came to that forest, desiring to play. ||267|| The three brothers, their souls absorbed in penance, came into the sight of the Yaksha's wives, who were playing with abandon. ||268||

Page #208:
---------------------------
##  Translation:

158
In the Padma Purana, the goddesses were brought near, their minds filled with curiosity, as if their beauty had seized their very essence.  ||269|| Some of them, with their faces adorned with curled hair, spoke, their beauty resembling that of a lotus. ||270|| Their bodies were extremely delicate, their radiance and brilliance spreading everywhere, yet they had not renounced their garments. Why are you performing austerities? ||271|| Such radiance of the body cannot be attained without enjoyment. And with such bodies, you cannot be afraid of anyone. ||272|| Where is the weight of these matted locks, and where is this youthful prime? Surely you were born to create a union of opposites. ||273|| Why do you subject your hands, which are fit for the pleasure of soft, full breasts, to the pain of contact with stones and other rough objects? ||274|| Oh, what a foolish mind you have, you beautiful ones! To inflict such suffering on a body fit for enjoyment! ||275|| Arise, let us go home. What are you waiting for, wise men? Enjoy the sight of beautiful things, and partake in great pleasures with us. ||276|| They spoke thus, but their words did not find a place in the minds of the three brothers, just as drops of water do not find a place on the petals of a lotus. ||277|| Then other goddesses said to each other, "My friends, these are surely made of wood, puppets! That is why their entire bodies are motionless." ||278|| Saying this, and filled with anger, they approached and struck the three brothers' large hearts with their earrings. ||279|| Yet, the three brothers, with their keen minds, did not become agitated. This is fitting, for cowards are easily swayed from their intended purpose. ||280|| Then, the lord of Jambudvipa, the Yaksha, whose mind was filled with wonder at the goddesses' words, smiled at the three brothers and said, ||281|| "Oh, good men, why are you performing such difficult austerities? Or, which god are you worshipping? Tell me quickly." ||282||

Page #209:
---------------------------
**Saptamaṁ Parva**

When the yakṣas spoke thus and remained immovable like clay figures, the lord of the yakṣas became angry and spoke in this manner: 283. "Forgetful of me, they are eager to meditate on some other god. Alas! how capricious these fools are!" 284. Thereupon, the fierce yakṣa, having uttered harsh words, commanded his servants who were awaiting orders to disturb these three brothers. 285. By their very nature, they were cruel, and having received such orders from their lord, they began to perform various acts in different forms before them. 286. One of the yakṣas leapt energetically, higher than a mountain, and fell before them as if all directions were being struck by thunderbolts. 287. Another yakṣa, coiling itself like a serpent, wrapped around their entire bodies, and yet another appeared as a lion, wide-mouthed and fierce. 288. They made a dreadful sound near the ears, rendering all directions deaf, while some adopted the forms of biting devils, elephants, thunderstorms, wildfires, and oceans, creating disturbances in varied forms. 289. When the three brothers, whose minds were steadfast like a pillar of meditation, did not get disturbed by these diversions as mentioned above, 290. a great fearful army of mlecchas was manifested through agitation. This army, filled with exceedingly wrathful chandālas, appeared fierce with sharp weapons, akin to a mass of darkness. 291. Then they showed that, having won the war, they had destroyed the city of Puṣpāntaka and captured your father Ratnaśrava along with his relatives. 292. The inner palaces were also lamenting with a heart-wrenching cry, proclaiming that even in the presence of sons like you, they had achieved suffering. 293. The father was thus creating a great obfuscation before them, exclaiming, "O sons! In this great forest, the mlecchas are killing me, so protect me!" 294. They demonstrated that your mother was being beaten by chandālas, bound in chains, dragged by her locks, and she was shedding a stream of tears. 295. The mother said, "O sons! Behold the state I am in the forest. Not only this, but the Shabara people are taking me to their settlement right before you!" 296. "You had previously claimed falsely that even those empowered by knowledge..."

Page #210:
---------------------------
160
It has been said in the Papouraana that even one Mlechchha is too much, but now you three are so weak that you are not even enough for one Mlechchha. ||297-298|| O Dashagreva, Vibhishana was praising you in vain, because you are not even able to protect your own mother. Then I understand that you do not have even one head. ||299|| You have been devoid of any sense of honour for as long as you have been in my womb and have come out. It would have been better if I had carried even excrement for that long. ||300|| It seems that this Bhanukarna is also devoid of ears, because I am shouting and he is not listening to my sorrowful words. Look, how he has become motionless. ||301|| This Vibhishana is also carrying this name Vibhishana in vain, and he has become so inactive like a corpse that he is not even able to defeat one Mlechchha. ||302|| Look, these Mlechchhas are making my sister Chandranakha irreligious, why don't you show any compassion towards her? A brother's love for his sister is greater than that of parents, but where is your concern for this? ||303|| O sons! Vidya is attained for the prosperity of one's own people, so parents are superior to those people, and a sister is superior to parents. This is the eternal order. ||304|| Just as trees are burnt to ashes by the sight of a venomous snake, so too can these Mlechchhas be burnt to ashes by the mere movement of your eyebrows. ||305|| I carried you all in my womb out of a desire for happiness, because sons are those who carry their parents like a palanquin - they protect them. ||306|| Even after doing all this, when their attention did not waver, those gods started doing a very terrible work of illusion. ||307|| They cut off the heads of their parents in front of them with the edge of a sword, and they cut off the heads of Ravana's other two brothers in front of Ravana. ||308|| Similarly, they cut off Ravana's head in front of those two brothers. Due to this act, Vibhishana and Bhanukarna became slightly agitated in their meditation due to anger. ||309|| But Dashagreva, holding onto the purity of his emotions, remained steady like Mount Meru. He was mighty and steadfast in his faith. ||310|| He restrained the movement of his senses within himself, and made his mind, which was as fickle as lightning, obedient like a servant. 1. Avavady Kh. !

Page #211:
---------------------------
## Seventh Chapter

**161**

Then, with the thorn of desire and the armor of conquered senses protecting him, Dashaanan, free from the defects of meditation, diligently meditated on the mantra. ||312||

If a great soul desires to enter meditation, then, for protection, he should immediately sever the eight karmas. ||313||

Meanwhile, thousands of embodied Vidyaas, with folded hands, stood before Dashaanan, becoming his. ||314||

Before the count of mantra recitations was complete, all the Vidyaas became his. This is certain, for what cannot be attained with firm determination? ||315||

Firm determination is also attained through the brilliance of past karma. Indeed, it is karma that creates obstacles and experiences of suffering. ||316||

A being without virtue cannot attain the three jewels, the fruit of right knowledge, the knowledge of names, or the three treasures, even if he gives charity at the right time, to the right recipient, and in the right place, or if his lifespan is about to end. ||317||

For some, Vidyaas are attained in ten years, for some in a month, and for some in a moment, all due to the influence of karma. ||318||

Even if a being sleeps on the earth, renounces food for a long time, immerses himself in water day and night, falls from the top of a mountain, and even dies, he cannot achieve his desires if he is devoid of virtue. ||319-320||

Those who have performed good deeds in past lives attain Siddhi effortlessly. Practices like austerities are merely instruments. But those who have not performed good deeds in past lives die in vain, their lives are meaningless. ||319-320||

Therefore, a human being should serve the Acharya with utmost respect and always accumulate virtue, for how can Siddhi be attained without virtue? ||322||

Gautama Swami says, "O Shrenik! See the power of virtue! Even though Dashaanan, with his great mind, did not have the full time, he still attained the Siddhi of Vidyaas." ||323||

Now, I will briefly mention the names of the Vidyaas. These names are derived from their meaning and power, and are commonly used. O Shrenik! Listen with an attentive mind. ||324||

Sंचारिणी, कामदायिनी, कामगामिनी, दुर्निवारा, जगत्कम्पा, प्रज्ञप्ति, भानुमालिनी. ||325||

Page #212:
---------------------------
## Padmapurana 162

**Verse 326:**  Anima, Laghima, Kshobhya, Manahstambhanakarini, Samvahinī, Suradhvamsi, Kaumari, Vadhakarini.

**Verse 327:** Suvidhana, Taporupa, Dahani, Vipulodari, Shubhapraday, Rajorupa, Dinaratrividhayini.

**Verse 328:** Vajrodari, Samaavrusti, Adarshanyajaramara, Analaastambhani, Toyastambhani, Giridarani.

**Verse 329:** Avalokani, Arihdvamsi, Ghora, Dhira, Bhujangini, Varuni, Bhuvanavadhya, Daruna, Madanasini.

**Verse 330:** Bhaskari, Bhaysambhutis, Aishani, Vijaya, Jaya, Bandhani, Mochani, Varahi, Kutilaakriti.

**Verse 331:** Chittodhavakari, Shanti, Kauberi, Vashkarini, Yogeshwari, Balotsadi, Chanda, Bhiti, Pravarshini.

**Verse 332:** Thus, Dasanana, with his past good deeds, obtained these great Vidya's in a short time, with unwavering results.

**Verse 333:** Sarvaha, Ratisamvridhi, Jrimbhini, Vyomgamini, and Nidrani, these five Vidya's were obtained by Bhanukarna.

**Verse 334:** Siddhartha, Shatrudamani, Nirvyaghata, and Khagamini, these four Vidya's were obtained by Vibhishana, like beloved wives.

**Verse 335:** Thus, obtaining the power of Vidya, these three brothers, due to great joy, felt like they had obtained a new birth.

**Verse 336:** Then, the king of the Yakshas, Anavrita Yaksha, seeing these Vidya's, worshipped the three brothers with great splendor and adorned them with divine ornaments.

**Verse 337:** Dasanana, with the power of Vidya, established a city called "Swayamprabha". This city was adorned with rows of houses as high as the peak of Mount Meru.

**Verse 338:** The windows of these houses were adorned with strings of pearls, they were very high, and their pillars were made of jewels and gold. The city was adorned with Jain temples.

**Verse 339:** The city was always illuminated by jewels, which produced rainbows due to the interaction of their rays, and whose brilliance was like that of constant lightning.

**Verse 340:** In the sky-touching palace of that city, Dasanana, endowed with the power of Vidya, lived happily with his two brothers.

**Verse 341:** Then, the king of Jambudvipa, Anavrita Yaksha, filled with wonder, said to Dasanana one day: "I am amazed by your valor, O great-minded one, and I am pleased with you."

Page #213:
---------------------------
## Seventh Chapter

163.
"O great one, I am very pleased with your valor. Therefore, dwell in this Jambudvipa, which is surrounded by four oceans, east, west, north, and south, and is filled with Nagakumara and Vyantara Devas, as you please." (342) "I am the lord of this entire island, and I have no rival. Therefore, I grant you the boon to roam freely in this Jambudvipa, as you wish, vanquishing your enemies." (343) "O dear one, I am pleased with you, and I will always be present in your memory. Even Indra would not be able to hinder your desires under my influence, let alone ordinary mortals." (344) "May you live a long life, filled with happiness, along with your brothers. May your divine powers always increase, and may your relatives always serve them." (345) 

With these heartfelt blessings, the Yaksha, accompanied by his family, returned to his abode. (346)

Hearing of Ratnashrava, whose form was adorned with knowledge, groups of Rakshasas, filled with joy, approached him from all sides. (347) Some danced, some played instruments, and some were so overwhelmed with joy that they could not contain themselves. (348) Some roared loudly, terrifying the enemy, while others laughed for a long time, smearing the sky with lime. (349) Sumali, Malyavan, Suryaraj, and Riksharaj, filled with joy, arrived in their magnificent chariots. (350) All their relatives, some in flying vehicles, some on horses, and some on elephants, came from their respective lands, free from fear. (351)

Then, Ratnashrava, whose heart was filled with love for his son, arrived, continuously making the sky white with flags, adorned with great power. Groups of captives praised him, and he was riding in a chariot as beautiful as a grand palace. (352-353)

As they all traveled together, they spent the night on a mountain called Panchasangama, filled with sorrow due to the fear of their enemies. (354)

Then, the sons of Kekasi, with reverence, greeted their elders and friends, and with affectionate eyes, they welcomed their servants. (355)

Page #214:
---------------------------
In the Padma Purana, there is a story about the questioning of the well-being of the body and the attainment of Siddhi. It is not considered inappropriate to repeatedly ask about such matters when they are relevant.  ||356|| The Rakshasas and Vanaras, filled with wonder, beheld the self-illuminated city, which was like the celestial realm. ||357|| Their parents, their eyes filled with joy, touched the bodies of Dasanana and the others with trembling hands, offering their salutations. ||358|| When the sun was in the middle of the sky, the divine women began the bathing ceremony of the three Kumaras with great festivity. ||359|| They were seated on bathing platforms adorned with pearls and rich with various jewels, made of pure gold. ||360|| Their feet, with their reddish hue like the tender leaves, were placed on footrests, making them appear like the rising sun on the peak of Mount Meru. ||361|| Then, they were bathed with pitchers made of jewels, gold, and silver, their mouths covered with leaves, adorned with garlands, their forms veiled by a radiance that rivaled the moon and the sun, filled with fragrant water that perfumed the entire sky, with one main mouth and many smaller ones, around which swarms of bees hovered, and which roared like thunderous clouds due to the cascading water. ||362-364|| Then, they were anointed with fragrant water and other substances that enhanced their radiance, accompanied by the auspicious sounds of trumpets and other instruments. ||365|| Afterwards, their bodies were adorned with divine garments and ornaments, and the women of the clan performed various auspicious rituals with great respect. ||366|| Then, the three Kumaras, who resembled divine princes and brought joy to their loved ones, respectfully offered their salutations to their teachers. ||367|| Seeing the wealth of knowledge they had attained, the teachers blessed them, saying, "May you live long and prosper." ||368||

Page #215:
---------------------------
The Seventh Chapter

Sumali, Malyaavan, Suryaraj, Riksharaj and Ratnashrava embraced them again and again out of affection. ||369||  They all, surrounded by their relatives and servants, who had all the desired wealth, ate together. ||370||  Then Dashaanan worshipped the gurus by giving them clothes and other things, and also honored the servants as per their worth. ||371||  The gurus, whose eyes were filled with joy, were reassured.  They asked them, "O sons, have you all been well for so many days?" ||372||  Then Dashaanan and the other princes, joining their hands and bowing their heads, said, "By your grace, we are all well." ||373||  Then, in the course of the conversation, the death of Mali was mentioned, and Sumali was so grief-stricken that he fainted immediately. ||374||  Then Dashaanan, the eldest son of Ratnashrava, touched him with his cool hand and brought him back to consciousness. ||375||  He also cheered him up with words as cool as ice and as powerful as the sprouting of seeds that would destroy all enemies. ||376||  Seeing Dashaanan, whose eyes were like lotuses, Sumali immediately forgot his grief and was filled with joy again. ||377||  He then spoke to Dashaanan with heartfelt words, "O son, your noble character is truly pleasing to the gods. ||378||  O, your radiance surpasses the sun.  Your dignity surpasses the ocean. ||379||  O, your prowess, combined with your beauty, is unmatched.  O son, you are a special jewel of the Rakshasa clan. ||380||  Just as Jambudvipa is adorned by Mount Sumeru, and the sky is adorned by the moon and the sun, so too is this Rakshasa clan adorned by you, O son, whose actions are a wonder to the world. ||381-382||  Your ancestors, like Meghavahan, ruled Lanka and then attained liberation after performing austerities. ||383||

Page #216:
---------------------------
166
You have been born now by the merit of the severance of our vices. How can I describe the joy I feel, O son, with just one mouth? ||384|| These celestial beings had given up hope of life, but now, with your birth, they have renewed their hope. ||385|| Once, we went to Mount Kailasa to worship the Jina. There, we bowed to the supreme sage, the possessor of omniscience, and asked, "O Lord, when will we again reside in Lanka?" The compassionate sage replied, ||386-387|| "The son born to you from the daughter of Viyabindu will be the one who will bring you back to Lanka." ||388|| That son will be endowed with strength and valor, and will be the sole refuge of virtue, prowess, humility, wealth, fame, and beauty. He will rule over three parts of the Bharata land. ||389|| He will also liberate the wealth that has been seized by the enemy. This is not surprising, for he will attain supreme wealth in Lanka. ||390|| So, you have been born as a cause for celebration for the family, and all your signs are auspicious. You have captivated everyone's eyes with your incomparable form. ||391|| Upon hearing this, Dasanana bowed his head in shame, and said, "So be it," and folded his hands and touched his head, paying homage to the Siddha. ||392|| Thereafter, due to the influence of that child, all the relatives lived happily in their respective places, free from fear of enemies. ||393||
Then, Gautama Swami said to King Shrenik, "O King, in this way, men attain wealth through fame, which spreads throughout the world, due to the influence of their past good deeds. Age is not the cause of this. Does not a single spark of fire instantly burn a vast forest? Does not a lion cub tear apart a herd of maddened elephants? ||394|| A single ray of the moon quickly brings coolness to the lotus flowers, and the rays of the sun dispel the heat generated in living beings. ||383||

Page #217:
---------------------------
Seventh Chapter
167
The sun, shining brightly, quickly dispels the darkness, like a garland of clouds, and removes sleep, causing joy in the lotuses. ||395||
Thus ends the seventh chapter of the Padmacharita, composed by the Acharya known as Ravishena, which describes Dashagriva. ||7||

Page #218:
---------------------------
## The Eighth Chapter

Now, in the southern range of the Vijayardha mountain, there was a city called Asura-Sangita. There lived a powerful warrior named Maya, a Vidyadhara, whose brilliance was like that of the sun. He was known as a Daitya in the world. He had a wife named Hemavati, who possessed all the virtues of womanhood.  

They had a daughter named Mandodari, whose every limb was beautiful. She had a slender waist, large eyes, and a beauty that flowed like a stream of water. 

One day, seeing his daughter, now fully blossomed with youth, the father was overwhelmed with worry and spoke to his wife with great respect, saying, "My dear, our daughter Mandodari has reached the age of youth. Seeing this, my anxiety about this matter has multiplied."

Someone has rightly said that at the onset of a girl's youth, which ignites the fire of anxiety, parents, along with other relatives, become fuel for that fire. 

Therefore, wise men, with hearts filled with sorrow, offer water with their eyes as an offering to a daughter at her birth. 

Alas, the separation from a child born from one's own body, taken away by strangers, pierces the heart. 

Therefore, my dear, tell me, to whom shall we give this young girl? Who, with his virtues, lineage, and beauty, would be a suitable match for her?

Hearing this, Queen Hemavati said, "Mothers are suitable for protecting the bodies of their daughters, while fathers are suitable for giving them away."

"Where you find it pleasing to give her away, it is pleasing to me as well. Daughters of noble families follow the wishes of their husbands."

Hearing this, the king, along with his ministers, began to deliberate. One minister suggested a certain Vidyadhara. 

Then, another minister suggested Indra, the lord of all Vidyadharas. All Vidyadharas fear him, for he is invincible.

Page #219:
---------------------------
## The Eighth Chapter

169

Then, King Maya himself said, "I do not know the minds of you all. But I am pleased with the renowned Dashaanan, who has mastered all the Vidyaas." 14

"He is destined to be a great one, a cause of wonder in the world. Otherwise, how could he have mastered so many Vidyaas at such a young age?" 15

Hearing this, all the ministers, led by Maricha, who were experts in Mantras, were filled with joy. 16

Maricha and his powerful brothers, along with the other ministers, urged King Maya to act quickly. 17

King Maya, considering that time was slipping away, decided to act. He chose a favorable day, when the auspicious planets were in the ascendant, the inauspicious planets were in the opposite direction, and the ascendant was auspicious. He then set out with his daughter in the Pushpantak Vimana. As they departed, the sound of trumpets filled the air, and the women sang auspicious songs. When the trumpets fell silent, the sky echoed with the women's songs, as if it were filled with sound itself. 18-20

"Dashaanan is in the Bhimavana," reported the young men who had gone ahead, returning to King Maya after disembarking from the Pushpantak Vimana. 1

King Maya, after consulting with the local spies, set out for the Bhimavana. There, he saw the forest, dark as a black cloud. 21-22

One of the spies, pointing out the specific location of Dashaanan, said, "O King! Just as there is the Mandaruna forest between the Sammedachala and Kailasa mountains, so too is this excellent forest between the Valahka and Sandhyavarta mountains. See how beautiful this forest is, like a mass of soft darkness, with its tall, dense trees." 23-24

"In the middle of this forest, you can see a city adorned with large, white houses like conch shells. It is as beautiful as a cluster of autumn clouds." 25

"Near this city, you can see a very tall palace. It is so magnificent that it seems to touch the sky with its peaks." 26

1.  Maricha and his brothers.
2.  The sound of the trumpets ceased, and the sky was filled with sound.
3.  The young men who had gone ahead.
4.  Between the Valahka and Sandhyavarta mountains.

Page #220:
---------------------------
170
Padmapurana
Having descended from the sky, the army of King Maya rested near the palace as was appropriate. ||27||
Abandoning the pomp of trumpets and other instruments, the king of the demons, Maya, approached the palace, adorned with the attire of a refined man, accompanied by a few close associates. ||28||
Seeing the palace, Maya's pride vanished and he was filled with wonder. He was announced by the gatekeeper and ascended the palace. ||29||
He reached the seventh floor, step by step, with careful steps. There he saw a beautiful maiden, like a forest goddess in human form. ||30||
She was Chandranakha, the sister of Dashaanan, and she performed the rites of welcome. It is only right that those who are well-versed in their lineage do not fail in proper hospitality. ||31||
Then, seated comfortably, Maya asked the maiden, who was seated on a seat fit for a princess, with humility and respect: ||32||
"Daughter, who are you? Why do you reside in this terrifying forest? And whose is this grand palace?" ||33||
"How do you endure being alone in this palace? Your beautiful body is not fit for suffering." ||34||
Asked thus, the young girl, with the natural shyness of women, lowered her head, like a timid deer in the forest, and spoke softly: ||35||
"My brother, Dashaanan, has gone to Mount Meru to worship the Jina, having perfected this Chandrahas sword through the sixth vow (tela). He has entrusted me with the protection of this sword. So, O noble one, I reside in this temple adorned by the radiance of Chandra Prabha. If you have come to see Dashaanan, please rest here for a moment." ||36-38||
While this sweet conversation was taking place, a circle of light appeared in the sky. ||39||
At that moment, the maiden said, "It seems that Dashaanan, the ten-headed one, has arrived, making the sky radiant with his thousand rays." ||40||
Soudharma heaven is what he desires. ||26||

Page #221:
---------------------------
## The Eighth Chapter

171

Seeing him approaching, like a mass of clouds accompanied by lightning, Maya, filled with anxiety, rose from his seat. ||41||

Having performed the appropriate rituals, they sat down again on their seats. Their bodies were darkened by the brilliance of their swords. ||42||

Marichi, Vajramadhya, Vajra-netra, Nabhastaddit, Ugra-nak, Marud-vaktra, Medhavi, Sarasa, and Shuka, and others like them, having seen Dasha-nan, were filled with great joy. They spoke these auspicious words to Maya, the minister of the Daitya king: ||43-44||

"O Daitya king, your wisdom is superior to all others. It is because of you that this best of men has been placed in our hearts." ||45||

They said to Dasha-griva, "Oh, how brilliant your form is! Oh, how great is your humility and your strength!" ||46||

"This Daitya king, known as Maya throughout the world, resides in the city of Asarasangeet in the southern region. He has been attracted by your virtues, O Kumar. Who would not be eager to see you?" ||47-48||

Then Ratna-shrava's son, Dasha-nan, said, "Welcome! The wise say that sweet speech is the family knowledge of the virtuous." ||49||

"The Daitya king, a noble man, has shown us his love. I wish that he would bestow his favor on these people with appropriate orders." ||50||

Then Maya said, "Father, it is right for you to say this. The virtuous never engage in harmful conduct." ||51||

Seeing Dasha-nan, Maya's ministers, whose minds were filled with curiosity, were filled with joy and spoke to him again with words full of affection. ||52||

Then, with good intentions, Dasha-nan entered the beautiful inner sanctum of the Chandra-prabha Jinalaya. There he performed great worship, especially to the Jina-endras. ||53||

He recited various hymns that caused the hair to stand on end. He folded his hands and placed them on his head, which was adorned with a jewel. ||54||

Page #222:
---------------------------
In the Padma Purana, 
He touched the ground with his forehead and knees, and bowed low to the feet of the Jinas for a long time. || 55 ||
Then, the one who had attained the highest liberation, left the Jina's house, accompanied by the king of the Daityas, and sat down comfortably on a seat. || 56 ||
While inquiring about the news of the celestial beings who lived on the Vijayardha mountain, he saw Mandodari. || 57 ||
She was adorned with beautiful features, and her body was like a land of jewels of good fortune. Her feet were small, but her nails were long and smooth. || 58 ||
Her thighs were like the trunks of banana trees, or like the quiver of Kamadeva, or like streams of beauty. || 59 ||
Her hips were well-proportioned, high, and like the assembly hall of Kamadeva, and they were adorned with a beautiful curve. || 60 ||
Her waist was strong like a thunderbolt, and her breasts were like golden pots. Her face was downcast in shyness, and her arms were soft like garlands of Shirisha flowers. || 61 ||
Her neck was adorned with lines like a conch shell, and it was slightly bent. Her face was like the full moon, and her nose was like a bridge built across a river of the brilliance of her eyes. || 62 ||
Her cheeks were adorned with the red hue of her teeth, and her voice was like the sound of a vina, a bumblebee, and a cuckoo in ecstasy. || 63 ||
Her eyes were like the messengers of Kamadeva, and she seemed to scatter blue lotuses, red lotuses, and white lotuses in all directions. || 64 ||
Her forehead was like the moon on the eighth day, her ears were beautiful, and her hair was smooth, black, and fine. || 65 ||
She was conquering the lotus flower with the beauty of her face and feet, the elephant with the beauty of her hands, and the swan and the lioness with her grace and movement. || 66 ||
The knowledge had embraced Dashaanan, and I remained like this, filled with envy, as if Lakshmi had left her lotus abode and come in the form of Mandodari. || 67 ||

Page #223:
---------------------------
## The Eighth Chapter

173

A creation, unprecedented, devoid of any flaws, was brought forth by Karma, as if gathering all the beauty of the world. ||68||

She, like a radiant light, had come to earth, abandoning the Moon, fearing the touch of the Sun's rays and the fear of Rahu's attack. ||69||

The cluster of gems adorning her forehead served as a veil for her face, and the necklace she wore was like a bridge over the stream of her facial beauty. ||70||

She wore earrings adorned with pearls, which seemed like a garland of white sandalwood. ||71||

Her hips, unable to bear the agitation caused by the pride of Kama, were adorned with a girdle studded with gems. ||72||

Seeing her, so beautiful, Dashaanan was filled with sorrow and thought, "Even those with fortitude are often subdued by worldly desires." ||73||

His gaze, falling upon her, filled with sweetness, became intoxicated, as if drunk with honey, even when withdrawn. ||74||

He wondered, "Who is this supreme woman? Is she Hri, Sri, Lakshmi, Dhriti, Kirti, or Saraswati?" ||75||

"Is she married or unmarried? Or is this some illusion created by someone? Oh, this is the most excellent creation, the crown jewel of all women!" ||76||

"If I could obtain this woman, who steals the senses, my birth would be fulfilled. Otherwise, it is as worthless as a blade of grass." ||77||

Thinking thus, May, the knower of intentions, brought his daughter Mandodari before Dashaanan and said, "She is yours." ||78||

Dashaanan, drenched by these words, as if by nectar, felt a surge of joy, his body tingling with delight. ||79||

Then, in a moment, all things came together, and the wedding ceremony of these two, filled with the joy of their families, was completed. ||80||

Then, Dashaanan, his purpose fulfilled, went to his city, Swayamprabha, with Mandodari, believing he had obtained the fortune that resided in all the worlds. ||81||

Karma, the creator, had gathered all the beauty of the world and, under the guise of a woman, had created this unprecedented creation. ||68||

Page #224:
---------------------------
In the Padma Purana, King Maya, though filled with joy at the removal of the thorn of worry about his daughter, was also filled with sorrow at her separation. He resided in his own abode.  ||42|| Mandodari, with her charming demeanor, gradually became the most prominent among thousands of goddesses, captivating the heart of the king with her virtues. ||43||  Like Indra with his consort Indrani, Dashaanan, accompanied by Mandodari, delighted in his desired places. ||8||  Desiring to know the power of his knowledge, Dashaanan, with his radiant brilliance, engaged in numerous activities. ||85||  He, being one, became many, uniting with all women.  He sometimes generated heat like the sun, and sometimes emitted moonlight like the moon. ||86||  He sometimes emitted flames like fire, and sometimes rained like clouds.  He sometimes moved mountains like the wind, and sometimes exerted the power of Indra. ||87||  He sometimes became the ocean, sometimes a mountain, sometimes a maddened elephant, and sometimes a swift horse. ||88||  He was near in an instant, far in an instant, visible in an instant, invisible in an instant, great in an instant, subtle in an instant, terrifying in an instant, and not terrifying in an instant. ||89||  Thus, while roaming, he reached a mountain called Meghrav and saw a clear water pond there. ||90||  In that pond, there were lotus flowers, blue lotuses, red lotuses, white lotuses, and other types of lotuses.  On its banks, there were cranes, swans, ducks, and herons. ||91||  Its banks were covered with soft green grass, and its steps enhanced its beauty.  Its water seemed as if the sky had melted and filled it with the rays of the sun. ||92||  Its banks were filled with tall trees like Arjuna (a type of tree).  Whenever groups of fish jumped up in it, water droplets flew up from them. ||93||  With its waves, which were like fleeting moments, it seemed to be making sounds like the chirping of birds, which were pleasing to the ears. ||94||

Page #225:
---------------------------
**Aṣṭama Parva**

175  
There, among those engrossed in play, the son of Kekasī saw the supreme prosperity of those holding six thousand maidens. ॥95॥ Some played in the water jets flown from afar by the distant girl. "The well-formed maidens roamed far, having fulfilled their friendships." ॥96॥ One of them, named Padmapaṇḍa, sat there, showing her teeth while making the water lily suspicious among her companions, lingering there for a long time. ॥97॥ Another, producing sounds like a mṛdaṅga with a slow tempo in the water, was singing in six measures. ॥18॥ At that moment, the young maidens saw Rātri, the son of Ratnaśrava, and for a moment forgot their playful water games, as if they were petrified. ॥19॥ In the middle of them was Daśagrīva, who, yearning for pleasure, became attached to that gathering of maidens, allowing them all to indulge in delight. ॥10॥ With arrows like flowers drawn from the flower-archers, they were all struck equally, and thus their gazes were fixed upon that glorious son. ॥101॥ Mixed in the flavor of desire, their minds were like the swaying of a fast-moving chariot, filled with restless excitement. ॥10॥ Among them was a maiden of great beauty, named Padmāvatī, whose eyes resembled the buds of a large blue lotus. ॥10॥ Another maiden named Aśokalata, the daughter of Buddha, was born anew with the beauty of a young Aśoka flower. ॥10॥ In the evening, the daughter of the king Kanaka, named Vidyutprabhā, was so beautiful that she made lightning feel shy before her splendor. ॥105॥ These maidens were born of a great lineage and were the most beautiful amongst all, seeming to embody the beauty of the three worlds. ॥106॥ The aforementioned three maidens, along with all others, approached Daśagrīva, as modesty persists until the pain of desire becomes unbearable. ॥107॥ Thereafter, without any doubt, Daśagrīva encountered all those maidens in playful pursuits, filled with joy.  

(Note: Certain Sanskrit words and phrases have been kept in their original language to preserve their significance and context.)

Page #226:
---------------------------
176
In the Padma Purana, Dasagriva, with those women, again engaged in play. They, being mutually attracted, became agitated at the first approach. ||109|| Indeed, that play is being performed by him, so it is fitting. The beauty of the stars is due to the moon. ||110|| Then, the Kanchukis, having quickly gone to them, informed the Janakas of this incident, which happened due to Ratnaśrava. ||111|| Then, those cruel men, sent by them for his destruction, with their lips bitten and their brows furrowed, were full of anxiety. ||112|| They, all together, released various weapons, but they were defeated by Kaitakeśaya with a mere glance. ||113|| Then, those, with their whole bodies trembling with fear, and their hands having released their weapons, approached the beautiful Amarasundara. ||114|| "Take our lives, O Lord, or cut off our hands and feet, or our necks, we are unable to destroy that man." ||115|| In the midst of the group of women, a certain valiant man, shining with beauty, equal to that of the moon, was seated. ||116|| Even the gods, headed by Indra, cannot bear the sight of him when he is angry, what to speak of us, who are mere mortals? ||117|| We have seen many excellent men, like the king of Rathnapura, Indra, etc., but this one is the most revered of all. ||118|| Hearing this, Amarasundara, whose face was red with great anger, went out, accompanied by Kanaka and Budha. ||119|| Other valiant husbands of the celestial women, making the sky brilliant with the rays of their weapons, also went out. ||120|| Then, seeing them coming, those celestial women, whose minds were filled with fear, said to Ratnaśrava: "O Lord, you have come to great danger on our account. In truth, we are all devoid of merit and auspicious signs." ||121-122||

The Gandharva married in the same way as the moon marries the group of stars. ||108||

After that, they, the women, started playing again with Dasanana, competing with each other, saying, "I will reach first, I will reach first." ||109|| The woman who plays with Dasanana seems to be good, and it is right, because what is the beauty of the stars without the moon? ||110|| After that, the Kanchukis, who had come back with these women, quickly went and told the fathers of the women about this incident of Dasanana. ||111|| Then, the fathers of the women sent such cruel men to destroy Dasanana, who were biting their lips in anger and looked terrible with their furrowed brows. ||112|| They were all releasing various kinds of weapons together, but Dasanana defeated them with a mere glance. ||113|| Then, those whose whole bodies were trembling with fear and whose hands had released their weapons, went to King Surasundara and said, ||114|| "O Lord! Take our lives, or cut off our hands and feet, or our necks, we are not able to destroy that man." ||115|| A valiant man, beautiful like Indra and shining with the beauty of the moon, was sitting among the women. ||116|| Even the gods, headed by Indra, cannot bear the sight of him when he is angry, what to speak of us, who are mere mortals? ||117|| We have seen many excellent men, like the king of Rathnapura, Indra, etc., but this one is the most revered of all. ||118|| Hearing this, King Surasundara, whose face was red with great anger, went out, accompanied by Kanaka and Budha. ||119|| Besides them, many other valiant husbands of the celestial women, making the sky brilliant with the rays of their weapons, also went out. ||120|| Then, seeing them coming, those celestial women, whose minds were filled with fear, said to Dasanana: "O Lord! You have come to great danger on our account. In truth, we are all devoid of merit and auspicious signs." ||121-122||

Page #227:
---------------------------
## The Eighth Chapter

177

Arise, O Lord, and seek refuge in someone. Be gracious to us. Fly up to the sky quickly and protect our precious lives. ||123||

Or, remain hidden in this Jain temple until these cruel men see your form. ||124||

Hearing these pitiful words and seeing the approaching army, Dashaanan turned his eyes, white like the moon and red like the lotus. ||125||

He said to the maidens, "Surely you do not know our prowess, therefore you speak thus. Consider this: what can many crows do to a Garuda, even if they gather together?" ||126||

"A lone lion cub, with his mane flowing, does not destroy a herd of maddened elephants?" ||127||

Hearing Dashaanan's words filled with valor, the maidens said again, "O Lord, if you think so, then protect our father, brothers, and relatives. Do not kill them in battle." ||128||

"My dear ones, it shall be so. Do not fear. I will comfort you until this army arrives." ||129||

Then, mounting a chariot created by knowledge, Ravana ascended to the sky and began to chew his lips with his teeth. ||130||

His very limbs, upon experiencing the festival of battle, swelled so much and became so rough with excitement that they could barely fit in the sky. ||131||

Then, just as clouds pour down thick streams of water on a mountain, all the warriors began to hurl weapons at Dashaanan. ||132||

Dashaanan then began to rain down stones. With some, he blocked the enemy's weapons, and with others, he terrified the enemy army. ||133||

"What good will it do me to kill these wretched, lowly Vidyadharas?" Thinking this, he turned his gaze upon the three chief Vidyadharas: Surasunder, Kanak, and Budh. ||134||

Then, with a weapon of darkness, he blinded them, rendering them motionless. He bound them with a serpent's noose and brought them before the three maidens. ||135||

Page #228:
---------------------------
137. Then, in the Padma Purana, there was a wedding ceremony for them, and a great festival lasting three days, celebrating knowledge. 
138. They all departed, with his permission, to their respective homes. He, attracted by the virtues of Mandodari, went to the city of Swayamprabha.
139. Seeing him, adorned with great splendor, accompanied by his wives, his relatives were overjoyed, their eyes wide with delight.
140. From afar, Bhanukarna and Vibhishana, along with other friends and relatives, came out to greet him.
141. Surrounded by them, he entered the magnificent city of Swayamprabha. They all enjoyed themselves there, attaining supreme happiness.
142. In the city of Kumbhapura, there was a beautiful daughter named Taḍinmālā, born to the king, Mahōdara.
143. Bhanukarna, delighted, obtained her as his wife. Immersed in the ocean of love, he enjoyed her charming and playful nature.
144. In Kumbhapura, a loud noise was made by an enemy. Hearing the cries of his father-in-law, Bhanukarna was deeply affected.
145. From then on, he became known in the world as Kumbhakarna. He was a valiant warrior, devoted to righteousness, and a master of the arts.
146. Wicked people have misrepresented him. They say he lived on flesh and blood and slept for six months.
147. His food was pure, sweet, and prepared according to his desire. It was fragrant and he always entertained his guests first, before eating with his family.
148. He slept at dusk and woke at dawn. The rest of his time was spent in religious activities.
149. Those who are devoid of the knowledge of the Supreme Truth, and who slander the virtuous, are destined for hell. Shame on them!
150. In the southern region, there is a city called Jyotiprabha. There, the king, Mayamahasuhrit, is as pure as a lotus.

Page #229:
---------------------------
## The Eighth Canto

179
From his Nandana Mala, a beautiful daughter was born, named Rajiva Sarasi, who was given to Vibhishana in marriage. ||15||
The wise Vibhishana, with his divine form, did not find pleasure with the beautiful Rajiva Sarasi, like a lotus with a lotus. ||152||
Then Mandodari, due to the auspicious time, conceived. Her mind was filled with thoughts, and her desires were fulfilled instantly. Her movements were captivating. ||153||
She was taken to her father's house, where she gave birth to a noble son, who was known throughout the earth as Indrajit. ||154||
Indrajit, the delight of his people, grew up in his grandfather's house. He played like a young lion, full of joy. ||155||
Then Mandodari, with her son, was brought back to her husband. She brought sorrow to her father, due to the separation from her son. ||156||
Dashanan, seeing his son, was filled with immense joy. There is no greater happiness than that of a son. ||157||
In due course, Mandodari conceived again and was sent back to her father. There, she gave birth to a son named Meghavahana. ||158||
Then she was brought back to her husband, and she immersed herself in the ocean of pleasure, her mind captivated by her husband. ||159||
The two boys, with their charming movements, brought joy to their family. They reached their youth, their eyes as vast as those of a great bull. ||160||
Then Kumbhakarna, going to the cities ruled by Vaishravana, destroyed them thousands of times. ||161||
From those cities, the valiant Kumbhakarna brought back beautiful jewels, clothes, women, and courtesans to his own city, Swayamprabha. ||162||
When Vaishravana, the powerful Indra, learned of Kumbhakarna's mischief, he sent a messenger to Sumali, filled with pride. ||163||
The messenger entered the city and was announced to the guards. He received a welcome befitting a guest, according to the customs of the world. ||164||

Page #230:
---------------------------
180
In the Padma Purana, this was said by the messenger, known as Vakyalankara. He spoke to Dashaanan (Ravana) in the presence of Sumali, in this order. ||165||  "O Maharaj, remember what Vaishravana (Kubera), whose fame pervades the entire universe, has said to you." ||166|| "He said that you are a scholar, a noble, a man of the world, a great man, afraid of wrongdoing, and a guide on the right path." ||167|| "It is fitting for you to restrain your reckless grandson, who is like a playful child." ||168|| "This is the main difference between animals and humans: animals do not know the difference between right and wrong, while humans do." ||169|| "Even when they gain some fleeting power, those with firm minds do not forget their past." ||170|| "The entire family should find peace in the death of the head gardener. Who would do something that would lead to the complete destruction of their own family?" ||171|| "Why have you forgotten the power of Indra, who destroys his enemies and whose glory is spread throughout the ocean waves? Why are you trying to do something inappropriate?" ||172|| "You are like a frog playing in the mouth of a snake, which is full of sharp teeth and spews fire-like venom." ||173|| "If you are unable to control this thief-like child, then hand him over to me today. I will take control of him myself." ||174|| "If you do not do this, then you will see your grandson in prison, bound in chains and suffering various tortures." ||175|| "It seems you have been away from Alankarodaya (Patalaloka) for a long time. Now you want to enter that same den again." ||176|| "Be sure that if I or Indra become angry, you will have no refuge on earth. Just as a bubble of water disappears with a slight breeze, so will you." ||177||
Then, the water of Dashaanan's mind, which was like an ocean, was agitated by the strong wind of the messenger's harsh words. ||178||
The messenger entered after delivering the message. He was well-versed in social etiquette and behaved with appropriate humility. ||164|| The messenger's name was Vakyalankara. He began to speak to Dashaanan in the presence of Sumali, in this order. ||165|| "O Maharaj, remember what Vaishravana (Kubera), whose fame pervades the entire universe, has said to you." ||166|| "He said that you are a scholar, a noble, a man of the world, a great man, afraid of wrongdoing, and a guide on the right path." ||167|| "It is fitting for you to restrain your reckless grandson, who is like a playful child." ||168|| "This is the main difference between animals and humans: animals do not know the difference between right and wrong, while humans do." ||169|| "Even when they gain some fleeting power, those with firm minds do not forget their past." ||170|| "The entire family should find peace in the death of the head gardener. Who would do something that would lead to the complete destruction of their own family?" ||171|| "Why have you forgotten the power of Indra, who destroys his enemies and whose glory is spread throughout the ocean waves? Why are you trying to do something inappropriate?" ||172|| "You are like a frog playing in the mouth of a snake, which is full of sharp teeth and spews fire-like venom." ||173|| "If you are unable to control this thief-like child, then hand him over to me today. I will take control of him myself." ||174|| "If you do not do this, then you will see your grandson in prison, bound in chains and suffering various tortures." ||175|| "It seems you have been away from Alankarodaya (Patalaloka) for a long time. Now you want to enter that same den again." ||176|| "Be sure that if I or Indra become angry, you will have no refuge on earth. Just as a bubble of water disappears with a slight breeze, so will you." ||177||
Then, the water of Dashaanan's mind, which was like an ocean, was agitated by the strong wind of the messenger's harsh words. ||178||

Page #231:
---------------------------
## The Eighth Chapter

2

As the messenger spoke, the ocean of ten heads was filled with agitation. || 178 ||

Hearing the messenger's words, the ten-headed one was shaken as if someone had grabbed him and shaken him violently. Sweat poured from every pore of his body, and his eyes, blood-red, stained the entire sky. || 179 ||

Then, deafening the directions with his voice that echoed through the sky, the ten-headed one, making the elephants lose their madness with his roar, spoke. || 180 ||

"Who is this Vaishravana, or who is called Indra, who has seized our city, inherited through generations?" || 181 ||

"This shameless, low-born man, acting like Indra in front of his servants, is like a crow pretending to be a hawk, and a jackal acting like a Sarabha." || 182 ||

"Oh, messenger! You speak harsh words in front of us without fear. I will offer your head as a sacrifice to my anger." || 183 ||

Saying this, he drew his sword from its sheath, making the sky, like a vast lake, appear as if it were filled with a forest of blue lotuses. || 184 ||

His sword, making a humming sound, trembled as if from the wind's anger, appearing as if Yama himself had come in the form of a sword, or as if it were the son of violence. || 185 ||

The ten-headed one had just raised his sword when Vibhishana intervened, calming him with great respect. || 186 ||

"What is the fault of this servant, this wretched, degraded soul, who has sold his body and repeats whatever he is told, like a parrot?" || 187 ||

"The messengers speak whatever they do, driven by their master, who resides in their hearts, like a demon. In reality, the messengers are like puppets, controlled by others." || 188 ||

"Therefore, O noble one, be pleased and show mercy to the suffering creature. By killing a small being, the earth will be filled with infamy in the world." || 189 ||

"Your sword will fall only on the heads of your enemies, for Garuda does not attack the non-poisonous snakes that live in water." || 190 ||

Thus, the fire of anger in the ten-headed one was quelled by the water of good counsel from Vibhishana, the righteous speaker, until others pulled the messenger's feet and quickly dragged him out of the assembly hall.

The Acharya says:

1. Karabhaayate M.
2. Neet M.
3. Mivaasannam M.
4. Yatra M.

|| 181 ||

Page #232:
---------------------------
##  English Translation:

182
In the Padma Purana, the messenger, having been treated well by others, was dragged by his feet. He was quickly expelled from the house. Shame on the servant who created this sorrow!  ||192||  Going to Vaishravana, he informed him of this situation. He also told him of the harsh words spoken by Dashagriva. ||193||  Fueled by this information, Vaishravana's anger ignited like a fire.  He, like a minister, shared this anger with his servants. ||194||  He declared war with a harsh sound of the trumpet.  Mani-bhadra and others were immediately prepared for battle. ||195||  Vaishravana, surrounded by Yaksha warriors wielding shining swords, spears, and chakra, marched forth. ||196||  He was accompanied by elephants resembling the size of Anjan mountain, chariots resembling the color of the evening sky, horses with waving chamaras, and swift winds of victory.  His celestial vehicles, resembling the abode of the gods, soared high in the sky. ||197||  He was also accompanied by infantry, whose strength was like a rushing torrent, surpassing even the horses, chariots, elephants, and celestial vehicles. ||198||  Meanwhile, Dashagriva, the mighty one, had already emerged with his brothers, Bhanukarna and others, ready for the great battle. ||199||  The two armies clashed on the peak of the mountain called Gunja.  The clash of weapons created a fiery blaze. ||201||  The sound of clashing swords, the neighing of horses, the roar of the infantry, the trumpeting of elephants, the beautiful sound of chariots colliding, the loud sound of the trumpets, and the whistling of arrows, all combined to create a unique and mixed sound.  The echo reverberated between the sky and the earth, filling the warriors with a supreme intoxication. ||202-204||  The warriors wielded swords resembling the jaws of Yama, spears resembling the teeth of Yama, arrows resembling the threats of Yama, shields resembling the arms of Yama, and maces resembling the fists of Yama. ||205-206||  Shame on such a servant who created this situation! ||191-192||  The messenger went and informed Vaishravana of this situation and also told him about the harsh words spoken by Dashagriva. ||193||  Fueled by this information, Vaishravana's anger ignited like a fire.  He, like a minister, shared this anger with his servants. ||194||  He declared war with a harsh sound of the trumpet.  Mani-bhadra and others were immediately prepared for battle. ||195||  Vaishravana, surrounded by Yaksha warriors wielding shining swords, spears, and chakra, marched forth. ||196||  He was accompanied by elephants resembling the size of Anjan mountain, chariots resembling the color of the evening sky, horses with waving chamaras, and swift winds of victory.  His celestial vehicles, resembling the abode of the gods, soared high in the sky. ||197||  He was also accompanied by infantry, whose strength was like a rushing torrent, surpassing even the horses, chariots, elephants, and celestial vehicles. ||198||  Meanwhile, Dashagriva, the mighty one, had already emerged with his brothers, Bhanukarna and others, ready for the great battle. ||199||  The two armies clashed on the peak of the mountain called Gunja.  The clash of weapons created a fiery blaze. ||201||  The sound of clashing swords, the neighing of horses, the roar of the infantry, the trumpeting of elephants, the beautiful sound of chariots colliding, the loud sound of the trumpets, and the whistling of arrows, all combined to create a unique and mixed sound.  The echo reverberated between the sky and the earth, filling the warriors with a supreme intoxication. ||202-204||  The warriors wielded swords resembling the jaws of Yama, spears resembling the teeth of Yama, arrows resembling the threats of Yama, shields resembling the arms of Yama, and maces resembling the fists of Yama. ||205-206||

Page #233:
---------------------------
## The Eighth Chapter

A great battle ensued, filled with valor and courage. The cowardly were struck with fear, while the brave sought glory by sacrificing their lives. ||207|| Seeing his army demoralized by the Yakshas, Dashaanan (Ravana) took charge, determined to hold the battlefield. ||208|| As he approached, his white umbrella shielded him from the sun, making him appear like a dark cloud with the moon shining upon it. His bow, adorned with Indra's rainbow, resembled a dark cloud charged with lightning. His crown, adorned with countless jewels, made him look like a thunderous cloud, veiled in brilliance. ||209-211|| The Yakshas, their eyes wide with fear, lost their strength and turned away, their resolve crumbling in an instant. ||212|| The Yaksha foot soldiers, their hearts filled with terror, began to flee in disarray, creating a deafening roar. Many Yaksha leaders rushed to the front of their armies, rallying their troops to face the enemy once more. ||213-214|| Dashaanan, like a lion leaping through the sky to destroy enraged elephants, set out to destroy the Yaksha leaders. ||215|| Fueled by the wind of his anger, the fire of Dashaanan's weapons blazed through the forest of the enemy army. ||216|| There was not a single man left on earth, in a chariot, on a horse, an elephant, or in a flying machine, who had not been pierced by Ravana's arrows. ||217|| Seeing Dashaanan approaching, Vaishravana (Kubera) was instantly filled with brotherly love. ||218|| He was overcome with sorrow and despair, just as the mighty Bhallu (Bhima) had been in the past, when he had engaged in the act of peace. ||219||

Page #234:
---------------------------
184
The world, full of suffering and misery, is indeed despicable.  Living beings are constantly reborn in different wombs, like a wheel turning.  ||220||  "Look, blinded by wealth, what have I started?  I am destroying my own brother out of pride." ||221||  "Oh, Dashaanan, listen to these noble words.  What sin are you committing, driven by fleeting worldly glory?" ||222||  "I am your maternal uncle's son, and I love you like a brother.  It is not right to behave so badly towards your own kin." ||223||  "A being who kills other beings, driven by the desire for pleasurable objects, goes to a terrible hell, filled with immense suffering." ||224||  "Just as a man who gains a kingdom for a day, but dies as a result a year later, similarly, this being enjoys fleeting pleasures, but suffers for an immeasurable time." ||225||  "Life is truly fleeting, like the blink of an eye.  Don't you know, Dashaanan, why you are doing this, for the sake of fleeting pleasures?" ||226||  Dashaanan, devoid of compassion, laughed and said, "Vaishravaan, this is not the time to listen to Dharma." ||227||  "Men mounted on intoxicated elephants, with swords in their hands, kill their enemies, not preach Dharma." ||228||  "Why are you talking so much?  Either stand in the path of my sword, or bow down to me.  There is no third option for you." ||229||  "Or, since you are the guardian of wealth, protect my wealth.  A man is not ashamed to do his own duty." ||230||  Vaishravaan then said to Dashaanan, "Surely your lifespan is short, that's why you are speaking like this." ||231||  Dashaanan, his mind filled with anger, replied, "If you have the strength, then kill me." ||232||  Vaishravaan then said, "You are the elder, so kill me first.  The strength of brave men with unblemished bodies does not increase." ||233||

Page #235:
---------------------------
## Eighth Chapter

Then, Vaishravana released his arrows towards the ten-headed one. The lord of the luminaries, like the sun showering its rays upon the earth at noon, aimed his arrows at the head of the ten-headed one. ||234|| The ten-headed one then cut those arrows with his own arrows. He created a canopy of arrows, dense and impenetrable, in a moment, without any fear. ||235|| Vaishravana, seizing the opportunity, struck the ten-headed one's bow with his crescent-shaped arrow, causing him to fall from his chariot. ||236|| Then, the ten-headed one, with his indomitable spirit, mounted another chariot, which roared like a cloud, and swiftly approached Vaishravana, his chariot shining like the Pushpaka. ||237|| With great anger, he rained down thunderbolts, shaped like meteors, upon Vaishravana, shattering his armor into pieces. ||238|| The one with the white garland, with his swift Bhindimala, struck Vaishravana's heart, causing him to faint. ||239|| A great cry arose in Vaishravana's army, while the Rakshasa army rejoiced with loud cheers. ||240|| Vaishravana, greatly distressed, was lifted by his servants and placed on a hero's bed. He was then swiftly taken to Yakshapura. ||241|| Ravana, seeing his enemy defeated, withdrew from the battle. For the victory of heroes lies in the defeat of their enemies, not in the acquisition of wealth. ||242|| Then, Vaishravana's physicians treated him, and he regained his former health. As he regained consciousness, he thought to himself, ||243|| "I am now like a tree without flowers, a broken pot, or a lotus-less pond." ||244|| "As long as a man possesses honor, he enjoys happiness in this world while alive. Now, my honor is lost, so I strive for liberation." ||245|| "The wise do not desire worldly pleasures, for they are impermanent, fleeting, full of obstacles, and filled with sorrow." ||246|| "This is not anyone's fault, but the result of the actions performed by living beings in their previous births." ||247||

Page #236:
---------------------------
186
In the Padma Purana, wise ones who know the state of the world do not get angry at others, for they are merely the cause of their happiness or suffering. ||24|| 
The son of Kekasi has become my friend, who has freed me from the great bondage of household life. ||249||
Bhanukarna is also my well-wisher now, who has caused the war that has led to my supreme detachment. ||250||
Thinking thus, he took the Digambara initiation and, by proper worship of the austerities, attained the supreme abode. ||251||
Having washed away the stain of defeat upon his family, Dashaanan (Ravana) lived happily on earth, and all his relatives considered him their leader. ||252||
Then the beautiful Dhanada (Kubera)'s Pushpaka Vimana was brought to Ravana by his servants. That Pushpaka Vimana was very beautiful, Dhanada was its owner, its peak was studded with various kinds of jewels, its windows were its eyes, the garland of pearls that was attached to it emitted a group of pure radiance, and it seemed as if it were constantly shedding tears due to the separation from its owner. Its front part was made of Padmaraga gems, so when he wore it, it seemed as if he had beaten his heart a lot due to grief, which is why he was wearing a very red hue. In some places, the radiance of Indranila gems was covering it, which made it seem as if he had attained a very dark complexion due to grief. It seemed like a city, being accompanied by Chaitya temples, forests, the front parts of houses, wells, and palaces. Various weapons had inflicted wounds on that Vimana, it was very high, it seemed like a divine abode, and it was like an ornament of the sky. ||253-258||
Dashaanan wanted to keep that Pushpaka Vimana with him, considering it a sign of the defeat of his enemies, otherwise, what vehicle made by knowledge did he not have? ||259||
He mounted that Vimana, along with his ministers, vehicles, citizens, sons, parents, and relatives. ||260||
All efforts are... ||245||
Suffering or happiness are merely causes for others, therefore, wise ones who know the state of the world do not get angry at them, meaning they do not experience joy or sorrow towards the cause. ||248||
He, the ten-headed one, is my well-wisher, who has freed me, the foolish one, from the great bondage of household life. ||249||
Bhanukarna is also my well-wisher now, who has caused the war that has led to my supreme detachment. ||250||
Thinking thus, he took the Digambara initiation and, by proper worship of the austerities, attained the supreme abode. ||251||
_Here, Dashaanan also washed away the stain of defeat upon his family and lived happily on earth, and all his relatives considered him their leader. ||252||
Then the beautiful Dhanada (Kubera)'s Pushpaka Vimana was brought to Ravana by his servants. That Pushpaka Vimana was very beautiful, Dhanada was its owner, its peak was studded with various kinds of jewels, its windows were its eyes, the garland of pearls that was attached to it emitted a group of pure radiance, and it seemed as if it were constantly shedding tears due to the separation from its owner. Its front part was made of Padmaraga gems, so when he wore it, it seemed as if he had beaten his heart a lot due to grief, which is why he was wearing a very red hue. In some places, the radiance of Indranila gems was covering it, which made it seem as if he had attained a very dark complexion due to grief. It seemed like a city, being accompanied by Chaitya temples, forests, the front parts of houses, wells, and palaces. Various weapons had inflicted wounds on that Vimana, it was very high, it seemed like a divine abode, and it was like an ornament of the sky. ||253-258||
Dashaanan wanted to keep that Pushpaka Vimana with him, considering it a sign of the defeat of his enemies, otherwise, what vehicle made by knowledge did he not have? ||259||
He mounted that Vimana, along with his ministers, vehicles, citizens, sons, parents, and relatives. ||260||
1. Durvi K., Kh. | 2. Athapatitam M. | 3. Param M. | 4. Kritam Pravaranam M. | 5. Garvayuktah.

Page #237:
---------------------------
The Eighth Chapter

187.  He was happy, situated in the midst of the Mahapadma Khanda, the inner palace. His movement was unimpeded, adorned with gestures of his own making. ||26||

262.  With his hands holding a bow, trident, sword, spear, and noose, he was followed by servants who had performed wondrous deeds. ||262||

263.  He was surrounded by vassals who had destroyed the armies of his enemies, who stood in a circular formation, whose minds were inclined towards virtue, and who were adorned with great splendor. ||263||

264.  He was fanned by beautiful chamaras held by the hands of the best Vidyaadharis, his body smeared with sandalwood paste and other fragrant substances. ||264||

265.  He was adorned with a magnificent umbrella, shining like the moon, as if he were adorned by the glory born from the defeat of his enemies. ||265||

266.  He possessed a radiant brilliance like the sun, and was receiving the fruits of his virtuous deeds. He was equal in glory to Indra, and was proceeding towards the southern ocean. ||266||

267.  Kumbhakarna, mounted on an elephant, and Vibhishana, mounted on a chariot, both filled with pride and splendor, followed him. ||267||

268.  The great demon Maya, along with his brothers and vassals, also followed him, riding in chariots drawn by lions, tigers, and other animals. ||268||

269.  Maricha, Ambaravidyut, Vana, Vajrodara, Budha, Vajraksha, Kruranakra, Saran, and Sunaya, the ministers of King Maya, and other celestial kings adorned with great splendor, followed him. ||269-270||

271.  Having subdued the entire southern region, he then proceeded towards other directions, observing the earth with its forests, mountains, and oceans. ||271||

272.  Then, one day, Dashaanan, whose body was bent in humility, ascended high into the sky and asked his grandfather, Sumali, in astonishment, "O venerable one! There is no lake on the peak of this mountain, but a forest of lotuses is flourishing. Look at this great wonder!" ||272-273||

274.  "O master! How is it that these large, colorful clouds are standing still on the earth here?" ||274||

Page #238:
---------------------------
In the Padma Purana,
After saying "Salutations to the Siddhas," Sumali said to Dasanana, "These are not lotuses, O son, nor are they clouds. || 275 || They are adorned with white banners, with thousands of arches, and these Jina temples are shining on the peaks of the mountains. || 276 || These were built by the virtuous and great-souled Harishena. O son, you should bow to them and purify your heart in an instant. || 277 || Then, standing there, Dasanana, the crusher of Dhanada, bowed to the Jina temples and, filled with wonder, said, "O venerable one, what was the greatness of Harishena, for which you have spoken of him in this way?" || 278-279 || Then Sumali said, "O Dasanana, you have asked a very good question. Now listen to the story of Harishena, the destroyer of sin. || 280 || In the city of Kampilya, there lived a great king named Mrigapati-dhvaja, who was renowned throughout the world. || 281 || His queen was named Prahva, who was adorned with the qualities of women and, by her good fortune, had attained the position of being the most beautiful among hundreds of queens. || 282 || From them was born a son named Harishena, who was the embodiment of supreme good fortune. He was endowed with sixty-four auspicious marks and was a destroyer of evil. || 283 || Once, on the occasion of the Ashtahnika festival, the virtuous queen Vatra desired to have a chariot of the Jina Tirthankara taken out in procession in the city. || 284 || King Singh-dhvaja had another queen named Mahalakshmi, who was always intoxicated with pride in her good fortune. Mahalakshmi, filled with many evil intentions, was Vatra's co-wife, and she raised her voice against her, saying, "First, my Brahma-ratha will go through the streets of the city, and then the Jina-ratha built by queen Vatra can go." || 285-286 || Hearing this, Vatra was so grieved that it was as if a thunderbolt had struck her heart. Filled with sorrow, she vowed, "If my chariot goes first in the city, then I will eat again as before, otherwise not." || 287-288 || Saying this, she bound herself by this vow, and, deprived of all business, she became pale and her face was like a lotus covered in mud. || 289 ||

Page #239:
---------------------------
## The Eighth Chapter

Then, she, releasing breaths and tears incessantly, her face wilted with sorrow. Seeing her, Harishena said, "Mother, why have you begun this inauspicious weeping, which you have never even dreamt of before? Please stop and tell me the reason." || 290-291 ||

Hearing her words, he pondered the reason. "What should I do? This heavy burden has come upon me. How can I tell my father?" || 292 ||

"He is my father and she is my mother. Both are my supreme gurus. Whom should I hate? Alas, I am caught in a great predicament." || 293 ||

Unable to bear the sight of his tearful mother, he left the palace and went to the forest, teeming with wild animals. || 294 ||

There, he wandered fearlessly, eating roots and fruits in the desolate forest, drinking water from the lakes. || 295 ||

Seeing his form, even the cruel animals were pacified for a moment. Indeed, who does not love a noble being? || 296 ||

Even in the secluded forest, the memory of his mother's weeping tormented him. The words she uttered with a choked voice, all of it was a constant burden. || 297 ||

Despite the beautiful landscapes of the forest, he found no peace. His gentle heart was constantly restless, wandering aimlessly. || 298 ||

"Is this a forest deity?" he wondered incessantly, his eyes fixed on the deer who watched him from afar. || 299 ||

Wandering thus, he reached the hermitage of Shatamanyu, a disciple of Angiras, where creatures of the forest lived in peace, their animosity forgotten. || 300 ||

Meanwhile, a king named Kalakalpa, mighty and fearsome, with a vast army, besieged the city of Champa. || 301 ||

Janamejaya, the king of Champa, fought against him, while Nagavati, his mother, along with her daughter, escaped through a long tunnel built beforehand, and reached the hermitage of Shatamanyu. || 302 ||

Page #240:
---------------------------
Here is the translation of the provided text into English, while retaining the Sanskrit words:

---

In the **Padmapurāṇa**:

Nāmnā Nāgavati tasyā mātā tanujāya samam | 
Pūrvameva gatā deśaṁ śatamanyu-yatiśritam || 303 ||

Seeing the beautiful and charming son of Nāgavati, 
he was struck by the arrows of Kāmadeva, which caused restlessness in his body. || 304 ||

Then, seeing her in distress, Nāgavati said to her, 
"O daughter! Be cautious; remember the words of the great sage." || 305 ||

Previously, the sage had stated that you would be 
the gem among the women of the chakkravarti. || 306 ||

Knowing this, the ascetics, feeling quite frightened, 
banished Harṣeṇa from their hermitage. || 307 ||

Then, humiliated, Harṣeṇa, holding the maiden in his heart, 
wandered aimlessly, as though embracing the knowledge of Bhrāmari. || 308 ||

In his heavy yearning, Harṣeṇa remained constantly sorrowful. 
Neither in eating, nor lying on a bed made of flowers and leaves, 
nor in the joy of fruits, nor in drinking the water of a lake, 
nor in the village, nor in the city, nor in the charming groves, 
did he find any peace. || 309-310 ||

He saw the cluster of lotuses as being like a forest fire, 
and the rays of the moon appeared to him like needles of diamond. || 311 ||

Rivers adorned with vast banks and holding pure waters attracted his mind 
because their banks resembled the curves of the maiden he yearned for. || 312 ||

The scent of the ketakī flower pierced his heart like a spear, 
and the fragrant flowers of the kadamba trees pierced him like a wheel. || 313 ||

The flowers of the kuta trees, swaying in the gentle breeze, 
constantly pierced his sensitive spots like the arrows of Kāmadeva. || 314 ||

Harṣeṇa kept thinking that if he could acquire that gem of a woman, 
he would undoubtedly alleviate his mother's sorrow. || 315 ||

If that maiden were obtained, he would consider himself 
the sovereign of all Bharatavarṣa, for her form is not meant for 
a scanty enjoyment. || 316 ||

If I acquire her, I will build temples on the banks of rivers, 
in forests, in villages, in cities, and on mountains. || 317 ||

If I do not see her, then being tormented by my mother's sorrow, 
my life shall be in vain. || 318 ||

--- 

This translation keeps the original essence and structure of the text while providing clarity in English.

Page #241:
---------------------------
## The Eighth Chapter

His mind filled with sorrow, he wandered about, forgetting his mother's grief, like a man possessed. (319) He traveled through many lands and reached the city of Sindhu. Though in such a state, he was still endowed with great strength and vigor. (320) As he went out to play, the women of the city saw him and stood motionless, their eyes wide with wonder. (321) His eyes were like lotus petals, his chest broad as the Meru mountain, his shoulders like the tusks of an elephant, and his thighs like pillars. (322) The women, their minds lost in wonder, could not take their eyes off him, and their desire to see him was never satisfied. (323) Then, a wild elephant, its body covered in dust and its eyes filled with rage, charged towards the women. (324) The elephant's mahout shouted, "Run, women! I cannot hold the elephant back. If you have any strength, flee!" (325) But the women, their minds fixed on the noble Harishena, could not hear the mahout's words, nor could they flee. (326) The mahout continued to shout, and the women, their hearts filled with fear, turned their attention to him. (327) Trembling with fear, they sought refuge in Harishena. Their desire to be with him had brought them this unexpected protection. (328) Harishena, filled with compassion and his body tingling from the touch of the beautiful women, thought to himself, (329) "On this side is a deep river, on that side a wall, and on the other side an elephant. In this time of danger, I must protect these creatures." (330) Just as a bull digs a mound with its horns, not a mountain, and a man pierces a banana tree with an arrow, not a rock, (331) so too, this world, filled with wicked deeds, overcomes the weak. Even if one tries to help, one does not wish to be involved with the harsh. (332)

Page #242:
---------------------------
Here is the English translation of the provided text, retaining the Sanskrit terms:

---

**192**
In the **Padmapurana**  
Those who are disabled (क्लीब) are indeed very humble; I have shown them forgiveness (क्षमा). Although those ascetics (तापस) were driven out, their nature was as gentle as that of deer (सारङ्ग). Therefore, it was extremely virtuous for me to bear with them, as they resided in the houses of gurus (गुरुगेहेषु). Truly, the forgiveness I granted them has been exceedingly beneficial for me and has resulted in supreme bliss (परमोदया). *[333-334]* 

Then, with a harsh voice, Hariṣena said, "Hey, great elephant driver (हस्तिपक), take the elephant away from this place!" *[335]* Acknowledging this, the elephant driver (हस्तिपके) replied, "Indeed! Your audacity (धृष्टता) is immense; you regard the elephant (गज) as a human and consider yourself the elephant!" *[336]* You certainly appear to be near death, as you carry such pride regarding the elephant, or perhaps you are under the influence of some spirit. If you wish well for yourself, leave this place immediately! *[337]* 

Then, in a fit of anger, Hariṣena, dancing playfully, laughed loudly, comforted the women (आँगन), and went in front of the elephant. *[338]* After that, like a flash of lightning, he leapt into the sky and mounted the elephant (मतङ्गज), placing his foot on its ear. *[339]* Subsequently, he began to sport (क्रीडितुमारम्भे) playfully with the elephant, at times becoming visible and at times disappearing. He played upon the entire body of the elephant and then descended to the ground, continuing various playful acts with the elephant. *[340]* 

Hearing this grand din (कलकलं) through tradition, all the people of the city emerged to witness this wonderful spectacle. *[341]* The great women (महाङ्गनाः) sat in the windows, observing him while the maidens (कन्यास्तत्समागमसंगत) expressed desires to engage with him. *[342]* Through patting (आस्फालनैः), loud reprimands (महाशब्दैः), and repeated shaking of the body, Hariṣena quickly rendered that elephant free from intoxication (निर्मदस्तेन) in just a moment. *[343]* 

The king of the city, Sindhu, who was seated on the palace roof, observed this wonder. He was so delighted that he sent his entire entourage to call Hariṣena. *[344]* Then, adorned with colorful trinkets and embellished with various colored paintings, he rode on that elephant in grand splendor. 

--- 

This translation aims to faithfully represent the original text while ensuring clarity for contemporary readers. Let me know if you need further assistance!

Page #243:
---------------------------
## The Eighth Chapter

193

**346.**  Entering the city, Harishena, adorned with drops of sweat like pearls, captivated the hearts of the city women with his handsome form.

**347.**  He then married a hundred daughters of the king. Thus, the story of Harishena spread everywhere.

**348.**  Though he received great honor from the king, he considered a year as a night without the jewel of a woman he had seen in the hermitage.

**349.**  He thought, "Surely, she is now in the desolate forest, tormented like a deer, bereft of me."

**350.**  "If this night ends even once, I will immediately rush to that young girl to show compassion."

**351.**  Lying on that exquisitely decorated bed, he pondered these thoughts. After a long time, he finally fell asleep with great difficulty.

**352.**  Even in his dreams, he saw the same lotus-eyed woman. Indeed, she had become the sole object of his mind.

**353.**  Then, in an instant, Vegavati, a skilled woman in all arts and virtues, the friend of the daughter of the king of the sky-dwellers, carried him away.

**354.**  Awakening from his sleep and seeing himself being carried away, he angrily said to Vegavati, "You wicked woman! Why are you taking me away?"

**355.**  Harishena, whose eyes shone with all their pupils and whose lips were clenched, clenched his fist to strike her, like a thunderbolt-bearing mace.

**356.**  Seeing Harishena enraged, Vegavati, though endowed with the power of knowledge, was frightened. She said to him, "O long-lived one! Just as a man climbing a tree branch cuts its root, so you, having mounted me, are destroying me."

**357.**  "O father! You will know the truth of my words when you reach the place I am taking you. Be assured, your body will not suffer even a bit there."

**358.**  Hearing Vegavati's words, Harishena thought, "This woman is gentle and sweet-tongued. Her appearance speaks of her desire to end the suffering of others."

**359.**  He had mounted...

Page #244:
---------------------------
The text appears to be a passage from the "Padma Purana," a significant work in Jain literature. Here is the translation to English while retaining the Sanskrit terms:

---

194  
In the "Padma Purana"  
Just as this right eye of mine is currently twitching, it is surely an indication that it will lead to a meeting with dear ones. (360) Then, Harisheṇa asked her once again, "O auspicious one! Tell me the precise reason and please satisfy my ears with a delightful story." (361) In response, the swift one said, "In the excellent city known as Sūryodaya, there resides King Śakradhanu. His wife is known as Dhī. They have a daughter named Jayacandrā, who is possessed by pride of her qualities and beauty, harbors hatred for men, and disregards her father's words." (362-363) Among all the excellent men in the entire Bharat Kṣetra, I had previously shown her the images, but none pleased her. (364) Then, I displayed your image to her, and upon seeing it, she was pierced by the intense dart of longing and said, "If I do not unite with this man, who is like Kamadeva, I would rather meet death than accept any lowly man." (365-366) Seeing the immense grief that was stealing away her heart due to his qualities, I made this difficult vow before her: "If I do not bring this man, who captivates your heart, to you quickly, O friend! I will enter the fire with flames." (367-368) It was only after making such a vow that I met you due to great merit. Now, by your grace, I will surely fulfill my vow. (369) Saying this, she reached the city of Sūryodaya. Upon arriving there, she informed King Śakradhanu and the daughter Jayacandrā that Harisheṇa, the one who would steal their hearts, had arrived. (370) Subsequently, the marriage was arranged between the two—a remarkable couple who bore extraordinary appearances. All the relatives, who were filled with wonder, congratulated them on their marriage. (371) Having fulfilled my vow, the swift one received great respect from both the king and the daughter, and there was no limit to her joy and fame. (372) Considering, "This daughter has chosen a worldly man, abandoning us," ... 

---

This translation strives to accurately reflect the meaning of the original text while preserving the significance of the Sanskrit terms.

Page #245:
---------------------------
The eighth chapter:  

The two, Ganga-Dhar and Mahi-Dhar, were filled with great resources and desired to wage war, being tainted by insult. ||374|| 

Then, Sakra-Dhanu, with his son, Su-Chapa, spoke to Hari-Shena, his heart filled with compassion. ||375|| 

"Stay here, brother-in-law, I will go to fight. For your sake, two enraged enemies, filled with sorrow, are enraged." ||376|| 

Smiling, Hari-Shena replied, "How can one who is always engaged in the affairs of others be indifferent to his own affairs?" ||377|| 

"Do me the honor, grant me your command for battle. Having obtained a servant like me, why do you fight yourself?" ||378|| 

Then, Ganga-Dhar, though desiring to stop him, was prevented by his fear of ill omen.  He mounted a chariot, drawn by swift horses, filled with various weapons, led by a valiant charioteer, and surrounded by a circle of warriors. ||379-380|| 

Behind him, the Vidyadharas, riding horses and elephants, made a great clamor, unbearable to the enemy's mind. ||381|| 

Then, a great battle, arranged by valiant men, began. Seeing his army defeated, Hari-Shena rose to fight. ||382|| 

Wherever his excellent chariot went, no horse, no elephant, no man, no chariot remained. ||383|| 

With his arrows, he struck the enemy's force, so that they fled in disarray, without looking back. ||384|| 

Some, trembling greatly, said in fear, "Ganga-Dhar and Mahi-Dhar have done a great evil." ||385|| 

"This one shines in battle like the sun, a great man. He releases arrows from his hands, many in all directions." ||386|| 

Seeing his army destroyed by that great soul, Ganga-Dhar and Mahi-Dhar fled in fear. ||387||

Page #246:
---------------------------
196
Padmapurana
Then, when those jewels appeared, at that very moment, due to the rise of good karma, Harishena, the tenth Chakravarti, became famous for his great rise. || 388 || Even though he was adorned with the supreme Lakshmi marked by the Chakra jewel, he considered himself as insignificant as a blade of grass, devoid of pride. || 389 || Then, leading his army, which stretched for twelve yojanas, he humbled all his enemies and reached the hermitage of the ascetics. || 390 || When the ascetics realized that this was the same person they had expelled from the hermitage, they were terrified. Finally, holding fruits in their hands, they offered him Arghya and honored him with words filled with blessings. || 391 || Shatamanyu's son, Janamejaya, and his mother, Nagavati, were pleased and offered their daughter to him. || 392 || Then, according to the rituals, their auspicious wedding took place. Obtaining this daughter, the king Harishena considered it his rebirth. || 393 || Then, adorned with the Lakshmi of the Chakravarti, he came to the city of Kampilya. Thirty-two thousand crowned kings accompanied him. || 394 || With his head bowed, adorned with a crown studded with a cluster of gems, and with folded hands, he respectfully prostrated at his mother's feet. || 395 || Sumali says to Dasanana, "O Dasanana! At that time, seeing such a son, Vaprā was overwhelmed with joy. She could not contain herself, and her eyes filled with tears of joy." || 396 || Then, he drove his magnificent chariots, shining like the sun, through the city of Kampilya, thus fulfilling his mother's desire. || 397 || This act brought great joy to the monks and the Shravakas, and many people embraced the Jina Dharma. || 398 || The numerous, multi-colored, tall Jinalayas, which adorn the earth, mountains, confluence of rivers, cities, and villages, were all built by him. || 399 || After ruling for a long time, the noble-hearted Harishena renounced the world and, through intense penance, attained the peak of the three worlds, the Siddhalaya. || 400 || Hearing the story of Harishena Chakravarti, Dasanana was filled with wonder. Then, after paying homage to the Jina, he continued on his journey. || 401 ||
1. Madanavalyā : M. 
2. Vaivāha - M.

Page #247:
---------------------------
## Eighth Chapter

Then, knowing the victory of the ten-faced one, the sun, as if out of fear, abandoned the sight of his eyes. || 402 || The entire universe was covered with the red hue of the evening, as if filled with the immense love born from the ten-faced one. || 403 || The twilight was gradually consumed by darkness, as if it was meant to serve the ten-faced one. || 404 || Then, descending from the sky, the ten-faced one made his camp at the foot of the Sammed mountain, on the mountain called Sansthali. || 405 || A sound like the roar of a thunderclap from a cloud burst, filled the entire army with fear. || 406 || The elephants, with their mighty trunks, broke the trees with their tusks, and the horses, with their ears erect and their skin trembling, neighed loudly. || 407 || Hearing this sound, the ten-faced one quickly asked, "What is this? What is this? Who is ready to die today under the guise of an offense?" || 408 || "Surely, it is Vaishravana who has arrived, or Soma, instigated by the enemy, or perhaps some other enemy of mine, thinking I am secure and at ease." || 409 || Then, following his orders, the minister Prahasta went to that place from where the sound was coming. There, he saw an elephant, playing, with a body as large as a mountain. || 410 || Returning from there, Prahasta informed the ten-faced one with great astonishment, "O God! Look at that elephant, like a great mountain of clouds!" || 411 || "I have seen this elephant before, even Indra, the king of gods, was unable to capture him, and so he left him. Or, let Indra be, even the king of gods himself is unable to capture him, no one can bear him. I don't know if this is an elephant or a collection of the combined strength of all living beings!" || 412-413 || Then, laughing confidently, the ten-faced one said, "Prahasta! Although it is not right to praise oneself, I must say this much, if I don't capture this elephant in a moment, then I will cut off these two arms of mine, which are afflicted by the armlet." || 414 ||

Page #248:
---------------------------
In the Padma Purana,
"These two arms of mine are weighed down by armlets. If I take even a single step, cut me down immediately." ||415||
Then, mounting the celestial chariot Pushpaka, which moves at will, he went and saw the elephant, endowed with excellent marks. ||416||
The elephant was like a smooth, dark blue gem, his palate was red like a lotus, he bore long, round, white teeth like the foam of nectar. ||417||
He was seven cubits high, ten cubits wide, and nine cubits long. His eyes were somewhat yellow, like honey. ||418||
His backbone was submerged in flesh, his forepart was high, his tail was long, his trunk was huge, and his nail-like shoots were smooth and yellow. ||419||
His head was round and thick, his feet were firmly planted, he was strong himself, his mighty roar was sweet and deep from within, and he stood with humility. ||420||
The intoxicating nectar that dripped from his temples attracted rows of bees. He made a great sound like a drum, with the beating of his ear-shaped flaps. ||421||
He made the sky seem empty with his bulk, and he was playing a game that stole hearts and eyes. ||422||
Seeing him, the son of Ratnaśrava attained supreme joy. He considered himself successful, and his every hair stood on end with delight. ||423||
Then, abandoning the chariot, he firmly tied his weapons and blew a conch shell in front of him, filling the world with sound. ||424||
Then, the elephant, whose heart was agitated by the sound of the conch, and who was filled with pride in his strength, roared and moved towards Dashaanan. ||425||
As the elephant rushed towards him with speed, Dashaanan, who was clever at turning, quickly threw his white sheet in front of him. ||426||
While the elephant was sniffing at the sheet, Dashaanan jumped up and touched his two cheeks with his sharp teeth, which were like the sound of a swarm of bees. ||427||
While the elephant was wishing to wrap Dashaanan in his trunk, the latter, endowed with lightness, slipped out between his teeth. ||428||
Dashaanan, who was as swift as lightning in his movements, touched his limbs on all sides, repeatedly struck his teeth, and sometimes his tusks. ||429||

Page #249:
---------------------------
The Eighth Chapter

Then, adorned with splendor, Dasanana mounted the back of the elephant. The elephant, like a devoted disciple, stood respectfully.  ||430||

Then, the gods showered flowers and offered salutations repeatedly. The celestial army, filled with joy, resounded with their voices. ||431||

Dasanana bestowed upon the elephant the name "Trilokamandan" (Adorner of the Three Worlds).  Indeed, the elephant adorned the three worlds, and Dasanana, filled with joy, considered the name fitting. ||432||

A grand festival was held in honor of the acquisition of this supreme elephant. The celestial beings, adorned with flowers, danced on the beautiful mountain. ||433||

Even though everyone was awake due to this event, the morning trumpet sounded a loud and resonant note, marking the boundary between night and day, echoing through every cave of the mountain. ||434||

Then, the sun rose, as if the day, skilled in service, had presented a auspicious pot to Dasanana. ||435||

Dasanana, seated comfortably, engaged in his bodily rituals, surrounded by the celestial beings who discussed the elephant. ||436||

Suddenly, a man descended from the sky, trembling violently, covered in sweat, burdened with sorrow, bearing wounds from attacks, shedding tears, and revealing his frail body. He joined his hands, placed them on his forehead, and with great distress, pleaded. ||437-438||

"O Lord! Ten days ago, trusting in your strength, my brothers, Suryaksharajas and Riksharajas, driven by their lineage, left Alankarpur, the netherworld Lanka, with great enthusiasm to conquer the city of Kishka. ||439-440||

Both brothers were filled with pride, accompanied by a massive army, and fearless. They considered the world as insignificant as a blade of grass, due to their faith in your power. ||441||

Inspired by these two brothers, a vast multitude, filled with anger, descended upon Kishka and began to plunder. ||442||

Then, the valiant warriors of Yama, the guardian of the underworld, armed with various weapons, rose to fight. In the middle of the night, a great battle ensued among them. ||443||

Page #250:
---------------------------
200
In the Padma Purana, there was a great battle between the two armies, with many soldiers dying from the clash of weapons.  Hearing the sound of the battle, Yama, the Lord of Death, himself went out to fight, his anger as fierce as the ocean.  His immense power overwhelmed our army, leaving them wounded and defeated.  The messenger, while narrating this, fainted.  He was revived by fanning him with the edge of a cloth.  When asked what had happened, he placed his hand on his heart and said, "Oh Lord, I felt like I was there, witnessing it all, and fainted."  
Then, Ravana, the son of Ratna Shrava, who was filled with wonder, asked, "What happened next?"  After a moment of rest, the messenger continued, "Oh Lord, when Rishyaraja saw our army defeated and in despair, he, filled with love, prepared to fight himself."  He fought for a long time against Yama, who was immensely powerful.  Though his heart did not break, he was tricked and captured by the enemy.  
While Rishyaraja was fighting, Suryaraja also joined the battle.  He fought bravely for a long time, but eventually, he was struck by a powerful blow and fainted.  His followers quickly carried him to the forest called Mekhala, where he was revived with cool water mixed with sandalwood.  Yama, believing himself to be the true Lord of Death, had created a place of torment outside the city, including the river Vaitarani.  All those who were defeated by him or by Indra, the King of the Gods, were sent to this place of suffering, where they are now dying in pain.  
Seeing this, I am deeply troubled.  I am a loyal servant of the Rishyaraja lineage.  My name is Shakhavali, and I am the son of Sushreni and Ranadaks.  Since you are our protector, I managed to escape and come to you.

Page #251:
---------------------------
## Eighth Chapter

~

Having understood the plight of my own people, I have informed you.  Now, you are the authority in this matter, do as you deem fit. I am satisfied having informed you. 

Then, the great wrathful Ravana, with great affection, ordered his people to heal the wounds of the branch.  Smiling, the ten-headed one then addressed his people, saying, "I will rescue those who have fallen into the ocean of suffering, those who have been cast into the torment of the Vaitarani and other such places."

The valiant kings, led by Prahasta, rushed forward, their weapons blazing, illuminating the sky.  They rode on various vehicles, adorned with umbrellas and flags, their great enthusiasm resonating with the sound of trumpets.  They were mighty warriors.

The lords of the Vidyadharas descended from the sky and landed on earth, near the city.  They were filled with wonder at the sight of the rows of palaces.

Then, Ravana saw the group of humans who had been cast into the artificial hell in the southern direction of Kishkindha.  He destroyed the guardians of hell and rescued all the people, just as a relative would rescue their loved ones from suffering.

Hearing of the enemy's strength, the powerful Yama, the guardian of the underworld, named Satop, emerged with his entire army, like a churning sea.  He was accompanied by elephants, tall as mountains, fierce and spreading darkness with their maddening roars; horses, adorned with beautiful, waving fly whisks; chariots, shining like the sun, decorated with rows of flags; and valiant warriors, clad in armor and armed with weapons.

Then, Vibhishana, mounted on his chariot and skilled in the art of war, laughed and instantly killed Satop with his arrows.

The lowly servants of Yama, struck by the arrows, fled in all directions.

Page #252:
---------------------------
202
Having heard that he had freed the sons of Surya from Naraka and killed Saatop, Yama, the lord of death, became very angry. He was as fierce as Yama himself, and he mounted his chariot, his hand on his bow, his face filled with rage. He was a mighty warrior, his banner flying high, his brow furrowed like a serpent's, his eyes blazing red, as if he were burning the forest of the world. He was surrounded by his own reflections, his vassals, and his chariot was enveloped in a blaze of light. 471-474

Seeing Yama emerge, Dasanana restrained Vibhishana and, filled with rage, prepared for battle. 475

Yama, his face contorted with fury, was consumed by the death of Saatop and engaged Dasanana in battle. 476

Seeing Yama, the Rakshasa army was terrified. Their movements became sluggish, and they retreated in dismay to Dasanana's side. 477

Dasanana, mounted on his chariot, then advanced towards Yama, showering him with arrows. Yama responded in kind. 478

The sky was filled with the sound of their arrows, as dense as a cloud of thunderheads. 479

Kaisika's son struck Yama's charioteer with an arrow, and he fell to the ground like a fallen star. 480

Yama, struck by a sharp arrow, was left without his chariot. He was so terrified that he vanished into the sky in an instant. 481

Then, trembling with fear, Yama returned to his inner palace, accompanied by his son and ministers. 482

He bowed to Indra and said, "O God, hear my plea. I have no further use for the game of Yama. 483

"Be pleased, or be angry, or take my life, or do whatever you wish. I will not oppose the will of Yama." 484

Page #253:
---------------------------
## The Eighth Chapter

203

The valiant Dashaanan, who had defeated Vaishravana in battle, had also defeated me, and I was defeated for a long time. ||485||

His body, like that of a valiant warrior, was made of pure valor. He was like the sun in the middle of the sky, impossible to look at. ||486||

Hearing this, the king of the gods, Indra, was ready for battle, but he was stopped by his council of ministers, who knew the truth of the matter. ||487||

Hearing this, Indra, smiling, said to Yama, his brother-in-law, "Where will Dashaanan go? Don't be afraid, be at ease and sit comfortably on this seat." ||488||

Thus, reassured by his brother-in-law's words, Yama, free from fear of his enemy, lived happily in the city designated by Indra. ||489||

Honoring Yama, Indra went to his inner palace, where he was immersed in the ocean of sensual pleasures. ||490||

Yama had told Indra about Dashaanan's character, and how Vaishravana had been exiled to the forest after being defeated by Dashaanan in battle. All this was forgotten by Indra, who was intoxicated by his power, just as a learned scripture is forgotten when it is not studied. ||491-492||

Even a dream-like experience leaves some trace in the memory, but Indra had completely forgotten what had been told to him earlier. ||493||

Meanwhile, Yama, having become the lord of the city called "Surasangeet," completely forgot the humiliation he had suffered at the hands of Dashaanan. ||494||

He thought, "My daughter, Sarvasri, is extremely beautiful and even more dear to Indra than his own life." ||495||

"My relationship with this great man is very close. Therefore, my birth has been fulfilled by receiving Indra's respect." ||496||

Then, Dashaanan, full of great prosperity and enthusiasm, gave the city of Kishkindha to Suryaraja, replacing Yama. ||497||

And he gave the city of Kishkupura, a place of great wealth, to Riksharaja. Yama, having come to this city in accordance with his lineage, lived happily there. ||498||

I wish to do so, but I will no longer be Yama, the guardian of the realm. ||484||

Page #254:
---------------------------
204
Padma Purana
They, both, having attained supreme prosperity, entered their respective cities, Kishkindha and Ayodhya, which were like the city of Indra, adorned with golden mansions and endowed with worthy rulers. || 499 ||  
Ravana, bearing great prosperity and fame, was proceeding towards the peak of Trikuta, with his ministers bowing down to him. He was the best, and like the moon in the bright fortnight, he was constantly filled with the wealth of his devotees. He was riding on the beautiful Pushpaka Vimana, which could travel at will, adorned with a garland of jewels and a row of lofty peaks. He was endowed with supreme patience and had attained the fruits of his good deeds. || 500-503 ||
Then, hordes of Rakshasas, filled with joy, adorned with various ornaments and wearing the finest clothes, followed him, shouting auspicious words like, "Victory to you, O Lord! May you prosper, live long, grow, and continue to attain progress." || 504-505 ||
They were mounted on various vehicles like lions, tigers, elephants, horses, and swans. They were filled with various illusions, their eyes were wide with joy, and they were adorned with the forms of the gods. Their brilliance filled the directions, and their radiance illuminated all the directions. They were moving through forests, mountains, and oceans. || 506-507 ||
They saw the ocean, which was deep and boundless, filled with huge crocodiles, dark like a Tamala forest, with waves as high as mountains, terrifying with many large serpents like those in the netherworld, and adorned with various jewels. They were filled with wonder and exclaimed, "Oh! Indeed!" and other words of wonder. Thus, many Rakshasas followed Ravana. || 508-510 ||
1. Sadmani म. 2. Bandha म.

Page #255:
---------------------------
The Eighth Chapter
205
Then, in the great hall of Maswan, surrounded by a deep moat, adorned with white Kund gems, dark blue Mahaniil gems, red Padmarag gems, bright Pushparag gems, and deep blue Garuda gems, the city of Lanka, naturally beautiful, was further embellished by the devoted citizens, filled with wonder and joy, at the arrival of their protector, the Rakshasa king, Dasanana.  Dasanana, the benevolent and generous ruler, entered his city, free from doubt, like Indra himself.  As he entered, he enhanced the splendor of Lanka with towering elephants like mountains, chariots adorned with jewels, resembling grand palaces, with golden bridles that clinked and waved chamaras, colorful flying machines that soared high into the sky, moon-like umbrellas, and flags whose ends fluttered far and wide.  The sound of auspicious chants echoed from the throngs of bards.  The vast sound of trumpets, mixed with the notes of the veena, flute, and conch, filled the entire space and sky.  ||511-518||
Then, those who were eager to see their lord, who had arrived in accordance with the lineage, and who were adorned with beautiful clothes and ornaments, all the citizens, accompanied by groups of captivating dancers, came before Dasanana, holding offerings made of fruits, flowers, leaves, and jewels.  They bowed to Dasanana, with the elders in front, and offered their salutations.  ||519-521||
Dasanana honored them all and dismissed them.  They all went to their homes, praising his virtues.  ||522||
Then, Dasanana's house was filled with women, whose minds were filled with curiosity and who were adorned with various ornaments, eager to see him.  ||523||
Some of these women were coming to the windows, their clothes loosened due to haste, and their ornaments were disarranged due to the jostling.  ||524||

Page #256:
---------------------------
## Padma Purana

**Verse 525:**  The necklaces of the women were falling apart, their breasts were heavy and they were pushing each other. The women were making a lot of noise with their anklets and feet, as they moved around.

**Verse 526:**  "Mother, can't you see? Move aside, you are blocking my way!"  "Get out of here, you don't belong here!"  These were the words being spoken by the women.

**Verse 527:**  Their faces were blooming with joy, and they had abandoned all other activities, their eyes fixed only on Dashaanan.

**Verse 528:**  Dashaanan, the vanquisher of Yama, resided in his beautiful palace, adorned with jewels, like the jewel of Lanka, along with his inner court, enjoying his happiness.

**Verse 529:**  The other Vidyaadhara kings, like the Devas, were also experiencing great joy and remained in their respective places.

**Verse 530:**  Gautama Swami said to King Shrenik, "O Shrenik! Those who perform pure actions, obtain various kinds of wealth, including jewels, their powerful enemies are destroyed, and they attain glorious fame that spreads throughout the world."

**Verse 531:**  "The five senses are the most powerful enemies. Those who perform pure actions, even these powerful enemies lose their memory in all three worlds, meaning they are destroyed to the point that they are not even remembered. Similarly, the group of external enemies constantly bow down at the feet of those who perform pure actions. In essence, both internal and external enemies are destroyed for those who perform pure actions."

**Verse 532:**  "Therefore, O men of noble minds, it is not right to worship the enemies in the form of worldly desires. Those who worship them fall into the abyss of hell, filled with darkness, and do not attain the supreme state illuminated by the rays of the sun."

**End of the Eighth Chapter of the Padma Charita, composed by Ravishenaacharya, known as Aarsha, which narrates the story of Dashaanan.**

Page #257:
---------------------------
## Ninth Chapter

And the Sun King begot a son named Bali from his queen Chandramalini, a woman full of virtues. || 1 || He was always benevolent, virtuous, wise, skillful, patient, blessed with fortune, valiant, knowledgeable, adorned with arts, possessed of right vision, immensely strong, a master of statecraft, a hero, compassionate, learned, radiant, and endowed with great brilliance. || 2-3 || Just as the birth of excellent sandalwood is rare in the world, so too is the birth of exceptional men like Bali. || 4 || Bali, with his doubts dispelled, was devoted to the worship of all the Jina images, with pure devotion. || 5 || He could circumambulate Jambudvipa, surrounded by four oceans, thrice in a moment and return to his city of Kishkindha. || 6 || Bali, with his extraordinary prowess, was a destroyer of the enemy forces, like the moon blossoming the lotus-like eyes of the citizens, and he was always free from doubt. || 7 || In the beautiful city of Kishkindha, adorned with colorful palaces and gateways, filled with learned men, and teeming with elephants and horses, and bustling with various markets, Bali enjoyed himself just as Indra, adorned with a garland of jewels, enjoys himself in the heavenly abode of Aishana. || 8-9 || 

Bali had a younger brother named Sugriva, who was also a valiant hero, endowed with a charming form. || 10 ||

Page #258:
---------------------------
## English Translation:

208
In the Papuraana, Bali and Sugreeva, the ornaments of the Kishkindha lineage, are to be known.  Their virtues, headed by humility, were their ornaments. ||11||
After Sugreeva, a daughter named Shree-Prabha was born, who was unparalleled in beauty on earth. She appeared like Shri (Lakshmi) herself. ||12||
In the city of Kishku-Pramodanagara, Rishyaraja, the younger brother of Suryaraja, had two sons, Nal and Neel, born to him by the queen Harikanta. ||13||
These two sons brought joy to their kin, instilled fear in their enemies, were adorned with noble qualities, and were like ornaments to Kishku-Pramodanagara. ||14||
The wise Suryaraja, skilled in appropriate actions, seeing that his son had attained the age of youth and was capable of upholding the family tradition, renounced the kingdom for the sake of upholding Dharma and gave it to Bali, making Sugreeva the crown prince. ||15-16||
Suryaraja, a virtuous man, considered his kin and others as equal, and realizing the world of four births (humans, animals, gods, and hell beings) to be afflicted by great suffering, became a disciple of the Muni named Pihithamoha. He followed the conduct of the Jina, as described by the Munis. He was free from desire even in his body. His heart was as pure as the sky, he was free from attachment like the wind, devoid of anger, and wandered the earth with the desire for liberation. ||17-19||
Then, Bali took as his wife a virtuous woman named Dhruva. Due to her virtues, she was the foremost among his hundred wives. ||20||
Bali, adorned with a beautiful crown bearing the mark of a monkey, whose commands were obeyed with respect by the celestial kings, enjoyed great prosperity with queen Dhruva. ||21||
Meanwhile, Kharadushan, the son of Meghaprabha, who was constantly seeking deceit, desired to abduct Chandranakha, the sister of Dashaanan (Ravana). ||22||
From the moment Kharadushan saw Chandranakha, whose entire body was beautiful, his body was consumed by lust. ||23||

1. Rupeṇa pratima m. 2. Samataḥ k. 3. Yoṣitā m. 4. Chandranakhaṃ.

Page #259:
---------------------------
The Ninth Chapter

The ten-headed king, Ravana, who was known to crush his enemies, went to steal the daughter named Tanudari, born from the queen of the Pravarajya, Avali. ||24|| Knowing that Lanka was devoid of the ten-headed king, the skilled Kharadushana, proficient in both Vidya and Maya, easily abducted Chandranakha. ||25|| What could the valiant Bhanukarna and Vibhishana do in Lanka, when the enemy, using his Maya, was abducting the girl? ||26|| Seeing that the army following him could not capture him alive in battle, Bhanukarna and Vibhishana returned. ||27|| Hearing this news, the son of Kaikasi, Ravana, became furious and his eyes became unbearable to look at. ||28|| Then, driven by pride, he was ready to go back, even though the sweat from the fatigue of his journey had not dried. ||29|| He took only a sword, not seeking help from anyone else, for in battle, the only true companion of the powerful is the sword. ||30|| As Ravana was about to leave, Mandodari, who clearly understood the state of the world, joined her hands and said, ||31|| "My Lord, it is certain that the girl is meant for another, for that is the way of the world." ||32|| Kharadushana has fourteen thousand celestial beings, all powerful and never retreating from battle. ||33|| Besides, he has mastered many thousands of Vidya, haven't you heard this from the people? ||34|| If a fierce battle ensues between you two, both equally powerful, there will be doubt about who will win. ||35|| Even if he is killed somehow, the girl, tainted by the act of abduction, cannot be given to another, she will only become a widow. ||36|| Moreover, the sun's rays have returned to your city, and the moon, known as "Alankaro-daya," shines brightly in the sky. ||37||

Page #260:
---------------------------
In the Padma Purana,
It is said that Kharadushana, a mighty warrior, resides with your sister in the city of Padmapura. Your family has benefited from him. ||38||
Then Dashaanan said, "My dear, I am not afraid of war. However, I am abiding by your words due to other reasons." ||39||
Then, due to the workings of fate, Chandrodara, the Vidyadhara, met his end. His pregnant wife, Anuradha, was left without shelter and, devoid of the power of knowledge, wandered aimlessly in the forest like a deer. ||40-41||
Wandering, she reached the mountain called Manikant. There, on a smooth rock covered with soft leaves and flowers, she gave birth to a beautiful son. ||42||
Thereafter, the forest-dwelling mother, whose mind was constantly troubled and whose life was sustained by the hope of her son, raised him gradually. ||43||
Since the enemy had attacked the son while he was still in the womb, the mother named him Viradhit, meaning "attacked," as he was deprived of worldly pleasures. ||44||
Just as no one respects a hair that has fallen from its place on the head, no one on earth respected Viradhit. ||45||
Unable to retaliate against his enemy, he harbored resentment in his heart. Following traditional customs, he wandered through the lands he desired. ||46||
He enjoyed himself on the peaks of mountains, in beautiful forests, and in extraordinary places where the gods visited. ||47||
He wandered, observing the exploits of valiant men in battles filled with elephants and other creatures, amidst beautiful banners, umbrellas, and other adornments. ||48||
Meanwhile, Dashaanan, resplendent and enjoying great pleasures, resided in the city of Lanka like Indra himself. ||49||
Bali, a powerful warrior, served by extraordinary knowledge, defied his orders. ||50||
Then Dashaanan sent a wise messenger to Bali. Carrying the pride of his master, the messenger went to Bali and said, "Dashaanan...

Page #261:
---------------------------
The ninth chapter

In the land of Bharata, I stand unmatched, a mighty warrior, possessing immense strength, radiant brilliance, and a master of strategy. I am blessed with great resources, wield a formidable weapon, and am destined for greatness. The slayer of demons, Dasanana, commands you. ||52-53||

I, who had vanquished Yama, the enemy of your father, the Sun-born, and established him as the king of Kishkindha in the lineage of the Vanaras, ||54||

You, forgetting the great favor done to you, are acting against your father. O virtuous one, this is not right. ||55||

I will shower upon you the same love as your father, or even more. Come to me today and pay your respects, so that you may dwell in comfort. ||56||

Or, give me your sister, Sri Prabha, to be my wife. By forming a bond with me, everything will become auspicious for you. ||57||

Seeing Bali turn away from paying respects to Dasanana, the messenger, his face contorted with anger, spoke again. ||58||

What is the point of saying more? Listen, O Shakha-mriga! Hear my firm words. You are merely a pretender to a small fortune. ||59||

Prepare yourself to either give or take a weapon. Quickly, either take a chamara (fly whisk) and become a servant to Dasanana, or take the direction-mandala (the compass) and flee to the ends of the earth. ||60||

Either bow your head or bend your bow. Either heed my command or place the unbearable string of the bow, which can give you life, in your ears. ||61||

Either place the dust from my feet on your head or wear a helmet to protect your head. Either fold your hands in supplication or gather a large herd of elephants to beg for mercy. ||62||

Either release an arrow or embrace the earth. Either take a staff or a garland. Either look into the nails of my feet or look into the mirror of my sword. ||63||

Then, his mind inflamed by the messenger's harsh words, the valiant warrior, known as Vyagravilambi, spoke. ||64||

O messenger! What has Bali, the king of the earth, who is unmatched in his valor, done to you, that you speak so harshly? ||65||

Page #262:
---------------------------
##  English Translation:

212
In the Padma Purana, it is clearly stated that he was captured by the planet. But you are healthy, why are you praising him so much, you lowly messenger? ||66|| 
Having said this, Vyāghravilombī became enraged, his face was difficult to look at, and his body trembled visibly. In this state, he was about to shoot an arrow at the messenger, but Bālī stopped him, saying ||67||
What is the benefit of killing a poor messenger who is merely conveying the words of his master? These people are just echoes of their master's words. ||68||
Whatever is in his mind, Daśānana should do it. Surely, Daśānana's lifespan is short, that's why he is speaking such harsh words. ||69||
Then, the terrified messenger went and reported everything to Daśānana, and the wrath of Daśānana, who possessed unbearable power, was ignited. ||70||
He immediately prepared his army and set out for Kiṣkindhā, for he was made of atoms of pride. ||71||
Hearing the roar of the enemy army, which covered the sky, Bālī, skilled in warfare, decided to leave the palace. ||72||
Then, Bālī, who was burning with anger, was pacified by the wise ministers like Sāgaravṛddhi, who poured out words like water, saying, "O Lord, let there be no unnecessary war, forgive him. Many kings who loved war have perished without reason." ||73-74||
Even those who were protected by the gods, who had the support of the rays of the sun, and who were known as the eight lunar mansions, perished by the arrows of Jayakumāra. ||75||
A vast army, difficult to look at, armed with swords and maces, was also destroyed. Therefore, you should not get on the unparalleled scale of doubt. ||76||
Hearing the words of his ministers, Bālī said, "Although it is not proper to praise oneself, I will tell you the truth, O ministers. ||77||
I am capable of crushing Daśānana, along with his army, with just the flick of my eyebrow, with a blow from the palm of my left hand." ||78||

Then 1. Bhāṣa from M., Kh., K. 2. Duḥprekṣaḥ M. 3. Gṛhāṇa M. 4. Bhīti M. 5. Krodaḥ M. 6. Meghaśvaraśarotkaraiḥ Kh., Jayakumāra Bāṇasamūhaiḥ.

Page #263:
---------------------------
The Ninth Chapter

What then, if the mind is inflamed by the fire of anger? What is the use of actions that bring about fleeting pleasures? || 79 || Having obtained these pleasures, which are like the pith of a banana tree, deluded beings fall into hell, filled with great suffering. || 80 || What is the benefit of inflicting pain on a group of beings who hold their lives dear, and then claiming to have gained happiness? || 81 || These beings, like the buckets of an *arhat* (water-lifting device), are constantly revolving in the well of existence, filled with great suffering. || 82 || Having bowed down to the feet of the Jinas, who are the cause of liberation from this world, how can I bow down to anyone else? || 83 || When I was enlightened, I made a vow that I would not bow down to anyone other than the lotus feet of the Jinas. || 84 || I will not break this vow, nor will I harm any living beings. I accept the *pravrajya* (renunciation), which grants liberation. || 85 || Those hands that were fit to touch the breasts of the most beautiful women, and those arms that were adorned with beautiful jeweled bracelets and were fit to embrace the most beautiful women, are now used by that man to fold his hands in submission to his enemies. What kind of wealth does he have? What kind of life does he have? || 86-87 || Saying this, he called his younger brother Sugriva and said, "Listen, my dear boy! You are now the king, so bow down to Dasanana or don't, give him your sister or don't, it doesn't matter to me. I am leaving home today. Do what you think is best." || 88-89 || Saying this, Bali left his home and became a *digambar* (sky-clad), like the moon in the sky, who is superior in virtues. || 90 || He had now dedicated his mind to the ultimate truth. He had attained many *abhyudaya* (spiritual progress) such as *riddhis* (supernatural powers). He was always absorbed in one pure state of mind, he was a hero in enduring hardships, he was pure in his *samyag darshan* (right faith), his soul was always absorbed in *samyag jnana* (right knowledge), he was devoted to *samyag charitra* (right conduct), and he contemplated his soul through *anupreksha* (reflection), free from delusion. || 91-92 || He wandered only in those lands that were free from subtle beings and were fit for the practice of *dharma* (righteousness), and were served by great *munis* (ascetics) who had pure conduct. ||

Page #264:
---------------------------
In the Padma Purana,
(93) He, dwelling in subtle, pure, and Dharma-aligned lands, was served by great souls, the Munis of immaculate conduct.
(94) He, like a father, showed compassion to all beings, constantly nurturing inner tapas with external tapas.
(95) He, with a tranquil mind, attained the abode of great wealth, embraced by the splendor of tapas, radiant with supreme beauty.
(96) He, striving to ascend the steps of high and higher virtues, was free from all knots of the scriptures, his inner self being untied.
(97) He, with great qualities, saw everything through the scriptures, discerning right and wrong actions, endowed with great restraint, destroying the lineage of karma.
(98) He, for the sole purpose of sustaining life, partook of food as prescribed by the Sutras, sustaining life for Dharma, and acquiring Dharma for liberation.
(99) He, performing excellent deeds, brought joy to the world of the blessed, becoming a model for the ascetics through his conduct.
(100) Sugriva, having given Sri Prabha to Dashagriva, happily ruled the kingdom inherited from his lineage, with his permission.
(101) Dashagriva, through his prowess, married all the beautiful daughters of the Vidyadharas on earth.
(102) Then, in the city of Nityaloka, Dashagriva married Ratnavalli, the daughter born to the queen of Nityaloka, and set out for his own city with great joy.
(103) The sky was adorned with the rays of the jewels adorning his crown.
(104) Just as a great wind stops upon reaching the shore of Mount Meru, so too did the Pushpaka chariot, as fickle as the mind, suddenly stop.
(105) When the Pushpaka chariot stopped, and the sound produced by the bells and other things was broken, it seemed as if, due to the loss of its brilliance, it had become silent out of shame.
(106) Seeing the chariot stop, the son of Kaikasi, filled with anger, asked, "Who is here? Who is here?"
(107) Then Maricha, knowing all things, said, "O Deva, listen! This is the Muni, the image of the one who resides on Mount Kailasa."

Page #265:
---------------------------
## Ninth Chapter

**215**

A single Muni Raja statue, adorned with yoga, stands there. ||107||

Facing the sun, his hands are like rays of light. On the level ground of stone, he stands like a pillar of jewels. ||108||

This is a great hero, bearing a terrible penance. He desires liberation quickly. This is the story that has come to pass. ||109||

I will return the Vimana from this land without delay. By the power of the Muni, it will come back piece by piece. ||110||

Hearing Maricha's words, the ten-headed one, proud of his own power, looked towards Mount Kailasa. ||111||

Filled with various metals, adorned with thousands of ganas, adorned with golden ornaments, and adorned with rows of steps. ||112||

Adorned with natural elements, filled with transformations, filled with various sounds, and comparable to grammar. ||113||

With sharp peaks, it seems to break the sky. With clear waterfalls, it seems to laugh. ||114||

Drunken with nectar-like wine, filled with bees, the sky is covered with a multitude of trees. ||115||

Adorned with flowers that bloom in all seasons, filled with thousands of happy creatures. ||116||

Free from the fear of medicines, filled with a multitude of snakes, it always holds youth with its pleasant fragrance. ||117||

With a heart of vast stone, with thick trees as arms, with a deep cave as a mouth, and with an unprecedented human form. ||118||

Page #266:
---------------------------
The mountain was covered with a multitude of white shores like the clouds of autumn, and it seemed to be washing the entire world with its rays of light, as if with milk. ||119|| In some of its caves, lions were sleeping without fear, and in others, trees were swaying in the wind caused by the breath of sleeping serpents. ||120|| In some of its forests, herds of deer were playing, and in others, herds of intoxicated elephants were standing. ||121|| In some places, it seemed as if its hairs were standing on end, due to the abundance of flowers, and in others, its form was terrifying due to the long manes of ferocious bears. ||122|| In some places, it seemed as if it were covered with a forest of lotuses, due to the red mouths of monkeys, and in others, the fragrance of sandalwood was spreading due to the water flowing from the trees that had been broken by rhinoceroses and elephants. ||123|| In some places, clouds were being born, embraced by lightning-like vines, and in others, the sky was shining with peaks that were as bright as the sun. ||124|| With its dense forests of tall trees, adorned with fragrant flowers, the mountain seemed to be eager to conquer the Pandu forest. ||125|| Descending upon the mountain, Dasanana saw the great sage, who was immersed in the ocean of meditation and surrounded by a halo of brilliance. ||126|| His two arms were hanging down like the trunks of elephants, and he seemed to be a large sandalwood tree embraced by serpents. ||127|| He was sitting motionless on a stone seat, engaged in the practice of sun-worship, and he was causing doubt in the minds of living beings, as to whether they were alive or not. ||128|| Recognizing him as Bali, Dasanana was consumed by the fire of anger, remembering their past enmity. ||129|| With his brows furrowed, his lips chewing, and his voice harsh, Dasanana, who was radiant in form, spoke to the sage without fear. ||130|| "Oh, what a fine penance you have begun! Even now, my chariot is being held back by your pride." ||131||

Page #267:
---------------------------
The Ninth Canto
217
Where is Dharma and where is anger? You are laboring in vain, O foolish one! You wish to make the immortal and the poison one. ||132||
Therefore, I will destroy your arrogant pride today. I will uproot the Kailasa mountain and throw it into the ocean along with you. ||133||
Then, he meditated on all the Vidyaas, and they surrounded him. Then, Dashaanan, like Indra, assumed a terrifying form. Entering the Patala, breaking through the earth, with the forest of his mighty arms, he spread darkness all around. He was intent on doing evil. ||134-135||
Then, Dashaanan, whose eyes were red with anger, and whose face was filled with anger, began to lift Kailasa with his arms. ||136||
Finally, the Kailasa mountain, which was shaking the earth violently, moved from its place. At that time, it was holding long, hanging snakes that were spitting poison. The intoxicated elephants that had fallen into the clutches of lions were escaping. The frightened groups of deer were standing with their ears erect, looking around. The cracked earth had drunk all the water of the springs, so their streams had dried up. The great trees were falling down all around, making a loud noise. The groups of rocks were breaking and making a loud cracking sound. And large stones were falling down with a thud, filling the entire world with their sound. ||137-140||
The broken earth had drunk all the water of the ocean, so it dried up. The rivers that flowed towards the ocean were flowing backwards, devoid of purity. ||141||
The Pramathas looked in all directions in fear, and were filled with great wonder. They began to say, "What is this? What is this? Ha-ha-hum-hi!" ||142||
The Apsaras, frightened, left their beautiful arbors of vines. The flocks of birds flew up into the sky, making a chattering sound. ||143||
With the laughter of Dashaanan's ten mouths, which were constantly emerging from the Patala, the sky split open along with the directions. ||144||
1. Mahavaayuvanenaath M. | 2. Nispheet Kh. | 3. Sattvai: Saduscharah M. | 4. Bhuktvaa M. | 5. Mandapat M. |

Page #268:
---------------------------
218
When the entire universe was agitated by the wind named Samvartaka, the Lord Balimuni, knowing the demon by his knowledge, recognized him. ||145|| Although he himself was not suffering and his entire body was still as before, he, being a wise and fearless man, free from anger, thought in his mind: ||146|| The Chakravarti Bharat has built these magnificent, high-rise Jain temples, made of all kinds of precious jewels. Devotees, filled with devotion, both gods and demons, worship them every day. If this mountain were to move, these Jain temples might be destroyed. ||147|| Thinking thus, the Muni Balimuni, whose consciousness was close to the auspicious meditation, pressed the top of the mountain with his big toe. ||148-149|| Then, the demon, whose forest of arms was heavily burdened and was breaking excessively, who was overwhelmed with sorrow, whose red, beautiful eyes were restless, became extremely distressed. His crown fell off and the weight of the mountain fell on his bare head. He knelt on the sinking earth. Due to his bulk, his thighs were submerged in his muscles. ||150-151|| Immediately, a stream of sweat flowed from his body and washed the netherworld. His whole body contracted like a tortoise. ||152|| At that time, since he had shouted with all his might and made the whole universe resound, he later became known as 'Ravana', a name that is prevalent everywhere. ||153|| Hearing that mournful, unprecedented sound of their lord, the group of Ravana's wives became distressed and began to wail. ||154|| The ministers were bewildered. They were ready for war and wandered around aimlessly. Their words kept stumbling and their weapons fell from their hands. ||155|| Due to the power of the Muni's strength, the drums of the gods began to sound and a shower of flowers, along with bees, covered the sky. ||156|| The divine princes, whose nature it was to play, danced in the sky and the melodious sound of the goddesses echoed with the sweet sound of the flute. ||157||
1. This verse is not in the M. book. 2. Shirogadham B. 3. Sannadha- M. 4. Sudundubhayo M. 5. Sashatpada: M.

Page #269:
---------------------------
The Ninth Chapter
219
'Then Mandodari, humbled, bowed to the sage and requested, "O Muni, possessor of wondrous prowess, grant me husband-alms." ||158|| Then, moved by compassion, the great sage loosened his toe. Ravana, freed from the mountain, emerged from the wilderness of suffering. ||159|| Going and bowing, repeatedly seeking forgiveness, he, knowing the power of his penance, began to praise the Lord of Yoga. ||160|| "I do not offer obeisance to anyone else, having renounced the feet of the Jina. This is the fruit of my strength, as I myself have said." ||161|| "Oh, your penance is truly powerful, O Lord, by which you are able to make the three worlds otherwise." ||162|| "Even the Indras do not possess such power, O Lord, as is born from the slight effort of those who are rich in penance." ||163|| "Oh, your qualities, your form, your radiance, your strength, your brilliance, your patience, your character, and your penance are all wondrous." ||164|| "It seems as if your body, the foundation of merit, has been created by karma, bringing all the beautiful things from the three worlds." ||165|| "You, who are endowed with such extraordinary power, have renounced the earth. This is a truly wondrous deed that you have done, O good man." ||166|| "I, being powerless, have only brought about the bondage of sin by desiring to do something wrong to you, who are endowed with such power." ||167|| "Curse this body, this mind, and this speech of mine, which, being sinful, has become inclined towards falsehood." ||168|| "The difference between you, such noble gems, and us, wicked people, is as great as that between Mount Meru and a mustard seed." ||169|| "O Muni, you have given me life when I was dying. What can be said about one whose mind is so wicked as to repay kindness with harm?" ||170|| "I hear, I know, and I see that the world is only a source of suffering. Yet, I am so sinful that I do not renounce worldly attachments." ||171|| "Those who are virtuous, great in character, and close to the fortune of liberation, have renounced worldly pleasures in their youth and stand firm in the path of liberation." ||172||

Page #270:
---------------------------
220
Having praised the Muni in this way, Ravana bowed down to him thrice, circumambulated him, and, utterly condemning himself, wept with a face full of sorrow. ||173|| Filled with shame and detached from worldly attachments, the son of Kaikasi entered the Jain temple near the Muni. ||174|| Throwing his sword, Chandras, on the ground in disregard, he, accompanied by his wives, performed worship to the Jina. ||175|| Pulling the string of his arm, which was like a musical instrument, he played the Veena and praised the Jina with hundreds of hymns. ||176|| "Salutations to you, the Lord of Lords, the observer of all worlds, who have transcended all worlds with your brilliance, who are fulfilled, the great soul. ||177|| You are worshipped by the three worlds, you have destroyed the great enemy, delusion. You are the holder of a multitude of qualities beyond the reach of words. ||178|| You are endowed with great power, the guide to the path of liberation, rich in the ultimate happiness, you have removed all evil. ||179|| You are the cause of liberation and prosperity for all beings, the root of great auspiciousness, the creator of all actions. ||180|| You have burnt all sins with the fire of meditation, you are the destroyer of birth, the Guru, you have no Guru, all bow down to you, and you bow down to none. ||181|| You are free from beginning and end, you are a continuous, eternal yogi, your ultimate truth is unknown, but you know all ultimate truths. ||182|| You have declared the soul to be devoid of all attachments, you have taught the doctrine of existence for all. You have shown that all things are momentary according to the Nayavada, and you have also shown that all things are eternal according to the Dravyavada. ||183|| You have said that our soul is a single, undivided substance, distinct from all external objects. You are the advocate of the Anekantavada for all, the conqueror of all enemies, the knower of all things, therefore, you are the one who grants liberation. ||184|| 
Those who have abandoned worldly attachments and are established in the path of liberation are blessed souls, they are powerful, and they dwell near the liberated Lakshmi. ||172||

Page #271:
---------------------------
The Ninth Chapter

Salutations to Rishabha, eternal and unconquered, salutations to Him. Salutations to Sambhava, forever adorned with the auspicious mark. ||185|| Salutations to Sumati, the radiant one, salutations to Him. Salutations to Suparshva, forever shining like the moon. ||186|| Salutations to Pushpadanta, the cool one, salutations to Him. Salutations to Shreyansa, the worthy of worship, salutations to the one who has attained spiritual brilliance. ||187|| Salutations to Vimala, salutations to the infinite, forever. Salutations to Dharma, the root cause of happiness, salutations to Shanti, the one who brings peace. ||188|| Salutations to Kunthu Jinendra, salutations to Aranatha, forever. Salutations to Malli Maharaja, salutations to Munisuvrata. ||189|| Salutations to all the other Tirthankaras of the past and future, salutations to them. Salutations to the Sadhus, forever. ||190|| Salutations to the one who is endowed with right faith, knowledge, and the destruction of the path of isolation. Salutations to the vision, forever. Salutations to the Siddhas, forever. ||191|| Thus, the Lord of Lanka, Ravana, chanted these sacred words. The seat of the Nagaraja, Dharanendra, trembled. ||192|| Then, the Nagaraja, with a noble heart, emerged from the netherworld, his soul illuminated by the light of knowledge, his eyes wide with joy, his raised hoods adorned with gems that dispelled the darkness, and his face radiant like the full, pure moon. ||193-194|| He bowed to the Jinendras and then performed a ritualistic worship, in which all wealth was obtained through meditation alone. ||195|| He said to Ravana, "O virtuous one, you have sung a very good song, connected to the praise of the Jinendras. Your song is a cause of excitement." ||196|| "See, my body is filled with dense and rough goosebumps due to joy. Even though I live in the netherworld, I still do not find peace." ||197|| "O Lord of the Rakshasas, you are blessed to praise the great Jinendras. Your devotion has forcefully drawn me here." ||198|| "I am very pleased with your devotion to the Jinendras. Ask for a boon, I will give you your desired object, which is rare even for the wicked." ||199|| Then,

Page #272:
---------------------------
222
In the Padma Purana, what is more auspicious than the worship of the Jinas? I am eager to give you something, so tell me what you desire. ||201||
Then the Nagapati said, "Listen, Ravana, there is no other auspicious thing equal to the worship of the Jinas." ||202||
The worship of the Jinas, when performed with devotion, bestows the bliss of liberation. There has never been and never will be anything equal to it. ||203||
Then Dasamukha said, "If there is nothing greater than the worship of the Jinas, and I have attained it, then what else should I ask for, O wise one?" ||204||
The Nagapati said, "Your words are true. What is unattainable by the power of the Jinas does not exist." ||205||
Those like you, those like us, and those like Indra and the others, who are the foundations of happiness, all have attained it through devotion to the Jinas. ||206||
Let this worldly happiness, which is small and fraught with obstacles, remain. Through devotion to the Jinas, the supreme bliss of liberation is attained. ||207||
Although you are a renunciant, endowed with great humility, strength, supreme wealth, and adorned with virtues, let my sight of you not be in vain. I beg you to accept something from me. ||208-209||
O Lankeśa, accept this Vidya called Amoghavijaya, which has the power to transform into any form. Do not break my affection. ||210||
O good man, whose time passes in a single Dasha? After misfortune comes prosperity, and after prosperity comes misfortune. ||211||
Therefore, if misfortune approaches you from any source, this Vidya will protect you, causing harm to your enemies. ||212||
Even the gods, who possess immense power, are afraid of this Vidya, which is enveloped in flames of fire. ||213||
In the end, Ravana could not break the affection of the Nagapati, and with great difficulty, he accepted the gift. ||214||
Then, with folded hands and bowing, Ravana, who had spoken to Dasanana, went to his own place, filled with joy. ||215||

Page #273:
---------------------------
## Ninth Chapter

The Naga King, having conversed, went to his own place with great joy. ||215||

Having stayed on Mount Kailasa for twenty-two and a half months, Ravana also, after paying homage to the Jina, went to the desired place. ||216||

Knowing the turmoil of his mind, Bali, the Muni, considered himself bound by evil karma and went to the Guru to perform penance. ||217||

Just as Vishnu Kumar, the great Muni, became happy after performing penance, so too did Bali, the Muni, become happy after the removal of the thorn from his heart through penance. ||218||

Through conduct, secrecy, religion, non-observation, assemblies, and endurance of the Pariṣaha, Bali, the Muni, attained Mahāsamvara. He stopped the creation of new karmas and began to destroy the accumulated karmas through tapas. In this way, through Samvara and Nirjara, he attained Kevala Jnana. ||219-220||

Finally, having destroyed the eight karmas, he went to the peak of the three worlds, where infinite happiness is attained. ||221||

Knowing, "I am defeated by one who is capable of conquering the senses," Ravana became humble before the Sadhus. ||222||

Possessing right faith, with firm devotion to the Jina, Ravana, not satisfied with supreme pleasures, remained as he desired. ||223||

Gautama Swami said to King Śreṇika, "O Śreṇika! The noble person who, being devoted to good qualities, listens to this story of Bali, the Muni, will never be defeated by others and will attain the radiant position like the sun." ||224||

Thus, the ninth chapter of the Padmacharita, composed by the Acharya Ravishena, known as Ārṣa, which narrates the Nirvana of Bali, is complete. ||9||

**Notes:**

* **Samvara:** Cessation of the inflow of new karmas.
* **Nirjara:** Destruction of accumulated karmas.
* **Kevala Jnana:** Omniscience.
* **Pariṣaha:** A group of people who are hostile to the Jain faith.
* **Mahāsamvara:** A state of complete spiritual purity.
* **Jina:** A victorious one, a title given to the Tirthankaras.
* **Sadhus:** Holy men, ascetics.
* **Ārṣa:** A term used to describe something that is ancient or traditional.

Page #274:
---------------------------
### The Tenth Chapter

Thus, O Shrenika, you have come to know this story. Now, I will speak further; listen to what I hold dear. ॥1॥

In Jyotipur, the daughter of the flame, a girl named Sutara was born from the womb of Queen Hrī. She was renowned throughout the earth for her beauty and seemed to have come straight from the abode of the lotus, like Lakshmi herself. ॥2-3॥

One day, the wicked Vidyadhara named Sahasagati, born of King Chakranka and Queen Anumati, was wandering about at his will and saw Sutara. ॥4॥

Upon seeing her, he was pierced by the arrow of desire and was immensely troubled. Mind always enveloped with the thought of Sutara, he behaved as if he were mad. ॥5॥

He sent messenger after messenger, pleading for her, while on the other side, Sugriva was also requesting the lovely maiden. ॥6॥

'To whom should I give my daughter?' With this doubt arising in him, King Agnishikha was unable to decide, and his soul remained in a state of turmoil. Finally, he inquired of the great sage. ॥7॥

The great sage Munichandra then spoke: "Sahasagati will not live long; he is of short life, while Sugriva, on the other hand, is of long life and bearer of supreme prosperity." ॥8॥

Due to the strength of the side of Chakranka, the father of Sahasagati, King Agnishikha could not resolve his doubts about Munichandra’s words. Then, Munichandra caused his words to be firmly established by taking two lamps, two bulls, and a royal elephant as a sign. ॥9॥

Afterward, knowing the words of the sage to be like nectar, King Agnishikha brought his daughter Sutara and, with auspicious rites, gave her to Sugriva. ॥10॥

Sugriva, whose merit was great, married the maiden and obtained abundant wealth along with excellent enjoyments of carnal pleasures. ॥11॥

Subsequently, Sugriva and Sutara had two sons in due course, both of whom were exceedingly handsome. The elder son was named Anga, and the younger son became renowned as Angada. ॥12॥

Page #275:
---------------------------
**Chapter Ten**

Even now, the shameless son of the celestial architect does not abandon his hope for the daughter. How shameful, this tainted hope born from desire! || 13 || This lustful man, consumed by the fire of passion, constantly reflects on how he can obtain that bliss-giving maiden. || 14 || When shall I kiss her face, which outshines the moon, her lips adorned with a resplendent red hue? || 15 || When shall I play with her in the gardens of Nandana, and when shall I partake in the joy that comes from the touch of her ample breasts? || 16 || Thus, contemplating the reasons for their union, he recalled the transformative power of the Shērmuśī knowledge. || 17 || Just as a dear friend continuously worships his sorrowful companion, the son of the celestial architect ascended the great Himalayas, seeking refuge in its inaccessible cave and began to engage in the worship of that knowledge. || 18 || Meanwhile, Ravana, having set out to conquer the directions, wandered around gazing at the earth adorned with mountains and forests. || 19 || After defeating the kings of the Vidyadhara residing in various islands, the mighty Ravana appointed them back in their respective kingdoms. || 20 || His heart was tender towards the kings he had subdued, just as a father feels affection for his sons. Truly so, for great souls are easily satisfied with mere respects. || 21 || He had subjugated all those bold kings of the Rakshasa and vanara lineages. || 22 || When Ravana traveled the skies with his vast army, his wind-like speed rendered the other Vidyadharas incapable of withstanding it. || 23 || The kings such as Sandhyākāra, Suvela, Hemāpūrṇa, Suyodhana, Haṁsadvīpa, and Parihālāda came forth, presenting gifts and bowing with folded hands, honoring him with their foreheads. Ravana, in return, satisfied them with sweet words and restored their fortunes to their former state. || 24 ||

Page #276:
---------------------------
In the Padma Purana,
Even though they were dwelling in very difficult places, the lords of the sky bowed down to his feet with auspicious previous deeds. ||26||
The Acharya says that among all strengths, the strength created by actions is the greatest. With its rise, what king could not be conquered by him? That is, he was capable of conquering everyone. ||27||
Then, as he was about to go to conquer Indra, the king of the Vidhyadharas of Rathnapur, he remembered his sister Chandra-nakha and her husband Khar-dushan with great affection. ||28||
He set out and reached the vicinity of Patala-lanka. When his sister heard that her beloved brother was near and had arrived, she was filled with excitement. ||29||
It was the last watch of the night, and Khar-dushan was sleeping peacefully. Chandra-nakha woke him up with great love. ||30||
Then, Khar-dushan, emerging from Alankar-odayapur (Patala-lanka), worshipped Ravana with great devotion and with great celebration. ||31||
Ravana, in turn, worshipped his sister with affection. It is true that there is no love greater than the love of a brother. ||32||
Khar-dushan showed Ravana fourteen thousand Vidhyadharas who could change their forms at will. ||33||
Ravana made Khar-dushan, who was very skilled, a valiant warrior, and who had attracted the minds of all his vassals with his qualities, his equal in command. ||34||
Just as the Chamarendra, surrounded by a host of Asuras, emerges from Patala, so Ravana, accompanied by Khar-dushan and other Vidhyadharas, who were skilled in all kinds of weapons, set out from Patala-lanka. ||35||
Hidamba, Haihido, Dimba, Vikata, Trijata, Haya, Makota, Sujata, Tanka, the king of Kishkindha, Tripura, Malaya, Hemapala, Kola, and Vasundhara, and other kings were riding on various vehicles. All these kings were adorned with various weapons. ||36-37||
Just as the month of Shravana is filled with clouds filled with lightning and rainbows, so was Dasanan filled with all those Vidhyadhara kings. ||38||
Thus, shaking Kailasa,

Page #277:
---------------------------
## The Vashma Parva
**227**

Ravana had gathered an army of more than a thousand Akshauhinis of Vidyadharas.  Each of them was protected by thousands of Devas, adorned with jewels, and bearing the weight of countless virtues.  They were fanned by chamaras resembling clusters of moonbeams, and Ravana himself was adorned with a white umbrella, his long arms graceful and beautiful.  He rode atop the Pushpaka Vimana, which shone like the sun on Mount Meru, and his aerial chariot covered the sky like a celestial canopy.  Ravana, filled with the desire to destroy Indra, marched forward with his army, driven by his ambition.

The sky resembled an ocean, filled with the brilliance of countless jewels.  The chamaras, like waves, rippled across the heavens.  The sky was filled with celestial beings, like fish in the sea, and the celestial chariots, like whirlpools, swirled through the air.  The army, like crocodiles, consisted of horses, elephants, and foot soldiers, and the weapons, like waves, crashed through the sky.

The sky was adorned with towering banners, adorned with peacock feathers, resembling a sky filled with diamonds and sapphires.  The celestial chariots, adorned with jewels and soaring peaks, made the sky resemble a celestial realm.

King Shrenik, the ruler of Magadha, said to Gautam Swami, "What more needs to be said? I believe even the Devas are terrified at the sight of Ravana's army."

Among Ravana's forces were Indrajeet, Meghavahan, Kumbhakarna, Vibhishan, Kharadushan, Nikumbha, and Kumbha, along with countless other warriors skilled in battle, all blessed with divine knowledge and mastery of weapons and scriptures.

Page #278:
---------------------------
228
In the Padma Purana, the Hepayantas, possessing great wealth and fortune, followed Ravana, filled with joy, being renowned for their vast glory. ||51|| Then, as the sun set near the Vindhyas, it seemed to be eclipsed by Ravana's brilliance, as if ashamed. ||52|| Ravana then stationed his army on the peak of the Vindhyas, where they found shelter due to their knowledge and power. ||53|| As if fearing Ravana, the moon, the lord of the Rohini constellation, arose, dispelling the darkness with his rays. ||54|| The night, adorned with stars like flowers on her head and the moon as her face, arrived before Ravana, like a beautiful woman wearing a pure sky-colored garment. ||55|| The night was spent by the celestial beings in pleasant conversation, filled with diverse stories and appropriate activities. ||56|| Then, awakened by the morning trumpets and auspicious sounds of the attendants, Ravana performed all the actions of his body. ||57|| As if having wandered through the entire universe without finding another refuge, the sun returned to Ravana's shelter. ||58|| Then, Ravana saw the Narmada River, which seemed to be engaged in a lively conversation with a multitude of birds, their sweet voices echoing. ||59|| The river, adorned with foam, appeared to be laughing, her water as pure as crystal, and she was graced by elephants. ||60|| The Narmada, with her flowing waves like eyebrows, her whirlpool like a navel, her fish like eyes, her vast banks like hips, adorned with various flowers, and her pure water like a garment, appeared like a beautiful woman, filling Ravana with great joy. ||61-62|| The Narmada, sometimes deep due to the presence of fierce crocodiles, sometimes flowing swiftly, sometimes moving slowly, and sometimes winding like a serpent, ||63|| was full of diverse movements, and though fearsome, was also beautiful. Ravana, whose mind was filled with curiosity, entered the Narmada River with great respect. ||64|| 1. -Uttamaange na ma. | 2. -Miva abhrashta maryadaam kurvati mamuum ma., ba. |

Page #279:
---------------------------
Here is the English translation of the provided verse, preserving the Sanskrit terms:

---

**10th Pavan**  
Then, the king of Mahishmati, known for his strength, entered the Narmada from another direction. He, known as Sahasraramshi, descended to this place. || 65 || That Sahasraramshi was truly very beautiful, as he was accompanied by thousands of women adorned with splendid beauty. || 66 || He had ordered various water mechanisms crafted by expert artisans, and taking their shelter, he was delightfully engaged in diverse sports at that moment. || 67 || Having with him many men skilled in crafting machines—who were also capable of holding back the ocean’s waters—he wandered in the Narmada as per his wishes, undeterred by its currents. || 68 || Due to the application of these mechanisms, the waters of the Narmada were halted instantly, allowing skilled women to move about near its banks, fully engrossed in play. || 69 || The extremely fine and bright garments of the women clung to their forms as they splashed in the water, causing them to feel bashful whenever their husbands glanced their way. || 70 || One woman, whose breasts were displayed by the marks of her nails, was creating jealousy in her co-wife. || 71 || Another excellent woman, whose entire body was visible, bashfully splashed water towards her husband with both hands, full of longing. || 72 || One woman, spotting the marks from claws on her rival's hips, playfully struck her husband with the water splashed from the lotus-like hands. || 73 || A woman of an angry disposition stood silently, unmoving; her husband then bowed at her feet and in some way earned her pleasure. || 74 || As long as the king Sahasraramshi pleased one woman, another would end up perturbed. As a result, he found it exceptionally challenging to satisfy all the women. || 75 || Surrounded by the finest women and possessing a charming appearance, the king displayed various expressions of anger, joy, and reverence towards others—showing affection by throwing water and other gestures. || 76 || 

--- 

This translation integrates the original Sanskrit terms while interpreting the literary and narrative aspects from the text.

Page #280:
---------------------------
In the Padma Purana, 
Women, like ornaments on a sandy shore, did not wish to pick up their ornaments that had fallen, their hearts filled with great compassion. ||80||
One woman made the water white with sandalwood paste, while another made it golden yellow with saffron. ||81||
The lips of the women, whose red betel stain had faded, and the eyes, whose kohl had smudged, had a unique beauty. ||82||
Then, in the water released by the mechanism, the king, with many excellent women who aroused desire, enjoyed himself as he pleased. ||83||
The sound of the women playing in the water, like the chirping of birds on the shore, seemed to be the sound of their ornaments. ||84||
Meanwhile, Ravana, having bathed comfortably and wearing clean, fine clothes, carefully adorned his head with a white cloth. ||85||
Ravana, with great effort, established the image of the Arhant, made of gold and jewels, which was always carried by appointed men, on the bank of the river. The bank was new, beautiful, white, radiant, adorned with a high platform made of sand, where a canopy was spread on sticks of lapis lazuli, with strings of pearls hanging from it, and filled with attendants eager to gather all kinds of equipment. ||86-88||
Having established the image, he performed a great puja with incense, sandalwood, flowers, and beautiful offerings, which attracted the senses with their strong fragrance, and sat in front, for a long time, filling his mouth with the pure words of praise. ||89-90||
Suddenly, Ravana, engrossed in the puja, was struck by the foam and

Page #281:
---------------------------
## The Tenth Canto
**6**

Then, Dashaanan (Ravana) quickly picked up the statue and, enraged, asked the immortals, "What is this?" || 92 ||

Then, following swiftly, the men returned and reported, "O Lord, there is a great man here. || 93 ||

He sits amidst beautiful women, the epitome of joy, surrounded by men wielding swords, standing at a distance. || 94 ||

There are many large machines of various kinds. Surely, this feat was accomplished by them. || 95 ||

We believe that the men with him are merely for show. His true strength is formidable, unbearable to others. || 96 ||

It is said that there is a king named Indra in heaven or on Mount Meru. But we have seen this Indra before our very eyes. || 97 ||

Hearing the sound of the mridanga, mixed with the sounds of the veena, flute, and the shouts of victory, and the sounds of elephants, horses, and men, all urging the kings to action, Dashaanan became furious and commanded, "Capture this wicked man quickly!" || 98-99 ||

Following the command, Dashaanan performed the highest worship of the Jina statue on the riverbank, with offerings of jewels, gold, and flowers. || 100 ||

The Vidhyadhara kings, taking Dashaanan's command as a sacred duty, rushed towards the enemy, fully armed. || 101 ||

Seeing the enemy forces approaching, Sahasrakirana (the hero) was enraged. He gave assurance to the women and quickly emerged from the lake. || 102 ||

Hearing the commotion and knowing the news from the crowd, the warriors of Mahishmati, filled with fear, rushed out. || 103 ||

Mounted on elephants, horses, and chariots, surrounded by foot soldiers, and accompanied by their vassals wielding various weapons, they rushed towards Sahasrakirana, filled with immense devotion. || 104-105 ||

Seeing the approaching army of Vidhyadharas, the vassals of Sahasrakirana, abandoning their fear of death, rushed to meet them. || 106 ||

Page #282:
---------------------------
232
Puranas
Seeing the army of the Vidyadharas approaching, the Samantas of Sahasrarashmi, who were eager to protect each other and filled with enthusiasm, abandoned their desire for life, formed a cloud formation, and rose to fight without waiting for their lord's command. ||106-107|| Meanwhile, when Ravana's army was ready to fight, the following words of the gods suddenly echoed in the sky. ||108|| The gods said, "Oh! These brave men want to commit a great injustice by engaging in battle with the Vidyadharas, who are earth-dwellers." ||109|| "These poor earth-dwellers are few in number and simple-minded, while the Vidyadharas, on the other hand, are masters of knowledge and illusion and are very numerous." ||110|| Hearing these words of anxiety, which were repeated again and again in the sky, the Vidyadharas, who were of good character, were filled with shame and descended to the earth. ||111|| Then, in the battle that was started by equal warriors, Ravana's men began to strike each other with swords, arrows, maces, and spears. ||112|| The charioteers fought with the charioteers, the horsemen with the horsemen, the elephant riders with the elephant riders, and the foot soldiers with the foot soldiers. ||113|| Those who were being defeated one after another and whose weapons were clashing, creating fire, began to fight justly. ||114|| When Sahasrarashmi saw his army on the verge of destruction, he immediately mounted his excellent chariot and arrived. ||115|| Sahasrarashmi, adorned with an excellent crown and armor, possessed extraordinary brilliance, and therefore, seeing the army of the Vidyadharas, he was not afraid in the least. ||116|| Then, those who had regained their strength due to being united with their lord, whose umbrellas were open, and who had forgotten the pain of their wounds, entered the army of the Rakshasas like intoxicated elephants entering a deep sea. ||117-118|| Just as the wind drives away the clouds, so too did Sahasrarashmi, filled with great anger, drive away the enemies with a shower of arrows. ||119|| Seeing this, the gatekeeper said to Ravana, "Oh, God! Look, 
1. Vaani m. | 2. Sardaham | 3. Nishshesh kh., m. | 4. Shreshtham | Rathmudhvamsamagatha m. | 5. Prasfurachchhatra k. |

Page #283:
---------------------------
The king, seated on his chariot and wielding a bow, made the world seem like mere grass, driving back your army a yojana with a shower of arrows.  ||120-121|| Seeing Sahasrarashmi approaching, Dashaanan mounted his elephant, Trilokamanadan.  ||122||  Ravana, whose brilliance was unbearable, was seen by his terrified enemies, and he released a shower of arrows, leaving Sahasrarashmi chariotless.  ||123|| Then Sahasrarashmi, mounted on a superior elephant, charged again, filled with wrath, towards the Rakshasa king.  ||124||  The arrows released by Sahasrarashmi pierced the armor and tore apart the limbs of Dashaanan, whose faces were sharp as blades.  ||125||  Ravana, pulling the arrows from his body, laughed and said to Sahasrarashmi, "Oh Ravana, you seem to be a great archer. From whom did you receive this skill?"  ||126||  "My boy, first learn the art of archery and practice, then you can fight me. You seem to be devoid of wisdom."  ||128||  Enraged by these harsh words, Ravana struck Sahasrarashmi on the forehead with a spear.  ||129||  A stream of blood flowed, and his eyes spun.  ||130||  While Sahasrarashmi was dazed and regaining his senses, Ravana, with a swift leap, captured the valiant warrior.  ||131||  Ravana bound him and took him to his camp.  ||132||  The celestial beings watched in amazement, wondering who could capture him if he were to escape.  ||132||  The sun, surrounded by the ramparts of twilight, set, as if Sahasrarashmi had learned a lesson from this incident.  ||133||  The world was enveloped in darkness, making good and evil indistinguishable, as if it were shrouded by the immense anger of Ravana.  ||134||

Page #284:
---------------------------
##  Chapter 234

135. The moon-like disc of the extremely pure fame of Ravana, obtained from the battle, rose, like a learned scholar dispelling darkness.

136. Some were applying ointment to the wounds of the soldiers, some were describing the valor of the warriors, some were searching for the missing soldiers, and some, who were not wounded, were sleeping. Thus, the night of Ravana's army passed according to the appropriate tasks.

137. When the morning dawned, Ravana was awakened by the sound of the morning trumpets.

138. Then, the sun, bearing extreme anger, rose trembling, as if it had come to know the news of Ravana.

139. Hearing that his son was bound, the thousand-rayed, the Digambara, the lord of the Jhangharacharan Siddhi, the great-armed, the great-penitent, came to Ravana.

140. He was as beautiful as the moon, as radiant as the sun, as steady as Mount Meru, and as deep as the ocean.

141. Having completed his bodily duties, he sat comfortably in the midst of the assembly, his mind calm and full of love for the people.

142. Seeing the Muni from afar, Ravana stood up and bowed his head to the ground.

143. When the Muni sat on the excellent throne, Ravana sat on the ground, his hands joined in humility, his whole body bowed in reverence.

144. Ravana said, "O Lord! You are accomplished, so there is no other reason for your coming here except to purify me."

145. Then, praising Ravana's lineage, valor, and glory, the Muni, like a stream of nectar, said, "O long-lived one! This is indeed the result of your good intentions. However, I have something to say, listen."

146. "For Kshatriyas, victory over their enemies is the only fulfillment. Therefore, release my son, Sahasrarashmi."

147. Then, after consulting with his ministers through gestures, Ravana, bowing to the Muni, said, "O Lord! My request is as follows. I am currently infatuated with the royal fortune and have offended our ancestors, the lord of the Vidyadharas, Mudyot."

Page #285:
---------------------------
The Tenth Canto
235
I declare, O Lord, that I have set out to subdue the King of the aerial beings. I have done what my ancestors did to subdue the proud Sri. ||149||
On my way, I performed the worship of the Jina on the beautiful bank of the Reva, with a wheel of gems, on a pure platform of sand. ||150||
That worship, along with its paraphernalia, was carried away by the swift current of water, created by the device of this Moghi. ||151||
Then, due to the destruction of the image of the Jina, I was filled with great anger. I have done this deed for a purpose, and I do not hate any human being without reason. ||152||
Nor did this proud and careless one say to me, "I did not know, therefore forgive me," when I arrived. ||153||
He who is not able to conquer the earth-dwellers, how can he conquer the aerial beings, who are skilled in various arts? ||154||
Therefore, I will first subdue the arrogant earth-dwellers. Then, in due course, I will subdue Indra, the King of the aerial beings. ||155||
Now that I have subdued him, it is only right to release him. What more can be said, when you, whose vision is only for the virtuous, are giving your command? ||156||
Then Indrajit, the son of Ravana, said, "Well spoken, O Lord! Who, except a wise king like you, can know how to release him?" ||157||
Then, at the command of Ravana, Maricha, the minister, brought Sahasrarashmi to the assembly, with officers, with naked swords in their hands. ||158||
Sahasrarashmi bowed at the feet of his father and sat down on the ground. Ravana, without anger, spoke to him with great respect. ||159||
"From today, you are my fourth brother. Since you are very powerful, I will conquer Indra, the king who mocks Indra, with your help." ||160||
"I will give you, for your service, the younger sister of Mandodari, Swayamprabha. O beautiful one, what you have done is proof to me." ||161||
Sahasrarashmi said, "Damn this fleeting kingdom of mine! The objects of enjoyment, which seem pleasant at first, are later filled with sorrow and fear." ||162||

Page #286:
---------------------------
236
Padmapurana
I curse this heaven from which there is inevitable fall. I curse this body, the receptacle of suffering. I curse myself, who has been cheated for a long time by evil deeds. ||163||
Now I will do that which will prevent me from falling into the ocean of existence. I am very tired of wandering in paths that are extremely painful. ||164||
Ravana said in reply, "O noble one! Renunciation is becoming for old men, but you are still in your youth." ||165||
Sahasrarashmi interrupted Ravana and said, "Death does not have such discrimination that it only takes the old and not the young. This body, like a cloud in the autumn season, is suddenly destroyed." ||166||
"Ravana, if there were any essence in pleasures, then my father, who was a holder of excellent wisdom, would not have renounced them." ||167||
Having said this, he handed over the kingdom to his son with firm determination. Ravana, seeking forgiveness, allowed his father Shatabahu to take renunciation. ||168||
Sahasrarashmi had earlier told his friend, the king of Ayodhya, Anaranya, "When I take the Digambara renunciation, I will inform you." Anaranya had also said the same to Sahasrarashmi. So, according to this agreement, Sahasrarashmi sent men to inform Anaranya. ||169-170||
When the men told Anaranya about Sahasrarashmi's renunciation, his eyes filled with tears. Remembering the virtues of that great man, he wept for a long time. ||171||
When his sorrow subsided, the wise Anaranya said, "Ravana has come to him, as if a brother in the guise of an enemy." ||172||
"He is Ravana, who, being extremely kind, has freed this man-like bird, who was trapped in the cage of wealth and was deluded by worldly pleasures for a long time." ||173||
"The king of Mahishmati, Sahasrarashmi, is blessed, who, taking refuge in the boat of right knowledge, which was created by Ravana, wants to cross the ocean of existence." ||174||
"What is there to ask about his fulfillment, who has renounced the sin of the kingdom, which gives immense suffering in the end, and has attained the vows ordained by the Jinas?" ||175||
1. Suviyogena b. | Dyutiyogena m. | 2. Pravrajyaam m. | 3 Tato naiv na me m. | Tate naiv hi me kh., n. | 4. Yamadhvamsam k., kh. | Yamadhvamse na Ravana na nimittena bodhapotam samyaggyanatarani samashritah praptah ity arthah.

Page #287:
---------------------------
## The Tenth Chapter

**237**  Anaranaya, filled with anxiety, entrusted the kingdom's wealth to his son and became a Muni, accompanied by his eldest son. ||176||

**177**  A mind is attained to the highest good by any means, whether by a noble deed, a cause, or an enemy, but not by a base deed. ||177||

**178**  He who engages another's mind in good is truly his friend, but he who engages another's mind in objects of enjoyment is his true enemy. ||178||

**179**  He who meditates on the thousand-rayed one, and hears the story of King Anaranaya, endowed with the wealth of the conduct of a Shraman, attains purity like the sun. ||179||

Thus ends the tenth chapter of the Padmacharita, narrated by the Acharya Ravishena, known as the Arsha, describing the initiation of King Sahasrarashmi and Anaranaya at the time of Dasanan's departure. ||10||

1. Son. 2. Base - M. 3. Restrained K..Kh., M. 4. Wealth of the conduct of a Shraman M.

Page #288:
---------------------------
## The Eleventh Chapter

**Thus, the Jain King Ravana, who had subdued all the human kings, heard of them and bowed down to all of them.** (1) **Surrounded by the kings he had subdued and honored, he saw the earth filled with prosperous cities and, like a righteous Chakravarti, he toured the land.** (2) **He was surrounded by people of various origins, shapes, adorned with various ornaments, with diverse manners and riding various vehicles.** (3) **He had the dilapidated Jain temples renovated and performed the worship of the Jina, the Lord of Lords, with great devotion.** (4) **He destroyed the wicked humans who were hostile to the Jain faith, and with compassion, he filled the poor with wealth.** (5) **He worshipped with affection those who were pure in their right faith, and he bowed down to the ascetics, even those who only wore the Jain symbol.** (6) **Like the sun in the Uttarayana, radiating unbearable heat, he set out towards the north, his own glory radiating.** (7) **Then, Ravana heard that the king of Rajapura was very powerful, arrogant, and never bowed down to anyone.** (8) **He was wicked from birth, deluded by the worldly path, and had committed the great sin of Yajna Diksha, which involves the destruction of living beings.** (9) **Hearing the sound of the Yajna, King Shrenik asked Gautam Ganadhar, "Oh, Lord, let the story of Ravana wait. I want to know the origin of this Yajna, in which wicked people are engaged in the destruction of living beings."** (10-11) **The Ganadhar replied, "Oh, Shrenik, listen, you have asked a very good question. Many people are deluded by this Yajna."** (12)

Page #289:
---------------------------
The Eleventh Chapter

231. In Ayodhya city, Yayaati, the ornament of the Ikshvaku dynasty, was the king, and his queen was Surakanta. ||13|| They had a son named Vasu. When he was fit for learning, he was entrusted to the guru, Kshirakadambaka. Kshirakadambaka's wife was named Svastimati. ||14|| One day, Kshirakadambaka, who was well-versed in all the scriptures, was teaching the Aranyakashastra to his disciples, Narada and others, in the forest. ||15|| At that time, a group of Charanas, who were traveling through the sky, were present there. One of them, a compassionate Muni, said, "One of these four beings will go to hell." Hearing this, Kshirakadambaka was greatly frightened. ||16-17|| Then, he sent his three disciples, Narada, Parvata, and Vasu, to their respective homes. They were happy to go, like calves released from their tethers. ||18|| When Parvata reached home alone, his mother, Svastimati, asked him, "Son, where is your father? Why have you come alone?" ||19|| Parvata replied to his mother, "He said he would come later." Svastimati waited for her husband's arrival, and the day passed. ||20|| When the day ended and darkness enveloped everything, he still did not come. Svastimati, overwhelmed with grief, fell to the ground. ||21|| She lamented like a cuckoo, "Alas, I am unfortunate, abandoned by my husband!" ||22|| "Has my husband been killed by some wicked person? Or has he gone to a foreign land for some reason?" ||23|| "Or, being skilled in all the scriptures, has he embraced renunciation, abandoned all attachments, and taken to the life of a mendicant?" ||24|| As she lamented, the night passed. In the morning, Parvata went to search for his father. ||25|| After searching for several days, Parvata saw his father, a Muni, in a garden on the bank of a river. He was sitting humbly near his guru, surrounded by his disciples. ||26|| Seeing him from afar, Parvata was overjoyed. He approached his father and said, "Father, my mother, Nivritti, is waiting for you." ||27||

Page #290:
---------------------------
240
Padmapurana
Then, knowing for sure that her husband would not return, she was overcome with sorrow. She beat her breasts with both hands and cried out loud. ||28|| Hearing this account, Narada, the devotee of Dharma, came to see his teacher, overwhelmed with grief. ||29|| Seeing him, she beat her breasts and cried even more. It is natural for sorrow to increase in the presence of loved ones. ||30|| Narada said, "Mother, why are you grieving in vain? Your grief will not bring back the pure-minded Guru now." ||31|| "He has been blessed by his good deeds, and knowing the impermanence of life, he has become eager to perform austerities." ||32|| Thus, comforted by Narada, her sorrow gradually subsided. Sometimes she would criticize her husband, saying that he had left her helpless, a weak woman, and sometimes she would praise his virtues, thinking how high his detachment was. Thus, criticizing and praising, she remained at home. ||33||
It was from this incident that Yayaati, the knower of truth, entrusted the kingdom to Vasu and became a great ascetic. ||34|| Vasu became a well-established king, renowned throughout the earth. His throne was situated on a large slab of crystal, and it was said that Vasu, by the power of truth, was situated in the sky without any support. ||35|| Then, one day, Narada and the mountain had a discussion about the true meaning of the scriptures. ||36|| Narada, the omniscient and all-seeing, said, "The Arhant Bhagavan has described two types of Dharma, Anuvrata and Mahavrata, based on their subtle and grand distinctions." ||37|| "To be free from the five sins of violence, falsehood, stealing, lust, and attachment is called a Vrata. This Vrata is accompanied by five different intentions for each Vrata." ||38|| "Those who are able to renounce these sins completely in all places are called Mahavratins, and the rest, who live in homes, are called Anuvratins." ||39|| "The Jina Bhagavan has described one Vrata for householders, called Atithisambhaga, which is of many types, based on the differences in the recipient, etc." ||40|| 
Mother, my father has been tricked by the naked ascetics and their devotees and has become naked. ||27||

Page #291:
---------------------------
## Eleventh Chapter

The meaning of the phrase "Ajairyastavyam" is related to compassion. This has been explained by the wise sages, who are the unravelers of the knots of the scriptures. ||41||

Aja refers to the old rice that does not sprout even when the cause is present. It is decided that such rice should be used for the sacrifice. ||42||

Parvata, being arrogant, said that Aja refers to animals, and therefore, their killing should be done, and this is called sacrifice. ||43||

Nārada, angered by this, said to the wicked Parvata, "Do not speak like this, because by speaking like this, you will fall into a terrible hell." ||44||

Asserting the strength of his side, Nārada also vowed, "Let us both go to King Vasu, and the one who is defeated will have his tongue cut off." ||45||

"The time to meet King Vasu has passed today, so this matter will be decided tomorrow," saying this, Parvata went to his mother. ||46||

The proud Parvata explained the root cause of the conflict to his mother. In response, his mother said, "O son! You have spoken falsely. ||47||

"I have heard from your father, who explained it many times, that Aja refers to the rice that does not sprout." ||48||

"You have gone to another country and become a meat-eater, and out of pride, you have spoken this falsehood. This will cause you sorrow." ||49||

"O son! Your tongue will surely be cut off. What will I, a helpless woman, do without my husband and son?" ||50||

At that moment, she remembered that King Vasu had once asked her for a guru-dakshina (gift to the teacher), and she had kept it with him as a deposit. Remembering this, she immediately went to King Vasu, filled with anxiety. ||51||

Thinking, "This is our teacher," King Vasu treated her with great respect, bowed to her, and when she sat comfortably on the seat, he asked her with folded hands, ||52||

"O teacher! Please tell me why you have come. I will fulfill your wish immediately. Why do you look so sad?" ||53||

In response, Swastimati said, "O son! I am constantly in sorrow.

Page #292:
---------------------------
242
There are two types of relationships: one based on sexual desire and the other based on scriptures. I consider the latter to be superior, as it is free from impurities. ||55|| Therefore, you are my son, as you are my husband's disciple. Seeing your prosperity brings me joy. ||56|| Son, you had once said, "Accept the Dakshina." I had replied, "I will accept it later." Remember this. ||57|| Kings who are dedicated to protecting the earth always speak the truth. Those who are dedicated to protecting living beings are truly called Rishis. ||58|| You are known for your truthfulness in the world, so give me that Dakshina. Upon hearing this, the king, with utmost humility, bowed his head and said, ||59|| "Mother, I am willing to do even the most despicable act at your command. Tell me what is in your heart, do not think otherwise." ||60|| Then, Swastimati narrated the entire story of the dispute between Narada and Parvata, and urged him to support her son's side, even though it was false. ||61|| Although King Vasu knew the true meaning of the scriptures, Swastimati, through repeated persuasion, kept him on her side. In this way, the king, blinded by his foolish adherence to truth, accepted her words. ||62|| After this, Swastimati, filled with joy, showered King Vasu with many blessings and returned home. ||63||
On the next day, early in the morning, Narada and Parvata went to King Vasu. Many people, filled with curiosity, accompanied them. ||64|| People from four different regions, various types of people, Samantas, and ministers quickly arrived at the place of the debate. ||65|| Then, a great dispute arose between Narada and Parvata in the presence of the righteous. Narada argued that "Aj" means seedless rice, while Parvata argued that "Aj" means animal. ||66|| When the dispute could not be settled, they asked King Vasu, "O King! Tell us what your Guru, Kshirakadambaka, had said on this matter. You are known for your truthfulness." ||67|| In response, King Vasu said, "Parvata had said...

Page #293:
---------------------------
The passage you've provided is a portion of Jain literature, written in a mixture of Sanskrit and Hindi, recounting a narrative involving themes of morality, the consequences of actions, and the concept of dharma (righteousness) and adharma (unrighteousness). Here's the English translation preserving the Sanskrit words:

---

243

The eleventh chapter speaks of how the realm (loka) became aware of the crystal (sphatika) in the sky. There was a throne (singhasana) that was situated there; then it was said: "Due to your false capability, O Vasu, the throne has descended. This is suitable in light of your true nature" (paramartha-nivedanam). Then, filled with delusion (moha), he again spoke. Just then he entered the earth, immediately accompanied by the throne (singhasana) (71). 

Plagued by terrible sin (maha-papa) due to promoting the dharma of violence (hinsa-dharma), he fell into extreme darkness (tama) and entered the seventh earth (prithivi), which is known for its severe agony (72). 

Then, loud cries of "Alas! Alas!" resounded, creating a significant uproar in the realm of beings (73). Narada had attained reverence from giving teachings on non-violence (ahimsa), and thus, this expression emerged from the mouths of all: "Where there is dharma, there is victory" (74).

The sinful mountain (parvata), struck by the punitive scorn (danda) in the world, became despondent and caused the suffering body to suffer extremely (75). Finally, having caused death, the wicked (rakshasa) who held great valor remembered the humiliation and strife he faced in the previous life (76). 

He reflected, “People have caused me great disgrace previously; therefore, I will take a revenge that brings pain” (77). "I shall create deceitful (dambha-racita) scriptures and perform actions that lead the deluded people into terrible realms (naraka) (78).”

Thereafter, that rakshasa assumed the guise of a human, wore the sacred thread (yajnopavita) on his left shoulder, and carried a water pot (kamandalu) and garland (akshamalā) among other items (79). 

Thus, he began wandering about the earth, intent on instigating acts of violence (hinsa-karman), reciting an extremely unfriendly (amangalak) tone of the fearsome scriptures (80). He was inherently cruel and constantly engaged in the entrapment of ignorant ascetics (tapasya) and brahmanas (81). 

Afterward, those foolish beings who were destined to suffer in the future began to align with him, just like moths (shalabha) drawn to the light (82).

---

This translation retains the essence of the original text, highlighting the themes of delusion, moral downfall, and the consequences of one's actions, as rooted in Jain philosophy.

Page #294:
---------------------------
In the Padma Purana, I myself declared the purpose of the Yajna. I am Brahma, who created this world of moving and unmoving beings. I created animals for the sake of the Yajna, out of my own grace. The Yajna is the source of prosperity and heaven, therefore the killing in the Yajna is not killing. In the Sautrāmaṇi Yajna, drinking of liquor is not a sin, and in the Gosava Yajna, the use of an agamya (unapproachable) woman is permissible. In the Matṛmedha Yajna, the mother should be killed, and in the Pitṛmedha Yajna, the father should be killed. This should be done within the vedi (altar), and there is no fault in it. The Juhūka, a deity, should be satisfied with offerings of ghee, placed on the back of a tortoise, while chanting "Svaha" with great effort. If a tortoise is not available, then a pure twice-born man, with a bald head and a yellow complexion, should be immersed in pure water up to his mouth, leaving only his head above the water, resembling a tortoise. A blazing fire should be kindled on his head and offerings should be made into it. All that has been, is, and will be, is the Purusha, the Lord of immortality, who lives on food. Since there is only one Purusha, who kills whom? Therefore, kill beings in the Yajna as you please. The Yajna performer should eat the flesh of those beings, because it is purified by the Yajna and is made for the purpose of the gods. Thus, showing such extremely sinful acts, that Rakshasa made beings inclined towards Yajna on earth. Then, believing his words, those who entered the land of the Yajna, seeking happiness, were bound by him like logs of wood, and he flew up into the sky. At that time, their bodies trembled with fear, their pupils rolled, and he turned them upside down, so that their thighs were on their backs and their necks were on their feet.

Page #295:
---------------------------
Eleventh Chapter

Then they cried out, "O Visvarodar, why are you angry with us? Why are you trying to kill us?" ||97|| "Please be merciful and release us, we are innocent, O great and powerful God. We are all your devotees and will obey all your commands." ||98|| Then the Rakshasa said to them, "Just as the animals you killed go to heaven, so too will you go to heaven after being killed by me." ||99|| Saying this, he threw some of them into another island where there was no human presence. He threw others into the vast ocean, and some into the midst of cruel animals like lions. ||100|| He spun some of them around and around, smashing them against the rocky ground, making a sound like a washerman beating clothes. ||101|| They were all in a state of agony and fear of death. They remembered their parents, children, and brothers, and then met their end. ||102|| Those who remained were deluded by the false scriptures and increased the violence of the Yajna shown to them by the Rakshasa. ||103|| Those who do not perform this terrible Yajna of violence do not go to the terrible hell that brings great suffering. ||104|| The origin of this Yajna of violence that I have described to you was a king named Shrenik, who was wise and the son of Ratna Shrava. ||105|| Then Ravana arrived at the royal city, which was like heaven. Outside the city, a king named Marutvan was sitting in the Yajna hall. ||106|| A famous Brahmin named Samvarta, who was well-versed in the religion of violence, was the chief priest of the Yajna and was giving instructions to the king according to the scriptures. ||107|| All the Brahmins on earth were invited to this Yajna, and they came with their wives, children, and other relatives, driven by greed. ||108|| The entire Yajna was filled with the sounds of auspicious chants and the eager faces of those who were hoping for rewards. The earth trembled with the power of the Yajna. ||109||

Page #296:
---------------------------
246
In the Padma Purana, it is said that many animals were tied there, their hearts filled with sorrow. Hundreds of boars were bound, their bellies heaving with fear. ||110||
Meanwhile, Narada, traveling through the sky at will, saw a gathering of people on the back of a mountain. ||111||
Seeing this, he was filled with wonder, his mind bewildered, and his body moved with curiosity. ||112||
He thought, "Whose is this excellent city? Whose army is this? And whose people, like the ocean in size, are standing here?" ||113||
"I have seen many cities, many crowds of people, and many armies, but never such a gathering of people." ||114||
Driven by curiosity, he descended from the sky. For it was his nature to be curious and to see. ||115||
The king, Shrenik, asked, "O Lord, who is this Narada? What is his origin, and what are his qualities?" ||116||
The head of the assembly replied, "O Shrenik, there was a Brahmin named Brahmaruchi, and his wife was named Kurmi." ||117||
"That Brahmin, being a devotee, lived in the forest, subsisting on fruits and roots. His wife lived with him, and he conceived a child in her womb." ||118||
"Then, one day, the liberated sages, who were devoted to self-control, were traveling somewhere. By chance, they came to that place." ||119||
"They rested for a while in that hermitage, which was a place of peace. There, they saw the Brahmin couple, whose appearance was good, but whose actions were blameworthy." ||120||
"Seeing the woman, whose body was pale, whose breasts were large, who was weak, who was exhausted from the burden of pregnancy, and who was breathing like a serpent, the great-souled sages, who knew the nature of the world, were filled with compassion and decided to teach them Dharma." ||121-122||
"The eldest of them, a wise sage, spoke in sweet words. He said, 'It is a pity to see how these creatures are controlled by their karma.' ||123||
"O ascetic, you have abandoned your family and your Dharma, hoping to cross the ocean of existence. What is your soul doing in this forest?" ||124||

Page #297:
---------------------------
## Eleventh Chapter

**247**

A wandering ascetic is born, what is the difference between him and a householder? He has merely changed his attire, but his conduct is contrary to his vows. (125)

Just as humans do not eat vomited food, so too, the wise do not desire what they have renounced. (126)

A renunciate who, after renouncing women, indulges in them again, is a sinner and will become a wolf in a terrible forest after death. (127)

One who, while engaged in all kinds of activities, indulges in unrighteous conduct and is intoxicated with pride, and yet considers himself initiated, is utterly deluded. (128)

What kind of renunciation is that of one who is consumed by jealousy and lust, whose vision is evil, whose soul is corrupt, and who is engaged in all kinds of activities? Tell me. (129)

One who is proud with an evil eye, a renunciate who is addicted to sensual pleasures, and who claims to be an ascetic, is a liar. How can he be a renunciate? (130)

One who enjoys comfortable seating and movement, and whose mind is always attached to food and clothing, and yet considers himself a Siddha, is a fool who deceives himself. (131)

Just as one who escapes from a burning house, but then throws himself back into it, is considered foolish. (132)

Or, just as a bird, having escaped from a cage through a hole, returns to it again due to ignorance, is foolish. (133)

Similarly, one who, after becoming a renunciate, falls under the sway of the senses, is condemned in the world and does not attain his own good. (134)

Only a Muni, whose mind is one-pointed and free from all attachments, can meditate on the true essence. Not those who are beginners like you. (135)

From the association of attachments, arise the passions of attachment and aversion in a being. From attachment arises lust, and from aversion, the destruction of living beings. (136)

One who is overwhelmed by lust and anger, whose mind is clouded by delusion, and who is confused about right and wrong actions, cannot have a discerning mind. (137)

Why have you, abandoning your relatives, subjected yourself to hardship in this forest? (124)

Page #298:
---------------------------
248
Whoever does anything in this world, earns karma, and his journey in this terrible ocean of samsara never ends. ||138|| Knowing these faults arising from association, the wise, controlling themselves by themselves, attain dispassion. ||139|| Thus, being instructed by the words of the ultimate truth, the Brahmin Brahmaruchi, freed from delusion, attained the Shramanī initiation. ||140|| Being free from attachment, he, with great dispassion, happily wandered with his Guru, who was dear to him. ||141|| The Kurmi, with a pure mind, also realized that the cycle of birth and death of a being is due to attachment. Knowing this, she renounced sinful deeds and immersed herself in pure conduct. ||142|| Abandoning the association of the wrong path, she became devoted to the Jina and shone like a lioness in the forest, even though she was without a husband. ||143|| In the tenth month, the patient woman gave birth to a good son. Seeing the child, the Kurmi, who knew the workings of karma, thought. ||144|| That since the great sages have said that this association is the cause of misfortune, I will abandon this association, that is, the company of the son, and do what is good for the soul. ||145|| This child will also experience the good or bad fruits of the law of karma that he has earned in his previous births. ||146|| The deeds done by oneself protect one in the dense forest, the ocean, or in the cage of enemies, not others. ||147|| When the time comes, even a being who is in the womb of his mother, being subject to his own karma, is taken away by death. ||148|| Knowing this truth, the ascetic, with a detached mind, abandoned the child in the forest. Then, with great urgency, she sought refuge in the city of Anjaloka, with the patient Aryā Indumālini, the beautiful and virtuous one. ||149-150||

Page #299:
---------------------------
A rai festival
2
That virtuous boy, free from crying, etc., was seen by the gods called Jṛmbhaka, who were bowing down. || 151 || He was taken by them with compassion and nurtured with love. He was taught all the scriptures, including the secrets. || 152 || Having become learned, he obtained the knowledge that travels through the sky. He attained supreme youth and firmly held the Anuvrata. || 153 || Seeing his mother, whose mark was a sign of recognition, he went to her with joy and, devoted to right faith, saw his father, the Nirgrantha Guru. || 154 || Having attained the Ksullaka conduct, he wore the matted hair crown, becoming like the Avadvara, i.e., neither a householder nor a monk, but between the two. || 155 || He was very fond of love, beauty, and eloquence. He always desired to see quarrels. He was a lover of music and influential. || 156 || The kings honored him, and there was never any obstacle to his coming and going. He wandered through the sky and earth, constantly looking at things with curiosity. || 157 || He was nurtured by the gods, so his actions were like those of the gods. He was known as the Devर्षि, brilliant with knowledge and wondrous. || 158 || Wandering at will, he somehow reached the sacrificial hall of the city of Rajapur. Standing near the sky, he saw the sacrificial ground filled with people. || 159 || Seeing the animals tied up, he was filled with compassion and descended to the sacrificial ground. He was a master of debate. || 160 || He said to King Marutvan, "O King! What have you begun? This act of violence against the animal kingdom is like a door for those who are going to hell." || 161 || The king, who knew the meaning of all the scriptures, replied, "I know what fruit I will obtain from this action. || 162 ||
Without any feeling of envy, she went to the city of light, Alok Nagar, and took refuge with the Aryika named Indramalini. She became an Aryika, a bearer of excellent conduct, with great emotion. || 149-150 ||
249
Then - the god called Jṛmbhaka was going through the sky, and he saw that virtuous boy, free from crying, etc. || 151 || Those compassionate gods took him with respect and nurtured him. They taught him all the scriptures, including the secrets. || 152 || Having become learned, he obtained the knowledge that travels through the sky. He attained supreme youth and firmly held the Anuvrata. || 153 || He saw his mother, whose mark was a sign of recognition, and with joy he also saw his father, the Nirgrantha Guru, and embraced right faith. || 154 || Having attained the Ksullaka conduct, he wore the matted hair crown, becoming like the Avadvara, i.e., neither a householder nor a monk, but between the two. || 155 || He was very fond of love, beauty, and eloquence. He always desired to see quarrels. He was a lover of music and influential. || 156 || The kings honored him, and there was never any obstacle to his coming and going. He wandered through the sky and earth, constantly looking at things with curiosity. || 157 || He was nurtured by the gods, so his actions were like those of the gods. He was known as the Devर्षि, brilliant with knowledge and wondrous. || 158 ||
Wandering at will, he somehow reached the sacrificial hall of the city of Rajapur. Standing near the sky, he saw the sacrificial ground filled with people. || 159 || Seeing the animals tied up, he was filled with compassion and descended to the sacrificial ground. He was a master of debate. || 160 || He said to King Marutvan, "O King! What have you begun? This act of violence against the animal kingdom is like a door for those who are going to hell." || 161 || The king, who knew the meaning of all the scriptures, replied, "I know what fruit I will obtain from this action. || 162 ||

Page #300:
---------------------------
In the Padma Purana,
The Ojain man said, "What is this that is presented, seen by all-knowing ones, as the cause of suffering?" ||163||
Sanvarta, angered, said, "Oh, your extreme foolishness! You speak in a way that is completely unconnected and without reason." ||164||
"Your opinion, that there is some all-knowing being free from attachment, is not true. Because of the existence of individuality and other things, that being is not like that." ||165||
"Words spoken by impure doers, those with attachment and aversion, are polluted. And there is no one different from them, because there is no proof of such a being." ||166||
"Therefore, the Veda, which is not created by any doer, is the proof for the things beyond the senses. In it, the karma of the three varnas (castes) and the yajna (sacrifice) are described." ||167||
"The eternal dharma, called 'Apuurva', is revealed through the yajna. It gives the fruit, born from desirable objects, in heaven." ||168||
"The killing of animals in the middle of the vedi (altar) is not a cause of sin, because it is described in the scriptures. Therefore, one should perform yajna and other rituals without worry." ||169||
"The self-born Brahma created the animals for the sake of the yajna. Therefore, there is no fault in destroying them for the purpose for which they were created." ||170||
Hearing this, Narada said, "You have spoken all falsehood. Listen, your soul is polluted by the wrong understanding of the scriptures, that is why you have spoken like this." ||171||
"You say that there is no all-knowing being. If there is no all-knowing being of any kind, then why have you yourself spoken of three kinds of all-knowing beings: the one who knows words, the one who knows meaning, and the one who knows the mind? You are contradicted by your own words." ||172||
"If you say that there is the one who knows words and the one who knows the mind, but there is no one who knows meaning, then that is not right. Because in all things, like cows, etc., all three, words, meaning, and mind, are seen together." ||173||
"If there is absolutely no meaning, then where will the mind and words stand? That is, what will be the support for that kind of mind, and how will that kind of word be spoken? And that kind of meaning will be obtained by the contradiction of the mind and the word." ||174||

Page #301:
---------------------------
## Eleventh Chapter
251

The term "omniscient" applied to the Buddha is a secondary usage, based on qualities. It is dependent on the primary, just as the sound of a lion in Chaitra is dependent on the actual lion. ||175||

This inference contradicts your claim that the Buddha is not omniscient. In our view, the complete absence of omniscience is not accepted. ||176||

"Where does this omniscient, who pervades the earth with his glory, reside?" To this question, it is said that he resides in the divine Brahma-pura, with a soul as pure as the sky. ||177||

Your scripture also contradicts your claim. If the Buddha were completely devoid of omniscience, why would your scripture mention his location, etc.? And thus, when the object of the argument is established in multiple ways, i.e., established in some way, it becomes a valid argument for us, because this is what we claim. ||178||

The argument you have presented for the absence of omniscience is based on the concept of "speech." Speech can be of three types: completely inappropriate speech, appropriate speech, and general speech. Completely inappropriate speech is not valid, because it is not established against the opponent. If you take speech according to the Syadvada, then your argument becomes invalid, because it would establish the validity of a speaker without any flaws. Secondly, we do not accept the interpretation of the Vedas by Jaimini, etc., as valid. They, like Devadatta, are also flawed speakers based on the argument of speech. Therefore, your argument based on speech becomes contradictory, as it proves the opposite meaning. ||179-180||

And the teachings given by Prajapati, etc., cannot be considered evidence, because they are also like Devadatta, etc., being influenced by attachment and aversion. And any scripture coming from such attached and averse individuals will also be flawed. Therefore, the absence of a flawless scripture is established in your view. ||181||

One who knows one thing knows all things in their true form. Therefore, the example you have given to prove the absence of omniscience is flawed by you, because since he knows one thing, he knows everything is established. ||182||

Furthermore, according to your view, there is no person who speaks completely appropriate words as an example. Therefore, you should show the absence of the means in the absence of the object in the example. Just as you show the occurrence of the object in the example of analogy by establishing the pervasiveness of the analogy, similarly, you should show the occurrence of the absence in the example of absence by establishing the pervasiveness of the absence. Only then can the object be established, otherwise not. ||183||

And in your view, hearing about an unseen object and the evidence coming from the scriptures...

Page #302:
---------------------------
## Padma Purana

**Verse 185:** What is equal to omniscience in opposition to eloquence? If there is a possibility of omniscience, then the speaker would be even more eloquent.

**Verse 186:** What does one who does not know speak? He is a fool with a confused mind. Without the absence of difference and non-difference, there would be no means of knowing.

**Verse 187:** Our view is that just as the impurities of gold and other metals are completely destroyed, so too are ignorance and the impurities of attachment, aversion, etc., destroyed in a person due to a cause. The one in whom they are destroyed is called omniscient.

**Verse 188:** According to our doctrine, the qualities (dharma) of substances are necessarily dependent on their opposites, just as the blue quality of a lotus flower implies that there are also lotuses that are not blue. Similarly, the quality of being non-omniscient, which you attribute to humans, proves that there are also humans who are not non-omniscient, i.e., omniscient. In reality, a quality is meaningful only when there is both possibility and variation, as stated elsewhere: "A quality is meaningful due to possibility and variation. Fire is never characterized by coldness, nor by heat." That is, a quality is meaningful only because of possibility and variation. Coldness is not attributed to fire because it is not possible, and heat is not attributed to fire because it is always hot. Similarly, according to your doctrine, if humans were always non-omniscient, then attributing the quality of non-omniscience to them would be meaningless. It is meaningful only when a human is considered omniscient.

**Verse 189:** The statement "There is no creator of the Vedas" cannot be proven due to the lack of logic, i.e., it does not fit with the concept of non-creation. On the other hand, there are many reasons to believe that "The Vedas have a creator." Just as visible objects like pots and pans have a cause, so too are there many reasons to believe that "The Vedas have a creator."

**Verse 190:** Since the Vedas are in the form of words and sentences, and are filled with the meaning of injunctions and prohibitions, they have a creator. Just as a poem by Maitra is created because it is in the form of words and sentences, so too are the Vedas created because they are in the form of words and sentences.

**Verse 191:** It is heard in the world that the Vedas originated from Brahma, Prajapati, and other beings. This well-known fact cannot be refuted.

**Verse 192:** Perhaps you think that Brahma, etc., are not the creators of the Vedas...

Page #303:
---------------------------
## Eleventh Chapter

**What would a perfect knower do other than explain the scriptures?**

Because the meaning of a perfect knower is that their statement is proof, they would not explain the scriptures in any other way. (193)

**The fourfold division of castes is not justified without reason.**

The knowledge of the specific body (caste) is not due to the Vedic verses or the fire rituals, as it is claimed. (194)

**The difference in castes is seen wherever there is a difference in the body.**

Just as there is a difference in the body of a human, elephant, donkey, cow, horse, etc. (195)

**A man of one caste does not impregnate a woman of another caste.**

Except for the Brahmanas, etc., where it is seen. This proves that there is no difference in castes among the Brahmanas, etc. (196)

**If you say that a donkey can impregnate a mare, then this argument is not valid.**

Because the donkey and the horse are not entirely different castes, as there is similarity in their bodies, such as having hooves. (197)

**Or, if you say that they are different castes, then their offspring would be different.**

For example, the offspring of a donkey and a mare would be neither a horse nor a donkey, but a mule. However, such a difference in offspring is not seen among the Brahmanas, etc. This proves that the caste system is based on qualities, not on birth. (198)

**Furthermore, the statement that Brahmanas are born from Brahma's mouth, Kshatriyas from his arms, Vaishyas from his thighs, and Shudras from his feet is baseless.**

Such a statement is only suitable for one's own home, not for everyone. (199)

**The Brahmanhood of Rishi Shrunga, etc., is attributed to their qualities, not to their birth in a Brahman family.** (200)

**Because of the growth of all qualities, Lord Rishabhadeva is called Brahma.**

And those good men who are his devotees are called Brahmanas. (201)

**Kshatriyas are called so because they protect from destruction (kshatra).**

Vaishyas are called so because they engage in trade and crafts (shilpa). And those who are quick to learn from the scriptures (shruta) are called Shudras. (202)

**If the speaker is not the doer, but only the speaker, then they will be influenced by attachment and aversion.** (192)

**If they are perfect knowers, then how would they explain the scriptures in any other way?**

Because their statement is proof, they would not explain the scriptures in any other way. This proves the existence of perfect knowers. (193)

Page #304:
---------------------------
In the Padma Purana:

No caste is inherently blameworthy, virtues are the cause of well-being. Even a Chandala who observes vows is considered a Brahman by the gods.

A learned person sees equality in a Brahman, a cow, an elephant, a dog, and a Chandala.

The four varnas (Brahmana, Kshatriya, Vaishya, Shudra) and the distinctions like Chandala, etc., are all known in the world due to differences in conduct.

You said that the *apūrva* (unseen) dharma is manifested through sacrifice. This is not correct, because *apūrva* dharma is eternal like the sky, how can it be manifested? And if it is manifested, then it will not be eternal, but impermanent like a pot.

Just as the knowledge of form is the fruit after the manifestation of a lamp, similarly, the fruit in the form of heaven, etc., should occur only after the manifestation of *apūrva* dharma. But this is not the case.

You said that the killing of animals in the middle of the vedi (altar) is not a cause of sin because it is ordained by the scriptures. This is incorrect, listen to the reason.

Firstly, it is not proven that the Vedas are scriptures. A scripture is that which teaches the good of the whole world like a mother.

It is not appropriate to speak of atonement for a deed that is blameless. But atonement is mentioned in this sacrificial killing, therefore it is blameworthy. Here is a description of that atonement.

He who performs the Soma sacrifice, which is symbolic of the Soma, the king of the gods, is considered to kill the Soma. The *dakshina* (offering) for this sacrifice is one hundred and twelve cows.

Out of these one hundred and twelve *dakshinas*, one hundred *dakshinas* purify the Soma, the king of the gods, ten *dakshinas* are for the satisfaction of the vital breaths, the eleventh *dakshina* is for the soul, and the twelfth *dakshina* is only a *dakshina*.

The other *dakshinas* are for the removal of faults.

People who engage in the business of manufacturing goods are called Vaishyas, and those who are far from the *shruti* (sacred texts) are called Shudras.

Page #305:
---------------------------
## Eleventh Chapter
255
'And if the animal, not having been consecrated, cries out or strikes its chest with its feet, O Fire, free me from all the sins arising from this.' ||21|| 
Thus, many atonements for sins have been mentioned. But there is a contradiction in this matter with other Agamas. ||215||
Just as the killing done by a hunter is the cause of suffering and therefore leads to bondage, so too, the killing of animals in the Vedas, being the cause of suffering, is also the cause of bondage. ||216||
To say that Brahma created the world is also not true, because upon reflection, such a statement appears as useless as dry grass. ||217||
We ask, if Brahma is already accomplished, what is the purpose of his creating the world? If you say that he creates the world for amusement, then where is his accomplishment? Just as a child who desires amusement is not accomplished, so too, Brahma, who desires amusement, will be called unaccomplished. ||218||
Then why doesn't Brahma attain pleasure without other things? Why does he have to create the world? Besides this, another question arises: when Brahma creates the world, what are the supporting instruments, objects, etc.? ||219||
Furthermore, not all people in the world are alike; some are seen to be happy and some are seen to be unhappy. From this, it must be assumed that some people are benefactors of Brahma and some are malefactors. He makes those who are benefactors happy and those who are malefactors unhappy. ||220||
To avoid all this contradiction, if it is assumed that God is not accomplished, then he will not be called God because he is subject to karma, just as you are not God because you are subject to karma. ||221||
Just as chariots, houses, etc., are considered to be created by the effort of an intelligent human being because they are endowed with a specific form, so too, lotuses, etc., should be considered to be created by the effort of an intelligent human being because they are endowed with a specific form. "The one whose intelligence creates all this is God." This inference leads to the establishment of God as the creator. But this is not correct, because the argument of the absolutist is not appropriate. ||223||
 
## 
The business of other offerings is to remove sins. ||212-213||

Page #306:
---------------------------
## Translation:

**256**

It is not true that chariots and other objects are created solely by the effort of a wise human being.  Because the materials like wood, etc., which are present in chariots, etc., are the ones that give rise to the form of a chariot, etc.  **[224]**

Just as a carpenter, etc., has to endure hardship in making chariots, etc., similarly, God would have to endure hardship in creating the universe.  This would hinder his happiness.  In reality, the one you call God is just a name.  **[225]**

Another question arises: Is God embodied or disembodied?  If he is disembodied, then the creation of material objects is not possible.  If he is embodied, then who created his body with its specific form?  If he created it himself, then why don't other objects create themselves?  If it is assumed that he was created by another God, then the question arises: Who created that other God's body?  This leads to an infinite regress.  To avoid this contradiction, if it is assumed that God has no body, then how can he be the creator of the universe, being disembodied?  Just as the sky, being disembodied, is not the creator of the universe, similarly, God, being disembodied, cannot be the creator of the universe.  If God is considered to be a creator like a carpenter, then he would be embodied, not disembodied.  **[226-228]**

And what you said that Brahma created animals for the purpose of sacrifice, if this is true, then why are animals used for carrying loads, etc.?  This creates a contradiction.  Not only a contradiction, but it would be considered theft.  **[229]**

This proves that due to the karmas acquired through passions, etc., all beings experience diverse conditions in the endless ocean of existence.  **[230]**

Does karma come first or the body?  It is not right to ask such a question because the relationship between the two has been going on since time immemorial, like the relationship between a seed and a tree.  **[231]**

It is also not right to say that the relationship between karma and the body is eternal, because just as the absence of a tree is seen when the seed is destroyed, similarly, the absence of a body is also seen when karma is destroyed.  **[232]**

Therefore, some hateful person, by performing evil deeds, has created a false scripture and propagated this sacrificial practice.  **[233]**

You have been born in a noble family and are a wise human being, therefore, refrain from this evil practice, like the work of hunters.  **[234]**

If killing beings were the cause of attaining heaven, then this world would become empty in a few days.  **[235]**

**[222-223]**  Upon reflection, it becomes clear that it is not true that all objects like chariots, etc., are created solely by the effort of a wise human being.  Because the materials like wood, etc., which are present in chariots, etc., are the ones that give rise to the form of a chariot, etc.  **[224]**

Page #307:
---------------------------
Eleventh Chapter
257. What is the benefit of attaining heaven, if one has to fall from it again? The happiness derived from external objects is mixed with sorrow and is also small in quantity. ||236||
If humans go to heaven by killing living beings, then why did Vasu fall into hell just by approving of the killing of living beings? ||237||
Vasu went to hell, the proof of this is that even today, wicked Brahmanas, who are evil-minded, who do harm to themselves and others, and who are pleased by the support of their own side, shout loudly, "O Vasu! Get up, go to heaven," and offer oblations into the fire. If Vasu had not gone to hell, then what was the need to offer oblations with the above mantra? ||238-239||
Those who killed animals by making them into flour also went to hell, then what to say about those who kill other animals with an evil intention? ||240||
Firstly, there is no purpose in the concept of Yajna, i.e., it is useless to even think about Yajna. Secondly, even if one has to think about it, then wise people should not think about such a violent Yajna. ||241||
They should perform Dharma Yajna. The soul is the Yajamana, the body is the Vedi, contentment is the Saakalya, renunciation is the Homa, the hair on the head is the Kusa, the protection of living beings is the Dakshina, white meditation is Pranayama, attaining the Siddha Pada is the fruit, speaking truth is the Yupa, penance is the Agni, the fickle mind is the Pashu, and the senses are the Samidhas. One should perform Yajna with all these, this is called Dharma Yajna. ||242-244||
If you think that Yajna satisfies the Gods, then this is not correct, because the Gods have divine food available to them as they desire. ||245||
Those who have a pleasing diet of touch, taste, smell, and form, what is the use of this meat, etc., for them? ||246||
How do the Gods eat meat, which is born from semen and blood, is impure, is the birthplace of worms, and whose smell and appearance are both extremely disgusting? They do not eat it at all. ||247||
There are three fires in the body, namely, the fire of knowledge, the fire of vision, and the fire of the stomach. Wise people should perform the three fires, namely, Dakshinagni, Garhapatyagni, and Ahavaniyaagni, in these three fires. ||248||
This world becomes empty. ||235||

Page #308:
---------------------------
Here's the translation of the provided text into English, while retaining the Sanskrit words:

---

In the Padma Purana:

If the Suras are sacrificed, they attain satisfaction through the offerings made in fire. Why do the Devas not attain satisfaction themselves, but rely on the offerings made by humans? (249) One who comes from Brahmaloka and consumes the foul-smelling body that is born of the yoni becomes like a crow, a jackal, or a dog. (250) Moreover, consider this: the food placed in the mouths of Brahmins, which is drenched with saliva, eventually goes to a stomach filled with excrement. How can such food satisfy the Devas residing in heaven? (251) Thus, Narada, radiating the brilliance of the Devarshi, seems like the sun of many angles, speaking such words that arise from the knowledge of the scriptures. (252) Surrounded by the Brahmins, he was shaken by the heavy weight of anger arising from the defeat of the yajaka. Due to the study of the meaning of the Vedas, their hearts were devoid of compassion. (253) Their eyes, like serpent's pupils, appeared to all, and, agitated, they were making a great tumult from all sides. (254) Those Brahmins, having girded up their loins, prepared to strike Narada with their hands and feet, just as crows prepare to attack an owl. (255) Then, Narada began to strike many of them with fist-like cudgels and others with kicks like thunder bolts. (256) At that time, all Narada's limbs appeared extremely difficult, like unbearable weapons. He went around and struck many Brahmins. (257) After a long time of hitting the Brahmins, he became distressed, caught by many wicked Brahmins who began to attack him all over his body, leading him to a state of great agitation. (258) Just as a bird bound tightly by a net becomes extremely distressed and is unable to fly in the sky, Narada found himself in a state of doubt about his life. (259) In the meantime, a messenger of Ravana arrived and, seeing Narada being beaten, recognized him. (260) He quickly returned and said to Ravana, "O Maharaja! The one to whom I was sent as a messenger, sees the king alone, being attacked by many wicked Brahmins..."

--- 

I hope this translation meets your expectations! If there are any specific sections you would like further elaboration on, feel free to ask.

Page #309:
---------------------------
The Eleventh Chapter
251
Narada saw the king being attacked by many cruel men, like a snake being killed by many wasps. 261-262
I was powerless and seeing the king there, I was terrified, so I came running to tell you this terrible news. 263
Hearing this news, Ravana was filled with anger and, mounting his swift chariot, he was eager to go to the sacrificial ground. 264
Those who were as swift as the wind, who had drawn their naked swords from their sheaths, and who were adorned with the sound of "su-su", were already on their way. 265
In the blink of an eye, they reached the sacrificial ground. There, those merciful men, with a mere glance, freed Narada from the cage of his enemies. 266
The cruel men who were protecting the herd of animals, were freed by them with a mere gesture of their eyes. 267
The sacrificial posts were broken, the Brahmanas were beaten, and the animals were released from their bonds. All this caused a great uproar. 268
Those who chanted "Abrahmanyam, Abrahmanyam" were beaten one by one until they fell to the ground, their bodies lifeless. 269
Ravana's warriors asked the Brahmanas, "Just as you find sorrow unpleasant and happiness pleasant, so too do these animals." 270
Just as all beings in the three worlds cherish their lives, so too should you understand the nature of all creatures. 271
The beating you have received has caused you this painful state. What then must be the condition of the animals who have been killed with weapons? 272
O wicked men! You have now received the fruits of your sins. Bear it, so that you will not do such things again. 273
Even if Indra himself were to come here with the gods, he would not be able to protect you while our master is angry. 274
Those who were on elephants, horses, chariots, in the sky, and on the ground, were all killing the Brahmanas with their weapons. 275
1. Seeing the king. 2. The sacrificial ground. 3. With swords drawn from their sheaths. 4. ... shining. 5. Freeing. 6. Merciful. 7. The herd of animals was protected for slaughter. 8. They were freed by them. 9. Uproar. 10. Brahmanas. 11. They said. 12. Your. 13. Pleasant. 14. Your. 15. The nature and order of creatures.

Page #310:
---------------------------
260
The Brahmins were crying out, "Abrahmanyam, what a disaster! Oh King, oh Mataryajnapali, protect us! Oh warriors, spare us, we will not do this again!" ||276||
Thus, they were crying out in misery, like worms, and the warriors were beating them. ||277||
Seeing the group of Brahmins being beaten, Narada said to Ravana, ||278||
"Oh King, may you be blessed. I was being killed by these wicked hunters, and you saved me from them." ||279||
"This was bound to happen, so it happened. Now, have mercy on them. Let these small creatures live, their lives are dear to them." ||280||
"Oh King, do you not know how these Kupakhandas were born? Listen, I will tell you. When the fourth time period of this Avasarpini Yuga was about to come, Lord Rishabhadeva became the Tirthankara. All beings in the three worlds bowed to him. He established the Krta Yuga and spread hundreds of arts." ||281-282||
"When Rishabhadeva was born, the Devas took him to the top of Mount Mandara and, pleased, anointed him with the water of the Kshiroda Ocean. He was the bearer of great radiance." ||283||
"The divine story of Lord Rishabhadeva, which destroys sin, is present throughout the three worlds. Have you not heard his Purana?" ||284||
"Lord Rishabhadeva, who was affectionate towards all beings, became the lord of this earth after his childhood. His qualities were so great that even Indra could not describe them in detail." ||285||
"He abandoned the earth, which was like a woman with high breasts, the Vindhya and Himachala mountains, whose face was towards the Aryan country, which was beautiful with rings of cities, whose waist was the ocean, whose hair was the green forests, whose radiance was enhanced by various jewels, and who was very skilled. He became a Shraman, a pure soul, for the benefit of the world." ||286-288||

Page #311:
---------------------------
The one who stood for a thousand years, with a body like a thunderbolt, holding the steady yoga, with long arms, and a matted hair reaching the earth. || 289 || He was embraced by his devotees, the fierce kings, like Kacha and others, who had taken the vow of nakedness. But, afflicted by the severe austerities, they finally abandoned the vow and took to wearing bark and other things. || 290 || Those who did not know the ultimate truth, afflicted by hunger and other miseries, were content with fruits and other food. It was they who created the ascetics and others. || 291 || When the Lord Rishabhadeva was near the great banyan tree, he attained the omniscient knowledge, which illuminates all things. || 292 || At that time, the gods worshipped him at that place, and even today, people follow the same method of worship. That is, the worship of the banyan tree today originates from the omniscient knowledge and auspiciousness of Lord Rishabhadeva. || 293 || The gods with noble hearts established his images in that place, and humans with great festivals installed his images in beautiful temples. || 294 || The Brahmanas, who were created by the emperor Bharata, the son of Lord Rishabhadeva, and his son Marichi, due to their pride and arrogance, spread throughout the world, causing suffering to living beings like poison drops in water. || 295-296 || Those who have established a tradition of evil conduct, who are full of pride, who wear various kinds of deceitful garments, and who hold fierce and sharp weapons, have deluded this world. || 297 || This entire world is filled with the darkness of extremely cruel actions, which are constantly in motion. Its light of merit has been extinguished, and it is eager to disrespect the virtuous. || 298 || The emperor Subhumi destroyed these Brahmanas twenty-one times on this earth, yet they did not attain complete annihilation. || 299 || Therefore, O Dasanana, how can you pacify them? Tell me yourself. Be pacified yourself. There is no purpose in killing living beings. || 300 || When even the omniscient Jinas could not free this world from evil, then how can we, ordinary people, do it? || 301 ||

Page #312:
---------------------------
262
In the Padma Purana, it is said that, "Hearing the words of Devyati, Kaikeyi conceived. Pleased by the story of the Purana, he bowed to the Lord of the Jinas." ||302|| He remained for a while, happy with Narada, engaged in delightful stories and the births of great men, full of variety. ||303|| Then Marutva, with folded hands, his head bowed to the ground, bowed to Ravana and spoke thus. ||304|| "I am your servant, O Lanka! Be pleased with me, O Lord! Due to ignorance, evil deeds are indeed committed by beings." ||305|| "Please accept this girl, whose name is Kanakaprabha. You are indeed the recipient of beautiful things." ||306|| Ravana, who was compassionate to the humble, accepted her and, with continuous progress in his happiness, married her. ||307|| Marutva, pleased, honored Ravana's vassals and warriors with vehicles, clothes, ornaments, and other things, as was appropriate. ||308|| While enjoying himself with Kanakaprabha, a daughter was born to Ravana at the end of a year, named Kritachitra. ||309|| Because she created wonder with her form, a picture, for those who saw her, she was aptly named Kritachitra. She, like a living embodiment of beauty, stole the hearts of all. ||310|| The valiant vassals of Dashaanan, whose enthusiasm was fueled by victory and whose bodies were full of brilliance, played here and there on the earth. ||311|| Seeing those powerful vassals of Dashaanan, he who bore the title of 'king' became extremely humble, filled with fear at the destruction of his pleasures. ||312|| Seeing the middle part of Bharatavarsha, adorned with golden mountains and rivers, the Vidyadharas were filled with wonder. ||313|| Some Vidyadharas said, "It would be good if we stayed here. Surely, even heaven is not more beautiful than this place." ||314|| Others said, "Seeing this country, we will not have any reason to return to Lanka, to see our families." ||315||
How can people do this? ||301||

Page #313:
---------------------------
263
Some said, "Staying at home doesn't seem appealing at all. Let's see the captivating expanse of this land." ||316||
Look, how the army of Ravana, vast as the ocean, is stationed here, so densely packed that they are not even visible to each other. ||317||
Oh, the extraordinary courage of this people, captivating the eyes! This realm, along with the realm of the celestial beings, is considered the best. ||318||
Wherever Ravana, the destroyer of Marutvamkha's sacrifice, went, the people of that land made his path beautiful with toranas and other decorations. ||319||
The earth-dwelling women, with faces as beautiful as the moon, eyes like lotuses, and bodies filled with beauty, were gazing at Ravana with great respect. Even the celestial beings, driven by curiosity, were descending to earth to see him. ||320-321||
As Ravana, with his body dark like the tip of a sharpened arrow or a sword, lips like ripe bimba fruit, forehead washed with the water of the pearls adorning his crown, hair shining brighter than the brilliance of an Indranila gem, eyes like lotuses, face like the moon, adorned with a pair of arched, smooth, and blue eyebrows like a bow with its string, neck like a conch, shoulders like a lion, broad and thick chest, arms thick like an elephant's trunk, waist strong and slender like a thunderbolt, thighs like a serpent's hood, knees submerged in their muscles, feet like lotuses, body of the right proportion, marked with the thirty-two auspicious signs like the Srivatsa, his crown gleaming with the rays of gems, his earrings made of various precious stones, his arms shining with the brilliance of armlets, his chest adorned with a garland, and holding a half-moon shaped weapon, was approaching the city, the women were eager to see him. ||322-328||
They abandoned all their previous activities and filled the windows. The women, filled with love, were crowding each other. ||329||

Page #314:
---------------------------
264
In the Padma Purana, the women, adorned with flowers, showered their love upon Ravana. They expressed their admiration in various ways.  [330]  Some said, "Behold, this is the same Ravana who conquered Vaishravana, the son of his maternal aunt, and Yama. He who was ready to lift Mount Kailasa. He who freed Sahasrarashmi from the burden of kingship. He is a valiant warrior." [331-332]  "Oh, what a wonderful union of qualities has been brought about by fate in Ravana after a long time. His beauty and his virtues are a source of joy for the world." [333]  "That woman is blessed who carried this noble son in her womb. And that father is fortunate who gave birth to him." [334]  "Those relatives are praiseworthy who are the objects of his affection. And what can be said of the women who are married to him?" [335]  The women, engaged in conversation, continued to gaze at him until he was no longer visible to their wide eyes. [336]  When Ravana, the thief of hearts, disappeared from their sight, the women stood motionless for a moment, like paintings. [337]  "Their minds were captivated by Ravana, and for some time they were lost in their thoughts, unable to focus on anything else." [338]  Wherever Ravana went, the stories of men and women in that land were overshadowed by his legend. [339]  The men who held positions of authority in the country, city, village, or shepherd's settlement, went to Ravana, bearing gifts. [340]  The people of the villages, carrying appropriate gifts, went to Ravana, bowed down with folded hands, and expressed their satisfaction. [341]  They said, "O King! All the beautiful treasures in the forests of Nandana and others are readily available to you, as if by your mere wish." [342]  "Since you are worthy of great wealth, what would be the point of having no son? We offer you these gifts to bring you joy." [343]

Page #315:
---------------------------
## Eleventh Chapter
265

Even though we have empty hands, we have come to see you. It is not right to come without anything. ||344||

The gods worshipped the Jina with golden lotuses. How can we, ordinary people, not worship him with flowers from trees? ||345||

People from various regions and powerful Samantas worshipped him. He, in turn, honored them with kind words. ||346||

Seeing the beautiful earth, adorned with various jewels, like his own beloved, he felt immense joy. ||347||

Wherever he went, due to his path, the land became abundant with unplanted, self-growing crops. ||348||

The people of that land, bearing the burden of the earth, showered his pure fame with the water of their affection. ||349||

The farmers said, "We are blessed, for the son of Ratna Shrava has come to this land." ||350||

"Until now, we farmers were rough, wearing tattered clothes, with rough hands and feet, experiencing pain. We spent our time in misery, never tasting happiness. But now, due to the influence of this great being, we are prosperous in every way." ||351-352||

The lands where this benevolent Ravana wanders are blessed with virtue and adorned with wealth. ||353||

"What use are brothers who cannot alleviate suffering? This Ravana is the elder brother of all beings." ||354||

Thus, increasing the affection of the people through his virtues, Ravana made the winter and summer seasons pleasant for them. ||355||

Even inanimate objects, let alone sentient beings, became beneficial to people, as if they were afraid of Ravana. ||356||

As he continued his journey, the rainy season arrived, as if it had come to welcome Ravana with joy. ||357||

Clouds, adorned with lightning bolts, thundered like mountains, creating a deep, resonant sound. ||358||

Page #316:
---------------------------
In the Padma Purana, it is said that the clouds, adorned with golden halos and banners, appeared as if Indra had sent them as gifts to Ravana, like elephants adorned with golden ornaments.  || 358-359 || The clouds, with their dark masses, shrouded all directions, making it impossible for people to distinguish between night and day. || 360 || It is fitting for those who are stained with impurities to make all things in the world appear the same, both light and dark. || 361 || The thick, uninterrupted streams of water, clinging to the earth and sky, were so dense that it was impossible to tell whether they were rising or falling. || 362 || The store of pride that the women had held in their minds for a long time was destroyed in an instant by the thunderous roar of the clouds. || 363 || The women, whose arms were adorned with jingling bangles, were terrified by the thunder and clung tightly to their husbands. || 364 || The cool, soft drops of rain, released by the clouds, were like a balm to the spectators, even though they pierced the hearts of the travelers. || 365 || The heart of the distant traveler, whose soul was filled with anxiety, was shattered by the torrent of rain, as if it had been pierced by a sharp wheel. || 366 || The traveler, captivated by the new flower of the Kadamba tree, became motionless for a moment, like a clay doll. || 367 || It seemed as if the clouds, which drank from the ocean of milk, had entered the cows. Otherwise, how could they continuously pour out streams of milk? || 368 || The farmers, who were wealthy due to Ravana's influence, were not troubled by the rains at that time. || 369 || The food prepared by the housewife for one person was consumed by the entire family, yet it never ran out. || 370 || Thus, Ravana was a festival for all living beings. Who can describe the good fortune of those who are blessed with virtue? || 371 || Ravana, dark as a cluster of blue lotuses, with his thunderous voice, aroused the curiosity of the women. || 372 ||

Page #317:
---------------------------
The Eleventh Chapter
267
As if by the command of Ravana, the waters roared, and all the kings bowed down in obeisance. ||373|| The maidens, with their captivating eyes, reached the ten-faced one for the swayamvara. They were like lightning, having abandoned the sky and descended to the earth. ||374|| They rejoiced, having attained the one who bore the weight of the earth, like the clouds, laden with water, delighting in the mountains. ||375|| Seeing the supreme radiance of the conqueror, the vanquisher of the Yakshas, the sun fled somewhere, overwhelmed with fear and shame. ||376|| The moon, thinking, "Whatever I do, the ten-faced one's mouth does the same," went away somewhere. ||377|| Knowing that their lord, the moon, had been conquered by the mouth of the ten-faced one, the stars, filled with fear, fled somewhere. ||378|| Knowing that the hands and feet of the women of Kaikesi were more red than theirs, the lotus-like assembly disappeared somewhere. ||379|| The women, adorned with lightning-like girdles and weapons of rainbow-colored cloth, and laden with breasts (or clouds), were like the rainy season for Ravana. ||380|| Ravana, with his breath, which attracted swarms of buzzing bees, could not distinguish between the fragrance of the Ketki flowers and the women. ||381|| Having attained the extremely beautiful and extensive bank of the Ganges, where abundant, beautiful grass grew far and wide, and where the fragrance of various flowers filled the air, Ravana spent the rainy season in comfort. ||382|| 
Gautama Swami says to King Shrenik, "O King! The name of the virtuous man is..." 
1. Laden with breasts (or clouds, in the context of the previous verses). 
2. Ravana's. 
3. Adorned with lightning-like girdles. 
4. Laden with breasts (or clouds). 
5. Disciple. 
6. Ravana.

Page #318:
---------------------------
268
Upon hearing the name Padma Purana, virtuous men bow down, they obtain groups of beautiful women who grant all desires. Abodes of wonder, filled with supreme wealth, are born to them. Even the sun becomes cool due to their influence, therefore everyone should strive for virtuous bonds. ||383|| Thus ends the eleventh chapter, titled "The Destruction of Marutvaya's Sacrifice," in the Padma Purana, narrated by the sage Ravisha. ||11||
1.  Nikhilvishayapraapyasangho m. | 2. Yaatrad m. |

Page #319:
---------------------------
## The Twelfth Chapter

I

The king, along with his ministers, pondered in private: "To whom should this daughter be given?" ||1||

There is no certainty of survival in a battle with Indra. Therefore, it is auspicious to perform the daughter's marriage ceremony first. ||2||

Knowing that he was troubled by the search for a suitable groom for his daughter, King Harivahana summoned his son, Madhu, to his presence. ||3||

Seeing him, handsome and respectful, Ravana was pleased and decided to give his daughter to him. ||4||

Seated on a suitable throne, surrounded by his ministers, the wise Ravana, the ten-headed one, pondered: "The king of Mathura, Harivahana, is born of a noble lineage. His mind is always engrossed in hearing praise of our virtues. This son, Madhu, is the lifeblood of him and his relatives. He is praiseworthy, well-mannered, and worthy of being entrusted with our happiness." ||5-7||

Knowing this, his actions seem beautiful. His collection of virtues is renowned. It is good that he has come to me. ||8||

Then, Madhu's minister said, "O King, the virtues of this valiant man are difficult to describe. However, I will try to describe them so that you may know them." ||9-10||

This prince, who brings joy to all, truly embodies the word "Madhu" because he always possesses a sweet, excellent fragrance. ||11||

His virtues are sufficient to describe him. The Asura king has bestowed upon him the great, virtuous, spear-jewel. ||12||

This spear-jewel is never wasted, it is extremely brilliant, and when thrown at the enemy army, it brings thousands of enemies to their knees before you. ||13||

**Note:** The text uses several Jain terms, such as "Asura" (demon) and "Indra" (king of the gods). These terms are not translated as they are specific to Jain cosmology.

Page #320:
---------------------------
## Chapter 270: The Five Puranas

**14.**  "Indeed, you will soon know his qualities through his actions.  To reveal them through words would only be a cause for laughter."

**15.** "Therefore, let the Supreme Lord grant you the wisdom to consider this union.  By obtaining this connection, he will be fulfilled."

**16.**  Having been convinced by the minister's words, Ravana, with wisdom, decided to accept him as his son-in-law.  He then arranged all the necessary preparations for the wedding.

**17.**  The wedding ceremony was filled with joy and happiness, as all the necessary causes for the union were effortlessly fulfilled.

**18.**  Just as the spring season, adorned with countless, captivating flowers, brings joy and fragrance to the world, so too did Madhu, the prince, find immense happiness upon obtaining the beautiful and captivating Kritachitra.

**19.**  Driven by curiosity, King Shrenik, with utmost respect, asked Gautama Swami, "O great sage, why did the Asura king give the rare Shula Ratna to Madhu?"

**20.**  Upon hearing this, Gautama Swami, blessed with immense power and devotion to Dharma, explained the reason for the Shula Ratna's acquisition.

**21.**  He said, "In the city of Shatadvara, located in the Airavata region of the Dhataki island, there lived two friends bound by a bond of love."

**22.**  "One was named Sumitra, and the other, Prabhava.  Both were highly learned, having studied under the same teacher."

**23.**  "Due to the influence of his past virtuous deeds, Sumitra gained a kingdom served by all his vassals and enjoyed the highest prosperity."

**24.**  "Although Prabhava, due to the effects of his past misdeeds, was born into a poor family, Sumitra, out of great affection, made him a king as well."

**25.**  "One day, a wicked horse carried Sumitra away to the forest.  There, he was seen by a savage, wild Mlechchha king named Dvirada-damshthra."

**26.**  "The Mlechchha king brought Sumitra to his city and, at an opportune moment, forced him to marry his daughter."

**27.**  "The lost hand returns to the owner."

Page #321:
---------------------------
## The Twelfth Chapter

271

Having obtained that maiden, who was like the very embodiment of forest prosperity, and who was known as Vanamala, King Sumitra stayed there for a month. 

28

Then, having been granted permission by the Dvirada-Danstra (the two-tusked one), he set out for the city of Shatadvara, accompanied by his beloved and surrounded by the Shabara army.

29

Meanwhile, Prabhava had set out in search of his friend, and he saw him, accompanied by his beloved, who was like the flag of Kamadeva (the god of love).

30

Prabhava, whose mind had been rendered devoid of all sense of right and wrong by the rise of evil deeds, developed a desire for his friend's wife.

31

Tormented on all sides by the sharp arrows of Kamadeva, his mind was greatly agitated, and he found no solace anywhere.

32

Kamadeva, the destroyer of the mind, is the greatest of all diseases, for it does not destroy the body of men, but it causes them to suffer.

33

Just as the sun is the chief of all luminaries, so is Kamadeva the chief of all diseases.

34

When his friend asked him, "Why are you so restless?" he replied, "Seeing the beautiful woman is the cause of my restlessness."

35

Hearing that his friend, who was dearer to him than life, was suffering because of his wife, the wise and affectionate Sumitra quickly sent her to Prabhava's house.

36

Then, hiding himself in a window, he watched to see what Vanamala would do.

37

He thought to himself, "If this Vanamala does not favor him, then I will surely punish her."

38

"And if she favors him and fulfills his desire, then I will worship this beautiful woman with a thousand villages."

39

When the evening arrived and the sky was adorned with clusters of stars, Vanamala approached Prabhava with great eagerness.

40

Sumitra seated Vanamala on a beautiful seat and sat opposite her, his heart pure. Then, with great respect, he asked her, "O noble lady, who are you?"

41

Vanamala then recounted the entire story of her life, from her birth to her marriage. 

42

Having heard this, Prabhava was filled with shame and went to the Dvirada-Danstra. 

The Dvirada-Danstra took him to his village (the settlement of the Bhils) and, after making a firm agreement, gave his daughter, Vanamala, in marriage to King Sumitra.

Page #322:
---------------------------
272
"Oh, how wretched I am! I have desired my friend's wife. What a disgrace for me, this senseless being!" ||43|| "Except by self-destruction, I cannot be freed from this sin. What use is this life stained with such a blemish?" ||44|| Thus pondering, he drew his sword from its sheath, its dense shadow obscuring the space between the directions. ||45|| He brought the sword near his throat, but his friend, Sumitra, quickly intervened. ||46|| Embracing his friend, he spoke in a voice filled with concern, "You are wise, do you not know the sin of self-destruction?" ||47|| "Those who destroy their bodies untimely suffer for a long time in the womb, unable to be born." ||48|| Saying this, Sumitra took the sword from his friend's hand and destroyed it, then consoled him with soothing words for a long time. ||49|| The Acharya says, "The mutual affection of these two friends, bound by their virtues, will reach its end. This shows that the world is impermanent." ||50|| Beings, bound by their own karma, attain different paths, some leading to happiness, others to sorrow. Who is a friend to whom in this world? ||51|| Later, Sumitra, whose soul was enlightened, embraced the life of a Shraman and eventually became the lord of the Aishana heaven. ||52|| After falling from there, he was born in Mathura, on the island of Jambudvipa, as the son of King Harivahana and Queen Madhavi. He was named Madhu, as he was as captivating as honey and shone like the moon in the sky of the Harivaṃśa. ||53-54|| The Mithyadṛṣṭi Prabhava, after dying, suffered in a hellish realm and was reborn as the son of Jyotishmati, named Shikhisruți. ||55|| He became a Shraman, a Dravyalingī, and through intense penance, became the lord of the Asuras, known as Chamarendra. ||56|| Then, remembering his past lives through his knowledge of the future, he recalled the virtues of his friend Sumitra and kept them pure in his mind. ||57||

Page #323:
---------------------------
## Chapter Twelve

**273** Remembering the excellent character of Sumitra Raja, his heart became like a broken leaf. **58**  He thought, "Sumitra was a good and virtuous man. He was my best friend, my helper in all matters." **59**  "We studied together at the Guru's house. I was born into a poor family, but he made me equal to him." **60**  "My wife, with a heart free from hatred, was sent to me by that compassionate one, free from desire, because sin had entered my mind." **61**  "Knowing that she was the wife of my friend, I was filled with extreme anxiety and was about to cut off my head with a sword, but he protected me." **62**  "Without faith in the Jina's teachings, I died and went to hell, experiencing such suffering that even remembering it is unbearable." **63**  "The consequences of my actions, the condemnation of the virtuous group who follow the path of liberation, I have received in the form of suffering in many births." **64**  "And he, Sumitra, having lived a pure life, enjoyed supreme happiness in the heaven of Aishana. Now he has fallen from there and become Madhu." **65**  "Attracted by the kindness of his friend, Madhu, whose heart was filled with love, came out of his palace." **66**  "With great respect, he worshipped his friend with precious jewels and gave him a spear-jewel called Sahasrantaka." **67**  "Madhu, the son of Harivahana, received the spear-jewel and was filled with great joy on earth. He became the master of the art of weapons." **68**  "Whoever reads or hears this story of Madhu will attain great brilliance, wealth, and long life." **69**  "Then, followed by many vassals, Ravana, who destroyed the world, spread his influence, subduing his enemies and creating many wonders, filled with love." **70**  "He spent eighteen years, creating wonders in the world, just like Indra in the heavens." **71**

Page #324:
---------------------------
In the Padma Purana,
The lord of the earth, leaving the ocean, reached the eight-peaked Kailasa mountain, adorned with Jina temples, after a long time. || 72 ||
There, the Mandakini river, with its clear waters, was adorned with golden lotus pollen, the queen of the lord of the Sindhu. || 73 ||
Having stationed his army nearby, he engaged in delightful pastimes in the caves of Kailasa. || 74 ||
The celestial beings, then the earth-dwellers, in turn, relieved their weariness in the clear, comfortable, crystal-like waters of the Mandakini. || 75 ||
The horses, having their dust removed by the new leaves of the Meru tree, and having been given water, stood in humility, having been bathed. || 76 ||
The elephants, their bodies wet with water spray, having accumulated thick dust, and having had their great weariness removed by the river, were bathed for a long time by their keepers. || 77 ||
Remembering the story of the young girl, Ravana bowed respectfully to all the Jina temples and performed actions in accordance with Dharma. || 78 ||
Then, Indra had appointed Nalakubara as the guardian of the city called Durlagha, and when he learned from his spies that Ravana, with his army like a sea, was approaching with the desire to conquer, he, with a fearful mind, wrote a letter with all the news and sent it to Indra by a swift celestial being. || 79-81 ||
When Indra was going to the Meru mountain to worship the Jina images, the letter-carrier celestial being, bowing, placed Nalakubara's letter before him. || 82 ||
Having read the letter and understanding its meaning completely, Indra, by means of a letter, commanded, "You must remain here with great effort. You are the holder of the infallible weapon, until I return after worshipping the Jinas in the Panduka forest." || 83-84 ||

Page #325:
---------------------------
## Chapter Twelve
275

Thus, having given this message, Indra, his mind filled with devotion to worship, went to the Pandu forest, not taking the enemy army seriously. ||85||

Meanwhile, Nalakubara, ever-ready to act according to the situation, along with all his trusted advisors, diligently planned the defense of the city. ||86||

He had a fortress built, known as Vajrasala, a hundred yojanas high, with a circumference three times its width, using the power of his knowledge. ||87||

Knowing that the city was under the control of the enemy, Ravana sent his commander, Prahasta, to collect tribute. ||88||

Returning to Ravana, Prahasta said, "O Lord! The enemy city is surrounded by a very high fortress, making it impossible to capture." ||89||

"Look, you can see the terrifying fortress from here, extending in all directions. It is very high, with deep moats, and its mouth resembles that of a fearsome dragon with sharp fangs." ||90||

"It is filled with a multitude of flames, whose sparks are difficult to look at, resembling a dense, burning forest of bamboo. ||91||

"There are huge machines, resembling fearsome Vetalas with sharp fangs, attached to the fortress, which can capture many men within a yojana's distance." ||92||

"Those who fall into the mouths of these machines, their bodies will only reunite in another birth." ||93||

"Knowing this, you should devise a skillful strategy to capture the city. Only a farsighted person can truly be a conqueror." ||94||

"It seems best to flee from this place quickly, as there is a great and insurmountable danger here." ||95||

Then, the wise ministers of the ten-headed Ravana, who resided in the caves of Kailasa, began to think of a solution. ||96||

Meanwhile, Nalakubara's famous wife, Uparambha, whose beauty and form were like that of the celestial nymph Rambha, heard that Ravana was nearby. ||97||

She had been attracted to Ravana's qualities from the beginning, and just as a cluster of moonflowers yearns for the moon, she went to him. ||98||

Page #326:
---------------------------
276
In the Padma Purana, the friend named Vichitramala said in private, "Listen, beautiful one, besides you, who else is a friend like my life?" 19
The word "friend" is used for one who shares the same opinion, therefore, you are not worthy of knowing my mind, O beautiful one. 10
Because you are skillful and worthy of being worshipped, you will surely do what I ask. Therefore, I say that friends are the greatest support of life. 10
Hearing this, she said, "Why do you say so, Goddess? I am your servant, use me for whatever you desire." 10
I do not praise myself, for it is condemned in the world. But I do say this, I am the embodiment of Siddhi. 103
Speak freely, whatever is in your mind. You are worrying in vain, for I am true. 104
Then, taking a long, slow breath, she placed her hand, like a lotus, on her cheek, beautiful as the moon. 105
The words that came out of her mouth were interrupted by shyness, so she encouraged them again and again. Her mind was constantly rising and falling in boldness, so she was struggling to keep it steady. 106
She said, "Friend, since childhood, my mind has been on Ravana. Although I have heard of his beautiful qualities that spread throughout the world, I could not meet him. But, on the contrary, due to my bad luck, I have been united with Nalakuvara, and I constantly suffer from the pain of unhappiness." 107-108
"O beautiful one, although I know this is not praiseworthy, O speaker of good words, I am not able to bear death." 109
"He who stole my heart, Ravana, is now nearby. Please be pleased, friend, and somehow bring me together with him." 110
Saying, "I bow to your feet," she was about to bow her head, but her friend stopped her due to her confusion. 111
She was overcome with longing, just as she was overcome with longing for Ravana. 98

Page #327:
---------------------------
## The Twelfth Canto

**277**

The messenger, knowing all things, said, "O mistress, I will fulfill your desire in an instant," and departed from the house.  [112]

She, veiled in a fine garment like a rain-cloud, flew through the sky and reached the abode of the lord of the Rakshasas in a moment. [113]

She entered the inner apartments and informed the doorkeeper.  Having made her way in, she sat down with humility on the seat given by Ravana. [114]

Then she spoke, "O god, the entire world is filled with your faultless qualities.  It is fitting that a man like you should be the cause of such an effect." [115]

"Because your generous wealth satisfies the supplicants on earth, I know that you are devoted to the welfare of all." [116]

"I know that you, who have assumed this form, will not violate my request.  Indeed, the wealth of people like you is the cause of **paropkar** (benevolence)." [117]

"O lord, for a moment, dismiss all your retinue and, with your attention focused, grant me your favor." [118]

When all the retinue had been dismissed and there was complete solitude, the messenger, who knew all things, told Ravana the whole story of the past. [119]

Then, hearing the messenger's words, Ravana covered his ears with both hands.  He shook his head for a long time and contracted his eyes. [120]

Ravana, who was devoted to good conduct, became troubled for a moment by the thought of the desire of the woman. [121]

He smiled and said, "O lady, how could such a thing, which brings about the union of sin, come to your mind?" [122]

"You have spoken this, abandoning pride.  I am extremely poor in fulfilling such a request.  What can I do?" [123]

"Whether she is a widow, or accompanied by her husband, or a respectable woman, or even a courtesan endowed with beauty, one should strive to avoid all women." [124]

"This act is contrary both in this world and in the next.  What kind of man is he who is corrupted by both worlds?" [125]

The friend, who had become eager, quickly caught her head in the middle. [111]

**Notes:**

1. **Paropkar** is a Jain term meaning "benevolence" or "doing good to others."
2. **Paramanayant** is a Sanskrit word meaning "contracting" or "shrinking."
3. **Kulabalika** is a Sanskrit word meaning "a respectable woman" or "a woman of good family."

Page #328:
---------------------------
In the Padma Purana,
Who would desire to eat food that is full of the saliva of another man's mouth and has been touched by another man's body? || 126 ||
Vibhishana, who was dear to Ravana, heard this with pleasure. Vibhishana, who was a knower of policy and always a leader among the councilors, said this: || 127 ||
O God! Since this is the way things are, a king who knows policy must always tell a lie, even if it is a small one. || 128 ||
Perhaps, by accepting, she will be pleased and, having gained confidence, will tell some way to take the city. || 129 ||
Then, following Vibhishana's words, Ravana, who was a follower of deceit, said to the messenger: O Bhadra! What you have said is right. || 130 ||
That poor woman's life is stuck in me, and she is in great distress. She is worthy of being protected by me. Indeed, generous people are compassionate. || 131 ||
Therefore, go and bring her back, even if it costs you your life. It is heard in the world that it is Dharma to protect living beings. || 132 ||
Having said this, Ravana sent the messenger, who went and brought back Uparambha in a moment. Ravana honored her greatly upon her arrival. || 133 ||
Then, when Uparambha, who was under the sway of Kama, reached Ravana, Ravana said: O Devi! My intense desire is to enjoy myself in the city of Durlagha. || 134 ||
Tell me, what pleasure is there in this forest? And what is the cause of Kama? O Devi! Do something so that I can enjoy myself with you in the city. || 135 ||
Women are naturally easily deceived, so Uparambha did not understand Ravana's cunning. In short, she, being afflicted by Kama, gave him the knowledge called Ashalika, which stood as a rampart, and various weapons, which were protected by Vyantara Devas, with great respect. || 136-137 ||
As soon as she received the knowledge, that illusory rampart disappeared, and in its absence, the city remained surrounded only by its natural rampart. || 138 ||
Ravana, with a large army, reached near the city. Hearing the noise of the city, Nalakuvara became agitated. || 139 ||

Page #329:
---------------------------
## The Twelfth Canto

271

Seeing this, the Lokapala, Nalakuvara, was filled with despair. He thought that the city had been taken by the Yaksha, Ravana.  ||14||  Despite this, he, bearing the spirit of a warrior, went out to fight, even though it meant certain death. He was accompanied by all his loyal vassals. ||140-141||

Then, in the midst of a great battle, filled with weapons and thunderous sounds, where even the rays of the sun could not penetrate, Vibhishana, with great speed, attacked Nalakuvara's chariot, breaking its axle with a kick, and captured him alive. ||142-143||

Vibhishana, filled with rage, did to Nalakuvara what Ravana had done to King Sahasrakirana. ||144||

At that time, Ravana obtained the Sudarshana Chakra, a jewel-studded disc, which was capable of striking fear into the hearts of both gods and demons, and was associated with Indra. ||145||

Then, Ravana, in private, said to Uparambha, "O Pravarangane, by teaching me, you have become my guru." ||146||

"It is not proper for you to do this while your husband is alive. And I, who am a teacher of the path of righteousness, am even less worthy of such an act." ||147||

After this, Ravana, having comforted Nalakuvara, took him to his wife. Nalakuvara, whose armor was torn and whose body was wounded, was brought before her. ||148||

Ravana said, "Enjoy all the pleasures you desire with this husband. What difference is there between me and him in the matter of enjoyment?" ||149||

"My reputation will be tarnished by this act, and others will follow my example." ||150||

"You are the daughter of King Akashadhvaja and Mridunakanta, born into a pure lineage. It is your duty to protect your virtue." ||151||

Hearing this, Uparambha was filled with shame and realized her mistake. She became content with her husband. ||152||

Nalakuvara, unaware of his wife's infidelity, continued to enjoy her company, having received honor from Ravana. ||153||

**Note:** The numbers in parentheses refer to the verse numbers in the original text.

Page #330:
---------------------------
## English Translation:

**280**

In the battle, Ravana, having achieved supreme glory by destroying his enemies, reached the land of Vijayadgiri with increasing prosperity. ||154||

Hearing of Ravana's approach, Indra, moving from the assembly of the gods, addressed all of them. ||155||

"O Vasvasvi and other gods! Why are you sitting relaxed? The lord of the Rakshasas, Ravana, has arrived here." ||156||

Saying this, Indra went to his father to seek counsel. He sat down on the earth, bowing respectfully. ||157||

He said, "What should I do in this situation? This enemy, whom I have defeated many times, has returned, now powerful." ||158||

"O father! I have committed a great injustice against my own duty by not destroying this enemy when he was weak." ||159||

"Even a common man can break a thorn when it is just emerging, but when it grows strong, it requires great effort." ||160||

"When a disease arises, it is easily destroyed, but when it takes root and spreads, it can only be countered after death." ||161||

"I have tried many times to destroy him, but you stopped me. You have made me forgive him in vain." ||162||

"O father! I am speaking this following the path of righteousness. It is the duty of a family to consult elders, and that is why I asked you. I am not incapable of killing him." ||163||

Hearing his son's words, filled with pride and anger, Sahasrar said, "O son! Do not be hasty." ||164||

"First, consult with wise ministers, for the work of those who act without deliberation becomes futile." ||165||

"Mere effort is not the cause of success, for what can a farmer achieve without rain? Similarly, what can a hardworking person achieve without the right circumstances?" ||166||

"Those who have equal effort and equal respect, some achieve success, while others fail due to the nature of their karma." ||167||

Page #331:
---------------------------
167. Some of the students who are reading will succeed and some will not succeed due to the compulsion of their karma.
168. Even if such a situation arises, you should make peace with Ravana, because if peace is made, you can make the whole world free from thorns.
169. Also, you should give your beautiful daughter, Rupini, to Ravana. There is no fault in doing so. Rather, your status will remain the same by doing so.
170. The father, who was the holder of pure intellect, explained this to Indra, but due to the group of anger, his eyes turned red in an instant.
171. Indra, whose body was filled with sweat due to the heat of the fire of anger, spoke as if he was breaking the sky with his voice, saying, "Father! How is it appropriate to give a daughter to someone who is worthy of being killed? Or, the intellect of old men is simply diminished."
172. "Father! Tell me, what am I inferior to him in? Because of which you have spoken these very humble words."
173. "He who is extremely distressed even when the rays of the sun touch his head, how will he bow down to another man who is a noble human being?"
174. "I am superior to Ravana in every way in terms of manhood, then how did it come to your mind that fate is in his favor?"
175. "If you think that he has conquered many enemies, then does a hunter not kill a lion who kills many deer?"
176. "In a battle where groups of flames are being generated by the clash of weapons, it is better to give up one's life than to bow down to an enemy."
177. "That Indra bowed down to the demon Ravana. I have never seen such a thing in the world, why haven't you seen it?"
178. "Being a celestial being is common, and it is not the reason for peace. Just as there is no unity between a lion and a jackal because of their commonality in living in the forest, similarly, there can be no unity between us two because of the commonality of being celestial beings."
179. As he was saying this, the loud sound of the enemy army, which filled the whole world, entered his ears.
180.

Page #332:
---------------------------
1. Having heard his father's call, he went to the armory and sounded the war trumpet to signal the preparation for battle. 
2. "Bring the elephant quickly, saddle the horses quickly, bring the sword here, bring a good shield, run and bring the bow, bring the helmet to protect the head, bring the arm band quickly, bring the dagger quickly, hey, groom, yoke the horses and prepare the chariot."  Thus, the Vidyaadharas, known as Devas, began to move around.
3. Then, when the valiant warriors were agitated, the drums were beating, the conch shells were roaring loudly, the elephants were roaring repeatedly, the horses were letting out long roars as soon as they were touched by the whip, the groups of chariots were moving, and the groups of bowstrings were humming loudly, the world was filled with the laughter of the warriors and the victory cries of the charioteers, as if it were created by sound.
4. The entire direction was covered with swords, tomars, nooses, flags, umbrellas, and bows, and the sun's influence was lost.
5. The Devas, who were eager for speed, came out, ready and prepared, and they pushed and shoved near the gate, listening to the sound of the bells on the elephants.
6. "Park the chariot over there, this intoxicated elephant is coming here. Hey, mahout! Quickly remove the elephant from here. Hey, rider! Why are you stopping here? Quickly take the horse forward. Hey, fool! Leave me and go back, don't make me anxious for nothing."  Thus, the Devas, filled with haste, came out of their houses. At that time, they were roaring with pride.
7. When the army, whose enthusiasm was increasing due to the trumpet that was sometimes played softly and sometimes loudly, stood in its place after facing the enemy, the Devas, releasing a group of weapons that covered the sky, broke the face of the Rakshasa army, that is, they attacked the front part of it with force.

Page #333:
---------------------------
## The Twelfth Canto

**283**

Vajravega, Prahasta, Hasta, Maricha, Udbhava, Vajramukha, Shuka, Ghora, Saran, Gaganojjvala, Mahajatara, Sandhyabhra, and Krura, these fierce Rakshasas stood before their army. All of them were clad in armor, mounted on excellent steeds, and armed with fine weapons.

**196-197**

Then, these valiant Rakshasas, in a moment, destroyed the army of the gods, striking fear into their hearts. The weapons they abandoned fell into the hands of their enemies.

**198**

Seeing the destruction of their army, the great gods rose to fight. Their bodies were filled with intense anger.

**199**

Meghamali, Tadipinga, Jvalitaksha, Arisajvara, and Agniratha, these gods appeared, showering down a torrent of weapons, their bodies ablaze with the fire of their anger.

**200**

Rising up, they confronted the Rakshasas, who were raining down a storm of weapons.

**201**

After a long battle, the Rakshasas were defeated. Each Rakshasa was surrounded by many gods.

**202**

Like insects caught in a whirlwind, the Rakshasas were tossed about, their weapons falling from their weakened hands.

**203**

Many Rakshasas turned back from the battle, but those who were proud, faced their death, refusing to surrender their weapons.

**204**

Seeing the Rakshasa army crumbling under the onslaught of the gods, the mighty son of King Mahendra, the valiant Kapiketo, who was known for his wisdom and bore the auspicious name Prasannakirti, advanced towards the enemy army, striking fear into their hearts.

**205-206**

Protecting his own army, he turned the enemy army back with a continuous barrage of arrows.

**207**

The army of the gods who resided on Mount Vijayadhara, shining with their various weapons, was initially filled with great enthusiasm at the sight of Prasannakirti.

**208**

But when they saw the mark of the monkey on his banner and umbrella, their hearts sank.

**209**

Then, with his blazing arrows, he pierced the hearts of the enemy, like the arrows of Kamadeva pierce the hearts of those who are infatuated.

**210**

**Notes:**

* **Rakshasa:** A type of demon in Hindu mythology.
* **Deva:** A god in Hindu mythology.
* **Prasannakirti:** A name meaning "one whose fame is pleasing."
* **Kapiketo:** A name meaning "one who has a monkey flag."
* **Vijayadhara:** A mountain in Hindu mythology, said to be the abode of the gods.
* **Kamadeva:** The Hindu god of love.

Page #334:
---------------------------
In the Padma Purana, 

**Verse 211:** Another army, fit for the gods, arrived, filled with gold, maces, weapons, bows, and maces.

**Verse 212:** Then, from within their ranks, stood the extremely valiant son of Malyavan, known as Sri Mali, with a resolute heart.

**Verse 213:** In a moment, he sent the gods, shining like the sun, to an unknown place, as he released a volley of arrows.

**Verse 214:** Seeing him, the enemy, unstoppable in his might, stirred up the army of his foes like a great wave,

**Verse 215:**  a mass of maddened elephant kings, clashing with the enemy ranks, wielding swords, and moving amidst the chaos.

**Verse 216:** The gods, roused to defend their own strength, their bodies consumed by great anger, their weapons gleaming,

**Verse 217:**  Shikhi, Kesari, Danda, Ugra, Kanaka, Pravara, and other warriors of Indra, covered the sky far and wide, like rain clouds.

**Verse 218:**  And Indra's own sons, like Mriga-chinha and others, blazing with the brilliance of battle, immensely powerful, covered the sky far and wide.

**Verse 219:** Then, Sri Mali, with his crescent-shaped arrows, covered the earth with their severed heads, as if with lotuses and their stalks.

**Verse 220:**  Indra pondered, "Who among these gods, or these valiant princes, can stand before this Rakshasa, whose brilliance is immense, whose power is overwhelming?

**Verse 221:**  Therefore, I myself will destroy his faith in battle, before he destroys the other gods."

**Verse 222:**  Thinking thus, he reassured his army, trembling with fear, as the lord of the gods prepared to fight.

**Verse 223:**  Just as the heart of a wicked teacher is shattered by the arrows of Kama, so too was the army of the gods shattered by the arrows of Prasanna Kirti, whose blazing flames were like fire.

**Verse 210:**  After that, the army of the gods and another army came face to face. That army was equipped with gold, swords, maces, weapons, bows, and maces.

**Verse 211:**  After that, the son of Malyavan, Sri Mali, who was extremely valiant and had a fearless heart, stood in front of the army of the gods.

**Verse 212:**  Where Sri Mali, whose radiance was like that of the sun, and who was constantly releasing a volley of arrows, sent the gods in a moment, no one knew.

**Verse 213:**  Then, seeing Sri Mali, who stood before them, unstoppable in his might, who was stirring up the army of his foes like a great wave, who was charging his maddened elephant kings against the enemy ranks, and who was wielding a sword and moving amidst the chaos of the warriors, the gods rose to defend their own army. At that time, their bodies were consumed by great anger, and their weapons were gleaming.

**Verse 214-216:**  Shikhi, Kesari, Danda, Ugra, Kanaka, Pravara, and other warriors of Indra covered the sky far and wide, like rain clouds.

**Verse 217:**  Besides these, Indra's sons, like Mriga-chinha and others, who were blazing with the brilliance of battle, immensely powerful, were covering the sky far and wide.

**Verse 218:**  Then, Sri Mali, with his crescent-shaped arrows, covered the earth with their severed heads, as if with lotuses and their stalks.

**Verse 219:**  Then Indra thought, "Who among these gods, or these valiant princes, can stand before this Rakshasa, whose brilliance is immense, whose power is overwhelming? Therefore, I myself will destroy his faith in battle, before he destroys the other gods."

**Verse 220-222:**  Thinking thus, he reassured his army, trembling with fear, as the lord of the gods prepared to fight.

Page #335:
---------------------------
## The Twelfth Chapter

2

Falling to his feet, and touching the ground with his knees, Jayant, renowned as a great hero, spoke to him: "O Indra, if you engage in battle while I am alive, then my birth from you will be meaningless."

"When I was a child, you would play with me in your lap, and you would look at me with love. Now I want to repay that love, to be free from that debt."

"Therefore, father, stay at home without worry. I will destroy all your enemies in an instant."

"Father, what can be cut with a nail with little effort, is pointless to cut with an axe."

Thus, having persuaded his father, Jayant prepared for battle. At that time, he seemed to be swallowing the sky itself with his body, filled with rage.

Protected by his army, shining with weapons, and swift as the wind, Jayant approached Srimal without any hesitation.

Srimal, seeing his worthy adversary after a long time, was very pleased. He ran towards him, moving through the midst of his army.

Then, the two princes, whose bowstrings were constantly drawn, showered each other with arrows, filled with anger.

The two armies, standing in their respective lines, watched the battle of the two princes, their minds filled with wonder.

Then, Srimal, cheering his army, broke Jayant's chariot with his weapon, Kanak, making him charioteerless.

Jayant fell unconscious, and seeing him fall, the hearts of his army sank. When he regained consciousness and rose, the hearts of his army also rose.

Then, Jayant, wielding the weapon Bhindimala, made Srimal charioteerless. He struck him with such force, fueled by anger, that Srimal fell unconscious.

Then, a great roar of joy arose from the enemy army, and a similar sound of lamentation arose from Jayant's army.

Page #336:
---------------------------
286
In the Padma Purana, Sri Mali, enraged after regaining consciousness, charged towards Jayanta, showering him with a storm of weapons. He appeared terrifying. ||23|| The two princes, shedding their weapons, shone brightly, like two lion cubs with their mane ablaze. ||239|| Then, the son of the king of the gods, Jayanta, struck the son of Malyavan, Sri Mali, with his mace, killing him instantly. He fell to the ground. ||240|| Blood gushing from his mouth, Sri Mali fell to the earth, resembling a setting sun. ||241|| After killing Sri Mali, Jayanta, mounted on his chariot, blew his conch shell in joy. The demons, terrified, fled in all directions. ||242|| Seeing Sri Mali lifeless and Jayanta, whose warriors were shouting in victory, ready for battle, Indrajit, the son of Ravana, came forward to face him. He reassured his fleeing army, his anger burning fiercely. ||243-244|| Then, like Kali in his wrath, Indrajit, with his arrows, shattered Jayanta's armor, just as he had shattered his armor, he shattered his body. ||245|| Seeing Jayanta, whose armor was broken, whose body was red with blood, and who was covered with arrows like a hedgehog, Indra himself rose to fight. He covered the sky with his vehicles and his shining, sharp weapons. ||246-247|| Seeing Indra ready for battle, his charioteer, Sanmati, said to Ravana, "O God! This is Indra, the lord of the gods, himself." ||248|| The Lokapalas, the guardians of the world, are protecting him from all sides. He is mounted on his intoxicated elephant, Airavata, adorned with the brilliance of his crown jewels. He is covered by a white umbrella, shielding the sun, and surrounded by an army like a raging ocean. ||249-250||
1. Vivodbhut m. | 2. Hatah Sri Mali yena sah. Hatah Sri Malikah m., k., b. | 3. Kavachavat. | 4. 'Shwavittu shalyastalloomni shalali shalalam shalam' iti Amarah. Shalali 'sehi' iti Hindi. Salilatulya tam k., kh., m., b. ||

Page #337:
---------------------------
## The Twelfth Canto

**287** This Kumar, Indrajit, is too powerful for this battle. You yourself should rise and destroy the enemy's pride. **251**

Seeing Indrajit approaching, strong and unyielding, Ravana, remembering the death of Mali and burning with the recent slaying of Sri Mali, charged forward in his chariot, swift as the wind. **252**

Seeing his son surrounded by enemies, Ravana, filled with rage, rushed forward in his chariot, swift as the wind. **253**

The battle between these two warriors was thrilling and terrifying. It was shrouded in the dense darkness created by the clash of weapons. **254**

In the darkness created by the weapons and the crimson mist, the valiant warriors could only be identified by their loud roars. **255**

Those warriors who had previously been hesitant to fight, now, spurred by their devotion to their lord and fueled by the anger of being struck, fought fiercely. **256**

They fought with maces, javelins, spears, clubs, swords, arrows, axes, golden discs, daggers, swords, tridents, nooses, maces, axes, maces, bows, stones, ploughshares, staffs, arrows, and countless other weapons designed to cut and kill. The sky was terrifying, filled with the fire of the clashing weapons. **257-259**

Here the sound of "grasad-grasad", there the sound of "shud-shud", here the roar of "ran-ran", there the sound of "kin-kin", here the sound of "trap-trap", there the sound of "dam-dam", here the sound of "chham-chham", there the sound of "pat-pat", here the sound of "chal-chal", there the sound of "tadd-tadd", here the sound of "tad-tad", there the sound of "chat-chat", and here the sound of "ghghghghgh". The battlefield was filled with the sounds of the clashing weapons. **260-263**

Horses were killing horses, elephants were killing elephants, charioteers were killing charioteers, elephant riders were killing elephant riders, and chariots were destroying chariots. **264**

The infantry, eager to fight, were ready to attack anyone who came before them. **265**

1. Rise. 2. Pride. 3. Tararavan-b. 4. Purvamara-v m., Purvamara-d b. 5. Karavali-bhiradhrip: m.

Page #338:
---------------------------
288
The group of water droplets, like a cluster of pearls, emanating from the elephant's trunk, extinguished the smoke and fire caused by the clash of weapons. ||266|| The massive teeth, like statues, falling from the elephant's mouth, shattered the ranks of the enemy soldiers. ||267||  "Strike, brave warrior, why are you being cowardly?  O valiant soldier, endure the blow of my sword for a moment." ||268|| "You are already dead, where can you go now after coming to me? You are poorly trained, you don't even know how to hold a bow." ||269|| "Run away and protect yourself, your battle-scar is useless. You have inflicted such a small wound that it hasn't even scratched my skin." ||270|| "You have wasted your master's wages, why are you roaring?  Your bravery will be revealed when the time comes." ||271|| "Why are you trembling?  Gain some stability, quickly take the arrow, hold your fist firm, see this sword will slip and fall." ||272|| Such conversations were repeatedly exchanged between the valiant warriors, filled with utmost enthusiasm, in front of their masters during the battle. ||273||  One warrior's arm was heavy with laziness, it wouldn't move, but when the enemy struck it with a mace, it started dancing in an instant and became strong. ||274||  Someone's head, profusely bleeding, fell down, repeatedly thanking the enemy. ||275|| The warriors' chests were pierced by arrows, but their minds were not broken. Their heads fell, but their pride remained. They preferred death over life. ||276|| The skilled and powerful warriors, protecting their honor, fought bravely and gave up their lives in the face of danger. ||277|| One warrior, filled with anger, was about to die, but he attacked the enemy's body as he fell. ||278||  One valiant warrior, struck by the enemy's weapon, retaliated with a fist and a mace, making the enemy fall to the ground. ||279||  He was ready to fight the infantry. ||265||

Page #339:
---------------------------
## The Twelfth Chapter

**289.** A great warrior embraced his enemy like a friend, squeezing him tightly until he was lifeless. The enemy's blood flowed freely from the embrace.

**290.** Another warrior, slaying the enemy ranks, cleared a path for himself in the battle. Fear kept other men from crossing his path.

**291.** Even as they fell, the best warriors never showed their backs to the enemy, whose chests swelled with pride.

**292.** Horses, chariots, warriors, and elephants fell with great force, crushing thousands of horses, chariots, warriors, and elephants.

**293.** The sky was filled with a mixture of dust raised by falling weapons, blood, and the intoxicating scent of elephants.

**294.** One fierce warrior, holding his spilling intestines with his left hand, raised his sword in his right and charged towards the enemy.

**295.** Another warrior, his lips clenched and his eyes wide open, tightened his belt with his own intestines and advanced towards the enemy.

**296.** A warrior, consumed by rage, picked up a large stone with both hands and hurled it at the enemy's head, who had lost his weapons.

**297.** Another warrior, his clothes stained with the blood of his fallen enemy, picked up his own severed bone and charged towards the enemy.

**298.** A warrior, eager for battle and full of the tricks of war, captured his enemy with a noose, dragged him far away, and released him.

**299.** Seeing his enemy disarmed and defeated, a warrior, eager for a fair fight, reluctantly abandoned his own weapon and approached the enemy.

**300.** One warrior, using a bow with a flaming arrowhead, rained down a torrent of blood upon the enemy, killing many.

**301.** Another warrior, though his head was severed, still charged at the enemy with great speed, wielding a stone in his hand.

Page #340:
---------------------------
**Padma Purana**

"Even though the head of someone filled with pride was cut off, he continued to bite his lips and roar, falling down only after a long time. || 293 || Another warrior, who seemed like a snake, cast a terrifying glance like a meteor upon his opponent as he fell. || 294 || One valiant warrior held his half-severed head with his left hand and with his right hand, he cut off the head of his opponent and threw it down. || 295 || Another warrior, whose weapon could not reach his enemy, threw it in anger and was ready to kill him with his long arms like a club. || 296 || One compassionate warrior saw his enemy lying unconscious. When he could not find water or other means to revive him, he, filled with anxiety, began to sprinkle his own blood, cooled by the air from the edge of his garment, upon him. || 297 || When the brave warriors fainted, they thought they had found rest; when they were wounded by weapons, they thought they had found pleasure; and when they died, they thought they had achieved their purpose. || 298 || Thus, a great battle was raging, a battle that terrified even fear itself and was eager to bring joy to the best of men. || 299 || Where elephants were pulling valiant men towards them with their trunks, but those valiant men were cutting off their trunks. Where men were eager to cut the horses, but those swift horses were throwing them down with the blows of their hooves. || 300 || Where horses, urged on by their charioteers, were pulling chariots, but their bodies were being wounded. Where headless elephants lay fallen and men were walking over them. || 301 || Where the bodies of foot soldiers were being shattered by the forceful blows of each other. Where valiant warriors were pulling the tails of horses with their hands so hard that they stood still. || 302 || Where the temples of elephants were being split by the blows of hands and pearls were falling out of them. Where chariots were being broken by falling elephants and many warriors were being injured. || 303 ||

Page #341:
---------------------------
The twelfth battle
Where the ground was covered with a layer of blood, and the sky and directions were covered with blood, and where the roar of the elephants created a fierce wind. || 304 || The battle was fierce, but the valiant Ravana, filled with the curiosity of war, was not paying attention to it. He said to his charioteer, Sumati, the son of Kaikasi, that the chariot should be taken in front of Indra, for what is the use of killing his other vassals who are not our equals? || 305 - 306 || My weapon does not rise against these insignificant vassals, nor does my mind, which is eager to devour the great enemy, turn towards them. || 307 || This Vidyaadhara, who has made himself a laughingstock, has made himself invincible out of petty pride. I will remove his Indrahood today with death. || 308 || This Indra has made himself great, he has made these Lokapalas. He considers other humans as gods and the Vijayardha mountain as heaven. || 309 || It is a matter of great wonder that just as a foolish clown, wearing the guise of a noble man, forgets himself, so this foolish man, intoxicated by his petty wealth, is forgetting himself and becoming a laughingstock for the people. || 310 || He has lived for a long time in the womb of his mother, filled with semen, blood, flesh, bones and marrow, and has come to consider himself a god. || 311 || This impatient person, who is doing something with the power of knowledge, considers himself a god, just as a bird considers itself a Garuda. || 312 || Having said this, Sumati, the charioteer, entered Ravana's chariot, protected by the mighty vassals, into Indra's army. || 313 || There, Ravana saw with a clear eye Indra's vassals, who were fleeing, unable to fight, and whose pathetic movements were like those of insects. || 314 || Just as the flow of water cannot be stopped by the banks, and just as a man who observes vows with a false vision cannot stop the momentum of his mind with anger, so the enemies could not stop Ravana from advancing. || 315 || Just as darkness is destroyed by the rising of the moon, so the army of the gods was destroyed. || 316 ||

Page #342:
---------------------------
## Padma Purana

Indra, mounted on an elephant, approached Ravana, who was as tall as Mount Kailasa, and drew an arrow from his quiver. ||317|| Like a cloud pouring down a torrent of water on a mountain, Indra rained down arrows on Ravana. ||318|| Ravana, in turn, pierced Indra's arrows with his own, creating a canopy of arrows in the sky. ||319|| Arrows pierced arrows, and the rays of the sun were extinguished, as if they had vanished in fear. ||320|| Narada, filled with joy at the sight of the battle, danced in a place where arrows could not reach. ||321|| 

Realizing that Ravana was invincible to ordinary weapons, Indra launched an Agni Astra (fire weapon). ||322|| The Agni Astra was so vast that the sky itself became its fuel. What can be said of bows and other material objects? ||323|| The roar of the Agni Astra was like the sound of a bamboo forest burning, its flames blazing fiercely. ||324|| 

Seeing his army engulfed in flames, Ravana quickly launched a Varuna Astra (water weapon). ||325|| The Varuna Astra instantly summoned a vast cloud, which poured down torrential rain like a mountain, thunderous and majestic. It seemed as if the sky itself had melted from Ravana's anger. The cloud extinguished Indra's Agni Astra in an instant. ||326-327|| 

Indra then unleashed a Tamas Astra (darkness weapon), which enveloped the sky and all directions in utter darkness. ||328|| The Tamas Astra engulfed Ravana's army, rendering them unable to see even their own bodies, let alone the enemy forces. ||329|| 

Seeing his army in disarray, Ravana's son, Ratna Shrava, a master of strategy and tactics, launched a Prabha Astra (light weapon). ||330||

Page #343:
---------------------------
## The Twelfth Chapter

**330.** Ravana, skilled in warfare, seeing his army bewildered, released the Prabhastra, the arrow of light. 

**331.** Just as the truth of the Jina teachings destroys the beliefs of the misguided, so too did that Prabhastra instantly dispel all darkness.

**332.** Then, in a fit of rage, Ravana unleashed the Naga Astra, filling the sky with radiant serpents.

**333.** Those arrows, capable of assuming any form at will, went to Indra and rendered him motionless, clinging to his body.

**334.** Indra was overwhelmed by fear, surrounded by those serpents, dark as the finest indigo, shaped like rings, and with flickering tongues.

**335.** Just as a creature trapped in the ocean of existence is bound by the web of karma, so too was Indra, encircled by the serpents, rendered helpless.

**336.** Indra then focused his mind on the Garuda Astra, and instantly the sky turned yellow with the brilliance of golden wings.

**337.** The wind from Garuda's wings, with its immense speed, caused Ravana's entire army to sway like a swing, unable to maintain their balance.

**338.** The Naga arrows, struck by the wind of Garuda, vanished without a trace. Their points of attachment to Indra's body were no longer discernible.

**339.** Embraced by Garuda, freed from all bonds, Indra became as terrifying as the sun in the summer.

**340.** Seeing Indra freed from the serpent coils, Ravana mounted his victorious elephant, the Triloka Mandana, whose tusks dripped with intoxicating nectar.

**341.** In a fit of rage, Indra brought his own elephant, Airavata, close to Ravana. A great battle ensued between the two proud elephants.

**342.** Both elephants, dripping with intoxicating nectar, adorned with lightning-like golden garlands, and roaring continuously, assumed the form of clouds.

**343.** The clash of their tusks was like the thunder of falling thunderbolts, shaking the entire world with their resounding roar.

**344.** With their powerful trunks, they struck each other repeatedly, their movements swift and fierce.

Page #344:
---------------------------
## English Translation:

294
Padma Purana

The two elephants, whose bodies were extremely agile and whose speed was immense, were brandishing their thick trunks, expanding, contracting, and striking. ||344|| With their eyes, whose pupils were clearly visible and whose gaze was extremely cruel, their ears erect, and possessing immense strength, the two elephants engaged in a very fierce battle. ||345||

Then, the powerful Ravana leaped up and placed his foot on Indra's head. With great speed, he kicked the charioteer down. Repeatedly assuring Indra, Ravana bound him tightly with a cloth and mounted him on his elephant. ||346-347||

Meanwhile, Indrajit also bound Jayanta and handed him over to the servants. Then, Indrajit, whose enthusiasm was fueled by victory and who was burning with the desire to defeat his enemies, ran towards the army of the gods. Seeing him run, Ravana, who was causing suffering to his enemies, said, "O son! Now your efforts are in vain. Retreat from the battle out of respect for the fight. The head of this army of the mountain dwellers is now in my hands." ||348-350||

"With him in my grasp, who else can stir? Let these petty vassals live and go to their desired places." ||351||

"When rice is extracted from a heap of paddy, the husk is discarded without any reason." ||352||

Thus, Indrajit, discouraged by Ravana's words, retreated from the battle. At that time, a large group of kings surrounded Indrajit. ||353||

Then, just as a large, long cloud of the autumn season dissipates in an instant, so too did Indra's army disperse in a flash, scattering in all directions. ||354||

A great victory cry was raised in Ravana's army by the excellent drums, conch shells, cymbals, and groups of prisoners. ||355||

Hearing that cry, Ravana's army became agitated and disheartened, knowing that Indra had been captured. ||356||

Then, Ravana, endowed with supreme power, departed for Lanka, his chariot covering the sky. He was very pleased at that time. ||357||

His chariots, resembling the sun's chariot, were adorned with flags and emitted rainbows from the rays of various jewels. ||358||

1. Sammukham M. | 2. Mahotsahaparantapah Kh., M. | Mahotsaham K. | 3. Vrindinaam M. |

Page #345:
---------------------------
## The Twelfth Chapter

Horses adorned with beautiful, fluttering fly whisks, moving with carefree grace, as if dancing, enhanced his splendor.  ||359||  A multitude of elephants, their necks adorned with large, resonant bells, from which flowed streams of intoxicating nectar, their trumpets resonating with a sweet sound, followed by a swarm of bees, accompanied him. ||360||  Along with these, the lords of great armies, mounted on their respective steeds, the celestial beings, the Vidyadharas, followed him.  Thus, in a moment, Ravana reached the outskirts of Lanka. ||361||  Seeing Ravana approaching, the protectors of the city, the citizens, and their relatives, filled with anticipation, came out to receive him, bearing offerings. ||362||  Some performed rituals for Ravana, while he, in turn, performed rituals for some elders.  Some bowed to him, while he, free from pride, bowed to some elders. ||363||  Knowing the nature of people, and with affection for the humble, Ravana honored some with a loving gaze.  He greeted some with a gentle smile, and others with pleasant words. ||364||

The city of Lanka, naturally beautiful, and adorned with special embellishments on this occasion, was adorned with tall, magnificent, gem-studded arches. ||365||  The city was filled with colorful flags, fluttering in the gentle breeze, and the entire earth was sprinkled with saffron and other fragrant substances. ||366||  The royal roads were adorned with flowers of all seasons, and the city was decorated with numerous garlands made of five-colored powders, black, yellow, blue, red, and green. ||367||  The city gates were adorned with full, shining pots, and the city was decorated with garlands of fresh leaves and fine garments, and a grand celebration was underway.  It was in this city of Lanka that Ravana entered. ||368||  Just as Indra is surrounded by many gods, so too was Ravana surrounded by many Vidyadharas.  At that time, he was enjoying the supreme happiness, the result of his past virtuous deeds. ||369||  Mounted on a beautiful, wish-fulfilling chariot, with a radiant crown, a magnificent necklace, and strong arms, he... ||370||

Page #346:
---------------------------
In the **Papouraana**,
He was adorned with a garland of jewels, radiating pure brilliance, like the spring season adorned with a multitude of blooming flowers. ||371||
He was gazed upon by women filled with insatiable joy, their **chamaras** gently raised, their expressions full of excitement. ||372||
He was delighted by the sounds of various instruments and the melodious cries of victory, accompanied by the finest dancing courtesans. ||373||
Thus, he entered Lanka, filled with joy and numerous festivities, and was welcomed by his family and servants, entering his own abode. ||374||

**Gautama Swami** tells King **Shrenik** that Indra, the **Vidhyadhara**, who had achieved great prosperity through the power of his past good deeds, having conquered all his enemies, well-prepared and as insignificant as blades of grass, lost his radiance and wealth when his **punya karma** diminished. Alas for the fleeting happiness of mortals! ||375||

And **Ravana**, the **Vidhyadhara**, through the power of his past good deeds, destroyed all his powerful enemies and achieved great prosperity. Knowing that all actions in the world are born of **karma**, O noble ones! Abandon attachment to other things and accumulate the **punya karma** that shines like the sun. ||376||

Thus ends the twelfth chapter of the **Padmacharita**, narrated by the **Acharya** **Ravishena**, known as **Aarsha**, describing the defeat of Indra, the **Vidhyadhara**. ||12||

Page #347:
---------------------------
## The Thirteenth Chapter

Then, the Samantas of Indra, filled with sorrow for their lord, arrived at Ravana's palace, led by Sahasrar. ||1|| They entered, respectfully informed the gatekeepers, and stood bowing, seated as befitting their status. ||2|| Ravana, with great dignity, looked upon Sahasrar. Sahasrar said to Ravana, "You have conquered my son Indra. Now, release him at my request." ||3|| "You have shown the greatness of your arms and your virtue. It is the nature of kings to crush the pride of others." ||4|| This very word, clear and echoing, arose from the mouths of the Lokapalas. ||5|| Ravana, laughing, said to the Lokapalas, "There is a condition. Only by fulfilling this condition will I release Indra." ||6|| "From today onwards, all of you shall perform the duties of my city, both inside and outside. ||7|| You shall keep this city free from dust, impurities, stones, grass, and thorns every day." ||8|| "Indra, too, shall take a pitcher and water the earth with fragrant water. This is his well-known duty in the world." ||9|| "And the adorned, dignified goddesses shall decorate the city with fragrant flowers of five colors." ||10|| "If you agree to these conditions with respect, I will release Indra. Otherwise, how can he be released?" ||11|| Saying this, Ravana looked at the Lokapalas, his head bowed in shame, and laughed repeatedly, striking his hand against his palm. ||12|| Then, with humility, he said to Sahasrar, his words like nectar, captivating the hearts of the assembly. ||13|| "O father! Just as you are revered by Indra, so am I. In fact, even more so. Therefore, how can I disobey your command?" ||14||

Page #348:
---------------------------
298
If there were not great teachers like you, then this earth would sink into the abyss, like a mountain abandoned by its supports. ||15||
I am fortunate because a revered person like you is giving me instructions.  Indeed, those who are worthy of the instructions of people like you cannot be devoid of merit. ||16||
Therefore, O Lord, from today onwards, let us do something that will bring about harmony between Indra and me. Let Indra be happy and let me also be happy. ||17||
This powerful Indra is my fourth brother. By gaining him, I will make the earth free from thorns. ||18||
Let his Lokapalas remain as they were before, and let his kingdom also remain as it was before, or even let him take more. What need is there for a difference between us two? ||19||
Just as you give instructions to Indra, give me instructions on what I should do, because the instructions of the teachers are like the protection and adornment of the remaining body. ||20||
Stay here according to your wish, or stay in the city of Rathnupura, or stay wherever you wish. We are both your servants, who is the owner of this land? ||21||
Thus, with his mind soaked in the water of these sweet words, Sahasrar spoke words even sweeter than those of Ravana. ||22||
He said, "O Blessed One! The birth of noble people like you is accompanied by qualities that bring joy to all beings." ||23||
O Auspicious One! Your excellent humility is praised in this world, and it is like an ornament to your valor. ||24||
Your sight has made my birth meaningful. Those parents are blessed who have you as the cause of their birth. ||25||
You, who are powerful yet forgiving, and whose fame is as pure as the white lotus, have removed the fear of the occurrence of faults. ||26||
It is as you say, everything is possible for you. What cannot your arms, which are as thick as the trunks of elephants, do? ||27||
But just as a mother cannot be abandoned, so too cannot one's birthplace be abandoned.

Page #349:
---------------------------
## The Thirteenth Chapter

299
Unable to leave their own land, their friends and relatives remained there, like chatakas, filled with anxiety, looking towards the path. ||29||
O Gunalaya, you too, following your lineage, are serving Lanka and attaining supreme joy. What can be said about one's birthplace? ||30||
Therefore, we shall go to that very land, the source of great pleasures. May the forest protect you, beloved of the gods, for a long time. ||31||
Having said this, Indra, along with his son Sahasrar and the Lokapalas, went to the Vijayadha mountain, accompanied by Ravana for a short distance. ||32||
All the Lokapalas remained in their respective places as before, but due to the defeat, they became devoid of essence, like moving machines. ||33||
Seeing the Vijayavasi people, the gods, filled with immense shame, did not know where they were going. Thus, the gods remained constantly depressed by their pleasures. ||34||
Indra did not find joy in the city, nor in the gardens, nor in the ponds filled with lotus pollen water. In other words, due to the defeat, he found nothing pleasing. ||35||
He did not even cast his simple gaze upon the women. What to speak of his body? His mind was always filled with shame. ||36||
Although people, by introducing other topics of conversation, constantly tried to make him forget his sorrow related to the defeat, his mind did not become healthy. ||37||
Then, one day, Indra, sitting on the top of a pillar inside his palace, resembling the peak of Mount Gandhamadana, was seated in the Jinalaya. ||38||
Wise men surrounded him. He, remembering the defeat constantly, was holding his body with a sense of disrespect. While sitting, he thought: ||39||
Shame on this wealth, connected to knowledge, which, like a very high group of clouds in the autumn season, vanished in a moment. ||40||
Those weapons, those elephants, those warriors, and those horses, all became like grass due to my previous wonder. ||41||

Page #350:
---------------------------
300
In the Padma Purana, or how else can a man describe the diversity of karma? For all else is strengthened by karma. ||42|| Indeed, the karma I have accumulated in the past, which is capable of bringing about the enjoyment of various pleasures, has been exhausted, and that is why this state of affairs exists. ||43|| It would be better to die in battle, in the midst of danger, than to be disgraced, for disgrace spreads everywhere. ||44|| How can I, who has placed his foot on the head of his enemies and lived, now enjoy the wealth granted by my enemies? ||45|| Therefore, I abandon the desire for worldly pleasures and worship the causes of attaining the state of liberation. ||46|| Ravana, my great friend, came disguised as an enemy, and he awakened me from my attachment to the taste of this fleeting pleasure. ||47||
Meanwhile, a sage named Nirvana Sangama, who was wandering through places suitable for virtuous people, was traveling through the sky. ||48|| Suddenly, his progress was halted. Then, looking down, he saw the temple. ||49|| The great sage, endowed with direct knowledge, quickly descended from the sky to worship the Jina image enshrined in the temple. ||50|| The king Indra, with great joy, had risen and worshipped the Jina. The great sage, in accordance with the proper procedure, paid homage to the Jina image. ||51|| Then, after the sage had worshipped the Jina and sat down, Indra, bowing to his feet, sat in front of him and began to criticize himself. ||52|| The sage, who was supremely skilled in making people experience the course of the entire world, comforted him with excellent words. ||53||
Then Indra asked the sage about his past life. The sage, adorned with a multitude of virtues, told him about his past life as follows: ||54|| O King! You have wandered through countless births in the four realms of existence, experiencing the great forest of suffering. In the city of Shikha Pada, you were born as a human being. ||55|| You were born into a poor family, associated with women, and you came with the name "Kulavanta," meaning "noble." ||56||

Page #351:
---------------------------
## The Thirteenth Chapter

A being wandering in the great forest of suffering, attained the human realm in the city of Shikhapad. Born into a poor family, he became known as "Kulavanta" due to his association with a woman. || 55-56 ||

Kulavanta's eyes were always filled with mucus, his nose was flat, and his body was riddled with hundreds of diseases. Despite this, he had no means of sustenance and survived by eating scraps left by others, a consequence of his karmic actions. || 57 ||

His clothes were extremely dirty, misfortune followed him, his entire body was rough, his limbs were torn, and his hair was disheveled. Wherever he went, people harassed him. He could find no peace anywhere. || 58 ||

In his final moments, with a good mind, he renounced food for a moment, practicing non-consumption. Upon leaving his body, he became a celestial being named "Kimpurusha," the son of a celestial woman named "Kshiradhara." || 59 ||

From there, he was reborn in the city of Ratnapura as the son of a couple named Dharani and Gomukha, named "Sahasrabhaga." || 60 ||

There, he attained the highest right faith and practiced the five vows. Upon death, he became a celestial being named "Shukra" in the highest heaven. || 61 ||

From there, he was reborn in the city of Ratnasamchaya in the Mahavideha region, as the son of a minister named "Mani" and his wife "Gunavali," named "Samantvardhana." || 62 ||

Samantvardhana renounced his king and became a practitioner of the great vows. He practiced intense austerities, constantly focused on the truth, endured hardships, attained pure right faith, and conquered his passions. Upon death, he went to the Graiveyak heaven, becoming "Ahamindra" and enjoying its pleasures for a long time. Finally, he was reborn in the city of Rathanupura as "Indra," the king of the celestial beings, born to the queen "Hridayasundari" of the celestial being "Sahasrar." || 63-66 ||

Oh Indra! Though I am filled with knowledge, I was defeated by my enemy. Why are you filled with sorrow, carrying this disrespect for yourself? || 67 ||

Oh foolish one! You sow millet and desire rice in vain. Beings always receive fruits according to their actions. || 68 ||

The actions you performed in the past are the means for your enjoyment. It is not surprising that there is no effect without a cause. || 69 ||

Page #352:
---------------------------
In the Padma Purana,
It is only a cause, Ravana's defeat. What you have done in this birth, you have received the fruits of it. ||70|| Why don't you remember the injustice you did while playing? Your pride born of wealth is now destroyed. Remember that now. ||71|| It seems that because of the long time, the story is not coming to your mind. Therefore, listen with a focused mind, I say. ||72||
In the city of Arijaipur, there was a Vidyaadhara king named Vahnivega. He had arranged the Swayamvara of his daughter named Ahalya, born of Queen Vegavati. ||73|| All the Vidyaadharas, adorned with their respective wealth, came to the Swayamvara, leaving their ranks out of eagerness. ||74|| You also went there, endowed with excellent wealth, and so did Anandamal, the king of Chandraavartapur. ||75|| Leaving all the Vidyaadharas behind, due to the influence of your past karma, Anandamal was chosen by the beautiful girl. ||76|| After marrying her, he enjoyed the pleasures he desired, just as Indra enjoys the ever-increasing pleasures in heaven. ||77|| From then on, you became extremely hostile towards him, driven by intense jealousy. ||78|| Then, due to the favorable nature of his karma, Anandamal suddenly realized that this body is impermanent, and therefore, it is of no use to me. ||79|| I will do penance so that the suffering related to the world will be destroyed. What is the use of hoping for deceitful pleasures? ||80|| Having realized this deeply with his enlightened inner self, he renounced all possessions and undertook the highest penance. ||81|| Once, he was situated on the mountain named Rathaavarta, on the bank of the Hansavali river, in the state of Pratimā Yoga. You recognized him. ||82|| The fire of your past anger, fueled by the sight of him, flared up. Then, mocking him with pride, you laughed repeatedly. ||83||
302
The karma earned in the past has now been exhausted. What is the wonder in this, that without a cause, there is no effect? ||69|| Ravana is only a cause in your defeat. You have done karma in this birth, and you have received this defeat from them. ||70|| Why don't you remember the injustice you did while playing? Your pride born of wealth is now destroyed. Therefore, remember the past now. ||71|| It seems that because of the long time, the story is not coming to your mind. Therefore, listen with a focused mind, I say. ||72||
I
In the city of Arijaipur, there was a Vidyaadhara king named Vahnivega. He had arranged the Swayamvara of his daughter named Ahalya, born of Queen Vegavati. ||73|| All the Vidyaadharas, adorned with their respective wealth, came to the Swayamvara, leaving their ranks out of eagerness. ||74|| You also went there, endowed with excellent wealth, and so did Anandamal, the king of Chandraavartapur. ||75|| Leaving all the Vidyaadharas behind, due to the influence of your past karma, Anandamal was chosen by the beautiful girl. ||76|| After marrying her, he enjoyed the pleasures he desired, just as Indra enjoys the ever-increasing pleasures in heaven. ||77|| From then on, you became extremely hostile towards him, driven by intense jealousy. ||78|| Then, due to the favorable nature of his karma, Anandamal suddenly realized that this body is impermanent, and therefore, it is of no use to me. ||79|| I will do penance so that the suffering related to the world will be destroyed. What is the use of hoping for deceitful pleasures? ||80|| Having realized this deeply with his enlightened inner self, he renounced all possessions and undertook the highest penance. ||81|| Once, he was situated on the mountain named Rathaavarta, on the bank of the Hansavali river, in the state of Pratimā Yoga. You recognized him. ||82|| The fire of your past anger, fueled by the sight of him, flared up. Then, mocking him with pride, you laughed repeatedly. ||83||
1. You, M. | 2. Ahalya, K. | 3. Ranks, extremely, M. | 4. Together, M. | 5. You, jealousy, K., M., B. | 6. Mocking, M. |

Page #353:
---------------------------
## The Thirteenth Chapter

303. You, the one who is excessively fond of sensual pleasures, the husband of Ahalya, why are you sitting here like this?  || 84 ||

You, bound by ropes, yet your body remains unshaken like a mountain, your mind steadfast in contemplation of the truth. || 85 ||

Seeing you being humiliated, your brother, the virtuous Kalyan, standing nearby, was filled with sorrow and anger. || 86 ||

He, possessing the power of the image-assembly, gathered it and gave it to you. With a long, hot sigh, he cursed you, filled with sorrow. || 87 ||

"You have scorned these innocent sages, and you will surely face great scorn yourself." || 88 ||

He wanted to burn you with his immeasurable breath, but your wife, Sarvasri, calmed him down. || 89 ||

She, with right vision, is a worshiper of the virtuous. Even the sages respect her words, for they are of pure heart. || 90 ||

If that virtuous woman had not calmed him down, who could have stopped his fire of anger? || 91 ||

There is nothing in the three worlds that cannot be achieved through penance. Indeed, the power of penance is supreme over all powers. || 92 ||

Even Indra, the king of the gods, does not possess the power, radiance, brilliance, or fortitude of a virtuous sage who acts according to his will. || 93 ||

Those who scorn the virtuous face great suffering in the animal realm and in hell. || 94 ||

Whoever, even in their mind, brings about the defeat of the virtuous, receives supreme suffering in this world and the next. || 95 ||

What can be said about a cruel-minded person who insults or kills a liberated sage? || 96 ||

Whatever actions humans perform with their body, mind, or speech, they will surely bear the fruits of those actions. || 97 ||

Knowing the nature of actions and their consequences, both good and bad, strengthen your resolve in Dharma and liberate yourself from suffering. || 98 ||

You were playing and laughing at him out of arrogance. || 83 ||

Page #354:
---------------------------
304
Padmapurana
Thus, remembering his past lives, Indra was filled with wonder. Bowing down to the Nirgrantha, he said, "O Great One! ||19|| By your grace, I have attained the supreme enlightenment. Now, I believe all my sins will vanish in an instant." ||100|| "Nothing is unattainable in this world through the association of the virtuous. The enlightenment that is not attained in many births is attained through it." ||101|| Having said this, Indra bowed to the Muni, who then went as he pleased. Indra also attained supreme detachment from worldly life. ||102|| Knowing that Ravana attained the highest liberation through the rise of virtuous karma, he praised the mighty Veerayantra, who resides on the banks of the great mountains. ||103|| Realizing that human existence is as fleeting as a water bubble, he made his mind firm in Dharma, condemning his evil deeds. ||104|| The great Indra bestowed his kingdom upon his son, Ratnanupura, and along with his sons and the group of Lokapalas, he took the Jain initiation, which destroys all karma. His mind became completely pure, and he renounced all possessions. ||105-106|| Even though his body was nurtured by extraordinary pleasures like Indra's, he bore the burden of austerity that others could not bear. ||107|| Generally, great beings possess extraordinary power in their fierce actions, and the same power arises in pure actions. ||108|| After performing austerities for a long time, with pure meditation, Indra destroyed his karma and attained Nirvana. ||109||
Dodhakavritta
Behold this picture of the deeds of men, full of strength and wonder. The pleasures acquired over a long time again lead to the path of supreme happiness. ||110||
Consider the fruits of virtuous and sinful actions, and hold your mind in Dharma, protecting yourself from suffering. ||98||

Page #355:
---------------------------
## The Thirteenth Chapter

**305**

There is nothing surprising in this, that great men, abandoning all attachments, destroy their sins in an instant through the power of meditation. ||111||

What great fire, fueled by a vast amount of wood gathered over a long time, does not consume everything in an instant, attaining immense glory? ||112||

Knowing this, O noble ones! Be diligent and purify your inner selves. No one can escape the day of death, that is, everyone must die when the time comes. Therefore, attain the sun of right knowledge. ||113||

Thus ends the thirteenth chapter of the Padmacharita, known as the Ārṣa, narrated by the Ācārya, describing the Nirvāṇa of Indra. ||13||

And finally, they attain the state of Nirvāṇa, filled with supreme bliss. ||110||

**Notes:**

1. *N্যস্ত* - abandoned
2. *ক্ষণমাत्र* - an instant

Page #356:
---------------------------
## The Fourteenth Chapter

**Then, Ravana, known as the lord of the gates, whose mind was engrossed in worldly pleasures, whose actions were difficult for enemies to achieve, and who was able to obtain whatever he desired, went to Mount Meru.**  [1] **He worshipped the Jina and then returned at his own will.** [2] **On his way back, he saw the various mountains that divided the earth, adorned with diverse trees, and the rivers, more pure than crystal, flowing with great beauty.** [3] **His chariot, shaped like the sun, was adorned with exquisite ornaments, and he was accompanied by the supreme Lakshmi. He was eager to reach Lanka.** [4] **Suddenly, he heard a loud, gentle sound, which filled him with great excitement. He quickly asked Maricha:** [5] **"Oh Maricha, Maricha! Where is this great sound coming from? And why are the directions turning red like gold?"** [6] **Then Maricha said, "Oh Lord! This is the arrival of the gods, who are going to attend the great auspicious event of a great sage."** [7] **"The sound of the gods, filled with joy and moving in various ways, is spreading throughout the world."** [8] **"These directions are filled with the rays of their crowns and other ornaments, and they are shining with a brilliance like that of the Kusumbha flower."** [9] **"It seems that the great sage, Anantabala, who resides on this golden mountain, has attained Kevala Jnana today."** [10]

**Hearing these words, Ravana, filled with the feeling of right faith, was overjoyed.** [11] **He descended from the sky, radiating great brilliance, like a second Indra, to pay homage to the great sage.** [12] **Then, Indra and the other gods, with folded hands, bowed to the sage, praised him, and sat down in their respective places, their bodies small and insignificant compared to the great sage.** [13]

Page #357:
---------------------------
## Chapter Fourteen

307. Ravana, filled with great devotion, bowed and praised, then sat down on the suitable ground, surrounded by the Vidyadharas. ||14||

Then, the Muni, revered like a disciple, asked Ravana, praised by the four types of Devas, the Tiryanchas, and the humans: ||15||

"O Bhagavan! People desire to know the fruits of Dharma and Adharma, and the cause of liberation for all. You are worthy of explaining all this." ||16||

Then, the Muni, dear to all, spoke words that were skillfully crafted, pure, full of meaning, concise, unbreakable, and beneficial to all. ||17||

"Bound by the eight types of Karma, beginningless and endless, this being, whose inner power is hidden by the Karma of knowledge-obscuration, etc., ||18||

continuously experiences pleasure and pain in countless lakhs of births, arising from various senses. ||19||

As the fruits of Karma ripen, whether mild, medium, or strong, he becomes attached, hateful, or deluded, and like a potter's wheel, he keeps revolving through the four states of existence. ||20||

Even attaining the extremely rare human birth, he does not understand his own welfare due to the Karma of knowledge-obscuration. ||21||

Subdued by the senses of taste and touch, beings perform highly condemnable actions, becoming burdened with the weight of sin, and fall into hells, which inflict great suffering arising from various causes, like stones sinking in water. ||22-23||

Driven by wealth, etc., some people, condemned by the world, kill their mothers, fathers, brothers, daughters, wives, and friends. ||24||

Some wicked people kill humans, birds, and deer, including those in the womb, the old, the young, and women. ||25||

Those with minds deviated from Dharma, with foolish intellect, kill land and water creatures, and all of them fall into the terrible hell of Puruvedana. ||26||

Those who kill honeybees, are cruel, are Chandala, set fire to forests, are devoted to violence, are sinful, are Kaivarta, and are low-born greedy people, ||27||

Page #358:
---------------------------
## Padmapurana:

**Verse 28:** Those who are attached to false speech and are eager to steal others' possessions, fall into a terrible hell, having abandoned their refuge.

**Verse 29:** In whatever way they consume flesh, in the same way they are consumed by others in hell.

**Verse 30:** Those who are attached to great possessions, engage in grand endeavors, and are fiercely determined, dwell in hell for a long time.

**Verse 31:** Those who hate the virtuous, are wicked, associated with false views, and die with a fierce mind, surely go to hell.

**Verse 32:** Such beings are torn apart in hells by axes, swords, wheels, claws, and other various weapons. Birds with sharp beaks peck at them.

**Verse 33:** Lions, tigers, dogs, snakes, scorpions, wolves, and other creatures born of karma inflict great suffering upon them.

**Verse 34:** Those who are deeply attached to objects like sound, are illusioned beings and attain the state of animal life.

**Verse 35:** In that animal realm, beings kill each other, humans slay them with various weapons, and they themselves experience great suffering through carrying burdens, pulling carts, and so on.

**Verse 36:** This being, wandering in the troubles of existence, sleeps on land, in water, on mountains, on trees, and in other dense places.

**Verse 37:** This being, from time immemorial, has been born with one sense, two senses, three senses, four senses, and five senses, experiencing birth and death.

**Verse 38:** There is not even a sesame seed-sized space where this being, caught in the whirlpool of existence, has not experienced birth and death.

**Verse 39:** Some beings are endowed with gentleness and simplicity, and are naturally content, and they attain the human realm.

**Verse 40:** Even in the human realm, deluded beings, for the sake of momentary pleasure, abandon the path of liberation and commit sins, mistaking the cause of ultimate happiness.

**Verse 41:** According to their past actions, some are Aryans and some are Mlechchas. Some are wealthy, and some are poor.

Page #359:
---------------------------
## The Fourteenth Chapter

**309** Many beings, bound by karma, perform hundreds of desires and spend their time with great difficulty in the homes of others. **42** Some are wealthy but ugly, some are beautiful but poor, some have long lives and some have short lives. **43** Some are beloved and possess fame, some are extremely disliked, some give orders and some obey them. **44** Some enter battle, some dive into water, some go to foreign lands, and some engage in agriculture and other activities. **45** Thus, even in the human realm, there is a variety of happiness and sorrow. In reality, all is sorrow, and happiness is merely an illusion. **46**

Some beings are characterized by attachment and restraint, some by restraint and non-restraint, some practice non-desire and austerity, and some are deluded by their passions. **47** They attain the state of godhood, endowed with the four blessings. Even there, some are endowed with great powers, and some with limited powers. **48**

Based on their state, radiance, influence, intellect, happiness, lightness, pride, and arrogance, they again accumulate karma and continuously wander through the four realms of existence. **49** Just as the wheel of an hourglass constantly turns, so too do these beings constantly wander. **50**

Through evil intentions, a being experiences sorrow, and through good intentions, it experiences happiness. Through the destruction of the eight types of karma, a being attains liberation. **51**

Through the power of giving, beings attain enjoyment in the realms of enjoyment. They attain various forms through the specific qualities of their vessels. **52**

The Jinas declare those who are free from violence, free from attachment, and devoid of attachment and aversion to be the best vessels. **53**

A vessel that is purified by right faith, even without austerity, is also praiseworthy, for it purifies the body of the one who holds false beliefs. **54**

One who protects from calamities is called a vessel (paatiti paatra). This is the etymological meaning of the word "vessel." Since the monks, through the power of right faith, protect people, they are vessels. **55**

That which is endowed with pure right faith, right knowledge, and right conduct is considered the supreme vessel. **56**

Page #360:
---------------------------
## Padma Purana:

"He who is equal in honor and dishonor, in pleasure and pain, and in grass and gold, is called a virtuous recipient. ||57|| Those who are free from all attachments, are absorbed in great austerities, and are always devoted to the contemplation of truth, are called Shramanas (ascetics) and are the best recipients. ||58|| Whatever food, drink, medicine, or other things useful for them are given to these Shramanas with devotion and according to their ability, yield great results. ||59|| Just as a seed sown in fertile land yields abundant wealth, so too does a gift given to a virtuous recipient with a pure heart yield abundant wealth. ||60|| A recipient who is filled with attachment, aversion, etc., is not a true recipient, and does not yield the desired result. Therefore, it is pointless to think about the result of giving to such a recipient. ||61|| Just as a seed sown in barren land does not produce anything, so too does a gift given to a sinful recipient who is attached to false views not yield any fruit. ||62|| Water drawn from a polluted well, if drunk by a sugarcane plant, becomes sweet, but if drunk by a neem tree, becomes bitter. ||63|| Similarly, water from the same lake, if drunk by a cow, becomes milk, but if drunk by a snake, becomes poison. In the same way, a gift given to a virtuous recipient yields good results, while a gift given to a wicked recipient yields bad results. ||64|| Some recipients, though attached to false views, are still imbued with the spirit of right view. For such recipients, a gift given with devotion yields mixed results, both good and bad. ||65|| Giving to the poor, the blind, etc., is called compassionate giving, and though it may yield some results, it is not considered the best kind of giving. ||66|| All those who wear the garb of religion strive to preach their own doctrines, but those who have a pure heart should carefully examine them. ||67|| Wealth given to householders who are equal to oneself, but who are filled with lust, anger, etc., does not yield any fruit. ||68||"

Page #361:
---------------------------
## The Four-Month Festival

**311** Alas! How great is this delusion that people deceived by false doctrines give their wealth to those who are in all states of existence! **69**  Shame on those wicked people who have deceived this innocent creature, and by showing greed, have diverted his mind with the discussion of false scriptures. **70**  Because it is sweet and forceful, wicked men have declared meat to be edible, and to show their deceit, they have also determined the number of those whose flesh should be eaten. **71**  Such cruel and greedy beings, by feeding others meat and eating it themselves, go to hell along with the givers, accompanied by terrible suffering. **72**  Many people, who are under the influence of greed, have wicked intentions, and falsely consider themselves to be sages, have also declared the donation of elephants, horses, cows, and other living beings to be virtuous. But those who know the truth have strongly condemned it. **73**  The reason for this is that the living being who is given in a living donation has to carry burdens, his body is marked with sharp tools, and he is beaten with sticks, etc. Due to these reasons, he suffers great pain, and because of him, many other living beings also have to suffer greatly. **74**  Similarly, land donation is also condemnable because it causes suffering to the living beings living in that land. And to desire merit by accumulating it through the suffering of living beings is like extracting water from a stone. **75**  Therefore, all living beings should always be given the gift of fearlessness, as well as knowledge, food, medicine, clothes, etc. **76**  Even the donation that is condemned becomes praiseworthy due to the difference in the recipient. Just as water drunk through a conch shell becomes a pearl, for sure. **77**  The donation of animals and land, although condemned, if given with the intention of offering to the Jina image, etc., grants excellent enjoyments that last for a long time. **78**  The inner intention is the cause of merit and demerit. Without it, giving externally is like raining on the top of a mountain. **79**  Therefore, who is capable of diminishing the fruit of the donation given with the contemplation of the Jina, who is free from attachment and omniscient? **80**  Except for the Jina, other gods are hateful, attached, and deluded because:

1. In all types of recipients.
2. Wealth.
3. Due to pride.
4. The living beings living in it.
5. Knowledge, medicine, food, etc.
6. Unreleased, released, becomes liberated.
7. Intention.

Page #362:
---------------------------
312
Those who hold weapons are considered hateful, those who keep women and wear ornaments are considered passionate. Their delusion can also be inferred from their passion and hatred, because delusion is the cause of passion and hatred. Thus, passion, hatred, and delusion are the three vices that are established in them, and the rest of the vices are transformations of these. || 42 ||
Some people in the world are known as gods, but they are like ordinary people, they eat, they are tainted by passions, and they indulge in desires like sex, time, and place. How can such gods be worthy of charity? If they are inferior or equal to their devotees, how can they give them good results? || 83-84 ||
Although their good deeds are seen in the present, how can they bring liberation to other suffering humans? || 85 ||
To desire liberation from such false gods is like wanting to get oil by squeezing a handful of sand, or like wanting to quench thirst by serving fire. || 86 ||
If a lame man can take another lame man to a foreign country, then these gods can also bring results to other suffering beings. || 87 ||
This is the story of these gods who commit sinful deeds. Their devotees, who are far from being worthy, cannot be considered worthy in any way. || 88 ||
Driven by greed, sinful people engage in sacrifices, and people give them money in the form of offerings. How can this be considered innocent? || 89 ||
Therefore, the charity given with the intention of benefiting the Jina is free from all vices and yields great results. || 90 ||
Religion is like business, just as in business, there is always a consideration of more or less, so in religion, there should always be a consideration of more or less, that is, one should look at the loss and gain. A householder can accept the religion in which there is more merit and less sin, because the greater thing overcomes the lesser thing. || 91 ||
Just as a single grain of poison does not contaminate the entire pond when it enters it, so also the slight violence committed by a man who follows the Jina's religion does not contaminate him. His slight violence is in vain. || 92 ||
1. kechidebhyah m. | 2. bhajanbhajanam kh. | pujanbhajanam m., b. | 3. kaladeshakamādi-m., kh., b. | 4. drishte'pi kh., m., b., j. | 5. vipāke kh., m., b., j. | 6. shivasthānam samprāpti m. | shivasthāna prāpti kh. | shivasthānam samprāpti b. |

Page #363:
---------------------------
##  Translation:

**Chapter 14**

**Verse 93:**  Devout followers of the Jinas should construct temples and other structures, and offer garlands, incense, lamps, and other auspicious offerings.

**Verse 94:**  By offering donations with the intention of benefiting the Jinas, beings attain the highest pleasures in both the heavenly and human realms.

**Verse 95:**  Donations given appropriately to those who have embarked on the path of liberation (like monks) bestow abundant pleasures and are considered worthy of merit.

**Verse 96:**  Only the donation given with devotion and faith to those who have attained Right Vision (Samyak Drishti) is true charity. The rest is merely a loss of wealth to thieves.

**Verse 97:**  The kingdom of perfect knowledge (Kevala Jnana) is established only through meditation. When one attains this perfect knowledge, they achieve liberation (Nirvana).

**Verse 98-99:**  Those who have shed all their karmas, are free from all obstacles, possess infinite bliss, and are illuminated by infinite knowledge and vision, are the Siddhas. They are without any physical body, remain in their true nature, reside on the peak of the universe, are free from rebirth, and their essence cannot be described in words.

**Verse 100:**  Those who are trapped in the fire of suffering fueled by the wind of greed, constantly suffer without the water of merit.

**Verse 101:**  Those who dwell in the darkness of sin and are under the influence of false vision, some attain enlightenment through the rays of the sun of Dharma.

**Verse 102:**  Beings who are imprisoned within the strong cage of evil tendencies and are bound by the ropes of desire, are liberated by the bond of Dharma.

**Verse 103:**  The word "Dharma" is used in the context of "holding" or "sustaining" as it is derived from the root "Dhr" (to hold) and is explained by the example of the country "Lokabindu Sara" (a country mentioned in ancient texts).

**Verse 104:**  Dharma is called "Dharma" because it sustains a being from falling into misery, as it is the right conduct.

**Verse 105:**  The root "Labh" means "to obtain" or "to gain". The benefit derived from Dharma is called "Dharma Labh" (benefit of Dharma).

Page #364:
---------------------------
## Chapter 314

I will briefly explain the Dharma as stated by the Jinas. Listen attentively, with a focused mind, to the different types of fruits that result from it.

**Verse 106:**

Non-violence, truthfulness, non-stealing, non-possession, and non-attachment are called vows. One should definitely practice these vows.

**Verse 107:**

Walking, speech, desire, taking and giving, and discarding are the five Samitis. A virtuous person should diligently practice them.

**Verse 108:**

Complete absence or gentleness in speech, mind, and body actions is called Gupti. One should practice it with utmost respect.

**Verse 109:**

Anger, pride, deceit, and greed are the four great enemies (Kashaya). It is through these that a being wanders in the cycle of birth and death.

**Verse 110:**

According to the scriptures, one who acts according to the scriptures should control anger through forgiveness, pride through gentleness, deceit through simplicity, and greed through contentment.

**Verse 111:**

All that has been described above, including vows, Samitis, etc., is called Dharma.  Beyond this, renunciation is also called a special Dharma.

**Verse 113:**

Touch, taste, smell, sight, and hearing are the five well-known senses. Conquering these is called Dharma.

**Verse 114:**

Fasting, austerity, counting breaths, renunciation of tastes, secluded sleeping and sitting, and bodily exertion are the six external austerities. External austerities are like a house, protecting the internal austerities.

**Verse 115:**

Penance, humility, self-reflection, study, detachment, and meditation are the six internal austerities. All these austerities are called Dharma.

**Verse 118:**

Through this Dharma, noble beings achieve the separation (destruction) of karmas and perform many wondrous actions that transform infinite activities.

**Verse 119:**

Through the influence of Dharma, this being obtains a body capable of action, which enables it to obstruct all humans and gods, and to permeate the space of the universe.

**Verse 120:**

Through the influence of Dharma, this being becomes so powerful that it can conquer the three worlds. It attains the eight types of divine powers and the rare Yoga.

Page #365:
---------------------------
The fourteenth vow

1. It destroys the heat of the sun, makes it like frost, and fills the whole world with rain in an instant. || 121 || It burns the world to ashes with its mere glance, like the poisonous snake, lifts Mount Meru, and scatters the ocean. || 122 || It lifts the celestial wheel, frightens Indra, Rudra, and other gods, rains jewels and gold, and creates groups of mountains. || 123 || It pacifies the most severe diseases with the dust of its feet, and gives humans many other wondrous riches. || 124 || A being can do many other difficult things through the power of Dharma. In truth, nothing is impossible for Dharma. || 125 || Those who die with Dharma transcend the celestial wheel and are born in the heavens of Saudharma and other abodes of virtue. || 126 || Some become ordinary gods, some become Indra, and some become Ahminndra, by acquiring Dharma. || 127 || Through the power of Dharma, beings are born in palaces made of gold, crystal, and lapis lazuli pillars, with walls of gold and other precious metals that always shine, very high and with many floors. || 128 || Their floors are made of various gems like ruby, yogurt-colored, and honey-colored, with strings of pearls hanging down, and adorned with windows. || 129 || Their edges are decorated with beautiful paintings of deer, yak, cows, lions, elephants, and other animals. || 130 || They are equipped with moon-like halls, adorned with flags and garlands, and their chambers are furnished with beautiful beds and seats. || 131 || Those who practice Dharma are born in places like vimanas, which are equipped with musical instruments, travel according to their will, are accompanied by good companions, adorned with lotus and other decorations, and whose brilliance eclipses the sun's radiance and the moon's light. || 132-133 || Through the power of Dharma, beings obtain:
1. The moon.
2. The dust of the feet.
3. Flags and garlands.

315

Page #366:
---------------------------
In the Padma Purana, it is said that a body free from dust, sweat, and disease, **samoda**, **nayanabhiram**, **upapadaj** in origin, and **digantar** in radiance, is obtained in the celestial abodes. This body is **samod**, **nayanabhiram**, **upapadaj** in origin, and **digantar** in radiance. It is also adorned with ornaments that cover the entire horizon with their brilliance.

Through the power of Dharma, Apsaras are obtained in heaven, whose feet are as soft as lotus petals, whose nails are radiant, and whose red garments are entangled in their anklets. Their thighs are as smooth as banana stems, their knees are hidden within their muscles, their hips are adorned with belts, and their gait is as graceful as that of an elephant. They are adorned with delicate trivalis at their waists, and their breasts are like newly risen moons. Their bodies are constantly bathed in the radiance of jeweled garlands, and they wear delicate vines of malati flowers. Their hands are adorned with bracelets of precious stones, and their fingers are as soft as ashoka leaves. Their necks are like conch shells, their lips are covered with the brilliance of their teeth, and their cheeks are like pure mirrors reflecting beauty. Their eyes are adorned with thick, radiant ornaments, and their foreheads are adorned with pearls and rubies. Their hair is black, fine, and soft like bees, their bodies are as soft as reeds, and their voices are sweet. They are skilled in all forms of treatment, their actions are beautiful, and their breath smells like the fragrance of Nandana. They are skilled in understanding gestures, they bring pleasure to the five senses, and they are capable of assuming any form. They obtain these celestial forms through Dharma.

Page #367:
---------------------------
## Chapter 14

**Verse 147:** The gods, along with the apsaras, enjoy immense pleasure born from the object of desire, where all the necessary equipment is created simply by the power of thought.

**Verse 148:** The pleasure that is experienced in the human realm, as well as in the realm of the Yantrikas, is all declared by the Jina masters to be the fruit of Dharma.

**Verse 149:** Whatever is experienced as pleasure in the upper, middle, and lower realms, by the enjoyers, is all born from Dharma.

**Verse 150:** The protection of thousands of human beings by a giver, enjoyer, and establisher of order, is to be understood as the fruit born from Dharma.

**Verse 151:** The dominion of Indra over thousands of gods adorned with beautiful ornaments is the fruit born from Dharma.

**Verse 152:** The attainment of the Siddha-loka by those who are adorned with the three jewels of Right Faith, Right Knowledge, and Right Conduct, and who have destroyed the enemy of delusion, is the fruit of pure Dharma.

**Verse 153:** Without obtaining a human birth, one cannot obtain this Dharma. Therefore, the attainment of human birth is the most excellent of all births.

**Verse 154:** Just as a king is the best among humans, a lion among animals, and Garuda among birds, so too is human birth the best among all births.

**Verse 155:** Dharma, which is the best in the three worlds and bestows pleasure on all the senses, is performed only in the human body. Therefore, the human body is the most excellent.

**Verse 156:** After wandering through thousands of births as a crawling creature, a being may or may not obtain a human birth.

**Verse 157:** Having obtained this rare human birth, which is the cause of liberation from suffering, if a person does not practice Dharma, they will again fall into the cycle of suffering.

**Verse 158:** Just as a precious jewel lost in the ocean is difficult to find, so too is it difficult to regain a lost human birth.

**Verse 159:** By performing Dharma appropriately in this human life, all living beings attain the fruits of heaven and beyond.

**Verse 160:** Having heard all this, Bhanukarna was very pleased. With devotion, he bowed down to the lotus-eyed omniscient being and asked a question with folded hands.

Page #368:
---------------------------
## The Padma Purana

**Chapter 162:**
The Blessed One, I am still not satisfied with the teachings I have received. Therefore, you should explain the Dharma in detail.

**Chapter 163:**
Then, the one with infinite strength, the Kevali, said, "Listen to the special description of Dharma, by the influence of which, the worthy beings are liberated from the cycle of birth and death."

**Chapter 164:**
Dharma is said to be of two types, Mahavrata and Anuvrata, due to their importance and the nature of the vows. The first, Mahavrata, is for the monks who have renounced their household life, and the second, Anuvrata, is for the householders who live in the world.

**Chapter 165:**
I will now describe the conduct of the great-souled monks who have renounced all possessions, a conduct that is capable of destroying sins.

**Chapter 166:**
In the Tirthankara of Muni Suvrata Nath, who knows all things, there are many great souls who are filled with the great fear of birth and death.

**Chapter 167:**
Knowing the human existence to be as useless as the castor oil plant, they have renounced possessions and embraced the path of a monk.

**Chapter 168:**
These virtuous ones are always absorbed in the five great vows and are dedicated to attaining the knowledge of the truth until the end of their life.

**Chapter 169:**
These courageous monks, with pure hearts, are always absorbed in the five assemblies and the three secrets.

**Chapter 170:**
Non-violence, truthfulness, non-stealing, and the Brahmacharaya as prescribed in the scriptures, are only for those who have no attachment to possessions.

**Chapter 171:**
What possessions can those wise ones have who do not even have attachment to their own bodies and who rest diligently after sunset?

**Chapter 172:**
Even with a possession as small as a grain of mustard seed, the monks, who are free from attachment, are extremely courageous and powerful like lions.

**Chapter 173:**
They are free from all restrictions, like the wind. Birds may have possessions, but the monks do not even have a trace of attachment.

**Chapter 174:**
They are free from the contact of impurities, like the sky, their actions are highly commendable, they are gentle like the moon and radiant like the sun.

**Chapter 175:**
They are deep like the ocean, courageous like Mount Meru, and like a frightened tortoise, they keep their senses completely under control.

Page #369:
---------------------------
## Chapter Fourteen

**319**  "Those who are equal to the earth in their forgiveness, free from the surge of passions, and endowed with eighty-four lakh virtues, **[176]** who are adorned with eighteen lakh aspects of conduct as expounded by the Jinas, who are supremely blessed with the power of austerity, and ever focused on attaining liberation, **[177]** who are absorbed in the meaning of the Jina's teachings, well-versed in the teachings of other religions, who have crossed the ocean of scriptures, and who are the upholders of Yama, **[178]** who are the creators of rules, free from arrogance, endowed with various powers, and embodiments of great auspiciousness, **[179]** these monks, adorned with all these virtues, who have subdued their karma, attain the highest state of godhood. **[180]** Then, in two or three existences, they burn away all impurities with the fire of meditation and attain the bliss of liberation. **[181]** Now, I will explain the twelve-fold path of righteousness for those who are confined in the cage of attachment and dwell in the household life. Listen carefully. **[182]** For householders, there are five Anuvratas, four Shikshavrata, three Gunavrata, and thousands of Niyamas to be observed as far as possible. **[183]** Abstaining from gross violence, gross falsehood, gross taking of others' possessions, sexual misconduct, and endless craving, these are the five Anuvratas for householders. The Jina-kings have explained the following contemplation for the protection of these vows. **[184-185]** Just as my own body is dear to me, so too is the body of all beings dear to them. Knowing this, a householder should show compassion to all beings. **[186]** The Jina-kings have declared compassion to be the ultimate limit of righteousness. For those whose minds are devoid of compassion, even a little righteousness will not bear fruit. **[187]** Any speech that causes pain to others is considered false, for truth is the opposite of this. **[188]** Killing, stealing, etc., in this life lead to imprisonment, bondage, etc., and after death, they cause various kinds of suffering in the lower realms. **[189]** Therefore, a wise person should avoid these with all his might. How can one engage in actions that lead to conflict between the two worlds?"

Page #370:
---------------------------
## Padma Purana

**191.**  A woman should be avoided like a venomous snake, for she is a destroyer of men, being enslaved by greed.

**192.** Just as one feels sorrow when another man touches one's wife, so should one understand this arrangement for all.

**193.** One who indulges in sensual pleasures receives great scorn in this very life, and after death, suffers unbearable pain in the animal realm and hell.

**194.** One should always measure one's desires, for if they are not controlled, they bring great sorrow. The example of Bhadra and Kanchana is well-known in this regard.

**195.** There was a man named Bhadra who sold wares. He vowed to possess only one dinar. Once, he found a purse on the road. Although it contained many dinars, Bhadra, remembering his vow, took only one out of curiosity and left the rest.

**196.** Another man named Kanchana saw the purse and took all the dinars. The owner of the dinars was a king. When he investigated, Kanchana was sentenced to death. Bhadra, however, returned the dinar he had taken to the king, who honored him for it.

**197.**  

**198.**  The three Gunavrata are: renunciation of worldly possessions and punishments, limiting one's movement to specific directions, and controlling one's consumption.

**199.** The four Shikshavrata are: performing Samayika with effort, observing fasts, sharing food with guests, and practicing Sallekhana when death approaches.

**200.** A Shraman who arrives at a home without giving prior notice, is free from possessions, and is endowed with virtues like right faith, is considered a guest.

**201.** One should offer such a guest food and other necessities according to one's means, with respect and without greed. This is called Atithisambhaag.

**202.**  A householder should abstain from honey, alcohol, meat, gambling, eating at night, and sexual intercourse with prostitutes.

Page #371:
---------------------------
321
Having performed the household dharma, the five who attain samadhi at the time of death, attain the state of a Sudeva, having fallen from the state of a Sumanyuṣya. ||203|| Having thus performed the observance within the eight existences, becoming free from the bonds of the three jewels, they attain siddhi. ||204|| Having attained the state of a human, which is difficult to obtain, he who is unable to perform the prescribed conduct, yet has faith in the teachings of the Jinas, is also a temple of Shiva. ||205|| Even by the attainment of right faith alone, a human being, being the most excellent of all beings, is freed from the fear of the terrible path. ||206|| He who naturally performs prostrations to the Jinas, is the foundation of merit, and even a small amount of sin does not attach to him. ||207|| He who even remembers the Jinas with devotion, his evil karma is destroyed. All that was earned through countless existences is immediately destroyed. ||208|| The houses, dreams, and birds of omen of that person are always auspicious, who holds the Jina, the jewel of the three worlds, in his heart. ||209|| He who utters the words "I bow down to the Arhant," with devotion, is undoubtedly freed from all karma in a short time. ||210|| The pure heart-lotus of the worthy being blossoms forth from the contact of the rays of the story of the Jina-chandra. ||211|| He who performs prostrations to the Arhant, Siddha, and Munis, is to be known as one who has abandoned the world, dear to the followers of the good teachings. ||212|| He who makes an image of the Jina, draws a picture of the Jina, worships the Jina, or praises the Jina, will not find anything difficult to obtain in the world. ||213|| Whether he be a king, a householder, wealthy or poor, he who is devoted to dharma is worthy of worship in all the worlds. ||214|| Those who are endowed with great humility and are wise in the knowledge of what should be done and what should not be done, are the leaders of householders through their association with dharma. ||215|| Those who do not use honey, meat, and liquor, are established in the beauty of householders. ||216||

Page #372:
---------------------------
## The Padma Purana:

**Verse 217:** Those who are filled with doubt, desire, and uncertainty, whose souls are distant from the praise of others, and who are devoid of praise for other doctrines, are the ones who hold the primary position among householders.

**Verse 218:** Those who are adorned with fine garments, exude a pleasant fragrance, have a pleasing appearance, are praised by the women of the city, and walk while looking at the earth, having abandoned all vices, are filled with good intentions, and are eager to perform good deeds, are those who, while going to pay homage to the Jina, attain infinite merit.

**Verse 219-220:** Those who consider the property of others as insignificant as grass, other men as equal to themselves, and other women as equal to their mothers, are blessed.

**Verse 221:** "When will I take initiation and wander the earth? When will I destroy my karmas and attain the abode of the Siddhas?" The person with a pure mind who contemplates this every day, finds that his karmas, as if afraid, do not associate with him.

**Verse 222-223:** Some householders attain liberation in seven or eight births, while some others, with a pure heart, achieve liberation in two or three births by performing intense austerities.

**Verse 224:** The average noble beings quickly attain great bliss, that is, liberation. However, those who are incapable but know the path, attain great bliss after some rest.

**Verse 225:** A person who does not know the path and wanders a hundred yojanas a day, keeps wandering and does not reach the desired place even after a long time.

**Verse 226:** Those whose faith is false, even if they perform severe austerities, do not attain the state free from birth and death.

**Verse 227:** Those who are corrupted by the three jewels (right faith, right knowledge, right conduct), wander in the forest of the world, covered in the darkness of delusion and filled with snakes of passions.

**Verse 229:** How can one cross the ocean of existence if one has no virtue, no right faith, and no noble renunciation?

**Verse 230:** In the flow of the Vindhya mountains, where elephants as tall as mountains are swept away, the poor rabbits are undoubtedly swept away.

**Verse 231:** Where even those who preach the wrong path are swept away by the current of birth, old age, and death, what can be said of their devotees?

Page #373:
---------------------------
## Chapter Fourteen

**323** Just as a stone cannot save another stone in water, so a householder cannot save a householder who has come to him for refuge. **232** Those who have burned away their sins through austerity and are light, knowing the truth, they alone are able to save people through their teachings. **233** This human realm is like a precious island in the vast ocean of samsara. It is obtained with great difficulty. **234** Having reached this precious island, wise people should take hold of the jewels of the vows, for they must inevitably leave this body and pass through the cycle of existence. **235** Just as someone grinds up jewels to obtain thread, so people grind up the jewels of dharma for worldly things. **236** The body and everything else is impermanent, there is no refuge in anyone, the body is impure, the soul is separate from the body, it alone experiences pleasure and pain, contemplate the nature of samsara, consider the diversity of the world, reflect on the vices of the asravas, contemplate the glory of samvara, think of ways to exhaust past karma, consider the rarity of enlightenment, and contemplate the greatness of dharma - these twelve contemplations have been spoken by the Jina, they should be held in the heart always. **237-239** Whoever practices dharma according to their ability, will enjoy the fruits of that practice in the realms of gods and humans. **240**

Thus speaking, Bhanukarna asked the omniscient Anantbal, "O Lord, I now wish to know about the vows and their distinctions." **241** In response, the Lord said, "O Bhanukarna, pay attention and understand. Vows and austerity are not two separate things." **242** One who is bound by vows is called an ascetic according to their strength, therefore, a wise person should be engaged in vows or austerity in every way. **243** Wise people should accumulate even a little bit of merit, for just as drops of water falling together create great rivers that flow to the sea, so too... **244** Whoever gives up food for even a moment in the day, will receive the same fruit as a month-long fast. **245**

Page #374:
---------------------------
##  English Translation:

324
Padmapurana

It is said that there are ten thousand years in heaven for those who enjoy the fruits of their actions.  || 246 ||  The time spent in heaven by a great soul who has faith in Jainism and performs the prescribed duties is equivalent to one *paly*. || 247 ||  After falling from heaven, he attains excellent enjoyment in the human realm, just as the *Upvanas* born into the lineage of ascetics did. || 248 ||

There was a girl named *Upvana* who was unhappy and without family, and she made a living by eating berries and other fruits. Once, she gave up food for a *muhurta*.  Due to the influence of this vow, the king honored her greatly and after the vow, he endowed her with great wealth. This incident made her mind very enthusiastic about religion. || 249-250 ||

Whoever constantly follows the words of the Jina, attains uninterrupted happiness in the afterlife. || 251 ||  Whoever gives up food for two *muhurtas* every day, gets the fruit of two fasts in a month. || 252 ||  Similarly, whoever gives up food for thirty *muhurtas* by increasing one *muhurta* at a time, gets the fruit of three, four, etc. fasts. || 253 ||

One should plan the *muhurtas* in the same way for *tela* and other fasts.  The fruit of a longer period of abstinence should be said to be greater, according to the increase in the cause. || 254 ||

Having attained the fruit of this rule in heaven, beings are born as humans and perform wonderful deeds. || 255 ||  Due to the remaining merit from enjoying the fruits in heaven, they become husbands of noble women whose bodies are adorned with beauty, and who captivate minds with their charming gestures. || 256 ||

Women who have fallen from heaven also come to the human realm and, being served by great men, attain equality with Lakshmi. || 257 ||  Whoever gives up food at sunset, especially a *samyagdarshi*, attains special prosperity. || 258 ||

This being, due to this religion, resides in a jeweled, radiant chariot in the midst of the Apsaras, for a time equivalent to many *palyas*. || 259 ||

Page #375:
---------------------------
## Chapter Fourteen

**325** Having attained the rare human birth, one should be devoted to the path of liberation. The duty of the great lord is to worship the Jina. ||26||

**26** Whose throne, when occupied, makes a yojana of land golden, and is served by gods, animals, and humans. ||26||

**262** Whose eight miraculous powers and thirty-four great wonders manifest, and whose form is radiant like a thousand suns, bringing joy to the eyes. ||262||

**263** The wise devotee who bows down to such a great lord, the Jina, crosses the ocean of existence in a short time. ||263||

**264** There is no other way for beings to attain peace except by following this path, therefore, one should serve it diligently. ||264||

**265** There are thousands of other paths, like the Go-danda, which are associated with Kutirthas, and in which the careless beings are deluded. ||265||

**266** There is no true compassion in those paths, as they openly consume honey and meat, but in the path of the Jina, even a speck of fault is not seen. ||266||

**267** It is completely worthy of abandonment in this world, to torment one's soul with hunger during the day, and then consume food at night, destroying the accumulated merit. ||267||

**268** Eating at night is a sin, yet those who consider it a virtue have hearts hardened by evil deeds, and their understanding is difficult. ||268||

**269** The lazy and sinful being who eats when the sun is not visible, does not understand the path to liberation. ||269||

**270** The sinful being, whose eyes are covered by darkness and whose mind is filled with sin, eats flies, insects, and hair at night. ||270||

**271** The one who eats at night eats with Dakinis, Preta, Bhutas, and other vile creatures. ||271||

**272** The one who eats at night eats with dogs, rats, cats, and other carnivorous animals. ||272||

**273** Or what is the point of elaborating further? Eating at night makes everyone impure and defiled. ||273||

**259** Sitting in the middle, one spends many moments in contemplation. ||259||

**260** Therefore, those who have attained the rare human birth and are devoted to the path of liberation, should worship the great lord, Shri Jinendra Deva. ||260||

Page #376:
---------------------------
## Padma Purana

**Verse 274:** Those who eat after sunset are considered bound by humanity, like animals, by the wise.

**Verse 275:**  One who is averse to the teachings of the Jinas and eats day and night, how can he be happy in the afterlife, being devoid of discipline and vows?

**Verse 276:**  A person devoid of compassion, who insults the Jina-endras, will have a foul-smelling mouth in another life.

**Verse 277:**  Whoever indulges in meat, alcohol, night-eating, stealing, and another's wife, destroys both his present and future lives.

**Verse 278:**  One who eats at night will have a short lifespan, be poor, afflicted with diseases, and devoid of happiness in the afterlife.

**Verse 279:**  Due to night-eating, this being experiences birth and death for a long time, and suffers in the womb.

**Verse 280:**  The night-eater, with a distorted vision, is born for a long time in the wombs of boars, wolves, cats, swans, crows, and other species.

**Verse 281:**  The foolish one who eats at night suffers in many evil wombs for thousands of years during the Utsarpini and Avasarpini periods.

**Verse 282:**  One who attains Jain teachings and adheres to the vows, burns all his sins and attains a good place.

**Verse 283:**  Those who are devoted to the three jewels and the Anuvratas, eat only after sunrise, free from any faults.

**Verse 284:**  These sinless beings attain the position of celestial rulers in the heavens, enjoying excellent pleasures. They are filled with compassion and do not eat at night.

**Verse 285:**  After falling from there, they attain human birth, free from slander, and enjoy the pleasures of a Chakravarti king and other such positions.

**Verse 286:**  Those who perform good deeds attain excellent pleasures and the eight Siddhis (perfections) in the heavens like Saudharma, etc., which are present as soon as they are desired.

**Verse 287:**  Those who eat during the day become great ministers, kings, rulers of the earth, and beloved by all beings, working for the welfare of the world.

**Verse 288:**  Those who eat during the day become wealthy, virtuous, beautiful, long-lived, endowed with the three jewels, and occupy high positions.

Page #377:
---------------------------
The fourteenth day is the day of the powerful, the rulers of cities and so on, who are adorned with magnificent vehicles and are honored by their vassals. ||28|| The lords of palaces, the lords of the gods, those who are endowed with the power of the wheel, and those who are endowed with great auspicious signs, are born from eating during the day. ||290|| Those who are steadfast in the renunciation of night-eating are radiant like the sun, gentle like the moon, and possess enduring pleasures. ||291|| Women who eat at night become orphans, unfortunate, deprived of parents and brothers, and filled with sorrow and poverty. ||292|| Those with flat noses, whose appearance inspires disgust, whose eyes are filled with dirt, and who are marked by many evil omens; ||293|| those whose bodies emit a foul odor, whose lips are cracked and thick, whose ears are erect, whose hair is yellow and brittle, whose teeth are like gourd seeds, and whose bodies are white; those who are blind, weak, and lacking luster, with rough skin; ||294-295|| those who are filled with many diseases, unclean, and wear torn clothes; those who live on scraps and depend on the work of others, are born from the sin of eating at night. ||296|| Women who are devoted to night-eating obtain husbands who are deaf, lame, and devoid of wealth and brothers. ||297|| Those who are constantly burdened with sorrow, become widows in childhood, carry water, wood, and other burdens, struggle to fill their stomachs, are despised by all, whose minds are destroyed by the weapon of speech, and whose bodies are covered with hundreds of wounds, are born from the sin of eating at night. ||298-299|| Women who are peaceful in mind, virtuous, benevolent to the wise, and abstain from eating at night, obtain desired pleasures in heaven. They are always surrounded by their families, who stand with their hands on their heads, awaiting their commands. ||300-301|| Having fallen from heaven, they are born into a prosperous and noble family, endowed with auspicious signs and possessing all virtues. ||302|| They are skilled in many arts, their bodies inspire love in the eyes and minds of others, and they release nectar through their words, delighting all beings. ||303||

Page #378:
---------------------------
Here is the English translation, preserving the Jain terms:

The lords of the Vidyadharas are filled with longing for them. Narayana, Baladeva, and the Chakravartis also [long for them]. 

They have bodies radiant like lightning and lotus flowers, with swinging, lovely earrings. They have connections with kings through marriage.

The compassionate ones who do not eat at night receive their desired food, prepared by servants.

Through daytime eating, they become like Sri Kanta, Suprabha, Subhadra, and Lakshmi - women with great beauty.

Therefore, whether man or woman, one should abandon nighttime eating, which is associated with many dangers, with a mind steadfast in discipline.

With little effort, happiness is obtained. Who does not desire their own happiness?

Knowing that "Dharma is the root of happiness, and adharma is the cause of suffering," one should engage in dharma and abandon adharma.

It is well known in the world that through dharma comes happiness, and through its opposite, suffering.

Observe the greatness of dharma, by which humans, fallen from heaven, are born among humans with great enjoyments and charming bodies.

They are the refuge of jewels born from water and land. Even when indifferent, they are always happy.

Their storehouses of gold, cloth, grains, and other goods are constantly guarded by those with diverse weapons in their hands.

They have abundant cows, buffaloes, elephants, horses, chariots, servants, villages, towns, and palaces.

A large retinue, endowed with great fortune and capable of seizing the objects of the mind and senses.

They have the gait of swans, bodies of dense beauty, sweet voices, full breasts, and excellent characteristics.

Their youthful forms are like fences for the eyes, with charming movements, adorned with various ornaments, and possessing the nature of meritorious deeds.

Page #379:
---------------------------
## Chapter Fourteen

**329**

Some ignorant people, unaware of the path to Dharma, do not strive for it, being foolish and unrighteous. **319**

Due to the influence of their evil karmas, some humans, even though they are wise, do not follow the path to Dharma, being engrossed in evil deeds. **320**

When the evil karmas that hinder good deeds are pacified, some beings, with a sincere desire, approach a Guru and inquire about Dharma. **321**

The words of the Guru become meaningful for those who, after the pacification of their impure karmas, engage in righteous conduct. **322**

Those wise beings who abandon evil deeds and follow this rule become either the first or the second in heaven, possessing great virtues. **323**

Those who, out of devotion, spend their time serving the monks and then eat, are always desired by the gods in heaven to be happy. **324**

Those with great brilliance become the Indra of the assembly of gods, or they attain the status of a Samanika, fulfilling their desires. **325**

Just as a small seed of a banyan tree grows into a tall tree, similarly, even a small amount of tapasya bears the fruit of great enjoyment. **326**

One who is constantly devoted to Dharma, due to the influence of their past good deeds, becomes a handsome person with captivating eyes, like Kubera. **327**

A man named Sahasrabhata, who had adopted the Munivelavrata (eating after the monks have finished), once offered food to a Muni. As a result, his house was showered with jewels, and he became Kubera in his next life. **328**

He was famous throughout the earth, with a noble character and great strength, possessing immense wealth and surrounded by servants. **329**

Like the full moon, his body was extremely beautiful, and he enjoyed the highest pleasures, being knowledgeable in all scriptures. **330**

Due to the influence of his past good deeds, he attained supreme dispassion and received the great initiation from the mouth of Jinendra. **331**

And the beautiful maidservants are obtained as a result of good deeds. **315-318**

Page #380:
---------------------------
The Padma Purana states:

Those who await the time of the great ascetics, they enjoy pleasures like the Harishena Chakravarti. (332)

Harishena, having waited for the time of the ascetics, accumulated great merit, and thus attained the highest Lakshmi. (333)

Those who, with pure vision, are inspired by the thought of meditation, approach the ascetic and become one-minded, (334)

They spend their time in unity and attain liberation. They are born in celestial vehicles, adorned with the brilliance of jewels. (335)

With pure hearts, they dwell in those celestial vehicles, illuminated by eternal light, and play amidst the apsaras for a long time. (336)

Those who wear fine garlands, have beautiful bracelets on their wrists, wear a belt around their waist, a crown on their head, and are attended by umbrellas and fly whisks, are such gods, due to the influence of the one-minded vow. (337)

Those who are attached to the highest vows and observe the Anuvrata, knowing the impermanence of the body, and whose hearts are peaceful, (338)

They fast on the eighth and fourteenth days with a pure mind, and thus bind themselves to the long life of Trivishtapa. (339)

Some of them are born in the heavens of Saudharma, etc., some attain the position of Indra, and others, due to their purity, attain liberation. (340)

Those who are constantly humble, endowed with good qualities and character, and whose minds are always engaged in austerity, undoubtedly go to heaven. (341)

There, they enjoy pleasures according to their desires, become human, enjoy great kingdoms, and embrace the Jain faith. (342)

Having embraced the Jain faith, they gradually adopt the character of the ascetics, and through its influence, attain the abode of the liberated, free from all karma. (343)

Whoever, with mind, speech, and body, praises and bows to the Jinas in the three periods of time, (344)

Page #381:
---------------------------
## Chapter Fourteen

**331** Adorned with thirty-three qualities, fragrant with good character, he enjoys pleasures that conquer all senses in the abode of the gods. **345**

**346** After dwelling for a while in the two auspicious paths of humans and gods, he departs for the supreme abode, free from all karmas.

**347** For, the objects of the five senses have been practiced for a long time by all beings, and thus, blinded by them, they are unable to renounce them. **347**

**348** Here is a great wonder: even after seeing those objects as poisonous, the best of men still practice the karma that leads to liberation. **348**

**349** Even a single renunciation, made by a being with right faith, while wandering in the world, becomes the seed of liberation. **349**

**350** Those who have no rules at all are animals, or like broken pots without ropes (i.e., devoid of virtues like vows and conduct). **350**

**351** A being who is rich in virtues and vows, and who follows the rules, should be free from carelessness if he desires to cross the ocean of existence. **351**

**352** Those humans who are poor in intellect and do not abandon evil deeds wander in the wilderness of existence like the blind for a long time. **352**

**353** Then, those who were present there, whether animals, humans, or gods, attained supreme joy from the contact of the rays of the words of the infinite-powered Kevali, like the moon. **353**

**354** Some attained right faith, some became followers of the minor vows, and some became strong upholders of the great vows. **354**

**355** Then, the Muni named Dharma-ratha spoke to Ravana, saying, "O worthy one, take some rules according to your ability." **355**

**356** "This Muni is an island of Dharma-gems, so take at least one gem of rules from him." **356**

**357** "Why are you sitting here burdened with worry? For the great ones, renunciation is not a cause of sorrow in their minds." **357**

**358** "Just as the mind of a man who enters the island of gems wanders, 'Should I take this or that?' so too, his mind is agitated in this island of conduct." **358**

Page #382:
---------------------------
##  Translation:

332
In the Padma Purana, his mind was overwhelmed with anxiety. The one who was attached to pleasures was filled with restlessness. ||359||
My food is naturally pure, fragrant, delicious, substantial, and free from the contact of flesh and other impurities. ||360||
I am not capable of observing even one of the vows of householders, such as refraining from killing large animals, etc. What to speak of other vows? ||361||
My mind, like a maddened elephant, runs after all things. I am not able to control it with my own will, like a hand. ||362||
One who desires to observe the vow of liberation wants to drink the flame of fire, bind the wind in cloth, and lift Mount Meru. ||363||
Even though I am a valiant hero, I am not capable of observing the vow of austerity. How wonderful it is that the best of men observe this austerity! ||364||
Should I adopt this rule: "Even if a woman is beautiful, I will not force myself upon her if she does not desire me?" ||365||
Or, how can such strength be in me, a lowly person? I am not even capable of controlling my own mind. ||366||
Or, is there no woman in the three worlds who, upon seeing me, would not be overcome with desire and restlessness? ||367||
How can a man, who is worthy of honor and virtue, find contentment in the body of a woman who is polluted by the touch of another man, who has lips marked by the wounds of another man's teeth, who is naturally foul-smelling, and who is a mass of impurities? ||368-369||
Having considered this, Ravana first bowed down to the Kevali of infinite power with reverence. Then, in the presence of the gods and demons, he declared clearly: ||370||
"O Lord! I have made this firm vow: I will not take a woman who does not desire me." ||371||
Bhanukarna (Kumbhakarna), who was listening to all this and whose mind was as steady as Mount Meru, also adopted this vow, taking refuge in the four refuges. ||372||
The man who had entered the city was wandering around in extreme anxiety, thinking, "Should I take this vow or that vow?" ||358||
Then, a heavy anxiety arose in the mind of Ravana, whose mind was always attached to pleasures and who was therefore filled with restlessness. ||359||

Page #383:
---------------------------
The Fourteenth Chapter
333
I will rise early every day and perform the daily rituals. I will praise and worship the Jinas with abhisheka. ||373|| I will not eat until I have performed the rituals for the Nirgrantha gurus. ||374|| I will prostrate to the Muni with my knees touching the ground, showing him respect. I will also take on other great vows. ||375|| Then the gods, the celestial beings, and the devotees, with their eyes wide open, bowed to the Muni and went to their respective abodes. ||376|| Ravana, with his great strength, flew up into the sky, imitating the play of Indra, and went towards Lanka. ||377|| Ravana, who had been worshipped by a group of beautiful women, entered his city, adorned with clothes and other ornaments. ||378|| Entering his dwelling, which was adorned with all kinds of splendor, he stayed there, like the unclothed god in the deep cave of Mount Meru. ||379||
When the karmas of embodied beings become pacified, they attain liberation. Then they receive the supreme teachings from the mouth of their guru. ||380|| Knowing this, O awakened and energetic beings, you should always be eager to listen to the Jina Dharma. For those who listen to the Dharma with humility, they attain vast knowledge like the sun. ||381||
Thus ends the fourteenth chapter of the Padmacharita, known as the Arsha, narrated by the Acharya Ravishena, which describes the Dharma teachings given by the Kevali Anantbala. ||14||
1. Worship. 2. Nirgrantha gurus. 3. Like the unclothed god. 4. Related to Mount Meru.

Page #384:
---------------------------
## The Fifteenth Chapter

The Muni (sage) Gautama, Hanumaan, and Vibhishana, with their minds firmly set, took the vows of householders. ||1||

The wise do not praise the stability of Mount Sumeru as much as they praise the unwavering character and right vision of Hanumaan. ||2||

Thus, when Gautama praised Hanumaan with words of auspiciousness, the king Shrenik, his body trembling with excitement, said: ||3||

"O Lord of the assembly! Who is Hanumaan? What are his special qualities? Where and from whom did he originate? O Lord, I wish to know his true character." ||4||

Then, the assembly leader, whose heart was filled with joy at the mention of the virtuous, spoke in a voice that brought delight: ||5||

"O King! In the southern range of the Vijaya mountain, after crossing ten yojanas, lies a beautiful city called Aditya-pura. There, the king was named Prahlad and his queen was Ketumati." ||6-7||

"From them was born a son named Pavana-Gati, whose broad chest was made the dwelling place of Lakshmi." ||8||

"Seeing him in the fullness of youth, his father, fearing the loss of his lineage, was worried about his marriage." ||9||

"O King! Let this story rest for now. Hold another story in your heart, so that the discussion of Pavana-Gati's marriage can continue." ||10||

"At the end of this Bharat-kshetra, near the ocean, in the southeast direction, lies a mountain called Danta." ||11||

"It is adorned with towering, shining peaks, covered with various trees and herbs, and its vast shores are filled with excellent waterfalls." ||12||

"On this mountain, a Vidhyadhara named Mahendra, possessing the prowess of Indra himself, established a magnificent city." ||13||

Page #385:
---------------------------
## The Panchavarsha Parva (Chapter 335)

From that point onwards, the mountain was called Mahendragiri and the city was known as Mahendranagara. ||14||

King Mahendra, overcome with joy, had a hundred virtuous sons born to his queen, starting with Aridam. ||15||

Their younger sister, known as Anjanasundari, was born. She seemed to be the embodiment of beauty from all three worlds, as if her form was created from the collective beauty of all the women in the universe. ||16||

Her complexion was as beautiful as a blue lotus, her hands were adorned with graceful palms, her feet resembled the inner part of a lotus, and her breasts were like the cheeks of an elephant. ||17||

Her waist was slender, her hips were full, her legs were well-proportioned with beautiful knees, and her body was adorned with many auspicious marks. Her arms were as soft as the garland of a blooming jasmine. ||18||

Her eyes, reaching up to her ears, were adorned with captivating pupils, and they seemed like the far-reaching arrows of Kamadeva (the god of love). ||19||

She was knowledgeable in the arts of Gandharvas and others, and she seemed like Saraswati herself. She was also endowed with virtues and resembled Lakshmi in her beauty. ||20||

Once, she was playing with a ball, moving around in circles, when her father saw her. He noticed that her body was adorned with the beauty of youth. Just as King Akampan, who was devoted to virtue, was deeply distressed about finding a suitable husband for his daughter Sulochana, so too was King Mahendra worried about finding a suitable husband for his daughter. This is natural, as the sorrow of a daughter is a source of great anxiety for proud men. ||21-23||

A father is always worried about his daughter: will she find a good husband? Will he be able to make her happy for a long time? Will she remain free from faults? Indeed, a daughter is a great source of worry for a man. ||24||

Then, King Mahendra, adorned with the ornament of knowledge, called all his friends, who were also adorned with knowledge, and went to a secluded house to decide on a suitable husband for his daughter. ||25||

There, he addressed his ministers, saying, "Oh ministers! You are all knowledgeable and wise. Therefore, tell me who would be a suitable husband for my daughter." ||26||

Page #386:
---------------------------
One of the ministers, the counselor, spoke up and said, "My firm opinion is that this maiden should be given to Ravana, the lord of the Rakshasas, the ruler of the Bharata land." ||27|| "By obtaining Ravana as a relative, the lord of all the Vidyadharas, your influence will spread throughout the earth, even to the ends of the oceans." ||28|| "Or, O King, if you wish, give her to Indrajit or Meghnad, the younger sons of Ravana. Even by giving her to them, Ravana will be a relative." ||29|| "Or, if this is not to your liking, then let the maiden choose her own husband, that is, hold a Swayamvara. By doing so, you will not create any enemies." ||30|| Having said this, the minister of the Amarsagar remained silent. Then, a wise minister named Sumati spoke clearly. ||31|| He said, "Ravana has many wives, and he is very arrogant. Even if he gets her, he will not develop any affection for us." ||32|| "Although this supremely powerful and pleasure-seeking Ravana has the form of a sixteen-year-old boy, his age is much greater." ||33|| "Therefore, I do not think it is appropriate to give him the maiden. On the other hand, if you give the maiden to Meghnad, Indrajit will be angry, and if you give her to Indrajit, Meghnad will be angry. Therefore, neither of these suitors is suitable." ||34|| "It is said that there was a great war between the sons of King Srishena over a courtesan, which caused great sorrow to their father. It is true, for what cannot happen because of a woman?" ||35|| Then, a minister named Taradharayana, whose heart was filled with good intentions, approved of the previous minister's words and spoke as follows. ||36|| He said, "To the south of the Vijayadhip mountain range, there is a city called Kanakpur. There lives King Hiranyabha, whose queen's name is Sumana." ||37|| "They had a son named Saudamini, who was very handsome, with great fame, brilliance, and age." ||38|| "He is a master of all knowledge and arts, a festival for the eyes of the people, unparalleled in his qualities, and his actions are pleasing to all." ||39||

Page #387:
---------------------------
The fifteenth chapter

All the celestial beings and vidyadharas, even united, could not conquer him by any means. It seems as if he was created by gathering the power of the three worlds. ||40|| If you agree, let this maiden be given to him, so that a union of worthy couples may be produced for a long time. ||41||

Then the minister named Sandehaparaga, shaking his head and closing his eyes for a long time, spoke the following words. ||42|| He said, "This one is a future great being, and he constantly thinks, 'Where did my ancestors go?' So it seems that knowing the nature of the world, he will attain supreme detachment." ||43||

This young man, whose soul is unattached to worldly objects, will abandon the householder's state at the age of eighteen, breaking the great illusion of enjoyment. ||44||

He, with a great mind, will abandon both external and internal attachments, and attaining perfect knowledge, will attain Nirvana. ||45||

Just as the night becomes devoid of beauty when it is devoid of the moon, which illuminates the world, so this maiden will become devoid of beauty when she is separated from him. ||46||

Therefore, listen! There is a city called Aditya-pura, beautiful like Indra's city, shining like the sun with jewels. ||47||

In it lives a king named Prahlada, who is full of enjoyments and appears like the moon among the vidyadharas. Prahlada's queen is Ketumati, who is adorned like the banner of Kamadeva due to her beauty. ||48||

They have a son named Pavananjay, who is very powerful, handsome, an ocean of virtues, and adorned with ornaments like the eyes. ||49||

His very tall body is filled with many auspicious signs. He is a home of arts, a hero, and free from evil deeds. ||50||

He is enshrined in the hearts of all people, and even in a hundred years, his entire collection of virtues cannot be described. ||51||

Or, the knowledge that is imparted through words remains unclear. Therefore, go and show this one, who has the radiance of a god. ||52||

Page #388:
---------------------------
Here is the English translation of the provided text, while maintaining the Sanskrit words:

---

338  
In the Pappapurana, thereafter, having reached the paths of the ears through the qualities of the Kaitan Matā, all were filled with supreme joy, revealing inward delight. 53. Having heard this news, even the maiden blossomed with delight, like the kumudini (water lily) upon merely seeing the rays of the moon. 54. Meanwhile, at that very moment, the time of the spring season arrived, and the cold season was energized to capture the beauty of the women's lotus-like faces. 55. The Kamalini (lotus) bloomed, and new clusters of lotuses, having long anticipated, began to mix with the gathering of bumblebees. 56. The dense foliage, flowers, and sprouts were produced abundantly, seemingly vibrating with the embrace of the goddess of spring. 57. The honey-drenched blooms created a melody that pierced the hearts of people, akin to the arrows of Kamadeva (the god of love). 58. The sweet calls of the cuckoos, which disrupt the pride of women, began to evoke a sense of agitation in the people, as if the spring itself were engaged in conversation. 59. The lips of the women, previously affixed with pain from their husbands' bites, now experienced a refreshing clarity after a long time. 60. A heavy affection began to manifest among the beings of the world, apparent through their altruistic deeds. 61. The wandering bumblebee, with the wind of its wings, began to relieve a tired bumblebee from its exertions. 62. At that time, a buck was uprooting tender grass for the doe, which brought her delight akin to receiving nectar. 63. The elephant was scratching itself for the comfort of the female elephant. In this act, its mouth's foliage fell and the female elephant's eyes closed with pleasure. 64. The vine-like women, with clusters of breasts leaning down and hands like leaves swaying, embraced the tree-like men with the bees perched upon their eyes. 65. 

From the southern direction emerged the Malaya (a fragrant wind). 

1. This is Kaitan Matā.  
2. The qualities of Kaitan Matā.  
3. Bumblebee.  
4. Of the arrows of love.  
5. Manifesting beauty.  
6. Emerging.  
7. As the buck scratches.  
8. The mouth fell.  
9. The comfort of the female elephant.  
10. They embraced equally.  
11. Emerging from the mouth.  

---

Page #389:
---------------------------
## Panchadarsha Parva
### 339

**67.** The saffron-colored flowers, trembling due to the wind, were falling down. The travelers saw them as the locks of Madhusinha.

**68.** The saffron of the Ankola tree, shining brightly, was terrifying to the women, like the fangs of the spring lion or the goad of the elephant of pride.

**69.** The dense network of Ketaki flowers, buzzing with bees, seemed to be spread by spring to attract the hearts of the separated women.

**70.** The Asoka tree, adorned with buds, was swaying with its new leaves. It seemed like a mass of love, ignited by the abundance of beauty.

**71.** The dense Kinshuka trees, shining brightly in the forests, seemed like the flames of sorrow that remained in the hearts of the separated women.

**72.** Spring, with its pollen born from flowers, spread across the entire horizon, as if celebrating a grand festival with fragrant powder.

**73.** When lovers, bound by the chains of love, cannot bear even a moment's separation, how can they endure being separated by distance?

**74.** Inspired by devotion to the Jinas and filled with great joy, the gods, led by Nandishvara, set out to the island of Nandishvara on the eighth day of the Phalguna month.

**75.** At that time, the king of the Vidyadharas, accompanied by his servants carrying offerings, went to Mount Kailasa.

**76.** The mountain was highly revered because of the liberation of Lord Rishabhadeva. Filled with devotion, King Mahendra, along with his family, also went there.

**77.** After offering worship, praise, and salutations to the Jina with devotion, the glorious King Mahendra sat comfortably on the golden stone platform.

**78.** At that time, King Prahlada also went to Mount Kailasa to worship the Jina. After completing his worship, he wandered around and saw King Mahendra.

**79.** Seeing his son, whose eyes were blooming and whose mind was filled with joy, King Mahendra, with great affection, welcomed him with open arms.

**80.** King Mahendra, rising up with joy, embraced Prahlada, the cause of his happiness, with a warm embrace.

Page #390:
---------------------------
340
In the Padma Purana, the two kings, Mahendra and Prahlad, sat down comfortably on a beautiful stone platform and inquired about each other's well-being. ||8||
Mahendra then said, "My dear friend, how can I be well when my mind is constantly troubled by the thought of finding a suitable match for my daughter?" ||82||
"I have a daughter who is ready for marriage, but I am constantly wondering who I should give her to. My mind is restless." ||83||
"Ravana has many wives, and his sons, Indrajit and Meghanada, would be angry if I gave my daughter to one of them. Therefore, I am not interested in them." ||84||
"In the city of Hemapura, there is a son of King Kanakadyuti named Vidyutprabha. He will attain Nirvana in a few days." ||85||
"This news has been spread by a knowledgeable sage, and it is known throughout the world. I have also heard about it." ||86||
"Therefore, after consulting with my council of ministers, I have decided that your son, Pavananjay, should be the one to marry my daughter." ||87||
"O Prahlad, you have come here and fulfilled my desire. I am overjoyed to see you." ||88||
Prahlad, who was delighted to have his wish fulfilled, said, "My dear friend, I am also concerned about finding a suitable bride for my son." ||89||
"Your words have given me a sense of peace that cannot be expressed in words." ||90||
Then, the fathers of Anjana and Pavananjay expressed their desire to hold their wedding ceremony on the beautiful banks of the Manasa mountain. ||91||
Therefore, their armies, which were equipped with tents and filled with the sounds of elephants, horses, and foot soldiers, were stationed there. ||92||
The astrologers, who knew the movements of all the celestial bodies, declared that the wedding would be auspicious after three days. ||93||
Pavananjay had heard from his people that Anjana was a beautiful woman, and he could not bear to wait three days to see her. ||94||
Mahendra immediately got up and welcomed Prahlad with a warm embrace, expressing his joy. ||80||
After that, both kings sat down comfortably on a beautiful stone platform and inquired about each other's well-being. ||81||

Page #391:
---------------------------
### Translation to English

**15** 
This wind-born (pavananjaya), who is tormented by the ten passions arising from lust, has become filled up like a warrior in battle fully struck by arrows. 

**96** 
In the first passion, thoughts concerning lust arise, leading to a desire for enjoyment. In the second passion, there is a craving to see the external form.

**97** 
In the third passion, there is a slow, deep, and hot exhalation. In the fourth, a fever arises that feels like the burning of sandalwood. 

**18** 
In the fifth passion, the body begins to turn on the bed of flowers. In the sixth passion, he begins to regard various kinds of delicious food as if they were poison.

**99** 
In the seventh, being absorbed in conversations regarding the beloved, he engages in nonsensical talk. In the eighth, madness manifests, causing him to sing and dance.

**100** 
In the ninth passion, this wind-born becomes faint due to the serpent of desire, and in the tenth, he begins to feel the weight of suffering that is experienced by oneself.

**101** 
Gautama says that although this wind-born was endowed with discernment, at that moment, his character became indulgent; thus, he deserves to be condemned for such wicked desire.

**341** 
From the aforementioned passions, the patience of the wind-born broke down. His face became restless due to the continuous exhalation, and he began to cover it with his palms.

**102** 
He constantly kept his cheeks, filled with sweat, in his palms, which increased their redness. In the pursuit of coolness, he would sit on the leafy seats while dampening them with long, hot exhalations.

**103** 
Enduring unbearable passions caused by deep strikes of arrows, this wind-born frequently yawned, trembled again and again, and stretched repeatedly.

**104** 
By constantly focusing on the woman, his sense faculties became futile, meaning none of his senses acted properly, and he could find no patience even in the best of places—he remained restless.

**105** 
He became empty-hearted, having abandoned all actions. For a moment, he might have held onto shame but then quickly discarded it.

**106** 
All of his limbs weakened, and he abandoned all embellishments.

---

The translation above incorporates the Sanskrit phrases and maintains the original structure and meaning as accurately as possible while translating to English.

Page #392:
---------------------------
342
Padma Purana
I
When will I see my beloved seated in my lap, touching her lotus-like body and engaging in conversation? || 108 ||
Hearing this, my state has become so painful. What will happen when I see her in person? I will surely die. || 109 ||
Oh, what a wonder! My dear friend, though beautiful, is the cause of my suffering. || 110 ||
Oh, good woman, why are you ready to burn the very heart where you reside with the fire of sorrow? || 111 ||
Women are naturally soft-hearted, but this seems contrary in your case, as you are causing me pain. || 112 ||
Oh, Cupid, even without a body, you cause me so much pain. If you had a body, it would be even more unbearable. || 113 ||
Though there is no wound on my body, the pain is immense. I am constantly moving around, even though I am sitting in one place. || 114 ||
These three days will not pass peacefully for me if I do not make her the object of my sight. || 115 ||
Therefore, what means can I find to see her, by which my mind will attain peace? || 116 ||
Or, in all the tasks to be done in this world, there is no other cause to be seen except my best friend. || 117 ||
Thinking thus, Pavananjay spoke to his friend Prahasit, who was sitting beside him like a shadow, as if another body born from his own actions, and who was a confidant in all matters. || 118-119 ||
He said, "Friend, you know my intentions, so what can I say? My words will only cause you pain." || 120 ||
Oh, friend, to whom can I express this sorrow, having abandoned you, who has witnessed all the activities of the three worlds? || 121 ||
Pavananjay was constantly thinking about the woman, and his family was very worried about his condition. || 107 ||
He used to think, "When will I see my beloved seated in my lap, touching her lotus-like body and engaging in conversation?" || 108 ||
"Hearing this, my state has become so painful. What will happen when I see her in person? I will surely die." || 109 ||
"Oh, what a wonder! My dear friend, though beautiful, is the cause of my suffering." || 110 ||
"Oh, good woman, why are you ready to burn the very heart where you reside with the fire of sorrow?" || 111 ||
"Women are naturally soft-hearted, but this seems contrary in your case, as you are causing me pain." || 112 ||
"Oh, Cupid, even without a body, you cause me so much pain. If you had a body, it would be even more unbearable." || 113 ||
"Though there is no wound on my body, the pain is immense. I am constantly moving around, even though I am sitting in one place." || 114 ||
"These three days will not pass peacefully for me if I do not make her the object of my sight." || 115 ||
"Therefore, what means can I find to see her, by which my mind will attain peace?" || 116 ||
"Or, in all the tasks to be done in this world, there is no other cause to be seen except my best friend." || 117 ||
Thinking thus, Pavananjay spoke to his friend Prahasit, who was sitting beside him like a shadow, as if another body born from his own actions, and who was a confidant in all matters. || 118-119 ||
He said, "Friend, you know my intentions, so what can I say? My words will only cause you pain." || 120 ||
"Oh, friend, to whom can I express this sorrow, having abandoned you, who has witnessed all the activities of the three worlds?" || 121 ||
1. Touching lotus-like body.
2. I will not see, I will die.
3. Residence is made.
4. In whom you are pleased.
5. Burn.
6. You are capable.
7. It is not done here.
8. You wander.

Page #393:
---------------------------
"Fifteen, the family member, is dear to the king as a student is to his teacher. A wife is dear to her husband, a patient to his physician, a child to his mother. In the same way, a wise man is dear to his friend. Therefore, I tell you this.

Since I heard about the flawless beauty, the daughter of King Mahendra, I have been overwhelmed by the arrows of Kamadeva.

I cannot bear to spend even three days without seeing that beautiful Priya, who steals my heart.

Therefore, make an effort so that I can see her. For by seeing her, I will be healthy, and by my being healthy, you will also be healthy.

Indeed, life is the most desired thing for all beings, for it is only with life that other things are possible.

Thus, the friend, laughing and joking, as if his heart was fulfilled, quickly said:

"My friend, what is the point of saying much when the time for action has passed? Tell me, what should I be done? There is no difference between us.

As long as this conversation continues between these two good-hearted friends, the sun has set, as if to do them a favor.

The sun, which was red like the passion of Prahlada, desired the spread of darkness and was a lover of good deeds, was driven by the light of the evening.

Seeing the sorrow of the sun, who was without his beloved, the evening, filled with compassion, followed her husband, the sun.

Then, the east, as if it had lost its husband, the sun, became dark, as if it had been stained by the darkness.

The world seemed to be covered in a blue cloth, or as if the dense pollen of blue collyrium was falling everywhere."

Page #394:
---------------------------
In the Pāpurāṇa, when the appropriate time for the natural task arrived, Pavanajaya, filled with enthusiasm, said to his friend as follows:  
"Oh friend! Arise, show the way, let us go to that place where the heart-stealer resides."  
After saying this, both friends set out for that location. Their minds had already started the journey even before their bodies did, moving like fish in the vast sea resembling the blue sky.  
In a moment, they reached the house of Aṅjanā-sundarī. That house was adorned as magnificently as Mount Sumeru, embellished by the presence of Aṅjanā-sundarī.  
Climbing the seventh compartment of the building, the two friends concealed themselves behind a lattice of pearls and began to observe Aṅjanā-sundarī from there.  
Aṅjanā-sundarī was rendering the lamps burning within the house fruitless by the rays of her full moon-like face, and the colors of the directions were being painted by the light of her white, black, and red eyes.  
She had majestic, elevated, and beautiful breasts which made it seem as if she was holding two pots filled with the essence of love, awaiting her husband’s arrival.  
Her hands and feet, adorned with a red radiance reminiscent of new buds and filled with many auspicious signs, appeared as if they were exuding beauty through beams like nails.  
Her waist was narrow, yet the heavy weight of her breasts rested upon it, leading her to bind herself tightly with ropes resembling three folds, lest she break under the burden.  
Aṅjanā, with her round thighs, resembled the quiver of Kamadeva, or the pillars binding intoxication and desire, or rivers that pour forth beauty.  
Her radiance was akin to a cluster of blue lotuses, adorned with stars resembling pearls, and with the moon-like husband nearby, she appeared like the embodiment of night.  
Thus, gazing at Aṅjanā who could never satiate the beholder, Pavanajaya attained supreme bliss with his unwavering eyes.

Page #395:
---------------------------
The Five Vows Festival

Meanwhile, her dearest friend, Vasantatilaka, spoke to Anjana Sundari, saying, "Oh beautiful princess, you are most fortunate! Your father has given you to the mighty Pavananjay."

"The entire world is filled with his virtues, pure as the rays of the moon, and he disregards the fame of other men's qualities."

"It is a joyous occasion that you, adorned with the brilliance of great jewels, will sit in his lap, like the tide in the ocean, making a beautiful sound."

"Your connection with him will be like a stream of jewels flowing on the banks of a mountain of jewels. Indeed, the joy arising from a praiseworthy relationship is the greatest joy for women."

As her friend Vasantmala was describing Pavananjay's virtues, Anjana was happy in her heart and, out of shyness, lowered her head and scratched her toe with her finger.

Pavananjay, whose eyes were filled with blooming lotuses, was carried away by the current of joy, far, far away.

Then another friend, Mishrakeśī, spoke, her red lips drawn inwards, and the flower in her braid fell down as she shook her head.

"Oh, you have revealed your great ignorance by choosing Pavananjay over Vidutprabha!"

"I have heard many times in the royal palaces that this girl should be given to Vidutprabha, or not.

"Only he who knows the number of drops in the ocean can understand the depth of his pure qualities."

"He is young, gentle, humble, radiant, wise, brave, powerful, a master of knowledge, and the whole world desires to see him."

"If, by good fortune, Vidutprabha were to become this girl's husband, then she would receive the fruit of this birth."

"O Vasantamalika, the difference between Pavananjay and Vidutprabha is known in the world, just as the difference between a cow and an ocean is known."

Page #396:
---------------------------
346
In the Padma Purana, it is said that he will attain the status of a Muni in a few years. His father abandoned him, which does not seem right to me.  ||16|| Even a moment spent with Vidhyut Prabha is a source of happiness, while an eternity spent with a lowly creature is not. ||162||

Upon hearing this, Prahlaadi, inflamed by the fire of anger, trembled and his complexion changed in an instant. ||163||

He bit his lip, drew his sword from its sheath, and his eyes, filled with a crimson glow, enveloped the entire horizon. ||164||

He said to his friend, "Oh, Prahasita! This must be what this girl desires, for this woman is speaking such vile things in her presence." ||165||

"Therefore, watch as I sever the heads of both of them. May Vidhyut Prabha, the beloved of my heart, protect them now." ||166||

Hearing these words, Prahasita, whose forehead was furrowed with anger, replied, "Friend, friend, stop this pointless effort, it is not your place. Your sword is meant for destroying enemies, not women." ||167-168||

"Therefore, see how I will silence this wicked woman with this rod and make her lifeless." ||169||

Seeing Prahasita's immense rage, Pavananjay forgot his own anger, sheathed his sword, ||170||

and his entire body became attuned to its natural state, meaning his anger subsided. Then he spoke to his friend, who was determined to commit a cruel act. ||171||

"My friend, calm down. These women are not worthy of your anger, you who are adorned with victories in countless battles." ||172||

"It is not right for anyone to kill women, let alone for you, who can cleave the skulls of maddened elephants. How could it be right for you?" ||173||

"It is not fitting for men born into noble families and renowned for their virtues to engage in such acts that defile their reputation." ||174||

"Therefore, rise and let us return by the same path. The minds of people are diverse, so it is not appropriate to be angry with them." ||175||

1. Prahlaadimityu -m. | 2. Paravruttam m. | 3. Saayakah m. |

Page #397:
---------------------------
## Chapter Fifteen

Surely, this lightning-bright one must be dear to this girl, for he did not even rebuke her, who was so engrossed in slandering me. ||176||

Then, without anyone knowing, the two friends, who had arrived, went out of the window and returned to their own camp. ||177||

Then, with a heart full of peace, Pavana-jaya, who had attained supreme dispassion, began to think: ||178||

One should avoid from afar the river of a woman attached to another man, which is filled with whirlpools of doubt and crocodiles of evil intentions. ||179||

This woman, who is extremely dense with bad intentions and filled with a swarm of sensual desires, is like a vast forest; the wise should never serve her. ||180||

What is the benefit of serving a king who associates with his enemies? Similarly, how can one find happiness with a weak friend and a woman attached to another man? ||181||

Wise men abandon their beloved friends, relatives, sons, and wives when they are disrespected, but those who are petty perish by drowning in the water of defeat. ||182||

A physician who is addicted to alcohol, an elephant without training, an enemy without cause, a cruel person who follows a violent religion, a group of fools, a country without morals, a cruel king, a child, and a woman attached to another man - a wise man should avoid all of these from afar. ||183-184||

Thinking thus, Pavana-jaya's night, like the night of the girl's invitation, came to an end, and the instruments that awaken the world began to play. ||185||

Then, the eastern direction was covered with the redness of the evening, as if it were continuously covered by the dispassion abandoned by Pavana-jaya. ||186||

And the sun, which appeared red due to anger, rose, holding a trembling orb, the cause of the world's activities. ||187||

Then, Pavana-jaya, who was completely indifferent to women, holding a body made sluggish by dispassion, spoke to his laughing friend: ||188||

"Friend, even if I am near her, it is not appropriate for me to stay here. Therefore, listen, let there be no contact with the wind that is attached to her." ||189||

Page #398:
---------------------------
348
In the Padma Purana, "Rise, let us go to our city, it is not right to linger here. Let the army be alerted by the sound of the conch shell that signals departure." ||190||  Upon hearing this, the army, which was like a churning sea, stirred and quickly prepared for departure, having completed all the necessary tasks. ||191|| Then, a great sound arose from the chariots, horses, elephants, and foot soldiers, along with the sound of the conch and other instruments, and it reached the girl's ears. ||192||  The sound, which signaled departure, filled her with immense sorrow, as if she were pierced by a nail driven in with the force of a hammer blow. ||193|| She thought, "Alas, what a misfortune! Fate has given me a treasure and then taken it away. What shall I do? How will this turn out?" ||194||  The desires I had, to play in the lap of this great man, have all been turned upside down, my hopes dashed. ||195||  Knowing that this is happening, somehow this enemy, my friend, has come to hate me. ||196||  Curse this friendless, sinful, cruel-tongued woman, who has brought this state upon my beloved. ||197||  My father, if he could bring my beloved back, would do me a great favor. Perhaps he could even bring him back to his senses. ||198||  If my beloved truly abandons me, I will give up food and die. ||199||  Thinking this, she fainted and fell to the ground like a vine uprooted from its roots. ||200||  Then, saying, "What is this?" and overcome with anxiety, her two friends revived her with cold water. ||201||  They asked her, with great effort, the reason for her fainting, but she, with her limbs slack and eyes fixed, could not speak a word. ||202||  Then, the people in the army of Vayu Kumar (Pavananjay) were bewildered by this unexpected departure and anxiously wondered why he was leaving without completing his desired task. ||203||  "Listen, and rise! Let us go to our city, it is not right to linger here. Let the army be alerted by the sound of the conch shell that signals departure." ||189-190||

Page #399:
---------------------------
## The Fifteenth Chapter

349

Why is he eager to go? What has caused his anger? Or who has instigated him otherwise? ||20||

He has all the preparations for taking the girl, so why has he become indifferent? ||205||

Some laughed and said, "His name 'Pavananjay' is indeed meaningful, since he has conquered the wind with his speed." ||206||

Others said, "He still doesn't know the essence of a woman. That's why he's eager to leave this girl." ||207||

"If he knew the joy of true love, he would be bound by its ties, like a wild elephant." ||208||

Thus, surrounded by hundreds of courtiers engaged in private conversations, Pavananjay, mounted on his swift chariot, was ready to depart. ||209||

Then, the girl's father, learning of his departure, came there in a state of panic, accompanied by all his relatives. ||210||

He, along with Prahlad, said to the prince, "O noble one, why are you undertaking this journey, which is the cause of sorrow? What has someone said to you? O noble man, who is not dear to you? O wise one, no one even considers what is not pleasing to you." ||211-212||

"Even if there are faults, it is right for you to heed my words and your father's. And this act is free from all faults, so how can it be wrong?" ||213||

"Therefore, O wise one, return and fulfill our desires. For men like you, a father's command should be a cause of joy." ||214||

Saying this, the father-in-law and father, moved by love for their son, respectfully took the hand of the bowed hero, Pavananjay. ||215||

Then, unable to bear the weight of their respect, Pavananjay turned back and began to ponder the reasons for the anger and sorrow that caused him to inflict pain on the girl. ||216||

Now, I will marry this girl, and through this union, I will experience the sorrow born of non-attachment. This way, she will not find happiness with any other man. ||217||

Page #400:
---------------------------
350
The Padmapurana states that the friend understood the meaning and spoke accordingly. This was also understood by the wise Pavananjay. ||21|| Hearing that her beloved had returned, the girl was overjoyed. Her entire body trembled with excitement. ||219|| Then, when the time was right, the relatives performed the auspicious marriage ceremony of the two, fulfilling everyone's desires. ||220|| Although the girl's hand was as cool as the touch of an Ashoka leaf, it felt like a burning ember to the detached Pavananjay. ||221||  His gaze fell upon Anjana's body, who was like lightning, involuntarily, but he could not stay there even for a moment. ||222|| Knowing that Pavananjay did not understand the girl's feelings, Agni, as if in the guise of a crackling spark, laughed with a sound. ||223|| Then, with the proper rituals, the marriage of the two was performed, and all the relatives were filled with joy and made sounds of celebration. ||224|| In that forest, adorned with various trees and vines, and blooming with fruits and flowers, they celebrated with great splendor for a month. ||225|| After exchanging greetings and offering appropriate respects to each other, they all went their separate ways, feeling a moment of sadness due to separation. ||226||
The Aryachhandas says: Those who do not know the true nature of things, perform sacrifices for others, but they are ashamed. The root cause of this is the sun of karma, which brings suffering. ||227|| Thus ends the fifteenth chapter of the Padmapurana, known as the Anjanasundari Vivah, narrated by the sage Ravishena, as told by the Acharya. ||15||
1.  "Teneti" is spoken by M.
2.  "Prarabdham" is the reading in M., J., and "Praduhtam" is the reading in M., J.
3.  "Praaptam sarvasamihitam" is the reading in Kh.
4.  "Vidyuti" is the reading in K., Kh., J., and M.

Page #401:
---------------------------
## The Sixteenth Chapter

Then, due to the lack of conversation and even a glance from him, she experienced immense sorrow, her mind unaware of the reason. ||1|| Even at night, she couldn't find sleep, her eyes wide open, her breasts constantly stained with tears. ||2|| She even greeted the wind, bearing the same name as her beloved, her ears eagerly listening for his name. ||3|| She kept his image, as she had seen him at the altar, in her mind, becoming motionless for moments, her eyes fixed. ||4|| Wishing to see him outside, she would wipe her eyes, but when she couldn't see him, she would again be filled with sorrow. ||5|| Having seen his form only once, she struggled to draw his image, her hand trembling, causing the pen to fall. ||6|| She moved her face with difficulty, her body so frail that her ornaments fell loose, making a clinking sound. ||7|| Her long, hot breaths burned her hands and cheeks, and even the weight of her thin garment caused her discomfort. ||8|| She severely criticized herself, constantly remembering her parents, her heart empty, becoming motionless for moments. ||9|| With her throat choked with tears, she would lament her fate, her words filled with sorrow. ||10|| She felt a burning sensation even from the rays of the moon, and even within the palace, she would faint repeatedly. ||11||

Page #402:
---------------------------
352
Padmapurana, O Lord, how are your beautiful limbs so pleasing to me? Why do they cause such great pain in my heart? ||12||
Indeed, Lord, I have committed no offense against you. Why are you so angry with me without any reason? ||13||
Be pleased, I am your devotee, please grant me peace of mind. I offer you this prayer with my hands joined in supplication. ||14||
Just as the sky without the sun, the night without the moon, and knowledge without virtues have no beauty, so too, I have no beauty without you. ||15||
Thus, she, dwelling in her mind, reproached her husband, shedding tears as thick as pearls. ||16||
Even on a bed of soft flowers, she felt sorrow, and with great difficulty, she ate food, obeying the commands of her elders. ||17||
She wandered about like a deer on a wheel, constantly spinning, and her hair, devoid of oil and combs, was rough and matted. ||18||
Her body was constantly burning, making her seem like fire. Her continuous tears made her seem like water. Her constant emptiness made her seem like the sky, and her stillness made her seem like the earth. ||19||
Her heart was constantly filled with anxieties, making her seem like the wind, and her hidden consciousness made her seem like the elements. ||20||
She lay on the ground, her limbs spread out, unable to sit up. If she did sit, she was unable to stand, and if she did stand, she was unable to support her body. ||21||
If she ever walked, she did so with her hands resting on the shoulders of her friends. While walking, her hands would constantly slip from their shoulders, and her feet would constantly stumble on the marble floor. ||22||
She looked with great longing at the clever women who were always surrounded by their flattering husbands, and her unwavering gaze was fixed on them. ||23||
She, who had been rejected by her beloved, without any reason, spent many days, even years, in misery. ||24||
She fainted again and again. ||11||
O Lord! Your beautiful limbs are present in my heart, then why are they causing me so much pain? ||12||
O Lord! I have not committed any offense against you, then why are you so angry with me without any reason? ||13||
O Lord! I am your devotee, so be pleased and grant me peace of mind. Look, I am offering you this prayer with my hands joined in supplication. ||14||
Just as the sky without the sun, the night without the moon, and knowledge without virtues have no beauty, so too, I have no beauty without you. ||15||
Thus, she, dwelling in her mind, reproached her husband, shedding tears as thick as pearls. ||16||
She felt sorrow even on a bed of soft flowers, and with great difficulty, she ate food, obeying the commands of her elders. ||17||
She wandered about like a deer on a wheel, constantly spinning, and her hair, devoid of oil and combs, was rough and matted. ||18||
Her body was constantly burning, making her seem like fire. Her continuous tears made her seem like water. Her constant emptiness made her seem like the sky, and her stillness made her seem like the earth. ||19||
Her heart was constantly filled with anxieties, making her seem like the wind, and her hidden consciousness made her seem like the elements. ||20||
She lay on the ground, her limbs spread out, unable to sit up. If she did sit, she was unable to stand, and if she did stand, she was unable to support her body. ||21||
If she ever walked, she did so with her hands resting on the shoulders of her friends. While walking, her hands would constantly slip from their shoulders, and her feet would constantly stumble on the marble floor. ||22||
She looked with great longing at the clever women who were always surrounded by their flattering husbands, and her unwavering gaze was fixed on them. ||23||
She, who had been rejected by her beloved, without any reason, spent many days, even years, in misery. ||24||
She fainted again and again. ||11||

Page #403:
---------------------------
## Sixteen Chapters

353. In this state, her entire family was equally distressed, or even more so, and they were constantly troubled by the question of what to do. ||25|| They pondered whether this had happened without any reason, or if it was the result of ripened karma accumulated from past lives. ||26|| Or perhaps it was the consequence of some obstructing karma acquired in a previous birth, now ready to bear fruit, the result of Vayu Kumar's actions in the past. ||27|| As a result, he, along with this innocent and virtuous woman, is unable to enjoy the supreme pleasures that bring happiness to all the senses. ||28|| Listen, Anjana, who had never experienced even a moment of sorrow in her father's house, is now burdened with this suffering due to the influence of her karma. ||29|| What remedy can we, who are devoid of fortune, find in this situation? This is a matter of karma, beyond our reach, beyond our efforts. ||30|| It would be good if this princess, through the merit we have accumulated, becomes the object of her husband's love. ||31|| Or perhaps we have no merit, not even a speck, and we are submerged in this vast ocean of sorrow, caused by this child. ||32|| When will that auspicious moment arrive when her beloved husband will hold her in his arms and engage in playful conversation with this child? ||33||

Meanwhile, a conflict arose between Varuna, who possessed immense pride and strength, and the powerful Rakshasa, Ravana. ||34|| Ravana sent a messenger to Varuna, who, radiating the supreme brilliance of his master, addressed Varuna, saying: ||35|| "O Varuna, the glorious lord of the Vidyadharas, Ravana, commands you to either pay your respects to me or prepare for battle." ||36|| Varuna, with his naturally steady mind, laughed and said, "Messenger, who is this Ravana, and what does he do?" ||37|| "I am not Indra, nor the powerful Vaishravana, nor Sahasrarashmi, nor the Maruts, nor Yama." ||38|| "This one, adorned with jewels bestowed by the gods, is indeed worthy of respect. Let him come, and I will show him what it means to be rendered speechless." ||39||

Page #404:
---------------------------
354
"Surely, your death is imminent, that's why you speak so clearly," said the messenger. Having said this, he went to Ravana and delivered the message. ||40||
Then, filled with extreme anger, Ravana surrounded the city of Varuna with his army, which was as vast as the ocean. ||41||
He made a vow, "I will defeat this fickle one without the divine gems, or I will face death." ||42||
Rajiva, Paundarika, and the other sons of Varuna were enraged upon hearing of the enemy's arrival. They came out, fully armed, ready for battle. ||43||
Then, a fierce battle ensued between Ravana's army and theirs. The various weapons clashed and shattered, falling to the ground. ||44||
Elephants fought elephants, horses fought horses, chariots fought chariots, and soldiers fought soldiers. The warriors roared, their lips were bitten, and their eyes were red with anger. ||45||
Then, the army of Varuna, which had fought for a long time and had been wounded by the enemy's weapons, turned back. ||46||
Then, Varuna, who was as fierce as the fire of destruction and was moving amidst the cage of weapons, rushed towards the army of demons. ||47||
Seeing Varuna approaching the battlefield with unstoppable speed, Ravana's army, armed with blazing weapons, protected him. ||48||
Then, reassured by Varuna, his sons again engaged in fierce battle, destroying the army of demons and elephants. ||49||
Then, Ravana, whose mind was burning with anger and whose forehead was furrowed, took up his bow. ||50||
While Ravana was preparing for battle, Khara and Dushana, who had been fighting for a long time without any weariness, were captured by a hundred of Varuna's sons. ||51||
Then, Ravana's mind became extremely troubled. He thought, "How can we be victorious in this battle?" ||52||

Page #405:
---------------------------
## Sixteen Chapters
### 355

It would not be fitting for me to harbor thoughts of war at this time. ||52|| If the great battle continues, there is a chance of Kharadushana's death, therefore it is appropriate to maintain peace now. ||53|| Having decided this, Ravana moved away from the forefront of the battle. For the noble do not abandon their sense of duty, nor do they lose their taste for what is right. ||54|| Then, after consulting with his ministers, who were skilled in matters of counsel, he summoned all his vassals, who were stationed in their respective territories, along with their entire armies. He sent messengers quickly, those who had traveled long distances and wore letters on their foreheads. ||55-56|| A man sent by Ravana also arrived at Prahlada's place. He, out of devotion to his master, treated him with due respect. ||57|| He asked, "O Bhadra! Is the lord of the Vidyadharas, Ravana, well?" Then, saying "He is well," with respect, he placed Ravana's letter before Prahlada. ||58|| After that, Prahlada, in a moment of excitement, took the letter himself, placed it on his head, and then had it read aloud, conveying its meaning. ||59|| The letter read: "Greetings! To the king Prahlada, who resides in the city of Aditya Nagar, the righteous judge, the knower of the laws of time and place, and devoted to our love. Ravana, the lord of the Vidyadhara kings, who is stationed near the city of Alankarpur, who is prosperous, the son of Sumali, the moon of the celestial sphere of the Rakshasa lineage, informs you, after inquiring about your well-being, that all the Vidyadhara kings, whose hair has turned yellow due to the radiance of their fingernails, have already come and paid their respects to me. But Varuna, who resides in the city of Patala, being endowed with his own power, is opposing me. He is surrounded by a group of Vidyadharas who inflict pain on the heart, and he lives happily in the middle of the ocean. Due to this animosity, a fierce battle took place, and Kharadushana was captured by his hundred sons." ||60-66||

Page #406:
---------------------------
"In the Padma Purana, there was doubt in the battle, 'He might perish,' so it was decided. The great battle was abandoned, knowing the time was right. [67] Therefore, you must come here to counter this, for men like you never falter in their duty. [68] Having decided this with you, we will act accordingly now. Even the sun performs its duty in conjunction with Arun. [69]

Then, having conveyed the essence of the letter to Vayu, and having consulted with the wise ministers, Prahlad decided to depart without delay. [70] Seeing his father ready to depart, Vayu, kneeling on the ground and joining his hands in salutation, said: [71] "O Lord, it is not right for you to leave while I am here. Fathers embrace their sons, and sons must surely repay the fruit of that embrace. [72] If I do not repay that fruit, I cannot be called a son. Therefore, please be pleased with me by granting me permission to depart." [73]

Then his father said to him, "You are still a child, you have not experienced the sorrow of battle, so stay here happily, I will go." [74]

Then, with his chest as broad as the shore of Mount Meru, Vayu spoke the following powerful words: [75] "Father, the first sign of my strength is that I was born of you. Or, is the spark of fire ever tested to see if it can burn the world?" [76] "My head, purified by the offering of your command, is capable of defeating even Indra, there is no doubt about it." [77]

Having said this, he saluted his father, and then, filled with joy, he rose and performed his ablutions, meals, and other bodily functions. [78]

Then, the elders of the family, with great respect, blessed him, and he, adorned with auspiciousness, bowed to the Siddhas with reverence, radiating supreme brilliance. [79]"

Page #407:
---------------------------
The Sixteenth Chapter
357
With eyes filled with tears, and fearing the destruction of auspiciousness, he was kissed by his parents who were showering blessings. ||8|| He asked after all his relatives, greeted them all with a smile, and, bowing down, honored his devoted followers in their entirety. ||8|| By nature, he raised his right foot first. His right arm kept twitching with joy. ||82|| His eyes fell upon a full pitcher with leaves on its mouth, as he was leaving the palace. He suddenly saw Anjana. ||83|| Anjana was standing leaning against the doorpost, her eyes filled with tears. She was supporting her waist with her arm, but due to weakness, her arm kept slipping down. ||84|| Her lips were very pale, devoid of the redness of betel nut, and she looked like a dirty doll carved into the very pillar. ||85|| 
Then, just as a man quickly averts his gaze from lightning, Pavananjay quickly averted his gaze from Anjana. He was angry and said, ||86|| "O you who look far away! Quickly leave this place. I am not capable of looking at you, like a meteor." ||87|| "Oh, what great audacity you have, being a woman of noble lineage, to stand in front of me even when I don't want you to. You are very shameless." ||88|| Although Pavananjay's words were very harsh, Anjana, being devoted to her husband, listened to them with great attention, just as a thirsty man drinks water that he has received after a long time. ||89|| With her eyes fixed on her husband's feet, and her hands folded, she said. Although she tried to speak clearly, she kept stumbling, becoming silent, or saying something else altogether. ||90|| She said, "O Lord! Even though I am living in this palace, I am abandoned by you. Still, I have been living with great difficulty, finding satisfaction in the mere fact that I am near you." ||91|| "But O Lord! Now that you are going far away, how will I, who am constantly in sorrow, live without the taste of your nectar-like words?" ||92|| "O Lord! While going to a foreign land, you have spoken to your servants with affection, even though they are not deserving. ||93|| 
Salute the supreme Siddha, Pavananjay, with devotion. After bidding farewell to all your relatives, greet your elder brothers, and converse with all your followers with devotion, smiling gently, and leave the house. ||79-81|| By nature, he raised his right foot first. His right arm kept twitching with joy. ||82|| And his eyes fell upon a full pitcher with leaves on its mouth, as he was leaving the palace. He suddenly saw Anjana. ||83|| Anjana was standing leaning against the doorpost, her eyes filled with tears. She was supporting her waist with her arm, but due to weakness, her arm kept slipping down. ||84|| Her lips were very pale, devoid of the redness of betel nut, and she looked like a dirty doll carved into the very pillar. ||85|| 
Then, just as a man quickly averts his gaze from lightning, Pavananjay quickly averted his gaze from Anjana. He was angry and said, ||86|| "O you who look far away! Quickly leave this place. I am not capable of looking at you, like a meteor." ||87|| "Oh, what great audacity you have, being a woman of noble lineage, to stand in front of me even when I don't want you to. You are very shameless." ||88|| Although Pavananjay's words were very harsh, Anjana, being devoted to her husband, listened to them with great attention, just as a thirsty man drinks water that he has received after a long time. ||89|| With her eyes fixed on her husband's feet, and her hands folded, she said. Although she tried to speak clearly, she kept stumbling, becoming silent, or saying something else altogether. ||90|| She said, "O Lord! Even though I am living in this palace, I am abandoned by you. Still, I have been living with great difficulty, finding satisfaction in the mere fact that I am near you." ||91|| "But O Lord! Now that you are going far away, how will I, who am constantly in sorrow, live without the taste of your nectar-like words?" ||92|| "O Lord! While going to a foreign land, you have spoken to your servants with affection, even though they are not deserving. ||93||

Page #408:
---------------------------
358
In the Padma Purana, I, with my heart solely devoted to you, am tormented by the pain of separation from you. How is it that you have not spoken to me, even through another's mouth, O Lord? ||9||
You have abandoned me, my Lord, and in this entire world, there is no other refuge for me, or else death would be my refuge. ||15||
Then, with a constricted face, she said, "Die," and, overcome with grief, she fell to the ground. ||16||
The wind, bearing the highest prosperity, and devoid of compassion, mounted a magnificent elephant and, along with his vassals, set out. ||17||
On the first day, he reached the Manasarovar Lake. Though his vehicles were not weary, he stationed his army on the bank of the lake. ||18||
As his army descended from the sky, it shone brightly, adorned with various vehicles and weapons, like a group of gods. ||19||
The Vidyaadharas, filled with joy, performed all the necessary tasks, such as bathing, eating, etc., for themselves and their vehicles. ||100||
Then, by the power of knowledge, a beautiful palace was quickly constructed, with many sections, and with appropriate length, breadth, and height. On the upper section of the palace, Pavananjay, seated on a magnificent throne, was engaged in conversation with his friend, his joy increasing with tales of war. ||101-102||
Pavananjay, through the windows, was looking at the trees on the bank and the Manasarovar Lake, gently swaying in the soft breeze. ||103||
In the lake, fearsome turtles, fish, crocodiles, proud alligators, and many other aquatic creatures were creating waves. ||104||
The water of the lake, clear like polished crystal, adorned with lotuses and blue lotuses, was further beautified by swans, cranes, herons, and sarasa birds. ||105||
The deep sound of all these birds was captivating both the mind and the ears. And within that sound, the buzzing of bees could be heard. ||106||
Servant people have spoken to you, yet my mind is fixed only on you, and I am constantly pained by your separation. Why have you not spoken to me, even through another's mouth? ||93-94||
O Lord! You have abandoned me, and in this entire world, there is no other refuge for me, or else death would be my refuge. ||25||
Then, Pavananjay, with a constricted face, said, "Die." As soon as he said that, she, overcome with grief, fell to the ground. ||96||
Meanwhile, Pavananjay, bearing the highest prosperity, mounted a magnificent elephant and, along with his vassals, set out. ||97||
On the first day, he reached the Manasarovar Lake. Though his vehicles were not weary, he stationed his army on the bank of the lake. ||98||
As his army descended from the sky, it shone brightly, adorned with various vehicles and weapons, like a group of gods. ||99||
The Vidyaadharas, filled with joy, performed all the necessary tasks, such as bathing, eating, etc., for themselves and their vehicles. ||100||
Then, by the power of knowledge, a beautiful palace was quickly constructed, with many sections, and with appropriate length, breadth, and height. On the upper section of the palace, Pavananjay, seated on a magnificent throne, was engaged in conversation with his friend, his joy increasing with tales of war. ||101-102||
Pavananjay, through the windows, was looking at the trees on the bank and the Manasarovar Lake, gently swaying in the soft breeze. ||103||
In the lake, fearsome turtles, fish, crocodiles, proud alligators, and many other aquatic creatures were creating waves. ||104||
The water of the lake, clear like polished crystal, adorned with lotuses and blue lotuses, was further beautified by swans, cranes, herons, and sarasa birds. ||105||
The deep sound of all these birds was captivating both the mind and the ears. And within that sound, the buzzing of bees could be heard. ||106||

Page #409:
---------------------------
On the shore of the lake, Pavanjaya saw a Cakavi. She was alone and deeply distressed, consumed by the fire of separation. She was making various efforts, her eyes fixed on the setting sun, repeatedly looking into the holes in the lotus leaves. She was flapping her wings with speed, flying up and down, distressed. She was looking at the sweet water with pieces of Mrinala, sorrowful. Seeing her reflection in the water, she called out to her beloved, and when he did not come, she was overcome with grief. Hearing the echoes from various places, she hoped that her beloved was calling out, and she circled around like a wheel, her eyes beautiful. She climbed onto a tree on the shore and looked in all directions. When she did not see her beloved there, she descended with great speed. She was scattering the pollen of the lotuses far and wide with the flapping of her wings. Pavanjaya, moved by compassion, saw her sorrowful state and watched her for a long time.

He thought to himself, "This is a great sorrow that has befallen her. Separated from her beloved, she is burning with the fire of grief." This beautiful lake, cool like the moon and sandalwood, has become like a blazing fire for her, having been separated from her beloved. For a woman separated from her beloved, even a leaf becomes a sword, the rays of the moon become a thunderbolt, and heaven itself becomes hell.

Thinking thus, his mind went to his beloved Anjanasundari. Filled with love, he looked at the places he had served during their marriage. Those places, now before his eyes, became unbearable sources of sorrow, like those who pierce the heart. He thought to himself, "Alas, what a terrible thing! She, abandoned by me, a wicked-minded man, is suffering like this Cakavi." If his friend had spoken harsh words to her at that time, why did I abandon her because of the fault of another?

Page #410:
---------------------------
360
Alas, for fools like me who act without considering the consequences, bringing suffering upon people without reason. ||12|| My heart, a sinner's heart, is truly made of iron, for it has remained so long against my beloved. ||122|| What should I do now, father? I left home after asking him. How can I return now? Alas, I have fallen into great trouble. ||123|| If I go to war, she will surely not survive, and in her absence, I too will be lost. There is no greater suffering than this. ||124|| Or perhaps my supreme friend, the one who unravels all knots of doubt, exists. He is the judge of this auspicious task. ||125|| Therefore, I ask this friend, skilled in all matters, for those who act with deliberation find happiness, not those who act without it. ||126|| While Pavananjay was contemplating this, his cheerful friend saw him distracted. Grieving over his sorrow, he softly asked, ||127|| "My friend, you have set out to destroy your enemy, why then does your face appear so gloomy today?" ||128|| "O virtuous one, cast aside your shame and quickly tell me the reason. Your sadness fills me with great anxiety." ||129|| Then Pavananjay, his courage shattered, spoke with difficulty, having gone far astray. ||130|| "O beautiful one, listen, to whom else can I speak? You are truly the recipient of all my secrets." ||131|| "My friend, this is not something you should tell anyone else, for it brings me great shame." ||132|| In response, the cheerful one said, "Speak without fear, for what you say is like water on hot iron to me." ||133|| Then Pavananjay said, "My friend, listen, I have never loved Anjana. ||134||

Page #411:
---------------------------
## Sixteen Chapters

Even though I am cruel and did not speak to her due to my cruelty, she kept herself alive by constantly shedding tears due to my proximity. ||135||

When I arrived, I saw her condition, and I know now that she will not survive this separation. ||136||

Without any fault of hers, I have disregarded her for twenty-two years, being like a stone in my heart. ||137||

When I arrived, I saw her face, devoid of the beauty that had been lost due to the contact of sorrow. ||138||

When her long, blue lotus-like eyes come to my memory, my heart is pierced like an arrow. ||139||

Therefore, O virtuous one, find a way so that we can meet, and death may not befall either of us. ||140||

Then, the one whose body was still but whose mind was like a restless swing in the contemplation of a solution, spoke with a smile, saying: ||141||

Since you have left after consulting the gurus and wish to conquer the enemy, it is not appropriate for you to return now. ||142||

Moreover, you have never brought Anjana to the gurus before, so bringing her here now would be shameful. ||143||

Therefore, it is best that you go secretly and make her worthy of your sight and the pleasure of conversation. ||144||

Your meeting is the support of her life, so grant her this for a long time, and then return quickly, having calmed your mind. ||145||

Then, being free from worry and carrying the best enthusiasm, you will be able to go and conquer the enemy. This is a sure way. ||146||

Then, saying "Very well," the swift Pavananjay, appointed Mudgara, the commander, to protect the army, and taking garlands, ointments, and other fragrant substances, he went up into the sky, taking the smiling friend with him, under the pretext of worshipping Meru. ||147-148||

Meanwhile, the sun was setting, as if urged by compassion, so that the union of these two might take place in the night. ||149||

Page #412:
---------------------------
362
In the Padma Purana, it is said, "Due to the destruction of the twilight glow, the world is enveloped in darkness, and all objects can only be known by touch." (150)
Pavananjay arrived at the house of Anjanasundari and stayed in the outer courtyard, while Prahasita went inside. (151)
Seeing him suddenly in the dim light of the lamp, Anjanasundari was terrified and exclaimed, "Who is this? Who is this?" (152)
She woke up her sleeping friend, Vasantmala, and the clever woman, upon waking, calmed her fears. (153)
Then, Prahasita, saying, "I am Prahasita," bowed and informed her of Pavananjay's arrival. (154)
Hearing this news, which was like a dream, of her beloved's arrival, she spoke to Prahasita in a choked voice, filled with humility, saying: (155)
"Oh Prahasita, why do you laugh at me, who am devoid of merit and abandoned by my beloved? I am myself the object of ridicule due to my own impure actions." (156)
"Knowing that I am rejected by my beloved, who has not scorned me, the unfortunate and sorrowful one? (157)
"Especially you, with your wicked mind, have encouraged my beloved and brought me to this state of extreme suffering." (158)
"Or perhaps, O noble one, what fault is yours? For the whole world, under the influence of karma, experiences both sorrow and happiness." (159)
Thus, Anjanasundari, shedding tears and intent on self-reproach, was addressed by Prahasita, whose heart was filled with sorrow. (160)
He said, "O auspicious one, do not speak thus. Forgive me, for I am a foolish and sinful being." (161)
"Your evil deeds have surely been destroyed now, for your beloved, drawn by the virtue of love, has come himself." (162)
"Now that he is pleased, what is there that will not bring you happiness? Indeed, what beauty is there in the night when the moon unites with the stars?" (163)
1. Sandhyam. 2. Tapasānvitām. 3. Pragrīvo. 4. Prasannēti.

Page #413:
---------------------------
## Chapter Sixteen

Then, after a moment of silence, Anjanasundari spoke, her words echoing the sentiments expressed by her friend.  || 164 ||

"My dear, it is impossible for a year to be without rain, just as it is impossible for them to come. Or perhaps, this is a time when some auspicious deed of mine has borne fruit, making their arrival possible." || 165 ||

"Very well, if my lord has come, I welcome him. The tree of my past good deeds has finally borne fruit today." || 166 ||

As she spoke, her eyes filled with tears of joy, and her friend, with the same compassion, brought her beloved to her side. || 167 ||

Seeing her beloved, Anjanasundari, whose eyes were as beautiful as those of a frightened deer, was overcome with joy. She tried to rise from her bed, but her legs trembled, and she kept placing her hands on her knees, only to have them slip down again. Her thighs were stiff as pillars, and her whole body shook. || 168 - 169 ||

Seeing this, Pavananjay, with a voice like nectar, said, "My dear, let it be. What is the point of this agitation, which only brings distress?" || 170 ||

Despite his words, Anjanasundari struggled to rise and fold her hands in greeting. Pavananjay, seeing her effort, took her hand and gently led her back to the bed. || 171 ||

Her hand, now damp with sweat, was tingling with excitement, as if it were sprouting new shoots, nourished by the nectar of her husband's touch. || 172 ||

Vasantmala, after bowing to Pavananjay, spoke to him with respect. Then, with a smile, she led him to another beautiful room, where they sat comfortably together. || 173 ||

Pavananjay, however, was ashamed of his earlier disrespect and could not bring himself to ask about her well-being. || 174 ||

Then, with a blush, he said, "My dear, forgive me for the disrespect I showed you, a result of the influence of my karma. " As he spoke, his mind was filled with anxiety. || 175 ||

Anjanasundari, her head bowed, replied in a soft voice, her entire body still. || 176 ||

Page #414:
---------------------------
Here is the translation of the text with the Sanskrit words retained:

---

In the Padmapurana:

364
“O Lord, you have not caused any offense to me at all. Now, as you are creating that most rare affection, it should be understood that I have not been disregarded by you.” (177) “The life I have lived until now is indeed dependent on your memory. Therefore, even the contempt you have shown me has become of great joy for me.” (178) 

Then, saying this, she placed her finger on her chin and lifted her face slightly while looking at Pavananjaya. He said: “O Devi! Forget all offenses, for I bow at your feet. May you attain supreme bliss.” (179) After saying this, Pavananjaya placed his head at the feet of Anjana. Anjana quickly attempted to raise him with her lotus-like hands. (181)

However, Pavananjaya remained in that position and said, “O beloved! I will only lift my head when you tell me that you are pleased.” (182) Then, when Anjana said, “I have forgiven,” Pavananjaya immediately raised his head and embraced her. At that time, her eyes were closing in joy. (183)

Having embraced her, Anjana seemed to merge into her husband’s body as if fearing that there would be no separation again. (184) Pavananjaya released Anjana from the embrace and began to gaze at her with motionless eyes devoid of the usual playful glances. (185)

Then, overwhelmed by love, he kissed Anjana on her feet, hands, navel, breasts, cheeks, forehead, and eyes. (186) Not just once, but repeatedly touching them with his sweaty hands, he kissed the same spots again, as it is essential for lovers to engage in the beloved's service by kissing their faces. (187)

Then, he drank from her lips, which were radiant as a lotus and seemed to exude nectar. (188) 

---

This translation conveys the essence of the original text while retaining important Sanskrit terminology. If you need further elaboration or analysis, feel free to ask!

Page #415:
---------------------------
Here is the translation of the provided text while retaining the original Sanskrit words:

---

**Sixteenth Chapter (षोडशं पर्व)**
365

Then, seeing the broad buttocks (नितम्बफलकं) of Anjana bare of clothing, the heart of the wind-vanquishing (पवनंजय) became disturbed by the speed of desire (कामके वेग) which was akin to the mind’s own nature (मनभूवेगरङ्गितम्)  (॥190॥). 

Thereafter, having been compelled by a wonderful speed, the wind-vanquishing (पवनंजय), taking hold of Anjana, who was soft like a lotus (कमल), held her tightly (॥191॥). 

Then, as the crafty (वैदग्ध्यं) would speak, like Apsara (काम) giving commands and providing lessons akin to increased affection (अनुरागो), the love activity of both couples attained a supreme increase (दम्पत्योर्वृद्धिमुत्तमाम). At that time, the emotions in the minds of both (तत्र हि यो) could not be expressed in words (॥192-193॥).

The supreme beauty (परम सन्दरी) Anjana, elevating (आस्फालयन्) the cup-like breasts (स्तनयोः कुम्भयोरेप) and the buttocks, was mounted by the elephant (महागजम्) of desire (कामदेवरूपी मत्त) (॥194॥). 

“Stop!” “Let go!”, “Hold on!”—in various sounds filled with lively confusion, their love scene appeared like a great war (नानाशब्दसमाकुलम्, युध्दम्) (॥195॥). 

While taking the lower lip (अधरग्रहणे), Anjana, making loud sounds (सी-सी), waved her hand, which appeared as if the sprout of a creeper (लताया इव पल्लवः) was shaking (॥196॥). 

The new nail indents on Anjana’s thighs (जघनस्थलम्) appeared as if blue sapphires (नीलमणिको) had emerged from the earth below (॥197॥). 

Gazing at Anjana’s thighs, the wind-vanquishing (पवनंजय) was not satisfied (तृप्ति), his eyes (नेत्र) fixed unblinkingly upon them (॥198॥). 

With sweet mellifluous sounds, her bangles (चूड़ियों) produced a delightful jingling, which resembled a swarm of bees buzzing (॥199॥). 

The glances and pupils of Anjana’s eyes appeared as if they adorned the elegance of blue lotuses (नील कमलों) joined with restless bees (॥200॥). 

After the union (सम्भोग), a group of sweat droplets (पसीनों) appeared upon the face and breasts of Anjana, which looked like a collection of pure pearls (मोतियों) (॥201॥). 

Her lower lip (अधरोष्ठ) had turned red due to the biting (दन्ताघात), making her look like a row of blossoming Tesu flowers (टेसूके वनकी पंक्ति) (॥202॥). 

This is due to the consumption (उपभुक्त) by her husband (पतिके) (॥203॥). 

---

This translation captures the essence and imagery of the original Sanskrit text while preserving key terms.

Page #416:
---------------------------
Here is the English translation of the provided Sanskrit text, while retaining the original Sanskrit words:

---

In the Pappapurāṇa, after the celebratory event was concluded, the weary couple, with their bodies fatigued, wished to indulge in sleep. (20) However, since their minds were absorbed in contemplating each other's virtues, sleep seemed to have fled out of jealousy. (205) Then, with the beloved's head resting on the shoulder of the husband, and their arms mutually embraced, they appeared to be infused with mutual love; their mouths were fragrant due to the exhalation of sweet-scented breaths, and the expansive chest had the shape of a lotus due to the close embrace. (206) A man's thigh was positioned between the thighs of a woman, and in the desired regions, various kinds of pillows were arranged. In such a state, like a celestial couple, that Ānjanā and the son of the wind somehow attained sleep. At that time, their bodies remained still, immersed in the ocean of touch-generated pleasure. (207-209)

Then, as dawn broke, Ānjanā rose from the bed and began to serve her husband, who sat nearby. (210) Perceiving the fragrance generated from their union, she felt shy, yet at the same time, she was filled with joy as her long-held desires were finally fulfilled. (211) Thus, those couple who previously were fearful of merely seeing each other spent many nights enjoying each other without restraint. (212) The senses of the couple, who were likened to the divine couple with the name Dodunduka, were now preoccupied, detached from other activities, and fully engaged with one another. (213)

Then, after enjoying the pleasures, the wise friend, having forgotten the master's command, and being aware of the heedlessness of his friend, when Vasantamālā entered, softly spoke as he walked into the palace: (214-215) "O beautiful one! Rise, why are you still sleeping? It seems as if you have been defeated by the splendor of your face..."

--- 

Please feel free to ask if you have any further questions or need additional translations!

Page #417:
---------------------------
The sixteen festivals, as they are called, are a time of great joy and celebration.  Pavananjay awoke from his slumber, his body still languid from sleep, his eyes red from the lingering effects of slumber, and a yawn escaping his lips.  He rubbed his ear with the index finger of his left hand, and then stretched his right arm, making a cracking sound.  He looked at his beloved, his eyes cast down in shyness, and said, "Come, my friend."  He then rose from his bed.  He smiled and asked, "Did you have a pleasant night?"  Pavananjay, in turn, smiled and asked, "Did you have a good night?"  After this exchange, Prahasit, who knew all the details and was a master of the art of statecraft, sat down on a nearby comfortable seat, as directed by Anjana, and said to Pavananjay, "My friend, get up, let's go.  Many days have passed since you have been engaged in the work of honoring your beloved."  "It is best to leave now, before anyone knows we are returning.  Otherwise, it will be embarrassing."  "Your commander, Rathanupuraka, and the king, Kairnaragit, who is eager to go to your master, are waiting for you."  "Ravan, filled with respect, constantly asks his ministers, 'Where is Pavananjay?'"  "I have devised this plan for your departure.  Therefore, you should leave the company of your beloved now."  "You must obey the orders of your master, Ravan, and your father, Prahlad.  Then, after returning safely, you should continue to honor your beloved."  "I will do as you say, my friend," said Pavananjay, and then, after performing the auspicious rituals of the body, he embraced his beloved in secret, kissed her trembling lips, and said, "My dear, do not worry, I am going.  I will return soon, after fulfilling my master's orders."  "Stay," he said in a sweet voice.  

And so, the moon, having lost its brilliance, was no more.

Page #418:
---------------------------
Here is the translation of the provided text from the Padmapurana into English while retaining the Sanskrit words:

---

In the Padmapurana,

368

Then, grieving (विरहतो), the beautiful (मीता) one whose eyes (लोचना) are on your face (वक्त्र) spoke, joining (कृत्वा) her lotus-like (करयुगाम्भोजां) hands: "O beautiful (सुन्दरी) lady, I am indeed the Arya's son (आर्यपुत्र), having united (कृतसंगमा) with you. Therefore, in your absence (विरहे), my womb (गर्भ) will become an object of slander (निन्दा) in the future (भविष्यति).” 

Thus, lacking (निवेद्य) you, go (गच्छ) to the teachers (गुरुभ्यो) of womb birth (गर्भसंभवम्). For long-term (दीर्घदर्शित्वं) welfare (क्षेमाय), it is fit (कैल्पते) for the life-bearers (प्राणधारिणाम्).

Having been spoken to in this manner, she said, “O goddess (देवि), earlier (पूर्वं) I left the house (गेहाद) without you (त्वया). Now I am determined (निश्चितो) and am seeking (संनिधावहम्) the meeting. 

Now, when going to them (तेभ्यः), I feel shame (त्रपे) to say (गदितुं) about that reason (तदर्थं). Knowing (विज्ञाय) this strange behavior (चित्रचेष्टं), people (जनः) will smirk (स्मेरतां) at me. 

Therefore, as long as my womb (गर्भ) does not manifest (नैति प्रकाशताम्) here, until then I shall not disturb (जिष्यामि). Do not become (मा ब्राजीर्विमनस्कताम्) disheartened (विमनस्कताम्).

For the removal (प्रमाद) of this anxiety (नोदाहरणं), take (गृहाण) this bracelet (वलयं) which is marked (कृतलक्षणम्) with my name (मन्नामकृतलक्षणम्); therein you shall have peace (शान्तिः) for now (एतः मविष्यति).”

Saying this and giving the bracelet (वलयं), repeatedly (मुहुः) soothing her (प्रियाम्), and ordering (उक्त्वा) the proper (ठीक-ठीक) worship (सेवा) of the spring (वासन्तमाला), he (पवनंजय) rose up (उत्तस्थौ) from the bed (शयनीयात्).

At that time, his bed (शय्या) was covered (व्याप्त) with broken (टूटे हुए) pearls (मोती) from the garlands (हार) of the pleasure season (सम्मदंनसे), filled with the fragrant pollen (गन्धित पराग) of flowers (पुष्पगन्ध) which attracted (खिंचकर) bees (भौंरे), and the sheet (चद्दर) laid over it was fluttering (लहरा रहा था); it seemed like (जान पड़ती) the Ksheeradweepa (क्षीर द्वीप) situated amidst the milky ocean (क्षीरसमुद्र).

Though Pavananjaya stood up (उत्तस्थौ), his mind (मनसः) was absorbed (लग रहा था) in his beloved (प्रियाम्).

Fearing (भयसे) that the falling (गिरनेसे) tears (अश्रु) on the earth (पृथ्वीक) might affect (बाधा न आ जाये) the auspicious (मंगलाचार) rites, Anjana (अंजनाने) collected (समेटकर) her tearful eyes (अश्रु नेत्रोंमें) and, therefore, could not see (देख सकती थी) Pavananjaya as she left (जाते समय). Yet, she flew (उड़ गया) towards the sky (आकाश) with her friend (मित्र).

Gautama Swami speaks to King Shrenika, saying that in this world (संस्कृति), sometimes (कदाचिद) the beings (प्राणियोंको) experience the consequences (कर्मपाकोदयात्) of their past deeds (स्वकृतकर्म). 

---

Note: The translation aims to capture the essence of the verses while preserving the terminology from the original Sanskrit text. The flow of thoughts from the original prose has been maintained, and the Sanskrit terms have been left in their original form for authenticity.

Page #419:
---------------------------
## Sixteen Chapters

Even though happiness is temporary for living beings, starting from birth, and death is inevitable, even then, there is unhappiness in this world. Therefore, O noble beings, serve the sun of Dharma, as spoken by the Jinas, which brings abundant and continuous happiness and destroys the darkness of worldly suffering. ||243||

Thus ends the sixteenth chapter of the Padmacharita, composed by the Acharya known as Ravishena, which describes the union of Pavanajaya and Anjana. ||16||

**Notes:**

* **Pavanajaya and Anjana:** These are characters from Jain mythology.
* **Jinas:** The Jain Tirthankaras, enlightened beings who have attained liberation.
* **Dharma:** The Jain path to liberation, which emphasizes non-violence, truthfulness, and self-control.
* **Bhavyas:** Souls who are destined to attain liberation.
* **Padmacharita:** A Jain text that narrates the life stories of the Tirthankaras.

Page #420:
---------------------------
### Chapter Seventeen

After some time had passed, special signs indicating the presence of a fetus appeared in the body of Anjana, the daughter of King Mahendra. 1. Her complexion turned white as if it had been obtained through the fame of Hanuman residing in her womb. Her gait, filled with the intoxication of a mighty elephant, became even more sluggish. 2. The breasts, which had turned dark, became exceedingly elevated, and due to laziness, she only raised an eyebrow to signal where speech was necessary. 3. Thereafter, noticing these signs, her envious mother-in-law questioned her, "Who has done this act to you?" 4. In response, Anjana folded her hands in greeting and recounted the entire previous story. Although the son of the Wind had discouraged her from revealing this account, when she found no other course, she was compelled to set aside her shyness and disclose all the news. 5.

Thereupon, Ketumati, angered and with great cruelty, spoke to her in a tone as hard as stone. When Ketumati was uttering harsh words to Anjana, it seemed as if she was beating her with sticks. 6. She proclaimed, "O sinner! He who, being filled with extreme hatred, does not wish to even see your form or allow your words to reach his ears, that courageous son of the Wind has gone out from the house after asking his own people. O without shame! How can he engage with you?" 7-8. "Cursed are you, O sinner, who taints a bright offspring like the rays of the moon and engages in this despised deed in both worlds!" 9. "It seems that your friend Vasantamala has given you this wise thought, which is just right, for what do the servants of courtesans and loose women do aside from this?" 10. At that time, although Anjana showed the hard evidence given by the son of the Wind, that wicked-hearted woman did not believe her. Far from believing, she spoke sharply in a very harsh manner. 11.

Page #421:
---------------------------
Chapter Seventeen
371
Having said this, the cruel one called his servant, Kar. Kar bowed and stood before her, his eyes red with anger.  “Take this Mahendra-puri-bound woman, along with her friend, and leave her there. Return immediately.”  [12-13]
Following his master’s command, Kar, ever-ready to serve, placed Anjana and her friend, Vasantimala, in the chariot and set off towards Mahendra-puri. Anjana’s body trembled with fear, she seemed like a vine uprooted and tossed about by a fierce wind, she was consumed with worry about the great sorrow that awaited her, her heart was melting like wax in the fire of grief.  She was speechless with fear, her eyes fixed on her friend, Vasantimala.  She silently condemned the evil karma that had brought her to this state, and tears flowed from her eyes like a stream of crystal, their source hidden in her bosom. [14-18]
As the day drew to a close, Kar reached the outskirts of Mahendra-puri.  He bowed to Anjana and spoke to her in a sweet voice, “My lady, I have done this for you, as per my mistress’s command.  Do not blame me for your sorrow, for it is your karma that has brought it upon you.” [19-20]
Having said this, he helped Anjana and her friend out of the chariot and returned to his mistress, reporting that he had carried out her orders. [21]
Seeing Anjana, whose radiance was dimmed by the weight of her sorrow, the sun seemed to set, its light fading. [22]
The western sky turned red, as if Anjana, with her eyes red from constant weeping, was looking towards the sun for protection, and her redness had stained the sky. [23]
The directions, as if grieving for Anjana’s sorrow, released a torrent of vapor, turning the sky a somber grey. [24]

Page #422:
---------------------------
372
The birds gathered in nests were making a great commotion, as if they were crying out in sorrow for Anjana's suffering. ||25|| Then Anjana, forgetting the pain caused by hunger and thirst, was about to be swept away by the ocean of slanderous suffering. ||26|| Fearful, she did not cry out loud, but wept silently within herself. Her friend made a seat for her with the leaves of trees, and she sat down on it. ||27|| That night, Anjana's eyes did not close in sleep. It seemed as if the constant flow of hot tears, burning her, had filled her with fear. ||28|| Her friend, having soothed her with her hand, had spent the whole night comforting her. Anjana had endured the night with great difficulty, or rather, she had spent the night like a year, enduring great hardship. ||29||
Then, as dawn broke, Anjana, whose leaves had withered from long, hot breaths, left her bed and went to the gate of her father's palace. Her friend, who was as agreeable as a shadow, followed her, and people looked at her with compassion. ||30-31|| Anjana's appearance had changed due to her suffering, so the gatekeeper did not recognize her. Therefore, when she tried to enter, he stopped her, and she stood there. ||32|| Then her friend told him everything. Upon hearing this, the gatekeeper, whose name was Shilakapat, left a different man standing at the gate and went inside. He bowed to the king, touched the earth with his hand, and went to inform him privately of his daughter's arrival. ||33-34|| Then King Mahendra, who was sitting nearby, ordered his son, Prasanna Kirti, to bring his daughter in with great pomp. ||35|| Then the king said again, "Let the city be adorned, and let the army be assembled. I will personally welcome my daughter." ||36|| Then the gatekeeper, having heard of his daughter's character, told the king all about it, placing his hand on his mouth. ||37|| 1. Duhkhasanghata, B. 2. Pallave, M. 3. Santvamana, M. 4. Sama Samam, B, J. Krichchanga Samam Sakam Samam Purna Nisam Niny. 5. Agacchat. 6. Avinjnata Vyavasthito, B. 7. Nyanaram, M. 8. Prasanna Kortakyam, M. 9. Parisajjatam, M.

Page #423:
---------------------------
The Seventeenth Chapter

Then, hearing this, the father, in order to punish his daughter, became extremely angry and said to his son, Prasanna Kirti, "Drive that sinner out of this city. Hearing her story, my ears feel as if they have been struck by a thunderbolt." ||38||

Then, Mahotsaha, a minister who was very dear to the king, said, "O King, it is not right to do this to her." ||40||

"Just as Vasantmala has spoken to the gatekeeper, perhaps it is the same in this case. It is not right to hate her without reason." ||41||

"Ketumati is cruel, influenced by worldly gossip, and completely thoughtless. She abandoned her daughter without any fault." ||42||

"Just as this daughter, who is devoted to virtuous conduct, was abandoned by her wicked mother-in-law, so if you also reject her, where will she go for refuge?" ||43||

"Like a deer that has seen a tiger, this innocent woman, terrified by her mother-in-law, has come to you for refuge, who are like a great forest." ||44||

"This young girl is suffering as if from the scorching rays of the summer sun, and knowing you to be like a great tree, she has come to you." ||45||

"This unfortunate woman, like Lakshmi who has fallen from heaven, is extremely distraught and trembling like a creeper due to the scorching heat of slander." ||46||

"She has been greatly humiliated by the gatekeeper's refusal to let her in. Therefore, she has covered her entire body with her clothes, including her head." ||47||

"This daughter, who was always pampered by her father's love, is now standing at the gate. O King, the gatekeeper has told you this news." ||48||

"So, show her mercy and let her in, for she is innocent. Indeed, everyone knows that Ketumati is wicked." ||49||

Just as a cluster of water droplets does not find a place on the lotus leaf, so the words of Mahotsaha did not find a place in the king's ears. ||50||

The king said, "Perhaps the friend, out of affection, has spoken untruthfully. How can we be certain without knowing the truth?" ||51||

Page #424:
---------------------------
374
Padmapurana
Therefore, this woman of questionable character should be expelled from the city immediately.  A stain does not arise in a pure lineage like ours. ||52||
A woman of pure conduct, graceful, and with charming actions, is dearly loved by all.  But where are these qualities in her? ||53||
Those great souls, possessing immense fortitude, are extremely pure and have not accepted women as their wives, who are the root cause of faults. ||54||
The acceptance of women as wives bears such fruit.  If, by chance, a woman becomes subject to reproach, she desires to enter the earth. ||55||
Those who have been made to believe in her through great sorrow, let them stay away.  Even my mind is now filled with doubt in this matter. ||56||
I have heard many times that she is an object of hatred to her husband, who does not even want to look at her.  Therefore, it is certain that the child in her womb is not his. ||57||
Therefore, if anyone else gives her shelter, I will kill him with my own hands.  This is my vow. ||58||
Thus, enraged, the king, before anyone else knew, had Anjana expelled from the palace gates along with her friend.  At that time, Anjana's body was filled with sorrow. ||59||
Seeking shelter, wherever she went to the homes of her relatives, she found the doors closed by the king's order. ||60||
It is right, for where the father is angry and shows his disapproval, what trust can be placed in others who act according to his wishes?  What hope can be placed in them? ||61||
Thus, rejected everywhere, Anjana became extremely distraught.  Her body was drenched in a torrent of tears.  She said to her friend, "Mother, why are we wandering here?  O friend, because of our sins, this whole world has become stone-hearted, that is, everyone's heart has become hard like stone." ||62-63||
Therefore, let us go to that forest.  Whatever is to be, let it happen there.  Death is the greatest happiness compared to this humiliation and the sorrow that arises from it. ||64||
How can one be certain if someone has spoken otherwise? ||51||

Page #425:
---------------------------
## The Seven-Month Festival
### 375

Thus speaking, she entered the same forest along with her friend. Like a deer, bewildered and frightened by the king of the deer, she entered the forest. 

Weary from the wind and sun, tormented by the pain of sorrow, she sat down at the edge of the forest and began to lament.

Alas! I am a wretched, unfortunate soul. Fate, the bringer of sorrow, has destroyed me without reason. What a terrible thing! Where can I seek refuge?

After crossing the ocean of misfortune, my lord somehow attained happiness, but driven by evil deeds, he has abandoned me.

Women who are tormented by their mothers-in-law and others, seek refuge in their father's home. But my misfortune has deprived me even of that.

My mother did not protect me either. It is right, for noble women follow the wishes of their husbands.

Oh, my lord! You had said that your womb would not be revealed and I would come to you. Why do you not remember that promise? You were so compassionate.

Oh, mother-in-law! How could you abandon me without any examination? Surely, there are many ways to test the character of those who are doubtful.

Oh, father! You nurtured me in your lap in my childhood and always kept me with great love and affection. How could you decide to abandon me without any examination?

Alas, mother! Why did not a single good word come out of your mouth? Why have you abandoned that unparalleled love?

Oh, brother! I am your sister, born from the same womb, and I am in great distress. Why did you not make any effort to protect me? You are so cruel.

When you, the leaders among our relatives, are in this state, what can the distant relatives do?

Or what is the fault of all of you? The season of virtue has ended, and now my tree of sin has borne fruit. I am compelled to serve it.

Her friend, her heart filled with sorrow and her courage shattered, echoed her lament.

Page #426:
---------------------------
376
In the forest, Vasantmala was lamenting, her cries echoing like those of a distressed animal. Even the deer shed large tears upon hearing her. ||79|| 
After weeping for a long time, her eyes turned red. Her wise friend embraced her and said, "My dear, your weeping is in vain. The fruits of your past actions have ripened, and you must bear them with closed eyes." ||80-81||
"O Goddess, Karma resides behind, before, and beside all beings. Where then is there room for sorrow?" ||82||
"Even the gods, whose bodies are adorned with the eyes of hundreds of Apsaras, experience ultimate suffering when their merit ends." ||83||
"People think differently and receive different fruits. The true Guru is the Law, who observes the actions of the world." ||84||
"Sometimes, the Law destroys a beneficial thing in an instant, and sometimes it brings something unexpected and unimaginable." ||85||
"The paths of Karma are diverse and unpredictable. Therefore, do not grieve and cause pain to the fetus." ||86||
"O Goddess, endure the fruits of your own actions, even if it means clenching your teeth and hardening your heart like stone. This is something you must bear." ||87||
"Indeed, you are enlightened, and my teaching seems like a rebuke. Tell me, what is it that you do not know?" ||88||
Saying this, the friend, eager to console her, wiped her red eyes with trembling hands. ||89||
"This place is devoid of shelter, my dear. Therefore, let us rise and go to the side of this mountain." ||90||
"Let us find a cave inaccessible to evil creatures, where we can stay for a while for the well-being of the fetus." ||91||
Following her friend's advice, she began to walk. However, she was unable to walk far due to the weight of the fetus. ||92||

Page #427:
---------------------------
### Translation into English

**Chapter on the Sevenfold Path**
377  
Accompanying the great forest-holding, the mountain of time,  
Filled with the net of wild beasts, that is endowed with a dreadful sound.  
Large as the sun, held back by the great storm,  
Noble in form, and difficult in its path of righteousness.  
  
With great difficulty, she set foot on the path of the matanga flower,  
In the abode of the matanga flower, she attained a mind that is inaccessible.  
Even as a powerful friend in the sky,  
Bound by the ties of love, she followed like a shadow.  
  
Having reached that dreadful, dense wilderness,  
She trembled as she entered the threatening thicket.  
After knowing her disarray, taking her by the hand,  
The friend spoke gently: "Do not be afraid, my mistress!"  
  
Thus, the friend, placing her supporting hand on her,  
With hair cascading like the soft grass,  
Thereupon, in various places on the ground, she laid her feet down again,  
Bearing her body, which was heavy with the load of sorrow.  
  
She strove to ascend, dispatching the rushing waterfalls,  
Remembering her family, all harsh in their conduct.  
She criticized her own situation and endlessly blamed her fate,  
Fearing the bonds like the tendrils of a creeper that entwined every limb.  
  
With the frightened eyes of a doe,  
She carried the weariness of her efforts, pouring forth sweat,  
Her garments tangled in thorny trees,  
She stood there for long, trying to untangle herself.  
  
Her feet, stained with blood, appeared as though  
Decorated with the color of red lac.  
From the burning heat of sorrow, her body became exceedingly dark,  
Even the slightest rustling of leaves terrified her.  
  
Her body trembled in fear,  
Her thighs stiffened from the weight of dread.  
Thus, she found it exceedingly difficult to walk.  
The matanga flower, beset by wild beasts and fearful sounds, was approached with diligence;

Alas! Although her friend was capable of soaring in the sky,  
Bound by the ties of love, she moved like a shadow on foot alongside her.  
When approached by that dreadful wilderness,  
All of Anjana's body quivered in fearful anticipation.  

After observing her restless state,  
The friend grasped her hand and, with great respect,  
Encouraged her gently, saying, "My mistress! Do not fear, come here."  

Anjana, wishing to receive support, placed her hand on her friend’s shoulder,  
Yet her hand frequently slipped downwards.  
Whenever a thorn pricked her foot,  
Poor Anjana would close her eyes and stand still in distress.  

Each time she lifted her foot,  
She would cry out and then replace it down again,  
Straining to bear the weight of her body,  
She crossed rushing waterfalls with great difficulty.  

She frequently remembered her own relatives,  
Who were entirely indifferent in their dealings.  
Sometimes she reproached herself,  
At other times, she repeatedly blamed her fate.  

Creepers wrapped around her body, and it seemed,  
As if they were overpowering her with compassion, almost hugging her.  
Her eyes, restless like those of a frightened deer,  
Sweat flowed from her weary body,  
And when her garments caught on thorny trees,  
She would bend there for a long time, trying to disentangle herself.  

Her feet turned red with blood,  
Seeming as if adorned with red lacquer.  
Her body darkened, burned by the fire of sorrow,  
And even the movement of a leaf would terrify her.  

Her body quaking, she found it exceedingly difficult to proceed.  
This was the narrative of Anjana, filled with fear and anxiety,  
Depicting the struggles of the journey through the dark wilderness.

Page #428:
---------------------------
378
The very dear-speaking friend, repeatedly making her rest, reached the foot of the mountain, and Anjana, filled with sorrow, reached there slowly. ||106||
There, she was unable to hold her body, her eyes filled with tears. She ignored her friend's words and sat down in great sorrow. ||107||
She said, "I am unable to take even a single step from here. I will stay here, and death is preferable to me." ||108||
Then, the clever friend, filled with love, comforted her with words that were dear to her heart. After making her rest, she bowed and said to her friend with love, ||109||
"Look, look, this excellent cave is nearby. Be happy, get up, we will both stay comfortably in that cave." ||110||
"Many creatures roam here, performing actions with their hands, and you also have to protect your womb. Therefore, O mistress, do not make a mistake." ||111||
Thus spoken to, Anjana, filled with sorrow, rose to go, urged by her friend and afraid of the forest. ||112||
At that time, these two women did suffer in the forest, but they did not go to the conqueror of the wind. This should be understood as due to their great virtue, lack of command, or shame. ||113||
Then, the friend, supporting her with her hand, somehow crossed that uneven ground and brought Anjana to the door of the cave with great difficulty. ||114||
They were both very tired from walking on the uneven rocks, and they were also afraid to enter the cave suddenly, so they sat outside for a moment. ||115||
After resting for a long time, they cast their slow gaze upon the cave. Their gaze seemed like a garland of withered red, blue, and white lotuses. ||116||
Then, they saw on the pure, even, and clear stone floor, a sage, the possessor of the wealth of the charanas, seated on a couch. ||117||
The sage's breathing was steady and regular. He had placed his eyes on the tip of his nose, his body was relaxed, and he was motionless like a pillar. ||118||

Page #429:
---------------------------
The Seventeenth Chapter

They were motionless, like a pillar, without any movement or shaking. ||118|| They had placed their right hand, raised, on the palm of their left hand, which was resting on their lap. They were still, and their minds were as deep as the ocean. ||119|| They were meditating on the true nature of things, according to the teachings of the Jinas, free from all attachments, pure like the sky, and as light as the wind. ||120|| Seeing them, one would have felt a fear like that of seeing a mountain peak. They were endowed with great fortitude, and their bodies, though gentle, were radiant. After looking at them for a long time, they realized that these were indeed great Muni-rajas. ||121||

Then, those two women, who had served Muni-rajas many times before, went to the Muni-raja with joy, and in a moment, they forgot all their sorrows. ||122|| They circumambulated him three times, with devotion, joined their hands in salutation, and their eyes sparkled with joy, as if they had found a dear friend in the Muni-raja. ||123|| It was just at that time that the Muni-raja ended his meditation, of his own accord. This is how it is for the blessed ones, their actions are always in accordance with the occasion. ||124||

Then, those two women, whose hands were joined together, and whose tearless, steady eyes were fixed on the Muni-raja's feet, said, "O Bhagavan! O you who have a pure mind! O you who are endowed with excellent conduct! Is your body well? For this body is the root of all our efforts." ||125-126|| "O Ocean of virtues! Is your tapas increasing day by day? And O you who have conquered your senses! Is your conduct free from obstacles, and full of great forbearance?" ||127|| "O Lord! We are asking you about your well-being in this way, because this is the proper way to ask. Otherwise, who would not be worthy of your well-being? You are the repository of all virtues." ||128|| "Those who take refuge in men like you become virtuous. But what is the point of discussing good and bad things about oneself?" ||129||

Saying this, they fell silent, their bodies bowed in humility. When the Muni-raja looked at them, they were free from all fear. ||130||

Page #430:
---------------------------
In the Padma Purana,
The Shraman, with a calm and serene voice, like the nectar of immortality, raised his right hand and spoke profoundly, saying: "O Kalyani! All is well with me due to the influence of my past actions. But, my child, all this is the result of one's own actions." (131-132)
"Behold the play of karma, where this innocent daughter of King Mahendra has been banished by her brothers, cast out of her home and subjected to great disrespect." (133)
Then, the great sage, who knew everything without being told, was approached by Vasantmala, her mind filled with curiosity and great respect. Bowing down to him, she eagerly sought the well-being of her mistress, as if showering his feet with the radiance of her eyes. (134-135)
"O Master! I humbly request you to kindly answer my question. For the actions of those like you are always for the benefit of others." (136)
"Why did this Anjana's husband remain detached for so long, and why has he now become attached? Why has Anjana been subjected to suffering in the great forest? And what unfortunate soul has taken refuge in her womb, causing this unfortunate woman to face the uncertainty of life?" (137-138)
Then, Amitagati, the sage, well-versed in the three knowledges - Shruta, Avadhi, and Manahparyaya - spoke about Anjana's story, as it truly was. For this is the nature of the wise. (139)
"My child, listen! I will tell you why this Anjana has suffered such pain. It is the result of her past sins, now reaching their fruition." (140)
"In the Jambudvipa, in the Bharat Kshetra, there was a city called Mandara, where a righteous householder named Priyanandi resided." (141)
"His wife was named Jaya. From her, Priyanandi had a son named Damayanta, who was blessed with great fortune and adorned with auspicious qualities." (142)
"Then, when the spring season arrived, a grand festival took place in the city. Damayanta, along with his friends, enjoyed himself in the beautiful garden, which was like the Nandanavana, filled with people from the city." (143)
1.  bhartasyam
2.  kovaasyam
3.  etannamni
4.  stri
5.  mahisobhagya

Page #431:
---------------------------
## The Saptavasa Parva
### 381

The Damyant, adorned with white powder and ornaments like earrings, was enjoying himself with his friends. 
Then, while he was staying there and playing, he saw the Digambara monks, who were engaged in meditation, study, and other practices, standing nearby. 
Like a ray of light emanating from the sun, he, shining brightly, left his group and went to the assembly of monks, who were as steadfast as the peaks of Mount Meru. 
Then, after paying homage to the monks and listening to the teachings of Dharma, he became endowed with right faith and adhered to the rules. 
At one time, he performed a seven-fold Parana for the monks and, after death, attained the heavenly abode. 
There, due to the influence of his past actions, rules, and charity, he enjoyed excellent pleasures. He was always adorned with a garland of blue lotuses, whose brilliance was like the eyes of hundreds of goddesses. 
From there, he was reborn as the son of King Harichandra and Queen Priyangulakshmi in the city of Mriganka, located on this Jambudvipa. He was named Singhchandra, a master of arts and skills. Although he was one, he was present in the hearts of all beings. 
Even in that existence, he renounced worldly pleasures after receiving guidance from the monks and, at the end of his life, went to heaven. 
There, he was like the sun, causing the lotus gardens of the goddesses' faces to bloom, and he enjoyed the supreme happiness that was obtained merely by his will. 
From there, he was reborn as the son of King Sukantha and Queen Kanakodaya in the city of Arun, located on the Vijayardha mountain in this Bharat Kshetra. He was named Singhvahana, and his virtues attracted the hearts of all people. 
There, he experienced the supreme joy of embracing women who could steal the attention of Apsaras, and he enjoyed the generous pleasures like a god. 
At one time, he attained enlightenment in the Tirtha of Sri Vimalnath, and after entrusting his kingdom and wealth to his son, Meghavahana, he departed from the world.

Page #432:
---------------------------
382
In the Padma Purana, a sage named Lakshmitilaka, who was filled with great compassion and had a clear understanding of the impermanence of the world, became a disciple of the great sage, Singhvahana. ||15|| He diligently followed the proper vows as prescribed by the Jinas, and through contemplation on impermanence and other such truths, he purified his mind. ||159|| He practiced austerities that were beyond the capacity of ordinary people, and he endured the burning heat of the sun. He always held fast to the three jewels, which are the source of true liberation. ||160|| Although he was capable of preventing harm due to the various powers he had attained, he remained calm and endured the suffering inflicted by his enemies, who were like fierce lions. ||161|| When his lifespan came to an end, he entered into a state of pure meditation and, piercing through the celestial realms of the gods, he attained the highest heaven, the Lantva. ||162|| There, he enjoyed the pleasures of that realm, which were in accordance with his desires, and he remained aloof from the knowledge and speech of the deceitful beings. ||163|| Driven by the remaining merit he had accumulated, this great being, who was destined for ultimate liberation and a recipient of happiness, left the Lantva heaven and entered the womb of Anjana. ||164|| Thus, I have described the conception that took place in the womb of your mistress. Now, O Vasantmala, who is devoted to good deeds, listen to the cause of the sorrow that arises from her separation. ||165|| When this Anjana was in the realm of Kanakodara, she had a companion named Lakshmi. Her soul was purified by right faith, and she was always devoted to the worship of the saints. ||166|| She had a statue of the Jina, the Lord of Lords, installed in a part of her house, and she worshipped it with devotion, offering praise with a joyful countenance. ||167|| However, because Kanakodara was a great goddess, she became filled with pride and anger towards her companion. Not only that, she had the statue of the Jina thrown out of the house. ||168|| At that time, a nun named Samyamsri entered her house to beg for alms. Samyamsri was renowned throughout the world for her austerities. ||169||

Page #433:
---------------------------
## Chapter 17

Seeing her (the woman) in such a state, the Sadhu felt great compassion. For the Sadhu community desires the welfare of all beings. || 171 ||

Even without being asked, the Sadhu, inspired by devotion to the Guru, begins to preach the Dharma to the ignorant beings for their benefit. || 172 ||

Then, the one adorned with the ornament of good conduct, spoke to her in these words, filled with sweetness. || 173 ||

"O Blessed one, listen with an open mind. You are adorned with the supreme radiance, the king honors you, and your body is a vessel of pleasures. || 174 ||

Wandering through the four gatis, this being is always afflicted with suffering. When the effect of the bitter karma subsides, it attains the state of a human being. || 175 ||

O Radiant one, you have attained the human birth through the accumulation of merit. Do not engage in despicable conduct. You are capable of performing good actions. || 176 ||

One who, having obtained the human birth, does not perform good deeds, loses the jewel that has come into his hands, due to delusion. || 177 ||

The actions of body, speech, and mind that are beneficial and conducive to the welfare of others are the same for all living beings. || 178 ||

Those who engage in good deeds with the intention of their own welfare are considered superior in this world, while those who engage in despicable conduct are numerous. || 179 ||

Even those who are self-fulfilled, rescue beings from the ocean of suffering through their teachings and guidance. Those who are the best of the best, the Dharma-wheel-turners, the Arhats, those who despise their image, the deluded beings, experience suffering that extends over countless lifetimes. Who can fully describe the suffering that they experience? || 180 - 182 ||

The Arhats are in a state of equanimity. Therefore, they do not feel joy towards those who seek refuge in them, nor do they feel hatred towards those who harm them. || 183 ||

However, beings experience happiness and suffering due to their own good and bad karma, which arise from their actions towards others. || 184 ||

Just as a being removes the suffering caused by cold through the use of fire, and the suffering caused by hunger and thirst through the use of cool water, so too, the suffering caused by disrespect is removed through the practice of Parana. || 185 ||

Page #434:
---------------------------
In the Padma Purana, it is said that just as the enjoyment of food and water relieves hunger and thirst, similarly, the worship of the Jinas brings happiness to beings, and their disregard brings supreme suffering. This is natural. 

It is certain that whatever suffering is seen in the world arises from sin, and whatever happiness is seen is obtained from past good deeds. 

You have obtained this wealth, a king as your husband, and a son who performs miraculous deeds, all due to your punya. You are praiseworthy among beings. 

Therefore, act in such a way that you will obtain more happiness. O Bhavyā! Do not fall into a pit while the sun is shining, as I have told you. 

If I had not instructed you, and you had fallen into hell with its terrible torments, it would have been a great negligence on my part. 

Upon hearing this, Kanakodari was terrified of the suffering that would arise in hell. At that very moment, with a pure heart, she embraced the supreme Samyak Darshan. 

She also accepted the dharma of a householder and performed austerities according to her strength. It seemed to her as if she had been born anew due to the association with dharma. 

She installed the image of the Arhant Bhagavan in its former place and worshipped it with various fragrant flowers. 

Considering herself fulfilled by having engaged Kanakodari in dharma, the Aryikā Samyamshrī, filled with joy, went to her own place. 

Kanakodari, who was attached to her home, also accumulated punya and at the end of her life went to heaven. There, she enjoyed the highest pleasures and then, falling from there, she was born as a daughter named Anjanā to Queen Manovegā, the wife of King Mahendra in the city of Mahendra. 

She was born into a prosperous and pure family due to the remaining portion of the punya she had accumulated in a previous life, and she obtained a most excellent husband. 

She had kept the image of the Trikālaya-worthy Jina Bhagavan outside her house for some time, and because of that, she experienced this suffering. 

When, before her marriage, she was praising the qualities of Vidhyutprabha and criticizing Pavanajaya in front of him, Pavanajaya...

Page #435:
---------------------------
Here is the English translation of the provided text, preserving the Sanskrit words:

---

**Saptavasha Parva**  
385

Having heard this, he who was concealed in the cow-window fell into a rage due to enmity towards her. As he set out for battle, he saw another lady resembling a Chakravaki, and, struck by separation, he swiftly sank into the beautiful mind-lake.  
201. Just as a friend is kindly led to his beloved at the appropriate time, having taken the embryo, he left to fulfill his father's command.  
202. Thus saying, the eminent sage, endowed with great compassion, spoke again, like amrit flowing from the autumnal skies.  
203. “You, suffering child, are afflicted by this sorrow due to the fruits of your actions. Therefore, do not again engage in this evil act.”  
204. The happiness that arises in this world comes, indeed, primarily from devotion to the Jineshvara.  
205. Therefore, be a devotee of the Jineshvara, who rescues from worldly existence, and perform puja to the munis according to your capability.  
206. Fortunately, you have attained knowledge through the great restraint of the noble Arya at that time. That noble one uplifted you, who were sinking into downfall, as if pulling you up by the hand.  
207. This extremely fortunate embryo has taken refuge in your womb, and will become a recipient of many great auspiciousness in the future.  
208. O beautiful one! From this embryo, you will attain supreme prosperity. No divine being can diminish its prowess.  
209. In a little while, you will unite with your husband, thus keep your mind happy and free from negligence, O auspicious one.  
210. Upon hearing this from the sage, the two friends, who were exceedingly joyful and whose lotus-like eyes blossomed, bowed to the sage repeatedly.  
211. After that, the sage with a pure heart, having bestowed blessings upon both of them, went to a place suitable for restraint in the sky.  
212. That eminent sage remained in the cave in the posture of Parayankasana; thus, in time, that cave came to be known on earth as "Payank Cave."  
213. Thus, King Mahendra...

1. Thus spoke M.  
2. You are referred to M.  
3. By devotion M.  
4. You (are) K.  
5. Having been well-fed M.  
6. Free from negligence B.

--- 

Let me know if you need further assistance or clarifications!

Page #436:
---------------------------
## Chapter 386

**386**

In the Padma Purana, Mahendra's daughter, Anjana, remained in the cave, awaiting the time of her delivery, after the Muni's assembly had purified her. (215)

Vasantmala, rich in knowledge and strength, fulfilled her desires regarding food and drink. (216)

Then, the Sun, as if unable to bear the sight of Anjana, separated from her beloved, desired to set, out of great compassion. (217)

The Sun's rays, like those depicted in a painting, became dim, as if they too were saddened by Anjana's sorrow. (218)

The Sun's orb, gathering the rays that were clinging to the peaks of mountains and trees, suddenly descended, as if it too was overcome by Anjana's grief. (219)

Then, the evening, red like the angry gaze of an approaching lion, covered the entire sky in an instant. (220)

After that, as if urged by an impending calamity, a line of darkness arose, like a Vetali emerging from the netherworld. (221)

The birds, who had been making a commotion earlier, became silent and perched on the branches of trees, as if terrified by the sight of the line of darkness. (222)

The sounds of jackals, fierce like the thunder of a great thunderbolt, began to echo, as if the approaching calamity had started beating its drums. (223)

Then, a fearsome lion appeared, shaking its mane, red with the blood of elephants, and bearing a crooked brow, like the line of a finger on a death warrant. (224)

It emitted powerful, echoing roars, as if tearing the entire sky into pieces, and it repeatedly thrust its tongue, as agile as the flames of a conflagration, into the vast abyss of its mouth, destroying countless beings. (225)

Anjana, hearing this account of her past life, was astonished and repeatedly condemned the evil deeds she had committed in her previous birth. (214)

Gautama Swami said to King Shrenik, "O King! Anjana, purified by the assembly of the Munis, remained in that cave, awaiting the time of her delivery." (215)

Page #437:
---------------------------
The lion was bearing sharp, pointed, dense, crooked, fierce teeth, which were as sharp as Kusha grass and terrifying even to death. He was carrying a fierce, red, blazing eye, like the sun at the time of destruction, which was engulfing all directions. His tail was placed on his head, he was digging the earth with his claws, his chest was as wide as the banks of Kailasa, and he was carrying a thick hip-region. All creatures were looking at him with fear, wondering if he was death itself, or a demon, or the end of time, or the king of the dead, or the Kali Yuga, or destruction, or the destroyer of even Yama (the god of death), or the sun, or fire.

The echoes of his roar filled the large caves, and the mountains seemed to be crying out in fear, their cries deep and profound. The creatures were struck in their ears by his thunderous roar, like a heavy hammer, and they began to make various efforts. The lion, who was looking at the inaccessible mountain in front of him with his eyes, and who was filled with pride, yawned and showed great anger. The lion, whose body was trembling like grass flowers, and whose eyes were red-yellow and restless like a gucchi, entered the cave of the mountain.

The deer, whose mouths had dropped the grass and tender leaves, and whose bodies had become stiff with fear, stood there as they were. The flow of the elephants' rut stopped, their eyes were rolling, their ears were erect, their minds were still, and their bodies were motionless. The group of female animals, including the deer, stood with their young ones inside the circle, trembling with fear. All their eyes were fixed on the leader of their herd. The female monkey, whose body was trembling with fear of the lion's roar, decided to give up her body and food, thinking, "If I survive this calamity, I will eat and live, otherwise not."

Page #438:
---------------------------
388
In the Padma Purana, Vasantmala, unable to bear the grief, quickly flew into the sky and circled around like a bird, her mind troubled. ||24|| Drawn by her love and virtues, she repeatedly came close to Anjana, but due to intense fear, she would again ascend to the sky. ||241|| Seeing them both terrified, with their hearts shattered, the Gandharva who resided in that cave was filled with compassion. ||242|| His wife, Ratna Chula, a virtuous woman, with a compassionate heart and quick speech, addressed her husband, Mani Chula, the Gandharva. ||243|| "Look, my dear! See, a woman is standing here, terrified by the lion, and another woman, connected to her, is circling in the sky." ||244|| "Oh, my lord! Please be merciful to me and protect this extremely distressed woman. This noble lady, born into a good family, has somehow come to this difficult place." ||245|| Thus addressed, the Gandharva, transforming into the form of a Sharabha, created as if from all the terrifying substances of the three worlds, ||246|| stood before the lion, his body covered with a multitude of peaks, only three hands away from Anjana. ||247|| Then, a terrible battle ensued between the lion and the Sharabha, filled with thunderous roars, as if mocking the groups of lightning-illuminated rain clouds. ||248|| Even though such a time had arrived, a time that instilled fear even in brave men, Anjana remained fearless, meditating on the Jina in her heart. ||249|| Thus, Vasantmala, circling in the sky, filled with great sorrow, lamented like a cuckoo. ||250|| "Alas, princess! You were first afflicted by misfortune, and then, when you somehow escaped that misfortune with great difficulty, you were abandoned by all your relatives. ||251|| You have reached this terrible forest, and somehow you have come to this cave. You have been comforted by the Muni, who has informed you of the possibility of finding your beloved." ||252||

Page #439:
---------------------------
The seventeenth chapter

Now, O Devi, you will go to the mouth of the lion, which is terrible with its fangs and the cause of the destruction of the proud elephants. || 253 || Alas, O Devi, your time has passed, due to the will of the wicked fate and because of my foolish mind. || 254 || O Lord, Pavana-jaya, protect your wife. O Mahendra, why don't you protect your daughter? || 255 || O wicked Ketumati, what have you done to her in vain? O compassionate one, why don't you protect your daughter? || 256 || This princess is dying in the desolate forest. O forest deities, please protect her. || 257 || What else could be the meaning of the words of that Muni, who knows the true nature of the world, and who has given a good omen? || 258 || Thus, weeping and swinging like a swing, Vasantmala was quickly going and coming near her mistress, that is, she was coming near with courage and then retreating due to fear. || 259 || 

Then, struck by the blow of the Sharabha, the lion was destroyed, and the Sharabha, having accomplished his purpose, disappeared into his own abode. || 260 || Then, seeing the end of the battle between the two, like a dream, Vasantmala, drenched in sweat, quickly went back to the cave. || 261 || Inside the cave, Vasantmala, searching for Anjana with her hands as soft as leaves, was saying, "Where are you? Where are you?" At that time, her fear had not completely subsided, so her voice was choked. || 262 || Vasantmala knew by the touch of her hand that she was lying completely still. Therefore, her mind was filled with anxiety, wondering if she was alive or not. || 263 || Placing her hand on her chest, she kept urging her, saying, "O Devi! Devi! Are you alive?" || 264 || Then, when Anjana regained consciousness from the touch of Vasantmala's hand, and somewhat understood that it was her friend, she said in a faint voice, "I am here." || 265 || 

After a long time, she understood, and then the two friends...

Page #440:
---------------------------
390
In the Padma Purana, the remaining fear made the women, who were captivated by the charms of the Chabi, feel as if they had been born anew. They stayed awake all night, discussing the cruelty of their relatives. ||267||
Then, just as Garuda destroys a serpent, the Gandharva destroyed the lion, and filled with joy, he drank the highly potent liquor. ||268||
The learned woman, whose eyes were sparkling, placed her arm on the Gandharva's thigh and said to him, ||269||
"O Lord! Grant me this opportunity, for I wish to sing now, as it is said that after drinking liquor, one should sing a beautiful song." ||270||
Hearing this sweet, divine, and heart-stealing music, the two women would also forget their remaining fear. ||271||
Then, when midnight arrived and no other sound could be heard, the Gandharva tuned his ear-captivating Veena and began to play. ||272||
And his wife, Ratnachula, with her eyes fixed on her husband's face, played the Manjira, singing softly. Her song was capable of causing even the sages to feel disturbed. ||273||
At that time, they were using four types of musical instruments: the Ghan, Vady, Sushir, and Tat. The other members of the group were keeping time with their hands, in a dignified manner. ||274||
The skilled Dev, playing the Tabla, was concentrating on producing a deep sound, while the skilled Dev, playing the flute, was moving his eyebrows gracefully. ||275||
The Yaksha, who possessed a beautiful aura, was playing a Veena, which was as radiant as coral and adorned with beautiful metaphors, using a Tambura. The Gandharva, who understood the subtleties of the notes, was playing the seven notes: Madhyam, Rishabh, Gandhar, Shadja, Panchama, Dhaivat, and Nishad, without missing a beat. ||276-277||
While singing, the Gandharva used the three types of rhythms: Druta, Madhy, and Vilambita, in their proper places, and he also used twenty-one Murcchaanas, which made his eyes dance. ||278||
He sang like the singers of the Devas, who are known for their "Ha-Ha-Hu-Hu" sounds. ||279||

Page #441:
---------------------------
## Saptadarsha Parva

**Verse 280:**
The seventy-five sounds of the song were composed of beautiful words connected to the qualities of the Jina.

**Verse 281:**
(In Vidyutmala Vrutta)
With devotion, I bow to the Arhant, the Lord of Lords, who is worshipped by gods and demigods with flowers, offerings, and various fragrances.

**Verse 282:**
(In Arya Giti Chhandas)
With utmost devotion, I always bow to the one who is pure, the epitome of excellence in the three worlds, the Muni Suvrata, whose feet are like the crown of the Indra, and whose nails are like shining gems.

**Verse 283:**
(In Anushtup)
Then, Vasantmala, whose mind was filled with wonder, praised that unprecedented and extremely beautiful music.

**Verse 284:**
Oh, what a song! What a song! Who has sung this enchanting melody? This sweet-voiced singer has, as it were, drenched my heart.

**Verse 285:**
She said to her mistress, "Oh, Goddess! This is a god who has protected us by driving away the lion."

**Verse 286:**
I think this melodious song, which is filled with the sweet sound of a woman's voice and all the elements of music, was sung for us.

**Verse 287:**
Oh, Goddess! Oh, beautiful one! You, who possess excellent character, are not the object of anyone's compassion? Even in the great forest, there are friends for the noble ones.

**Verse 288:**
With the destruction of this obstacle, it is certain that you will be reunited with your husband. Or, does the Muni say otherwise?

**Verse 289:**
Therefore, having taken refuge in this virtuous god, we should, in this cave, which is purified by the Muni's seat, install the image of Muni Suvrata and worship him with fragrant flowers for our happiness.

**Verse 290:**
Let us focus our minds on the happiness of giving birth to this child, forgetting the pain of separation and the passing of time.

**Verse 291:**
(Verse 279 continued)
Or, he was singing a song even more beautiful than that, and this song is known among the Gandharva gods.

**Verse 291:**
(Verse 280 continued)
He was singing in seventy-five sounds, and his entire song was composed of beautiful words connected to the qualities of the Jina.

Page #442:
---------------------------
The Padma Purana says, "Having attained supreme joy by meeting you, the mountain is laughing as if with the swift streams. (292) The trees, bowed down by the weight of their fruits, with their soft leaves swaying, and laughing with their flowers, have attained joy. (293) The forest plains of this mountain, with the sweet sounds of peacocks, mynas, parrots, and cuckoos, seem to be engaged in conversation. (294) In this mountain, caves adorned with the shadows of various metals, with groups of trees as their garments, and perfumed with the fragrance of flowers, are shining like women. (295) In the ponds, lotus flowers, worthy of being offered to the Jinas, are blooming, resembling your face. (296) O Vamini, be patient, do not be overcome by anxiety. The gods here will bring you all kinds of good fortune. (297) Now, at the beginning of the day, the birds are chirping, as if they are making a joyful noise, knowing your healthy body. (298) These trees, standing on the tips of their branches, and moved by the gentle breeze, are releasing cool drops of dew, as if they are shedding tears of joy. (299) To inform you of this, first, like a messenger, the red-hued evening has been sent, and now, behind her, the sun is rising. (300) Hearing this, Anjana replied, "O friend, all of you are my relatives. With you here, this forest is like a city to me. (301) The person who serves someone in times of distress, in ordinary times, and in times of celebration, is their true friend, while the one who brings sorrow is an enemy, even if they are a relative. (302) Saying this, they both placed the image of the Devadhideva Muni Suvrata Nath in the cave and continued to worship him. Their food was provided by the power of knowledge. (303) The Gandharva, filled with compassion, protected these two women from all sides, making music every day in devotion to the Jina. (304) 
1. Do not be anxious. 2. What is the use of lamenting? 3. Food provided by the power of knowledge.

Page #443:
---------------------------
## The Seven-Year Festival

393

Then, Anjana said, "My dear friend, my womb is restless, and I am filled with anxiety. What will happen?" ||305||

Vasantmala replied, "O beautiful one, the time for your delivery has surely arrived. Sit comfortably." ||306||

Then, Vasantmala prepared a bed with soft leaves, and Anjana gave birth to a son, just as the east gives birth to the sun. ||307||

As soon as the son was born, the cave was filled with his radiant energy, dispelling all darkness and making it seem as if it were made of gold. ||308||

Although it was a time for joy, Anjana, remembering both her families, felt a sense of sorrow and wept while holding her son. ||309||

She lamented, "O son, how can I celebrate your birth in this dense forest, a place of fear for humans?" ||310||

"If you had been born in your father's or grandfather's house, there would have been a great celebration, one that would have driven people mad with joy." ||311||

"Seeing your face, like the moon, adorned with beautiful eyes, who in the world would not be filled with wonder?" ||312||

"What can I do? I am unfortunate and deprived of everything. Fate has given me this state of suffering." ||313||

"All beings desire long life above all else. Therefore, my son, my blessing is that you live to the highest state." ||314||

"That I am alive, even in this forest where death is imminent, is a testament to your good karma." ||315||

Hearing this, her friend, who was always helpful, said, "O goddess, you are filled with blessings because you have received such a son." ||316||

"He is seen to be full of auspicious signs, and his beautiful body carries immense wealth." ||317||

"The vines, with their six-petaled flowers and swaying, delicate leaves, are dancing as if celebrating your son's birth." ||318||

"Because of your son's extraordinary energy, all that is auspicious will come to pass, and misfortune will be meaningless." ||319||

1. Gocharam M. | 2. Dainyaprāptā M., J., K., Kh. | 3. Kim mayatasmin M. |
50

Page #444:
---------------------------
394
Padma Purana
While the two friends were thus conversing, a magnificent chariot, bright as the sun, suddenly appeared in the sky. || 320 || Seeing it, Vasantmala informed Anjana, who, filled with apprehension, began to speak again, saying, || 321 || "Is this some enemy of mine, who will take away my son? Or has some relative of mine arrived?" || 322 || Hearing her words, the chariot remained stationary for a while, and then a compassionate Vidyaadhara descended from the sky. || 323 || After parking the chariot at the entrance of the cave, he entered, accompanied by his wives, his mind filled with anxiety. || 324 || Vasantmala welcomed him, and he sat down on a seat provided by his servant. || 325 || After a moment's pause, he addressed Vasantmala, who was welcoming him with great humility, in a deep voice, his words stirring the curiosity of the thirsty chatakas, like the sound of thunder. His speech was adorned with the brilliance of his teeth, which mingled with the radiance of the child. || 326-327 || He said, "O Sumaryade! Tell me, whose daughter is this? Whose auspicious wife is she? And why has she come to this great forest?" || 328 || "Her form does not match the character of a woman who has been condemned. How then has she come to be separated from all her relatives?" || 329 || "Or perhaps, in this world, there are often enemies without cause, who are driven by their past deeds, even when they are in a position of neutrality." || 330 || Then Vasantmala, her throat choked with tears of sorrow, her eyes fixed on the earth, spoke slowly, || 331 || "O Great One! Your words reveal your noble and auspicious heart, for the shade of a tree that is the cause of disease is not pleasant or joyful." || 332 || "Since you are a virtuous man, worthy of receiving information, I will tell you what you wish to know. Listen." || 333 || "It is a principle that sorrow, when revealed to a virtuous man, is destroyed, for it is the nature of the great to be the saviors of those who are in distress." || 334 ||

Page #445:
---------------------------
The Seventeenth Chapter
395
Listen, this is the daughter of King Mahendra, known as Anjana, who is filled with the glory of the world and has a pure heart. She is the beloved wife of Pavanavega, the son of King Prahlad, whose mind is an ocean of virtues. ||335-336||
Once, without informing his relatives, he went to war, following his father's command, and conceived a child in her womb. He was a friend of Ravana. ||337||
Although Anjana was innocent, her cruel and heartless mother-in-law, driven by her wicked nature, sent her back to her father's house. ||338||
Her father, fearing the consequences of her misfortune, did not give her a place in his home. It is true that noble people are often afraid of false accusations. ||339||
This noble girl, abandoned by all her relatives, was left alone in this great forest, like a deer, without any support. ||340||
I, a servant of this kind-hearted woman, came here following the tradition of our family. She, always cheerful, has made me her confidante. ||341||
This Anjana has given birth to a son today in this forest, full of various hardships. I don't know how this virtuous woman will find happiness and support. ||342||
I have told you this story briefly, O virtuous one. I am unable to describe all the suffering she has endured. ||343||
Then, from the heart of that Vidhyadhara, filled with love that had melted due to Anjana's suffering, a voice emerged, as if his heart was overflowing with emotion and had no space left for it to stay inside. ||344||
He said, "O virtuous woman! You are my niece. I couldn't recognize you because your appearance has changed due to our long separation." ||345||
"My father is Vichitrabhanu, and my mother is Sundaramalini. My name is PratiSurya, and I live on the island called Hanuruh." ||346||
After saying this, he recounted all the events of his childhood to Anjana, weeping as he spoke. ||347||
Then, recognizing her uncle from his narration, Anjana embraced him and wept for a long time, her tears flowing like a river. ||348||
All her sorrow was released with those tears. Indeed, the stability of the world lies in the reunion of loved ones. ||349||
It is the nature of great men to rescue those who are in distress. ||334||

Page #446:
---------------------------
396
Padma Purana
Thus, overwhelmed with grief, they both wept. Vasantmala, sitting beside them, also wept loudly. || 350 || Seeing them weep, the Vidhyadhara women also wept out of compassion. Seeing them weep, the female deer also wept. || 351 || At that time, a loud echo was coming from the cave-like mouth, so it seemed as if the mountain was also weeping with large waterfalls. || 352 || And the birds, too, were making sounds out of compassion, so the entire forest was filled with sound at that time. || 353 || After consoling her, Prati-Surya washed Anjana's face and his own with water brought by a servant. || 354 || The forest, which had become filled with sound, became silent again in the same way as before. It seemed as if it had become silent to listen to the story of these two. || 355 || After staying for a moment, when both of them came out of the pit of sorrow, they asked each other about their well-being and told each other about their families. || 356 || After that, Anjana spoke to Prati-Surya's wives in turn. It is right, because virtuous people never fail in their duty. || 357 || Anjana said to her maternal uncle, "Respected one! Tell me about the condition of all the planets of my son." || 358 || Upon hearing this, the maternal uncle asked the astrologer named Pashvang, who was proficient in astrology, about the son's birth ceremony, i.e., he asked about the son's planetary position. || 359 || Then the astrologer said, "Tell me the time of birth of this auspicious son." Upon being asked this, Anjana told the time. || 360 || Vasantmala, the friend who dispels all doubts, also said, "The child was born today at night when half the night was left." || 361 || Then the astrologer, who knew about auspicious times, said, "His body is adorned with auspicious signs, which indicates that the child will be blessed with all kinds of achievements." || 362 || "However, if you are not satisfied or if you think this is a worldly ritual, then listen, I will tell you about his life in brief." || 363 || "Today is the eighth day of the bright fortnight of Chaitra. The star is Shravana, the lord of the day is Vibhavasu." || 364 ||

Page #447:
---------------------------
Chapter Seventeen
397
The Sun is in Aries, exalted. The Moon is in Capricorn, in the middle house. ||365|| Mars is in Taurus, in the middle house. Mercury is in Pisces, also in the middle house. Jupiter is in Cancer, exalted. ||366|| Venus and Saturn are both in Pisces, exalted. O King of Kings! Pisces was rising at that time. ||367|| Saturn is being looked at by the Sun with full aspect. Mars is looking at the Sun with half aspect. ||368|| Jupiter is looking at the Sun with three-fourths aspect. The Sun is looking at Jupiter with half aspect. ||369|| Jupiter is looking at the Moon with full aspect. The Moon is also looking at Jupiter with half aspect. ||370|| Jupiter is looking at Saturn with three-fourths aspect. Saturn is looking at Jupiter with half aspect. ||371|| Jupiter is looking at Venus with three-fourths aspect. Venus is also looking at Jupiter with three-fourths aspect. ||372|| There is no mutual aspect between the remaining planets. At that time, the strength of the rising sign and the time is very strong. ||373|| The Sun, Mars, and Jupiter are indicating the yoga of kingship. Saturn is indicating the yoga of liberation. ||374|| If even one Jupiter is exalted, it is the cause of attaining all auspiciousness. Then, all the auspicious planets are exalted in this case. ||375|| At that time, there was a yoga called Brahma and a muhurta called Shubha. Both of these indicate the attainment of happiness related to the external world, i.e., liberation. ||376|| Thus, this horoscope indicates all things for this child, free from all defects. ||377|| Then, the king honored the astrologer with a thousand coins and said to Anjana with joy, ||378|| "Come, daughter! Now let us go to the city of Hanuruh. All the birth ceremonies of this child will be held there." ||379|| Upon hearing this, Anjana, placing the child in her lap, paid homage to the Jina, and repeatedly sought forgiveness from the lord of the place. ||380||
This is the eighth day of the dark fortnight of Chaitra, the Shravana constellation, and the Sun is the lord of the day. ||364|| The Sun is in Aries, exalted, and the Moon is in Capricorn, in the middle house. ||365|| Mars is in Taurus, in the middle house. Mercury is in Pisces, also in the middle house. Jupiter is in Cancer, exalted. ||366|| Venus and Saturn are both in Pisces, exalted. O King of Kings! Pisces was rising at that time. ||367|| The Sun is looking at Saturn with full aspect, and Mars is looking at the Sun with half aspect. ||368|| Jupiter is looking at the Sun with three-fourths aspect, and the Sun is looking at Jupiter with half aspect. ||369|| Jupiter is looking at the Moon with full aspect, and the Moon is also looking at Jupiter with half aspect. ||370|| Jupiter is looking at Saturn with three-fourths aspect, and Saturn is looking at Jupiter with half aspect. ||371|| Jupiter is looking at Venus with three-fourths aspect, and Venus is also looking at Jupiter with three-fourths aspect. ||372|| There is no mutual aspect between the remaining planets. At that time, the strength of the rising sign and the time is very strong. ||373|| The Sun, Mars, and Jupiter are indicating the yoga of kingship, and Saturn is indicating the yoga of liberation. ||374|| If even one Jupiter is exalted, it is the cause of attaining all auspiciousness. Then, all the auspicious planets are exalted in this case. ||375|| At that time, there was a yoga called Brahma and a muhurta called Shubha. Both of these indicate the attainment of happiness related to the external world, i.e., liberation. ||376|| Thus, this horoscope indicates all things for this child, free from all defects. ||377|| Then, the king honored the astrologer with a thousand coins and said to Anjana with joy, ||378|| "Come, daughter! Now let us go to the city of Hanuruh. All the birth ceremonies of this child will be held there." ||379|| Upon hearing this, Anjana, placing the child in her lap, paid homage to the Jina, and repeatedly sought forgiveness from the lord of the place. ||380||

Page #448:
---------------------------
In the Padma Purana, Anjana, accompanied by her family, emerged from the cave. Standing near the aircraft, she resembled a forest goddess. The aircraft was adorned with tinkling bells, as if it were filled with waterfalls, and adorned with strings of pure pearls. It had lanterns hanging from it, and was decorated with forests of glass bananas. Golden bubbles on it sparkled in the sunlight. The aircraft was a rainbow of many jewels, and was adorned with hundreds of colorful flags, making it look like a Kalpavriksha. It was made of precious stones, and was filled with jewels. It was divine, and seemed to be surrounded by heaven.

Seeing this, the child, filled with curiosity, jumped out of his mother's arms and wanted to enter the aircraft. He seemed to have fallen from his mother's lap into the cave of the mountain. Everyone, including Anjana, cried out in alarm, trying to find the child. Anjana lamented in a sorrowful voice, which even moved the hearts of animals. She said, "Oh, my son! What has happened? What has fate done? After showing him a treasure filled with jewels, why has it taken him away?" She continued, "I was already grieving for my husband, and you were my only support. Now, fate has taken you away too."

Then, everyone saw that the child was lying safely on a rock, which had broken into a thousand pieces due to the force of the fall. He was playing with his thumb in his mouth, and his face was adorned with a gentle smile. He was lying on his back, and his hands and feet were moving. He had a beautiful body, and his complexion was like a forest of red and blue lotuses, swaying in a gentle breeze. His radiance illuminated the entire cave with a golden hue. Then, Anjana, seeing her innocent child, picked him up and held him to her chest, kissing his head.

Page #449:
---------------------------
The seventeenth chapter:

The king, Prati-Surya, then said, "Oh, what a great wonder this is! Just as if by a thunderbolt, this stone mass has been pulverized." (395)

"Even as an infant, his power surpasses that of the greatest gods. What can be said of his youth? This body is surely his last." (396)

Knowing this, Prati-Surya, with his hands clasped in reverence, circumambulated the child three times and, along with his wives, paid homage to his final body. (397)

His wives, with their white, black, and red eyes, looked upon him with smiles, as if they were worshipping him with garlands of white, blue, and red lotuses. (398)

Then, Prati-Surya, placing his son and Anjana in a chariot, departed for his own city, adorned with flags and arches. (399)

He then entered the city, greeted by the townspeople bearing auspicious offerings. The sky was filled with the sound of trumpets and other musical instruments. (400)

Just as the gods celebrate the birth of Indra in heaven, so too did the Vidyadharas celebrate the birth of this child in the city of Hanuruh. (401)

Because the child was born in a mountain (Shaila) and later pulverized stones (Shaila), his mother, along with his maternal uncle, named him "Shreeshala." (402)

Because he received his birth rites in the city of Hanuruh, he became known throughout the earth as "Hanuman." (403)

His body, whose actions filled the minds and eyes of all beings with joy, and whose radiance was like that of a divine prince, played in that city. (404)

Gautama Swami said to King Shrenik, "O King! By the power of accumulated virtuous deeds from a previous life, even a thunderbolt, which can pulverize mountains, becomes as soft as a flower. Even fire becomes as cool as the rays of the moon, and a creeper, even if it is like a sword, becomes soft and tender in the hands of beautiful women. (405)

Page #450:
---------------------------
400
Padma Purana
Knowing this, be detached from the evil deeds which are skilled in causing suffering, and be absorbed in the character of the Jina, which is skilled in giving the best happiness. Oh! This sun of birth, which is endowed with thousands of rays of disease, is constantly scorching the whole world with great firmness. ||406||
Thus ends the seventeenth chapter of the Padma Charita, narrated by the Acharya Ravishena, known as the Arsha, which describes the birth of Hanuman. ||17||
The delicate arms of women become strong. ||405||

Page #451:
---------------------------
## The Eighteenth Chapter

This is the story of the birth of the great Sri Sail. Now listen to the story of Vayu, the ornament of Magadha. ||1||

Vayu, as swift as the wind, went to Ravana and, having received his command, engaged in battle with Varuna in the midst of a battlefield filled with various weapons. ||2||

After fighting for a long time, Varuna was defeated and captured by Vayu. Khar-Dushan had been captured by Varuna earlier, so he was released. Vayu took Varuna to Ravana and made a treaty with him, making him subservient to Ravana. Ravana greatly honored Vayu. ||3, 4||

Then, with Ravana's permission, Vayu, carrying Kanta in his heart, quickly returned to his city with the great ministers. ||5||

Vayu entered the city, which was adorned with brilliant flags, arches, and garlands, and was welcomed by the citizens, who were adorned with the finest ornaments. ||6||

Then, leaving his work unfinished, Vayu went towards his palace, where he was greeted by a group of city women standing in the windows, who were overjoyed to see him. ||7||

Then, Vayu entered the palace, honored by the elders and welcomed by his relatives with auspicious words. ||8||

There, he paid his respects to the elders and was greeted by others. He sat in the assembly hall for a while, engaging in pleasant conversation. ||9||

Then, filled with anxiety, he ascended to Anjana's palace. At that time, he was filled with his former emotions and was accompanied only by his laughing friend. ||10||

Seeing the palace devoid of his beloved, his mind, like a lifeless body, fell to the ground in an instant. ||11||

He said to his laughing friend, "Friend, what is this? Where is Anjana, the beautiful one with lotus eyes?" ||12||

Page #452:
---------------------------
402
PapPuran
Without her, this house seems like a forest or the sky to me. Therefore, let her news be known quickly. ||13||
Having learned the news from his close circle, Prahasita spoke to Pavanjaya, telling him all the news, as it was, that would cause him distress. ||14||
Hearing this, Pavanjaya, leaving his family, immediately set out for Mahendra Nagar with his friend, filled with anxiety. ||15||
Reaching near Mahendra Nagar, Pavanjaya, assuming his beloved was in his arms, spoke to his friend, saying, "My friend, look at the beauty of this city, where my beloved Anjana resides, adorned with beautiful charms." ||16-17||
"And where rows of palaces, like the peaks of Mount Kailasa, are hidden by trees of the garden, shining with the brilliance of the monsoon clouds." ||18||
Speaking thus, the best of men, Pavanjaya, reached the city, with his friend, his heart filled with love, and speaking with him. ||19||
Then, hearing of Pavanjaya's arrival, a group of people, led by his father-in-law, came to greet him with offerings. ||20||
Led by his father-in-law, with a loving heart, Pavanjaya entered his home, greeted with respect by the people of the city. ||21||
He entered the house, longing to see his beloved, and sat there for a while, engaging in conversation. ||22||
But even there, when he did not see his beloved, he, filled with separation, asked a young girl who lived in the house, "Little one, do you know if my beloved Anjana is here?" The girl, with a sorrowful voice, replied, "Your beloved is not here." ||23-24||
Then, by those words, Pavanjaya's heart was shattered as if by a thunderbolt, his ears filled with hot, salty water, and he stood still, as if lifeless. His face, touched by the frost of sorrow, lost its radiance. ||25-26||
Then, he left that city, as if escaping from a demon, and wandered the earth, seeking news of his beloved. ||27|| 
1. Conversation. 2. Within reach. 3. Still. 4. From his father-in-law. 5. His beloved.

Page #453:
---------------------------
The Eighteenth Chapter
403
www
wwwwwwwwwwwww
Knowing that Vayu Kumar was afflicted by the wind, Prahasita, filled with sorrow, comforted him, saying, "Why are you despondent, my friend? Calm your troubled mind. Your beloved will soon be found, for how vast is this earth?" ||28-29||
Vayu Kumar replied, "My friend, go quickly to Surya Pur and inform the gurus of my situation. ||30|| I cannot bear to live without my beloved, the incomparable beauty of the earth. Therefore, I will wander the entire world in search of her." ||31||
Thus, Prahasita, overwhelmed with sorrow, left Vayu Kumar and went to Surya Pur, his heart heavy. ||32||
Vayu Kumar, mounted on an elephant that soared through the sky, wandered the earth, his mind consumed by thoughts. "Where has my beloved gone, whose lotus-like body has withered under the scorching sun of sorrow? She who carried me in her heart." ||33-34||
"She who resided in the forest of widowhood, consumed by the fire of separation, and constantly terrified, where did that poor soul go?" ||35||
"She who was virtuous, pure, and bore the weight of her pregnancy, did she not perhaps wander alone into the great forest, adorned with spring garlands?" ||36||
"With eyes blinded by sorrow, did she not perhaps stumble into a deep well or fall prey to a hungry serpent?" ||37||
"Or, burdened by her pregnancy, did she not perhaps lose her life, terrified by the roar of wild beasts?" ||38||
"Or, parched and with a dry tongue, did she not perhaps perish in the waterless forest of Vindhya, my life, my very breath?" ||39||
"Or, in her innocence, did she not perhaps enter the Ganges, teeming with crocodiles, and get swept away by the swift current?" ||40||
"Or, with her feet torn by sharp blades of grass, and blood flowing from her wounds, was she not perhaps unable to take even a single step and died?" ||41||
Here, when Prahasita, his friend, learned that Vayu Kumar was suffering as if from a wind-borne illness, he was deeply saddened by his friend's sorrow and comforted him, saying, "My friend, why are you so despondent? Calm your troubled mind. You will soon see your beloved, for how vast is this earth?" ||28-29||
Vayu Kumar said, "My friend, go quickly to Surya Pur and inform the gurus of my situation. ||30|| I cannot bear to live without my beloved, the incomparable beauty of the earth. Therefore, I will wander the entire world in search of her." ||32||
Having said this, Prahasita, filled with sorrow, left Vayu Kumar and went to Surya Pur, his heart heavy. ||32||
Meanwhile, Vayu Kumar, mounted on an elephant that soared through the sky, wandered the earth, his mind consumed by thoughts. "Where has my beloved gone, whose lotus-like body has withered under the scorching sun of sorrow? She who carried me in her heart." ||33-34||
"She who resided in the forest of widowhood, consumed by the fire of separation, and constantly terrified, where did that poor soul go?" ||35||
"She who was virtuous, pure, and bore the weight of her pregnancy, did she not perhaps wander alone into the great forest, adorned with spring garlands?" ||36||
"With eyes blinded by sorrow, did she not perhaps stumble into a deep well or fall prey to a hungry serpent?" ||37||
"Or, burdened by her pregnancy, did she not perhaps lose her life, terrified by the roar of wild beasts?" ||38||
"Or, parched and with a dry tongue, did she not perhaps perish in the waterless forest of Vindhya, my life, my very breath?" ||39||
"Or, in her innocence, did she not perhaps enter the Ganges, teeming with crocodiles, and get swept away by the swift current?" ||40||
"Or, with her feet torn by sharp blades of grass, and blood flowing from her wounds, was she not perhaps unable to take even a single step and died?" ||41||
1. Satvam M. | Svantam Kh. | 2. Dayita sa te M., J., Kh. | 3. Parimalaanaapadm- M. | 4. Deepika M. | 5. Shruta- M. | 6. Tu M. |

Page #454:
---------------------------
404
Perhaps she was taken away by some wicked Vidyaadhara who travels through the sky. It is a great sorrow that no one brings me news of her. ||42|| Or perhaps she has been lost due to the sorrow of a miscarriage and has gone to the place of the Aryikas? She was a follower of Dharma. ||43|| Thinking thus, the mind-distracted Pavananjay wandered the earth, but he did not see his beloved, who captivated all senses and minds. ||44|| Then, consumed by separation, he saw the whole world as empty and firmly decided to die. ||45|| He found no joy in the mountains, nor in the trees, nor in the beautiful rivers, for he was separated from Anjana, who was his everything. ||46|| It is right that Pavananjay asked the trees for news of her, for those who are in sorrow are devoid of reason. ||47|| 
Then, reaching the forest called Bhutarava, he descended from the elephant and sat still like a sage, meditating on his beloved for a moment. ||48|| He had thrown his weapons and armor on the ground with disregard, while the dense branches of the trees above him blocked the sun. ||49|| The elephant named Ambargocar stood before him with great humility, and Pavananjay, exhausted, spoke to him in a very sweet voice: ||50|| "O King of Elephants! Now go, roam wherever your heart desires. Forgive me for my defeat, for I was blinded by my love for Anjana and sought your help to find her." ||51|| "Graze on the green grass and the leaves of the Sallaki trees on the banks of this river, and roam freely with your herd of elephants." ||52|| Pavananjay said all this, but the elephant, knowing his kindness and generous nature, did not leave his sorrowful master's side, like a true friend. ||53|| Pavananjay had decided that if he did not find his beloved Anjana, he would die in this forest. ||54|| For Pavananjay, whose mind was fixed on his beloved, a night in the forest seemed longer than four years, filled with various thoughts and anxieties. ||55|| 
1. Me na vidyate M., Kh., B., J. | 2. Duhkhatsute Kh. | 3. Krishna M. | 4. Viprयुक्तस्य M. | 5. 'Uraschhadaḥ kaṅkaṭako'jagaraḥ kavaco'striyaam' ityamarah. -Mastrakantakam M. | 6. Shasya M. | 7. Sarthena K. | 8. Varshachatushtayadapyadhika. 'Hayano'stri sharatsama ityamarah.

Page #455:
---------------------------
The Eighteenth Chapter

Thus, O King Shrenik, listen to this story. I will tell you what your parents did after Pavananjay left. 

When his friend told them about Pavananjay, all his relatives were overcome with grief. 

Then Ketumati, overwhelmed with grief for her son, spoke with a mocking tone, her voice choked with tears. "Oh, Prahasit, was it right for you to do this? To leave my son and come alone?"

Prahasit replied, "Oh, Mother, he sent me with great effort. He wouldn't let me stay there in any way."

Ketumati asked, "Where did he go?" Prahasit replied, "Where Anjana is." Ketumati asked again, "Where is Anjana?" Prahasit said, "I don't know. Those who act hastily without examining things, they are bound to suffer later, those who are the life-force of people."

Prahasit also told Ketumati, "Your son made a firm vow that if he didn't see his beloved, he would surely die."

Hearing this, Ketumati was deeply distressed and began to wail. A group of women, their eyes streaming with tears, surrounded her.

She cried out, "Without knowing the truth, what have I, a sinner, done? That my son has been brought to the brink of life and death?"

"With a cruel heart, a deceitful mind, and acting without thought, what have I, a fool, done?"

"This city, abandoned by Vayukumar, does not shine. Why just this city? Even Vijayardhagiri does not shine, nor does the army of Ravana without him."

"Who on earth is equal to my son, who made a pact even with Ravana, a pact that was difficult even for him?"

"Alas, my son! You were the foundation of humility, always devoted to honoring your teachers, the most beautiful in the world, with your virtues known everywhere. Where have you gone?"

"Oh, my son, who loved your mother like your own life, please soothe your mother's heart, burning with the fire of your sorrow, with your comforting words, and make her free from grief."

Page #456:
---------------------------
406
In the Padma Purana, while lamenting, they beat their chests severely. The sorrowful-eyed Prahlad, with great difficulty, comforted the women. ||7|| Having put on a brave face in front of all his relatives, Prahlad, eager to find his son, left his city. ||72|| He summoned all the Vidyadharas who lived in the two categories. They all came, filled with love, along with their families. ||73|| They, with their various radiant vehicles, followed the path of the sun. With their eyes fixed on the deep forests, they diligently searched the earth. ||74|| Having learned this news from Prahlad's messenger, Pratibhana, bearing great sorrow in his heart, informed Anjana. ||75|| Anjana, already sorrowful, became even more distressed by this heavy grief. With her face washed with tears, she began a sorrowful lament. ||76|| "Alas, my lord! You were the bond of my heart. Where have you gone, leaving me, the one who constantly suffers?" ||77|| "Are you still not giving up that ancient anger, which has made you invisible to all the Vidyadharas?" ||78|| "Oh, my lord! Give me even one word, like nectar, for the great souls never abandon the welfare of those in distress." ||79|| "I have sustained my life only with the hope of seeing you. What use are these sinful breaths to me now?" ||80|| "The desires I had made, to be united with my husband, have been thwarted by fate." ||81|| "My dear one must have attained that state, which this cruel heart has always feared, because of my bad luck." ||82|| "Vasantamala! See what is happening to me? How am I forced to roll on a bed of burning coals of unbearable separation?" ||83|| Vasantamala said, "Oh, goddess! Don't indulge in such inauspicious talk. I say with certainty that your husband will come to you." ||84||

Page #457:
---------------------------
## The Ashtavasha Parva

**85.** "O Kalyani, I will bring your husband soon." Thus, reassuring Anjana with great sorrow, King Prati-Surya, riding a beautiful, swift chariot like the sun, ascended into the sky. 

**86.** Looking down at the earth, he went on his way, bowing his head in reverence.

**87.** The Vijayavasi Vidyadharas and the Trikuta-dwelling Rakshasas, accompanied by Prati-Surya, diligently surveyed the earth from the sky.

**48.** Then, in the forest called Bhutarava, they saw a huge elephant, whose form resembled a monsoon cloud.

**89.** "This is the elephant called Kalamegha, belonging to Pavankumar," they recognized him, having seen him many times before.

**90.** "This is the same elephant," all the Vidyadharas exclaimed with joy, making a great noise.

**91.** "This elephant, whose color is like the Neelagiri or Anjanagiri, and whose trunk is of the right proportion, is where Pavankumar must be.

**92.** This elephant, like a friend, always stays by his side."

**93.** Saying this, they approached the elephant, their minds trembling with fear, for he was unrestrained.

**94.** The great elephant was disturbed by their loud noise. He was unstoppable, his entire body was restless, and his speed was immense.

**95.** His cheeks were stained with musk, his ears were erect, and he roared loudly. The Vidyadharas were terrified and fled in every direction he looked.

**96.** Seeing the crowd, the elephant, devoted to protecting his master, did not leave Pavankumar's side.

**97.** He circled Pavankumar, playfully swinging his trunk and terrifying all the Vidyadharas with his sharp tusks.

**98.** The Vidyadharas, eager to subdue the elephant, surrounded him with female elephants.

Page #458:
---------------------------
In the Padma Purana,
Among all the methods of subjugation, there is no other superior to union with a woman. || 99 || Then the celestial beings saw Vayu, whose limbs were trembling, whose form was like a painted figure, and who was sitting in silence. || 100 || Although all the celestial beings treated him appropriately, he remained immersed in thought like a sage, not speaking to anyone. || 101 || His parents, filled with love for their son, smelled his head, embraced him repeatedly, and their eyes were filled with tears of joy. || 102 || They said, "Son, why do you behave in such a way, abandoning your parents? You were the foremost among the virtuous." || 103 || "Your body is worthy of a fine bed, but why have you placed it in the hollow of a tree in this terrible and desolate forest?" || 104 || Even when addressed in this way, he did not utter a word. He simply indicated that he had decided to die. || 105 || "I have taken this vow that I will not eat or speak until I obtain Anjana. How can I break that vow now?" || 106 || "Let the matter of my beloved be forgotten. How can I satisfy these parents while upholding my vow of truth?" He became anxious, thinking this. || 107 || Then, seeing Vayu, whose head was bowed and who was sitting in silent contemplation, knowing that he was determined to die, the celestial beings were filled with grief. || 108 || All the celestial beings, whose hearts were deeply saddened and who were touching Vayu's body with their sweat-soaked hands, began to lament with his parents. || 109 || Then, smiling, Prati-Surya said to the celestial beings, "Do not be distressed. I will call Vayu Kumar for you." || 110 || And embracing Vayu, he spoke to him in order: "Kumar, listen, I will tell you everything that happened." || 111 || On the beautiful mountain called Sandhyabhra, there arose a state of solitary knowledge in the sage Ananga-Vichi, which caused disturbance among the Indras. || 112 || I was going there at night, worshipping him with a lamp, when I heard a sound of weeping, like the sound of women crying. || 113 ||

Page #459:
---------------------------
## The Eighteenth Chapter

"I heard a sound like the notes of a vina, a woman's weeping." (113) 

"I made that sound my target and went to the highest peak of the mountain. There, in a cave called Paryanka, I saw Anjana." (114)

"Knowing the reason for her exile, I comforted the young woman, who was weeping in sorrow." (115)

"In that cave, she gave birth to a son with auspicious signs. His radiance made the cave seem as if it were made of gold." (116)

"Hearing of the birth of his daughter, Pavananjay was filled with joy. He quickly asked, 'What happened next? What happened next?'" (117)

"Pratibhanu said, 'After that, Anjana's son, with his beautiful actions, was being placed in a chariot when he fell into the mountain cave.'" (118)

"Hearing this, Pavananjay, along with his army of celestial beings, was again filled with sorrow, crying out in despair." (119)

"Pratibhanu said, 'Do not grieve. Listen to what happened. O Vayu, the whole story will dispel your sorrow.'" (120)

"Pratibhanu continued, 'Then, with cries of sorrow echoing through the directions, we descended and saw the innocent child in the middle of the mountain.'" (121)

"The child had fallen and shattered the mountain. We, in awe, praised him as 'Shreeshala.'" (122)

"Then, I took Anjana, along with her son, in a chariot and brought her to my city." (123)

"Since he was raised in the island of Hanuruh, he was given the second name Hanuman." (124)

"So, you should know that the woman you spoke of, Anjana, with her son who performs wondrous deeds, resides in my city." (125)

"Then, the joyful celestial beings, eager to see Anjana, quickly went to the city of Hanuruh, with Vayu leading the way." (126)

"There, a great festival was held for the reunion of Anjana and Pavananjay. The joy of the couple was palpable, especially for them, it was indescribable." (127)

"The celestial beings spent two months there, filled with joy. After receiving their due respect, they returned to their respective places." (128)

Page #460:
---------------------------
In the Padma Purana,
Even though the wind god, having obtained a wife after a long time, was well-behaved, he was delighted by the deeds of his son, like the sage Vyasa. || 129 ||
Hanuman, having attained the peak of youthful glory there, stole the hearts of all, and his body shone like the peak of Mount Meru. || 130 ||
He was a master of all knowledge, possessed immense power, was humble, and skilled in the meaning of all scriptures. He was generous in helping others, and he enjoyed the remaining merit from his heavenly pleasures. He delighted in that city, being devoted to the worship of his teachers. || 131-132 ||
The Shardulavikridita
410
Whoever, with the same love as the wind god, listens to this union of Anjana and Vayu, which is filled with various flavors and wonders, will, by the knowledge of all the laws of the world, attain self-knowledge. His mind will not be inclined towards evil deeds, but will be inclined towards the good deeds he has begun. || 133 ||
He will obtain a long life, a beautiful body free from disease, a mind that can comprehend the ultimate subjects of all scriptures, fame as pure as the moon, the ability to enjoy heavenly pleasures, and all the rare things in the world. He will obtain all this as easily as the sun obtains its radiant halo. || 134 ||
Thus ends the eighteenth chapter of the Padma Purana, titled "The Union of Vayu and Anjana," narrated by the sage Ravisha, as it is known in the tradition of the sages. || 18 ||
0
Two months passed. After that, everyone left, having received their due respect after asking. || 128 ||
After a long time, having obtained a wife, the deeds of Pavananjay also became proper, and he delighted in the deeds of his son, and he began to roam there like the god Devaki. || 129 ||
Hanuman also, having obtained the best youthful fortune there, began to steal the hearts of all, and his body shone like the peak of Mount Meru. || 130 ||
He had mastered all knowledge, his influence was unique, he was a knower of humility, he was mighty, he was skilled in understanding the meaning of all scriptures, he was generous in helping others, he was the enjoyer of the remaining merit from his heavenly pleasures, and he was devoted to the worship of his teachers. In this way, he played with great joy in that city. || 131-132 ||
Gautama Swami says to King Shrenik, "O King! Whoever listens with devotion to this union of Anjana and Pavananjay, which is filled with various flavors and wonders, will gain knowledge of all the laws of the world. And by the influence of that knowledge, he will attain self-knowledge, which will cause him to begin only good deeds, and his mind will not be inclined towards evil deeds." || 133 ||
He will obtain a long life, a beautiful body free from disease, a mind that can comprehend the ultimate subjects of all scriptures, fame as pure as the moon, the ability to enjoy heavenly pleasures, and all the rare things in the world. He will obtain all this as easily as the sun obtains its radiant halo. || 134 ||
Thus ends the eighteenth chapter of the Padma Purana, titled "The Union of Vayu and Anjana," narrated by the sage Ravisha, as it is known in the tradition of the sages. || 18 ||
-
1. The connector is "me". 2. The lotus is "me". 3. The ultimate subject of all scriptures.

Page #461:
---------------------------
The nineteenth chapter: Ravana, filled with unfulfilled rage, summoned all the Vidyadharas again through letter carriers.  ||1|| The king of Kishkindha, Dundubhi, the lord of Alankarapur, the master of Rathnapur, and all the other Vidyadharas residing in both ranges of the Vijayarddha mountain, arrived at Ravana's presence with all preparations. ||2-3||  After that, a man bearing a mark on his forehead arrived at Hanuruh island, near Pavananjay and Prati-Surya. ||4|| Understanding the meaning of the letter, both decided to go to Ravana, but before leaving, they were eager to perform the coronation of Hanuman on the kingdom. ||5|| Great preparations were made for the coronation. The sound of trumpets and other musical instruments echoed, and men stood before Hanuman with kalashas in their hands. ||6|| Hanuman asked Pavananjay and Prati-Surya, "What is this?" They replied, "O son! Now you rule the kingdom of Hanuruh island." ||7|| "Ravana has summoned us to assist him in the war, so we must obey his command with love and as befits us." ||8|| "Varuna, who resides in Rasatalapur, stands against him. His army is vast, and he is invincible due to the strength of his sons and fortresses." ||9|| Hearing this, Hanuman humbly replied, "It is not proper for you to go to war while I am here." ||10|| "O son! You have not yet tasted the flavor of battle," they said. Hanuman replied, "What is liberation, if it is not attained now?" ||11|| When he refused to stay despite their attempts to dissuade him, both granted permission to the young man to leave. ||11-12|| 

Then, after bathing and eating in the morning, he paid homage to the Arhats and Siddhas with great effort, adorned his body with auspicious substances, and, filled with great energy, he...

Page #462:
---------------------------
The Padma Purana states:

Having paid respects to his father, mother, and maternal uncle, and having spoken to all, the learned Hanuman, mounted a chariot that shone like the sun, and, encompassing the ten directions with a multitude of weapons, proceeded towards Lanka.

Approaching Lanka, he was as resplendent in his chariot as Indra, the king of the gods, is when he approaches Mount Meru.

As he reached the mountain of water-waves, the sun set, kissing the vast hips of the ocean.

There, after spending the night in pleasant conversation with his valiant companions, Hanuman, with great enthusiasm, set his gaze on Lanka and continued his journey.

He saw various countries, islands, mountains, and crocodiles churning the ocean, and he entered the army of the Rakshasas.

Seeing Hanuman's army, the chieftains of the Rakshasas, with eyes fixed on the abode of Sri Saila, were struck with utter amazement.

Hearing the words, "This is the same glorious one who pulverized the mountain," Hanuman went to Ravana.

Seeing Hanuman, who was adorned with flowers, whose buzzing, intoxicated bees were attracted by the fragrance, and whose chariot was adorned with the radiance of jewels, Ravana rose from his seat on the stone platform, where he was surrounded by his ministers.

Embracing Hanuman, whose body was bent in humility, Ravana sat down beside him, his face beaming with joy.

After inquiring about each other's well-being and seeing each other's prosperity, the two fortunate ones, like two Indras, reveled in their meeting.

Then, Ravana, whose mind was filled with delight, and who was looking at Hanuman with eyes full of affection, said:

"Oh, how much my dear friend, the son of the wind, has increased my love by sending this son, who is an ocean of renowned virtues!

Having obtained this great being, adorned with a halo of brilliance, I have no fear of anything in this vast world."

Page #463:
---------------------------
The Nineteenth Canto

413. While the qualities of Hanuman were being described, Sri Saila, the lord of the mountain, became humble, like a bee that has been satiated. This is the nature of the virtuous. ||29||

414. The sun, fearing the impending battle, hastened to set, its rays tinged with a reddish hue. ||30||

415. Evening, carrying the crimson of passion, followed behind, adorned like a virtuous wife following her beloved. ||31||

416. Then, the night, adorned with the moon, shone brightly, following her husband, the sun, without ceasing. ||32||

417. The next day, when the world was illuminated by the sun's rays, Dashagriva, fully armed, stood at the head of his army. ||33||

418. Hanuman, standing nearby, adorned with auspicious symbols, had crossed the ocean by his divine power and was approaching the city of Varuna. ||34||

419. As the sun, aiming at Parashurama, shone with unparalleled brilliance, so too did Ravana, approaching his enemy, radiate an unmatched light. ||35||

420. The sound of the army alerted the city of Varuna to the arrival of Dashagriva, and the entire city was shaken with fear and commotion. ||36||

421. The city of Varuna, known as Patala-Pundarika, was adorned with strong banners and jeweled gates. But the arrival of Ravana filled the city with the clamor of war preparations. ||37||

422. In that city, beautiful and captivating like the city of the Asuras, the women were filled with fear, their eyes wide with terror. ||38||

423. The warriors of the city, like the gods who dwell in their abodes, came out to fight. Varuna, proud of his valor, emerged like the lord of the Asuras. ||39||

424. A hundred valiant sons of Varuna, who had blocked the sun's rays with their weapons, also rose to fight. ||40||

425. Just as the Asura princes easily defeat the lesser gods, so too did the hundred sons of Varuna quickly vanquish the Rakshasa army. ||41||

426. The mighty warrior, whose body was enveloped in a halo of brilliance, declared, "No task in this world will be too difficult for me." ||28||

427. When Ravana was describing the qualities of Hanuman, he became humble, like a bee that has been satiated. This is the nature of the great ones. ||29||

428. Then, the sun, whose rays were tinged with red, seemed to set, as if fearing the impending battle. ||30||

429. Evening, carrying the crimson of passion, followed behind, adorned like a virtuous wife following her beloved. ||31||

430. The night, adorned with the moon, shone brightly, following her husband, the sun, without ceasing. ||32||

431. The next day, when the world was illuminated by the sun's rays, Ravana, fully armed, stood at the head of his army. ||33||

432. Hanuman, standing nearby, adorned with auspicious symbols, had crossed the ocean by his divine power and was approaching the city of Varuna. ||34||

433. As the sun, aiming at Parashurama, shone with unparalleled brilliance, so too did Ravana, approaching his enemy, radiate an unmatched light. ||35||

434. The sound of the army alerted the city of Varuna to the arrival of Dashagriva, and the entire city was shaken with fear and commotion. ||36||

435. The city of Varuna, known as Patala-Pundarika, was adorned with strong banners and jeweled gates. But the arrival of Ravana filled the city with the clamor of war preparations. ||37||

436. In that city, beautiful and captivating like the city of the Asuras, the women were filled with fear, their eyes wide with terror. ||38||

437. The warriors of the city, like the gods who dwell in their abodes, came out to fight. Varuna, proud of his valor, emerged like the lord of the Asuras. ||39||

438. A hundred valiant sons of Varuna, who had blocked the sun's rays with their weapons, also rose to fight. ||40||

439. Just as the Asura princes easily defeat the lesser gods, so too did the hundred sons of Varuna quickly vanquish the Rakshasa army. ||41||

Page #464:
---------------------------
414
The army of Ravana, which had a hundred brothers displaying their skills, was shattered by the army of Varuna. The army of Ravana scattered in fear like a herd of cows. ||42|| The weapons of the Rakshasas, such as the chakra, bow, mace, spear, and shataghni, fell from their hands, which were slippery with sweat. ||43|| Seeing his army distressed by the shower of arrows, Ravana, himself struck by the swift rain of arrows, became enraged. In a moment, he broke through the enemy ranks and entered their midst, felling the heroes of Varuna's army like a mighty elephant uproots trees. ||44-45|| Then, the hundred sons of Varuna surrounded Ravana, like thunderous clouds encircling the sun during the rainy season. ||46|| Though his body was pierced by arrows coming from all directions, the proud lion of a man, Ravana, did not abandon the battlefield. ||47|| On the other side, Varuna had arrayed against him the best of men, the one with radiant ears, Indrajit, and other lords of the Rakshasas. ||48|| Seeing Ravana, who was marked by the arrows of Varuna's sons and whose body was stained with blood, resembling a cluster of Palasha flowers, Hanuman quickly mounted his chariot, which moved among the great men. His heart was filled with affection for Ravana, as if he were his brother, and he shone like the sun. ||49-50|| Then, Hanuman, who surpassed the wind in speed, who was revered for his victories, and who shone like the sun, prepared to fight like Yama himself. ||51|| Just as a group of high clouds, driven by a mighty wind, scatters in all directions, so too, the sons of Varuna, driven by Hanuman, fled in all directions. ||52|| He repeatedly engaged in the sport of cutting through the Kadali forest with the bodies of his enemies, that is, he effortlessly cut through the bodies of his enemies, who were like Kadali trees. ||53|| Just as a man pulls his friend out of affection, so too, he pulled a hero with a noose made of a Vidya-created Langul. ||54||

Page #465:
---------------------------
## The Nineteenth Chapter

**415** Just as someone strikes the head of a deluded person with a hammer, so too was he being struck on the head by a falling meteorite. **55** Seeing him playing, Sri Saila, adorned with the banner of the monkey, approached with eyes red with anger. **56** Seeing Varuna approaching Sri Saila, the king of the Rakshasas, ran and blocked him like a mountain blocking the flow of a river. **57** The battle between Varuna and the Rakshasas raged, filled with horses, elephants, foot soldiers, and a multitude of weapons. **58** Meanwhile, the son of the wind, Hanuman, had bound a hundred of Varuna's sons. They were exhausted from the long battle, and their army was decimated. **59** Hearing that his hundred sons were bound, Varuna was overwhelmed with grief. He forgot his knowledge and his strength faltered. **60** Seizing this opportunity, the master of battle, Ravana, pierced through Varuna's knowledge called "Yogini" and captured him alive. **61** At that time, Ravana acted as Rahu to the moon, Varuna, whose radiance was lost due to the loss of his sons and who was devoid of his rising. **62** Varuna, who was trapped in a cage of weapons, his pride broken, was entrusted to the care of Kumbhakarna, who looked at him with wonder. **63** After that, Ravana, relieved of his worries, gave his army rest. He stayed in the excellent garden called "Bhavanonmad". **64** The weariness of his army, which had taken shelter under the shade of trees, was dispelled by the cool breeze from the sea. **65** Knowing that their leader was captured, the entire army of Varuna, filled with fear and anxiety, entered the city of Poundarika. **66** Although they were the same army and the same great warriors, they became useless without their leader. **67** Oh, look at the greatness of punya! When a virtuous person is born, many others rise with him, and when he falls, many others fall with him. **68** 

**Notes:**

* **Punya:** Merit, virtue, good deeds.
* **Yogini:** A type of knowledge or power.
* **Rahu:** A celestial being who is said to cause eclipses.
* **Kumbhakarna:** Ravana's brother, known for his immense size and sleep.
* **Bhavanonmad:** A garden, possibly named after a deity.
* **Poundarika:** A city.

Page #466:
---------------------------
In the Padma Purana, it is said that Bhaskarakarna, the enemy, destroyed the city, which was filled with a multitude of bewildered people.  ||65|| The warriors looted all the wealth, jewels, and other valuables of the city. This was done out of anger towards the enemy city, not out of greed. ||70|| The women, who were filled with the delusion of love, with their eyes streaming with tears, were being taken away, wailing. ||71|| Those women, whose bodies were bent under the weight of their breasts, with their hands trembling like tender leaves, were being taken away by the cruel men, crying out for their relatives. ||72|| One woman, who had been thrown inside the chariot, whose moon-like face was eclipsed by the sorrow of the Rahu, spoke to her friend, her eyes filled with tears. ||73|| "My friend, if my virtue is destroyed, I will surely die by hanging myself from a cloth." ||74|| Another woman, whose death was uncertain, was calling out to her beloved, again and again, her eyes dull with sorrow, remembering his virtues. ||75|| Those women, whose eyes were streaming with tears, were calling out to their mothers, fathers, husbands, brothers, uncles, and sons, causing sorrow even to the sage. ||76|| One woman, whose eyes had turned green due to the radiance of Kumbhakarna, spoke to her friend, who had lotus-like eyes, in a secluded place. ||77|| "My friend, seeing this great man, I have experienced an extraordinary joy, and my whole body feels like it has become subservient to that joy." ||78|| Thus, due to the strange nature of karma, both pure and impure thoughts arose in the minds of those women. Indeed, the actions of people are strange. ||79|| Then, Kumbhakarna, who possessed wealth like Kubera, who was served by valiant warriors, who was filled with the sound of victory, and who was adorned with beautiful pastimes, descended from his chariot and, with great joy, presented the captured women with their pale lips to Ravana. ||80-81|| Those women were filled with sorrow, their eyes filled with tears, and their bodies trembling. ||82||

Page #467:
---------------------------
They say that the nineteenth chapter is full of compassion, spontaneous, and somewhat sorrowful. Ravana, filled with compassion, spoke to his brother. ||83|| Oh, this is a terrible deed you have done, my dear brother! You have brought these noble women as prisoners. ||84|| What fault is there in these innocent women, who are like precious jewels? Why have you brought them here in vain? ||85|| The duty of protecting the innocent, destroying the enemies, and serving the teachers, is the duty of the great souls. ||86|| Saying this, he immediately freed them, and they quickly returned to their homes. The virtuous women were comforted by his words, and their fear quickly subsided. ||87|| Then Ravana called Varuna, who was ashamed and whose face had turned pale at the sight of the warriors. He said, "Do not grieve over being captured in battle, for the capture of heroes in battle is a cause for their great fame." ||88-89|| A valiant hero in battle obtains only two things: capture or death. Only cowards flee. ||90|| You, as before, should protect your entire kingdom, with all your friends and relatives, free from all troubles, in your own place. ||91|| Thus addressed, Varuna folded his hands and said to the valiant Ravana, "In this world, your virtue is vast. He who holds enmity towards you is a fool." ||92|| Oh, this great courage of yours is worthy of thousands of hymns, like that of a sage. You have defeated me without using divine jewels. Truly, your rule is exalted. ||93||

Page #468:
---------------------------
## Chapter 418 of the Padma Purana: The Story of Vayu's Son

How can the influence of Vayu's son, the wonder-worker Hanuman, be described? For, O virtuous one, he was also honored by your auspicious presence. ||94||

This earth, protected by the treasury of valor, is not attainable by anyone through lineage. It is meant for the enjoyment of the valiant, and you stand at the head of the valiant, therefore, you should rule the world. ||95||

O lord of great renown, you are our master. Forgive us for our harsh words. We speak because it is necessary to speak, O lord, your boundless forgiveness is already evident. ||96||

By forming a bond with you, O one of great effort, I have achieved my purpose. Therefore, accept my daughter, for you are the most worthy of her. ||97||

Saying this, he offered his daughter, born to the queen Sudevi, a beautiful maiden with a lotus-like face, known as Satyavati, to Ravana. ||98||

A grand celebration took place at their wedding, honoring all the people. For both of them possessed all prosperity, and there was nothing left for them to seek. ||99||

Thus, honored by Ravana, who himself had honored him, and having followed him, Vayu entered his own capital. There, for some days, his heart was filled with sorrow due to the separation from his daughter. ||100||

Ravana, who shook Mount Kailasa, also came to Lanka and, with great honor, gave his daughter, Chandra-nakha's beautiful daughter, to Hanuman. That daughter was known throughout the world as Anangapushpa, the queen of virtues. Her eyes were like the flower-shaped weapon of Kamadeva, the god of love. Obtaining her, Hanuman was filled with great joy. ||102||

Page #469:
---------------------------
## The Nineteenth Chapter

**419**

**Vasantatilaka Vritta**

He acquired wealth and was crowned in the city of Karnakundala, like Indra in the celestial realm, he enjoyed the best of pleasures. ||10||

Similarly, Nala, the king of Kishkupura, gave his renowned daughter, Harimalini, to Hanuman, who was victorious in acquiring Lakshmi through his beauty. ||104||

In the city of Kinnaragita, he obtained a hundred daughters of the Kinnara race. Thus, the great one had more than a thousand wives in succession. ||105||

**Upjati Vritta**

Hanuman, who was known as Shrishaila, wandered and stayed on that mountain. Thus, the beautiful peak became known as Shrishaila throughout the earth. ||106||

At that time, in the city of Kishkindha, resided the noble Sugriva, the king of the Vidhyadharas. His wife, Tara, was like the moon in her face and resembled Rati in her beauty. ||107||

They had a daughter named Padma raga, whose complexion was like a fresh lotus. She was renowned throughout the earth for her virtues and resembled Lakshmi in her beauty. Her eyes were large, her lotus-like face was adorned with a cluster of radiance, her breasts were high and full like the temples of a large elephant, her belly was slender like the grip of Indra's thunderbolt, she moved like a beautiful lake, and she stole the hearts of all men. ||108-109||

**Upendra Vajra Vritta**

Her parents, thinking about a suitable match for their beautiful and charming daughter, could not sleep at night, and during the day, their minds were scattered. ||110||

**Note:** The text mentions that Hanuman received not only a daughter but also a coronation in the city of Karnakundala. This suggests that he was crowned as the king of that city.

Page #470:
---------------------------
420
In the Padma Purana, the Vidyaadharas, led by Indrajit, whose lineage and character were well-known, were depicted in paintings. These beautiful paintings were shown to the daughter by her parents. ||111||
Looking at them in sequence, the girl repeatedly narrowed her eyes. When she saw the painting of Hanuman, her gaze was immediately drawn to it and remained fixed. She looked at him with affection. ||112||
Seeing Hanuman in the painting, whose entire body was devoid of any resemblance to others, the girl was struck by five unbearable arrows of Kamadeva at the same time. ||113||
Seeing her affection for Hanuman, her wise friend said, "Oh, girl! This is the son of Pavananjay, known as Shrishail." ||114||
"His qualities were known to you before, and his beauty is before your eyes. Therefore, enjoy the pleasures of love with him and give your parents a long sleep, that is, let them sleep peacefully." ||115||
"Oh, what a wonder! Hanuman, even in a painting, has aroused passion in your heart." The girl, blushing, struck her friend with a lotus flower. ||116||
When the father learned that his daughter's heart had been stolen by the son of Marut, he immediately sent her painting to Hanuman. ||117||
The messenger sent by Sugriva reached Shreenagar. There, he introduced himself, paid his respects, and then showed Hanuman the painting of Padma raga, the daughter of Tara. ||118||
1. Looking at them in sequence, the girl repeatedly narrowed her eyes. 
2. By him, the mind...
3. The other...
4. Born...

Page #471:
---------------------------
## The Nineteenth Chapter

It is said in this world that the god of love has five arrows. If this is true, then how did the daughter of the king wound Hanuman with a hundred arrows at once?  || 119 ||

Thinking, "My birth is in vain if I do not obtain this maiden," Hanuman, endowed with great wealth, went to Sugriva's city in an instant. || 120 ||

Hearing of his approach, King Sugriva, overjoyed, immediately went out to greet him. Then, Hanuman, who had been honored with hundreds of offerings, entered the city with his father-in-law. || 121 ||

At that time, as Hanuman was going towards the royal palace, the women of the city, abandoning all other tasks, went to the jewel-studded windows of the palaces. Their lotus-like eyes were filled with longing to see him. || 122 ||

Padmaraga, the daughter of Sugriva, with her delicate body, gazed from the window at Hanuman's form. In her mind, she experienced a state beyond description. || 123 ||

"This is not the same man, this is someone else," or "No, friend, this is the same one," the women debated amongst themselves. Thus, Hanuman entered Sugriva's city. || 124 ||

Their marriage was celebrated with great splendor, with all their relatives present. The two, adorned with beautiful forms, attained supreme joy through their harmonious union. || 125 ||

Hanuman, his mind at peace, returned to his own place, taking his wife with him. He left his father-in-law and mother-in-law filled with sorrow, due to the separation from their daughter and their own separation from her. || 126 ||

With such a glorious son, whose fame spread throughout the world, King Pavana and Anjana, immersed in the ocean of supreme bliss, reveled in their joy. || 127 ||

**Notes:**

1.  "Kanya liyukt" should be "Kanya liyukt**a**" (daughter of the king)
2.  "Swavargau" should be "Swavarg**a**" (his family)

Page #472:
---------------------------
Here’s the English translation of the provided text, while keeping the Sanskrit words intact:

---

422

In the Padmapurāṇa, revered like the Śrīśaila by the king of Khecaras, hailed as one who holds great honor. The master of all enemies, the lord of the three realms, is equal to Hari in his neck. ||128|| 

In the great city of Laṅkā, the lord, renowned for his vast splendor, enjoyed happiness with the pleasures of the earth. Just as the lord of gods provides fulfillment to the entire world, so did he, like the Surendra in the celestial abode. ||129||

A great personage, his hands red like the lotus, and who is adored by the women of pleasure. He did not realize the long passage of time like a bumblebee delighted by a beloved face. ||130||

If a man had a single wife who was deformed and constantly quarreling, he still engages in sensual pleasures, thinking himself the lord of desires while situated in worldly happiness. ||131||

What to say of that king, who possessed great power, was adorned with the beauty of eighteen thousand women, the lord of three realms, and was matchless in his splendor? ||132||

Thus, surrounded by all the celestial beings, whom people revered with lowered heads in fear, and who was ceremoniously anointed as the ruler of the three worlds, such was Rāvaṇa, who attained that praised sovereignty. ||133||

Worshipped by all celestial beings, whose body was enchanting with the qualities of glory and beauty, he was like the moon, captivating the hearts of all. ||134||

His discus, known as Sudarśana, was divine and faultless, shining like the midday sun, adept at annihilating hostile kings, and stood out brilliantly, adorned with various celestial gems. ||135||

The intense energy emanating from him was terrifying, like the dreadful death that grips the bodies of wicked souls, while he was praised and honored in the abode of weapons. ||136||

Now, great Hanumāna, the supreme king of the celestial beings, was honored by all for his great virtues.

--- 

This translation aims to carry over the meaning and context of the original text while retaining the significance of the highlighted Sanskrit terms.

Page #473:
---------------------------
## The Nineteenth Chapter

**423**

Thus, Ravana, due to his own karmic actions, inherited the kingdom of Lanka, a lineage passed down through generations. He possessed extraordinary wealth and happiness, a protector of the Rakshasas, and enjoyed the highest worldly pleasures. **(137)**

The Muni Suvrata Tirtha, the place of attaining Right Faith, Right Knowledge, and Right Conduct, has long passed. Yet, those who are far from the ultimate truth, those foolish poets, have spoken of this great man in a different way in the world. **(138)**

Those poets, enslaved by worldly desires, devoid of true knowledge, extremely cunning, and constantly attached to sin, with their fabricated, harmful, and deceitful writings, ensnare the innocent and simple-minded like a flock of deer. **(139)**

Therefore, O Shrenik, you who have understood the true nature of things, who have destroyed the mire of false doctrines created by those with wrong views, who shine brighter than the sun, and who are as vast as Lakshmi, worship the jewel of the Jina's teachings, the one revered by Indra. **(140)**

Thus ends the nineteenth chapter of the Padmacharita, narrated by the Acharya Ravishena, which describes the kingdom of Ravana. **(19)**

Thus ends the first chapter, the Vidhyadhara Kanda.

Page #474:
---------------------------
## The Twentieth Chapter

The learned Shrenik, with a humble heart and a clear mind, having heard this, bowed down at the feet of the Ganadhara and said with wonder, "O Lord! By your grace, I have come to know the origin of the eighth Pratinarayana, and the difference between the monkey and demon lineages. Now, O Lord, I wish to hear the story of the twenty-four Tirthankaras and the twelve Chakravartis, along with their past lives, as it is the cause of purifying the mind."

"And, O Lord, who was the eighth Balabhadra, famous throughout the world, born in what lineage, and what were his deeds?"

"O great sage! I also wish to know the names of their fathers and others. O Lord, you are worthy of telling all this."

Thus addressed, the great-souled, expert in ultimate truth, Ganadhara, pleased by the excellent question, spoke these words: "Listen, Shrenik, I will tell you the story of the past lives of the Tirthankaras, which destroys sin and is worshipped by the Indras."

"Rishabha, Ajita, Sambhava, Abhinandan, Sumati, Padma Prabha, Supaikha, Chandra Prabha, Suvidhi (Pushpadanta), Sheetal, Shreyans, Vasupujya, Vimala, Ananta, Dharma, Shanti, Kunthu, Ara, Malli (Muni) Suvrata Nath, Nami, Nemi, Parshva, and Mahavira, these are the names of the twenty-four Tirthankaras. Mahavira is the last Tirthankara, and his reign continues even now."

"Now, I will describe their past-life cities: the most excellent Pundarika, Susima, the very beautiful Kshema, and the most excellent Ratna Sanchay Puri, shining with precious jewels, these four cities were very excellent and well-organized. From Rishabha Deva to Vasupujya Bhagavan, these were the capitals of the Tirthankaras in their past lives, three by three. In these cities, there were always festivals."

"The past-life capitals of the remaining twelve Tirthankaras were as follows: Sumahanagar, Arishtpur, Sumadrika, Pundarika, Susima, Kshema, Vitashoka, Champa, Kaushambi, 1. Padma Nabha, 2. Prabhu, 3. Vimala Nath, 4. Mahan + Ara."

Page #475:
---------------------------
## The Twentieth Chapter

**425**

Susima, Simasampam, Kshema, and Kshemakari, Vyatitishonama, and Champa, are known in the world. ||15|| Kaushambi, Maha-bhoga, Nagapur, Saketa, Kantabhavana, and Chatrakarapur. ||16|| These are the capitals of the Jinas in their previous births, known as heavenly cities. ||17||

Vajranami, Vimala-vahana, Vipula-khyati, Vipula-vahana, Mahabala, Atibala-kirtan, Aparajita, Nandishena, Padma, Maha-padma, Padmottara, Pankaja-gulma, Nalin-gulma, Padmasana, Padmaratha, Dridharatha, Maha-megha-ratha, Simha-ratha, Vaishravana, Shridharma, A-pratistha, Siddhartha, Anand, and Sunanda. ||18-23||

These are the names of the Jinas in their previous births, as told by me, the king of Magadha. ||24||

Vajrasena, Maha-teja, Ripudama, Swayamprabha, Vimala-vahana, Simandhara, Pihita-srava, Arindama, Yugandhara, Sarva-jana-ananda, Abhaya-ananda, Vajradanta, Vajranabhi, Sarvagupta, Guptiman, Chinta-raksha, Vipula-vahana, Ghana-rava, Sanvara, Sadhu-sanvara, Varadharma, Sunanda, Vyatitishonka, Domara, and Prosthila. ||25-30||

Sarvartha-siddhi, Vaijayanta, Urdhva-graiveyaka, Vaijayanta, Vaijayanta, Urdhva-graiveyaka, Madhyama, Vaijayanta, Aparajita, Aran, Pushpottara, Kapishta, Purushukra, Sahasrar, Tripushpottara, Muktisthanadhara, Vijaya, Aparajita. ||31-34||

Nagapur, Saketa, and Chatrakarapur. All these capitals were beautiful, vast, and adorned with excellent buildings, like heavenly cities. ||14-17||

Now I will tell you their names in their previous births. 1. Vajranabhi, 2. Vimala-vahana, 3. Vipula-khyati, 4. Vipula-vahana, 5. Mahabala, 6. Atibala, 7. Aparajita, 8. Nandishena, 9. Padma, 10. Maha-padma, 11. Padmottara, 12. Pankaja-gulma (with a face like a lotus), 13. Nalin-gulma, 14. Padmasana, 15. Padmaratha, 16. Dridharatha, 17. Maha-megha-ratha, 18. Simha-ratha, 19. Vaishravana, 20. Shridharma, 21. A-pratistha (without equal, the best of the gods), 22. Siddhartha, 23. Anand, and 24. Sunanda. O King of Magadha! These are the names of the previous births of the twenty-four wise Tirthankaras, told to you. All these names were very famous in the world. ||18-24||

Now listen to the names of their fathers in their previous births. 1. Vajrasena, 2. Maha-teja, 3. Ripudama, 4. Swayamprabha, 5. Vimala-vahana, 6. Simandhara, 7. Pihita-srava, 8. Arindama, 9. Yugandhara, 10. Sarva-jana-ananda (possessing the name "benefactor of all"), 11. Abhaya-ananda, 12. Vajradanta, 13. Vajranabhi, 14. Sarvagupta, 15. Guptiman, 16. Chinta-raksha, 17. Vipula-vahana, 18. Ghana-rava, 19. Dhira, 20. Sanvara (possessing the name "good Sanvara"), 21. Trilokiya (possessing the name "best Dharma"), 22. Sunanda, 23. Vyatitishonka, 24. Domara, and 25. Prosthila. Thus, you should know the names of the twenty-four fathers of the twenty-four Tirthankaras in their previous births. ||25-30||

Now listen to the names of the twenty-four heavens from which the twenty-four Tirthankaras came. 1. Sarvartha-siddhi, 2. Vaijayanta, 3. Graiveyaka, 4. Vaijayanta, 5. Vaijayanta, 6. Urdhva-graiveyaka, 7. Madhyama-graiveyaka, 8. Vaijayanta, 9. Aparajita, 10. Aran, 11. Pushpottara, 12. Kapishta, 13. Purushukra, 14. Sahasrar, 15. Pushpottara, 16. Pushpottara, 17. Pushpottara, 18. Sarvartha-siddhi, 19. Vijaya, 20. Aparajita. ||31-34||

Page #476:
---------------------------
## Chapter 426

**Verse 35:**
The twenty-four Tirthankaras are known by these names in their respective heavens: Pranata, Anantara, Atit, Vaijayanta, and Pushpottara.

**Verse 36:**
I will now tell you about the birth star, mother, father, city, Caitya tree, and the place of liberation of the twenty-four Tirthankaras.

**Verse 37:**
The first Tirthankara, Rishabhanatha, was born in the city of Vinita (Ayodhya), his father was Nabhiraja, his mother was Marudevi, his birth star was Uttaraashada, his Caitya tree was the Banyan tree, and his place of liberation was Kailasa.

**Verse 38:**
The second Tirthankara, Ajitanatha, was born in the city of Saketa (Ayodhya), his father was Jitashatru, his mother was Vijaya, his birth star was Rohini, his Caitya tree was the Saptaparna tree, and his place of liberation was Mangala.

**Verse 39:**
The third Tirthankara, Sambhavanatha, was born in the city of Shravasti, his father was Jitar, his mother was Sena, his birth star was Purvaashada, his Caitya tree was the Shaal tree, and his place of liberation was Indra.

**Verse 40:**
The fourth Tirthankara, Abhinandanatha, was born in the city of Ayodhya, his father was Sanvara, his mother was Siddhartha, his birth star was Punarvasu, his Caitya tree was the Sarala (Deodar) tree, and his place of liberation was Abhinandan.

**Verse 41:**
The fifth Tirthankara, Sumatinatha, was born in the city of Saketa (Ayodhya), his father was Meghaprabha, his mother was Sumangala, his birth star was Magha, his Caitya tree was the Priyangu tree, and his place of liberation was Sumadhya.

**Verse 42:**
The sixth Tirthankara, Padmaprabha, was born in the city of Vatsanagari (Kaushambi), his father was Dharanraja, his mother was Susima, his birth star was Chitra, his Caitya tree was the Priyangu tree, and his place of liberation was Susima.

**Verse 43:**
The seventh Tirthankara, Supaarshvanatha, was born in the city of Kashi, his father was Supratistha, his mother was Prithvi, his birth star was Vishakha, his Caitya tree was the Shirish tree, and his place of liberation was Rajendra.

**Verse 44:**
The eighth Tirthankara, Chandraprabha, was born in the city of Chandrapuri, his father was Mahaseena, his mother was Lakshmana, his birth star was Anuradha, his Caitya tree was the Naga tree, and his place of liberation was Chandraprabha.

**Verse 45:**
The ninth Tirthankara, Pushpadanta (Suvidhinatha), was born in the city of Kakand, his father was Sugriva, his mother was Rama, his birth star was Mula, his Caitya tree was the Saal tree, and his place of liberation was Pushpadanta.

**Verse 46:**
The tenth Tirthankara, Shitalanatha, was born in the city of Bhadraka, his father was Dridharatha, his mother was Sunanda, his birth star was Purvaashada, his Caitya tree was the Plaksha tree, and his place of liberation was Shitala.

**Verse 47:**
The eleventh Tirthankara, Shreyansanatha, was born in the city of Singhapuri, his father was Vishnu, his mother was Vishnupriya, his birth star was Shravana, his Caitya tree was the Tindooka tree, and his place of liberation was Shreyansa.

**Verse 48:**
The twelfth Tirthankara, Vasupujya, was born in the city of Champapuri, his father was Vasupujya, his mother was Jaya, his birth star was Shatabhisha, his Caitya tree was the Patala tree, and his place of liberation was Vasupujya.

**Verse 49:**
The thirteenth Tirthankara, Vimalanatha, was born in the city of Kampilya, his father was Kritavarman, his mother was Sharma, his birth star was Uttarabhadrapada, his Caitya tree was the Jambu tree, and his place of liberation was Vimala.

Page #477:
---------------------------
The 20th Parva

427. The Peepal tree, King Singhasena, Revati Nakshatra, Queen Sarvayasha, and Anantnath Jinendra, may they all bring you auspiciousness. ||50||

The city of Ratnapuri, King Bhanuraja, Queen Suvrata, Pushya Nakshatra, Dadhiparna tree, and Dharmanath Jinendra, may they all bestow prosperity upon you, O Shrenik! ||51||

The city of Hastinapur, King Vishvasena, Queen Airani, Bharani Nakshatra, Nand tree, and Shantinath Jinendra, may they all bring you peace forever. ||52||

The city of Hastinapur, King Surya, Queen Shridevi, Krittika Nakshatra, Tilaka tree, and Kunthunath Jinendra, O King! may they all be the cause of the destruction of your sins. ||53||

The city of Hastinapur, King Sudarshan, Queen Mitra, Rohini Nakshatra, Mango tree, and Ar Jinendra, may they all destroy your sins. ||54||

The city of Mithila, King Kumbha, Queen Rakshita, Ashwini Nakshatra, Ashoka tree, and Mallinath Jinendra, O King! may they all make your mind free from sorrow. ||55||

The city of Kushagra (Rajgriha), King Sumit, Queen Padmavati, Shravana Nakshatra, Champaka tree, and Suvratnath Jinendra, may they all be attained by your mind, i.e., you meditate on them with your heart. ||56||

The city of Mithila, King Vijay, Queen Vapr, Ashwini Nakshatra, Bakul tree, and Neminath Tirthankara, may they all bring you the union with Dharma. ||57||

The city of Sauripur, King Samudravijay, Queen Shiva, Chitra Nakshatra, Mesha Shrunga tree, Urjayant (Girnar) mountain, and Neminath Jinendra, may they all be auspicious for you. ||58||

The city of Varanasi (Banaras), King Ashvasena, Queen Varmadevi, Vishakha Nakshatra, Dhawa (Dhau) tree, and Parshvanath Jinendra, may they all generate patience in your mind. ||59||

The city of Kundapur, King Siddhartha, Queen Priyakarini, Uttara Phalguni Nakshatra, Sal tree, the city of Pava, and Mahavira Jinendra, may they all be supremely auspicious for you. ||60||

Among these, the city of Champapuri is the place of liberation of Lord Vasupujya. The places of liberation of Rishabhdev, Neminath, and Mahavira are Kailash, Urjayant mountain, and Pava respectively, these three have been mentioned earlier, and the remaining twenty Tirthankaras attained the abode of liberation from Sammed Shikhar. ||61||

Shanti, Kunthu, and Ar, these three were kings and Chakravartis, and they became Tirthankaras. The remaining Tirthankaras were ordinary kings. ||62||

Chandra Prabha and Pushpadanta, these were white in color like the moon. ||63||

Vimalnath Jinendra, may you purify him. ||49||

Page #478:
---------------------------
428
Padmapurana
Parshva, the king of Nagas, was described as having the color of unripe barley.  Padmagarbha was described as having the color of the inner petals of a lotus.  He was the best among those who asked questions. ||64|| Vasupujya was described as having the color of the flower of the Kimshuka tree.  Munisuvrata, the Tirthankara, was described as having the color of the blue mountain. ||65||  Jina, the best of the Yadavas, was described as having the color of a peacock's neck.  The remaining Jinas were described as having the color of molten gold. ||66|| Vasupujya, Mahavira, Malli, Parshva, and the best of the Yadavas, were all described as having left their homes as princes.  The other Tirthankaras accepted the kingdom and then took initiation. ||67||  These Tirthankaras were all worshipped, praised, and bowed to by the lords of the gods and the lords of the earth.  They all received the ultimate abhisheka on the peak of Mount Meru. ||68||  These twenty-four Tirthankaras, who are the cause of the attainment of all auspiciousness and who are the greatest wonders of the three worlds, may they always protect you. ||69||
Then, King Shrenik said to Gautam Swami, "O Ganadhar! Now, tell me the truth that purifies the mind, the measure of the lifespan of these twenty-four Tirthankaras." ||70||  "And, O Venerable One, I also want to know about the Tirthankara during whose time Ramachandra was born." ||71||
When King Shrenik asked this question with great respect, the Ganadhar Swami, whose mind was as pure as the ocean of milk, said, ||72|| "O Shrenik! The entity called time transcends the realm of numbers, meaning it is infinite.  It cannot be perceived directly by the senses.  However, the great ones have described it using an analogy in their minds." ||73||
"Imagine a space the size of a yojana, surrounded on all sides by walls.  It is filled with the tips of the hairs of a sheep that was just born. ||74||  This space is made very hard by pounding it.  This space, which is one yojana long, wide, and deep, is called a dravyapalya.  Since it has been said that this is an analogy, then questions like who dug this pit, who filled it, etc., are meaningless." ||75||

Page #479:
---------------------------
Jain Terms Preserved:

The 429th chapter describes the 'Ratnakaropama' time period, which is the time period of the ten Avarsarpini (descending) cycles. Each Avarsarpini and Utsarpini (ascending) cycle lasts for the same duration, just like the waxing and waning phases of the moon. These cycles are divided into six sub-periods by the Mahatmas (great beings) based on the differences in the potency of the substances involved.

The first sub-period of the Avarsarpini cycle is called Sushama-Sushama, whose time period is measured in 4 Koṭikodyās of Sāgaropamas. The second sub-period is called Sushama, whose time period is 3 Koṭikodyās of Sāgaropamas. The third sub-period is called Sushama-Duhṣhama, whose time period is 2 Koṭikodyās of Sāgaropamas. The fourth sub-period is called Duhṣhama-Sushama, whose time period is 1 Koṭikodyā of Sāgaropamas minus 42,000 years. The fifth sub-period is called Duhṣhama, and the sixth sub-period is called Duhṣhama-Duhṣhama, each of whose time periods is 21,000 years as per the Jinas.

The time intervals between the Tīrthaṅkaras are then described. After Bhagavān Ṛṣhabhadeva, the second Tīrthaṅkara Ajitanātha appeared after an interval of 50 lakh Koṭikodyās of Sāgaropamas. The third Tīrthaṅkara Sambhavanātha appeared after an interval of 30 lakh Koṭikodyās of Sāgaropamas. The fourth Tīrthaṅkara Abhinandananātha appeared after an interval of 10 lakh Koṭikodyās of Sāgaropamas. The subsequent Tīrthaṅkaras appeared at intervals of 9 lakh, 90,000, 9,000, 900, 90, and 9 Koṭikodyās of Sāgaropamas respectively.

Page #480:
---------------------------
430
Padmapurana
5
||9
||
Forty-five lakhs, then one lakh more, then six lakhs, then five are declared. ||89|| Eighty thousand, then eight hundred and a half, then three hundred and a half are declared. ||10|| The Dharma of Vardhamana Jinendra is touched by suffering. When Mahavira, the great lord of the Dharmachakra, is gone, ||11|| When the arrival of the gods is freed, when the extraordinary is gone, ||12|| When the birth of Kevala is lost, when the holder of the plough-wheel is abandoned, ||13|| When the qualities of a great king like you are gone, ||14|| The people will become wicked, their minds always eager to deceive. ||15|| They will be without playfulness, withdrawn, full of pain and disease, false-sighted, very terrible, and unreformable. ||16|| There will be excessive rain, no rain, and uneven rain. There will be various unbearable ways that will cause unbearable suffering to living beings. ||17|| They will be intoxicated by the intoxicating fog of delusion, their bodies will be like lumps of attachment and aversion, their eyebrows and hands will always be moving, they will be very sinful, they will always smile with pride, they will be eager to speak harsh words, they will be merciless, they will always be engaged in accumulating wealth, and they will wander on the earth like fireflies or glowworms in the night, that is, they will be of little influence. ||18-19|| They will be fools themselves, and they will fall into the path of the goad, which is full of various evil deeds, and they will lead others into it. They will be of a wicked nature, always engaged in harming others and themselves. They will know the Self as the Siddha, but they will be destined for hell. ||20|| 
After the thirteenth, the pure Vimala was born. After nine Sagaras passed, the fourteenth, Ananta, was born. After four Sagaras passed, the fifteenth, Shridharmanatha, was born. After three Sagaras less than a quarter of a Paly passed, the sixteenth, Shanti, was born. After half a Paly passed, the seventeenth, Kunthunatha, was born. After a thousand years less than a quarter of a Paly passed, the eighteenth, Aranatha, was born. After a thousand crore Sagaras less than sixty-five lakhs eighty-four thousand years passed, the nineteenth, Mallinatha, was born. After fifty-four lakh years passed, the twentieth, Munisuvratanatha, was born. After six lakh years passed, the twenty-first, Naminatha, was born. After five lakh years passed, the twenty-second, Neminatha, was born. After three-quarters of eighty-four thousand years passed, the twenty-third, Shriparshvanatha, was born. And after two hundred and fifty years passed, the twenty-fourth, Shree Vardhamana Swami, was born. The Dharma of Bhagavan Vardhamana Swami is prevalent in this fifth time, whose two feet are washed by the water of the radiance of the crowns of the Indras, who is the originator of the Dharma-chakra, and who was the holder of great wealth. After the departure of Mahavira Swami, who was the holder of great wealth, the fifth time will come, in which the arrival of the gods will cease, all the extraordinary will be destroyed, the birth of Kevalajnana will cease, the birth of Balabhadra, Narayana, and Chakravartis will also cease. And the time will be devoid of the qualities worthy of a great king like you. Then the people will become very wicked, their minds will always be eager to deceive each other. The people of that time will be without playfulness and withdrawn, full of various pains and diseases, false-sighted and very terrible. ||84-94|| There will be excessive rain, no rain, and uneven rain. There will be various unbearable ways that will cause unbearable suffering to living beings. ||95|| The people of that time will be intoxicated by the intoxicating fog of delusion, their bodies will be like lumps of attachment and aversion, their eyebrows and hands will always be moving, they will be very sinful, they will always smile with pride, they will be eager to speak harsh words, they will be merciless, they will always be engaged in accumulating wealth, and they will wander on the earth like fireflies or glowworms in the night, that is, they will be of little influence. ||96-97|| They will be fools themselves, and they will fall into the path of the goad, which is full of various evil deeds, and they will lead others into it. They will be of a wicked nature, always engaged in harming others and themselves. They will know the Self as the Siddha, but they will be destined for hell. ||98||

Page #481:
---------------------------
## The Twentieth Chapter

**431**  By the roars of those who have released the weapon of the scriptures, the Karma-Mlechchas, who are intoxicated with pride, whose enthusiasm is born of evil, who are covered in the darkness of delusion, 
**10**  the rulers of the non-noble, who are constantly engaged in violence, will be cut down by the axe of the weapon of violence, due to the influence of the slow time. 
**101**  In the beginning of the fifth time, the height of humans is said to be seven cubits, and then there will be a gradual decrease. 
**102**  Then, in the sixth time, they will be twenty cubits tall, with a lifespan of twenty years. After that, they will be one cubit tall, with a lifespan of sixteen years. 
**103**  They will live like reptiles, earning their livelihood with great difficulty. 
**104**  They will have deformed bodies, constantly engaged in sinful activities, tormented by delusion and disease, like animals. 
**105**  There will be no order, no connection, no rulers, no servants. There will be no wealth, no homes, and no happiness, only misery. 
**106**  Driven by the pursuit of pleasure, wealth, and dharma, the people will be empty, like piles of sin. 
**107**  Just as the moon wanes in the dark fortnight and waxes in the bright fortnight, so too, in the Avasarpini time, there is a decrease in the lifespan and other qualities of people, and in the Utsarpini time, there is an increase. 
**108**  Or, just as the activities of festivals and other good deeds decrease at night and increase during the day, so too, one should understand the state of the Avasarpini and Utsarpini times. 
**109**  The decrease that has been described in the Avasarpini time should be understood as an increase in the Utsarpini time. 
**110**  Gautama Swami said to King Shrenik, "O King! I have spoken of the difference between the twenty-four Tirthankaras. Now, I will speak of their heights in order. Listen carefully." 
**111**  The height of the first Tirthankara, Rishabhadeva, is said to be five hundred bows. 
**112**

Page #482:
---------------------------
432
In the Padma Purana, it is stated that each of the Tirthankaras from Pushpadanta to Sheetalnath had a decrease of fifty dhanus each. The height of Sheetalnath is ninety dhanus. From there, each of the Tirthankaras from Sheetalnath to Dharmanath had a decrease of ten dhanus each. The height of Dharmanath is forty-five dhanus. From there, each of the Tirthankaras from Dharmanath to Parshvanath had a decrease of five dhanus each. Parshvanath is two dhanus less than the height of Vardhaman Swami, which is seven dhanus. 

**Meaning:** 1. Rishabhanath - 500 dhanus, 2. Ajitanath - 450 dhanus, 3. Sambhavanath - 400 dhanus, 4. Abhinandanath - 350 dhanus, 5. Sumatinath - 300 dhanus, 6. Padma Prabha - 250 dhanus, 7. Suparshvanath - 200 dhanus, 8. Chandra Prabha - 150 dhanus, 9. Pushpadanta - 100 dhanus, 10. Sheetalnath - 90 dhanus, 11. Shreyansnath - 80 dhanus, 12. Vasupujya - 70 dhanus, 13. Vimalnath - 60 dhanus, 14. Anantanath - 50 dhanus, 15. Dharmanath - 45 dhanus, 16. Shantinath - 40 dhanus, 17. Kunthunath - 35 dhanus, 18. Aranath - 30 dhanus, 19. Mallinath - 25 dhanus, 20. Munisuvratnath - 20 dhanus, 21. Naminath - 15 dhanus, 22. Neminath - 10 dhanus, 23. Parshvanath - 9 dhanus, and 24. Vardhaman Swami - 7 dhanus. 

Now, I will describe the lifespan of the Kulkaras and Tirthankaras. O King! The lifespan of the first Kulkar, who is the omniscient, the seer of the Lok and Alok, is one-tenth of a Paly. The lifespan of each subsequent Kulkar is one-tenth of the previous one. This means that the lifespan of the second Kulkar is one-tenth of the lifespan of the first Kulkar, and the lifespan of the third Kulkar is one-tenth of the lifespan of the second Kulkar. In this way, the lifespan of fourteen Kulkaras should be known. 

The lifespan of the first Tirthankara, Shri Rishabhdev Bhagwan, is eighty-four lakhs purvas. The lifespan of the second Tirthankara, Shri Ajitanath Bhagwan, is seventy-two lakhs purvas. The lifespan of the third Tirthankara, Shri Sambhavanath, is sixty lakhs purvas. After that, the lifespan of each of the next five Tirthankaras decreases by ten lakhs purvas. This means that the lifespan of the fourth Tirthankara, Abhinandanath, is fifty lakhs purvas, the lifespan of the fifth Tirthankara, Sumatinath, is forty lakhs purvas, the lifespan of the sixth Tirthankara, Padma Prabha, is thirty lakhs purvas, the lifespan of the seventh Tirthankara, Suparshvanath, is twenty lakhs purvas, the lifespan of the eighth Tirthankara, Chandra Prabha, is ten lakhs purvas, the lifespan of the ninth Tirthankara, Pushpadanta, is two lakhs purvas, the lifespan of the tenth Tirthankara, Sheetalnath, is one lakh purvas, the lifespan of the eleventh Tirthankara, Shreyansnath, is eighty-four lakhs years, the lifespan of the twelfth Tirthankara, Vasupujya, is seventy-two lakhs years, the lifespan of the thirteenth Tirthankara, Vimalnath, is sixty lakhs years, the lifespan of the fourteenth Tirthankara, Anantanath, is thirty lakhs years, the lifespan of the fifteenth Tirthankara, Dharmanath, is ten lakhs years, the lifespan of the sixteenth Tirthankara, Shantinath, is one lakh years, the lifespan of the seventeenth Tirthankara, Kunthunath, is ninety thousand years, the lifespan of the eighteenth Tirthankara,

Page #483:
---------------------------
The Twentieth Chapter
433
One thousand years and seventy-two years are mentioned as the lifespan of the twenty-fourth Tirthankara, Mahavira.  
The lifespans of the Tirthankaras are mentioned in order. Listen now to the details of the Chakravartis who were born in between the Tirthankaras. 
The first Chakravarti, Bharat, was born to King Rishabhadeva and Queen Yashovati. This Chakravarti's name made this region known as Bharat in all three worlds. 
This Bharat was a prince named Pitha in the city of  Pundarika in his previous birth. He attained Sarvarthasiddhi after becoming a disciple of Kushasen Muni. After that, he became the Chakravarti Bharat. He was constantly filled with dispassion, and after shedding his hair and nails, he attained Kevala Jnana and reached Nirvana. 
The second Chakravarti, Sagar, was born in the city of Prithvipur. He was a disciple of the Muni Yashodhar. After attaining the highest state of liberation, he was reborn in Ayodhya as the son of King Vijay and Queen Sumangala. He was so powerful that even the gods respected his commands. He enjoyed the highest pleasures and then, due to the grief of losing his sons, he renounced the world and took the Jain initiation. He attained Kevala Jnana and reached Siddhalaya. 
The third Chakravarti, Maghava, was born in the city of Shravasti. He was the son of King Sumitra and Queen Bhadravati. He was a disciple of the Muni Vimala in the city of Pundarika. He enjoyed the highest pleasures of the world in the city of Greveyak. He was a tree for the creeper of Lakshmi, the goddess of wealth. He was born between the Tirthankaras Dharmanatha and Shantiantha. He took the vows of a monk and was born in the Saudharma heaven according to his meditation. 
After this, the fourth Chakravarti, Sanatkumar, was praised by Gautam Swami. King Shrenik asked, "O Bhagavan, by what virtue did he become so beautiful?" 
The lifespans of the Tirthankaras were: Aranatha - 84,000 years,  Naminatha - 10,000 years,  Mallinatha - 55,000 years,  Muni Suvrata - 30,000 years,  Neminatha - 1,000 years,  Parshvanatha - 100 years, and Mahavira - 72 years. 
O Shrenik, I have thus described the lifespans of the Tirthankaras in order. Now listen to the details of the Chakravartis who were born in between the Tirthankaras.

Page #484:
---------------------------
In the Padma Purana, the great sage narrated the essence of the Purana, saying that even a hundred years would not be enough to tell it all. (135) He said that until a being attains Jainism, it continues to suffer in the animal realms, hell, and the human realm. (136) Describing the past life, he said that there was a village called Govardhana, full of people, where a great householder named Jinadatta lived. (137) Just as the ocean is the chief among all water bodies, Mount Meru with its beautiful caves is the chief among all mountains, the sun is the chief among all planets, sugarcane is the chief among all grasses, the Nagavalli is the chief among all creepers, and the sandalwood tree is the chief among all trees, so too, the lineage of the Shravakas is the chief among all lineages, for it is purified by conduct and dedicated to attaining the best path. (138-140) That householder, born into the lineage of Shravakas, followed the conduct of a Shravaka, adorned with virtues, and attained the best path. (141) His wife, Vinayavati, was a devoted wife, dedicated to the dharma of householders, and was very sad at the loss of her husband. (142) She built a magnificent temple for the Jina in her home and, after taking the vows of an Aryika, attained the divine path through her excellent austerities. (143) In the same city, there lived a great householder named Hemabahu, who was a believer, very enthusiastic, and averse to evil conduct. (144) Vinayavati, who had built the Jain temple and performed great worship there, received his approval and, at the end of his life, became a Yaksha deity. (145) That Yaksha was always dedicated to the service of the fourfold sangha, possessed right faith, and was always dedicated to the worship of the Jina. (146) From there, he became a noble human, then a deity. Thus, he went through three transformations of human and divine paths and became a king named Dharma-ruchi in the great city of Maha-puri. This Dharma-ruchi was born from the heavens, being the son of Sanatkumara. His father's name was Suprabha and his mother's name was Tilakasundari. Tilakasundari was like a treasure chest of the virtues of excellent women. (147-148) King Dharma-ruchi became a disciple of the sage Suprabha and became a charaka, observing the five great vows, the five samitis, and the three guptis. (149)

Page #485:
---------------------------
The Twentieth Chapter

He was always devoted to self-criticism, patient in enduring afflictions, completely detached from his body, compassionate, self-controlled, wise, a bearer of the burden of virtue, far removed from the eight defects of right faith, and constantly engaged in the proper conduct of the virtuous. ||150-151|| At the end of his lifespan, he was born in the Mahendra heaven and, residing amidst a group of goddesses, attained supreme enjoyments. ||152|| Subsequently, he was born in Hastinapur as the fourth Chakravarti, named Sanatkumar, to King Vijay and Queen Sahadevi. ||153||

Once, in his assembly, Saudharmendra praised the form of Sanatkumar Chakravarti in the course of a narrative. Some gods came to see his form, which was a cause of wonder. ||154|| When those gods secretly observed him, he had just finished his exercise, his body's radiance was obscured by the dust of the arena, his head was smeared with fragrant gooseberry paste, his body was very tall, he was wearing a single garment suitable for bathing, he was seated on a seat suitable for bathing, and he was situated amidst a circle of pitchers filled with fragrant water of various colors. ||155-156|| Seeing him, the gods said, "Oh! Indra has rightly praised his form. Even though he is a human, his form is a cause of attraction for the minds of the gods." ||157|| When Sanatkumar learned that the gods wanted to see his form, he said to them, "Please stay here for a while. Let me bathe, eat, and adorn myself, then you can see me." ||158|| "So be it," said the Chakravarti Sanatkumar, and after performing all his duties properly, he sat on his throne. At that time, he appeared like the peak of a mountain made of jewels. ||159||

Thereafter, seeing his form again, the gods began to criticize each other, saying, "The beauty of humans is worthless and fleeting, so it is to be condemned." ||160|| How is it that the beauty that we saw in his youth at the first glance, like lightning, has become fleeting and decayed in an instant? ||161|| Knowing that Lakshmi is fleeting, Chakravarti Sanatkumar, free from attachment to the gods, attained the state of a Shraman, adorned with intense austerities. ||162||

Page #486:
---------------------------
## English Translation:

**436**
**Padma Purana**

**163.**  Even though he was afflicted with many severe illnesses, he endured them with great peace. He attained many Siddhis through his austerities. Finally, through the power of his meditation, he became a Deva in the Sanatkumara heaven.

**164-165.** Now, the description of the fifth Chakravarti. King Megha Rath lived in the city of  Pundarikin. He was a disciple of his father, the Tirthankara Dhanarath, and attained Sarvarth Siddhi. From there, he was born as a son of King Vishvasen and Queen Airadevi in Hastinapur. He was known as Shanti Nath, a renowned son who brought peace to mankind.

**166.**  As soon as he was born, the Devas performed his coronation on Mount Sumeru. Indra praised him, and thus he became the master of the enjoyments of a Chakravarti.

**167.** He was the fifth Chakravarti and the sixteenth Tirthankara. Finally, he renounced his kingdom, which was like a blade of grass, and took Diksha.

**168.** After him, Kunth Nath and Ar Nath became the sixth and seventh Chakravartis respectively. They had accumulated the sixteen Karana Bhavanas in their previous births, and therefore attained the Tirthankarahood.

**169.** Sanatkumara, the fourth Chakravarti, lived between the Tirthankaras Dharmanath and Shanti Nath. One should know that the time difference between these three Tirthankaras and Chakravartis is their own individual time.

**170.** Now, the description of the eighth Chakravarti. King Kanakabh lived in the city of Dhanyapur. He was a disciple of the Muni, Vichitragupta, and was born in the Uttara Vimana as Jayant.

**171-172.** From there, he was born as the eighth Chakravarti, Subhum, in the city of Ishavati, to King Kartavirya and Queen Tara. He was a possessor of excellent virtues and made the earth excellent. Therefore, his name Subhum was meaningful.

**173.**  In a battle, Parashuram had killed his father. So, he killed Parashuram. Parashuram had killed the Kshatriyas and collected their teeth. A Nitijnanee told him that the one who would see these teeth transformed into Kheer would be the cause of his death. Subhum went to Parashuram's Yajna. When he was about to eat, Parashuram showed him all the teeth in a vessel.

**174.** Due to the power of his punya, the teeth turned into Kheer, and the vessel transformed into a Chakra. Subhum ate the Kheer.

Page #487:
---------------------------
## The Twentieth Chapter

437

**175.** It is said that the earth was filled with enemies of the Kshatriyas for seven cycles. He who made the earth devoid of Kshatriyas for twenty-one cycles, 

**176.** Due to his extremely strict rule, the Brahmanas, obtaining great fear, hid themselves in the families of washermen, etc., like the Kshatriyas.

**177.** This Chakravarti, named Subhūm, lived between Aranāth and Mallināth. He was not detached from worldly pleasures and therefore went to the seventh hell after death.

**178.** Now we describe the ninth Chakravarti. In the city of Vītashoka, there was a king named Chinta. He became a disciple of Suprabhamuni and attained Brahma heaven.

**179.** From there, he was born as the ninth Chakravarti, named Mahapadmin, in Hastinapur, to King Padmaratha and Queen Mayuri.

**180.** He had eight daughters who were proud of their beauty and did not desire any husband on earth. Once, the Vidyadharas took them away.

**181.** After finding them, the Chakravarti brought them back, but they, being detached, took initiation and attained heaven after achieving self-liberation.

**182.** The eight Vidyadharas who had taken them away also became initiated due to their separation and fear of the unpredictable nature of the world.

**183.** This incident made the Chakravarti, who possessed great virtues, realize the truth. He left his kingdom for his son, Padma, and went with his son, Vishnu, to become a monk.

**184.** Mahapadmin, after performing intense austerities, attained Kevala Jnana and finally reached the peak of the universe. This Chakravarti lived between Aranāth and Mallināth.

**185.** Now we describe the tenth Chakravarti. In the city of Vijay, there lived a king named Mahendradatta. He became a disciple of Nandan Muni and was born in Mahendra heaven.

**186.** From there, he was born as the tenth Chakravarti, named Harishena, in Kampilya, to King Hariketu and Queen Vaprā.

**187.** He adorned his entire kingdom with Jina images and attained Siddha-pada in the Tirtha of Muni Suvrata Nath.

Page #488:
---------------------------
438
In the Padma Purana, there was a king named Amitanka in the city of Rajapura. He became a disciple of Sudharma Mitra and went to Brahmaloka. ||18|| From there, he was born as Vijay in the same city of Kampilya, to queen Yashovati. He was known as Jayasen, the ruler with the wheel-kissed edict. ||189|| Abandoning his great kingdom, he took the Digambara initiation and worshipped the Triratna, attaining the Siddha state. ||190|| This happened between the times of Munisuvratnath and Naminath.

Now, we describe the twelfth Chakravarti.

In the city of Kashi, there was a king named Sambhuta. He became a disciple of the Muni named Svatantralinga and was born in a Vimana called Kamalagulma. ||191|| From there, he was born as Brahmadutta, the twelfth Chakravarti, in the city of Kampilya, to king Brahmaratha and queen Chula. ||192|| This Chakravarti enjoyed Lakshmi but did not renounce her, and in that unrestrained state, he died and went to the seventh hell. This happened between the times of Neminath and Parshvanath. ||193||

Gautamswami tells king Shrenik, "O king of Magadha! Thus, I have described the six-section rulers, the Chakravartis. They were so powerful that even the gods and demons could not stop their progress." ||194|| "I have spoken of the fruits of virtue and vice directly. Why do people not do the right thing after hearing, experiencing, and seeing it?" ||195|| "Just as a traveler does not go to another village without taking food like appu, so too, this being does not go to another world without the food of virtue and vice." ||196|| "Those who dwell in excellent mansions, filled with the best women and as high as Mount Kailasa, are the fruit of the tree of virtue." ||197|| "And those who are immersed in the mud of poverty, dwelling in crooked houses with the hardships of cold, heat, and wind, are the fruit of the tree of vice." ||198|| "Those kings and emperors who ride on elephants as tall as the peak of Vindhyachala, with fly whisks waving over them, are the fruit of the virtuous paddy." ||199|| "Those who ride on beautiful horses with fly whisks waving on either side, and who have a beautiful body, are the result of the virtuous king's actions." ||200||

Now, we describe the eleventh Chakravarti.

Page #489:
---------------------------
## The Twentieth Chapter

**A stream of sweet nectar flows from the mountain of merit, as the devotees ascend the chariot resembling a celestial palace.** (20)

**Those who wander with their feet covered in dirt, their steps unsteady, are the fruits of the tree of sin, poisoned by evil.** (202)

**The food that is consumed like nectar in golden vessels is the effect of the Dharma-rasa, as declared by the great sages.** (203)

**The attainment of the position of Indra, the Chakravarti, and the ordinary king, by the noble souls, is the fruit of the vine of non-violence.** (204)

**The wealth attained by Rama and Keshava, O श्रेणिक, is also the fruit of Dharma. Now, I shall speak of Rama and Keshava.** (205)

**First, listen to the names of the nine cities associated with the previous births of the nine Narayanas in the Bharata region: 1. The beautiful Hastinapur, 2. Ayodhya adorned with flags, 3. The vast Shravasti, 4. Kaushambi adorned with a clear sky, 5. Podanpur, 6. Shailanagar, 7. Singhapur, 8. Kaushambi, and 9. Hastinapur. These nine cities are mentioned in order. All these cities were filled with all kinds of wealth and grain, free from fear, and adorned with the residences of the Vasudevas, i.e., Narayanas, in their previous births.** (206-208)

**Now, listen to the names of these Vasudevas in their previous births: 1. The mighty Vishvanandi, 2. Parvata, 3. Dhanamitra, 4. Sagardatta, who, having attained the position of a king, made a sound like the ocean, 5. Vikata, 6. Priyamitra, 7. Manasacheshtita, 8. Punarvasu, and 9. Gangadeva. These are the names of the Narayanas in their previous births.** (209-211)

**In their previous births, they were all extremely deformed and unfortunate. They became monks due to the following reasons: 1. Loss of capital, 2. Defeat in battle, 3. Abduction of a woman, 4. Playing in gardens and forests, 5. Desire for forest games, 6. Extreme attachment to worldly pleasures, 7. Separation from loved ones, 8. Fire disaster, and 9. Misfortune. They practiced austerities with the desire for future enjoyments, and were devoid of true knowledge. After death, they became Narayanas. All these Narayanas are younger brothers of Balabhadra.** (212-214)

**O श्रेणिक! The desire for future enjoyments should be avoided with great effort, as it is the cause of great suffering and a harsh teacher.** (215)

Page #490:
---------------------------
## Padmapurana: Translation with Jain Terms

**Verse 216:** Sambhuta, the embodiment of austerity, is known as Subhadra, Vasudarsana, Shreyans, Subhuti, Vasubhuti.

**Verse 217:**  Ghosha, Sena, Parambhodi, and  Drumasen are the great Munis, the gurus of the Krishnas in their previous birth.

**Verse 218:**  The Kalpas (epochs) are named Maha-Shukra, Pranata, Lantava, Sahasrar, Brahma, and Mahendra.

**Verse 219:**  The Kalpas are also known as Soudharma, the abode of those who strive for truth, and Sanatkumara, another Maha-Shukra.

**Verse 220:**  These beings, having attained the fruits of their good deeds, descended from these heavens and, due to the residue of their merit, were born as the Vasudeva kings.

**Verse 221:**  Their birthplaces are Podan, Dwapuri, Hastinapur, Chakrpur, Kushagra, Mithilapuri, Ayodhya, and Mathura.

**Verse 222:**  These cities were filled with wealth and constantly bustling with festivals.

**Verse 223:**  The fathers of the Krishnas are Prajapati, Brahmabhuti, Raudra-nada, Soma,  Prakhyata, Shiva-kara, Sama-murdhagni-nada, Dasharatha, and Vasudeva.

**Verse 224:**  The mothers of the Krishnas are Mrigavati, Madhavi, Prithvi, Sita, Ambika, Lakshmi, Kesini, Kaikeyi, and Devaki.

**Verse 225:**  These mothers were blessed with great fortune and possessed beautiful forms.

**Verse 226:**  The queens of the Krishnas are  Suprabha, Rupini, Prabhava, Manohara, Sunetra, Vimala-sundari, Anandavati, Prabhavati, and Rukmini.

**Verse 227:**  These queens are known as the Mahadevi (great goddesses) of the Krishnas.

**Verse 228:**  One should abandon the practice of austerity with great effort, as it is capable of causing immense suffering in the future.

**Note:** The names of the nine Narayanas are missing in the manuscript and printed copies, but they are essential. Pandit Daulatramji has also translated them. Therefore, the text within the brackets [ ] has been added to the translation for the sake of consistency.

Page #491:
---------------------------
## Translation:

**Chapter Twenty**

The city of **Puṇḍarokini**, with magnificent, pale-colored palaces, is like the earth, vast and wide. **Pṛthivīpurī**, the second earth-city. ||229||

**Ānandapurī**, the city of joy, and **Nandapurī**, the city of happiness, are also remembered. **Vyatītashōka**, the city beyond sorrow, and **Vijayapur**, the city of victory. ||230||

**Susīmā**, the city with good boundaries, **Kshema**, the city of safety, and **Hastinapur**, the city of elephants, are also mentioned. These were the cities of **Balabhadra** in his previous birth. ||231||

**Bala**, the strong one, **Mārutavega**, the speed of the wind, **Nandimitra**, the great friend, **Mahābala**, the very strong, **Purusharṣabha**, the best of men, **Sudarśana**, the sixth, **Vasundhara**, the earth, **Śrīcandra**, the moon, and **Sakhisan̄jna**, the friend, are the names of **Balabhadra** in his previous birth. ||232-233||

**Amritāra**, the best of the monks, **Mahāsuvratasūvratī**, the great vow-keeper, **Vṛṣabha**, the bull, **Prajāpāla**, the protector of the people, **Damavara**, the subduer, **Sudharma**, the righteous, **Arṇava**, the ocean, and **Vidruma**, the ruby, are the teachers of **Balabhadra** in his previous birth. ||234-235||

**Anuttara**, the highest, was the abode of three **Balabhadra**. **Sahasrāra**, the thousand-petaled lotus, was the abode of three others. **Brahma**, the creator, was the abode of two, and **Mahāśukra**, the great Venus, with its supreme beauty, was the abode of one. From these abodes, the **Balabhadra**, with their good deeds, were born. ||236-237||

**Bhadrāmbhoja**, the lotus of good fortune, **Subhadra**, the auspicious one, **Suvesha**, the well-dressed, **Sudarśana**, the beautiful, **Suprabha**, the radiant, **Vijaya**, the victorious, **Vaijayanti**, the victorious one, **Mahābhāga**, the fortunate, **Mahāshīla**, the great virtuous, **Aparajīta**, the unconquered, and **Rohinī**, are the mothers of the **Balabhadra**. ||238-239||

**Śreya**, the best, and the five **Jina**s, starting with **Tripṛṣṭha**, followed by the **Balabhadra**, are five in number, each one superior to the previous one. ||240||

**Lakṣmaṇa**, the eighth **Balabhadra**, is mentioned between **Munisūvratanatha** and **Naminatha**. **Kṛṣṇa**, the ninth **Balabhadra**, with his miraculous deeds, worshipped **Neminātha**. ||241||

**Acala**, **Vijaya**, **Bhadra**, **Suprabha**, **Sudarśana**, and **Nandimitra** are the names of the **Balabhadra**. ||242||

**[Note:** The names of the **Balabhadra** are not found in the available manuscripts, but Pandit Daulatramji has translated them and they are useful. Therefore, they are included in brackets.]

**[Note:** The names of the **Balabhadra** are not found in the available manuscripts, but Pandit Daulatramji has translated them and they are useful. Therefore, they are included in brackets.]

Page #492:
---------------------------
## Translation:

**442**
In the Padma Purana, the city of Lankapura, along with other cities, were known to be the abodes of the Pratichक्रिणs. These cities were illuminated by the rays of jewels. ||243||

**444**
The names of the nine Pratichक्रिणs of the Vasudevas are as follows: Ashwagriva, Taraka, Meraka, Madhukaitabha, Nishumbha, Bali, Prahlada, Dashanana, and Jarasandha. ||244-245||

**446**
The names of the Gurus of the Balabhadra are: Suvarna Kumbha, Satkirti, Sudharma, Mriganka, Shruti Kirti, Sumit, Bhavanashruta, Suvrata, and Susiddhartha. All of them were enveloped in the glory born from the burden of their austerities. ||246-247||

**448**
Eight of the nine Balabhadra, having attained the glory of Balabhadra, became indifferent to the world and burned the forest of karma. They attained Nirvana, where they were free from the torment of various diseases, which were like animals roaming in the forest. This forest was terrifying, with the tiger of death and the huge, tall trees of birth being cut down. The last Balabhadra, due to the remaining karma-bondage, attained the Brahma heaven. ||248||

**449**
Gautama Ganadhara tells King Shrenik, "O King! I have told you the story of the Tirthankaras, the Chakravartis who conquered the Bharat Kshetra, the Narayanas, and the Balabhadra. This story is full of wonder, starting from their previous births. Some of them, after performing great austerities, attain liberation from this world. Some have a few remaining sinful karmas and wander in the world for a short time before attaining liberation. Some, due to the strong power of their karmas, wander in the dense cycle of birth and death for a long time." ||249||

**Note:** The numbers in the text refer to the verse numbers in the original text.

Page #493:
---------------------------
443
Knowing this twenty-first **Parva**, which is strange, the beings of the world, engulfed in the great ocean of the **Kalikaluṣa** (the pollution of the Kali Yuga), are burning in the great suffering of the **Nīcagatī** (lower realms) like fire. Knowing this, some **Bhavyas** (future Jinas) do not even desire this world. Some want to make the acquaintance of **Puṇya** (merit), and some, like the sun, end their **Moha** (delusion) and attain pure **Kevalajñāna** (omniscience). ||25||
Thus ends the twenty-first **Parva** called **Tīrthankara Bhavanukīrtana** (the narration of the births of the Tīrthankaras) in the **Padmacarita** (the story of the lotus) narrated by **Raviṣeṇa Ācārya**, known as **Ārya**. ||20||
1. **Prāṇajāta** m.

Page #494:
---------------------------
## The Twenty-First Chapter

I tell you the story of the connection of the eighth Balabhadra with Sri Rama. Listen to the lineage of some great men. ||1||

After the tenth Tirthankara, Sri Shitalnath Bhagwan attained liberation, a king named Sumukh ruled in Kaushambi. At the same time, a wealthy merchant named Veerak lived in the same city. ||2||

The king, Sumukh, abducted Veerak's wife, Vanamala, and enjoyed her company as he desired. Finally, he gave donations to the ascetics and went to Mount Rukmagiri. ||3||

There, in the southern part of Mount Rukmagiri, there was a city called Haripur. In this city, a couple was born, a Vidhyadhar and a Vidhyadhari. They enjoyed the pleasures of the material world. ||4||

Veerak, whose body was burning with the fire of separation from his beloved, attained the status of a god, surrounded by many goddesses, through his penance. ||5||

With his knowledge of the past, the god knew that his enemy, King Sumukh, was born in Harikshetra. Driven by his evil mind, he brought Sumukh from Harikshetra to Bharatkshetra and caused his downfall. ||6||

Since he was brought from Harikshetra with his wife, he became known as Hari throughout the world. ||7||

He had a son named Mahagir, who had a son named Himagiri. Himagiri had a son named Vasugiri, who had a son named Indragiri. Indragiri had a son named Ratnamala, who had a son named Sambhut, who had a son named Bhootdev. In this way, hundreds of kings, all descendants of Hari, were born. ||8-9||

Later, in the same lineage, a famous and excellent king named Sumit, was born in the great city of Kushagra. ||10||

This king was equal to Indra in his enjoyment, he conquered the moon with his brilliance, he conquered the sun with his radiance, and he defeated his enemies with his power. ||11||

Page #495:
---------------------------
## The Twenty-First Chapter

Padmavati, the wife of Padma-netra, was a woman of great beauty. Her eyes were like lotuses, she was adorned with auspicious marks, and all her desires were fulfilled. ||12||

One night, while sleeping on a comfortable bed in her beautiful palace, she saw sixteen auspicious dreams in the last watch of the night. ||13||

She dreamt of an elephant, two bulls, a lion, the coronation of Lakshmi, two garlands, the moon, the sun, two fish, a pot, a lotus-filled lake, the ocean, a throne adorned with jewels, an aerial chariot, a bright palace, a heap of jewels, and fire. ||14-15||

Astonished and bewildered, the wise queen Padmavati woke up and, after performing her morning rituals, went to her husband with great humility. ||16||

With folded hands, she asked her husband, the knower of justice, about the meaning of her dreams, while sitting comfortably on a beautiful seat. ||17||

As her husband was explaining the meaning of her dreams, a rain of jewels began to fall from the sky. ||18||

By the command of Indra, a happy Yaksha showered three and a half crore jewels on her house every day. ||19||

For fifteen months, the continuous rain of wealth transformed the entire city into a city of jewels and gold. ||20||

All the goddesses, like Shri and Hri, who resided in the lotus ponds of Padma, Mahapadma, etc., along with their families, served the mother of the Jina with great respect. ||21||

Then, the Lord was born. As soon as he was born, Indra, along with the Lokapalas, performed his abhisheka with the water of the ocean of milk on Mount Meru with great splendor. ||22||

After the abhisheka, Indra worshipped, praised, and prostrated before the Jina, and then lovingly placed him in his mother's lap. ||23||

Since the time the Lord was in the womb, his mother had become particularly devoted to good vows, hence he became known as Muni-Suvrata. ||24||

Muni-Suvrata, whose face was like the full moon, conquered the entire world with his radiant body and defeated all his enemies with his prowess. ||25||

Page #496:
---------------------------
446
In the Padma Purana, it is said that the great Indra, adorned with the finest pleasures, had rejected the immense happiness of the Indra-world from afar. ||26||
Ha-ha, hoo-hoo, the celestial musicians like Tumburu, Narada, and Vishvavasu, along with the Kinnara women and many Apsaras, sang and danced with their veenas, flutes, and other instruments. Many goddesses bathed him, applying fragrant pastes and other beauty treatments. ||27-28||
The Lord, with his beautiful body, enjoyed the company of women in their youth, adorned with charming smiles, shyness, pride, jealousy, grace, and other captivating qualities, as he desired. ||29||
Seeing the clouds of the autumn season dissolving, he was awakened to the desire for liberation. At that time, the celestial beings praised him. ||30||
He then relinquished all desires and gave his kingdom, where all the vassals were submissive and lived happily, to his son, Suvrata. ||31||
Then, he emerged from the lotus-garden, his body fragrant with divine unguents, attracting a multitude of eager bees with its sweet scent. The garden was filled with green gem-like leaves, white lotus petals like rows of teeth, the sounds of birds singing and ornaments jingling, waves of water, and swan-like breasts. He emerged from this garden of beautiful women like a swan from a lotus pond. ||32-35||
Then, the Lord Munisuvratanatha, the jewel of humanity, mounted the Aparajita palanquin, carried by gods and kings, and went to the vast garden called Vipula. ||36||
After descending from the palanquin, the Lord Munisuvratanatha, the ornament of the Hari-dynasty, took Jain initiation along with thousands of kings. ||37||
When the Lord took initiation, he observed a two-day fast. After the fast, in the city of Rajagriha, Vrishabhadatt, with devotion, gave him food for the breaking of the fast. ||38||

Page #497:
---------------------------
The twenty-first chapter describes how the Lord, for the sake of the practice of the teachings and the enjoyment of the world, took food. Vrishabhadutta attained the fivefold worship. ||39||

Then, while the Lord was seated in white meditation under the Champaca tree, the final karma of the killer was destroyed, and he attained Kevala Jnana. ||40||

Then, the gods, along with Indra, came together, praised him, bowed down, and listened to the excellent Dharma from the Muni Suvrata Nath, who was adorned with the excellent Ganadharas. ||41||

The Lord explained the Dharma in many ways, with and without the possession of a house. Having heard this pure Dharma, they all went to their respective places as appropriate. ||42||

The Muni Suvrata Nath, who was praised by the gods and demons, also established the Dharma Tirtha, and, filled with joy, he wandered the earth with the great souls, the protectors of the Gan, and other virtuous ones. ||43-44||

Then, he ascended to the peak of Sammed Shikhar, destroyed the four types of karma, and became the jewel of the world, that is, he attained Siddhalaya. ||45||

Those who read or hear this great story of Muni Suvrata Nath, their sins are destroyed. ||46||

They attain enlightenment, purify the three jewels, and attain the supreme state from which there is no return. ||47||

Then, Suvrata, the son of Muni Suvrata Nath, ruled his kingdom for a long time, and then, after handing over the kingdom to his son Daksha, he renounced the world and attained liberation. ||48||

Daksha had a son named Ilavardhana, Ilavardhana had a son named Srivardhana, Srivardhana had a son named Srivrksha, Srivrksha had a son named Sanjayanta, Sanjayanta had a son named Kunima, Kunima had a son named Maharatha, and Maharatha had a son named Pulama. Thus, thousands of kings were born in the Hari dynasty. Some of them attained liberation, and some went to heaven. ||49-51||

In this way, after many kings had passed, a king named Vasavaketu was born in this dynasty in Mithila. ||52||

Page #498:
---------------------------
The queen was named Vipula, meaning "abundant." She had large eyes and was a possessor of great fortune, yet she was also afflicted with poverty in the middle, meaning her waist was very thin.  ||53||  Their son was named Janaka, meaning "father," and he was skilled in politics. Like a true father, he always worked for the welfare of his people. ||54||  O King Shrenika, I have thus described the birth of King Janaka to you. Now listen to the story of King Dasharatha, who belonged to the Yadu dynasty. ||55||  In the glorious lineage of the Ikshvaku, after the great Lord Rishabhadeva attained nirvana, and after the emperors Bharat, Arka-kirti, and Soma, the ornament of the dynasty, had passed away, countless years later, many kings arose in that lineage. Some of them attained nirvana after performing extremely difficult austerities, some went to heaven and indulged in pleasures, and some, lacking in merit, became dry, meaning they went to hell and other lower realms, where they wept and suffered the consequences of their actions. ||56-58||  O Shrenika, in this world, afflictions and joys are like a wheel, constantly turning. Sometimes afflictions become like festivals, and sometimes festivals become like afflictions. Sometimes, in this being, the defects of Maya, etc., gradually increase. ||59||  Sometimes these beings die and suffer, and sometimes they die in childhood due to the depletion of their pre-ordained lifespan or some other reason. ||60||  Sometimes these beings take on various forms, sometimes they remain as they are, sometimes they kill each other, sometimes they grieve, sometimes they cry, sometimes they eat, sometimes they cause harm, sometimes they argue, sometimes they go, sometimes they walk, sometimes they become powerful, meaning they become masters, sometimes they carry burdens, sometimes they sing, sometimes they worship, sometimes they eat, sometimes they become poor, sometimes they speak. ||61-62||  Sometimes they win, sometimes they give, sometimes they release, sometimes they rule, sometimes they adorn themselves with many luxuries, sometimes they are content, sometimes they rule, sometimes they desire peace, meaning forgiveness, sometimes they destroy peace. ||63||  Sometimes they are ashamed, sometimes they behave in a vile manner, sometimes they torment others, sometimes they are distressed, sometimes they are deceitful, sometimes they beg, sometimes they run forward, sometimes...

Page #499:
---------------------------
The Twenty-First Chapter

442. They play, they go, they give, they discipline, they dwell. They shine, they measure, they grieve, they prosper, they deviate. 65. They are pleased, they worship, they deceive, they console, they understand. They are infatuated, they protect, they dance, they love, they are humble. 66. They inspire, they gather grain, they plow, they cook, they bow. They play, they shine, they listen, they perform oblations, they walk, they wake. 67. They sleep, they fear, they act, they destroy, they break, they hurt, they complete, they bathe, they bind, they stop, they shout. 68. They sleep, they wander, they decay, they drink, they create, they choose, they rub, they spread, they please. 69. They contemplate, they abhor, they desire, they swim, they treat, they approve, they stop, they swallow. 70. O King! Thus, many humans in the Ikshvaku dynasty were engrossed in a web of actions and were engaged in auspicious and inauspicious deeds. 71. In this way, time, known as Avasarpini, which is like a moving picture depicting the various actions of all humans, gradually comes to an end. 72. After that, in the interval of the present Tirthankara, where the arrival of the gods continues, there was a great king named Vijay in the vast city of Ayodhya. He had conquered all his enemies. He was endowed with the brilliance of the sun and was skilled in the welfare of his subjects. 73-74. His queen was Hemchula, a woman of great brilliance, and she gave birth to a son named Surendramanyu, who was endowed with great virtues. 75. Surendramanyu had a wife named Kirtisama, and they had two sons who were as radiant as the moon and the sun. Both sons were adorned with virtues. 1. Shidanti M. 2. Bhanti M. 3. Stutiantyarchanti M. 4. Rudanti cha M. 5. Siviyantyavanti M. 6. Shatai: M. 7. Shaurya -kh.

Page #500:
---------------------------
450
In the Padma Purana, the elder son was Vajraबाहु and the younger son was Purandar. Both of them bore meaningful names and enjoyed happiness in the world. ||77|| In those days, the king named Ibhavahana ruled in the beautiful city of Hastinapur. His wife's name was Chudamani. They had a very beautiful daughter named Manodaya. She was obtained by the most praiseworthy Vajraबाहु Kumar among men. ||78-79|| Once, the daughter's brother, Udayasundar, went to Vajraबाहु's house to take the girl. Vajraबाहु, adorned with a beautiful white umbrella, was also eager to go with him. ||80|| That girl was famous throughout the earth for her beauty. Vajraबाहु, holding her in his mind, set out for his father-in-law's city with great pomp. ||81|| Then, while walking, his gaze fell upon the beautiful mountain named Vasant, which was filled with spring flowers. ||82|| As he approached the mountain, he was filled with joy at the sight of its supreme beauty. ||83|| The fragrant wind, mixed with flower dust, embraced him, as if a friend long lost had embraced him. ||84|| The mountain, with its treetops swaying in the wind, seemed to be cheering for Vajraबाहु with the sound of the male cuckoos. ||85|| The sound of the intoxicated, melodious, bee-like buzzing, like the sound of a veena, captivated his ears and mind. ||86|| 'This is a mango tree, this is a kener, this is a lodhra with flowers, this is a priyal, and this is a palash, shining like a burning fire.' Thus, his steady gaze, moving in sequence, fell upon the sage, whose human form was doubtful due to the distance. ||87-88|| Vajraबाहु was perplexed about the sage, who was sitting in a state of kayothsarga, wondering if he was a stump, a sage, or a mountain peak. ||89|| Then, when he reached the very nearby path, he was certain that he was a great yogi-sage. ||90|| That sage was situated on a rough terrain of high and low rocks. His face, touched by the rays of the sun, was pale and his lotus-like face was drooping. ||91||

Page #501:
---------------------------
## The Twenty-First Chapter

Standing firm on the uneven ground, his face pale from the sun's rays, his two excellent arms hanging down like a large serpent, his chest broad and wide like the shore of Mount Meru, his two shining thighs steady like the pillars that bind the elephants, though thin from austerity, he appeared very stout due to his radiance. He had fixed his extremely gentle and unwavering eyes on the tip of his nose. Seeing the Muni meditating with such single-pointed focus, King Vajraबाहु began to think:

"Oh, how blessed is this extremely peaceful, excellent human being who, renouncing all attachments, is performing austerities with the desire for liberation! He is graced by liberation, his mind is absorbed in his own welfare, his soul is free from harming others, he is adorned by the divine Lakshmi. He is equal in his attitude towards friend and foe, a heap of jewels and a blade of grass. He is free from pride and envy, his desire for the embrace of the divine consort Siddhi is growing. He has subdued his senses and mind, he is steady like Mount Meru, he is free from attachment, and his mind is fixed on virtuous actions."

"He has received the full fruit of his human birth. He has not been cheated by the cruel, malicious thieves of the senses."

"And me? I am constantly bound by the chains of karma, just as the sandalwood tree is bound by the great serpents of the Ashivisha clan. Shame on me, this inert, sinful being whose mind is filled with delusion. I am sleeping on the top of the great, round rock of the mountain of enjoyment."

"If I could only attain the state of this yogi, then I would have achieved the fruit of my human birth."

Thinking thus, the eyes of King Vajraबाहु, the master of the unfettered, became as steady as if fixed on a pillar.

Seeing him with such unwavering gaze, Udayasundara, with a pleasant smile, said jokingly:

"You have been observing this Muni for a long time, so are you taking this initiation? You seem to be attached to it."

Then, concealing his feelings, Vajraबाहु said:

"What is your opinion, Uday? Tell me."

Page #502:
---------------------------
452
Not knowing his inner detachment, Udayasundara, with a fondness for jest, said, his lips adorned with the gleam of his teeth: 
“If you accept this initiation, then I too will be your friend. Oh, Kumar! You will be adorned with the glory of a Shraman.” 
“So be it,” said Vajrabahu, adorned with the ornaments of marriage, and he descended from the elephant and ascended the mountain. 
Then the women, with their large eyes, wept loudly. Large drops of tears, like strings of broken pearls, fell from their eyes. 
With tears in his eyes, Udayasundara said, “Be pleased, Deva! What are you doing? I was only jesting.” 
Vajrabahu, soothing him with sweet words, said, “Oh, one with a heart of good intentions! I was falling into a well, and you saved me. 
There is no other friend like you in the three worlds. Oh, beautiful one! It is inevitable that those who are born must die, and those who die must be reborn. 
This machine of birth and death, more fickle than lightning, waves, and the tongue of a venomous serpent, keeps turning constantly. 
Why don’t you see the life of this world, consumed by sorrow? Enjoyments are like dreams, life is like a bubble, affection is like the glow of twilight, and youth is like a flower. Oh, Bhadra! Your jest has become like nectar to me. 
What is drunk in jest? Does it not cure disease? Since you have turned me towards my welfare, you are my friend today. 
I was engrossed in the ways of the world, but today you have made me detached from it. Now, I take initiation. Do as you please.” 
Saying this, he went to the Muni Raja named Gunasagara, and bowing at his feet, with folded hands, he said, “Oh, Master! My mind has been purified by your grace, so today I wish to leave this terrible prison of the world.” 
1. Yajnatvattamaho-m., j. - Manyatvatta-b. 2. Kumarah m. 3. Vaivāha-m. 4. Pitam aushadham m. 5. Visham m. 6. Sa tvameṣodyame bandhu -m. 7. Caranānūce m. 8. Samsarakarāgṛhāt. Bhavatārakāt m.

Page #503:
---------------------------
## The Twenty-First Chapter

Then, the Muni (sage) approved of his disciple's actions. Filled with great fervor, Vajraबाहु renounced his clothes and ornaments.  He sat down on a lotus posture, his mind filled with fervor. With hands like red petals, he plucked out his hair. At that moment, he felt his body become light, as if freed from illness. He renounced the marriage-related initiation and embraced the initiation leading to liberation. 

Those who had renounced attachment, aversion, and pride, whose speed was towards fervor, and who were like beautiful, illusory beings, such as Udayasundar and the other twenty-six princes, filled with utmost enthusiasm, bowed to the Muni and took initiation. 

Knowing this, Manodaya, filled with brotherly love and great fervor, also took initiation.  She, whose large breasts were covered with white cloth, whose belly was thin, and whose body was covered in dust, became a great ascetic.

When Vijayasyandan, Vajraबाहु's father, heard this news, he was filled with sorrow and spoke in the middle of the assembly, "Oh, what a wonder! My grandson, still in his youth, has renounced worldly pleasures and embraced the Digambara initiation.  Even I, an old man, am still bound by these pleasures that are difficult to renounce. How could this young prince abandon them?  Or perhaps, he has been blessed with the fortune of liberation, and has renounced these pleasures like straw, attaining a state of peace.  I, who am unfortunate, what should I do now, burdened by old age?  For a long time, I have been deceived by these sinful pleasures, which seemed beautiful at first.  My hair, which was once the color of indigo gems, has now turned white like a pile of straw.  My eyes, which were once captivating with their white, black, and red hues, are now veiled by the dust of old age."

Page #504:
---------------------------
454
The body which was once radiant with splendor and endowed with great strength, now resembles a picture struck by lightning, faded and weak.  ||135||
Wealth, righteousness, and desire, these three are appropriate for a young man. For an aged man, they are difficult to attain. ||136||
Alas, I am a senseless, wicked, careless, and foolish man, caught in the whirlpool of false affection for my relatives. ||137||
Having said this, and without consulting his relatives, the king, with a detached heart, bestowed the kingdom upon his grandson, Purandara, and, with his son, Surendramanu, took initiation from the great soul, Nirvanaghoṣa, the liberated one. ||138-139||
Thereafter, Purandara's wife, Prithivimati, gave birth to a son named Kirtidhara, who was like an ocean of all renowned virtues. ||140||
By his charming conduct, Kirtidhara, ever respectful, gradually attained youth, delighting all his relatives. ||141||
Then, King Purandara, having chosen a daughter of the king of Kosala, arranged for his son's marriage. After this, the king, renouncing worldly attachments, left his home. ||142||
Adorned with the ornaments of virtues, King Purandara, taking initiation from the sage Kṣemaṅkara, began to perform severe austerities to eradicate the effects of his past actions. ||143||
Meanwhile, Kirtidhara, the conqueror of his enemies, ruled the kingdom inherited from his ancestors, enjoying the pleasures of life like the best of gods. ||144||
Once, Kirtidhara, the king who was a friend to his subjects and who terrified his enemies, was seated on a comfortable throne in his beautiful palace, resplendent like the celestial being Nalakubara, when his gaze fell upon the sun, obscured by the blue radiance of a solar eclipse. Seeing this, he thought, "Alas! This calamity cannot be averted by any means." ||145-146||
Sun
1. Pavanirvāṇa M. ||

Page #505:
---------------------------
## Chapter Twenty-One

**Verse 147**
Even though the moon, devoid of brilliance, destroys the terrible darkness and causes the lotus forest to bloom, the sun is unable to dispel Rahu.

**Verse 148**
Just as this sun is being destroyed, so too will this youthful sun, afflicted by the eclipse of old age, be destroyed. Bound by the strong ropes of fate, this poor creature will inevitably enter the jaws of death.

**Verse 149**
Considering this world to be impermanent, King Kirtidhara addressed his ministers assembled in the court, saying, "Oh ministers! Protect this earth, bounded by the ocean. I am departing on the path of liberation."

**Verse 150**
Upon hearing this, the assembly, filled with wise men and relatives, became filled with sorrow and said, "Oh King! You are the only husband of this entire earth."

**Verse 151**
This earth, under your control, and with all enemies defeated, will not be adorned without you. Possessing great strength in your youth, rule like Indra.

**Verse 152**
The king replied, "Seeing this forest of afflictions, filled with the trees of birth, enveloped in the fire of old age, separation, and aversion, and extremely long, I am filled with great fear."

**Verse 153**
When the ministers understood the king's firm resolve, they extinguished a large pile of burning embers and placed a beautiful, radiant, and excellent vaidurya gem in the middle. Its brilliance illuminated the extinguished embers.

Page #506:
---------------------------
456
Padma Purana
Upeendra Vajra Vrittam
Again, the king spoke in Upeendra Vajra Vrittam, as follows:
"O King, just as a pile of coals does not shine without a gem, so too, this world does not shine without you. ||154||
O Lord, without you, this entire population, bereft of their protector, will become helpless and perish. With the destruction of the people, Dharma will be destroyed, and with the destruction of Dharma, what will not be destroyed? Tell me. ||155||
Therefore, just as your father, giving you to the people for their protection, performed austerities and became adept at giving liberation, so too, you should protect the Dharma of your lineage. ||156||
Thus, being advised by his wise ministers, Kirtidhara made a vow. Hearing of the birth of his son, he would surely take the exalted path of the munis. ||157||
Then, that king Kirtidhara, whose power was like Indra's, whose soul was always alert, ruled the vast earth, free from all fear, for a long time, with a well-established order. ||158||
Then, for a long time, Queen Sahadevi, enjoying happiness with King Kirtidhara, gave birth to a son, complete in all virtues, capable of bearing the earth. ||159||
Upajati Vrittam
There was no celebration of the birth, for fear that the news might reach the king's ears. And so, for many days, the time of confinement was like a prison. ||160||

Page #507:
---------------------------
## Chapter Twenty-One: The Lineage and Story of Kirti Dhar

**457**

How could the child, shining like the sun, be kept hidden for long?  A poor man, driven by greed, informed the king, revealing the secret.  [161]

The king, overjoyed, bestowed upon him a crown and other ornaments, along with the beautiful city of Ghosha, a branch city, adorned with a hundred prosperous villages.  [162]

He summoned the child, born of a single parent, and placed him on his throne, surrounded by great splendor, earning the respect of all.  [163]

The city of Kosala became exceptionally beautiful due to the child's birth.  Therefore, the child, known for his noble deeds, was named Sukosala.  [164]

Leaving the confines of his palace, Kirti Dhar, the king, went to the forest of penance and, radiating the brilliance of his spiritual practice, shone like the sun, free from the constraints of material wealth.  [165]

Thus ends the twenty-first chapter of the Padma Charita, narrated by Acharya Ravishena, titled "The Greatness of Muni Suvrata, Vajra Bahu, and Kirti Dhar."  [21]

**Time is kept secret and protected.** [160]

Page #508:
---------------------------
The Twenty-Second Chapter

Then the great ascetic, the Lord who was as forgiving as the earth, whose body was covered with a garment of dirt, who had renounced pride, who was magnanimous, whose entire body was dried up by austerities, who was a hero, who considered his matted hair as an ornament, whose long arms hung down, whose eyes looked at the path of four cubits, who walked slowly like a drunken elephant, who was free from all impurities, who was full of concentration, who was humble, who was free from greed, who followed the teachings of the scriptures, whose mind was pure with compassion, who was free from the mire of affection, who was adorned with the glory of a monk, and who had been fasting for a long time, such a glorious monk, while wandering, reached his former home, which he had obtained in due course, and entered it for alms.

Seeing him, Sahadevi, his wife, stood at the window, her eyes fixed on him. She was filled with extreme anger. Her face was flushed with anger. With her lips clenched, she said to the gatekeepers with evil intentions, "This monk is going to destroy the house, so let him be driven out quickly."

The innocent, beloved by all, and gentle by nature, the young prince, as long as he did not see him, quickly said, "Drive him away." Not only that, if I see any other naked man inside the palace, remember, I will surely punish you, gatekeepers. Since this heartless man left Shishuputra, I have not been happy with these people.

These people hate the royal fortune, which is served by great heroes, and they cause great distress to men who are devoted to great endeavors.

Thus, with her face distorted by harsh words, and holding a staff in her hand, the yogi was quickly driven away.

Page #509:
---------------------------
## Twenty-Second Chapter

Even all other Lingins were expelled from the city at that time. The king was afraid that the prince would hear the word Dharma. || 13 ||

Hearing and seeing the Muni-punga who was being robbed by words, the devoted Kirti-dhar's foster mother, Su-koshal, was filled with grief and sorrow. || 14 || Recognizing her master Kirti-dhar after a long time, she cried out loud, tearing her throat. || 15 ||

Hearing her cry, Su-koshal came to her and comforted her, saying, "Mother, who has wronged you?" || 16 ||

"Mother only carried this body in her womb, but this body has reached this state only because of your milk." || 17 ||

"You are more honorable to me than my mother. Tell me, who, desiring to enter the mouth of Yama, has insulted you?" || 18 ||

"If even my mother has defeated you today, I am ready to be disrespectful to her, what to speak of others?" || 19 ||

Then, the foster mother, Vasanti-lata, with great difficulty, reduced the flow of her tears and told Su-koshal, "Your father, who had you crowned king in your childhood and then, fearing the cage of worldly sorrows, entered the forest of penance, has come to your house today for alms. Your mother, by her authority, had him expelled by the gatekeepers." || 20-22 ||

"Seeing him being humiliated, I was filled with great sorrow, and I could not stop it. Therefore, my dear son, I am crying." || 23 ||

"Who can defeat the one whom you always see with honor? This is the reason for my crying, which I have told you." || 24 ||

"Remembering the favor that Lord Kirti-dhar did for us at that time, my body starts burning freely." || 25 ||

"This body of mine is stuck here to be a recipient of suffering due to the rise of sin. It seems to be made of iron, for even in the separation of the Lord, it remains steady." || 26 ||

The Nirgrantha Munis were expelled by the wicked gatekeepers from afar. || 12 ||

Not only them, but all other Munis residing in the city were also expelled from the city, fearing that the prince residing in the palace would hear the word Dharma. || 13 ||

The Muni-punga, who was robbed by words, was heard and seen by Su-koshal, the devoted foster mother of Kirti-dhar, whose grief was renewed. She recognized her master Kirti-dhar after a long time and cried out loud, tearing her throat. || 14-15 ||

Hearing her cry, Su-koshal came to her and comforted her, saying, "Mother, who has wronged you?" || 16 ||

"Mother only carried this body in her womb, but this body has reached this state only because of your milk." || 17 ||

"You are more honorable to me than my mother. Tell me, who, desiring to enter the mouth of Yama, has insulted you?" || 18 ||

"If even my mother has defeated you today, I am ready to be disrespectful to her, what to speak of others?" || 19 ||

Then, the foster mother, Vasanti-lata, with great difficulty, reduced the flow of her tears and told Su-koshal, "Your father, who had you crowned king in your childhood and then, fearing the cage of worldly sorrows, entered the forest of penance, has come to your house today for alms. Your mother, by her authority, had him expelled by the gatekeepers." || 20-22 ||

"Seeing him being humiliated, I was filled with great sorrow, and I could not stop it. Therefore, my dear son, I am crying." || 23 ||

"Who can defeat the one whom you always see with honor? This is the reason for my crying, which I have told you." || 24 ||

"Remembering the favor that Lord Kirti-dhar did for us at that time, my body starts burning freely." || 25 ||

"This body of mine is stuck here to be a recipient of suffering due to the rise of sin. It seems to be made of iron, for even in the separation of the Lord, it remains steady." || 26 ||

The Nirgrantha Munis were expelled by the wicked gatekeepers from afar. || 12 ||

Page #510:
---------------------------
460
Seeing the Muni in the city, the king was afraid that his son would become dispassionate. Therefore, he prohibited the entry of the Muni into the city. ||27||
This is the Dharma that has been passed down in your lineage, that you should give the kingdom to your son and serve the Tapovan. ||28||
Don't you know the decision of the ministers? You will never be able to leave this house. ||29||
For this reason, the ministers, who are wise in policy, have made arrangements for you and others in this very house. ||30||
Hearing the entire account from the messenger, Sukoshal quickly descended from the top of the palace. ||31||
Leaving behind the royal insignia like the umbrella and the fly whisk, he walked on foot, his feet adorned with a soft, lotus-like radiance. He was graced by Lakshmi and inquired along the way, "Have you seen a great Muni anywhere here?" Filled with utmost eagerness, Prince Sukoshal reached his father. ||32-33||
His attendants, including the umbrella-holders, were all agitated and ran after him in a flurry. ||34||
Reaching the place, he circumambulated his father, Kirtidhar Muni, who was seated on a magnificent, excellent stone platform, three times. His eyes were filled with tears, and his emotions were sublime. ||35||
He joined his hands, touched his forehead with them, and prostrated himself with his knees and forehead touching the ground, paying his respects to his father with great affection. ||36||
He folded his hands and sat before the Muni with humility. As if he was ashamed of the Muni being rejected from his home. ||37||
He said to the Muni, "Just as a group of clouds with loud thunder wakes up people sleeping in a house engulfed in flames, so too, in this house of the world, burning with the fire of birth and death, I was asleep, embraced by the sleep of delusion. O Lord! You have awakened me." ||38-39||
"Be pleased and grant me the same initiation that you have taken yourself. O Lord! Please liberate me from the troubles of worldly desires." ||40||
While Sukoshal was speaking with his head bowed, the entire assembly of his vassals arrived. ||41||

Page #511:
---------------------------
## The Twenty-Second Chapter

The queen, Vichitramala, carrying the weight of her pregnancy, filled with sorrow, arrived with the inner palace. ||42|| Knowing that Sukoshal was about to take the initiation, a soft humming sound, like the buzzing of a bee, arose from the inner palace. ||43|| Sukoshal said, "If this child in Vichitramala's womb is a son, I have given him the kingdom." Saying this, he became indifferent, severed the bonds of hope, burned the cage of affection, broke the chains of his wife, and abandoned the kingdom like a blade of grass. ||44-45|| He renounced all ornaments, discarded both internal and external possessions, sat on a simple seat, and cut his hair. ||46|| He took the great vows, with firm determination, and with a peaceful mind, he wandered with his father. ||47|| As he walked, the red rays of his feet seemed to offer lotus flowers to the earth. People looked at him with wonder. ||48|| Sahadevi, filled with false beliefs and devoted to sin, died and was reborn in a lower animal form. ||49|| Father and son wandered together, following the course of the sun. When the sun set, they would rest. Then, the rainy season arrived, darkening the sky. ||50|| The sky, covered with dark clouds, seemed to be plastered with cow dung. Here and there, flying vultures made it seem as if the sky was being adorned with clusters of white lotuses. ||51|| The large buds of the Kadamba trees, buzzing with bees, seemed to be singing the praises of the king of the rainy season. ||52|| The world seemed to be filled with clusters of blue collyrium, like towering mountains. The moon and the sun had gone, as if they were frightened by the roar of the clouds. ||53|| Uninterrupted streams of water poured from the sky, making it seem as if the sky itself was melting and flowing. The earth, covered with green grass, seemed to be wearing a garment of contentment. ||54||

Page #512:
---------------------------
462
Padmapurana
3
Just as the mind of an extremely wicked person makes all high and low equal, so the flood of water flowing with great speed made all the high and low land equal. ||55|| The masses of water on the earth were roaring, and the masses of clouds in the sky were roaring, as if they were searching for the fleeing summer, the enemy. ||56|| The mountains adorned with waterfalls were covered with very dense clusters of creepers. They looked as if the clouds had fallen down under the weight of a lot of water. ||57|| In the natural land of the forest, moving here and there, Indragopa (Veerbahuti) insects were visible. They looked as if the pieces of the sun, ground by the clouds, had fallen on the earth. ||58|| The lightning was moving quickly in all directions, as if the eye of the sky was looking to see which country was filled with water and which was not. ||59|| The sky was adorned with a rainbow, holding many kinds of brilliance, as if it were adorned with a very high and beautiful archway. ||60|| The polluted rivers, which were bringing down both banks, in which terrible whirlpools were rising, and which were flowing with great speed, looked like adulterous women. ||61|| The women who were frightened by the roar of the clouds, and whose eyes were as fickle as those of a deer, were quickly embracing the pillars. ||62|| The emigrants, whose consciousness was being shaken by the extremely terrible roar, were bewildered, with their eyes fixed in the direction where the woman was. ||63|| The Digambar Muni Rajas, who were always eager to practice compassion (mercy), having reached the Prasoo place, had taken the vow of the Chaturmas Vrat. ||64|| The Shravakas, who were observing various kinds of vows, such as Aakhari, etc., according to their strength, and who were always eager to serve the saints, had taken the Digvrat. ||65|| Thus, when the rainy season arrived, filled with clouds, the two father and son, the Nirgrantha saints Kirtidhar Muni Raj and Sukoshal Swami, observing the appropriate conduct, came to the cremation ground, which was filled with the darkness of trees, 1. Praskhalasyava M., Kha. | 2. Richhanna M. | 3. Gopaga: M., J. 1 4. Yasyamashayam dishi pramada tasyamashayam ahitekshana: pradatta lochanah. | 5. Chaturnam masanam samaharaschaturmasi tasyavratam. | 6. Digviramashritam M.

Page #513:
---------------------------
## Twenty-Second Chapter

The cremation ground was vast, filled with snakes and other ferocious creatures. It was difficult to traverse, with its many small hills, and terrifying even to the most fearsome beings. The air was thick with the sounds of crows, vultures, bears, and jackals. Half-burnt corpses lay scattered about, making the place even more dreadful. The ground was white in places, covered with piles of skulls. The wind carried a strong, putrid smell of decaying fat. The place was filled with laughter, and throngs of terrifying demons and Vetalas. The trees were entangled with clumps of grass and vines.

In this vast cremation ground, two ascetics, father and son, with pure minds and the wealth of tapas, wandered together, arriving there by chance on the full moon of Ashadha. 

Free from all desires, the two ascetics took up a four-month fast, settling down at the foot of a tree where the leaves had fallen and the water was clear. They spent their time in various postures, sometimes in Paryankaasana, sometimes in Kayotsarga, and sometimes in Viraasana and other postures. In this way, they passed the rainy season.

Then came the autumn season, when all human endeavors were in full swing. It was like the dawn, illuminating the entire world with its brilliance. In the sky, white clouds appeared, resembling clusters of blooming Kash flowers, swaying gently. 

Just as the glorious beings, the Jinas, shine brightly after the passing of the Dushama-kala of the ascending time, so too did the sun shine brightly in the sky, free from the presence of clouds. 

The moon shone brightly amidst the stars, like a young swan amidst a cluster of lotuses. 

The entire world was bathed in the white light of the moon, like a sea of milk flowing from the mouth of a river. 

The rivers were filled with joy, their sandy banks marked by waves. The sounds of cranes, sarasa birds, and chakwas filled the air, as if they were engaged in conversation. 

The lotus ponds were adorned with clusters of lotuses, buzzing with bees, as if they were adorned with false jewels.

Page #514:
---------------------------
464
In the Padma Purana, the bees buzz around the lotuses in the lakes, just like the group of the liberated souls, free from the accumulation of the false beliefs. ||8||
The wealthy people, accompanied by their beloved ones, enjoy themselves in the beautiful palaces, adorned with flowers, during the night. ||8||
The gatherings of the couples, who were separated, take place, where their friends and relatives are honored and where great festivals are celebrated. ||8||
The ascetics wander in the places of the great glory of the Jinas, where the auspicious events like the conception, birth, etc. of the Jinas took place, after the full moon of the Kartik month. ||8||
Then, the two monks, whose vow of the four-month fast was completed, started to go to the city for the breaking of the fast, with the speed suitable for the time. ||84||
Seeing them, the tigress, who was Sahadevi in her previous life, became filled with anger. Her hair, stained with blood, was scattered and trembling. Her face was terrifying with her fangs. Her yellow eyes were sparkling. Her round tail was touching her head. She was digging the earth with her claws. She was roaring loudly. She looked like a female demon, with her red tongue flickering. She was carrying a radiant body, and she looked like the midday sun. After playing for a long time, she jumped high, aiming at Sukoshala Swami. ||85-88||
Seeing her jumping, the two monks, who were adorned with beautiful radiance, stood firm with their bodies, fearless, with the vow of "If we survive this calamity, we will eat and drink, otherwise not." ||89||
The merciless tigress fell upon Sukoshala Muni, tearing his head and other parts of his body with her claws, and fell to the ground. ||90||
She tore his whole body, so that he looked like a mountain, from which streams of water mixed with ochre and other metals were flowing. ||91||
Then, she stood in front of him, performing various tricks, and started eating him from his feet. ||92||
1. Sahadevi in her previous life, Sahadevi-chari.
2. Fearless with the vow, M.
3. From the head, M.
4. Tearing him from his feet.
5. This verse is not in the K. book.
6. Of him, K.

Page #515:
---------------------------
## The Twenty-Second Chapter

**465** Behold, O Shrenik, the workings of delusion in the world, where a mother devours the body of her beloved son.  ||13|| What greater sorrow can there be than that, blinded by past lives, relatives become enemies and perpetrators of evil. ||14|| 

Then, for this Sukoshal, steadfast like Mount Meru, and immersed in white meditation,  Kevala Jnana arose before the shedding of his body. ||15||  Indra, along with the gods and demons, came and, filled with joy, worshipped his body with divine flowers and other treasures. ||16|| 

The tigress, enlightened by the wise words of Kirti Dhar, embraced renunciation and attained heaven. ||97||  Then, Kevala Jnana arose for Kirti Dhar as well.  The journey of these two, father and son, became a glorious event for the gods. ||98||  The gods and demons, proclaiming the supreme glory of Kevala Jnana, bowed down to the feet of the two Kevalins and went to their respective places. ||99||

Gautama Swami says, "He who studies the greatness of Sukoshal Swami, will be free from calamities and live happily for a long time." ||100||

Then, at the completion of her pregnancy,  Vichitramala, the wife of Sukoshal, gave birth to a son with a beautiful and auspicious body. ||101||  Because the mother became as beautiful as gold while the child was in her womb, he was named Hiranyagarbha. ||102||

Hiranyagarbha, a king of great virtue, brought back the time of Lord Rishabhadeva. He married Amritavati, the virtuous daughter of King Hari. ||103||

King Hiranyagarbha was blessed with friends and relatives, a master of all scriptures, possessed inexhaustible wealth, was glorious, and as beautiful as Mount Sumeru.  He was also magnanimous.  While enjoying the finest pleasures, he noticed a white hair amidst his black hair, like a bee. ||104-105||

Seeing that white hair in the mirror, he was filled with sorrow, as if he had been summoned by the messenger of death. ||106||

Page #516:
---------------------------
In the Padma Purana, 
(107) He thought, "Alas, it is a great hardship that my limbs are being forcibly taken away by this old age, which destroys strength and radiance."
(108) My body, which is like a sandalwood tree, will now be burnt by the fire of old age and become like a coal."
(109) The disease, which is like a hole, has been waiting for a long time, and now it will enter my body like a demon."
(110) "Death, who is eager to devour, has been standing like a tiger for a long time, and now he will devour my body."
(111) "Those young men who have reached this land of action and have boarded the boat of vows, will cross the ocean of existence."
(112) Thinking thus, he placed his son, Amritavati, on the throne and went to the pure yogis to take initiation.
(113) Since no inauspiciousness was declared when he was in the womb, he was known as "Nighusha," and he had conquered the whole world with his virtues.
(114) Then, leaving his queen, Singhika, in the city, King Nighusha went to the north to subdue his hostile enemies.
(115) The kings of the south, knowing that Nighusha was far away, came to seize his city of Ayodhya. They were accompanied by a large army.
(116) But the very valiant Queen Singhika defeated them all in battle. She appointed a trustworthy king to protect the city and, with the defeated vassals, went south to conquer the remaining kings. She had worked hard in both weapons and scriptures.
(117) She conquered the hostile vassals with her own prowess and returned to the city, filling the directions with the sound of victory.
(118) When King Nighusha returned after subduing the north, he was very angry, having heard of his wife's valor.

Page #517:
---------------------------
## Twenty-Second Chapter

**467**  The king, convinced that the noble lady could not have been so audacious, became estranged from the Lioness. **120**  Despite her virtuous conduct, she was removed from the position of Mahadevi by the king.  Thus, she was reduced to great poverty and endured hardship for some time. **121**

Later, the king was afflicted by a severe burning fever, which could not be cured by any medicine prescribed by the physicians. **122**  Upon learning of this, the Lioness was overwhelmed with grief.  She then devised a plan to prove her innocence. **123**

She summoned all her relatives, vassals, and subjects, and holding water given to her by the priest in her cupped hands, she declared, "If I have not harbored any other man in my heart, then let this water, sprinkled upon the king, cure him of his fever." **124-125**

As soon as a single drop of the water from the Lioness's hand touched the king, he became as cold as if he had been plunged into ice.  The chill caused his teeth to chatter like a vina. **126**

At that moment, the sky was filled with the sound of "Sadhu! Sadhu!" and the air was showered with flowers released by unseen beings. **127**

Recognizing the Lioness's virtue, King Nahusha reinstated her as Mahadevi and paid her great homage. **128**

Free from enemies, he enjoyed pleasures with her for a long time, following all the customs of his ancestors.  Despite his enjoyment of worldly pleasures, he remained detached in his heart. **129**

Finally, he bestowed the kingdom upon his son, born to the Lioness, and followed the path of his father, embracing the Jain path. **130**

King Nahusha, having subdued all his enemies, was known as Sudasa.  Therefore, his son was known throughout the world as Saudasa (the son of Sudasa). **131**

In his lineage, for eight days, even after the completion of four months, no one consumed meat, even those who were accustomed to eating meat. **132**

Page #518:
---------------------------
468
In the Padma Purana, it is said that due to the arousal of some inauspicious karma, the king Saudas developed a desire to eat meat on those very days. ||133|| Then, calling the cook aside, he said, "O Bhadra! I have a desire to eat meat today." ||134|| The cook replied, "O King! You know that on these days, throughout the entire earth, there is a grand celebration of the Jina's worship and the killing of living beings is prohibited." ||135|| Hearing this, the king said to the cook, "If I don't eat meat today, I will die. Having decided this, do whatever is right. What is the use of talking?" ||136|| Knowing the king's condition, the cook went outside the city. There, he saw a dead child abandoned in the ditch on that very day. ||137|| Wrapping it in cloth, he brought it, cooked it with delicious things, and gave it to the king to eat, thinking, "This is suitable for him." ||138|| The king, whose mind was extremely delighted by the taste of human flesh, ate it and, getting up, said to the cook in astonishment, "O Bhadra! Where did you get this meat, whose taste is so extremely sweet, which I have never tasted before?" ||139-140|| In response, the cook, seeking his protection, told him everything as it was. Then the king said, "Let this be done always." ||141||
Thereafter, the cook started giving laddoos to the small children. Enticed by them, the children started coming to him every day. ||142|| When the children went to take the laddoos, the one who lagged behind was killed, cooked, and given to the king continuously. ||143|| When the children of the city started decreasing every day, the people realized this and expelled the king and the cook from the city. ||144|| Saudas had a son named Simharatha born to his wife Kanakamba. The city dwellers installed him on the throne, and all the kings bowed to him. ||145|| King Saudas became so attached to human flesh that he even ate his cook. ||146||
When the month was over and the eight days of the Ashtahnika came, no one in his lineage ate meat, even if their body was nourished by it. ||132||

Page #519:
---------------------------
## Chapter Twenty-Two

**469**

Just as a lion's food is meat, so too was his food meat. Therefore, he became known in the world as Simhasoudas. (147)

Reaching the southern path and finding refuge with a Digambara Muni, he heard the Dharma and became a great observer of the Anuvratas. (148)

Then, in the great city, the king died without a son. The people decided to release the Pattabandha elephant. They decided that whoever the elephant would place on its back would be made king. As per the decision, the Pattabandha elephant was released and it placed Simhasoudas on its back and took him to the city. As a result, he obtained the kingdom. (149)

After some time, when Soudas became strong, he sent a messenger to his son to pay respects. In response, the son fearlessly wrote that since he was engaged in despicable conduct, he would not pay him respects. (150)

After that, Soudas marched to attack his son. Fearing that he might be eaten, all the people of the country started to flee. (151)

Finally, Soudas defeated his son in battle and made him king. Having achieved his purpose, he, filled with great dispassion, went to the forest of penance. (152)

Then, Simharatha had a son named Brahmaratha, Brahmaratha had a son named Chaturmukha, Chaturmukha had a son named Hemaratha, Hemaratha had a son named Shataratha, Shataratha had a son named Mandhata, Mandhata had a son named Veerasen, Veerasen had a son named Prati Manyu, Prati Manyu had a son named Kamalbandhu, whose brilliance was like the sun, Kamalbandhu had a son named Ravimanyu, who was equal in prowess to the sun and a knower of all Dharma, Ravimanyu had a son named Vasantatilaka, Vasantatilaka had a son named Kubera Datta, Kubera Datta had a son named Kunthubhakti, who was famous, Kunthubhakti had a son named Sharabharatha, Sharabharatha had a son named Dviratharatha, Dviratharatha had a son named Singhdaman, Singhdaman had a son named Hiranyakashipu, Hiranyakashipu had a son named Punjastala, Punjastala had a son named Kakutha, and Kakutha had a son named Raghu, who was extremely valiant. (153-158)

Thus, the kings born in the Ikshvaku dynasty were described. Many of these kings attained liberation by adopting the Digambara vow. (159)

After that, King Raghu had a son named Anaranya in Ayodhya, who settled the people and made the country Anaranya, meaning free from forests. (160)

Page #520:
---------------------------
470
Padma Purana
The great queen Prithivimati, endowed with great virtues, resided in the midst of a circle of radiance, bringing happiness to all senses. ||161||
She had two sons, both of excellent qualities. The elder was known as Anantarath, and the younger as Dasharath. ||162||
Anantarath had an excellent friendship with Anaranya, the king of Mahishmati, who was known as Sahasrarashmi. ||163||
These two noble men, bound by mutual affection, lived in their respective abodes, like Sudharma and Aishaneindra. ||164||
After being defeated by Ravana in battle, Sahasrarashmi attained enlightenment and, with great fervor, embraced Jaineshwari initiation. ||165||
Having learned all the details from the messenger sent by Anantarath, Dasharath, who was only a month old, relinquished the royal fortune and, with great detachment, went to the great Nirgrantha, Abhayasena, along with his elder brother Anantarath. ||166-167||
Anaranya, the sage, departed for liberation, while Anantarath, free from all attachments, wandered the earth as befits a sage. ||168||
Anantarath, who was not shaken by the twenty-two Pariṣahas, became known as Anantavirya on earth. ||169||
Dasharath then acquired a body adorned with youthful vigor, as tall as a mountain peak, and decorated with various flowers. ||170||
He then married Aparajita, the daughter of King Sukoshala, the lord of Darmasthala, who was born of the great queen Amritaprabhava, and who was known for her beautiful movements. Aparajita was so virtuous that even desire could not conquer her. ||171-172||
There was a magnificent city called Kamalasankula. Its king was Subandhutilaka, and his wife was Mitra. They had a virtuous daughter named Kaikeyi, whose eyes were like blue lotuses, and whose head was adorned with a garland of them. ||173-174||

Page #521:
---------------------------
## Twenty-Second Chapter

**471**  Since she was born from a mother named Mitra, who was of excellent conduct and beautiful, she became known in the world as Sumitra. **175**  The great king also married another princess named Suprabha, who was radiant with beauty and brought prosperity. **176**  King Dasharatha obtained both Right-Faith and a kingdom full of glory. He considered Right-Faith as a jewel and the kingdom as mere grass. **177**  The reason for this is that if one does not renounce the kingdom, it leads to downfall, while Right-Faith leads to an unquestionable ascent. **178**  King Dasharatha repaired the beautiful temples of the Jinas, which had fallen into disrepair, that were built by the kings Bharata and others. **179**  He also built new temples of the Jinas, which were praised by Indra himself, and were adorned with a multitude of jewels, radiating brilliance. **180**  Gautama Swami tells King Shrenik, "O King! Those who accumulate virtue in other births, attain the most beautiful prosperity of the gods, and are reborn in this world as fortunate beings like King Dasharatha, radiating brilliance like the sun, and attaining prosperity." **181**  Thus ends the twenty-second chapter of the Padmacharita, narrated by the Acharya, known as Ravisha, and containing the story of the birth of King Dasharatha, along with the greatness of Sukoshala Swami.

Page #522:
---------------------------
## The Twenty-Third Chapter

Once upon a time, King Dasharatha, adorned with great brilliance and resembling Indra in splendor, was seated in his assembly, engrossed in the tales of the Jina Kings. Suddenly, Narada, a wise man and a beacon of virtue, arrived, his body radiating light.  

The King rose to greet him, offering him a comfortable seat. Narada blessed the King, and the wise King inquired about his well-being. Narada replied with news of his welfare, and the King, in turn, asked about his journey. 

"From where do you come, O Lord? Where have you been traveling? What have you seen and heard? Is there any land you have not visited?" asked the King.

Narada, his heart filled with joy at the mention of the Jina, and his body tingling with excitement, replied, "O King, I have been to Videha, a land cherished by the virtuous, adorned with the Meru, Gaja, and Vijaya mountains, the very foundations of the Jina temples."

"There, in the city of Pundarika, radiant with the brilliance of countless jewels, I witnessed the initiation ceremony of Simandhara Swami. The sky was filled with celestial chariots, adorned with banners and umbrellas, and the arrival of the gods, a sight to behold. Just as the gods of this land celebrated the coronation of Muni Suvrata on Mount Meru, so too did they celebrate his coronation there. I heard the stories of Muni Suvrata, the Jina, just as they are told here, and I saw them unfold before my very eyes. I saw countless temples, towering and vast, adorned with precious jewels, where worship is offered without cease."

Page #523:
---------------------------
## Twenty-Third Chapter

O King! I have seen the Jain temples there. In the Nandana forest, I have seen very beautiful Chaitya-alaya. Those temples have many kinds of gem-studded bells and their seats are made of gold. ||13|| They are adorned with golden pillars, radiating various kinds of rays, resembling the sun-chariot, adorned with garlands and toranas, enriched with gem-studded garlands, with vast Vedikas in their grounds, with walls made of excellent Vaidurya gems, decorated with pictures of elephants, lions, etc., and whose interiors are filled with divine women playing music. I have bowed to all the Jina images in such Devaranya Chaitya-alayas. ||14-16||

I have circumambulated Mount Meru, which is endowed with the brilliance of artificial images, and have gone to the very high sky, piercing the cloud-sheet. ||17|| And I have bowed to the many great, radiant Jina Chaitya-alayas on the peaks of the Kulachala mountains. ||18|| O King! In all those Chaitya-alayas, I bow to all the great, radiant, non-artificial images of the Jinas. ||19||

When Narada said this, King Dasharatha, with folded hands and bowed head, uttered the words, "Salutations to the Lord of Lords." ||20||

Then, prompted by Narada's signal, King Dasharatha, with respect, had all the people removed from there by the gatekeeper. ||21||

Then, when they were alone, Narada said to King Dasharatha, the ruler of Kosala, "O King! Listen attentively, I am telling you a good thing." ||22||

I went to the peak of Trikuta mountain with great eagerness to pay my respects. There, I bowed to the very beautiful Shantinath Bhagwan's Jinalaya. ||23||

Then, by the influence of your merit, I heard a decision of Vibhishana and other ministers of Lanka's king, Ravana. ||24||

There, a man named Sagarbuddhi, who had the knowledge of auspicious omens, told Ravana that the son of King Dasharatha would be the cause of your death. ||25||

Similarly, the daughter of King Janaka will also be a cause in this. ||26||

Hearing this, Vibhishana, with a heavy heart, decided... ||26||

Page #524:
---------------------------
474
In the Padma Purana, it is said that as long as the progeny of Dasharatha and Janaka exist, Vibhishana will not kill them. He said this with great determination. ||27|| He wandered the earth for a long time, but could not find them. Then, his spies, who could assume any form at will, informed him about their location, appearance, and other characteristics. ||28|| Being a sage, he asked me, "O sage, do you know of any kings named Dasharatha and Janaka on earth?" ||29|| In response, I said, "I will find out and tell you. O best of men, I see his intentions as extremely cruel." ||30|| Therefore, O king, until this Vibhishana does something to you, hide yourself somewhere secretly. ||31|| I have equal affection for those who are righteous and worship their gurus, and especially for those like you. ||32|| Do what you think is right. May you be well. I am now going to inform King Janaka of this matter. ||33|| Having said this, Narada Muni, who had been greeted by King Dasharatha, flew up into the sky and went towards Mithila with great speed. ||34|| He went there and informed King Janaka of all this. It is right, because those who are worthy of respect are dearer to him than life itself. ||35|| After Narada Muni left, King Dasharatha, whose mind was filled with fear of death, summoned his minister, Samudrahrdaya. ||36|| The best of speakers and devoted to his master, the minister heard the great fear from the king's mouth. ||37|| He said, "O lord, all creatures perform actions for the sake of life. Tell me, what is the use of the kingdom of the three worlds for a lifeless creature?" ||38|| Therefore, until I destroy the enemies, you should wander the earth in disguise, so that no one recognizes you. ||39|| Upon hearing this, King Dasharatha entrusted his treasury, country, city, and people to Samudrahrdaya and left the city. ||40||

Page #525:
---------------------------
475
The twenty-third chapter
The minister, having examined the king well, had a dummy made of Dasaratha. The dummy was so similar to the original that only by its lack of consciousness could it be distinguished. [41]
The dummy was filled with a mixture of lac and other substances to simulate blood, and it was made as soft as the body of a real being. [42]
The dummy was seated on a fine throne in the seventh storey of the palace, surrounded by all the usual paraphernalia. [43]
The minister and the artist who made the dummy both thought it was a real king, and everyone else thought so too. Sometimes, even they were deceived. [44]
The same thing was done to Janaka. The minds of the wise are often superficial, one surpassing the other. [45]
Just as the moon and the sun hide themselves during the rainy season, so too did these two kings, who knew the state of the world, hide themselves during times of trouble. [46]
Gautama Swami said to King Shrenika, "O king of Magadha! Those kings who once lived in great palaces, who were rich in material possessions, and who were served by the most beautiful women, are now, like ordinary men, helpless and wandering the earth on foot. Alas, the state of this world!" [47-48]
Having decided this, what did that man, who gave protection to all beings, not give to those who stood at the head of the virtuous? [49]
Vibhishana, having learned of their whereabouts from his spies, sent many assassins to kill them. [50]
These assassins, armed with weapons, were cruel by nature, their bodies were invisible to the eye, and their eyes were very restless. They roamed the city day and night. [51]
These assassins, being weak, were unable to enter the palace. When they were delayed in their task, Vibhishana came himself. [52]
He followed the sound of music and, having entered the palace, found Dasaratha in the inner apartments. [53]
This is correct because the minister had thoroughly examined the king. [40]
When the king left, the minister had a dummy made of King Dasaratha's body. The dummy was so similar to the original body that only by its lack of consciousness could it be distinguished. [41]
A mixture of lac and other substances was used to create blood inside the dummy, and it was made as soft as the body of a real being. [42]
The dummy of the king was seated on a fine throne in the seventh storey of the palace, surrounded by all the usual paraphernalia, just as before. [43]
The minister and the artist who made the dummy both thought it was a real king, and everyone else thought so too. Sometimes, even they were deceived. [44]
The same thing was done to King Janaka. The minds of the wise are often superficial, one surpassing the other. [45]
Just as the moon and the sun hide themselves during the rainy season, so too did these two kings, who knew the state of the world, hide themselves during times of trouble. [46]
Gautama Swami said to King Shrenika, "O king of Magadha! Those kings who once lived in great palaces, who were rich in material possessions, and who were served by the most beautiful women, are now, like ordinary men, helpless and wandering the earth on foot. Alas, the state of this world!" [47-48]
Having decided this, what did that man, who gave protection to all beings, not give to those who stood at the head of the virtuous? [49]
Vibhishana, having learned of their whereabouts from his spies, sent many assassins to kill them. [50]
These assassins, armed with weapons, were cruel by nature, their bodies were invisible to the eye, and their eyes were very restless. They roamed the city day and night. [51]
These assassins, being weak, were unable to enter the palace. When they were delayed in their task, Vibhishana came himself. [52]
He followed the sound of music and, having entered the palace, found Dasaratha in the inner apartments. [53]

Page #526:
---------------------------
## English Translation:

**476**

The celestial being named Vidyudvilasita, instigated by Vibhishana, severed the head of Dasharatha and presented it to his master with great joy. ||54|| Having heard the cries from the inner palace, Vibhishana cast the severed head into the ocean. He acted with the same cruelty towards Janaka. ||55||  Then, considering himself successful and filled with brotherly affection, Vibhishana, full of joy, went to Lanka. ||56|| Dasharatha's entourage, after much lamentation, learned of the puppet's true nature and were filled with wonder. ||57|| Vibhishana, upon reaching the city, performed auspicious acts like charity and worship to pacify the inauspicious deeds. ||58||  His mind, once calmed, was filled with remorse due to the strange nature of karma. He thought: ||59||

**Upajati-vrutta**

Driven by false fear, I have needlessly killed those helpless earth-dwellers. Even a serpent, born from the poison of the Ashvi, cannot harm Garuda. ||60|| Where is the earth-dweller with his insignificant valor, and where is Ravana, with his valor equal to Indra's? Where is the elephant, slow and intoxicated with pride, and where is the lion, swift as the wind? ||61||

**Indravajra-vrutta**

Whatever happiness or sorrow a man is destined to experience, he will inevitably receive it, guided by his karma. ||62|| If someone truly understands the cause and effect, why wouldn't they strive for their own liberation? By doing so, they will attain supreme happiness in this world and liberation from the cycle of birth and death. ||63||

**Note:** The translation preserves the Jain terms like "Upajati-vrutta" and "Indravajra-vrutta" as requested.

Page #527:
---------------------------
## Chapter Twenty-Three: The Story of Vibhishana's Misconduct

**477**

This wisdom, which has been rendered foolish by the accidental separation of the two kings' lives, is a result of my ignorance. It is true that the intellect of a human being, due to poor education, is prone to act in ways that are not beneficial. ||6||

This city of Lanka, situated in the middle of the ocean, which pierces the netherworld, is capable of frightening even the gods. How then can it be accessible to those who dwell on the earth? ||65||

"This act that I have committed is entirely unworthy of me. I will never again engage in such reckless behavior." With this thought, Vibhishana, radiant like the sun, returned to his palace and indulged in his pleasures. ||66||

Thus ends the twenty-third chapter of the Padmacharita, narrated by the sage Ravishena, which describes the misconduct of Vibhishana.

**1. Gūḍhatva - Kh. || 2. Kh. B. Pustakayoḥ Pāṭhaḥ.**

**Note:** The text uses the Jain term "naimittika" (निमित्तज्ञानी) to describe someone who is influenced by external factors and lacks true wisdom.

Page #528:
---------------------------
The Twenty-Fourth Chapter

"O Shrenik, I will tell you the wondrous story of King Dasharatha's journey for the sake of protecting his life, listen to it with wonder.  There is a city called Kautukamangal, adorned with a rampart like a mountain, in the north.  There reigned a king named Shubhamati, who bore the epithet 'Sārthaka'.  His wife was Prithushri, adorned with the ornaments of feminine virtues.  They had two children, a daughter named Kekaya and a son named Drona-megha, both of whom filled the space between heaven and earth with their pure qualities.  Kekaya, with her beautiful limbs and excellent features, shone brightly, having mastered all the arts.  She knew the three types of dance: Angahārāshraya, Abhinayāshraya, and Vyāyāmika, along with their many sub-types.  She was also well-versed in music, which is expressed through the throat, head, and chest, and is composed of the seven notes: Shadja, Rishabha, Gandhara, Madhyama, Panchama, Dhaivata, and Nishada.  It was accompanied by three tempos: Drut, Madhy, and Vilambit, and had two types of talas: Asra and Chaturasra.  It was composed of four types of varna: Sthayi, Sanchari, Arohi, and Avarohi, and was set in four types of pada.  She was proficient in the three languages: Sanskrit, Prakrit, and Shauraseni, which are characterized by their use of nouns, verbs, prefixes, and particles.  There are eight types of jati: Dhaivati, Ārshbhi, Shadja-Shadja, Udicya, Nishadini, Gandhari, Shadjakaikshi, and Shadjamadyama.  Or, Gandharaudicya, Madhyamapanchami, Gandharapanchami, Raktagandhari, Madhyama, etc."

Page #529:
---------------------------
## Chapter Twenty-Four

**479** The ten jātis are: Āndhrī, Madhyamodīcyā, Karmāravī, Nandīnī, and Kaiśikī. The music that was composed with these eight or ten jātis, along with the thirteen ornaments mentioned here and those to be mentioned later, was excellent. ||14-15||

The four ornaments of the sthāyī pada are: Prasannādi, Prasannānta, Madhyaprasāda, and Prasannādyavasāna. ||16||

The six ornaments of the saṃcārī pada are: Nirvṛtta, Prasthita, Bindu, Preṅkholita, Tāro-mandra, and Prasanna. ||17||

The ārohī pada has only one ornament, Prasannādi, while the avarohī pada has two ornaments, Prasannānta and Kuḥara. Thus, there are thirteen ornaments in total. She knew this excellent music well, along with all its characteristics. ||18-19||

The four types of instruments are: *tata* produced from the *tantri* (veena), *avanaddha* produced from the *mṛdaṅga*, *śuṣira* produced from the *vaṃśa* (flute), and *ghana* produced from the *tāla*. All these instruments have various variations. Just as she knew all this, so too was there hardly anyone else who could match her knowledge. ||20-21||

The combination of song, dance, and instruments is called *nāṭya*. The nine rasas are: Śṛṅgāra, Hāsya, Karuṇā, Vīra, Adbhuta, Bhayānaka, Raudra, Bībhatsa, and Śānta. She, the young girl Kekayā, knew them all with their various sub-categories and in their highest form. ||22-23||

The script that is commonly used in one's own country is called *anuvṛtta*. The script that people imagine according to their own symbols is called *vikṛta*. The script that is used for writing about the *pratyanga* and other categories is called *sāmayika*. The script that is created by using flowers and other objects in place of letters is called *naimittika*. This script has many variations depending on the region, such as Prācya, Madhyama, Yaudheya, Samādra, etc. Kekayā knew all of them well. ||24-26||

There is an art called *uktikauśala* which has many variations depending on the *sthāna* (location) and other factors. The jātis are: *sthāna*, *svara*, *saṃskāra*, *vinyāsa*, *kāku*, *samudāya*, *virāma*, *sāmānyābhihita*, *samānārthatva*, and *bhāṣā*. ||27-28||

The *sthāna* (location) is of three types: *uraḥ* (chest), *kaṇṭha* (throat), and *śiraḥ* (head). The *svara* (tone) is the same as before, starting with *ṣaḍja* and having seven variations. ||29||

Page #530:
---------------------------
## The Papouraana

**Verse 30:** Two types of *sanskar* are described based on their characteristics and purpose. *Vinyasa* refers to the arrangement of words, sentences, and larger units of discourse.

**Verse 31:** *Kakus* are of two types: relative and absolute. *Samadaya* (collection) is of three types: prose, poetry, and mixed (champu).

**Verse 32:** Conciseness and pauses are general features. The use of synonyms is also mentioned.

**Verse 33:** Using one word to convey multiple meanings is called *tulyarthata* (synonymy). Language is of three types: *arya*, *lakshana*, and *mleccha*, based on their rules.

**Verse 34:** *Lekha* refers to the practice of writing poetry. These are all considered *jati* (categories). *Vyaktavaak*, *lokavaak*, and *margavyavahar* are considered *matrika* (sources).

**Verse 35:** Even these categories have many subcategories known to the wise. The skill of eloquence, encompassing all these aspects, is called *uktikoushal*.

**Verse 36:** *Shushkachitra* (dry painting) is of two types: *naanasushk* (various dry) and *varjit* (forbidden). *Aichitra* (moist painting) is of many types, created using substances like sandalwood.

**Verse 37:** It is created on earth, water, and cloth using artificial and natural colors. It is combined with various colors. Kekaya, with auspicious signs, knew all about this art of painting.

**Verse 38:** *Pusthakarma* (toy-making) is of three types: *kshaya* (destruction), *upachay* (addition), and *sankrama* (transfer).

**Verse 39:** *Kshayajan* *pusthakarma* is created by carving wood, etc. *Upachayajan* *pusthakarma* is created by adding clay, etc. *Sankramajan* *pusthakarma* is created by molding using molds, etc.

**Verse 40:** *Pusthakarma* is further categorized based on the presence or absence of mechanisms, holes, etc. Some toys are mechanized, while others are not. Some have holes, while others don't. Kekaya knew this art of toy-making as well as it was rare for others.

**Verse 41:** *Patracched* (paper cutting) is of three types: *bushkim*, *chhinna*, and *achhinna*. *Bushkim* is created using needles, teeth, etc. *Chhinna* is created by cutting with scissors. *Achhinna* is created by combining different elements.

Page #531:
---------------------------
## Chapter Twenty-Four

**481**

That which is cut with scissors etc. and is connected with other parts is called **chhinna**. That which is cut and is devoid of connection with other parts is called **achhinna**. ||42||

This **patracchedyakriya** (art of cutting leaves) is performed on leaves, cloth, gold etc. and is of two types: **sthira** (stable) and **chanchal** (mobile). The beautiful Kekaya had mastered this art. ||43||

The art of garland making is of four types: **ardra** (moist), **shushka** (dry), **tadundmukta** (released from that) and **mishra** (mixed). The garland made from fresh flowers etc. is called **ardra**. The one made from dry leaves etc. is called **shushka**. The one made from rice husk or jaw etc. is called **tadundmukta**. And the one made from a mixture of all three is called **mishra**. ||44-45||

This garland making art is associated with various aspects like **ranprabodhan** (awakening of war), **vyuhsangyog** (combination of formations) etc. The wise Kekaya was well-versed in all these aspects. ||46||

**Yoni dravya** (source material), **adhiṣṭhāna** (base), **rasa** (taste), **virya** (potency), **kalpana** (imagination), **parikarma** (process), **guna-dosha** (qualities and defects) knowledge and **kaushala** (skill) are the components of **gandhayोजना** (art of fragrance creation). **Tagara** (sandalwood) etc. are the **yoni dravya** from which fragrant substances are created. The base of incense sticks etc. is called **adhiṣṭhāna**. **Kashaya** (astringent), **madhura** (sweet), **tikta** (bitter), **katu** (pungent) and **amla** (sour) are the five types of **rasa** which need to be carefully determined in fragrant substances. ||47-49||

The **virya** of substances is of two types: **shita** (cold) and **ushna** (hot). **Kalpana** is the combination of suitable and unsuitable substances. ||50||

**Parikarma** includes processes like **sneha** (oiling), **shodhan** (purification) and **kshalan** (washing). **Guna-dosha** knowledge is the understanding of qualities and defects. **Kaushala** is the knowledge of the uniqueness of external and internal substances. ||51||

This art of **gandhayोजना** is associated with two aspects: **svatantr** (independent) and **anugata** (dependent). Kekaya was well-versed in all these aspects. ||52||

There are five types of food items: **bhakṣya** (eatable), **bhojya** (edible), **peya** (drinkable), **lehya** (lickable) and **chushya** (suctable). Among these, **bhakṣya** is eaten for taste and is of two types: **kṛtrima** (artificial) and **akṛtrima** (natural). ||53||

**Bhojya** is eaten to satisfy hunger and is of two types: **mukhya** (main) and **sadhaka** (supplementary). **Odan** (rice), **roti** (bread) etc. are **mukhya bhojya**. **Lappsi** (sweet porridge), **dal** (lentils), **shak** (vegetables) etc. are **sadhaka bhojya**. ||54||

**Peeya** is of three types: **shityoga** (sherbet), **jala** (water) and **madya** (wine). **Lehya** is of three types: **raga** (sweet), **khaṇḍa** (sugar candy) and **valehya** (lickable). **Chushya** is of two types: **kṛtrima** (artificial) and **akṛtrima** (natural). ||55||

Page #532:
---------------------------
## English Translation:

482
In the Padma Purana, the knowledge of taste is described as being associated with digestion, cutting, heating, and cooling, etc. Kekaya possessed this beautiful knowledge. ||56|| She knew well the characteristics of gems like diamond, pearl, sapphire, gold, silver, weapons, clothes, conch shells, etc. ||57|| She was skilled in weaving, dyeing clothes in various colors, and other such arts with great beauty and excellence. ||58|| She was very knowledgeable in making various tools from iron, teeth, lac, alkali, stone, thread, etc. ||59|| There are four types of measurement based on the differences in the object, place, weight, and time. Among these, the measurement of the object is called "meya" and is differentiated based on the differences in length, width, etc. ||60|| The measurement of place is called "desh" and is measured in "vitasti" (span), etc. The measurement of weight is called "tula" and is measured in "pal" (weight), etc. The measurement of time is called "kal" and is measured in "samaya" (time), etc. ||61|| This measurement is generated from ascent, circumference, diagonal, and action. She knew all of this well. ||62|| She was also knowledgeable in the arts of agriculture, treasure hunting, identifying precious stones, business practices, and the science of life, all in a special way. ||63|| She was well-versed in the treatment of humans, elephants, cows, horses, etc., with knowledge of their causes and other aspects. ||64|| There are three types of fainting: caused by illusion, pain, or magic, and by spells and medicines. She knew all of this well. ||65|| She was well-versed in the various doctrines created by hypocrites, including their character and various aspects. ||66|| There are four types of play: based on action, tools, speech, and artistic skill. Action is the play that originates from the body. ||67|| Playing with balls, etc., is considered a tool. Speech play is the use of various beautiful words. ||68|| Gambling, etc., is considered artistic skill. She was an expert in all these types of play. ||69||

Page #533:
---------------------------
The twenty-fourth chapter
483
The world is said to be of two kinds, based on the distinction between the dependent and the support. The living beings and the non-living beings are the dependents, and the earth, etc., are their supports. || 70 || In this world, there is the origin, existence, and destruction of various forms of life. To know this is called Lokajñāna (knowledge of the world), which is very difficult to attain. || 71 || This world exists naturally in various forms, such as mountains, earth, islands, and countries. Kekaya had the best knowledge of this. || 72 ||
1
The art of massage is of two types: one is Karma-saṁśraya (dependent on karma) and the other is Śayyopacārika (related to the bed). There are four types of Karma-saṁśraya, as they provide comfort to the skin, flesh, bones, and mind. Some massages provide comfort only to the skin, some to the skin and flesh, some to the skin, flesh, and bones, and some to all four: skin, flesh, bones, and mind. Besides these, there are other types: contact, holding, eating, moving, striking, breaking, piercing, pressing, and splitting. Furthermore, there are three types based on softness, medium, and firmness. || 73-75 || The massage that provides comfort only to the skin is called soft or delicate. The one that provides comfort to the skin and flesh is called medium, and the one that provides comfort to the skin, flesh, and bones is called firm. When music is added to it, it becomes known as mind-comforting massage. || 76 || This art of massage also has the following drawbacks: reversing the growth of hair on the body, pressing too hard on areas without flesh, hair pulling, amazing, corruptly obtained, going astray, overeating, being ordered to do something, excessive, and being the opposite of sleep. The delicate massage that is free from these drawbacks, applied in the right place, and done with knowledge of the intention, is very beautiful. || 77-79 || The massage that is done with various instruments, such as cushions, is called Śayyopacārika, which provides comfort to the mind. || 80 || This art of massage, which is related to the limbs and their parts, was known to that girl in a way that no other woman knew. || 81 || Bathing, braiding the hair, and perfuming them are the arts of body-culture and dressing. So
1. Cāsa-kha., Vāsa ja. 2. Doṣāstasyā ma.

Page #534:
---------------------------
This maiden was also well aware of this. ||82|| Thus, adorned with beautiful character and the excellent ornament of humility, she possessed all the arts that captivated the minds of people. ||83|| Her fame, born of the qualities of art, shone uniquely in the three worlds, attracting the minds of all. ||84|| King, what more need be said? Briefly, hear this: even in a hundred years, it would be impossible to describe her form. ||85|| Her father thought, "Who could be a suitable groom for her? It would be good if she chooses her own husband." ||86|| With this decision, he gathered all the kings of the earth, including Harivahana, for her swayamvara. These kings were adorned with various kinds of gestures and expressions even before the swayamvara. ||87|| King Dasharatha, accompanied by King Janaka, arrived there. Although King Dasharatha was in simple attire, he overshadowed all the other kings present with his brilliance. ||88|| The usher was introducing the generous kings seated on well-decorated platforms, and the virtuous maiden, skilled in reading human character, was going around, observing each king. Finally, she placed her garland of blue lotuses, symbolizing her gaze, around Dasharatha's neck. ||89-90|| Just as a swan is approached by a goose amidst a flock of geese, so this maiden, with her graceful movements, approached King Dasharatha amidst the assembly of kings. ||91|| She had already accepted Dasharatha with the garland of emotions, and the garland of wealth she placed on him was a repetition, as per social custom. ||92|| In that pavilion, many kings, with happy hearts, exclaimed, "Oh! This excellent maiden has chosen a worthy and unparalleled husband." ||93|| And some kings, out of extreme arrogance, became enraged and created a great commotion. ||94|| They said, "Leaving us, who are born in renowned lineages and possess great wealth, this wicked maiden has chosen one whose lineage and character are unknown. ||95||

Page #535:
---------------------------
Chapter Twenty-Four

485. "Seize this foreign woman, whose intentions are evil. Grab her by the hair and drag her away forcefully, you wicked girl!" ||17||

Having said this, the kings, led by Dasharatha, all armed and ready, marched towards him, their hearts filled with rage. ||98||

Then, overwhelmed with fear, Shubhamati, the girl's father, spoke to Dasharatha, "O noble one! While I hold back these enraged kings, you take the girl and hide her somewhere. The knowledge of time is the supreme principle in all strategies." ||99-100||

Hearing this, Dasharatha, the wise and valiant king, smiled and said, "Be at ease, my friend. See how they flee in fear!" ||101||

With these words, he mounted his chariot, drawn by powerful horses, and became as terrifying as the midday sun in autumn. ||102||

Kekaya quickly dismounted from the chariot and, taking the reins and whip, stood in the battlefield, her courage unwavering. ||103||

She said, "My lord, command me. Whom shall I attack? Death is eager to embrace whom today?" ||104||

Dasharatha replied, "What good is killing these petty kings? I will strike down the head of this army, the leader of these men. O wise and beloved one, drive the chariot towards the one with the white umbrella, shining like the moon." ||105-106||

Following his command, she drove the chariot forward, its white umbrella raised high, its great banner waving in the wind. ||107||

The flames of the chariot, like the blazing light of the banner, consumed thousands of warriors like moths drawn to a flame. ||108||

The kings, struck by the arrows released from Dasharatha's chariot, fled in all directions, trampling over each other in their panic. ||109||

Then, Hem Prabha, seeing the kings defeated and ashamed, rallied them and urged them to attack Dasharatha's chariot once more. ||110||

Page #536:
---------------------------
486
Padma Purana
Many kings surrounded by horses, chariots, elephants and foot soldiers, roaring like lions and moving with a large group, aimed their tomars, arrows, nooses, chakras and gold weapons at the single king Dasharatha with great eagerness. ||111-112||
It was amazing that King Dasharatha, even though he was in a single chariot, was Dasharatha, and at that time he was becoming a hundred-charioted or countless-charioted by his prowess. ||113||
The king Dasharatha, who held a circular bow, pierced the weapons of the enemies with arrows whose drawing and holding were not known. ||114||
He made the Hemprabha, whose flag and umbrella had been cut and fallen down and whose vehicle was exhausted and very anxious, chariotless in a moment with arrows shining like gold. ||115||
Then Hemprabha, whose mind was filled with fear, mounted another chariot and fled quickly, tarnishing his glory. ||116||
King Dasharatha pierced the enemies and weapons and protected himself and his wife. The work that one Dasharatha did at that time was worthy of an infinite chariot. ||117||
Seeing the lion-like Dasharatha, who was shaking his arrow-like hair, the deer-like warriors fled in all eight directions. ||118||
At that time, this loud sound was rising in both his and the enemy's army: "Oh! What amazing power this man has! And what a miracle this girl has done!" ||119||
People could recognize King Dasharatha, who was holding high his prowess, only by the victory cry proclaimed by the devotees or by his unparalleled power. ||120||
Then King Dasharatha took the hand of the girl in the city called Kautukamangal, where others had performed auspicious ceremonies and rituals. ||121||
After that, King Dasharatha went to Ayodhya and King Janaka went to Mithilapuri, whose wedding celebration was held with great wealth and splendor. ||122||
There, the relatives filled with joy performed the rebirth festival and the re-coronation of King Dasharatha with great splendor. ||123||
The virtuous King Dasharatha, who was free from all kinds of fear and whose orders were considered sacred by all, was playing in Ayodhya like Indra in heaven. ||124||

Page #537:
---------------------------
487
In the twenty-fourth chapter, the king Dasaratha addressed Kekaya, who was seated in the presence of his other wives and kings, saying, "O fair-faced one, O beloved, tell me what you desire, I will fulfill it. I am very happy today." 

If you had not driven the chariot with great skill at that time, how could I have conquered the angry group of enemies who had risen together? 

If the charioteer Arun had not been there, how could the sun, pervading the entire world, have destroyed the darkness? 

Kekaya, whose face was bowed down under the weight of shame born from receiving the boon, said repeatedly, "O lord, let my request be a trust with you. When I ask, you will give it without saying anything."

As soon as Kekaya said this, King Dasaratha, whose face was like the full moon, and who was a rival to the moon god, said, "O beloved, O broad-hipped one, O gentle-complexioned one, O possessor of three-colored, very beautiful, clear and large eyes, let it be so."

The king Dasaratha said to the others, "Oh! This Kekaya, born in a great family, skilled in the arts, and endowed with all enjoyments, is truly wise in her policy, that she has made her request a trust."

Thinking that this virtuous lady will slowly consider and ask for some desired good thing, all her loved ones at that time attained the highest joy.

Gautama Swami says to Srenic, "O king! I have, according to my intelligence, made this king for you.

Page #538:
---------------------------
488
Padma Purana
I will briefly tell you the story of the three worlds. Why elaborate? Those with bad conduct experience extreme suffering, while those with good conduct, shining like the sun, experience happiness. ||135||
Thus ends the twenty-fourth chapter of the Padma Charita, narrated by the Acharya known as Ravishena, titled "The Gift of Kekaya." ||24||

The story of Dasharatha's good conduct has been told. Now listen to the account of the birth of the great humans who illuminated their noble lineage. ||134|| There is no need for elaboration to understand the story of the three worlds. Therefore, I will briefly tell you this: those with bad conduct experience extreme suffering, while those with good conduct, shining like the sun, experience happiness. ||135||
Thus ends the twenty-fourth chapter of the Padma Charita, narrated by the Acharya known as Ravishena, titled "The Gift of Kekaya." ||24||

Page #539:
---------------------------
The twenty-fifth chapter:

The queen Aparajita, sleeping peacefully in her palace, on a bed adorned with a lake of shining jewels, saw wondrous dreams in the last watch of the night, dreams that foretold the birth of a great man. She saw these dreams as vividly as if she were awake. 

In the first dream, she saw a white elephant, in the second a lion, in the third the sun, and in the fourth the moon. Upon seeing these, she awoke to the auspicious sounds of trumpets. 

Her mind filled with wonder, Aparajita performed her morning rituals. As the world was illuminated by the sun's rays, she went to her husband, her heart filled with anxiety to know the meaning of her dreams. She was accompanied by her friends, and she adorned the royal throne. 

With a slight bow, Aparajita joined her hands and recounted her dreams to her husband, who listened attentively. 

Then, King Dasharatha, the seer of all knowledge, standing amidst the assembly of wise men, revealed the meaning of the dreams. He said, "My dear, the reason for your wonder is that you will give birth to a son who will destroy all enemies, both internal and external."

Upon hearing this, Aparajita was filled with joy. She touched her belly and her lotus-like face was adorned with a gentle smile. 

With a pure heart, Aparajita, along with her delighted husband, performed grand worship at the Jain temples. 

From that day forward, her beauty increased, and though her heart was filled with great strength, she also experienced a profound peace. 

Later, the beautiful queen Sumitra also had dreams. She was astonished and her body trembled with excitement, her dreams filled with auspicious meaning.

Page #540:
---------------------------
490
Padma Purana
She saw that Lakshmi and Kirti were respectfully anointing the lion king with kalashas, which had lotuses placed on their mouths and were filled with beautiful water. ||13|| Then she saw that she herself was standing on the peak of a high mountain, looking at the vast earth adorned with the ocean-like girdle. ||14|| After that, she saw a beautiful, rotating wheel, shining with radiant rays, resembling the sun, studded with various gems. ||15|| Seeing these dreams, she woke up to the sound of auspicious musical instruments. Then, with great humility, she went and told her husband the news of her dream in very sweet words. ||16|| In response, King Dasharatha said, "O beloved, you will have a son who will be the head of the age, who will destroy the group of enemies, who will be of great brilliance, and who will be the bearer of wonderful deeds." ||17|| With her mind filled with joy at her husband's words, Queen Sumitra went to her place. At that time, she was seeing the entire world as if it were located below. ||18||
Then, when the time was complete, just as the eastern direction gives birth to the full moon, Queen Aparajita gave birth to a radiant son. ||19|| When King Dasharatha sat down to give wealth to those who announced this fortune-increasing event, he was left with only umbrellas, whisks, and clothes, as he had given away everything else in charity. ||20|| All the brothers and relatives celebrated this great birth with great pomp. It was such a birth celebration that the whole world went mad with joy. ||21|| They named this son, who had the complexion of the midday sun, whose chest was embraced by Lakshmi, and whose eyes were like lotuses, Padma. ||22|| Then, just as the land of gems, i.e., the mine, gives birth to a precious gem endowed with qualities like shade, etc., Sumitra gave birth to a son who was the bearer of supreme radiance. ||23|| As if researching the birth celebration of Padma, the relatives also celebrated his birth with great pomp. ||24|| Thousands of calamities arose in the cities of the enemies, indicating misfortune, and thousands of auspicious signs appeared in the cities of the relatives, indicating wealth. ||25||

Page #541:
---------------------------
## The Twenty-Fifth Canto

**26.**  A son, whose brilliance resembled the heart of a full-blown blue lotus, who floated in a sea of radiance, and who was adorned with many auspicious marks, was born to Lakshmana and his wife. His parents named him Lakshmana.

**27-28.**  The two boys were exceedingly beautiful. Their lips were red like coral, their hands and feet were the color of red lotuses, and their movements were captivating. Their touch was as soft as butter, and they possessed a natural fragrance.  Playing their childish games, they stole the hearts of all who saw them.

**29.**  Anointed with sandalwood paste and adorned with saffron tilak on their foreheads, they resembled mountains of silver, infused with the essence of gold.

**30.**  Bound by the love that had grown over countless lifetimes, they were each other's inheritors.  They were cherished by all their relatives within the palace.

**31.**  When they spoke, it was as if they were vomiting nectar. When they looked at someone, it was as if they were anointing the world with a blissful ointment.

**32.**  When they were called, they seemed to tear through poverty itself. They satisfied the hearts of all, according to their own desires.

**33.**  Their very presence seemed to bring blessings and prosperity.  Protected by their guardians, the two princes roamed the city, enjoying their carefree games.

**34.**  Just as Vijaya and Triprishtha, the names of Balabhadra and Narayana, had been given before, so too were these two princes endowed with similar qualities.

**35.**  Later, Kekaya gave birth to a son, whose form was divine and who was destined for great fortune. He was named Bharata in the world.

**36.**  Subsequently, Supribha gave birth to a beautiful son, whose fame as Shatrughna still echoes throughout the world.

**37.**  Aparajita named her son Bala, after the lotus, and Sumitra, with great desire, named her son Hari.

**38.**  Kekaya, seeing that the name Bharata was associated with the universal emperor, declared her son to be half-emperor.

**39.**  Supribha, hearing the name Chakravarti (emperor), declared that her son was worthy of the name Shatrughna.

Page #542:
---------------------------
492
In the Padma Purana, the four Kumaras were as deep as the ocean, as harmonious as the right paths, and as generous as the directions. ||40|| Seeing the Kumaras fit for learning, their father, Dasaratha, anxiously considered a suitable teacher. ||41|| There was a beautiful city called Kampilya, where a Brahmin named Shikhi lived. He had a daughter named Ishu. ||42|| They had a son named Air, who, due to excessive pampering, became very unruly. His actions were the cause of thousands of reproaches. ||43|| Earning wealth, acquiring knowledge, and accumulating virtue, although within the control of man, are often achieved in foreign lands. ||44|| Thinking thus, his parents, filled with sorrow, expelled him from home. He went to the city of Rajagriha, wearing only two garments, in a state of misery. ||45|| There was a learned man named Vaivasvata, who was highly skilled in archery and had a thousand disciples who were diligent in their studies. ||46|| Air approached him and learned archery according to the proper method. In a short time, he became more skilled than all his thousand disciples. ||47|| The king of Rajagriha heard that Vaivasvata had made a foreign boy more skilled than his own sons. He was filled with anger upon learning this. ||48|| Hearing the king's anger, Vaivasvata, the teacher of archery, instructed Air, "You should appear foolish before the king." ||49|| Then the king, saying, "I will test the education of all your disciples," summoned Vaivasvata and his disciples. ||50|| Then the king had all the disciples shoot arrows in turn, and they all hit the target as they should. ||51|| Then he had Air shoot arrows, and he shot them in such a way that the king considered him foolish. ||52|| When the king realized that everyone had been deceived, he sent Air away. The teacher of archery returned to his own abode, surrounded by his disciples. ||53|| 
When Kekaya named his son Chakravarti, I thought, "Why shouldn't I name my son something even greater?" With this thought, he named his son Shatrughna after the Lord. ||39||

Page #543:
---------------------------
The Twenty-Fifth Chapter

Having accepted the daughter of Vaivasvata as his wife, with the consent of his Guru, he fled at night and reached the city of Dasharatha. [54] He displayed his skills in the forest and was presented to the king. The king, pleased with him, entrusted his sons to him. [55] Just as the image of the moon expands in clear ponds, so too did the skills of Aira expand in his disciples. [56] Similarly, with the attainment of other Gurus, other knowledge also became illuminated in them, just as hidden gems become illuminated when the lid is removed. [57] Seeing the excellence of their knowledge in all the scriptures, the king, whose heart was filled with joy due to the conduct, humility, and generous actions of his sons, was greatly pleased. He honored the Gurus with great wealth, exceeding their desires, being renowned for his generosity and possessing knowledge of the qualities and wisdom of the Gurus. [58]

Gautama Swami says, "O King! A little knowledge attained by some men becomes excellent, some remain the same, and some, due to the disparity of their actions, do not even retain what they have attained. This is because the group of rays of the sun, upon reaching the shore of the crystal mountain, expands greatly, remains the same in some places, and is completely destroyed in places of darkness." [59]

Thus ends the Twenty-Fifth Chapter of the Padmacharita, narrated by the sage Ravishena, which describes the birth of Rama and his four brothers. [25]

Page #544:
---------------------------
Please provide the text you would like translated. I need the text to translate it into English.

Page #545:
---------------------------
## Sloka Index

**[A]**

* Akampanasutaheto. 128
* Akasmatkathitam Mayam Akasmad. 230
* Akaryena Tatah Svena Akarane Devaalam 212
* Akrushtasarvasasyadhya Akruro Varisheno'tha 22
* Akshaya Nidhayastasya Agamat Pramadoydaan- 88
* Agraheed Grihadharma Cha 394
* Agnijvala Kulagare Agraskanthena Choudara 201
* Ankapraptena Sa Tena 47
* Ankasthavamapaanyanka 379
* Ankasya Purusheindrasya 348
* Anganoptayavabrihi Angananaam Tatastasya 
* Anganavishaya Srishti Angaharaashrayam Nruttam 478
* Angeshu Cha Chaturvashya 198
* Achiresshava Kalena Achintayacca Kintvet- 353
* Achintayacca Drishtevam 246
* Achintayacca Drishtavataam 104
* Achintayacca Noonan Sa 193
* Achintayacca Bhadreayam 193
* Achintayacca Yadyesha 271
* Achintayacca Lokena 243
* Achintayacca Virena 28
* Achintayacca Ha Kashttam 272
* Achintayacca Ha Kashttam 348
* Achintayacca Ha Kashttam 
* Achintayattaatah Shakro 284
* Achintayattada Naam 173
* Achiakaracca Sangraam- 182
* Achchhinnajaladharaabhi- 461
* Ajaah Pashva Uddishta 241
* Ajaata Evaasmi Na Yaavadenaam 421
* Ajaaste Jayate Yeshaam 241
* Ajitam Vijitasesha Ajitasya Avataranam 
* Ajairyashtavya Mityasya 241
* Agnaatparamarthastaih 261
* Agnaatasatyaya Kashttam 405
* Anjanaadriprakaasho'pi 
* Ajitamatyuurukalavidhaana 305
* Atavaamiha Saukhyam Kim 278
* Adhaukishi Tamuddesha 409
* Anima Laghima Kshobhya 162
* Anuvratani Pancha Syu Anuvratani Samprapta 
* Anuvratani Sevante 
* Atah Karmabhirevedam 
* Atah Paramparayaat 
* Atah Pashyata Vaakrosh 
* Atah Sanskaranopaaya 
* Atah Tatpratikaaraya 
* Atah Taddarshanoupaaya- 342
* Atah Tishttha Tvamatrava 100
* Atikrantmahaaraksho 
* Atikrantastito Drishtava 107
* Atikranta Vasum Drashtrum 248
* Atimatram Tato Bhooori 283
* Ativrushtiravrushtisch 
* Ativirya Suviryashch 
* Atishayashubhacinta 
* Atishaakhaamrigadweepa 101
* Ato Naathasya Me Shishya 242
* Ato'pi Samatikramya 
* Ato Yathaatra Sutraarth- 323
* Ato Vidhatstva Tam Yatnam 343
* Ato Vipadai Jaataaya 222
* Attichatyantduurganndham 32
* Atyanta Suashamah Kaalah 429
* Atyantdineematasyam 376
* Atyantdussahayogi 470
* Atyantphalasampatti 
* Atyantmadhbhutam Kaaschidd 39
* Atyantmadhikaam Kurvan 205
* Atyantmantarangouyam 203
* Atyantmupacharajnaa 
* Atyantvishayasaango 
* Atyantashuddhacittaaste 
* Atyalpen Prayasena 328
* Atyashishtastato. Drishtava 164
* Atyugrashaasanaattasmad 437
* Atarantre Chalaanveshi 208
* Atarantre'tyayam Praaptah 338
* Atarantre Nabhogaanaam 122
* Atarantre Punah Praapto 
* Atarantre Pure Raja 139
* Atarantre Priyatyanttam 345
* Atarantre Mahamaano 141
* Atarantre Munish Praapto 
* Atarantre Vinishkranto 225
* Atarantre Virodho'bhoo- 353
* Atarantre'vishadroha- 382
* Atarantre Sadehaanaam 
* Ath Kaschittparaadhino 50
* Ath Kaalaanyato Haani 36
* Ath Kinnarageetaakhye Pure Rati 80

**Note:** This is a partial translation. The original text contains many Sanskrit words and phrases that are difficult to translate directly into English. I have attempted to preserve the Jain terms as much as possible, but some terms may have been slightly modified for clarity.

Page #546:
---------------------------
496
Atha Kinargitasye Pure Sri 93
Atha Kusumapatantas
Atha Kumbhapure Raj
Atha Ketumati Putra
Atha Kenapi Vegena
Atha Kailasa Sankṣobho
Atha Kridanasaktāyā
Atha Kṣubdheṣu Vireṣu
Atha Ghoratapodhāri
Atha Cāraṇasādhūn
Atha Cetobhūvo Vege
Atha Caikāntayukto'ni
238
113
282
458
Atha Ghnan Sa Cirāt Khinnaḥ 258
Atha Candrodare Kāla
210
239
341
251
10
256
92
205
80
26
Atha Jambūmati Dva
Atha Tam Gamane Saktam
Atha Tatraiva Nagare
Atha Tadbhavanam Tasyā
Atha Tasyābhavatputraḥ
Atha Tirthakaro'dāra
Atha Tena Sthitenārāt
Atha Te Sabhaye Dṛṣṭā
Aba To Pāraṇāhetoḥ
Atha Dantaprabhājāla
Atha Dharmarathākhyena
Atha Dhūtebhakalāla
Atha Nākādhipasyo
Atha Nīlāñjanākhyāyāṁ
Atha Naiva Kṛtārtho'sā
Atha Pāṇigṛhītyasyā
Atha Pratikriyām Cakre
Atha Pravartanam Kṛtvā
Atha Pravattitam Tasyā
Atha Praśāntayā Vācā
Atha Prāsādasikhare
Atha Priyavimuktām Tām
Atha Vāledhumvā Nāmnā
..Aya Bhaṅgam Gataḥ Siṁhaḥ
30
178

405
365
381
388
464
32
331
386
306
50
255
108
185
58
186
380
57
186
208
389
Padmapurāṇe
Atha Bhāskarakarṇa
Atha Bhāsvānmahāśālāṁ
Atha Bhūtaravāṭamyāṁ
Atha Bhūtaravābhirūpam
Atha Mandodari Garbha
Atha Mālinamityūce
Aya Māli Samuttasyo
Atha Meṣapurare Rājā
Atha Meruguhakāre
Atha Yajnadhvānī
Śrutvā
Atha Yo'sau Surendreṇa
Atha Ratnapuram Nāma
Atha Ratnadhavāḥ Putra
Atha Rambhāguṇākārā
Atha Rājapuram Prāpto
Athaṛkṣa Sūryarajasa
Atha Vaktṛe Triyāmāyāḥ
Atha vā Karmaṇām Etam
Atha vā Ki Prapace'na
Atha vā Ko'tra Vo Doṣaḥ
Atha vā Dhanapālasvam
Atha vā Na Nanu Kṣudre
Atha vā Nirmitam Ceto
Atha vānugrahīto'sat
Atha vā Bhadra Te Ko'ya
Atha Vāyukumārasya
Atha vā Yuktamevedam
Atha vā Vacana Jñāna
Atha vā Vidyate Naiva
Atha vā Śrutamevāsi
Atha vā Sarvakāryeṣu
Atha vā Sarvasandeha
Atha Vijñāya Jayinam
Atha Vidyābalādāśu
Atha Vidyuddvasyābhū
Atha Vidyuto Nāmnā
Atha Vegavati Nāmnā
Atha Ve'ndra Jite Yūne
416
205
407
404
179
141
144
134
154
238
274
97
163
275
245
89
300
325
375
184
332
130
**3
362
348
266
337
353
107
342
360
197
398
70
68
193
336

Atha Vaibhavaṇaḥ Kūṭo
Atha Vaiśravaṇo Yāsāṁ
Atha Śabdaśca Buddhiśca
Atha Sūryarajāḥ Putraṁ
Atha Svayamvarāśānāṁ
Athāgantukasiṁhasya
Athājit Jino Jāta
Athāñjana Giricchayāḥ
Reta Samaye Prāpta
Ayādiśyamateḥ Putro
Athānādarataḥ Pūrvam
Athāhasi Saṁpūrṇa
Athānyadā Kirtidharaḥ
Athānyadānava Ucat
Athānyadā Madhī Kodā
Athānyasya Dinasyādau
Athāparājita Devi
Athāpi Jananārabhūtyā
Athāyudvijamānasyā
Athāmangalabhītābhyāṁ
Athāmṛtaprabhāvāyā
Athālamalamaiten
Athāvocad Daśagrīvaḥ
Athāsāvan Yadāpṛcchat
Athāsīdakṣiṇasreṣṭ
Athāsau Kathayannevam
Avāsi Darpaṇa Chāye
Athāsau Bhagavān Dhyānī
Athāsau Yauvanaprāptām
Athāsau Lokamuttārya
Ayāsi Vipule Kānte
Athāsau Suvratas Kṛtvā
Athāsati Dakṣiṇasreṇyāṁ
Athārīta Nagaram Nāmnā
Athāsya Carite Padma
Athāsya Pṛṭhamārūḍhaḥ
Athāsya Mānasam Cinta
Apāsya Vrajatī Dṛṣṭi
179
179
250
207
122
386
71
191
89
94
363
490
454
393
380
242
489
369
299
136
470
363
412
187
168
.200
108
57
122
66
151
447
178
492
28
199
332
450

Page #547:
---------------------------
##  Verse Index

497
1
327
170
280
81
52
279
299
150
211
110
311
139

##  Verses

* **Athaasyatiprasannaasy**
* **Athaekshwaakukulotthesh**
* **Athaekshamchakre vaiyam**
* **Athaindunakhaayatasy**
* **Athaindrajitaye gantum**
* **Athaindrajiduvaachedam**
* **Athopashamachandrasya**
* **Athovaacha vihasyaivam**
* **Atho hanuruhdveepa**
* **Athaikastambhamurdhsthe**
* **Athaiteediyasantaapa**
* **Arthatann tavaabheesht**
* **Arthatasy samam devya**
* **Arthatasyashravo bhootva**
* **Athaivam kathitam tena**
* **Athaivam bhaashamanaya**
* **Athaivam shrenika shrutva**
* **Athaivamuktah kushalairmaatya**
* **Athaivamukto varunah sa veera**
* **Adrishtaparagambheeram**
* **Adoshaapi doshaaktaam**
* **Adyaprabhrti me bhrata**
* **Adyaprabhrti me sarve**
* **Adya me tvam jananyaapi**
* **Adya raatraau maya yaame**
* **Adyaapi naiv nilanjj**
* **Adrevalahakaakhyasya**
* **Adharam kashchidaakrushya**
* **Adharagrahanee tasyaah**
* **Adhaschampakavrikshasya**
* **Adhisthitastalee prishthah**
* **Adhisahya mahaarogaan**
* **Adhuna gamanam tebhyah**
* **Adhuna dinavaktre te**
* **Adhunaasmin prasanne te**
* **Adhogatiryato raajya**
* **Adhyatisthachcha mudito**
* **Adhyaaseeshcheti ha kashtam**
* **Anagaaramaharsiinaam**
* **Ananga san vyathaamata**
* **Anangapushyeti samastaloke**
* **Anantam dadhatam jnaana**
* **Anantgunaagehasya**
* **Anantaram cha swapnaanaam**
* **Anantaveeryakaivallyam**
* **Anantaayaasch garbhaayaah**
* **Anantaa lokanabhano**
* **Ananyagatachittaah**
* **Ananyajena roopena**
* **Ananyasadrishah kshetre**
* **Anaranyasahasraanshu**
* **Anaranyogamanmoksha**
* **Anaakhyeyamidam vatsa**
* **Anaathannaath nah krutva**
* **Anaadarena nikshipya**
* **Anaadarena vikshipya**
* **Anaathaa durbhagaa matru**
* **Anaaghmaatastatah shankho**
* **Anichchhato gata drishtih**
* **Anityatvam shariraade**
* **Anityametajjagadesha matva**
* **Anilo'rimuhkhaspars**
* **Anukampaparaah shaantaa**
* **Anukramaachcha tasyaabhoot**
* **Anukramaatsaath nireekshmanaa**
* **Anukramena sheshaanaam**
* **Anujnaatastatah tena**
* **Anujnaato'trahatkantaam**
* **Anudaarabaleebhang**
* **Anupaalya sameechinam**
* **Anubhooaya chiram bhogaan**
* **Anuyaanasamaaroodha**
* **Anuyaanti mahaaranya**
* **Anuraagam gunairevam**
* **Anuraadhaa mahadaahukham**
* **Anuvruttam lipijnaanam**
* **Anusutrasamaachaaro**
* **Anekajanmasamvuddha**
* **Anekaroagasanpoorna**
* **Anekashah krtodyoga**
* **Aneketra tato'te**
* **Anekopaya sambhoota**
* **Anena nagnaroopena**
* **Anenaapi bhave svassmi**
* **Anenaiva samam bhee**
* **Antahpallavakantaabhyaam**
* **Antahpuram cha kurvaanam**
* **Antahpuram pravishtaa cha**
* **Antahpurammahaapadma**
* **Antaranga hi sankalpah**
* **Antaraasya kritaangashtham**
* **Antare'sminnavadvaara**
* **Antaniroopya vaanchanti**
* **Antarghatrishatenait**
* **Antarvatnee satimetaa**
* **Antaviraktamajnaatva**
* **Antavedi pashoonaam cha**
* **Anto'pi tahi na sya**
* **Annam yathepsitam taasaam**
* **Annam yathepsitam tebhyah**
* **Annam yadamritapraya**
* **Annamaatra kriyaa pumsam**
* **Annamekasya hetooryat**
* **Anyah kastasy kathyet**
* **Anyadaa kandukenaaso**
* **Anyadaa krishisaktaanaam**
* **Anyadaatha taditkeshah**
* **Anyadaatha mahadaaha**
* **Anyadaatha vibuddhaatmaa**
* **Anyadaatha sukhaaseenam**
* **Anyadaaranyaka shaastram**
* **Anyadaa ramyamudyana**
* **Anyadaashanivego'tha**
* **Anyadaa sa gato'pashyad**

##  Numbers

250
297
439
335
447
272
239

Page #548:
---------------------------
Jain terms preserved in the English translation:

498
Anyadā saukhyasaṃbhāra
Anyadā Hāstinipuraṃ
Anyadēśaḥ samaṃ tābhyāṃ
366
57
76
Anyabhaveṣu prathitasuddharmāḥ: 471
Anyaśāsana saṃbaddha
322
Anyānandapurī jñēyā
Anyānapi bahūnē va
Anyānapi mahābhāgān
Anyānapi yadīkṣē tu Anyānī ca gurupprāptyā Anye ca bahavaḥ śūrāḥ Anye ca svajanāḥ sarvē Anyēdyuḥ pratipannaśca Anyēdyurbhānubhirbhāno Anyēnāśīviṣēṇēva
Anyairiva mahābhūtaiḥ Anyaiśca vividhaiḥ śastraAnyaiśca vividhairyānAnyaistē nāśitāḥ santo
Anyō'nyaṃ kuśalaṃ pṛṣṭvā Anyōnyakarasambandhā
Anyō'nyagati saṃvṛddhaAnyō'nyaprēmasambandhaṃ
Anyōnyasaṃgamād bhūtaAnyō'nyasya tato ghātaṃ
290
168
Anyēnēndraḥ samuddiṣṭaḥ Anye'pi liṅginaḥ sarvē 459 Anyebhyaśca bhaviṣyadbhayo 221 Anye'vadannimaṃ dēśaṃ
262
148
287
106
24
Anvayē bhavatāmāsīd Anviṣya kathayāmīti Anviṣya gītaśabdēna Ahnō'pi yōjanaśata
Ahna muhūrtamātraṃ yaḥ
Apakarṇya tato dhātrīṃ
Apakārē samāsaktāḥ
Apakvaśāli saṃkāśaḥ Apatrapāṃ vimucyāśu
441
126

2
458
493
176
163
122
413
412
162
470
40
182
74
109
474
475
322
323
127
430
428
360
Padmapurāṇē
Apayātaśca śālō'sau
Aparatrāyikāsaṃghō
Aparīkṣaṇaśīlānāṃ
Aparīkṣya kathaṃ śvaśru
Aparēṇēti tatrōktaṃ
Aparē'pi khagāḥ sarvē
Aparēśvarayatnōttha
Aparō'bhramayat padmaṃ
Apaśyatāṃ tataḥ śuddha
Apaśyannā kulō'bhūvaṃ Apāpāstē'dhigacchanti
Api bālāpramātrēṇa
Api bālē'tra jānāsi
Apūrvaparvātākāraiḥ
Apūrvapuruṣā lōka
Apūrvākhyaśca dharmō na
Apūrvā dhruva dharmō
Apūrvāyāḥ parābhūtē
Apṛcchata sa bhavaṃ pūrva
Apṛṣṭō'pi janaḥ sādhu Api ēkaṃ prativākyaṃ mē
Apragalbhatayā prāptā
Apratiṣṭhaḥ suraśrēṣṭhaḥ
Aprāmēyamṛdutvanī
Aprāptaḥ pīḍanaṃ svāsya
Aprāpya mānuṣaṃ janma
Apsaraḥ śatanētrālī Apsarōmaṇḍalāntasthō Abadvārayatau yātē Adhikāñcīguṇāṃ nīla
Abrahmaṇyakṛtārāvā
Abrahmaṇyamahō rājan
Abhavacca tatō yuddha
Abhavattanayastasya
Abhāviṣyattavāvāsō
Abhāṣayādimāṃ bālāṃ
Abhidyata śarairvakṣō
Abhidhāḥ kōṭiśastēṣāṃ
278
21
405
537
53
122
256
123
378
130
326
318
402
10
149
254
250
128
300
383
406
276
425
18
218
317
376
324
474
260
259
260
144
336
384
126
288
95

Abhidhānaṃ kṛtaṃ cāsya
Abhidhāyēti kṛtvā ca
Abhidhāyēti taiḥ sarvē
Abhidhāyēti sā tasyā
Abhidhāyēti saṃkrudhya
Abhinanditaniḥśēṣa
Abhinandyēti saṃvignaḥ
Abhinnaćētasastatra
Abhiprāyaṃ tatastasya
Abhiprētēṣu dēśēṣu
Abhiprētya vadhaṃ śatrō
Abhimānāttathāpyēnaṃ
Abhyāyāntaṃ ca taṃ dṛṣṭvā
Abhyutthāya mahēndrō'pi
Amandāyanta kiraṇā
Amarāṇāṃ vilādhīśō
Amarāṇāṃ sahasrēṇa
Amarēndraḥ svayaṃ yōddhu
134
356
Abhimānēna tuṅgānāṃ
Abhimānōdayaṃ muktvā
Abhilaṅkāṃ daśāsyō'pi
333
Abhilāṣō yatastasmin
140
Abhivyaktaṃ tribhiḥ sthānaḥ 478
Amarōdadhībhānubhyaḥ
Amātē ca tatastasmin
114
376
158
1
237
157
Abhiṣicya śiśuṃ rājyē 459
Abhiṣēkaṃ jinēndrasya
44
280
Abhūd yaḥ puṇḍarīkīyāṃ 433 Abhyaṇaṃ rāvaṇaṃ śrutvā Abhyarthitā suhṛdbhiḥ sā Abhyavāñchātpadanyāsaṃ
134
153
183
Amitāṅkō'bhavad rājā
Amī bhūgōcarāḥ svalpā
Amīṣāṃ janakaādīnāṃ
Amīṣāṃ prathamō mālī
Amī samutthitā dēvā
Amuṃ kamapi vai

Page #549:
---------------------------
499
302
38 212
356
92
No
195
260
101
286
17
Verses from the beginning:  Amunchatam tatas kruddho 285 Arateyah prayunktetau 213 Amushmadapasarpashu 357 Arinjaya-pure vahni-amogh-vijaya nama 222 Arishtanemi-manuyuna-amritaro munih shreshtha
Arundhativ naathasya amritena nishiktena
Arkakirti-bhujadhara amba ko'yam ito yati 155 Arjunadi-mahottunga- 174 Amba te vachanad-ady 242 Artho dharmascha kaamascha 454 Ambe ihaatra kim bhranti 374  _ Ardhakrittam shiro'nyena 290 Ambhojadadhim-adhya-adi 315 Ardhachandra-akritiyastaa 45 Ayam ko'pi rane bhati
Ardhayaama-aveshashayaam ayam cha te maha-bhagyah 385 Ardharatre tatas tasmi- 390. Ayam jalagatah shailo 79 Ardhaswargo-tkata-schaapi ayam tu vyakta eva-asti 112 Ardhaswargo-tkata-avarti ayam ni-raparadhah sam- 303 Abhankasya satopyesha 399 Ayam patang-bimbecha 142 Arhat-pada-paridhyan- 93 Ayam bhati sahasra-anshu
Arhat-siddha-munibhyo yo 321 Ayam aditya-vanshaste
Alankaaran samutsrijya 461 Ayam mrto'si mam prapya
288
Alankaarais samam tyaktva 52 Ayam ratna-pura-adhisho
124
Alankratastato deho ayam shakro mama bhrata 298 Alam vatsa prayatnena 294 Ayam shakro mahan-ete 291 Alakam vijayam jneyam 441 Ayam sa kalamegha-akhyah 407 Alak-bhramara eva
38 Ayam sa nayam purusho'paro'yam 421 Alakshata saratnena ayam sa prakhala-is khyati 178
Alankara-pura-avase 133 Ayam sa ravano yena 264 Alankara-pureshasya 134 Ayameva cha vrttanto 475 Alankara-udayam tyaktva 180 Ayamesha sa hasti-ti
Alanghano nabho bhanuh 101 Ayi krura-ashu nitvama 371 Alasah kasyachid-bahu- 288 Ayi naath tava-angan-i 352 Alabu-bijan-samsthana-ayi bhadre katham yasmi- 342 Alik-svahat-vaami-ayi maricha maricha
Alpa-karma-kalank-tvata-t ayi mitra shamam gachchha 346 Alpa-kalam idam jantoh 3 Ayodhya-nagare shriman
Alpaireva cha teho-bhih araghatta-ghati-yant-ra- 213 Avagamy jainendrasya aranyanyam samudre va 248 Avagamy param swam cha 208 Ara-mallyantara chakri 437 Avatirnascha sva-desha 306 Arati mucchhitam kashchit 290 . Avatirnascha tatra-asa-arati-bhang-chinh-tv-a- 186 Avatirya tato rajnan
Avatirya divo munah 81 Avatirya nabho-bhagat 170 Avatirya vimanan-tat avadhaye-psitam kasma-avadharya tvaya sardham avadharyeti bhavena 332 Avadharyedam-atyant-am 302 Avabhajya hrish-ikanam 160 Avarasmin videhe'tha avalokanya-ridhvamsi 162 Avocat sa tatas-tasya 409 Avashyameva-met-ena avasthana-m chakaraso 18 Avasthitam jagad-vya-py 487 Avadi-t sarathi-schaiva avapa meru-shikhara-m  44 Ava-pta-prapaniyasya ava-pya durlabham tad-yah 315 Ava-pya yo matam jainam 326 Ava-pyaapi dhanam klesha- 20 Ava-pyasy phalam na-ke- 324 Avikhandita-shila-ya- 467 A-vijnata-ran-svado a-vidita-tattva-sthitiyo- 350 A-vidhaya nara-h karya 135 A-vidhaye-psitam kasma-a-vibhinna mukha-chhaya 85 Avocata tatas savam 383 Avochad bhagavan sangho 87 Ashaktastatra rajan- 259 Ashakta-h sva-bhuvam tyaktum 299 Ashaknuvamstato kartum 222 Ashakya-h shatrubhir-dhattam 291 Ashirira-h svabhava-stha 313 Ashuddha-h kartribhih proktam 250 Ashubha-ayo-mayatyant-a- 313 Asesha-bhaya-nir-mukto
486 Ashoka-pallava-sparshah
349
407
0
375
216

Page #550:
---------------------------
500
Padmapurana
82
141
72
172
Below the Ashoka tree 22 Unbelievers in the Jinas 273 This is unbelievable 30 She sheds tears 371 Known as Ashvagriva 422 Ashvattha and Singhasen 427 Ashvadharma was born 70 With a herd of horses, neighing gold 205 A donkey is in the horse 253 Ashvini Vasus are eight, Ashvini Vasus are the world 147 With horses, chariots, and elephants 289 With horses, elephants, and those who are there 259 Eight karmas are freed 83 Eight days are you, the eighth is the lord of the night, the eighth is also famous 424 Eighteen Jinas are mentioned, riding on an eight-footed mountain 81 On the eight-footed mountain, by Maheendra 437 This is impossible, O Bhadra, you are unable to see 189 In falsehood, completely 250 With fear of falsehood, the earth-dweller 476 Unbearable brilliance, in number 327 Incurable, the weapons of the nature 292 He also, from there, of her 126 With swords, etc., weapons 99 Swords, arrows, maces, and javelins 232 With swords, spears, and nooses 282 With the name Asura, of enjoyments 147 By the lord of the Asuras 270 He gave birth to a son, dear 210 He, of her, with the best wives 399 He, the lord of the gods, is the receiver 306 He fled, frightened 142 He, in attainment, increase, ten-headed 296
He, with few years
346 The great hero has set, near the setting sun 359 Near the setting sun 26 There is one called Govardhana 434 I have a daughter, suitable 340 There was enmity between my father and me 73 For my purpose, O lord 176 Our original religion 252 Our affliction-cutting, to us, O lord of the Daityas 171 In this entire three worlds 177 In this interval, the story 177 In this house, a Jain 177 In this Bharat-kshetra 34 This, his life-giving, this 269 Of this, the navel mark 71 In the name of this, gone, ear 124 In both his arms, Lakshmi 126 On his broad chest 114 Of this Sanatkumara 434 If you have pleasure in her lap 124 Of this, the title 460 Of this, Ambunatha's city 477 There is a name, skill in speaking 479 With various weapons, full 195 So be it, having spoken 452 I am, indeed, surrounded by sin 451 I, again, not attaining 403 I also, by this, son 403 I am Indra, supreme happiness 403 I carried the mind, of my father 135 Non-violence, pure religion, non-violence, harmony of kings, non-violence, truth, non-stealing 318 Oh, of the beautiful lady, yours 357 Oh, the song, oh, the song 391 Oh, qualities, oh, beauty 219
Oh, people, they are ridiculed 403 Oh, thirst, etc., dry 403 Oh, this is completely childish 417 Oh, brilliance, this, having conquered 417 Oh, blessed, this, completely 451 Oh, patience, oh, belly 263 Oh, certainty-possessed 219
Oh, you are supremely blessed 345 Oh, supreme ignorance 345 Oh, supreme greatness 116 Oh, this is supremely wonderful 345 Oh, valor, with beauty 165 Oh, again, in the picture, yours 420 Oh, intelligence, of this, great lineage 487 Oh, it pierces the vital parts 168 Oh, this is great, wonderful 342 Oh, this is great patience, yours 417 Oh, this is great delusion 311 Oh, this is great, hero 232 Oh, Ravana's bow 233 Oh, the mockery of the world 291 Oh, the power, of this man 486 Oh, the beautiful beginning 216 Oh, the love is bound 264 Oh, the meeting is good 264 Oh, the intelligence is small 158 I bow, with the word, "I bow" 321 Of the lord of the Arhat's image, the nectar-taste of the Arhat's doctrine
[A]
363
412
772
A: In the city of the messenger 181 Imaginary, and attained 175 Of this form, I know 277 Like the sky, vast 79 Agitated, with a sigh 202 Crying, thus, making 389 Attacking, with teeth, fangs 376


.

Page #551:
---------------------------
##  Verse Index (Shloka Anukrama)

501
440
'Naapatashaya
382
481 111
Aakhandalatvamasyady 291 Aagachchata cha putrena Aagachchata maya drishtam 361 Aagachchata maya drishta 361 Aagata gocharam ka te Aagatya cha sahendrena 465 Aagatya cha surai: sarvesh 51 Aagamen tavaanen 251 Aagamyate kutah sthana- 472 Aagopalaanganam loke 328 Aachaar iti pucchaavo 379 Aachaganam vighatena 81 Aachaarye dhriyamanaye 115 Aachita vividhai ratnai 101 Aachchidyant sharaabaanai- 392 Aajnaam daatum abhiprayah 153 Aajna cha mama shakre va 298 Aajneyam karaniya te 367 Aatakeetyangana tasya Aataapanashilalpiithaatoodyavarasampurna 115 Aatmakaarvaviruddho'yam 280 Aatmajaya tato raajyam 94 Aatmanah shaktiyogena 323 Aatminindaaparo dheerah 435 Aatmaanam chaatitungsya 490 Aatmano vahaanaanaam cha 358 Aatmiya tena men patni 273 Ati dhyanena sampurna Aatvijinam tato'vaadi Aadaaya taam shilan te Aadaavaratanayah sapta 431 Aadityanagaraabhikyam Aadityabhavanakaara Aadityarathasankasha 294 Aadityavatprabhavantaaadityabhimukhastasy 215 Aaditye'stamanu praapt- 324 
Aadityo vartate meshe 397 Aadi kritvaa jinendran 442 Aadya prajaapatijneyo Aadyanta ripu muktaaya 220 Aadya sambhashanat saapi 366 Aadya mrigaavati jneya 440 Aadya tadvishaya chinta 341 Aardra shushkam tadunmukta Aadhipatyam samastaanaam Aanachchalokanagare 248 Aananda: paramaam vruddhi Aanandam bhavyalokasya 214 Aanandavachanaadeva 102 Aananditashcha tadvaakya- 165 Anaayya varuno'vaachi- 417 Aaniyaasau tato palli 270 Aaniyaasau tato dravyam 74 Andhri cha madhyamodeechya 479 Aapgaanaathataam yaati 174 Aapatan ti tato drishtava 231 Aapadbhyah paati yastasma- 309 Aapanmadhyotsavaavasthah 392 Aapaandurashariraam cha 246 Aapaatmaatraanav Aapaatmaatra ramyesh 
83 Aapuriyan parityaakt- 263 Aaprichchhantam tato kritvaa 51 Aaprichchaya bandhavan sarvaa- 357 Aaptavargaat parijnaaya Abhogino samuttungo 344 Aamgarbhesh duhkhaani 272 Aamashtani karairindo Aamodam paramam bibhrat Aamodam raavano jajne 
267 Aamodi kusumodbhaasi Aayaatmaatrakenaive 
200 Aayantam prushthato drishtava 98 Aayuhpramaanabodhartham 428 
Aayuh shodashavarshaani 431 Aayurdirghamudaaravibhrama- 410 Aayudhagrahanadanye 311 Aayuviraamamaasaadya Aayushmannasya shauryasya 298 Aayushmannidam astyeva 234 Aaranashcha samaakhyaata- 425 Aarasaatalamulaam taam 85 Aaraadeva nivrityaakhya- 239 Aarudhah paramekaante 295 Aarudhast rushaakhaayaam 193 Aarudha navataarunyam 168 Aarebhe cha samuddhattum 217 Aaropya sumukhe raajyam 95 Aarohi nah prasannaadi 479 Aryaputraartumatyasmi Aarya mlecchaashcha tatraapi 308 Aalayam kalpayamyatra Aalaapamiti kurvanty- 264 Aalingatiiva sarvaashah 19 Aalinganavimuktaaya 364 Aalinganti mridusparsha 47 Aalingaya mitravatkashchi- 289 Aaline cha yatha jaat- 282 Aalokanamatho chakra 98 Aavartavighatambhoda Aavarteshvi va nikshipta 283 Aavayonan majjaapi 152 Aavalpaam pravarajjaata Aavaanchhataam ranam kattum Aavaasataam mahardeenaam 214 Aavritam tena tatsthaan Aashakarikarakaara- 216 Aashapaasam samuccchidy Aashastambaramaalat 
47 Aashivisha samaashesha 
258 Ashushushk animaadhaya 244 Aashramashcha samutpannah 
216 
402 
27 
21 
334 
327

Page #552:
---------------------------
502
Papuraṇe
[]
1
3
Jyi-
191 346
359
48
āśritāśrayato bhinno 483 āśliṣṭā dayitasya aso 364 āśvāsayann ijaṁ sainyaṁ 286 āsan stoyadavāhādya āsatāṁ cetanāstāva- 265 āsatāṁ tāvade te vā āsatāṁ mānuṣāstāva- 222 āsanam śayanam pānam  47 āsanābhimukhe tatra āsannastahanūmatkaḥ 41 āsan sunayanānande āsi t ki tasya mahātmyaṁ 188 āsi t tato vinītāyā 469 āsi t tatra pure rājā 14 āsi t tatro bhayoh śreṇyoh 122 āsid garbhasthite yasmin 445 āsid aṣṭottaraṁ tasya 94 āsid ikṣurastāsā āsinasya tato joṣaṁ 300 āsināṁ cāsane ramye 271 āsinā cāñjali kṛtvā 151 āsecanakavīkṣyāṁ tā- 344 ājñāpayadanudhyāta- 19 āstāṁ tataḥ phalenaiva 136 āstā tāvatpriyā satya- 408 āstāṁ tāvadi daṁ rājan 334 āstāṁ tāvadi daṁ svalpaṁ 222 āsthānamaṇḍape 'yāso 31 āsyatāmiha vā chandā 298 āsyadadhne 'vatīrṇasya 244 āsphālanair mahāśabda- 192 āhataṁ bhaṅgitaṁ viddhaṁ 483 āhataś ca samaṁ sarvā 175 āhatya bhiṇḍimālena 285 āhāro 'sya śuciḥ svādu 178 āhalyāramaṇaḥ sa tvaṁ 303 āhūtāviha kenato 127 āhūya cābhiyātasyā 129
āhūya suhṛdaḥ sarvā
iti bruvata evāsya 281 iti vācāsya jāto 'sau 367
iti vācintayāt kōghā- 119 ikṣvāka vo yathā chaite
iti vicin tya na yuktama upā- 206 ikṣvāku prabhṛtīnāṁ ca
iti vijñāpyamāno 'pi 121 ikṣvākuḥ prathamast eṣāṁ
iti vijñāpito dūtyā 100 ikṣvākuṇāṁ kule ramye 448 iti vijñāya karttavya- 275 iṅgitajñānakusalāḥ
 _ iti viditayathāvad 423 icchānurūpamāsādya 382 iti śuddha viruddhaś ca 416 itaḥ sindhugambhīro 'ya
iti śrīkaṇṭhamāhedam itarasyāpi no yuktaṁ
iti śrutvā tato vaprā 188 itarāvi va to koci d 475 iti śrutvā 'tha khe śabdaṁ 232 itare 'pi yathā sama 79 iti śrutvā vilāpaṁ sā 405 itaś cetas ca vidyāyā 210 iti śrutvā surādhiśaḥ 303 iti ca dhyātame tena
iti sañcintayantī sā 348 iti cācintayāt kaṣṭaṁ
iti sañcin tya jagrāha 186 iti cācintayall apsye 190 iti sañcin tya mūrdhānam 272 iti āhurdaśagrīva- 171 iti sañcin tya vinyasya iti citrapatākāra- 449 iti sañjanitāśaṅka 387 iti cintayatastasyā
iti santa kṣyamāṇaṁ taṁ 459 iti cintayatastasyā 451 iti sandisya garveṇa 275 iti cintāpramode na 42 iti sambhāṣamāno 'sau
142 iti covāca taṁ hṛdya- 165 iti sambhāṣyamāno 'pi iti jñātvā parītya triḥ 399 iti sāśru vadantī tā- 362 iti tasya prabuddhasya 51 iti stuti prabhajyāsau 21 iti tāṁ śīlasampa nnaṁ 467 iti stutvā muni bhūyaḥ 220 iti to gadgadālāpo 77 iti stutvā vidhānena iti devayateḥ śrutvā 262 iti spaṣṭe samudbhūte 27 iti dhyātvā samāśvā sya 284 iti svapakṣadoḥsthitya- 21 iti dhyātvā sthitaṁ pārve 342 itīkṣvā kukulōdbhūtāḥ 469 iti niścitya jantubhyo 475 ito 'sty uttarakāṣṭhāyāṁ 478 iti niścitya manasā 107 ito varamunir dṛṣṭo 460 iti niścitya saṁgrāma- 355 itthaṁ nijabhavān śrutvā 385 iti niṣkramaṇe tena 51 itthaṁ vasanta mālā ca 388 iti prabuddhōdyatamānasa- 333 ity abhidhyāyatstasyā 225 iti prasādyamāno 'pi 121 ity avagamyajāḥ suviśuddha 305 iti priyavacōvāri 298 ity avagamy duḥkhakuśalā- 400 iti proktamātre jagau bhūmi- 487 ity ādidevadevēna
359

Page #553:
---------------------------
## Sloka Anukrama (Order of Verses)

**379**
* **102**  Many heroes like this were mentioned, such as **68**, **166**, **Indra**, **Indra**, **Prabho**, **Megha**, etc.
* **371**  He said, "Cruel-named **270**," and drew his sword from its sheath **181**.
* **227**  He said, "Indrajit, the cloud-chariot driver," and the minister spoke **294**.
* **188**  He said, "Indrajit, the cloud-chariot driver," and the battle-enthusiast **280** said, "Indratva (Indra's position) belongs to the assembly of gods."
* **227**  He said, "The great-souled one," and they were filled with fear **404**.
* **485**  He said, "The one who knows good deeds," and they were well-armed **186**.
* **392**  He said, "The Indra-blue-light-net," and the wise one's friend **455** said, "The Indra-blue-light-net."
* **157**  He said, "Holding the Indra-blue-light-net," and **453** said, "He was afflicted by that sorrow."
* **213**  He said, "He left the house," and **471** said, "The Indra-worshipped ones are themselves beautiful."
* **236**  He said, "He placed it on his son," and **299** said, "He went far away."
* **270**  He said, "Indrabhuti, the purpose here," and the goddess said **168**.
* **133**  He said, "The one who is allowed to speak," and **140** said, "The Indra-temple-like."
* **385**  He said, "They were then," and **349** said, "With love for her husband."
* **143**  He said, "Indra then spoke," and **119** said, "They were asked by them."
* **278**  He said, "She was then abandoned," and **139** said, "She was then by him."
* **385**  He said, "She spoke again," and **378** said, "Indra's command, pleased by them, with agreement."
* **454**  He said, "He bound his relatives," and **219** said, "Even the power of Indras."
* **42**  He said, "She was filled with great joy," and **417** said, "They were released by him."
* **44**  He said, "Indrani, the chief of the goddesses," and **384** said, "She was frightened."
* **485**  He said, "She mounted the chariot," and **141** said, "From Indra's shelter, the kings of birds."
* **490**  He said, "She, the virtuous one, with her husband," and **304** said, "He was worshipped by him."
* **223**  He said, "He is capable of conquering the senses," and **49** said, "He, with them."
* **368**  He said, "He gave her a ring," and **159** said, "They stood there when."
* **395**  He said, "Whatever happened, the truth," and **139** said, "Indra also mounted the elephant."
* **245**  He said, "He left some in the wilderness," and **299** said, "Indra also did not have joy in the city."
* **474**  He said, "He placed it there," and **336** said, "When the cessation came."
* **292**  He said, "His becoming fuel," and **473** said, "He, seeing."
* **297**  He said, "The one who rides the elephant," and **450** said, "Narada spoke."
* **272**  He said, "The friend, the sword," and **368** said, "This, for the purpose of removing carelessness."
* **270**  He said, "He was determined by wisdom," and **375** said, "He was with his friend."
* **329**  He said, "Those who are wise, this rule," and **396** said, "He was named Pasvang."
* **364**  He said, "He established it," and **383** said, "Seeing this enchantress."
* **304**  He said, "He called Sugriva," and **213** said, "His previous births."
* **479**  He said, "He was united with these castes," and **344** said, "He was about to go."
* **63**  He said, "These desires, O Lord," and **331** said, "This is a great wonder there."
* **83**  He said, "Even with this time," and **110** said, "The ministers comforted him."
* **177**  He said, "They spoke to him again," and **406** said, "They held this for a long time."
* **297**  He said, "The guardians of the world," and **401** said, "This is your birth that was told."
* **135**  He said, "Knowing him to be averse," and **211** said, "This time, father."
* **73**  He said, "The Lord spoke this," and **370**  said, "He came to the Pandu-like shade."
* **115**  He said, "They were filled with wonder," and **64** said, "Now I will feed these."
* **347**  He said, "The beloved ones, sons, daughters," and **104** said, "By these, hundreds of his."
* **266**  He said, "The Indra-blue-lotus-dark," and **309** said, "Some beloved, glorious ones."
* **428**  He said, "The assembly-bearer, the gentle one," and **172** said, "The Indra-blue-lotus."
* **168**  He said, "The body, as it is," and **319** said, "The Indra-blue-lotus-row shade."
* **269**  He said, "The ministers, together," and **292** said, "Here, in the Jambudvipa island."
* **349**  He said, "Indra, heaven, and other gods," and **317** said, "Here, in the human world."
* **380**  He said, "The king of the Rakshasas," and **147** said, "The king of the Rakshasas."

Page #554:
---------------------------
504
Padma Purana
12
و لمس
187
Idakparakramaadhaarah 207 Ikshmano mahim mukta 322 Ikshanchakre parān svapnān 151 Ikshitah purvam apyesha 197 Idrishi cha tayoḥ priti- 272 Idrishe patitaaranya 393 Idashe yachite'tyantam 277 Iryavakyaiṣaṇādānīrṣyāmanmathadagdhasya Ishavatyāṁ narendrasya Ishvaratvam tataḥ prāptā 162 Ishvaratvam daridrāṇā- 148
247
Tan tasata
344
[U]
435 170
222
224 192
Uttamāṅge cha vindhyasya 228 Udanvadambhaso binduuttamottamtaṁ teshaṁ 383 Udayachalamerddhastham 40 Uttānaḥ kampayan bhumi 154 Udarasthakishorāṇāṁ Uttarya kekaya cha ashu 485 Udaattam naditam kaischid 163 Uttisthat griham yamaḥ 158 Udāram bhanuvattejo Uttisthat nijān desān 53 Udāragopurāṭṭāl- 54 Uttisthatāshu gacchaamo 64 Udārascha tiraskāraḥ 320 Uttisthatō mukhaṁ bhaktu- 280 Udāro.vibhavo yaste 277 Uttistha bho vaso svarga 257 Udaahrito maya yaste 245 Uttistha mitra gacchaavaḥ 367
Udiaya cha tigmāṁshuḥ 347 Uttistha sharaṇam gaccha 177
Udichi prasthitaḥ kaṣṭhāṁ 238 Uttistha svapuram yamo 348
Udguṛṇaścha ayametena Uttisthāne sakhe tistha
Udghāṭakaghaṭīsīktaiutthāya cha nṛsiṁho'sau 58
Uddhateṣu satā tena utthāya rākṣasās tais te
Uddhatuṁ dharini śaktā utthito yudhyamāne'smi- 200 Udabhūto vavadraṁṣṭro'tauṭpatadbhiḥ patadbhiścha 43 Udyatpralayatibrāṁshu 387 Utpatantāṁ tu tāṁ dṛṣṭā 464 Udyadarkakarālīḍha utpattaveva rogasya 280 Udyamya kṣipramātmiyayaiḥ 200 Utpatti bhagavannasyā
Udyānānāṁ mahādhvamsaḥ 143 Utpatti lokapālānāṁ 146 Udvahantim stanau tuṅgo 260 Utpattisamaye yasya
Udvr̥ttakuhukācāraiuṭpatya tvaritā vyomni 388
Unnatam charanena asya 126 Utpannā mandavatyāṅge 150
Unnatam nanṛtuḥ kecid. 163 Utpatsyante trayaḥ putrā 152 Unnamayya tato vakṣaḥ utpātāḥ śatrugeheṣu 140 Unnayanti rajo dūram utpātā jajñire'rāti- 490 Unmajjanti chalabhṛṅgāḥ 464 Utsangalalitāṁ bālye
375
Unmattatvam upetaanā- 191 Utsarpiṇī cha tāvantya 429 Unmīlya sa tato neutsarpiṇīsahasrāṇi 317 Udaattamiti cha avochad 184 Utsarpiṇyavasarpiṇyo- 80
Upakaṇṭhaṁ cha kaṇṭhasya
272 Utsarpiṇyavasarpiṇyoḥ saha- 326 Upakaṇṭhaṁ muneśchaitya- 220 Utsavādipravṛttīnāṁ 431 Upakārasamākṛṣṭa- 273 Utsārya yo bhīṣaṇamandha- 455 Upakāre pravṛtto'yauṭsṛṣṭacāmaracchatra- 17 Upacāreṇa veśyāyā 74 Utkshipya parvatān kecit 114 Upacitiyā mṛdādīnāṁ Udapādi pṛthustasmād 469. Upadravārthameteṣāṁ Udapādya nujā teṣāṁ 335. Upaneetāścha tatraiva 246
238
261
Pistāsmān
74
228 269
Uktaḥ sa tairaho rūpaṁ uktaṁ cha kanyayā nūna- uktaṁ cha nāgapatinā uktaṁ cha munichandreṇa uktameva tatas tena uktamanyairedam tatra ukto varṣasahasrāṇāṁ ugraṁ kṛtvā tapas tasmin ugranakrakulaakrāntāṁ ucite cha asane tasmiucchakesarakoṭīnāṁ uccaavacashilājālucchalatkarabhāro'sya ucchrite nātapatraṇa ucairucchairguṇasthānucchyamāneti sā tena ujjagāma cha śītāṁshu utkr̥ttaśravaṇaṁ vigraṁ uttamavratasansaktā uttaranti prayāsena uttariyaṁ cha vinyastauṭtareṇa tatha ṣaṣṭi- uttamāṅgaṁ tato dhūtvā
27
450 125 187
214
27
327 330
377
480
54 337

Page #555:
---------------------------
##  Verse Index and Glossary

**Verse Index:**

* 505
* 280
* 214, 276, 279
* 221, 433, 424
* 82, 253
* 177, 485, 126, 452, 405, 291, 249, 241, 236, 249, 340, 180, 137, 224, 330, 270, 314, 323, 408, 412, 379, 437, 314, 49, 340, 274, 327, 329, 329, 241, 241, 329, 325, 408, 473, 282, 479, 88, 141, 185, 42, 238, 133, 262, 349, 158, 394, 401, 361, 140, 185, 425, 317, 38
* 251, 141, 308, 330, 222, 261, 82, 170, 177, 245, 164, 422, 163, 263, 375, 331, 174, 443, 395, 346, 353, 368, 397
* 55, 258, 261, 260, 61

**Glossary:**

* **ऋषभ (Rishabha):** The first Tirthankara (spiritual teacher) in Jainism.
* **नमो (Namo):**  A salutation, meaning "obeisance" or "respect."
* **अजितनाथ (Ajitanatha):** The first Tirthankara in the present time cycle.
* **वज्रबाहु (Vajraबाहु):** A powerful warrior.
* **सारथि (Sarathi):** A charioteer.
* **दशास्य (Dashasya):** A ten-headed demon.
* **मरुत्वञ्च (Marutvancha):** A powerful wind deity.
* **महेन्द्रोऽथ (Mahendra):** A king of the gods.
* **उपमान (Upaman):** A comparison or analogy.
* **उपयम्य (Upayamya):** To approach or go towards.
* **उपरम्भा (Uparambha):** An undertaking or beginning.
* **उपर्युपरि (Uparyupari):** Above, on top of.
* **उपवासं (Upavasam):** A fast.
* **उपविष्ट (Upvishta):** Sitting.
* **उपशल्य (Upshalya):** A wound or injury.
* **उपशान्त (Upshanta):** Calm, peaceful.
* **उपसर्ग (Upsarga):** A calamity or affliction.
* **उपाध्याय (Upadhyaya):** A teacher or guru.
* **उपाय (Upaya):** A means or method.
* **उपांशु (Upanshu):** A ray of light.
* **उरः (Urah):** The chest.
* **उरुदण्ड (Uru-danda):** The thigh.
* **उर्वरा (Urvara):** Fertile, productive.
* **उल्का (Ulka):** A meteor.
* **ऊचुः (Uchu):** They said.
* **ऊर्ध्वं (Urdhvam):** Upwards.
* **ऊष्मा (Ushma):** Heat.
* **एकं (Ekam):** One.
* **सहस्राणां (Sahasranam):** Of thousands.
* **संकोच्य (Sankochya):** Contracting.
* **सुमित्र (Sumitra):** A name.
* **एकनासत्व (Ekanasatva):** Having one nose.
* **एकचूडो (Ekachudo):** Having one tuft of hair.
* **द्विचूडश्च (Dvichudo):** Having two tufts of hair.
* **एकत्र (Ekatra):** Together.
* **भावनस्त्री (Bhavana-stri):** A woman who meditates.
* **एकत्व (Ekatva):** Oneness.
* **संसारो (Samsara):** The cycle of birth and death.
* **पुरस्यास्य (Purasya):** In front of this.
* **बलिवत् (Bali-vat):** Strong.
* **एकभक्तेन (Ekabhaktena):** By one devotee.
* **कालं (Kalam):** Time.
* **दशया (Dashaya):** By ten.
* **कस्य (Kasy):** Of whom?
* **एकविंशति (Ekavimshati):** Twenty-one.
* **वारान् (Varan):** Times.
* **अतीत (Atita):** Past.
* **एकाकिन्या (Ekakinya):** Alone.
* **पृथुकः (Prithuka):** Strong.
* **सिंहः (Simha):** A lion.
* **अस्फालयन् (Asphalayan):** Shaking.
* **क्षोणी (Kshoni):** The earth.
* **एकमुखैः (Ekamukhai):** With one face.
* **प्रान्त (Pranta):** Edge, boundary.
* **विरूपा (Virupa):** Deformed.
* **एकीभूय (Ekibhuya):** Becoming one.
* **व्रजन्तोऽमी (Vrajanta ami):** These who are going.
* **गृहे (Grihe):** In the house.
* **वासो (Vaso):** Residence.
* **एकोदरोषितां (Ekodaroshttam):** Born from the same womb.
* **भ्रात (Bhrat):** Brother.
* **नास्ति (Nasti):** There is not.
* **येषां (Yesham):** Of those.
* **भारतीनाथ (Bharatinatha):** A name.
* **भवत्यनेकश्च (Bhavati aneka):** There are many.
* **एतं (Etam):** This.
* **बन्धुजनं (Bandhujanam):** Relatives.
* **रक्ष (Raksha):** Protect.
* **विचित्रं (Vichitra):** Strange.
* **कलि (Kali):** The age of darkness.
* **एतत्कुलक्रमायातो (Etatkulkramayaato):** Coming from this lineage.
* **ऋतवो (Ritavo):** Seasons.
* **चेतःस्थ (Chetastha):** In the mind.
* **ऋत्विक् (Ritvik):** A priest.
* **पराजयोद्भत (Parajayodhbhata):** Arising from defeat.
* **संजातं (Sanjatam):** Born.
* **विभोदिव्यं (Vibhodivyam):** Divine glory.
* **शतं (Shata):** Hundred.
* **पुत्रा (Putra):** Sons.
* **समुत्पत्ति (Samutpatti):** Origin, birth.

Page #556:
---------------------------
506
Padmapurana
177
30
227
462
This is the best that has been done, this is all resolved, 9 this is the good city of whom, 246 they do not desire this meaning, 185 having heard this story, 108 this is the beautiful joy, this is the inner sixteen, 314 this is the story of the great, 273 for this reason, all, 460 from this very end, 240 in the meantime, the messenger, 258 these contagious defects, 248 agitated by these two, 199 I will tell you this much, 198 these are the crests of them, 306 these and others by misrepresentation, 87 these and others are many, by this inference, 151 these are said to be like fathers, 37 these are fallen, 440 these change, these are the six-part lords, 137 these are the first wives, 480 these are the differences, 480 these are the lords of the gods and demons, 428 these are freed from thirst, 64 with these, he departed, 226 having obtained this great being, 412 freed from these two, 483 knowing it to be like castor oil, I do this well, 367 thus, then, speaking to him, 258 thus, there, great effort, 44 thus, there also, variety, 309 thus, in their conversation, 394 thus, her son also, 85 thus, this story, 224 thus, this story, listen, 405
Thus, this fetus, 382 thus, all, having obtained, thus, in those who have passed,
Thus, in the hermitage of the virtuous, thus, like giving,
Thus, searching, we do not grieve, 132 thus, alas for the world,
Thus, he gives this to her, 168 thus, various in that, 104. Thus, be dear, you, thus, having heard it said, 135 thus, it is said, 145 thus, being harassed, she, 374 thus, the network of actions, 449 thus, the firm rock, 451. Thus, and so on, many, 255 thus, by the merit of past lives, men, 166 thus, and so on, conversations, 288 thus, being asked, the girl, 170 thus, and so on, conversations, beings, 282 thus, being asked, Ganesha, 63 thus, and so on, beautiful arts, 484 thus, being asked, the Jina, words
Thus, and so on, gone, pleased, 171 thus, every day, whose, 322 thus, and so on, great knowledge, 162 thus, being told by Ganesha, 35 thus, and so on, the lord of birds, 226 thus, by the merit of future lives, austerity, 96 thus, having said, having done, 435 thus, in a great battle, 290 thus, being told by the people, he, thus, in a great lineage, 94
Thus, being told, he called, 147 thus, in a great arrival,
Thus, being told, then, he said, 343 thus, whatever they do, 24 thus, having heard, according to karma, thus, of this kind, by the gain of dharma,
Thus, a family, in one, thus, he said, being asked, 323 thus, your austerity is done, 156 thus, of the monkey banners,
Thus, the fire of anger, his, thus, knowing the truth, she,
Thus, in succession, in those who go, 447 thus, this kind of book,
Thus, having gone, even reconciliation, 281 thus, this kind of auspicious omen,
Thus, having said, his daughter, polite, 418 thus, this kind of ornament, poor, 260 thus, the qualities, of the whole, 319 thus, this kind of, you, to do, 219 thus, and, he is enjoying, 174 thus, this kind of, you, it is proper, 180 thus, thinking, his daughter, 347 thus, this kind of, how, gods, 312 thus, thinking, his, thus, in this way, even having arrived,
Thus, the birth of Janaka, 448 thus, in this kind of, beings, 119 thus, knowing, again, enmity, thus, by these means, you, 159
Thus, being told, he said, 392 thus, this celestial physician, for you,
Thus, being told, Anjana said, 392 thus, having heard, great anger, 176 thus, being told, placing her in her lap, thus, in brief, it is said, 112 thus, being told, then, they went, thus, being urged, even, 121 thus, being told, he said, 99 thus, being addressed, by words, 248 thus, being told, by her, completely, 485 thus, all the birds, 422
Thus, being told by Indra,
438
181
248
318
388
120
276
143

Page #557:
---------------------------
##  Verse Index by First Word

**507**
* evamukte param tosham
* evamukto ganeshah sa
* evamukto jagado'sau devi
* evamukto jagadasau
* evamukto'tha gandharvo
* evamuktva jinedranam
* evamuktva dadavasmai
* evamuktva vatayaitam
* evamucustataश्चान्याः
* evamekatra puruse
* evamekatapatrayam
* evametadyatha vakshi
* evametasya jatasy
* evam prakaramatyant
* esha kalyani te natha
* esha bhavam na vetta sya
* eva te somavansho'pi
* esha rakshasavanshasya
* esham tavad iyam vartta
* esha te kathita sakam
* esha namami te pada
* esha api grihava pyante
* esha bhartu rakshun ya
* eshaiva hi para kastha
* ehi dani puram yamo

**128**
* kankagrdhhah gomaayu

**350**
* kanchid ulkabhigate na

**483**
* kanchilla angala pasena

**68**
* kantakena krta tranah

**312**
* kati va ratna chakra anga
* kati va samatikranta
* katham kuryat tava stotram
* katham chatyant guru bhih
* katham cheto vishuddhih syat
* katham jinedra dharmena
* katham sphutati vo vakshah
* kathanchichcha hate'pyasmin
* kathanchitsancharam cha sa
* kathamasmad vidhas tasya
* katha kalpita dharmakhya
* kathayam iti jatayaam
* katha vidyut prabhasya smi
* kathitam cha ganeshena

**451**
* kadambasthula mukula

**87**
* kadali garbha nihsara

**368**
* kada chid ath tatra asi
* kada chid iha jayate

**342**
* kada nu tam aham kantam

**125**
* kada nu bhrataraveto
* kada nu vadanam tasya

**436**
* kanaka prabhaya sardham
* kakabhah iti khyato

**137**
* kanakabhapureshasya

**468**
* kanakabhasamutpanna
* kanaken tato bhitva

**394**
* kanakodaryapi sreya

**47**
* kanayasaiva kalena

**173**
* kanayan jit satrost u
* kandarpadarpasa ksobham
* kandarasu ratam mero

**142**
* kandalai ni vidaish channa

**462**
* kandukadi tu vijneyam

**482**
* kanyam tam rupatah khyatam

**450**
* kanya drishti hara prapu

**267**
* kanyanam yauvanarambhe

**209**
* kanya nama prabho deya

**176**
* kanyanivahama dhyastha

**175**
* kanya asokalata nama

**337**
* kanye yam diyatam tasmai

**144**
* kapiyatu dhanai apt

**105**
* kapotapalyupan teshu
* kapolaveva satatam

**38**
* kamalayu dha mukhyasca

**316**
* kambukantha radchchhaya

**263**
* kambugrivam hariskandha

**172**
* kamburekha nata grivam

**198**
* karam karena kachichcha

**460**
* karata chyuta danambu
* karanai vividhair ya tu
* karayugmant ikam krutva

**341**
* karasangaru nibhutta

**47**
* karangasthe tato nyasta

**290**
* kara ghatadalat kumbha

**338**
* kari kandu yanam reje

**407**
* karini bhir athavrutya
* karena veshtitum yava

**333**
* karomi pratarutthaya

**393**
* karomi mandha bhagya kim

**351**
* karaih sheet karasyapi

**48**
* karau tasya arun chhayo

**19**
* karnatalasama sakta

**335**
* karnantasangate kanti

**105**
* karnan vidushakasakta

**173**
* karn yorb alikaloka

**139**
* kartum shakto'smi te kante

**256**
* kartari chchedanodbhut
* ka prabhavascha vedasya

**492**
* karma kastha kutharaya

**146**
* karma kim purva mahosvi

**285**
* karmanastva shubhasyasya

**468**
* karmanam viniyogena

**276**
* kashyapa

**262**
* kashyapa

**481**
* kaksavidyut krtodyota

**252**
* kaksavidyut krtodyota

**46**
* kaksavidyut krtodyota

**143**
* airavarudhis tayo putra
* airavatam samaruh ya

**29**
* airavatasamarudha
* airavato gajo yasya

**107**
* aishvaryam tanaye kshipta

**236**
* aishvaryapanjarant astha

**215**
* aushadhatrasadur astha

Page #558:
---------------------------
508
Padmapurana
303
355
466
88
360
22
He is influenced by karma 240, the kashaya is sweet and bitter 481. || Having made time, he became cruel 243, knowing that karma is difficult, by which this being
Over time, he is reborn 179, by eight types of karma 307, in ten years of someone 161, having attained this land of karma, time and place
Whose daughter are you, child? 150, having done the dharma of time, freed from the eight karmas 223, playing in Kashi 390, in time, the method of giving in a vessel, tightly embraced by a spouse 229, by a coincidence 118, until the time has passed, the wealth of the earth of the spouse
Kakanda, the root of convenience 426, when the time is full, and complete 139, the word kalasha, a great jewel 345, a certain one, born from a lotus 55, in time, by chance, there 379, the art combined with art 207, a certain one, angry, silent
Who is not attached to another man 372, beautiful with the qualities of art
448
A certain one, with sandalwood paste 230, a certain one, with a net of pearls 175, the moon in the capture of art
A certain one, with all limbs visible 229, the weight of wood, as it is 244, three months of art 479, in the city called Kanchana 146, what is this, quickly 197, skilled in art, eyes 227, with gold, the ground of the pyre
What, do you worship stability with a compass 288, the house of the wish-fulfilling tree, with bowed feet
What should I do now, father, with millions of wishes, satisfaction, a certain one, inside the door
What, the dust of the sun released 209, the supreme of the wish-fulfilling feet, a certain one, the ear of the sun
What, having done something terrible 213, resembling a wish-fulfilling palace
439
If I do not see my beloved 405, what, with a messenger, with a blessing
212, in a wish-fulfilling dwelling
With eyes fixed on my beloved
367, what, do you not see, oh mother 206, born from a wish-fulfilling tree
With my beloved, with my beloved 179, what, do you not remember, what was before 302, three colors were imagined
Without my beloved, of this 343, what, do you not know from this 460, by the nature of auspiciousness
14, radiant, with Indra
What, is the womb troubled, auspiciousness be to you, king 260, radiance, born from the lower lip
What, me, blessed with laughter, auspicious friendship, having gone
Beloved, driven out, the lord of stars 152, what, service to the king, enemy 347, auspicious, well-being, all, of one overcome by lust and anger
Auspicious, do not be like this, oh lady 362, the enjoyment of lust, by comparison 194, what, or, from sorrow, in the womb 404, a certain one, made a path 289, the arrows of one who has the form of lust 293
What, or, by some wicked one 404, a certain one, seeing one who has fallen from his weapon 289, the wealth of lust, dharma, and duty 431
What, even if you do not have that anger 406, a certain one, having attained bondage 289, having stopped the action 289
Kampilya, having done armor 426, what, would it be the karma of an obstacle 353
In the city of Kampilya
437
What, or, the Milky Way, enchanted 403, a certain one, taking a stake 289, in the city of Kampilya, the king 188, the kinshuka, very dense 339, a certain one, with hair on the forehead
Body pain, it is said
314
Resembling the kinshuka flower 428, a certain one, having taken a well 122, with body, mind, and speech 303, some are benefactors 255, a certain one, shaking the left hand
The activity of body, speech, and mind 383, but, like a mother, we are not able 298, a certain one, having become excited, with speed, abandoning the body
What is more painful than this 465, a certain one, with the right hand 127, causing, old stupas 238, what, much has been said here, do 211, a certain one, looked, with curiosity 127, caused, by Bharata, this
What, much has been said here 9, a certain one, his own, with the city's water 289. Caused, by Harishena 188, why, thus, are you shining 403, a certain one, throwing, with anger 290, in the month of Kartik, having been born 464, what, like the fruit of the pak 362
186
380
247
289
123
127 159
218


.

Page #559:
---------------------------
509
295
411 152
401
128
किमेकमाश्रयाम्येतं
332 किमेतदिति तो तेन किमेतदिति नाथ त्वं किमेतदिति पृष्टश्च 200 किमूढेवमुतानूढा 173 कियत्यपि प्रयातेऽथ 370 किरणैजिनचन्द्रस्य किरतां पुष्पनिकरं 104 किरीटं बिभ्रतं नाना 183 किरीटी कवची चापि 232 किष्किन्धनगरे रम्ये 207 किष्किन्धेनापि निक्षि- 130 किष्किन्धेन्द्रस्तमभ्यागा- 411 किष्किन्धपुरविन्यासं 5 किष्कुप्रमोदनगरे 208 कीर्तयन्त्यां गुणानेवं 345 कीचकानामिवोदारो 292 कीर्तितः सुषमस्तिस्रो 429 कीर्तिशुक्लस्ततोऽपश्यद् 99 कीलालपटलच्छन्नकुग्रन्थं वेदसंज्ञं च कुटजानां विधुतानि कुटुम्बी क्षितिपालाय 343 कुठारैरसिभिश्चक्रः 308 कुड्मलोद्दीपितोऽशोकः 339 कुतूहलादिति ध्यात्वा 246 कुन्थुप्रभृतिसत्त्वानां कुन्थ्वरौ परतस्तस्य 436 कुदृष्ट्या गवितो लिङ्गी 247 कुन्दशुभ्रसमावर्तकुन्दशुभ्रः समुत्तुङ्गे कुपितेनेति सा तेन 374 कुपिते मयि शक्रे वा 180 कुबेर इव सद्भूतिः 416 कुबेरदत्तनामा च कुभावगहनात्यन्तं 347 कुमारी व्रतकस्यान्ते 324 कुमार्गसङ्गमुत्सृज्य 248
श्लोकानामकाराद्यनुक्रमः कुमुदैरुत्पलः पद्मः 174 कुम्भकर्ण इति ख्याति 178 कुम्भकारोऽभवद्राजा 87 कुम्भकारोऽभवन्मृत्वा 87 कुरुते यो जिनेन्द्राणां 321 कुरु नाथ प्रसादं मे
388 कुरु पूज्य प्रसादं मे कुरु सज्जो करं दातु- 211 कुर्वतो मानसे रूपं कुर्वतोऽनेकशो व्याख्यां 241 कुर्वन्तं बधिरं लोकं कुर्वन्त्याराधनं यत्नात् 156 कुर्वन्मनोहरां लीला कुर्वन्निव बलि पमैः 461 कुर्वाणं क्वणनं वाता 181 कुर्वाणा यशसो रक्षा 288 कुर्यान्मह्यं हितं तातो 348 कुलंधरोऽपि तत्रैव कुलक्रमसमायातां 299 कुलक्रमागतं राज्यं 454 कुलक्रमेण सास्माककुलपुत्रेण चासन्नकुलमेतच्छकुन्तानां 41 कुलवृद्धास्तदस्माकं कुलानामिति सर्वेषां 434 कुलालचक्रसंस्थानो कुलोचितं तथापीदं 156 कुवाक्यमुखराः क्रूरा 430 कुशास्त्रमुक्तहुंकारैः 431 कुहेतुजालसंपूर्ण- 116 कूजितः पक्षिसंघानां 19 कूपादुद्धृतमेकस्मा- 310 कुलद्वयनिपातिन्यो कृच्छ्रेण दधती गर्भकृतं छेकगणस्यापि 357 कृतं मयात्यन्तमिदं न योग्यं 477 कृतकोलाहलाः पूर्व 386 कृतगम्भीरहुंकारा- 464
कृतचन्दनचर्चेऽन्यः 123 कृतपूजस्ततः कैश्चित् कृतप्रत्यङ्गकर्माणं 234 कृतमङ्गलकार्याय 151 कृतयुद्धश्चिरं खिन्नो कृतश्रमः स तैर्दृष्टो 435 कृतशत्रुसमूहान्तः 187 कृतसंगीतदिव्यस्त्री 473 कृतस्तदर्थमाटोप- 411 कृताञ्जलिर्जगी स्वप्नान् 489 कृताञ्जलि: पप्रच्छ स्व- 445 कृताञ्जलिरथोवाच 460 कृताट्टहासमन्येन कृतानतिर्नृपेणैव 474 कृतानुगमना सख्या 372 कृतान्तवन्दनाकारै- 182 कृतान्तस्य ततो योद्ध- 199 कृतार्थः सांप्रतं जातो 236 कृतार्थ मन्यमाना स्वं 394 कृतार्था अपि ये सन्तो 383 कृतार्थो यद्यसो सृष्टी 255 कृते मे मन्दभाग्यायाः 406 कृतोपलम्भं स्वप्नेऽपि 203 कृतोऽर्धचक्रिनामायं 491 कृत्तोऽपि कस्यचिन्मर्धा 290 कृत्यं कालातिपातेन कृत्यं कि बान्धवैर्येन

Page #560:
---------------------------
510
Padma Purana
85
265
433
Having done so much evil, 138 Having killed living beings, 184 Having risen, sitting, 171 Having done proper conduct, 171 Having become a good disciple, 434 Having smiled, then the goddess, 152 Having smiled, then she said, 367 Mixed with worms, 431 The strength of the people also perishes in the dark fortnight, 431 Kekaya, Drona, and clouds, 478 Some, having reached the throat, 484 Some, by special action, 484 Some, the roar of the lion, 103 Some, the color of the conch shell, 103 Some, there, sang a star, 484 Some, by the bonds of karma, 68 Some, with thin karma, 25 Some, with virtuous karma, 25 Some, having endured great penance, 25 Some, having attained great beings, 24 Some, having attained right faith, 484 Some, from extreme arrogance, 484 Some, in deep samsara, 484 Some, not having attained destruction, 484 Some, like snakes, raised up, 484 Some, fallen to the ground, 484 Some, continuous, 25 Ketuki dust, white, 485 The shadow of the flag, a great flame, 485 With a shining armlet, 263 Who, then, do they worship, these colors? 150 Some, from excessive difference, 484 Frightened by the roar of the lion, 387 The king of the Kekayas, 7 The messenger of the son of Kaikasi, 7 The son of Kaikasi, 7 The story of the Kekayas, 7 The shaking of Kailasa, 418 Even reaching Lanka, 418 With anger, he, 418 In the peaks of Kailasa, 402 With anger filled heart, 135 With anger, 114 The mountain of Kailasa, 418 Anger, pride, and illusion, 314 Some, their efforts, 458 They are distressed, freed from wealth, 458 The sound of cuckoos, 338 Those ascetics, by whom, 192 With billions of parrot beaks, 11 Time has passed for us, from distress, 265 Billions of billions, they show, 429 Eight kotis, ten are mentioned, 61 Sometimes, Gandharvas sing, 78 Another, with great strength, 73 Sometimes, playing in the surrounding area, 216 I have an enemy without reason, 394 Sometimes, with a form of hair standing on end, 216 This one, a great hero, 215 Sometimes, the sound of swallowing, 287 The son of Kauleya, and the jackal, 74 Sometimes, with lightning flashes, 216 This one, with bad luck, blows, 380 Sometimes, with confidence, asleep, 216 This one, whose name is Vaishravana, 181 With the sound, then, of those sitting, 182 Kaushambi, with great enjoyment, 425 Where is dharma, where is anger? 217 Kaushiki, greater there, 147 Sometimes, by the pure one, 216 The king of Kosala, 454 For the sake of momentary happiness, 308 In order, thus, of the Jinas, 308 In an instant, attained, entered, 157 In order, he attained, 454 From an instant, from an instant, 174 Gradually, he attained youth, 140 In an instant, and attainment, 344 Being done, with devotion, 110 There is no wound on my body, 342 Knowing this being done, 348 The foot, wounded by an arrow, 377 By action, the god, his, 270 Those who are engaged in the treatment of wounds, 377 Those who are engaged in giving in actions, 377 Thousands of Kshatriyas, 415 Seeing him playing, 415 Kshatriyas, they are engaged in the treatment of wounds, 448 They play, immersed in enjoyment, 448 Falling, giving, shining, 292 They sing, they fly, they give, 449 By forgiveness, by forgiveness, they are equal, 319 Playing with women in the water, 230 Forgiveness, gentleness, association, 314 When will I play, good one? 225 Support by the forgiving, 298 Having bought, by the decree of fate, 75 Having said, "I am patient," then, 364 The sight of that angry one, 176 As if thrown in a good field, 310 I would be cruel, as if abandoned, 310 As if thrown in a barren land, 405 They quickly go to great joy, 322 Cruel ones, having given that, 311 The karma done in the past, diminished, 301 Even in my hand, nearness, 361 In the diminished, splendor trees, 458 Cruel ones, thus said, quickly, 458 Born from milk watering, 212 Having said, "He is unconscious from anger," 212 The clouds, who drink the ocean of milk, 266
72 253
373
353
202

Page #561:
---------------------------
Translated to English, preserving Jain terms:

The restless one, afflicted by hunger and thirst, holds 28 kshetras (realms) in which the auspicious Kshemankar Muni's feet are placed, 454. 103, 352. Throwing up the dust, the donkey (khara) 142, of the wicked Kharadushana Bhadra, 355, the date palm, emblic myrobalan, and lotus are destroyed as if they have gone to the most wretched kshetras (realms) of the Khechakas (celestial beings), 127. Thousands of Khecharas (celestial beings), 209, O blessed Khechari (celestial being), 77, angered by many Khecharas (celestial beings), 73. The famous one, named Vahni-shikha, 69, the famous Vrishabhasena, 452, 269. [Ga] The index of the verses by initial letter:
The departed Dasharatha, 484, went out in search, 271. By movement, body, and yoga, 23. The other one is deeply bound, 123. Increased by movement, coming, and staying, 112. One sang a powerful song, 128. By movement, he conquers this mind, 156. All by the Gandharva rite, 175. Going and paying obeisance, 219. By the Gandhara and Udichya designations, 478. Going to the provinces, 264. Sing together with their wives, 44. Going, speak boldly, 139. The mountains are extremely lofty, 35. Going, circumambulating, 116. Where the mountains are inaccessible, 157. Going to the abode of the gods, 32. Then the Muni of Gujja, 182. Going to Vaisravana, 182. Arising from the contemplation of qualities, 487. Going to the Shilakavata, 372. Engaged in the contemplation of qualities, 124. With maces, spears, and javelins, 287. In the combination of qualities and defects, the qualities, 4. With maces, spears, and arrows, 129. In the combination of qualities and defects, the defects, 4. The two ornaments spoke, 479. Overwhelmed by the form of qualities, 194. Desiring to go, as a lame, 59. The gods began to go.
The one named Gunasagara, addressed the Gandharva maiden, 390. These are the qualities of this one in the Gandharva city of song, 93. Endowed with excellent qualities and ornaments, 331. To the Gandharva city of song, 335. Your qualities are renowned, 420. The Gandharva also did for both, 392. He who is in the enumeration of the virtuous, 148. By the Gandharva rites, the luster, 164. When the qualities are being contemplated, he will go to the lord of Iladhya, 335. He is attracted by these qualities, 171. Then Garuda took the weapon, 293. By your noble qualities, O lord, 121. Garuda embraced, 294. His quality is the whole world, 49. By the roar of the clouds, 267. His quality is the whole world, 345. By the extremely fierce roar, 462. The teachers by the ultimate truth, 298. Increased by the wind of pride, 397. The teacher, the foot of Sīmandhara, is to be known, 425. Even the Gavita, by the sciences, 156. Seeing the teacher, the guru of the demons, 397. The fragrance of the cheek, 198. When the teachers are honored, 165. This one with the flow of blood, 358. Through the aperture of the cave, 421. The woman emerged from the aperture of the cave, 146. Performing this household duty, 321. Some facing the apertures, 205. This house is empty by her, 402.

Page #562:
---------------------------
512
Padmapurana
Ghanaughadiv nirghata: 197 Ghora: patanti nirghata: 142 Ghoshasenaparam Bhodi- 440
82 300
[c]
92
489
239
147
460
224
Grihana jeevanam natha grihitam nayakam jnatva
415 Grihitaprabhrita gatva 225 Grihitabhusanatyant- 205 Grihitamandalane grihithridayatasya grihitam ripuna lakshmi 166 Grihitam sravakaih shaktya 462 Grihitamalashasthrabi- 40 Grihite'smin parishyand- 294 Grihitva kikasam kachhi- 289 Grihitva kumbhamindro'pi 297 Grihitva cha kripayukt- 249 Grihitva modakan yataam 468 Grihitvevakhilatraina 149 Grihyatam kanyaka cheyam 262 Gotranasha kari cheshta gotre paramparayato godandapathatulyeshu 430 Gopalaken sammantra go purani cha tungani grasitveva vimunchantan 155 Grasta iva dishastena 140 Grahanam parishishtaanam 397 Grahanam haridrusva cha 434 Graheshvabhimukhastheshu 169 Grame tatraiva vipro'bhut 69 Grahayitva cha tan kishku-105
[gh] Ghaghaghaghayate'nyatra 287 Ghatate naakriterasyah 394 Ghana: shakha bhritaam jajne 338 Dhanam kairavjam jalm ghanadukhavabaddhesh 
ghanadhvanitavitrasta ghanagamavinirmakt 463 Ghanaghanaravatrasta
462
Chatuhsamudra paryantan 207 Chatuhsamudra paryante chaturgatikasamsara chaturgatigataanek chaturjnanopgadhatma chaturjnanopgadhatma chaturna praninamesha chaturna lokapalanachaturdasha sahasrani 226 Chaturdasha swatite shu 72 Chatubhiradhikashiti purv- 432 Chatubhiradhikashitirabda 432 Chatubhih sahita jneya: 429 Chaturangula manasca chaturvidham idam vachan 479 Chaturvidhasya sanghasya 434 Chaturvidho janapado 242 Chandanena samalamya 45 Chandanadrava digdhango 491 Chandanadrumasankashah 466 Chandram samastaya drishya 397 Chandrakantmani chhaya chandrakantsharirascha chandrakantivinirmaan chandraadityapratispadhi chandraadityasame tasya chandrapadasraye ramye
120 Chandraabhas chandrasankashah chandraabhas cha parastasman chandrarshi vaya karai: 227 Chandraloke tato lok- 271 Chandrasaladibhiryuktann 315 Champakksharakakara- 27 Champayam ath rudhayaam champeva vasupujyasya 427 Charanam shirasi nyasya charadbhihamsasanghate- 12 Chamanjalakasanshanna
Chakara cha samam bhi chakara viditartha cha 350 Chakara vipralapa cha 396 Chakra sudarshanam amogha- 422 Chakrachapadhanaprasa- 414 Chakrachihnamasau bhu ktv 438 Chakradhvajo manigrivo
70 Chakravatparivartante 448 Chakravatidhwani nito chakravatishriyam tavat chakravarti tato'prachcha chakravakiva duhkharta 239 Chakraankatanayo'pasyat chakraankapaksasampreetya 224 Chakraankitam shriyam bhu ktv 82 Chakraarudham ivajasram . 352 Chakraahvav patipriita chakru'nye ravam karne chakre cha mitra bhariyaayam 271 Chakrena lokapalanam 286 Chakrotpattim cha saumitreh 81 Chakshuspakshmuputasang- 184 Chakshurmanasayo schouri chakshushah putasancocho 23 Chakshusham vaguratulya 328 Chakshusho gocharibhuta 359 Chakshusmati tato'tite chakshusmanparastasmat 36 Chachara vaidyu tam tejo 462 Chanchalatvam samudbhut chanchupattamrunalanam 108 Chatuhpanchashadakhyatam 430 Chatuhsharanam ashritya 332
75
106
159
427
37
266
300


.

Page #563:
---------------------------
##  Verse Index:

513
246
154
409
412
254
338
253
450
187
282
40
473
482
95
186
169
473
98
13
487
25
381
223
152
288
393
435
172
437
438
381
185
162
453
381
486
436
125
382
396
376
173
151
191
404
287
116
40
121
270
491
160
486
421
302
410
452
326
404
272
378
373
104
277
203
357
156
234
194
201
240
240
335
467
455
221
124
184
485
372
421
484
339
67
158
160
74
474
324
205
212

Page #564:
---------------------------
Padma Purana
94
261
436
Whose birth was announced by water pouring 462 by all creatures 393 by creatures, leading the life of creatures 90 by creatures, who are deluded, their 383 three births have passed 36 from birth onwards, cruel birth, thus I am fulfilled 142 before and after birth 16 from birth onwards, evil-minded 238 birth, he obtained from the mountain 399 birth after birth, then he said 119 birth after birth, with the love of his son 78 birth and incarnation of all 82 Jahnu, the Apsaras were afraid 217 birth festival of the great one 490 Jambudvipa king said 162 Jambudvipa king, Yaksha 157 Jambudvipa's Bharata 75 Jambubharata, in the name of Jambudvipa, in the abode of the Jambudvipa tree, victory, the Kalpadruma is in the navel 37 they are born, they die, they release 448 victory, Nand, live long 204 victory, the sound created by the arrows 79 victory, the place to the south of the mountain 336 victory, the enthusiasm of Jayajit 262 water-bright, then angry 354 water-bubble, the essence 304 water-bubble-like body 84 water-machines, beautiful 229 water-wave-mountain, his 412 water-land-born 328 in water, by the use of the machine, born, eternally flowing 261 just born, then the saint 445 just born, and who is the god 260 just born, the coronation, who 436
Born, the abode, Padma, called 
By the Jinas, even this was not done, born, that cave, by him 393 by the Jinas, Dharma was declared 334 born, in the dim morning, then 366 Jina-born, the meaning of the meaning, born, from where, there, it was beautiful 457 the being, does by Dharma, born, twenty in number 449 the being, the pair of beings 104 born, Megha Ratha, called 146 lives, the lord of life, they 279 knowing, then by the king 242 life-donation, and what is said 311 knowing, the light body 453 life-attraction, the shape of the Kusa 387 I know, and so, not this 276 life, indeed, of all 343 I will know, as my deed 342 life, all the work 474 with the knees, the earth was conquered 333 life-support, having made 361 Jamadagni, the respected Kshatriya
I will live now, master 357 sick, then by words 203 Jain, the best word, is born, as long as this 474 trembling, shaking, Jamma 341 wife, wife, there was 380 known, what, not so born 260 wife, in the golden teeth 381 knowing, as it were, the story 269 the desire to conquer, the Yaksha-killer 267 knowing, him, you are pleased 63 conquered, conquered, even not the weapon 1 knowing, then, without light, so much 209 the conqueror of enemies, having joined, the conquerors of enemies 
71 knowing, the ten-headed one, obtained 413 having conquered, the lord of the Vidyadharas 225 knowing, the obtained boon, this 
Jina Chandra Katha Rashmi 321 8 knowing, the friend's wife, so 273 Jina-declared truths 23 knowing, the spring garland, her 389 Jina-feet, near 
knowing, the wind-son, and 403 Jina-worship-worthy 
knowledge, having obtained, some, goes 493 Jina-image, Jina-form 321 knowledge-Jina, with three 42 Jina-mother, then, having done 44 eldest, the thousands of diseases 271 Jina-worship, equal to 
light, the light-net 35 Jina-abode, they, by him 75 light-wheel, to lift 315 Jina-teaching, having attained 330 lights, in the abode, born 43 Jinas, the birth-stars 426 light, the world, flooded 463 Jinas, the interval, said 431 light, the thoughts, the kalpas 37 Jina, obtained, worship 265 burning, very near, the Jina, the two, having released 
219
burning, the matted hair, the fire, the Jina, only, he saw 28 burning, fierce-mouthed, this 142 Jina's word, whoever 324
[D] Jina, the tenth, in the past 
Dakini, preta, ghost, etc. 325 Jina, the lord, the hero 19
[Dh] Jina-feet, pure-ash 28 shaken, and, in the forest, himself 493
73
392
222
229

Page #565:
---------------------------
[ T ]
Knowing him to be inclined towards initiation,
Seeing him, and even more so,
Hearing of him, the one with the jewel earrings,
They brought him, clothed in a garment, and he became theirs at that time.
His very limbs, his climbing up and down,
461
240
163
468
101
177
482
65
269
The spreading of the feet on the shore,
359
Where is the Dikesh, for what reason?
113
The story of the lightning-haired one,
5
Knowing the lightning-haired one,
112
176
331
Then, by whom, at that time, some turns, then, the Cupid, some, then, the girl's father, knowing,
43
349
Then, hearing the murmur,
131
Then, the going to Kapistha,
120
198
Then, the going to Kama, then, coming to Kampilya,
196
Then, saying, "What is this?",
348
Then, the king of Kishku,
120
Then, even of Kirtithara,
Hearing this, Bharata became angry,
Sowing, the mind-absorbed branch,
Then, having made a shade with a Kustha tree,
Then, the burden of the hair,
Then, seeing the young boys,
Then, united with the prince,
Then, making himself worthy,
Then, attached to compassion,
Then, having done what glory,
Then, Ketumati, the daughter of Kuda,
Then, of Ketumati, then,
Then, with the trembling of Kailasa,
Then, of the belly of Kailasa, then, in order, their sons, then, to play, they began,
465
192
58
492
47
476
50
24
370
338
221
275
224
192
The order of the verses, according to the first letter,
Then, for a moment, she stood, knowing,
Then, for a moment, having stood,
She went out,
396
Then, for a moment, having stood, he,
394
Then, with the waters of the milk ocean,
44
Then, the auspicious one was born,
36
Then, the celestial sun, him,
125
Then, by the celestial world,
80
Then, the shade of various trees,
104
Then, on the banners, Indrajeet, the chief,
420
Then, even by the husband of the Yakshas,
162
Then, with the greatest anger,
354
Then, the strong one, with delight,
285
Then, the sound of the strong one,
212
Then, united with the greatest,
294
Then, having obtained the greatest,
347
Then, saying, "The greatest",
361
Then, some put on,
52
Then, seeing the insult,
382
Then, with harsh words,
211
180
194
178
486
432
71
356
277
379
72
135
489
124
399
Then, the harsh-word wind,
Then, he performed the taking of the hand, then,
Then, he performed the taking of the hand, of him,
Then, the taking of the hand was done by him,
Then, from the side of the Jina, before,
Then, he asked his father,
363
Then, the father spoke to him,
Then, covering with his hands,
Then, many things done before,
Then, angry at the killing of his father,
Then, bowing down, they were asked,
Then, the duties of the limbs,
Then, he answered him,
Then, the city people came out,
Then, the lotus bud blossomed,
364
Then, with the morning music, auspicious,
Then, with the morning music, the conch,
Then, from that time, with beauty, he,
151
489
Then, from that time, with anger,
Then, from that time, those who were born, then, with joyful gods,
Then, with the wind of destruction,
Then, having done praise,
Then, the one named with happy fame,
Then, he laughed and said,
Then, "I am famous",
Then, laughing, confidently,
Then, he climbed up the palace,
Then, when it was said, "Food, etc.",
Then, the one who lived in the country of Priyans,
Then, the fruits, etc., of them,
Then, with the bow of Indra,
Then, the followers of Indra,
Then, the sound of the conch became,
Then, with the sound of the instruments,
Then, all that was sound,
Then, they went for refuge,
Then, the autumn season arrived,
Then, in the darkness made by weapons,
Then, the autumn cloud,
Then, he attained the feet of Shiva,
362
197
401
346
366
52
195
297
198
51
396
48
463
287
19
62
87
284
Then, hearing, he should protect,
373
Then, she released her breaths,
189
Then, even the six, not until,
52
Then, they, having accomplished their task,
366
85
218
143
196
191
199
377
196
334
Then, by the snake of sorrow, he,
Then, by Srimalina, of them,
Then, the kings, coming together,
Then, the one named Samvartaka,
Then, she, being bound,
Then, carrying, he arrived,
Then, united with compassion,
Then, with flowers, pearls,
Then, friendship, well-arranged,
515
Then, he, frightened by the ascetics,
Then, in the form of good men,
302
110
58
130
234
372
360

Page #566:
---------------------------
56. Then, by the light of the evening,
Then, along with the ministers,
Then, reaching the appointed time,
Then, becoming agitated, then they arrived and knew.
Then, the vow was completed.
Then, by the combination of the time,
Then, the Bhairava deities were summoned.
Then, at the appropriate time,
Then, they set out to go.

457. Then, the sun-like lord went, seeing properly.

64. Then, abandoning the distorted form,

114. Then, while wandering in that place, 104. Then, the powerful Shakra enjoyed. 456. Then, the thousand-rayed one approached. 233. Then, the thousand-rayed one shone.

396. 396. 155. Then, in thousands, the fragments.
Then, the year spoke.
Then, she told him. Then, the city of Saketa.
Then, the one named Sagardatta. Then, the inner palace. Then, after worshiping the ascetic,
Then, seated on a comfortable seat,
Then, hearing about the death of the son,
Then, completely pure and perfect,
Then, the divine, human-like god,
Then, the entire divine army,
Then, return to the sun,
Then, he of immeasurable speed,
Then, with a smiling face, he spoke,
Then, hearing like a dream,
Then, seeing like a dream,
Then, by himself, as I said,

347. 355. 350. 485. 347. 149. 453. 44.

344. 61. 43. 439. 202. 381. 170. 199. 129. 307. 434. 294. 349. 380. 408. 129. 362. 389. 127. 169.

In the Padma Purana:
Then, he himself took.
Then, the arising.
Then, the arrival occurred.
Then, Indra was born.
Then, he began to destroy.
Then, rising up, he placed.
Then, on the horse.
Then, that which was the enemy.
Then, by the four types of gods.
Then, the moon-nailed one was born.
Then, the supreme divine energy.
Then, his extraordinary qualities.
Then, going and bringing her.
Then, on that day, the ten-necked one.
Then, crying for a long time.
Then, fallen, shining loudly.
Then, falling from humanity,
Then, born here.
Then, on the day of the battle.
Then, seeing him angry,
Then, with deep anger,
Then, seeing him in that way,
Then, the head was honored.
Then, he went out.
Then, with great skill,
Then, adorned, he was,
Then, from youth he saw,
Then, humble, he was,
Then, trembling,
Then, with a shower of arrows,
Then, suddenly seeing him,
Then, the god, well-established,
Then, that charioteer.
Then, to break that pride.

Page #567:
---------------------------
## Verse Number Index:

517
105
371
292 331
358
115
292
135
245 200 389
284
176
284
31 283 104
**الم ال مہ**
110
Then by him, the army, then by him, many, then by him, the ten-headed, then by him, the infinite-strength-moon, then by him, "die", then by him, the god, then by him, heard before, then by him, seeing the troubled, then by him, the dharma-gone-out, then by them, by Sukeśa, then by him, on the head, then by him, the world-generous, then of them, the great born, then by them, from the union, then by them, sent, cruel, then by them, followed, the unrighteous, then by them, raised, the army, then by them, the great roar, then by them, that promise, then by him, with the group, then by him, the sons, the kingdom, then by him, the unsaid-known, then the inner chamber, pleasant, then the being in the womb, then the teachers, with obeisance, then from the house, of the Jinas, then by the lineage, then having taken all, then spoke, the eye-possessing, then spoke, the god's, then spoke, the Bhagavan, then spoke, Marīci, then from the crowd, hearing, then for the benefit of beings, the gathering, then to chant, they began, then the birth-festival, of him, then near the Jina, him, then in the born, jewels, then the great cry, 185 then his own strength, the foolish, 292 then seeing the ointment, then the hip-fruit, then the very dense battle, 355 then seeing the sleep-depletion, 193 then the very cruel, 357 then the helpless-body, 114 then the very great-being, then going out, by him, 226 then like the burnt, then hearing the news, 460 then by the ten-headed, said, then the night-bride, shone, 413 then by the ten-headed, ordered, 235 then the certainty-known, 240 then the ten-faced, quickly, 231 then by compassion, the thumb, 219 then the ten-faced, spoke, 210 then they inferred, of him, then the seeing, one another, then following, with speed, then the long-hot-breath, 372 then by this, called, 468 then the sorrow-filled-body, 394 then the interval, even, then the sorrow, not knowing, 372. then the dwelling-in, by him, 239 then the bad-speed, him, 354. then another chariot, mounting, 185 then seeing, the approaching, 295. then another, also, obtained, then seeing, his effort, 346. then the ear-cutting, doing, 282 then by the god-sons, 164 then the insulted, by whom, then the god-sky-vehicles, then also, the arya-being, 92 then the gods, coming together, then spoke, them, the Rakṣas, 245 then the gods-demons, devotees, 333 then Bali, he, 216 then before the dharma-jina, 432 then Brahma-ratha, born, 469 then the "Fie-Fie" sound, almost, 243 then the breaking, obtaining, 283 then the meditation-elephant-mounted, 121 then the Bharata-king, also, then the sinless-body, him, then there was, the great battle, 136 then not born, I, then you, by me, of her, 194 then the infinite-strength, said, 318 then by the future-disease, 386 then by this, again obtained, 69 then the sun-lord's, then of these two, the moment-born, 173 then the overcoming, able, 286 then the lord, the strength, seeing, 200 then the face-to-face, coming, him, 233 then not gave, the father, of her, then the various-flowers, 104 then the face-to-face, coming, seeing, 183 then the various-birds, 228 section then the name, the great-enthusiasm, then frightened, very much, the messenger, 212 then all this, of her, 372 then the servants, lifting, 185 then all-knowledge, 489 then by the brother, together, enmity, 62 then said, the serpent, 222 then turning, by him, 196 then his own strength, passed, 183 then the Magadha-king, also, 132 380 171 153 163 172 205 277 323 395 402 157 153 196 21

Page #568:
---------------------------
518
Padma Purana
28
235 82
92
Then with a auspicious song, then with an inauspicious fear, 195 then in pleasant seats, 122 then with intoxicated elephants, 143 then with the ocean of wisdom, then with intoxicated Kalabhaindra, then with the attainment of Madana, 278 then he spoke this honey-like word, 
269 then with the mind-born Indra, 472 then with the distressed Mandodari, 219 then with the Jina-image, then with me gone to liberation, then with the immortal Prabhu born, 108 then after performing great penance, then with a great assembly, then in a great battle, then with the great battle begun, 279 then with the king of the great city, 469 then with the great strength born, 67 then with the great burden afflicted, 218 then he performed a great festival with the navel, 43 then he performed a great festival with the company, 139 then with the great rising enthusiasm, 203 then with the human form, 243 then with the garland of excellence on the neck, 127 then with the son of the garland-wearer, then knowing the Muni-mountain, 
224 then with the Muni-face like the sun, 120 then with the Meru-mountain stable, then with the intoxication of delusion, 243 then with the desired gift, then with the Yama-torment, 293 then until he was to kill, 114 then until Dasagriva, then those who were conquered by him, 200 then with the Rakshasa-army, 204 then with the battle-like attainment, then with the net of gem-light, 
283
then with the gem-box in the hair, 52 then with the gem-creation, then with the chariot-horse-elephant, 348 then with the Rakshasa-army, 282 then with the king together with them, then seeing the marked, 414 then to know the writing, 
356 then with the Vajradhara, then with the light of the limit, 
272 then with the light of the limit, the delight, 221 then with the destruction of the deaf, 181 then with the beautiful women, 452 then with the thousands of years, 36 then with the increase only, he, then with the subdued, 235 then with the spring garland, him, 394 then with the spring garland, that song, 391 then with the spring garland, then with the broken down, then with the fire-burning, 347 then with the wind, he spoke this, 360 then to know the news, 234 then with the victorious strength, 111 then with the victory of the lion, 127 then knowing with Janaka, her, 420 then with the power of knowledge, then with the method of Dharma, 350 then with the destruction of the Naga-city, 390 then with the humble, he, 297 then with the exit from the dwelling, 457 then with the Vindhya-mountain, his, 288 then with Vibhishana born, 154 then with the ascent of the aircraft, then with the abandonment of the aircraft, 198 then with the prepared bed, then with the fear of separation, then with the eyes, then until the marriage, 271
then with the army resting, 415 then with the poison-arrow-thrower, 217 then with the astonished mind, she, 445 then with the astonishment attained, 
114 then with the Vaishravana, again, 
184 then with the delighted army, he spoke, 340 then with the eight-limbed sign-knower, 152 then with the conversation of this, 351 then he said, with what, then he, thus spoken, then he, with the Dharma of time, 120 then he, with the men spoken, 236 then he, with the arrow of desire, 224 then he, gradually increasing, 210 then he, like the moon-beam, 126 then he, with the touch of the goat, 389 then he, his death, then he, with that intention, 124 then he, like the bow, born, then he, killed, for the sake of, 120 then he, fallen, child, 130 then he, returned again, 110 then he, brought back again, 179 then he, to go from behind, 132 then he, simultaneously, son, 414 then he, lamenting greatly, 131 then he, with the trembling attained, 115 then he, with all the knowledge, 217 then he, with the weapon-mass, 177 then he, in the just-moistened, 467 then with him, enduring, then with him, suddenly, the wisdom, 302 then with the Hanuraha-named, 409 then I also, with the word, 340 then with the laughter, he spoke this, then with the elephant-leader, spoken, then with the sound of Ha, 409 then with the king of Hemapura, 137
8
am
177
393
192


 .

Page #569:
---------------------------
##  Sloka Number Index

519
126
348
175 88
12
270
Then by Hem Prabha these
485
There in heaven thousands 324.  So with precious jewels illuminated 424 I do that again by which 236 There his wife, going to her husband 98 So by Rajas, Kisku
203 That which is made, born from service 112 There then with ministers together 269 So situated, he was 364 That there, the root cause, karma's sound 350 There, attached, having obtained increase 420 So monkey-marked
112 That, all, Baladir 141 There he saw, that vast 105 So true-word-dharma
117 That, his end-body 62 There also, in the southern row
So, all people's joy 425 That, by those arrows, after 283 There also, not the mind of that
So, let it be, welcome to him 363 That, to you, as long as this, something 474 There also, liberated enjoyment 281 So, stealing, a woman's company 91 That wife, Chelna by name 16 There also, being remembered, that
So, thus, caused by him, there, by lust, having enjoyed 330 There, this moon, cold
So, thus, of Airavata's year, there, in Kumbhapura, his 178 There, seated, knowing him
So, thus, he also, was appointed 492 There, of those playing, engaged
There, Asura-pura-like
413
So, thus, of these, awake, this 199 There, to play, he began, where is, everywhere, beautiful
That, today, beginning, thinking 298 There, and, alone, one 359 There, his world, was born 19 That, for that, earthly kings, all
484 There, birth-festival, his 399 There, indeed, by celestial beings, these
That, state, king, knowing 468 There, there, indeed, in the land 377 There, indeed, at the time, his 150 That, his, for the sake of, intellect, there, three-world-common, there, indeed, another, was, in the village
That, ordered, Prahasta, then 197 There, god, like, generous 381 There, generous, happiness, obtained 381 That, he saw, the world, whole 404 There, to hold, body 378 That, region, made, by gods
Then, Mlechcha-force, terrible, there, various, was, birth 483 That, be pleased, compassion, noble 181 Then, Varuna-Chandra's 415 There, exit, seen 472 Truly, if, lord, mine 348 Then, this, then, seen 115 There, son-killing-anger, his, vassals, and, pleased,
That, is, Kishkindha-pura 419 There, Purnaghana, by name 72 So, somehow, having obtained
That, means, do, you, there, directly, other, of her 487 So, do, as, more 384 That, this, Sikata-fist 312 There, in the question, in the age, that
So, thus, done, then, in the ear 277 That, thus, enemy, sorrow 131 There, in the middle, is, that island 78 So, fierce, also, doing 322 That, indeed, shrinking, seeing, there, minister, spoke 336 So, and, that, animal, life
That, indeed, means, that
415 There, two months, taking 409.  So, their, delight, obtained 365 That, indeed, this, lake, delightful 359 There, root-fruit, etc. 189.  So, joyful, to be known 440 That, these, opposite, there, gone, indeed, in the Rewa 235 So, Nala, in Kishku-pura, body 419 That, village-dwelling, by one, there, night, happiness, taking 412 So, still, they, gone, disturbance 158 That, sorrow, etc., dullness 386 There, in the greedy, in the wicked, so, still, by the other, joined
That, sorrow, etc., having obtained
372 There, in a hundred years, past 428 So, still, manliness, bearing
That, country-altar, by, charioteers, there, Vidyadharas, all 302 So, still, let it be, known 269 That, country, vast-shouldered 58 There, Vaivasvata, by name 492 So, still, if, dissatisfaction 396 Then, tell, young woman, to whom 168 There, of worldly-beings
So, still, valiant-handed 265 That, hair-like, with, spears 182 There, beautiful-limbed 478 So, still, with faith, that, mine 107 That, like, worldly-house, I
460.  There, crystal-walled
So, thus, renounced, having become 247 That, for-killing, gone, Indra 145
159
262
361
255
87
279
23
t

Page #570:
---------------------------
520
In the search for that, those who were left after being killed by him,
His son, the son of Sagara, killed - the son of Kekaya,
The body of the one who was being understood,
335
245
87
491
240
341
335
492
482
String, lineage, and mixed,
121
That is certain, the ministers understood, 455
294
61
The whole body was thin, the middle of the body was broad-hipped,
The one who lived at the end of the body, by him,
The connection of the thread of lineage, and
Bad house
In the middle of that, Bharata, the wheel-bearing one,
In the middle of that, it shines like Mount Meru,
Those who have set out on that path, and the penance I do, the penance of the world, the inconceivable penance of the cowardly,
The penance of the crooked one who is the end of the world,
The penance, by the suffering, of you,
The penance, the one whose whole body is dried up, those who have burnt away their sins by penance,
The forest of penance, by the best of the sages - seeing him, then, the Shal tree,
Hearing him, then, the end, hearing him, then, all,
Knowing him, then, the end,
I told him, in the jewel-topped one,
The darkness, then, was separated by the pure,
By her, too, for my son, by her, the one who was humble,
With her, great wealth,
He was made generous in body,
By that wealth,
The battle of those two princes, the news of the well-being of those two,
With the love of those two, thus,
That was said, he heard that, then, the direction of those two, his,

78
313
302
382
8
69
458
323
13
279
259
242
453
388
27
97
434
208
464
182
265
99
396
189
195
In the Padma Purana,
Of those two, unknown, thus, of those two, mutually connected,
Of those two, also, obtained before, of those two, also, before, the head,
Of those two, the elephant-skull-shaped umbrella,
From the covering cloth of the waves, of the one whose color is like the young sun,
Thinking, from the one whose color is like the young sun, the disease, the hole,
The one who has been satisfied, the group of travelers,
On the bases, of the tall mansions,
You were given, by the love of others,
The wealth of those two, made into music,
390
The daughter of those two, and
450
Of those two, a great one arose, in the marriage, 418 the gathering of the prowess of those two,
337
The marriage of those two, by great wealth, 421 Yo-har,
461
Of those two, the name was Shrikantha, of those two, there was, there, Bhima,
Of those two, the daughter, the nine lotus-colored ones,
The one who is like the breaking of the waves, the one whose eyebrows are like the waves, the one who is adorned with the beauty of the waves, the new, beautiful one,
By his grace, then,
They stood together, free from knots,
Therefore, I do actions,
And from that, I obtained birth,
Therefore, we go to her,
Therefore, son, return,
366
47
153
160
62
Therefore, giving up all this,
Therefore, this good god,
Therefore, the Veda is without a doer,
Therefore, we stay here,
97
388
419
27
228
230
368
490
34
466
12
464
121
393
21
107
134
299
132
360
374
Therefore, I ask him, now, therefore, of doubtful character, therefore, with all effort, in a man, 3 therefore, with all effort, the standard, 319
84 391
250
53

Therefore, another, also, who, to him, 374
217
361
284
50
132
346
92
312
92
90
456
474
368
Therefore, I will abandon him, therefore, going without knowing, therefore, his own battle, therefore, giving up this, therefore, get up, go, therefore, get up, go, therefore, hearing him get up, therefore, giving with the intention, therefore, skilled by what was obtained, therefore, foolish, like this, therefore, as your father, therefore, until the arrogant ones, therefore, until this womb, therefore, born from the fire,
70
Therefore, by someone who hates,
256
Therefore, by a man, or a woman,
328
Therefore, he is returning,
98
Therefore, informing, go, you, 368 in that, thus, in the prosperous one, existing, 421 in that, then, he goes to Rajagriha, 421 in that time, in those who are lost,
48 116
In that, he speaks, in that country,
42
In that, while in the womb, because in that, the jewels of rules,
323
311
In that, indeed, of the one who is shining, to him, truth is not pleasing,
57
To him, the king of men, delighted by the crown, etc., 457
To him, five prostrations,
114
To him, the flower-answer, the girl,
97
To him, in summary, he said,
434
To him, she spoke with words,
150
449
467
195
448
373
In the fame of that one, in the lineage of that one, eight days, of that one, also, the footsteps went,
The name of the father of that one was,
The word of that one, the ear, of that god, in this world,
49

Page #571:
---------------------------
## Verse Number Index

521
* **179**  *tasyacchandanamalaaya*
* **243**  *tasyapakse tatas petuh*
* **71**  *tasyapadmottaraabhikyah*
* **71**  *tasyapitraa jitaah sarve*
* **413**  *tasyaputrashatam taav*
* **387**  *tasyapratininadena*
* **58**  *tasyapradakshinam kurvan*
* **139**  *tasyabhaaryaa babhuveshta*
* **33**  *tasyamadye mahaameru*
* **100**  *tasyayogyaa gunaih kanyaa*
* **69**  *tasyayuddhaaya samprapto*
* **69**  *tasyaloshthubhiranyaisch*
* **149**  *tasyasaa yoginah paaven*
* **445**  *tasyah kamalavaasinyo*
* **365**  *tasyah sechanakatvam tu*
* **173**  *tasyam madhuryayuktaayaam*
* **147**  *tasyam vaishravano jaatah*
* **94**  *tasyadityagatirjaato*
* **285**  *tasyadityayashah putro babhuva*
* **67**  *tasyadityayashah putro bharat*
* **39**  *tasyanaabhisametaaya*
* **39**  *tasyanugamanam chakra*
* **39**  *tasyanupam maishvaryam*
* **409**  *tasyamasuuta saa putram*
* **353**  *tasyametadavasthaayaam*
* **358**  *tasyarupasamudre'sau*
* **358**  *tasyavata ratah sena*
* **404**  *tasyavartaasu mugdhena*
* **361**  *tasyavinaaparaadhena*
* **402**  *tasyasannbhuvam prapya*
* **61**  *tasyasid ganapalaana*
* **395**  *tasyastatsakalam duhkham*
* **365**  *tasyaste kamyamaanaaya*
* **361**  *tasyaste nayane dirgha*
* **284**  *tasyasyako rane sthatum*
* **414**  *tasyeshubhirvapubhinnam*
* **241**  *tasyai chaakthayann mulaam*
* **334**  *tasyaiva cha muneh paarve*
* **291**  *tasyaiva shakrasanjnasy*
* **214**  *tasyocchinnigateh shabde*
* **469**  *tasyopare tato yaati*
* **177**  *tasyopare tato yodha*
* **271**  *tam kanyaam sodaro netut*
* **271**  *tam kanyaam samaasaady*
* **202**  *taaditastrikshnabhanena*
* **159**  *taadyamanaa cha chandaalai*
* **109**  *taat naasmin janah ko'pi*
* **356**  *taat me lakshanam shakt*
* **235**  *taatasya charani natvaa*
* **100**  *taat svalpaapi nastyatra*
* **299**  *taani shastraani te naaga*
* **29**  *tapatyajanachittasya*
* **177**  *tamaasena tato'strena*
* **246**  *taapasena sata tena*
* **243**  *taapasaan durvidhaan buddhya*
* **10**  *taapasphutitakooshikai*
* **158**  *taabhirityu ditam teshaam*
* **343**  *tamadrishvaatichakshusyaam*
* **39**  *taambuldayini kachit*
* **357**  *taambularaganimmukt*
* **463**  *taaranikaramadhyastho*
* **455**  *taarunyasuryo'pyayamevameva*
* **265**  *taavachch vrajatastasya*
* **265**  *taavachch bhaanu raidastham*
* **415**  *taavatputrashatam tasya*
* **233**  *taavatsaagaravriddhya*
* **233**  *taavadan yakathaachchede*
* **233**  *taavadutpattyavegena*
* **280**  *taavadeva janah sarvah*
* **280**  *taavadvimrishya kaaryaani*
* **280**  *taavantyeva chotpannaah*
* **280**  *taavanty eva sahasraani*
* **209**  *taavandmandodari bava*
* **416**  *taa vishadavatiirdrishtaa*
* **179**  *taasu ratnaani vastraani*
* **180**  *tiraschaam maanushaanaam cha*
* **75**  *tiryagjaatisametasya*
* **75**  *tiryagjaatisvabhaavena*
* **75**  *tiryagnara kaduhkhaani*
* **75**  *tiryagnara kanthah san*
* **75**  *tiryagbhirmaanushairdevaih*
* **33**  *tiryaglokasya madhye'smin*
* **308**  *tilakena bhrumormadhyam*
* **308**  *tilamatro'pi deso'sau*
* **357**  *tishtataapi tvayaa naath*
* **114**  *tisht tisht duraachaar*
* **367**  *tishtatyudikshmanasch*
* **194**  *tisht tvamiha jaamataah*
* **187**  *tishtanti nischalaah svaamin*
* **64**  *tishtanti munayo yatra*
* **365**  *tisht munch grihaaneti*
* **445**  *tisra koṭyo'rdhakoṭi cha*
* **215**  *tikshnah shikharasamghaatah*
* **404**  *tire'syaah saritah shasyam*
* **381**  *tirthe vimalanathasya*
* **227**  *tungaarjunavanakiirnatungavanhinapichchougha*
* **227**  *tungastarangsanghaataih*
* **236**  *tubhyam vedayitaasmiiti*
* **480**  *turangairyadalam svangat*
* **480**  *turangachanchalaacharut*
* **480**  *turiyam va srijel lokam*
* **480**  *tulyarthataikashabdene*
* **278**  *tushtābhyupagamāt kinch*
* **47**  *tushtā samvikshya tanayam*
* **72**  *tushtena tena saa tasmai*
* **449**  *susyantyarchanti vanchanti*
* **170**  *tuni mano bhuvah stambho*
* **170**  *turyadidambaram tyaktvaa*
* **291**  *trnatulyeshu naamishu*
* **322**  *trnaanaam shalayah shreshthah*
* **322**  *trnupamam paradravyaam*
* **27**  *trtiye mandaddirghoshnat*
* **27**  *trpta rasen padmaanaam*

**438**
**212**
**344**
**317**
**341**

Page #572:
---------------------------
522
Papouraane
_34  _ 78
43
486
81
Trilokeshwara-taachihna- 22 Trivarna-netra-shobhinyo Trivishtapaṁ yathā Shakro 143 Trishchatasribhir-yukta Trinshad-yojanamānādhah Trailokyaṁ shobhamāyātatrailokyaṁ api sambhūya Trailokyasyā paritya jya Trailokyādath niḥsheṣaṁ 219 Twaksukhaṁ sukumāraṁ tu 483 Twangmāṁsāsthīnāḥsaukhyā 483 Twatsangamaṁ samāsādya 392 Twatsmṛti pratibaddhaṁ me 364 Tvadgatiprekshaṇenaite Tvadvaktrakantisambhūtatvayā nāth jagatsupta 20 Twayyavijnātagarbhāyātvādṛśā mādr̥śā ye cha 222
375
414
Te kathaṁ vada śāmyante 2 Te kadācidatho yātāḥ 84 Te kudharma samāsthāya Tejomayīva santāpa- 352 Te taṁ prāpya punardharma Te taṁ bhāvena sansevyate Sato vadatāmeva
379 Tena kṣaṇasamudbhūta- 292 Tena chabhihitaḥ pūrva- 236 Tena tanikhilaṁ dhvantaṁ 293 Tena te kṣaṇamātreṇa 284 Tena tvayā sārdhamahaṁ vidhāya 418 Tena doṣānubandhena 70 Tena dharmaprbhāvena Tena paryata tā dṛṣṭvā 134 Tena yukto janaḥ śaktyā 323 Tena vākyena sikto'sā- 173 Tena vāruṇayāḥ sarve Tena sādhaṁ mayā vidyā 273 Tenānudhāvamānēna Tenāpahatachittānāṁ Tenābhijnānadānēna Tenāmī kārītā bhānti 196 Tenaikena vinā sainya- 129 Tenaiva taccha sanjātaṁ 58 Tenoktaṁ deva jānāsi 468 Tenoktāste kṛtasnānaṁ 435 Te punaḥ parapeedāyāṁ 25 Te'pyasṭau tadviyogena 437 Tebhyo jagāda yajñasya Tebhyo bhāvena yaddattaṁ 310 Te virūpasamāstāṅgā- 431 Te shakranagarābhikyē 204 Te śastrapaṇayaḥ krūrā- 475 Teṣāṁ kenachidityukta 53 Teṣāṁ nāmāni sarveṣāṁ Teṣāṁ madhye tato jyeṣṭho Teṣāṁ madhye na dagdhau dvai 85
Teṣāṁ mahotsavastatra 409 Teṣāṁ vaktrāṇi ye prāptā 275 Teṣāṁ śiṣyāḥ praśiṣyāścha Tenāmanupadaṁ lagnā 136 Teṣvastrakoshalaṁ tasya 493 Te samādhi samāsādya 25 Tomarāṇi śarānyāśāṁ Tyaktarāgamadadveṣā 453 Tyaktāyā me tvayā nāth 358 Tyaktā vaśasthā dharaṇī tvayeyam 455 Tyaktvā dharmadhiyā bandhūn 246 Tyaktvā nau dharaṇīvāso 194 Tyaktvā parigrahaṁ sarva 93 Tyakvā lingī punaḥ pāpo 247 Tyajato'sya dharitriyaṁ 87 Tyāgasya nāthino yasya 15 Tyājyetadtparaṁ loke 325 Trapraprapāyate'nyatra 287 Vapante drānti sajjanti 448 Ayaṁ surabhikoṭīnāṁ prayo'gnyo vapuṣyeva 257 Trastasāranga kāntākṣī Trastasāranga jāyā kṣī 377 Trastāvyālokanāśāḥ 217 Trāsākulitachitteṣu 183 Triḥparītya cha bhāvena
379 Trikūṭaśikhārādhastān Trikūṭaśikharaṇāso 136 Trikūṭābhimukho gacchan 412 Trikūṭēnēva tenāso 102 Tridaśēndrasamo bhogaḥ Tripuro malayo hema- 226 Tripuspoत्तरसंज्ञोऽतो 425 Tribhūvanakushalamatiśaya- 391 Trilokakṛtapujāya 220 Trilokamandanaabhikyāṁ 199 Trilokasrīpariprapta 117 Triloka vibhutāachihna
[da]
275
171
Daṁṣṭrayoḥ preṅkhaṇaṁ kurvan 142 Daṁṣṭrākarālavadanā- 464 Daṁṣṭrākarālave tāla
karālasta- 114 Daṁṣṭrā vasantasimhasya Dakṣaḥ prasanna kīriyaṁ 283 Dakṣāt sambhavatsuṇuḥ 447 Dakṣiṇasyāṁ nṛpaśreṇyāṁ 334 Dakṣiṇasyāmaṁ śreṇyādakṣiṇāṁ cha gṛhāṇēti 242 Dakṣiṇāpathamāsādya Dakṣiṇāśāmaśeṣāṁ sa 187 Dakṣiṇāśāmu khodgīrṇaḥ 338 Dakṣiṇēnāghriṇā pūrva 357 Dakṣiṇē vijayārddhasya 54 Dakṣiṇodantvato dvīpe 146 Dagdhvā karmorukakṣa kṣubhita- 442 Daṇḍaścha mṛtyuriva jātaśarīra- 422
244

Page #573:
---------------------------
What is the gift desired?
The gift given by the king of the demons.
The battle of giving lasted for a long time, and after giving the order, he again did.
Giving the news of the counter-force.
Giving the seven virtues.
Giving to Suvrata, he showed the Narmada with foam-covered waves.
He gives liberation.
He gave the knowledge of the Ashali.
They saw, struck with wonder.
They saw him, the king of the people.
With teeth-bitten lower lip, bound.
Row of teeth, white-shadowed.
Those very teeth, which are peaceful-toothed, having seen the clearly-seen king of the teeth, the great circle, the elephant smells him, as long as he holds the supreme by him.
Holding the self as void.
Wearing a garland on his chest.
He said, "Again, O Bhadra!" He said, "O fire of desires!"
By suppression, the beating of the wicked.
The Jinas, being told of compassion.
The burning coal of separation from the beloved.
The beloved told, as long as.
142
154
354
231
111
381
446
228
222
278
164
57

142
446
3
294
140
198
446
341
296
273
225
23
326
444
445
270
20
Born of a poor family, always in a poor belly.
By pure vision.
309
302
By the fuel of vision, having become beyond the reach of vision. 325 By vision, by touch, by anger. 229 Shown by these two, on the back. Shown, even then, in that. 370 In the middle of the mirror. 144
465
153
Even though there is a mirror, a blade of grass is distinct. 403
The order of the first letters of the verses.
Like a leaf, with pride.
Even in the leaf, fear of movement.
Dashagriva in vain.
Praise.
Dashagriva is the essence.
To Dashagriva, Sugriva.
With Dashagriva, those.
Dashagriva, then, his son.
In those ten divisions, thus.
On the tenth day, from that day, the tenth, the tenth part.
By the one released from the ten mouths.
35
199
432
233
By the mouth of Dashagriva.
267
By the ten-mouthed one, by him, I.
170
Dashagriva, even those arrows. 292 By the ten streams released. 485
One hundred more, by him.
The birth of Dashaanan.
Whatever mouth of Dashaanan.
The story of the ten-mouthed one, to him.
It is the duty of the ten-mouthed one.
By the ten-mouthed one, then, he was driven.
The ten-mouthed one, with many wives.
84
6
267
203
212
210
336
185
346
275
As in a burning house.
247
Pomegranate, betel nut, and kol.
103
The giver, the enjoyer, the one who stands, the doer. 317
Even though the gift is condemned, it goes.
311
152
309
179
190
328
6
The ten-mouthed one, even though he conquered the enemy.
With bitten lower lip, he pulled.
Like a generous one being burned.
By the gift, the cloud of desires.
By the gift, they resort.
The child, the joy of his own people.
20
377
160
160
214
176
179
Like a forest fire, by him.
The class of servants, vast wealth.
By the Digambara, the statement.
The pillar of Dignaga's bondage.
At the end of the day, the end of the Tatpurusha.
In the three days that have passed.
451
371
340

These three days are not mine.
Then, on that day, the disc.
The touch of the sun's hand.
The horses of the sun's chariot.
Made joyful with divine garlands.
Covered with a divine garment.
The direction in which the sun went.
In the direction of Kishkupura, then.
All directions were darkened.
By destiny, you have resorted to enlightenment.
To those who are the cause of increase by destiny.
He attained the Jain initiation.
By taking initiation, by him.
The initiation of Indrajeet and others.
If you choose this initiation.
The initiation of the son of the wind.
Having performed austerities for a long time.
Long, hot breath.
To the poor, blind, and people.
The king, the owner of the dinar.
What else with the poor here?
For sorrow goes to destruction.
By the speech that has come out of sorrow.
The sorrow-stricken grove, without relatives.
The self-proof of sorrow.
Overwhelmed by the burden of sorrow.
By sorrow, the state of death.
The difficult entry of the unrighteous.
By bad nature, the mother-in-law.
By the wicked, how by him.
Broken, with a foul body.
By nature, in foulness.
Rare, in the existence of beings.
Bad clothes, unfortunate, rough.
Difficult, even for Ravana.
Those who do not give up evil deeds.
Those who are attached to evil deeds, the supreme.
The wicked, of the evil deed, now.
523
342
199
173
11
51
22
129
201
266
385
490
304
81
8 452 8
304
351
310
320
136
394
351
324
374
327
245
78
395
130
327
332
91
301
405
331
96
259

Page #574:
---------------------------
524
In the Padma Purana
486
154
482
253
Leaving that wicked woman 108
Seeing that hostile 284 great serpent of the senses
Seeing his form again 435 the daughter named Kaikeyi 470
Seeing with respect and doing 273 the daughter of Janaka
473
Seeing Dasharatha like a lion, 470 Seeing him being determined 459 The messenger said thus 100 Seeing the enemy force arrive 231 The young messenger went to Shrinagara 420 Seeing the fragrance on the body 366 The messenger stood in the northern part 101 Seeing the child, the father 154 Flying far away
Seeing him overwhelmed 303 Seeing him from afar 178 The gardener with a sharp arrow 137 Seeing from afar
Seeing those joyful ones before 109 Leaving him from afar 22 Seeing the extraordinary knowledge 493 Descending from afar
Seeing the wonder of this garland 154 Knowing that the king has gone far 466
Seeing on the bank of the river 239 Pulling out the Durvā sprout 338 Seeing that Prithuka to his mother 396 Dūpanākhya was the commander of the army 226
Seeing Hanuman's army
412 With firm steps 137 Seeing the brilliance of Kapila 283 Caste distinction is seen
Seeing the northern direction pervaded 99 With eyes devoid of stars
Devakī is to be known as the last 440 Seeing these only
The jewel-bearing deity 353 Defeated in the battle of sight
They attain divinity 309 He then said with gravity
The miseries of the fallen deities Seen even by them
Riding the king of gods and men Seen by him, the minister
This is the divine prowess 278 The eyes wander here and there
People are like gods among them Honoring some with the gaze 295 Free from going to the gods Seeing and honoring the armored one 286 The devotion to the gods 391 Seeing him, then frightened 202 The lord of the gods has set 439 Seeing him, great affection 198 The gods are pleased with him 306 Seeing the wind-born one standing 420 Where is that lord of the gods 29 Seeing those animals bound 249 In the fear of gods and demons 279 Seeing the son captured by enemies 287 O virtuous lady, whose 391 Seeing, a mark arose in her 249 O goddess, all offenses 158 Seeing that handsome form 269 The goddess fell down again 108 Seeing the parasol of this one 291 The goddess with a wonderful garland 465 Seeing him in the nearby village 87 Saying "By the god"
115
By the demon king god The gods also nourished 249 The threshold, the part of the foot 106 Embodied, he attained the state of the body Even in the body, they do 318 Crowded with villages and towns Traveled to another country 241 The regions are equal in enjoyment He wanders in every region 135 Known for his demonic nature 168 Similarity to the Dodunduka. In the magnificent swings 113 What fault is there in the crows 417 Her faults are the opposite 483 At the end of the ocean of misfortune 375 Like the sky freed from the sun 352 Satisfaction in acquiring wealth 117 Wealth acquisition is knowledge 492 Wealth that is equal to the self 310 This wealth is deeply 428 The coldness and heat of wealth 481 You bear the life span 163 The flower fallen from the tree 185 Only two were borne by that face 48 Only two by the brave ones 417 The twelfth day, the dakshina, go 254 Placed at the entrance
295 Blocking the door 373 Seated at the door 357 Completely with the door posts 319 The elephant, the lion-like 445 The dharma is said to be twofold 318 Measured by two hands The fearsome islands and mountains 201 This entire island 163 This island is of the jewels of dharma 431

Page #575:
---------------------------
## 224
## 470
rm
## 27
## 389
The order of the verses, starting with the first, is twofold.
## 311
Woe to those wicked ones, two of whom are in Kuru-dvipa.
## 360
Two great trees are to be known.
## 299
Woe to those who are beyond the reach of knowledge, two sons will be born.
## 259
Those who are shaking their wings with speed.
## 459
This demerit is washed away.
## 262
He who possesses the fame of a king.
## 478
Divine and Rishi-like fear.
## 326
He who is wealthy, generous, and has washed away the stains of betel nut.
## 282
Run with the bow in your hand.
## 218
Having meditated, the big toe.
## 220
The sin burnt by meditation.
## 379
Touched by the earth, then knowledge.
## 448
They meditate, they go, they wander.
## 78
Another in the other earth.
## 371
Meditating, she is overwhelmed with much.
## 161
Abandoning her father's house.
## 247
The object is to be meditated upon with a concentrated mind.
## 314
They practice Dharma for the sake of liberation.
## 238
You are praised, O Goddess, as Goddess.
## 161
The mind is attached to Dharma meditation.
## 238
Destroying the hatred of the Jinas.
## 161
By the mere utterance of the word Dharma.
## 144
The army is being destroyed, then.
## 195
Liberated by hearing Dharma.
## 144
The army is being destroyed, then, seen.
## 314
This is the Dharma-sign.
## 210
Flags, umbrellas, etc., are beautiful.
## 328
See the greatness of Dharma.
## 110
On flags, on the horns of houses.
## 117
For Dharma has compassion as its root.
## 182
Any sound was mixed.
## 48
Even by a Dharma-soul, of the world.
## 145
The enemy is destroyed, and the thread is good.
## 148
Dharma, Artha, Kama, and Karya.
## 197
The attainment of the drop of Dharma-water.
## 315
They do it with this Dharma.
## 276
I do not praise myself.
## 314
United with this Dharma.
## 326
Eating day and night.
## 328
Dharma is the root of the origin of happiness.
## 45
Large pearls in the constellations.
## 427
Dharma is the city of jewels, the sun.
## 427
No one recites the ten virtues.
## 55
No one is a part of the country.
## 270
In the island of Dhataki-lakshmi.
## 364
No one is born, O Lord.
## 294
Running, born of victory.
## 418
No one's name is greater.
## 233
With the bow, in the chariot.
## 285
The nail can be cut.
## 111
The bow is the union of the bow.
## 118
A man going to the city.
## 263
Near the city.
## 370
Woe to you, wicked moon.
## 219
Woe to this body, this mind.
## 454
Woe to me, this unconscious sin.
## 246
Cities and crowds of people.
## 424
The city is very beautiful.
## 210
In the city, then in Lanka.
## 190
Neither in the village nor in the city.
## 193
The daughters of the king of the city.
## 467
The son of Naghusha.
## 466
Naghusha also desired the northern region.
## 466
Because it was not proclaimed there.
## 253
Nor by one of another caste.
## 235
Nor is this said to me.
## 100
Nor is there any reason.
## 254
There is no caste-benefit.
## 334
Not so the king of the mountains.
## 210
His glory is not in the wheel.
## 372
Sleep does not come to his eyes.
## 380
Having bowed down to the spring garland, having looked at the spring garland.
## 190
On the banks of rivers, in forests.
## 349
By whom are you told?
## 352
Was anyone born to you?
## 376
To the enlightened one herself.
## 218
She danced and played on the Ganges.
## 218
Like Nandan, with the wind.
## 210
Nandan, etc., are beautiful.
## 218
Nanda said, "Live."
## 218
In the Jinas, the lords of Nandis.
## 438
The wind of the clouds, the food, cakes, etc.
## 281
The cloud-travelling, these cloud-travelling groups.
## 281
The commonality of cloud-travelling.
## 337
The cloud-travelling moon is here.
## 155
The cloud went somewhere with the cloud.
## 124
This one, named Nabha-tilaka.
## 164
The sun having gone in the middle of the sky.
## 208
The interior is as pure as the sky.
## 221
Salutations to Kunthu-Jinendra.
## 221
Salutations to the one united with Right Faith.
## 188
Having said, "Salutations to the Siddhas."
## 221
Salutations to Sumati, the lotus.
## 120
Bowed down, prostrated, O God.
## 55
## 264

Page #576:
---------------------------
526
Padmapurana
125
ir
Namatiiva sadaayana
Naakopbhuuktapaakasy 410 Naanaalabdhisamutpatteh 382 Namaskritya ca sambhraanta- 202. Namas kritya vahaamyetan
Naagabhogasamaakara- 263 Naanaavaaditra shabdena 296 Namaskrityopavishtaste
Naagabhogopamaa bhoga- 83 Naanaasanvyavaharaabhi- 207 Namaste vijagadgiita
Naagavatyah sutaa tasmin 190 Naabhicca tatsutan drishtaa 47 Namaste devadevaaya 220 Naagavruksho'nuraadhakhya 426. Naabheya samayastena 465 Namaste viitaraagaaya 20 Naagiyama iva tatkaanta
Naabheya sya sunandaabhuut Namisu vrata yorm adhye 441 Naagendrakritarakshana 154 Naabheyo vaa punar yasmin Nabhijanato dosho 97 Naajnaasiit kila tall oka 243
Naama shruutvaa pranamati janah 268 Namero pall avaapaasta- 274 Naatishita na caatyushna 35 Naamaaksharakarair asya Navidyadharendrasya 68 Naatyant munnati yaataa 103 Naamaakhyatopa sargeshu 478 Namo'stu pushpadantaaya 221 Naatha te gamanam yuktam 356 Naamnaatha mishrakeshiiti 345 Nayamaanam prapan nena 280 Naatha tvayema vikalaa vina- 456 Naamna naagavati tasya 190 Naratvam durlabham praapya 321 Naatha nyaaso'maastaam me 487 Naamna prahasitam mitram 342 Naranaatha ku tumbee vaa 321 Naatha yaataa samas taaste 48 Naamna mahaa giris tasya 444 Naravrindaraakaasaktanaatha gaganayaatraanaam 201
Naamna shaakhabali putra 200 Narantara mukhakleda- 278 Naathena tu vina yaataan 53 Naayaatah sa dinaante'pi 239 Naraaschandra mukhaah shooraah Naanaakaaraani yantraani 231
Naaradah kupito'vochattatah 241 Narendra tava naasty eva 101 Naanaacheshtitasampoornaa
Naaradastama tha shruutvaa 240 Narendrasya dharaadevyaam
76 Naanaajanapadaan dweepaa
Naaradaalikhitaam sitaam 7 Narorvantaranik shipta
Naanaajanapadairevam
265
Naarado'thaantare tasmin 246 Navam patala mabjaanaam 338 Naanaadurodaran yaasa 482 Naarado'pi tatah kaanchin 258 Navati panchabhih saardhanaanaadrumalataakirne
Naarthi hridayavegaayaamajaayan ta 335 Navati sch sahasraani Naanaadeshasamaayaata
Naashane shayaniyena Navati stasya sanjaataa
Naanaadeshasamutpanna- 238 Naasaavabhimato'smaakam Navaneetasukhaspartee 491 Naanaadeshodbhavam shruutvaa
Naasikaagranivishtaati- 451 Navapallavasachchhaayam
344
Naanaadhaatu kritachchhaaya 392 Naaso shishyo na chaacharyo 115 Navayauvanasampoornaa 168 Naanaadhaatusamaakirna 215 Naasti kachchin naro loke 86 Na vina piithabandhana Naanaapushpasamaako naam
Naahaminindro jagannindy- 353 Na vyavastha na sambandha Naana bhavanti tishthanti
Nishaeshadrishyavibhraanta- 109 Na shaknoomi gajam dhatum Naanaratanakaraasanga
Nishaeshado shanirmukto Na shiilam na ca samyaktva 322 Naanaratanakaro dyota
Nisarpanamaram taavad- 275 Na shaileshu na vrukshesh u 404 Naanaratanakritachchhaayam
227 Nishareyasasya bhutaanaam 220 Nasht adharma jagatyasmin Naanaratanakrito dyota
Nikaaram arunagraame Na samyakkarunaa teshu
Naanaratanakrito dyota- 227 Nigadanty evamaadiini 206 Na saa tridashanaathasya 303 Naanaratanachitaanaam cha
Nighnanti taani randhreshu 135 Na so'sti purusho bhumau 183 Naanaratanaprabhaajaal- 78 Nijagaad tatah shakrah
144 Naakaardhasanjnakasyaayam
Naanaratanaprabhaatyani
472 Nijagotrkramaayaatam 199
x
432
350
359
33
228
448
57
325
104
126

Page #577:
---------------------------
## 308
## 27
## Verses and their order
## 527  Self-nature attainment - 346 ||  Exiting from there, then from that - 402  The king marched forward 31  Hip-carrying effort - 113  Unbound, your sight is seen 460  Decision also gained beforehand - 161  Completely, far away, he was taken 345.  Unbound, seen in front 65 ||  He threw flowers 264  Completely, in a soft field 36.  Let me explain this to you 127  Playless, those who have gone forth, mostly 430  Completely, even though a renunciant 222.  Having defeated them, you, the enemy 92 ||  With a sigh, measured, he was - 306  Completely, those who do 
##  Defeat, knowing the slain 137  Sitting down, with good eyes, he 72  Completely, with delicate limbs 158  The reason for killing and defeat
##  Unshaken, even though on the head 122  Completely pure, he made
##  The law, his maternal uncle, then 395 ||  He exited, stunning the colors 276  Completely brilliant, others
##  Of waterfalls, very large 103 ||  They exited, well-armed - 282  In those with eternal darkness
##  Of the friendless, the helpless 21  She exited from the cave dwelling 398  In eternal light, then in the city 214  Of the friendless, the helpless 21  She exited from the cave dwelling 398  In eternal light, then in the city 214  In eternal light, those, in those 330
##  Made, self-nature itself 38  Pulling out, with a thread, the string 220  Death, in the courageous
##  Appointed, always, by men - 230  The firmness of the body 153  The repository of actions, this 152  Shameless, this one, with clothes removed 119  Nature-science, right understanding - 23  Blaming, severely, herself  _351  The reason for exile, of this one 409  Nature, this, thus, by which 384  Blaming, her own reproach 377  Exile, of those, by dharma
## 118
##  With groups of three-headed ones 259  Blame, of the virtuous class 273  Let him be exiled, from the city, from us - 373  Exiting from the circle, from the friend 381  Falling at the feet, then 285  He was exiled, standing, with the virtuous 210  He was slain, your brother 132  With suppressed, deep, breathing 378  He has ceased, he has departed, the point 479  He was taken, with the thousand-rayed one 264  Subtle, sinking, arising - 113  He has ceased, also, by the law 135  He was taken, to his own abode, binding 233  With the branch of the submerged lineage, the topmost part - 198  I will turn you away, from this country 215  She was taken, to the house of her father 179  The mere cause, others, this 186  The dwelling, of past good deeds 10
##  He was taken, by a new boat 266  The mere cause, in this 302  The dwelling, the highest, is to be known 441  With the brilliance of blue lotuses  He endures, even a blink - 339  Dense, the mass of hair . 48
##  With the color of blue lotuses, with a blink, the earth of sacrifice
##  259  Entered, in the belly of the arrow
##  The shade of blue, mountain-like 407  Deep, the sound of the low-flying ones 318  Having heard, the beloved, has ceased 350  The attainment of blue collyrium 461  You are able to control, then 180  Having ceased, with anger, blazing
##  Having ceased, quickly, completely - 258  With blue lotus eyes, the lotus - 149  By rule, given, here, also
##  Having ceased, from the effort of Ravana - 275  With the loosening of the loincloth, busy, by rule, the creators 319 ||  It was reported, then, by him 197  They push, they raise, they pull  Indifferent, excessive, what 248
##  This was reported, virtuous one - 395  They sounded, the aerial beings, sorrow 274  Without throwing, then, becoming 361
##  He was reported, with lightning hair 120  Surely, someone, is mine, in this 109  They were observed, in the mother, yours 136  Having reported, well-being, by him 472  Surely, in the past, the action done 300  Observing, the waning of the power of Rahu 454  Having reported, he is freed, from sorrow - 343  Surely, good birth 298  Observing, with the goddess, him 458  Having placed, in the place, desired by the beloved 367  Surely, you are near death 192  Without, Vaishravana, who fights 182  This, night, is clear 42  Surely, Vaishravana, has arrived 197  He exited, the sun, not reached - 446  At night, eating, is unrighteousness, those who - 325 ||  Surely, this one's, beloved, he is not 347  He exited, with his own, hidden, thorn 223  He marched forth, from the womb 43  Surely, near death, you are 354
## 335
## 343

Page #578:
---------------------------
528
The king again, two rivers, the path
In this country, the forest is beautiful
Nothing is said about this
It is not commanded by any reason
If he does not do this, see
Naval torture, like the fig tree, is small
Justice, the conduct, is satisfied
Those who fight with justice, less than a crore
[ P ]
By the wind, the king's wings are tightly bound
Pulse
Is taken
Five hundred sons of the lame
Five-colored great jewel
Let them do it with five colors
Lame
You are a learned man, you are a noble man, wearing a silk garment
The sound of falling, jagged stones
Falling, in a difficult path, because even falling, not falling from the back, that is humanity, the fallen sand, fallen from the earth
Husband, the pain of union
Fighting with leaves, clothes, gold, etc.
Lotus-like action, relationship
Born from a lotus, the festival, without a lotus garland, then becoming

468
450
127
53
Fifty, the loss of the bow
432
Fifty crore more, 429 five great vows, high 117 wearing a silk garment
40
473
180
439
329
56
232
429
293
258
18
312
63
41
297
45
180
217
313
289
317
230
345
396
481
287
4
490
190
In the Padma Purana
Pure red ruby
Red ruby creation
Red ruby, red, closed
Padmalakshmana, Shatrughna, Padma, another great Padma
I will tell the story of the lotus
Born in the lotus womb
Covered with lotuses, water plants
Lotus, etc., the great sages
Padmavati, the tip of the grass
Padmavati, the wife
In the beautiful lotus ponds
Covered with lotus ponds
Lotus transaction, writing
The king of Magadha asked
He asked with loving words
Attacked by the enemy's wheel
Words that cause pain to others
The highest good from this
Smaller than an atom
Self-interest in the ultimate truth
By understanding the ultimate truth
They are the cause of great wonder
They are full of great enthusiasm
Mutual contemplation of qualities
Mutual speed attack
Mutual chariot attack
Mutual killing there
Mutual conversation
He who considers another's wife as his mother
They both obtained great joy
Then the army from afar
Experiencing the pleasures of others
By the mere defeat
They were defeated, yet others, again, the work, love, acceptance, embrace, in acceptance, of the wives
302
Surrounded by women
151
Abandoning compassion, freed
458
Abandoning the kingdom, the king
112
Abandoning fear, the brave
149
Abandoning the great kingdom
438
Abandoning happiness, from that
300
Protect yourself, oh lord!
389
Then he cried
Defeated, shining, the group of her
To be avoided, like a snake
With the whole family
Appendix, letter of penance, etc.
Embracing Hanuman
For the sake of mocking blows
What is drunk with mockery?
Enough of the group of companions
Seen by others, afraid
Always a benefactor of others
Stay on the couch, the couch, the posture, the body
By the couch posture
Because of the couch posture
He traveled many countries
He traveled the earth for a long time
You two are traveling here
The arrogant chariot, falling
He attains, abandoning
The mountain, that Kishkindha
The music of the bees
These are on the tips of the Palasha trees
Less than one third of the Palya
The tenth of the Palya
Embracing the wind
By the wind-conquering hero
In the story of the wind-conquering
In which the wind trembles, etc.
Even the wind, climbing
107
22
98
320
145
460
412
39
452
301
233
207
453
463
385
191
474
119
217
100
134
31
392
429
432
408
407
405
102
403

Page #579:
---------------------------
##  Sloka Number Index

529
373
221 311
148
2
243
165

##  Verse

Thus, these letters are pure
And the feet on the pedestal, 164. Given with paternal affection at the door,
From the animal earth and so on,
To the feet and hands, 364. Like a father, for the sake of spreading
The life-forms and animals, 250. Bowing down to the feet,
High up, 143. Established by the father,
For that, 484. In the midst of animals,
Slaughter is to be known, 255. As long as the feet are pulled,
182. Knowing the parents thus,
75. Then, I said,
239. With the big toe, someone,
123. And the parents, in humility, the feet,
146. See this picture of men,
304. With the big toe,
Meru, 16. He holds the evening glow,
27. See the play of actions,
380. Joined by the foot-soldier,
117. Tied by fear of the demon,
154. See, I am born with joy,
221. Someone seated on the footstool,
289. See, this is clearly visible,
275. In the method of drinking and eating,
Someone,
257. Seeing, filled with wonder,
204. Giving up drinking, eating, and so on,
48. Sin, the mountain, in the world,
158. Seeing, the king's ministers,
291. By the commission of sinful deeds,
103. Seeing, seeing the blue gem-like shade,
329. Seeing, Meru,
191. Seeing, hidden bodies,
88. The boundary of the sinful star,
378. Seeing, seeing this cave,
402. Seeing, seeing the front of this,
272. Seeing, seeing, dear! Let us go,
388. Those who are in the darkness of sin,
313. The virtuous, great beings, liberation,
219. See the row of the virtuous,
161. By some sin, death,
239. I am virtuous, worthy of worship,
298. See the row in the world,
465. The lineage of the Parijata,
38. Seeing, his chest is broad,
125. From that, hearing the tradition,
192. Seeing the generosity of virtue,
415. Seeing, bewildered by wealth,
184. By that very tradition,
396. They were graced by virtue,
265. He saw the rule of cooking,
71. The son, of the one with full wealth, then,
23. By the cooked and uncooked, the beans,
417. The son, equal to, and the bird-kind,
457. The cutting of the digestion, heat,
482. Someone brought with a rope,
289. With love for the son, he smelled,
408. The Padala, worthy of worship,
426. Someone, in the side,
123. The son's fortune, when will you,
156. With one hand,
390. The other hand of the one beside,
123. To the son, all the wealth,
372. From the carrying of the hands, the number,
454. In the side, the sound of Nirvana,
159. The sons, protect me from the barbarians,
44. The name of the pale cloth,
216. Doing like the pale one,
293. Having made into a ball, the heavy ones,
286. With the pale one, above,
355. This, in the city of Patala,
412. Again and again, he did,
364. The name of the lotus of Patala,
413. My grandfather, my lord,
87. Then, the nurse said again,
136. From Patala, he came out,
189. Much beloved, said again,
217. From Patala, he arose, with hands,
145. You have attained rebirth,
132. In Patala, there,
349. Your words to my father,
43. The festival of the previous birth,
439. The one who killed the father,
117. The king, even a speck of dust,
211. The father, your similar joy,
230. The two feet of the Jinas,
492. Again, she was asked by this,
106
112
125 242
395
486

Page #580:
---------------------------
Padma Purana
"
Not
353
38
108
339
470
372
297
Again, the king said, 456 Male Kokila's sweet sound - 450 Another desire from them, again Nagamalati Kund - 40 The method of the book is said 480. Scattered flower rain city, there by great desire 105 Worship with various flowers 107 Nature stable mind, then the city circumambulated, worshipped by all the world's
Following nature, combined 215 City crown jewel in the house 206 Worshipped by the king's world 249 Washed, ten-faced, also 186 Purandara city form, worthy of worship, not retreating
Good qualities, section, country, Purandara's son, he gave birth 454 Full, by the ultimate form
Fallen, in Bharata, born 77 Thousands of Purandhri, full moon like mirror
Prajag, this country is 51 City, great, beautiful
Being filled, always served - 204 By Prajapati, etc. 251 Honoring, then, wind
409
Full moon faced, tell 487 In the bowed, merciful - 262 City's, let there be beauty
Full moon, gentle faced 157 Bowing to the Jina, with strength 63 City's, whose, what name 147 Before, Brahma Ratha, let him go 188 Bowing to the rest, and 402 Before, by the Muni, said 190 He went, then, combined, cities, in them, beautiful 101 Previous birth, names 425 By power, like the sun, all the cities, you 417 Previous birth, conduct
By power, he conquered, city, now, doing 
Previous dharma, influence
Unable to do, he 210 Man, excitement, full 382 Before, qualities, loved 275 Opposed, command 210 City, birth, Indra's
Before, also, gone out 182 Returning, he, that, confused 134 City, thus, Kinnara song, named 419 Before, obtained, god, born
Promise, also, he made, this 354 City, Podana, named, then
Before, practice, Sakra's 301 Promise, also, he made, god 241 City, Meghapur, placed
Before, earned, merit's 111 Promise, also, city's, city, Hanuruh, in which
Asked, also, with effort 348 Promised, thus, merit 194 City, Hemapura, named, separately, oneness, doctrine
Opposition, seat, shaking, city, in the evening, excitement 135
Separately, separately, they take refuge 272 Opposition's, seen 229 Flower top, with, riding 227 Earth, very, to be called 470 Take refuge, when, initiation 322 Flower tooth, eight, end
Wide, dead, forest, brave 463 Reflection, own, seeing 359 Flower dust, mixed 450 Wide, trembling, some 195 Reflections, like, own, flower, wealth, this, seeing
Earth, what, Magadha, king 227 Awakened, moon, also 145 Flower, pollen, from, light 101 From behind, then, that, this
Shining, again, high 409 Flower, wealth, like, obtaining
Back, shoulder, head, thigh 244 Shining, roaring, him 406 Flower, offering, saying, then 133 Back's, seeing, by whom
Shining, combined, they 407 Flowers, five, colors
Podana, two, city, elephant 440 Image, also, Jina's 394 Flower, end, gathering
Podana, mountain, city
Image, also, entering 394 Flower, end, from, going out 169 Podana, named, city, his
Image, heavy, teeth 288 Flower, joy, wealth, with 133 Manliness, more, so much
Image, god, gods 382 Flower, after, saying, this, full moon, as, moon
Images, also, by gods, his 261 Flower, decorated, purpose 18 Before, after, holding, many 483 Image, placed, his, then 53 Men, family, born 346 Very, pale, house 441 Echo, like, his 375
71
146
340
220
153
82
209
270
132
281
....
.
329

Page #581:
---------------------------
## Verse Index:

531
181
348 451
133
285 166 163
454 460 399 67
328 491 121
459 458 320 424 232
105 300 265 352 438
288 352 413 293 202
468 28 218
148 
386 320 131
142 
226 152 179 182
429 205 365
288 406 333
435 414 355 83 401
339 228 297 339
175 297 
106 122 296 
479 378 
426 20 378 214
390 
417 21 209 63
433 121 247 213 77 65
153 
38 
32 43 
174 274 174 19
479 157
395
349
321
325

Page #582:
---------------------------
532
Then I think it is obtained
Obtained by the learned
And that dark country is obtained
And the god is obtained with it
And the beautiful Anjana is obtained
They are certainly obtained in dissolution
And the attainment of Jitapadmā is obtained
And what is obtained by that, the living being born in the family, if he obtains this
257
300
173
326
24
249
Obtaining a small character, obtaining time spent there, obtaining those banana pillars - 213
131
203
83
Obtaining the sweet music of the gods, obtaining her command even in a dream, obtaining this hole of Rāvaṇa, atonement without fault
Atonement and good conduct
Generally, the power of the great ones
They started, Śivārāva
He obtains birth and death
He obtains religious fervor
A mace-like wheel
Those who are of low character have a palace
Then the work of the palace etc.
There are palaces in the trees, in the palace he is a Jain elsewhere
Like a fire in passion
Priyadattā is new to him, his body is enjoyed by the beloved, his mind is not attracted to the unpleasant
Obtained by the beloved's contempt
By separation from the beloved
He is despised by the beloved
The joy of the king of Kūṭapura
Born in a joyful one, why is my joy greater?
Looking at the treasury
190
73
31
20
362
362
7

415
254
314
304
386
144
475
313
35
92
343
365
365
404
352
23
362
137
148
76
271
In the Padma Purāṇa
Driven by anger, driven by devotion to the master
Driven by devotion to the master
These are said in the descending age
With mature indigo embryos
Plaksha, the strong chariot king
[F]
The fruit is plentiful with this
The fruit is the description of the form
In the pleasant fruits, flowers and minds
The tips are humble with the weight of the fruit
Drinking the sweet juice of the fruit
The dream of the foam, Indra's bow
[B]
Many, tying their brows fiercely, are sinners with their paraphernalia
He tied it tightly
He was taken prisoner in the prison
The relative of the lotus pieces
There was joy between them
And his mind was so
There was a king in the city
216
258
133
29
40
150
476
433
436
278
183
72
264
491
86
238
265
226
131
131
232
441

There was a lotus
There was Rāvaṇa with him
There was a great birth
He was of auspicious form
He said to Daśagrīva
Another name for the child, the mother
For all the strong ones
And he heard of the strong one
The cloud, the thunderbolt of Indra
Of all the strong ones
131
183
287
83
491
426
The stronger enemy is hidden, the thunderbolt is stronger than this
The strength of the king of the demons
Strength is the speed of the wind
451
254
113
392
11
86
Going out to play
337
What more can be said
A large army, difficult to see
Thousands of his
Relatives, Bhānukaṛṇa, even a child, carrying a child, playing with a child, a fierce child, playing with a child
484
212
209
186
Playing
155
140
130
223
6
129
491
297
139
Your child, with a smile, this childish act, he hears
The child's departure is a disturbance
The child is blind, wicked
The children are beautiful in form
The arms of virtue are exalted
Why do you carry your limbs?
Carrying the form of the thirty-three gods
Like the Buddha, not released
Because of his greatness, the Lord Brahma
As the day's lord departs
Almost like Brahma, the creator
From the world of Brahma, he came to Alki
He speaks the word of the god
He speaks as long as this
Brahma is the name of that yoga
Saying this, he arrived
[B]
Devotees, be the Jinas
The god has done this with devotion, food, drink, and drink
Lord, by your grace
Lord, I have not yet
Lord, I have not yet
Lord, in the descending age
Lord, the story of Padma
Lord, they want to know
204
15
253
26
252
258
100
460
397
402
385
45
481
304
318
332
80
32
307

Page #583:
---------------------------
## Verse Index:

533
266
287 259
152
Seeing the broken progress 214 || Seeing the greatness of yours, broken head and disease-ridden 218 Your two kinds of great kings 430 Broken, indeed, should be followed 132 The lords of the houses, the lords of the gods 327 Broken space, the sky 198 In the houses, those who are hit, I do not make a break, not staying 213 When actions become, the break of the garland of trees 197 They become those who have prosperity 379 The army, close to the break 232 They become united with anxiety 328 The army, being worshipped 
They become, indeed, in the world, being worshipped, then, by the vows 
Of those like you, the jewels of men 219 By the noise of the soldiers 282 You also went there, the war of the soldiers 
Of you, thus, eight 321 And by the soldiers, they were surrounded 
By the dense other-world 247 Blessed, the renounced one, was born 
The other-world, the earth, the abundance 106 Blessed, in the Sal forest, those which are 
We will be again, blessed lotus, Subhadra and 
He will be the first of them 152 Blessed, seated on the seat 
He will be, some great one 169 Blessed, listen, making your mind 383 When will he become praiseworthy 353 All limbs, trembling with fear 
Of the younger brother, who will be 153 With the remaining fear, and the desired 
Of him, then, the battle 413 The terrifying, then, obtaining 377 In the four-fold existence, wandering 383 The earth, the place of the elephants 427 In her, the golden-bodied 382 Bharata, then, made the kingdom 62 Worthy, the obeisance of this 325 Bharata, he, the three parts 166 Worthy, for the sake of seeing the truth 46 By Bharata, his son 
The worthy and the unworthy, in this 23 Bharata, in the Podana place 92 Worthy, this, the ancestors, gone 337 By the Bharatas, in the Aravata field 
Covered with ashes, like fire, ashes 156 The husband, became, in youth 260 The ashes, he takes, the people 315 Brought near the husband 179 The ashes, the state of being, attained 
The remaining of your command 
The bank of the Ganga, very far 267 Of you, being beaten 259 In this part, he who crossed 147 You, a friend like 
The sun, setting in the three 20 You, with the caravan 
Then, the sun-eared one, was born 154 Your sight, by this 298 The sun-eared one, also, this, released 160 You, who is considered, anyone 250 Like the disc of the sun 145 Your family lineage, come 
The wife, of the humble 
434 Your merit, by the grace 473 || The place of the expression of feeling 
It becomes, of the meaning, the established 280 In this, the garland of feelings, taken 484 Your sorrow, the fire, burnt 405 Thinking, thus, with a thousand rays 237 
Half of the language, Magadhi, his 80 The hearing of the sun, the best 
The hearing of the sun, obtained 178 Like the chariot of the sun 
The fear of the sun, arising 162 Those who are illuminated by the sun 
Begging, in another's house, obtained 
The giving of alms, to the virtuous 
For the sake of alms, he came, today 
Different, the stream of flowers 
Fearful, inside the face, tearful 372 With fear, speechless, become 
Bhima, very, very, fierce-eyed 101 Bhima, the tortoise, the elephant, the fish 358 Having enjoyed, having enjoyed, the pleasure born of the world 137 The earth-dwellers, the humans, to 235 The forest of beings, entered 
The action of the elements, the knowledge of the treasure 482 By the beings, and by the beating 
The being, the king, in the crowd, him 484 The earth-born, the fruit-bearing 
48 The earth, the cloud, connected 
The gift of land, also, thrown 
On the earth, roar, the water-dwellers 462 On the earth, thrown, all limbs 352 Again, taking birth, in Kashi 75 Again, near the sky 388 Again, with the water-shine 
Again, coming to enlightenment 
Again, this place, high 376 Again, also, carrying the mind 184 Fear, he said, then, the earth 
The ornament, the bees, indeed 
The fire of the sun, the head of the bee 
The fault of the servant, what 181 By the servants, brought to you 186 I am your servant, O Lord of Lanka! 262 He went, the circle, as it is 
311
34
The adorned, the letter 
87
452
124
155

Page #584:
---------------------------
534
In the Padma Purana
118
155
78
316
367
188
The sound of the conch shell also
His mandala revolves eternally, equal to the land of enjoyment. 407 My understanding of the object. 54 Without enjoyment, the limbs do not. 158 According to the virtuous Suvratanathas, the food is divided into two, like gruel. 48.1 By the collision of the intoxicated elephants
284 Oh, good people, for what reason 158 Wandering where the wind has crushed the intoxicated elephant 102 Mounted on the intoxicated elephant- 184 Wander among the beasts 118 By whom the earth-bearing mountain is wandered like an intoxicated elephant. 419 Even the elephants of that 28 Embraced by the swarm of bees- 108 Intoxicated by the taste of honey 102 Subtle and dark like the bees
The great one is not intoxicated- 147 The bee, tired of wandering, 338 The dust from my feet, O sage 211 This chariot of mine will wander
The lord of the city of Mathura, having lost the path, 483 Seeing his brother killed in Mathura 145 With his cheeks wet with passion
407 Along with his brothers there
Of the one whose eyes are intoxicated by Madana, 341 Wandering through the whole world, 228 That intoxicated woman, wandering in the swarm of intoxicated bees, 484 Even a mere touch of these intoxicated by liquor 160 The physician intoxicated with passion 347 As if making eyebrow movements 174 Even this sight of mine 222 Just by the movement of the eyebrows 212 Just by the movement of the eyebrows
126 On the sword blade smeared with honey
From honey, intoxication, meat [and]
From honey, meat, and liquor- 321 Attached to the nectar of the flowers
Those whose speech drips with honey, the intoxicated by the nectar- 215 In the middle of them, the ten-necked one 325 Looking at the middle part 262 Auspicious is what was done before 110 Auspicious is what was served by the elders 110 In the middle of the women with braids 231 And for fear of destroying the auspicious 368 In the middle of this ocean 101 Auspicious things were used 123 Like the midday sun 112 Holding the pillar in the middle of the day 128 Seated on the couches, the people 484 The minds of the city women- 193 Placed in the jewel-studded 106 Having attained the human state 383 Like the jewel trees sprouting 103 Having attained the human state 325 Adorned with Indra's bow 462 Having attained the human state - 23 The adornment of the shaved garland
Human enjoyment and heaven 387 Only those who are human
Seeing even that beautiful one 173 The arrow of Manobhava
271 This is the desire of hundreds of desires 340 His mind is the ketaki flower 407 Ascending the beautiful one by nature 49 With beautiful celestial gardens 169 And the ministers, indeed, constantly 340 Endowed with the council of ministers 453 Now the unfortunate one's efforts 274 Like the Mandara with the gentle wind 295 The arrival of the gentle Mandodari 358 I think even Indra 197 I think this one is like us 428 Like the peacock's neck 392 This news is known to me 174 Even I have the worry of a daughter 389 The destruction of the Maruts 263 Having joined the palms, the Maruts 12 Free from dirt and sweat 17 And my fame is tarnished 279 Mallika and Suvratanatha 424 With the tip of the tail on the head 387 With the great sound of the musical instrument 486 The great impetus of righteousness 320 187 175 340 303 77

Page #585:
---------------------------
##  Order of the Names of the Heroes etc.

175
Pal
321
187
293
Born of a great lineage, born of a great lineage, residing in the land of great caves - 157, with a great roar, by the moon - 76, the great cloud-like evening - 283, the great cloud-like assembly, in the great star, as in one, endowed with great wonders, great drums sounded - 59, from the position of the great goddess, together - 467, with great pride in the great goddess - 382, the great demon, I too, by him, the great sound, at its end - 123, the great roar of the clash - 295, with great blue-like ones, the great glory, of the playful people - 422, the great glory, the yoga - 378, with the great glory, the words - 394, the great noise, blocked - 377, a great clamor arose - 64, even the great, attained, the great lotus, famous, the great lotus, having performed penance, endowed with great possessions - 308, overwhelmed by the burden of great sins - 243, the great character of the great man, the other, dear - 425, the great strength, this one, of him - 287, with the great arm, the blind - 217, the great fortunate ones, should be known - 441, endowed with great pride - 199, on the back of the great buffalo, attached to the great flesh-juice - 468, the great flesh-juice, tasting - 468, the great cloud-chariot, by name, the great protector, the moon, even, the great protector, having deposited, in the great beginnings, engaged - 471, the great king's daughter, another - 471, the great precious jewel, the great Lakshmi, known as - 188, endowed with great beauty, the great Videha country - 34, endowed with great humility, the great vessel of glory - 264, the great vows, five, the great vows, having taken - 461, the great Friday, by name, the kalpa - 440, the great Friday, by name, having attained the great assembly - 223, endowed with great means - 225, endowed with great means - 211, endowed with great means - 228, the great fragrance, breathing, the glory, seeing his face - 155, the glory, then, having made - 52, the glory, the highest, having made - 465, by glory, the whole sky, the queens, by thousands, that - 12, the queen, his, by name Vaprā - 188, by the women of the earth, going - 263, like the earth, that lord, famous in the earth-sphere - 329, like the earth, born - 136, Mahendradatta, was his name - 437, Mahendra's daughter, in her - 386, Mahendra's, then, the learning - 339, Mahendra's, raised, the pitcher - 419, with great wealth - 220, the great festival, from where, his - 199, the great festival, Dasagriva, the great enthusiasm, then, the army, by the great ocean-prince, the great ocean-roar, by name, to me, in danger - 219, to me, then, the kings, lost - 475

Mother, from where, this, before - 189, mother, father, dear, mother, father, brothers - 307, in the grandfather's house, growth - 179, by the mother's grief, afflicted - 190, in the mother's lap, then, having made - 46, in the mother's lap, situated, then, he - 155, in the mother's womb, whose - 16, having heard the mother's compassionate words - 156, in the mother's sacrifice, the killing, of the mother - 244, the mother's sister's son, I am, to you - 184, even the mother, did not do, anything - 375, like me, even, very difficult to release - 453, Madhavya's son, by name - 272, honor, carrying, of a man - 185, in the mind, the mental burden, honor, dishonor, equal - 310, proud, there, Marīci, but, the human-two-winged-horse - 482, having come to the human birth - 119, by pride, the height, of this, Mandhātā, Vīrasena, and - 469, may not be, from the two, my, arising - 482, illusion-made, three-fold suffering - 482, Marīci, then, said - 214, Marīci, the sky-knowledge, and - 187, Marīci, the thunderbolt-middle, and - 171, Māruti, Rāvaṇa, seeing - 412, Māruti, the wind, speed - 414, the paths, club-shaped - 325, on the path, stand, the sword - 184, the path, this, by which, one goes - 116, Mārtaṇḍakuṇḍala, by name - 124, by gentleness, endowed, some - 308, Mālinī, the story, having obtained - 165, Mālinī, in the forehead-region, then, Mālyavattana, seeing - 437, the garland-anointing, etc. - 144, the garland-wearing, son, seeing - 425, the garland-wearing, son, seeing - 144, the garland-wearing, son, seeing - 286

Page #586:
---------------------------
55
248
18
Tamattavishaya-
536
Padmapurana mentions meat, alcohol, and night-time enjoyment 326. The power of Munikshobhana 113. Eating meat for them 244. Muni, the wealth, the brave 425. Ten years, even for a Muni 223. Muni's trust, therefore 474. Four months, there 
Muni's power of virility 218. Fifteen months, a part 
Muni's time, waiting 330. In the tenth month, the brave 
Muni's time, giving 329. The king of Mahishmati, blessed 236. Muni Suvrata Nath's pilgrimage 112. The king of Mahishmati city, then 
Muni Suvrata Nath's, as here 472. With a moderate family 122. Muni Suvrata Nath's, placing 391. The father of the friend, because 471. Muni Suvrata Nath, also 447. The friend, Sudarshan, the arrow 427. Muni Suvrata's greatness 447. The friend's equipment, whose 148. The mind, whose delusion is hidden 208. The friend, those two, of Saurika, then 76. The Muni, having reached Rantaka, together with Vibhishana, this 278. The Muni's, also, his 389. False vision, combined 25. Many times, with great speed, he mounts 
False vision, the origin, dying 272. The one who is very tired 378. False vision, also, thirsty 65. A moment, the food 
False vision, also, having attained 
Three hundred moments, having done 324. Mixed, the sexual desire of those 175. Two moments, whoever 
Fish, the Daitya Guru, high 397. A moment, the work 324. They contemplate, they are disgusted 449. The foolish, the great sorrow, the net 131. The crown, placed, the moon-rays 263. The foolish, having taken up the bow 218. Released, the son of the wind 
The root, indeed, the cause, karma 153. Released, the lotus, in the lotus 
The root, the net, firmly bound 128. Released, the net, scattered 162. The foolish group, the bad manners 347. Released, the net, in those 194. In a swoon, having fallen, in that 285. Released, the net, by the released 186. Born of the womb, indeed, the blades of grass 257. Released, the garland, adorned with gold 
The tamer of the deer, known as 
The moon of the face, this, seen 
By the deer, the killing of the lion, this 
The origin from the mouth, also 253. Dead, the moon, the strength, the protector 
Delighted, pleasing to all people 458. Like a dead one, he thought of her 150. Delighted, with faces like the full moon 57. The machine of death, birth, and time 452. Releasing, a long roar 282. The cycle of death, birth, and old age 322. Releasing, that speech 393. The death, the Daitya, the end, indeed 387. Releasing, "Hey," the net, those two 286. The death, the difficult to obtain, of this 86. Releasing, the arrow, from the sea 274. Dying, a kalpa, he, the Indra 
The lentil, like a terrible one 387. The sound of the mridanga, some 
Life, having enjoyed 288. The earth, he defeats 191. 
324
Soft-hearted, by nature 342. Soft heat, in the fire, also 
Soft, the roots, very 20. Soft, the grass, covering 
174. From sweetness, from being forced 311. The cloud, the lightning, the wind 
283. He thought, and my all-glory 203. The country of Meya, the time of the scales 482. The shape of a Meskutta, the mountain, the head, like 59. The east of Meru, Videha 
The minister, all the subjects, released, from hell, having heard 202. They were released, then, by them 177. The intoxicating, the creeper, the intoxicated 
430. The delusion, the darkness, covering 322. The delusion, the darkness, covering 80. The vow of silence, having taken 
The auspicious moment, then, he spoke 396. Dying, the soldier, some 288. The Mlechchha, the different religion, being practiced 160. 
_[y] Whoever, abandoning the earth, the wife 260. Whoever, again, the time of attainment, may be 248. Whoever, applies the mind, to the good 237. Whoever, remembers, even, with feeling 
Whatever country, he, the all-knowing 
Yaksha, Kinnara, Gandharva 44. Yaksha song, in the city, the Yakshas 147. Yaksha, Rakshasa, the battle 
Yaksha king, the hand, attached 22. Yakshi, the lotus, the hope, the eye 
Begging, having known, that 53. For the purpose of sacrifice, indeed, of the created 256. The sacrificer, may be, the self 257. By the creation of the sacrifice, not 257. For the purpose of sacrifice, the animals, created 244. 
405

Page #587:
---------------------------
By sacrifice is satisfaction obtained,
From whence, beginning, there abides,
From whence, hear, from there even,
From whence, of good families born,
From whence, this, by the opponent,
From whence, as formerly in error,
From whence, that, green, fields,
Whatever, doing, of that,
By effort, even, here, be thou,
By effort, great, seeking,
Whatever, against the enemy's force, thrown,
Whatever, that, of the thousand Indras,
Where, umbrella-shaped,
Where, born, of the father, all,
Where, to you, is pleasing, gift,
Where, elephant-riding,
Where, where, foot-placement,
Where, you, this, are striving,
Where, indeed, the father, angry,
Where, medicinal-herb-radiance-net, like fire, from eating, cold,
As, and, is born, sorrow,
As, and, by snakes, drunk,
As, and, the hole, reaching,
As, and, in the eyes, placed,
As, father, waiting, you,
As, to save, able,
As, you, many, gone,
As, mirror-transmitted,
As, speaks, skill,
As, to me, prostrated, all,
As, as, nearness,
As, this, here, attached,
As, of that, by the side, that,
As, poison-grain, obtained,
As, power, then, by devotion,
As, white, and, black, and,
As, all, water-bodies, 68

257
334
33
100
210
119
444
248
274
143
269
317
102
17
168
13
57
375
374
102
383
320
36
247
36
297
323
86
42
365
355
450
89
492
312
313
36
434
Verses, beginning-letter-sequence,
As, place, then, in them, 59 As, own, and, situated, all, 299
247
As, indeed, concealed, various,
As, indeed, life, dear,
As, deserved, treatment, you,
As, desired, wealth, given,
As, this, pulsates, eye,
As, desired, necklace, placed,
As, this, day, kingdom,
As, indeed, they, arisen,
As, proper, conversation-made,
As, excellent, Indras, and,
As, thus, wandering, conduct,
As, purpose, is taken, father,
As, ordered, you, said,
When, then, arisen,
When, then, obtains, gambling,
When, was, defeated, in gambling,
If, and, there, be, even,
If, that, not, bring, quickly,
If, so, this, destroyed,
If, name, then, of that,
If, name, then, meditation,
If, name, by that, virtuous,
If, name, I, worship,
If, name, be, essence,
If, name, this, not, ask,
If, motionless, by sight,
If, creature-killing, heaven,
If, creature-killing, Brahma,
If, or, that, like, be,
If, all-kind, even,
If, be, then, known,
If, being, prevented, even,
That, this, by mountain, said,
When, indeed, by that, she, seen,
When, thus, even, not, meditation-wisdom-preceded,
259
408
140
194
151
184
111
350
23
478
193
148
81
244
74
170
194
89
359
161
303
451
236
99
62
256
257
253
250
349
411
242
208
160
255

537
Wherever, as long as, from where, by which, 476 Wherever, own-people-house, she,
374
Whatever, is striven, with,
130
117
60
Although, be, somewhere,
And, austerity, by power,
Although, these, to the surrendered,
Although, thus, speaks, clearly,
Whatever, or, in the three worlds, not, that,
Machine-emanating-machine-hole,
Machines, and, applied,
Whose, name, is seen, in the world,
Which, not, by means, achievable,
Which, great, Hari-Dwar,
Whose, place-fallen, and, meaning,
Whose, servants, poor,
Yama's, wrath, arising,
By Yama, oneself, self,
Yama, Vaishravana, Soma,
Fame, ornament, of that,
And, who, Kamadeva, amorous-glance,
And, who, Rama, within, whose,
Who, you, scolds, untied,
From, whom, beginning, in me, womb,
From, whom, killing, son,
In, which, wandering-obtained,
Whose, gold-made,
Whose, even, in forests,
Whose, this, pale, umbrella,
Whose, above, not, go,
In, which, which, beings, take refuge,
Goes, if, here, your, mind,
Yatudhana, even, obtaining,
Whatever, even, speaks, indeed,
Which, which, and, pleasures,
As long as, that, of those, war,
As long as, tumult, of those,
As long as, anyone, not, knows,
As long as, of those, conversation,
383
212
332
480
139
384
111
317
6
201
211
200
44
149
249
428
303
139
65
17
325
109
485
157
90
125
144 2
385
129
129
367
343

Page #588:
---------------------------
538
Papuraṇe
53
50
7
.
74
4
nny
475
yāvattena samaṁ yuddhaṁ 189 yāvantaḥ samatikrāntā yāvatparigrahasaktiyāvatprasādayatyekāṁ 229 yāvadevaṁ manastasyā yāvadevaṁ samālāpo yāvadevaṁ sutaṁ śāsti 132 yāsāṁ varcaś ca mūtraṁ ca 54 yāhi yāhi puromargā- 31 yuktaḥ paramadhairyena 204 yuktaḥ priyāṇāṁ daśabhiḥ 422 yuktaṁ prahasitedaṁ te yuktamatanna dhīrāṇāṁ 131 yuktavistāramuttungaṁ 172 yuktaṁ mātaṅgamālābhi- 377 yuktiś ca kartṛmān vedaḥ 252 yugaṁ tena kṛtaṁ yasmayugāntghana bhīmānāṁ yugmamutpadyate tatra yuddhaṁ sulocanasyogra- 72 yuddhāya prasthito dṛṣṭā 385 yuddhe vaiśravaṇo yena 203 yuddhe sahāyatāṁ kartuyuvā saumyo vinītātmā 345 yuṣmākaṁ pūrvajairyasmāyūkāpanayanaṁ paśyan 105 ye kāmavaśatāṁ yātāḥ ye kṛtā mandabhāgyena ye ca te prathamaṁ bhagnā 66 ye ca matsadṛśāḥ sarve 82 ye tu śrutād druti prāptā 50 yena kenacidu dāttakarmaṇā 237 yena yena prakāreṇa 308 yenāyamanayā sāka yenāvasarpiṇīkāle 431 ye'pi jātasvarūpāṇāṁ ye'pi tīrthakara nāma ye'pi śoṣayituṁ śaktā
ye punaḥ kutsitē dānaṁ 36 rakṣonāthapariprapti ye bharatādharnapatibhiruddhaḥ 471 rajaḥsveda rujā muktaṁ 316 yojanapratimaṁ vyōma- 428 rajanipativatkānto 234 yojanāni daśāruhya
rajanȳā paścime yāme 489 yojanānāṁ śataṁ tuṅgaḥ 275 rajobhiḥ śastranikṣepa- 289 yojanānāṁ sahasrāṇi 33 ।। raṇaprabodhanavyūha- 481 yodhāstatra nirākramān 413 ।। raṇe nijitya tāṁ sarvān 466 yo na tvat sadṛśaṁ pāpe 370 ratavyatikara chinnā- 368 yo na vetti sa kiṁ vakti 252 ratā mahattvayukteṣu 318 yonidravyam adhiṣṭhānaṁ 481 rativibhrama dhāriṇyḥ 416 yonivisiṣṭamūlādi- 481 rantum ced yāt kiṣkiṇdhaṁ 135 yo yastasyā mayālikhya 194 ratnakāñcanavistīrṇa- 102 yoṣitaḥ sukumārāṅgāḥ 55 ratnacitro'bhavat tasyā 68 yoṣitpuṇyavati so'yaṁ 264
ratnacūṇaratiślakṣṇaiḥ 108 yo'sau tatra mahārakso
ratnatritayasampuṇṇā 326 yo'sau niyamadatto'bhūt
ratnadāmasamṛddheṣu 473 yo'sau bhāvananāmāsi
ratnadāmākulaṁ tuṅgaṁ
204 yo karī varanārīṇāṁ 213
ratnadvīpaṁ praviṣṭasya . 331 yo purā varanārībhi
ratnamālo'sya sambhūto 444 yauvanaśriyamālokya 208 ratnapātreṇa datvārgha yauvanauṣmasamudbhūtā 39 ratnabuddhir abhūd yasya
ratnabhumiparikṣipta 88 _ [ra]
ratnaśravaḥsutena'so 165 raktakardamabībhatsa- 24 ratnaśravaḥsutena'stān 233 raktadantchachhadachchāyā 172 ratnāṁśukadhvajanayas- 146 raktāṁ ca tasyā tāṁ jñātvā 190 ratnāvalīprabhājāla- 316 raktāruṇitadehaṁ ca
rathānūpuranāthendra- 176 rakto dviṣṭo'thavā mūḍho 307 rathamāropyā tāvat tvam raktoṣṭho haricandraś ca 70 rathamāśu samāruhya 414 rakṣatā balamātmīyaṁ 283 rathaarūḍhastatastasya 202 rakṣanti rakṣasāṁ dvīpaṁ
rathino rathibhiḥ sādhaṁ 232 rakṣasastanayo jāto 94 rathair aśvaigajair uṣṭraḥ rakṣasāmanvaye yo'bhūd 225 rathairādityasaṁkāśai
201 rakṣātmānaṁ vrajāmuṣmād 288 rathair mattagajendraś ca rakṣitaṁ yasya yakṣāṇāṁ 63 rathotsahaḥ samāruhya rakṣitā bāhrūḍaṇḍena 16 radagrahārūṇībhutaṁ 365 rakṣitā mithilā kumbho 427 radanasi kharadaṣṭaspaṣṭarakṣitāste yatastenā 65 ।। randhra vaiśravaṇah prāpya 185
58
"
1
353
202

Page #589:
---------------------------
The one who is bitten by the serpent of love,
Whose love is devoid of love,
Whose love is like a pillar,
Whose love is like a pillar,
Whose love is mixed with the beautiful,
Whose love is in the beautiful places,
Protected himself and his wife,
And his roar with all his might,
Following the path of the sun,
Oh, great sage,
The sun has also touched them,
The rope is connected to the lightning,
The touch of the tongue, the smell,
The cutting of the tongue, son,
Taking the taste of the alms,
The one who is surrounded by the touch of taste,
In the city of the taste, he embraced his beloved, who was like the taste, with many secrets,
The son of the king of the demons,
You are blessed by the lord of the demons,
The demon is a sign,
The chain of passion, which is called passion, is filled with passion, hatred, etc., and can be inferred from passion and hatred.
338
359
77

316
172
98
189
486
218
406
407
281
267
314
241
58
307
411
204
367
294
221
32
481
310
312
85
353
156
88
254
478
317
85
King Sagar, see,
Let her be the king's daughter,
The king's path of valor, the king, becoming a monk, kills the king Soma,
The king named Shubhamati, the best king of men, was named Bharata,
Rajiva, Paundarika, etc.,
See the king, the king named Sukoshala, the life of those two kings - 477
470
354
259
The order of the verses starting with Ra
He declares the kingdom,
Leaving the kingdom to his sons,
These two hate the glory of the kingdom,
Even at night, she did not get it,
The enemy of Rama, Keshava, the wealth of Rama and Keshava,
The desire of the Ramas,
The name Rama is in vain,
Ravana, having obtained in the battle,
Ravana, having obtained his own people,
Ravana's brother,
Ravana's entry,
Ravana's strength,
Ravana's anger,
Ravana, knowing,
Ravana, defeated in battle,
Ravana, carrying a long,
Ravana, bowing,
Ravana, bathing happily,
Ravana, his sister, with love, Ravana, with many wives,
Ravana, my great brother,
Ravana, not a demon,
Seeing his empty,
Enemies, more fierce,
Compassion for those who are crying,
The lions of the Rurus,
Then, angry with those words,
Rough, broken hand, etc., seeing the form of the Jina, that form, seeing him,
The beautiful daughter, for him,
By their form,
By form, a picture is made,
Free from the thorns of the Reņu,
He rejoiced, delighted with them,
They rejoiced, having reached him,
Many
397
67
458
351
7
439
112
341
280
336
28
8
354
292
275
470
411
307
230
226
340
300
32
401
206
396
315
127
327
44
189
281
158
262
55
109
267
229

On the peaks of the mountains, thousands of Raishas,
Burning with anger, filled with sorrow, terrible, disgusting, and peaceful,
[ L ]
The sign of which, in the world,
The best of signs and ornaments,
We go to Lanka,
In the city of Lanka, he is vast,
In Lanka, he was then the lord,
Lanka, the royal palace, and another, taken by the king of Lanka,
Overtaken by horses, airplanes, ashamed by his own form,
In the middle of the creeper house,
Your son will be obtained,
If I do not get her, Rama,
For the sake of obtaining the color of merit,
Having obtained wealth, having done his duty,
Having obtained the knowledge of the demons,
Having obtained perfect knowledge,
Having obtained the vision of the right,
Having obtained humanity, karma,
Even if born in a good family, blind,
They get whatever they want,
The element is remembered in the attainment,
Shining, hanging, flowing,
Shining, hanging, earrings, made of glass, lac, etc., with the juice,
The gain of Manorama,
Thrown into the mouth, smeared with saliva,
Smeared with beauty,
Everything is looted here,
See the story written by the writer,
To get the meaning of the writing,
539
210
397
281
479
111
45
141
422
112
442
130
182
.53
32
166
404
148
77
79
301
25
383
24
327
313
31
396
475 8
258
324
149
416
346
274
411

Page #590:
---------------------------
540
Padmapurana
402
He obtained the color of the obtained one, having crossed all the 249 lokas, 49 in the three lokas, it is not there, 303 the fruit of the two lokas, then the lokapalas said, 297 the lokapalas also went out, 143 the lokapalas are also like this, 298 the loka-anta-parvata-akara, the shadow of the eye is like this, 371 the shadow of the dense eye, 316 in the eye, making buds, 387 producing after the eye, 433 driven by greed, the sinful one, equal to the lord of the earth, dharma, 117 iron teeth, salt, 482 red-bodied, in the middle of the bull, 397
[v] the shadow of the lineage, the lineage, there is a great being, 444 the lineage, the demon, the sky, the fragrance of the bakula, the sigh, 
149 eloquence is completely inappropriate, 
251 opposition to eloquence, 252 the moon of the face, the eyes of that one, 150 in the mountains of the chest, 34 this word, he then said, 171 the word, in the suffering of others, the thunderbolt, the weapon, three, 
140 the thunderbolt throat, then Sai, 107 the protection of the speed of the thunderbolt, known as the thunderbolt navel, 425 the thunderbolt navel should be known, 425 the thunderbolt arm then said, 451 the thunderbolt arm, the first of those two, 450 the thunderbolt middle, below the face, the thunderbolt pearl platform, 482 the speed of the thunderbolt, the hand, then, 283
Vajrasena, great radiance, Vajra-abho, Vajra-bahu, 68 the son of the thunderbolt weapon, 125 like a thunderbolt, then, his, Vajrodari, attraction, 162 deception, the rays of the sun, the throwing, 229 having deceived his own people, then, 402 the one named the greedy hand, 69 the one who gave the rules of the merchant, 69 the merchants, the two brothers, there, 107 calf. As long as the bow science, 233 calf (forest) the protector of the forest, 11 calf, who are you, where do you live, 170 calf, listen, from where you have come, 380 tell, by whom the lower jaw, from that, 281 the one who is said, or the listener, says this, then the doctor, the face, the hand and foot, 104 from the face, then blood, 286 they say, they have gone, 407 they say, all the lingins, 310 they say, a compassionate voice, she says this, 363 tell, good sir, from where you have come, 468 tell, having become fearless, bound with a garment, Indra, 294 from the killing of Vijayasimha, the killing, etc., gives birth, 319 the one to be killed, the girl is given, 281 the forest, go there, the forest god, this delusion, 189 the forest, see, in the middle of this, come to worship, 92 come to worship, another time, with the sound of the praise, 486 having worshipped him, with a lamp, 408 having worshipped, they praised, good, the body of Dasaratha obtained, 470
Vapra, and another time, in Jainism, 188 we are some great pure ones, 65 we have come to the lord, the boon, the lightning radiance, the name, the boon, choose, I am pleased, 221 the boon, I am in this battle, 300 the boon, master, your desire, 277 the boon, the Vidya-dhari hand, 187 the boon, the suitable bed, the body, 4.8 the boon, the gathering of women, the one whose life has gone to me, 278 the boon, the one who has been struck, 177 the boon, the seat, the one who has sat, 475 the boon, the one who has sat on the seat, 234 the boar, the wolf, the cat, 326 the boon, the one who has worn clothes, like Varuna, there is no wealth, Varuna, there was a battle, 
415 Varuna, made to be reassured, 354 the three colors, Bhagavan, the date is present today, 396 at the end of Vardhamana-jina, Vardhamana-jinendra, 430 Vardhamana-jinendra said, at that time of years, 266 the sound of the rings, from the contact of the waves of the ocean, 446 from the obstruction of the ant-hill, I will stop there, 235 the one who controls, the desires, the one who has controlled, the mind of the desires, 451 in the controlled ones, there was, 225 the one who has been controlled, and the respect, living in the houses of the guru, 192 see the spring garland, 406 the spring garland, the difference, the spring garland, the name, 373 the spring garland, and it is said, 406
417
276
365
374
238
80
172
345

Page #591:
---------------------------
##  Śloka Anukrama (Index of Verses)

541
441 239
208
Kāśya
120
349
48
Vasāntamālāyā tasya 386 vāsa re prathame vāso 358 vasāntamālāyā datte 394 vāsa sya bharatasya ante 334 vasāntamālāyā sākaṁ 40 vāsudeva bhavisyanti 83 vasundharaśca vijñeyaḥ
Vāsupūjyaṁ satāmīśaṁ vasur nāma bhavat tasya
Vāsupūjya jināntānāṁ 424 vaso vitathasāmā - 243 vāsupūjyo mahāvīro 428 vastrānu lepanādīni
Vāsyāntaragirindrāṇāṁ 473 vasvaśvi pramukhā devāḥ 280 vāṣpākulitane trābhyāṁ 357 valivan muñcati jvālā 174 vikacendīvarayantra 102 vākyam tato 'numanyedaṁ 366 vikṛtya nijarūpaṁ sa vāṅmanasakāyavṛttīnā - 314.। Vikretā badarādīnāṁ 320 vācayitvā ca taṁ kṛtvā 274 vigatā lepanā kācit 229 vājibhiḥ syandana gaḥ 486 vigamo 'narthadaṇḍebhyo vājibhir vāyuraho bhi - 99.। Vigrahe 'pi nirāsango 121 vājimātaṅgapādāt - 227 vicicchedha sa nārācaiḥ 486 vāñchatam naramātreṇa
Vicitto 'si kimityeva 271 vāṇijyakṛṣigorakṣā
Vicintaty evame tasmin 193 vāṇijyavyavahāreṇa
Vicintayanti pitaro 419 vāṇijyasadṛśo dharma - 312 vicitra karma saṁpūrṇā dāṇyava madhurā vīṇā 39 vicitramaṇibhakti ni
473 vātātapa pariśrāntā 375.। Vicitramaṇi sambhūta vāta ātmikaṁ ca tatkarṇa - 136 vicitra vanitā vāñchā 277 vātayanagatāśce kṣā
Vicitra vāhanārūḍhā 201 vātoddhṛtā jaṭā tasya 52.। Vicchhada m iva kurvāṇā vāto 'pi nāharat kiñcit 15 vijayaśca triprṣṭhaśca vānareṇa satā prāptaṁ 115 vijayasya ndano vārtā
453 vāyunā vāyunēvāśu
Vijayāmīri sthānāṁ 172 vāyuputrasahāyatvaṁ
Vijayar dhajalo kena 299 vāyumapyabhinandanti 351 vijayar dhagire ge vāyurapyuttamāmṛddhi
Vijayāddhagirī tena vāyoḥ sutasyaiva kathaṁ 418 vijayar dhanagastheṣu 141 vāyitvetyaso tātaṁ 285 vijayar dhanage ye ca vā rāṇasī viśākhā ca 427 vijayā? tataścyutvā vārtāyā śrūyate ko 'pi
Vijayo nāma rājendro vāttikairasuracchidraṁ
Vijayo mithilā vaprā 427 vālišānāmanāthānāṁ
Vijitā bahavo 'nena 281 bāleyai mahip ahaṁsa
Vijñāto 'sau tatastena 74 vāsagehācca niḥkrāntā 42 vijñāpayāmi nātha tvāṁ 380
Vijñāpayāmi nāthāhaṁ 235 vijñāya kṣaṇikāṁ lakṣmī 435 vijñāya manasaḥ kṣobha - 223 vijñeyau bālisugrīvo 208 vitathavya hṛtāsaktāḥ 308 vitānaṁ dambharacitaṁ 243 vitīrṇasvajānandaḥ vitīrya bālaye rājyaṁ 208 vitṛptiharṣapūrṇābhi - 293 vittāni nānurāgasya viditvā nagaraṁ ruddhāṁ 129 viditvāvadhinā devo 444 viditvā vitathā sarvā 492 viditvopaśama prāptān 133 videhaṁ nṛpa yāto 'ha - 472 vidyate sarvamēvā sya vidyamāne prabho bhṛtye 145 vidyā cāṣṭākṣarā nītā 157 vidyādhara kumāryo yā 214 vidyādhara purākārā vidyādhara samājo 'yaṁ vidyādharaṇāṁ saṁghātaiḥ vidyādhara ādhipa ti pūjita - 422 vidyānu yoga kuśalāḥ 95 vidyābalena yaḥ kuryād 126 vidyābalena yatkiñcit 291 vidyābhṛccakravarttitva vidyābhṛtāṁ tṛtīyastu vidyābhṛtāṁ patis tasmin 91 vidyāmandara - saṁjñasya
122 vidyāyāṁ viditāṁ pūrva vidyā lābhaṁ mahendrasya vidyāliṅganajāmīā 172 vidyāvatāṁ prabho bhadral 355 vidyāvinayasampanne 254 vidyāsamūhasampanna 207 vidyā hi sādyate putraḥ vidyutīva tato dṛṣṭi
127
401
147
358
140
231
77
141
357

Page #592:
---------------------------
542
Padma Purana
10
18
184
277
401
28
Vidhyutprakasha naamasya 112 Vipralapaṃ tataḥ śrutvā 394 Vidhyutprabhaguṇastotram 394 Vipralapaṃ paraṃ kṛtvā 476 Vidhyatprabo bhavedasyāḥ 345 Vibhudhendrādibhogānām 118 Vidhyutvān cāruyānaśca 144. Vibhaktaparvatān paśyan 306 Vidhyuddandeṇa saṃyuktaṃ 171 Vibhīṣaṇena vegena 279 Vidhyuktotpala chāyā 328 Vibhīṣaṇo'pi saṃprāpya 476 Vidhyudvāhananāmnāsau 129 Vibhīṣaṇo'pyayaṃ vyartha Vidhyudvilasitākārāṃ
Vibhur nalinagulmaśca
425 Vidhyudvilasitenāso 192 Vibhūti mama paśya tvaṃ Vidhyadvilasito nāma 476 Vibhūtyā parayā yukto Vidhyunmālā kṛtābhikyai
Vimala antar dharmāśca 82 Vidhyunmukhaḥ suvaktraśca 68 Vimala amalakāntādyā Vidrāvayan mayūkhaiśca 151 Vimalaaya nabhastredhā 221 Vidhattāṃ pañcatāyogyāṃ
Vimānaṃ sūryasaṃkāśaṃ 412 Vidhat sva dhṛtimośe 392 Vimāna prabhṛtīn jīvā 315 Vidhavā bhartṛsaṃyukta
Vimānābhyantara nyastā 416 Vidhāya ca namaskāra 221 Vimānavividha chāyaiḥ ketu 472 Vidhāya praṇati tatra
Vimānavividha chāyaiḥ sandhyā 141 Vidhāya bhūbhujaḥ kṛtyaṃ
Vimuñcanviṣama chchedā 386 Vidhāya mahatīṃ pūjāṃ 230 Vimuñceṣu dharitrī vā 211 Vidhāya sādhulokasya
Vimu ktaṃ sarpajālena 293 Vidhāya siddhabimbānām 85 Vimu ktāśeṣakarmāṇaḥ 313 Vidhāyāntaka saṃmānaṃ 203
Vimu ktyānugṛhīto'yaṃ 451 Vidhinā ca tato vṛttaṃ
Viyukta iva jīvena 402 Vidhmāpakāya duḥkhāgne 46 Viyuk tānena bāleyam 337 Vinayena paripva kā 330 Viracayya ghanavyūhavinītā nagarī nābhi 426 Virati sarvataḥ kattu 240 Vinītā mathurā ceti 440 Viralata ādrśān loke 207 Vinītāyāṃ mahānāsī 239 Virādhitasya āgamanaṃ Vindhyakūṭa samākārai
Virūpā dhaninaḥ ke ci 309 Vindhyasya srotasā nāgā 322 Virūpā durbhgāḥ santaḥ 439 Vinyastaṃ bhāvato dānaṃ 310. Virocane'stasamsa rga 326 Viparītaṃ yadetasmād 118 Virodhavadidaṃ karma
277 Vipāṭitau svabhāvena 113 Vilakṣastu priye mṛṣyavipulaṃ śikhare ca ekaṃ
Vilakṣāścābhavan yakṣā 183 Vipulābhraṃlihodāra 334 Vilalāpa mahāvatsa vipuleti mahādevī
Vilāpamapi kurvāṇaṃ Vipralapaṃ tataścakre 130 Vilāpamiti kurvantyā 239
Vilīnatripusī sādi 119 Vilupyamānaḥ pathikaivilomāni nayello mā 105 Vivarṇasūtra sambaddha vivartaḥ pañcame'ṅgasya 341 Vivi ktadhiṣaṇenā sā 281 Vividharatnasamāgama sampadaḥ 206 Vividhāni vimuñcanta 176 Vivekarahitāmetāṃ 348 Vivekino'pi tasyaedaṃ 341 Vivedeti ca dhikkaṣṭaṃ Viveśa ca kṛtāryādi 401 Viveśa bhavanaṃ cāsya 402 Viṃśatyardhamukhaḥ kṛddhaḥ 414 Viśaddhiḥ sainyamāgatya Viśaśramuḥ kṣaṇaṃ tasmi 246 Viśāla pulināścāsya 190 Viśiṣṭacintayā yātaṃ 3 Viśiṣṭākārasambaddha 256 Viśaddhavinayā cārvi 374 Viśeṣatastvayā kāntaḥ 362 Viśrabbdhā guravo'pṛcchāṃ 165 Viśrāntaṃ mūrcchhayā śūraiḥ 290 Viśrāntābhyāṃ cirād dṛṣṭi 378 Viśvanandī mahātejā 439 Viṣayavaśamupētai naṣṭa 423 Viṣayā hi samabhyastā 331 Viṣaye nagare grāme 264 Viṣayeṣu tathā saukhyaṃ Viṣayesvaprasaktātmā 337 Viṣādamatulam cāgā 183 Viṣāde ca gate māndya 236 Viṣṇuśrīḥ śravaṇo viṣṇuḥ 426 Visajitāśca te tena 205 Visarpaṇamime sūtra 261 Visṛṣṭasarvasangānām 318 Visphu rachchafarīnālai 11 Vismayaṃ prāptavān dṛṣṭvā 21
303
232
89
448
.

Page #593:
---------------------------
## Ilokanamakaradhanukramaḥ

230
192
314
231
246
They forget not the past 180, bound by ropes, the earth 303, doubts, etc., defects of vision 435, forgetting me, this god 159. || Bound by this, then pleased 79, able to go in the sky 377, forgetting good deeds done 211, Vaidyuta-dandhika-sakta 
Able to fight, whose 126, wandering, all living beings 214, Vaidarya, the branch below 22, with supreme power 140, laughing, he then anger
Vaidhurya, forest in the middle 403, able to harm all, abandoning the kingdom like grass 436, enemies are many
Shakra, etc., bull-like gods 77, abandoning the tilaka-kesha 72, Vaivasvata-suta-Aira 493, Shakra also, in anger, the Aravata 293, seeing white teeth 105, manifest form, like color, speech 3, hundred, his sons, seeing auspicious sound
Announcing, with tearful eyes 452, hundred, others, by the son, Vina-jhankara-ramya 450, past sorrow, consciousness 425, hundred-armed, chariot, hearing
234 Vina, bamboo, conch 123, adultery, not knowing
279
Hundred-two, Kha-khadya-yoshat 429, Vina, bamboo, mixed 205, order, only, his
Hundred, five, bows 431, Vina, bamboo, etc., musical instruments, he discharged, the son's
Enemies, creating trembling, free from attachment, all-knowing 311, tiger-seen, deer-like this 373, enemies, arrival, hearing, free from attachment, that purpose, tiger, lion, etc., before
Enemy, thus, he conquered 146, hero-producing, hero
Tiger, by the fame-bearer 465, Shani, all-seeing 397, hero's, equal position, hunter, of those two, there was one
Sound, by that, knowing 294, what is cut, what is not cut
480, diseases, very severe 315, these pacifiers, how, snakes, tree-root-located, below
Hunter, also, for a long time, wandering 120, bed-making, method, some, trees, darkness, deep
Filled, direction, circle 339, autumn, ocean, form 133, surrounded, by Kshaya-samantas 117, sky, drop, thus, known 147, refuge, obtaining, that, lord 120, round, fat, great, pot, sky, like, dirt, connection
Refuge, obtaining, that, lord, sages 81, story, that, I, seeing 200, wound, breaking, then, his
Autumn, ocean, form 216, story, in, this, you, wound, breaking, method
Autumn, all, moon, like 295, in, knowledge, by, celestial beings, gods
Autumn, water, like, form 18, bowing, monkeys, of 127, by, those, some
Autumn, ocean, like, wave, increase, going, knowledge
Going, thus, in order, his
450
Autumn, moon, white, Veda, knowledge, scripture-ness 254, going, by, offering, with 150, autumn, flower, like, form 387, year, digs, ant-hill 191, let them go, now, living beings 51, arrows, hearing, attracted 292, bull-killer, not, whose
You go, where, by, samantas 121, body, obtained, by, dharma, bull, drum, shoulder
You go, now, elephant-hood 404. || Body, welfare, asking, etc. 164, bull, she, then, joined, vow, obtained, by, Rama
Body, then, not, his, rain, without, how, clouds
Vow, this, householder's 117, body, dress, refinement 483, speed, from, practiced, his 198, vow, this, by me, obtained
Body, like, with, joined 150, speed, great, going 120, vows, other, five, these 311, arrows, by, that, with, joined 195, speed, by, that, then, going 114
Moon, white, high 140
[Sh] Prostitute's, going, plane, or 141
Moon, like, form, by, bound, entered, by, those 178, doubt, desire, with, joined 322, moon, gentle, face, like 263
462
198
318
201
234
12
316
256
408

Page #594:
---------------------------
Padmapurana
78
219
Lankā, 132 śaśi-pūrva-antara, 76 śaśi-pūrva, tat-chyutvā, 75 śaśi-pūrva, rajo-valyā, 75 śaśi-bhiḥ, puṇḍarīkiṇyāṁ, 433 śaśi-vaṁśe, samutpannāḥ, śaśyāvali-samāhvānī, 75 śastra-pañjara-madhyastho, 415 śastra-āyamānaiḥ niḥśeṣa-, 258. śastri-bhiḥ vīra-nilayo, 13 śāka-kandala-vāṭena, 11 śākhā-bhiḥ, supra-kāśā-bhiḥ, 103 śāntiḥ, kunthura-raśceti, 427 śāntiḥ, māli-vadhenaiva, 180 śāli-śūka-sama-chchāyān, 105 śāsana-ācāra-vṛttyartha, 447 śāstreṇa co-ditatvācca, 254 śikharaṁ tasya śailendra, śikhīkeśari-daṇḍona-śithilāyitum-ārabdhā, śiraḥ-kapāla-saṁghātaḥ, śirasā mukuṭa-nyasta-śiraḥ-su vidviṣām eva, 181 śiro namaya cāpaṁ vā, 211 śilā-tala-viśālā ca, śilā-taleṣu viśrabdhaṁ, 104 śilā-vistīrṇa-hṛdayaṁ, śilpānāṁ śataṁ uddiṣṭaṁ, śoka-rādita-devatvā-d, 274 śotalaṁ śītaladhyāna, śītalā mṛdavo dhārāḥ, 266 śītāṁśuka-kiraṇa-śveta-, 40 śītoṣṇa-vāta-yukteṣu, śukra-śoṇita-māṁsāsthi-, 291 śukra-śoṇita-saṁbhūta-, 257 śuklāyāṁ mārga-śīrṣasya, śuddha-dhyāna-samāviṣṭa, śuddha-abhijana-tāṁ mukhyā, śubha-lakṣaṇa-saṁchhanna, śubho vāyu-gatiḥ nāma, 334 śramaṇa-tva-dharaḥ kṛtvā, 272 śubhraṁ stamberaṁ aṁ sihaṁ, 489 śrāmaṇyaṁ kevala-utpatti-śuśubhe, bhrātṛ-madhye sā, 155. śrāmaṇya-vatam-āsthāya, śuśrāva cāgato vārtā, 209. śritā ye 'pi su-durgaṇi, 226 śurukakāṣṭhaṁ dadhac-chañcā, 142 śriyam indraḥ sute nyasya, 304 śuṣka-citraṁ dvidhā proktaṁ, 480 śriyāṁ ca saṁpādinī karṇa-, 419 śuṣka-patra-ādi-saṁbhūtaṁ, 481 śrīkaṇṭhaṁ abhidhāyaivaṁ, 101 śuṣka-sāgara-virti, śrīkaṇṭho 'pi kule jātaḥ, 99 śaro 'pi na samartho 'haṁ, 332 śrīkāntā supra-bhātula-yāḥ, 328 śūro ki kurutāma-tra, 209 śrīmatī nāma tasyāsīt, 97 śūla-ratnaṁ sa tat-prāpya, 273 śrīmato hariṣeṇasya, śūlaiḥ pāśaiḥ bhuṣuṇḍībhiḥ, 287 śrīmān vidyādhara-ādhiśo, 353 śṛṇutāto 'sti nagara-, 337 śrīmālāṁ cābravīdevaṁ, 133 śṛṇu duḥkhaṁ yathā-pūrva, 353 śrīmālāyāṁ tataḥ teṣāṁ, 122 śṛṇ śreṇika vakṣyāmi, 424 śrīmālī cāpi saṁprāptaṁ, 285 śṛṇu saṁprati te svāsthyaṁ, 77 śrīśailatula-yairatha khecareśaḥ, 422 śṛṇu su-ndara kasyānya-, 360 śrīśailasya samud-bhavena, 410 śṛṇomi vedmi paśyāmi, śrīśailābhimukhaṁ dṛṣṭvā, 415 śṛṇvato 'ṣṭama-rāmasya, 444 śrīvat svargāt paribhraṣṭā, 373 śrīvat-saprabhṛti-stulya, śṛṇveṣā viṣṭapa-vyāpi, śrīvat-sa-maṇḍita-uraṣko, 156 śeṣaṁ sādhvasamete ca, 390 śeṣā api yathā-sthānaṁ, 206 śrīvardhanas tapaḥ kṛtvā, śeṣām iva daśāsyājñāṁ, 231 śrīṣeṇa sutayorāsīt, śailakuṭa-gatāśakaṁ, 379 śrutaṁ kuśāgra-rājena, 492 śokaḥ pratyuta dehasya, 131 śrutāntaḥpura-jākrāṇḍo, 476 śokātapa-parimlāna-, 403 śrutena sakalaṁ paśyan, 214 śokādiva rabiṁba, 386 śrutvā kanyāpi tā vārtā, 338 śokān-dhanayana kiṁ nu, śrutvā kalakala-dhvānaṁ, 200 śodhayatyatra devānāṁ, 254 śrutvā gavākṣa-jālena, 385 śobhamānāṁ nisargeṇa, 205 śrutvā ca tat-kṣaṇaṁ yuddha, 128 śobhayāsyāṁ hiha-stānāṁ, 182 śrutvā ca svāminam kṛddhaṁ, 392 śoṣayed vāṁbhasā nāthaṁ, 126 śrutvā taṁ dīna-bhārāvaṁ, 218 śaurya-raksita-loko 'pi, śrutvā tad-vacanaṁ samrāḍ, 64 śraddadhānāstato bhūtvā, 244 śrutvā tamāsan-nataraṁ pra-vṛṣṭaḥ, 421 śraddadhāno mataṁ jainaṁ, 324 śrutvā tāṁ rudatīm āśu, 459 śramaṇa-thāvakāṇāṁ ca, śrutvā tāvad-iyam jāta, 342 śravaṇaṁ vāma-tarjanyā, śrutvā dharma jinaṁ stutvā, 395 śrutvā, 70 śrutvā, 215 śrutvā, 438 śrutvā, 14 śrutvā, 100 śrutvā, 367

Page #595:
---------------------------
## Verse Number Index

415
474
480
449
Having heard the Dharma, he was filled with joy,
228. Having heard the powerful one, he attained, 201
Having heard the beautiful stories, 262. Having heard this from the people, 340
Born only from thought, 317. Having heard that a hundred sons were bound,
Born from thought, sorrow arose, 309. Having heard of the previous birth,
88
There is no sign on the day for whom, 271. Having heard the words of Maricha, 215
Playing with the body, 251. Having heard from the king's mouth, the minister,
Brevity is the pause, 251. Having seen the things, 
I will do it briefly, 161. Having heard this humble word, 177
After the number, in time, 448. Having heard the contracted eyebrows, 231
The object that is within the range of number, 428. Having heard that, I hold it in my heart, 343
Combined with the sound of music, 12. Heard in the worldly scriptures,
28
From his going to war, 152. Hear this series,
The series, hear this, 26. The series, even the great king,
Having conquered the two series, he, 110. Moving with difficulty, 351
The two series, then of them, 137. Sanjaya, by Narada, 473
Thus, in these beautiful series, 56. The best, the Jinas, the five, 441
Not having attained suffering, 13. The best of the gods, the god of gods, 112
With contentment, and by Indra, 300. The best lips, those two, 3
Leaving all the celestial beings, 302. The best, from the assembly, 107
Leaving those pleasures, 62. Praiseworthy, that world of relatives, even, 264.
Doubtful death, someone, 416. The mother-in-law, Ketumati, cruel, 373
The cycle of doubt and inequality, 347. The sorrows caused by the mother-in-law, 375
The evening colors, the beautiful lines, 225
The evening color, the delight of the mind, 101
The evening-attached cloud-masses, 33. With six verses, music is made,
The evening, born of gold, 175. The six, the bull, the third, 478
The evening gathering, the rising, 178. The six pleasure-worlds are said, 34
The wealth and the other, the carriage, twenty-two thousand, 140
This contact, this misfortune, 248. Sixty, and five, should be known, 432
The promised pledge, 170. By the sixth part, accomplished,
Worshiping with devotion, praising, 72. For him, with the sixth fast,
Now, indeed, that play, 446. For him, with the sixth fast, the king,
Considering that, then, half, 234. In the sixteenth year, even, 336
Sending first, the evening, 392. [S]
He attained the respect of the gods, 435. From the order of stories, whose,
He attained the protected wealth, 24. He attained the supreme place, 25
You have attained the forest, terrible, 388. Narada attained worship, 243
You have attained birth in a good family, 256. Having attained perfect knowledge, 17
The enemy of the earth, he will be born, 399. He will be born, six months, 42
I respect the gods, 126. Then, he spoke,
Born in the golden necklace, 146. Born, the womb of Sri Prabha,
Born in the lioness goddess, 467. Born from austerity, the form, 440
Born in the golden mountain, 467. Together, they were then broken,
Together, all of us, 217. Confused, steady-eared,
Confused, brown-eyed, 387. The face, the door, the day, the arrangement, 105
Combined with the time-duty, 435. In a hundred years, even, 337
Ten and eight years, 273. The king, angry, spoke,
The art of carrying, two ways, 320. The art of carrying, this,
The division of guests, 320. The division of this, should be done,
Wandering in the world, 23. The knowledge of the nature of the world,
In the terrible ocean of the world, 323. The destroyer of the world,
Attached to the conduct of the world, 452. Wandering in the world, the being, 331
The ritual, two kinds, is said, 480. I will suppress the pain, anger, 144
Collecting the image-work, 303. He, seeing these first, 109
How will he ask about his family, 370
0 0 Ww.
246
194
58

Page #596:
---------------------------
546
Papuraana
197
319
346
Of all this country, 109 of all the pure Tara kings, 221 in the presence of Abhayasena, 470 having once made the earth, 437 having once seen clearly, 351 having once said this, if at all, 193 friend, any of mine has been born, 416 friend, from childhood, 276 friend! My destruction of virtue, 416 friend, Vasantamala and, 362 friend, known as Vicitramala, 276 friend, the people of the friends are arranged, 352 friend, Vasantamala, you, 370 friend, equal to those who are satisfied, 38 friend, whose generosity, 342 friend, what is there to say more, 343 friend, here, not even nearby, 347 friend! The destruction of the enemy, 360 friend, friend, enough of this, friendship, abandoned, 124 friend, together, 371 friendship, please, taken, 385 he, going, with a crane, 106 the ocean, and the wives, 84 he, born there, 434 association, with the country, by whom, 265 association, anxious, he, 341 the assembly, condemnation, having done, 88 he, and, that, attached, 183 he, and, the story, having done, 273 true, effort, description, color, 3 watery, water, deep, 116 he, wife, known as Singhika, 466 he, having conquered, son, in battle, 469 he, decorating, became, 447 hundred, aircraft, having ascended, 186 from, the staircase, in, 113 he, there, the Jina, not having seen, 9 he, there, in the vast, pure, 9. evening, darkness, Suvela, and, 93 he, those, having seen, great, joy, 108 evening, cloud, mountain, beautiful, 408 heat, victory, mountain, 
evening, color, covered, he, that joy, great, obtained. Evening, color, like, love, 452 good, story, hearing, from, 4 evening, light, destruction, 363 good, story, hearing, which, 3 evening, back, from, going, 413 good, karma, child, and, that, 249. evening, pride, decoration, with, 143 good, praise, nectar, taste, 3 evening, placing, near, this, 274 truth, first, principle, 
evening, honored, friend, relative, 464 truth, stake, austerity, fire, 257. evening, honored, by, that, honored, 418 truth, they, say, kings, 242 with, leaves, mouth, full, 357 truth, arrows, five, mind, being, 421
with, son, vehicle, having mounted, truth, others, also, exist, 125 with, sons, and, sons, 84 truth, righteousness, together, that, 403 seventh, and, floor, obtained, 170 truth, by, heard, you, that, 242 seventh, shoulder, having ascended, 344 truth, indeed, in, me, Indra, 285 seven, times, done, offering, 437 you, that, to say, not, 360 seven, eight, birth, by, some, 322 you, that, do, mercy, in, this, 373 seven, by, falls, horse, you, that, any, great, being, 49 seventh, that, story, attachment, 341 you, that, play, frog, 180 with, blow, forest, with, tears, 199 you, that, free, having become, 285. being, existence, liberation, you, that, become, happy, mind, 109 he, prosperity, great, desiring, 149 you, that, festival, born, 166 he, wandering, many, countries, you, that, proper, do, well-being, 474
equal, Kubera, beloved, 329 you, that, Indra, dejected, what, 301 equal, friend, enemy, and, 451 you, that, expelled, all, 
equal, by, that, then, gone, 
173 you, that, such, having become, 49 equal, mountain, in, lord, 240 member, then, Jina, of, 
equal, friend, world, by, 165 with, sight, knowledge, foot, 
in, front, guru, world, of, immediately, melted, sweat, 218 all, strength, together, with, Sanatkumara, Chakra, king, 
he, minister, plasterer, and, 475 Sanatkumara, king, became, 
equal, half, fire, sound, and, 440 Sanatkumara, fame, 83 time, and, considering, beginning, 482 with, cause, austerity, from, that, 339 time, those, who, not, householder, with, full, king, army, 182 time, by, this, united, with, anklet, sound, 
all, creature, trouble, 24 saints, they, say, who, you, 114. all, Jina, image, of, 207 there, are, salt, water, 
78
all, earth, spreading, 211
423
436
329
297
139

Page #597:
---------------------------
With all restrictions,
All-pervading the universe,
With all the gods assembled,
275
All of them, at that time, desired - 48
Hearing that speech,
I will attain the meeting,
Applying the mind to dharma,
The same fame by which,
Those who desire the same,
Do not attain their end until,
346
406
116
276
280
161
Comforting her then,
112
Comforting her then, he was taken,
279
In short, I tell you all this,
488
Calling together all the relatives,
467
Even in the assemblies, that number,
318
189
26
271
169
Angiras, the disciple of Samia,
318
187
Near the source,
339
259
Near the city, the trembling caused by the wind,
363
The breath of the wind,
The beloved one arose with difficulty,
456
A festival was held there,
The assembly and the cessation,
The conquest of the sea,
The vast army of the sea,
Connected to the waves of the sea,
Four like the oceans,
Cooled by the association of the ocean,
Gathering together, I will pacify her,
Dead, having attained victory,
Equally loved by both parents,
Now, your smile is not,
The full milk has become,
Seeing the full youth,
The full moon of the face, the connection,
Two kinds of sexual,
The summit of Mount Sammed,
479
427
263
180
492
415
349
433
408
41
139
334
344
242
447
Index of verses by the first letter
At the end of Mount Sammed,
With right knowledge, the soul,
Right faith, may they come,
Some by their own power,
Right faith, may they come,
Some, some, with vows,
331
Those with right faith,
474
You are endowed with right faith,
134
By the greed for right faith,
321
120
309
238
Right faith, knowledge,
Right faith, pure,
Those who are pure in right faith,
Those endowed with right faith,
Endowed with right faith,
Right faith, enlightenment,
The lack of right faith, the birth of wrong vision,
Right vision is enough,
If one knows the right cause,
He mounts another chariot,
In that lake-less one,
Of the mind called lake,
In one lake, water,
Some with passionate restraint,
Lotuses with petals,
The gate of the lake, water,
The touch of the lotus petal,
The lotus covered with dust,
Some with a snake's embrace,
All,
Man, this is,
The attainment of all welfare,
Free from all bonds,
Omniscient, all-seeing, where is he?
Hearing this, the omniscient,
Always, simultaneously,
Endowed with all wealth,
Filled with all relatives,
All blind,
197
213
26
60
223
17
117
64
303
476
486
187
340
310
309
54
4 316
54
159
244
428
410
251
317
87
439
406
134

All ornaments, liberation, the refuge of all beings,
Possessing all wealth,
Filled with flowers of all seasons,
Charming in all seasons,
Flowers and fruits of all seasons,
With flowers and fruits of all seasons,
Surpassing all worlds,
The eye of all minds,
The master of all arts and sciences,
Along with all the keepers of knowledge,
Skilled in all the meanings of the scriptures,
Skilled in all the meanings of the scriptures,
Having vowed all to be void,
The story of all existence,
Delight in the forefront of all,
Placed on all fingers,
By man, all giving,
The abandonment of all beginnings,
In the abandonment of all beginnings,
All beginnings are established,
The word for the fulfillment of all purposes,
The prosperity of all food,
All were invited by him,
All the citizens came together,
Fearlessness for all,
For all beings,
In all those shrines,
With all effort,
The trembling of the limbs,
Covering the face with the left hand,
He was called by the disciples,
He attained right faith,
She remembered the words spoken before,
Endowed with the nature of plants,
The tigress, the companion of the goddess,
The destruction of speech,
The light born suddenly,
547
8
7
203
295
215
18
35
327
399
336
129
239
32
220
300
15
45
161
60
117
247
425
162
406
205
311
376
473
98
164
123
492
471
241
102
564
128
472

Page #598:
---------------------------
548
Suddenly a loud roar
Suddenly a flower-like pillar
Suddenly he was going
Suddenly he reached the sky
He reached the thousand-rayed one
The karma of the thousand-rayed one
I with thousand eyes
Thousand-petaled eyes
Thousand times more born
Released by the thousand-rayed one
The thousand-rayed one is also called
This is the thousand-rayed one
The story of the thousand-rayed one, the one known as the thousand-rayed one
Born in thousands
The servant of the thousand-headed one, the thousand-rayed one said
And four thousand
Eighty thousand
The thousand-rayed one, the son, in the kingdom
Then the thousand-rayed one said
One sword of help
He is the cause of all faults, with his instruments
Doing it on the upper surface, near the city of Saketa
Saketa, the lord of his own
To fight with him
Directly with the body
Why is there direct pleasure
The ocean, the lion-joined ocean, even the ocean, the ocean of the ascetics
306
214

300
199
231
279
73
263
226
233
235
229
233
470
447
76
236
52
430
132
143
209
74
235
358
63
426
124
90
255
445
229
60
This death of the ocean dwellers
85
447
The ocean and the non-ocean, the ocean, the people in heaven 118 She is a disease, a chip, a chip 301 With folded hands, she bowed and said 370
In the Padma Purana
In the midst of calamities, not too much
Joined by those who remove calamities, the terrible one, laughing, with his fame, white
All the seven yajnas, the earth
By the power of the karma
You, the lion-faced one, speak
You, by virtue, increase this
With respect, the elders of the family
You have understood the true Lord
The true one, the demons
Good, good, with this sound
The haters of the good are wicked
The association of the good with the good
From the association of the good in the world
Free from bad conduct
After comforting her
After comforting her with words
She, too, is pure-minded, a tortoise
Relative and non-relative
Now I want to hear
Like the lotus-born, the one who is like the moon, followed by his vassals, then he
With his vassals, the doorkeepers
Equipped with this power
Some of the common gods
By the effort of Samayika
I am your mother-born, even though
By the crowds of the joyful
The smell of the musk deer
The destroyer of the face of the musk deer, attracted by the urging of the charioteer
The teaching of the essence of dharma
The cat of the Sarameya
The essence of dharma in the three worlds
The essence and non-essence, seen by oneself, the purpose made clear
202
41
463
97
245
385
389
384
356
51
171
467
308
13
304
91
396
378
248
480
424
277
273
466
31
219
315
320
459
11
12
387
290
77
325
317
101
11

With the great chariot, he
The year: Kundapura, the city of Pava
She, the virtuous one, the wife of her husband, the greatness of her courage
The king of the deer, being watered
The prosperity being watered by the serpents
The shadow made by the white flag
The white shadow, the clouds, somewhere
Covered with white cloth, white-black-red-colored
Red-colored, high, perfect, complete, beautiful meaning
The one with perfect knowledge, powerful
Born from perfect knowledge, the destroyer of enemies
The one with perfect knowledge, the protector, Ayodhya
Perfect, from grammar, the world
The lion-flag, the moon-faced one
Known as the lion-moon
410
135
162
426
313
70
381
118
469
59
34
467
308
The lion, the tiger, the elephant
204
The garland of boundary gems
173
They are sewn, they are worn out, they are old 449
The son, known as hair
120
Kosala, the sage, stopped
464
The greatness of the well-being
465
For the sake of remembering good deeds
148
317
132
315
391
59
247
The lion, the tiger, the wolf, the dog
The lion, as if from meat
Sitting on the throne
Four thrones
The lioness, thus, that one
The lion, the tiger, the dog, the serpent
Comfortable, the state of the machine dwelling
Comfortable, the union of the senses
87
427
489
16
490
40
188
463
453
453
20
1
The destruction of comfortable sleep
The comfortable birth of that one
Everything was done for comfort
Comfortable sitting and walking

Page #599:
---------------------------
## Verse Number Index

549
208
490 270
279
267
194
128
153
1
395
Sugandhimaruto yasya 18 Sugreevo'pi harigreevam Sugreevanantara kanya sucharuvasano'tyanta- 322 Sukha pratibalasyapi 111 Sutagaatra samaasanga- 47 Sutaraam sa tato loke Sutaakasha dhvajasyaapi Suta cha suryakamala 134 Suta dasasamutpanna 93 Suta mandodari naama 168 Sutaavijnaapanat tyakta- 100 Sutareti gata khyati 224 Suteshu prabhutaam nyasya Suto'yam merukantasya Sutraamaprahitaiyasyasya Sutraamaapi samam deva
259 Sundarottista kim seshaisudridham Sukrite lagno Sudharmo'rnavasanjna sch Sudharasasamaasangasudhirvasantamalaayam Suputrena tatha raksha Suptametena jeevena Suptaajagaranischvasa- 157 Suptaasau bhavane ramye Supratisthah puri kaashi Supratistho'bhavad raja 240 Suprabha prathama devi 440 Subuddhinarayatnotthasamstha 255 Subuddhinarayatnotthaah Subhadrah sagaro bhadro Subhoomi iti chaakhyata- 436 Subhoorilakshasankhyasu 307 Sumangala priyayangu sch 426 Sumaryaadevadeyam ka 394 Sumahaanagaram charu
424 Sumali nyagadarchvam 188
Sumali malyavan
Suryaraja rikshasumali malyavan suryaraja 165 Sumitrarajacharitam 273 Sumitrasyabhavad raajyam 270 Sumitranantaraam tasya 489 Sumitrapita tatah putra Sumitro'thanyadaaranya Sumerushikharakaaram Suyashodatanamaaso Suraktam panicharanam Suranathaapitaskandhaam 51 Suravidyadharaih sarve. 337 Surasundarato jaata 175 Sura yadi hutenaagnau 258 Suraristraijato bheemo Surupee pratipadyasva 125 Surendram vikshya pitra te 108 Surendramukutaashlistasurendrena tato'saji 292 Suleshashauryah kshitigocharah 476 Sulochanaasutaabhartri 335 Suvarnakakshaya yuktam 19 Suvarna kumbhah satkiitih 442 Suvarna khura shringaanam 54 Suvarnaparvate'mushimissuvarnavastrasasyadisuvidhanaa taporupa 162 Suvidhih sheetalah shreyann 424 Suvyakto'mritavegaakhye Suvrataam suvrataanaam cha Suvrata sch susiddhartho
442 Suvratasya jinendrasya 472 Susheelas teraso saakam Sususuve suprabhaputra 491 Susannaddhaan jitva trinam iva 296 Susarvajnascha kim kuryu- 253 Suseema cha tatha kshema 441
Suseema vatsanagari cha 426 Suseema simasampanna 425 Suswaadarasasampannasuhridbandhavasampannah 465 Sukshmaasu madviyuktaasu. Sutra kanthah prithivyaam ye 245 Sutrakanthah pura tena Sudo'tha datumaarabdhah 468 Sunuryugapradhanaste Suryo gajapuram kunthu- 427 Suryodayapuram chaisha Srishtam virarase neva 203 Srishtah kaale cha tasya eva 81 Senayorubhayorjaat Senaajitaariraajasch 426 Senamukhaavasadena 282 Seyam nidaghasuryamshu- 373 Seyam punyavaseshena 394 Seyamadya prasoota nu Seyamalaambanarmukta Sainyavritasch sannahya 212 Sainyen dashavaktrasya 294 Sodaro mama kantaaya So'nyada kamalacchhanna- 88 So'nyada svaravijnaatah 395 So'pi kaalanubhavena 48 So'pi datvaashi sham taabhyaam 385 So'pi samsaraakiryaakhye 95 So'bhayam margayitvaasmai 468 So'yam manushyamaatrena
29 So'yamaasannadeshastho 276 So'yamindro dasasyasya 281 So'yam syenaayate kaakah 181 So'yam svakarmavashatah kulasam- 423 So'vochadamb tena eva- 405 So'vochad gachch gachch tvam 403 So'ham sadhu prasadena 115 Saukumaryadivoodara 149
395
366
_98
165 308
426
Di.
328

Page #600:
---------------------------
550
244
440
Soudharma is described in the Sutramani Vidhana. In the Kalpas beginning with Soudharma, the Manas - 326 In the Kalpas beginning with Soudharma, they go 330 With great fortune, etc. 334
433
355
204
446
344
370
416
335
282
363
338
103
And having spoken various praises 171
22
Having praised, they bow down to you, some praise at that time
39
Having praised in the three periods of time, whoever 330 Even a little here is not surprising - 305 Having seen a woman, some of them 66 Women also fall from heaven 314 By women, he is then surrounded, that 
307 Having obtained that jewel of women, from the land, from the water, Dharma - 307 They are seen in the land countries, this Shraman is firm, indeed
119
73
462 450 Give me a place, O Lord 390 If you were to be born in a place
393
394
230
93
99
68
313
478
Somangalo became
Soumalinandano Raksha:
Soumali also wearing
Saurabha attracted, confused
From the weight of the breasts, etc., generous, breasts rise to the top
Breasts are painful
These are the two pots of the breasts, this pillar is here, what is the reason
The trunk has become stiff and spread out
Praise, breasts are humble
Praise, breasts are not humble
Having established the cave door, having established the dense joy, having established the kingdom, having established it, he is confident, established by him, he is led, he is in the kingdom of knowledge, he is in the three numbers of destruction

Padma Purana
He is situated near the sky - 98 The origin of the lineage of stability
4
With both armies stationed there
340
261
66
309
478
332
154
411
435
20
198
319
338
257
172
293
352
102
Desiring, they followed those who were 
Crystal-like, arranged in between, clearly different, bitten by another - 123 With the feet clearly pressed, 439 The water clearly pressed on the earth, the radiant network of rays, the radiant sparks, the fierce fire, the radiant taste, thousands, laughter, anger, mixed, that
217
Remembering that very thing
Smiling, shy, not wanting, smiling, then he spoke
He stayed for a thousand years, this is your right to stability
By the power of stability
Combined with the stable and the mobile, the killing of large animals, etc., in the large, pure gems
Having bathed and eaten in the morning
The one who bathes in a single garment, glorious
Soft in the nail areas
Like a soft, dark blue sapphire
Blocked by love
Love became very great, from touch, from taste, from form
Touching the forehead plate
Touched by Garuda
490
118
18
280
130
446
195
Remembering, along with the gods
106
274
Remembering the story of Bali, put the chariot behind
282
You may have the opinion that there are no doers 252 The womb of the variegated garland 461 Hanging down the garment
113
48
438
This is for those who roam freely, the sign of independence

Independent, followed by the name, the name with the same name
481
93
391
434
257
252
They sleep, they tremble, they go 449
Even in a dream, he saw her
193
As if there was a meeting in a dream
84
37
4
Fifty of their own sounds
In the dwelling place of the Jinas
Pleased with the approval of their own side, this is their own side, it is not to be known
The nature of time
Thinking about the nature
The nature of the intoxicated elephant king, by nature, you are cruel
By nature, I am pure
My Indra, the mountain, my own
Known as self-luminous
You will be a slave to the self-luminous
Self-created, the world, heaven, the fate of falling
The heavenly Ganges, then again, falling
Fallen from the heavenly world, born in the human world, in heaven
Even a little, even a little, by the wise
Her sister was
And give her sister, give her sister, do not give her to me
They went to the front of their own army
Prosperity, in the place, in front
Prosperity, then she asked
From us, even so, of the creatures
His own
Directed
My wife, my good woman, you
The sisters of the king of the gods, welcome, etc., he said, recognizing his master, with love for his master, they are ruled by their master
He spoke to his mistress
458
159
332
147
162
235
255
236
118
146
313
323
97
211
213
183
355
239
383
383
395
284
171
459
261
232
391

Page #601:
---------------------------
##  Verse Index

**S**

* **Swamini** Shaasasadevi 371
* **Swamin** Bhavatprasadena 452
* **Swamini** Alam Ruditva Te 376
* **Swami** Tvam Asmakam Udara Kirte 418
* **Svedi** Paniraso Tasyah 363
* **Swedod** Bindu Sambaddha 109
* **Sveshu** Putreshu Nikshipya 328

**H**

* **Hansavali** Nadi Tire 302
* **Hansi** Vibhrama Gaminyo 
* **Hata** Srimalika Prapya 286
* **Hata** Kudrushtyo Yasmin 
* **Hanuman** Tatra Samprapya 410
* **Hanuman** Ko Ganadhisha 334
* **Hanmane** Vam Uktash San 411
* **Hanti** Tapam Sahasransho 315
* **Hanyamanam** Tato Drista 260
* **Hanyamana** Narah Krur 114
* **Hanyate** Vajina Vaji 
* **Harigrivo** Api Nikshipya 
* **Haridaso** Gatash Kveti 
* **Harinmani** Saroshasri Harishena 
* **Harishena** Samutpannah 188
* **Harishena** Charitam 196
* **Harmya** Prushthagato Drishtva 192
* **Hastina** Nagaram Ramyam 439
* **Hasitva** Kecid Ityuchu 349
* **Hinsakarma** Param Shastram 243
* **Hastatritaya** Matra Stha 388
* **Hinsato** Alikatah Steya 314
* **Hastanam** Saptakam Tung 198
* **Hinsadharma** Pravinasy 235
* **Hastavalam** Badanen 378
* **Hinsayajna** Mim Ghoraha 
* **Kasta** Vanchita Papo 89
* **Hinsaya** Anritat Steyan 240
* **Ha** Ki Ketumati Krure 389
* **Hinsitva** Jantu Sanghatam 223
* **Ha** Devi Te Gatash Kalo 389
* **Hidimbo** Haihido Dimbo 216
* **Ha** Nath Pranasarvasva 406
* **Hitankar** Api Pratam 376
* **Ha** Putra Kimidam Vrittam 396
* **Himavantam** Tato Gatva 225
* **Ha** Bhartrudarike Purva 188
* **Himani** Lavinirmukto 
* **Ha** Bhratarmayi Satyev 130
* **Hiranya** Ruchira Mata 465
* **Ha** Mata Sadhava Kyam Te 375
* **Huta** Asanashikhasyasit 224
* **Haramusti** Tato Balam 154
* **Hata** Asanashikha Peya 332
* **Harina** Katakadhara 330
* **Hrutva** Taddayitam Raja 444
* **Haro** Pashobhita Grivam 
* **Hridayavyatha** Vidya Bhruchrena 355
* **Ha** Vatsa Vinaya Dhara 405
* **Hridaye** Shukla Male Ath 185
* **Havabhava** Sametascha 44
* **Hridayasthena** Nathena 
* **Ha** Hata Mandabhagyasmi 375
* **Hetuna** Kena Bharta Sya 380
* **Hahakara** Tato Kritva 
* **Hetuna** Tena Chakresha 
* **Hahaha** Hu Shruti Tasy 
* **Hemaka** Kshabhrita Kambu 266
* **Hahaha** Hu Saman Sa 
* **Hemasphatika** Vaidyurya 
* **Hasa** Ev Cha Sadgandha 39
* **Heyangavina** Kankshasya 
* **Napaka** Kankshasya 29
* **Hasad** Bhushan Nikshepat 229
* **Hrasvayu** Vittamuktasya 326

**N**

* **Napaka** Kankshasya 29

Page #602:
---------------------------
Please provide the text you would like translated. I need the text to translate it into English.

Page #603:
---------------------------
Published by Bharatiya Gyanpeeth, Puranas, Charitas and other poetic works:

* **Adipurana (Sanskrit, Hindi):** Acharya Jinsen, Part 1, Edited and Translated by Dr. Pannalal Jain, Sahityacharya
* **Uttarapurana (Sanskrit, Hindi):** Acharya Gunabhadra, Edited and Translated by Dr. Pannalal Jain, Sahityacharya
* **Padmapurana (Sanskrit, Hindi):** Acharya Ravishena, 3 Parts, Edited and Translated by Dr. Pannalal Jain, Sahityacharya
* **Harivamsapurana (Sanskrit, Hindi):** Acharya Jinsen, Edited and Translated by Dr. Pannalal Jain, Sahityacharya
* **Samaraicchakaha (Prakrit prose, Sanskrit shadow, Hindi translation):** Original by Haribhadra Suri, Translated by Dr. Rameshchandra Jain
* **Kathakoṣa (Sanskrit):** Pandita Acharya, Edited and Translated by Dr. A. N. Upadhye
* **Viravarthamana Charita (Sanskrit, Hindi):** Mahakavi Sakalakiriti, Edited and Translated by Pt. Hiralal Shastri
* **Dharmasarmabhyudaya (Sanskrit, Hindi):** Mahakavi Harichandra, Edited and Translated by Dr. Pannalal Jain, Sahityacharya
* **Purudeva Champu (Sanskrit, Hindi):** Mahakavi Arhaddas, Edited and Translated by Dr. Pannalal Jain, Sahityacharya
* **Virajinincha Charita (Apabhramsha, Hindi):** Kavi Pushpadanta, Edited and Translated by Dr. Hiralal Jain
* **Vaddhamana Charita (Apabhramsha, Hindi):** Vibudh Shridhar, Edited and Translated by Dr. Rajaram Jain
* **Mahapurana (Apabhramsha, Hindi):** Kavi Pushpadanta, 5 Parts, Edited by P.L. Vaidya, Translated by Dr. Devendra Kumar Jain
* **Nayakumar Charita (Apabhramsha, Hindi):** Kavi Pushpadanta, Edited and Translated by Dr. Hiralal Jain
* **Jashar Charita (Apabhramsha, Hindi):** Kavi Pushpadanta, Edited and Translated by Dr. Hiralal Jain
* **Siriwal Charita (Apabhramsha, Hindi):** Narsen Dev, Edited and Translated by Dr. Devendra Kumar Jain
* **Paum Charita (Apabhramsha, Hindi):** Swayambhu, 5 Parts, Edited and Translated by Dr. Devendra Kumar Jain
* **Riththanemi Charita (Yadavkanda):** Swayambhu (Apabhramsha, Hindi), Edited and Translated by Devendra Kumar Jain
* **Vardhamanapurana (Kannada):** Aachan, Modern Kannada translation by T.S. Shamrao, Pt. Nagarajayya
* **Ramachandra Charitapurana (Kannada):** Kavi Nagachandra, Modern Kannada translation by Dr. R.C. Hiremath

For Private & Personal use only
Inelibrary.org

Page #604:
---------------------------
Balampranalama Parine Pratiśacapratihāra Mumbedanagirama Yovarisp: Karmayathocita Hovainimindrodhi Sarvanakaranūbit Lākhamānatānā Yathātāprītiya Jīyavinmukti Bavattāntyāthā Karikhānidhi Vākevāgadātābā Rānayormata. Mamevaramhi Daijināmārthako Ru 2evjeta Bhāratīya Jñānapīṭha Sthāpanā: San 1944 Uddesya Jñāna Ki Vilupta, Anupalabdha Aura Apräkāśita Sāmagrī Kā Anusandhāna Aura Prakāśana Tatha Lokahitakārī Maulik Sāhitya Kā Nirman Sansthāpaka Swa. Sāhu Śāntipraśāda Jaina Swa. Śrīmatī Ramā Jaina Adhyakṣa Śrīmatī Indu Jaina Kāryalaya: 18, Institūśanala Eriyā, Lodī Rōḍa, Nayī Dillī-110 003

